OBSERVATIONS On the POEMS OF HOMER AND VIRGIL A discourse representing the
Excellencies of those Works; and the perfections in general, of all Heroic
Action. Out of the French, By JOHN DAVIES of KIDWELLY

LONDON* Printed by S. G. and B. G. and are to be sold by Dorman Newman at the
Kings-Arms in the Poultrey, and Jonathan Edwin at the three Roses in Ludgate
Street. 1672.

There is in the press and ready to be published.

The comparison of Plato with Aristotle, with the opinions of the Fathers on
their Doctrine, and some Christian Reflections.

Judgment upon Alexander and Caesar as also upon Sen^ca, Plutarch, and
Petronius.

And are to be sold by Jonathan Edwin at the three Roses in Ludgate Street.

To the Honorable Sir JOHN BERKENH^A^ Master of Requests to his Majesty,
Master of the Faculties, and one of the Members of the Honorable House of
Commons.
SIR,
I Here present you with a Discourse on the Poems of Homer and Virgil, the most
accomplished productions of Mans's wit in their kind, their excellency being
such, that they have been the delight and admiration of all after-ages, and the
Models of all those who have since written upon the subject of Heroic Action.

As to the former, you know, Sir, what was said of him by Alexander the Great,
that Kings gave their votes for him, when Hesiod had only those of the
Pesantry: not to urge that Horace's eloge of him, when he said -- Nil molitur
inepte, was certainly the greatest could be given an Author.

And as to Virgil, what can be imagined more remarkable, than that the Romans,
a People so intelligent, and such as numbered crowned Heads amongst their
Subjects, should render him, one day, in the Theater, the same honors which
they were wont to render Augustus; making thereby a public acknowledgement of
such a grandeur of Genius, in that admirable Person, as they thought worthy the
respects due to Scepters and Diadems?

How intimately Sir, you, are acquainted with these transcendent Poets, all
know that know you especially they who reflect on your recesses during the late
unparalled Usurpations, when the envied ingenious had no other consolations,
than those of Poesy and Philosophy. These observations of my Author will happily
recall to your mind some your self had made on this subject, which, had not the
distractions of those times smothered them, might have prevented the present
Address of these to you, from,

SIR, Your most ^^^ble and ^^^h obl^^e^ Servant, JO. DAVIES

OBSERVATIONS UPON HOMER AND VIRGIL.
OBSERVATION I* Of the value of their several Works.
OF all the productions Man's mind is capable of, the Epick Poem is doubtless
the most accomplished, in regard it involves all the perfections of the others.
This is the general sentiment of all the Poet, c. 26.
Learned, though Aristotle attributes the advantage to Tragedy, as to the
quantity, in as much as its parts being of less extent, and bearing a more
equal and timited proportion, it is more proper to excite a less wearisome and
less languishing divertisement. Yet may it be affirmed, that the other
advantages, which the Heroic Poem has over the Dramatick, are so
considerable, nay so much acknowledged such, that all allow it to be the most
excellent and most transcendent of all humane productions. So that the Poems of
Homer and Virgil being, by the consent of all ages, the most perfect modells
that ever appeared in that kind of writing; to judge which of them ought to be
preferred before the other, is, in my opinion, to decide the most important
question that can be advanced in matter of literature, and peremptorily to
define upon the point of their highest grandeur and perfection. For never any
equaled the sublimity and loftiness of Genius of those two great Persons.

This is the sentiment of Duo illi omnis doctrinae apices Homerus and
Virgilius. Casaub. Praes. in Pers.
one of the ablest Critics of the later ages, who calls these two Authors the
two Chiefs and Sovereigns of all the Sciences: not to insist on the suffrage of
two of the most learned and most judicious Princes that ever were. For
Pretiosissimum opus animi humani. Plin. lib. 7. c. 9.
Alexander, having found Homer's Iliads in a Cabinet of Darius, after his
defeat, called it the richest and most exquisite work of man's wit: And Augustus
made it sufficiently appear that he had not ever esteemed any thing comparable
to the Aeneids. by the impatience he was in to see it during Virgil's life, and
the care he took of it after his death. But not insisting, I say, on the
Authority of these two great and so intelligent Princes, it may be said, that
there never was any merit more universally celebrated then that of those great
Genii, nor any more unanimously acknowledged: Qui Homerum contemnunt vix illis
optari quioquam pejus potest, quam ut fatuitate sua fruantur. Casaub, Dissert.
de Homero.
And there has not risen up any one during the whole process of time since,
that durst dispute it, without dishonouring himself, and, by so irrational a
presumption, betraying his insufficiency and the weakness of his endowments.

OBSERVE. II. How these two Poems are to be considered in order to a Right
judgment of them.
Among the Learned of the latter ages, who have pretended to give their
opinions of the Poems of Homer and Virgil, and to make a parallel between them,
the most considerable are Macrobius, Julius Scaliger, and Fulvius Vrsinus. But
as they have examined those works merely as Grammarians, so have they not
judged rightly of them, having only applied their reflections to the external
and superficial part thereof, and sparing themselves the trouble of penetrating
to the bottom. This defect has hindered in a manner all the Learned from
judging rightly of them; and the prepossession they had for Homer has dazzled
all those who pretended to the glory of being thought learned. For it is known,
that they who affect the repute of being thought learned men imagine themselves
the more considerable, I account it an honor to declare their judgment in
favor of Homer, and to give him the advantage over Virgil. And they are of
opinion, that it argues a certain discovery of greater sufficiency, to declare
in favor of merit, which requires more capacity and attentive application to
be known. And indeed as there is a greater depth of Learning requisite to judge
of Homer then of Virgil; so men think themselves much distinguished from the
common sort, in preferring the former before the latter, and, by that means,
that they acquire a reputation of superiority in point of abilities, which
highly satisfies the slight vanity of those who make ostentation of Science.

This is a prejudgment, which a man would do well to rid himself of, how great
soever his ability may be. For one is many times more capable of judging when
he thinks himself not to be so; nay sometimes it is a certain assumption of
authority for a man not to take it upon him, in as much as presumption
ordinarily deprives the mind of the liberty of judging with absolute
indifference, which is requisite for the well doing of it. This is the party it
is my design to take, that so I may not expose my self to prepossession, if
while I am desirous to examine things, I took the liberty to judge of them: but
I declare that I only intend to propose my Observations and Scruples, upon the
works of these two Authors, yet so as to leave it to those who are more
excellently qualified than I am, to make what decision they please upon my
Remarks.

But to enter upon the discussion of the question, I shall not stick to make a
previous acknowledgment, that Homer has a much larger Groundwork to build
upon, than Virgil; that he has a greater extent of characters, that he
deciphers things much better; that his representations are more accurate; that
his reflections are more moral and sententious; that his imagination is more
pregnant; that he has a more universal fancy; that he is of all professions,
Poet, Orator, Mathematician, Philosopher, Astronomer, Artizan, when he pleases;
that he has more variety in the disposition of his Fable; that he discovers
more of that impetuosity, which makes the elevation of the Genius; that his
expression is more pathetical; that he is more fortunate as to his natural
inclination; that he is a Poet upon the account of his temperament; that his
Verses are fuller of pomp and magnificence; that they more delightfully fill
the ear by their number and cadence, to such as know the beauty of versifying.
But after all this considered, it were only to judge of Homer and Virgil, only
by what is most superficial in them, as the Grammarians do, if one should frame
his judgment on those considerations, since there are other more essential
things in their works to be examined.

To come then to a regular judgment of them, we must begin with an enquiry,
what an Epick Poem is, what is its matter, its form, its end, and its other
parts.

The Epopoea, says (...). Poet. c. 5.
Aristotle, is an imitation, or a draught or portraiture of an illustrious
action. It has that common with Tragedy; yet with this difference, that the
latter imitates by representation, and the former by narration. So that its
matter is Heroic action; its form, Fable; its end, the instruction of Princes
and Grandees.

Let us now examine the Poems of Homer and Virgil, according to these rules and
principles; and that we may not be mistaken, let us not look on those great
works by fragments; Let us not examine those two Authors, by their
Descriptions, Similitudes and Epithetes: That is only the superficial part of
them; let us search into what is essential therein, as to the design and
execution. To do it methodically, let us reflect on the order of the parts of
the Epick Poem, which Poet. cap. 5.
Aristotle gives us some account of, to wit, Fable, Manners, Sentiments, and
Words, Let us compare Homer and Virgil by those Rules, and according to that
order.

OBSERVE. III. The Fables of the Iliad and the Aeneid compared.
LEt us begin with Fable, which is the first of the parts of the Epick Poem,
and consider that of the Iliad, and that of the Aeneid, as they both ly naked
without the Episodes or Digressions thereof.

The Fable of the Iliad is, that one of the Chieftains of the Grecian Army
being malecontent and disgusted by the General, retires from the Camp, without
harkening to his Duty, Reason, or Friends; deserts the public interest and
that of the State, to comply with the impetuosity of his resentment; he
abandons himself to grief in a solitary retirement. His Enemies make their
advantage of his absence, and grow too powerful for his Party; they kill his
best Friend; he takes up Arms again to revenge his Death; and Passion makes him
do what Reason had not been able to get from him; and in fine, he kills the
Head of the adverse party. This is the Fable of the Iliad, abstracting the
Episodes, and despoiled of all its Ornaments.

That of the Aeneid is this. A Prince forced to fly by reason of the Ruin of
his Country, comes to seek up and down the World for another establishment; He
makes his Gods and his Father the Companions of his flight. The Gods, moved
with that Piety of his, concern themselves to establish him in the noblest
Country in the world; and he becomes the Founder of the most flourishing Empire
that ever was.

Let us make a comparison between these two Fables, and compute the Grandeur of
the two Heroes by that of their actions. The action of Achilles is (...) Iliad.
1.
pernicious to his Country, and his own Party, as Homer himself acknowledges:
that of Aeneas is advantageous and glorious: the motive of the former is a
Passion, that of the latter, a virtue: The action of Achilles is the occasion
of the death of Patroclus, his best Friend; the action of Aeneas is the
occasion of the liberty of his Gods, and that of his Father, and of the safety
of those who were with him: The one is Heroic, that is, above the ordinary
virtue of Man (so (...).
Aristotle defines Heroic Virtue, in his Ethics): The other is not so much as
rational, and implies in it self a character of ferocity, which, according to
the same Aristotle, is the vice opposite to Heroisme, if we may use that term.
For as Heroisme is above Man, so its contrary is below him.

The action of Aeneas has a more perfect end than that of Achilles; it puts a
period to affairs by the death of Turnus; that of Achilles puts no period to
them. The Siege of Troy lasts a whole year after Hectors death; which
occasioned Quintus Calaber, and an Egyptian named Tryphiodorus, Authors of no
mean note, to observe, that the Iliad is imperfect, because they are not
terminated by Hector's death, but his death made an obstacle to that
termination; and consequently, which way soever we look on the Aeneid, we find,
that its end is much more fortunate and fully complete than that of the Iliad.

But if we be at the trouble to consider how much Conduct, Invention,
Perspicacity, and Wit, must club together, in the choice of a subject that
derives the Romans from the blood of the Gods, particularly Augustus, who
reigned during the Poets Life, and whom he so delightfully flatters with the
promise of an Empire that was to be eternal; what beauty, what grandeur, what
an insinuation of divertisement, what excellency do we not find in the
admirable choice with Virgil has made? And what is there to be found comparable
thereto in that of Homer? For as never any Author more honored his Country by
his works than Virgil has done his, by attributing to the Romans a divine
extraction, and an eternal posterity according to the decrees of the destinies;
so it may be said of Homer, that he has disgraced his Country, in taking for
his Hero, a person who occasioned the (...).
destruction of so many Heroes, whom he sacrificed to his grief and discontent.
Which gave Plato occasion so much to blame hat Anger of Achilles, the
consequences whereof were so prejudicial to the Greeks: L' ira di Achille, fu
con amaritudine ripresa da Platone: The anger of Achilles was sharply reproved
by Plato, as Tasso has observed after him in his Opuscula.

Yet to excuse Homer, for his having made that Passion the subject of his Poem,
it may be urged, that the animosities of the ancient Heroes, before the
affability and meekness of Christianity had been preached, was not either a
weakness or defect, as Tasso seems to insinuate, in his Dialogue of virtue; Il
souverchio dell' ira fu attribuito a Hercole, Achille, Aiace, and altri Heroi.
Et Alessandro per ammaestramento filosofico, non pote tener laa freno,
quantunche alcuna volta vincesse il piacere come dimostro doppo la morte di
Dario, nel respetto portato a la moglie, e a la madre: A certain transcendency
of Anger was attributed to Hercules, Achilles, Ajax, and other Heroes. And
Alexander himself, notwithstanding all his documents of Philosophy, could not
bridle that passion, though sometimes he mastered his concupiscence, as he
showed upon the death of Darius, in the respect he bore to his Wife and Mother.
But as the same Plato tells us, that Anger is not virtuous, but when it takes
up Arms for the defense of Reason, so is it to be inferred, that that of
Achilles was not upon any account a virtue, since it was far from being
rational, as Tasso says in the second Book of his Opuscula: Pare che Homero
con la persona di Agamemnone ci metta inanzi a li occhi una figura della
ragione depra^ata: e con quella d' Achille l' imagine dell' ira smoderata, and
trapassante ^termini presscritti della ragione: It ap^ears, that Homer, in the
Person of Agamemnon sets before our eyes an image of depraved reason; and in
that of Achilles that of an excessive Anger, and such as ^ranscends the
prescribed bounds of reason.

Thus is the Matter or Subject of Virgil's Poem more happy, nay, and more
advantageous, both to himself and his Country, and consequently his choice more
prudent and judicious than that of Homer.

OBSERVE. IV. A comparison made between the two Heroes: Achilles and Aeneas.
THe action of Achilles importing somewhat more of mavelous, than that of
Aeneas, in regard it is managed by him himself, without any assistance or
company, and that his presence in, or absence from the army occasions all the
advantages and disadvantages of his party, every one will be apt at the first
sight to give it the preference. But it will not be so when a man takes the
leisure to look into things more narrowly, and more strictly examines these two
great Heroes* The first observation to be made i^ order to the clearing of the
point, is that it is likely it was not Homer intention to give us, in his Hero,
the idea of a great Captain, or an accomplished Prince; but to show how
prejudicial discord is in any party, and so to make a draught of an action at
the same time, both dreadful and miraculous. This is the opinion of Tasso in
his Opuscula: Per cio fare l'idea di una terribile et mara^igliosa attione.

Wherein he did not as Xenophon did, who, describing his Prince, the Grand
Cyrus, to make an absolutely accomplished person, confined himself not to the
truth of things, but to the idea in general, of a complete Prince, according to
Poetic^
Aristotle's precept, who would have the Poet, in the representation and
descriptions he makes, imitate, not such as are like, nor yet such as have any
imperfections, but the most perfect in their kinds. And Leg. l. 5.
Plato teaches that imitation is not to be made, but from the things that are
most accomplished. Besides as the image, in a just and regular imitation, ought
to be like the original; so ought not this original to be any one man or Prince
in particular, but the idea of a Prince or accomplished Person in general.
According to this model has Plato described the perfect idea of a just man;
Xenophon, that of a Prince; and Cicero, that of an Orator; by attributing to
each what was most transcendent and accomplished in the idea which he framed to
himself thereof.

And hence it is apparent, not only that Homer followed not that maxim in
framing his Hero, since he has made him subject to great weaknesses and
notorious imperfections, instead of inserting into the idea, which he pretends
to give of him, the consummation of all the Virtues, according to the
advertisement of Paul Beni in his Academicall Discourses: Nel poema Heroico
conviene esprimer l'idea di perfettissimo Capitano: o vero formar Hero in cui
sia il colmo di tutte le virtue militari e civilly. In an Heroic Poem, it is
requisite to express the idea of a most perfect Captain, or to form such an
Hero in whom should be the height of all virtues military and civil.

And this is a very considerable advantage that Virgil had over Homer. For
whereas the latter had not, for the making up of his Hero, any other idea then
that of the Virtue of Hercules, Theseus, or some other person of the primitive
times, who were celebrated only for their strength and vigor, it is no wonder
if there be such a defect of Morality in the Hero he has given us, considering
the time wherein he framed him: there being not then either in History or Books
any idea of moral Virtue. And whereas men knew not of any greater enemies to
oppose, than Monsters and Wild-Beasts, there needed only bodies and arms to
pretend to the title of Hero. They knew not then that there were some dangerous
and terrible enemies, to wit, their passions and their own desires, and
moderation and justice were not as yet virtues much known in the world.

Thus Virgil, besides the advantage he had of framing his Heroes out of the two
Heroes of Homer, that is, the valor of Achilles, and the prudence of Ulysses,
had also the opportunity to add thereto the Gallantry of Ajax, the wisdom of
Nestor, the indefatigable patience of Diomedes, and the other virtues, whereof
Homer sets down the characters in his two Poems: to all which reuniting yet
further the other virtues which he had observed in all other illustrious men,
as Themistocles, Epaminondas, Alexander, Hannibal, Ingurth, and a thousand
other foreigners, as also in Horatius Camillus, Scipio, Sertorius, Pompey,
Caesar, and a great number of others of his own Country. Had he not a
groundwork infinitely greater to fancy to himself an accomplished Hero than
Homer had? Thus did the Painter Zeuxis finish that famous Picture of Helena,
which he had undertaken, and was the admiration of his age, much more happily,
and after a more complete manner, than Apelles did that of Venus; inasmuch as
Zeuxis framed his idea from all the perfections he had found in the rarest
Beauties of his time, whereas Apelles would frame his only from his own pure
imagination, which he found to fall short in the execution; so that he was
forced to leave his piece imperfect, as being of opinion, that he was not able
to finish it as he had begun it.

This inequality in the subject whereof I treat will appear yet much more
evident, if we but take the pains to compare the pourtraicture which Horace
has left us of Achilles, with that which Virgil makes of Aeneas. Achilles is a
Bravo, but withal a hasty, impetuous, furious, passionate, violent, unjust,
inexorable one, a contemner of Laws, and one that places all his reason in the
sword he wears by his side;

De Art Poetic.
Impiger, iracundus, inexorabilis, acer, Jura negat sibi nata, nihil non arrogat
armis. Besides those excellent qualities, which certainly are not very Heroic,
he is cruel toward the body of Hector, so far as to take a pleasure in
exercising his vengeance upon it, and out of an un^xampled avarice he sells to
the afflicted Father, the body of his son. I shall not say any thing of his
quitting (with a lightness not to be pardoned) that great and generous
enterprise made by a general combination of all Greece, upon the occasion of a
she slave, for whom he abandons himself to tears and complaints, with so many
discoveries of weakness. In fine, this Hero of Homer, whose repute is so
great, and so highly celebrated through all ages, is but an epitome of
imperfections and vices.

But on the contrary, Virgil makes a conjunction, of all the virtues to frame
his: he gives him Religion toward the Gods; piety, toward his Country;
tenderness and friendship for his Relations and equity and justice, toward
all. He is undaunted in danger, patient in labors, courageous when occasion
requires, prudent in the management of assaires. In sine he is a good peaceful,
liberal, eloquent, gentile, civil person; his very air makes a certain
discovery of grandeur and and majesty; and that he may not be destitute of any
one of those qualifications which might contribute to the accomplishment of a
great Person, he is fortunate. Ilioneus gives Dido a character of him in these
two Verses, which may be confronted to those two of Horace, wherein Achilles is
described; Rex erat Aeneas nobis, quo justior alter
Nec pieiate fuit, nec bello major and armis.
These are the three sovereign qualities which make up his essential
character, Religion, Justice, and Valor, and which were those of Augustus,
whose pourtraicture, Virgil drew in the Heroes he dedicated to him, as Monsieur
de Segrais has well observed in the learned Preface to his Traduction of the
Aeneid: which is one of the most subtle and ingenious flateries that ever were:
wherein happened to him, what Fingenti formantique Principem voto concipe^e
succur^i^ similem huic qu^m videmus.
Pliny said sometime after with so much smartnesse in his Panegyric to the
Emperor Trajan: For Ovid tells us that Piety was one of the eminent qualities
of Augustus, who made it so much his care to reestablish the Temples at Rome:
Fast. l 2.
Sub quo delubris sentitur nulla senectus,
Nec satis est homines, obligat ille Deos.
So that out of the virtues of Augustus, and an infinite number of perfections
distributed and scattered among diverse other Heroes, Virgil framed his; in as
much as the true Heroic virtue is a combination of all the virtues, as
Aristotle affirms in his Ethics. And indeed, if the Pythagoreans would have a
Sovereign, that he might deserve the pre-eminence over others, not only to be
without any defect, but also absolutely accomplished in and possessed of all
the Virtues; with much more reason should a Hero, who is the model according to
which Kings ought to regulate themselves, be a person of transcendent and
consummate virtue.

OBSERVE. V. Which of the two Heroes was most eminent, as to Gallantry and
Valor.
Yet may we allow all these Observations, without giving the pre-eminence to
Aeneas For the character of Valiant, which Homer gives Achilles, which of all
the characters implies most of the Heroic humor, makes a great show, and is
infinitely more accomplished than that which Virgil gives Aeneas, and denotes
and distinguishes him much better from all those of his party, though all
valiant. For there is nothing done without him, and he alone occasions the good
and bad fortunes of his Army.

I must confess the valor of Achilles makes a greater noise and show then
that of Aeneas, in regard it is the only Heroic quality Homer gives him, and
by which he distinguishes him; and so itis the more remarkable, being alone:
and in Aeneas, being attended by many others, it is so much the less
observable, inasmuch as the luster of it is confounded with that of all his
other qualities. We find in Achilles only the Hero of Homer, but in that of
Virgil, we have Menelaus, Agamemnon, Ulysses, Ajax Nestor, Diomedes, and
Achilles himself, if we follow Virgil but any thing closely through all the
transactions he makes him go through in the second book of Aeneids

Nay it may be affirmed, that if we can exactly distinguish between true Valor
and Temerity, and shall have well observed the circumference which Aristotle,
in the Ethics attributes to the magnanimous person, we shall find that Virgil
exalts the Valor he attributes to Aeneas as far as it ought to go; but we must
take the leisure to make an attentive reflection thereon, to find that
character in him, and ought not to suffer any of all the circumstances,
wherewith he endeavors to prepossesse our minds, to escape our observance.

In the first place he brings in Aeneas advertised by Hector, who appears to
him after his death, that the Greeks have supriz'd Troy, that they are Masters
of it, and that its destiny is to be destroyed. This advertisement coming from
a deceased person, Religion renders his testimony sacred; and to take him off
from all endeavors to defend it, he assures him, that he had done the utmost
he could by his courage; Sat patriae Priamoque datum est -- He might have
contented himself with that, being informed by so sacred a ^estimony of the
will of the Gods; but ^waken'd by the noise of the sacking of the City, and the
conflagration of the neighboring houses; he goes up himself to the top of his
house to discover the cause of that noise and disorder; and his apprehensions
prompt him to take arms, and die for his Country; -- Pulchrumque mori
succurrit in armis. The danger startles him not, though he were alone at his
going forth armed out of his house. Without consulting his own people he runs
to the place where the tumult was, the confusion of a surpised City, and the
most pressing exigency, that could be, call him away; In flammas and in arma
feror -- Having in his way met with Choroebus, Dymas, and Hypanis, with some
others whom he knew, he leads them on, and animates them by his example;
Moriamur and in media arma ruamus -- He with his own hands kills Androgeos, one
of the most forward of the enemies Commanders; he makes a great slaughter of
the Greeks, with a handful of his own people; he and they take up the arms of
the slain to disguise themselves; which proved so successeful, that he forced
some out of the City, and pursues them flying, quite to their ships; Diffugiunt
alii ad naves, and littora cursu
Fida petunt --
But orepress'd by number, Dymas, Hypanis, and his other friends, being killed
by his sides, he runs to the Palace, where the danger was greatest, and
attaques it with all his might, in hopes to rescue the King and all of the
Royal Family; Instaurati animi Regis succurere tectis. He comes thither too
late, the Greeks had put all within it to the sword, and, being the only person
left of his party Jamque adeo super unus erami -- and finding himself deserted
by all, there being not any thing left in the Palace, that might occasion his
stay, after he had seen the King, the Queen, and her Daughters slaughtered, he
runs to his own house, to spend his own life, in defending that of his Father.
But his mother Venus stops him in his way, and opens his eyes to let him see,
that it is against the Gods he thinks to fight, and that they are the
destroyers of Troy, and not only the Greeks;

-- Mixtoque undantem pulvere fumum
Neptunus muros, magnoque emota tridenti
Fundamenta quatit; totamque a sedibus urbe^
Eruit. Hic Juno Scaeas saevissima portas
Prima tenet, sociumque vocans a navibus agmen.
Ferro accincta vocat -- etc.
Jupiter and Pallas are also against him. So that Aeneas, who saw them, might
have contented himself, without pursuing things any further; it had been an
impiety, and not a mark of valor to stand out longer against so many Gods
combined together. Yet being come to his house, which he did only in order to
the defense of his Fathers life, though with the loss of his own, and
perceiving he would not survive the destruction of his Country, he arms once
more at least, to go and court a glorious death; Hic ferro accingor rursus --

And there must be Prodigies from Heaven, and advertisements from the Gods
themselves, ere he will be diverted; -- Subitoque fragore
Intonuit laevum, etc. --
Anchises himself is the interpreter of them, and Aeneas could not submit to
any thing but that; Cessi, and sublato montem genitore petivi, It Is not to Men,
but to the Gods only that he yields; I am in doubt, whether Gallantry can be
advanced any higher; and yet this is but the beginning, and the first essay of
that of Aeneas: all the courageous actions he performs in the sequel of the
Aeneid bear the character of his valor: which will appear miraculous even in
these times, wherein that excellent name is without any distinction bestowed on
the most temerarious sallies and eruptions of fury and brutality.

From these observations it will be no hard matter to judge, which of the two
Heroes, Achilles and Aeneas is the most complete and accomplished; which is one
of the most essential parts of the Poem. I come to the second, which is the
disposition of the Fable.

OBSERVATION VI. Of the disposition of the fabulous part of the two Poems.
THe disposition or distribution of the Fable consists in three things, to wit,
the natural deduction or consequence of the principal action, and all the
matters which compose it; an exact intermixture of what is probable and what
miraculous; and the marshalling and correspondence of the Episodes or
Digressions, with the principal action. These three qualities, which comprehend
the distribution of the Fable, by Aristotle, called the (...).
Constitution of the things are so essential to the Poem, that it cannot be
absolutely complete without them.

The first is the Action, which ought to be entire, and perfect, according to
the advice of Aristotle: that is to say, as he explains it, such as has a
beginning, a middle, and an end. Horace would have these parts to have a
certain proportion and connection among themselves; Primo ne nedium, medio ne
discrepet imum And these are the observations which may be made upon our Poems
as to this point. If the action and principal subject of the Iliad be the war
of Troy, according to the sentiment of Ad Loll. l. I. Ep. II.
Horace, a great Master in that Art, who calls Homer Trojani belli Scriptorem,
and that of many others; that action is defective and imperfect, for that war
has not, in the Iliad, either beginning or end; and it would be as it were a
Statue which should have neither head nor foot. So that we might apply to that
work this verse of Horace; Ad Pison.
Infelix operis summa, qui ponere totum
Nesciat --
But if it be the anger of Achilles, as it is more likely, and as Homer himself
acknowledges by his proposition; that anger has indeed a beginning; but it has
neither end, nor middle: for it is thrust out of doors by another animosity of
the same person against Hector for the death of Patroclus. So that there are
two angers, one upon the loss of his Friend, the other upon their taking away
of his Mistress. But the greatest defect is, that the rest of the Poem has no
connection with that anger; and Homer, during the space of eighteen books,
thinks no more of it, as if he had clearly forgot his proposition and design,
which like a star should regulate the course of it, or be as it were a
Compass which a man cannot have out of his sight but he must deviate. During
that long intervall he speaks only of sieges, battles, surprises,
consultations of the Gods, and all relates to the siege of Troy. Which
occasioned Horace's being of opinion, that the subject of the Iliad is the war
of Troy, according to the very name it goes under. And so which way soever we
look on that Poem, it will appear defective in that part

Nor is the Odyssey an action, any way more perfect than that of the Iliad. It
begins with the voyages of Telemachus and ends with those of Ulysses. All is
made for Telemachus in the four first books; Menelaus, Nestor and the other
Grecian Princes relate to him the adventures of Troy; all relate to that,
there is no thought at all of Ulysses; which made Paul Beni affirm in his
Academical Discourses upon Homer and Virgil, that the Fable of the Odysses is
clearly double; E chiaramente provato che l'Odisse a contenga due
peregrinationi, e in somma sia di doppia favola. Not that I absolutely allow it
to be so; yet I stick not to pretend, that it is hard to find therein the
principal action very regularly carried on, and according to the proportions
required by Horace, in the forementioned precept for the natural connection of
the parts. Nay this very voyage of Telemachus bears not any proportion to that
of Ulysses, which is the principal action. It contributes nothing at all, nay
not so much as to minister any occasion for his return, which is brought about
by the disposition of Jupiter and the assistance of the Phenicians. Which made
Beni say, that the four first books of the Odyssey are neither Episode nor part
of action, nor have any connection with the rest of the work. Take them as they
are, one knows not what to make of them.

The Aeneid, methinks, is not chargeable with that defect. Aeneas leaves
Phrygia, makes his voyages, and settles himself in Italy; all is consequent in
that design, and all relates to the establishment of a new Empire, which is
the true subject of the Poem. And Virgil prosecutes it to the designed mark
without digressing to what has no relation thereto.

Semper ad eventum festinat, and in me diasres
Non secus ac notas auditorem rapit -- Hor.
He is also more happy than Homer in the distribution of the particular matters
and occurrences which relate to the general Disposition of his Poem.

And it is this distribution and this disposition of things which makes that
admirable regularity, and that proportion; wherein alone consists the
perfection of a great work, which is neither beautiful nor complete any further
then there is that correspondence between its parts. Which occasioned Beni's
observation in his Academical discourses, That the perfection of a Poem ought
not to be computed by the beauty of one, or several parts, but by all together:
Non dee stimarsi l' excellenza del Poema da una sola circostanza o parle, ma da
tutte insieme.

This regular proportion of the parts, and the exact rapport there ought to be
between them, seems to be incomparably better observed in the Aeneid, than the
Iliad; for there, every thing is introduced in its order and place, and no man
ever better followed that distribution of matters, and that series of events
then Virgil has done. Thence Horace recommends it above all things to the poet,
Ad Pison.
Vt jam nunc dicat, jam nunc debe^tia dici. insinuating that all the excellency
and perfection of a work consists in that order; adding Ibid.
Ordinis haec virtus erit, and venus -- in regard the grace and divertive
satisfaction in a work cannot proceed from any thing but that distribution.

And not to dilate here, upon what may be particularly and minutely observed
therein, I shall only make a transient comparison between the games or
divertisements, which Achilles makes in the 23. book of the Iliads upon the
death of Patroclus, and those which Aeneas makes for the Apotheosis of Anchises
in the 5. of the Aeneids.

Games may be numbered among those actions which may occur in the lives of
Heroes, and be so introduced into the matters of the Heroic Poem, in regard
they are occasions of magnificence, which is one of the qualities that make up
the Hero. Virgil makes his in the V. of his Aeneids, first to divert the
imagination of his Reader from the mournful object of Dido's death, which he
had represented in the fourth book, and which had something of savagenesse in
it; secondly to divert himself by the diverting of his Hero; and these are of
those sorts of pleasures, which, to be received well ought to come in, in their
place.

Horat. ad Pison.
Ne spissae risum tollant impune coronae. If Virgil had not placed his Games
well in the second or third book; it had been to take breath too soon, as Homer
does it too late in the 23. of the Iliad. The time is elapsed; it is
unseasonable; people are quite tired out; he should not have amused himself
being so near the cloze of it. 'Twere much at one, as if a Traveller earnestly
desirous to return from the Indies to Paris, after he had spent two years in
his voyage, should trifle away a whole month at Dieppe, in playing at
tick-tack, or seeing plays. This would argue a strange want of judgment. And
this we must seriously say of Homer, that he might have been more serious
toward the end of his work, and in all likelihood he ought to have been a
little weary, and not have diverted from making up to his final stage, being
got so near it. There are abundance of things utterly incredible in the
representation of those Games. The Surveyors or Judges make discourses in them,
which tire out and exhaust the patience of the Readers.

The second part of the Disposition which is the just intermixture and
attemperation of what is miraculous with what is probable, is also essential
to the Epick Poem, which ought to have somewhat admirable in it, to move the
hearts of Grandees for whom it is writ, that they may be animated to great
things: but with this caution, that it ought also to be probable, so to avoid
giving an absolute check to their emulation, and in fine running them into
despair. Truth it self which the Historian ought strictly to enquire into,
being sometimes too strong to be imitated, is not always so convenient to be
the matter of the Epick Poem, as Probability, which has a greater proportion to
things than men are wont to make. For example the action of Sampson, who
defeated the Philistines with the jaw bone of an ass, is an Heroic action; yet
can it not be the subject of an Epick Poem. For though it be true, yet is it
not likely to be so; and consequently it is too miraculous to be proposed for
imitation; we are therefore to avoid that excess by a just attemperation of
probability, without which all becomes fabulous and incredible, and makes no
impression on men's hearts, which cannot endure to be moved at any thing but
what seems possible to them.

Let us see whether Homer has been more fortunate in the observance of this
Rule, than of that I spoke of last. He insists* so little on the probable part,
and so far expatiates in the miraculous, out of an excessive earnestness to be
always thought admirable and to hurry men's minds along with him, that he does
not leave any thing to be done by reason, or passion, nor indeed by nature; all
is done by machines and engines. If Priamus has lost Hector, there is a
necessity of Jupiter's sending the Goddess Iris, his Messenger, to give him an
advertisement that he should take a care of his Sons body, and redeem it from
Achilles. Could not his Father, who had so great a tenderness for his Son, and
was so superstitious to observe the ceremonies performed at funerals, and was
so loath that precious depositum should be left to the mercy of the birds,
think of it himself? There must be a machine to put him in mind that he is a
Father.

If Telemachus in the Odyssey go to find out Ulysses in the Courts of Greece
he cannot stir a foot forwards without the assistance of Minerva, she is his
guide wherever he goes, his remembrancer of all things; he does not do or think
of any thing himself, he is a great child, whom a Governesse leads up and down,
by the sleeves. Should not honor, duty, nature have moved his heart, and have
raised a little disquiet in him for an absent Father, and that near the space of
eighteen years, but there must be a necessity of another's help and a recourse
to the machine? Nay this very machine has not any appearance of probability,
in as much as Minerva conducts Telemachus to seek for Ulysses all over Greece,
save only to the place where he is, which she ought not to have been ignorant
of, upon the score of her Divinity, from which nothing should be conceald.

And yet this is Homer's method, who to be always vaulting and jumping, that
he might be every where the more wondered at, would do all things by
extraordinary ways. It may be said, that he makes his Gods such as are to be
daily Employed, and orders them, as those among the Comedians who are to act
any part. Mercury becomes Coachman to Priamus, to carry him to Achilles, to
demand the body of his Son; and least he should be exposed to the Scouts in his
way to the Grecian camp, Jupiter makes use of the same Mercury, and his
Ministry, to set them asleep: and to prepare Achilles's heart by some
sentiment of compassion, Thetis, his mother, must go and prevent him, and
dispose him thereto by Jupiter's order. In fine the Per ambages Deorumque
ministeria.
Gods are employed to do all things; there is no regard had of their rank, nor
the peace and tranquillity of heir condition. They are so many Galley-slaves to
be put upon any work.

This is not the air of Virgil, who so religiously observes what Horace has
since advised, that the Gods be not brought into the action, if the thing do
not deserve it.

Nec Deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus
Incide^it --
And thus does that judicious Poet introduce Mercury in the fourth of the
Aeneids, to satisfy Aeneas, who was in a terrible perplexity. The promise he
had made to Dido detains him at Carthage; the destiny of his Son, and that
Empire of the whole world promised by the Gods, press his departure thence. He
is troubled on the one side to be chargeable with a defect of fidelity toward
Dido, and on the other, of submission to the Gods. There must come another from
above and it must Art. Poet.
be some superior power to deliver him out of so strange a trouble. There is a
necessity that a God should speak to surmount his difficulty and break that
engagement. Mercury does it

The same may be said of the adventure of Aeneas in the first of the Aeneids.
It Is not a shepherd or a huntsman that serves him for a guide, in the wandering
condition he was in, which was natural enough; but Venus appears to him,
acquaints him what Country he is in, and with the adventure of his companions,
whom he thought lost, and shows him the ways. For such was the conjuncture of
things then, that it was necessary it should be a Divinity to raise up Aeneas's
courage who had suffered extremely in a dreadful tempest, who had seen some
ships of his Fleet cast away, and had been forced by the storm upon a desert
shore, destitute of all humane relief and reduced almost to despair. It was fit
the Poet should not leave him in that extremity: nay it was likely the Gods
ought in some measure to concern themselves for him, since his piety made him
so careful of their interest, and since they were the companions of his exile
and flight; and decorum required that it should be his Mother who appeared in
it, and should make it her business to encourage him, especially after she had
been informed by Jupiter of his destiny.

Moreover, besides that all these machines and contrivances of Virgil are more
grounded in reason and likelihood than those of Homer; you will find them less
frequent, and less forced, if you take the leisure to examine them one after
another. Nay the very management of the Ministry of the Gods is much more
suitable to their rank and condition, and incomparably more judicious in Virgil
then in Homer, whom for that reason, Dion Chrysostom calls the (...).
greatest impostor in the world, and that in the things most hard to believe.

We may add further, according to Tasso's remark in his Opuscula, that Virgil
had the happiness to embellish his Poem with a kind of the miraculous part,
which Homer notwithstanding all his affectation to find out such matter, never
thought of: which is to bestow valor on Women, and to make them fight, as
Camilla does in the eleaventh book, and that so effectually, which is a very
great ornament of the Aeneid. Thus speaks Tasso of it: Niuna cosapar pui
maravigliosa della fortezza feminile: Virgilio occupo questa part, della quale
Homero. s'era dimenticato. Nothing seems more admirable than feminine
fortitude; Virgil was master of this part, wherein Homer was wanting: after the
observation of Dion Chrysostom, who had observed it in his Discourse of the
affairs of Troy.

The third part of of the (...), Pollux.
Disposition is the intermixture of the Episodes with the principal Action.
The Episode is a kind of Digression from the Subject; and consequently it ought
(...). Suidas.
not to be long, if there be a right observance of the proportions. It ought
not to be forced, violently brought in, nor drawn from far, and so betray its
disaffinity to the subject; in fine it ought not to be too frequent, that it
may not occasion a confusion of matters. Homer begins his Odyssey, which is his
more perfect Poem, by an Episode of four Books; he recedes from his subject
e're he was well gotten into it, and to make a regular structure he begins with
a piece not suitable to the works, according to the observation I have already
made of it.

Has Virgil any such thing in his Episodes, which are so admirably
proportionable to the subject, as is that of Pallas and Evander, that of Nisus
and Euryalus, that of Camilla and others? Nay that of Dido which is the
greatest and largest of them all, never excludes the person of the Hero but it
is he that spakes, and relates his own adventures: if he recedes ought from his
subject, he still makes frequent returns upon himself; a thing not to be found
in the Illiad or Odyssey. Achilles and Ulysses, who are the Heroes celebrated
in them, are quite out of sight for the space of several books, and a man may
travel a great way ere he can meet with them.

I leave it to those who can better spare leisure, to examine, whether the
Episodes of Homer are not more forced and less natural than those of Virgil.
What reference has the wound which Mars received from Diomedes to the anger of
Achilles? Homer expatiates upon that adventure in the fifth of the IliMars
crying like a child and makes his complaint to Jupiter, who unkindly entertains
him with bitter railleries. However, to try all ways, they think fit to send
for Paeon, the Physician of the Gods to cure him: The God, dess Hebe concerns
her self for him. The poet, who thinks the passage Pleasant, prosecutes it
with might and maine. He descends to obscenity, and would be pitied, were it
not for the respect wherewith men are possessed for the grandeur of his Genius.

But to forbear being too particular, which would be an endlessework we may
say Virgil never recedes from his subject, Homer is for the most part at a
distance from his; and by the multiplicity and great train of his Episodes, he
is continually hurried away with the impetuosity and intemperance of his
imaginations, which he follows without any discretion or choice. He may be
compared to those Travellors, who have a great journey to go, yet every thing
stops and amuses them. There is not a good blow given with a sword in the heat
of an engagement., but he must take occasion thence to tell stories and derive
genealogies.

OBSERVE. VII. Of Manners
MOrality, or Manners, ought to follow the Disposition of the Fable, according
to Aristotle's design. It is the third quality of the Poem, and it is not so
much the morality of the Poet himself that is to be understood by these
Manners, as that of the Actors and Persons who are to enter into the action.
What a vast difference shall we find, as to this point 'between our two
admirable Poets? In Homer, Kings and Princes speak as scurrilously one of
another as Porters would do. Agamemnon, in the Iliad, treats Chryses the high
Priest, as an extravagant and impious person, when he only demands, with much
respect, nay with presents, his own Daughter, which he had taken away from him.
He told him, that he had no regard at all to the external marks of his
Priestood, whereby he ought to have gained his respect. Nor does that priest
speak afterward like a good and virtuous man in the prayer he makes to
Apollo, wherein he desires him to destroy the Greeks, that his resentment might
be reveng^d. That is somewhat uncharitable, little beseeming him, whose office
it was to pray for the people, and the preservation of the state, according to
his function of High Priest.

Achilles, in the nineteenth of the Iliads goes to his Mother Thetis, to make
her sensible of the fear he was in, that the flies might injure the body of his
friend Patroclus, then newly killed, and enter into his wounds, which might
breed corruption, such as might render the body most deformed. Is the same zeal
against the flies a thing beseeming a Hero? And is he not an excellent Poet who
employes a Divinity to drive them away?

Ulysses, whom Homer proposes as an exemplar of wisdom, suffers himself to be
made drunk by the Pheacians, for which Aristotle and Philostratus blame that
Poet. But what extravagance was it in that accomplished Sage, so soon to forget
his wife, a women so virtuous as she was, and his Son who was so dear to him,
to squander away so long a time in the dalliances of his Prostitute Calypso,
and to run after the famous Sorceres Circe, and being a King, as he was, to
abase himself so far as to go to fifty-cuffes with a pitiful raskally beggar
named Irus? Priamus, in the 24 of the Iliad, does not speak like a Father at
all; he cruelly all treats his other children, to express his grief for the
death of Hector. He wishes them all dead, so Hector were but alive again. His
affliction might have been expressed some other way.

I say nothing of the inhumanity of Achilles upon the body Hector, after his
death, but only cite what Cicero says of it Trahit Hectorem ad currum
religatum Achilles lacerari eum et sentire, credo, putat, et ulciscitur, Tusc.
Qu^st. l. 1.
ut sibi videtur. Achilles, says he, drags Hector being fastened to a chariot,
I suppose he conceives that he was torn and sensible of that treatment, and
thinks that he is thereby revenged. This pleasure is not very Heroic. The
accidental interview between Ulysses and the daughter of Alcinous in the 6. of
Odysseys is clearly against the rules of deceny; and that Princess forgets her
own modesty to give too long an audience to his compassion or curiosity.

In fine there is but little observance of Decorum in Homers poems: Fathers are
therein harsh and cruel, the Heroes weak and passionate, the Gods subject to
miseries, unquiet, quarrellsome, and not enduring one another; there being not
yet any thing of that Stoic Philosophy, which Zeno and his followers taught
men since, to make them more rational and perfect than the Gods of the Iliads
and Odysseys: whereas in Virgil, every thing observes its proper character.
Drances and Turnus quarrel there, but as persons of quality. The passion
between Aeneas and Dido is indeed pursued to the greatest extremity; yet is
there not any violation of modesty, or of the rules of external decorum: nay
the Gods themselves are people of quality and good repute; and whatever is
essential as to devoir or decency is therein most religiously observed. For
Virgil had followed that admirable model which he had found in Terence, of whom
In argumentis Cacilius pa^m^m poscit, in sermonibu. Plautus, in moribus
Ter^n^ius.
Varro says, that he had, as to morality and good manners, borne the advantage
over Cecilius and Plautus who had be eminent for other talents.

But we must pardon this weakness in Homer, who writ in a time when Morality
was hardly come to any perfection; the world was yet too young to be imbued
with principles of modesty and decorum. Morality was more accomplished and
better known in Virgils time, in whom it was much more cultivated than in
Homer's. For Virgil could not himself smother his sentiment as to the injustice
of the civil war; though it had occasioned the establishment of the Empire, and
that of Augustus fortune. He could not approve it, and as if his heart had been
republicane even in Monarchy, he condemns it, but with the greatest caution
and tenderness imaginable, by cajolling even Caesar himself, who was the
Author thereof; Tuque prior, Tu parce, genus qui ducis Olympo
Projice tela manu sanguis men's! --
So full was his Morality of honor and uprightness, and so opposite to that
spirit of flattery, which that of Monarchy began to countenance.

OBSERVE. VIII. Of Sentiments.
THe Sentiments, which are the fourth qualification of the Poem, have so great
a reference to Manners that the principles of the one are those also of the
other. Nay it may be said, that the sentiments are in effect, but only the
expressions of the Manners. It is not therefore to be admired, if Virgil have
that advantage over Homer, since he had, after so singular a manner, that of
the Manners. He has that obligation to the age wherein he writ, the spirit and
humor whereof was much more just and polite than that of Homer, who made it
not so much his business to think well, as to speak well: for his sentiments
are never so excellent as his discourses. And therefore I shall not stand to
make a long parallel between them, but only a particular observation of some of
the sentiments which Homer attributes to his Heroes, whence a judgment may be
framed of the rest. Agamemnon, in the first of the Iliads, says, that the
reason obliging him to retain Chryseis, is, that he has a greater affection
and esteem for her than for Clytemnestra. A very kind Husband! to prefer a
stranger before a Princess, who was his Wife, and a well deserving person.

Nestor, in the 9 of the Iliads, tells Agamemnon, who desires his advice upon
the distraction of affairs, by reason of the absence of Achilles, that he will
give him an incomparable counsel, and that never any person since the
beginning of the world, has given any that was more prudent and more
excellent. The good man reads a lecture full of ostentation upon the chapter of
Prudence; and indeed considering his reputation of being so wise a man, he
might have been more modest and reserved. Yet is not the counsel he gives him
of so great account, since it amounted only to this, that Achilles should be
appeased, satisfied, and by plausible insinuations, obliged to return to the
Army. This argued not any great reach of policy; a person of ordinary
endowments might have given that counsel.

Antilochus, his Son, in the 23. of the Iliads, speaks to his Horses, enters
into a formal discourse with them, and conjures them to do their utmost to get
the better of Menclaus and Diomedes, in the course which was to be run at the
Games, celebrated upon occasion of the death of Patroclus. He excites them with
the most pressing earnestness of discourse imaginable; yet with very childish
reasons, telling them that his Father, Nestor, will turn them out of his
service, or get their throats cut, if they do not as they should do: in fine,
he becomes a pathetick Orator to brute beasts.

True it is, that Plutarch, in the discourse he made upon Homer, excuses him
for the liberty he took to make Antilochus, in that passage, as also Hector in
another, speak to their horses, upon the score of his opinion of the
transmigration of souls, which he had taken from Phythagoras; But I refer my
self to that philosophy, whether it renders beasts less beasts than they were,
and more capable of hearkening to reason.

Jupiter tells Mars, in the fifth of the Iliads, after Diomedes had wounded
him, that he could not endure him, that he deserved the misfortune which had
happened to him, for having complied too far with the counsels of his Mother
Juno, whose humor was intractable. What kindnesses were these in the Prince of
the Gods, toward his wife? What consolation to his Son Mars who was then newly
wounded? We should never come to an end, if we minutely remarked all. Besides
that, Virgil is not subject to those weaknesses, he is always serious, always
great, always soaring on high, to keep up the Heroic Character: He does not
abase himself to act the pleasant droll, nor fall down to a childish
familiarity, contrary to the decorum of his rank, from which Homer many times
degrades himself. This latter puts off that air of Majesty, which ought to be
annexed to his character; he ever and anon falls into foolish freaks, by
degenerating to the familiar way of talking, and turning things to an air of
divertisment: as when, in the 8. of Odysseys. he entertains the Gods at a
Comedy, some of whom he makes Bouffoons, by introducing Mars and Venus
surpised in the nets laid for them by Vulcan. The battle between Irus and
Ulysses, in the 18. book savours strongly of the Burlesque humor, as do also
the character of Thersitis, and the wounding of Venus in the Iliad. But to do
Homer all the right he deserves, we may justly affirm, that that weakness is
not so much to be attributed to him, as to the age he lived in, which was not
capable of any greater politenesse

OBSERVE. IX. Of Words.
THe sentiments are the expression of the words, and the words that of the
Manners. In this part, which is the fifth, according to Aristotle's order,
Homer triumphs, and is most accomplished There is no contesting with him as to
this advantage, which he has over all the other Poets, in such a manner as
cannot sufficiently be expressed. It Was also this admirable talent of wording
well, that made Sophocles, who passes for the model of Tragedy, his perpetual
admirer and most exact imitator: which gave the Critickes occasion to call him
(...).
The great Lover of Homer. Plato, for the same reason, in the 10. book of his
Republic, calls him the Prince of Heroic Poets. Pindar, in the 7. Ode of the
Nemaean Games, does not commend and admire him, upon any other account, than
that of the loftiness of his discourse. And Longinus proposes him in his (...).
Treatise, as the most accomplished idea of a majestic style.

In fine it may be said, that it is upon this qualification he has imposed
upon all Antiquity; and that the elegance and excellency of his words and
expressions was the charm and enchantment, whereby he merited the dmiration of
all those who have had any acquaintance with literature, and that he has
engrossed to himself the esteem and consideration of all the Learned. For
whereas the diversion and luster of Poesy consists only in its expression,
which is always in a manner the most remarkable part of its beauty, Homer, who
has excelled all Poets in the riches, elegance, and grandeure of his, has
thereby merited, among the ablest persons, that admiration which all ages have
had for him. It Was this that put Pindar, whom Horace proposes to himself for a
model, and all the Greek Lyricks, into a despair of ever attaining the majesty
of Homer's verses; Pindarus novemque Lyrici Homericis versibus canere
timnerunt. And Paterculus has this commendation of him in the first book of
his History, Fulgore carminum solus Poeta appellari meruit; and a little after,
mollissima dulcedine carminum memorabilis.

It Was for this admirable advantage, that Lycurgus made so great ostentation of
his Poesy, in the Oration he made against Leocrates; That Aeschylus says, in
Plutarch and Athenaeus, that his Tragedies are but the crumbs of Homer's great
banquets; That Plato affirms him to be the most accomplished and most divine of
all the Poets; That Aristides says in the third Tome of his Orations, that no
man ever spoke better; That Aristotle, in his Treatise of Poesy said, that he
transcends all other in the height and grandeur of his expressions. Socrates,
in one of his Epistles to Xenopon; Xenophon himself, in his Banquet; Democritus
in Dion Chrysostom, Aristophanes, in the Froggs; Hierocles, in his Fragments
preserved by Stobaeus-Hermogenes, in his Ideas; Philostratus, in his Heroic
Images, Theocritus, in his 16. Idyll; Moschus, in his third; Plutarch, in the
Discourse he made upon Homer; Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, in the Construction of
names; Iamblichus, in the life of Pythagoras; Origin against Celsus, lib. 7.
Thucydides, in the funeral Oration of Pericles; Maximus Tyrius, in his 16.
Dissertation; Lucian, in the elogy of Demosthenes; Themistius, in his 16.
Oration; Theodoret in the second Book de curandis affectibus Graec. and
abundance of others do all affirm the same thing.

But all these great persons, whom I have named, gave Homer these eloges, only
upon the score of the beauty and luster of his Discourse, for which he cannot
be sufficiently commended. And it must be acknowledged, that, upon this
advantage, which he has in an eminent manner, he deserves to be preferrd
before Virgil; though Virgil be the most prudent, the most discreet, and the
most judicious of all those that ever writ.

OBSERVE. X. Reflections upon the Expression of Homer and Virgil.
YEt is there still somewhat to be further remarked upon this expression of
Homer, the luster whereof has so highly merited the esteem and applause even
of all Antiquity.

Transitions, which, upon the account of their character, ought to be very much
varied, for the greater divertisement of the Reader, are much alike, in the
greatest part of his work. We cannot reckon up above twenty or thirty sorts in
the whole extent of near thirty thousand verses: and consequently one and the
same connection, presenting it self ordinarily, is very apt to give disgust,
by so frequent a repetition: which gave Martial occasion to make a little sport
at the (...) and to say, that the Latin Muses are not so light and such
libertines us the Grecian; Qui Musas colimus severiores.

The comparisons, in the same work, are flat, forced, not very natural in some
passages, never very excellent, though, in so great a number as there are of
them, it is impossible but there should be some pertinent and suitable enough.
I shall say nothing of that which is grown so famous for its bluntness, its
undecency, and its meannesse, which is generally known to all, of the Ass
feeding in a wheat field, and which the children would drive out thence with
poles and staves compared to Ajax in the midst of an engagement orewhelm'd with
a haileshower of blows by the enemies. I leave it to be imagined what a noble
effect that should have in a production so grave and serious as that of the
Iliad; and whether the draught and colors of this Comparison afford a prospect
any thing pleasant, whatever light it be turned to. For these are some
Grammarians, who set their wits on the rack to find some delicacy in it. Yet
shall not stick to acknowledge, that there are in this Poet, some admirable
comparisons, but very seldom to be met withal, wherein he exposes all that is
imaginable of graces and beauty in the discourse and expression, and whereof
Virgil has so admirably made his advantage, and which he has so well placed
in his Work by assigning them his own air and light.

Descriptions, which are to be accounted, what is most childish and of least
force in Eloquence, are over-frequent in Homers Works, and spun out too much;
and they carry with them a certain air of affectation. The description of
Alcinous's Garden in the seventh, and that of the Port of Ithaca in the
thi^teenth of the Odyssyes, are of that sort. The description of the Port, and
that of the Grot inhabited by the Nymphs, takes up eighteen verses, upon which
Porphyrius has certain Commentaries. That of Virgil, where he describes Mount
Aetna, in the third, consists only of three verses, though it might have given
him so fair an occasion of dilating. True it is, the description of the Port of
Lybia amounts to ten verses, and that of Fame, in the fourth, to much more: but
the former is pardonable, in regard it was requisite to give the Readers mind
some breathing-time, after that of the Tempest; and it is the greatest
description of any place in the whole Aeneid. And the second, which is the
description of Fame, is not the noblest part in that Author. For he is reserved
every where else, and does not fall into those childishnesses, which Horace, in
his Art of Poetry treats as insupportable in very serious matters.

-- Cum lucus and ara Dianae
Et properantis aquae per amaenos ambitus agros.
Aut flumen Rhenum, aut pluvius describitur arcus.
These descriptions of Woods, Temples Rivulets, the Rainbow, and other
pleasant things, have a smack of puerility, says that great man, and are no
more suitable to great subjects, than a very rich and glittering stuff, to
another that is very simple and modest.

Incaeptis gravibus plerunque and magna professis
Purpureus late qui splendeat unus and alter
Assuitur pannus --
These far-fetched beauties never do well, in as much, as wherever they are
placed, they cannot have any rapport to the rest, by the reason of their being
too glittering; Non erat his locus -- It must also be acknowledged, that Homer
is more admirable than Virgil, in Epithets and Adverbs. This indeed is his
Masterpiece never was there any imagination richer, or more happy, and it is
but a raillery, to pretend that he repeats the (...). There is no such thing,
he is imposed upon; I have counted above twenty sorts of other Epithets in the
Iliad, for Achilles alone. Virgil, in comparison, is poor as to those kind of
ornamants, which proceed from the rich and fruitful treasury of the Greek
Tongue, which the Latin has not. Yet may it be said of this exterior dress,
what a certain person said, sometime since of a great Courtier, who was a very
handsome person, that, if his ranting sleeves and Periwig, were taken off, he
would be but as another man. For if we strip Homer of his Adverbs and Epithets,
he would come into the rank of ordinary Poets. And that doubtless is the most
ornamental part of him, and what makes up one of his greatest beauties.

But it were not amiss, after all, to observe, that these Epithets, which so
much adorn him, are very simple, obvious, and ordinary. For without any more
ado, he calls snow white; milk sweet; fire burning. He does seek so much
delicacy therein as our young Authors, who do not allow any epithets
supportable, if they have not a kind of contrary or counter-signification to
the words joined with them, to give a more extraordinary air to the discourse,
and to make it glitter and sparkle by that opposition, of which the depraved
taste makes a delicacy. For there are some who think it the pleasantest thing
in the world to see those words joined together, which cannot endure one the
other. Ovid, in his Metamorphoses and Heroic Epistles, and Velleius Paterculus
were the first that gave that false gusto to their age, which was so much a
lover of simplicity. Seneca would needs imitate them, with all the writers of
Declamations, the fragments of whom we read in his Controversies; but they did
it without that distinctive precaution, which is observable in Ovid and
Paterculus, who knew how to be thrifty in the disposal of those counterfeit
pearls, Lucan and Tacitus made that character their particular study, and made
an art of clinching or quibbling, which for the most part is only a game
consisting of words opposite among themselves, such as superficial wits are so
much enamored of. And in fine, 'twas consequently to the propagation of this
universal debauche, that the Epigrams of Martial, and the Panegyricks of Pliny,
Pacatus, and Mamertinus came into play. Not but that this kind of writing has
its beauties, but they are like those of women who paint, and are forced to
seek out exterior and artificial ornaments, because they have not any natural
or real ones.

Nor is it to be argued hence, but that an Epithet which is smart, brisk, and
well placed, is a marvailous ornament in a discourse, as that used by Dido in
her Epistle to Aeneas, Exerces preciosa odia -- in the Heroic Epistles of
Ovid, which always call the most glittering part in those works that are the
pure productions of the mind, and whereto our Poets will never attain; And that
which Velleius Paterculus gives to L. Domitius, when he calls him
eminentissimae simplicitatis virum, and abundance of others which may be found
in those two Authors. But whereas those kinds of expressions betray a certain
luster, it happens, that some have not the moderation requisite in the cautious
husbanding of them which they had. For the ordinary imperfection of those
persons who have the talent of expressing themselves in a pleasant and
facetious way, is that they are apt to speak too much, in regard they suffer
themselves to be transported with the success they meet withal, accustom
themselves thereto, and at length become disgustful and importunate, through an
excessive passion they have to be always divertive in their discourse. So that
it were much better, in order to the preventing of this imperfection, and the
more to keep themselves within the limits of sound sense, especially in a
continued discourse, which ought to discover a certain character of grandeur
and elevation, to forbear the use of those so far fetched Epithets, and such as
have a certain air of mystery. Those which are the most obvious and common,
and which best express the nature of the things, are always the most
pertinent, such as are those used by Homer. I must acknowledge that to do this,
there is requisite a greater stock of prudence and discernment, than of wit and
fancy but men never speak well, but when they think wisely, and such as do so,
are never short of their reckoning, as the Critic has observed; Adeo nihil
commodius est quam semper ^um sapientia loqui. Which is to be understood, as
much of the nature of ^he discourse, as of its morality.

OBSERVATION XI. How the character of Homer is to be distinguished from that of
Virgil.
WHoever is desirous to judge with any kind of certainty of these two
incomparable Authors, must be very exact in discerning between their several
characters, which are extremely opposite. For if Homer be observable in the
inclination he has to speak much, Virgil is remarkable for his inclination to
be silent: and it is from this difference, that we may make an exact
computation of the singularity of their Genius's, and of the essential mark of
their character. There are many persons guilty of a great affectation to be
thought Critics, and make it their business to judge of Virgil by profound
reflections, without having ever observed in what the eminent quality of the
fancy and judgment of that Poet, whereby he is distinguished from all the
rest, does consist. For my own part, who admire nothing so much in his way of
writing, as the admirable reservednesse and moderation he is master of in
expressing things, and in not expressing any more then what is requisite, I
have ever been of opinion, that he might be distinguished by them. A man must
be very attentive in the perusal of him; to find out that his reservednesse
and silence in certain passages, speaks much, and argues an exquisite
discretion; and when he has discovered the secret of being well assured of his
meaning, he finds him sometimes as admirable in what he says not, as in what
he says.

And for my part, I do not know any Author but Virgil that has a talent of
prudence great enough to keep in the whole stock of his moderation and
stayednesse of judgment, amidst the ardour and excitations of an imagination
enflamed by the genius of Poesy, and that the most inspire'd of any that ever
was, Lucan, in comparison of him, is an inconsiderate writer; and Statius, a
furious one. Nor could Ovid ever arrive to that excellency, till toward his
latter days, when he writ his Fasti, which is the only part of his works,
wherein he is moderate and discreet: in all the rest he discovers his
youthfullnesse. Nor do his inductions of examples and comparisons in his books
De Tristibus, and his other Elegies, come near that character; and his Heroic
Epistles, which I call the flower of the Roman wit, have not any thing of that
maturity of judgment, which is the transcendent perfection of Virgil. As to
which particular I compare him to those Generals of Armies, who carry along
with them into the midst of a fight all the phlegm and tranquillity of there
Closet Counsels, and who in the greatest heat of action, amidst the noise of
Canons, Drums, and Trumpets, and the general distraction and tumult of an
Engagement, are not attentive to any thing but what their own prudence and
moderation dictates to them, inducing them to consult only their own reason.
And this is a character not to be imagined in any but great Souls, and such as
dare pretend to a consummate wisdom, as was that o Virgil, who in the heat of
his poetica fury, says no more then is requisite to be said, and always
leaves more to be thought of, then he says of a thing.

This is a commendation much like that which Pliny gives the admirable Painter
named Timantes, whose elogy he makes in the 10. chap. of the 35. book of his
History: Timanti plurimum adfuit ingenii, in omnibus operibus ejus intelligitur
plus semper quam pingitur. And a little lower he adds, the better to express
his reflection; Rarum in successu artis, ut ostendat etiam quae occultat: And
which was that miraculous eloquence whereof Cicero speaks to his Friend: Epist.
ad. At. lib. 13.
Sumpsi aliquid hoc loco de tua eloquentia, nam tacui. And it is my judgment,
that in this exact circumspection, and this admirable parsimony of discourse,
we are to find the true character of Virgil, who slightly passes over things,
as a Traveller that is in great haste, without insisting too long upon them: he
generously prunes and cuts off all the superfluities, that he may retain but
what is purely necessary. And indeed in that anatomy of things consists the
excellency of a work, which is never more perfect, than when there cannot be
any thing cut off from it.

It was also in this perfection that that exquisiteness of sound sense
consisted, which reigned at Rome in the time of Augustus, and which was the
character of all the excellent wits that writ then, and whom we look on as the
only modells of the purity of discourse, sobriety of expressions, and that
admirable air of writing which is in vogue at this day.

Of this we have a proof in the order which Augustus gave Tacca and Varius, to
review the Aeneid, which the Author would have suppressed, as not thinking is
complete. He permitted them to cut off those parts of it, which might be taken
away without injury to the work; but he forbad them to do any thing thereto,
nay not so much as to complete the Verses which were imperfect. It Was the humor
and gusto of that happy time to cut off what they could in discourse, to be
sober and frugal therein, and to speak little. Lucretius, who is so pure and so
polite had not yet attai'd that perfection. And Catullus, who was the first
among the Romans, that began to improve and heighten the Language wtih the
advantages of elegance, had not as yet learnt that great precept which Horace
has since so much inculcated to the Pisone^s; -- Prudens versus reprehendet
inertes Ambitiosa recidet ornamenta; Luxuriantia compescat: He does not repeat
any thing else, in his Satyr upon Lucilius: -- Currat sententia, neu se
Impediat verbis lassas onerantibus aures. And a little lower, speaking of the
same Lucilius, he says, that if he had florish'd in his time, he would have
known how to have contracted himself, and no doubt would have dashed out many
things out of his verses; Detereret sibi multa, recideret omne quod ultra
Perfectum traheretur -- This was their course in that time, which they had
learnt from the dictates of sound sense, then in its Empire, which Virgil has
so well practiced, and whereof he makes his essential character.

On the contrary, that of Homer is observable for his tediousness in speaking
and relating things. He is the greatest talker of all. Antiquity, insomuch that
the Greeks themselves, though chargeable with excessive discoursing above all
others, have reprehended Homer for that intemperance of words, as a
considerable miscarriage in discourse, which they called (...). He is ever in
his rehearsalls, not only as to the same words, but also to the same things;
and so he is in a perpetual circulation of repetitions. That flux of the
tongue, and that ebullition of fancy make him carry things much beyond the mark
they ought to have been levelled at; and thence it comes, that the draughts he
makes of things are for the most part too accurate; and by that means he leaves
nothing to be done by the imagination of the Reader, who, in order to his
particular satifaction, ought regularly to be as much taken up with what he
thinks of, as what he reads.

Upon this account is it that Virgil never burdens his thoughts with the whole
matter lying before him, that so he may leave some part of it exposed to the
reflections of those who read him. Young Authors, who are all apt to be
impertinently zealous in what they do, and to run into the character that has a
smock of puerility; and all those who are less fortified with judgment, then
fancy, are not able to comprehend this maxim: for, out of a defect of
experience, they follow their natural inclination, and as by an excess of
discourse and verbosity they carry things beyond their proper limits, so they
ordinarily give ideas for true objects, by making too too accurate
representations of all the matter they handle. This is an imperfection which
Apelles reprehended in the Painters of his time, as Cicero observes, Pictores
eos errare dicebat, qui non sentirent, quid esset satis.

Yet are we further to observe, that this defect relates only to the expression
and the words. For it is a very great perfection for any one to give the most
complete images he can of things, and always to raise his superstructures upon
the groundwork of the greatest ideas.

OBSERVE. XII. Of the unity of the Subject and Time of the two Poems.
YEt is it to be acknowledged, that there cannot be any thing more
advantageously said of Homer, than what Aristotle, the wisest and most
judicious of all the Critics, has said of him. He proposes him in his Books
of Poesy for the model of the Epick Poem, and he derives all his precepts from
the Iliad and the Odyssey. But it may also be urged on the other side, that
Aristotle having not met with, in his time, but only two inconsiderable Poems,
one upon Hercules. and the other upon Theseus, whereof he speaks in his
Poeticks, which might come into any contest with the Iliad and the Odyssey, it
is not to be wondered at, that he takes these for a model, since the two others
are rather the Lives of Hercules and Thesius, than the subject of an Epick
action.

And that was it made Horace speak so earnestly against those Poets, whom he
calls Cyclick Authors, by reason of the pure natural and historical
representation they gave of things, multiplying matters clearly against the
simplicity and the unity of action, which is essential to the Epopaea: upon
which score we are yet further to examine Homer and Virgil, that so we may not
omit any thing required in an exact comparison.

I grant, that as to the unity of the time, the Iliad and the Odyssey have the
pre-eminence over the Aeneid: for the action of the Odyssey, from Vlysses's
leaving Calypso to his being discovered, lasts but forty five days; and the
action of the Iliad takes up but eight or nine months at most: and the Aeneid
takes up a whole year and somewhat more.

Nay some pretend that the unity of action is more perfect in the two Poems of
Homer, than it is in that of Virgil; inasmuch as not only the action of both of
them is one and the same, but also of one single person. For Achilles does all
things himself; the same thing is to be said of Ulysses, (as Aristotle affirms)
who reestablishes himself without the assistance of any other: and that seems
to argue a certain hint of grandeur. Aeneas does not any thing but with the
assistance of his people; which is not so much to be wondered at. And Paul Beni
observes in the second of his Academical Discourses, that the Apologist of
Dante pretends that his Poem is more perfect in regard it is the action of one
single person: Costui Poema, oltre esser Heroico e fatto anco di attione, di
uno assolutamente solo. E cio ad essempio, non gia de l Aeneide, ove con
assercito opra Enea: ma ^en dell Iliade e Odissea; dove al fin e Achille e
Vlisse solo fa Heroiche imprese: percio conclude che il Poema di Dante sia
eccelentemente maraviglioso e This Poem, besides that it is Heroic, is also
composed of action, and that of one person only: And this according to the
example, not only of the Aeneid, wherein Aeneas acts with an Army; but also of
the Iliad and Odyssey, where in fine both Achilles and Ulysses perform alone
all the heroic actions: whence he concludes, that Dante's Poem is excellently
mavelous and illustrious.

To this it may be answered, that the unity of the person is sufficiently
preserved by that of his Character and condition; That the Epick Poem ought to
present the perfect Idea of a great Captain and General of an Army, and and not
of a Knight Errant, who most commonly is but a phantasm and a Romantic
Palladine: and it frames a greater character of a Hero, and it attributes to
him a much more noble air of dignity, to make him a Sovereign and the head of
a people, as Beni observes in the same place: L' attione Heroica debbe esse una
d'un solo, ma pero Prencipe and capo di molti: in regard that, as he says,
great enterprises, such as the conquest of Countries and Kingdoms, the sieges
of Cities, and Battles, ought to be carried on by Armies, managed by the
conduct and designs of one person, which is as much as is requisite for the
unity of the action. Besides, there is always a defectiveness as to matter of
probability in those actions of Knight-Errants and solitary Worthies, such as
Hercules was, and however they are dressed up, they still smell strong of the
Romance and Fable.

Nay we may further add, that the unity of action, so it be rightly taken, is
more perfectly served in the Aeneid, than in the Iliad, where after the death
of Hector, which ought to have closed the action, there are still two Books to
come; the 23. which comprehends the Exercises celebrated for the death of
Patroclus, and which contribute nothing to the principal action; and the 24.
which contains the Lamentations of the Trojans, and the ransoming of Hector's
body, which have no connection to the principal action, that being complete
without it.

There is yet this further fault to be noted, that a Poem, which had no other
design then to celebrate the honor of the Greeks, should be closed with that
which is done to Hector, the chiefest of their Enemies, where the Poet employes
a whole Book, to give the description of his funeral solemnities; which
procedure seems to be in some manner defective; and it is of such a work we may
cite that passage of Horace, which few understand as it ought to be understood;

Art. Poet.
-- Amphora caepit Institui, currente rota cur urceus exit? Homer takes his
beginning the best in the world, for the honor of the Greeks: their glory is
the only thing he prosecutes in all his work; and he makes an end by that of
Hector, whose loss he brings in lamented with so much magnificence. Was it not
a little mistake in him to forget the design he had proposed to himself? Does
not the Aeneid take its period much better by the death of Turnus, which closes
the action? Virgil does not carry on things any farther; he knew well enough,
that he had committed a fault if he had not stopped there.

Abundance of other observations might be made upon a minute examination of
those two works; and particularly upon the delicacy wherewith Virgil reflects
on things, wherein he has still a great advantage over Homer, whose thoughts
are not delicate upon any subject. For what more insinuating, what more
surprising can there be imagined then that of the Apotheosis of Anchises, in
the fifth of the Aeneid, which so highly flatters Augustus and the Romans, with
an extraction whereof he so ingeniously establishes the Divinity? Not to make
any mention of the most illustrious Roman Families allegorically deciphered in
the combats described in the same Book, the mystery and application whereof
Paul Beni explicates in his Commentaries upon Virgil.

What is there to be found in Homer any way comparable to that passage, which I
have ever looked upon as of exquisite delicacy, in the sixth of the Aeneids,
where Virgil is content to attribute to the Greeks, the glory of being
ingenious, reserving to the Romans that of Authority and jurisdiction?

Excudent alii spirantia mollius era,
Orabunt causas melius, etc. --
Tu regere imperio populos, Roma^e, meme^to.
What shall I say of the Littora littoribus contraria -- in the fourth Book,
which works so admirable an effect in order to the war between Rome and
Carthage? Of Dido's imprecation, by the expression of so passionate a revenge?
Exoriare aliquis nostris ex ossibus ultor, etc. which, in the obscurity of
future events does so delicatly point at the great Hannibal, the most
illustrious enemy of the Common wealth, and with whom Rome was so long
disputing the Empire of the world. The death of Marcellus in the sixth is of the
same force, nay has somewhat that is more insinuating and more exquisite, as
it appeared by the impression which that passa^e on the spirit of Augustus, and
much more upon the heart of Octavia his Mother, who fell into a swound at the
very recitation, ^ which Virgil made of it in the Emperors presence.

shall say nothing of all the complants of Dido in the fourth, which ma^e Saint
Augustine weep so often as, he himself acknowledges in his Confessions. Lib. 1.
c. 14.
He is far enough from having that tenderness for Homer whom he complements no
better, then to call him dulcissime vanus.

In a word, Virgil is much more solid, his expressions have somewhat in them
that is more real; He does not speak so much at random, nay his very
discourses of greatest tenderness and passion, which in any other would
discover a certain character of lightness, have not in his work any thing that
is frivolous and chimericall; there is no^ any thing, but has some ground, and
his words are so many things; which renders him more affective and more
patheticall

There are yet a thousand other passages, which I shall not stand to insis^
upon, as that of the second of the Aeneid;

Iliaci cineres, et flamma extrema meoru^ which alone destroys all the
objectios that may be made against Aeneas, of his defect in point of valor.
The death of Dido, touched over with an air so pathetick, which begins with
this Verse At trepida et caeptis immanibus; -- The abbridgement of the Roman
History engraved upon the Buckler in the eight, the explication of the destinies
of the Roman Empire by Jupiter, in the first, the Conquests of Augustus, to
whom he dedicates his work in the sixth which make an admirable elogy of that
Emperor, Hic vir hic est etc. and all those admirable insinuations, whereof he
does with so much artifice make his advantage, to force his way into men's
apprehensions, and to inspire them with his inclinations and affections, which
every where bear the expression of his genius, which are are so many miracles
of art, and cannot be perceived but only by such as are intimately acquainted
with him, and accordingly able to judge of him. For there is a greater
penetration and perspicacity of apprehension requisite, to discover what is
good and excellent in a work, than to find in it what is defective: inasmuch as
the defects are more remarkable than the true beauties, which easily elude the
reflections of persons of an ordinary rate of understanding, and discover
themselves only to the more intelligent.

But whereas the noblest passage of Virgil, and his real Masterpiece, is the
passion of Dido, I cannot let it pass without allowing it a stricter reflection
than any of the rest. True it is, that Eloquence never employed all its
advantages of artifice and ornaments in any Work with so great success as in
that. All the degrees of that passion, all the renovations of that growing
affection, and that well known frailty of the sex, are there discovered in
such a manner as raises admiration in the best able to judge of them; and the
greater their abilities are, the more will they be disposed to discover the
excellency of that passage, and to admire all the parts of it. All is neat,
delicate and highly passionate in the description of that adventure, and the
world is not likely ever to see any thing that shall surpass it.

Tasso indeed may happily afford us some passages which seem to have a greater
eye of luster, as that of the adventure of Tancrede and Clorinda: but if we
look on him of all sides, we shall find, that all the proportions and
correspondencies with the principal action, do not seem to be so exactly
observed there, as they are in that of Dido.

Yet is there one great reproach made to Virgil, to wit, that he has put a
filthy slur on that Lady, by attributing so great a passion to her, contrary to
her true character. For History makes her a woman of good repute. But this is
an artifice, and that the most delicate and subtle of any observable in Virgil,
who to excite a certain contempt for a Nation which was afterward to be so
detestable to the Romans, conceived himself obliged, not to celebrate any
virtue in her, who should be the foundress of it, imagining he might, without
any disparagement to himself, sacrifice her, the better to flatter his own
Country, which no doubt, would have boggled at the reputation History gave that
Princess. And whereas this artifice was advanced only to humor the Romans, and
that the Poet himself looked on them as Masters of the world, with whose
sentiments all other Nations ought to comply, or at least to conform thereto,
yet he thought himself concerned to use all precautions, to prepossess their
minds, upon that disguising of the truth. To that purpose he cunningly brings
the Gods into the plot, to put a better gloss upon the sacrificing of her.
Venus and Cupid make it their business. Nay he makes them use all their art to
smother the good repute which common fame gave that Queen. This is the subject
of Juno's complaint to Venus, which serves only to make a fuller discovery of
the earnest solicitation of those two Divinities to surprise, and, in the end,
to seduce Dido;

Egregiam vero laudem, and spolia ampla refertis Tup; puerque tuus, etc. The
Characters of Sinon in the second of the Aeneid, and that of Mezentius, in the
eighth and tenth, are also of the highest pitch of accomplishment. Homer indeed
has many more of that kind, and a greater variety of them: but those on which
Virgil thought fit to bestow a particular draught, are better prosecuted than
those of Homer, and he has found the secret to express them with a greater
liveliness.

Yet must it be acknowledged that Homer has a better stored and more sumptuous
stock of invention, and greater varieties; a more delicate and and divertive
cast of versification; a more sparkling air of expressing things, nay a smarter
and more peircing sound of words, more suitable to Poesy, and such as much more
fills the ear; for the defect whereof: Cicero found fault with Demosthenes:
Vsque eo difficiles ac morosi sumus, ut nobis non satisfaciat ipse Demosthenes,
non semper implet aures meas, ita sunt avidae and capaces, and semper aliquid
immensum infinitumque desiderant.

This indeed Homer has much beyond Virgil, and the ear is much more satisfied
with the currency, the harmony, and the whole air of his versification; because
the Greek Tongue has all those advantages over the Latin, which is more
modest, more grave, and more serious. True it is also, that he has a greater
extent of matters, and affords his Readers a larger prospect; but his fancy
ever and anon hurries him from one place to another; he is not so much master
of it, as Virgil is of his. In Bruto.
It Was this defect that made him commit that so essential an oversight of adding
the two books of the Iliad after the close of the action; one, of the death of
Hector the other, of the Games for that of Patroclus; and one other after that
of the Odyssey, which is the mutual discovery, of one to the other, of Ulysses
and Penelope. For as every Poem, as well Epick as Dramatick, ought to take its
period with the close of the principal action, so after the said close, which
ought to put an end to things, a man cannot make any addition thereto, without
committing an extravagance.

I find few passages in Homer, such as may be opposed to those of Virgil. Yet
can I not forbear having a kindness for that of the sixth book of the Iliad,
where Andromache, who was so honest and virtuous a woman, bids adieu to her
Husband Hector, then going to his last combat with Achilles. In a word, it is
impossible to imagine any thing of greater tenderness than that a???dieu,
wherein that Princess, by a presentiment of something disastrous, let fall some
tears, a thing she was not wont to do, for she was not subject to any weakness,
and the Poet says delicately enough, that she began to lament with her women,
the death of Hector, who was yet alive.

(...)* True it is, that in regard people do bewayl only dead persons, and that
she bewayls a man that is alive, that expression is tender and well imagined;
there are but few such in Homer; for though the expressions are still kept up
in him, and are not ever neglected, yet the things he says do as it were lagg
and languish. Of this rank is the numbering of the Grecian Fleet in the second
of the Iliad: all there is at the same rate, and the squadrons are all for the
most part terminated by one and the same Verse: -- (...). And all the banquets
of the Iliad are served up in the same fashion, without any variety.

Nay Vlysses's being known by his wife Penelope, in the 23. of the Odyssey,
which was the most favorable passage in the world to set all the subtleties of
art on work, has nothing but flat and simple surprises, cold and heavy
astonishments, and very little delicacy of sentiment and real tenderness.
Penelope is too long obstinate, in opposing the reasons they allege to
persuade her, that he is her husband, who contributes nothing himself to his
own discovery; He suffers his wife to hearken too long to her distrust and
circumspection; the formalities she observes to be assured of all things, are
there set down by tale and measure, least there might be any mistake, which
methinks has somewhat that is mournful and languishing, in a place which
required so much fire and vivacity. Ought not the secret instinct of her Love
to have inspired her with other thoughts? And should not her heart have told
her what her eyes did not tell her? For Love is illuminated and inspired; he
has a secret and mysterious voice, which explicates his meaning better than the
senses. But Homer was not skilled in that Philosophy, which the Italians have
since so much taught; and Virgil, who makes Dido foresee the design Aeneas had
to forsake her, before she had notice brought her of it, would have made a
better advantage of that occasion.

OBSERVE. XIII. That there is in Homer a greater air of Morality and
sententiousness, than in Virgil.
WE must not also dispute this advantage with Homer; for this is so true, that
Macrobius lib. 5. c. 6. of his Questions, says that Homer has stuffed his
Poems with sentences, and that his pleasant sayings were quoted by the People
as Proverbs. Homerus omnem Poesim suam ita sententiis farsit, ut singula ejus
apophthegmata vicem proverbiorumin civium ore fungantur. And an English Author
has lately given us a considerable volume of sentences collected out of Homer,
upon all the matters of Morality, which he has reduced into common places.

But I pretend with Heinsius. in his Poetical tract upon Aristotle, that those
sententious reflections of Morality are rather designed for the Theater, and of
the Dramatick kind, than of the Heroic, the essential character whereof is
Narration, which ought to be of a continued thread, and simple, without
affectation of figures, and without all that tackle of reflections, which
despoil a discourse of its natural color and force: a fault wherewith that
excellent Author of the Satyricon does so earnestly reproach the declamators of
his time, Inanibus sonis ludibria quaedam excitando effecistis, ut corpus
Orationis enervaretur, and caderet. By gingling and rediculous discourses, you
have enervated the body of the Oration, and brought it to the ground.

In a word, that force which some pretend ordinarlily to sum up in a small
compasle of words to make up a sentence, is wont to exhaust, and extremely
weaken the rest of the discourse, by depriving it of its natural simplicity,
and giving it a forced air. For this reason is Livy a much more accomplished
Historian than Tacitus, in regard he has less reflections, which are more
proper for the Theater, than for History, and Narration. Ad ^^^en l* 4.
Cicero is also of that judgment in one of his Books of Rhetoric: Sententias
interponi raro convenit; ut rei actores, non vivendi praeceptores esse
videamur. So that Sentences and moral reflections are a beauty not sit for the
Epick Poem, in regard they are not suitable to Narration, which is the
principal and essential character thereof. Yet may the Poet bring in to it
some sentences or reflections, when he makes the Actors speak whom he
introduces; but he ought not to do it, when he speaks himself, unless it be
very seldom; and then too it must not seem to have been sought for.

As to this we may safely imitate Livy who in the body of his History puts in
very little of that kind, but reserves it to be said by those whom he makes to
speak. So that the Poet is to let them slip by, without affecting to be the
utterer of them, much less to scatter and strew them up and down as Homer does:
and it is a mistake for any to think to esteem him upon that account, inasmuch
as that affectation is certainly an imperfection, which Virgil found out a way
to avoid; reflecting that there was not any thing more opposite to that simple
and continued air, which he professed to observe, than those glittering words
and fancies, which seem Independent from the discourse, and jutting out of the
structure, in regard they are not well proportioned thereto, and serve only to
magnify the Object, and make a noise; Rerum tumore and sententiarum vanissimo
strepitu.

And this has some reference to that great precept of natural reason, for those
who make it their business to write; which one of the most expert and subtle
Critics of all Antiquity gave heretofore, and which is not sufficiently
understood: Curandum ne sententiae emineant extra corpus orationis expressae;
sed intexto vestibus color niteant: which passage I translate not, that all
may be at liberty to render it, according to their several abilities. It
suffices, as to what I pretend, that it appears, that Author, does in that
place condemn the fancies which a too strong and too brisk expression, makes,
in some sort, distinguishable from the body of the Discourse; he would have
nothing over exquisite, or too far???fetc'd, and that all the luster be as
natural to it, as color is to garments. These sorts of simple and natural
words, says he, did natural reason dictate to Sophocles and Euripides, and
which they saw it necessary to use in speech, before men bethought themselves
of shutting up youth in Schools, and to limit all the exercises of the mind to
pure Declamations. Nondum Juvenes declamationibus continebantur, cum Sophocles
and Euripides invenerunt verba quibus deberent loqui. In a word, all these
ornaments of words and brisk fancies so far-fetc'd and so frequent, deprive the
discourse of its natural beauty and true dignity: Cic ad Heren. lib* 4.
Gravitas minuitur exornationibus frequenter collocatis, quod est in his lepos
and festivitas, non dignitas neque pulchritudo, And this principal is general
for all great things, whose grandeur attended by a regular simplicity, makes
all the excellence and dignity of them; as we see in Painting and Architecture,
where great fancies are kept up much less by the multitude of ornaments, than
by that simple and even, but regular air, which gives them their grandeur and
Majesty.

OBSERVE. XIV. Showing how Homer has the glory of invention over Virgil.
INvention, one of the qualities most essential to the Poet, is one of the
advantages of Homer wherein he deserves preference before Virgil. For he is the
Model, and original, which Virgil proposed to himself. But it is to be
observed, that as Poet. c. 23.
Aristotle makes mention of a small Iliad, attributed by Suidas to one named
Antimachus, which was the abbridgment of a greater, upon which there is some
likelihood that Homer framed his work; so it may be conjectured thence, that
the glory of the invention was not wholly due to him.

Besides, we read in Lib. 3.
Athenaeus, that one Hegesianax had writ, in verse, before Homer, what had
passed at the Siege of Troy. Cicero also makes mention of one Callisthenes, who
had written upon the same subject. It Is true that he lived in the time of
Alexander, that is to say, some ages after Homer: but it is to be conceived,
that he had other collections different from those of Homer, since he gave a
different account of that expedition, then he has done.

Suidas affirms, that one Corinnus, a Disciple of Palamedes, had also written
an Iliad in Verse, about the time that Troy was taken: and that another Poet,
contemporary to Homer, named Syagrus* has also written upon that subject: That
all those works were suppressed by the endeavors of Homer, who was not so
blind, (as some have imagined) as not to make it his business to transmit his
own labors only to posterity, and so to be accounted the first Author of the
Iliad. And as the others were his model, as he was that of Virgil, so it were
to be wished, that we knew, whether he has been as happy in the coppying of
others, as Virgil has been in imitating him.

But we are to make a great abatement of the esteem which all Antiquity has
had for Homer, if we credit what Aelian says in his lib. 13. c. 14.
History. He pretends, that the opinion of the Learned of his time was, that
Homer had not composed the Iliad and Odyssey, but only by fragments, not
proposing to himself any continued design; and that he had not given any other
title to those diverse parts, which he had composed in the heat of his fancy
and the impetuosity of his Genius, without any order, save only that of the
subject and matter whereof he treated, as The valor and prowess of Agamemnon.
The exercises instituted for the funeral solemnity of Patroclus; The engagement
near the Ships, their Number; and so of the rest; That he had done the like for
the Odyssey That Lycurgus was the first that brought from Jonia to Athens,
those several parts, distinct one from the other, and without any connection;
And that Pisistratus was the person who disposed them into some order, and, of
them, made up the two Poems of the Iliad and the Odyssey, which we now have:
And from thence, as some pretend, is derived the name of Rarpsodies, which has
since been given to those two Poems.

But I find in my self a backwardness to assent to this story; for it were to
deprive Homer of his greatest glory, to take away from him the disposition of
his Poems: That were a weakness, which I cannot allow that great man to be
chargeable withal, especially considering that Aristotle has authorized the
belief established since in all ages, to wit, that he is the true Author of
those Poems, though Josephus in his first book against Apion, seems to be of
the same opinion with Aelian, and Plutarch, in the life of Lycurgus, and Cicero
in his third book de Oratore, give some occasion to believe it. But this
opinion would so highly contribute to the absolute destruction of Homers merit,
that it were better to give Aelian the character of a collector of trivial
stories. As for the other three, who countenance his sentiment, as they do not
so peremptorily stand upon the affirmative, so we may well adhere to the common
opinion, and be favorable to the reputation of Homer, which, as to this point,
is too strongly established, to admit of any contest.

OBSERVE. XV. Of the Exordiums of Homer and Virgil's Poems.
IT were to be further wished, in order to the fuller satisfaction we might
derive from an exact comparison of these two great men, that a parallel should
be made, between the beginings of the Iliad and Odyssey, and that of the
Aeneid, which is the first touch toward the execution of those excellent
Poems. For though the beginings of great works ought to be simple and modest,
as Orat.
Cicero advises; Principia verecunda, non elatis intensa verbis, and that
Horace so highly blames him who begins with so much pomp and ostentation
Fortunam Priami cantabo, etc. yet were it not amiss to to take a fair start,
and to begin well. The beginning of the Iliad, as I translate it, runs thus.
Sing, O my Muse, of the wrath of Achilles the son of Peleus, that wrath which
proved so pernicious to his own party, by abundance of misfortunes which
itbrought upon them; it occasioned the death of many Heroes. He takes a
pleasure in aggravating that wrath by its causes and effects; he advances
things with a too-confident, too violent, and too hyperbolical expression, for
a beginning: (...).
That wrath, says he, made a bloody slaughter of the bodies of the Heroes.
Thus Didimus, one of Homers most exact Interpreters explicates him. He does not
reflect, that it is his Hero, of whom he speaks, whose passion he aggravates,
and that he seeks out extraordinary terms, to express the distraction it made
in the Army whereof he was a great commander. He might have said things more in
general, in a proposition which ought to be simple; there was no necessity of
running it over again, 'twas enough that he had called that passion pernicious;
there is a certain affectation in the repetition of it so often; and he takes a
pleasure in amplifying what he ought to have concealed, or at least alleviated.
He prosecutes things yet farther, saying, that that implacable wrath made the
bodies of those Heroes a prey to all the dogs and birds. Nay so far was he
possessed by that spirit of exaggeration, that he imposes upon him; for of that
number of Heroes, whom the wrath of Achilles brought to destruction, we cannot
in reason allow any to deserve that name but Patroclus; and I much question
whether there were many among those that perished who might deserve it, or had
a good title thereto, A man should never descend to that particularity in a
proposition intermixed with invocation; but what this Poet adds compleats his
miscarriage, and makes an enormous contrariety; -- (...), 'Twas the will of
Jupiter it should be so. He forgets that he is speaking to his Muse, which is a
Divinity, that knows all things and ought not to have forgotten any thing of
what it knows: He takes occasion to inform it, that it was the will of God*
that things should happen so. It was the part of Homers Muse to acquaint him
with the secrets of the divine will, and what passes in the order of its
Decrees, and not Homers to tell that to his Muse, the Daughter of Mnemosyne and
Jupiter, that is to say, of the Understanding and memory. It is yet much more
strange in him to add those words to amplify the excess of the destruction,
which that wrath had caused the Greeks, since it had obliged the Gods to
concern themselves in the resentment of that passion, and that it was their
pleasure, it should occasion that destruction of all the people of good repute
in that Army. And it is to carry on the dreadful effects of that wrath to the
utmost extremities, to authorize by the will of the Gods, the defeat of the
Grecian Army, whose loss was the accomplishment of the good pleasure of
Jupiter, who has the character of showing kindness. Upon that benignity his
very name is grounded, which is the same as Juvans pater.

It would be a hard matter to tell where this invocation ends: the two
subsequent verses are part of it, and it is confounded with the Narration, if
we look narrowly upon it: besides, to say the truth, what construction soever
be made of those words, we shall find a certain affectation in them: he has a
mind to fall a moralizing too soon, when he does it at the very entrance of a
work, which is not moral, and that at the fourth verse of it. The Readers mind
is not yet prepared for reflections: it ought to have been instructed,
prepossessed, and a little inflamed beforehand.

The Exordium of the Odyssey is this, I know not whether it appear any thing
more rational. Give me an account, O my Muse, of that subtle and expert man,
who travel d through so many Countries, and crossed so many Seas; He suffered
much indeed; but still he was extremely careful to preserve himself. He also
took some care for the preservation and return of his companions: but he
brought not one home, they all perished. An admirable Hero! whose essential
character is to be subtle, crafty, and circumspect, yet the interpreters allay
the signification of (...), to excuse Homer. Put I do not see what allay can be
allowed it; besides that in the whole prosecution of the story, the conduct of
Ulysses bears no other quality in particular then that of craft, which is many
times managed by impostures and lies, which is in no wise Heroic; and Minerva
her self, however she may be favorable to him, cannot forbear reproaching him
therewith.

And if it be urged that that craft is a dexterity and readiness of wit, why
does he not make use of it for the safety of his Companions, but employ all his
subtlety to preserve himself? But they all perished through their own fault.
Ought not this Hero, a person so wise, and of such extraordinary prudence, to
have had conduct enough to secure them from that misfortune? Nay the very
reason of their destruction is ridiculous and fabulous; They were destroyed for
their having eaten the Suns Oxen, This is a far-fetched destruction; the
Hero, or the Poet was willing to be rid of them; and if Vlysses's providence
had not been great enough to save his Companions who ran the same fortune with
him, ought not the Poet at least to have dissembled it? Who obliges him to
begin with that, and to advance that weakness of his Hero in the Frontispiece
of his Poem, and the most obvious part of it, and to implore his Muse to
celebrate the fame of that so subtle Hero, who made a shift to save himself,
and suffered all that were with him to be destroyed? Is there any thing in the
world less Heroic, more weak and more despicable than this? Tasso, in the
proposition of his Poem, makes a good advantage of that fault, for the
accomplishment of his Hero, of whom he says,

-- e sotto i santi
Segni ridusse i suoi compagni erranti.
The beginning of the Aeneid is more simple and more natural, and its
proposition is without any difficulty. I sing, says Virgil, the arms and
valor of that Man, who having retreated from the ruins of Troy, was the first
that came into Italy. He had much to suffer, through the persecutions of the
Gods, and the animosity of Juno. An enemy of that consequence renders him the
more considerable. But after all that, he builds a great City, which is to be
the seat of the Worlds Empire, and the Metropolis of the Universe. According to
this model of comparison, all the rest may be compared at leisure.

OBSERVE. XVI. The Conclusion of the Discourse.
I Leave it to the decision of the Learned, what judgment ought to be made of
both these admirable Poets, when they shall have taken the pains to inform
themselves of the truth of these Observations, and have perticularly reflected,
that all the Grammarians, who are the true Critics of State having not been
able to endure the luster of Homers manner of expression, and the magnificence
of his way of versifying, which doubtless, is more brisk and glittering than
that of Virgil, have suffered themselves to be dazzled thereby, and without
penetrating to the ground of both their works, have for the most part
attributed the advantage to Homer. But they all judge of of them as
Grammarians, without considering the observations I have made.

Nay Plutarch himself, in a discourse expressly writ by him upon Homer,
expatiates much upon his great Learning, and the universal knowledge he had of
all the sciences; and he sufficiently denotes the vast extent of that great
Genius by the Idea he gives of his character, without insisting upon what is
essential to the Poem. Accordingly, all the learned, who fix their reflections
upon the expression of Homer, and the exterior part of his works, are not
competent judges. To judge aright of them, they must take in the knowledge of
what is essential, compute all the proportions thereof, consider whether the
beauties are well placed therein, whether the intertexture of the probable part
with the miraculous, be therein judiciously observed, whether the licenses,
which poesy permits, be not over confident, or violent, whether all the
decorums, as to manners and sentiments be therein exactly prosecuted, whether
the expressions be smart and passionate, whether every thing keeps its proper
rank, and bears its true character, whether soundness of sense and reason
spread through the whole production, and whether things are all as they ought
to be: for nothing can please, if it be not so, according to the great precept
of Quintilian; Nihil potest placere quod non decet. In a word, they are to
judge of these great works, as they would do of a Palace or sumptuous
structure, whose chief beauty consists in the proportion there is between the
design in general and its parts, and their mutual rapport: this is that which
such as are well skilled consider in them, without fixing their thoughts on the
exterior ornaments, which take up the survey of the ignorant.

To conclude there is among the Catalects of the ancient Poets, the fragment of
an Epigram of an uncertain Authors, which may contribute somewhat to the
judgment, which ought tobe made of Homer and Virgil's Poems. This fragment
says, that the former is more ample, the latter more regular and complete.
Virgil himself is the Epigrammatist.

Maeonium quisquis Romanus nescit Homerum,
Me legate, and lectum credat utrumque sibi:
Illius immensos miratur Graecia campos,
At minor est nobis, sed been cultus ager.
The lesser works are indeed ever more complete than the great ones, in regard
the Authors may bestow more time and leisure in the polishing and perfecting of
them.

But in fine, to avoid being tedious by insisting on any further perticulars,
which to do, we should be obliged to borrow matter from Eustathius, and
Servius, the most eminent and exact commentators of those two great men;
methinks, I may say, without deciding any thing, as I have always pretended,
that, according to the observations I have made, things may be thus divided:
that Homer has more fancy, Virgil more discretion and judgment; and that if I
should choose rather to have been Homer, then Virgil, I should also much rather
wish that I had writ the Aeneid, then the Iliad and Odyssey. In which I have
the approbation of Propertius, as it appears by his suffrage, which he bestows
on Virgil, in so disinteressed a manner, For though his reputation were much
more established than that of Virgil, and though the jealousy of the mind,
which is the true self-love, be incomparably greater than that of the heart,
yet does he not stick to take off the Crown from his own head, to place it upon
Virgils, and to acknowledge, that all ought to give him place, nay even Homer
himself.

Cedite Romani Scriptores, cedite Graii,
Nescio quid majus nascitur Aeneide,
FINIS.

