RELIGIO LAICI, OR A Lay-mans Faith, Touching the SUPREME HEAD AND INFALLIBLE
GUIDE OF THE CHURCH. In Two Letters to a Friend in the Country.

By J. R. A Convert of Mr. Bays's.

Licensed

June the 1st. 1688.


LONDON, Printed for John Newton, at three Pigeons over against the Inner-Tempe
Gate in Fleet Street. 1688.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
A Little before the late King (of ever Blessed Memory) dyed, a Poem was
Published called Religio Laici, etc. and not long after another by the same
Author called the Hind and Panther: Which Pieces (though as opposite to one
another as Light and Darkness) fell into an intimate Friends hand of mine, who
knowing me a great Admirer of that Authors Poems, writ to me to desire my
Judgment, touching the Infallibility of his Mother Hind, which was the occasion
of the following Letters, which indeed has been long since writ; and the
Reasons why they were not Published before are two: The first is the same which
a late Reverend Author gave in his Reasons for taking away the Test (viz.) They
were designed for a private use: The second was my fear (through a knowledge of
my own Inability) of a good Cause suffering by the weakness of its Advocate;
but however the Importunity of my Worthy Friend, to whom I writ, did at last
prevail with me to send them thus (as we all came) Unpollished into the World.
And as you have found them (without Prejudice if possible) read them, and if
you meet with any thing that makes amends for the pains I have my End, if not I
am sure you miss Yours.

J. R.

THE FIRST LETTER.
SIR,
THE many and never to be forgotten Favors I have received commands a ready
Compliance to your Request, of giving you my Opinion touching the Doctrine of
Infallibility, so universally received and believed in the Church of Rome,
though at the same time they differ amongst themselves where to fix this
Infallible Guide; some are for placing it in a General Council, others in his
Holiness and Council together, and a third sort in the defusive Church, and a
fourth in the Person of the Pope only, he being St. Peter's Successor, to whom
our Savior gave (as they say) the power of the Keys, etc. But however though
they differ in the Manner, yet they do all agree in the Matter, that such a
Convenient Doctrine should belong to their Church; and truly I cannot blame
them for it, for it is indeed the only Rock and Foundation on which all their
other Rubbish and Fopperies are built; and the Removal of it would be like
Sampson's pulling down the Pillars or main Prop, so that consequently the whole
Fabric would fall to to the Ground: But this being a Herculian work more
proper for the famed Heroes of our Age (viz.) Men of great Parts and Letters, I
had not so much as attempted it, but only, Sir, in obedience to your Command,
in doing which it is possible I may put a helping hand toward the removal of
some trash and trumpery out of the way, whereby others of my own mean Rank and
Capacity may the better discern the weakness of this Babel Foundation, which
has made such a Confusion in the Christian World. And amongst all the late
Learned Pieces in Vindication of this Sovereign Antidote (viz.) Infallibility
(for if swallowed, it would without doubt exspel the Poison of all the other
Pestilential Doctrins of that Church;) none has made a greater noise in the
World than the last, though least unlearned Piece of the most famous
cellebrated Author Mr. Bays (the new Adopted Champion of the Roman Catholic
Cause) by the Name and Title of the Hind and Panther, writ in the true Dialect
and Language of the Beast J. D. in which he proves the necessity of an Unerring
Guide, as plain as a Pike-staff (or rather as Demonstrable as
Transubstantiation is made out, in a late Reverend Authors Reasons for taking
away the Test). Now for an Unlettered Layman to engage with this Mighty
Sampson of an Author, is as rash an Undertaking as little David's fighting with
Great Goliath without Armor.

But we read ( Ecclesiastes the 9th. and 11th.) The Race is not always to the
swift nor the Battle to the strong; therefore in hopes of being assisted by him
whose Cause it is (namely the Lord of Hosts) through whom David not only
fought, but overcame the Champion of the Philistines, I enter the Field, and if
I perish I perish; however the attempt of great things is Honorable. And the
Method I shall take to engage this Potent Adversary, shall be first to fight
him with his own Weapons, and discharge his own Artillery upon him, viz. his
own Arguments, when he was (possible) of another Opinion (I had almost said
Religion, but I am Inclinable to believe he never had any.) Secondly, I shall
examine those Places of Scripture which the Papists do most insist upon for the
Proof of their Infallible Doctrine, etc. but I will begin with the first, and
Arm my self with Mr. Bays's own Armor of Proof that he has formerly engaged
with, against the Asserters of this Doctrine, in a Poem of his called Religio
Laici: In the Preface of which he has (Page the 4th.) these words, viz. For
having laid down as a Foundation, that the Scripture is a Rule; that in all
things needful to Salvation, it is clear, sufficient, and ordained by God
Almighty for that purpose, I have left my self no right to Interpret obscure
Places, because whatsoever is obscure is concluded not necessary to be known:
On which, as a Rock, I shall (being of the same Opinion) Erect and build my
Faith; and that it may the better hold out a Siege against the mighty Host of
Wild Beasts, Commanded by their Infallible Mother Hind, I will fortify it with
such strong murdering Morter-peices, (of his own, etc.) that I Will defy all his
Bears and Boars, his Woolves and Tigers, his Foxes and Asses, and Lions, etc.
to demolish and pull it down. And the first is the Case which he puts between a
Socinian and them of his own Church; what that was then, you will best
understand from his own Arguments, which are (I think) as strong, and he as
much Inspired when he writ them, as when he writ the (Immortal Milk white) Hind
and Panther; but be your own Judge Religio Laici, Page the 20. We hold and
prove from Scripture plain
That Christ is God, the bold Socinian
From the same Scripture urges he is but Man.
Now what Appeal can end the Important suit,
Both parts talk lowdly, but the Rule is mute;
Shall I speak plain, and in a Nation free,
Assume an honest Lay-mans Liberty?
(which I hope is as little a fault now, by Virtue of his Majesty's Gracious
Declaration, as it was when Bays did it.)

I think (According to my little Skill,
But to my own Mother Church submitting still)
That many have been saved, and many may,
That never heard this question brought in play.
The Vnletter'd Christian, that believes in gross,
Plods on to Heaven and nere is at a loss;
For the strait Gate would be made straiter yet,
Were none admitted there but Men of Wit.
(And Page the 22, 23, and 24.)

The partial Papist would infer from hence,
Their Church in last resort should judge the Sense:
But first they would assume with wondrous Art,
Themselves, to be the whole, who are but part
Of that vast Frame the Church, but grant they were
The Handers down, would they from thence infer
A right to Interpret? or would they alone,
Who brought the Present, claim it for their own?
The Book's a common Largis to Mankind,
Not more for them than every Man designed.
The welcome news is in the Letter found,
The Carrier's not Commissioned to expound;
It speaks it self, and what it does contain,
In all things needful to be known is plain.
In times over grown with Rust and Ignorance,
A gainful Trade their Clergy did advance,
When want of Learning made the Layman low,
And none but Priest was Authorized to know;
When what small knowledge was, in them did dwell,
And he a God that could but read or spell;
Then Mother Church did mightily prevail,
She parcell'd out the Bible by Retail:
But still Expounded what she sold or gave,
To keep it in her power to damn or save.
Scripture was scarce, and as the Market went,
Poor Laymen took Salvation on content,
As needy Men takes Money: good or bad
Gods word they had not, but the Priests they had.
Yet what ere false Conveyances they made,
The Lawyer still was certain to be paid.
In those dark Times they learned their knack so well,
That by long use they grew Infallible.
A very short but fair and full account how and by what Methods (if they will
believe their Champion Bays) they arrived to be the Infallible Church; but he
goes on.

At last a knowing age began to 'nquire
Whether they the Book, or that did them Inspire;
And making narrower search, they found, tho late,
That what they thought the Priect's was their Estate;
Taught by the will, produced the written Word,
How long they had been Cheated on Record;
Then every Man who saw the Title fair,
Claims a Child's Part, and puts in for a share;
Consulting soberly their private good,
So saved themselves as cheap as e're they could.
That is to say Good buy Mr. Infallible Indulgences, they did not care to be
cheated any longer with such a chargable sort of Doctrine: And now I Will appeal
to all unprejudiced Persons, whether Mr. Bays has proved the Infallibility of
the Church of Rome in his Fable of the Hind and Panther, better than he has the
contrary in his (much better Poem) Religio Laici; but it may be objected he was
of another Judgment then, which is easily granted, and that (possible) the same
Reasons that prevailed with him to alter it now, might oblige him not to part
with it before; for indeed Solomon (which I presume was as Wise a Man as Mr.
Bays) says There is a time for all things; and though Mr. Bays has (for some
Reasons best known to himself) changed his Opinion, in grace of God his
Religion may be still the same it was when he writ his Religio Laici, in the
late Kings time; nay, for ought any body knows, it may be still the same it was
in his great Patron Cromwell's days, for they two did much alike admire Priests,
for one made them (like Jerehoam) of the meanest of the People, and Mr. Bays
made them to be all alike Cheats and Impostors; for his only Celebrated Poem of
Absalom and Achitophel (which changed his Principles from Wigism to Toryism, he
begins with his never failing kindness to the Priests (Page 1. line 1.)

In Pious times e're Priestcraft did begin, etc. So by a Penny we know how a
Shilling is made; for by Priestcraft he makes no distinction, but takes them
all in from Dan to Bersheba, as if no Religion could be good where a Priest was
concerned, and he gives you partly a Reason for it in the same Poem, and what
it was that put -- The Priesthood in a flame,
For Priests of all Religions are the same.


Which compared with his Priestcraft in the first Line of that Poem, is as
much as to say they are all a company of Crafty K -- s, which is a Note beyond
Ela, and possible Mr. Bays might hug himself in that copious Thought; for by
Priests of all Religions Infallibility it self is included, which is very bold
indeed; but possible he may think it is not so bold as brave, because it shows a
generous Temper, and that he was not partial in his Estimation of the Priests,
etc.

And to let us see he was not in jest, he has (to his Eternal Praise) drawn
the Picture of them all in one Piece; that I question whether the famed
Apelle's Picture of Venus (which it is said was Seven years a doing) was more
nice and lively Painted than Bays's Plump Spanish, (and most Catholic Friar)
for any body that vews that Piece may very easily guess at his design, of
halling in by Head and Shoulders that unnecessary Character, to complete his
double discovery, etc. Well, Mr. Bays, though you say in the Preface to your
Medall, Sign-post Painting will serve to remember a Friend by, yet I must tell
you, you have neither spared cost nor pains, but have been extravagantly lavish
in Painting your (beloved) Priests; but I presume the Reason was your Charity
to your poor Brethren the Laity, that they might beware of having any thing to
do with them, and that possible might induce you to publish your own Creed in
82, giving it the Title of the Lay-mans Faith, in which you insinuate the
unreasonableness of pinning our Faith upon the Priests Sleeves; and truly as to
that you have made an absolute Convert of me, for I am much of your mind; for
these Priests have, and still do make Bloody work amongst us, by endeavoring
to impose upon our Understandings; yet I must needs confess I am not altogether
of your Judgment, for I am willing to believe there are Priests of some
Religions that are very honest and have no ill designs: But your Religio Laici
has made me almost of your Persuasion; and I am very apt to believe that Poem
has gained you more Proselites than your Hind and Panther; for it is not a
little diverting to see how you have their mauled and worried (beyond any
English Mastiff at the Bear-garden) the poor Pope and his Bulls; which puts me
in mind of what you said in your Medall upon another occasion, which with a
little variation will serve here, The Man who laughed but once to see an Ass
Mumbling, to make the Cross-graind Thistle pass,
Might laugh again to see the Papist chaw
The Prickles of unpallatable Law.
And I am apt to believe were that Philosopher alive, he would as readily laugh
to see Persons swallow so greedily some things now, which but a little while
ago none but Asses would venture so much as to chaw them, by reason of their
pricking and choking quality. But to give the Devil his due, I must needs own
Mr. Bays has a most powerful and luxurious hand at Satyr, and may challenge all
Christendom to match him; for indeed I never in my slender Province met with
any that was to compare with him, unless that unknown (but supposed) worthy
Author, that writ to him upon his (at last) turning Roman Catholi^k (for Bays
like the Vicar of Bray, in Henry the 8th. Edward the 6th. Queen Mary and Queen
Elizabeth's days, was resolved to keep his Place) and the quoting an Author to
the purpose, is the same thing (the Learned say) as if it was his own; and that
will I hope excuse my putting them down here.

Thou Mercenary Runnegade, thou Slave,
Thou ever Changing, still to be a Knave:
What Sect, what Error will thou next disgrace?
Thou art so lude, so scandil^^sly Base,
That Antichristian Popery may be
Ashamed of such a Proselite as thee.
Not all thy Rancor or Felonious spite,
Which animates thy lumpish Soul to write,
Could have contrived a Satyr more severe,
Or more disgrace the Cause thou would prefer?
Yet in thy favor this must be confessed
It suits with thy Poetic Genius best;
There thou -- -- -- --
To Truths disused may entertain
Thy self with Stories more fanciful and vain
Then e're thy Poetry could ever fain;
Or sing the Lives of thy own fellow Saints,
It Is a large Field and thy assistance wants;
Thence Copy out new Opera's for the Stage,
And with their Miracles direct the Age.
Such is thy Faith, if Faith thou have indeed,
For well we may suspect the Poets Creed;
Rebel to God, Blasphemer of thy King,
Ah, tell whence could this strange Compliance spring:
So may thou prove to thy new Gods, as true
As thy old Friend the Devil has been to you;
Yet Conscience and Religion's your pretense,
But Food and Drink the Methologick Sense.
Ah, how persuasive is the want of Bread,
Not Reasons from strong Box more strongly plead:
A Convert thou, it is past all believing,
It Is a damned scandal of thy Foes contriving;
A Jest of that malicious monstrous Fame,
The Honest Lay-man's Faith is still the same.
And so much for Mr. Bays, for he has already detained me a little too long
from what I chiefly intended; but since his Arguments were so strong and
pertinent to my purpose, I judged it not amiss to have my Opinion favored by
so Eminent an Author of their own, which I made use of only as an Introduction
to the more serious and useful part, namely, what I promised in the beginning
of the Letter (viz.) the Examining those Places of Scripture which the Papists
do most insist on for proving their Church or the Pope, (no matter which)
Infallible. But I fear I have already transgressed the Bounds of a Letter, and
therefore I shall reserve the rest till another opportunity, in the mean time I
shall Subscribe my self,

Sir, Yours to Command so far

THE SECOND LETTER.
SIR,
I Have Received yours, and am not a little proud at your gracious Acceptance
of my last, which gives me no small Encouragement of giving you the trouble of
a second, which I hope will give you a full satisfaction of what my poor
Sentiments are, touching the Doctrine of Infallibility; which indeed is the
second Part to the same Tune, only with this difference; Neither Mr. Bays nor
his Banter,
Of his Milk white Hind and Panther
is at all concerned in this; for though Bays's Reasons and Arguments are
strong and to the purpose, yet with those of our Saviors and the Apostles, I
did not judge it necessary they should be Transcribed in one Letter, no more
than I thought them fit to be named in the same day; and that was the Reason,
Sir, of my giving you a double trouble; but without any more Preamble I will
endeavor to make good my Promise in my last (viz.) the examining those Places
of Scripture which are made use of for the proving the Doctrine of
Infallibility, and likewise those Places (which all Honest and sincere
Protestants ought to consider) that plainly prove the contrary. I will begin
first with those Places, or rather that Place (for I can find but one that
seems so much as to favor the Point in Hand) which is Matthew the 16. and the
17, 18, and 19. Verses, Then Jesus answered and said unto Peter, blessed art
thou Simon Bar-jona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my
Father which is in Heaven: And I say unto thee, thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock I will build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
it; and I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever
thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall
loose on earth shall be loosed in Heaven.

In which words the Romanist do believe St. Peter to be made the Infallible
Head of the Church, etc. as sure as the Wafer after Consecration is
transubstantiated into the Corporeal substance of our Blessed Lords Body; and
upon that account it is, the pretended Successors of St. Peter has Lorded it
over, not only their Fellow Bishops, but all Christian Princes and Crowned
Heads; but upon what Grounds this more than Sovereign Authority has been set up
and practiced, I shall now inquire, and I do not question but to make it appear
from our Saviors own words, that he neither meant or intended any such Power
and Authority to be set up by his Disciples and Followers, as is at this day
exercised by some body in the World, etc. and that will plainly appear if we
consider the occasion of those words of our Savior to St. Peter, which was the
Question our Savior asked (not St. Peter but) all the Disciples ( Matt. the
16. and 13. ver.) When Jesus came into the Coasts of Cesarea Philippi, he asked
his Disciples, saying, Whom do men say, that I, the Son of Man, am. Now it is
not to be supposed that our Savior asked them because he did not know as well
as they what the Peoples thoughts were concerning him, but in all probability
it was to draw a Confession of their own Opinion of him; for in the 15. ver. He
says unto Them, but whom say Ye that I am; then we find ver. the 16th. And
Simon Peter answered and said, thou art Christ the Son of the living God; upon
which account it was that our Savior, in the next verse said, Thou art Peter,
and upon this Rock I will build my Church, etc. so that it is plain our
Saviors words had Relation to all the rest of the Disciples, whose Answer it
was, though St. Peter (like a Foreman of a Jury) delivered it as the Belief and
Sentiments of them all; for we find (as I before observed) the question was put
to them all, but it would be unreasonable to suppose they should (as in a rout)
answer we all, all, one and all, do believe, etc. but they being all present,
without contradicting St. Peter, it is not to be questioned but that they did
All believe and own the same thing; so that it would be some violence offered
to that place of Scripture, to understand our Savior meant the Person of St.
Peter, and not the Confession, which (in the behalf of them all) he delivered,
being so happy (as he was always very forward) to speak first: and it is not
unreasonable to suppose, that if any of the other Disciples had said the same
thing, our Saviors answer would have been the same likewise. And that our
Savior did not intend those words to be understood, as some would have them,
will better appear if we consider two things: First the great caution that our
Blessed Savior gave, with the care and pains he took upon all occasions, to
prevent his Disciples entertaining so much as a Notion of that Nature: And,
Secondly, a positive Command to the contrary. As to the first we find in St.
Mark the 9. and 33. our Savior asking his Disciples What it was they were
disputing of among themselves by the way; but they held their peace, etc. and
well they might, for they knew they had been disputing upon a rong Topic, for
the matter was no less than who amongst them should be the greatest, as you may
read ver. the 34. and in the next ver. we have our Saviors answer, And he sat
down and called (I pray mark) the Twelve, and says unto them, if any Man
desire to be first the same shall be last of all, and Servant of all. From
which we may observe the early care our Savior took to prevent this Doctrine
of Exercising Authority over one another; and though it was possible but a
Discourse to pass away the time as they were coming to Capernaum, yet our
Blessed Lord, that knew their thoughts as well as their dispute, takes an
occasion to crush this Cockatrice in the Egg, that it might not reign in his
Spiritual Kingdom; for no doubt he did foresee the ill Consequence of it. But
were this Doctrine of such important use as some would make it, one would think
nothing had been more necessary for the Peace and Good of the Christian Church,
than the Doctrine of St. Peter and his Successors Infallibility to have been
delivered to the World, so plain (as is indeed the contrary) that it could not
admit of a Dispute. And therefore for our Savior and the Apostles to be (if I
may so say) wanting in a matter of so great concern, appears to me wonderful
strange; and it is not to be doubted, that if such an Infallible Guide and Head
of the Church had been necessary, our Blessed Lord, whose design and purpose of
coming into the World was to do and procure for us all imaginable good, would
not have been wanting in instituting so convenient a Determiner of all
Controversy, nor likewise sparing of his pains in the instructing and
directing us how and where to find this Balm of Gilead, this Philosophers
Stone, which is able to refine and cure all the Distempers and Divisions of the
Christian World about the true Worship of God, etc. Besides, had Almighty God
designed his Church such a particular Head, how unreasonable would it be to
suppose our Savior should be ignorant of it; and if the contrary, to conceal
it from his Disciples, especially at this time, when they were contending (as
it were about the same thing) who amongst them should be the greatest: And
without all doubt had our Savior designed to have invested St. Peter with such
a Power, he would have acquainted them with it, and would (as this had been a
very fit time) have told them, they need not trouble themselves about those
unnecessary Disputes, for there was one amongst them that was already designed
and intended to be the Rock and only Foundation on which he would build his
Church, and so consequently their Principal Head and Governor, and they ought
to respect him and his Successors accordingly. But as there is no Footsteps or
Place of Scripture to warrant our Belief of any thing of this kind, let us
inquire whether there be any to the contrary, which is the second thing to be
considered, (viz.) our Saviors positive Command to his Disciples, that they
should not exercise any such Authority, etc. and that will more plainly appear
in the 20th. of St. Matt. and the 20. and 21. verses, When the Mother of
Zebedees Children came to desire that her two Sons might sit, the one on the
right hand, and the other on the left, of our Blessed Savior in his Kingdom,
we find all the rest moved with Indignation against the two Brethren (for their
Ambition of being exalted above their Fellows) and though it is reasonable to
suppose this desire was grounded upon a mistake of Christ's Kingdom (which the
Jews, nay the very Disciples themselves, at that time did believe it, a
Temporal one) yet we find our Savior takes care to rectify both their
mistakes and ambitious Temper of Mind, of being exalted one above another,
which was by no means to be practiced amongst them, as you may read from the
25th. to the 29th. of the same 20th. of St. Matthew. But Jesus called them unto
him and said, Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion over
them, and they that are great exercise Authority upon them; but it shall not be
so among you; but whosoever will be great among you let him be your Minister;
and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your Servant; even as the Son
of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and give his Life a
Ransom for many. To the same purpose in St. Mark the 10th. from the 42. to the
46. and in St. Luke the 22. and the 25. and 26. Verses, and so on; by all which
Places, and many more to the same purpose, we may observe the more than
ordinary care our Savior took to cure this Epidemical Distemper that had began
to infect them in his days; that they might be the better prepared to follow
his Example, especially in that humble, peaceable Temper of Mind, etc. The
consideration of which one would think is sufficient to convince any Rational
Creature of the unreasonable pretense of the pretended Successors of St.
Peter's claiming a Supreme Power and Authority, not only in Ecclesiastical
matters, but Temporal over all Christian Kings and Princes, pretending they
hold their Authority by Virtue of the Popes Grace and Favor, and that he can
depose one and set up another as he thinks fit. And that this is no new Notion,
you shall hear what my Brother Layman says to the same purpose, in the Preface
to his FAITH, Page the 5th. How can we be secure from the practice of Jesuited
Papists in that Religion; for not two or three of that Order, as some of them
would impose upon us, but almost the whole Body of them are of Opinion, that
their Infallible Master has a Right over Kings, not only in Spituals but
Temporals; not to name Mariana, Bellarmine, Emanuel Sa. Molina, Santarel
Simancha, and at the least, Twenty others of Foreign Countries: We can produce
of our own Nation, Champian, and Doleman or Parsons; besides many are named
whom I have not read, who all of them attest this Doctrine, that the Pope can
depose and give away the Right of any Sovereign Prince, Si vel paulum
deflexerit, if he shall never so little warp; but if he once comes to be
Excommunicated, then the Bond of Obedience is taken off from Subjects, and they
may and ought to drive him like another Nebuchadnezzar, ex hominum
Christianorum Dominatu, from Exercising Dominion over Christians; and to this
they are bound by Virtue of Divine Precept, and by all the Ties of Conscience,
under no less Penalty than Damnation. Which is more than our Savior and the
Apostles ever taught or pretended to, but the contrary is very evident; and to
that purpose St. Paul in the 13th. to the Romans ver. the 1. says, Let every
Soul be subject unto the Higher Powers, etc. which Power is there understood
the Supreme Magistrate, and ver. 6. For this cause pay you Tribute also, for
they are Gods Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing. And to the
same purpose St. Peter himself Commands this Duty, Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake; whether it be to the King as Supreme, or
unto Governors as unto them that are sent by him, etc. the first Epistle of
Peter the 2. chap. the 13. and 14. verses. So that it is plain who the Apostles
calls Supreme, and whom our blessed Lord, owned, does appear by his putting
himself to the Charge of a Miracle, lest he should offend. But this was a great
while ago, and the Cause and the Times altered, and another sort of a Supremacy
set up, which was not known in those days, not till many Centuries after; for
if St. Peter had been invested with any such Authority (as his pretended
Successors pretend too) certainly our Savior or the Apostles would in some
manner one time or other have taken notice of it; but for our Hearts we cannot
find any such thing. But to oblige our Roman Friends, I will examine the Matter
a little farther, and the better to inform our selves of this great Point, we
will take a view of our Saviors treating St. Peter after this supposed
Prerogative delivered him; in the same 16th. of St. Matthew (where our Savior
is supposed to give St. Peter only the Power of the Keys) we find our Blessed
Lord telling his Disciples what he was to suffer, etc. From that time forth
began Jesus to show to his Disciples, how that he must go unto Jerusalem, and
suffer many things of the Elders and Chief Priests and Scribes, and be killed,
and be raised again the third day. Then St. Peter took him and began to rebuke
him saying, Be it far from thee, Lord, this shall not be unto thee, ver. the
21. and 22. but pray mark our Saviors answer (to this Infallible Head) in the
next verse; But he turned and said unto Peter, get thee behind me Satan, thou
art an offense unto me; for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but
those that be of Men. By which it appears it was not the Person, but the great
Truth in the Confession, which he delivered in the behalf of himself and the
rest, that was the Rock our Savior would build his Church, etc. which indeed
is a good and strong Foundation, such a one as our Savior speaks of in the
7th. of St. Matthew, the 24. and 25. Therefore whosoever hears these sayings
of mine, and does them, I will liken him unto a wise man which built his House
upon a Rock; and the Rain descended, and the Floods came, and the Winds blew,
and beat upon that House; but it fell not, for it was founded upon a Rock;
which Parable is understood of a good Christians Faith, which will hold out
against the Storms and Tempests of Persecution, which all good Christians will
do, whose Faith is built upon that Confession of St. Peter's (viz.) Thou art
Christ the Son of the living God, which as a good and strong Foundation, will
support all the rest of our Creed, and therefore by an Allegorical Expression
called a Rock, which must be understood in a Spiritual Sense, on which Christ
would erect his Spiritual Kingdom. Agreeable is that place of St. Paul,
Ephesians the 2. and the 19. and 20. verses, Now therefore ye are no more
Strangers and Foreigners, but fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the
household of God; and are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone. So that here it is
plain, and beyond all dispute, that the Apostles and Prophets were the Rock and
Foundation, that is to say, the Faith and Doctrine which they did profess and
teach (and not their Persons) was the Rock and Foundation that both our Savior
and St. Paul meant, on which the Christian Church was built; if otherwise, why
should he omit telling them they were built upon St. Peter, that Rock and Head
of the Church? and so of the rest; but we see he takes no more notice of St.
Peter than the rest. Besides, there is little reason to suppose our Savior
should mean the Person of St. Peter, when he so well knew the weakness of that
Foundation; for though he was indeed very forward upon all occasions, as his
attempting to go to our Savior when he was walking on the Sea, yet we find
this presumptive Faith soon failed him, for he was forced to implore our
Savior's Assistance, by crying out, Lord help me or I perish: And again,
notwithstanding his Resolution to dye rather than deny his Lord, etc. yet we
find our Savior telling him, Matthew the 26. and 34. verse, Before the Cock
crow he should deny him thrice; in all which we do not find any more notice
taken of St. Peter by our Savior than of any of the other Disciples, unless it
were to reprove him for his want of Faith and other Faults. And we may observe
further that on all occasions our Savior was not wanting in cautioning his
Disciples, not only to forbear setting up such an Authority (as we have been
treating of) amongst them, but likewise commanded all Obedience to be given to
the Supreme Powers that was then in the World: and from thence it was that he
reproved St. Peter's rashness in drawing his Sword, though he did it with design
to defend him against those that came to apprehend him, John the 18. ver. the
11. Then said Jesus unto Peter, put up thy Sword, etc. and he gives the reason
for it, ver. the 36. Jesus answered, my Kingdom is not of this world, if my
Kingdom were of this world, then would my Servants fight, that I should not be
delivered to the Jews; but now is my Kingdom not from hence; which I think is a
very powerful Argument against him who calls himself Christ's Vicar, and Lords
it over all the Kingdoms of the World, contrary to Christ's Command, and the
Practice of the Apostles and Primitive Christians for almost a Thousand years
after Christ. But to proceed, since we cannot find, in all the time of our
Saviors being with his Disciples in the Flesh, any thing to warrant our belief
of St. Peter's being the Head, etc. We will go one step further, and inquire if
after his Resurrection (which was the accomplishment and Confirmation of all he
had delivered to them) whether he did deliver to St. Peter any Power or
Commission, more than he did to any of the rest of his Disciples. In the three
last verses of the 28th. of St. Matthew we thus read, All power is given unto
me in heaven and in earth, go Ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever I command you; and lo I am with you even
to the end of the world. Now it is granted that here is a Commission given; but
to whom? was it delivered to Peter, James or John? etc. No, but to them all, in
those words Go Ye, etc. Neither do we find any distinction, though St. Peter
and all the rest was there at the same time, as you may read verses the 16th.
and 17th. of that Chapter; Then the Eleven Disciples went away to Galilee, into
a mountain where Jesus had appointed them; and when they saw him they
worshipped him, but some doubted. And in St. Mark the 16th. and the 14th. and
15. verses, And afterward he appeared unto the Eleven, as they sat at meat, and
upbraided them with their unbelief, and hardness of heart, because they
believed not them which had seen him after he was risen. And he said unto THEM,
go YE into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every Creature. So that here
is again the same Commission, but without any Pre-eminence given to either of
them. St. Luke makes no mention of this Matter: And for that Place of St. John
which the Romanists brag so much of from our Savior, biding St. Peter three
times feed his Sheep; it is I think impossible to be understood as if from
thence our Savior intended Him to be the Head and Chief of the Apostles; but
rather, as it is most probable, to strengthen his Faith, that he might be the
better enabled to go through with a difficult Work; for we find our Savior
telling him in the two following verses, being the 18th. and 19th. of the last
of St. John, What he was to suffer for his sake, etc. So that it is very
reasonable to suppose that our Savior's knowing his weakness from his former
denying him, might upon that account lay a more strict Command upon him than
any of the rest. Besides, it is not unreasonable to suppose from those words of
our Savior (viz.) Simon Son of Jonas love thou me, which was as often repeated
as his biding him Feed his Sheep, might be to upbraid him for his former
denying him, whereby he might take notice he had given our Blessed Lord
sufficient reason to doubt; and as he had (notwithstanding his Resolution to
the contrary) denied him with Oaths and Imprecations three several times: So
possible that might be one great Reason why our Savior did likewise trible his
Commands, etc. And to me it appears plain, that our Saviors trible Command, of
biding St. Peter Feed his Sheep, can have no Relation to his being made Head of
the Church, notwithstanding that Papistical objection (viz.) to whom did our
Savior so often bid Feed his Sheep, etc, which objection I must needs say is a
very strong sheepish one, though at the same time I know it is urged as a
strong Argument, to confirm (as they say) the Commission which our Savior gave
to St. Peter in those words, (viz.) Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock, etc.
And they tell us our Savior's giving such a particular charge to St. Peter,
must import something more than ordinary, which indeed is very true, and I
think the reason as plain; for, as I before observed, our Savior well knowing
his Faith wanted his special assistance, took more than ordinary care that his
Faith might be agreeable to his Confession (which indeed was the Rock our
Savior meant) and to that purpose we read in the 22. of St. Luke the 31. and
32. verses, And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired to have
you, that he may sift you as wheat, but I have prayed for thee that thy Faith
fail not; and when thou art converted strengthen thy brethren. By which words
we find he was not as yet converted, nor indeed any of them, until after the
Resurrection; for as our Savior had foretold, Matthew the 26. verse the 31. I
will smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad.
So after the Jews had put our Savior to death, we find them disperc'd and
scattered up and down, for indeed they could not tell well what to make of the
matter, as appears by the discourse our Savior had with some of them as they
were going to Emmaus, which was distant from Jerusalem some threescore
Furlongs, Luke the 24. from the 13. to the 25. verse, and at the 21. verse, But
we trusted that it had been He which should have Redeemed Israel, etc. By which
it appeared they was still in doubt; but after Christ's Ascension and sending
the Holy Ghost, the promised Comforter, amongst them, we find they were very
bold and courageous, and some thousands was converted, Acts the 2. and the 41.
at St. Peter's first Sermon; from which some Learned Men have understood those
words, Upon this Rock I will build my Church, etc. as a particular favor of
our Saviors to St. Peter, in making him the first Instrument of laying the
Foundation of his Church, not at Rome, but Jerusalem (which indeed was the
Mother Church) and as our Savior was to the Jews, so may the misunderstanding
that Place of Scripture (viz.) Upon this Rock, etc. be a stumbling Block
(possibly) to the Papist. And for those words of our Saviors bidding St. Peter
feed his Sheep, it cannot possible, without taking leave of our Understandings,
be understood as our Roman Friends would persuade us; but much rather from
their being so often repeated, we may reasonable gather our Saviors purpose was,
they should make the greater and deeper impression in his Heart, that so he
might not forget this his last Command, as he forgot him Matthew the 26.72.
ver. And again he denied him with an oath, I do not know the Man. And so much
shall suffice for our inquiry, how or in what manner our Savior, both before
and after his Resurrection, took notice of St. Peter more than of the rest of
his Disciples, in Relation to his being the Chief and Head of the Church. But
the better to understand this Infallible Point, which is of so great concern,
that if gained, it would be like a General's taking the Metropolis of a
Kingdom, all the little Towns and Villages would fall in in course. I will go
one step further, and inquire whether the Apostles themselves did know or
believe any such thing in their Time; for certainly if St. Peter had been
invested with any such Power, they could not be ignorant of it; and that time
(viz.) after Christ's Ascension into Heaven, and sending the Holy Ghost, was the
most proper to have put it in Execution. But in the prosecution of this I shall
make two Inquiries; First, Whether St. Peter did assume or take upon him any
such Power and Authority above the rest of the Apostles? And, secondly, Whether
the rest did give Place or any Pre-eminence to St. Peter, as believing him to
be their Chief and Head? and if neither of these two things do appear, I hope
it will sufficiently clear the Point in hand. I will begin with the first,
Whether St. Peter did assume any such Power? etc. after the Disciples return
from seeing our Savior taken up into Heaven, Acts the 1. and 13. verse, we
thus read, And when they were come in, they went up into an upper-room, where
abode both Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas,
Bartholomew, Matthew, James the Son of Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas
the Brother of James; which indeed is all the Eleven, but without any manner of
distinction, which certainly would have been a great fault in St. Luke (the
supposed Author of the Acts) had he known St. Peter to have been the Head, etc.
And again when the Apostles met to choose one in the room of him which betrayed
our Lord, verse the 23. and 24. And they appointed two, Joseph called Barsabas,
who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias: And they prayed, and said, Thou Lord
which know the Hearts of all men, show whether of these two thou have
chosen. And verse the 26. THEY gave forth their Lots, and the Lot fell upon
Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven Apostles. From which it is
evident St. Peter did not assume any Power above the rest in this matter,
though it was of so great concern as the choosing an Apostle, but did only act
equally with the rest, as appears by those words before recited (viz) And THEY
appointed; and THEY gave forth their Lots, etc. So that from hence it is
reasonable to suppose that neither St. Peter nor the rest of the Apostles did
so much as dream of such a Power lodged in any one of them, for if they had,
one would think then it had been as proper a time to have made use of it as any
since; and then upon such an occasion it had been rational for the Evangelist
to have given the Account of that matter thus (viz.) St. Peter the Chief of the
Apostles and Head of the Church, etc. did Summons the Rest to attend and be
present, at HIS Choosing or Consecrating a Person whom HE judged sit to be
Ordained a Witness, with them (in the room of Judas) of our Blessed Lords
Resurrection. This, as it would have been to the purpose, so likewise it would
have been highly necessary at that time, for then the rest of the Apostles
would not only have known this great Prerogative of St: Peter, but likewise how
to have behaved themselves accordingly, and also to have instructed their
Followers in the like Obedience to him and his Successors. But to proceed, in
the second of the Acts we read of the Holy Ghost's descending verse the 3. and
4. And there appeared unto THEM Cloven Tongues, like as of Fire, and it sat
upon (I pray mark, not one, St. Peter only, but) EACH of THEM, and THEY were
ALL filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other Tongues, as the
Spirit gave THEM utterance; where by the way we may take notice the Evangelist
still keeps to his Rule of giving an impartial account; for in this place also
he tells us the Holy Ghost made no distinction, notwithstanding St. Peter's
being present, but sat upon EACH, and THEY were ALL filled, etc. And in the
third of the Acts verse the 6. we find St. Peter cure a Man that had been lame
from his Mothers Womb; yet St. John's being present, he does not assume, as if
he only in the Name of Jesus had done it, but makes St. John a Copartner and
instrumental in it, as you may observe upon the Peoples being gathered together
ver. the 11. and 12. And when Peter saw it, he answered unto the People, Ye men
of Israel, why marvel ye at this, or why look ye so earnestly on US, as though
by OUR own Power or Holiness WE had made this man to walk: In which Place no
less than three times he speaks in the Plural Number, (viz.) US, OUR and WE,
etc. which plainly shows, that neither St. Peter's humble Temper nor Spirit
does reign in his pretended Successors. And so much shall serve for the first
Inquiry, whether St. Peter did take upon him or assume any such Infallible
Power, etc. The second is, Whether the Apostles did give Place or Pre-eminence
to St. Peter as believing him to be their Chief and Head of the Church, etc.
When the High Priest, and those that were with him (which was the Sect of the
Sadduces) had laid hands on the Apostles, and put them into the Common Prison,
the Angel of the Lord by night opened the Prison-doors, and brought them forth,
and said, go stand and speak in the Temple to the people all the words of this
Life: And when THEY heard it, THEY entered the Temple, etc. as you may read
Acts the 5. from the 17. to the 22. verse; in all which we do not find any
difference, but an equal Power and Authority was delivered to them all. But
it is possible the Romanist may object against the Commission given by this
Angel, and say, it is the same that St. Paul gave them caution of, saying, If an
Angel from Heaven preach any other Doctrine (than Infallibility) etc. let him
be accursed. But what they will say to the Holy Ghost and Spirit of God, for
not taking notice of the Prerogative given (as they say) by our Savior to St.
Peter, I cannot imagine, but I suppose the next General Council that's called by
his supposed Successor, something may be done to be even with Him. But to go
on. After the Church began to increase, we read Acts the 6. and the 1. verse,
And in those days, when the number of the Disciples was multiplied, there arose
a murmuring of the Graecians against the Hebrews, because their Widows were
neglected in the daily ministration. Now any body would think if St. Peter had
been invested with such a Power, etc. none more fit to order and appoint
Persons for that business, because it might have been done with much less
trouble than by assembling the Multitude, which was the method they took, as
you may read verse the 2. and 3. of that Chapter, Then (not St. Peter, but) the
Twelve, called the multitude of the Disciples unto THEM, and said, It is not
reason that WE should leave the word of God and serve tables. Wherefore
Brethren, look ye out among you seven men of honest report, full of the holy
Ghost and wisdom, whom (pray observe) WE may appoint over this business. Which
was done accordingly, And when THEY had prayed, THEY laid their hands on them,
etc. And in another Cause different from this, When the Apostles, which were at
Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, THEY sent unto them
Peter and John. Now this methinks seems very odd for the Chief of the Apostles
and Head of the Church, to be sent by his Inferiors as it were of an Errand. So
that it is plain the Apostles did not behave themselves as they ought, or else
they did not believe any such Authority to be placed in St. Peter; but we do
not find only the Apostles, but the new Converts, contending and chideing (as
it were) St. Peter; so that he was forced to tell a long Story for his
Justification, as you may read Acts the 11. from the beginning to the 18.
verse, from which it is evident THEY had the same opinion of his being the Head
of the Church then, as we have of his pretended Successors now. But once more
to make (if possible) the Cause more plain, in the 15. of the Acts, we have an
account of the first Council that ever was held in the Christian Church, where
were most, if not all the Apostles, and likewise the occasion of it, as you may
read ver. the 1. and 2. And certain men which came down from Judea taught the
brethren, Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses ye cannot be
saved. When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and disputation
with them, they determined Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them should
go up to Jerusalem unto the Apostles and Elders about this question: And the
Apostles and Elders came together about this matter. But in all that account we
do not find one Syllable of St. Peter's taking Place or exercising any
Authority above the rest in this Assembly, nor the rest taking any notice of
him in that kind. But when there had been much disputing, Peter rose up and
said unto them, etc. verse the 7. So it does not appear that he spoke first to
the business in hand, for there was much disputation before he began to speak
to the matter, and ver. the 12. Then all the multitude (which argues there was
a great number) kept silence and gave audience to Barnabas and Paul, etc. And
after they had held their peace James answered, and said, Men and Brethren
harken unto me. And so goes on from the 13 to the 22. verse of that chapter;
from which we may observe that if any of them was infallible it was St. James;
for they all (as you may observe in that Place) seemed to be concluded by what
he delivered; for we do not find that any contradicted him, or so much as spoke
after him. But it follows, Then pleased it the Apostles and Elders with the
whole Church (which I suppose was all the Multitude there Assembled) to send
chosen men of their own company to Antioch, with Paul and Barnabas, namely,
Judas surnamed Bar^abas, and Silas, chief men among the Brethren: And wrote
letters by them after this manner, The Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren send
greeting unto the Brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch, and Syria, and
Cilicia. Forasmuch as we have heard, that certain which went from us, have
troubled you with words, subverting your Souls, saying, Ye must be circumcised,
and keep the whole Law, to whom we gave no such commandment: It seemed good
unto US, being assembled with one accord, to send chosen men unto you with our
beloved Barnabas and Paul, verse the 22.23, 24. and 25. of the same 15. of the
Acts. And we find Paul and those that were with him, as they went through the
Cities, deliver them the decrees for to keep, that were ordained of the
Apostles and Elders that were at Jerusalem, Acts the 16. and 4. verse. Which
decrees may possibly rise up in Judgment against some body; for if ever any
Council was infallible this was, and the Decrees they made; yet we do not find
in the least manner, neither by St. Peter nor the rest of the Apostles, any
thing of this Infallible Head-ship pretended to by them, which is a strong
Argument there was no such Notion known in their time, and that which further
confirms me, is that Place of St. Paul, Galatians the 2. and 12. ver. But when
Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face, because he was to be
blamed. Now this sounds very strange, What! the Infallible Head of the Church,
and Prince of the Apostles, in a fault that deserved such a sharp Reproof, sure
St. Paul was in an Error and mistaken, or else the pretended Infallible
Successors of St. Peter are; for I cannot be persuaded but if St. Peter had
been but as Infallible as some have made themselves, it was impossible for him
to do any thing that might give occasion to St. Paul to be angry with him, as
no doubt but he was, when he withstood him to the face. There is two Places
more I cannot omit, by reason they are much to the purpose, but I will but name
them and hasten to a conclusion; for I did not at first entrance upon this
Discourse design to have been so redious, but the matter being of so great
Consequence, I judged it necessary to give you, Sir, as full satisfaction as
possible I could. Corinthians the 1st. chapter the 12. verse the 28. And God
has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly
Teachers; and so on. Now if St. Peter had been the Head (as our Romish Friends
would persuade us) why should St. Paul omit it in this Place? where he seems to
be so exact in distinguishing the Orders and Degrees that God had set in his
Church, by First, Second, and Thirdly, etc. but it is evident he knew nothing
of the matter, for if he had, it is but reason to suppose he would have given an
account of those Orders thus (viz.) God had set some in the Church, First St.
Peter the Head, secondly Apostles, thirdly Prophets, etc. And in the 4th. of
the Ephesians ver. the 11. much to the same purpose, And he gave some Apostles,
and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, but not
one word of this Infallible Guide; which to me, and I hope all unprejudiced
Persons, is a sufficient Proof that no such Power was ever intended by our
Savior to St. Peter, nor that St. Peter did ever own that he had any such
Authority* nor the Apostles believe any such matter; which is I think
sufficient for the second Inquiry, Whether the Apostles did give Place or
Pre-eminence to St. Peter, as believing him to be the Head of the Church, etc.

And now to Conclude, all they ground their Arguments upon, are general
Considerations, That there ought to be an Infallible Judge, and from thence
they would infer our Savior did possibly Institute such a one, and the most
likely Person was St. Peter, from those words of our Savior, Thou art Peter,
and upon this Rock I will build my Church, etc. But the most that this can
amount to, is but a favorable Construction of the matter. Now by the same Rule
it is I hope as rational to presume the contrary, especially from the
Consideration of so many Places of Scripture as I have here set down, which do
not favor this Infallible Doctrine; all which I will draw up to this one
single Point

(...)
