Tunbridge-Wells: OR A DAYS COURTSHIP. A COMEDY, As it is Acted at the
Dukes-Theatre. Written by a Person of Quality.

Licensed, Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Henry Rogers at the Crown in
Westminster Hall, 1678.

PROLOGUE.
THE Old English Stage, confined to Plot and Sense,
Did hold abroad but small intelligence,
But since the invasion of the foreign Scene,
Jack pudding Farce, and thundering Machine,
Painted to your grave Ancestors unknown,
(Who never disliked wit because their own)
There Is not a Player but is turned a scout,
And every Scribler sends his Envoys out
To fetch from Paris, Venice, or from Rome,
Fantastic fopperies to please at home.
And that each act may rise to your desire,
Devils and Witches must each Scene inspire,
Wit rowls in Waves, and showers down in Fire.
With what strange Ease a Play may now be writ,
When the best half's composed by painting it?
And that in the Air, or Dance lies all the Wit?
True Sense or Plot would fooleries appear,
Faults (I suppose) you seldom meet with here,
For it is no mode to profit by the ear.
Your souls (we know) are seated in your Eyes,
An Actress in a Cloud's a strange surprise,
And you never paid trebble prizes to be wise.
Actors Names.
Tom. Fairlove. -- A Gentleman of the Town, that Loves handsome Women. Owmuch.
-- A Gamster, that Lives by his Wits and borrowing of Money. Mr. Wilding. -- A
modish Husband, that gives himself the Liberty of the Age. Sir Lofty Vainman. A
Baronet of great means and little sense, a great affecter of figures and hard
words. Squire Fop. -- A Coxcomb that pretends to know all persons and business.
Alderman Paywel. An indulgent City Husband. Dr. Outside. -- A Man made up of
Physical terms and little Art. Parson Quibble. -- A Welsh Vicar in Love with
the Widow, and strangely adicted to punns. Poet Witless. -- A conceited Rhimer,
that strains his fancy beyond his Judgment, and Writes Nonsense for strong
Lines. Farendine. -- A Quondam Mercer disgusted with his Profession, and from a
sedentary Fool being turned a Riotous Coxcomb pretends to all the worst
Qualities of a Gentleman. A Boy. --
WOMEN.
Alinda. -- A wity discreet Lady, beloved by Fairlove. Courtwit. -- A great
pretender to Wit, and an Admirer of it, where she finds it. Paywel. -- A
pampered Aldermans Wife, that imployes more of her Husbands Estate in Lewdness
than Charity. Parret. -- Parcel Midwife, parcel Bawd, the Confident of Paywel.
Brag. -- Two Whores. -- Crack. -- Two Whores. -- Page. -- Lacquies. --
Coachmen. --
Tunbridge-Wells: OR, A DAYS COVRTSHIP.
ACT. I.
Fairlove discovered dressing: His Lacquey attending. Fairl. Have called my
Sister?


Lacq. An hour since; I consider a Lady requires more time to harness than a
Coach and six --


Fair. What Company came down last night?


Lacq. Three Coachfuls, besides droves of Horsemen.


Fair. Have learned their Names.


Lacq. And Qualities, Intrigues, and Assignations.


Fair. Come, your discovery.


Lacq. In primis, Lady Brag, a rich buxom Widow, with a noise of Bullies
attending her.


Fair. She has been here these two days.


Lacq. But her Adorers came last night, Videlicet, Mr. Farendine the spruce
Mercer, Parson Quibble, and Poet Witless.


Enter Owmuch. Fair. They Will serve for a Vacation Courtship -- Jack Owmuch!


Owm. What Hurricane of Love drove thee from London, before our Beauties do
desert the Mall, the dusty Park, and treating Mulberry?


Fair. You appear to me the stranger miracle: Have Maribone and Putney lost
their charms, that you forsake the Town this Bowling-Season?


Owm. The Courts retirement to Windsor has attracted so many Modish Fops, there
are few Cullies stirring, and thou know my business Tom's to borrow money.


Fair. I faith I want it for my own Occasions.


Owm. Husband thy holy day Oaths, and don't suspect me for so vain a Sot, as to
hope to borrow money of a Wit.


Fair. Continue that wise faith, lest you prove more terrible to thy
Acquaintance than a Sheerness Ague.


Owm. As to my foolish Acquaintance, I may say Nature designed them my
inheritance, and as Lord Paramount I still dispose 'em


Fairl. If all Fools be thy Copyholders thou may be Pope for the
universality of thy jurisdiction.


Owm. Sometimes indeed they pay me Peter pence: My happy Stars disposed me
the other day amongst a Collony of Elder Brothers, whence I chose a Brace to
whom Fortune had been more bountiful than Nature.


Fair. Some dull insipid Heirs to their Parents industry:


Owm. Right; Masters of Land in present, and of wit in reversion.


Fair. Where do these Dotterels lodge?


Owm. Here at Bounds under the same Roof with you -- Boy, inform the Knight and
Squire where I am; then in my name salute the Lady Brag; within this hour, say
I Will kiss her hands.

[Exit Boy. Music within. Morrow to the Right Worshipful Sir Lofty Vainman, to
his fair Sister, and to the celebrated Esquire Fop.


A SONG within.
HOw wanton, and frolick's this Age,
Wherein Gallants so briskly invade
The Misses that furnish the Stage,
And the Madams in Maskarade?
Unseen and unknown they still court,
And walk a Corant to and fro',
Bad faces never hinder the Sport,
If the Blade's well provided below.
The Ladies make choice by the size,
The Gallants by Garb and Proportion,
And when their brisk Spirits do rise,
They fall to their carnal devotion.
There needs neither Parents consent,
A Ioynture nor Rites of the Church,
If fiercely the Gallant be bent,
The Ladies scarce leave him ith'lurch.
Yet if he too faintly pursue
The Idol he seems to adore,
With a frisk she will bid him adieu,
And leave the young Fop at the door.
Fair. The Fiddlers named a Sister, Came she down with you?


Owm. Yes, and such a pollished piece of Flesh and blood, Tom; so tempting fair.


Fair. Prithee say.


Owm. Such a delicious, delicate, ingenious Rogue; no shrugging, cease your
vain hopes, and to thy future torment know, that she is reserved.


Fair. For my embraces Jack.


Owm. Learn to despair betimes, thou may as soon persuade the Dutch to adjure
Traffic, as move her to affection; she has a frost in her blood, and a fire in
her brain.


Fair. If handsome, let the Fire be where it will I Will quench it.


Owm. There Is more than up and ride here Tom, you will find her no Theater
Visor-mask, nor one of the Moseleys Persons of Quality, she defies the
enchantment of a Snake curl, cannot be mollified with a treat, nor will she
dance after a consort of Guineys.


Fair. Introduce me, and let me take my venture.


Owm. Thou may as soon draw the chief Prize in the Indigent Officers Lottery,
as purchase her; the majesty of her beauty will command thy reverence, and the
acuteness of her Wit thy admiration.


Fair. Doubtless I shall admire her, for I find I love her already.


Owm. I Would fain see that movable in petty-coats thou could not love.


Fair. I Am a well wisher to the soft Sex.


Owm. As ever trappan'd Virgin of her trifle, thou obligest all, from the Bib
to the Mufler, from the bulk to the Alcove.


Fair. Had my design on Woman been half so successeful as thine upon gouty
Purses and consumptive Coxcombs, I had not been thus long condemned to the dull
and nauseous embraces of an old overridden acquaintance.


Owm. Thy penance would become my Paradise.


Fair. Do love an old Obliger?


Owm. I could never keep Friend to make the experiment.


Fair. You should caress them, as I do mine, not cheat 'em so inhumanely.


Owm. Thou art as foul mouthed as a decayed sinner in the lower Alsatia: It Is
as great a Sollicism in good manners to say a Gentleman cheats, as to call a
Lady of Quality Whore, for obliging a a distressed Cavaliere with a nights
lodging.


Fair. I beg your pardon; you out wit them. My Sword.

[To his Boy
Enters Owmuch his Boy. Boy, Sir, an ancient Gentlewoman without inquires very
loudly for you.


Owm. What kind of Animal is she?


Boy, she calls her self Madam Parret.


Fair. The Midwife, I Will withdraw -- I had rather stand ten broadsides of a
Ship Royal, than the artillery of her Voice: she quarrelled once a Bearward,
and tho nine Oyster Wives came in to his assistance, she half killed him with
noise, and rendered him entirely deaf for a month after.


Owm. She Is a Woman of an uncontrollable clamor when she is moved, and nothing
does it sooner than to debauch one of her fair Lodgers without her privacy.


Fair. My ears have suffered so cruel a Martyrdom in the confirmation of that
truth, I dare not oppose it.


Owm. She out does a Playhouse Orange Woman for the politic management of a
baudy intrigue.


Fair. Well, when you have rendered her conversable, I Will appear, and in the
interim hasten my Sister for the Wells.


[Exit. Owm. Boy, send her in -- She comes with fresh intelligence of Game, if
profit's the Attendant, I Will make a stoop and gorge the golden Prey; if only
pleasure, let those whom ease and plenty have made wanton, pursue the riotous
variety, I cannot live upon it.


Enter Parret. Par. Dear Owmuch! I have run my self into a Bath to find you.


Owm. Thou art the prettiest obliging Creature! But do these Waters afford
never a piece of barren, or disgusted Matrimony, some Widowed antiquity, or
antiquated Virginity, to whom a strong chined Gentleman, with a back of the
first rate, may be serviceable.


Par. Do take me for a Harridan, or a Cuff^ey? ha!


Owm. I believe thee a very obliging Creature, truly.


Par. I will not be believed an obliging Creature by never a Sir Fopling of you
all, the Court know me a Creature of Heavens special Handiwork, and if I live
to see the City, Bow shall Ring with thy abominations, till Mary-Overs echo
thy lewdness: Tempt me to be an obliging Creature;


Owm. Let this Guiney render me more intelligible to your good Name.


Par. You have a good Lady of your own, and for you to make these wild
excursions to abuse your old acquaintance with the occupation of an obliging
Creature.


[Weeps. Owm. A few tears may do her parched hide a kindness, and cement the
clefts in her face, which gape for a shower like a clay fenn in the Dog-dayes.


Par. But as I was saying Mr. Owmuch, if you can discover any implyment,
whereby a poor Gentlewomans reputation may not be blited, you shall find me as
pliable as a Willow; tending to all occasions, Honorable and commodious.


Owm. Now you speak reason; Ladies come down here for the common cause, and can
you (who are the very modle of experience) imagine that desires can be
satisfied without their common remedy: Waters are but waters Mrs. Parret, there
goes more to the composition of an Heir, than minerals.


Par. Now you come to me; and I Have an Aldermans wife in chase to answer your
full wishes, who wanting the conveniences her Sex requires, is kindly willing
to spare the decrepit years of her Husband, and to manage his Cash to his
ease, and her own satisfaction.


Owm. In short, she would be furnished with an able friend.


Par. That can hardly be done in short, Mr. Owmuch.


Own. Busiy not thy projecting head about dimensions; she may spare the
question the Lady asked the Giant, by your assuring her that all is
proportionable, Fairlove comes, you will find me at the Wells.


[Enter Fairlove. Par. I Will give the Lady an Inventory of your abilities.


[Exit. Par. Fair. I find the Beldame has not digested our last quarrel, by the
flight she took upon my appearance.


Owm. I warrant you disappointed her assignation, for she loved thee
passionately.


Fair. I Have younger game upon the Wing, your Knights Sister.


Own. The worshipful Wight appears; who rightly managed may prove a future
introduction to that amor, and a pleasant diversion at present.


[Enter Sir Lofty Vainman. Vain. My Stars are superabundantly propitious in
administering the Seraphick felicity of this crittical encounter.


Owm. Such accumulated kindness will bankrupt my poor acknowledgements.


Vain. My soul's inhabited, or rather Collonized with an allacrity to see you.


Fair. I know not how his Soul's inhabited, but's head may pass for a Collony
in Greenland, it is so thinly peopled.


Vain. My noble Mustapha, is he thy Zanger?


[to Owm. Owm. A Gentleman, whose accomplishments will recommend themselves to
your acquaintaince.


Vain. As I Am a Baronet of the old Iocabus stamp, I am his Vassal in decimo
sexto.


Fair. You much honor me.


Vain. Fragrant Sir, I honor any Man of parts, for I hate a Dunce, and adore a
new Acquaintance.


[draws his Book. Fair. Pray enter me into the List.


Owm. D' you book 'em all Sir Lofty.


Vain. I should obliterate half else, here is thy Name, and thy friends should
be Registered next, could I decipher't.


Fair, Mine Is Fairlove.


Vain. Odoriferous Mr. Fairlove! I reverence thy Name sublimely, and to
ellucidate the redundancy of my devotions, I Will enter it upon the knuckles of
my Pedestals.


[writes upon his knees. Fair. It Is the friendliest fool I e're conversed with.


Owm. Now shall I be more slighted then a passionate cast Mistress, who thinks
a Man obliged to digest the nauciousness of her Age, because he was surfeited
with the pleasures of her youth; for he admires an acquaintance no longer than
he gets a fresher.


Fair. Keep him from others, and my acquaintance with him shall tend to thy
advantage.


Vain. So! I have you down in capital characters.


Courtwit peeps, steps back, then Enters. Fair. You may enter without the
hazard of a blush, for these are very modest Gentlemen.


Owm. A modest Gentleman is less acceptable to a well bred Lady then an Eunuch
to an experienced Widow.


Fair. This Knight I Am sure allows the character, he seems a harmless Servant
to fair Ladies.


Cour. If but to the Fair, what will become of me?


Vain. Excuse me thrice resplendant Nymph, I am so to all.


Cour. Who speaks to all is silent still to me.


Vain. You shall make an impropriation of me, and be the sole Incumbant of my
amors. Pardon me, Madam, tho I illustrate my ellocution with those clerical
metaphers, know I am a Baronet of 2000 per Annum.


Cour. I guest it by your ridiculous bravery, and extraordinary confidence.


Vain. She Is a Lady of an intellectual sublimity.


Fair. She Will improve by the converse of so ingenious a Knight.


Vain. She may impregnate, Sir.


Fair. You mean my Sister no dishonor.


Owm. I dare engage for's innocence.


Vain. I contemplate the impregnation of her capacity by this snuch.


[Pulls out his snuch Box. Cour. This is the extravagants Coxcomb, that ever
nature produced to countenance folly.


Fair. Would thou had him for better and worse.


Cour. To sell to Gresham College to be anatomized for a Fool, 'twere worth
the Virtuoso's while to find out the Seat of folly, and learn to cut Gallants
of the simples.


Fair. Did know the sweet convenience of a wealthy Fool, thou would have a
greater aversion to indigent Wits, than celebrated Court beauties to an
habitation in North- Wales.


Cour. If Fate design me for such an unfinished piece of Manhood may she send
me a soft insipid Fool, for these half witted Pops are more obstinate than
ignorant Devotes, and less tractable than Mules.


Fair. You Lady Wits have still the ill Fortune of fooling your best Servants
first, and then your selves: I expect you should consume your youth amongst the
Wits, and purchase a large dowry in Sonnets and Reparties; but when maturer age
shall blunt the edge of these fantastic nothings, and show what you thought
wit, want of discretion, Sister.


Cour. Would you would instruct more by example, Brother.


Fair. My defects are no warrants for your Follies.


Cour. But running in a blood they ought to be the more excusable, at least to
you.


Vain. Pray Madam, what is your name?


Cour. I was christened before I could well remember -- Ha, ha.


Vain. Does she deride Sir Lofty Vainman?


Owm. No, it is a particular grace.


Vain. Say you so; in veracity, the elegance of my fabric tittilates the
imaginations of most Ladies I converse with.


Fair. You are certainly Venus's Darling, and that my Sister may be in your
Books, her name is Courtwit.


Cour. But who gave her that name is the next query; the Knight makes me too
much a Girl, and my Brother would have me too soon a Woman, certainly there is
a medium Mr. Owmuch.


Owm. She Is as pleasant as any thing in Nature.


Fair. Ever except a Monkey and a Shock Dog.


Cour. And a Lover Brother, for there is nothing in Nature so fantastically
apish.


Fair. It Is because Ladies are caught like Dotterels by imitation, we are fain
to counterfeit your follies to bring you to our lure.


Cour. You make Dotterels of us, and we make Dolts of you.


Enter Fop. Fop, Faith and troth I Am glad I Have found you, dear Coz.


[to Sir Lofty Cour. Was he afraid to lose the Knight or himself?


Owm. He pretends to know all persons, and their concerns, has the ambition to
be thought a Wit, and commends all things in the wrong place.


Cour. Methinks our Knight ingrosses him.


Owm. A fresh object to Sir Lofty is next to a new acquaintance.


Cour. Never was Knight and Esquire better matched,


Fair. It grows late, I suppose you command Sir Lofties Coach.


Owm. And him to, or I mispend my time.


Fair. May thrive in thy adventure: Come Sister.


[Exit with Courtwit. Owm. Fairlove designs Sir Lofty for his Sister, but I
intend him first for my own advantage, and then may she be happy in her Fool;
it is true she seems averse, but an Estate yoked with a Ladyship may change her
mind: But now to my own Plot. O Lord, Sir, I had forgot your danger! I beg your
pardon, your safety makes me rude.


He muses then pulls Vainman hastily. Vain. Where Is Fairlove and the Lady?


Fop. Do you know Fairlove?


Owm. If you respect Sir Lofty spare your impertinance.


Fop. Never stir, I love you for that, as if any man knew Fairlove better than
I,


Owm. Had you the knowledge of an Oracle, you must be ignorant of this concern.


Fop. I thank you for that, as if your business were not the Wells.


Owm. No more than to the Indies.


Fop. And now you talk of the Indies, I Will discover a mystery of Trade, our
Merchants are taxed with the exportation of broad Gold to that Clime, when
insincerity the greatest part is exchanged with Sweden for Copper.


Owm. A Pox on your brazen impudence!


Fop. Why it is generally used amongst the Misses instead of Mercury in all
their washes.


Vain. By the soul of industry it may turn to account, for most of our refined
Gallants look as if they used the same wash too.


Owm. Will you believe me?


Fop. I love you for that never stir, as if this were an Age to believe any Man.


Owm. There Is no persuading him, I must think upon some other course. So-ho-Boy
-- [Enter Boy; he whispers the Boy goes out, If this prove not let the Devil
take the Dice, and throw me a worse change. -- [Boy returns with two naked
Swords. Mr. Fairlove sends you these to take your choice.


Fop. I love him for, what shall I do for a Scabbard.


Owm. One you may dispose as you please, the other he intends to sheath in your
sweet guts.


Fop. The Devil take me for a souced Mackarel, if ever I spoke to the Man in my
Life.


Owm Just now, none knew him better,


Fop Know, or know not, I Am a Person of resolution, and scorn to fight any Man
without a quarrel: Send me a sword!


[Exit. Owm. Your Kinsman has put me in a kind of heat, but he is an Animal; and
were not your interest concerned.


Vain. Most indearing odoriferous Owmuch,


Owm. If you carry not some spell about you.


Vain. Not I, by the spirit of Garagaeneva.


Owm. It were else impossible, I Have a passion for thee, as if thou were a Miss
of an hours acquaintance.


Vain. Put in sincerity, do affect Sir Lofty Vainman.


Owm. Refuse me else! were Fairlove ten thousand Friends, since he resolves to
quarrel my noble Knight, I Would renounce him.


Vain. Quarrel me!


Owm. In short, for I dare disguise 't no longer; these Weapons I used to scare
your Kinsman, were sent by Fairlove to you, who took offense, how e're he
seemed to bear it, at the ambiguity of your expressions.


Vain. I apprehend the Gentleman's very quarrelsome.


Owm. The veriest Wasp in Europe* he beat a modish Fop for discharging a Volley
of crittical non sense upon Ben Iohnsons Fox, and kicked a Vallet de Chamber in
the pride of his Lords cast Suit, disputing precedence with a Ballad-maker: at
certain times the Devil possesses him, and then he destroys Friend and Foe
without distinction.


Vain. You have talked me into an intermitting Fever, what is to be done?


Owm. Done! Cut's throat.


Fain. Is It for the credit of a Baronet in Commission to fight?


Owm. That Is considerable.


Vain. Besides, my Estate is 2000 per Annum, what has he?


Owm. What Fortune and the Dice oblige him with.


Vain. May I dwindle to an Esquire, if I scorn not to risque my life at such
uncertainties.


Owm. What if we try the Sisters intercession?


Vain. Most Philosophically imagined.


Owm. Yet I Have a certain scruple.


Vain. Be not retrograde my dear Elixir of amity.


Owm. I swore upon an accident never to tempt a Lady empty handed.


Vain. I apprehend, thou shall* present this Locket.


Owm. To the Lady, but have no slight regalio for the Chambermaid, to
facilitate address.


Vain. Here Is a moveable of eight guineys.


Owm. Illustrated with a Paper of Verses 'twill serve turn: but let me consider
what I Am indebted, a hundred and fourscore.


Vain. It wants ten, thou art a faithful Debtor.


Owm. Then thirty makes just two hundred pounds.


Vain. My Purse is superstitiously at thy devotion.


Owm. And to requite the courtesy I Will introduce you into the acquaintance of
a rich young Widow, whose pleasant conversation will shorten the time spent in
adjusting your quarrel.


Vain. Thou art expansively obliging, I Will go numerate the pounds, and
randevouz you at the Portal of my apartment?


[Exit. Owm. Every Man in's way; here is a good mornings purchase; two hundred
pounds, a Locket, and this ring; all got by honest industry, the Brandenburg of
couzenage, by which the zealous sober Citizen does circumvent the ignorant,
oppress the indigent, and swallow the profane and prodigal.


To thrive is but our Neighbors right to invade,
And cheating's the chief knack of every Trade.
[Exit. ACT. II. SCENE. I.
In the Widows lodging, Enter Brag and Crack. Brag* OUr Wits grow duller than a
Dutch Lampoon, and our best projects meet as bad success; as if the Devil
(Traitor to himself) had leagued with virtue to suppress poor Sinners.


Crack. Well fare old London, I say there is the game; there they come tumbling
in with fiery bloods, light heads, and weighty purses; these dull waters render
intrigue too phlegmatic and serious.


Brag. O the dear time when Misses came up first in fashion: then half the Town
were Novices in love; and not so many Ladies of the game: the subtle practice
of one afternoon for Petty-coats in the Row, and Lumbard Street, for Smocks in
Cornhil, and for Gloves at the Change, whilst Covent garden furnished golden
Cash, then were the happy days.


Crack. But now grown numerous, like other Traders, must rest content t'imploy
our industry for smaller gains than our happy Predecessors.


Brag. We are barred the blessing of variety for want of choice, we cherish
costive Fops, whose narrow bounty scarce affords us gruel.


Crack. The Mercer comes off pretty handsomely.


Brag. Inspired with Pontack, that spur to Venery, we feel his bounty.


Crack. In that gay mood, he turns a Debauche; and hates the City Idol,
Interest.


Brag. What think you of our quibbling Levite.


Crack. The Guiney-gelder, he was born in Wales, and thinks a mark a most
Majestic Bounty.


Brag. Curse on these hide bound Cullies! I must have such mettled Sparks as
scorn to starve their venery; a poor it inerent White-Friers Sinner, that
nightly plies 'twixt Theator and Temple, I cannot live upon such scraps; I Will
strait cashier 'em.


Crack. That were ill policy: Suitors about a Widow are like Daws circling a
Prey; their cawing may invite the Eagle, but summons certainly their fellow
Daws,


Brag. We might extract more Spirits from these Weeds.


Crack. No Chimistry is like a Woman's Wit.
If mine fail not, I Will turn 'em all to profit.

Brag. But I Would fain see some proofs.


Crack. You are too impatient, the World's improved, and not so easily imposed
upon, as formerly.


Brag. Plays and converse have so refined the Age old Cheats wont pass; Yet
had I rich Pretenders!


Crack. New Setters up must entertain all Comers; and I despair of none, but
your dull Rhimer, for one may easier extract from Cinders Balsamic Oil, than
gold from Poets.


Brag. Why then let us squeeze the Parson.


Crac. His Tyth Geese and Pigs come in so slowly they will scarce discharge a
Treat of pettit Paste and brandy. Obscure, I hear some footing. I vow my Lady's
busy -- Brag hides: Crac. runs to the door to stop Quibble and Farendine. Pray
be civil -- Your Coat speaks more reverence, than to press upon a Ladies
privacy; if these intrusions be countenanced no Person of Quality will drink
the waters at their Lodging.


Quib. It is my duty to have regard to so comfortable an importance as a young
Widows water.


Crac. She Is none of your charge, Mr. Quibble.


Quib. But I have been at charges with her, therefore I charge you t'evade your
frumps, least I crack your conundrum, Mrs. Crack.


Crac. The Cracks have as good a report as the Quibbles in spite of your Welsh
Herauldy.


Quib. Thy tongue's a very cracker, all noise, and no danger.


Crac. It is not such a firebrand as yours, to cause dissension in a whole
Parish.


Far. There Is no dealing with Women, the Merchandise seldom answers
expectation.


Crac. He prates like a City Orphane.


Far. Know I defy that enclosure of horned Beasts, where hypocrisy stalks
like Religion, and fraud wears the Cloak of Sobriety; I dwell within the
Precincts of Gentility; keep a Warehouse within the sent of his Majesty's
Kitchen, wear my sword, maintain my Miss, converse with the Huza's, storm
Punks, beat Watches, and reel to bed by three in the morning.


[Enter Witless. Wit. Where Is this magnetic of beauty; here is an Ode shall
make her fairer than Nature designed her, it contains 999 Stanza's, writ all
ala vole; my Muse never drew bit for it.


Quib. Then she baited on horseback, for I Am sure she keeps the Stage.


Wit. That such shrubs of illiterature should censure us! But I Will consound
their ignorance: know that I am happily the best Poet that ever translated
Farce.


Crac. It Is the first time I ever heard of your merit*


Wit. That argues you of low conversation; why, the Age takes its measure from
my garb and writings, and for Plays a late piece of mine ravished the World;
it was so charming, so divertisant, the Actors could not hear it without
bursting their buttons. And I confidently dare aver 'twill read and act with
any Play in Christendom. Have seen Tunbridge Wells?


Quib. I don't frequent the Theators.


Wit. I Would have it acted all by Women:


Crac. And why by Women?


Wit. Because Baudry and non sense is best received from their mouths.


Quib. Your Muse roams, and becomes vagrant.


Wit. Tempt me not, least I tell thee, thou Nonconformity to Order, how much
the canting Pulpit has borrowed from my strain, to inhance its reputation.


Crac. You Had best profane Heroic Plays to.


Wit. Poor Chamber Utinsil; thy heart is no more proof against Love in rhyme
than thy sleazy Smock against him thou likest.


Crac. He must be a better Engineer than thou, to undermine it.


Wit. Thou art no competent Judge; therefore I Will make an Essay upon thy Lady.


Crac. No admittance there to an empty handed Lover, she is resolved to value
your affections by the price of your Presents.


Wit. Present her strait these Verses, where resides the Cleopatrian Pearl of
Poetry.


Crac. These paper presents might find at Epsom a more fit employment.


Wit. O thou impertinences! but you are great Judges, Gentlemen.
When most Stupendous Thunder from the Earth
With silent noise concealed this Ladys Birth,
The Bull in Paralax did bray so loud
That Fate by him had like to have been cowd.

Wit. Do you Laugh at me, Laugh at an Author, by Ate Nemesis and all the
infernal spawn inspires Lampoon, I Will dray thy Portracture in Traves^y so
horribly deformed, and like a Hag, thou shall deface thy Idol Looking-glass,
and in thy cruel garter hang thy self.

Horror, and Hell with Nature shall conspire
And blast thy face, to compliment my Ire.

[Exit. Quib. His Muse is still upon the speed, I wonder he posted away no
sooner.


Crac. Your conundrums are as unacceptable to my Lady as his Rants; she
understands no Courtship but Plate and Jewels.


Quib. For Plate, I Have little besides a Brandy-Cup.


Crac. A brandy Cup! you sure mis-understand me.


Quib. We Will beget right understandings, fear not, how e're I Will give thee a
Mark to remember me by.


[gives her Money. Crac. You are too noble.


Quib. A Wit of my own strain, there is Ten-groats for that jest.


Crac. What a quarter you keep with your kindness?


Quib. Art with me again? that joke deserves a kiss.


Faren. These Priests are prodigal of their flesh; but were he an Arch-Flamine
I durst drop Angels with him.


Quib. My bounty has been so remarkable you cannot forget me.


Crac. The way to keep benefits in memory is to repeat 'em.


Quib. When next we meet we will come to repetition.


Crac. You see the address I use, to be at your devotion.


Faren. Your kindness shall not forestal my bounty.


Crac. My Lady, hears nothing from me but your praise.


Faren. You give my love kind hopes.


Crac. She Is the richest Widow that ever thrift, or cousenage produced.


Far. Present her this small token of my Love.


[a Jewel. Crac. Now I Will pronounce her Yours; the strongest simpathies in love
or Nature are less violent than her inclinations to a franklover.


Faren. Iv'e given direction for a Richer present, when Poet, or Parson rival
me in bounty, may I return to my first vomit, snort at government over a Coffee
dish, and curse French Weavers.


Crac. Not a word of your Profession, as you affect preferment; my Lady sounds
at the very Name of a Citizen.


Faren. That generous humor does improve my hopes; I want but little of a
Gentleman, except a Privilege not to pay my debts; for I can swear as loud,
talk as profainly* Drink as deep, and Court a Miss as lewdly: Therefore I Will
order straight my Journy-man to shut up Shop, turn all my Wares to cash,
defraud my Creditors with a composition, and make me large returns of the
overplus, that I may put my self into a Garb, Purchase a Knighthood, and
atchiev'e the Widow.


[Exit. Crac. It Is a most Gentleman-like resolution.


[Enter Brag. Brag. Excellent Rogue! Thou have out done thy self!


Crac. What I performed, was all by your direction.


Brag. Thou growest too modest, I acknowledge thee the builder of my Fortunes,
and thy own.


Crac. This Gold and Jewels are but fortunes pledges, here comes your Doctor,
and in his thread bare velvet.


[Enter Outside. Brag. Would you have him leave his degree behind him?


Out. Madam, I could not take my round, without certifying my self of the
intrinsical operation of your Ladyships waters.


Brag. They pass but dully.


Outs. Do you ponderate them, according to prescription?


Crack. Alas! She has not discharged (saving your Worships reverence) the
demi-quantity she drank.


Out. Some viscous obstructions latent; but I Will prescribe an apperative: I
profess they should be drank at the Well, least they evaporate their volatile
Salt.


Enter Parret in a heat. Par. O! you are a worthy man to be relied on.


Out. Why all this indignation, Mrs. Parret? you see I dispatch my Patients as
fast as the best of the College.


Par. You are a worshipful dispatcher indeed, to have had a Lady under your
hands these five weeks for the common cause, when I have known more good done
in five minutes.


Out. The Waters must have time for operation.


Par. Is it not a shame for you, and your waters not to render a Lady fruitful
in five weeks.


Out. The Husbands old and defective.


Par. Were not you employed to supply those defects? Do we not call the
Phisician to help the infirmities of Nature? and were not you called (as they
say) by my advice, I thought you an able Man, but you approve your self a Man
of weak practice, and feeble parts.


Out. Be pacified, what is within the power of Man I Will effect.


Par. What Is within the pores of Man may do much by a right applications, I
know it by experience, I beg your Lady-ships pardon that I borrow your Doctor
for an hour.


Brag. He Is freely at your service.


[Exit with Doctor. Brag. I hope Owmuch has brought some freshgoslings.


[Enter Owmuch, Vainman, Fop. Owm. You Will pardon, Madam, this bold intrusion.


Brag. I seldom admit Company at my Lodgings, when I drink the Waters, but
yours is at all times acceptable.


Owm. The reallity of your compliment will appear in your courteous reception
of my friends.


Brag. They need no other Character to assure their welcome.


Owm. Sir, Lofty Vainman, and Esquire Fop.


[They Salute her. Vain. Her Lips are softer than the Clouds, and melt to Manna.


Fop. My memory, fails me, or I should know this Lady.


Brag. Know me!


Fop. I Have seen those eyes shoot glances in the Park and now I think on it, your
Manty was Cherry and Buff trimmed with a Genti^nella colored ribband.


Brag. What shall I do? I shall be discovered.


[To Owmuch. Owm. Let not fear betray you, it is his humor to pretend to know
all persons. Sir Lofty I must recommend this Lady to you for a Virtuosa, and
leave you Esquire to the mercy of Mrs. Crack.


Fop. You are for the Wells now.


Owm. You should be an Astrologer by your conjecture: Do you know I want twenty
Guineys?


Fop. Was I ever ignorant. These make an even hundred.


Owm. I owe Sir Lofty two. But I Will leave my Fools to their Fortunes.


[Exit* Owmuch. Vain. My Visage is the perspective of my heart, and my tongue,
the Landscape or passage of my intellects.


Brag. It Is too intricate a Prospective for me to judge by, for I have but one
sure proof of love.


Vain. Make it the Standard of mine, and if it prove not Alchimy contemn my
prowess, and render my Chivalry ridicule!


Brag. Your imprecations have unlocked my breast, indulge my modesty to whisper
the kind secret.


Vain. The Heavens are not more bountiful when they dissolve in fruitful
showers to impregnate Nature: But con licenza that rapture merits quotation.


[draws his Book. Brag. Sure Nature takes delight in varying Fools, and made
this for her sport, he is so affectedly ridiculous.


Vain. Madam, my auricular aurifices dilate themselves to entertain your secret!


[they engage in dumb show. Crac. You are the cunningest Squire I e're met with.


Fop. Yet I dare wager you know not what is a Clock. But I Have that about me does
to a minute.


[drawes his Watch. Crack. A very gentile Watch, and well studded!


Fop. It Is East's own handy work, and made of old spurroyal Gold, newly
returned from Holland, to quicken the motion.


Crack. I doubt it will move as dully back as a sat Burghy-master after a
surfeit of Pilchers.


She goes to put the Watch in her Pocket, he holds her Arm. Fop. Never stir, I
love you for that.


Crack. Tell me when you shall have't again, and I Will swear, you are cunninger
than the Deaf dumb Fortune Tellers.


Fop. Never go you are a pleasant Lady, as if I knew not.


Crac. I Will lay a Crown you don't.


Fop. Done!


Crac. Done! And you shall keep stakes.


Fop. In feikens I love you for that.


Crac. Now resolve the question.


Fop. I shall have't when I ask for it, shall not I? whose the Fool now?


Crac. Try, and ask.


Fop. That Is well enough; D' you think me such an Ass to lose my wager.


Crac. The Angel be your guard, and mine the Watch.


Fop. Never stir, I thank you for that, but lend me it me again, and I Will teach
you to set the alarm.


Crac. O fie; I cannot endure a noise, it makes me sound.


Fop. It has such a pretty motion for the tide.


Crac. Pray let that motion rest till I take Water.


Fop. Foutreblew, I hope your heels are not so light as your fingers.


Vain. 'Twill stupifie all indigent pretenders, and ratify the value of your
charms.


[to Brag. Brag. It Is not the present, but the love I value, they that are
always giving before Marriage, will give it afterward to better purpose.


Vain. This Locket shall remain, bright Pyramid, a splendid hostage to confirm
my Love, which future Presents shall expatiate.


Brag. You are generous, but I must beg your pardon. The waters make me
unmannerly.


[Exit. Crac. Madam, I come.


[Exit running. Fop. My watch, never stir my Watch! Her heels are so light, I
wonder how they balance her brains.


Vain. I am intranced with such Seraphick charms.


Fop. I Will lay my Soul to a Pepper Corn that you're in Love.


Vain. Delphos never spoke with more veraciousness.


Fop. Delphos, and Jupiter Amon were Asses, Timothy Fop was a seventh son, and
divined in's Mothers belly.


Vain. Thou art enthusiastically congnitiant, but I must make an est inventus
of Owmuch.


Fop. And I Will voyage the while toward the straights of your Sisters affection.


Vain. Hold Armiger, you must a while retire; the Knight must nuptialize before
the 'Squire.


[Exeunt. ACT. III. SCENE. I.
The Wells are discovered full of people washing and drinking Water; amongst
the rest Fairlove, Alinda, Alderman, Mrs. Paywell, Parret, Outside, Owmuch,
Courtwit, the two last advance toward the Audience. Owm. YOur Brother's
engaged in a very hazardous adventure.


Crac. Were she more wittily abusive, and enviously censorious than the Ladies
of the Circle on the Queens birth night, he has confidence enough to put her
out of countenance, and new color her paint with blushes.


Owm. Nay she has her proportion of assurance too; and the tartness of her Wit
may give his Love a surprise.


Court. It Is well if it do; for if her wit were no more surprising than her
beauty, 't would neither deserve his Love, nor our argument.


Owm. They must both abate their value in your presence.


Court. Were this from any body but you, I should value my self much upon that
compliment.


Owm. My commendations are not, I hope, scandalous.


Court. But praise is a dangerous surfeit from persons that afford such large
pennyworths.


Owm. Where deserved, they may be received without vanity.


Court. So might Lady's favors by you, though you continually boast 'em, and
least you should brag of mine, I Will not take one thing kindly you say.


Owm. That will not be for the reputation of your good humor.


Court. If 't be for the reputation of my good name, it is better.


Owm. That Is as insignificant to a well-bred Lady in this Age, as a patch ill
placed; it disgraces her beauty.


Court. Those modish Ladies are very unkind to themselves to be obliging to you.


Owm. That Is another argument of a virtuous ill nature, to be suspicious
without cause.


Court. Pray give me a proof of your good one, by handing me down, the other
walk to avoid my Brother; for I had as live be seen in the Company of a Baboon,
as of so near a Relation in public.


[whilst they walk off, Fairlove and Alinda advance. Fair. It Is as impossible
for you Ladies to be fair without being ill natured, as for a fig to ripen
against a North wall.


Alin. It Is not over civil for an entranced Cavaleire to tell his Lady her
faults at first sight.


Fair. Since scorn's the prerogative of Beauty, it is no great imputation.


Alin. But to me, who cannot challenge that Character, it is very offensive.


Fair. Profane not, Madam, such divine perfections; Nature has copied out all
other faces, and drew you only her Original, for this Age to adore, and the
succeeding to take their measures of proportion from.


Alin. I Am sorry I cannot say as much by you.


Fair. 'Twere not difficult, had you the same affection.


Alin. But then, I must outlye a Lover.


Fair. That Is as easy, now I have shown you the way. But setting apart your
rallery, which is but the breathing exercise of your wit, I Am confident you
have no aversion for me.


Alin. I am so far from doubting your confidence, I believed you impudent the
first minute I saw you.


Fair. Let Us kiss and be friends, why should we Wits quarrel?


Alin. I had rather subscribe my self a Fool, than be of your society.


Fair. That would avail you little, for I Am such an amorous Coxcomb, I should
turn fool too, rather than forsake you.


Alin. Since the matter's so difficult, let us draw cuts who shall go first.


Fair. I Am in no haste; may I dye if your company be not extremely pleasant.


Alin. And yours so tiresome, I Am resolved to quit the Walk, rather than give
my self a farther penance.


[Exit looking back. Fair. So quick! She expects now I should follow her; and
for my pains be laughed at, nay it may be scorned: I Am in the snare, but to own
my chains were to adjourn my wishes; and become the passive anvile of her
gilting wit: Rather than I Will erect the imperious Throne of her proud Tyranny,
I Will curb my Love that she may give a loose t'her own desire: I know she burns,
but scorns to own the fire.


[Exit. Alinda reenters Alin. He Is gone, I fear I was too sharp; and yet he
took more liberty in's smart replies to me; but they were brisk and wity, full
of spirit: Yet what is his wit to thee, or thine to him? I Will rend his memory
from my soul; be gone!


Love vainly hopes a conquest over this heart,
Since 't has resisted Wit, his keenest dart.
[Exit* The Wells continue still full of company: Enter Wilding and Courtwit.
Court. I wonder you would embark on the Vessel of Matrimony having so little
kindness for the Voyage.


Wild. Beauty, and Portion were such tempting Devils.


Court. I should suspect 'em for Angels, since they have brought you so soon to
Repentance.


Wild. Had not your beauty relieved me, they had played the Divil's in earnest,
and led me e're this to despair.


Court. Your faithless inconstancies has played that Devils part with so many
of our Sex, that I Am arrived at that Harbor already, and utterly dispairing of
Man's reformation, have formed most desperate resolutions against Marriage.


Wild. Indeed it is pleasanter to enjoy the same delights at liberty, and
change often; else it is as dull, for if a man must be confined to one dish, a
Wife's the more Sanctified diet, and sometimes the more wholesome.


Court. How profainly you talk?


Wild. A Wife of the second year has less Harmony than the Bells in a
Pestilence, a perpetual jangling, and should the Husband rise at every peal,
the thin Animal might rest to Eternity.


Court. And you come to the Wells for a recess.


Wild. Rather to put my self in the mode, and choose a Miss; for their price is
so inhanced in Town (through the vanity of Witless Heirs) that a very waiting
Actress expects a Settlement.


Court. Approves your Lady these excursions?


Wild. We be neither so ill bred to concern our selves with each others
intrigues.


Court. On these terms I could fancy Marriage extremely.


Wild. Fie, Love and liberty have softer charms; Birds never hatch well in a
Cage; And I Am not so enamored on the words, to have, and to hold, but I could
be kinder without 'em; especially to so dear a Creature.


Court. But how long would this kindness continue? not till Death us depart.


Wild. Can you be so cruel to expect it? Love and Youth should finish their
course together, for there is no condition in Nature so miserable, as to be
strong in desire, and weak in performance.


Court. What think you of the Married one?


Wild. As of a Pestilence, none but so fair a Doctress can relieve.


Court. I fancy Paywell has the same power, and happyly more inclination.


Wild. She Is in years, and Married; and I Am a very conscientious Sinner.


Court. Therefore may oblige you with more safety.


Wild. Dull security rebates all pleasure; give me danger, and difficulty, to
inhance the object, I hate an easy purchase.


Court. Now I know your mind, I Will grow extremely scornful, to heighten your
affections.


Wild. I would not have you put a constraint upon your self; you have beauty
and youth sufficient to heighten love without such artifice.


Cour. I cannot digest that compliment without a glass of Water, Lets to the
Well.


They walk toward the Well, and the Alderman and Mrs. Paywel, Outside and
Parret advance, followed by an Old Woman with Water. Ald. Give me the other
glass; these Waters are so cold, I profess they will hardly down.


Outs. Stir Mr. Alderman, motion warms, and gives the Waters just operation.


Payw. By my truly, if they don't satisfy my longing for a Boy, I shall scarce
applaud 'em.


Outs. You see they 've brought the old Gentleman to an appetite.


Par. He eats well (as you say) but I cannot discern the Madam one jot the
better satisfied.


Ald Midwives will talk Mr* Doctor, and my Bunting's so passionate for a great
Belly, she will never have done by her good will, when any Man enters upon that
argument.


Par. She Is not so long upon that point as you are too short, Mr. Alderman.


Pay. Many a Woman would have supplied his defects elsewhere rather than suffer
such an estate to go out of her line.


Outs. Have patience till I have finished his course; then by the help of a
prolifie Bolus, and a secret Arcana I Will administer, I dare engage an happy
product.


[ Parret spies Owmuch at distance. Par. Yonder Is the Party I told you of.


Payw. Conduct him to the Place of Assignation --; Well Doctor, the hopes you
give me shall suspend my longing -- Good Honey fee him well.


Ald. I ha'nt known my Bunting in a better humor; Come Doctor, lets walk, and
see how the squares go among the Nine-pins.


[Exeunt Alderman and Doctor. As Paywel is looking for Parret she meets Wilding
and Courtwit advancing toward her. Payw. Mr. Wilding, You are very late this
morning.


Wild. I have been here this hour.


Payw. What Creature have you got by the fist? her Garb savours much of the
Mall by twylight.


Court. And why of the Mall, Dear Madam?


Payw. Because of your Court tincture, Nature works you all in wax, and like an
Artist Painter, clothes variety of Features with the same complexion.


Wild. You are too severe; this Lady lives in Fleetstreet.


Payw. I beg your Ladyships pardon, and since y' inhabit within the verge of
the City, supplicate a further acquaintance -- Y' eye my Point, I think it is
the greatest curiosity in Europe, my Smock's laced with the same, I assure you.


Wild. Now she is entered her right qu.


Payw. And were it not for giving scandal in so open a place I coud show that
might creat th'envy of all the Court Misses.


Wild. 'Twould much oblige the Company.


Court. And no ways disoblige the Court.


Payw. They rail at me already for wearing such rich points upon my
petty-coats, and swear they don't become a Tradesmans Wife, but did they see
what is under my petty-coats.


Wild. That were a sight indeed.


Payw. I Will come one day with all my trappings, and dazzle their weak eyes; and
let them know a Banckers Wife can vie jewels with the proudest of 'em.


Enter Witless, his Pockets crammed with Papers* Alderman Farendine, Quibble,
Outside, Tipwell, as from Nine-pins. Quib. Sussex, Sussex, I Will be judged by
the Alderman.


Aid. I scarce observed it; What say you, Doctor?


Faren. He Is a Bettor, What says Poet Witless.


Wit. I vote against you, either tip from the Brook or bowl again.


All. Content.


Quib. Not five, Mr. Alderman.


Ald. Five for a Crown.


Outs. For another.


Wit. Not five, six.


Faren. Not six, six to four.


Outs. I take you.


[Exeunt huddling, Witless drops a paper. Court. The Poet has dropped a paper,
pri'the reach it.


Wild. What Is here? A Lampoon, and to that Satirical Tune of Amarillis.


Court. As you love me sing it.


Wild. I have none of the charming'st voices, and may therefore obey you
without further entreaty.

LAMPOON.
COurtwit she is exceeding gay
Courtwit she is exceeding gay.
And kisses Wilding, when she may
Without her Brothers knowledge,
For plush Outside, she does deride,
Tho a Member of the College.

Court. The rhiming Fop was much your friend; proceed,


Alinda she is seldom kind;
Alinda she, etc.
Although her wit seem much refined
I doubt at last 'twill fool her;
For she is of Age, I dare engage
And wants a Man to cool her.

[Courtwit snatches the Verses and tears them. Wild. Oh unmerciful to destroy a
Poet in a moment!


Pay. They found a fate too noble: But I implore your pardons to seek the
Alderman!


Court. Rather a Rummer of Rhenish, let us observe her.


Wild. I can find nothing worthy observation but your self.


Court. Always except your Glass, for there you may observe on of the
prettiest affected Gentleman, what ever France taught to be ridiculous in
England:


Wild. And yours represents the beautyfullest Angel that ever England produced
for France to adore.


Court Such another compliment would make me sound: I had rather be led a
corant in the Bear-garden than flattered in public: And see where comes the
Morris, which will prove a much better diversion.


[Amorrice Dance, which done Enter Roger. Cour. Is my Brother gone?


Roger. When the Lady with the Blew-livery took Coach, he mounted his Barb.


Court. Be ready at the end of the walk: I must take the other glass; come
Platonic.


Wild. I may thank your virtue for that unfashionable epithet, mine never
deserved it.


Court. Were It not in hopes of your conversion, I should be loath to venture my
reputation in your Company.


Wild. And had not I contrary hopes, I should fancy my self to have the worse
of the bargain, for it is a greater imputation for a Man of Wit to converse
thus publicly with a Vertuons Lady, than it can be to her to rally with the
greatest Debauche in Nature.


Court. It Is pity Custom allows such a mixture of conversation, that the Chaste
can scarce be discerned from the Misses.


Wild. Why should Custom distinguish what Nature has made so like; indeed your
Virtuous Ladies are the worse Natured, for they presume so much to be saved for
their Chastity, that they will be sure to be damned for their Pride.


Court. It Is Nobler to fall by the crime of Angels, than the Sin of Brutes.


Wild. So you fall any way, I shall be pleased.


Court. A glass of water will allay this Flame.


Wild. Love, like a burn, must be drawn out by fire,
Waters may quench my thirst, not my desire.

Court. Some more such flights (good Servant) as we walk, for your discourse
before was neither Rhyme, nor reason.


[The Scene of the Wells shuts. SCENE II.
Quibble, Farendine, Outside, Witless, drinking. Wit. Here Is a health to the
blazing Star of perfection.


Quib. Perhaps she is but an exhalation; I Will not falsify the intention of my
health.


Out. Drink with a mental reservation; I Will do thee reason.


Quib. I abominate drinking obscure healths as much as praying in unknown
tongues.


Wit. I say the Blazing Star, the Epithet's my own, and I Will mantain it.


Quib. If she be a Star, I Will drink her up to a Sun, Mercer to thee.


Fair. No more a Mercer than thy Mother, I Have turned my Shop out of doors, and
can justify my self a Gentleman to the Heralds.


Quib. Then here is to thee, Gentleman of the last edition.


Draw. Anon, anon Sir, did you call?


Faren. The other Bottle. To the happy Man that first enjoyes the Widow --
Little do they imagine whose health they drink.


Outs. Each man believes he drinks his own.


Faren. T'unriddle all, she is mine; I Have given earnest for her.


Quib. To give earnest before marriage is to forestal the Market.


Wit. And that is directly against the Statute.


Faren. Damn Statutes! tho I gave the Widow no earnest, yet I gave earnest for
the Widow.


Quib. Worse, clear circumvention, a superstitious fraudulent design to marry
her without her own consent.


Wit. A very Rape in Law,


He that a Widow sans consent does wed,
In his own wrong does get the Maidenhead.
Faren. A Widows Maidenhead, Ha, ha, ha.


Quib. He meant the Virg in-Widow.


Wit. Right, it is the unhappiness of us great Poets to speak things in our
Seraphick flights somewhat unintelligible: Now listen to an Ode.

A BALAD.
YOu Ladies who in loose body'd gown,
Forsakes the sneaking City,
And in whole Shoals come trundling down,
Foul, foolish, fair, or Wity.
Some for the Scurvy, some the Gout,
And some for Loves disease,
Know that these Wells drive all ill out,
And cure what e're you please;
They powerfully break the Stone,
And heal consumptive Lungs;
They Will quicken your conception,
If you can hold your tongues:
Then you that hither Childless come;
Leave your dull He Is behind you,
You Will never wish your selves at home
Our Youth's will be so kind to you.

Quib. An Ode! a Grubstreet Balad.


Wit. Thou degenerate Bastard of Levi; but for ludere cu^m sacris, I Would break
thy canonical Crown.


Quib. Then 'twoud be as little current as thy rhimes; but I Will swear the peace
against thee immediately.


Wit. Thou dogmatical Dunce in Orders: Did e're know Poet bound to's good
behavior, We that can depose Kings, subvert States, creat and annihilate
unborn Worlds.


Quib. Treason and Blasphemy, bear witness Farendine.


Outs. He means in's Plays; he showed me a Comedy wherein he murdered a dozen
Kings by one Plot.


Wit. Let me see ever a Parson do as much; I went not treacherously about to
incense the People, and foment Rebellion, but contrived my Stratagem with such
artifice, they destroyed each other playing a Prize at Cudgels. There was
surprise for you.


Outs. Why should sober persons differ about trifles?


Wit. Know the value of an Ode, the worst Syllable I sung was worth the East
India Fleet.


Quib. I Would not give this grain of snush for a whole Volumn.


Wit. Urged by's contempt, and by m'own rage inspired,
My Muse with ruinous revenge is fired;
But I Will so mawl the Slave, abused my Poem,
That Friend, nor Foe, nor Heaven shall dare to know him.

[Exit in rage, the rest following him. SCENE III.
Owmuch, Paywel, Parret, Boy with Wine. Owm. This Room's more airy, and has
better prospect, down with the Bottles Boy, and set us Chairs.


Par. Here Is health to this Ladies hans in Kelder, Gentleman.


Owm. First to the work of Propagation, dear Midwife.


Pay. I vow you make me blush: here is to the premises.


Par. She drinks it with a gusto.


Owm. Do thou pledge it so; I have known thee a well-wisher to the business.


Par. I Would have you to know I am not past my labors.


Owm. I wish thee a Hercules to perform twelve upon thee. But, Madam, we baffle
opportunity.


Pay. The Alderman toward five will be in the Grove at Ninepins; but should
you fail and prove inconstant.


Owm. My word's my reputation, that is my Soul; for what is a faithless man? a
walking shadow.


Pay. You profess nobly, and if your actions answer expectation you shall not
repent the knowledge of my person. Tho I Have ancient Man, I want no Money.


Owm. And for all other wants let me supply them.


Pay. As an earnest of future bounty, accept this.


gives him a Purse. Owm. It Is a younger Brothers glory to serve so generous a
Mistress.


Pay. Go, Y' are a Flaterer; the Alderman will think me long. But at five, Dear
Friend, you will not let slip the time.


Owm. Nature shall sooner lose her youthful Season, and lie confined insensible
of warmth within the womb of Winter, than I forget, that blessed hour, that
Spring of happiness.


[Exeunt. SCENE IV.
The Wells again, where Alderman, Outside, Farendine, Witless, and Quibble are
discovered sitting upon a Bench, others walking. Enter Wilding and Courtwit
walking very fast. Cour. You speak such soft things, I wonder any heart can
resist'em:


Wild. Dear nimble Soul give me leave to breath, you have run me this hour as if
I were taking my heats for a race.


Court. You are an able Servant to tire upon a Ladies frolic: Now have I a
mind, after all this ramble I have led you, for your further persecution, to
make you dance.


Wild. Are not you a cruel Lady to tempt a Man to caper, that can scarce stand?
but since you provoke me, you shall find me a Tarquin.


Court. After the Rape was over, as dull and insignificant.


Wild. I Will be judged by the Bench, if y' are not a little too severe to a
foundred Servant.


Court. No disputing, for I Am resolved to be absolute.


Wild. Since there is no resistance.


[Dances. [After the Dance, Enter Owmuch, Paywel, Parret. Court. Here comes
Owmuch, I^le try his breeding.


Wild. Be not so froward, he is engaged, I Will spend the utmost of my strength to
serve you.


Court. Now I Have made you know your self I can have mercy.


Wild. You Will cross your inclination, and I dare venture on a Country dance.


Cour. Will your Ladyship please to take a Frisk this morning?


Pay. Come Owmuch, I love to shake my legs.


Court. Sit not idle, here are Ladies, Gentlemen, would be in motion.


[ Farendine, Witless take the Ladies. A Dance Ald. Well said Honey! Have a
care of heating thy self.


Outs. Enough, enough, this violent exercise exhales all the volatile Spirits
by insensible transpiration.


Court. Fancying you very weary, I care not if I drop you at your Lodging.


Wild. It Is happiness enough to be disposed by you.


[Exeunt. Ald* Let Us be jogging toward South-borrough, it is almost dinnertime.


Pay. Dear Bunting I attend you: I shall too much incommode you.


[To Owmuch offering her his hand. Exeunt. Out. You're Horsemen Gentlemen, I
shall enjoy your Companys.


Far. I Have business at Rust-Hall.


[Exit. Wit. A mere pretense, he will slip to the Widow.


Quib. Slip as he will, the Noose shall sail him.


Wit. And you too, unless you hang in your sursingle, [aside.

My puisant Love must tyrannize her soul,
I Will govern her, and reign without control;
By the Soul of Poetry a most stupendous flight.


[Exeunt. ACT IV.
Enter Alinda, Fairlove following. Alind. ARe you not extremely audacious to
pursue me thus into my Lodgings?


Fair. And are not you a strange Lady, first to invite me, and then to make so
slight of my welcome.


Alin. I invite you, 't was in my sleep then, for that little knowledge I have
had of your conversation waking* has been so unpleasant, I can never wish your
Company but on Good Fridays, because it is a day of penance.


Fair. What a strange deceitful world do we live in? I Have been an interpreter
of Ladies looks these Ten years* and if the languishing glance you gave me,
when you took Coach did not plainly s^y, Fairlove follow me, and see how kind I
can be to a person of your merit, I Will never trust observation more.


Alin. My eyes were very intelligent to be so soon acquainted with your
deserts; But if your Name be Fairelove, I would entreat you to march fairly
off: You see the door.


Fair. Does it lead to your Lady-ships Bedchamber?


Alin. Yes, yes, through a close Lobby behind the Stairs.


Fair. If it be dark, 'twill be difficult to find; I Will stay for my Guide,
[Enter Parret. And if I am not deceived the Devil has sent me one.


Par. Madam, my Patroness presents her devoirs to your Ladyship, and desires to
know the state of your Paraquetta's health, and whether your pretty Shock has
puppi'd yet?


Alin. The poor Creature has been in travel ever since last night.


Fair. For want of some of your occupation, Mrs. Parret.


Par. How can your Ladyship suffer the lewdness of that profane fellow? I Would
not be seen in's debauched company for a dozen of Christenings.


Alin. He rudely followed me from the Wells, I cannot be quit of him.


Fair. I never heard you desire it; but for this Beldam, she is always Bedlam
mad, near Midsumer Moon.


Par. By the Faith of my Body he is the greatest Debauche in Nature, nor fit to
be trusted in a civil woman's company, he would have ravished me; a broom-stick
in a Petty-coat, could not 'scape him; Madam, there is not a Village within nine
miles, but is at charge with his adulterous Offspring.


Fair. Tho my breeding has not been so course as to allow me a vindication in
her Billingsgate phrase; I hope your Ladyship will not entertain the worse
opinion of me.


Par. If she values her reputation she will, for to be seen in thy company, is
to be concluded a Wench.


Alin. These clamorous reproaches in my Lodgings will not, I Am sure, be much
for my reputation; therefore sweet Mrs. Parret, let me entreat your silence.


Par. Command your Bully, Does he think to bear me down, I am not to be oppressed
by any man.


Fair. I intend no oppression; let me entreat your absence.


Par. For ought I know you may debauch the Lady, nay perhaps ravish her, you have
intruded into her privacy already.


Fair. There Is but one way. Give me thy hand, you are as peevish as a sick
Judge toward the end of a long impertinent Cause, thou know I love thee.


[gives her Money. Par. You are such an insinuating kind of Gentleman, I beg
your Lady-ships pardon for the exorbitancy of my Passion, and shall give my
Patroness assurances of your good health.


[Exit. Alin. Receiving so pious a Character of your good life, I Have reason to
invite your stay.


Fair. I am not so scrupulous, the first invitation shall serve; unless you
peremptorily command my absence I dare not stir.


Alin. Your civility might have saved you the labor of coming, and me the
trouble of bidding you be gone.


Fair. If you find it so difficult to bid me go, consider how vexatious my
absence may prove.


Alin. Doubtless I should employ all the water-fillers in hunting after you.


Fair. But that I Am extraordinary good natured, I Would take you at your word, and
make my leg.


Alin. That would I fain see, for I Am so civil to believe you have learnt to
dance.


Fair. O! I could lead you such a Corant to Church*


Alin. Had I the grace to follow!


Fair. You blush as if you were not quite past it.


Alin. Would you had enough to find the door?


Fair. Swear first that you will not call me back.


Alin. My word may serve sure.


Fair. Not now, your eyes have proved so fraudulent, and in most Women, they are
less deceitful than the tongue.


Alin. Well since it must be so -- By all --


Fair. Hold! do nothing rashly, swear seriously, an demurely.


Alin. You are a pleasant Gentleman: here comes my Brother, you had best tell
him I invited you.


Fair. Nay, I Will Swear it, for I find you hant courage to deny it.


Alin. Rely upon it.


[Enter Vainman* Vain. It Is Fairlove, If Owmuch should not have glutinized our
Imbroglio.


[he starts back. Alin. Nay Brother you may advance, for our discourse might
suit the Piazza for it is concern, and the Mall for it is impertinence.


Fair. Madam, I suppose, you speak for your own, since y^ ought to have mine in
more reverence.


Alin. Good forward Sir, it is not come to that yet.


Fair. Not to the Maturity you wish Lady.


Vain. The ruptures cemented, I may be bold dear* Fairlove! I am transcendantly
perplexed by the participation of some sinister misapprehensions between us.


Fair. I never entertained the least of Sir Lofty.


Vain. By the quiddity of my Knighthood, I was as innocent of any intentional
injury, or injurious intention, But con licenza, that figure must not laps
quotation.


[draws his Book. Fair. Your Brother slips no opportunity of improving his
observation.


Alin. I find little difference between ye; for he silently observes his own
follies, and you loudly proclaim yours to render 'em observeable to others.


[Enter Owmuch. Owm. How! Sir Lofty and Fairlove; I wish my Stratagem to keep
'em at distance been't discovered.


Alin. I Am glad this Gentleman comes to my deliverance.


Fair. You talk as if you were with Child.


Alin. I Have been in travail ever since you came.


Fair. She means she has been at labor to detain me here.


Alin. I suppose you know his way of confidence.


Owm. I doubt not but you understand your selves; and my business lies to Sir
Lofty.


Vain. Fairlove and I have contracted a reintigration of amity, thou have
performed a Miracle.


Owm. Tom can witness how industruously I labored, but pray a word.


Fair. I may connive a wile at his deceit, till I Have imprinted on my sisters
Soul the knowledge of her happiness, in marrying so Rich a Fop; But he shall
then refund, or join his interest to conclude the Match.


Vain. Balsamich Fairlove, I petition thy pardon, for I have very ponderous
engagements.


Fair. You are Master of your own occasions.


Alin. Sure Brother you wont leave me abandoned to the discretion of a stranger.


Vain. Were you my Mother, I could not recommend you to a Person of more
sincere sobriety, or sober sincerity another admirable anti me tabole but time
compresses my af^air.


[Exit with Owm. Alin. My wise Brother as trusted us together.


Fair. He knew I ran the greater hazard in trusting my self.


Alin. I shall scarce eat you, though it be toward dinner time.


Fair. Yet your fair eyes devours my peace; your Beauty preys upon my heart
continually.


Alin. How do you Sir, Are you well?


[Alinda stamps. Fair. Well, Madam: y'astonish me.


Alin. You spoke so like a Wight in Love, I was afraid you would sound, and knocked
for a Restorative.


Fair. You are resolved I find to murder me.


Alin. Die not yet, I beseech you, 'till the World has taken notice you were my
Servant: That may advantage me.


Fair. I had rather live miserable all my life, than profit a Woman by my death,


Alin. Nay, it shall cost you nothing, die when you please, I Will mourn at my
own charge, and wear the ruthful Bandore like a Bill upon my forehead, t'inform
Mankind that here is a Woman to be let.


Fair. By Lease or yearly Rent.


Alin. That Is as we can agree, perhaps for term of Life.


Fair. You Are a mad Soul, nothing but age and wedlock can tame you.


Alin. When I am hungry especially, therefore I Will to dinner.


[Exit. Fair. And because I can digest a good meal better than your unkindness,
I Will follow.


[Exit. SCENE. II.
Enter Witless, Quibble, Farendine, Crack. Wit. Not except my Verses, I Will
lampoon her to dishonor.


Crac. You mispend your fury; my Lady's not of the Tribe of Hellicon, and were
you heir apparent to Parnassus, she would not accept it for a jointure.


Wit. Each Acre of that precious Land is worth an Empire.


Crac. What Is Empire to her? that would be content with a Parish.


Quib. Or the tyth of a Parish: Well urged Crack.


Faren. She Will be as soon pleased with a tyth Pig.


Wit. Or a Pigs tail.


Quib. The tip of such a tail's worth all thy rhiming Reams.


Wit. Avaunt ignorance, I despise and desert you like two legged Brutes, that
have felloniously stolen the Shapes of rational Creatures.


[Exit. Crac. There Is one blown off in vapor; These I must manage to more
profit.


[Aside. Quib. Your Lady, I doubt, is no Saint.


Crac. Your reason good charitable Vicar.


Quib. Because she loves deeds of darkness, and seldom comes to light.


Crac. She loves you indeed but too well.


Quib. Softly, dear Rogue, Farendine over hears.


Far. She wheedles him to give me opportunity to woo the Widow, which these
Orators will soon effect; when Gold is no prevailing advocate.


Quib. Thy services have been remarkable, and I Will reward them methodically,
with a positive mark of my liberality, a comparative mark of thy fidelity, and
a Superlative mark of my own gratitude.


[gives her money. Crack. You Will observe the time and place.


Quib. I Will be as watchful as a famisht Cat, that has her Prey in a pound.


[ Exit Quibble. Crac. 'Twas no slight cunning to stave off these Suitors, to
give your love and bounty free access.


Faren. I thirst to see thy Lady, and present her with my heart, this offering.


[a purse of gold Crac. She loves old gold most passionately, but I delay your
bliss, I pray walk in.


Far. Be faithful and be happy.


[Exeunt SCENE III.
Fairlove, Alinda. Fair. To make protestations were to increase your doubts: but
rest assured I Will serve you with all the faith becomes a Gentleman; your
apprehensions are to me no strangers.


Alin. You then must think it worth a Sisters care, to impede the ruin of an
only Brother.


Fair. In pity to him, and kindness to my Sister, before I had the honor to
know you, I meant to retreive him from that Harpies snares.


Alin. Pursue the kind design; I should be proud to have him joined to a Person
of her conduct.


Fair. Your partial Character seems t'nsinuate a former knowledge of my Sister
Courtwit.


Alin. I Have seen her often at either Theater. But could not till last Spring
boast her acquaintance, when she was pleased to oblige my morning walks in the
Mall with her converse. Fairlove, 't was there she gave me that little, but
kind knowledge of your worth, which best justifies my Modesty, in craving thus
abruptly your assistance.


Fair. The greatest justice you can do my love, Is to believe that I was born
to serve you.


[Enter Fop. Fop. Never stir Madam, you know I Am to lodge next door to the sign
of your heart, that is when you consent to be my wedded Mate; But now I think
on it, the Devil swallow me if I care a blew-point for your resolve; for your
Brother and I have concluded the matter.


Alin. Without my privity.


Fop. I love you for that, never stir a very impertinent interogation; let your
Brother pay your Portion, and I settle a joynter, and then a Fig for your
privity,


Alin. Y' are not gone I hope so far.


Fop. We go hand in hand never stir, I love you for that, when he weds the
Widow, I must marry you.


Fair. You!


Alin. Why are you concerned at such a Butter-fly?


Fop. Zookes never frown for the business; you may as soon overthrow the new
Pyramid as alter me; and if y' have been concerned before me, you shall be
concerned altogether, for Timothy Fop -- I love you for that never stir.


Alin. Why so chollerick; pri' thee tell me this Widows Name.


Fop. I love you for that, she hopes to be wiser by me.


Alin. I might indeed despair often.


Fair. He makes a secret of a Proclamation; I Will tell you her Name presently.


Fop. The Devil barrel me for a shotten herring, if I suffer that, her name is
Brag; as I know how to keep a secret; so I scorn that any Man should disclose
it before me.


Fair. She Is on of Owmuches Decoys, a very Iilt.


Alin. My fears were too prophetic; what is to be done


Fop. Nay you may whisper till your hearts ache, but if I catch you in the
censuring walk in Greys-Inn, I Will be even with you never stir, and in the
intrim I Will withdraw to contemplate my own merits.


[Exit. Fair. Could we but draw my Sister to our party, we soon might frustrate
this intended Match?


Alin. I blame not her aversion to his follies, yet hope her Charity will feign
that love t'attract him for the present, and divert him from this intended
treachery.


Fair. Your friendship will oblige her to much more, I know the shade she
usually frequents, give me the Honor to attend you thither.


Alin. Y' are grown too serviceable to me now, to scruple any favor virtue
warrants*


[Exeunt. SCENE. IV.
Owmuch, Vainman, Brag, Crack. Owm. The Widow's yours, and I Am proud of the
service; as for this Bond, your kind acknowledgement, take your own time for
payment.


Vain. Your precipitated favors confound my intellects; come Widow, I hunger
to stamp thee a Lady.


Brag. You triumph in your Victory, but I bar Sealing till the Man in Black has
delivered you up to my use.


Crack. If the grove will serve for a Chathedral, Quibble shall exercise that
function.


Owm. He Is a pretender, and will never consent.


Brag. Unless I were disguised.


Vain. By the rapidity of invention, I apprehend a Night gown with a visor my
sister left in my appartment might serve.


Crac. Admirably, for I Am to meet the Person by assignation.


Owm. You are setting up for a Husband then.


Crac. Not there believe me Sir. Madam --


[seems to whisper Brag* Brag. This Ring, pri'thee take it, and may it answer
thy desires.


Owm. Let her engage the Minister, and I Will meet you two hours hence.


Crac. Doubt not my working him.


Owm. But to assure the business Crack, take Gold, it will work on any Clergy
Man in Europe. Give her Ten Guinnys.


Vain. Most beatifically imagined; there is Twenty; thou and the Parson shall
divide.


Crac. In the next close from Bounds you will see an Oak carved full of Lovers
names; Be there in readiness, and leave the rest to me.


Vaen. Well, you will remember.


To Owmuch. Owm. I hope to arrive in time; but should m' affairs detain me, you
may confide in Crack, she is a Girl of wit, and for the management of this
concern much apter than my self.


Vain. Come Widow, this Night I Will celebrate the Bacchanalia's of Hymen; and
inebriate my Knighthood in the profundities of Venus.


[Exeunt. Crac. How the Fool's exalted in imagination; I Have lodged in the grove
a brace from the same Herd,


And if blind Fortune favor my design,
The Raskal Dear shall make the fatter mine.
[Exit. ACT. V.
Alinda, Fairlove, Alin. YOur Sisters Plot appears most probable to break this
match; but she is too obstinate, to gratify my hopes of her Aliance.


Fair. Correct, by a compliance to my love, that error in your self, which you
condemn in her.


Alin. Happily, I Have the same aversion to wits, as she to fools; but here
comes your Sisters Engineer.


Enter Wilding in Spanish-habit. Fair. You Are habited as if thou dwell'st next
door to a Playhouse.


Wild. This is my City Maskarading suit, my Pattent of Intrusion to all
meetings.


Fair. 'Twas happily brought down -- where is Courtwit?


Wild. In her love dispatches for London, and has immured her self like an
Anchorite for that Employ.


Fair. I hope you are well instructed.


Wild. What Wit or Courage can perform, expect.


Alin. I doubt not your capacity, nor Spirit, and hope the piety of my
intenions, will bribe Heavens assistance; I Will not detain you, for it is near
the hour chose by my Brother for this fatal Match.


Wild, My haste to serve you, shall prevent your wishes.


[Exit. Fair. Having proceeded to the rupture of one Marriage, it is but
reasonable we should enter upon the Treaty of another.


Alin. So it be still in raillery, I Am content.


Fair. If we continue to make love in jest, Death may finish the Treaty, er'e
we conclude the Match.


Alin. No matter' we will leave it like a game at Chess to be played out by our
Heir's.


Fair. Then I hope you will be pleased, that we may withdraw and get 'em.


Alin. It Is time for me to do so, when you dare use this bold Language.


[Exit. Fair. Nay that frown shall not discourage me; I Would after, tho she could
arm her eyes with lightning.


[Exit. SCENE. II.
Paywell, and Parret. Pay. Would it not torment a Woman of my longing to lose
so precious an opportunity?


Par. Any Woman in nature, as I hope for benevolence.


Pay. Yet business may detain him.


Par. I shall have the worse opinion of him, whilst I breath, for failing a
Lady in the Heaven of her expectation.


[ Enter Owmuch. Owm. My haste intended to prevent your love; I hope I have not
slipped my time above a quarter.


Par. D' you think a quarters disappointment to a Lady nothing, when I Have known
many good gifted men rendered incapable by the bare delusion of a minute.


Owm. Pri'thee silence that unruly morcel, that unmerciful tongue of thine.


Par. Y' are a rude, sawey, mallipert, impertinent fellow, to prate thus to a
Woman of my occupation.


Pay. Good Midwife leave us, and be vigilent in thy office.


Par. I Will see him damned first; keep watch for such a Scoundrel.


Owm. Will you be a Fool, and spoil all for nothing.


Par. No nor an Ass, to keep sentinel for nothing.


Owm. Is that it? here, commend me to my friends in Guinney.


[gives her money. Par. So you will commend me to mine in the Lowcountries, I care
not if I do.


[Exit. Pay. She Is a troublesome Old Creature, but very useful.


Owm. Having introduced me to the Honor of your acquaintance, I must own her
obliging.


Pay. I know you Courtly; but Complements in Love are like long Graces before
feasts, they cool the meat, and dull the appetite; we will be familliar.


Owm. Now have I no more power toward this she thing, than if my Breeches had
been impoverished in my Youth to enrich my Voice.


Pay. Let me advise you to be very civil, tho you press me never so far,
consider me a person of Honor.


Owm. Rather then risk your displeasure, I Will take my leave.


Pay. You misapprehend me.


Owm. Hell take your meaning! it is but too plain, that lewd Grimace has turned
my Stomach -- Madam, I Am the most rude debauched fellow in a Ladies Chamber.


Pay. Y' have been so civil I dare not credit it; come give me your hand.


Owm. Slife, what an unsatiable fist's there? marble against rain is not so
moist, nor the sweat of a Jew so rank.


[gives his hand and snatches it back Pay. I vow y' are such a backward man.


Owm. You Will find me an Hercules forward; I must ravish you; for let me perish I
am a most unsatiable Creature.


Pay. I never met a reasonable Creature, but I was able to give him reasonable
satisfaction.


Owm. The Devil in Breeches could not scare her; I Have taken her Money; and
something will be expected; well, Madam, since y' are desperate.


Pay. O Lord, I vow, what d' you mean, I protest, nay I Swear, I Will cry out,
Parret Parret.


[Enter Parret. He pulls her toward the Chamber, she calls softly. Par. O
Madam the Alderman, the Alderman! we are undone.


Pay. What cursed fortune's this?


[stamps. Owm. Which way shall I avoid him.


Par. I Am distracted, he is at the Stair foot.


Pay. Into my closet with him quick, I hear him Enter*


[They lock him up, Enter Alderman. Ald. Ah Bunting! I Have had the crossest
luck, and yet I had the better of the lay, a 100, Pounds to a farthing, the
Devil's in that Tipwels fingers and in's horses knees; the Beast was so
pliable, and at command, he had little disadvantage in tipping on Horseback;
all nine as I live Chuck.


Pay. Poor Dear, how thou Sweat'st I was afraid thou had been ill Chick.


Ald. I Am come for more chink Bunting, where is the key of the Closet.


Pay. 'Slife Man! what is the Matter with your eyes?


Ald. Why Bunting? why, what is the matter?


Pay, They Are as red as my Petticoat. Parret.


Par. Madam.


Pay. Fetch the eye water quickly, if you heat your self, and drink and han't a
care, it may grow to a Fistulae.


Ald. Indeed law Bunting they burn, and smart extremely, but give me the Key.
I Will be back immediately.


Pay. The Key's in my other Pocket, but thy eyes are so blood-shot, it greives
my heart to see 'em, some chairs, quickly good Parret quickly.


Enter Parret, chaires set, he lies down, and they drop Water in his eyes. Ald.
I profess the Water's very refreshing.


Pay. Be sure you wink hard Chicken, and keep it in. [she steps to the Closet,
and lets Owmuch out. Softly as you love me; to morrow I Am for London, where let
me see you often, in the intrim keep this for my sake


[gives him a Jewel. Owm. And in exchange receive my heart, and future service.


[Exit. Pay. Come honey, how do find thy self?


Ald. Very clear sighted, Bunting, thanks to thy care; but I must back, I
profess, I Am deeply engaged, fetch the Key.


[Exeunt. SCENE. III.
Enter Crack babited like the Widow. Crac. My Clothes and Stature favor my
design, and by the assistance of this Ring and Visor, I hope to pass for the
supposed rich Widow; nor will* my Mercer los^ by the exchange, since I Am the
fresher merchandise of the two; and for our Portions, hers is in Feetail, and
mine in Capite, a nobler Tenure. But here is the Parson; [Enter Courtwit in
Quibbles habit. Your Servant Mr. Quibble.


Cour. She takes me for the Vicar in disguise; could I but hit upon his
quibbling strain, I see I might pass.


Crac. I Am confident you take me for the Widow.


Cour. You Are cosened, for I Am so taken with thee, I Would only take thee for my
self.


Crac. The Widow's lodged, thou shall have her within this hour.


Cour. This intrigue I understand not, yet must not let my ignorance betray me.


[Aside. Crac. You entertain your happiness but eoldly.


Court. I want some marks of gratitude to signalize my bounty.


[Feeling in's pocket. Crac. All I desire is, that you marry me gratis.


Cour. Marry you, I thought I was to marry the Widow.


Crac. Your Wit's so volatile, you must marry me to Farendine.


Cour. I conceive you and so I hope you will do by the Mercer.


Enter Farendine. Crac. Here he comes, Mercury thou Favourer of Wiles, assist
my love! follow me, and when I stop perform your Office.


[To Courtwit. Faren. It Is she, I know her petty-coat, and size, and, as I
live, the Parson following her; the Fool is made a Property to marry her to me,
his Rival; She beckons, and I le follow -- And wed her with that silence she
desires.


Exit Crack. Courtwit, and Farendine following. SCENE IV.
Enter Sir Lofty Vainman, Brag, Fop, Wilding in Spanish habit. Vain. Challenge
my Spouse! I bid defiance to thy diminitive breeches.


Brag. He Is mad beyond the cure of hellebore.


Wild. I Am mad indeed to seek a Runagate, one that forsook me in the heat of
Wedlock, the next day after the religious Priest had joined our hands, as love
before our hearts.


Brag. He Will persuade me I was begot in the Moon, born in Aries, are bred in
Capricorn, to learn to make Cuckolds: If ever I saw the man before, may I never
attain a Ladyship.


Wild. Resign my Wife, Sir Lofty, and that quickly, or --


[Laying his hand on his sword. Vain. You obliterate your self and her, she has
no cognizance of your Person, and y' appear an Allen to her affection.


Wild. I Am not the only Husband labors under that misfortune:


Fop. Not of a Million never go, I love you for that.


Brag. Where in the name of mischief did I marry thee, and when?


Wild. A month since, at Pancras.


Fop. The Devil pickle me for a Pilchard, if I know what to think often.


Brag. This is the strangest fixion Hell e're contrived to cross a Woman's love
-- Good Sir, a word --


[Whispers Wilding. Vain. I Will interrogate him of her appellation,
quallification, demeans, and the Et cetera appurtenances of a Widow, and if he
exhibit satisfactory reasons, or reasonable satisfaction.


Wild. Well, I confess what I alleged, is false.


Brag. Bear witness, you heard him say 'twas false


Wild. 'Twas you I said were false to your Nuptial Vow.


Brag. Hell has inspired him to my ruin!


Vain. Have you any cognizance of her Name?


Wild. I married her by the Name of Barbara Brag.


Fop. I love you for that, there may be two of one name.


Wild. But not of one face, Mr. Fop.


Fop. Does your Donship know me; I Am an East India Elephant, if I don't
remember you too; your Name is


Wild. Don Roderigo de los Blustrados hectoromanos Bullirockos.


Fop. Dear Blustrados, when shall we be drunk again?


Wild. Thou 'rt as saucy as a Country Squire with his Mothers Maid; when did
see me drunk? Ha!


Fop. Can Pharo and Stichback slip your memory? The Devil swallow me for a
quartern of Brandy, if we have not been drunk an hundred times.


Wild. Then have I kicked you ninety nine.


[kicks him. Fop. Faith and troth I remember nothing of that tho.


Wild. I Am satisfied you must, if you remember the other.


Fop. If this be your satisfaction, The Devil keep you company for Timothy Fop
--


[Exit. Wild. Nay take your Knight, least he share your calamity.


Vain. I hope y' are too intelligent t'imagine a Knight can be kicked.


Wild. I beg your pardon, my toes are no Heralds.


Vain. Since y' implore my pardon, I can recede -- Come Widow


[offering to lead her out. Wild. You must pardon me for that too, she is my
Wife, therefore unhand her, and vanish without expostulation.


Vain. He looks as terribly as a Sea fight.


[he sneaks away. Brag. What horrid injury, or strange affront has my too
wanton youth, or erring Pride offered your friends or you? thus to provoke your
malice or revenge to ruin me.


Wild His very being a Gentleman obliges all Men of Honor to endeavour's
rescue from your destructive snares.


Brag. If he is a stranger to you, let my knees with [Kneels. humble
intercession, beg your favor; and you shall share in all the advantages of
profit, or what else I can call mine, by being His.


Wild. This Knight's committed to my care, and by a person I dare not disoblige.


Brag. Then I dare dye -- help, help, murder, a rape! I Am ravished, I Am
ravished.


She pulls a Knife out of her Pocket, Wilding endeavors to hinder her, She
lets fall the Knife and lays hold of him. Wild. 'Sdeath! Who offers y' any
violence? Let go my Arms you Whore, or if I get 'em loose, I Will nail thee to
the Earth.


Brag. Repeat thy stabs till thou have made my body but one sear, rather than
wound my honor, a rape, murder, rape!


Enter Owmuch, Vainman, Fop, and Neighbors. Owm. Where Is this Villain, this
lewd ravisher?


Brag. Welcome to my redemption, I Have lost my breath, and faint with struggling.


[they disarm Wilding. Owm. Sir Lofty pray approach, and comfort her. You are a
Spanish Letcher -- To justice. Do right with him, you shall be cut for the
Stone, my Tarmagant, and Rampant Don, you shall.


Wild. When thou know me, thou wilt repent this usage.


Owm. That Is more then e're I did my Sins. What art?


Wild. Dismiss your rabble, and I Will tell you.


Owm. Now she is retrieved, make sure, and speedy work, I brought the Vicar with
me, he is within.


[to Vainman. Fop. I love you for that never stir, you will stay till I run to
Bounds for your sister, we are to be married together by contract.


Vain. Make expedition then; come relict.


[Exeunt. Vainman Brag, Fop. Owm. Neighbors, I thank you for your kind
assistance, now he is disarmed I shall be singly able to govern him; [Exeunt*
neighbors now my Coatamuntain Don, what is thy design, and business here?


Wild. To cut thy Throat, unless thou break this Match between Sir Lofty, and
thy Strumpet.


Owm. Do know the value of this Throat Castilian? It yearly swallows half a
thousand pounds in deep pontac, clear Mant, and Burgundy.


Wild. These whiskers off, you cannot choose but know me.


[pulls of's whiskers. Owm. In The Name of Protheus, why in this disguise?


Wild. Fairlove and I are equally engaged to save Sir Lofty from the ravenous
jaws of your damned Cockatrice; and if y' affect your safety, you will assist me
in it.


[Off'ring to go out. Owm. You are too quick, your haste ill suits your garb:
move but a foot toward the interrupting them, and this shall center in thy
heart.


Wild. It Is base to insult upon a Man disarmed.


Owm. Were you ten thousand friends, you should excuse me; ^'de not release my
share in this Knights marriage, t'ingross the ami^y of all mankind.


Wild. Thy base ignoble ways of livelihood beget a general scandal on the name,
and garb of Gentleman, they will grow contemptible, being used by thee.


Owm. Thou art too young, and scrupulous a sinner; examine but the Town, and
thou will find the gayer part, to have as little Landas thou, or I, and yet
they keep guilt Coaches, their race and hunting Nags, Lacquies, and Pages* and
what is more expensive then all these, Misses, whose clothes may vie with
Eastern Queens, and Palaces with Cardinals for cost; and can believe these
miracles performed by simple rules of honesty, and honor? Thou art not such a
Novice.


Wild. I know there are several ways of livelihood, most indirect; but this
damned down right cheating I affect not.


Owm. Kind Nature gave to every Man his Portion, some in Wit, to others Lands
or Moneys, and did contrive us for each others use. And I account it as
unreasonable to waste Wits precious tallent on a fool without advantage, as to
let Lands gratis -- My brain's the nobler freehold.


Wild This cursed Match will, in Alinda, ruin Fairlove hopes, and forfeit me
the kind respects of Courtwit.


Owm. Why this is right the World; you do not blame the Match as bad, but as it
injures you.


Enter Farendine with Crack Vizarded. Farend. Widow, now y' are at home, I
hope, you will show your face, and welcome me.


Owm. No more cross plots I hope; what Widow have you there?


Far. The Tunbridge Widow Sir, the Widow Brag.


Wild. Do the Widows multiply?


Far. She may in time, and season; Gentlemen y' are welcome. both; call in the
Fiddler, I Will dedicate this Night to mirth and hymen -- By your favor she is my
Wife, Sir, and I Will have the first kiss -- Ha! Crack.


Owmuch endeavors to pull of her Visor Farendine prevents him. Owm. This your
rich Widow?


Far. I Am abused, cheated, gulled, I Will be unmarried, avaunt Sorceress, come
not near me.


Crac. But I will, my Love, and kiss thee too.


Owm. Was that kiss over and above the twenty thousand pounds.


Far. Mock not a Man in misery! Damned Quibble, thou knewst what trash thou
wedst me to.


Crac. I think y' are obliged to him for bestowing the Maid on you, and keeping
the grass Widow for himself, nay I Am the better fortune.


Far. Thou art indeed much younger, and may crown me oft'ner with the City
night cap, if thou call'st that a fortune.


Crac. What say you to this security for my good behavior?


[Gives him a box full of Jewels and Gold. Owm. That Cabinet's thy Ladies?


Faren. But the contents were partly mine before, and to the rest I Will make her
prove her title,


If Cuckold be my fate, yet thus adorned
I shall be rather envyed than scorned.
Crac. She gave 'em me to pack for London, meaning to cheat you of your
dividend, and I to end disputes, took this occasion to restore to the Owner, my
dear Husband,


Owm. Deceitful Wretch!


[Enter Fop, Fairlove, Alinda. Fop. Where Is Sir Lofty? faith and troth this
Gentleman wont let me marry his Sister.


Fair. You know it was the Ladies fault not mine.


Enter Vainman, Brag, Courtwit in Quibbles, habit. Fop. I love you for that
never stir; but here comes Sir Lofty himself; if he will promise her to one, and
bestow her on another, I Will have nothing to do with him or her either.


Wild* You justly may condemn my negligence, since the success ha'nt answered
your desires, and I must suffer in your good opinion till time permit me to
recite at large the various sinister accidents, which did obstruct my service.


To Alinda, who must be supposed to have been inquiring the success of the
design. Fop whisper, Vainman. Alin. Since he is undone, 'twill but avail me
little to know how.


Vain. D' you refuse to ratify the parole of Sir Lofty Vainman, your own
natural Brother?


Courtwit and Fairlove seem to discourse all this while. Alin. Would you would
refuse that common Creature too.


Vain. Sister you err, I 've made an enclosure of her, brought her within the
pale of Matrimony.


Fop. I love you for that, some envious Knave may still pretend a right of
common, and make a gap to graze a Nag, or so.


Vain. I apprehend no such danger: But this is digressive from my
interrogatory; Will you nuptialize our Consanguinity, Timothy Fop?


Fop. That Is the point never stir, press it home.


Alin. Would he had taken your place.


Court. Lets lose no time in vain congratulations. [ To Fairlove. Gain from
Alinda, if I free Sir Lofty, a Marriage promise, whilst I and Wilding disgust
him with his Bride.


Fair. Thou advisest like one of Cupids Privy Counselors.


Fairlove goes to Alinda, Courtwit to Wilding, who having whispered go to
Vainman. Brag. Cheated of gold, and Jewels both!


To Owmuch, who is supposed to have told her. Own. Of all, sh' has given 'em
Farendine, whom she has made her Husband.


Brag. Damned Wretch! yet there is some comfort, the Knight may still be managed
to advantage.


Owm. Yes, to yours, but how am I assured you will not deceive me there, as Crack
says you designed of the Gold, and Jewels.


Brag. You know I Sealed you yesternight a Bond.


Owm. Well remembered 'twas for a thousand pounds y' are M^rried now pray let
me have 't in keeping.


Brag. You see it is in my power to destroy, yet I Will deliver't to your use.


[gives him the Bond. Owm. Honest Girl! this is good Money still.


Vain. Since you both affirm her Whore, you shall find Sir Lofty has
profundity, I Will affiance her to my Kinsman.


Wild. 'Twill hardly hold in Law, y' had better bribe the Vicar to Swear he did
not marry you.


Vain. Most feasible, but let us proceed methodically; surreptitious Spouse.


Brag. What says my heart?


Vain. This Don avows of's proper cognizance, that thou art much inclinable to
a thing we call an Harlot.


Brag. He challenged me for's Wife, and is it probable he would wed a Whore?


Vain. A very falacious Age, it cannot be supposed.


Fop. Faith and troth the wrankest Whore Master in England would be glad of an
honest Woman, if he knew where to find her.


Vain. It is an intrinsical intrigue, and an apparent Stratagem.


Alin. I hope your folly will not still besot you.


Vain. D' you suppose I Will give credence to a Rival?


Alin. Lend Faith to Mr. Fairlove, he has known her these seven years past a
common Jilt in Town.


Fair. Whetstons Park never held a more debauched one.


Brag. What e're I was, I Am now your Sister, and his Wife.


Alin. Mine, I defy thee; be Sister to he Goats, there is nothing that has
honesty or Honor, but must abhor thy converse and Alliance.


Fair. Y' have made a wondrous happy Match here.


[ to Owmuch Owm. What I have done Sir, I dare justify.


Brag. Let 'em say their worst Sir Lofty, you are not the first that has
Married an obliging Lady.


Vain. An obliging Lady, Zooks an obliging Lady, what a Lacquer she has found
for a Whore? I Would give half my demeasnes for an emancipation.


Brag. I Will not abate a farthing of a thousand a year annuity for life.


Owm. And the present payment of two thousand pounds, due to me by bond, one on
your own account, on hers the other.


Vain. By the heroic achievements of my Progenitors, it is too unconscienable.


Owm. For my part I Will not abate a soulze.


Brag. Nor I, I Will force him to maintain me.


Fair. Since they are so obstinate, for your fair Sisters sake, I Will release you
from this shameful Match on easier terms.


Vain. Covenant your Articles, and you shall have Lofty Vainman to the
pedestals of the Indenture.


Fair. The Articles shall be only two, and short ones; first your consent to
Marry Alinda, I Have hers already, and a thousand pounds for the party I engage
in your release.


Vain. I frankly condescend to both.


Fop. I love you for that, Alinda's mine.


Vain. That Is immaterial; a Cavalier may Honorably infringe his parole to be
infranchized from an Harlot.


Faren. Now your hand's in; be charitable to a quondam Citizen, free me from
this Chamber-Utinzel, I Will give you 500 pounds, for which these Jewels shall
remain security, Nay, I Will never more pretend to the qualifications of a
Gentleman.


Fair. On these conditions, I accept them.


[takes the Cabinet. Brag. Quibble's in order certain.


Owm. That I Will engage, it is impossible he should make good his undertaking.


[Enter Witless, leading Quibble wrapped in a rug. Wit. Come Parson, since thou
abhorrest Women I Will see thee righted.


Quib. Right or wrong, I Will have nothing to do with 'em.


Owm. What new Monster have we here?


Quib. A certain incumbant upon a Neighboring Vicaridge, you might know me
Mrs. Crack, for you have had some marks of my kindness.


Crac. What two Parson Quibbles?


Fair. No faith, this is a fair Nun, and no black-Frier.


[pulling off her peruk, All. How, Madam Courtwit.


Fair. The same, she never was in orders; and, I suppose, her Marriage will not
stand good in Law.


Brag. Bafled on all hands! damned chance!


Owm. It would persuade a Novice in Vice to change his Copy, and turn honest.


Crac. I hope you will return th'overplus of the Gold, and Jewels, I Am but a poor
Maid.


Faren. Not a farthing, when I have paid the 500 pounds, I Will distribute to
every Man his own.


Fop. Never go that is honest, the Gold Watch belongs to me.


Court. Here ends our modish Courtship, for I Am so out of love with Wits since
mine has proved the best, that I could find in my heart to cast my self away
upon a Fool.


Fair. A rich one Sister's the more substantial Man, and if Sir Lofty and you
can make a Bargain, the 1500 pounds I Have got shall be your portion.


Vain. I superstitiously embrace the proposition?


Court. What, without my approbation?


Vain. I know you are too intelligent a Wit to refuse a Knight of 2000 a year.


Court. And because I will not forfeit that reputation, here is my hand to the
foolish bargain.


Owm. I shall expect present payment of the Bond you made to me, tho the other
of your quondam Wifes proves bad.


Fair. How could he contract so great a debt to you.


Vain. Let me dissolve like a Cherubim, if he owes me not 200 Guinnies, money
lent.


Fop. And me an hundred, or I Am a guilt Nutmeg.


Fair. What an unconscionable fellow were thou, was not 300 pounds an handsome
purchase: Be satisfied, and give him up the Bond, least you provoke me to
indite you for a Cheat.


Owm. Upon condition they discharge the Guinnies they pretend I owe them; there
it is.


[gives up the Bond. Fair. I Will engage they shall. For you may fair Trapans I
would advise you to pack up your tools, and post for London, and there live
penitentially this long Vacation, on Mackarel, and Cucumbers; till Smith-field
Pigs increase your commons.


Brag. Crac. You are a damned jeering Rogue.


[ Exeunt Brag, and Crack. Fair. Mr Quibble, my Sister shall return your
Cassock, which she stripped you of, when you were drunk; take warning how you
fuddle with Footmen; and to morrow you shall have the profit of our Wedding;
and you Poet Witless may employ this evening in composing Epithalamiums to be
Sung to the Brides in the morning, they may turn to better account than your
next Droll.


Fop. I love you for this never go; what shall become of me?


Fair. Y' had almost scapled my memory; But since I have robbed you of one
Wife, the best justice is to help you to another; a Medly of poor Wits and Rich
Fools make the best mixture in Nature; and I Have a Sister in London at your
Service.


Fop. The Deel swallow me if I post not to London within this minute to Court
her.


Fair. It Is now too late to cellebrate our Nuptials, and too early to rectire, a
Country Dance may prove perhaps no very unpleasant motion.


Court. Come Platonic; let us have a Dance at parting.


Wild. My condition is not so desperate as you imagine it, for I can more
confidently beg a kindness from a married Woman, because the concession is less
to her disadvantage.


Court. Did I abound as much in Charity as you in hope, the Knight were in a
very dangerous condition.


Wild. I care not how little Charity you have, for they say that is extremely
cold, give me love.


Court. You know not how a Dance may warm it.


[a Dance. Fair. Tho the execution of our first design met very ill success,
our obligations are still payable to your good intentions, the pro^ects were
both Courtwits, and she resolved to reserve the best to ^er self, as an
Encomium of her Wit.


[ To Wilding. Wild. To which I shall submissively subscribe.


Owm. And I for ever curse.


Fair. 'Twere nobler to repent, you plainly see
No Wit can prosper without honesty.

[Exeunt. FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
HOw harmlessy we have treated you to day,
There Is not one dangerous Line through all the Play.
There Is no keen biting Satyr to enrage
The guilty Consciences of half the Age.
No mighty Sense to make the Critics jar,
And set the envious Tribe at mortal War.
No Lines so rare, intrigues so wondrous wity
Enough to adjourn the Wits to a Committee,
And make the Chairman of the Cabal cry, ram him,
Confound him, sink him, split him, rot him, damn him,
Down with him for a saucy son of a Whore;
He must be damned, the Dog shall write no more.
No, thanks to our safe Authors milder Stars,
He has no such dangers, no such threatening fears,
He gives you no occasion for your spite,
Is no pretender to their fame that Write.
Then Gentlemen, you may be kind to Night*
Yes there indeed, it is worth your while to frown,
It Is victory to run great Authors down.
But let
This Triflle of a Play creep safely under,
For Gallants it is too humble for your Thunder.
Books newly Printed this Year 1678, and are to be Sold by Henry Rogers at the
Sign of the Crown in Westminster Hall.
SCarrons Comical Romance, or a facetious History of a Company of
Stage Players, interwoven with diverse curi^us and choice Novels, rare
Adventures, and amorous Intrigues, ^n Fol.

2. The wonder of the Peak of Darby, commonly called the Devils Arse of Peak,
English and Latin. Oct.

3. Melpomene or the Muses delight, being new Poems and Songs Written by
several of our Great Wits of the present Age, Oct.

4. Camera Regis, or the present State of London, Oct.

5. The Works of Homer; both Odysses and Illiads, translated into English Verse
by the famous Thomas Hobs of Malmsbury, Twelves, together with Mr. Hobs his
Preface about Heroic Poetry, and the ^ife of Homer.

6. The Memoires and rare Adventures of that Heroic and va^^rous Lady,
Henrietta Sylvia Molierae, now complete in six parts, Written by her self now
living in France.

7. Ten Dialogues of Natural Philosophy, Written by Thomas ^obs of Malmsbury,
Oct.

FINIS.

