KING EDGAR AND ALFREDA. A Tragi-Comedy, Acted at the Theater Royal. Written By
EDWARD RAVENSCROFT, Gent.

Illud quod medium est atque inter utrumque probamus. Mart. LONDON, Printed for
M. Turner near Turn-Style in Holbourn. M.DC.LXXVII.

READER,
INstead of a Preface, I will only treat you with the Life of Edgar, as I find
it in our English Chronicles; No Romance Affords more variety in so few words;
and the pleasure of reading it will recompense the trouble.

The LIFE of EDGAR, King of the West Saxons.
EDgar, by his Brother's death, became King of all England at Sixteen Years of
age; but his Coronation when, and where, and by whom; is uncertain. Some say he
was Crowned at Kingston upon Thames by Otho Archbishop of Canterbury, in the
First Year of his Reign; others say not till the Twelfth; and William of
Malmsbury not till the Thirtieth. Another Chronicle says in his Eleventh year,
and that in the City of Bath, by the hands of Dunstan, whom he called home out
of Flanders, where he lived in Exile. This King had no War all his Reign, yet
always well prepared for War; he governed the Kingdom in great Peace, Honor
and Prosperity, gaining thence the Surname of Peaceable. The Saxons
acknowledged him their sole Sovereign without Division of Provinces and Titles;
under him ended the Heptarchy; till then the Land was cantl'd out into Seven
Principalities.

His Acts were some Virtuous, some Politic, some Just, and some Pious, and
some with a mixture of Vice; but those related to Women.

His Care and Wisdom was great in guarding the Coast round with Ships, to the
Number of Three thousand six hundred, which he divided into Four Squadrons to
sail to and fro about the Four Quarters of the Land, meeting each other. Thus
he kept out wisely the Force of Strangers, prevented Foreign War, and secured
the Coasts from Pirates. He would himself sail round his Kingdom once every
Summer. In the Winter and Spring time he usually Rode the Circuit as a Judge
Itinerant through all his Provinces, to see Justice well administered, and the
poor not oppressed; he severely punished his Judges, if he found them corrupted
with Bribes.

To repress Drunkenness which the Danes had brought in, he made a Law,
ordaining a size by certain pinns in the Cup, with penalty to any that should
presume to drink deeper then the Mark.

To clear the Land from Wolves which in his days did great annoyance to his
Country, he wholly remitted the Tribute imposed on the Princes of Wales by King
Athelston, appointing in lieu thereof a certain Number of Wolves yearly to be
paid, whereof the Prince of North Wales for his part was to pay Three hundred,
which continued for Three years space, and in the fourth year there was not a
Wolf to be found, and so the Tribute ceased.

Toward the end of his Reign the Welsh-men moved some Rebellion, against whom
he went with a Mighty Army, and chastis'd the Authors; but when his Soldiers
had gotten great Spoils, and made prey upon the Innocent Country people, he
commanded them to restore it all back again, which if it made some few English
angry, it pleased the whole Country of the Welsh, and raised him high in their
admiration.

His Pious Acts were, that he built and re-edify'd seven and forty Monasteries,
and meant to have made them up Fifty, but was prevented by Death.

In his Progress going to Chester, he summoned to his Court there all the Kings
that held of him, took homage of them, their names are Kened, King of Scots;
Malcolm of Cumberland; Maccuse of the Isles; Five of Wales, Duffnall, Howell,
Griffith, Iago, Iudethil. These he had in such awe, that going one day into a
Gally he caused them to take each man an Oar and row him down the River Dee,
whilst himself sat at the Stern, saying, That his Successors might then glory
to be Kings of England, when they had such Honor done them.

The same Year he gave to Kened the Scottish King many Rich Presents, and the
whole Country of Lawdian or Lothien, to hold of him on condition, That he and
his Successors should repair to the English Court at high Festivals when the
King sat Crowned; gave him also many Lodging places by the way, which till the
days of Henry the Second, were still held by the Kings of Scotland.

He was of Stature not tall, of body slender, yet so well made, that in
strength he chose to contend with such as were thought strongest, and disliked
nothing more, then that they should spare him for Respect or fear to hurt him.
Kened King of Scots then in the Court of Edgar; sitting one day at Table, was
heard to say jestingly among his Servants, He wondered how so many Provinces
could be held in subjection by such a little dapper man. His words were brought
to the King's Ear, he sends for Kened as about some private business, and in
talk drawing him forth to a secret place, produces two Swords, gave one of them
to Kened, And now, says he, it shall be tried; which ought to be the Subject;
for it is shameful for a King to boast at Table, and shrink in Fight. Kened
abashed demanded his pardon for what he had simply spoken and no way intended
in contempt, or to his disparagement, wherewith the King was satisfied.

His Faults were, that he deflowered a sacred Nunn called Wolsechild, on whom
yet he begot a Saint, the Chaste Edyth. After her, he took another Virgin out
by force, called Ethelf^ede; where she was placed by her Friends to avoid his
pursuit. For her excellent Beauty she was called Ethelf^ed the White; He kept
her as his Concubine, but lived not obstinately in the offense; for sharply
reproved by the Archbishop Dunstan, he submitted to seven years penance.

Another Story there goes of him, that he chanced to hear of a Virgin, Daughter
to a Western Duke, exceedingly praised for Beauty, and coming to Andover,
commanded her to his Bed; The Mother not daring flatly to deny, yet abhorring
that her Daughter should be so deflowered, brought in the dark her Maid to him
dressed in her Daughters Clothes. A Wench it seems not unhandsom nor unwitty,
who supplied the place of her Young Lady. In the Morning making haste to rise,
daylight scarce yet appearing, was by the King asked Why she made such haste?
She answered, To do the Work her Lady had set her, not daring to hazard her
displeasure by a longer stay. By which words the King perceived the Deceit, and
turned it to a Jest. But so well liked her company, that he kept her with him,
advanced her in Honor above her Mistress, and made her take place of her in
public; Loved her and accompanied her only till he married Alfreda.

Alfreda was the only Daughter of Ordgar Duke of Devonshire, Founder of
Tavestock Abbey in that County. She was extremely cried up for a Beauty; the
King hearing the loud Commendations, sent his Favorite Earl Ethelwold to see
her, intending if she were found such as answered report, to demand her in
Marriage. The Young Earl at sight of the Lady was so surpised with Love, that
he began to court her for himself, and concealing the Kings Intentions, got her
Fathers consent. Hereupon the Earl posted to the King, told him that the Lady
was fair indeed, but nothing answerable to the fame that went of her; yet
desired the King that he might marry her, as being her Fathers Heir, thereby to
raise his Fortunes: The King consented, and he took another Journey to
consummate the Marriage. Soon after the Fame of her Beauty began to spread more
than before; The King began to doubt he had been abused, and to find out the
truth, sent the Earl word, that he would come and hunt with him in his Park.
Ethelwold fearing the Event, and to cover his deceit from the Kings Eyes,
acquainted his Wife with the wrong he had done both her and the King, and
earnestly requested her to deform her self what she could either in Dress or
otherwise, lest the King whose Amorous inclination was not unknown, should
chance to be attracted. But she considering, that now was the time to make the
most of her Beauty, and longing to be a Queen would not be accessory to her own
wrong. Against his coming she used all her Art in Dressing, put on her Richest
Clothes, and omitted nothing might make her appear charming in his Eyes; which
took effect, for the King at first sight was struck with admiration, and in
mind resolved to recover his intercepted right, and to punish the Interloper of
his destined Spouse: But hid his resentments under a clear brow, appointing, as
was usual, a day of Hunting in a Forest now called Harewood, where in the
midst of the Sport singling out the Earl, struck him through with a Dart of
Javelin. It chanced that the Earl's base Son coming by upon the Fact, the King
sternly asked him, How he liked this Game? He submisly replied, That Whatever
pleased the King, must not displease him. The King for this Answer took an
Affection to the Youth, and ever after highly favored him, making amends in
the Son for what he had done to the Father. Alfreda was not long a Widow; for
after this he made her his Queen, who to expiate her former Husband's death,
though therein she had no hand, covered the place of his blood shed with a
Monastery of Nunns to sing over him.

This King built the Monastery of Ramsey in Hampshire. He Reigned Sixteen
years, Lived Seven and thirty, and with great Funeral Pomp was Buried in the
Abbey of Glassenbury.

These only are his Faults upon Record, rather to be wondered how they were so
few, and so soon left, he coming at Sixteen to the License of a Scepter; and
that his Virtues were so many, and so mature, he dying before the age wherein
Wisdom can in others attain to any ripeness: However, with him died all the
Saxon Glory. After him was nothing heard but their Decline and Ruin.

For the Fact of Ethelwold's Death, this King is Censured by most Historians as
Cruel and Tyrannical; but considered well, it may be judged more favorably,
and that no Man of sensible spirit, but in his place, without extraordinary
Perfection, would have done the like; for next to Life, what worse Treason
could have been committed against him? From this last Act of his I draw the
Argument of this Play, taking notice of no passage of his Life, but his Love to
Alfreda.

I have introduced new Persons to raise a Plott, and varied from the Chronicle,
to better the Character of the King; Knowing that the Critics in Poetry are
more Censorious and Severe, than the Historians.

Several Foreign Authors have writ upon this part of the Story; some have
disguised it under borrowed Names, but all of 'em were at a loss when they came
toward a conclusion, and have left it imperfect, fearing to blemish the
Character of the King: I found it difficult, but hope I have succeeded so well
as to make the last Act the best, and the Catastrophe in that point not
blameable; the Husband receives his death from another hand, whence it appears
just, yet accidental. I have mixed with it a run of Comedy, but not after the
manner of our Old Tragi-Comedies, where one half of the Play are Heroes, and
the other Mechanics and Buffoons. The Character of Durzo, I presume is so well
judged, that none may count his presence in the Court impertinent or unsuitable
to the business of the Place. But I submit all to a free Censure, careless of
the Fate of any trifle in this nature.

Farewell.
ERRATA.
PAge 11. line 18. r. Oswo. Come. p. 25. l. 12. f. then will I, r. then I will.
p. 36. l. 25. f. Vere off, r. Sheere off. p. 143. l. 15. f. to your, r. over
your.

PROLOGUE to EDGAR.
THis Play at least Ten Years ago was writ;
A time, when the Author had more Zeal than Wit;
But pondring on it he found it would not do,
Without Romantic Love and mighty show.
And nothing pleased you in those days but Rymes,
From Four to Seven we daily rung the Chymes*
Long did you hear, and long the sound did please,
But now --
Y^ are surfeited, and Verse grows a Disease,
Well he forbore, and well has nicked the time,
If Sense may do that is not shodd with Ryme.
If Heroes too that are no more than men,
May be allowed to tread the Stage again,
If Lovers may be Lovers, yet not by fits
Rave and discourse like Folks beside their wits.
But if you will still have Poets wrack their Brain
For Sense that shall your Understandings strain --
To Verse we will return --
And once more let the Goss-Hawk fancy fly,
That beats the Air and flutters in the Sky,
Sports for a while in view, but takes a flight
On the sudden, and flies clearly out of sight.
Still there remains the Music of her Heells,
And all you hear's the gingle of her Bells.
But Humane Actions now in Plays allow,
And business such as does from Nature slow,
Let not what is natural be counted Low;
We have no Rant, no Rapture, nor high flight,
The Poet makes us Men and Women all to Night,
The Persons Names.
Edgar King of the West Saxons. By Mr. Mohun. Ethelwold A Lord and Favorite in
Court, By Mr, Goodman. Ruthin An Ambitious designing Lord, Father to the Queen.
By Mr. Burt. Aldernald A Young Admiral, Brother to Alfreda. By Mr. Clark.
Oswold A Gentleman of the Court, Brother to Hillaria, By Mr. Wiltshire. Durzo.
A Blunt Sea Captain. By Mr. Grissin. Courtiers and Guards.
WOMEN.
The Queen By Mrs. Knight. Matilda The Princess. By Mrs. Bowtell. Alfreda Bride
to Ethelwold, and Daughter to Ordgare Earl of Devonshire. By Mrs. Frances
Baker. Hillaria A Young Lady at Court By Mrs. Katherine Baker. Alicia Confident
to the Princess By Mrs. Rutter. Court Ladies and Attendants.
The SCENE, Mercia, or Middle England, ACT I. SCENE I.
The Curtain drawn up, an Altar is discovered, Aldernald giving Alfreda to
Ethelwold in Marriage, an Abbot joining their hands, with Monks attending him.
Ruthin looking and smiling. After a while the Scene closes. Then enters Lord
Ruthin and a Servant. Scene the Body of the Church. Ruth. It Is done, it is done!
Alfreda is to Ethelwold a Bride.
Now let the busy tongues of Flatterers
No more whisper her praises to the King,
But speak 'em loud, till their enchanting Echoes
Again reach his ear.
Now in his love, my Daughter will have no Corrivals
And when this Marriage is divulged
I in his favor shall have no Competitors.
Go find out the common Music of the Town,
Place 'em in the street, near Ethelwold's Apartment
Close to the Palace Garden wall.
Thence will their noise over all the Court be heard.

Ser. I shall my Lord.

Ruth. Give 'em instructions, and let 'em be in readiness.

Ser. Yes my Lord.

Ruth. This credulous Aldernald will put a stop
To thy early rising greatness.
Brave thou art, but young and unexperienced:
Of thy Friend too consident, of thy King
Too suspicious, of Honor too jealous.
But to thee, rash amorous Ethelwold
That art ensnared by Beauty,
Enchanted by a face, and in Love besotted,
To thee it will give a lasting fall.
Enter Aldernald. My Lord where is the Bridegroom and your Sister?

Alder. I have taken my leave of 'em at present.
That Company which is coming to their Devotions
May not suspect what has been done.
I would not have the King Know of their marriage
Before the Queen has perfectly recovered her health.

Ruth. She has not of three days felt any symptoms
Of her Fever, she rested well last night:
I was with her this morning early.

Alder. Holds she her last nights resolution
To venture abroad to day?

Ruth. Yes.
This I count will be her wedding day too.
For though the Marriage-Rites have been performed*
The greatest Ceremony is yet to come.
Marriages begin at the Altar,
But in the bed are Consummate.

Alder. I have not heard the like accident,
She sickn'd at the Altar?

Ruth. Yes, at the very instant the Priest joined their hands,
Her health was so vigorously assayl'd,
That the Ceremony was scarce finished
When she fell into her women's arms.

Alder. Has not the King e're since bin much concerned?

Ruth. 'T has been a melancholy week with him,
But her recovery will wipe away
All sad resentments from his soul.
You will not long be absent.

Alder. I Will but dispatch an express to my Father,
To let him understand that in your presence
I have resigned the Charge of my Sister.
I know the return of his Letters
Will be fraught with thanks to your Lordship
For your advice and friendship in this affair.

Ruth. I wish he were here himself
To share the mirth and pleasures of the day.

Alder. Age has rendered him unfit for Journeys.

Ruth. My Lord I Will to Court before, you will be there anon?

Alder. My appearance will give a surprise
For my arrival last night was so private
It cannot yet be known to any.
I had advice too early this morning
That the Fleet is coming up the River --

Ruth. That Is very lucky, we will meet anon.

Alder. My Lord your Servant.

Exeunt severally. Enter Ethelwold and Alfreda, as from the Altar into the Body
of the Church. Ethel. 'Till now I shared but Heavens imperfect Bounty,
Which when it gave thy heart,
Snatched me from thy embrace,
Not permitting us as other Lovers
To repeat our amorous vows:
But now it gives thee to me for ever.
And hastens on the happy minute
Which I have wished, and languish'd for so long.
Now is our Fate entirely kind

Alfred. Kind indeed to me my Lord, it gives
What I never yet enjoyed, Liberty.
No more, now your wife shall I be confined
To Country solitude, and life obscure.
No more be debarred the gaieties of Courts,
The delights of Cities, and public Gallantries,
Which yet I never knew but by Relation.

Ethel. Thy presence from thy Fathers Palace
Had banished solitude and turned it to a Court,
Though far from any Town or City,
Yet all around came there to admire
And to adore thy heavenly form.

Alfred. Such as pass for great ones there
Told me that I was fair and beautiful.
But men are not more apt to dissemble,
Then women to believe their flatteries,
Valuing it from their praises.
I dispis'd their little Courtships:
I had a fond opinion this face
Might not shame the Court, therefore resolved
That Marriage should transfer me to that Sphere.

Ethel. O Pride! thou untaught vice in woman
That from her very nature take thy being

Alfred. When yo^ Lord Ethelwold appeared
With the many Charms of Court about you,
Great in your Family and long descent,
Greater in the favor of your Prince,
I thought my Pride not much above your Glory
And therefore taught my heart submission.

Ethel. She does confess her Pride.
Aside. And with it Ambition too appears,
To what ills does Love persuade, how fatal
The fury of an Amorous King will be
And the Revenge of an Ambitious Woman,
I Will trace her Ambition yet farther,
And see how far it goes beyond her Love.
Suppose a Lady to have two Lovers,
One her equal, whom with an unbiased
Affection she esteems:
Another, less loved by her, but greater much
In Titles and in Riches then his Rival;
Which ought she to make her choice?

Alfred. It is noble to aspire, and argues a great Soul*
Therefore I think Ambition should raise
Her Love, Love not debase her Pride.

Ethel. But to choose where most she loves
Argues the truest Love.

Alfred. But not the wisest.

Ethel. Did any thing but Love negotiate for me
In your thoughts? Love, true Love I mean,
Sets no regard on wealth or honors.

Alfred. Without them I might have loved
But not married.

Ethel. Your beauty alone, made me your Captive,
And your virtues will make the conquest
Of your eyes a lasting victory.

Alfred. This little Prudence which the World calls Pride,
Is the best Guard and Ornament to Beauty.
Yet had it lost its triumph over Love,
If Love over my Soul had not a greater made.

Ethel. You so exactly have determined
That I must praise your judgment.
And your Love admire --
How inquisitive I Have been to know my Fate,
Aside. Which now I have not power to avoid.
Forewarned I was, yet could not retreat,
But still pressed forward to my ruin
Come my divine Alfreda, let us go
Where we our joys more freely may express,
To shady walks, where Love has no restraint:
There sit and look, and from our eyes dart beams
That in our Souls shall kindle vigorous flames,
Till both of us grow red with inward fire,
And both do burn, and glow with one desire:
There we will sit, and wish away the Light,
And chide the Day for keeping back the Night.

Exeunt. The King and Queen sleeping in an Arbor hand in hand. Matilda sitting
on the other hand of the King awake* Alicia playing a soft Air on the Lute, and
singing to it. SONG.
How sweet a torment it is to love?
And ah how pleasant is the pain?
I would not if I could remove
And now put off the amorous chain.
Though Chloris eyes do give me Laws.
And me of liberty beguile
I like a Martyr love my cause
And on my fair to mentor smile.

Matt. Alicia lay aside thy Lute
For sleep has robbed them of the sound.

Alic. The King asleep.

Mart. Sure Souls are near allied to harmony.
That Music so strangely can affect them*
Mine sweetly languish'd with each dying sound
And from the pleasing trance as often waked,
As thy skilful fingers gave bolder touches
To the strings.

Alic. From this relation Madam I may guess
You are inclined to Melancholy.
But you are a Princess and in all things happy*
And therefore rather then judge that your temper,
I may with more reason conclude it the effect
Of my unskilful Play. For if not melancholy,
Such ill Music was enough to make you so.

Matt. Condemning your skill you wrong my Judgment
But why inferred you that a Princess could not be melancholy.

Alic. A Princess cannot except it be for Love.

Matt. Then I am far from it.

Alic. You are Madam.
Your youth and beauty gives you
A universal Empire over hearts:
You cannot love in vain, therefore can be
No melancholy Loyer.

Matt. Suppose I loved one that was dead?

Alic. O Madam I have a better opinion of your wit
Then to think you can love any but the living.

Matt. Suppose he be absent or in danger?

Alic. Then I suppose he would soon be here if he knew it,
And from ill, your love is Divinity
Sufficient to defend him,

Matt. To put an end to these Arguments,
Tell me Alicia your opinion of that Picture:
Is it not an excellent piece of Art?

Alic. Admirably well done and rarely handsome,

Matt. Sure too handsome for a man.

Alic. Here Is much of Gallantry in's looks.
If I may be so bold, pray Madam whose is it?

Matt. It Is no secret,
It Is Aldernalds the young Admiral,
That has done such glorious things at Sea.

Alic. Fame speaks his praises loud.

Matt. The King my Brother gave it me, and with it
This Relation of his last great action.
That in the late Engagement
He gave such remarks of's valor,
That the old Admiral by wounds disabled,
Whilst yet he had life gave him his sword,
Who took it with a resolution
To stand in's place a Conqueror or dye.

Alic. It was a noble resolve.

Matt. Then sailing in the midst of his Enemies,
Grapl'd with their insulting Admiral,
Himself the first man that boarded him;
Made way to that proud Commander,
And in the crowd of his opposers
Reached his heart, and soon cleared all the Decks.

Alic. He bravely then Revenged his Admirals fall.

Matt. And now Commander of his Enemies ship,
With the dead Admiral lying at his foot,
The great Flag up and all the gaudy Streamers
Wavering in the air, in triumph sailed
From the midst of them to his disheartn'd Fleet,
Who took such courage at that sight,
Each Captain strove which first should wonders do:
And fighting by that brave example,
Destroyed their foes, and ruined their whole Fleet.
For this brave service the King confirmed him Admiral,
And think he is still indebted to his valor.

Alic. O how I could love so brave a man!

Matt. Thou love him Alicia.

Alic, Oh Madam, are you jealous? then I perceive
You love him.

Matt. I love him? I have never seen him.
Follow me Alicia to the next walk.

Exit. Mat. cum Ali. Queen. Ha! he sleeps still.

Enter Ruthin. Ruth. The King asleep.

Queen. Yes Sir.

Ruth. How was his humor this morning.
Showed he any signs of mirth?

Queen. Not extraordinary.

Ruth. Was he kind to thee?

Queen. Yes Sir.

Ruth. But was he fond of thee?
Was he glad to see thy health restored?

Queen. He expressed so much in words.
But from his looks I guessed
He had some trouble in his mind,
Which by his kind expressions he endeavored
To conceal from me.
I believe the Princess observed it too,
For after some discourse past betwixt us
She commanded a Lady to fetch a Lute,
To play and sing to it to relieve his mind,
Which she did till the sweetness of the Music
Deprived him of the pleasure of hearing it.

Ruth. He begins to wake
Retire to the Princess in the next walk
Till I have had discourse with him
Concerning business of State --

Exit Queen. King. Ha! she is gone.

Ruth. The Queen and Princess, Sir, are in the next walk

King. Alfreda's gone.

Ruth. Alfreda still revels in his thoughts.

King. O Ruthin! in my Dream I saw a cloud descend
Beautiful as if it had passed the blushes
Of the setting Sun, adorned with streaks of red,
And little sprays of light, as if some beam
Had been untwisted into Golden threads
And through his airy Fleece had shot
Their trembling lustres.
Admiring it, and fixed in wonder I thought
I saw it open, and like Curtains draw.
Divided thus, O what did I not see?
I beheld Heaven in it is glory. I saw
A Woman with blushes more beautiful
And eyes more radiant, an Army of Cupids
Flew brandishing their Darts above her head,
As if she came to conquer all mankind
With love. My heart told me this could be none
But Alfreda, I called her to my embrace,
And stretching out my arms to receive her,
(My eyes which till then never descended
From the bright glories of her Face) espied
About her waste a Serpent in Folds,
Which hissing snatched her from me.
The clouds, and all this Scene of Beauty vanished.
With the surprise I started, then waked:
My Dreams conspire with same t'exalt her Beauty.
Though my Imaginations err, why should that?
She is still the favorite of Report
And Opinions Idol.

Ruth. A Glowworm in the Country is thought as luminous
As a Star, she is a beauty though homely, where
No one is fairer than her self.

King. In this her picture brought me by the Earl
I discover something excellent,
But nothing to admiration.
The Queens Beauty much excells.

Ruth. When she shined in a firmament alone
Her beauty was thus magnified by Fame,
But in the Court-Sphear it appears not
Of so extraordinary a magnitude.
Alfreda too, placed in the throng of Beauties,
And looked on by Court-eyes,
Would not appear so great a wonder,

Enter Queen, Matilda, Alicia, Oswold at another Door. Oswo. Aldernald, the
young Admiral is arrived.

King. Admit him.

Mat. Aldernald arrived?

Oswo. Yes Madam.

Enter Aldernald. King. Come thou man of honor and of valor:
Thou early aspirer to fame and virtue:
Come near, let my arms receive thee,
As a blessing sent from heaven.

Alder. I wish I merited the bounty of your expressions.

King. Thou art the wonder of young men.
Your honors spread with the wide Ocean,
And your virtues first make you man.
Matilda, here turn thine eyes,
This is the man,
Whose glorious deeds of late have been
The subject of our discourse and fame:
This is that brave young warrior,
I often told thee of with praise and wonder.

Matt. Fame is the Mistress of his Soul,
Whom he does Court with so much gallantry,
He fills the world with admiration.

Queen. He is the glory of the young, and wonder of the old.

Ald. My little services are paid with too great acknowledgments,
And I must blush my merits are no more.

Ruth. Yes, you shall have cause to blush anon
These smiles shall vanish like winter-Sun
Aside. And thy Laurels soon wither on thy brow.

King. Madam your health makes this a happy day.
It shall be dedicate to mirth and pleasure,
And your presence will much increase our joy.

To Alder. Enter Oswold and Durzo. Oswo. Look you Sir, there is your Admiral.

Dur. Why here is a place a man cannot find the way
In or out with both his eyes open. I can walk
All about my I rigot in my sleep,
Fore and aft, upper Deck and lower Deck.
And return to my Cabin without waking.

Alder. Durzo here!

Dur. Admiral our Fleet is come into the River*
We want your further Orders. Our men
Are all for coming ashore, they leap
Over board as if their ships were on fire.

Alder. Be uncovered you are in the presence of the King.

King. Who is this?

Alder. The valiant Durzo:
One that shared with me the hazards
And the glories of the last great fight.

Dur. Heaven bless the King say I.

Alder. A stout Soldier tho a blunt Courtier,
He was born in a ship, and never was
Five miles on shore in his life;
He scarce knows any thing of Land affairs
Beyond a Seaport Town or Haven.

King. I like him well, he looks
As if fighting was his business.

Alder. He is yet but Commander of a small ship
But hopes his merits may advance him.

King. I Will think to do it so that he shall own
To hold part of our favors from our bounty.

Oswo. Come Captain, now we will have you to the Wardrobe.

Dur. What place is that? do they fight or drink there?

Oswo. It Is one of his Majesty's Storehouses,
You must be new rigged Captain,
The Ladies will not like the smell of pitch and tar.

Dur. Not like it, which of 'em will not like it?
Come Captain, follow me

Exeunt Os. and Dur. Alder. So great a beauty have I never seen.

Looking at Matilda. King. Thy looks Matilda are not cheerful*

Mat. Mine is but a Copy of that Melancholy
Which of late like a Cloud hung on your brow.

King. That Cloud is now dispersed. Come my Queen, my Friend,
This day restores peace to my mind.

Mat. But here engenders war.

Exeunt. Alic. Her unsteady looks
And the quick changes of her Countenance,
Betray some alteration in her mind;
And when she turned away she sighed.
If from Love it does proceed,
She Will soon the secrets of her heart Reveal;
Lovers but seldom can their flames conceal.

Exit. ACT II.
Enter Aldernald and Durzo. Alder. Durzo have thou observed the glorious
tincture
The rising Sun spreads 'ore the Eastern sky
When he begins his Circuit?

Dur. I have.

Alder. And have you not heard tell of Nations
That fall down to adore its brightness?

Dur. Yes, but the more fools they.

Alder. They would be so, had They beheld the sight
That Thou and I have seen to day
Without forgetting former worship,
And here pay their Reverence;
'Twou'd turn that which we call in them
Idolatry, to just adoration.

Dur. Why what have we seen to day?

Alder. A form whose excellent brightness mocks
The most beauteous shapes that Angels
Ever were invested with; a form, that would
Give Verity to Fiction, and make that truth
Which was related once for wonder.

Dur. What mean you Admiral?

Alder. I mean the Princess.

Dur. She Is a woman.

Alder. Something sure much finer.

Dur. Why Admiral? a woman's the finest thing*
I ever saw, except a Canon mounted,
And a ship under fail, but now I talk
Of ships, would I were aboard again.

Alder. Why Captain?

Dur. There I should understand what yosay*
As I am a living man, you speak nothing
But Riddles on land -- Why Admiral
What means this glorious tincture,
Resplendent Deity, Beauteous Shapes,
Forms, Angels, and the Devil and all.
What Is all this to the Princess, I am a shark if I can
Guess at your meaning. 'Sbud I say she is a woman.

Enter Matilda. Alder. Behold, all I was talking of appears.
Observe her perfections, and thy dull sense
Will be instructed to mend its errors.
Do thou not think the sight of her
Makes thee Immortal?

Dur. Immortal! what a rare thing would that be
For a Soldier?

Alder. Oh Durzo, that I might ever
Gaze upon the glories of that form?

Mat. His Form, his Mien, his Looks, how great
In each, how much of Gallantry I see!

Alder. Love in my heart has raised its sacred Altar,
And there I pay a secret adoration
To the Divinity of that face.
That it were permitted
I might more than Contemplate.

Mat. He regards me at distance,
But moves not nearer; O that he would
Ald. and Matt. advance on the Stage, looking on one another at distance. But
speak to me t'oblige my stay

Alder. O Love!

Matt. O my heart!

Alder. O Conquering eyes!

Matt. O resistless charms!

Alder. I Would speak but dare not,
She Is a Princess, and my Love is presumption.

Matt. I Would tell him, but must not,
He Is a Subject, and my Love is below me.

Alder. O tyrannical Love!

Matt. O tyrannical Honor?

Ald. My passions more raging.

M. My slames more tormenting.

Alder. Be silent I cannot,

M. To conceal't is impossible.

Alder. Madam,

Matt. Sir,

Alder. O my heart!

Matt. O Heaven!

Alder. What confusion!

Matt. What distraction!

Dur. Admiral, what makes you start?

Alder. She Is unconcerned and minds me not.

Enter Oswold, Alicia and Hilaria. Osw. There, Hilaria, is the Captain I told
you of.

Hila. He looks as rough as a storm.

Osw. I Will bring him amongst the Ladies anon.

Alic. His Company will be good divertisement.

Dur. O here is another crew.

Alder. We Will avoid 'em,
Ald. gazing at Mat. and she at him, with Durzo, Osw. Ali. Hill. follow. I am
not now for Company -- Come Durzo
I turn from glory, and from heaven.

Matt. Heart hold thy seat in spite of all his charms,
The liberty thou strugl'st for is Bondage,
His conquest will enslave thee -- but my eyes
Are too much thy friends, with the enemy
They hold Intelligence, but I Will break it off. So
My heart is once more
Turns away her head laying her right hand on her eyes. Then starts and claps
the other on her breast, then both. Seated in its Throne
But had he stayed the field he must have won.

Alic. I see Madam the Admiral is gotten into harbor.

Matt. Hold Alicia: Trust not thy thoughts to words
Least they be heard by others, with care conceal
This secret, which I had not power to hide.
Hard Law of Custom to impose restraint
On minds Impartial Nature ordained free.
She knew the seeds of Passion which she sowed
In humane breasts, were in each Sex the same,
And would with time grow up to equal strength:
And wisely therefore left our wills
As unconfined as man's. O Tyrant Custom!
But more Tyrants men, whose Censures do
Uphold that power is usurpt of thee.
They blame the Passions we unurg'd reveal;
Yet feel the same, but cannot theirs conceal.

Exeunt. Enter King and Aldernald. King. I wish Alfreda's form had given report
Just ground to proclaim her Natures miracle.
The Earl by me was sent to view her Beauties.

Alder. Heavens! Did he for this call me from the Camp?
Shall I, ungrateful King, from thy own mouth
Aside. Be told how ill thou did intend to requite
The service I have done?

King. If Ethelwold had confirmed my belief
That in Alfreda those many graces met
Fame so loudly has bestowed on her,
She should have been my Queen.

Alder. Your Queen!

King. Yes Aldernald, if Love, or that title
Had charms to win her heart.
I ever thought thy loyal Family
Worthy my Alliance, and by this tie
Designed to advance its ancient glory.

Alder. Indeed Sir, had she been your Queen?

King. Yes Aldernald, my Queen -- why this wonder?

Alder. I cannot Sir but wonder,
If she should have been your Queen, why she was not.

King. Look there, and let all wonder cease.
Gives him two Pictures. Not wanting Allies, nor necessitated
To marry for State-Interest,
I proposed to indulge my Genius,
That Beauty should Crown my Nuptials with Love,
The solid blessing of a married life,
A blessing Princes but rarely find.
No Country more than this for Beauty famed;
My intents concealed, a general Collection
Of their Pictures that were much renowned
I procured. Of all that number
None but that one excelled Alfreda.

Alder. This the Queens, it does her beauty Justice.
This Alfreda's -- This my Sister's?

King. Yes, is it not like her?

Takes a Picture out of his pocket, shows it the King. Alder. I have a piece
more exact.

King. O what Charms are here!
How like the Beauty of my mornings dream!
Alfreda was that Heavenly form, Ethelwold
Was the Serpent that bore away that Scene of Glory.
Enter Ruthin. I have been betrayed.

Ruth. Sir, in what?
Gives Ruthin the Pictures. There read the Treason, thence guess the Traitor:
What Music is this so loud?

Music without. Ruth. This Music will discover all.

Alder. Not all my Lord.

Enter Oswold. King. The occasion of this Public joy?

Osw. Earl Ethelwold is this morning married,

King. And who is his Bride?

Alder. My Sister Sir?

King. Thy Sister! in Town! and married! this morning!
And to Ethelwold! when came she?

Alder. With me last night.

King. What reasons urged this have?
And to conceal your self and her?

Alder. To preserve her Honor.

King. Her Honor? what danger could attend it?

Alder. The Earl sent by you to my Father, declared that
you designed --

King. What?

Alder. My Faith's so criminal
Shame will not let me speak it.

King. What said he I designed?

Alder. Sir, read it in my blushes,
Or think the worst and that is it.

King. O my apprehensions!
Speak Aldernald, what was it?

Alder. The dishonor of our Family.

King. O Impiety!

Ald. That you would make her not your Queen, but whore

King. O Profanation!

Alder. Our hope's not so ambitious to believe
Our Family merited that Honor:
With ease gave credit to the other.

King. When Fame had made such often repetitions
Of her Excellencies, you on his single assertion
Might as justly suspect my Virtue,
As I her Beauty. If you yet doubt me,
There Is one can witness, my intentions
[Turns to Ruthin. To her and to your Family were just.

Alder. And he can witness too the Earl's deceit.
So positively he affirmed this for truth,
That he believed it too,
For my Father was guided by his Counsels,
Which he received by Letters.

King. How!

Alder. After the Earl returned to Town,
And had obtained your leave to marry her,
Being to return again into the Country,
When upon account of business
You countermanded his journey,
We grew suspicious of your intents;
And then my Lord there, zealous in our service,
Counseled she should be brought to Town,
And married here.

King. He counsel this?

Alder. Wisely concluding, that when you knew
The Honor of two such Families were concerned,
'Twou'd be a prevailing argument
To alter your Intentions.

King. He advised like a Friend -- Earl Odgare
Acted as a Father, you like a Brother:
It Is a Virtue to be jealous of our Honor.

Alder. But not of our Prince.

King. The fault was Ethelwold's, -- but I pardon all;
His Crimes were but Errors of Love,
Which is the madness of the mind.
Tell him I Will be his Guest this day at dinner,
But conceal my knowledge of his Guilt.
I Would have his mind rest in a confidence
I think him Innocent. That all his Thoughts
May be employed to heighten the pleasures
He this night must ravish from his Bride.

Alder. Mercy is the Monarch-Virtue in a Prince,
[Exeunt Ruth. Alder. And that is the Ornament of your Soul.

King. False Traitor! has Love his Loyalty betrayed?
Those Eyes must have powerful Charms can draw
The hearts of Subjects from their Allegiance.

[Exit. Enter Oswold, Durzo. Dur. But what do you with these Ladies here?

Osw. We Court, Complement, and Gallant 'em.

Dur. What is that Courting 'em?

Osw. Sometimes it is called making Love to 'em:
You must have a Mistress if you stay long at Court.

Dur. Must I, which of 'em?

Osw. Her you like best.

Dur. Why I like 'em all.

Osw. You must appropriate but one.

Dur. I Would have a whole Tier of 'em.

Osw. Every man must have his share:
Make choice of her you think most handsome.

Dur. But how may a man know a handsome Woman?

Osw. I^le give you the description of my Mistress
For a Pattern to choose one by. --
She has Hair, I know not how to term it;
Nature affords not a comparison.

Dur. I like not That; she is like no body then.

Osw. Her Forehead high and fair, eyes black and sparkling,
They twinkle like the Stars.

Dur. They are then Gemini.

Osw. Her Brows like Arches
Cut out of purest Snow, consolidate.
A Nose exactly to the square of Beauty.
Her Cheeks plump, not by Art but Nature painted.
Her mouth little, red Lips, and white Teeth;
A Pearly Portcullis, with a Ruby Gate.

Dur. Ay -- that is fine.

Osw. A Chin dimpl'd, but in that little Pit
A thousand hearts lie buried.

Dur. They are thrown in then as fast as we heave dead
Men over board in a Sea Fight.

Osw. Her neck smooth, fat, white, and soft
as the Down on Swans.

Dur. Ay, That --

Osw. Her Breasts, those milky Fountains, snowy Alps,
Round and not limber, their motions pant
Beholders hearts into an Ecstasy.
No Pride about her but what they swell with,
They rise and fall like Waves blown up by gentle winds.

Dur. O, O, O, feel here.

[Pulls Owald's hand to his breast. Osw. Auh your heart beats high:
We shall have boisterous weather, I perceive it coming.

Dur. Ay, my heart begins to leap and play
Like a Porpice before a Storm.

Osw. An Arm, a Hand, small, white, and
Round; the blood blushing through the fair skin,
Like a Lawn Veil spread over a Bed of Roses.

Dur. Me thinks I see this fair Creature;
Yes and touch her too: Oh how fine it is
To stroke such Limbs!

Osw. Yes, Captain, very fine: Beauty I see will soften
And polish you.

Dur. Your words have painted something more than
Woman in my fancy.

Osw. She is as valiant as fair, a brave Virago:
She fans her beauty with a Shield, and darts
A Javelin with as much courage as an Amazon.

Dur. Ay That Is a Woman.

Osw. Take this Picture, it is very like her.
When you see the Lady this resembles,
Claim her for your Mistress; Love her,
Court her, Gallant her, and do your best;
Win her and wear her, that is fair play.

Dur. Will you give her me?

Osw. Yes, if you can get her.

Dur. Why, I can take her up in my Arms
And run away with her.

Osw. And whither will you carry her?

Dur. Aboard my Frigot, and he that dares come
To take her from me there, had as good leap
Into a blazing Fire-ship, or kiss Thunder.

Osw. But she is no lawful Prize if you take her by force;
By the Laws of Love you must, as I told you, Court her,
And win her fairly; you must get her good Will.

Dur. I thought I had had her Will when I had her.
But now I think on it, I have heard a Woman's Will
Shifts into more Points than the Wind.
But if she sail under any Point of the Court-Compass,
I Will hale her in I warrant you.

[Exeunt. Enter Ethelwold, Aldernald. The Scene Ethelwold's Apartment. Ethel.
May their wishes of Joy
Convert to Curses on themselves, and every Curse
Attended with a mischief greater than this
They Have brought on me. O untimely discovery!

Alder. This News is much unwelcom to you.

Ethel. As Frost is to early Flowers,
It blasts my new born Joys.

Alder. But thou, treacherous Ethelwold, in their
[Aside. Bud did stifle the glories of our Family;
You are too apprehensive of the consequence.
He designs his coming as a particular favor;
His presence will grace your Nuptials.

Ethel. I know his temper, and foresee the Event.

Alder. He is now married, his Love is engaged,
But were it not, and was he free,
To Alfreda it could have no access.
Her Honor's strongly guarded; she is your Wife,
If that is not enough, she is yet more,
My Sister, -- her wrongs will call on me
To own the title of Brother.

Ethel. With what temper did he receive the News?

Alder. He showed no great surprise,
For had he been concerned, or should he yet
Resent the Marriage ill --

Ethel. He conceals his Thoughts.

Alder. Be confident and cheerful. --
Suspect of mischief hastens mischief on,
He fewest dangers meets that does fear none.
I must attend him hither --
O Alfreda, were I but assured
[Aside. Thou could receive the knowledge of this wrong,
And thy Ambition not transport Revenge
To the loss of Honor and Virtue,
Not the command of Edgar should make me tame.

[Exit Ald. Ethel. To dinner, unwelcome Guest!
I know the dish thy greedy eye will feast on.
But his Reception shall be with smiles,
That in my looks he may not read my fears,
And thence conclude me conscious of a Guilt.

Enter Alfreda. Alfr. My Brother tells me the King will be here.

Ethel. Yes, Alfreda, the King will be here.

Alfr. This Country Dress will shame me;
I would appear in more Gallantry.
I Will wear my Jewels. --

Ethel. Thy beauty has its native purity,
With Art not injured, nor with Age impaired,
Not broke with Surfeits, nor worn with Cares,
Nor by late Revelings decayed, you, Alfreda,
Want not the ornament of Dress.

Alfr. But I am a Bride.

Ethel. The Court makes no distinction.

Alfr. You look on me, my Lord, with eyes
Full of Love and Sadness, as if your Breast
Gave entertainment to some thoughts
Injurious to the blessings of the Day.
My Brother's Brow too wore an unwonted frown.

Ethel. Did he acquaint you with the Cause?

Alfr. No.

Ethel. It Is then a Secret to us both. -- But mine
Proceeds from an apprehension that you
Will suddenly be angry or unkind.

Alfr. This day should know no Grief, --
What can have power to make me so to you?

Ethel. A request I would have you grant,
And not demand the reason why I ask it.

Alfr. Your words a little surprise me,
For they import some Diffidence.
Yet you may dismiss your fears,
Since all I can with honor grant
You now are priviledg'd to ask.

Ethel. Then, to oblige me, instead of adorning,
Resolve to cloud that bright Orb of Beauty,
And in a meaner Dress obscure those Beams.
Let a pale Green Sickness Paint be drawn,
As a Veil over the Roses of thy Cheeks;
A tawny Die spread over thy Neck and Breasts;
Let the same Art instruct thee to sully
That excellent whiteness of thy Hands.

Alfr. You forget the King will be here.

Ethel. No, I had rather he would forget to come.

Alfr. You are jealous then, my Lord!

Ethel. Not of thee by Heaven, Alfreda.

Alfr. This injurious Caution shows you are.

Ethel. Of the King I am, for thou art so fair,
And he so amorous.

Alfr. Poor suspicious man, do thou believe,
That should my Beauty have Charms to conquer his Heart,
He can find any to or'ecome my Virtue.
Now I perceive the Mark at which you levelled
Your Discourse this morning. Tho ambition
Of all Passions, in my Soul has the Ascendant,
Yet my aspiring thoughts pursue
The bright Tracts of Honor, and take no slight
Where Virtue towrs not above, your Thoughts.
When I told you Ambition did guide my Love,
Were too injurious to conclude,
It had the conduct of my Virtue too.

Ethel. No man less jealous is than I.

Alfr. Suck not that Poison in, which would burst out:
You have already done me Injuries,
Not to be repaired, and scarce forgiven.

Ethel. Let not reproaches add to my sorrows.
I swear to thee I am not jealous:
Imagine not this strange Request
Proceeds from suspicions of your Virtue:
But grant if possible what I ask,
Without farther obliging me to declare
The Reasons that compel me to it.

Alfr. No, no, my Lord, you can have no other
Sentiments in your Soul, nothing but Jealousy
Has eyes to foresee the future so far off.

Ethel. Unkind Alfreda, thou will force my tongue
To an acknowledgment that will destroy
Thy peace, my guilt made known:
If thou have not a noble stock of Courage,
Thy Thoughts will soon grow mutinous,
And Passion against thy Reason will rebel.

Alfr. Then to suspect my Virtue there can be
No greater crime.

Ethel. Yes, Alfreda; yet it is a crime may be forgiven too,
Since but from the excess of Love it grew.

Alfr. What is it, my Lord?

Ethel. I dare not tell thee.

Alfr. Dare not?

Ethel. No, must not.

Alfr. Yes, you must.

Ethel. I would not, but I must.

Alfr. Come out with it.

Ethel. I have loved you too well.

Alfr. Is that a Crime?

Ethel. I wish it were not;
And I fear you scarce will thank me for it.
By the King I was sent to view your Charms.
If my Tongue had confirmed the report of your Beauty,
You had been Queen of Mercia, but your Eyes
Made me a Traitor to my Prince.
When I had gained an interest in your heart
To advance my Love, I falsify'd
The intentions of my King, I told
Your Father he designed your dishonor.

Alfr. Then at your return to Court
Degraded my Beauty? --

Ethel. I did.

Alfr. And this you call Love?

Ethel. To incur the King's displeasure --

Alfr. Was Treachery.

Ethel. To hazard Life and Honor to purchase thee --

Alfr. Was folly.

Ethel. But does the excess of Love declare.

Alfr. No, it argues self interest, had you loved me
You had not robbed my Beauty of its Glories,
And interposed 'twixt me and a Crown.
You would have been more pleased to have seen me
Fixed in the Glories of a Throne
Than confined to your low Embrace.

Ethel. Pardon the Treason I have committed,
And be content to reign absolute
In the heart of one that truly loves you.

Alfr. Had your Love been true it had been generous,
Then you would have declared the King's intentions,
And by this high act of Exemplar Virtue
Taught me to value your Love above a Crown.

Ethel. Love its greatness shows in rash effects:
That had expressed more Generosity,
But less Love; if you would prevent my ruin,
And cherish my affection,
You must submit to be less beautiful.
If his eye catch but one limb or feature
Undisguis'd, it hastens my confusion,
Damns his Soul, and ruins Thee.

Alfr. The injuries you have done me
Permit not you should be my Counselor.
I will consult my own thoughts, at present
Expect to know no more than this, --
What Honor does oblige, I Will do.

Ethel. Let Pity in your thoughts have share.

[Exit. Alfr. You should first have pitied your self.
Bold man! that durst expose his safety
To the frailty of a Woman's Virtue!
Could he know, we covet all that is fair,
That we love to be envied for our Greatness,
Adored for our State, feared for our Power,
Flattered in hopes of Rewards and Favors.
Yet durst he rob me of all these,
And hope a Refuge in my Virtue?
Ah too presumptious man! Thy folly gives
My virtue too severe a trial.
Yet i will give thee a farther Testimony,
And it shall be as daring, as the proof
Of thy injurious Love was bold.
I Will work thy fears to punishment,
My Looks shall court Enticements, 'till they have raised
Thy Jealousy to a dispairing height,
Then will I make a brave Retreat,
And Greatness, which I seemed to covet, slight,
And glory in that proud Defeat.

[Exit. The End of the Second Act.
Act the Third.
The King seen at a Banquet, holding Alfreda by one hand, gazing on her Face.
Ethelwold, as conversing with Ruthin, but turning his head, and looking Reverse
on the King, with an angry jealous Countenance. Aldernald in discourse with
Matilda. Durzo and Oswold in discourse with Ladies. SONG.
PHillis do not slight your Prize,
And scorn my Heart, because your Eyes
At first did conquer me and win it:
Nor think mine is not a real flame,
'Cause it so on a sudden came,
Burst forth and raged all in a Minute.
Meaner Beauties by their Arts
More than their force do conquer hearts,
And by degrees a flame engender*
Small Armies so do Sieges form,
Whilst Royal Ones take Towns by Storm,
And bravely force 'em to surrender.
They but lie in Ambuscade,
Whilst nobly you a heart invade,
And conquer it in your first advance.
Of Victories thus gained by you,
The Glory's to your Beauty due;
They their Conquests poorly owe to Chance.
A DANCE. King. She Is wondrous Beautiful.
Nature in this fair Original has excelled;
As most great Artists do, in some one Piece,
All they have done before or after can.

Alfr. A King is sure on Earth a God.
How great, how glorious are his Looks!

King. Here I must as on some blessed Vision gaze,
Where still our Sight enlarges our Desires,
And greedy to see more, at last we find
Our Eyes too narrow for the Object, -- but still
Unsatisfied, we look, and look, and thus look on.

Alfr. On his Brow sits Majesty enthroned,
Whilst his Eyes dart Glories round him,
And from his Form, amazing Greatness flows.
Thus like the Sun, encircled with his Beams,
He dazles with excess of Light.

Ethel. His Eyes dart pointed beams at hers,
And hers repay 'em with their trembling lustres.
Their Hearts play the Wantons in their Eyes.
O fatal Enterview! I am ruined
If it longer last --
Madam, I fear the King is not well.

[To the Queen. Queen. Sir, are you not well?

King. A strange unusual pain on the sudden
Has seized my heart.

Ethel. How quickly Love takes root!

(...) Sure I have seen that face before:
O 'twas in that Picture.

Mat. What is the Captain doing?

Osw. Making comparisons 'twixt the Shadow
And the Substance.
I gave him my Sisters Picture,
With a description of her to prepare him for Love.

Mat. Her Beauty warrants all you could say of it;
If her Carriage holds, 'twill be a fierce Encounter.

Hill. My heart begins to fail me already,
But I Will huff it out as long as I can.

King. Now lead the way to cool Walks, and shady Groves.
Madam, your Hand, and thine, Alfreda,
By so much Beauty on every side attended,
No Prince so happy but would envy my Triumphs.

Queen. Hold, Sir, I am not well.

King. Ladies, take care of the Queen, be assistant
To her health. -- Come, Alfreda.

[Exeunt omnes praet. Queen, Ladies, and Ruthin. Queen. So, I thank you all, my
Illness is over.
Ladies, pray retire a while.
O my dear Father, is this my Nuptial Treatment?
This my Welcome to a Throne? are these the Joys
Attend on Crowns! If such they are, who'd sigh to
Be a Bride, or be ambitious to be a Queen?

Ruth. O my Leonora!

Queen. Love, the path that leads to Marriage
Is strewn with Wreaths and Flowers;
And when at distance we behold a Throne,
How pleasant is the prospect! and we ascend to
It by Golden Steps. O cruelty of Nature!
Oh Tyranny of Fate!
To lead to pain through such delightful ways,
And make the Journeys end so differing from the Road.

Ruth. Afflict not thy self,
Let this thought warm thy breast with Joy;
Though Alfreda usurp his Heart, his Throne
She cannot, thou art still his Partner there.
Fate by Death alone can remove thee thence;
Tho not his Love, thou shar'st his Glory.

Queen. I willingly would change my Throne for hers,
In his Heart I would reign --

Ruth. Remember thou art a Queen;
Let this thought inspire a Courage in thee
To own that Title, and maintain its Rights.
If as a Wife, Love softens thee to tears,
Yet be emboldened by thy Quality.
Exalt thy Looks to awful Greatness
With haughty Frowns, and an Imperious Brow,
Check the advance of that bold Invader:
And with the Grandieur of a Queen
Dispute the Empire of his Heart.

Queen. Tho she retreat, his heart will not return,
But with the Flames her Eyes have kindled, burn.

Ruth. Not fed by her, those Flames not long can live.

Queen. But he will no new ones from these Eyes receive.
Over Hearts we can no second Conquest boast,
A Heart once gone, for ever, ever's lost.
To me I never more shall see him kind*
His Love is as unconstant as the Wind.

Ruth. But thence some ground for better hopes I find.
For Winds that vere from Point to Point so fast,
Chop round to the same Point they left at last.
Thy longer absence may injurious prove,
Freedom and Privacy do nourish Love.
Join with the Earl to hinder their converse,
To stop Love's progress cut off all Commerce.

[Exeunt. Enter Aldernald, and Matilda. The Scene, the Garden. Mat. That
Passion's weak that cannot move the Tongue
To court the Object, which the Soul affects:
Or else the Object has no strong attractions.

Alder. All that is excellent may justly be attributed
To her Honor, Beauty, Virtue, and what e're can enter
In the perfect composition of a Woman.

Mat. Much Commendation does much Love discover;
O were he not in Love, or else my Lover.

Alder. In every limb and feature I read the greatness.
Of her Soul, a Form so rare and beautiful
She has, that where I fix my eye, I stand amazed,
And think my Love would grow Presumption
If I exceed a silent admiration.

Mat. A Gallant man should not his Flame conceal;
Should you the Sent'ments of your Soul reveal,
Fame, and your own great Deeds would nobly plead
Your cause, no other Orators you need.
Were she like me a Princess, nay were it me,
Were It me you loved; and I as fair as she,
Tho I perhaps could not accept your flame,
Yet should your Love less than your Silence blame.

Alder. Madam, suppose 'twere you I loved?

Mat. That Supposition does my blushes raise,
Because I know I merit not such praise.

Alder. You blame my silence now, because you know
I love some other, and that it is not you.

Mat. I wish this truth had not so plain been told,
But now I think on it, Love may be too bold.

Alder. My hopes are dashed again, Joys came so fast
[Aside. And thick, I knew they were too great to last.
In that good mind had she one minute longer stayed,
My too rash tongue had my presumptuous Love betrayed.

Mat. Since I am not the Mistress of his Vows,
[Aside. Still may he fear the Secret to disclose.
But tell me, what your Resolutions are,
Will you love one, and not your Love declare?

Alder. I still must love, but know not what to do;
I Will not discover't to her. --

Mat. Never?

Alder. No.
Never, unless I Am counseled to 't by you.
This shall be silenced too, this I designed,
[Shews a Letter. Because my Tongue durst not, should tell my mind.

Mat. To read that Letter what would I not give?
My Love's grown curious and inquisitive,
I guess there is much of Passion in your style.

Alder. It is too mean a trifle for your sight.
Yet if you think it will reward your pains

Mat. If it no secret but your love contains.

Alder. I have no Secret which from you I Will hide,
For in my love I chose you for my Guide.

[She takes the Letter, and reads the Super. Mat. To your fair Self. --

[Starts. Alder. Madam, what makes you start?

Mat. To me?

Alder. Madam, to her that has my Heart.

Mat. That is not I.
[Aside. One dull as I am this might well surprise.

Alder. When to her hands I'ad given this -- my Eyes
Would at first instant the Contents discover,
She Would in my looks first read I was her Lover.

Mat. It Is true Love cannot be concealed by Art,
A Lover's Eye reveals a Lover's Heart,
And gives of Love the first Intelligence.

Alder. Then sure I have no Love, or she no Sense.

Mat. How dull!

Alder. How ignorant!

Mat. By Love besotted, he can nothing learn.

Alder. That read, she cannot but my Love discern.
Madam, the King.

Mat. Let us remove to the next Walk,
I Will read it there.

[ Exeunt Ald. and Mat. Enter Alfreda and the King. King. Alfreda, were thou a
Queen and absolute,
That in thy breast did bear a secret flame,
For some one Gallant and deserving Subject;
How would you treat the Lady you had raised
To the high honor of your Confident,
If perfidiously she should expose
Her Charms, and by treacherous enticements
Deprive you of that only man, whom now,
Tho you cannot have, you cannot choose but love.

Alfr. Great persons should do great things, -- if a Queen,
My deeds should not receive a luster
From that name, but add new Glories to it.
I would forget the flame, and fault forgive.

King. That generous Act would too much encourage
Subjects to grow bold. Since Ambition
Is a Passion not less powerful than Love.
They that dare snatch from your heart a Lover,
Would from your head a Crown. --

Alfr. Crowns admit of a precedent claim,
But Love, like newfound Land, is theirs
That first can get possession of it.
Here, should I punish the Offender's crime,
'Twou'd make me guilty of the same.
For the offense is, not that she loved him,
But that her Love deprived me of him.

King. No, the punishment is not due, because
She deprived you of your Lover,
But him of those Glories he with your Love
Might have enjoyed.

Alfr. But since a man in all Estates, not finds
But makes his Happiness, he may not think
Her Love has injured him. Then I ought to act
The Generous Lover, and for the satisfaction
He enjoys, pardon my Rival's fault, for in her Love
He meets content, then crowns a greater blessing

King. But in your love, this fancied blessing had come
Attended with the Glories of a Throne.

Alfr. Love is a bliss so absolute, and high,
It no additions does from Accidents receive,
But like an Infinite, is incapable
Of change, to more or less.
Thus he being in her love nor less happy
Than in mine, I ought to think him so:
And thus as a Lover I am always
Debarred from punishing the Offender.

King. You have subt'ly managed the Argument,
To show the Excellency of your wit.
Wit, like a towering Hawk, flies high in Speculative notions,
Whilst Judgment, like the Hound, pursues his Game,
And follows Truth upon the level.
Now, Alfreda, tell me thy real thoughts.
Do you apprehend you should
So perfect a Contentment find
In any Subjects love, not to imagine
You might more happy in a Monarch's be?

Alfr. The flame ascends not more naturally,
Than to a Throne our Thoughts aspire.
If free, I think I could not force my self
To refuse the bright temptations of a Crown:
But my heart being before engaged,
As now it is, I cannot, as I am,
Resolve; but if I were in that condition,
And the very person, I could, because I should
Then know my own thoughts.

King. Know then, thou art in that condition.
False Ethelwold snatched thee from my Embrace;
Now can you resolve the Question?

Alfr. Sir, I can. --
If I had been acquainted with your love,
It should have been as absolute in my breast,
As you are in your Kingdoms.

King. You strangely bless me, in but discovering
That you could have loved me*

Alfr. Hold Sir --
The same temper that had inclined me then
To have received your flame, permits not now
I should so much as think I might have been
More happy, much less declare it.

King. If thou art not miserable, I am,
And though you may not declare it, I must.

Alfr. But I must not hear it.

King. Hear it, and pity me.

Alfr. Pity for a King, is in a Subject's breast Presumption.

King. A Duty rather.

Alfr. In others it may, but in me 'twoud be a Crime.

King. Alas, Alfreda, if you are rigorous
I shall hate Ethelwold: your Pity should,
Like healing Balm be powered into the wounds he made.

Alfr. That Pity would not heal your wounds,
But make 'em fester, and deeper to my Honor give.
Tho I may be sorry for his fault,
I must not be concerned at your Complaints,
My Honor suffers if I longer stay.

[Turns from the King and meets Ethelwold. Enter Ethelwold. Ethel. What,
Alfreda, does my coming fright you hence?

Alfr. No, nor would your departure much please me.

Ethel. I know you had a good Game,
You had no reason to throw up your Cards.

Alfr. Do you play my Hand out,
And anon tell me, what you are a winner.
[ Exit Alfreda.
King. How much the Remedy she gives to cure,
Increases my disease.
While she appears thus charming fair,
Thus exactly virtuous, and thus truly great,
With what temper can I bear the loss of her?
Ethelwold, thou have robbed me of a Woman,
So made to be my Queen
Thou seem to have foiled Destiny,
And prevented Fates disposal of her. Speak,
Why did you tell me she was not beautiful?

Ethel. I judged her Beauty by your Greatness.
I did not think it merited the honor
To be placed in so great a Monarch's Throne.

King. The world contains not such another Woman.

Ethel. If I am guilty, your Opinion is my Crime;
For Fancy gives beauty its estimate.

King. In meaner beauties what you say is true;
But Alfreda has Excellencies so much
Above the rest of womankind, that none
Could behold her matchless Charms, and not know
She was and is the fairest of her Sex.
This was the reason why you deprived me of her.

Ethel. I requested not Alfreda of you 'cause she was
Fair, but because I loved her.

King. If it be true that you deceived me
'Cause you loved her, it is also true
That you loved her 'cause you thought her beautiful.

Ethel. I humbly asked your leave to marry her.

King. Yes, after thou had profaned her beauty,
And said she had more than her Equals here.

Ethel. If Sir, I thought --

King. The Thought was Blasphemy, and blacks thy Soul,
But this was an arch piece of Treachery.
Look there, then there: two Copies how different,
Yet from the same Original! This to the Eye
Belies, profanes, blasphemes Divinity.

Ethel. If, Sir, the Painter erred, must I be blamed?

King. For this conspiracy you will both be damned.
Traitor, thy Crimes shall not go unpunished.
Guards there --
[Enter Guards. Ruthin, Queen, Alfreda (from one side,) Aldernald, Matilda, (
from the other.) Seize that Traitor.
In Dungeons thou shall celebrate thy Nuptials.
Chains shall embrace thee, not Alfredas arms.
And that thou may even in this life be damned,
Thou shall quite be deprived of the sight of her.
Still may her Beauty haunt thy restless mind,
Despair be the attendant of each thought.
This Heaven of Beauty in thy hopeless fancy see,
A Heaven that never shall be possessed, enjoyed, by thee.

Alfr. Sir, on my knees --

King. Away to prison with him.

Alfr. Brother, Madam, my Lord, will no one speak?

Ruth. His offense --

King. You should be the last should speak.
You was his Counselor, and shared his Guilt.
He was by Love, you by Ambition led;
Yo've raised your Daughter to my Throne and Bed.
But your ambitious ends I^le thus destroy,
She shall my Throne, but not my Bed enjoy.
Thou to a Crown shall not be long allied,
With her ends thy Ambition, and thy Pride.
Madam --
To you Respect and Honor I will pay,
Though not my Heart, you shall my Scepter sway.
You in the Grandeur of a Queen shall move,
Deprived of nothing but the Rights of Love.
To punish him, those joys must be denied,
[Points at Ruthin. But shall by a kind friendship be supplied.

Queen. Unhappy Woman, that art made wretched
To be great!

King. The first proof of my friendship this shall be,
For the Queens sake enjoy your liberty.

[Exeunt K. Q. Alfr. I am resolved the King shall hear me speak.

Alder. To Ethelwold I will a visit make,
And tell him that his cause you undertake.

[Exeunt Ald. and Alfreda severally. Ruth. The Watchful Chemist, that with
pregnant hopes
Waits the Return of his long labors,
And in that minute he expects should give
Perfection to the precious Elixir,
Sees the Stills fall, and all the rich Production
Buried in the ruins, receives not a defeat
Than this more unexpected. --
Fortune to the Wise, and the industrious shows
Her spite, but unto Fools success allows.

[Exit. Enter Durzo, Hillaria, Alicia meeting him. Alic. O here is your man of
War.

Hill. Captain, you look as if you were not well.

Dur. I am not, I have Wildfire in my veins,
My blood is a Circulating Flame,
Hot as the Current of melted Metals,
That flows from the Entrails of burning Mountains;
It spouts against the upper Region of my Brain,
Like a tempestuous Hurricane; I have a red-hot Devil in me.

Alic. O Terrible!

Hill. Do you know what this strange Disease is?

Dur. Know? I know nothing.
But Nature is at war within me:
My Brain's reversed, all, all my Senses on the Rack.

Hill. We had best begone, he will beat us presently.

Alic. By the description, this should be Love.

Hill. Yes Love, Captain, that is the little hot Devil
You talk of.

Alic. He plays mad Reaks, when first he enters a
Breast, and finds Resistance.

Hill. Love, like the small Pox, as any seldom escape it,
So the longer we live without it, the more
Dangerous it is when it comes.

Enter Oswold. Osw. Hillaria, what execution have you done?

Hill. I have discharged my upper Teer;
I have peppered him with small Shot.

Osw. How is it, Captain, are you in Love yet?

Hill. Yes, yes, he is furiously infected with Love.

Alic. But can you tell him how to cure this Disease?

Osw. To cure Love, he must look for Love again,
Bear up close, speak to her, Captain.

Dur. I could speak better to the great Guns
Of an Armada, that answer in leaden syllables,
Whose Oratory is nothing but fire and noise.

Osw. Bear up with the little Pinnace,
Clap her aboard briskly.

Dur. If I was but once Master of her Fore-deck!

Osw. That Is easy, she is leaky, Captain, she is leaky.

Dur. Then she will founder in the Hold anon.

Osw. Come, I Will bring you both to Grapling,
Get clear of one another as you can.

[ Oswold brings them together. Alic. Here will be an excellent Scene of Love.

Osw. Let us vere off, and give 'em Sea-room.

[ Exeunt Osw. Alic. Dur. Can you love?

Hill. Yes, Captain.

Dur. Me? say but that word, and this Sword,
[Draws his Sword. If you command, shall unpeople half the World
To give us and our Progeny Elbow-room.
Discharge but that word from your mouth,
And command me to still Tempests, to split Rocks asunder.
Lady, do but feel the weight on it;
See, is it not an excellent Blade?

Hill. I have no great skill.

Dur. Feel, has it not a brave edge, and
What a point is here!

Hill. It Is dangerous meddling with edg-tools,
Pray put it up.

Dur. Have you any Enemies? if you have
I Will make their bodies Scabberds.

Hill. No Captain, put it up.

Dur. Will you love me then?

Hill. I love not danger, any thing but killing.

Dur. Did you ever see one killed?

Hill. No.

Dur. Heaven, had you been with me in our last
Engagement, you might have seen a sight, that would have
Made a Coward in love with death; there you might
Have seen our Enemies bear up in a half Moon,
Exposing to our view the terror of their Wooden Castles,
The mouths of their great Guns, which were made
To swallow leaden morsels that might lie heavy on
Their stomachs, 'till they were disgorg'd in our faces.

Hill. Faugh, faugh.

Dur. We with Topsails out, Flags and Streamers
Flourishing in the Wind, and Trumpets sounding
Unite our force, then like Thunder fall in amongst 'em:
There like the Sons of Terror we are seen
In Clouds of fire and Smoke, Slaughter puts on
Her Purple Robes. --

Hill. Hold, good Captain.

Dur. We play at Tennis with Iron Balls, and death comes
Whizzing by our Ears: Heads take fire in their
Brain-pans, and burst asunder like Grenades,
Scattering the Wildfire of their Brains
In their Fellow Soldiers faces.

Hill. You fright me horribly.

Dur. Other heads fly from one Ship with the bullets
That saluted them, to visit their friends in another.
Limbs like Langrel-shot, mount scattering in the air,
And hands that could not reach the Enemy before,
Now fly into distant Vessels to give their foes a box
Of the ear; other hands grasping their swords,
Clear a whole Deck in the slight.

Hill. What shall I do?

Dur. We are now in a confusion, the Fireships
Flame, and their Half Moon is divided
Into blazing Stars. --

Hill. Enough, good Captain.

Dur. Some burn, the men leap over board,
And drown themselves to save their lives,
Other Ships reel, drunk with the Sea-brine,
And at last sink to the bottom, to follow
Those brave men, who fought in 'em
With as much courage as they drank.

Hill. Have you yet done?

Dur. The Flags and Streamers --

Hill. Yet more?

Dur. That hung wantonly playing in the air,
Now on the Deck lie stained in blood,
And their tall Masts lie in their Hulls
As in Coffins. How like you it? is it not brave?

Hill. I am almost dead with fear.

Dur. I thought you valiant.

Hill. Yes, Captain, in Land matters a very Lioness,
But in Sea-affairs a mere Coward.
The very Terms are Bullets to me;
I would not hear such another Relation.

Dur. Not hear! Can you fear when I stand by?
My voice is gentle, but I have something
That can speak louder to your Enemies,
[Shews a Pistol. See --

Hill. What Is that, a Pistol?

Dur. It Is the Spawn of a Cannon, a little Spit-Devil.

Hill. Pray conjure him down again.

Dur. Frighted at my voice, you shall hear
What a brave Language this speaks.
[Fires. Sure she will love me anon.

Enter Oswold, Matilda, Alicia. Osw. What warning-piece was that?

Mat. Alas, poor Hillaria, how thou trembl'st!

Hill. O Madam, the Captain's in his hot Fit,
And I am in my cold.

Osw. What has he done to you?

Hill. Frighted me horribly, he has not spoke a word
But what was terrible as the roaring of Cannons.

Alic. The Captain would be a rare Physician to cure
Ladies of the Ague, if frighting will do it.

Mat. What was you doing Captain?

Osw. Only saluting his Mistress.

Dur. Right, I gave her a Gun, and that is Sea-Courtship.

Alic. Your Complement was very loud.

Mat. Hillaria, admit him again into your Service,
He will forget he is a Soldier, and turn
Courtier for your sake.

Hill. No, let him still retain his valor,
But not o'reshoot himself in his Complements,
And express his Love in such terrible Rhetoric.

Dur. I know not how to court you in a Silken phrase,
But in downright Reality I will do it.
I am your Friend Star-board and Lar-board.

Hill. Then Captain, out with your Sails again;
Top and Top-gallant you shall be my Lover.

Mat. Well performed, Hillaria.

Hill. Whilst I my heart under your Conduct steer,
No coasting Pyrate Lovers I, nor Rovers fear.

The End of the Third Act.
Act the Fourth. Scene First.
Enter Aldernald and Matilda. Mat. THat my Enjoyment might be the greater,
I deferred the perusal of your Letter
'Till the Court-disturbances were past.
Peaceful minutes suit best with Love affairs.

Ald. I wish, Madam, you had read it in my absence,
And prevented my blushes.
[ Matilda opens the Letter, and reads. I have a Heart that is amorous, but a
Tongue
That is timorous, I would speak but dare not,
I would be silent but cannot; I am urged by Love,
Detained by Fear. If I conceal my Flame,
I torment my self, if I reveal it I offend her I love.
What is she, Aldernald?

Ald. A Princess.

Mat. A Princess!

Ald. Yes.

Mat. A Princess too!
Then I in vain my hopes of Love pursue.
What foreign Princess can this be?

Ald. Oh ill construction, unlucky evasion!
[ Matilda reads again. Thus am I doomed by rigorous Destiny
To be the scorn of Fate, Beauties Slave,
And Love's Martyr! It is for her I languish
That now reads this Paper. --
It is for her I languish, that now reads this Paper*
Oh were that meant to me! how fate conspires
To indulge my hopes, and flatter my desires!
Aside The Invention is pretty, this fully expresses
Your Love, and is an evidence too of your
Respect -- Your approach is modest, and such
As I could not blame,

Ald. How void of apprehension!
[Aside, She cannot, will not understand.

Mat. Now, Aldernald, I Will make you my Confident.
It was my fate once to admit of a flame,
Yet not unworthy my Breast, if Merit
May excuse the want of Royal descent.
For the man I loved, though not born to a Crown,
Had done Actions deserving one. --

Ald. He had more than a Kingdom in your Love.

Mat. But he never knew it: I concealed my Flame.

Ald. Much more than mine your silence was too blame.
Monarchs your Love upon their knees would meet,
And throw themselves and Scepters at your feet.
Then what would not the proudest Subject do?

Mat. But Modesty forbids our Sex to woo.

Ald. Love might have found ways without blame to impart
To him you loved the conquest of your heart.
Against your silence lies a just complaint.

Mat. My Birth too on my Love imposed restraint.

Ald. What Charms had he could such a Princess move?

Mat. Great Actions first disposed my heart to love,
And then his Picture. --

Ald. That Is but an empty Shade.

Mat. Yet on my heart a strong Impression made.
But when I saw him, he or felt no flame,
Or else like you was ignorant and tame.

Ald. What do I hear? her heart has been possessed,
[Aside. And Love still holds Dominion in her breast;
She does relate it with so much concern,
That I no hopes but of my Ruin learn.
A burning blush still covers all her face.

Mat. This stupid man will force me to disgrace.
I am not well on the sudden. --

Ald. Not well?

Mat. Some other time I Will tell you more, --
Since words will not, let that the mystery clear.

[Exit. [As she goes off, she pulls out a Handkerchief, which draws a Picture
out of her Pocket. Ald. Ha, what is this? --
Blessedsight! my Picture here
It is, at least it much resembles me.
It Is mine, if I can judge of what I see.
How dull have I been, not to apprehend
I am the man she loved?
And therefore did my Silence discommend.
My thoughts are now crowded with things she spoke,
How each the others meaning has mistook!
How both by Jealousy have been misled!
Each shunned the Approaches which the other made.
But though she love, and does her Love disclose,
A Princess cannot of her self dispose.
And when the King --

Enter Durzo. Durz. Admiral! Yes it is he; How he stands,
As if he was but the appearance of a man!
I have seen him in the heat of an Engagement,
In the posture of that Hero Angel,
That pitched the Devil headlong out of Heaven.
So ho, who is within?

[ Durzo knocks with his hand at Aldernald's breast. Ald. Are you here, Captain?

Durz. That Is a Lover's question right. B'ne let your Eyes
Answer you: but I thought you had not been at home,
Your Body looked as if 't had been the forsaken
Tenement of some great Soul, that stood empty,
And wanted an Inhabitant. Whirlwinds take
This Love, it has made a Fool of me too. When
I am spoken to, I am thinking of Ladies; my
Wits and Senses are gone a rambling, like Sailors
Gotten a shore in their Long Boat, and my Body
Left without motion like their Ship at Anchor.

Ald. You had fair warning not to fall in love.

Durz. Here Is the Devil on it, I know not how it
Comes about -- Well believe me, Admiral,
Tho Women from the Wast upwards look like
Angels, there is Witchcraft under their Petticoats.
And I Will tell you, if a Woman does but fetch
This long Heave, with the lifting up of her head,
And the bending in of her back, two little
Round plump pouting Devils peep from
Underneath her Gorget, which put such a glowing
Heat into my veins, that my blood in a moment
Grows too hot for its channels, and I could
O'retun a score of 'em.

Ald. You are heated at the very thoughts of Women.

Durz. Now I am in one of my Fits. Oh Admiral
That I had but half a dozen Ladies now in my Cabin,
How I Would rummidg 'em together!
I Would make 'em smoke again --

Ald. Since you are so hot, take a Walk with me
In the open Air to cool you.

Durz. That will not do it; if we were going to engage,
Perhaps the loss of a Leg, or an Arm, or forty
Ounces of blood, might something abate my Fever.

Ald. Your Distemper has gotten such hold,
That you must lose a Leg, or an Arm,
For every handsome Lady you see,
Or you will not be thorougly cured.

Durz. Say you so, then I Will indure't still,
And try what time and chance will do.

[Exeunt. Enter King, and Alfreda. King. Have you, Alfreda, considered his
crimes,
And whom he has offended?

Alfr. I have considered that your clemency
In this act, will most brave and God-like show,
Because you pardon wrongs done to your self.

King. That for a Lover is too Heroical,
With less regret I could pardon him
Had robbed me of a Crown, than thee.
The King would pardon him, but the Lover cannot.

Alfr. Is the Lover than the King less generous?
Forgive him, Sir, if but to show
You can be to your self a King.

King. That he durst offend, declared the greatness
Of his Love; to forgive him will show mine less.

Alfr. No, his offenses were not proofs of Love,
But Self-interest; but your forgiveness
Will be an argument of a generous passion.
He acted for himself, but you for her you loved.

King. How should an ill-living Divine, who preaches
Against Licentiousness, convert his Hearers,
When he is himself the greatest Libertine?
So do thy Words and Actions disagree,
Whilst you endeavor to make me tame,
You, Alfreda, act the Tyrant.

Alfr. Not I, but Virtue is the Tyrant.
Virtue directs to keep your Passions
In severest awe, -- to treat 'em like Slaves
If they rebel, to banish 'em.

King. When Love first took possession of my Breast,
He fortified so fast, and is so strongly seated,
He will not now be forced to quit his Hold.

Alfr. Though not your Love, you may overcome your Rage.

King. My Anger from my injured Love does rise,
'Till that abates, I cannot this assuage.

Alfr. But if from Love you cut off all supplies,
His strength will weaker grow, his power decay.

King. From your bright beauty it receives its force.

Alfr. Then from my beauty turn your eyes away.

King. But that will not my thoughts from you divorce.
My fancy still will represent you fair,
And I in all your Charms shall see you there.

Alfr. Though still your fancy does my Form pursue,
It represents me in a Husband's arms,
Of me it gives you but a hopeless view:
Love stripped of hope the heart but gently warms.

King. How you a Lover's hopes destroy, beware,
We are all Rage and Madmen in despair:
If you would anger from my Soul remove,
Say something that is kind, and speak of Love.
Treat me as you would do a froward Child,
Sooth me 'till I Am by flattery beguiled.

Alfr. Whilst Ethelwold in Prison you detain,
To 'scape the censures of the misjudging Crowd,
I even that common freedom must refrain,
Which is to all the Court besides allowed.
I must reserved and sullen now appear,
Or every gazing eye, and harkening ear,
Will take false measures of my mirth and me.
My Lord, --
Already wants no ground for Jealousy.

King. Must Liberty, must it to one be given?
Whose crimes offend beauty, a King, and Heaven.

Alfr. Whilst he by your commands remains confined,
You imprison too the freedom of my mind,

King. Command my death, but not his liberty.

Alfr. Restoring him you set Alfreda free.

King. But freed, what will the fair Alfreda do,
When she has power to grant, and I must sue.
Quickly impose on me some lesser task,
For this you will want power to requite.

Alfr. A meaner favor I disdain to ask.

King. Meet me then, Alfreda, meet me to night.
In the Garden when it is dark.

Alfr. Meet him? what for?
I Will meet you, Sir.

King. To Ethelwold his Freedom I restore.
You Will meet?

Alfr. I will. -- You Will not recall this Grant?

King. My Promise firm as Fates Decree shall stand.
A King's word I gage.

Alfr. If from me you want a Pledge,
Sir, in assurance take my hand --

Enter Aldernald. King. Come, Aldernald, be thou a Witness,
With what severity I treat my self;
That robbed of all my happiness, resolve to lose
The pleasure of Revenge, and neither to complain;
Nor punish the Offender.

Ald. The noblest conquest is over our selves.

King. You left me a King, an angry Jove,
Then I held Thunder in my hand,
Of which Alfreda has disarmed me; now
Only to my self I am a Tyrant.
Go, -- let Ethelwold have his Enlargement,
Tell him my after-rage he need not fear,
My Passions I enslave, and him let loose
To play the luxurious Wanton, in the yet
Untasted pleasures of thy fair Sisters love.

Ald. It Is a less glory to conquer Kingdoms,
Than thus to subdue our Passions.

King. Now fair cruel one, let him enjoy thy Love,
Whilst I in secret mourn my unkind Fate.
If any Sigh by chance shall reach thy Ear,
Let it not breed disquiets in you,
For after this your pity will be vain,
Nor will I of your cruelty complain.

[Exit King. Alfr. So, this hard Task is over.

Ald. I know not which has most generous been,
You Alfreda to entreat, or the King
To grant a Pardon, fot both alike were injured.

Alfr. Ethelwold perhaps will make but an ill Return,
Advise him to correct his jealous temper,
For Jealousy is the restless worm of the Brain
As Guilt is of the Conscience,
Full of causeless fears and apprehensions.

Ald. This Act of Virtue will compose his thoughts,
And wipe away his fears, -- but
Remit the management of this to me,
I Will undertake to cure his Jealousy.

[Exit. Alfr. I am run into a Labyrinth of dangers,
And know not which way to escape:
The Queen is suspicious, the King amorous,
My Husband jealous. -- To gain him Liberty,
I have engaged to meet the King to night:
If I do not, I fear his anger will relapse;
If I do, I expose my Honor. --
Unfortunate state! I have no Guide,
No Counselor if I err. -- Malicious Fortune
Has so contrived it, -- the fault must be all
My own, -- let Heaven, that knows my Innocence,
Take care of it.
Enter the Queen and Ladies. The Queen brings anger in her brow:
I Will stand the shock. --

Queen. Ladies, why do you follow me?
Why do you press on my Retirement?

1 Lady. Madam, you are melancholy,
We hope our company may divert it.

Queen. Why this care of me? why to me so kind?

2 Lad. It is our duty, Madam.

Queen. Your duty, to whom?

2 Lady. To you, Madam.

Queen. Why, who am I?

1 Lad. You are the Queen, Madam.

Queen. The Queen? how you all mistake?
There is the Queen, you misplace your Service;
Go attend on her, that is the Queen.
You seem not to believe me --
Does not the whole Court bow to her?
Do they not in Crowds follow her?
What State, what Train have I? who follows me
Except your selves? Foolish Virgins,
There make your Court!

Alfr. She is much troubled in mind, and her discontent
Reflects on me with great severity.

Queen. Go, be Attendants there; blessed with her influence
You Will pass through merry Spheres, she will conduct you
To Courts of State, and Palaces of delight,
Where Kings shall make Love, and Princes court you;
Where all the year is spent in Balls, Masks, Treats,
And your whole lives in pleasures melt away.

Alfr. My Soul, stand firm to generous Resolutions.
It is not noble to insult over Griefs.

Queen. I shall lead you but to silent Grotto's,
To lonely Walks, and melancholy Groves,
The Recesses of the Forsaken and Afflicted,
Places sit only to sigh and mourn in,
Where rapt in serious contemplation,
I shall a while forget my sorrows,
And though I weep, and sigh, not know I do.

Alfr. The King's late Resolutions impressed
These mournful characters so deeply on her heart.

1 Lad. Let us still follow her.

[Ex. Queen and Ladies. Alfr. I have overcome all that was Woman in me.
Inspired by my injuries, I could severely
Have retorted, -- But that had been too
Womanish. -- The wrongs thou did were
In obedience to a Father, -- thy Ignorance
In part excuses the Guilt.
But here he comes --
Enter Ruthin. Whose confederacy was malice and design,
For he knew the secrets of the King's soul.
Sir, I have heard the Queen lament,
And seen her Griefs.
How soon they are grown to an excess!

Ruth. Tides blown by strong winds role in apace,
And quickly swell above their banks.
Her sorrow is already next distraction,
And just breaking over the bounds of Reason.

Alfr. The expressions of her Discontent were such
As called my Honor into question,
And arraigned my Virtue.

Ruth. There needs no greater evidence to show
The sudden discomposure of her mind,
Than her Doubts of Virtue, that is guarded
By duty and obedience to a Father:
By the Glories of a Family,
None more Noble, none more Ancient;
By Love and Friendship to a Brother,
By his acquired Fame and high Renown,
By Fath and Loyalty to a Husband,
And Conjugal affection. --

Alfr. True, my Lord.

Ruth. Though urged by Love and Inclination,
No Lady but would mak't her choice
Rather to sacrifice her life to Virtue,
And die the Martyr of her Passions,
Than part with Honor, when the loss of it
Would taint her whole blood, and entail disgrace
On two such Great and Noble Families.

Alfr. Right my Lord --

Ruth. For such a deed the present Age in Songs
Would celebrate her Shame, and History
To after-ages bear her memory
With long Traditions of her Infamy,
And on her name fix an eternal Blot.

Alfr. Through these aggravations I perceive
Your fears, my Lord; but know, that I have yet
Than these a stronger Guard, my Virtue.
Perchance some Lady of a common temper
Gladly would embrace the fair occasion,
Grow proud of her interest, and meanly
Insult over you, a Husband, and a Queen,
And count such Revenge glorious.
But my Thoughts are more transcendent.
Ethelwold already owes his life to me.
My Lord, come with me to the Queen,
I have something to impart to her and you
Will ease your minds of half your fears,
And take away your mean Suspicions.
If ought I can contribute to her peace
I Will do it, the Revenge I prosecute
Shall be to make you all ashamed,
And blush at your so vulgar apprehensions.

[Exit. Ruth. Virtue may protect her, but her absence
Is the only remedy against the King's love:
Be her Absence then decreed, be it,
The constant subject of my meditation.

[Exit. Enter Oswald and Durzo. Osw. But, Captain, you should first have
parlied,
And demanded satisfaction fairly.
Did you think to take her heart by storm,
As men do Towns?

Durz. It was more like a Soldier.

Osw. But not like a Lover. Love is a gentle Passion --
Here she comes, you had best steer a new course.

Enter Hillaria. Hill. What, in the dumps, Captain?

Osw. He Is in a contemplation of Love.

Hill. Let not such idle thoughts trouble your head,
I am almost weary on it my self.

Durz. Say sou so?

Hill. Yes, you and I will be friends for all that:
Such a trifle as Love shall break no squares.

Durz. There Is the Devil of Love now.
Had she been as forward as I am,
I had been indiff'rent as she is;
That is one Experiment I have made in this Voyage.

Hill. When Lovers pause, it is a sign Love cools;
And since you know not what to think on it,
E'ne let us fairly part stakes -- I will have
My heart again, and you shall have yours;
Thus we will make a handsome Retreat,
And so Captain tack about to the next.

Osw. A fair proposal.

Durz. But by your leave, in the faith of a Soldier,
It Is more honorable to stand in to rights,
Than to make a Tacque, and say and sing
The Devil's head off. --
I will judge of Love by the Rules of Honor,
Therefore sink or swin I Will bear up close with you.

Hill. I like a man of resolution well;
Then give me thy hand, my trusty Tarpolin,
You shall find me no Flincher neither

[Exeunt. Enter Ethelwold, and Aldernald. Eth. Which ought I most to admire,
The King's high act of Clemency,
Or Alfreda's unexampled Generosity?
Revenge had been a milder punishment:
For conscious of the Injuries I have done,
I cannot without blushes meet his Pardon,
Or her Love, and must wear a Shame about me,
As lasting as the memory of these Favors.

Ald. You acknowledge the wrongs done to the King?

Eth. With so great a sense of sorrow,
That were not thy Sister a Heaven of Blessings,
My Penitence would rob me of future joy.

Ald. Nor do you longer doubt my Sister's virtue?

Eth. Her Virtue rather makes me doubt,
That I have sinned beyond repentance,
Offending so much Innocence.
Oh that 'twere permitted we might exchange,
Or could recall our Matrimonial Vows;
Then would I, to appear grateful,
Resign my interest in Alfreda
To the King, and to both be just.

Ald. To them you cannot, but to me you may.

Eth. The injuries I have done your Family,
Are too great to be repaired.

Ald. They are then too great to be forgiven
But to the brave, no wrongs can be above
The satisfaction of the Sword, -- That is the
Justice, That the Requital I demand.

Eth. The King and Alfreda are generous Examples;
Will Aldernald less noble be?
'Twas in them a more Glorious Act
To pardon than to punish; but in me
Forgiveness is dishonorable. I am free
To call thee to a strict account: thy Lies
raised thoughts in my breast, which like a Nest
Of Snakes, shot their poisonous Stings
At my Prince's Virtue: Thy Falsities
Fooled me to Actions, which I blush to own.
Come on, the Valiant never capitulate.

Eth. If I appear to want a courage,
Or my arm but feebly guide my Sword,
Think it is the love I bear thy Sister
Directs it slowly to the Brother's heart,
Within me is a Power that takes your part.

[They fight. Enter King Alfreda, and Guards. King. Hold, part 'em.

Ald. We are prevented.

Alfr. Oh my Lord, you bleed!

Eth. To my Breast he has added one wound more,
The Sister's beauty, and the Brother's valor,
Alike successful prove.
Against your Eyes is no resistance,
Against his Sword no defense.

King. What, Aldernald, provoked you to this deed?

Ald. Sir, has he not offended?

King. I sent you to restore his Liberty,
I had pardoned him.

Ald. Yes, Sir, Offenses done to your self,
Not those he did our Family:
He ignobly sought my Sister's love,
With lies and gross inventions abused
My Fathers ears and mine, and drew me in
To be his property.
These affronts required my Sword.

King. Thy scrupulous Honor has too far engaged thy valor.

Ald. In honor I could not less than fight him.

Alfr. Brother, your Presumption was too great,
When you thought your self concerned to punish,
Where the King had mercy shown.

Ald. Forgiveness is in Kings a mercy, 'cause
They are above us, and have power to punish;
But when the Offended and Offenders equal are,
Forgiveness looks like want of Courage.
And if you well consider Circumstances,
You will find, Alfreda, he had done wrongs,
Which the Kings Pardon could not wipe away,
And those concerned the honor of our Family:
For those no one but I was fit to call him
To account.

Alfr. You mistake, those wrongs were mine,
Till I had declared them Injuries,
They were not so to you -- to me belonged
The Prerogative to Revenge, or Pardon:
Nor could your Love, or Hatred claim in him
An Interest, but subordinate to mine.

Eth. Cease, cease this Generous Strife.
You, Alfreda, have too obliging been,
Me you forgave, and will you not your brother?
His Crime, if it be one to vindicate
The honor of his Family, was at least necessary.

Alfr. He has been too forward, and assumed too much;
A Sister's Husband cannot be a Brother's Enemy,
'Till she has first declared him so.

Eth. I only wish his cause had been less just,
For I have so offended him, thy Self,
My King, and Heaven, that if my Death
Could atone for my Offenses,
I Would beg it from this wound;
For though thou art a Heaven of Blessings,
The sense of my Guilt in possessing thee
Is a torment above the joy I have
To see my self enriched.

King. Aldernald, your quarrel must end here,
Let this be the last resentment of your wrong;
That Generosity, which so highly you
Did applaud in me, now imitate.
If in me Forgiveness was a worthy act,
It Is an Example fit for you to follow.

Ald. When you command, my obedience
Wants not to be prompted by Example,

Alfr. My Lord, how do you, how do you feel your wound?

Eth. I believe it slight,
But with loss of blood grow faint.

King. Lead him off --
When the Surgeons have searched his wounds,
Let me, Alfreda, from you be informed
[Guards lead Ethelwold off. What their judgments are of the danger.

Alfr. Sir I will not fail.

[ Exit Aldernald. King. To meet to night in the Garden.

Alfr. Yes.

King At the Grotto?

Alfr. Yes, Sir, at the Grotto.

King. I have performed my promise.

Alfr. I le be as punctual.

King. This accident lets you command your liberty.

Alfr. Which I Will employ in thanking you for Ethelwold's.

King. When it is dark I will expect you.

Alfr. When it is dark, you shall not expect
But find me there.

[ Exit Alfr. King. Fly fast you lazy minutes,
Swift as my Wishes fly,
And with more nimble wings bear hence the Light.
Let Day resign its Empire soon,
And Night set up it is black Standard.
I am impatient, but why am I so?
What do I hope, design, or what resolve?
Oh I dare not examine my thoughts,
They are yet confused and indistinct.
My Wishes are unformed, my Resolutions
Not quite born; and yet I think, hope, wish,
Design, resolve, but what I know not.
Honor and Love for Victory struggling are,
And make my breast their present seat of War.

Exit. The End of the Fourth Act.
Act the Fifth. Scene First.
Enter King Ethelwold, Aldernald, Ruthin, Alfreda, and Ladies Attendants. King.
THis, Alfreda, should have been
A night of pleasure to you and Ethelwold,
A night of Ecstasy and Delights;
But this amorous Conflict must be deferred
'Till Ethelwold recovers his health.

Eth. My wound is slight, the Surgeons
Have declared it so; but with all
Humble thankfulness I own your care
Of my health, as an Honor and a Blessing.

King. I Would have you meet your Bride in your
Full strength, in all your vigor.

Alfr. Since you have begun to make his health
Your care; Sir, command him to let it be
His own chief concern, (...) too rashly
To expose himself abro^.
The open air, late hours, (...) Court-attendance
[ To Eth. You should avoid.

Enter Ruthin at distance. Eth. Deprived of you, how shall I pass this night
Without sad thoughts and great inquietude?
Like one just grasping of his long wished store
Of wealth, I am snatched back.

King. Commit your Lord to my care.
Good night, Alfreda.

Alfr. Good night, my Lord.

Eth. Soft and gentle slumbers close your Eyes.

Ald. Your Wedding night is yet to come.

[Exit Alfreda and Ladies. Eth. How many unexpected accidents, retarda
Lover's progress, and delay his bliss?

King. To divert your thoughts from Melancholy,
And to give my own mind a Truce from cares,
We Will pass one hour at Chess,
You have excellent cunning in that Game;
I have many nights tried the Experiment,
And found it against the minds distempers
A most prevailing remedy. -- Come,
I know your sleep will be more sound and quiet.

[Exeunt Ald. and Osw. Ruth. My Lord all this is design.
The King and Alfreda have appointed
A private meeting this night in the Garden,
Near the Marble Grotto.

Eth. O subtlety, O woman Devil!

Ruth. Be calm, but circumspect.
This my friendship obliged me to discover.

Eth. I thank you for your intelligence.

Ruth. No ceremony, but away.

Eth. Woman, woman, what art thou but deceit!

Exit Eth. Ruth. I Will keep him thus alarmed, his Jealousy
May rouse his fury to some desperate act.
From Court this will induce him to remove her,
Perhaps he may think Heaven a fit place for her.

[Exit. Scene 2d.
Enter Oswald and Durzo. Osw. Well met, Captain, how go squares
Now 'twixt you and your Mistress?

Durz. She has sent me a Letter here,
I wanted you to read it to me.

Osw. Cannot you read?

Durz. Neither write nor read, it is out of my Element:
The Sea breeds Soldiers, but not Scholars.

Osw. You shall hear it then.
Oswald reads the Letter. My roaring Boy, I can love no longer at your fierce
rate, my heart is sailing under another Convoy; give Chase to a fresh Mistress,
I am making all Sail after a new Rigged Gallant, and now bid you defiance, and
so a boon Voyage to you, Captain, and Farewell.

Hillaria.



Durz. What, turned Renegade?

Osw. Short warning, this.

Durz. Steal away like a cowardly Enemy in a dark night.

Enter Hillaria and Alicia, led over the Stage by two Courtiers. Osw. See,
she is not out of Hemisphere,
Give her chase, you see how she is manned.

Durz. Meer' Hulls of men.

Osw. They Tack about again.

Hill. How dejected my Lover looks, now I Have taken
Away his Commission!

1 Court. Captain, what think you?

Durz. Think I.

1 Court. Of Love?

Durz. As of Folly.

2 Court. Is it not a fine Pastime?

Durz. Yes for fools.

1 Court. What think you of Women?

Durz. As of light Sailers.

Omnes. Ha, ha, he.

Osw. That Shot hits you 'twixt wind and water.

Durz. Or as of Ships that want Ballast,
That are tossed about with every Wave,
And cannot be steered in any true course.

Omnes. Ha, ha, he.

Durz. Do you play with my anger?
Am I so tame to be laughed at?
Sure I have seemed more terrible,
When with this Sword I have lopt off limbs,
Strewn the Decks with Carcasses, turned Fleets
To floating Hospitals, sent Navies to their Ports
To cut down Masts, and hew the Timber of their
Shattered Vessels into wooden Legs and Crutches,
To underprop the Criples they brought home.
Love, have thou disarmed my Looks of Manhood?
Phew -- with that Gale be gone.

Omnes. Ha, ha, he.

Durz. Are you laughing again? have amongst you Piccaroons.

Osw. Hold Captain, what do you mean?

Durz. I Will shatter their Tacklin, --

Osw. Let 'em go, they are not worth pursuit*

Hill. Come on, bold Captain, if you are for fighting,
See here your Enemy.

Durz. Beauty, that raises storms of Love,
Allays those of Anger; you the Object,
I can look my self into a Calm.

Hill. Captain, you have a Qualm coming
Over your stomach, you are either Sea-sick,
Or Lovesick still.

Alic. Captain, Love is still in Port, he went not out
With that strong Puff.

Osw. No, Love has not yet weighed Anchor.

Hill. Captain, if you are not for fighting, let
Me know what you think of Love in good earnest.

Durz. Love is a Sea, a dangerous Sea,
Where Wind and Tide are still contrary.
Men are the Barks that venture out,
Whose ruins still its waves conspire.

Alic. But what are women in this Ocean, Captain?

Durz. You are Pirates that rob us of our hearts:
You are Laplanders, that give us a fair wind
To leave safe Harbors, and when we are out at Sea
Make it swell to a Tempest to drown us.
I have out-rid the Storm, thanks to my
Lusty Vessel, and now being gotten safe into
Harbor, can look back and say,
Yonder I had like to have suffered Wreck.

Osw. Well said, Captain, you have given the women
A whole Broadside.

Hill. For all that, I see he is but a Fresh Water
Lover yet; now you think your self past danger,
You are in greatest peril to be cast away.
What think you, if that Letter, which raised
This Tempest, was but a plot to see
How my Lover could brook a Rival.

Osw. What Wind do you call this? By what Point
Of the Compass will you sail now?

Durz. I think I had best tack about again
And make what have I can to fall
In a Stern of her.

Hill. That it was so, here is my hand on it.
Now if you dare put off to Sea again,
My heart shall run the Risque with yours
In all adventures.

Alic. It Is very true, this plot was but to try your love.

Durz. Why then I Will count my self your Lover still.
And if the wind hold thus fair for me
You Will quickly lie by the Lee.

[ To Oswold. Osw. You are not quite undeceived yet,
She Is not my Mistress but my Sister.

Durz. If you are not my Rival, I fear no Reprizal.

Alic. You must reckon our two Gallants your Enemies
No more, their Rival-ship is ended.

Hill. They have struck Sail to you:
You now with Triumph in Love's Ocean steer,
Calm is the Sea, and from all Pirates clear.

[Exeunt. The Scene opens, and discovers the King and Ethelwold playing at
Chess, Courtiers looking on. After a while enter Oswald and Durzo. Osw. How
stands the Game?

1 Court. The Earl won the first,
But of this the King has the advantage*

King. Sit down, and play my Game, if this end
Before my Return, begin another, Oswald.

[Exeunt the King and Oswold. A Courtier sits down to play. After a while
Ethelwold rises. Eth. Cosen, I Will trust my Game to your management;
Pray use your skill 'till my Return.

[Exit. [Another Courtier sits down to play. The Scene shuts upon them. [Scene
4th.
Enter the Queen and Alfreda in the Garden. Queen. This Secret you have
revealed, takes from me
All suspicions of your Virtue.
I have not now one jealous thought of you;
But the King still does, and will love you.

Alfr. But after this night I will no more
Be seen at Court, not that I doubt my Virtue
Or my Courage; no, Madam, it is for your sake
I go, because I know my absence will with
More speed and ease restore you to the King's love:
I would else stand my ground, and my Virtue
Should from this Trial grow exemplar.

Queen. Let the excess of love I bear the King
Excuse the wrongs my Jealousies have done,
Which are so much the greater, because
The Virtue they have offended is so highly eminent.

Alfr. That my Honor may not receive a blemish
From this nights private conference,
I have entreated your presence in the Garden.
Assisted by the darkness of the night,
You may, unperceived by the King,
Hear our Discourse, and thence know his intents.

Queen. My heart is on the sudden much oppressed,
Something fills my mind with sad presages,
And makes me grow suspicious of the event.

Alfr. Those thoughts are the dictates of your Melancholy.

Queen. I would fain retreat.

Alfr. Oh Madam, let me importune your stay,
To witness for me, if by any chance
Our meeting be discovered, that nothing past
Injurious to my Lord, or unworthy
A Ladies public vindication.

Queen. Hark, I heard the Garden-gate clap too.

Alfr. He is coming, stand concealed.

[The Queen absconds. Enter the King and Oswold in disguise, with a dark
Lanthorn, and a naked Sword. King. Here, expect my Return.

[ To Oswold. Alfr. Who Is there?

[The King advances. King. It Is I, the King, Oh my Alfreda.
Oh most blessed and happy minute of my life!

Alfr. Why are you, Sir, so much rejoiced?

King How sweet are stolen minutes in love!
Of this kind compliance That be the Reward.

[Puts a Casket of Jewels into Alfreda's hand. Alfr. What is it, Sir?

King. A rich Present of Jewels,
Wealth enough to purchale a Kingdom,
Or ransom a Captive Monarch.

Alfr. To receive so rich a Present from you
Will surely bring my Honor into question,
And to my Husband's Jealousies
Add the censures of the world.

King. Take 'em, and with 'em take my heart.
Take me a King, one that has power
To authorize and justify his Love,
One that will be thy Lover and Protector.

Alfr. Sir, I have now a Lover, and Protector,
That has than yours a more unlimited Power.

King. Than mine?

Alfr. My honor forfeited, your Power can weak
Defense afford. None to my face perchance
May dare to call me Strumpet, but in
Their hearts they will brand me with that Title,
And there call you Tyrant. Now I have
Heaven for my Protector; Heaven, that
Protects the virtuous, and the innocent.

King. Sin repeated, and to a Habit grown,
Removes us from the state of Virtue,
But one single act will not destroy
Thy Innocence.

Alfr. For ever it would blot my Soul, and
Darken my honor.

King. The world shall never know it.

Alfr. It never shall, for I will never --

King. Oh hold --

Alfr. What wou^d you Sir?

King. Lead me to thy Apartment,
And there make satisfaction for
Ethelwold's Crimes. I would have thee
Give thy self up to me, and love.

Alfr. Your discourse is too urging,
I can no longer bear it.

King. Speak lower.

Alfr. Let them speak low that speak amiss*
I speak what I ought, and fear not to be heard.

King. Are you then resolved not to comply?

Alfr. From a woman of my quality
That Question for an Answer merits Silence or Death.

King. Comply then, and kill me after.

Alfr. No, kill me first, and live in peace; kill me,
And with my blood quench your unlawful fires.

King. Behold a King that languishes,
A King that courts you with
His Wealth and State, and to your merits
Dedicates his Life and Honors.

Alfr. Oh King, Here at your feet a wretched woman falls,
That with her tears and prayers beseeches you,
That asks for nothing but her Liberty;
And, except her honor, gives you all,
And to ransom That, offers her life.

King. Without that you give me nothing.

Alfr. I give you all I can.

King. Your love --

Alfr. That is my Husband's Right.

King. He is a Traitor, and his life is mine.

Alfr. Your Pardon has acquitted him.

King. He is still in my power; his Life,
And your Honor are at my mercy.

Alfr. Your word is past and cannot be recalled.

King; I am a King, and can do what I please:
And now, Alfreda, as a King I speak,
I love, and must enjoy.

Alfr. Since as a King you have declared your mind,
And as Monarch of these Dominions.
I will return you my Answer,
As I am a Queen of my own free Will,
And Mistress of my Affections.
Your Love from me shall meet with no return:
If me you love, with hopeless fires you burn.

King. I can act too as a King, but in deeds
You want power to show your self a Queen:
See there --

[Gives a sign. Oswald at a distance shows a Light, and a naked Sword. Alfr.
What means this Sight?

King. See there the fate of Traitors,
Of such Traitors as is Ethelwold.

Alfr. What shall I do?

King. Besides the fate that threatens him, consider
You are a Woman, alone, defenseless;
I have Power, have Followers, and am resolute.
Retreat not, you are guarded on every side.

Alfr. Sir, I request one favor.

King. What is it?

Alfr. Sir, give me but my choice which to part with,
My Honor, or my Life.

King. Life must not be at your dispose.
I love, I burn, and must quench my Flame.

Alfr. If I consent not, what can you do?

King. Force you.

Alfr. who values not life, fears not force.

King. Force must prevail.

Alfr. Then force opposed by force must be
The remedy. You are resolved to attempt my Honor?

King. I am resolved to procure my peace.

Alfr. To this then I owe my deliverance
[Puls out a dagger. To this, which my care provided for a refuge.
Come, begin your assault --
Come Sir, make your Amorous approaches:
See, I Am ready to receive your Embraces.

King. What art thou doing, my Life?
Oh Alfreda, what are your intentions?

Alfr. Approach not, If you do,
You press this forward to my heart.
Tho you would not grant me my choice which to part with,
Life or Honor, yet I Will give you your freedom,
To see me live with honor, or with honor die.
If, barbarous man, I snatch my life from thee,
My Honor will eternally be safe.

King. Oh cruel one, what do I behold?

Alfr. A woman that has courage above her Sex,
And honor equal to the best.
You behold a Ladies hand armed against
Her own soft breast, and ready
TO encounter Death to 'scape thy Tyranny;
One that by death will immortalize her Name.

King. Unheard of bravery!

Alfr. Pause not but away, hence,
Or this minute is my last.
Resolve with speed, for I am resolute.

King. I would not kill thee, cruel one.

Alfr. Be gone then, Sacrilegious man!

King. If in despair I part, I die.

Alfr. Your longer stay kills me.

King. Live, and I Will be gone.

Alfr. Be gone, that I may live.

King. She has a hardened Virtue, she is brave
To the last degree.

Alfr. If you return, this posture I resume.

King. Grant me, Alfreda, one request.

Alfr. It must be very small.

King. Consent I may leave thee a few minutes,
And find thee here at my return.
In my absence think on Ethelwold's Treason,
Think by his guilt how wretched I am made,
That some atonement for his crimes should be,
That for his grant of life thou art indebted.

Alfr. I will.

King. Love is the sum I ask.
This night let me be blessed with thy Embraces,
And after live ever free from importunities.

Alfr. Sir?

King. A sudden answer cannot be favorable,
Keep it back 'till my return; but then
Let thy first words declare thy Resolution.

Alfr. They shall.

Alfreda enters the Grotto. The King goes to Oswold. Oswold appears. King. Thy
unalterable Resolution.
Oswald?

Osw. Sir.

King. She Is invincible.
What other woman could have stood this test?
Calms delude her not, nor Storm; affright her,
Go bring Ethelwold into the Garden;
I Will act it over again, let him stand concealed,
Tell him I do this to give him a proof,
That his past Suspicions wronged her Virtue,
And to root out remaining jealousies,
Find out her Brother too.
[Enter Alicia with Lights. Aldernald and Matilda at a distance. What Lights
are these?

Alic. Go forward with your Lights
To the Princes Lodgings.

[Exit Lights. Osw. The Princess is going to bed,
And Aldernald attends her cross the Garden.

King. Go quickly, bring Ethelwold here,
I Will speak to him my self.

[ Exit Oswald. Ald. Love has the the same dimensions as our Souls;
It Is as impossible that either should admit
Degrees, as Parts.

Mat, Yes, Aldernald, I want no Arguments to convince me
That a real Lover's flame breaks forth like
Lightning, in a moment, and at one flash
Shows all that Heaven inflamed in which it is.

Ald. This obliging acknowledgment makes my hopes
Grow up to confidence, that as you have done me
An Act of Grace, with circumstances so
Convincing, to give my Passion Language,
And to raise my humble thoughts to an
Aspiring flame; that now you will complete
My happiness, and let me here receive
Assurance, that this presumption of my love
Is not esteemed a Crime.

Mat. In my blushes you may read my mind,
They too officiously betray my heart,
And like the Flag set up in Towns besieged,
Give joyful notice of Surrender.

Ald. The blessings this minute gives, are greater
Than all my former life e're knew.

King. Their conference will hold too long.

[The king makes a noise. Mat. What noise was that?

Ald. I heard some one tread!

Mat. Quickly let us shift our ground,
Or rather quit me here, that we may not
Be surpised together, and our love from
Thence discoursed in public.

[The King treads again. Ald. The noise is that way, this leads to your Lodgings.

Mat. I Will find the way alone.

Ald. Let me not lose one step of this pleasant Journey,
And by the way I Will make you Vows, shall show
My love of an Immortal birth.

Exeunt Aldernald and Matilda, The King follows them. Enter the Queen and
Alfreda. Queen. They are gone.

Alfr. It was Aldernald's voice.

Queen. 'Twas he and the Princess, Success attend their
Vows. But what do you resolve on? the King
Will soon return.

Alfr. I have found the means, he shall meet a kind
Reception; when he finds me compliant to his love
He Will be all on fire, and in eager have
Hurry me away; I Will speak to him,
And to all he says return an Answer.
But when he leads me off I Will step back,
And into his hand put yours:
The Night is favorable to our design,
It Is very dark; me he shall court,
But you he must enjoy.

Queen. A fainting joy spreads gently over my breast,
But how can that approach my heart
In the crowd of so many fears?

Ald. Madam, be comforted, your Embraces have charms
Will re-instate you in his love,
Make him repent his rash unlawful Oath,
And establish a blessed peace betwixt you.

Queen. I fear the deceit will more enrage him.

Alfr. It cannot, at least your issue, if it successful
Prove to that degree, will inherit his Crown.

Queen. Hark, I hear a noise in the Garden.

Alfr. Be near me, let me hold your hand in mine;
When I deliver you to his, suffer your self
To be led in the dark to my Apartment.

Queen. You instruct, and Love persuades me to comply.

Enter Ethelwold. Eth. No Whisper yet has reached my Ear,
They Are very still in their Amors.
Oh they cannot vent their breath for Kisses;
They are close, close, and silent,
I am near the place.

Alfr. Sir, is it you?

Eth. It Is I.

Alfr. I fear my late Repulse has much incensed you,
That it has armed your Love with Rage,
And now that you return with fiercer resolutions,
And more determined to execute your purpose.
But now with love alone make your approach,
For since your departure, I have considered
Your promise, which o'recomes my obstinacy.
Pardon me, Sir, for first transgressions
Are not without great reluctance.
From one bred up in the strict Rules of Virtue;
Honor parts not without strong convulsions,
As life from men by nature strong and
Healthful; If this night I yield to your Embraces,
Will you no more disturb my quiet?
Shall I not again be urged by you
To wrong my Honor, and my Lord?

Eth. Never.

Alfr. Shall your Hate not persecute him,
Nor your Love me? Shall both then live in peace?

Eth. Ever.

Alfr. This one thing more, Sir, you must promise,
Removed from hence to use no more discourse,
Lest your voice betray my Honor;
Nor expect any light in my Apartment:
Let all be done in silence and in darkness,
Now I have consented I hate the light,
And should you see my face, you would find it all confused,
Let Night conceal my Blushes and my Guilt.

Eth. It shall.

Alfreda puts the Queens hand into his, and changes places. Enter King and
Aldernald. King. Oswold's not yet returned?

[ Ethelwold kisses the Queens hand, and draws out a Dagger. Ald. This may
better Ethelwold's opinion
Of her, it cannot mine.
What she has already done, is proof enough
To me, and should be so to him.

Alfr. Now, Sir, take my hand, and as you please
Dispose of me, but take care to preserve my Honor.

Eth. I will.
[Pistols the Queen. Die, false lascivious Woman.

[She falls. Queen. Oh I am killed.

Alfr. Oh Murder Treason, Treason Murder!

Ald. Treason --

King. Guards --

Alfr. Treason --

Ald. Retire, Sir, I Will stand 'twixt you and danger.

King. Lights, lights --

[The King goes off. Ald. Who Is there? stand.

Eth. I will not.

Ald. Stand, or dye.

Eth. Avoid, be gone.

Ald. Who e're thou art thou shall.

[They fight. Alfr. Oh Madam speak! Oh she is dead!

Ald. Thy Career is stopped,
[Eth. falls. We shall see who thou art,

Alfr. I heard Swords clash -- Oh my fears!

Ald. Who Is there?

Alfr. A Woman half dead with fear!

Ald. Is not that Alfreda's voice?

Alfr. Brother!

Ald. What Is the matter?

Alfr. Oh the Queen, the Queen is murdered!

Ald. Here then lies the Murderer.

Alfr. Oh what have you done! you have killed the King!

Ald. The King?

Enter Matilda, Ladies, and Lights at one door. The King, Oswald, Durzo,
Courtiers, and Guards, at the other. Osw. What Cries are these?

Alfr. The Queen is murdered!

Mat. Murdered -- She Is dead!

[Runs to the body. Ald. See, the King is safe.

Alfr. The Innocent then is fallen by your hand,
And the guilty Murderer lives,
Tyrant, Barbarian, Murderer!

King. Why this unjust Accusation?

Alfr. Me you thought you had murdered,
But the mistake proves yet more fatal
Than your Intention; there behold your Queen,
The best of Women, murdered!

King. Murdered, by whom? had he ten thousand lives,
My revenge should reach 'em all.

Alfr. Oh rare Dissembler!

Osw. This is my Lord Ethelwold.

Alfr. My Husband slain too, Oh Monster, Monster!
Oh my dear Lord! --

[Runs to embrace Eth. Eth. False Woman --

King. Whence proceeds all this?
Who can clear this Riddle?

Eth. If any can, quickly let 'em speak
Before my little breath that is left is spent;
I would not die in so much ignorance.

Ald. Attempting your flight, you
Fell by my Sword.

[To Eth. Alfr. And the Queen by thy barbarous hand.
[To the King. Mistaking her for me, you killed her.

Eth. I struck that blow to punish thy Lust
To Alfreda. And Falsehood.

Alfr. Now I find the Fatal error.
After you left me at the Grotto, Sir.
To think what Answer I should give your love,
Which you had urged with so much violence,
I resolved to feign a kind compliance,
Thinking it was you that returned,
I put the Queen into his hand, whom my
Entreaties had drawn into the Garden,
And who by my Persuasions there stood ready
To be lead off in the dark instead of me.

Eth. What do I hear?

King. You conspired my breach of Vows --

Alfr. Them we judged unlawful, we hoped
Her Embraces might reconcile your love,
And call home your wandering loose affections.

Eth. Oh Innocence! What Expiation can I make!

Alfr. Live, live my Lord.

Eth. My Death's ascertained, and the time draws nigh,
Oh had I died this truth unreveal'd,
The joys of Heaven could not have made me blessed.

King. I grieve the Tragical Event,
Here are some can witness my Innocence:
I came to make a trial of thy Virtue,
And if I found it absolute, to send for
Thy Husband, and thy Brother
In their hearing, to act the Scene over again.
In Ethelwold's breast I was sure
The lees of Jealousy were yet remaining.
When I retired, 'twas not with expectation
Or desire that thou should change thy mind,
But to accomplish that Design. Oswald I sent
To call thy Husband, where I thought
I had fixed him, and in the interim
I declared thus much to you, Aldernald.

Ald. You did* Sir.

King. But how came Ethelwold to the unlucky
And untimely knowledge of our meeting.

Eth. My Lord Ruthin discovered that to me.

Alfr. And I to him.

Eth. His Discovery wakened my Jealousy.

King. And of all this mischief is the cause.

Ruth. How strangely Fate baffles humane Reason
In all designs man's Prudence frames,
And where our Wisdom most labors for success!
Lets us our greatest disappointments meet.

Eth. Give me thy hand, Alfreda,
That e're I am deprived of the Glory,
I may dispose of what I could not merit.
With my last breath, Sir, I bequeath her to You;
Accept the Legacy, -- I resign her,
As dying Penitents restore ill-gotten Wealth.

King. Thy Penitence to Heaven is not more grateful
Than this Gift to me!

Eth. The Fatal minute crowds on apace.
If in my death, Alfreda, you permit
I retain an Interest in you, Love the King,
For I am Thine no more --

Alfr. Ah my Lord!

King. Cursed Instrument, here behold the end
[ To Ruthin. Of all thy Polices! Here see the painted bubble of Ambition
Broken, and all thy Hopes dashed to air!

Ruth. Nothing remains in the world I value now:
In a Cloister I Will spend the remainder of my life,
Where I Will thank Heaven, which timely lets me see
How fruitless and how vain are Earthly hopes.

Alfr. Ah Sir, he is dead, no Sigh nor breath remains!

King. Alfreda, weep not.
Each precious drop that falls from your bright eyes,
Will raise in me an envy of his death.

Alfr. I Know your heart does feel a tenderness.

King. His and the Queens death I grieve;
But Fate's hand was in it, and Justice
Seemed to strike the blow.
Forbear thy tears, and now only remember
Thou art his Legacy.

Alfr. To requite that Generous act, I ask Supplies
To found a Monastery over the place of his Interment.

King. It Is granted. This more I Will do to merit thee.
Blush not, Matilda, nor wonder, Alderlnald,
King takes Ald. and Matilda's hands, and joins em. If uniting thus your hands,
I reveal
The Secrets of your hearts.
Love of your Souls has a strict union made,
And Vows, which Heaven records, have sealed it.
This I learnt to night from your discourse,
Whilst here in the Garden I stood concealed.
Take her, brave young man.

Ald. Here I possess what does transport,
And lead my Soul to an Elysium.

King. Now, Alfreda, to my Throne ascend,
Bright as the Constellation that shined
At thy Nativity, and cast its glorious Influence on thee.

Alfr. One Month I dedicate to Virgin-Widdowhood,
Sir, the rest of my whole life to you.
Captain, why stand you single, are
Not you a Lover too?

Durz. Yes, and this is the very thing I love.

Durzo. To reward your merit, and promote
Your Love, we make you our Rear-Admiral.

Mat. Hillaria, you must now strike sail to him.

Hill. Madam, did not your Example encourage me,
I durst not give my heart to a Soldier.

Durz. I thank your Grace, now I Will board her to rights.

Hill. Now, Captain, we are sailing out of the Haven
Of Love, into the tempestuous Sea of Matrimony.

King. You must a while forget Wars rough Alarms,
Love does invite you to reap gentler Spoils:
To you most Kind Fortune the Glory gives
In these more pleasing Triumphs to advance,
Whilst she delays my happiness. But when
Alfreda's month of Widdowhood is past,
Our Solemnities shall raise new joys.
Then we with Nuptial Rites will consummate
The yet imperfect bounty of our Fate.

FINIS.
EPILOGVE.
FAin I would ask your Judgments of the Play,
But you employ your Wit still the wrong way.
You reckon up the Faults tho near so small,
Pass by the Good, and so like none at all.
You Critics are like Sives, you only show
The Bran, and let the finest Flower run through.
But do not now impute it for a Crime,
That we do mention Guns in Edgar's time;
Nor let the Critic that is deeply read
In Baker, Stow, and Hollinshead,
Cry Da^ me, the Poet is mistaken here,
For Ethelwold was killed hunting the Deer,
To these Objections this he bid me say,
They writ a Chronicle, but he a play.
Poets may as they please with Truth make bold,
And Stories to the best advantage mould.
How easily might the Remedy have been,
By alt'ring Names or changing of the Scene?
Tho not these faults, yet others you would have found;
Your Censures give to every play a wound.
Leave off this finding fault, it spoils Delight;
Commend what is good t'encourage them that write.
When ye would pleasure in enjoyment find,
Who calls his Mistresses Defects to mind?
We Will think upon her Charms, the more to raise
The Fancy to a Pitch;
As it is in Love, so let it be your rule at Plays.

