CHIRVRGORVM COMES: OR THE Whole Practice OF SURGERY.

Begun by the Learned Dr. READ; Continued and Completed By a Member of the
College of PHYSICIANS in LONDON.

Licensed, Feb. 15. 1686/7.

At in ea part, quae manu curat, evidens est, omnem profectum, ut aliquid ab
aliis adjuvetur, hinc tamen plurimum trahere.

Cells. praesat. L. 7. LONDON, Printed by Edw. Jones, for Christopher Wilkinson
at the Black Boy in Fleetstreet, over against St. Dunstans Church, 1687.

TO THE READER.
ABout the time of Erasistratus (whom Historians celebrate for finding out, and
curing the Love-sickness of young Prince Antiochus) the Art of Physic began to
be divided into three Parts, the Diaetetick, Pharmaceutick, and Chirurgick.
Since therefore not only the Art it self is lengthened by new Inventions, and
the number of Mankind multiplied; but the Lives of those are mightily shortened;
well it were, if the Physician, Surgeon, and Apothecary, would each keep his
Post, and not one invade another's Province: For every Man's own would find him
work enough, and spend him time enough, to cultivate it well.

But as for Diet, it is become below the Dignity of a Physician to mind it,
since every Nurse and good Woman presumes to direct the Patient herein: When I
am confident, at this day, an improper Diet in acute Diseases kills many, who
want not for other proper Remedies; yea many, who by a right Diet, without any
Medicamental Aid might have recovered. I could instance in several under my
care, who rather than they would live secundum artem, chose to dye, according
to the custom of London, at the mischievous persuasion of a wretched Woman, to
take either some of her cooling or comfortable things. And how the Profession
and its relative Trades encroach on each others business, is too notorious.

Such considerations had once more than half persuaded me to have written only
of Chirurgical Operations, without meddling either with Medicine or method of
Cure. But upon second Thoughts, and a review, finding Celsus of opinion, that
one Man may be able to be all; a good Physician, Surgeon, and Apothecary;
and where one Man is not all, the more of them he is, the more commendable; I
thought it better to take notice of so much Medicine and Method, as fairly
offered themselves in the way of Surgery. Since the parts of Physic are so
interwoven one with another, that they cannot well be separated.

It Is true, Van Horn, Anatomy and Chirurgery-Professor at Leyden, who has
methodized the Art most excellently well, is of Opinion, that the best way of
delivering Surgery, is to treat of its Operations, abstracted from the
consideration of any thing else: So he has done in his Microtechne.

But the way, I have taken, was chalked out to me by the Learned Dr. Read, in
his Chirurgical Lectures. His Method is very nigh the same with Van Horne's, in
dividing Surgery into Parts, according to its Operations. Insomuch, that I
suspect Van Horn to have taken his Method from Dr. Read; because I have heard
that Read's Lectures were translated into a Foreign Tongue, which very likely
Van Horn may have perused, if he did not understand them in English. But our
Famous Countryman, as he is exact about Chirurgical Operations, so he likewise
is very curious and Orthodox in his Method and Medicines; Wherefore I have
chosen, so far as he has gone in his designed Work, to give you Read, as he
was, subtracting the address of his Lectures, and turning them into Chapters;
but varying his Meaning no more in any alteration of Language, than Tagaultius
did Vigo's in rendering his Meaning in better Latin.

Our much desired Read did, in his First Lecture, give a Scheme of the whole
Art of Surgery, as his intended Labors, and accordingly went through the
Doctrine of Tumors, Ulcers, and Wounds; but stopped there, and the Work till now
has laid incomplete.

If any would have been at the pains and charge of Translating Read into Latin,
I question not, but e're this he had obtained the Suffrages of the Learned, to
have been one of the best Surgeons that ever writ: So all our English
Surgeons of any Note since him, have subscribed their Testimony of his great
Abilities. But his Lectures in English being very scarce, it was judged, that
an Edition of them would not be unacceptable.

And, tho he left his Work unfinished, it has but fared with him as with
curious Architects, who seldom live to finish any vast Building; yet leave
behind them such Models of their Contrivance, as may enable an ordinary Workman
to go through with it. Thus our Read has so proposed his design, that tho he
lived not to give the finishing stroke; yet he has left such directions, as may
enable a meaner Capacity to follow him.

What Read has done, and other Men's as well as my own Opinion of it, I have
told you. Now what I have done further, I will tell you, and submit it to
better Judgments.

I have, according to Dr. Read's Scheme, endeavored to complete the Work by
supplying all the parts of Surgery wanting, (for he did not finish one of
the four,) neither from my own, nor other Men's Notions; but from the Works of
the best practical Authors, and from my Communication with some now living,
together with my own Observation.

In my choice of Authors, I took my direction from Van Horn, who in his
partition of Surgery, all he differs from Read is, in making Read's Pars
(...) to be two, viz. (...) and (...), which difference, how little it is, let
any one competent be judge; Since Read's (...) has Latitude enough to
comprehend Van Horne's (...) in it: And so, whether you make four or five Parts
of Surgery, it is left indifferent. Now he, as well as Read, being both a
great Scholar and a good Surgeon, but writing since Read, must have had the
better opportunity to know the later discoveries in Anatomy, which is necessary
to Surgery. And since he has deservedly a Reputation among the Learned, as
he has closely followed Read, or at least concurs with him (for his Parts of
Surgery are the same, and he ranks them in the very same order as Read
does,) I thought I might very well follow him; which I have done in being more
concise in the later Parts, than Read was in what preceded me.

And because Cases, like Examples, instruct better than Precepts, they being
the most lively representation of Practice; I have out of such, as on whose
integrity we may rely (especially out of Hildanus,) inserted into Read's Part
several Observations, and have made use of them all along the Parts, that I
have supplied. In several matters also I have been beholden to our English
Surgeons. But above all, I have endeavored to make use of such in each
particular, as have been remarkably Famous therein.

In the King's Evil I have used the Great Anatomist Andreas Laurentius, in his
Treatise on that Subject.

To the Treatise of Wounds I have subjoyned the substance of what Fortunatus
Fidelis has written concerning Reports about Wounds, given in before a
Magistrate, and in Courts of Judicature.

In Midwifry, I have been beholden to Dr. Chamberlain.

In Cutting for the Stone, to Dr. Groenevelt.

In the Supplemental Part I have given you the substance of Taliacautius,
concerning the supplying of a Nose, Lip, or Ear artificially.

And last of all, out of the best Authors I could meet with, I have given you
what is worth Notice, about Embalming the Dead.

That Dr. Read's Works, tho Learned, were capable of Improvement, his Anatomy
is a Monument; which by a late Learned Pen has been so meliorated in our own
Tongue, (wherein Dr. Read himself also wrote,) that it now out-does all
Translations of any other Anatomists. This consideration has almost persuaded
me, that some Alterations, and the many Additions I have told you of, are not
out of a possibility of affording some value to his Surgery; but what that
is, the perusal of this New Chirurgeon's Mate, can best show you.

THE TABLE.
BOOK I.
PRaecognita, concerning the Definition, and Parts of Surgery. Page 1. CHAP.
I. The general Doctrine of Tumors. Page 8. II. The general Indications of Cure
in Tumors. Page 15. III. Of the four times of a Tumor, and the Indications
taken from them. Page 20. IV. Of Curing of a Tumor come to Suppuration. Page
22. V. Of a Phlegmon. Page 28 VI. Of an Erysipelas. Page 37. VII. Of an Oedema.
Page 43. VIII. Of a Scirrhus. Page 50. IX. Of Aqueous Tumors. Page 56. X. Of a
Flatulent Tumor. Page 60. XI. Of the Kings Evil. Page 62.
BOOK II.
CHAP. I. Wherein the Authors, and Definition of Ulcers are set down. Page 67
II. Of the Causes of Ulcers. Page 70 III. Of the general Differences and Signs
of Ulcers. Page 75 IV. Of the general Prognostics of Ulcers. Page 77 V. Of the
general Cure of Ulcers, and their Times. Page 80 VI. Of Medicaments befitting
Ulcers in general, and First, of repelling Medicaments. Page 83 VII. Of the
Cure of a plain and a hollow Ulcer, being simple. Page 91 VIII. Of compound,
but milder, Ulcers, in general. Page 95 IX. Of the differences of the milder
sort of compound Ulcers, and First, of a sinuous Ulcer, without any callosity.
Page 100 X. Of the Palliative Cure of a sinuous Ulcer, with Callosity in
general. Page 105 XI. Of the Cure of Fistula's in general. Page 111 XII. Of
Fistula Lachrymalis. Page 116 XIII. Of Fistula's in the Breast Page 122 XIV. Of
Fistula's in the Belly and Joints. Page 128 XV. Of an Herpes exedens. Page 135
XVI. Of Phagedaena and Nome. Page 141 XVII. Of a Cancer and a Cancerous Ulcer.
Page 147 XVIII. Of the Leprosy, and Leprous Ulcers. Page 155 XIX. Of abating
superfluous Flesh. Page 161 XX. Of scaling corrupt Bones. Page 166 XXI. Of a
discolored and varicous Ulcer. Page 172 XXII. Of a venomous and lousie Ulcer.
Page 179 XXIII. Of Ulcers of the hairy Scalp. Page 186 XXIV. Of Ulcers of the
Ears, and Ophthalmia. Page 193 XXV. Of the rest of the Ulcers of the Eye. Page
201 XXVI. Of an Ozaena. Page 209 XXVII. Of Ulcers of the Mouth. Page 216
XXVIII. Of Ulcers of the Lungs. Page 221 XXIX. Of Ulcers of the Back, the
Abdomen, and Joints. Page 227
BOOK III.
CHAP. I. Of the description of a Wound, the differences, and general Fountains
of special Prognostications. Page 233 II. Of Symphysis, and Syssarcosis, and
the means of staying an immoderate Flux of Blood in a Wound. Page 238 III. Of
removing extraneous Bodies from a Wound. Page 245 IV. Of the preservation of
the Temperature of the Part, by the right ordering of things not natural. Page
251 V. Of the fifth and sixth Duties belonging to a Surgeon in Curing a
Wound. Page 256 VI. Of the common Symptoms of Wounds. Page 261 VII. Of the
stitching of Wounds. Page 266 VIII. Of Agglutinative Medicaments and Rolling.
Page 272 IX. How a Wound is to be Cured after the Second Intention. Page 277.
X. Of a Convulsion in Wounds. Page 283 XI. Of a Palsy and Crudity in a Wound.
Page 289 XII. Of a Wound made by a poisoned Weapon. Page 295 XIII. Of a Wound
by the biting of a mad Dog. Page 301 XIV. Of a Wound made by the biting of an
Adder. Page 307 XV. Of Wounds made by Gunshot. Page 313 XVI. Of the means to
avert Humors from the wou^^ed Head. Page 319 XVII. Of the rest of the points
common to most Wounds of the Head. Page 324 XVIII. Of Wounds of the parts
placed above the Scull. Page 329 XIX. Of the general points to be observed in
the Wounds of the Scull. Page 334 XX. Of the Section of the hairy Scalp, and
opening the Scull. Page 339 XXI. Of the Cure of Fractures, appearing in the
wounded part. Page 346 XXII. Of Fractures in other than in the place wounded,
and those which happen when the Cutis Musculosa is not wounded. Page 350 XXIII.
Of Wounds of the Meninges and the Brain. Page 354 XXIV. Of the Cure of Wounds
of the Face. Page 363 XXV. Of the Cure of Wounds, which happen to the
Instruments of the Senses. Page 368 XXVI. Of Wounds of the vessels of the
Thorax. Page 374 XXVII. Of Wounds of the other parts of the Neck. Page 378
XXVIII. Of Wounds of the Breast. Page 382 XXIX. Of the Cure of a Fistula of the
Breast following a Wound thereof. Page 388 XXX. Of Wounds of the Abdomen or
lower Belly, which penetrate, and yet without any hurt of the parts contained.
Page 392 XXXI. Of penetrating Wounds of the Belly, wherein some of the Parts
contained are wounded; and First, of the Wounds of the Parts appointed for
Chylification. Page 396 XXXII. Of Wounds of the Parts that help Sanguification
and Procreation. Page 401 XXXIII. Of Wounds of the Nervous Parts. Page 406
XXXIV. Of Wounds of the Joints. Page 410
AN APPENDIX Concerning Surgeons Reports before a Magistrate, upon their
view of a wounded Person.
SECT. I. Whence the Reason of Mortal Wounds is to be taken, What Wounds are
safe, and what indifferent? Page 415 II. In what parts of the Body Wounds are
mortal? Page 418 III. By what tokens Parts, whose Wounds are mortal, may be
deprehended to be wounded? Page 422 IV. What Wounds may b called safe, and wha
dangerous? Page 425 V. Of what nature Wounds of the Head may be reckoned to be?
Page 427 VI. How it may be determined, whether a Man died of his Wound, or of
some other Cause. Page 430 VII. How it comes to pass, that Men die of small
Wounds, and such as are not mortal? Page 431 VIII. On what days the secret
Malignity of Mortal Wounds uses to show it self? Page 433 IX. How we may know,
whether a Man died of a Blow, or Contusion, and some Opinions about it. Page
435 X. What are the Signs of such, as being beaten died, but of no conspicuous
Wound? Page 436 XI. How many ways People may be suffocated by an external
Cause? Page 437 XII. What are the signs of external Suffocation? Page 437 XIII.
Of such as are suffocated by inspiration of a hot and strange Air. Page 439
XIV. Diverse effects of Thunder, whence signs of it may be taken? Page 440 XV.
Diverse marks of such as have been slain by Thunder. Page 442 XVI. How a
Surgeon may be able to predict some hurts of the Functions in some Wounded
parts? First, What is the Instrument of voluntary Motion? Page 443 XVII. What
Cuts of the Muscles do hurt, what Motions in general? Page 445 XVIII. Some
general Instructions very useful for Predictions. Page 446 XIX. What harm
Wounds of the Forehead and upper Eyelid do? Page 447 XX. The Functions of the
Cheeks and Lips; also of the lower Jaw, and Mastication, by the Wounds of what
parts they are hurt? Page 449 XXI. By the Wounds of what parts the Motions of
the Head are hindered? Page 451 XXII. What Functions Wounds of the Arms do
incommode? Page 452 XXIII. What Functions are hurt by Wounds of the Hand? Page
454 XXIV. What harm is done by the Wounds of the Thighs and Legs. Page 455 XXV.
What Wounds of such or such Nerves, and of such or such parts of the Spine, do
hurt the Motions of this, or the other part? Page 457 XXVI. Of Maiming. Page
459 XXVII. Three sorts of Maiming. Page 460 XXVIII. The Opinion of Physicians
concerning the signification of a Member. Page 462 XXIX. A more exact account
of the true signification of a Member. Page 463 XXX. Of Disfiguring. Page 464
XXXI. The general Notion and Explication of Beauty. Page 464 XXXII. The
definition of Beauty more particularly explained. Page 467 XXXIII. The nature
of Beauty yet further explained. Page 469 XXXIV. Of a Cicatrix, or Scar. Page
470 XXXV. In what Parts, and for what Reasons, a Scar is more or less deformed?
Page 471 XXXVI. Some Cautions in judging of Scars, Page 472
BOOK IV.
CHAP. I. Of the Definition, Differences, Causes, and Signs of Fractures. Page
475 II. How an Inflammation in Fractures may be prevented? Page 477 III. Of
Curing a transverse Fracture, without a Wound; and First, of joining together
the Parts of the broken Bone. Page 478 IV. How the Parts of the broken Bone may
be kept united? Page 480 V. How the substance of the Bone may be kept sound?
Page 483 VI. Of breeding a Callus in Fractures. Page 485 VII. Of Symptoms
attending a Fracture; and of a Fracture of the Knee-pan. Page 486 VIII. Of
Curing a Fracture with a Wound, wherein neither the Bone is made bare, nor the
coming away of any piece of Bone is expected. Page 490 IX. Of a Fracture with a
Wound, wherein the Bone is not made bare; but we look for a piece of Bone to
come away. Page 491 X. Of a Fracture with a Wound, in which the Bone is made
bare. Page 494
BOOK V.
CHAP. I. Of the Definition, Differences, Causes and Signs of Luxations in
general. Page 496 II. The Cure of a Luxation in general. Page 499 III. Of
particular Luxations: and first of Luxations of the Jaw Bone. Page 501 IV. Of a
Luxation of the Shoulder. Page 503 V. Of a Luxation of the Clavicle or
Collar-bone. Page 508 VI. Of the Luxation of the Elbow. Page 509 VII. Of the
Luxation of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Fingers. Page 511 VIII. Of the Luxation
of the Thigh. Page 512 IX. Of the Luxation of the Knee. Page 514 X. Of the
Luxation of the Ankle and Toes. Page 515
PART II.
BOOK VI.
CHAP. I. Of cutting Tongue-tied Children. Page 517 II. Of the growing together
of Fingers or Toes. Page 520 III. Of Imperforation of the Hymen. Page 521 IV.
Of the growing together of the Labia of the Womb. Page 523 V. Of the Anus
imperforate. Page 524 VI. Of Rectification, or setting Parts that are
distorted. Page 525 VII. Of the Reduction of the Fingers. Page 527 VIII. Of
shrunk Sinews, and crooked Arms and Legs. Page 529 IX. The Cure of a distorted
Foot. Page 531 X. The Cure of a crooked Back. Page 534
PART III.
BOOK VII. Of taking away Things superfluous.
CHAP. I. Of Things superfluous in general; and concerning Women's Labors. Page
551 II. The Signs that precede and accompany as well a natural, as an unnatural
Delivery. Page 559 III. Of the several natural situations of an Infant in the
Mother's Womb, according to the different times of Pregnancy. Page 542 IV. What
is to be done when a Woman first falls in Labor. Page 544 V. Of a natural
Labor, and the means of helping a Woman therein, when there is one or more
Children. Page 547 VI. How to fetch the After-burthen. Page 550 VII. Of
laborious and difficult Labors, and those against Nature, their Causes and
Differences, together with the Means to remedy them. Page 552 VIII. Of
unnatural Labors, where manual Operation is absolutely necessary, and what
Observations the Surgeon must make, before he goes about it. Page 556 IX.
The Signs to know whether the Child be alive or dead. Page 559 X. How to fetch
the After-burthen, when the string is broke. Page 560 XI. To deliver a Woman
when the Child comes footling. Page 562 XII. How to fetch the Head, when
separated from the Body, and it remains behind in the Womb? Page 564 XIII. How
to help a Woman in her Labor, when the Child's Head thrusts the Neck of the
Womb forth before it? Page 567 XIV. How to fetch a Child, when coming right it
cannot pass, either because it is too big, or the Passages cannot be
sufficiently dilated? Page 568 XV. How to deliver a Woman, when the Child
presents the side of the Head to the Birth, or the Face? Page 569 XVI. How to
deliver a Woman, when the Head of the Child is born, and the Womb closes about
the Neck? Page 570 XVII. How to deliver a Woman, when the Child comes with one
or both Hands together with the Head? Page 571 XVIII. How to deliver a Woman,
when a Child presents one or both Hands foremost, without any other part? Page
572 XIX. How to deliver a Woman, when Hands and Feet come together? Page 574
XX. How to deliver a Woman, when the Child comes with the Knees? Page 575 XXI.
Of a Delivery, when the Child comes with Shoulders, Back or Breast. Page 576
XXII. Of those Births, wherein the Infant presents Belly, Breast, or Side. Page
578 XXIII. Of Labors, wherein several Children present together in the
different postures abovenamed. Page 579 XXIV. Of a Labor, when the Navil-string
comes first. Page 581 XXV. Of a Labor, wherein the Burden first offers, or
first comes quite forth. Page 583 XXVI. How to deliver a Woman, when the Child
is Hydropical or Monstrous? Page 585 XXVII. Of delivering a dead Child. Page
589 XXVIII. Of extracting a Mola, and false Conception. Page 590 XXIX. Of the
Caesarian Section. Page 592 XXX. Of Ruptures in general, their Differences,
Signs and Causes. Page 595 XXXI. The Cure of a Hernia Intestinalis, when the
Peritonaeum is either distended or relaxed. Page 597 XXXII. The Cure of a
Hernia Intestinalis, when the Peritonaeum is burst. Page 599 XXXIII. The Cure
of a Hernia Omentalis. Page 601 XXXIV. The Cure of a Hernia Aquosa. Page 602
XXXV. The Cure of a Hernia Ventosa. Page 604 XXXVI. The Cure of a Sarcocele and
a Hydrosarcocele. ibid. XXXVII. The Cure of a Hernia Varicosa. Page 605
XXXVIII. Of Amputation of a Member. Page 607 XXXIX. Of the extirpation of a
cancerous Breast. Page 612 XL. Of taking away Blood by Venaesection,
Scarification and Leeches. Page 615 XLI. Of the Couching of a Catarrhact. Page
623 XLII. Of Lithotomy, or Cutting for the Stone. Page 626
Part IV.
BOOK VIII.
CHAP. I. Of supplying the Nose, Ears, or Lips, when deficient. Page 645 II.
Intentions of Cure in supplying defects, and how the Body ought in general to
be prepared. Page 648 III. An Enumeration of what things are necessary for the
delineation of the traductive Skin, and the provision of all Implements. Page
651 IV. In what manner the cutaneous Graft must be delineated. Page 655 V. The
Cure of the delineated Graft. Page 658 VI. The Cure of some Symptoms, which
sometimes befall the delineated Skin. Page 661 VII. Why the taking up of the
Graft is deferred, and not done at one Section; what time is proper for the
Administration, and what Provision must be made for it? Page 663 VIII. The
manner of taking up the cutaneous Graft. Page 664 IX. Of the Cure of the New
and Old Wound, both in the Graft, and in the Bed; and also of rearing the
Graft. Page 667 X. The time of Ingrafting, that is, of what Age a cutaneous
Graft must be chosen, to ingraft withal. Page 672 XI. Of things necessary for
Ingrafting. Page 683 XII. The Administration of Insition. Page 685 XIII. The
Cure of the Insition, and what course of Life must be observed. Page 688 XIV.
How the Symptoms, attending Ingrafting are to be corrected. Page 690 XV. Of
cutting the Graft quite from the Arm, and how it must be Cured. Page 691 XVI.
Of Shaping the Graft, so as it may represent the Nose. Page 693 XVII. The
Insition of the Bridge. Page 696 XVIII. The further conformation of the
cutaneous Graft. Page 698 XIX. Of Curing the Hare-Lip, and supplying a Lip
deficient. Page 700 XX. Of supplying Curt Ears. Page 703 XXI. The History of a
Nose artificially Engrafted. Page 704 An APPENDIX of the Venereal Disease. Page
705 An APPENDIX concerning Embalming. Page 707
medical instruments

THE ART OF SURGERY.
BOOK I.
PRAECOGNITA
Concerning the Definition and Parts of Surgery.

BEfore we come to treat of Surgery it self, there are several Praecognita
fit to be known by him, that would be a Proficient therein. For these
Praecognita are Introductory, and will clear the Way for the better
Understanding of what shall afterward be discoursed: And they are these: 1. Of
the Antiquity and Dignity of Surgery. 2. Of such Authors as have written of
it. 3. Of the Definition of it. 4 Of the Division or Parts of it.


And then my Intent is to pass through all the Parts of Surgery
methodically, that so the Reader's Memory may more easily Retain what he
peruses: And I shall give you nothing but what is warranted by the Authority of
the most Learned and best Experienced Men in all Ages.

As for the Antiquity of Surgery, its Pedigree is as old as Adam. But if any
Gentleman doubt it, I dare tell him, I can produce more probability for it,
than perhaps he can for his Descent from his Great Grandfather, though he
would oblige the World with a Genealogy elder and stouter than the Conqueror.
For can we think, that Adam and Cain, after Fratricide committed upon Abel,
would not both contrive how to ward a Blow, yea, and to cure a Wound, if need
were? Certainly, when their knowledge of Evil had, through amazement and
horror at the first obliterated all recognition of Good, Prudence must needs
take care to redress such Disasters; and Adam especially, if he were so good an
Herbarist, as most Divines hold him to have been, must from his knowledge of
Vulnerary Herbs, naturally proceed to the use of Plasters. Indeed concerning
the Antediluvian Transactions Moses gives us but short Remarques; yet we find
by those, that Lamech committed Murder, and gloried in it: And the Earth being
filled with Violence, there must of necessity be Work for the Surgeon. And
it cannot be imagined, but that when Men had received Wounds and Hurts, they
would try to cure them. As for profane History, in it we find Surgery as
ancient as any Records of that sort. Podalirius and Machaon, sons of
Aesculapius, were Surgeons to the Grecian Camp before the Walls of Troy;
yea, Cicero de not. Deor. tells us, That Aesculapius himself drew Teeth, and
dressed Wounds. Apollo was an Oculist; Mercury cut Aesculapius out of his
Mother Coronis her belly; and Venus her self sometimes played the good old Woman
in dressing the Wounds of her dear Diomed, and their Boy Aeneas, when Virgin
Pallas had in these Heroes chastised the tricks of that wanton Goddess her
Youth.

But secondly, to leave these more obscure and antique Times, and that we may
come to the Men, who have left us the Monuments of their Skill in Surgery,
let us descend a little lower, and we shall find Hippocrates, the seventeenth
in a lineal descent from Aesculapius, to have been the first and the skilfulest
of all who have written of this Subject, as his Books De Officin^ Medici, De
Articulis, De Vulneribus, etc. do testify. From which Treatises it is plain,
that Hippocrates not only understood Surgery, but also practiced it. Several
other Grecians have written of it, as Galen, Oribasius, Paulus, Aegineta,
Aetius, Alexander Tralianus, Actuarius, and others. Among the Latins Celsus has
written skilfully, and expressed his Skill i^ most elegant Latin: and he indeed
is the only Latin Author among the Ancients. But after the Partition of the
Empire into the Eastern and Western, when War and Devastations had made way so
an inundation of Barbarism into these Parts, Learning began to flourish among
the Arabians; and the Chief of them in Surgery i^ Albucasis. After this some
ski^ful Men arose, who having derive their Skill from the Arabians, a^ well as
the Greeks and Latins wrote in a most barbarous Style Amongst these Guido de
Cauliac^ is the most Eminent: for Fallopius (the great Anatomist, and Glory of
his Age) makes no scruple to parallel Guido, notwithstanding his barbarous
Style, with Hippocrates. There were several others, who wrote in a barbarous
Style, who deserve to be read, as Brunus, Theodoricus, Rolandus, Lanfrancus,
Bartepalia, R^gerius, and Gulielmus a Saliceto Placentinus, also Johannes de
Vigo, but he had taken what he wrote from Guido; and Tagaultius turned him into
more elegant Latin. Marianus Sanctus Barolitanus was one of Vigo's Scholars,
who afterward published a Compendium of Surgery. Constantinus Africanus,
who lived, An. 1080. wrote something in Surgery. And Petrus de Argillata of
Bononia wrote about 1490. But of Guido, Fallopius confesses ingenuously, that
excepting Hippocrates and Galen, he not only excelled all the Grecians, Latins,
and Barbarians, especially considering the barbarism and obscurity of Physic
at the time when he lived, but that he added many useful and learned Things of
his own to Surgery: He lived about the year 1363.

But to come to the Writers of the preceding, and of this present Century, I
think I may place the incomparable Fallopius in the first Rank. It were to be
wished, that he had lived to give the finishing stroke to those excellent
Pieces, that came out in his Name at Venice 1606. for then I know not what a
Man could have wished for more: for he discourses every thing, with that Candor,
Judgment, Reason and Accuracy, that one may easily observe, he was no less a
Physician and Surgeon, than that he was a most excellent Anatomist. Next to
him comes Ambrosius Paraeus, Surgeon to the King of France, a Man who by his
great experience in difficult Cases greatly enriched Surgery: But we must
understand, that that huge Volume, which came out in his Name, was made by the
Doctors in Physic of Paris, whom Paraeus furnished with an ample stock of
Chirurgical Examples: They put them into Method, and to make the Work the
bigger, they added many things superfluous and alien from the business of
Surgery. But truly I think it had been more for this worthy Person's credit,
had he in a less Volume published his particular Cures, and Observations of
rare Cures, and their Remedies, as he found them by infallible Practice, and so
many years Experience: As Gulielmus Fabricius Hildanus, the Honor of the
Germans, whose Fame Ages to come shall celebrate, has to his immortal Glory
done. For, as Seneca says, Longum est iter per praecepta, breve and efficax per
exempla; and so in reality every man finds, what Impression is made in our
Minds by particular Cases (in which Diseases appear to us far otherwise, than
what Authors make them to be in their Writings, so that it is no marvel, if he
be miserably gravelled, who has all he knows from Books) and the Cures, when
the success of Remedies, as day by day they are used, the supervening Symptoms,
and the good or bad Events, are faithfully related. And when all is done, if
after the Patient's death, an accurate search of the Parts affected were made
(which I wish the Patient's Relations would give way to, though the Physicians
are hindered from doing it by the vain superstition of the dead parties Friends)
the Business would be complete. Also Hieronymus Fabricius ab Aquapendente is a
Learned Writer, and has done excellently well in his Books, entitled, De
Chirurgicis Operationibus, wherein he endeavors to imitate Celsus, while
according to the order of the parts of his Body, he accurately treats of the
Names of Diseases incident thereto, the Signs, and the Cure which is performed
by manual Operation, and so he frequently professes himself to be Celsus his
Interpreter and Commentator. And with Aquapendent may be joined Johannes
Jessenius a Jessen, Stephanus Gourmelinus, and Vidus Vidius junior. And for a
clear conception of the Operations, the Figures of. Scultetus with their
Explications are excellent, in which the Manual Operations, used by others, are
set before our eyes. In our English Tongue we have these, who have written
well, Mr. Gale, Mr. Banister, Mr. Clowes, Mr. Woodall, Mr. Wiseman, and the
Learned Dr. Reed (who so far as he has gone shall be my Pattern and Precedent.)
And these have written of Surgery in general.

As for such as have written of peculiar Parts of Surgery, I shall select
some of the most approved. Of Tumors Ingrassias has written, no unlearned Man:
But he is too much taken up in the reconciling the Greek and Arabic names, and
confounds his Reader in enumerating the Species of Tumors. Saporta is but an
ordinary Author. But among Authors to be prized are Julius Caesar Arantius and
Marcus Aurelius Severinus, who wrote a Book De Recondita Abscessuum natura, a
Work certainly full of recondite Learning established by many years Experience.
He it was who left us that Excellent Work De Efficaci Medicina. Of Wounds of
the Head Jacobus Berengarius Carpensis has written, or, who is the same,
Jacobus Carpus, for whose excellent Work we are beholden to the famous
Conringius. But because in so noble a Part too great diligence cannot be
blamed. Jo. Bapt. Carcanus Leo his Book may be perused, as may Andreas Alcasar
a Spaniard, and Ludovicus Queirats, a late French Writer: for there is an
infinite number, who have commentated upon Hippocrates de vulneribus Capitis,
as Arantius, Parma, and Petrus Paaw a Dutchman. Guillemaeus has written of
Diseases of the Eyes; but we owe the Chirurgical way of curing them to Durant
Scach, and to Peter Franco, who both of them wrote also of the Stone in the
Bladder, though the first Writer of that way of Cure was Marianus Sanctus
Barolitanus: And Hildanus is to be preferred before all; who wrote a peculiar
Treatise of Lithotomy, and Dr. Groenevelt in his Dissertatio Lithologica, who
wrote since Hildanus died. Taliacotius is the only Man that treats of curing
Parts cut off by Incision. Of Ruptures we have Franco, Scacchi, and Geigerus.
Of Wounds, besides Alcasar and others, who have designedly made it their
business, there is Matthias Glandorpius an Excellent Man, and one that has
shown himself a Physician in his Speculum Chirurgorum. Magatus also in a
peculiar Treatise commends a rare Inspection of Wounds: But of Inspection and
Judgment of Wounds mortal and curable there have written Bernhardus Suevus,
Melchior Sebizius and Hieron. Welschius, to whom we may add Fortunatus Fidelis
his Treatise De Relationibus Medicorum. And a Physician indeed ought to be well
versed in this Affair; seeing usually according to his Judgment the injurious
Party either loses his Life, or is acquitted. Although several have written of
Gunshot Wounds, yet they are most to be credited who have followed the Camp,
such as Paraeus, Botallus, and Guillemaeus. But as particular Observations
faithfully related do give a Man much Light, so they are to be abominated, who,
when they communicate theirs to the Public, either out of Envy or Malice
conceal what Remedies were administered; of which Gulielmus Losellus is guilty.
But such as Riverius, Borellus, Barbette, Sculterus and others, who have
heartily imparted their Secrets for the common benefit of the Sick, are to be
commended. Besides, Johannes Van Horn in his Microtechne has given an
admirable Introduction to Surgery. And Johannes Muys in his Praxis
Chirurgica Rationalis has begun to cultivate this Part of Medicine according to
the newest discoveries in Nature, as the other Parts have been by other hands.
Out of these and such other Authors as these, I shall give you according to my
Abilities, a perfect Systeme of Surgery.

Thirdly, Surgery by virtue of its Etymology (...), signifies, Manual
Operation, and by Learned Men is defined to be the third Branch of the Curative
Part of Medicine, which teaches how sundry Diseases of the Body of Man are to
be cured by Manual Operation. By this as well as by Diet and Pharmacy does the
Physician attain his End, which is, his Patients Health.

Fourthly, The parts of Surgery, must be assigned according to the main
differences of Operations. Those are four in number, and consequently so many
parts: for either by Surgery, Solution of unity is removed, and union
restored; or things unnaturally united are separated and disjoined; or things
superfluous taken away; or last of all defects are supplied. Now Solution of
unity is either gathered by reason, or deprehended by sense. In Tumors,
although the parts seem to the eye united; yet reason teaches us, that there
is a divulsion of them.

The doctrine of Tumors therefore ought to be the first particular Treatise.
Solution of unity apparent to the senses, to wit, sight and touch, is either in
the soft parts, or in the more solid and hard. In the soft or fleshy parts
there be two differences of Solution of unity: vulnus and ulcus, a wound, and
an ulcer. In the hard parts there are found a fracture, and a luxation; two
distinct sorts of Solution of unity. This part may be called (...), or parts
compositrix, the part joining together.

The second part of Surgery opposite to the first, teaches to separate
parts unnaturally united: where either the comely composition of the Body of
Man is defaced or impared, or the actions of the same hindered. Sundry have been
brought into the World with the anus and vulva quite shut up. The consideration
of that Membrane, which is found in the Neck of the Matrix of some Women, is in
this place to be noted and considered: Seeing there have been, and yet are so
many Concertations amongst both skilful Physicians and Surgeons about it.
Here also is the Cure of the wry Neck to be set down. In this Grief the Head is
drawn on the one side, by reason of one or more Tendons of the Muscles of the
Neck being shortened toward the Claves more than on the other: whereby it
comes to pass, that the face grows awry and distorted: and so the Beauty of
the Countenance is much impared. To this part belongs the curing of
Tongue-ty'd Children, in whom Sucking and Speech are hindered. Not only Fingers
and Toes cleave together in the same Person; but Twins also, and double Members
of one Person. The consideration of such does belong to the History of
Monsters; not to any Art: seeing such things are to be ranged amongst raro
contingentia, and so belong not to Art, which is of things necessary. This part
may be termed (...), or separatrix pars, the separating part.

Now follows the third part of Surgery, which shows the means to remove
from the Body things superfluous, which may fitly be called (...) or ablatrix
pars, the subtracting or removing part. Things superfluous are such, either by
Event, or by their own Nature. Things superfluous by Event are several: And
first a dead Child in the Womb, or staying too long to the prejudice of its own
and tho mothers Life. Here shall be set down the manner how to bring Women to
bed (as we term it) artificially and safely. Secondly, a falling of the small
Guts into the Cod by enlarging or rending of the production of the Peritonaeum,
which we call a Rupture. When I come to this Point, I will set down the
diversities of Ruptures, and the means of curing of each: which are either
Incision, or Truss, or application of Medicaments, sometimes used solitary,
sometimes concurring most or altogether. Thirdly, the amputation of a Limb by
reason of a mortification, or some other accident. Here shall be set down the
most accurate method of dismembring. Fourthly, the extirpation of any part, as
the Breast, when a Cancerous either Tumor or Ulcer does possess it. Here you
shall be acquainted with the safest way of extirpating a Cancer and a Lupus.
Fifthly, Blood, offending either in quantity or quality, is drawn by
Phlebotomy, Leeches, or Ventoses, of all which I will particularly discourse.
Things by their own nature superfluous, are either somewhat familiar to Nature,
or altogether adverse: Of the first sort, are Wens, and Strumae; when I come to
them I will set down the diversities of them, and how they also are to be
cured. Secondly, the couching of a Cataract offers it self. Here I mean to
set down the variety of Cataracts, the prognostics of them, whereby it shall
be known which are curable and which not, and the most exquisite manner of
couching of such as are curable. Things adverse to Nature, are Stones in sundry
parts of the Body; but chiefly in the Bladder. The Incision for extracting of
it, is called (...): of it I mean diligently to discourse; because it is a
dangerous Operation, and many times scandalous.

Last of all, I come to the fourth and last principal part of Surgery, which
is the supplying of the defects of the Body, which may be called (...) or
additrix the supplying or adding part. Now things which are added, are either
of the Body it self, as restoring of the Nose lost, or curing of the Hairlip.
Of the first, I will set down the Method of several Physicians, and
Surgeons; Of the second, many famous Men's Experiments in curing both the
single and double Hair-lip. The matter of things, which is used for the
repairing of the losses in other parts, as the Eye, the Ear, Arm and Leg, is no
ways of the Nature of the Body. Nevertheless when I am come so far, I will make
an end of the course of Surgery with touching these so much as shall seem
sufficient, to instruct such as have not been verst in these practices. I have
varied, I confess, from all who have written of this subject: Nevertheless I
have the Light of Nature on my side, and the Experience of all skilful
Practitioners. So that it is needless to take further pains, either to confirm
those things which I have alleged, or to refute that which has been said by
others; Seeing I intend rather to frame an able operating Surgeon, than to
set out a contentious disputing Theorician: Besides reprehending of others does
not so much instruct the hearers in the knowledge of Truth, as it shows that,
which is not to be learned, but shunned. Neither is a Surgeon contented to
have performed so many Duties to the Body of Man while it is alive, and the
instrument of the Soul for performing actions; but when it is dead, the spirit
rerurning to God, who gave it, he cease not to be officious to it, in
dissecting of it, for the instruction of himself and others, and preserving it
from putrefaction and annoyance, until time and place fit for burying of it be
offered: which he compasses partly, by Encearing of it, and partly by
Embalming: of the which two last, I mean also to discourse.

CHAP. I.
The General Doctrine of Tumors.

FIrst, I will declare what a Tumor is. Secondly, what the Causes of Tumors
are. Thirdly, the main difference of Tumors.

Before I come to the essential definition of a Tumor, I will set down the
denominations of it. A Tumor in Greek is called (...), that is, a prominence or
protuberance in the Body. And from hence the Latin words uncus, a crook or
hook, and aduncus, bended or crooked, are derived: Because things bended cause
a sticking out. The Arabians and barbarous Physicians, who follow them, call
all Tumors unnatural Apostemata, in Latin Abscessus: this word is derived from
the Greek Verb (...) Abscedere: Because in Apostems there is a collection of
Humors in any place which have left their own proper seat, etc. For Humors
which cause Apostems come from the Veins, and so leaving their own natural
receptacle, seat themselves in other parts of the Body, being dependant and
weak. And Surgeons commonly call Tumors wherein there is collection of
matter Apostems. Tumor which is a Latin word, and by frequent use made familiar
in English Conferences and Discourses, is derived from the Latin word Tumco, to
be raised or puffed up.

Now bunchings or stickings out of parts of the Body, are threefold: for either
they are natural; and then they serve for the comeliness of the Body, and
further the actions, as we may see in the Head, Belly, Joints, the Thighs,
Calves of the Legs, and Arms: Or they only pass the ordinary dimensions of some
parts, such are the Dugs full of Milk, and the Bellies of Women which are with
Child: Or they are altogether unnatural, not only marring the comely
composition of that part of the Body which they possess; but hindering the
actions also. Such a Tumor, or eminence of the Body, is called by Galen (...),
id est, Tumor praeter Naturam, a Tumor contrary to Nature. Having set down the
denominations of a Tumor, I must come to the Definition of it. Of all the
Definitions, two are chiefly to be noted: the one of Fallopius in his Treatise
of Tumors, cap. 3. The other of Hieron. Fabricius ab Aquapendent. in operibus
Chirurgicis, part 2. lib. 1. de tumoribus, cap. 1. That of Fallopius is
gathered out of Galen. cap. 1. lib. 13. de method. medendi: and it is thus. It
is a Disease, whereby the parts lose their natural bigness, exceeding it. So
that extenuation is contrary to a Tumor. He will have it to be a disease of the
instrumentary parts: for quantity is only an instrument, whereby the organical
parts perform their actions, more strongly, or weakly, as we may see in Dwarfs,
and tall Men. Galen lib. 1. de tumoribus praeter not. c. 1. affirms, That in
Tumors contrary to Nature, all Dimensions, that is, Length, Height and Breadth
are increased. But the former Definition cannot be ascribed to every particular
Tumor, and so it is not large enough: for in an Erysipelas, extreme Heat rather
offends, than the bigness is enlarged, which very often cannot be deprehended
by the Senses.

The definition set down by Fabricius ab Aquapendente is this: A Tumor against
Nature is a Disease for the most part compounded, which is to be named of that
thing which hinders the actions. And he to make his definition plausible to
his Readers, will have all to mark some remarkable points in his definition.
And first of all, in that he calls a Tumor against Nature Morbus, or a
Disease, he will not have Pushes in the Face, and such small Eminences of the
Skin to be Tumors, because they hinder not the actions. He cannot deny that the
equality of the Skin is altered, and besides this, the action of the Skin,
which is Perspiration in that place is hindered. Let no Man think it harsh, that
I ascribe action unto the Skin, being a simple and similar part of the Body: It
cannot be denied that all similar parts have an use; which use sometimes is an
action, as this of the Skin; to send out by its Pores suliginous Vapors; and
superfluous serosity of the Blood, by insensible Perspiration and Sweat. And
although such small Eminencies commonly are denied to be Diseases, because they
hinder not the Actions; yet they be Passions, and Affections, which require the
skill of the Physician and Chyrurgeon: yea, those Pushes of the Face are
sometimes more hard to be cured than great Tumors, and Artists many times gain
more by those, than these: Besides this, by reason of the matter, they are to
be referred to one or other of the main Tumors. Howsoever, they are not to be
neglected. According to Aristotle 1 Rhetoric. c. 5. and Galen, ad Thrasibulum,
there be three Gifts of the Body, to wit, Health, Strength, Beauty, all which
Medicine is to direct: Health is preserved by wholesome nourishment, Strength
by convenient exercises: of the which (...) Treats, whereof Hieron.
Mercurialis has written a Volume; (...) has care of the Beauty: Now seeing by
reason of the Face a Man is called Beautiful or Ugly, who can deny that they
deserve the care of the Physician, and Surgeon? He adds, that a Tumor is a
Disease most commonly compounded; if he had said ever compounded, he had spoken
a Truth: for in every one of these Tumors there is a Tumor conspicuous or
latent; or a solution of unity, either sensible or imaginary. In an Erysipelas
it self, wherein there appears neither quantity of part increased, nor
solution of unity procured, yet in it there are undoubtedly both: for the
first, seeing there is so great a heat in the part possessed with this Grief,
the Humors must be rarefied, and the part dilated, which will require a more
spacious place than it had before, which is an evident Argument that the
quantity is enlarged. As for the Second, the parts before arctly united, must
be somewhat separated by stretching: Reason must teach us that which cannot be
deprehended by the Senses. The last clause of the definition. That the Tumor is
to be named from that which hinders the Action; as Erysipelas a Disease of
Distemperature, because Heat does most hinder the action of the part: this is
frivolous, because not Heat only, but the bedewing of the Skin with Choler, by
the which it is stretched, hinders the contraction and extension of the Skin,
and so by a necessary consequence, the hindering of the motion of the Part
organical, wherein it is seated. To conclude, This definition may be applied to
other Griefs than a Tumor, as to the Headache, which is a Disease most commonly
compounded of distemperature of the Humors, and solution of Unity, and may have
its denomination from the diversity of the Humor causing it.

Wherefore seeing neither the definition of Fallopius out of Galen, nor the
definition of Fabricius ab Aquap^nd^nte, can abide the trial of the Laws of a
good definition, we must assay to give another; which shall be this: A Tumor
against Nature is most frequently a Disease, sometimes a light Affection, for
the most part incident to the organical parts, increasing their quantity above
Nature, by reason of receiving of superfluous Humors sent from other parts.
Here I will labor to yield a Reason for every point of this Definition. The
Genus is a Disease, because it hinders the Actions; sometimes it is a Passion,
or light Affection, which hinders not the action of the Part, as appears in
small Oedematous Tumors, and Scirrhosities: And therefore these Modifications
frequently, and sometimes are added. The subject of a Tumor is a part
organical, sometimes by its own Nature organical, as a Finger or Toe, sometimes
Organical only by Office, as when the use of a similar part is performed by an
Action: as it appears in the Skin, one of the uses whereof (...) send forth
by its Pores insen^^^ Perspirations, fuliginous Vapors, and superfluous
serosity of the Blood by Sweat, and Ichors of Humors in the beginning of Tumors
and declination by discussive and resolutive Medicaments. The form of a Tumor
is quantity increased, whereby it differs from all other Griefs. The cause of
increase of quantity, is receiving of superfluous Humors, which is done two
manner of ways, to wit, Affluxion, and Congestion; Affluxion is, when an Humor
offending either in quantity or quality suddenly with violence seizes upon
any Member, either by reason of the weakness of it, the rarity, looseness,
dependency, heat, or pain, or because the whole Body is full, or cacochymical,
and the parts sending strong. Congestion is, when a Humor is collected in any
part by little and little, by reason of the weakness of the concocting and
expelling Faculty of the same: So that a Tumor against Nature is a Disease
always compounded, against Fallopius in his Treatise of Tumors, c. 3. For there
is always a solution of Unity, either Manifest, or Latent and Occult, and this
he grants; for he says, and de hac conveniemus: we shall agree concerning
this. Besides this, the quantity is increased, and that always to Reason and
Imagination, although not to the Sense, as has been said of an Erysipelas.
Moreover, you shall hardly find a Tumor without some distemperature, either
simple, or compounded. I have insisted somewhat the longer in clearing the
definition of a Tumor against Nature, because there is great contention
concerning it amongst Authors, both Ancient and Modern.

Now order of Doctrine requires, that we speak somewhat of the causes of
Tumors: These are either External or Internal. The Causes External are in
number Eight. 1. The Air, if it be contagious, it causes Tumors, as Carbuncles,
and Botches in the Plague time. 2. The touching of things exceeding temperature
in the active qualities, as we see in the application of Vesicatories, and
sitting long upon any cold Seat. 3. Too hard binding of the part, which causes
sometimes Gangreens. 4. The application of an attracting instrument to the
Body, as Cupping-glasses, and Horns. 5. Whatsoever may cause a solution of
Unity, as Wound, Fracture, Luxation, or Contusion. 6. Biting of Beasts, whether
they be venomous or no. 7. Taking inwardly things offensive to Nature, whether
it be by the excessive quantity, as when by too liberal drinking Wine, an
Erysipelas seizes upon the Head; or by a malign quality, as we may see fall
out after the taking of Arsenick or Mercury sublimate. 8. Immoderate Motion,
whereby immoderate Heat is procured, whereby the Humors become more subtle, and
the passages to the weaker part more patent.

Now the part is weak, First, by Nature, and that either by reason of its
substance, it being spongy and loose, as Glandules; so we see frequently
Parotides behind the Ears, and Buboes in the Groins: Or by reason of the
natural Humidity of the Part; so Tumors more often appear in the Flesh than in
the spermatick parts. A Part also naturally is weak by reason of the situation;
for the dependent Parts are more apt to receive influence of Humors, as the
more high are to receive Halitus; so it is often seen, that it rising from the
Stomach, or some inferior part, causes in some the Falling Sickness. A Part,
Secondly, is weak by accident, and that by reason of Errors committed in the
things not natural, as Air, Meat and Drink, Exercise, and such like, whereof
much is spoken in that part of Physic which is called Physiologia. So that to
the causing of a Tumor in a Part, there be required the weakness of the part
which receives, patent passages, preparation of the Humor, and the strength of
the Part sending.

The internal Causes of Tumors are either Humors or Flatuosities; The Humors
are either Natural or Unnatural: The Natural are either sincere, as Choler,
Phlegm and Melancholy; or mingled, as some of these with Blood; for Blood is no
where sincere, but according to the Humor mingled with it, which is
predominant, it is called Choleric, Phlegmatic, or Melancholy Blood. The
Humor unnatural is Water, as in the Dropsy, for it never can become
nourishment. Some add a Third cause of Tumors, the interposition of a solid
Body, as in the Hernia intestinalis, zerbalis, exomphalos. Of Tumors which are
caused by reason of strange things, as Worms, Lice, Bones, Nails, Hair, Grisly
Substances, and such like, I will speak when I come to the Third part of
Chyrurgery, called (...) or Ablatrix, which takes away superfluities. But time
admonishes to come to the setting down of the principal differences of Tumors.
In this matter I will leave all needless and fruitless distinctions of Tumors,
from time, as that some are new, some old, some short, some long enduring: from
the quantity, as that some are small, some great, some of a mean bigness: from
the condition of them, as that some are mild, some malign, some curable, some
uncurable, and such like; which either do not greatly further the knowledge and
curation of Tumors, or else are to be set down to some purpose in the
explication of every particular Tumor. Only now in my general Discourse of
Tumors, which is to show Light unto that which shall hereafter be spoken in the
special Doctrine of each, I will meddle with the differences taken from the
material Cause of Tumors, from whence spring the main principal Species of
Tumors, unto which all others may be reduced.

All Tumors then are either simple or compounded. The simple are caused either
of Humors or Flatuosity: the Humors are either Natural, or Unnatural: the
Natural Humors are Four, Blood, Choler, Phlegm and Melancholy: If Blood, which
neither in the Veins, nor without, is found sincere and unmixed (as has been
said) cause a Tumor, it is called Phlegmone or Inslammatio, according to Galen.
lib. 2. ad Glaucon. cap. 1. Of the diverse kinds of it, which have their
denominations from their places, and of the diversities which arise from the
complication of it with other Humors, I mean to discourse when I come to the
particular Treating of it: For I mean not to confound Particulars with
Generals, because this would breed Confusion, and so deprive Men of the Fruit
of that which is delivered. Of all other Tumors a Phlegmone deserves the first
place, because it is caused of Blood, which is the Son of Nature, first
begotten, and the Treasure of Life. If Choler cause the Tumor, it is called
Erysipelas; these Two are hot Tumors. If Phlegm cause a soft and white Tumor
like it self, it is called Oedema, unto which diverse pituitous Tumors are
reduced, of the which I will speak in their proper places. If a Tumor very hard
be produced of the melancholy Juice, and without pain, it is called Scirrhus;
these two last are cold Tumors. If a Tumor be caused of Water contained in any
part, it is called Tumor aquosus: If from flatuosity; Emphysema; these two last
Tumors are the offsprings of Crudity, caused by the weakness and defect of the
natural Heat. And seeing these have the material cause different from that of
others, I will speak of these in several Chapters, as was done in every other
particular Tumor. Besides this, they require other Medicaments than the rest of
the main Tumors do, as shall be showed when we come to the Curation of them,
differing them from the rest. I see no reason why they may not be accounted
several Tumors; one cannot truly say that either Hernia aquosa, or flatuous
Tumors of the Joints, can be reduced to the aforesaid Four principal Tumors, or
that they can be cured by the same Indications of Curing, and Medicaments which
are applied to the other. You see how I have set down six simple Tumors, for
fewer I cannot, if you consider either the diversity of the material Causes, or
the diversity of the Topical applications, or the evidence of Doctrine. The
combination of these begets the compound Tumors; in these compound Tumors, what
Humor is predominant, that carries away the denomination: As for example, if
Blood abound more than Choler, the Tumor is called (...). If Choler be
predominant, it is called (...), and so in all other combinations of Humors in
Tumors, which shall be presented to your view. When you have noted the
Pathognomonical signs of each of the simple principal Tumors; it is an easy
matter at the first sight to discern the kind of Tumor, and what compound
Medicaments are to be applied to it. Hitherto have I Declared unto you the
Opinion of Hippocrates, Galen, and of the rest of the Grecians; as also of the
Arabians, concerning the material Causes of Tumors.

Now I will show you what Paracelsus and his followers think of this point:
First then they acknowledge but Two Elements, Water and Earth; for if they
should not grant so much, they could not be counted in the number of the
Faithful; for in the very first Verses of Genesis mention is made of both.
Secondly, they account the Humors parts of the Body, and so the causes of no
Griefs, but erroneously; for if they were parts, they would be endued with
Life, which they are not. Thirdly, they would have some Action, whereof they
also are deprived: only they have an Use, which is to nourish the parts.
Besides this, they maliciously dissemble the Doctrine of the rational
Physicians and Chyrurgeons, for they make each Humor, contained in the mass of
Blood, either Natural, or against Nature: the Natural they make either,
Alimentary, which nourishes the parts, or Superfluous, which Nature reserveth
for some other uses: of this abounding, Diseases proceeding of fullness are
engendered, called Plethora: of the Humor against Nature, causing impurity,
Cacochymia is caused; so Choler in the Veins and Arteries is natural, and
Alimentary. In the Cystis fellis, and in the Porus bilarius, the superfluous i^
contained: if it leave the appointed Receptacles, and pass to the habit of the
Body, it causes the Yellow Jaundice; if by adustion, it become Bilis atra, it
procures Cancers and Wolfs; so that they hold not the natural, but those that
are unnatural to be Causes of Diseases.

The Paracelsians appoint Three Principles of all things, Sal, Sulphur and
Mercury, and not only by resemblance, or allegorically, but really: by Sulphur,
they understand the fatty substance; by Mercury, the waterish substance: by
Salt, the Earthly substance. Distill Cloves, there come Two Humidities, the Oil
and Spirit: in the bottom the Earthly substance stays, which has Two Parts,
Terra repurgata, the Crystalline Salt, and Terra mortua the Black Earth. The
life of the Salt is a strong Water, which if it be by distillation drawn, it
leaves but a Terra damnata, only fit for the Dunghill. This Salt preserves the
Body from putrefaction. From Defects in these Three, they will have all
Diseases to proceed, and concerning Tumors against Nature, the Hot they will
have to proceed from Sulphur and Mercury; and the hotter the Tumor is, the more
Sulphur to concur. The cold Tumors they will have to proceed from Mercury and
Salt, and according to the looseness, or firmness of the Tumor, the more Salt or
Mercury to be required, as in an Oedema more Mercury, in a Scirrhus more Salt.
This is their Doctrine concerning the material Causes of Tumors. In my judgment
it is the safest course to insist in the Footsteps of the Ancients, for their
way is plain and easy; no Man can deny that there are Four Humors in the mass
of Blood, as may appear when it is drawn out of the Veins: Choler swimmeth
about the Blood, which is known by its bright Redness; Melancholy is in the
bottom, which is deprehended by its grossness and blackness; now Phlegm uniteth
these Two last Humors, and makes them tough. The Puracelsian Doctrine is full
of difficulties, which he makes more obscure by coining strange Words, as his
Reader will perceive; so that his Discourses are but a kind of canting
Philosophy. Nevertheless I thought good in plain terms to acquaint you with it,
that when any Emperick shall make a show of Learning, by using these terms, you
may find him out, and esteem of him as he is: that is, Like that Head which the
Wolf afar off espied, representing the Head of a living Man, but coming near,
and seeing it but curiously carved, affirmed it to be Pulchrum caput, sed sine
scientia, A comely Head, but without Wit.

CHAP. II.
Of the general Indications of Cure in Tumors.

HAving set down the Definition, Causes, and Differences of Tumors, I will set
down the general Indications of cure in Tumors.

Now an Indication is That which shows what course is to be taken for the
recovery of Health: The general Indications are taken either from the Matter,
or from the times of every Tumor; in the Matter, we are to consider the motion
of it, and its nature. As concerning the motion of the Matter; it is either in
flowing, or it is received already into the Part. The Causes of Fluxion are
Two, Plethora, or fullness and Cacochymia, an ill complexion: Plethora or
fullness is twofold, Ad vasa, and Ad vires: Ad vasa is when the Veins are only
full, and the Body notwithstanding quick and nimble; this is twofold, Pura,
when there is a due proportion of the Humors of the Body; and Impura, when
there is an excess of any of the Three Humors besides Blood, as Choler, Phlegm,
or Melancholy. Ad vires, is when there is such a fullness, as causes
sluggishness of the Body: this requires Evacuation by Phlebotomie, as
Cacochymia by Purgation. As for Phlebotomie, Three things are to be observed
concerning it. 1. The manner: In Fullness, Quoad vasa, at one time so much Blood
is to be drawn as is requisite; but in Fullness, Quoad vires, because Strength
is somewhat abated, you are to draw Blood by repetition, and not all at one
time. 2. The quantity, how much then is to be drawn, the Weakness or Strength
of the Party will inform you; for in a weak Body you are to draw less, in a
strong Body more. Strength and Weakness are to be discerned by the Functions:
The weakness of the natural Faculty is discerned by Crudity of Urine, and
Excrements of the Body; the weakness of the vital, by a weak and small Pulse,
as also breathing weak and Sick; the weakness of the animal Function is found
out by defect in moving and feeling; by the integrity and Perfection of these
Three Faculties, the strength of the Party is perceived: But we must diligently
distinguish between languishing and weakness indeed, and oppression of the
Faculties by reason of Fullness, making them dull and slow; for, as in weakness,
great Moderation is to be used, so in Oppression we may more bountifully and
boldly suffer the Vein to run. 3. The Third thing to be observed in Phlebotomy,
is the end of it, wherefore it is instituted; the scopes of Blood-letting are
Two; Derivation and Revulsion: Derivation is the drawing of the Humor to the
part adjacent, or of the same side by opening of that Vein, or a branch of it,
which is inserted into the part affected: as for example, if in Diseases of the
Head or Neck, we open the Cephalica in the same side: and even in this there is
a kind of opposition, to wit, high and low; for in Tumors of the Groyn, we open
Vena poplitis: thus they do also who open this Vein in Podagra, if the Gout
invade the Foot. This kind of interception we use, not only because there is a
plentiful Fluxion to the part affected, but because a speedy Interception is
required, lest the natural heat of the Part be oppressed, or the rupture of a
Vessel ensue; so in Inflammation of the Lungs and Side, we open the Liver-Vein
of the same Side, and draw Blood plentifully. Revulsion is a drawing of the
Humor to a part opposite: Of this there are Four differences: 1. From the
higher to the lower parts, as from the Head to the Feet. 2. From the Right Side
to the Left. 3. From the Forepart to the Back, which we shall do if we apply
Leeches in Diseases of the Breast or Belly. 4. Is when we draw from the Center
unto the circumference, as in applying Ventoses with Scarification to the Neck
in Diseases of the Brain, as in the Apoplexy, and Lethargy. Vesicatories
perform the same.

But one may ask, which are to be accounted high, and which low?

I Answer, That all those parts which are above the Navel, including also the
Liver and Stomach, are accounted high: but the parts below the Liver are
accounted low, as the Kidneys, and Genitals in Man and Woman.

This kind of Interception we use in Two Cases: First, if the Matter flow but
slowly, and so a sudden Interception is not required. Secondly, If we are to
open a Vein to prevent a Disease, as Vena cubiti for to free one of a Fit of
the Gout. But this kind of drawing has no place in contagious Tumors, if they
appear either in the upper or lower parts; for whether they appear either
behind the Ears and Armpits in the upper parts, or in the Groins in the lower,
Revulsion must be by the Vena cava, which is inserted into the Right Ventricle
of the Heart: Now whether any contagious Vapor or Humor can be sent by this
passage safely; let every judicious Person consider.

Now there is a difference between Revulsion, Derivation, and Evacuation; for
in the former two, Motion is required, but in Vacuation the Humors must be
quiet. In the translation of Humors flowing from any part, we must mark
according to Hippocrates, that it be done (...) Secundum rectitudinem, by
observation of a straight course; and that is done two manner of ways.

First, by the rectitude of the parts, as the Left with the Left, and Right
with the Right, and the hinder with the Fore-parts. Secondly, by the rectitude
of the Vessels: As for example, The Liver-Vein of the Arm has a kind of
streightness with the Veins ascending to the Head: So if one bleed immoderately
at the Right Nostril, by applying a Ventose to the region of the Liver, the
Flux cease: If it flow from the Left Nostril, it must be applied to the
region of the Spleen.

Having set down how Plethora is to be abated, if it cause Fluxion, we are to
show how Cacochymia is to be removed, which is not so much, by reason of the
quantity oppressing, as by reason of an evil quality offending a part. Now this
Matter offending in quality, it either moves from place to place, or it
rests where it had its first invasion; if it move from place to place, it is
the safest course to abate the Humors wherein this quality is resident by
Phlebotomy, lest it seize upon some principal part: if it be quiet, resting
contented with the first place, then let us use Purging, expelling the Humor,
whether it be Choler, Phlegm, or Melancholy, with appropriate Medicaments,
which Physic prescribes in that branch of the Curative part of Physic, which
restores Health by the administration of inward Medicaments. Having set down
the Indications which are taken from the motion of the Humor, we must come to
those which are taken from the nature of it.

Now the Humor if self is either not contagious, or contagious: If it be not
contagious, the Fluxion of it proceeds from Three causes: The First is the
strength of the part sending the Humor, which it does, either because it is
burdened with the quantity, or pricked on by the quality; we have showed what
is to be done in these cases. The Second is the thinness of the Humor. The
Third is the attraction of the affected part. When Fluxion is caused by reason
of the thinness of the Humor, if we cannot use Phlebotomy, or Purging, as in
Children, decrepit Persons, and in Women with Child in the First and Last
Months: then we must use Revulsion, and this is done six manner of ways. 1. By
Ventoses without Scarification, as when we apply a Ventose to the region of the
Liver, when one bleedeth too much at the right Nostril. 2. Painful
constriction, or binding of the Parts, as Arms and Legs: but we must first ^rub
the Parts hard which are to be bound; and if we bind the Arm, we must use a
Ligature in three Parts: First, near the Arm-pit. Secondly, a little above the
Elbow. Thirdly, about the Wrist. In the Legs we must use a Ligature near the
Groin, a little above the Knee, and near the Ankle. 3. Painful Frications when
we mean to revell from the Center to the Circumference. 4. Bathing of the Parts
with very hot Water. For First, by reason of the pain it does revell. Secondly,
it does discuss, because it opens the Pores. And in Fevers, by bathing the
Limbs Sleep is procured, the Vapors ascending to the Head. 5. Vesicatories,
which are used in an Apoplexy, Lethargy, and such like. 6. Fontanels, and they
are of great use, applied to diverse Parts, for the preventing and curing of
sundry Griefs: If the Fluxion be procured by the attraction of the part
affected, there are two Causes of Attraction: First, the distemperature of the
Part. Secondly, Pain. If distemperature of the Part be the Cause, it must be
removed by its contrary: but seeing it is most commonly a hot Distemperature,
things cooling are to be applied, as by applying Clothes moistened with Oil of
Roses or Violets cold; but when the Clouts become hot, they are to be removed,
and cold to be applied, or Clothes moistened in the juice of cold Herbs. If we
apply Unguents, as Infrigidans Galeni, Resatum Mesuis, de cerussa Rasis,
Populeon, we must not apply the Unguent immediately to the Skin; but on a thin
linen Cloth; for it keeps the Unguent from drying, and does not hinder the
breathing out of the Vapors, which the immediate application of the Unguent
would do, and so by stopping of the Pores, would increase both the Heat and
Pain.

And in application of Pultesses, they are to be spread between the foldings of
a Cloth dipped in some convenient Oil or Liniment; for so it does not hinder
Perspiration, and the applications are removed more easily from the part. This
in your practice is to be noted, and the inveterate Error to be shunned. If the
ways by which the Humor passes, be too ample and patent, and a hot
Distemperature joined, then things astringent and cooling are to be applied,
Roulers and other Clothes being moistened in them. Wherefore in this case
Myrtle-Berries, Red Rose Leaves dried, Pomegranate Rinds and Flowers, Sumach,
Sloes, Oaken and Owlar Bark boiled in Red astringent Wine, or Vinegar and
Water, or new and fresh Tanners Woose, and strained, are effectual. The Parts
therefore by which the Humor passes, are to be rouled somewhat strait with the
Rouler, Clothes, Stupes, or Pledgets and Bowlsters being moistened in this
Liquor, and wrung: You may also apply astringent and defensive Emplasters drawn
upon Leather; such an one as this, rad. torment. bistort. symphyt. ros. rub.
gallar. balaust. malicor. sang. drac. boli Armen. santal. rubr. ceruss. an. j.
cerae albae iij. ol. myrtil. j. misc. fiat ceratum. So much then shall be
sufficient to have been set down, concerning the attraction of the affected
part, by reason of the Distemperature of it: Now we must come to the Second
cause of the Attraction, which is Pain. There are Two causes of Pain, solution
of Unity, and a venomous Quality: If the solution of Unity proceed from the
affluxion of Humors hot or sharp distending the Parts, the Pain is to be eased
with Medicaments convenient; these are of two sorts, Anodyne, and Narcotick;
Anodynes gently contemperate the Part, by reason of the conformity which they
have with the Nature of Man. They are hot in the first Degree, and of subtle
parts; such are Milk, old Sallad-Oyl, Butter, Hogs Lard, Fat of Hens, Ducks,
Geese, Eels, Man, Badgers, Bears, the Oil of Chamomil, Lilies, Earthworms,
Linseed, Dill, Sweet Almonds, Eggs, the Pulp of Cassia tempered with the Oil of
Roses, the Pulp of sweet Apples with the Powder of Saffron. Narcoticks deprive
the part of the faculty of Feeling, such are Opium, Hemlock, Henbane, the
deadly Nightshade, Mandrakes, and the Apple of Peru, or prickly Apple: these we
are to use when the former will not prevail, and when by reason of Watching, a
Fever, or Faintness is to be feared. Sometimes in extremities they are used
Solitary, sometimes with their Correctives, to wit, things hot, if we fear
stupefaction of the part, unto which they are to be applied: Such things are
Castoreum, Saffron, Cinnamon, Cloves, Pepper, and such like. If the biting of a
venomous Beast, as of a mad Dog, or a Viper, or Adder; or the stinging and
pricking of any Beast, as of a Scorpion, or Insect, as a Hornet, be the cause
of a Tumor, we must address our selves to meet speedily with the Poison. If
therefore a venomous Beast bite or sting, First, the part is to be scarified,
and Ventoses to be applied, then the part is to be fomented with Theriaca
Andromachi, dissolved in strong Wine-Vinegar, and Stupes moistened in the same,
applied to the same; or it is to be fomented with the Oil of Scorpions, and a
Pledget wet in it to be applied: And above the Pledget, this emplaster of
Fallopius De tumoribus, c. 14. is to be spread warm, pic. naval, j. sal. nitri.
ss. semen. sinap. ij. cepar. allior. sub prun. coctor. an. iij. assae foetid.
sagapen. an. ij. stercor. columbin. j ss. aristol. rotund dictamn. alb. an. j.
ol. lil^albor. ss. fiat emplastrum: Pigeons also, and Hens, and Cocks divided
in Two parts, and applied hot, are available. Sometimes the actual Cautery is
to be applied, to tame the malignity of the poison, if the poison has
continued above three days: Besides this, two things, more are to be done;
First, according to Galen, 3. De loc. affect. 7. the Member is to be bound
hard, three or four Inches above the part bitten or stung: Secondly, Antidotes
inwardly are to be given; but chiefly Theriaca Andromachi, for many days
together in a Liquor, fit for the constitution of the diseased Person: Now if
the matter of a Tumor be contagious, we are by all means to draw it out of the
Body, lest if it go in, it deprive the Person of Life, as in the Plague; or
infect the Liver, as in the Pox; wherefore Ventoses and Medicaments attractive
are to be applied: Such is Fallopius his Emplaster set down before, for the
attraction of Poison. In the Plague we must not fail to minister Antidotes,
even three times in a day, and to procure Sweat: Such are Theriaca, Electuarium
de ovo, Electucrium Orvietani, or this of Fallopius, De tumor. 9.. baccar.
juniper. caryophyll. nuc. moscat. rad. enul. an. ij. rad. aristol: utriusque,
gentian. an. vj. semen portul. acetos. doron. ben. rub. an j. spodii, oss. de
cord cervi. ligni aloes. corallii albi and rubri, rasur. ebor. baccar. lauri.
mastich. croci. an. ij. rut. morsus diabol. an. j. Pulp. ficuum and dactylor.
an. j. cinamomi. liqiurit. an. ss. tormentill. card. bonedict. dictanini albi.
an. iij. amygdal. dulc. and pinear. excort. an^ j. agaric. trochiscat, vj. rad.
peuced. ij. terrae sigillat. and bol. orient. an. j. zedoar. ij. caphur. iij.
spec. 3. santal. spec. diarrhod. abbat. an. ij. cort. citri, pulv. smaragdi an.
j. moschi j. Theriac. Andromach. and Mithridat. an. j. fol. mali Armeniaci ss.
cum syrup. de cort. citri. and de acetositate citri. an. triplo pondere, ad
pulveres, fiat Electuarium. Vt Electuarium fiat magis efficax addi possunt
cornu rhinocerotis iij. and cornu cervi praeparat. ss. Dos. a j. ad ij. in
conveniente liquore.

The stinging of Wasps or Bees is cured with Mallows stamped and mingled with
cold Water, or Chaulk applied with the same.

CHAP. III.
Of the Four Times of a Tumor, and the Indications taken from them.

HAving spoken of the Indications Curative, taken from the Matter of a Tumor,
now it follows that we speak of the Indications taken from the times of a
Tumor; The times of a Tumor are Four, the beginning, the increase, the state
and declination. The beginning is thought to be, when a part begins to
swell, although the actions be not hindered: in the beginning repelling
Medicaments are required; repelling Medicaments are cold, and of gross
substance, for they are to thicken the part affected, and to cool the inner
parts of it; such are the Whites of Eggs, Plantain, Nightshade, House-leek;
Prickmadam, Purslain, Rose-buds, dry Roses, Myrtle-berries, Pomgranate-flowers,
and Rinds, Galls, Sumach, Quinces, Sloes, Bole, Sanguis draconis, terra
sigillata, sour Wine, Tanners Woose; which you may apply either single, or
mingled according to your scope. But in six cases we are not to use repelling
Topics; First, if the Matter be vonemous or malign, lest it being repelled,
should assault some principal part. Secondly, if the Matter be critically
turned to a part, so that it be not a principal part, by the error of Nature:
for then it ought to be repelled; as when in a burning Fever, the Matter being
sent to the Meninges, causes Ravings. Thirdly, when the Body is either
Plethorick, or of an ill habit. Fourthly, when the Humor flows to the
emunctories. Fifthly, If the Part have but little Natural Heat, we are not to
use repercussives, lest the natural heat be extinguished, and the part
mortified. Sixthly, when the pain is vehement, for then Anodynes are only to be
used.

We are to think the Tumor to increase, when the part is stretched, and
symptoms are increased; and seeing in the increase the Matter partly flows,
and partly possesses the Part, you are partly to repel, and partly to
discuss: but if the Matter flow with such force and plenty of Humor, that it
threatens corruption of the Part, or if the Humor which flows be thick, and
so hot that the Part feels a burning, as in a Carbuncle; then are you to use
sensible Evacuation by Scarification; but where we cannot conveniently Scarify,
Leeches are to be applied, as in the Hemorrhoids, and other griefs of the Anus.
Now discussion is an evacuation of a thin Matter gathered in a Part, by
insensible evaporation, procured by the natural heat increased by proportionate
Medicaments. In this description insensible is added, to distinguish it from
Evacuation by Incision, Scarification, or Leeches, which evacuate sensibly to
the Eye: the principal efficient cause is the natural Heat; the adjuvant
discussive Medicaments; the Matter which is to be resolved, must be thin; for
it is in vain to go about to discuss a thick substance, because it is not apt
to yield Vapors. In the description, discussive Medicaments are said to help
natural Heat by increasing of it; which being done: First, the Humor is made
thin. Secondly, it is resolved into a Vapor. Thirdly, it is drawn from the
Center to the Circumference. And Lastly, expelled by the Pores of the Skin.
Such Medicaments then must be familiar to Nature, and these perform their
Office, by consuming superfluous Humidity: and so they must be hot and dry.
They must then be subtle, that they penetrate to perform these Offices. There
are three degrees of discussive Medicaments, they in the first Degree are hot
and dry in the second, as dry Figs, Bran, Chamomil, Ammoniacum, galbaman,
Leaven, Lilieroots, Melilot, the roots of Marsh-Mallow, Goos-Grease, and old
Hens Grease; and because such assuage pain, we ought always to begin with them.
In the second Degree are Calamint, Hysop, Penniroyal, Mint, Cummin-seeds, and
Dill-seeds, Bean-flour, the Flour of Vetches, Fenugreek, Horchound; the root of
Peucedanum, the roots of the Birth-worts, Lions Fat, old Bear's Fat, old
Badger's, Cat's. Dog's, and Man's Fat: these are somewhat dryer and hotter than
those of the first. In the third Degree, are those which are dry and hot in the
third Degree, as Niter, unslacked Lime, Sulphur vive, assa-foetida, etc. These
are to be applied according to the constitution of the Party, and as the
skilful Surgeon shall see cause.

The state of a Tumor, is when it is come to such a Degree, as that it can go
no farther in bigness, the signs of it are these: First, all symptoms, as
Tension, Pain, Redness and Fever symptomatical are at the height, and remain
uniform, neither increasing nor decreasing: Secondly, the Veins of the parts
adjacent continue in the same fullness and dilatation. In the state we are to
use Anedynes discussives by reason of the pain.

We are to think that the declination of the Tumor begins, when the
aforesaid Symptoms begin to abate, and then strong discussives only are to be
applied, whereof we have spoken before. In necessity we may use these which are
found in the Shops, Diachylon cum gummi, Diachylon magnum Mesuis, Diachylon
ireatum. Tumors end not only by Resolution, but often by Maturation; and
sometimes by Induration and Corruption: and as Discussion is better than
Apostemation; so Induration is better than the Corruption of the part: Fifthly,
Tumors do end changing the place, as when in a Pleurisy the Matter falls
upon the Midrif, and causes an Empyema.

CHAP. IV.
Of curing of a Tumor come to Suppuration.

HAving showed the Method how Tumors are to be discussed: now order requires
that the means be set down, how a Tumor is to be handled, if it tend to
Suppuration, or Maturation, which by our usual term is called Apostemation. And
we are enforced thus to go to work: First, if the Humor be too plentiful; for
then the natural Heat cannot well rule it, and so it must be seconded by
foreign and external Heat, which working upon superfluous Humidity, causes
Putrefaction according to the Philosopher. Secondly, when it is crude; for then
we must labor to concoct it with Medicaments, which are peptica or coquentia.
Thirdly, when the Matter is hard, and then we must use emollient Medicaments.
The Medicaments which procure Quittour, they are temperately hot and moist: and
these help natural Heat, that it may the more easily elaborate the Matter, and
make it fit for expulsion, and this we call Concoction. Emollient Topics are
used to soften any Matter indurated, and such are dry in the first degree, and
hot in the first, and in the beginning of the second. But it is to be noted
that there is a difference between Tension and Hardness, and Relaxation and
Softness: a part stretched will yield to the Finger pressing it, if it be hard
it will not; and where there is any Tension, relaxing Medicaments are to be
applied, which attenuate and open the Pores, and therefore they must more
discuss than dry, and so be drying in the first Degree, and hot in the second.
A part indurated must have emollient means applied to it: whereof we will
speak, when we come to discourse of a Scirrhus. In the Cure of Apostems, we are
to do two things: First, we are to prepare the Matter; and make it fit for
expulsion: Secondly, we are to evacuate it when it is prepared. To accomplish
the preparation of the Matter, first, we are to remove Accidents: Secondly, to
procure the maturation of the Matter. The Accidents are these, Pain, Tension of
the Part, Hardness and Heat. As for the asswaging of Pain; narcotical or
stupefactive Medicaments have no place here: For first, they extinguish the
natural Heat of the Part; which is the principal efficient cause of Coction:
Secondly, by thickning of the Matter, they make it more rebellious; wherefore
we are to use Anodyne Medicaments, whereof we have spoken already: you shall do
well to apply a Cataplasm of White Bread Crumbs, let the Apostem be dressed with
this, or such a Medicament Morning and Evening.

If the part be stretched, use relaxing Topics, such are those which are
temperately hot, not drying much, and of subtle parts, as White Hore-hound,
Archangel red and white, Mullen, Dill, Chamomil, Fenugreek, Mercury, Melilot,
Turnips, the leaves of Marshmallow, the Flour of Barley, Beans and Vetches; of
these you may frame to your purpose such a Cataplasm; Take of Chamomil-flowers
beat to Powder ij. pugils, of Barley, Bean, and Flour of Vetches, of each ij.
ounces, of Marsh-mallow Leaves and Flowers pounded a handful: boil these in
Beef or Mutton Broth strained, and the Fat taken away, until they come to the
consistence of a Poultess: Then add to it the oil of Dill, Chamomil and
Rapeseed, of each one ounce: dress the Apostem with this or the like, Morning
and Evening.

If hardness hinder, use those things which are emollient, as all manner of
Fats, the Dregs of Oil, all sorts of Mallows, Coltsfoot, Bugloss and Burrage,
Quinceseed, Milk, the White Lilie, Linseed, Figs, Raisins, the Marrow of
Beasts, Oil of Sweet Almonds, Marshviolets, Ammoniacum, Bdellium: of some of
these you may frame a Cataplasm after this manner: Take of Linseed Meal or
Powder iiij. of Marsh-mallow Roots, and Whitelilie Roots boiled in Water, and
well bruised, of each ij. of Violet Loaves and Flowers, and Coltsfoot Leaves,
of each an handful; boil these in new Milk, until they come to the consistence
of a Cataplasm; unto the which add of Ammoniacum dissolved in Muscadine, of the
pulp of Figs and Raisins of each j ounce, and so make up your Cataplasm.

If immoderate heat trouble you, apply things cooling: but let them be cold
either in the second degree, or beginning of the third, for the Reasons yielded
against Narcoticks, when I spoke of Pain; such are umbilicus Veneris, or Navel
Woort, Prick-madam, Sengreen, Barley meal, Endive, the pulp of the Pumpion,
Sea-tong Lettico, Ducks-meat, the Water Lilie, the Water Archer, Plantain,
Garden Nightshade: of these Herbs with Barley meal boiled in fair Spring Water
make a Poultess, and to every pound of the Poultess, add ij. of populeum
unguentum, and j ss of unguentum rosatum Mesuis.

You may demand of me, how long the Application of these Topics, prescribed
for the removing of Accidents, is to be continued?

I answer, until the Accident be almost gone, with the which you encountrred,
and then you may proceed to assist Nature, by increasing natural Heat by
ripening Medicines, which was the second intention of curing Apostems set down
by me: Now those Medicaments which help Nature, ought first to stop the Pores
reasonably, only suffering the sharp Vapors to breath out, and to detain those
which are mild and somewhat thick, which are the secondary cause of Coction. In
this respect then they ought to be viscous and tough in substance, which are
temperate Oils, and Mucilages, which by Galen are called Emplastica; secondly,
they ought to be familiar to Nature, and so temperately hot and moist. One
thing is to be noted, that hotter Simples are to be chosen, according to the
temperature of the part, if the Tumor seem somewhat cold: wherefore if the
Tumor seem hot, only Maturatives in the first Degree are to be used, and those
of the second Degree to be shunned: But if the Matter be somewhat cold, then
you are to use Maturatives of the second, yet always mingling with them some of
the first Degree. And the Reason is this, because the Medicaments of the second
Degree dry too much; wherefore those of the first Degree are to be added, in
the which there is much moisture, which is requisite to Coction and producing
of Quittor. These Medicaments are called Concoquentia, and Pus moventia, and
Suppurantia: such ought to be hot and moist, as the Body of a temperate Man is,
and so they ought neither to dry or moisten, or to heat or cool immoderately,
but only to preserve and increase the Natural Heat; for a Suppurative
Medicament ought to answer the Constitution of him unto whom it is applied.

Of these Suppurative Medicaments there be two Ranks; In the first, are
Mans-grease, which asswageth Pain, also Ducks-grease, Geose-grease,
Hens-grease, Oil of sweet Almonds, sweet sallet Oil, Mallows, sweet Butter,
Figs, Fenugreek, Lily-roots, Linseed, Wheatflour; a Cataplasm made of
Wheatflour, Water and Oil, an Emplaster made of yellow Wax, and Oil called
Cerelaeum, Violet-leaves and flowers, Saffron; For an Example, I will set down
the description of a Suppurative. Cataplasm compounded of some of these of the
first Rank: Take of Milk a pint, in the which boil of Wheat-flour a quarter of
a pound, of Violetleaves, and Mallow-leaves stamped, of each a handful, of
Lily-roots, and Figs boiled in Water, until they be soft, of each two ounces;
when they are come to the consistence of a Poultess, add of Saffron beat to
powder a dram, of the Oil of Linseed, sweet Almonds, Lilies, and Mans-greese,
of each one ounce, and so make up your Medicament, If the Tumor be immoderately
hot, mingle always with your Suppuratives those things which are cold and moist
in the first Degree, as Violet-leaves, Lettuce, the pulp of Pompions, Grownsil,
Succory, Dandelion, and such like. If on a sudden you be called, and be
required to dress a Tumor tending to Suppuration, you may have recourse to the
Apothecaries shop, and with these things dress it. First, beat some Oil of
Violets and fair Spring Water together, taking two spoonfuls of Oil, and one of
Water, with the which embrocate the Tumor; then apply a Pledget moistened in
this, upon the part which is like to break, or be opened: and above the
Pledget, Diachylon simplex if the Tumor be hot, or Diachylon cum gummi if it be
but a little exceeding the ordinary temperament.

Suppuratives of the second Degree are these; Terebinthina, Ammoniacum,
Galbanum, Sagapenum, Gummi elemi, Pix navalis, Burgundy Pitch, Saffron,
Leaven, Fenugreek, Onyons and Garlic roasted under the Embers, old Butter, Oil
of Chamomil, and Dill, old Hens-grease, Badgers-grease, and Bears and
Dogs-grease, Wheatflour, Flour of Linseed. In the Shops there are Emplastrum de
mucilaginibus, Dialthaea cum gummi, Diachylon cum gummi, Diachylon magnum.

Now I will set down a compound Medicament, framed of these Simples: Take of
the Roots of white Lilies, of the Roots of Marsh-mallow, of Onyons boiled and
bruised, with the Liquor of each iiij. of Leaven ij. of Linseed-meal j. and a
half, of Saffron beat to powder a dram, of Ammoniacum and Galbanum dissolved in
Muscadine, and the pulp of Figs, of each j. of Oil of Chamomil and Lilies, so
much as will make a Cataplasm of a good consistence.

In Strumes, and Bubo's venereal, use this: take of Diachylon cum gummi, and
Emplastrum de mucilaginibus, of each j. of Garlic and Onyons roasted under the
Embers of each ij. of Dialthaea cum gummi, Mans-grease, and Bearsgrease of each
j. make a Medicument. One thing I would have you to note, that Suppuratives of
this Degree are fittest for all contagious Tumors, and that to all such, Onyons
and Garlic roasted, and mingled with other Medicaments, are to be applied, for
being thus prepared, they lose their sharpness, attract, and become familiar to
the Natural Heat.

How Apostems are to be opened.
Hitherto you have heard, how that Tumors that cannot be discussed are brought
to suppuration: Now I am to deliver unto you, how the Matter, which is
suppurated, is to be discharged. This is done by opening the part: Now some
things are to be considered before the Action, some in the Action, and some
after the Action. Before we go about to open an Apostem, 1. We must be certain
whether it be ripe enough; 2. We must resolve how to open it.

The signs of Maturation, are; I. The Tumor, by contracting it self, seems
less than it was in the state; for while the Natural Heat concocts the Matter,
Vapors are raised by the heat, and so the part is distended; but when the
Matter is concocted, the Elevation of Vapors ceases, and the Tumor falls
somewhat. II. The Tumor draws it self to a point, or prominence; because when
Nature overcomes the Matter, it draws it together, and draws it to the skin.
III. Hardness and tension are much abated; for Maturation being procured, many
Vapors are discussed, which before stretched, and made the skin hard. IV. By
pressing the Matter with the Finger, we find a fluctuation or coming and going
of it: but we must be circumspect when a Tumor in a great Joint is offered unto
us, as in the Knee; for if we press lateral parts of it, a certain undation
will appear. V. The party feels much ease in the part; partly, because some
of the sharp Vapors are resolved; partly, because the Matter concocted does
make the parts more loose. VI. The vehement Heat cease; for the Humor being
come to Maturation, the unnatural Heat abateth, and the natural Heat rests.
VII. If the part inflamed has changed the color, and of red is become white,
and chiefly in the pointed place. VIII. The Scarf skin becomes shriveled, and
ruffled; and this is a good sign, for it shows that unnatural Heat has left
it.

The second thing which we said was to be resolved upon, was the Instruments
with the which the Apostems are to be opened. They are three; I. The Lancet or
Incision-knife, of the which there be diverse forms set down by the Ancients: of
the which we will speak, when we come to discourse of particular Operations for
the which they are required. II. Is the Caustic or Pyrotical Medicament. III.
The Actual Cautery, which we will leave willingly to Horseleeches, unless we be
destitute of other means, and when we are to make a Fontanel, or to stay a
great Flux of Blood, or to dry a Carious Bone, or to correct a Cancerous part
after that it is extirpate.

As for the Steel Instruments, we are to use them. First, if Apostems be in the
Face, to avoid the filthiness of the Scar, after the Curation. Secondly, in
small Tumors: for so they will be the sooner whole.

As for Caustic Medicaments, we use two sorts of them: the first is made of
the strongest Sope-lees, boiled to the consistence of a soft Stone. The second
is made of the like Lee, and unslaked Lime, boiled to the form of a firm
unguent. The first is best in Tumors which possess the unequal part. The second
is most convenient, if they be in parts concave or hollow.

These Pyrotical Medicaments are most fit to be used in five Cases: I. If we
intend to keep the Tumor long open, as is requisite in all contagious Tumors,
in the Plague, and Pox: for where the Caustic is applied, there is always loss
of substance, and by it we make the Orifice round, which of all other Figures
most slowly is cured. II. In large Apostems Causticks are fittest; for by them,
making as large an Orifice as we will, we shall spare tenting and enlarging of
it; besides, the stretched parts will the sooner be contracted. III. They are
to be used in deep Apostemations, such as happen in the Belly and Back, for so
the Matter shall have a readier way for Evacuation. IV. They are best, when a
Flux of Blood may be expected. V. We apply them, when we will gratify timorous
persons.

When we are come to open the part, then these things are to be observed: I.
The Nature of the Part: this teaches us, to shun Veins and Arteries by reason
of Hemorrhage; and Nerves, Tendons and Membranes by reason of the pain which
ensues. II. If the Skin only be to be divided, then the Apertion is to be made
strait; but if a Muscle also be to be incided, it must be done according to the
Fibers of it. III. Apertion must be made in the depending part, because the
Matter will be more readily so drawn out. IV. It must be done where the part is
thinnest, for so less pain is caused. V. The Apertion must be proportionate;
for if it be too little, then the Matter, especially if it be thick or grumous,
cannot be well drawn without expression, which makes way for Callosity and
Fistulation. If it be too large; First, the Scar will be the more ugly;
Secondly, the parts subjacent will be made more apt to be altered, by receiving
the impression of the cold air. VI. We are to know how much Matter is to be
evacuated at one time: In great Tumors, and those which are in the Joints,
great moderation is to be used; for with the Matter many Spirits breath out,
and so are spent: from whence extenuation of the Body, yea, and Death sometimes
ensues. The Surgeon who is to do this, ought to be resolute, cheerful in
countenance and speech, and no ways scrupulous: otherwise he shall make the
Patient dismayed, and fearful, which does much weaken and abate the courage of
the Patient.

Things to be observed after the opening of an Apostem, are these: First, the
removing of Accidents which most commonly fall out. Secondly, the manner of
dressing. The Accidents are most commonly three, Fainting, chiefly if the
parties be Children or Women, but above these, Effeminate Men. Secondly, Pain.
Thirdly, a Flux of Blood.

As for Fainting, we may labor to prevent it by giving the Patient a Caudle,
Aleberry, or some styptick Wine with a Toast, as Alegant and Tent; or if it be
like to ensue, we may give them some Cordial Water with Sugar, as Cinnamon
Water, Treacle Water, or Aqua coelestis. If pain ensue, let the part be
embrocated with Oil of Roses, and the third part of Wine beaten together: yet
the Oil is not to touch the brims, if Apertion has been made by Incision, lest
it cause Spungeous Flesh to grow. As for staying of Blood, I will set down the
fittest, and most effectual means to perform this, when I shall come to
discourse of Wounds, for in them it does most commonly fall out.

As concerning the manner of dressing after opening: If this has been done by
Incision, either a Tent, if it be small, or Dosels with Pledgets armed with
some restringent Powder, as Bole, Frankincense, and Flour tempered with the
Whites of Eggs, if it be large, are to be used: and so it is to remain for the
space of four and twenty hours. If the Caustic be applied, then Dialthaea
simplex, or sweet Butter melted in a Saucer, are fit to be used until the
Eschare fall; then the Cavity is to be Incarnate: If in the mean time Spungeous
Flesh appear, it is to be removed with Catheretical Medicaments, as Mercury
precipitate alone in gentle Bodies, or mingled with Alume, taking the third
part of this in harder Bodies: yea, you shall be enforced sometimes to use
Pulvis sine pari, and other Fistula Powders with some Medicaments which cool
and assuage pain, as Vnguentum Populeum, and Rosatum Mesuis: take my word,
Basilicum and Aureum are not so fit.

Last of all it is to be sealed up with Epulotical Medicaments, as Diapalma,
Emplastrum de minio, Vnguentum comitissae, and Desiccativum rubeum. If a Tumor
end into an Induration, it must be cured as a Scirrhus, whereof I will speak in
its proper place. If it end in the Corruption of the Part, the way of Dressing
this shall be set down in my Discourses of Gangraena and Sphacelus. If a Tumor
cease, because the Matter removes from one place to another, as when Pleuritis
ends in Empyema, neither does this belong to this place.

CHAP. V.
Of a Phlegmon.

HItherto I have delivered a General Method, common to the Cure of all
particular Tumors: now it remains that the use of the General Method be showed
in every special Tumor. Of all which a Phlegmon does first offer it self:
First, because it is caused by the most excellent Humor, to wit, Blood, the
Matter of Spirits, and the Storehouse of life. Secondly, because it is most
frequent. Thirdly, because very often, as a Symptom, it accompanies other
Griefs, as Wounds, Contusions, Ulcers, Luxations, and Fractures, as Galen
notes.

The word (...) is derived from (...), from whence flagro to burn, by reason of
the heat of it.

A Phlegmon is a Tumor hot, proceeding from the affluxion of Blood to any part.
In this Description, where it is said to be hot, in this it is distinguished
from an Oedema and a Scirrhus; and in this that it is said to proceed from
Blood, it is distinguished from an Erysipelas caused of Choler. The differences
are taken either from the Material Cause of it, or else from some parts which
it possesses. The differences of it taken from the Matter are these: It is
either Legitima, or Notha, either truly bred, or else bastardly.

A proper Phlegmon, is caused by good Blood, only offending in quantity: Good
Blood is discerned by Color, Taste and Consistence: In Color it is Red, in
Taste Sweet, in Consistence Mean, between Thick and Thin: of all other Humors
it is most plentiful in the Body, because it affords nourishment to all the
Fleshy Parts, as they have their being by it, next unto Blood.

The Signs of a true Phlegmon, are six. I. This Tumor begins suddenly, and
increases speedily, because the Matter is plentiful, and the ways by which it
is sent, very patent and large. II. It is very hot in respect of an Oedema and
a Scirrhus, but yet not so burning as an Erysipelas. III. The Color of the
Part is of a fresh ruddy Color. IV. In this Tumor there is great Pain with
Pulsation. V. There is a great Tension in the Part, because the unnatural Heat
raises plenty of Vapors which distend the Part. VI. The Veins, which before
lay hid, become conspicuous and appear either ruddy or blackish.

Now as I said, there be many differences of Phlegmons taken from the parts
which they invade: for if it siese upon the Meninges or Membranes of the Brain,
it is called (...); if the Conjunctiva of the Eye, then it is called (...); if
the Muscles of the Throat, it is termed Angina; if the Pleura, it is named
(...); if the Lungs, (...), if the Kidneys, (...), if the Emunctory of the
Heart and Liver, Bubo; of the Brain, Parotis; of the Gums, Parulis; of the
Almonds, Paristhmia, Tonsillae: Phlegmons in other parts have no proper Names,
and even these I will refer to the particular practice of Physic, wherein they
are handled, and rest contented with the Doctrine of External Tumors.

These Inflammations, if they possess the external Parts, and be but moderate,
are healthful; as those which either by reason of the plenty, or Malignity of
the Humor, threaten a Gangrene and Mortification, are to be suspected. A
Phlegmon which happens in a young Body, in a hot and thin Part, the Body being
not very Plethorick, and in the Summer time, is more speedily cured; but quite
contrarily, if the conditions be opposite. The Indications curative of a true
Phlegmon are taken from the times of it: The Means by which we cure are two, a
convenient Diet, and Artificial Application of apt means for curing of the
Tumor.

In the beginning therefore, we must prescribe such a Diet as is able to hinder
the increase of superfluous Blood, and the Fluxion of that which is already
bred: wherefore the Diet must be spare and slender, only sufficient to sustain
Nature, and withal cooling: the Patient then shall rest contented with Chicken
and Veal Broth with Bread, Calves-feet and Trotters stewed, and seasoned with
Vinegar, thin Oatmeal-Gruel, Panadoes, Sallets made of Sorrel, Spinach,
Purslain boiled in thin Chicken or Veal-broth, seasoned with some Vinegar,
Verjuyce and Sugar; let his drink be small Beer or Ale, altered in the Summer
with Burrage, Bugloss, and Burnet, Barley-water, fair Spring Water, wherein the
crust of a Loaf has been boiled, and made pleasant with Oxysaceharuin, or
Oxymel diureticum, mingling with a pint of the Water one Ounce and an half of
the Syrup. If the Party be weak, Almond-Milk made of Barley-water, or the thin
Broth of a Chicken may be permitted: If we intend to make the Blood unapt to
motion, and to detain it in its own receptacles, then we must institute a Diet,
having these three qualities: First, it must cool: Secondly, it must make a
constriction, and pursing up of the Vessels: Thirdly, it must be Diuretical, or
move Urine, for much serosity being carried away by the passages of Urine, the
Blood must be made thicker, and therefore not so apt to flow. But we must take
heed that such a Diet be only prescribed to such as are in their constant age,
and have large Veins; otherwise, we shall cause new obstructions, and multiply
griefs: Now to this purpose you may ordain Broths, wherein Lettuce, Sorrel,
Spinach, Purslain, Marigold-Flowers, Columbine-Flowers and Leaves have been
boiled, Calves, Sheeps, and Lambs Heads boiled, with Green Sauce made of
Sorrel, or Alleluja, beware of Alliaria, Jack of the Hedge, or those Simples
which are hot. Young Chickens with Gooseberry sauce, are good, and such like.
We must forbid Wine, Flesh, Eggs, fat things, and such as breed too much Blood;
and Spices, because they heat the Blood; and piercing Drinks, as stale Beer or
Ale, because they further the Fluxion of Blood. To procure Urine, an
Almond-Milk may be made of a Ptisan, having an emulsion of Seeds of Pompion,
Gourd, Musk-melon, Cucumber, Lettuce, Purslain, and Plantain. Now the Humor
flowing immoderately we must labor to stay, by abating of it, and that by two
manner of ways, by Phlebotomy and Purgation.

As for Phlebotomy, if the Inflammation be great, the Party young and strong,
and full of Blood, in the Spring time we may take a pound at a time; yea more,
and iterate it if occasion be offered. In others, moderation is to be used,
according to the strength of the Patient. If a Phlegmon possess the parts which
are above the Liver, then the Veins of the Arms and upper parts are to be
opened: but if it invade the parts which are under the Liver, as the Kidneys
and Genitals, then the branches of the Vena cava descending, are to be opened
in the Hams or Aukles. One thing is to be noted in Phlebotomy; that we open not
Veins too far distant from the part affected, as Vena frontis in diseases of
the Feet; for we should evacuate too great a quantity of blood, before we
should intercept any tending to the part affected. If a Phlegmon has succeeded
the staying of the evacuation of Blood from any part, as from the Nose, the
Womb, the Haemorrhodes, means must be used to procure these accustomed
evacuations.

As for Purgation, one may doubt whether it do any good, seeing no Blood, the
matter of a Phlegmon, can be by this means spent. I Answer, That it helps by
accident, and two manner of ways: For First, Purgation dries the Body, and so
depriving the Blood of moisture, makes it more unapt to flow. Secondly, By
Purging sharp Humors, the part which sends the Humor is not irritated. But in
this case, lenitives are better than eradicatives, because they rather cool
than heat, and cause no ebullition in the Humors: such are Diacatholicum,
Electuarium lenitivum, Electuarium de sebesten, or a Bole, or Cassia, Tamarinds
and Sugar of Violets.

As for the Topical means, which respect the Part and the Humor, they are of
three sorts: Revellentia, Defensiva or Intercipientia, and Repellentia: now
Medicaments appointed for Revulsion, must be hot and attractive, and applied to
the parts opposite and remote, as I have set down in the general method of
curing of Tumors. Of this kind are Fomentations, made of all sweet Smelling and
hot Garden Herbs boiled in strong Wine, as Calaminth, Penniroyal, Mints,
Lavander, Tansie, Time, Smallage, Feverfew, Sage, Savory, Pellitory of Spain;
the Fomentation must be very hot, the use of them must be continued until the
part become Red. Sometimes, if the affluxion of the Humor be fierce, and
plentiful, we are to apply Vesicatories, as in Inflammations of the Eyes to the
Neck: but seeing there is none who is but initiated in the practice of
Surgery, who is not fitted with a Medicament for this purpose, I mean not to
mispend Time in setting down any descriptions of them. But let me tell you,
that some forts of Ranunculus, or Crow-foot green beaten and applied to the
Part, are more secure than Cantharides; but the Bull-foot, which is found in
most Pools by the Highway, is most excellent, being beaten, and applied in a
Walnut-shell, or Muscle, or Cockle-shels, choosing the ampleness of the Shells,
according to your purpose. If in the Winter time you apply Cantharides, you
must correct them with Eupherbium, Mustard-feed, and Seeds of Ammi, or Dill;
for if a Vesicatory of them be applied to thin and tender Bodies, it will cause
difficulty of Urine, which will be removed speedily, if the Party drink of an
Almond-Milk, made of Barley-water, wherewith the emulsion of the great cold
Seeds has been drawn, and that warm. Besides these local Medicaments, we are
to use Cupping-glasses, sometimes without scarification, if the Party be
timorous, and not very Plethorick; but if the affluxion of Humor be great, and
the Party strong and courageous, let scarification be used. Frictions also are
not to be omitted; but in this exercise we must begin at the Extremities, as
Hands and Feet, and end at the Trunk of the Body, to move the Humor, and then
to labor again from the Trunk to the Extremities, to bring it downwards.

As for Ligatures, in applying them you must begin at the Trunk, as about the
Shoulder, and articulation of the Thigh, and end in the Hands and Feet, making
three Ligatures in each Extremity; above the Elbow, and about the Wrist in the
Arm, and above the Knee and Ankle in the Leg.

After revelling means, Defensives succeed. These are applied to stay the Humor
from flowing to the Part, these must be cold, dry, and astringent, sit to purse
in and contract the Vessels. These are applied to the parts adjacent, and which
have less Flesh, as to the Joints, and parts above the Joints; for there the
Vessels are most conspicuous, and so are most apt to receive the impression of
the Medicament: so if the Foot or Hand be inflamed, let the Defensives be
applied to the Wrist, and so forth.

Of these Defensives there be two sorts; for some are more mild, as Plantain,
the White Rose, Nightshade, Red Poppy, or Water of the Spawn of Frogs, Red
Wine, Vinegar and Water, Vinegar and Oil beaten together, called Oxelaeum,
Verjuice, and such like, and these are to be applied to tender Bodies, and who
have but small Veins. Others are stronger, as Bole, Sanguis draconis, Terra
sigillata, Pomegranate-Flowers and Rinds, the Decoction and Pulp of Sloes,
Sumach, Myrtle-Berries. These are to be applied to Bodies of a strong
Constitution, of ripe age, and who have large Veins, and in the Summer time,
and when the Inflammation is fierce. Of such Simples we may make Compositions
fitting our purpose: as mingling Mastick and Bole with the Oil of Myrtles, and
Whites of Eggs: The juice of Housleek with Milk is good, or a Decoction made of
Red Wine and Tanners Woose, wherein are boiled Red Rose Leaves, Myrtle-berries,
Sumach, and Pomgranate Pills and Rinds: Ceratum Santalinum is good. It is not
amiss to have in readiness, such a Defensive as this, Take of White Wax Ten
Ounces, of the Oil of Myrtles, and Quinces of each one Ounce, of Mastick
powdered iij of Bole, and Sanguis Draconis beat to Powder, of each j Ounce and
two Drams, make up an Emplaster: in the Winter you may add more Oil.

Last of all Repellentia offer themselves, which beat back from the part
affected, the Humor: The differences of such Medicaments, taken from their
Substance are these. Some are cold and moist, as Housleek, Lettuce, Purslain,
Succory, Ducks-Meat, the White of an Egg, Navelwort, Nightshade. These are
mild, you may use either the juice of these, or a Cataplasm made of
Barley-meal, and these Juyces. There be some Simples which more strongly cool,
as the Henbane, Mandrake, Hemlock, the deadly Nightshade, and the Apple of
Peru: but these are only to be used, when the Party is of a flourishing age, in
the Summer, and the Veins large.

Again, some of these repelling Medicaments are astringent, cooling and drying:
these repel more strongly than the cold and moist, for besides cooling,
whereby the natural heat flying its contrary, does carry with it the Blood;
they draw together the part, and as it were wring out the Humor: of these some
are weaker, as Vine-Leaves, Plantain, Horse-tall, Perlwinkle, Bulls of Red
Roses; Oil of Myrtles: others are stronger, as Bole, Pomegranate Pills and
Rinds, the Pulp of Sloes, Oaken and Owlar Bark, Red Wine with Alum, Galls, the
husks of Green Nuts: These if they be untimely used, wrinkle the Skin, increase
the pain, indurate the Humor in the Part, and sometimes return the Matter to
some principal part.

Wherefore if we will use aright the Simples, and make good Compositions of
them, we must diligently consider the temperature of the Party and Part, the
measure of the Inflammation, the quantity of the Humor flowing, the Sense of
the Part, the Passages and Air. Wherefore the hot Constitution of the Party and
Part require gentler Topics, because the excess is not great, only Heat being
added to Heat; but if the Part be cold, and less fleshy, it requires stronger
Medicaments; because the Cause must be greater: So in Children and Women we use
milder than in aged and strong Bodies: So the greater the Inflammation is, the
stronger ought the Topic to be: So if the Part be very sensible, gentle means
will serve, but if it be dull it will suffer stronger; so if the Veins be
large, stronger Medicaments are to be applied, because plenty of Blood must
needs flow. Last of all, according to the constitution of the Air, the local
means must be stronger or weaker.

Now it is time to determine, what Medicaments are to be used in the beginning
of a Phlegmon: If therefore the Party be offered while the Blood is wholly yet
in the small Veins, then repelling Medicaments are to be applied. 1. Because
the Humor as yet is but little and thin. 2. Because Nature as yet is strong. 3.
Because the Matter is not as yet settled or impacted; If some of the Humor be in
the small Veins, and some be without them in the distances of the Muscles, and
Parts, or in the Porosities of the similar Parts, we are to apply Medicaments
partly repelling, partly discussing, but more of the repelling.

Nevertheless, in cases repelling, Medicaments are not to be applied unto
Phlegmons beginning. 1. If the Parts be weak, lest their Natural Heat be
quenched; such are Glandulous parts, for they are loose and flaggy. 2. When
there is intolerable pain; for then repelling Medicaments would cause greater
pain, and so perhaps cause Fainting and Swouning. 3. When the Cause is
External, and causes the Malignity, as the biting of a Mad Dog, or of an
Adder; for so the Matter should be driven to the principal Parts. 4. When the
Fluxion is vehement, and much Matter flows; for then repelling Medicaments
should be fruitless; the Part not being able to resist.

But seeing I have set down both the Simples, and some forms of compound
Medicaments of the Two kinds of Topics, I will abstain from all idle
repetition, and pass to the Augmentum, or increase of a Phlegmon. In it then we
are to apply discussing Medicaments mingled with repelling, yet the repelling
during the whole course of the Augmentum, ought to have the Dominion; because
until the latt^r end of the increase, the greatest part of the Matter is within
the Vessels, and may be repelled; for when Blood is once slipped out of the
Veins, it cannot be evacuated by repelling, but by discussing Topics: These
are called also (...). They ought to be hot and dry in the Third Degree, and of
a piercing substance: For First, they must make the Blood thin and fluxible:
Secondly, They must convert it into Vapors; And Thirdly, They must evacuate by
the Pores of the Skin, by insensible Perspiration. In thin and tender Bodies in
the Summer time, mild Medicaments are most convenient, as Chamomil, Dill,
Fenugreek, Bean-Flour, and such like. But in compact, and thick Bodies, strong
are required, as, Sulphur vivum, Opopanax, Galbanum, Mints, Horehound,
Wormwood, Calamint, etc.

When the Phlegmon is come to the state, or height of pain, Tension, and Heat,
Medicaments equally repelling, and discussing are to be applied; because a
great deal of the Humor is yet in the Veins, and much without them.

When a Phlegmon is come to the Declination wherein Tension, and Heat begin to
abate, a discutient Fomentation, made of Chamomil Leaves and Flowers, Melilot,
Dill; Tanlie, Sage, Lavander, Mints, Scordium, and such like, and the
application of Diachylon cum gummi will serve, or a Cataplasm of Bean-flour,
Chamomil, Dill, Melilot boiled in strong Ale-Lees, adding to the Cataplasm, Oil
of Chamomil, Dill, and White Lilies; but if the Inflammation be great, the Pain
vehement, the Heat intolerable; if there be Tension and Swelling,
notwithstanding the following of the former course, then Suppuration or
Apostemation is to be procured.

If the natural Heat in the Body of Man be prevalent, it turns all things to
nourishment, that are familiar to Nature; if any Excrementitious part be in
them, it turns that into Vapors, and expels them by insensible
Perspiration. But if the natural Heat be enforced to encounter the unnatural
Heat upon equal terms, then the natural Heat discusseth some part, and the
unnatural Heat not able to corrupt the Part, suffers a Mean to be wrought,
that is, Generation of Quittour. Now unto which of them the Victory inclines,
may be gathered by the qualities of the Quittour. If the Quittour be good, it
is White, because it is caused by the coats of the Veins, Arteries, Nerves, and
Membranes, which are in color White, and transmute the Matter into the same
color. Secondly, thick, because Concoction is performed by thickning. Thirdly,
Uniform, because the natural Heat has an absolute Dominion over every part of
the Quittour. Fourthly, Not stinking, the natural Heat enduring no
putrefaction: If contrariwise the Quittour be pale, red, or black, thin,
unequal, of diverse substances, and stinking; then the unnatural Heat is
prevalent. Now how a Phlegmon, which must be Suppurate is to be dressed, I have
set down at large in the former Chapter of Apostumations of hot Tumors.

But because Examples are the most effectual Instructers, I will give you one
out of Hildanus his Ob. Chir. Cent. 3. Ob. 100. A Gentleman's Servant, a young
Man, after over-violent walking, was troubled with a pain in his Foot, and not
minding it in the beginning, the pain increased, and an Inflammation ensued. I
was called, and found his Foot all swelled, and seized with a Phlegmon. The
pain was great, and reached to the Hips, he was in a continual burning Fever,
he was restless, delirous, and fainted away sometimes; I ordered his Cure in
this manner. I prescribed him a spare Diet, and purged him with the following
Potion. Elect. de succo rosar. Pulv. Passavanti cum Rhabarb. jss. Syrup. ros.
solut. j. Cum decoct. agrimon. veron. rad. Lapat. acut. cortic. inter. radic.
frangul. and sem. anis. f. potiuncula. This purged him gently. The Evening of
the same day, two hours after Supper, I gave him Laudani gr. vj. He rested well
that Night, and was a little refreshed. Wherefore the next day I took away Ten
Ounces of Blood from the Arm of the Side affected, (for he was Plethorick and
strong). Hereupon his Fever, Pain, and Inflammation abated much; immediately
after I anointed his Hip, Knee, and all thereabout, that was free from
Inflammation, with the following Liniment Ol. ros. ij. Ol. Lumbric. Axung.
human. a. ij. M. And because according to Galen l. 1. de simp. med. facult. Fat
things ought not be applied to the part affected, I applied the following
Cataplasm. Sem. Cydon. Foenugr. Alth. a. ij. Pulv. rosar. ss. Coquantur cum s.
q. aquae adformam cataplasmatis. Postea admisce vitellum ovi cum albumine.
Applicetur and renovetur quotiescunque opus videbitur. After these Medicaments
were applied, the pain began to assuage very much, and the place of the Matter
appeared, to which I applied Emplastr Basilic. and the Cataplasm prescribed all
over the Foot. And because the Sole of the Foot is very callous, I diligently
fomented it with hot Milk, wherein Fenugreek Seeds, and Mallows, and
Violet-Leaves were boiled. Then I shaved off the Callosity with a Razor, as I
have written, Obs. 97. Cent. 7. in the Cure of a Whitlow. Thus in a short time
the Aposteme broke in the Sole of his Foot, and he recovered. While I attended
his Cure, his Mistress told me, that a Kinsman of his died in a few days of the
like Disease. which need not seem strange to any Man. For the Part being
Nervous, and endued with a most exquisite Sense, it must needs occasion most
grievous Symptoms.

Hitherto I have spoken of a true bred Phlegmon, engendered of sincere Blood.
Now I shall take notice of a Bastard Phlegmon, which is caused by the admixtion
of some other Humor with Blood: If Choler be mingled, it is called (...). If
Phlegm (...): If Melancholy (...). Seeing compounded Diseases are to be
discerned, esteemed, and cured by the Diseases and Simples solitary, I need not
say much of them. If Choler abound, we are to cool and moisten in a higher
measure than in a true Phlegmon. If Phlegm he joined, we must heat more. If
Melancholy, we are to use things warming and softning. They who have written of
Tumors after a Phlegmon, have set down Discourses of a Gangreen, Carbuncle, and
a Pestilential Bubo, but immethodically: For a Gangreen is an Accident, which
does not only accompany Tumors, but Wounds, Ulcers, Fractures and Dislocations,
and that more often; of it therefore I will discourse in its proper place. As
for a Sphacelus Mortification, or Sideration of a Part, it belongs to the third
part of Surgery, called (...), which teaches to take away superfluities:
such as a Member is by Accident, when it is deprived of Life, and threatens
Corruption to the whole, unless it be taken away.

A Carbuncle and a pestilential Bubo are symptoms of the Pestilence, as a
Venereal Bubo of the Pox. Of these I shall treat, when I discourse of Diseases
unto which they are to be referred.

Unto Phlegmon (...), that Tumor which is called Panus, Panis, or Panicula in
Latin, from the Figure in Greek (...), is to be referred: It is a Tumor most
commonly in the glandulous parts, somewhat flat, in the top whereof there is a
representation of a Pustle: It has a greater heat and pain than the bigness of
the Tumor shows; it is commonly most discussed without Apostemation: Because
it has more Choler than Blood. But contrariwise (...) has more Blood than
Choler, for it quickly comes to Suppuration. In form it is like to Panus, a
Weavers Roll or Touch-wood, and has this same seat, to wit, the Glandules in
the Emunctories. As for furunculus or (...), it is engendered of gross Humors
mingled with Blood in Fleshy Parts most commonly: If it be mild and come to
Maturation without any great difficulty, it may be referred to (...). If it be
hard and stubborn to medicaments, it is to be referred to (...).

CHAP. VI.
Of an Erysipelas.

BEfore I speak of an Erysipilas, that I may make all things more plain, I will
tell you first the signification of this term Choler: Secondly, the diverse
kinds of Choler: Thirdly, the Signs of a choleric Person: For such an one is
most subject to this Tumor. Cholera then in Latin, and (...) in Greek
signifies not the Humor, which in English is called Choler or the Gall; but a
Disease, whereby this Humor is expelled vehemently by Vomit and Stool.
Nevertheless in our Vulgar Speech, and with the Barbarous late Writers, it is
taken for the Humor it self; and so I shall be enforced to use it. Thus much I
thought fit to insinuate to you, that you should not be ignorant of the proper
and learned significations of the terms of Art.

Now Bilis or Fell in Latin, (...) in Greek, Choler or Gall in English, is
either Alimentary, or Superfluous: The Alimentary is the fourth part of the
Mass of Blood dry and hot, which more properly might be called Bilious Blood:
the Superfluous, which serves not for the nourishment of the Body, is either
Natural or Unnatural: The Natural is that which in the Liver is separated from
the Blood, and sent to the Vesica fellis. The Unnatural comprehends four
sorts under it. I. Is the Vitelline, like unto the Yolks of Eggs yellow; but
thicker and hotter than that of the Gall. II. Is Porracea, which in color
represents the Leek, it is engrendred in the Stomach by reason of Crudity,
and eating of such Meats as engender it: as Garlic, Onyons, Leeks, and Milk in
Infants, who often by Stool discharge such an Humor. III. Aeruginosa, like
Verdigrease engendered of more vehement Heat, and corrupt Aliments in the
Stomach. IV. Is I (...) like unto Woad, it is more green than that which
resembles the Leek: It is caused of the Aeruginosa more burned, and comes
near to Atra bilis.

Now, a Man is thought to be of a Bilious Constitution, if he be Watchful,
Nimble, Hasty, Angry, and dreams of Fire and Thunder, his Urine is thin and
yellow, his Pulse strong, swist and hard, his Veins are large, the habit of his
Body is lean and dry, his color yellowish: cold things refresh him.

These things premised, I come to the Tumor Erysipelas it self; Of it I will
set down five things: The Etymon of the Word, the Nature of the Tumor, the
Signs of it, the Prognostics of it, and last of all, the Indications of curing
of it. 1. As for the Etymon of the Name of this Tumor it is called (...) in
Greek quasi (...): for the Ancients for (...), which signifies red, used
(...); and (...) signifies near, wherefore (...) is nothing else but a Tumor
in Color, coming near to Red, and tainting often the adjacent parts: for thin
and hot Blood, or Blood with which yellow Choler is mingled, dies the Skin
with the color of a pale Rose: the Nature of an Erysipelas is discovered by
setting down the Description, and Kinds of it.

An Erysipelas then is a hot Tumor proceeding most from Choler. In this
Description Tumor is the Genus: for this is common to an Erysipelas with all
other Tumors. In that it is said to be hot, it differs from Oedema and
Scirrhus: And whereas it is affirmed to proceed of most Choler, it is
distinguished from all the rest of the Tumors.

But here it may be demanded, whether an Erysipelas be caused of Alimentary, or
of superfluous Choler. I answer, that it is to be thought that it is caused of
the alimentary Choler, if it be exquisite: otherwise how could the yellow
Jaundise and an Erysipelas so much differ, if they both did proceed from
excrementitious Choler? For first, the yellow Jaundise possesses the Skin of
the whole Body, but an Erysipelas one part only Secondly, an Erysipelas has
always a symptomatical Fever annexed to it; but the yellow Jaundise is most
commonly free from it. Thirdly, in an Erysiypelas there is always pain, but in
the Jaundise none. Fourthly, in the Jaundise the Skin is of a yellowish color,
but in an Erysipelas it is of a bright red color.

There are two kinds of Erysipelas, for it is either exquisite or not
exquisite, or a true, and a bastard one: As for an exquisite Erysipelas it is a
Tumor of a bright Red tending to Yellow, causing little swelling, very hot,
with a pricking pain, caused of alimentary Choler: this Choler abounding in the
Body, if part of it be turned into any part, it causes an exquisite
Erysipelas. The parts which it most commonly invadeth, are the Nose and Face,
for much thin Blood flows to these parts. Secondly, the Legs: for Nature
being moved by the plenty of this Choler, sends it first to the Emunctories
of the Groins, and from thence it descends to the Legs; it happens in the
Summer, because then Choler is multiplied; but in the Winter, because the Pores
of the Skin are shut by Cold, and so insensible perspiration hindered; and
because this Humor is thin, it spreads to a great part of the Skin.

As for the Signs of an exquisite Erysipelas, they are either taken from the
Qualities of the Humor which causes it, or from the differences between it and
a Phlegmon. The Signs taken from the Qualities of the Humor are these: The Pain
is great and urgent, the Heat notable, the Color a bright red tending to a
yellowness, the Tumor is small, only possessing the Skin, the Pulsation is very
small, and less than in a Phlegmon, First, because the Parts in a Phlegmon are
more compressed: and it reaches deeper. Secondly, because in a Phlegmon the
Humor is thicker, and cannot so easily be breathed out as in Erysipelas. The
differences between a Phlegmon and an Erysipelas are these. I. A Phlegmon
possesses the Skin, and the Flesh lying under; but an Erysipelas the Skin
only: the cause in an Erysipelas is the thinness of the Humor, which rather
disperseth it self through the Skin than heaveth it up. II. The Heat in an
Erysipelas is greater than in a Phlegmon: for sometimes the Cuticula is
blistered. III. The symptomatical Fever is greater in an Erysipelas than in a
Phlegmon: because Choler is hotter than Blood. IV. The pain in an Erysipelas is
less than in a Phlegmon: because in it there is only a hot Distemperature; but
in this a Solution of Unity, besides the Parts being stretched. V. In a
Phlegmon, the Color is of a dark red by reason of thick Blood lying deep; but
in an Erysipelas the Color is a brighter Red, tending to a Yellowness. VI. In
an Erysipelas there is a pricking pain, but in a Phlegmon a heavy and
stretching one. VII. The Skin in an Erysipelas being pressed yields, but in a
Phlegmon it does not: The Causes are the thinness and thickness of the Humor.
VIII. In an Erysipelas the redness vanishes away from the Skin, and it becomes
white, if it be pressed with the Finger, but in a Phlegmon it does not so. IX.
In an Erysipelas there is no stretching of the Skin, but in a Phlegmon there
is. Last of all, a Phlegmon sets it self in one place; but an Erysipelas
makes the parts adjacent red by spreading.

As for the Prognostics of an Erysipelas: I. That which proceeds from natural
yellow Choler is mildest: for no vehement Symptoms succeed: and besides, seeing
it appears in the outward parts, it is to be thought that the inner parts are
discharged of this Humor. II. As it is a good sign, if an Erysipelas be driven
to the outward parts; so it is fearful, if it return from the outward to the
inward parts, Aphor. 25. sect. 9. III. An Erysipelas appearing in the Head is
more dangerous, than in other parts: because if the Matter pass to the
Meninges, it causes Phrenitis or Raving; if to the Muscles of the Neck, the
Quinsie. IV. An Erysipelas appearing in Wounds, Ulcers, Fractures, and
Dislocations, is commonly Mortal; if it proceed not from the Application of too
hot local Medicines. V. If an Erysipelas tend to Suppuration, it is not good:
for then the Humor must be thicker than ordinary, and the Obstructions
stronger, and so the solid Parts are in danger to be corrupted. VI. If a Bone
being bare, the adjacent fleshy parts be possessed with an Erysipelas, it is
ill: For first, the Body must be troubled with sharp Humors: Secondly, Flesh
cannot be restored by such Blood.

There are four kinds of helps, Diet, Surgery, internal Medicaments, and
local Means. As for the Diet, our nourishment must be cooling and moistning.
Let the Patient then eat thin Chicken broths, altered with cooling Herbs,
Panadoes, thin Oat-meal Gruel, Sallets of Lettuce, Sorel, Purselain, and
Spinach boiled. If the Choler be very thin, the party may eat fresh Fish, which
live in clear sandy or rocky Waters, as Trouts, small Pickrels, Perches, and of
Sea-fishes the Whiting-maps, and Smelts; he may eat also of the Brain of a Pig
or its Petitoes, or Trotters with Vinegar and Sorel; let him refrain from all
Meats which are fat and sweet. Let his drink be Spring Water, boiled with the
bottom of a Loaf, made pleasant with some Oxysaccharum, or the distilled Waters
of Endive or Sorel; he may use a plain Ptisan. Galen, lib. 9. met. c. 5.
permits the Patient to drink as much cold Water as he will, for this cools the
Body, quenches Thirst, abates the heat of Choler, and cools the Liver: but in
this case the Season must be hot, and the Stomach good: with us Small-beer
botled is best, all sorts of Wine are forbidden. In the Summer, let the Air be
cool and moist, in Winter, let it be rather hot: for in this Season an
Erysipelas is caused of the constriction of the Pores of the Skin, by reason of
cold: let all perturbations of the Mind be banished, let sleep be procured; for
watching dries the Body. But if an Erysipelas be in the Face, watching is
best: for immoderate and long sleep fills the Head full of Vapors, whereby the
Grief is increased.

As for the Chirurgical helps, it may be doubted whether Phlebotomy be
necessary or no: for the decision of this doubt, these Propositions shall
serve: I. If an Erysipelas invade the Head, Neck or Face, the Cephalica always
is to be opened: lest a Phrenitis or Angina ensue. II. In an Erysipelas
Phlegmonodes, wherein Blood increases the heat, in what part of the Body
soever it be, a Vein is to be opened. III. In an exquisite Erysipelas in other
parts of the Body we ought not to let Blood: For first, by letting of Blood,
the Blood which remains moves more, and becomes more subtle: Secondly, the
qualifier of Choler is taken away: Thirdly, by taking away both good and bad
Blood together, the party is weakened.

As for the internal Medicaments, they ought always to go before the local, if
you except two Cases: I. If an Erysipelas be procured by an outward Cause, as a
Blow: II. If the Heat be vehement, and the Tumor be far from any principal
part. In these Cases we may apply something cooling and moistning, before we
give any purging Medicament. If an Erysipelas appear in the Head or Face, we
must open a Vein, apply Leeches, give a purging Medicament, prescribe a slender
Diet, and use Revulsions by Frictions, Ventoses, Blisterings, and Vomiting if
it appear in the Legs.

As for local Medicaments, we must look about us, for if we apply cold
Medicaments, the Matter may be repelled to the Brain, from whence a Phrenitis
may proceed, or to the Throat, which may cause an Angina: If you be enforced by
the importunity of the Patient, or standers by to apply a local Medicament;
Aetius counsels to apply a Swallows nest beat to powder, and tempered with
Honey, that it may represent a Liniment with a Feather. This is a safe
Medicament, for it only dries and repelleth not: We may also apply the
Decoction of Mallows with some Oil of Violets, or sweet Almonds. Now the
purging Medicaments which discharge Choler, these or such like will suffice,
Rheubarb, Tamarinds, Cassia extracted, Electuarium lenitivum, Diacatholicon,
Diaprunum solutivum, Electuarium de succo rosar. Caryocostinum. If it be but a
mild Inflammation, sharp Clysters made of the decoction of cooling Herbs, with
the aforesaid Electuaries will serve the turn.

Having set down the helps taken from Diet, Phlebotomy, and the ministration of
internal purging Medicaments, I must hasten to set down convenient local
Medicacaments; for in these we are most employed and busied: one thing is to be
observed, that we must not in any case apply astringent Medicaments, which are
cooling and drying: For seeing the Vapors in this Tumor are sharp, if they be
kept in, they might erode and corrupt the part. Now as concerning local
Medicaments; First, I will set down which they are: Secondly, how long they are
to be applied. These Medicaments ought to be cooling and moistning: but before
I name them, let me warn you, that first you refrain from Narcotical Simples,
unless exceeding great pain, and a part far from a principal part call for
them. Secondly, that you apply not unctuous and fat Medicaments: For first,
they most easily are inflamed: Secondly, they stop the Pores. Now the
Medicaments which are to be employed, are either Simple or Compound: The Simple
are Navel-wort, Horse-tail, Knot-grass, both the Plantains, Ducks meat, Garden
Nightshade, Lettuce, Purselain, the Poppies: First, the Juice of them
expressed may be applied: Secondly, the distilled Waters drawn from them, some
Powder of Myrrh having been infused in them. We may also apply Clouts wet in
the Juyces of the aforesaid Herbs, being mingled with Verjuyce or Vinegar. The
compound Medicaments are Ceratum infrigidans Galeni made of lb j. of Oil of
Roses, and iiij. of white Wax: this is to be washed with Water and Vinegar. You
may add to it the Juice of Nightshade. Heurnius has three good Medicaments:
The first is Castle-soap dissolved in Spring Water: The second, is Bulls dung
boiled in a Drying Pan with Vinegar, and a few Flowers of Chamomil and Elder,
until it come to the consistence of a Liniment: The third is made of two parts
of Aqua Spermatis ranarum, and one part of Rose Vinegar, wherein some Myrrh
must be infused: these may be safely applied to an Erysipelas of the Head, Neck
or Face: the Juice of Horse-dung is not only good, being applied to this Tumor,
but in Scaldings and Burnings also, if a little Camphor be added to it.

The Medicaments which are to be applied to an Erysipelas must be very liquid,
actually cold, and often changed; for when they become hot, they will rather
offend than profit, if they be not removed. The last thing which I promised to
set down concerning the local Medicaments, was, How long they were to be
applied? This we may find out by two Signs. The First is, If the Heat be
altogether abated, or almost: The Second is, if the Skin has recovered its own
color. When you perceive these two Signs, you must desist from applying
cooling Topics, lest the Skin become livid, or black, which threaten a
Gangreen, and sometimes Mortification. If this appear, What then is to be done?
First, a Fomentation is to be used, made of Calamint, Scordium, Wormwood,
Peniroyal, the lesser Centaury; and Betony boiled in a weak Lie made of
ordinary Ashes: After the part is sufficiently fomented, you are to apply
Hippocrates Cataplasm made of Barley-meal, Vinegar, and Oil of Roses warm: or
this, take of the Flour of Barley, Beans, and Vetches of each liij.. of a weak
Lie, iii j. lb. boil these to the consistence of an Emplaster, then put to it
iiij.. of Oxymel. If the discoloring of the Part pass through the Skin, and
the part be immoderately cooled, it will not be amiss to scarify the part which
only remains.

Hildanus Obs. Chirurg. 82. Cent. 1. gives good caution against using Oils in
an Erysipelas. He says, a certain Country fellow had an Erysipelas
Phlegmonocides in his Left Hand, who by a Barbers advice, anointed his Hand and
Arm for several days with Oil of Roses; whereupon Pain and inflammation ensued,
and all Symptoms grew worse and worse, till in fine his whole Hand Gangrened:
When he came to me, I treated him with Scarifications, and other Remedies
proper for the Cure of a Gangreen, and he was Cured. So that as Galen, l. 5. de
Simpl. Med. has advised, Oil is bad for Inflammations.

A Bastard, or spurious Erysipelas, is when with alimentary Choler another
Humor does concur. Now seeing Four other Humors may associate themselves to
Choler, so many kinds of a Bastard Erysipelas may be accounted. If therefore
some Blood be mingled with Choler predominant, (...) is caused: in this kind of
Tumor the Redness is more dark, and the Swelling not so spreading. If a
waterish Phlegm be mingled with Choler, then (...) arises: If gross Blood or
thick Phlegm concur with Choler, then (...) is caused: Lastly, If Choler
associate it self with the corrosive Salts of the serosity of Blood, it causes
Erysipelas ulcerosum, which breaks the Skin. But compound Humors are to be
discerned by the Doctrine of the simple, and the Medicaments are accordingly to
be applied.

Of that Erysipelas which breaks the Skin, there are two kinds, Herpes
miliaris, and Herpes exedens: Herpes miliaris is caused of a salt waterish
Humor mingled with unnatural sharp Choler: the signs of it are these. First,
many Pustules rise in the Skin like to Millet Seeds. Secondly, When they break,
a Matter issues out representing Quittour and Sanies. Thirdly, The place has
a mingled color between Red and Pale: This is without danger, the Medicaments
which are to be applied to this, ought to be cooling and drying, as Knot-grass,
Horse-tail, Plantain, Owlar, Willow and Oaken Bark, Pomegranate-Flowers and
Rinds, Myrtle-Berries, Red Rose Leaves boiled in Tanners Woose, Vnguentum album
Rasis, de cerussa, de minio, Diapompholygos.

Herpes exedens, called by Celsus, ignis sacer, and by some ignis Sancti
Antonii: it is caused of unnatural Choler, hot and sharp, corroding the Skin
only, by the which sign it is discerned from Phagedena, or (...). Wherefore if
many small Ulcers appear not, passing deeper than the Skin; you may pronounce
this to be Herpes exedens. In the curing of this, minister the decoction of
Sarsa, and after the fomentation of it with Tanners Woose, wherein cooling and
astringent Simples abovementioned have been boiled; apply this local
Medicament. cerae flavae ij. resinae pini. j. ss. terebinth. j. ol. myrtini.
vj. succi Nicotianae. iij. Coq. in ceratum molle. But here a question may be
moved, why Choler which causes the Yellow Jaundise does not ulcerate the Skin?
This falls out: First, because the Choler which causes the Yellow Jaundise
is dispersed; but in an Erysipelas it is united. Secondly, Because the Choler
is natural, and only excrementititious in the Jaundise, such as is contained in
the Vesicula fellea, and discharged into the Guts. Thirdly, because thin Phlegm
is mingled with Choler in the Jaundise: for this Disease ends with much
Sweating.

CHAP. VII.
Of an Oedema.

IN the subsequent Discourse of an Oedema, the Third general Tumor caused of
Phlegm, I will use the same method which I did in the Doctrine of an
Erysipelas. First then, I will set down what Phlegm is, Secondly, the
differences of it: and Thirdly, the signs of a Phlegmatic Person, and then I
will deliver the Doctrine of Oedema, for such an one is most subject to this
Tumor.

Phlegm then is the Fourth part of the mass of Blood, Cold and Moist: As
concerning the sorts of it, it is either alimentary, or excrementitious. The
natural as it is cold and moist, so it is without any foreign Taste: as Oil and
Butter are accounted Sweet, when as they have no rank taste. This Humor by the
natural Heat increased (as in Famine) may become Blood, and serve for the
restoring of natural Humidity: it ought rather to be called pituitons Blood,
than Phlegm.

Unnatural Phlegm is that which cannot be turned into Aliment: of it there are
three kinds. The First is Pituita acida, sour Phlegm, so called from the Taste
which it leaves in the Mouth, when it is spit out: This is a raw Phlegm, and
bred in the Stomach, through defect of natural heat: so that being drawn into
the Veins, it hardly can be altered. The Second is, Pituita salsa, salt Phlegm,
this is caused by the admistion of a thin salt Moisture: For of bitter things,
as Aloe, and Coloquint, mingle them with thin Humors as you will, a Salt Taste
never can be procured. In Sweat, Tears, and Urine, this Taste is manifestly
deprehended: a very Novice in Alchymie is able to make the Salt of Urine. The
Third kind of unnatural or excrementitious Phlegm, is Pituita vitrea,
representing in color and substance, melted Glass. This is very cold, thick,
and tough, and causes great pain, if it be detained in any part. Galen affirms
of himself; that being troubled with a vehement pain of the Belly, by injection
of the Oil of Rue, he was discharged of such an Humor, and so the pain ceased:
whereas before he thought that a Stone had stuck in one of the Ureters.

Phlegmatic persons are slow and sluggish, their Senses dull, they are sleepy,
they dream of Waters, Rain or Snow, they are not easily moved to anger, their
Pulse is soft, small and slow: their Appetite is not great, they are seldom
dry, they by the Mouth and Nose void many Phlegmatic Excrements: their Urine
is White or Pale, sometimes thick, sometimes thin; their Stools often are raw
and phlegmatic: The Blood, by what means soever it flow from the Body, is
pituitous: their Body is Whitish, Soft, and Coldish, they are subject to cold
and long Diseases, as the Dropsy, Lethargy, and such like: Lastly, they endure
Fasting well. These signs show natural and sweet Phlegm to abound in the Body.

Concerning an Oedema, or a Phlegmatic Tumor, I will discourse Five things:
First, The signification of the term Oedema: Secondly, The differences of it:
Thirdly, The Prognostics of it: Fourthly, The Indications of Cure: and Lastly,
What Tumors are to be reduced to it. As concerning the term (...) in Greek, in
Latin, Oed^m^: With Hippocrates and all other Ancients, it is the same with
(...), which signifies eminentia, eminence or bunching out: and so every
particular Tumor may be called Oedema. But with Galen, and later Authors, it is
taken more strictly for that Tumor which is caused of Phlegm. An Oedema is
either exquisite or not exquisite: an exquisite is either primary or
symptomatical: The Primary is caused of natural Phlegm, which is contained in
the mass of Blood, and by reason of the too great quantity of it, incites the
expelling faculty to discharge it into the weaker and depending parts. Natural
Phlegm is cold and moist, thin in consistence, in color White, in Taste
Sweetish, or insipid. The signs of an exquisite Oedema are Five. 1. It is soft
and loose, because it is caused of thin Phlegm. 2. If it be pressed with the
Finger, it has either no pain, or very little. 3. If it be pressed down with
the Finger, it yields and leaves a pit, which is the most proper sign of an
Oedema. 4. It is White, representing Phlegm in color, whereof it is bred. 5.
It is cold without heat, because the pituitous Humor is cold and moist: Avicen
calls this Tumor Vndimia. The material cause then of this Tumor, is the
pituitous Humor redounding in the whole body. This Humor is caused either of
External or Internal causes: the External causes are Air, Cold and Moist,
Phlegmatic Meats, Idleness, too much Sleep, stinging of Wasps, and such like:
the Internal are a cold and moist Constitution of the Head, and Stomach, but
chiesly of the Liver. This Tumor invades not promiscuously all parts, but such
as are cold, weak, and loose, such are the Feet and Hands, the Cods, as in
Hernia aquosa, the Eyelids: and then in them appears an outward Tumor loose,
without pain, not altering the color of them; which being pressed with the
Finger, quickly yields and returns. The material Cause being a waterish Humor
mingled with Flatuosity: So the Heart and Liver cannot suffer any such Tumor,
as neither the Kidneys, because these parts are firm and hot. As for the
Prognostic, an Oedema is a long continuing Disease, because it is cold, and
therefore the natural heat of the parts affected, must be weak. 2. It is not
very dangerous, because the pain is none or very small. As concerning the Cure,
it is performed either by Diet, or Internal Medicaments, or local means: As for
the Diet of such as are subject to an Oedema, if it proceed from External
Causes they must be removed: The Air, which is to be chosen, must be hot and
dry, the Food must be drying: Wherefore roasted Meat is better than boiled;
Fowls and Birds which live in dry Grounds, are better than Water-Fowls;
Rabbets, Chickens, and Veal are good; Mutton is better than Lamb; Swines Flesh
and Fishes are to be shunned, as also Heads, Brains, and Feet of Beasts:
Sallets of cold Herbs are hurtful; use Biscoct-Bread, or good Houshold-Bread
baked with Aniseeds, Fennel-seeds, and Coriander-seeds. Let the Drink be
altered with the rasping of Guajacum, Sarsaparilla, Radix chinae, Sassafras,
Yellow Sanders, Cummin-seeds, Corianderseeds, Fennel-seeds, Anise-seeds,
Galingal, Nutmegs, Calamus aromaticus, some Ginger, Cinnamon, Rosemary and Sage.
A drying Diet made of these, especially in the Summer time is good. Sweating in
this case is very effectual, every other Morning after taking of the Diet:
Fasting is good, as also Watching, Studying, and Laboring: for all these dry
the Habit of the Body.

If an Oedema possess the Hands, then walking is good; if the Feet, then we are
to prescribe sitting and working with the hands. Seeing then an exquisite Diet
will not serve to conquer this Disease alone, we are to entertain purging
Medicaments for obtaining the victory. We need not to trouble the Patient with
many preparative Medicaments, seeing the pituitous Humor which causes this
Disease is thin, waterish and in motion; First of all, no Medicaments internal
are so effectual in this Grief as Mercurius vitae, and safe Medicaments of
Antimony: For first, they discharge the Stomach of crudities by Vomiting, and
so correct the cold and moist distemperature of it: Secondly, they dispatch the
obstructions of the mesaraical Veins and Liver: Thirdly, they mightily evacuate
waterish and phlegmatic Humors, and so correct the distemperature of the Liver
and Kidneys.

As for ordinary internal Medicaments, Pilulae de hiera cum agarico, quickened
with a grain of Elaterium, are good: Diaphaenicon, Diacarthamum, Diaturbith,
Pilulae de Hermodactylis, de Aromatibus Cochiae. And the Pills of Galen made of
Coloquint, Aloe, and Scammonie, with Syrupus Augustanus.

But here you may demand of me what is to be thought of Phlebotomy?

To this demand I answer, That in an exquisite Oedema opening of a Vein is to
be shunned. I. Because in a Body cold and moist we open not a Vein; such is
that which is tainted with an Oedema. II. Because in this Grief there is always
Cacochymia, seldom Plethora: III. Because in an Oedema, there is neither a
malign Matter, nor a horrible Symptom, and so it cannot be called Morbus
Magnus, or a fearful Disease: and so Phlebotomy is not required. As for the
local Medicaments, which are to be applied, they ought by drying and
strengthening to alter the part.

In the beginning we are to apply such Medicaments as repel, and digest; but
more digesting than repelling, because the Humor is cold; for in the beginning
some part of the Humor is in the small Veins, some in the Pores of the Skin;
but more in the Cavities, and greater Veins: toward the state of the Grief we
are to use digesting means. Galen uses four Things. I. A Rowler with two ends,
such as is used in Fractures; first the Rowler must bind the Tumor it self more
straightly; but the parts on every side adjacent more slackly; for so the Humor
is wrung out from the part affected, to the parts adjacent above and below. II.
Is a Sponge; but in the use of a Sponge we must see that it cover all the
affected part, otherwise at the next dressing we shall see that the Humor has
flowed to the bare part: Instead of a Sponge we may use Pledgets of Hemp-tow;
yea, and double Clothes. III. Vinegar; for it does consume Phlegm, and because
it is subtle it pierces. IV. Some Water to moderate the sharpness of the
Vinegar: If the Oedema be above Sinews and Tendons in a tender Body, less
Vinegar is required. But in hard Bodies, and in other places more Vi^egar is to
be applied: If you mingle some Alume with Vinegar and Water, the Medicament
will be the more effectual. Avicen advises to apply Limewater with the Juice
of Myrtles: but instead of the Juice we may boil Myrtleberries in Limewater.

If you boil Scordium, Myrtle^erries, Sumach, Red-rose Flowers, dried Calamint,
Wormwood and Peniroyal, in equal quantity of red ^stringent Wine, Vinegar,
Tanners Woose and Limewater, adding to every Pint of the Decoction strained 3.
drams of Alume, you shall have an excellent Medicament. You may apply also an
Unguent made of unslaked Lime, and old Swines-grease.

One thing is to be noted, that the Oedematous part is to be rubbed well with a
Cloth before the Medicaments be applied, that they may penetrate more easily.

If an Oedema in the Belly according to Hippocrates after 60 days tend to
Suppuration (which comes to pass because the Phlegm by long staying in the
part, is altered by heat, and turned to Quittour) then we are to hasten
Suppuration by the Application of Diachylon cum gummi. Then to open it.
Thirdly, to mundifie it. Fourthly, to incarnate it. And last of all to procure
skinning.

Hildanus Obs. 91. Cent. 6. relates a strange History of a Woman, who from her
Childhood was troubled with an aedematous Tumor, but hard, in her right Hand,
which yet did not hinder the use of it, and she was otherwise very well in
Health. Several things had been used, but without success. At last it was
resolved to leave it to Nature. And about the thirteenth year of her Age, when
her Friends never dreamt of Cure, it began to decrease of it self; so that in
few days it was quite gone. But the Physician predicted some ill Event, and so
it proved. For it fell into her Shoulder and tormented her most grievously. By
using proper means she seemed cured; but in a little time it fell into her
right Hip, and there tormented her again; till at length the Head of her
Thigh Bone slipped outward, which made one Leg shorter than the other, which
could not be reposited. Afterward, when all was thought to have been over, a
pain fell into her right Foot, especially about the Heel, with a great
Inflammation, which required a new course. She was Purged, took Apozems, Juleps
and Sudorificks, had Topical Anodynes, moderately repelling applied at first,
and then things to cause Pus. At last the Abscess broke in her Heel, out of
which there ran a great deal of Matter. In a few days a piece of Bone like a
Fishes Scale came away; when it was got out, she was cured; only she halted a
little.

It falls out many times that an Oedema, is a symptom of another Disease, as I
have said: but chiefly of the Cough of the Lungs, Dropsy, or Cachexia, or ill
habit of the Body, and does possess the Legs and Hands: First, because they are
farthest from the Heart, the Wellspring of heat: Secondly, because they are
framed of cold parts; seeing this Accident cannot be removed, unless the
Disease which is the cause of it be cured, and seeing these Diseases are for
the most part mortal, I will suffer such as are Empiricks, and prodigal of
their own Credits, to follow their own courses, and to undertake such Cures.

An Oedema is thus engendered: when Nature is troubled with Phlegm, the
expelling faculty thrusts the pituitous Humor from the great Vessels to the
lesser, and being kept in by the density and coldness of the Skin, is gathered
in the Musculous part, and so causes this Tumor. Hitherto I have discoursed of
an exquisite Oedema. Now it remains that I briefly dispatch that Oedema which
is not exquisite. This is caused when some other Humor is joined with the
pituitous: if Blood then be joined with it, it causes (...): If Choler concur,
it procures (...): If Melancholy or thick and glutinous Phlegm, it causes
(...). In all these kinds of a not exquisite Oedema, the thin pituitous Tumor
must be predominant. The other Humors concurring are found out by their own
proper Signs, which are set down in the discourses of every principal Tumor, so
that I should mispend time, if I should go about to set them down here. Some
things I would have you to note. The first is, a primary Oedema is caused by
congestion; for it creeps on by degrees: But that which is Symptomatical, an
Accident of other Diseases, as Tabes, Asthma, Cachexia and Dropsy, is procured
by Fluxion: for it suddenly appears. The second is this: li^ by reason of
long keeping bed, either because one has had a long and lingering Disease, or
because h^ has received a hurt in the Leg, the Feet swell and become
Oedematous: When by motion afterward the Natural Heat is increased, this
flatulent Phlegm is discussed and the Tumor cease. But it is time to set down
those Tumors which are referred to an Oedema: of those some are enclosed within
a Cystis or a Membrane; and some have no proper Membrane: those which have a
proper Membrane are in number. 3. Atheroma, Steatoma, and Meliceris. But it may
be doubted from whence this Cystis, Membrane, or Folliculus does proceed:
Undoubtedly it is framed of the ties of the Cutis and Membrana Carnosa: for
seeing the Natural Heat cannot concoct the Matter of these Abscesses, Nature
does providently separate it by its proper Cystis from the parts adjacent, lest
it should corrupt them.

The Matter which causes these Abscesses and feeds them, proceeds from a Vein,
which is not accompanied with an Artery; and so being destitute of Vital Heat,
it is altogether unnatural, and cannot be assimilate to the parts unto which it
flows. Atheroma the^ contains a substance like unto Rice-pottage, or Curds:
The Matter of this Tumor is thick and gross Phlegm.

Steatoma is a Tumor not so high as Atheroma, containing a Matter like unto
Grease, or that which we call the Sweetbread, Pancreas: Blood flowing by the
Vein which has no Artery, and so is destitute of Vital Heat, is easily turned
into this fatty substance. Meliceris contains a Matter representing Honey: so
the Phlegm which causes this Tumor is thinner than that which breeds an
Atheroma, and has some Choler mingled with it, the heat whereof makes the
Matter fluid and liquid.

The Tumors reducible to an Oedema which have no Cystis are three, Psydracium,
Ficus and Talpa, Psydracium is a pointed white Pustule containing in it a
waterish Humidity. Ficus is a Tumor so called; First, because it has a Root
like unto a Fig; Secondly, because it contains small grains as a Fig has. It
is a Tumor red, round, and somewhat hard and painful; from whence issues a
Matter, like unto the seeds of a Fig, if it be broken and wrung. The Matter of
this Tumor is gross Blood, mingled with Phlegm and some waterish moisture.
Talpa or Testudo is so called, because as a Mole heaves up the Ground, so this
Tumor lifts the Skin from the Peric^anium: This Tumor is larger than a Ficus,
and is caused of more gross Humors; wherein there is little moisture.

So you have a brief description of the Tumors which are reducible to an
Oedema: As for the cure of them, I will reserve it until I come to that part of
Surgery called (...); which shows how superfluities of the Body are to be
taken away. The Modern Authors add to these Nata, which is a large Tumor so
called, because it represents the Buttocks called Nates, without pain,
consisting of soft and pituitous Flesh; caused of congestion of pituitous
Blood: it is seated most commonly in the Neck, Shoulders and Back: it is only
cured by excision.

Ganglium and Lupia are round Tumors of the Nervous Parts without pain: yet
they differ; for Ganglium is hard but Lupia soft: Secondly, Lupia may be moved
every way, upward, downward, and side ways: but Ganglium toward the sides only.
Thirdly, Gang'ium is like to a knot of the Sinew; but Lupia possesses not the
Sinewy Parts only, but other solid and hard Parts in the Hands and Feet.

CHAP. VIII.
Of a Scirrhus.

NOw are we to enter into the contemplation of a Scirrhus, the ugly progeny of
muddy Melancholy, as we have discoursed of a Phlegmon, Erysipelas and Oedema,
who deduce their Pedigree from Blood, Choler, and Phlegm, and ascribe their
being to them. But that you may hereafter discern the better the nature of a
Scirrhus, I will first set down the description of Melancholy: Secondly, the
diverse sorts of it: And thirdly, the proper signs of a Melancholic Person:
which will both lead you to the knowledge of the Grief, and open the way of
curing the person possessed with this Grief. Because the English Tongue does
promiscuously use Melancholy, both for (...) Melancholicus Succus, and (...),
Atra Bilis, I must give you warning, that these two do much differ; for
Melancholicus Succus is the feculent part of the Blood, like unto the Lees of
thick Wines, as Allegant. It is one of the four nutritive Humors natural to the
Body, and gentle, having no corrosive or stinking quality. But Bilis Atra is
caused of immoderate Heat, and is Malign, for it burns and corrupts the Flesh,
it is sour and sharp, and being poured upon the ground, it boileth and raises
it up, as Leaven does Dough, and has an unpleasant smell. There be three sorts
of this: The first is caused of Blood burned, and of all others is the mildest:
The second is engendered of Succus Melancholicus burned; and it differs as much
from the natural Black, as Lees burned from the unburned: The third is caused
of yellow or vitellin Choler more burned, which of all others is the worst;
because Choler, whereof it is bred, is more hot and sharp than melancholic
Juice.

None of these are engendered in a sound and healthful person, whereas the
Succus Melancholicus is found in all persons of what temperature or state
soever they be. Wherefore Melancholicus Succus may be thus described: It is the
fourth Humor in the Mass of Blood, black and thick, yet natural cold and dry.
This Humor natural is either Alimentary or Excrementitious. The Alimentary
nourishes the Melancholic Parts, which are cold and dry, as the Bones,
Cartilages, and Ligaments. The excrementitious or superfluous is drawn by the
Spleen.

Now these signs discover Melancholic Persons; they are silent, pensive,
constant in their purposes, slow to Anger; but if they entertain it, they turn
it unto Hatred: Their Sleep is troublesome by reason of fearful Dreams, as of
black Things, dead Bodies, Death, they are sad, and given to fear without
cause; their Pulse is small, slow and hard: their Color is dark, their
Appetite to Meat and Venus is more than ordinary: they seldom thirst, because
they abound with much superfluous Phlegm, their Blood is thicker and blacker
than ordinary, from what part soever of the Body it flow, the Urine is thin and
white, if no Melancholy be mingled with it; but if Melancholy be mingled, then
it is thick, black, or of a leaden color; they Sweat much in their Sleep; the
habit of their Body is lean, tough and hard: they are subject to Varices and
Hemorrhoids: If such a one be presented to you possessed with a Scirrhus, it is
easy to discern the Disease, and of what Humor it proceeds, and how the party
is to be dealt withal. In my Discourse of a Scirrhus; I will set down first the
Description of a Scirrhus: Secondly, the Signs of it: Thirdly, the Differences
between it and other Tumors: Fourthly, the Kinds of it: Fifthly, the
Prognostics of it: And lastly, the manner of curing it.

To begin then with the Description of a Scirrhus, it is a Tumor hard, and
without pain, caused either of natural Melancholy, or thick, tough and cold
Phlegm. If the Cause be Melancholy, it has a leaden color; if Phlegm, it
changes not the color of the Skin: for Phlegm is white; As for the Signs of
it; I. It is hard.

Now there are four Causes of hardness: The first is coldness, as appears in
Ice; This is removed by moderate Heat, as by the Sun. The second Cause, is
Dryness, as we may plainly see in the hands of Sailers and Felt-makers. The
third Cause, too great Repletion, which does appear in the Stomachs of
Gluttons. The fourth Cause, may be the Combination of these, and indeed all
these concur to procure hardness in a Scirrhus. As for Coldness, it may be
induced either by things external, as cold Air, and narcotical Medicaments:
Secondly, from the part affected, for Scirrhositles chiefly appear in the
beginnings of the Muscles, Ligaments and Tendons, and other cold Parts:
Thirdly, from the Humor; so the melancholic Juice, and thick, and viscous
Phlegm, the material causes of a Scirrhus, are very cold.

The second sign of a Scirrhus is, that it is without pain; and this comes to
pass, either because the animal Spirits, cannot pass through an Humor so thick
and glutinous as that which causes a Scirrhus, or because it is benumbed by the
coldness of the Humor. This is the third Sign that it is fixed, and as it were
nailed to the part, and does not move by pushing, as Scrophula, or Ganglium.

Now I will show how it differs from other Tumors. It differs from a Phlegmon;
for in this, there is great pain; from an Erysipelas, because this is not hard;
from an Oedema, because this yields to the touch, and leaves a pit. It is
discerned from waterish and flatuous Tumors, because they have a thinner, and
more clear Matter. The differences betweeen it and a Cancer are these. I. A
Cancer is always painful, because it is caused of Bilis A^ra, or adust Choler;
but a Scirrhus is without pain. II. A Scirrhus is cold, but a Cancer hot; this
is caused by reason of the Humors whereof they are bred. III. A Scirrhus
invades the solid and hard parts, as the Joints, Tendons and Ligaments; but a
Cancer the loose and slaggy parts, as the Breasts, the Privy parts, and such
like. IV. In a Cancer, not in a Scirrhus, the Veins appear full of a black
Humor: which for the likeness, one may call the Legs of the Crab, as the round
Tumor the Crab it self. It is good to set down the predictions of the success
of curing, which Scirrhosities are like to have, that when such Tumors are
offered to you to be cured, you may be made circumspect and wary in taking of
them in hand. An exquisite Scirrhus is uncurable; for seeing it is senseless,
it is manifest that the part is deprived of the influence of the Animal
Spirits; and seeing this Humor does distend the Sinews, Veins and Arteries, the
Faculty it self is strangled and choked, so that it neither can direct, nor
help the Natural Heat to concur with the means, to be applied for the
dispatching of this Grief. Secondly, this being a cold Tumor, and the Natural
Heat extremely weak, what hope can there be, that it can at any time triumph
over so great an Infirmity? A Scirrhus not exquisite, although it be not
mortal, unless it be very great, yet it hardly admits any Cure, and by much
difficulty. A Scirrhus which is extreme hard is altogether uncurable: for
gentle means avail nothing, and those which are strong make it more hard: A
Scirrhus from Succus Melancholicus is warily to be dealt withal: because it has
a great affinity with a Cancer, and so may degenerate into it, if improper
Medicaments be applied. If a Scirrhus be caused of thick and glutinous Phlegm,
you may be the more bold: for this cannot easily contract any Malignity. The
differences and diverse sorts of a Scirrhus are these: A Scirrhus then is either
Primary, or Epigenematical. A primary Scirrhus is that, which is a Grief of it
self, and not caused by reason of any infirmity preceding. This is twofold, for
it is either exquisite, or not exquisite: a primary exquisite Scirrhus is that
which at the first, is caused by collection of the Melancholic Juice in a
part. A Scirrhus is thought to be not exquisite, when another Humor is joined
with Melancholy. If therefore some laudable Blood be joined with it, it causes
Scirrhus Phlegmonoides; if Choler, Scirrhus Erysipelatodes: if Phlegm, Scirrhus
Oedematodes. But these are compound Tumors, and are to be dealt withal
according to the doctrine delivered concerning simple Tumors, whereof they are
bred.

A Scirrhus Epigenematical or Symptomatical, is that which ensues after another
Tumor, not handled according to Art, as a Phlegmon or an Erysipelas: this
happens two manner of ways. I. It may fall out by the immoderate use of local
Medicaments too cold, and narcotic or stupefactive: for these condense, and as
it were congeal the Humor. Secondly, this may happen by the too continual
application of resolutive Topics: for so only the subtle and thin parts are
breathed out, and the thick and glutinous remain.

The Indications of Cure are taken from three things, to wit the Diet, internal
Medicaments, and external Applications. As for Phlebotomy it is here fruitless,
because the Humor is cold, unless the Veins be very full, the Blood black, and
Age and Strength conspire: for then it is expedient, because so the Humors in
the Mass of Blood will be more fluxible; and the quantity being diminished, the
Natural Heat will the more easily rule the residue. If a Scirrhus be caused in
a man by reason of the Hemorrhoides stopped, then Leeches are to be applied; if
in a Woman by reason of the Menstrues suppressed, then the Saphaena is to be
opened.

As for the Diet then, the Meat must be of easy digestion, moistning and
affording a thin Juice: such are Chickens, young Pigeons and Mountain Fowl,
Lamb, Veal, young Pullets and Cockrels, fed Rabbets, Poched Eggs, Asparagus
Sallet, Spinach, Burrage, Purselain: Bread of good Wheat not too much leavened
is convenient. Let the Drink be small White Wine, or reasonable strong Beer
well boiled, clear, and neither too old, nor too new; good Cider also with
Rosemary, Burrage, Bugloss burned, and Sugar is good. Meats which afford a
gross Juice are to be shunned, as old Beef, all Meats dried in the Smoke,
Venison, Fish living in muddy Waters, all Salt Meats, course Bread, the
immoderate use of Vinegar is hurtful: Apple-tarts, and Warden and Pear-pyes
baked with Fenil-seeds and Anniseeds will serve instead of other Sweat-meats.
Let the Habitation of the diseased party be in a pure, hot and moist Air: too
much Sleep, Idleness; Grief and Pensiveness are to be avoided. As for internal
Medicaments, they ought to purge Melancholy, and thick and glutinous Phlegm;
but both of these are to be prepared before they are evacuated. Those
Medicaments which prepare Melancholy, ought to attenuate or make thin, and
moisten, such are the Syrups of the Juice of Burrage, Bugloss, the Syrups of
Fumitery, Hops and Apples, with the decoction of Balm, Hartstongue,
Scolopendria, Tamarisk, and such like. Those Medicaments which prepare Phlegm,
ought to be of an attenuating, and mundifying quality, as the Syrup of Hysope,
of Betony, of Staechas, Oxymel and Mel rosatum in a decoction of Calamint,
Hore-hound Peniroyal, and such like. The Humors being prepared, they are to be
purged: Melancholy is to be purged with Confectio Hamech, Electuarium Indum,
Pills De Lapide lazuli, the extract of black Ellebor, Electuarium Lenitivum,
and the like, which may be ministered in the infusion of Sena-leaves and
Polypodie. Phlegm is to be purged with Diaphoenicum, Diacarthamum, Hiera
Pachii, Pilulae de agarico and Hermodactylis, Diaturbith, and the like.
Electuaries are to be ministered in a decoction of those Simples which prepare
Phlegm.

One thing is to be noted, that nothing is more effectual in discussing these
Scirrhosities, than the continual taking of the Decoction of Sarsa Parilla, and
Guajacum instead of other Drink, using a convenient Diet, and procuring every
other Morning sweating: for L^gnum Vitae warmeth, and Sarsa dissolveth the
hardness: if it perform this in Nodes, which are far harder than any Scirrhus
possibly can be; why should it not perform this office in a Scirrhus?

Here it is no wonder if few be cured: for sundry are impatient if their
expectation be not speedily answered; and besides this, they are unwilling to
gain their health, by foregoing their sensuality and pleasure, being Ventris
Mancipia, more careful of their Palate than health.

In external Applications, which are fit to be used in the Cure of a Scirrhus,
you are to consider three things; their Faculties, their Differences, and the
right use of them. As for the Faculties then of the local Medicaments, they
ought to be discussing and softning, emollientia, and discutientia. Repelling
Medicaments are not to be used, because the Humor is thick, and hard, and so
unapt to motion.

Of emollient Medicaments there are four degrees: in the first are those which
are gentlest; such are Mans-grease, Capons-grease, the Marrow of Hearts, and
Calves-bones, Ducks-grease, Swines-grease, sweet Butter. Galen advises to apply
to gentle Scirrhosities, a Medicament made of sweet Butter, black Rosin; and
new Wax. Dialthaea Simplex is of this Degree. In the second Degree are these,
Goose-grease, Badgers-grease, Dogs-grease, old rank Oil, Oil of Linseed. In the
third Degree, are, the Fat of Lions, Bears, Wolves, Foxes, Libards, and the
Marrow of Horses, and Mansbones. In the fourth Degree, are Ammoniacum,
Galbanum, Bdellium, Caranna, Tacamahaca, Opopanax, of these Simples you may
frame unto your selves such Compositions as the quality of the Scirrhus, which
you are to take in hand, shall require. Rases in all Scirrhosities commends a
certain Cataplasm, and it is excellent indeed.

The Description may thus be framed, take of Bdellium, Ammoniacum, and
Galbanum, of each 1. dissolve these in a hot Mortar with Oil of Lilies, add of
the Mucilage or Pulp of roasted Figs ij. of the Mucilage of Linseed and
Fenugreek, vj. make up a Cataplasm, dress the Scirrhus with this Cataplasm once
a day. Diachylon cum gummi, and Emplastrum de Macilaginibus are convenient.
Riolan the Father commends this Medicament; Take of Vnguentum de Althaea, of
Diachylon cum gianmi and Emplastrum de Mucilaginibus of each 1. of the Oil of
Lilies vj. drams: mingle these well together, you may add to these Medicaments
some Vinegar to help penetration. If a Scirrhus be above a Nerve or a Tendon,
instead of Vinegar you may use the Spirit of Wine.

One thing is to be observed, that before you apply any Medicament, the part
affected is to be fomented with the decoction of Mallows, Marshmallows,
Chamomil, Melilot, and Cowslip-flowers in Vinegar, unto which after it is
boiled, some Spirit of Wine is to be added.

As concerning the right use of local means, these Observations following are
worth the noting; The First is: If a Scirrhus be caused of the melancholic
Humor, which is cold, thick, and dry, you are to apply a Medicament which
warms, attenuates, and moistens. II. If the Scirrhus be engendered of cold,
thick, and tough Phlegm, then the Medicament ought to be warming, attenuating,
cutting, and mundifying. III. Tender Persons and Parts require milder; but
Parts and Persons harder and stronger require more forcible means. IV. If a
Scirrhus has been procured, because an unskilful person has applied Medicaments
too much repelling or discussing to an Inflammation; then apply this mollifying
Liniment; Take of Yellow Wax, and Ducks Grease tried, of each j. of Oil of
Lilies ij. of the Marrow of Ox Bones ij. mingle them well together. V. If
immoderate use of drying Topics has procured hardness, then Medicaments
moistning are to be used: such is a Cataplasm made of Mallows boiled, and
Capons Grease, or Swines Grease. Hildanus Obs. Chirurg. 79. Cent. 3. relates
how a Gentlewoman of Berne had grievously bruised her Right Hand, which put her
to much pain in her Wrist, and caused her Hand to swell. Diverse remedies were
used; but it ended in a Scirrhus. She went to him, and he found a very hard
Scirrhus on the inside of her Right Wrist, as big as a Hens Egg; she could not
bend her Fingers, because the Scirrhus stuck fast to the Muscle, which bends
the Fingers, and to that part of it where it is distributed into four fleshy
parts. After using Universals, such as were requisite, he applied a potential
Cautery; after the Eschar was removed, a thin Matter ouzed out for several
days: Afterward, when the Flesh was eroded deeper with Escharoticks, a thick,
viscous, and yellowish Matter showed it self, which he was forced to squeeze
out with some violence, having first dilated the Ulcer with Sponges. This
Matter, after it had been for some hours exposed to the Air, turned as hard as
a stone. He extracted a great deal of such Matter at several times. For a
passage was found from the Ulcer, which reached from the upper part of the
Wrist toward the Elbow, to the Palm of the Hand under the transverse Ligament,
and entering the Palm, between the extuberances of the Fifth and Eighth Bone of
the Wrist. When the Ulcer was Mundified, he successfully cicatrized it.

Unto a Scirrhus these Tumors may be referred, Strumae, Warts, Corns, Leprosy.
As for Strumae and the Leprosy, they will require several Tracts.

Warts, if the root be small and the top broad, may be taken away by Ligature;
if the root be broad, they must be extirpate with Medicaments. There I commend
unto you strong Aqua fortis, or Lapis infernalis relented; these must be
applied to the Warts with a Rush or a Straw. The Third is an experiment of
Fabricius ab Aqua pendente, and that is this; of Purslain bruised, and the
Powder of Savin make a Cataplasm and apply it.

Corns must first be artificially cut, and then only these Medicaments which I
shall name, must be applied: Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar, and brought to
the consistence of Cerot, emplastorum de mucilaginibus, and Diachylon cum gummi.

CHAP. IX.
Of Aqueous Tumors.

I Have delivered what I thought most material concerning the Four principal
Tumors, Phlegmon, Erysipelas, Oedema and Scirrhus, which are caused of the Four
Humors in the mass of Blood; to wit, Blood properly so called, Choler, Phlegm,
and Melancholy; and so might have concluded the Doctrine concerning the
differences of Tumors, as sundry others have done who have written of this
subject.

Nevertheless, seeing aqueous or watery and flatuous Tumors are often presented
to Surgeons to be cured, I think it expedient to discourse of these, that
the Doctrine of Tumors may be complete.

First then I will discourse of the aqueous, and then of the flatuous Tumor.
The material cause of the aqueous Tumor by Physicians is called Serum, or
Serosus humor. Of this Humor there is but a small quantity in a healthful
person; no more than is fit to make the Blood thin, that it may be the more
readily carried unto all the parts of the Body to afford them nourishment. This
being done, it is discharged through the Pores of the Skin, either by Sweat, or
insensible Perspiration.

Wherefore Galen not without reason affirms all Serosity to be an Excrement.

This Serosity is not only of a moist and waterish substance; but of a salt
quality in like manner; yea, this Serosity, Urine, and Sweat have the same
Matter: yet they differ; for Serum is that aqueous Humidity which is contained
in the Blood: and although Blood be drawn, yet it cannot be discerned unless
the Blood grow cold and congeal, and this thin part by the concretion of the
Blood be separarated from the thicker. But Urine is nothing else but the
superfluity of this Serosity of the Blood mingled with the waterish Humidity of
Meat and Drink, and separated from the mass of Blood, and drawn by the
attractive faculty of the emulgent Veins and Ridneys, and by the Ureters sent
to the Bladder, there to be detained until the convenient time of excretion. So
that this kind of excretion purges the Blood from waterish Humidity, whereby it
is made more firm, and so more fit to nourish the parts. As for Sweat and
insensible Perspiration, they are nothing else but the excrements of the solid
parts. Nevertheless, they carry with them some obscure signs of the
constitution and temperature of the Body. Some preternatural Causes will
increase the serosity of Blood; as Meats affording plenty of waterish Humidity,
as most Fruits, cold Herbs, and immoderate use of Water, and other Drinks: for
although some Drinks be hotter than others, yet all of them have more waterish
Humidity than Spirit, and by reason of the distemperature and obstruction of
the parts appointed for Sanguification, oftentimes this Serosity is not
separated from the alimentary Humors; but is detained and increased, and not
expelled by Urine and Sweat: from whence the Dropsy, Fevers, and Pustules of
the Skin do proceed.

An aqueous or waterish Tumor then is caused of the superfluity of this
Serosity detained in the Body, after that it has performed its Office, which
is, when it has carried the nourishment through the narrow passages: such are
the mesaraical Veins. If too much of this waterish Humidity be sent to the
habit of the Body, and move the expelling faculty, then part of it is sent to
the Skin, which causes waterish Tumors. Those which heave up the Cuticula, are
called Sudamina. Those which arise in the night time are called Epinyctid^s. If
waterish Humidity be gathered in the Cod, it causes (...); if in the Navil,
(...); if in the Head, (...). And although neither Fallopius nor Tagaultius
have made any mention of waterish Tumors, thinking perhaps that they may be
reduced to pituitous Tumors, yet these Tumors wherein nothing else but waterish
Humidity is contained, do plainly evince, that an aqueous Tumor is one distinct
from all others. Superfluity of this Serosity is sent to the habit of the Body:
partly because the weakness of the Kidneys, does not suffer them sufficiently
to draw it: partly because the Liver is too cold, and Lastly, by reason of some
error committed in the use of the things not natural, as immoderate taking of
Water, and other drink, as Wine, Ale, Beer, Cider. etc.

The signs of a waterish Tumor are these, First, It is sometimes more,
sometimes less swollen, yet it yields when it is pressed hard, whereby it is
discerned from a Scirrhus. It is distinguished from a Phlegmon, and Erysipelas,
because these are painful, but it not. It is discerned from an Oedema by this,
That it being pressed, it admits no pit, as an Oedema does. It being beaten
it yields no noise, as a flatuous Tumor does, as appears in a Tympany. Last
of all, when it breeds, there is always an itching in the part, by reason of
the Saltness, which is in the waterish Humidity; These Tumors appear in the
Navel, Cods, and the habit or compass of the Body: yet most frequently in the
joints of the Arms and Legs: because these parts being weak, cold, thick, are
aptest to admit such waterish Tumors. As for the Prognostics, that waterish
Tumor which happens by reason of any imperfection of the Sanguification, is
dangerous; not so much in consideration of the Tumor it self, as of the
infirmity of Sanguification. Other waterish Tumors, although they be not so
dangerous, yet by reason of the weakness, colddess, and thickness of the Skin,
are not so easily cured. As for those Tumors which rise in the compass of the
Body, like to Blisters, or small Bladders, and are called Sudamina, as they are
no ways dangerous, so they are easily cured. As for the Cure of this Grief,
Reason and Experience have found out four means to meet with it, to wit, a
convenient Diet, internal Medicaments, external Applications, and manual
Operation. If then an universal Humidity possess the whole Body, the Diet must
be drying, wherefore roasted Meat is better than boiled. Immoderation in Drink
is by all means to be shunned: For Jejunet, vigilet, sitiat, qui rheumata curat.
Watch he must, and thirst, and fast,
Who means to cure a Rheum in have.


And as Temperance and Sobriety have a promise of prolonging our temporal
Lives, so are they powerful helps in curing Diseases; but chiefly those which
are caused by the superfluity of moist and waterish Humors. Flesh then is
better than Fish, and of Flesh Meats those are best which are dryest: Kid then
is better than Lamb, Veal than Muton, Rabbets and Conies are good, Land-Fowl
are better than Waterfowl. Hippocrates himself commends Pork above
Pigs-flesh: but neither of both is good; for Pigs-flesh is exceeding moist, and
in Pork the Fat is moist, and dissolves the Stomach, but the lean is hard, and
not easily concocted. All supping Meats are to be shunned, for they multiply
moisture. Ludovicus Cornarus his Diet recorded by Lessius in his Hygiastieon,
or Treatise concerning preservation of Health, is fit for such persons. For
above the space of Forty years, he rested contented every day with xij. of
Bread and Meat, and xiiij. of Drink: when he was 80 years of age, so able he
was by the observation of this moderate Diet, that without any advantage of
ground, he usually backed the fairest Italian Horses. One thing is to be noted,
that seeing superfluous Humidity seldom possesses the Body, unless there be
some fault in the Sanguification and Kidneys, you must by all means labor to
reduce them to their natural temperature. The means to compass this are set
down by every one who has penned the practice of Physic, unto whom I remit
you.

The internal Medicaments appointed for the expugnation of this Grief, are of
three sorts: for either they purge by Stool, or by Urine, or by Sweat, and
insensible Perspiration. To touch the Cathartick Medicaments, such are one
grain of Elaterium with a scruple of Pilulae Cochiae, or de Euphorbio, or
Aloephanginae: Two Drams of the Seed of Dwarf-Elder, or Ebulus beaten to Powder
and ministered in White Wine, and a spoonful of the juice of Ebulus, the
Flour-de-luce, or soldanella mingled with ij. of the Syrup of Damask Roses,
dissolved in ij oun. of White Wine. The purging Diet is excellent, if you add
to the ordinary Purgatives in it, the roots of Esula major, the Berries of
Buckthorn, and Carthamus Seeds. Amongst all the Simples Mechoacan and Jalap are
most commended, both for their efficacy in working, and safety in ministering.
As for Diuretical means, I commend unto you this Medicament: Take of the Ashes
of Broom, and Bean-straw burned, of each a good handful; strain through those
Ashes, iiij. pints of Rhenish-wine three times: then infuse in this Wine of the
root of Sassafras sliced ij. of Nutmegs and Cinnamon, of each two drams; of
Bay Berries, and Juniper Berries, of each six in number, of Cummin-seeds ij. of
Fennel-seeds, and Anniseeds, of each one dram and an half, of Sugar four
Ounces, of the Spirit of Salt one dram. Minister every Morning four Ounces of
this Wine strained, and so much about four of the clock in the Afternoon: the
Decoction also of Penniroyal, Time, Calamint, with Seeds of the Melon, Pompion,
Cucumber and Purslain, made pleasant with the Syrup of Althea, de quinque
radicibus, and of Hysop ministered as the former, is good.

As for Diaphoretick Medicines, the Decoction of Guajacum Sarsaparilla,
Sassafras, and China-root, with Agrimony, Betony and Coriander; sweet
Fennel-seeds, and Anniseeds carry away the Bell. How effectual these
Medicaments are, being judiciously used, not in this Grief only, but in moist
Ulcers also, and other Diseases contagious, I need not to labor to persuade.
When these Decoctions are ministered, a strict Diet must be enjoined, and
plentiful Sweat procured, according to the tolerance of the diseased Party.

The topical Remedies ought not to be repercussives, although the Humor be
thin, because seeing Nature can make no use of it, it is to be evacuated:
wherefore the Remedies ought to discuss and rarefie the Skin, that vent may be
given to the Humor. Fabricius ab aqua pendente commends this Medicament; Take
of Mallow Leaves an handful and a half, of the Meal of Lupines, j. of the Oil
of Dill and Chamomil of each ij. with f. q. of White Wine, make up a Cataplasm.
The Lie of unslacked Lime, and branches of the Vine are good. Avicen out of
Galen, against waterish Tumors describes thus the emplaster of Mustard, and
affirms, that if this Medicament prevail not, there is but small hope that any
other will. Take of Mustard Seed, Nettleseed, Brimstone, Aristolochia rotunda,
of the Foam of the Sea, or Brine and Bdellium, of each j. of Ammoniacum, old
Oil, and Wax, of each j. make a Cerot according to Art. Let me advertise you of
one thing, that the part is to be fomented before either Cataplasm or Emplaster
be applied. The Fomentation is to be made of a Lie made of Bean-straw, Broom,
and twigs of the Vine burned with some ordinary Ashes, wherein you are to boil
common Wormwood, Sea-Wormwood, the lesser Centory, Calamint, Cummin-seeds,
Bay Berries, Juniper Berries, Scordium, Chamomil-flowers, Melilot-flowers, and
tops of Dill; unto the Decoction strained add the sixth part of Sherry Sack.
Now to come to the last Remedy appointed for rebellious waterish Tumors, to
wit, manual operation. If they cannot be discussed, as oftentimes Hydrocephalos
and Herniaaquosa cannot; then the Humor is to be let out sometimes by incision,
sometimes by a caustic Medicament: then the part is to be mundified: Thirdly,
It is to be incarnate; and Last of all cicatrized. But seeing I have handled
these points when I discoursed of an Apostem, and that I am to set down what is
singular in every Chirurgical Operation, whereby superfluities are taken from
the Body, in that part of Surgery which is called (...), here I desist,
referring every thing to its proper place.

CHAP. X.
Of a Flatulent Tumor.

HAving set down the Doctrine of a waterish Tumor, I shall speak of a Flatulent
Tumor; in Latin it is called Tumor flatulentus, in Greek, (...), or (...), for
the Grecians call Flatuosity sometimes (...), sometimes (...).

The person in whose Body Flatuosities are multiplied, is often troubled with
gudlings in his sides, he belches often, he is troubled with singing of the
Ears, his Excrements come forth with Flatuosity, his Urine is frothy, he finds
a stretching of his Belly, yet without any heaviness.

The causes of Flatuosity are Crudity and weak Heat. The Heat may be accounted
weak two manner of ways. 1. Of its own Nature, and so it has some Power and
Dominion over the Humor, and does in some sort dissolve it, but imperfectly;
and so it produces halituous Vapors, which are called Flatuosities, but is not
able to discuss them; and so they remain in the part, and distend it, and that
because the Flatuosities are gross, and the part thick: this appears often in
the Knees, and troubles Surgeons and Physicians much. 2. Heat may be
accounted weak, by reason of the Matter it self; when as the Matter is so
plentiful, that the Heat cannot wholly overcome it, but leaves some Vapors
undiscussed.

The causes of Crudity are Ebriety, Gluttony, a sedentary Life, and flatuous
Meats and Drinks; such are Beer and Ale not well boiled, Pease, Beans,
Chestnuts, Turnips, Radishes, green Fruit, Swines Flesh, Waterfowl, salt Fish,
and such like. It is discerned from a waterish Tumor, whereof we have spoken by
the lightness of it; for an Aqueous Tumor is heavy, but this not. Secondly, By
distending the Membranes, and stretching of them, it causes often intolerable
pain, whereas in waterish no pain is felt. It is discerned from an Oedema by
this, that it admits no pitting, although it be pressed: it is distinguished
from a Scirrhus, because this is hard, but it not: it is discerned from a
Phlegmon and Erysipelas, for in it the Skin is not discolored, neither is
there any extraordinary Heat felt; but in those both appear.

As for the Prognostics, receive these; If these Flatuosities possess parts
very sensible, as great Joints, such are the Elbows, or Knees, which are
compassed with thick Membranes, they are hardly cured, and will busy the most
skilful.

As for those which invade other parts, they are not very easily cured. First,
because these halituous Spirits are gross. Secondly, because the parts through
which they are to be discussed are thick. Thirdly, Because the natural Heat is
weak. Whosoever goes about to cure these flatuous Tumors; First, he must
prescribe a strict Diet to the Patient, such as I have set down in the cure of
a waterish Tumor. Secondly, he must bar him of the use of all flatuous
Aliments, whereof I have made mention, and prescribe unto him Meats of easy
concoction, and which afford a laudable Juice. After Meals let him eat a slice
of Marmalad of Quinces, with some Coriander, and Anniseed-Comsits, having but
one covering of Sugar. The Stomach a little before Bedtime is to be embrocated
with the Oil of Mastick, Wormwood and Rue.

As for the Topical Remedies, the part first is to be fomented with Sheres
Sack, wherein Dill, Rue, Bay Leaves, Chamomil, and Melilot-flowers,
Cummin-seeds, Annise-seeds, Fennil-seeds, and Bay Berries have been infused.
Then the part is to be embrocated with the Oil of Chamomil, Lilies, Dill, Rue
and Bays mingled with Aquavitae. Thirdly, apply to the part the Cummin
emplaster, or that of Bay Berries: if the Patient do feel inflation in his
Stomach, or in the region of the Spleen, minister unto him of the Confection of
Bay Berries ij,. in three Ounces either of good Hippocras, or Canary Wine,
wherein Cinnamon has been infused two hours before Supper, ii j. or iii j.
drops of the Oil of Pepper, or vj. of Fennel-seed Oil in the Sack-posset drink,
are good. Digestion is furthered in such persons, if they take a cup of Sack
having a Toast in it, and afterward eat the Toast, being first besprinkled with
Sugar. To such a remedy the meanest may attain, and it is very proper. Take it
two bours before Supper.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Kings Evil.

THe King's Evil is in French called, as by Us, Le Mal du Roy; The Spaniards
call it, Porcellanas, Lamparones; The Portugueze, Las Porcas; The Latins call
it Strumae, Scrophulae, Scrophae, Sodellae; The Greeks call it (...), as the
Latins Scrophae. This Disease, as Laurentius has defined it, is an obdurate
Tumor of the Glands, enclosed in a coat of its own, bred of thick Phlegm dried,
rarely simple, often adulterate and salt, and sometimes of a peculiar sort of
indurate Flesh. Some would reckon the King's Evil among Scirrhi; but it may
make a peculiar Species of Tumors, it having a peculiar Seat, the Glands. Now
the Glands are of two sorts. One sort is connate with our Body and the parts of
it: Another is adventitious and preternatural. The first have some use; the
latter none. They either serve for the divisions of the Vessels, or to imbibe
superfluous Humors, or to irrigate the Parts. Besides, there are Glandulous
Bodies, which cannot properly be called Glands; so the Testicles, Breasts and
other Parts are Glandulous Bodies, i. e like Glands. The adventitious and
preternatural Glands are bred in almost all the Parts of the Body, most
frequently in the Fat, and between the Flesh and vacuities of the Muscles;
sometimes in Membranous and Exanguous Parts, often in the extremities of the
Vessels, from Blood, Phlegm, Mucus, and other redounding Humors. And all these
Glands are subject to Scrophulous Tumors, and by consequence the whole Body may
be troubled with the King's Evil. The Matter of these Tumors is reckoned Phlegm
or Serum (this being a new word Homonymous to the Ancients Phlegm.)

This Disease is either primigenious of it self, not following another Disease:
Or Secondary, which follows some other Disease, as an Inflammation. It either
proceeds from Fluxion of an Humor from some where else, generally from the Head
by the Vessels: Or by Collection or Congestion, which is bred of the Relics
of the proper Aliment, which the Glands through weakness of heat and laxity of
substance could not expel. The diversity of Matter whereof the King's Evil is
bred, which is various Humors, makes several differences of it. There is a
difference in quantity; sometimes there are many Knots, sometimes few,
sometimes large, sometimes small; Sometimes it is mild, sometimes malignant.
One is external, another internal. One is moveable, another fixed. One has
Veins, Arteries and Nerves implicated, another has none.

The Causes external are a thick, soggy, moist Air, bad Water, such as comes
from the Alps when the Snow melts, and intemperance in Meat and Drink. The
internal Efficient Causes are Intemperature of the inner Parts, Cacochymy, a
bad Liver, a weak Stomach or Brain, an ill made Head. The material Cause is
Phlegm or Serum, with a medley of the other Humors.

The King's Evil is very like to a Gland, a Node, and to all those Abscesses
which Practitioners call Phlegmatic. But the Evil is distinguished from a
Gland, because a Gland is soft and without pain; the Evil, if it be touched
feels hard and is painful. A Gland is single and only one; the Evil consists of
many Knots. A Gland slips, when pressed, and returns again; the Evil gives not
way to the touch. A Gland is usually Cutaneous, the Evil lies deep. As for a
Ganglium it is indeed a round Body; but it differs from the Evil, because it is
only in a Nervous Part. Nodes according to the Modern Latins, are pituitous
Tumors, enclosed in Membranes, which gradually increase, as the Evil does; but
they are separable from the subject parts, and the Evil sticks fast to the
Flesh. A Node breeds in any; the Evil only in a glandulous part. As for the
distinguishing of one King's Evil from another, the efflorescence of the Humor
in the Skin, which colors it, shows what Humor causes the Evil.

The Prognostics are these, I. Every King's Evil is difficult to cure, because
it comes from a gross Humor, because it is contained in a Coat of its own, and
because it is hard and scirrhous. II. Many Knots are more difficult to cure
than one, the painful, than one without pain; the Melancholic than the
Phlegmatic; the fixed than the moveable; in the fore part of the Neck, than in
any other part. III. Celsus says, the King's Evil tires Physicians, because it
occasions Fevers, nor ever comes to Maturation, whether it be treated with
Instrument or Medicine; and therefore it often rises again in the very Scar it
lest. IV. The Evil often ulcerates, when the Humor is putrid, when it is hot,
or irritated with Applications; sometimes it turns Scirrhous, sometimes
Cancerous. V. This Disease, according to Aph. 26. Sect. 3. is familiar to
Children. VI. And in Coac. Praenetion. Hippocrates says, the Evil seldom comes
after forty years of Age. VII. Such as have a narnow Forehead, flat Temples,
broad and prominent Cheek-bones, and a narrow Neck, these are very liable to
the Evil. VIII. Hippocrates, l. 2. Prorrhetic. says, that as to these, Biles
turn to Pus; and indeed Strumous ones self many Children, and they go away
again easily; but as they seldom grow in elder Boys and Youths, so they go away
with the more difficulty. But in grown men such Swellings seldom arise.

The Cure of this Disease is twofold, Supernatural and Miraculous; or Natural.
The Supernatural and Miraculous Cure of the King's Evil (waving all
Metaphysical Speculations and Theogical Concertations about it) I dare affirm
to be one of the Regalia annexed to the Crown of Great Britain, the gift being
no way obliged to any special Form of Religion; since our own Experience as
well as History informs us, that Princes of different Persuasions in Religion
have equally by their Sacred Touch in the Name of the Most High, cured
multitudes of the Evil, called, because the King cures it, the King's Evil.

But since all People asslicted with this Disease have not the Opportunity to
approach the Royal Presence, and receive the Blessings of his Hand, it is a
Work becoming a skilful Surgeon to supply a Miracle by his skill in Nature,
and to save a Subject, where his Majesty is not present by his immediate Hand
to do it. That it is possible to be done (tho difficult) there want not
Instances of several in London cured of the King's Evil by a Method of Physic.
For besides others, Doctor Willoughby at this present in London cures several
of this pertinacious Disease, he having been very industrious to conquer it,
and having spent much of his Medical Studies upon Enquiries into this very
particular Malady. He has likewise some Arcana, whereby he effects strange
Cures upon persons disaffected with the Evil; yet he frankly acknowledges that
the same Method and Medicines, in several Patients have quite different
Effects, and that without proceeding Methodically nothing i^ to be done. Method
therefore being the great Arcanum of a True Physician, I shall endeavor
Methodically to lay down the Cure of the King's Evil.

As for the Diaetetick part, the Air must be thin, dry, serene, pure and open
to the East. Avoid a thick, foggy, moist, rainy, fenny and a Western Air. If it
be not naturally good, let it be rendered so by Art. Smell to a Pomamber.
Fasting is good sometimes, because it dries. The Bread must be well baked and
seasoned with Anise or sweet Fenilseed. Avoid all Milkmeats and Sweetmeats and
Pulse. The Meat must be of good Juice; Avoid all young, mucilaginous and fat
Flesh, Pork and Feet of Quadrupedes. Sup little Spoon-meat. Eat roast Meat
rather than boiled. Fish and Fruit are bad. Avoid much drinking, and corrupt
Waters. But Spaw-waters are good. A Diet drink altered with Rosemary, Thyme and
Sage is good. And so is a China Drink. Mastich Wood strengthens all the
nutritious Parts, invigorates the Blood and Humors, is amicable to the Brain,
and keeps the Belly loose. Never sleep on the day. Use Exercise. Keep the Body
loose. Purge the Head, and apply Bags to it. Use Sneezing.

In the King's Evil there are two Indications of Cure. The first removes or
diminishes the Antecedent Cause. The second takes away the Conjunct Cause. The
Antecedent Cause of the Evil is a pituitous Humor, either simple, or mixed with
another Humor, which resides sometimes in the Veins, sometimes in the Brain,
which Hippocrates calls the sent of Phlegm. Therefore the luxuriant and noxious
Humor must first be evacuated, and then the Temperament and Strength must be
restored to the Parts. Evacuation is either Sensible or Insensible. Sensible
evacuation is made by Vomit, Stool, Sweat and Bleeding. A Vomit is good, if
there be much crudities in the Stomach. One may be given de decocto raphani,
semine atriplicis, floribus genistae, and Oxymelite, or Diasarum Fernelii, or
this; Oxymel. simpl. ij. decocti sem. atripl. hord. flor. genist. iiij. M.
hauriat tepide. It is good to vomit in the Morning fasting. Purging with
Diaturbith and such things is good. Sudorificks of the Woods are good: Mineral
Waters are proper, such as the Spaw and Borbonne. Diuretics may be given, when
the Body is well purged and clean. Venesection in this case is seldom proper.
When the whole Body is purged, the Head may be likewise purged by
Apophlegmatisms, Errhines, Sternutatories. Issues in the Neck and Arms, and
Blisters are proper. Thus the material Antecedent Cause of the Evil may be
removed by sensible Evacuation. It may also be insensibly evacuated by such
things as by degrees soak up, ex^aust and dry the Phlegm contained in the
Stomach, Veins and Brain. Such as Scrophularia, Vr^ica Mortua, Filipendula,
Caryophyllata, Gladiolus, Enula Campana, and such things; of which various
Forms of Medicines may be made. Radix Gladioli is good taken either in powder
or preserved. Arnoldus Villanovanus commends this highly for the Evil, Pilae
Marinae, Spong. Marin. Os. Sep. Pip. long. nigr. Zinzib. Cinnam. Sal. gemm.
Pyrethr. Gallar. Spinae Rosarum a. q. s. Omnia subtilissime pulverizentur,
excepta spongia and Pilis marinis, quae prins secundum artem comburantur,
postea carum cinis cum aliis rebus pulverizatis misceatur. This Powder must be
held night and day in the Mouth, and the Meat may be seasoned with it. Vipers
and preparations of them are good, as Celsus observes, against the Evil.
Cephalicks must then be used.

The Conjunct Cause of Tumors may be thus removed. Every Tumor according to
Galen is either dispersed, or suppurated, or it turns scirrhous, or it
gangrenes. Hot Tumors are easily dispersed and suppurated, because the Matter
of them is thin and capable of coction: Cold ones with difficulty: and the Evil
is well known to be of such a Nature. Yet when it begins, it is capable of
Resolution and Suppuration. One confirmed, and turned to a scirrhous substance,
is sometimes cured by Emollients and Discutients. But one that will not give
way to the foresaid Medicines, can only be cured by the Knife, Fire and
Corrosives. Begin always with the gentlest means first. When therefore the
Strumae are small and beginning, and are but enclosed in a tender Membrane,
they are easily cured. For squeeze, bruise and rub them with the hand till they
grow hot, at first they grow soft; then beat them with some wooden Vessel till
they disappear, and swathe a plate of Lead hard over all the Tumor. In the
beginning Resolvents are proper for the great ones, with which Galen mixes
Astringents, because of the Laxity of the Glands, which admits defluxions. Here
is a Cataplasm; Rad. Gladiol. ij. Lil. alb. jss. Fol. Cupress. M. j. Sem.
Foenugr. vj. Cymin. jss. Flor. Melilot. Chamaem. Ros. Rubr. a. P. j. Coquantur
omnia, pistentur, cribrentur, quibus add Farin. Orob. aut Lupin. j. Mell. opt.
ss. Ol. Aneth. q. s. f. Cataplasma. Langius describes a most excellent Remedy
to dissolve the King's Evil. Ol. Philos. lb. ss. Thuris, Mastich. Gum. Arab.
Terebinth. a. iij. Pistata simul per Alembicum distillentur, tandem add salis
ex cinere cerrae modicum, and iterum destilla, and in vitro serva. Here is a
dissolving Plaster. Mass. Empl. de Melil. j. Bdellii aceto scillit. dissolut.
dr. ij. Castor. Pinguis jss. Pulv. Rad. Ireos, Fol. Cupress. a. j. Ol. Chamaem.
Lil. Amygdal. Amar. a. q. s. f. Massa Emplastri. If the Evil cannot be
dissolved by these Remedies, and some signs of Suppuration appear, it may be
promoted by Diachylon, Ceratum Tripharmacum, a Cataplasm of Marsh-mallow Roots,
and Sorel Roots boiled in Water, adding Wheat-Flour and Oil. The Evil, when it
is suppurated, must be opened with a Knife or a Caustic, then the Pus must be
evacuated, and purged out, then the Sinus must be silled with Flesh by
Vnguentum Iridis, de Betonica, de Tuthia, and the like. When the Evil is grown
scirrhous, all means must be used to mollify and discuss it. Aetius takes
equal parts of Sulphur and Galbanum, and makes a Plaster. These are mollifying;
Emplastrum nigrum Galeni, de Meliloto cum Ammoniaco, Oil of Lilies, and Powder
of Iris Root. Emplastrum Vigonis cum Mercurio is good. Some commend this
Unguent. Cineris Agni casti flore caeruleo, Senectae Serpentis a. j. cerae q.
s. Ol. Amygd. Amar. j. f. Vnguentum. Rogerius commends this Plaster, Rad.
Filic. Asphodel. Ebul. q. v. Coquantur in vino optimo, and tundantur in
Mortario, addendo Sulphuris modicum and cerae q. s. f. Emplastrum. Some make an
Ointment of Scrophularia Root gathered in Autumn. If Ulcers arise, things good
in malignant Ulcers must be used by the Surgeon. We shall refer the
Chirurgical taking out of the Kernels to the proper place in the Part
Ablatrice. And thus we have completed the first Book of Tumors.

THE PRACTICE OF SURGERY. BOOK II.
CHAP. I.
Wherein the Authors, and Definition of Ulcers, are set down.

I Divided Surgery into four Parts: whereof the first was (...), which
teaches to unite parts disjoined. Solution of Unity I made twofold: either
intelligible, to be apprehended by Reason or Understanding; or sensible, which
may be perceived by the very Senses. The intelligible I named a Tumor, in which
very often no Solution of Unity offers it self either to the sight or touch, as
in many choleric Tumors, and others in their beginning. Sensible Solution of
Unity, I affirmed either to be in the soft parts or in hard. As for the
Solution of Unity in the soft Parts, I appointed two Differences of it; to wit,
Vlcus and Vulnus, an Ulcer and a Wound.

In my proceeding, I will handle these ten Points: I. I will point out the
Authors who have written laudably of this Subject. II. I will set down the
Definition of an Ulcer. III. The Causes of an Ulcer. IV. The Differences of
Ulcers. V. The general Signs of Ulcers. VI. The general Prognostics of Ulcers.
VII. I will set down such Medicaments as are fit for all Ulcers in general.
VIII. Of the general Indications of curing of Ulcers. IX. Of their times. X. I
will discourse of every particular sort of Ulcers.

First then, to come to the Authors, I mean not to name all who are come to our
hands, and have written of this Subjects but such as are famous for their Skill
and Experience. Hippocrates and Galen, though they have not left to Posterity
particular large Monuments of this Matter, yet when occasion is offered, they
omit not to set down both the Indications of Cure, and Medicaments effectual to
cure. Hippocrates in his 6. Sect. Of Ulcers and Fistulaes. Galen in those
excellent Books of his, which he penned, De method. medendi, lib. 3. of a
Simple Ulcer, lib. 4. or an Ulceer with Accidents, of the orderly way to cure
Diseases, for the most part does illustrate his Precepts by Examples borrowed
from the Practice of Surgery.

If you demand why he did so?

I will tell you the Cause in Fallopius his words, in his first Chapter of
Ulcers, Quoniamut ait Celsus, lib. 7. cap. 1. Quum cadem est, Seeing according
to Celsus, the means which Physicians use in curing, sometimes take effect,
sometimes avail not, it may be doubted whether Health may be ascribed to the
good constitution of the Body, or to the means applied; but the effect of
Surgery is most evident. O pregnant testimony to evince the certainty and
excellency of Surgery! Let those Physicians who slight the Practice of
Surgery, thinking themselves to be Chicks of the white Hen only, consider
and weigh the weight of this Testimony of Celsus and Fallopius in the impartial
balance of Reason. Avicen, the chief of the Arabian Physicians, handles this
Matter in the fourth Book of his Canon, and the third Treatise: although he
writes confusedly; yet the reading of him will profit such as understand him,
and will not be fruitless. Albucasis has some good things, but the number of
the trifles are many more. Paulus Aegineta in his sixth Book, Of the Art of
Curing, only touches some Points of this Matter, as a Dog does Nilus when he
drinks. Gabriel Fallopius follows, who has written an excellent Treatise of
this Matter; but whosoever shall peruse him, shall find him in sundry things
intricate enough: I will bring him a new Companion, but far surpassing all
other Modern Writers, Minadous, one of the Famous Professors of that renowned
University of Padua, in his three Books which he penned of the curing of the
Deformities of the Body of Man: Whosoever he be who shall go about to make a
parity between these two and others of the late Writers, I shall judge him
worthy of Midas his Ears, and after that he has proceeded, and been promoted
in Germany, to be saluted a Doctor with four Feet. To these two Italians, I
join the German Samuel Haffenreferus, in his Four Books of the Affections of
the Skin, in whom there are many varieties, if one with judgment discern them.
The rest that can be named are of the lower Bench, as Guido de Cauliaco, and he
who has only taught him to speak a little more cloquently, Joannes Tagaultius,
in the Third Book of his Institutions of Surgery. Joannes de Vigo accounted
the Father of Empericks. Marianus Sanctus in the Third Treatise of his
Compendium of Surgery, and Angelus Bologninus in his two Books of Ulcers,
shall bear him company. I must not omit that painful and judicious Surgeon
Ambrose Parrey, unto whom Surgery is much beholding. Vesalius also deserves
praise. The two latest who have written are the two Fabricii, Jerome and
William: Hieronymus Fabricius in the Third Book of the Second Part of his
Chirurgical Works: Gulielmus Fabricius in his Learned Chirurgical Observations,
who in this course outstrip all their fellows. These Authors of all other are
most to be perused; for in reading of them, one shall become both more
understanding, and more able to perform the Cures which shall be committed to
his care and skill. As for the rest, I leave them unto those who rather choose
to feed upon Acorns, than pure Mancliet. Riolan the Father, Jaques Guilmeau,
Peccetius and Pigraeus, although they deserve their own praise, yet in my
opinion they are to give place to those whom I have named. If any one would
mispend good hours, let him read Paracelsus his great and little Surgery,
which are like Clouds without Rain. If you would be furnished with Forests of
Chirurgical Medicaments, peruse the Treatise of the Learned Hollerius de
materia Chirurgica, of Chirurgical means, and Jacobus Dondus in his enumeration
of Chirurgical Remedies, both simple and compound.

As for those Medicaments which in my proceedings I shall from time to time set
down, they shall not be a confused heap, but a choice of the best approved, to
ease you of the labor of Election.

Now are we to descend to the desinition of an Ulcer, which was the Second
point: I will not stand upon the setting down of sundry descriptions of sundry
Authors, and the examination of them, because this labor would take up too
much time, and little edify. An Ulcer in English is derived from the Latin
Vlcus, and this from the Greek (...), because it disjoyneth the part which it
possesses; and so this term, in its general signification, comprehends every
solution of unity: and so Hippocrates in his Treatise concerning wounds of the
Head, does entitle it.

But seeing solution of Unity may proceed from two Causes, to wit, an external
instrument dividing, and a sharp Humor eroding, according to Galen: there must
be two differences of solution of Unity likewise according to the same Author,
de constit. art. c. 6. Vulnas, a wound, procured by an external instrument, and
Vlcus, an Ulcer, caused of an inward cause eroding, Thus then an Ulcer is to be
described: It is a solution of Unity proceeding from an inward cause eroding
the part. The subject of an Ulcer, I make not only the fleshy part, (whereby I
understand, all the parts which cover the Bones) but the Bone it self also.
Unto the Ulcer of a Bone the Author of the Book De constit. art. c. 6. gives a
peculiar Name, calling it Teredo, (...), which properly signifies the little
Worm which pierces Wood, and consumes it. I see no reason why the name of an
Ulcer may not be ascribed to the solution of Unity in a Bone, if it proceed
from an inward cause eroding, as the term of a wound is, if it be divided by an
external instrument, as a Sword or Hatchet. An Ulcer then is a compound
Disease; for in it there is both solution of Continuity, and loss of substance.

CHAP. II.
Of the Causes of Ulcers.

IN the third general concerning Ulcers, is set down by me the causes of
Ulcers. These are either antecedent or conjunct: The antecedent causes may be
reduced to three; to wit, Cacochymia or the evil habit of the Body; Contagium,
or the communication or imparting of an infecting quality, Vapor or Humor, by
the which an Ulcer is caused in any part; a venomous moisture, as in biting and
stinging of Serpents; or lastly, the distemperature of the part it self.

As for Cacochymia, the speculation of it belongs to the practice of Physic!
yet in my Discourses of Tuniors I set down the signs of every Humor redounding
as much as was requisite for any to know, who only meddles with the practice of
Surgery. While any of the three Humors (Blood being excepted) in the mass
of Blood contained in the Veins is faulty, and peccant in quality, it is
accounted the cause antecedent of an Ulcer. Sometimes these Humors are
solitary, sometimes they are associate together.

Contagium, or Infection, it is communicated sometimes by a rotten and
corroding Vapor; and so very often, if one visit often one having a Phthisis,
such Vapors being mingled with the Air, infect the party who visits,
especially if he draw too near to the diseased Party. So Ulcers of the Yard
come from dealing with Women, whose Secret parts are touched with Venereal
Ulcers: yea, the Itch it self, and scabbedness, is gotten by either lying with
one troubled with it, or by sleeping in a Bed where a scabbed person has
rested.

As for the distemperature of the Part, it may be procured either by Cold, as
appears in Kibes; or by Heat, as we may see in a Gangrene, because the Blood
flowing copiously to the part pained, and not being concocted, it putrefies and
erodes the part. Last of all, by biting or stinging, as of a mad Dog, or a
venomous Serpent, a corruption of the Humors may be caused, the conjunct cause
of an Ulcer: so that every Humor that is changed from its own natural
temperature, whether it be by putrefaction, adustion, or commixtion of any
thing unnatural, may procure an Ulcer, in whatsoever part it seats it self.

But the followers of Hippocrates and Galen, speak otherwise of these Humors
than the Chemists do. The Galenisis make the three Humors of the mass of
Blood; to wit, Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy, to be the causes both antecedent
and conjunct of all Ulcers, if they become contrary to Nature. So they will
have Rheumatick Ulcers to be caused of salt Phlegm, Herpes exedens to be caused
of aeruginous Choler; cancerous Ulcers of Bilis atra, which are the worst and
most deplorable of all others.

The Chemists on the other part, affirm that the Discourse of Humors does not
manifest unto us the Essence, and proper Nature of any Disease. So Quercetan in
his advice of curing the Gout, brings in the Stone, which he affirms not to be
engendered of the Galenical Humors. Petrus Severinus the Dane in his Idea
Medici^ae Philosophicae, or Pourtraicture of the Philosophical Physic, wonders
at the folly of those who make those fantastical Humors Blood, Choler, Phlegm,
and Melancholy the causes of Diseases; wherefore they out of Minerals, Salt,
Sulphur, and Mercury, fetch the causes of all Griefs. Although Galen sometimes
calls the Humors salt, nitrous, and aeruginous; yet the Chemists have no reason
to reject the ordinary names of Humors, and to call contumeliously dogmatical
Physicians Humorists, and to deny any Disease to proceed from the ordinary
Humors of the Body becoming unnatural: For seeing that according to Galen 1. De
loc. affect. c. 2. that is to be accounted the cause of a Grief, which being
present, the Disease continues, and which being removed, the Grief cease;
and seeing we perceive Diseases to be caused of vicious Humors abounding, and
these being expelled, the Grief to vanish, I see no reason why these Humors may
not be accounted the true causes of Griefs; and that it is a mere folly, and an
affection of novelty, to Baptize these by names of Minerals far fetched; as to
call that which in Fevers is cast up by vomit, rather Sulphur than Choler.
Besides this, the Chemists are injurious to dogmatical Physicians, in laboring
to persuade Men, that they by the name of a Humor, understand nothing else but
a waterish substance void of all other Faculty; which should be the principles
of all Bodies, and the causes of all Diseases: whereas every rational
Physician, by the term of a Humor, understands a liquid Body mixed with Blood:
which seeing it is a several body of its own kind, and is more compound than
water, so it has far more excellent qualities than water: The Physicians their
own selves have set the Alchymists at work, while talking of Humors, and the
causes of Diseases, they so much talk of the first qualities, Heat, Cold,
Moisture, and Dryness. For although sundry Diseases are caused of Heat, Cold,
Moisture, and Dryness, yet we shall find other qualities in the Humor, which
may as well hurt the Body as these: For Hippocrates in his Book De prisca
Medicina, or ancient Physic, affirms, not that which is hot, cold, moist, or
soft, to be most powerful, but that which is bitter, salt, sweet, and sour,
unsavory, and sharp, with some Sowerness; these and a thousand such, (...)
being exalted in their Faculties, he will have to be the causes of Diseases,
and not the first qualities only: and from these the differences of symptoms
in Fevers of this same kind do depend. These whilst they are exquisitely mixed
in the Body are harmless, yet when one of these is severed from the rest, and
is exalted in its quality, it manifests it self, and annoys Man; so the
corrosive Salt bewrays it self in Cancers and corrosive Ulcers. Neither is it
to be thought absurd, that Minerals are in the Body of Man; for seeing Man is
sed by Plents, and Beasts which seed also upon Plants; seeing also the Herbs
have their Aliment from the ground, which is not alike in all places, but often
is mingled with a salt Juice, and other Mineral Spirits, which the Beasts and
Herbs cannot perfectly convert into their own substance; one can hardly think
that a Man can live upon these, and participate of no such thing. So we see
what variety of Wines the diversity of Soils brings forth; and that in every
Wine there is Tartar or Argol, which appears also very often in podagrical
Persons. In vomiting sundry times substance like to Leeks, green, and
aeruginous, exceeding hot and sharp, are thrown up, which being received in
Basins, die them with a bright aeruginous color. See Histories in Schenkius
Med. obser. lib. 3. ob. 63 in the Third Book of his Physical Observations, the
62 Observation. Michael Doringius lib. 1 De Medico and Medic^^a, in his First
Book of the Physician and Physic reports, That a certain Lawyer made such
Urine as did fret his Linings, as if it had been the Spirit of Vitriol; such
Humors appear plainly in Scubbedness, fretting Ulcers, but especially in a
Cancer. Wherefore Bertinus: in his Third Book and Eleventh of his Physic, does
rashly and inconsiderately assirm, that not one whit of Mercury, Salt, or
Sulphur, lies hid in the Body; for in the Itch, Scabbiness, some Catarrhs,
Inslammations of the Eyes, and fretting Ulcers, it may be perceived; but in
Urine, which is also an excrementitious Humor, the Salt may be separated and
presented to the sight: yea, besides the Salt in Urine, another substance the
cause of Diseases may be marked: for if you take a clear Urine and suffer it to
settle, a Matter like unto the powder of Brick, and sometimes a white muddy
substance will so cleave to the sides of the Chamber Pot or Urinal, that it can
hardly be sometimes washed away: of such a Matter Tophi in gouty persons, and
Stones in the Bladder are engendered.

Whoever shall go about to reduce the causes of all Diseases to Blood, Choler,
Melancholy, and Phlegm, shall wrap himself into a number of difficulties: I
will desire him to yield me a reason, Why he calls salt Phlegm so, seeing
Phlegm is said to be cold, but this hot? Why is Atra bilis comprehended under
Melancholy, seeing it is very hot, but this cold? Besides this, if any
Physician go about to cure Diseases, procured either by Contagion, or Poison,
he without any great respect to the Humors, presently goes about to minister
Alexipharmica, as in the Plague, which is gotten by Contagion, to abate the
force of it, and then he addresseth himself to the preparation and evacuation
of the Humors. If Poison be ministered to any one in Meat or Drink, which
according to Cardan, commenting upon the 62 Aphor. of the 4. Sect. may be
suspected, if he find griping in his Stomach, and if he Vomit and go to Stool,
if within six hours the Skin become greenish or spotted, then Antidotes are
ministered, and not such as respect Choler, Melancholy, or Phlegm. Let the
Humors then which are engendered in the Body, retain the accustomed names; but
if an external cause make them degenerate from their Nature, let these be
distinguished from the ordinary, and have their denomination from that which
alters them. If Salt, Nitre, Alume, Vitriol, Verdigrease be mingled with any
Humor, let it be called from the Mineral mingled with it, salt, nitrous,
aluminous, vitriolate or a^^uginous. And for this cause some late judicious
Physicians writing of malign and pestilent Fevers, and considering their
notable differences, have affirmed some to participate of the nature of
Arsenick, some of Mercury, some of Hellebore, some of Opium, some of
Leopards-bane, some of Hemlock; some to participate of the poison of a Viper,
Scorpion, mad Dog and such like, noting the variety of Symptoms in sundry
persons.

One doubt remains concerning the Melancholic Humor, whether it be only thin
and waterish, as Reusnerus affirms in his Book of the Scurvy, Exercit. 4. out
of sundry places of Hippocrates, who calls Melancholy (...), as in his Book
De morbis, and in his first Book De morbis Mulierum; or whether it be thick and
earthy, according to the vulgar and received Opinion. Before this doubt be
solved, some Propositions are to be premised. 1. In the Chyle there are two
substances, one liquid and thin, the other thick and terrestrial, which can no
more nourish than Ashes. 2. Nature mingles these which are not sent away by
Stool, with part of the aqueous and superfluous Humidity, caused of Drink and
liquid Meats. So in a Lie the Salt and some adust Parts are so mingled, that
they are not discerned before separation. I say then, that this thick and
feculent Humor tempered with much moisture, is to be accounted the superfluous
melancholic cholick Humor, and that it is attracted by the Spleen. For First,
Seeing this feculent Humor is altogether unapt to nourish, it must be separated
from the Chyle, which cannot be performed by any other part besides the Spleen.
Secondly, the Spleen is of a darker Red color than the Liver is, which
proceeds from the thick, feculent, and terrestrial Humor, which it imbibeth.
Thirdly, Hippocrates de aere, aq. and loc. affirms, that such persons as dwell
in Fenny places, are subject to passions of the Spleen. The cause is, because
the waters are not pure but muddy. Fourthly, if the Spleen did draw only thin
and waterish Humors, it could not be so subject to obstructions as it is. The
feculent Humor mixed with much Humidity, is the cause of sundry Diseases, the
thin parts sometimes ascend to the upper parts, the gross to the lower parts,
as we see in the Scurvy, wherein the Gums are ulcerated, and the Legs tumefy.
The Spleen being spongy, draws much Humidity to it, wherefore splenetick
persons ought to drink sparingly; for if they bib too much, the natural heat of
the part is easily oppressed, and so they become Hydropick. The waterish Humor
of the Spleen is not insipid, but sharp and biting, and copious: so we see
those who are troubled with Quartanes, about the end of each Fit to sweat
plentifully; and those who are oppressed with Melancholy, to spit much. In the
thick, feculent, and terrestrial blackish Matter, sometimes there is no excess
of the Spleen: in qualities sometimes there is, and those are two: Acerbitas,
an astringent sharpness, such as appears is green unripe Fruits; and Acidit^,
sowreness: from these qualities intended and exalted, atra bilis becomes so
corrosive. So much I thought good to set down of Melancholy, to clear the
doubts which are moved about it, and to show one use of the Spleen.

To return then to the carbonary Cure of unlearned Alchymists, they object
thus, The rational Physicians affirm the Body to be nourished by the four
Humors, How can they then be causes of the Diseases?

It is strange that any Man should wilfully shut the eye of the Mind
(Understanding I mean) that they may not see Truth, seeing Man, as Aristotle in
the very first words of the Book of his Metaphysics affirms, naturally covets
knowledge, and our first Parents to their own and our loss, are witnesses. No
dogmatical Physician ever affirmed any disease to be caused of any Humor of the
Body, as long as it continues in its own natural estate; but then to stir up
Griefs, when it is separate from the rest, when it putresies, when foreign
substances and qualities are added, which make it of a familiar Humor a
professed enemy to Health, consisting of the natural constitution of the Body,
a result of the laudable commixtion of the four Humors natural. I have insisted
somewhat long in the setting down of the causes of Ulcers, because he
(whosoever he be) that goes about to cure Ulcers without the knowledge of the
Causes, is like one, who being blind-folded, is set to thrash a Cock.

CHAP. III.
Of the general Differences and Signs of Ulcers.

NOw the fourth Point, concerning the differences, and sundry sorts of Ulcers,
offers it self to be handled, and in Truth the course of Nature so requires:
for the form of every particular Ulcer does spring from the Cause conjunct of
the same: for Example, a Cancer ulcerate is discerned from all other Ulcers by
its proper and Pathognomonical Signs, all which, as effects, are ascribed to
Atra bilis, impacted in the part, the Cause conjunct of the same.

Here of purpose I omit the idle and fruitless distinctions of Ulcers, set down
by sundry Authors, which neither better the understanding, nor further the
Cure. These only I will set down, which are material. The material differences
then of Ulcers, are taken either from the Nature or Constitution of an Ulcer,
or from the subject or part affected. From the Nature and Constitution, an
Ulcer is either simple or compound.

In a simple Ulcer, nothing is offered which may stay the Surgeon from going
about the consolldation of it, as the Cause conjunct, a cruel Symptom,
Adjuncts, or some Disease.

A compound Ulcer wherein either some of these, or all are found, which must be
removed before Unition be procured, is either of the milder sort, or malign.

The more mild sort of Ulcers yield to ordinary and usual Medicaments, if they
be judiciously applied.

The Malign yield not, and besides have fearful symptoms: those Malign Ulcers
proceed either from inward, or outward Causes.

From internal Causes spring a Cancer Ulcerate, Phagedaena, Nome, fretting
Ulcers, and others which are called Chironia, or Telephia, which denominations
insinuate nothing unto us concerning the Nature or Cure of an Ulcer, but bring
only unto our Memory the Names of those who are celebrated by Poets, which
belong more to Grammarians than Physicians or Surgeons to be known.

The external Causes, which procure Ulcers, are two, to wit, Contagium,
Contagion, or a venomous quality, Vapor, or Humor, comprehended under the name
of Venenum, or Poison.

The Differences taken from the Subject or Part affected are two, for either an
Ulcer possesses the outward part, and is called externum or outward; or it
afflicts the inner parts, and is named internum or inward. Other differences
taken from the continuance, figure and quantity, are here impertinent, and
further only predictions, of which I will speak in the Prognostics of Ulcers.

As concerning the signs of Ulcers; an internal Ulcer is found out and
discerned by the Excretion, or Matter expelled. As for Example, if the Urine be
purulent, we conjecture the Kidneys or Bladder to be ulcerate. If purulent
Matter be voided by coughing, it is like that the Lungs are ulcerate; if much
of such Matter be rejected, and signs of an Apostem have gone before, it is an
apostematous Ulcer; if the purulent Matter be but little, and no signs of an
Inslammation have been noted, then it is but a primary Ulcer proceeding of
Erosion, by reason of a sharp Humor separating the unity of the substance of
the Lungs. These internal Ulcers I will leave to the consideration of
Physicians, unto whom they are most commonly presented to be cured. Only I will
set down such things as tend to the cure of Ulcers of the external Parts. I
need not to busy my self about setting down of the general signs of such,
seeing they are presented to the view of the Surgeon by the parts grieved.
Only let me give you warning, that you mistake not a Wound for an Ulcer: into
this error you may easily fall, if you admit the most ordinary description of
an Ulcer, strange even to judicious Physicians and Surgeons; which is, that
it is a Solution of continuity in a fleshy part, yielding Quittour; it matters
not, they think, whether it be laudable or illaudable. It is set down that
there should be set down no other difference between a Wound and an Ulcer, than
this, that the one is bloody, and the other purulent. Does not, I pray you, a
Wound become purulent of it self, although no Surgeon deal with it, and may
not an Ulcer become bloody if Incision be used, as it may daily be seen?
Frivolous it is also in my judgment, that a Solution of Unity inflicted by an
Instrument that wounds in a Bone, as a Sword, may be called a Wound; and that
a Solution of Unity in a Bone, procured by an eroding Humor, may not be termed
an Ulcer.

Seeing the Causes conjunct make the true differences of an Ulcer and Wound:
which are an external Instrument dividing, and a sharp Humor eroding, the
parts; Who can imagine that in a Venereal Ulcer, wherein there is corruption of
the Bone, there should be two sorts of Ulcers specifically differing, to wit,
one in the fleshy part, and another in the Bone, the same Humor causing both?

But a Solution of Unity in the Bone by a corroding Humor is called Terede, say
they.

What then? Must a Malign Ulcer in the Face, because it is called Noli me
tangere, be exempted out of the list of cancerous Ulcers?

No. Let this then be accounted an undoubted Truth, that a Solution of Unity
procured in the Body by a Humor eroding, whether it be in the Flesh or Bone,
may be, yea ought to be, called an Ulcer, as a Solution by an Instrument
separating is called a Wound in both.

CHAP. IV.
Of the general Prognostics of Ulcers.

THe next thing I shall proceed upon concerning Ulcers is their general
Prognostics. The consideration of these will make one circumspect, when an
Ulcer is offered to him to be cured, in the election of his Cure: for whoever
takes in hand a grief uncurable, he discredits himself, and causes the Art to
be contemned by those who are simple and ignorant, imputing the Error of the
Practicer to the insufficiency of the Art. Let this be the first prediction: an
Ulcer in a Body of an evil complexion, which may be conjectured by the color
of the Skin, if it be of a tallowy whiteness, yellow or swarthish, is not
easily cured: for it is likely, that corrupt Phlegm, Vitellin Choler, and
feculent Melancholy do abound, which Humors hinder the regeneration of Flesh:
but on the contrary, an Ulcer is easily cured in a person of a good complexion,
who digests well and does not increase superpersluous moisture. II. Ulcers in
Bodies which are either very moist or dry, are hardly cured. This is plain in
the Bodies of Hydropical persons, and those who are aged; for as superfluous
Humidity contrary to desiccation hinders the healing in those first: So in the
latter the defect of Radical Moisture is an impediment. III. Ulcers in Children
by reason of their excessive Humidity, and in Women with Child, because the
most laudable part of the Blood is turned to nourishment of the Child, are not
easily cured. IV. Ulcers which fall out after critical Apostems in the
Sphondyls of the back, or great joints of the Body, for the most part are
mortal: because after sickness, and Apostemation Nature must be exceedingly
weakened, the Natural Heat much abated, and the Radical Moisture almost spent.
Such Apostems do fall out when as sharp Fevers end not critically in the
decretory days by some Evacuation, as Bleeding at the Nose, Vomiting, Sweating,
Purging by Stool and Urine, but extend themselves to the fortieth day. V. If
the place wherein the Ulcer is seated be blackish, bluish, or greenish, it
hardly can be cured: for the Blood must be naughty, and the flesh corrupt. VI.
Ulcers with a round figure are cured with difficulty; the reason is this,
Consolidation is procured by unition of the parts; the farther the parts are
asunder, the more slowly it is procured: but a round Figure, of all other
within the same bounds, is most ample. VII. Painful Ulcers in Children are
dangerous, because their Bodies being raw, and the Spirits subtle, they are
easily spent, which is the cause that they are much weakened, and so disposed
for death it self. VIII. If an Ulcer become either bluish or pale, the party
being ill, death is not far off; for these colors in the Natural Moisture show
the Mortification of the part; and dryness shows, that is gone. IX. If an Ulcer
be complicate with a Disease which maintains it, the Ulcer, according to the
Nature of the Disease, is either of easy or hard cure. So a Venereal Ulcer in
a succulent and strong Body is easily cured, but if the party be in a Marasmus,
neither the Ulcer nor the Disease can be cured: Because the use of the
desiccatives, which only avail in these Infirmities, will only hasten death,
increasing the extenuation of the Body: In like manner Ulcers in Hectic and
Hydropick persons are hardly cured, in these because superfluous Humidity
hinders Desiccation of the Ulcer; in those because laudable juice flows not to
the part ulcerate. X. If Tumors in Ulcers suddenly vanish without any evident
and manifest Cause, as Bleeding, or application of a discussive Medicament,
they portend no good; but Convulsions, if they appear in the hinder parts,
because the Spina is very Nervous; and Madness, Pleurisy or Suppuration, if
they were red, and i^ the forepart. XI. Soft Tumors in Ulcers are laudable,
because they will yield to Medicaments; but hard, not easy to be cured,
because the Humor is more rebellious. XII. If the Hairs fall in places of the
Body about the Ulcer, it is an evil sign: For then there must be great
Acrimony, and Corruption of the Humors, as in quartane Agues, the Pox, and
Leprosy. XIII. If in an Ulcer where there is Cariosity of the Bone, the color
of the Flesh be livid, the party must be in danger; for it is a sign of
extinction of the Natural Heat. XIV. Ulcers that afford Quittour which is
white, smooth, and uniform, and not stinking, promise an easy cure; for these
qualities in the Quittour show the dominion of the Natural Heat, and the
soundness of the solid parts. XV. A Flux of Blood coming in an Ulcer after
strong pulsation is ominous, according to Hippocrates, sect. 7. Aph. 21. for
there must be a strong Phlegmon, and the Arteries must be much pressed, so that
a Gangrene may be expected: however, of such furious Blood no Flesh can be
regenerate. XVI. If an Erysipelas appear, the Bone being bare, it is no good
sign, Hippocrat. Sect. 7. Aphor. 19. for Flesh cannot be regenerate by such a
sharp Humor as this, that causes so hot a Tumor. XVII. From malign Ulcers two
sorts of Quittour flow; One thin, and it is called Ichor or Sanies; such a
virulent Matter issues also from the pricking of the Nerves, and corruption of
the Periosteon. The other sort of Quittor is thick, and is called Sordes.
XVIII. In Ulcers which have continued a Twelvemonth or longer, the Bone must
be scaled, and the skinning be hollow, Hip. lib. 6. Aph. 45. But to make good
this Aphorism of Hippocrates, some conditions are to be required: The First is,
that much Flesh above the Bone be not in the part ulcerate. Secondly, the Humor
which flows to the part must be very corrosive. Thirdly, it must not have been
dealt withal by any Physician or Surgeon. If one or more of these Conditions
fail, the Aphorism must miss of its prediction. What Galen and late Writers
have set down in the explication of this Aphorism, clears not the truth of it:
only these Conditions set down by me do. The signs which lead you to the
knowledge of a Bone corrupted, are these. 1. If the Ulcer, having been skinned,
breaks out again: for it is likely that the Bone casts out an ichorous
substance, which is the cause of this recidivation. 2. If the Ulcer yield more
and thinner Matter than the bigness of it requires. 3. If the brims of the
Ulcer will not come in. 4. If the brims become reddish. 5. If the Bone, being
presented to the Sight, appear rugged, and of a blackish color, not smooth, or
a ruddy white color. XIX. Whatsoever Ulcers cast out much Sanies or ichorous
Matter, which is too thin, of a leady, pale, or black color; or glutinous, or
stinking, and which frets the Skin adjacent, are hard to be cured, for this
Humor keeps the Ulcer moist, and cannot easily be dried, even if you apply
powerful Topics. XX. Inveterate Ulcers which cast out a Quittour called by the
Greclans (...) like unto white Oil, are hardly cured; for this signifies a
colliquation of the part, and an extenuation of the rest of the body.

CHAP. V.
Of the general Cure of Ulcers, and their Times.

THE Universal Cure of Ulcers is comprised in this one Proposition: All Ulcers
ever desire desiccation, So Hippoc. in princ. lib. de Ulcer. and Galen. lib. 3.
Method. c. 3. for whether we go about to engender Flesh, or to seal up an Ulcer
by cicatrisation, desiccative Medicaments are still required.

There are four times to be observed in Ulcers.

I. Principium, The beginning; In it the Quittour is thin and waterish.

II. Augmentum, the proceeding; In it the Quittour flows more sparingly, and
thicker.

III. Status, The consistence; In it there is no ichorous Matter but Pus, yet
it appears somewhat thinner.

IV. Declinatio, When the Ulcer is on the mending hand; then laudable Pus shows
it self. It is white, being altered by the natural temperature of the Veins,
Arteries Nerves and Membranes, whose substance is white. Secondly, It is
uniform, not grumous, or cruddy, natural heat working equally upon every part
of it. Thirdly, It is without all ill smell, seeing the natural heat has
corrected all the evil qualities of it.

The Cure of Ulcers is performed by two means; The First, is the removing of
the Causes antecedent. The Second, is the artificial dressing of them.

The Causes antecedent are four, Cacochymia, Contagium, Venenum, and the
distemperature of the part.

The ill habit of the Body is to be removed by alteration and evacuation, if an
Humor abound.

Contagion is to be overcome by Alexipharmaca.

Poison is to be contemperate by Antidota.

The distemperature of the part is to be removed by things contrary unto it.
And that we may the more easily attain to these scopes, a convenient order of
Diet must ever be prescribed.

The cause conjunct, which is the eroding Humor, that is settled in the part, is
surprised by such Medicaments, as suit the four times of an Ulcer
beforementioned.

In the beginning then Suppuratives or Digestives are to be applied. First,
because the Matter which has left the Vessels, and has insinuated it self
within the porosities, putrefies: wherefore it ought to be concocted, that it
may become laudable Quittour.

Secondly, good Flesh cannot be procured by sarcotical Medicaments, unless the
Matter be concocted; For so the Ulcer is made apt to admit the Generation of
Flesh. These Suppuratives ought in the first qualities to be proportionate to
the temperature of the part to which they are to be applied; so to parts hot in
the First or Second Degree, Suppuratives hot in the same degrees are to be
applied: for if they exceed, they are so far from strengthening the natural
heat, that they rather pervert it, making it Aguish and unnatural: if the part
be temperate, let temperate Suppuratives be applied.

But Digestives ought not to be applied, First, to putrid Ulcers: for seeing
Suppuratives are hot and moist, if they should be applied, they would cause the
greater putrefaction.

Secondly, they are not fit for Rheumatick Ulcers; for such Medicaments relax
the part, and make it more subject to receive the Matter that flows, and so a
Tumor might be caused. And since Suppuratives are to be applied to the parts
ulcerate, because the Humor, which is hot and sharp, would inflame the part, if
it were not suppurated and cleansed: So repelling Topics are to be applied to
the parts about the Ulcer, to repel the Matter which flows.

1. That the heat of the Suppurative Medicament draw nothing from the parts
adjacent.

2. To strengthen the parts, that they may resist Fluxion.

3. Because by the repelling of the Humor, the desiccation of the Ulcer is
furthered.

4. Because the heat of the part ulcerate is intended and strengthened, it
being kept in by the coldness of repelling Medicaments.

And for as much as I affirm, that Ulcers always require desiccation, it is not
amiss to mix with Suppuratives some driers; yet, that in the beginning the
Suppuratives have the upper hand, but in the end the Desiccatives.

After that the Ulcer is well digested, and yields laudable Quittour,
Mundificatives are to be applied: for if you apply sarcotical Medicaments,
before the Ulcer is well digested, spongy and naughty Flesh will grow, which
will admit of no cicatrization. In mundifying we must not use too sharp
Medicaments, for these may cause an unskilful Physician or Surgeon to
believe that it is a corrosive Ulcer. The pain which the Patient feels in the
part ulcerate will bewray this error. These three scopes being compassed to
overcome the Cause conjunct, nothing remains but to seal up the Cure by
Cicatrization.

Seeing most ordinary Ulcers proceed from Fluxion, it is to be withstood,
First, by Revulsion. Secondly, by Repulsion. In Revulsion, wherein the Matter
is drawn to parts far distant, the rectitude of the part and vessels is to be
observed. So if the Ulcer be in the Right Leg, Revulsion is to be procured in
the Right Arm, if you respect the rectitude of the part; but if you consider
the rectitude of the vessels, Revulsion is to be used in the Left Leg, if the
Ulcer be in the Right: for so the communion of vessels is kept.

Revulsion is performed by attractives, and these are three; Heat, Pain, and
the shunning of Vacuity. Hot things which procure Attraction, are hot
Inunctions, and Baths: strait Ligatures cause pain; but both pain and heat are
caused by Ventoses, and Vesicatories. Fontanels attract by reason of the
shunning of Vacuity; for they sending out still some substance, some other must
be drawn to fill up the place of that.

Repulsion, wherein the Humor is stayed in its passage, is performed by
applying those Medicaments which commonly are called Defensives: these
Medicaments are astringent and cold, and rather dry than moist in Ulcers. Now
that you may know whether you proceed according to Art in the curing of Ulcers,
receive this Aphotism: When Medicaments applied to Ulcers do good, or at least
hurt not, it is a sign that they are convenient; but if they do harm, by making
the Ulcer hotter or colder, dryer or moister than is fit, then you may gather
that such are to be changed, and their contraries applied.

To conclude this Point, nine things make Ulcers hard to be cured.

1. The defection of good Blood in Bodies extenuate.

2. The impurity of Blood in Cacochymical persons.

3. The filthiness of the Ulcer.

4. Soft and cadaverous Flesh about the Ulcer.

5. The malignity of the Humor.

6. The hardness of the brims of the Ulcer.

7. A secret cause in the Air of some places, it being hot and moist.

8. When the Bone is corrupted.

9. The application of unfit Medicaments.

CHAP. VI.
Of Medicaments befitting Ulcers in general, and First of repelling Medicaments.

IT is not unknown how many saucy and malepert Empericks there are in London,
who basely and irreverently speak of those who are skilful indeed, and deserve
well of the Art of Surgery, (purchasing unto it credit, and to their own
selves profit and renown, by their methodical and successful practice) and so
impudently boast of their Secrets, and exalt themselves as if they had no
Forehead. That you may be the more able, not only to encounter with these
consident Cowards; but to overthrow them also, I will endeavor, according to
that talent of Skill which I have, to furnish you with competent, both Theorie
and Practice. It is a shame for a Surgeon not to be furnished with admirable
variety of Medicaments; seeing Nature has been so provident for him. Turn your
Eyes whither you will, and behold the fertility of Nature, and you shall see
and find that in her Works she has not been unmindful of you. As for Plants,
you have Dioscorides and Galen, yea all who have written of them, witnesses;
that the greatest part of them have fallen to your share. As for the things
which lie hid in the bowels of the Earth, as Metals, Spirits, Marcasites, do
they not serve your turn? The Metals for your instruments, the rest for your
Medicaments. Let no Man think then, that a skilful and industrious Surgeon
can by his Art, perform no other Cures, but such as may be compassed by the
compositions in his Salvatory. These he must have in readiness, other
Medicaments he is able to fetch out of the Treasure of Nature, which he has at
his Command. This I will make good by setting down only those Medicaments,
which are known to belong to the cure of Ulcers. Of these there are two Orders
or Ranks: for some serve for ordinary Ulcers, some for those which have a
Malignity annexed. Those that serve for ordinary Ulcers, are of five sorts, for
some are Repelling, some Digesting, some Mundifying, some Incarnating, and some
Cicatrizing, and the Medicaments which perform these Offices, are either simple
or compound.

The Simples Repelling are these that follow.
Of these, some are of an Aqueous substance, as Water it self, Lettuce, all
sorts of Succory, Knotgrass, Horse-tail, Periwinckle, Nightshade, Comfrey,
Purslain, Navelwort, Housleek, these four yield not their Juice easily;
wherefore they must be beaten in a Mortar, and some Verjuyce, Vinegar, or joyce
of Quinces mingled with them. There be some Simples not so waterish as these
are, as Plantain, Milfoil, Vine-Leaves, astringent Red Wine, Verjuyce, Vinegar,
the fruit of the Berbery, the fruit of the Quicken-beam, Sloes, Myrtle-berries,
Pomegranate-rinds and Flowers infused in Red Wine, which is astringent, Tanners
Woose, which will be more effectual, if these Simples together with Red-Rose
Leaves dried, be boiled a little in it; but the Woose must be taken when it is
newly made, and before any Leather be put in it. The Leaves and Apples of the
Mandrake, the Henbane, the Leaves of Stramonea, black Poppy, and deadly
Nightshade are more cooling than the former; but they must be left before the
part become livid, or of a Leady color. If you use the Juyces or Decoctions of
the aforesaid Simples, which you shall be enforced to do, if the cure of Ulcers
and Wounds be presented unto you, being in the Country, where no Apothecary
is, by whom you can be furnished with Medicaments which are fit to repel, then
you must apply to the parts adjacent to the Ulcer, Pledgets of Wool or Tow
moistened in them; then above these Stupes of linen or woollen Clothes,
according to the temperature of the Party, and the season of the year, moistened
in the same and wrung, are to be applied.

Last of all, the part ulcerate is handsomely to be rolled, the Rowler having
been moistened in these Juyces or Decoctions. One thing is to be noted, that it
is the best course still to mingle some Astringents with those which have a
waterish juice: for as these cool best, and repress the Fluxion and
Inflammation; so these by wrinkling of the Skin repel more effectually. As you
roll up Fractures, so must you roll Parts Ulcerate. Of this kind of rolling I
will speak in its proper place.

The compound Medicaments that repel are these.
1. Oils, as the Oil of Roses made of green Oil, the juice of unripe Grapes,
and the juice of Red Roses, boiled together over a simpering fire, until the
juices are consumed. Last of all, infuse some Roses picked in the Oil; the Oil
of Myrtles, the Oil of Quinces, the Oil of Mastick, the Oil of Henbane, Poppy,
and Mandrake. Sallet Oil, whereof these compound Oils are made, must not be old
or rank. If an Inflammation has possessed the parts adjacent, use not Oils;
for they are easily set on fire.

2. Cataplasms, made of the aforesaid juices, and Barley-flour, with some of
the forenamed Oils, or Bole, Terra sigillata, or Amber tempered with some of
the forenamed Oils, and Whites of Eggs beaten, Vinegar or Verjuice.

3. Unguents, as Tripharmacon; Vnguentum album, Camphoratum either of it self,
or mingled with Vnguentum populeum.

4. Emplasters, as Emplastrum de Minio, the Sope-Plaster, Diapalma made with
the juices of Plantane, Horse-tail, Knot-grass, Yarrow, Comfrey, and
Perywinckle. When you make your Diacalciteos, reserve one part for the Juices,
which must be added by little and little, as you bring your Emplaster to a
consistence. This Medicament is second to none.

Of Suppuratives or Digestives.
Being furnished with Medicaments repelling, which are to be applied to the
parts adjacent to the Ulcer, to hinder Fluxion, you are to look for Medicaments
which are to be applied to the Ulcer it self: Amongst them Suppuratives offer
themselves first; Those as the former, are either simple or compound.

The Simples are these, which are to be temperately warm and moist.
The Flour of Wheat and Barley, Swines-grease, sweet Butter, Capons-grease,
Calves-tallow, rape Oil, Black Rosin, the juice of the Flowers of White Lilies,
the pulp of Figs and Raisms, the mucilage of Marsh-mallow, Fenugreek, and
Linseed. These are convenient, if any hardness or callosity be in the Ulcer,
Saffron, Bird-lime, Pitch, Storax, Galbanum, Gummi Elemi, the Burr-Dock,
Mell^ot, the Flower-de-luce, new Wax.

Of Compounds.
Tetrapharmacum of the Ancients, which is made of Pitch, Rosin, Wax, and any of
the forenamed Fats: Dialthaea simplex, Basilicum majus and minus, Vnguentum
aureum: if a little Mercury precipitate washed in Plantain, and Rose Water, be
mingled with these Unguents, as a Scruple with an Ounce, they will be the more
effectual: for the precipitate does excellently thicken and digest any ichorous
Matter. Above these, applied unto the Ulcers, either upon Lint or Tow, lay
Emplastrum diachylon simplex in the Summer, and cum gummi in the Winter, if the
brims of the Ulcers be hard: otherwise use your Diapalma cum succis; for there
is no Emplaster comparable to this.

Of the forenamed Simples, as your Flowers, or Meals, Pulps, Mucilages, and
Juices, you may frame unto your selves sundry Suppuratives, according to the
temperature of the party, the condition of the Ulcer, and season of the year.
Let this be an example; Take of the pulp of Figs and Raisins, of each an Ounce,
of the Mucilage of Marsh-mallow, Linseed, and Fenugreek, of each two drams; of
the juice of the Flowrs of white Lily, two drams and a half; of Barleymeal,
three drams; of Saffron beat to powder, half a Scruple; make up a Medicament,
This is powerful in callous Ulcers.

Of Mundificatives.
When the Ulcer is well digested, which you may conjecture, if the Quittour be
somewhat laudable, if the brims of the Ulcer be soft and well colored; and
Lastly, if you find no ill damp to rise from the Ulcer; then you are to address
your selves to the application of Mundificatives; for if you use sarcotick or
incarnative Medicaments before Mundification, only loose Flesh will arise,
which will admit of no cicatrization.

The Simples that Mundify are these.
Aristolochia or Birthwort, whereof there be two sorts, the long and the round;
Hore-hound, Smallage, Vitriol calcined to redness, Verdigrease, Orpiment,
Arsenick natural and sublimed, Mercury sublimate, and precipitate; the yellow
Turbith, if you use it before it be washed, it is as powerful as Arsenick, or
Mercury sublimate, but much more safe; for it dispatches its operation sooner,
causes not so great Inflammation, and is more familiar to the body of Man.
Honey also mundifies, Savin, Cockle-shels burned, Alume burned or calcined, the
flour of Vetches. All Vegetables calcined mundify, by reason of the Salt in the
Ashes, but some more powerfully than others, as the Ashes of Tobacco,
Vine-stalks, and the stalks of Beans: join to these the juice of Celandine, the
root of Arum, Wormwood, Century the lesser, Carduus Benedictus, Beet, Colewort,
Gentian, bitter Almonds, Scordium, the white and black Hellebore.

Compound mundifying Medicament.
L. 15. of Fabricius ab aqua pendente: Terebinth ij. syrup. ros. vel mel, ros.
ss. succi apii i ss. farin hord. and lupin. aq. q. s. ut spissentur. That which
is called Paracelsus Mundificative, is second to none: It receives these
things; Take of Honey iiij. of Turpentine ij. boil these with a very soft fire,
until they come to the consistence of a soft Unguent; then take them from the
fire, and mingle with it the yolk of an Egg; incorporate all well together. If
a foul Ulcer be offered unto you, mingle with an Ounce of this Unguent, a dram
of Mercury precipitate, washed with Plantain and Rose Water, and you shall find
it to excel all other Mundificatives. In the Shops you have Vnguentum
Aegyptiacum, and Apostolorum; Aegyptiacum is good to be injected into sinuous
Ulcers, being mingled with White Wind, and Mel rosatum: Vnguentum Apostolorum
is best for plain and superficial Ulcers, If you mingle with Basilicum and
Aureum, precipitate mingled with Alume calcined, you shall have a Medicament
which will both digest and mundify. Take of your precipitate two parts, and one
of Alume, and grind them upon a Painters-stone, until they come to an
impalpable Powder. From the enumeration of these Medicaments, you may gather of
what qualities Mundificatives ought to be; They are drying without astriction,
without any notable cold quality, or great heat; but of a subtle substance: by
reason of the dryness they consume the humidity of the Ulcer: and by reason of
their siccitie and tenuity, they take away the glutinousness of the Quittour.
These must not pass the second degree of dryness: otherwise they would consume
the Flesh it self. Extersion then is the removing of filth cleaving to the
Ulcer, by drying of it, and abating the viscosity, by which it cleaves to the
part.

Of Incarnatives.
When the Ulcer is sufficiently mundified, which you shall learn of Celsus lib.
5. c. 20. If the Ulcer appear red, sensible and clean, and neither too dry nor
too moist, then it is sufficiently mundified: but on the contrary, if it appear
pale or whitish, or of a livid or black color, and want sense, and be either
too moist or too dry, then it is not cleansed sufficiently. These signs may be
seen in a plain and open Ulcer.

But you may ask, how shall we know when a sinuous Ulcer is sufficiently
mundified?

Galen will tell you, l. 4. (...). cap. 2. That you shall conjecture a hollow
Ulcer to be clean, when the part begins to be more sensible of the
Mundificatives than it was before.

When these signs of sufficient Mundification appear, then you must go about
incarnating of the Ulcer. And although Incarnation be the effect of Nature
principally, that is, of the temperature of the part, from whence the faculty
of the part, the cause of all the ordinate actions of the part does flow: yet
it is requisite that the Physician and Surgeon should help Nature now, being
weakened by the grief, by removing the Impediments and Lets which hinder the
natural constitution of the part. Nature when she is in her vigor, cannot
totally convert the Aliment into the substance of the solid parts, but after
she has had a care of the preservation of them, has a task to expel both a
waterish or thin, and a thick Excrement by the pores of the Skin to the outward
superficies of it, (as is manifest in the Morphew,) when she is disabled by a
Solution of Unity; much less can she effect her purpose, whereof the thin
Excrement a humid Ulcer is procured; but of the thick a sordid. Wherefore if
you will go about to cure an Ulcer, you must labor to dry the humid Ulcers by
desiccatives, and the sordid by Mundificatives; and because in all Solution of
Unity Nature is ever vigilant and busy, and in Ulcers to regenerate flesh, in
perfecting of which work these two Excrements must be separated; it is manifest
that there cannot be one moment designed in the curing of Ulcers, where drying
and mundifying Medicaments are not required. Now Medicaments endued with these
two qualitles of desiccation and mundification in a temperate degree, are
called sarcotical or incarnative Medicaments.

The Simples are these.
S. John's Wort, Clown's- panax, Milfoil, Knot-grass, Hors-tail, the garden and
mountain Avens, our Ladies mantle, Sanicle, Salemens-seal, fresh Galls,
Barley-flour, Mastich, Myrrh, Aristolochia rotunda, Hearts horn calcined, Bones
calcined, Sarcocol, Rosin, Pitch, Gummi Elemi, Butter, Turpentine,
Swines-grease, Sheep's, Goat's, and Deer's-shet, sweet Tallow, Olibanum,
Frankincense, the powder of Snakes and Adders: these most effectually. Green
Tobacco.

The Compound are these.
And amongst the first of these, suffer me to commend unto you this of mine:
Take of Swinesgrease eight ounces, and Rosin iij. of Wax, and Gummi Elemi, of
each one ounce, of the juice of the aforesaid Vulneraries one pound, of the
Leaves of Tobacco stamped two handfuls: boil all these over a soft fire until
the juices be consumed, then strain the Unguent. Make trial of this, and leave
it when you have found out a better. You have in the Shops Vnguentum Basilicum
majus and minus, and Aureum set out with glorious Titles. But I will show you
anon, how these cannot fit all Bodies. Vnguentum de tutia is in much use. You
may use these Compositions if you will, or you may frame unto your selves, of
Sarcotical Simples, such Compositions as you shall think most fit for your
purpose.

But let me warn you, that your Incarnatives must not exceed the first Degree
in drying; yet seeing there is a Latitude in this Degree, for some are mild,
some more harsh; you are to apply them according to the constitution of the
party, temperature of the Part, and the quality and quantity of the Ulcer it
self. So if the party be of a tender and soft constitution milder driers are
required to engender soft flesh: but if a party b^ offered to you to be cured
who has a firm and dry flesh, more strong desiccatives are to be applied. If
the Ulcer be in a place not so fleshy, as in the Joints, the beginning or tail
of the Muscles, then your desiccatives must be forcible. Last of all, if the
Ulcer be large and moist, more strong desiccatives are to be used in it, than
in small and not very moist Ulcers.

When you go about your Compositions of Incarnatives for Ulcers, observe these
Rules: The first is, That they be neither too soft, nor too hard, for if they
be too hard, the weak part cannot easily take benefit of them; if they be too
liquid, the heat of the part will cause them to spread, and fall from the
Ulcer; besides, these are apt to engender spongy flesh.

The second is, that they be smooth, and equal: otherwise they will cause pain
in the part.

Of skinning Medicaments.
The Ulcer being filled with good and laudable flesh, now are you to skin the
part ulcerate. Nature in the Womb does frame first the Skin, but it being
afterward lost by any accident, she cannot repair it any more, lacking seminal
Matter: wherefore here, there is need of the help of Art to supply this defect.
This is done by hardening and thickning the upper part of the flesh regenerate,
until it be able to supply the office of the Skin.

The Epulotical Medicaments which bring this to pass, must be,

1. Cooling, for so the thin parts are wring out, and the thick parts are
brought together, as we may see in Ice.

2. They must be drying; for these consume the thin parts; so the hands of
Sailers, and Feltmakers, become dry and hard. Then a Cicatrix is nothing else,
but flesh thickened, dried and made callous.

These Medicaments ought to be drying in the third Degree: for Incarnatives are
dry in the first Degree, because they only are to dry the Excrements, which are
superfluous in the generation of Flesh. Glutinative Medicaments are dry in the
second Degree: for they are not only to dry the Excrements, but whatsoever else
flows to the part, although it be alimentary. But cicatrizing Medicaments are
dry in the third Degree: for these are to dry not only Excrements, and what
flows from other parts, but the natural humidity of the part it self also. But
Catheretical or Corrosive Medicaments are drying in the fourth Degree; for
these consume not only the Excrements, and that which flows to the part, and
the natural humidity of the Superficies of the part, but the flesh subjacent
also. These Epulotical Medicaments are in like manner simple or compound.

The Simple are these.
Aes ustum, Lead made to Powder, the Amalgama of Lead and Quicksilver beat to
Powder. When you would make this, melt two ounces of Lead in a Crucible, then
take it from the Fire, and put to it an ounce and a half of Mercury; these will
incorporate together; when the Mass is cold, you may beat it to a Powder. The
Pumice-stone and Cuttle-bones calcined, Stags-horn calcined white, all bones
well calcined, the Head of Vitriol after the Spirit is drawn, well washed and
dried; it is called by the Chemists Henricus Rubeus, and indeed it is a potent
desiccative. Chalk powdered is good; to drive it into Powder, you must rub it
upon a broad Tile somewhat fine, and then scarce it; otherwise you shall hardly
do it. Terra sigillata, Bole-Armenick, Umber, are good; and unslaked Lime, well
washed and dried, Alabaster beat to powder, Minium, Litharge, Cerusse,
Calaminaris, Tutia, Regulus of Antimony, Crocus Martis, Galls,
Pomegranate-flowers and Rinds, Comfrey Roots, Sandarach of the Grecians,
Egg-shells calcined, the Roots of Tormentil and Bistort, Swine's-grease, Dear's
and Sheep's-suet.

Skinning compound Medicaments.
Sundry very effectual Medicaments may be made of the aforesaid Simples;
wherewith I mean not to burden you, only I will commend you unto one of
Fallopius, and another of my own. That of Fallopius is thus described, Ol. Ros.
and Ol. Omphacin. an. vj. Ol. Myrtin. and Unguent. popul. an. iij. fol.
Plantag. and Solan. Hortens. incis. an. man. j. Bulliant ista ad consumpt.
succorum, ac colentur: colaturae add cerae jv. Spatha lignea misceantur: Quum
incipiunt frigere, add litharg. auri vel argenti vj. Cerussae, tutiae
praeparat. ij. Plumbi calcinati i ss. Ducantur ista in Mortario plumbeo per
hor. 2. The ingredients do show what is to be thought of this Medicament. That
which I use is this, Sevi Ovilli lib. ss. Axung. Porc. iij. Cerae, Vernicis,
Colophon. an. ij. liquescant ista simul. Amotis ab igne ac coeuntibus, add
litharg. auri, aeris usti, tutiae praeparat. Henrici rub. an. ss, Calaminaris
j. Fiat ceratum ex l. a. You have in the Shops Diapalma, Emplastrum de minio,
Vnguentum comitissae, Desiccativum rubrum, and Emplastrum contra rupturam
Fernelii. Now seeing amongst these, some do more weakly, some more strongly
dry, the gentlest are to be applied to tender and moist Bodies, but the
strongest to solid and hard Bodies: wherefore neither are mild Skinners to be
applied to the Bodies of Clowns and Artificers; nor strong to the Bodies of
Children, and dainty Women: to these use Emplastrum album coctum. Before I
conclude this Point, two things are to be set down: the first is when these
Epulotical means are to be applied. Secondly, how they are to be applied.

As for the first, they are to be applied before the Flesh be even with the
Skin, according to Galen. 13. method. c. 5. otherwise the Cicatrix will be
higher than the natural Skin, which will cause deformity: wherefore they are to
be applied while there is some cavity.

As for the second, seeing always in skinning there is lest a greater cavity in
the middle, than about the brims of the Ulcer, stronger desiccatives are to be
applied to the brims; but milder to the middle, that the Flesh be not too soon
dried. Wherefore Powders and Cerots are to be applied to the brims, but only
Cerots or Unguents to the middle. When you have cicatrized an Ulcer by
Methodical proceeding, there be some persons who will not rest so contented; as
Ladies (who make much of their Skins) and Whores (who gain much by theirs) but
will desire to have the Cicatrix made by any means somewhat beautiful to the
Eye. I will furnish you with two Medicaments, that you may be the more enabled
to fulfill their desires.

The first is this, Unguent, Rosat. Mesuis j. Ol. de Been. ij. Talci Pulv. iij.
Fiat linimentum.

The second make thus, Axung. Porc. aquae florum fabar. lotae j. Spermatis
Ceti, ij. Ol. Amygdal. dulc. i ss. Talci praeparati. ij. Fiat linimentum.

Every night a little before bedtime anoint the Cicatrix with some of either of
these liniments, and apply a soft linen rag moistened with the same.

CHAP. VII.
Of the cure of a plain and hollow Ulcer, being Simple.

HAving passed through the ten Points whereof I intended to write, before I was
to meddle with the Cure of any particular Ulcer; now it is time to set down the
Method of Cure of Ulcers in particular. I would have you to call to remembrance
the material differences of Ulcers delivered by me in the third Chapter, which
were taken either from the Nature and Constitution of an Ulcer, or from the
parts affected: from the Nature of the Ulcer I deduced two forts of them; some
I called Simple, some Compound. Now the Simple Ulcer is to be accounted such an
one, as has neither a Disease, Cause, or Symptom annexed to it, or complicate,
besides the Solution of Unity caused by Erosion. Of these simple Ulcers there
are two kinds; for some are plain and equal to the natural Skin, wherein only
the Cuticula and Cutis are lost. Some are hollow, cava, wherein, besides the
Cuticula and the Cutis, a part of the Flesh is lost. It is not needful
severally to set down the Cure of Vlcus planum, or aequale, a plain, or even
Ulcer; because in prosecuting the Indications of cure of Vlcus cavum, a hollow
Ulcer, I must set down the means of curing a plain one: for this is contained
as a part in the other.

Seeing then there are two affections in a hollow Ulcer, to wit, Solution of
Unity and Cavity; three scopes of Cure offer themselves, Unition, Incarnation,
and Clcatrization. Wherefore if the Quittour be white, smooth, small in
quantity, reasonable thick, and not evil smelling: If besides the Ulcer it self
be red, and sensible, then we may go about to engender Flesh, by applying
Sarcotical Medicaments. But on the contrary, if the Pus be black, uneven,
grumous, rough and stinking, and if the Ulcer it self be not red and sensible,
the Ulcer cannot be incarnate, before it be prepared by Suppuratives and
Mundificatives. Besides Pus, which is reasonable thick, three sorts of
Excrements appear in Ulcers.

The first is thin, and waterish, like to Water wherein Flesh has been washed:
this has received no alteration, but has flowed pure, as it is in the Veins and
Flesh; and is called Ichor. The second is thin too, but it has received some
alteration by the temperature of the part; this is called Sanies or Virus. The
third is very thick and glutinous, and is called Sordes.

Now the Excrements which are thin, moisten the part ulcerate, that it cannot
sufficiently discharge it self by breathing out the humidity. Wherefore
Desiccatives are to be used, to consume this superfluous moisture: but the
Excrements which are thick cleave to the part, and hinder the addition of
Flesh. These are obviated by Abstersives or Mundificatives. The Ulcer being
prepared by Suppuratives and Mundificatives, you are to engender Flesh by
incarnating Medicaments. There are two Causes of this Flesh, which is to be
procured. 1. Is the efficient Cause: This is Nature it self, not only of the
whole Body, but of the part it self also, which is called Temperies, the
natural Temperature or Constitution of it: whereby it attracts, concocts,
applies and assimilates the nourishment to it self. 2. Is the material Cause:
this is sincere and pure Blood. If the part ulcerate enjoy such, then nothing
remains but to maintain it: If the Blood be not pure, then it is to be altered;
if it be too hot, it is to be cooled; if too cold, it is to be warmed; if it be
too thin, it is to be thickened; if it be too thick, it is to be attenuated; if
there be too great plenty of it, it is to be diminished; if it be too little,
then it is to be increased by convenient order of Diet.

To come nearer to the Cure of of a simple Ulcer: First, we must discreetly
order those things which are called not natural: seeing a convenient Diet
preserves and maintains the good Constitution of the whole Body, and
temperature of the part. Wherefore all those Meats and Drinks that make the
Blood too hot, too sharp, too thin, or too thick, are to be shunned; and those
only to be permitted, which afford good Juice, and are of easy concoction,
especially if the diseased party be tender and weak. Besides this, they must be
taken moderately, and at convenient times. The part it self must be kept quiet;
for motion heats the part. Care also is to be had of sleeping and watching: for
as watching dries the Body, and consumes superfluous humidity, so sleeping
moistens the parts; but those chiefly which are nervous or sinewy, as
Membranes, Tendons and Ligaments. If then the Ulcer be humid, enjoin watching;
if it be dry, command sleeping. As concerning vacuation of the Excrements, let
it be appointed, that they may answer in quantity the Food which the diseased
party takes. If he proves costive, either minister unto him a Clyster, or give
him an ounce of Electuarium lenitivum in Chicken Broth. As perturbations of the
Mind change the state of the whole Body, so the tranquillity of it maintains
the same. A special care is to be had of the Air; for it wonderfully preserves
the temperature of the part. Southerly and Northerly winds are not fit for
Ulcers: for as the first moistens and heats, so the second does much cool and
dry: but cold is an Enemy to Ulcers. So it is observed that the Air in Angien
is hurtful to Ulcers in the Legs, but in Paris good. So in Pisa and Ferrara it
is hurtful; but in Florence wholesome.

As for the Prognostics of the simple Ulcers: If I should set down any, you
might justly think I did abuse the time; for there is none so simple, who may
not gather out of the very denomination of them, that they are most easy to be
cured, and that great skill is not required to compass the same: only let me
give you warning that the Cure may be either more easy or hard, according to
the Nature of the part ulcerate, and the Diet of the Patient. So simple Ulcers
are more easily cured in a fleshy part, than in a Joint or a Nervous part; for
in these stronger Desiccatives are required, and in them the natural Heat is
not so powerful to make use of the Medicaments applied. In like manner a simple
Ulcer is more easily cured in the Body of a temperate person, than it is in the
Body of one given to debauchery. Having set down the right use of the things
not natural, as Diet, Sleeping and Watching, evacuation of the Excrements, the
perturbations of the Mind and Air; I shall set down some local Medicaments for
the accomplishing of the Cure of these Ulcers, according to the general
Indications of Cure, set down in the fifth Chapter.

As for the Digesting, Mundifying, and Incarnating of a simple Ulcer, if it be
hollow, these Intentions and Scopes shall be performed by the Application of my
Basilicum; The description of it is this; Cerae and Resin. an. vj. Picis
Navalis iv. Gummi Elemi ij. Ol. Olivar. v ss. Vernicis clarae iv. Sevi Ovil.
ij. Terebinth. ij ss. Olib. Myrrh. pulv. an. j. fiat Vnguentum ex l. a. If you
make trial of this, you shall find it not a little better than the ordinary
two, bearing this name, to wit, Basilicum magnum and parvum. If an hollow
simple Ulcer prove sordid, mingle with an ounce of this my Basilicum, two
scruples of the Catheretical Powder made of Precipitate and Alume calcined; or
if you apply Paracelsus his Mundificative tempered with the same, you shall
happily Mundifie it; but if a plain or equal Ulcer be unclean, yellow Turbith or
Precipitate washed, besprinkled, and covered with a Pledget of Lint will serve.
Above these Medicaments apply Diapalma cum Succis, and above this a double
cloth moistened in red astringent Wine, having some Alume dissolved in it. If
you be in the Country, apply to the parts adjacent to the Ulcer, Clouts
moistened in the Juyces of cooling and astringent Herbs, as Plantain,
Garden-Night-shade, Knot-grass, Purselain: if you anoint the parts with
Tripharmacum, and Vnguentum populeum mingled together, you shall prevent
Fluxion and Inflammation.

When you have filled an hollow simple Ulcer with flesh, nothing remains but to
cover it. Now the cover of the Flesh is the Skin it self: and as the Flesh lost
is to be repaired, so is that which covers it. But seeing the Skin is framed in
the Womb of a seminal Matter, it, being lost, cannot be restored, by reason of
the defect of Matter: Wherefore we must find out another cover. This cover is
called by Artists Cicatrix. This is nothing else but the uppermost Supersicies
of the Flesh so dried, that it represents the Skin. And as in ingendring of
good Flesh in an Ulcer laudable Blood was the material Cause of it, so good
Flesh is the material Cause of the Cicatrix.

This Cicatrix is procured by three means; by Nature it self, the Air, and
epulotical Medicaments. That Nature has an hand in this Business it does appear
many ways: for we may see daily Ulcers skinned with these same Medicaments by
Empirlcks, which they used in incarnating, so that Nature must be the chief
efficient Cause. Secondly, many times a Scab covers such Ulcers being
incarnate, which being removed, or falling away of it self, the place appears
skinned. Only Nature is the cause of this; for no Medicament was applied.
Thirdly, if Nature had not a hand in this Business, such an order would not be
observed, that the brims of the Ulcer should first be skinned, and then the
middle. Fourthly, Nature works in her actions to the period appointed: so in an
Ulcer she not being hindered fills the Ulcer with Flesh, even unto the uppermost
Superficies; which being done, she ceases from affording any more Matter of
Flesh; whereby it comes to pass, that the upper Superficies, being deprived of
further nourishment, must become dry.

What power the Air has, does manifestly appear in the Bodies of Infants newly
born; their whole Skin is soft and red; the cold Air afterward repels the
Bloood, dried the Skin, and makes it more hard.

But seeing Nature very often in such an action proves slow, so that if you
would wholly rely upon her, and expect her leisure, you should seem of purpose
to protract time, and be in danger to lose your Patient, it is the safest and
best course to aid Nature by assisting her with convenient and good epulotical
or skinning Medicaments. In the Monuments both of Ancient and Modern Writers
one shall find great variety, whereof notwithstanding a discreet and judicious
choice must be had, if he mean to make good use of them; for I dare be bold to
affirm, that there are almost infinite descriptions of Medicaments, whereof the
first describers never made any trial, but set them down, being induced only by
imagination. And amongst these Medicaments, you shall find not a small number,
which are either ridiculous, or superstitious, or both. Seeing then the case
stands thus, I will only commend unto you three Medicaments fit for skinning of
simple Ulcers: The first is, Diapalma cum Succis. The second my Epuloticum,
which I described in the former Chapter. The third shall be Heurnius his
Sparadrap. The description of it, is this, taken out of his Method of Practice,
Lib. 1. page 81. of the Leyden Edition. Ol. Omphacin. and Axung. Porcin. an
iij. Lythargrr. Auri vel Argent. iv. Cerussae j. Coq. ista lento igne ad
Emplastri consistentiam: tum adds Cerae, Picis, an. i ss. Colophon. ij. Plumbi
Pulverizati i ss. Fiat Emplast. sec. art. Sparadraps made of this help not only
simple Ulcers, but parts of the Body excoriate by reason of long lying in bed,
caused of weakness brought by Chronical Diseases.

CHAP. VIII.
Of compound, but milder Ulcers, in General.

IN the former Chapter, I set down what did belong to the Cure of simple
Ulcers, as well plain as hollow, wherein no other offense besides the loss of
the Skin and Flesh is found. Hereafter I am in like manner to write of compound
Ulcers, wherein besides Soution of Unity, caused by Erosion, there is somewhat
else that hinders the consolidation of the ulterated part.

These compound Ulcers are either of the milder sort, or else Malign. Those of
the milder sort, have annexed either a Disease, or a Cause, or Symptoms, which
hinder the Surgeon from going about Unition of the part ulcerate. Sundry
Diseases in the Body of Man may keep Ulcers from healing: some corrupting the
Humors, as the Leprosy and Pox: I mean the French; some hindering of laudable
Blood in sufficient quantity to be sent, as Phthisis, and a Hectic Fever: some
by sending too much waterish Humidity with Blood hinder the Unition of the part
ulterated. If Ulcers in such persons be presented to you to be cured, you are
seriously to ponder in your mind, how hard a task is put upon you, if any of
the former Diseases be complicate with the Ulcers, if you only except the
French Pox in a reasonable strong Body. But if the Body of one troubled with
the French Pox be extenuate much, then permit the Cure of him also amongst the
rest, to the charge of such as are only (...), or Citizens of the World, having
no permanent habitation; and resting contented at the first with half the
bargain made for the Cure, willingly (tho not honestly) commit the second
payment to the arbitration of Fortune. They during their life time, continuing
scandals to Art and Artists, it is strange, if at the hour of their Death,
their Consciences for the present seared, grow not tender, and fearfully accuse
them. Seeing the practice of Physic and Surgery are severed in England, I
hold it to be the safest course for you to leave the Cure of Diseases to
learned Physicians, and to assume only to your selves the methodical dressing
of Ulcers: for so the whole discredit, (if any redound) will fall to the
Physicians share, who cured not the grief, the only hindrance of the cure of
the Ulcer. This is my advice, If an Ulcer complicate with a dangerous Disease,
come at any time to your handling: (It is not your desire, I know, that I
should set down the manner of Cure of any inward disease: for then I should be
be busy with my Sicle in the harvest of other Men) that then in this case you
have recourse unto some Author who has written most Learnedly of the manner of
curing that Disease which is annexed to the Ulcer, and follow his Indications
in dealing with the Disease, if you have not the opportunity of a Physician,
whose advice you may follow.

In the cure of the French Pox, if you intend to use the Unction, be directed
by Ambrose Parry, Mr. Clowes, or Mr. Wijeman. If you resolve to insist in the
cleanly way of curing this Disease by Diet, then follow renowned Fallopius or
Capivaccius. There is a Volume in Folio, wherein are contained the Monuments of
such as have written of this Disease, according to the Talent of skill granted
unto them: I rather would have you acquainted with these, than to range much,
and imitate the Swallow, which flies much, but preys only upon flies.

As concerning the Dropsy, the Cough of the Lungs, the Hectic Fever, or
Marasmus, and the extenuation of the Body: if these being complicate with an
Ulcer, hinder the cure of it, have recourse to the Learned Works of that famous
modern Writer Daniel Sennertus, the late Professor of Physic in Wittenberg,
who has couched in his Learned Books, what almost can be spoken, either by
Galenists or Chemists, concerning these and other diseases. The Plagiary Bar^^
in his method of Physic, and Bruel are but like unto rotten Reeds, appointed
for the ruin of impotent, and lame persons, if they rely upon them.

From a disease joined to an Ulcer, I will descend to the causes hindering the
cure of an Ulcer. These are two: the Humors that slow, and the distemperature
of the part.

As for the Humor, if it be in slowing, then you are to obviate it with
ordering the things called not natural; as Air, Meat and Drink, Sleeping and
Watching, Evacuation and such like, and by Purging of the Humor offending;
whereof I spoke sufficiently in the doctrine concerning Tumors. If it has
flowed to the part, and be impacted in it, then it is to be removed by three
means; to wit, by drying, expressing, and removing of the causes of the Fluxion.

You shall dry the Hunior, if you use sarcotical Medicaments drying at the
least in the third degree, as Bones calcined, Hartshorn calcined, and made up
in Trochisces with Plantain, and Rosewater, Aes ustum, the Pumicestone
calcined, Calaminaris, Borax, the powders of Tormentil, Bistort, Comfrey, and
such like; whereof I have spoken sufficiently before; yet Nunquam satis dieitur
qual nunquam sat is discitur, a thing remarkable can never be too much pointed
at; so fluxible and gliding are the objects of our memory.

You shall express the Humors: First, by using such repelling Medicaments as I
have often spoken of, which are to be applied to the parts adjacent to the
Ulcers.

Secondly, by rolling the Ulcer, as Hippocrates prescribes in his Treatise of
Fractures, that it begin about the Ulcer, using so many revolutions, or
windings of the Rowler, as are fit, and ending in the sound part.

As for the causes of Fluxion, they are three; Transmission, Attraction, and
the furious motion of the Humor it self. A part sends, either moved by the
superfluity of the Humor, or urged by an offending quality, or both. If the
Humor offend in quantity abounding, then it is to be abated by Phlebotomy,
Purging, slender Diet, and such means as have been delivered by me in the
Treatise of Tumors, to lessen plenitude, or Pletbora, the signs whereof I
delivered there also, so that I need not to repeat them here. If the Humor
offend in quality, urging and pricking the part to the expulsion of it, as the
Liver, which being tainted with the French Pox, sends the Humor to the Groins,
Yard, Matrix, the Fundament and Throat. When we have observed and noted the
quality and nature of the Humor, then we are to go about the expulsion, or
alteration of it, or both.

If the Humor offend both in quantity and quality, then are we to use both
purging and altering. Now to find out the Humors in quality offending, seeing I
have set down their Pathognomonical and proper signs, when I discoursed of
every special Tumor, I will remit you to the places where they were set down.
If Humors do flow by reason of the attraction of the part, it is procured
either by the heat, or the pain of the part. If a Humor flow to the Ulcer,
neither being sent from a part, nor received by a part, but because the Humor
it self is eliquate, either by the vehement perturbations of the Mind, or an
aguish Constitution, or the exhibition of an eradicative or strong Medicament:
then the tranquillity of the Mind is to be procured, the aguish heat to be
abated, and the exhibition of such Medicaments to be stayed. Having discoursed
of the fluxion of Humors so much as is fit for our present purpose, now I am to
touch briefly the other cause of mild, yet compound Ulcers, to wit, the
distemperature of the part.

The single distemperatures are in number four, to wit, too dry, too moist, too
hot, too cold. A dry distemperature is found out by these signs: the color of
the ulcerate part is ill-savoured, not lively, little or no Matter flows from
it. in touching it seems hard and dry.

This distemperature is removed by two means: First, by drawing out the natural
Humidity to the part affected, by opening the passages, which before by reason
of immoderate dryness were drawn together. In this case Friction is excellent.

Secondly, dryness is removed by the application of humecting Medicaments. Two
such are commended by the Ancients pure Spring Water, and Water and Oil mingled
together.

As for the use of Spring or Riverwater, it must be applied lukewarm, not very
hot; for if it be very hot, it discusses; because the Humors having been
attenuate by it, they are turned into vapors, and so resolved: but if it be
temperately hot, and the part fomented by it, it moistens.

The Second Medicament composed of Water and Oil, by the Ancients is called
(...). The ulcerate part immoderately dry, is to be fomented with this
Medicament warm: Take either two parts of Water and one of Oil, or equal; warm
them in a single Vial-glass, then shake them well together that they may be
mingled, and apply the Medicament. This is a convement Topic in the winter;
for though warm water warm the part during the time of Fomentation; yet after
Fomentation it leaves the part cold, because it drew out the heat to the
Superficies of the Body: wherefore Oil is excellent, for it stops the Pores,
and keeps in the heat. These two Medicaments are to be applied to the ulcerate
part by stupes, sponges, or pledgets.

One thing you are to look to, and to provide before fomentation, that the Body
of the party, unto which they are to be applied, be neither plethorick (for
then too much moisture may he attracted) nor cacochymical (for then corrupt
Humors may be drawn) both which will hinder the cure of the Ulcer. Use
therefore first of all Phlebotomy, or Purgation, according as you shall see
cause.

But you may not without cause ask, when Fomentation is to be left?

I answer, that two things shall declare unto you the period of Fomenting: the
First is the substance of the part, the Second is the color: wherefore when
you see the part a little tumefied, soft and moist, and of a ruddy color,
defist from Fomentation; otherwise the Humor attracted will be discussed.

If a moist distemperature has possessed the part, then the flesh of the part
will be moist; spongy flesh will be apt to grow, and plenty of excrements will
flow from the Ulcer: In this case strong Desiccatives, or Sarcoticks mingled
with Basiticum aureum, or Arcaeus his Liniment are to be used: with an Ounce of
any of these Unguents you may use one dram and a half of these Desiccatives:
such are the Regulus of Antimony, Lead calcined, Lapis Calaminaris, Bones and
Horns calcined, the powder of the root of Iris, Mastick, Olibanum, and such
like. Aes ustum, the Pumice-stone calcined, and Henricus rubeus are excellent.
If the part be distempered with heat, then the part ulcerate will be somewhat
tumesied, hard and red; and besides the relation of the diseased party, your
own feeling will assure you. In this case use Aqua caleis vivae, so called; but
more properly Lixivium calcis vivae, wherein some litharge of Silver has been
boiled: you may use also Snow-water, wherein some of your Vitriolum album or
white Copperas has been dissolved: In a quart of Epsome water, dissolve two
drams of Roman Vitriol, you shall have a water of the color of a light
Emerauld fit for your purpose. In a pint of Plantain water dissolve two drams
of ordinary Vitriol or Alum; and this also is a ^t Medicament. Let me acquaint
you with one thing, that in Redriffe a Copperas is made of Mars or ^ron, which
is most fit in the cure, not only of ordinary Ulcers, but of those also which
are in the Eyes, Bladder, Throat, and the Intestinum rectum. Make trial as I
have done, and you shall find that true which I say. You see how plain I am
with you, concealing nothing, which may purchase unto you credit and gain.

If Cold distemper the part, which you shall discern by its color, hardness,
sense of the Patient, and your own feeling, then apply to the ulcerate part
Basilicum magnum, my Basilicum, Arcaeus his li^iment upon Pledgets, and above
these Diachylon cum gummi, Emplastrum de mucilaginibus, or Paracelsus his
Styptick Emplaster. But before the application of these, soment the part with a
Fomentation made of Sack and March-Beer, wherein Calamint, Centaury, Wormwood,
Spike, Chamaemill. Tansey, Scordium, Rue, and Bay Leaves have been infused and
boiled.

The Third thing which we affirmed to make up a compound Ulcer, was a symptom
annexed to an Ulcer. Now of all other, Pain it the chiefest: for First, pain by
attraction brings much moisture to the part, and so hinders the Cure. Secondly
it inflames the parts. Thirdly, it causes watching, Fainting, and oftentimes
Convulsions. Pain is removed two manner of ways. First, by taking away the
cause of pain, which is affluxion of Humors: How this is to be done we have
spoken already. Secondly, by application of Anodyne Medicaments. These ought to
be temperately hot, and subtle. Simples of this kind are the waters of warm
Baths, Chamaemil, Dill, Millet, Linseed, Fenugreek, Marshmallow, the pulp of
Casia, Raisins, sweet Apples, and Turnips, with a little Saffron, they are
effectual, Milk, Butter, Oesypum, or the greasiness of Wool, Sapa, new Wine
boiled to the Third part, Swine's, Hen's, and Man's Grease, the fat of Eels and
Calves, Oil of Eggs, Earthworms, Foxes, Swallows, Rue and Elder: the Oil of
Wax, and Sallet-Oil, Oil of Chamaemil, Dill and Roses: Of these you may frame
unto your selves compositions, as occasion shall require. Take this for an
example; Farin. Hord. Milii, Furfur. an. ij. Lact. recent. lb. ss. coq. ad
consistentiam cataplasmatis, tum add Pulp. Cass. and Passul. major. an. vj.
Pulp. Pomor. redol. j. Ol. Ros. Lumbric. Aneth. Chamaemil. and Ovorum, an. j.
Oesypi. i ss. Croci. j. Make a Cataplasm. Sometimes the pain will be so great
that you shall be enforced to use narcotical Medicaments: The Simples are
Opium. Henbane, Hemlock, the Apple of Peru, Mandrake: of these, adding
White-bread crumbs, Milk and Saffron, you may make Pultesses: I will set one
down as an example, after which you may frame others: Lact. recent. lb.ss. Mic.
pan. albiss. iv. Hyoscyami, Solani. Cicut. Contus. an. man. 1. Buliiant ista ad
cataplasmatis consistentiam: tum add unguent. popul. ij. Dress the Ulcer with
Plantain water, wherein some Alume is dissolved, or Roman Vitriol. Then apply
Diapalma cum succis, and above it this Cataplasm. Dressed this Ulcer at the least
Morning and Evening until the pain be gone.

CHAP. IX.
Of the differences of the milder sort of compound Ulcers, and first of a
sinuous Vleer without any callosity.

HAving discoursed in the former Chapter of those things which make the milder
fort of Ulcers to be accounted compound; to wit, a sickness, cause or symptom
complicate with an Ulcer; In this Chapter I will set down the differences of
milder Ulcers, and the cure of them. These differences are taken either from
the Figure or Adjuncts. From the Figure these. Of the milder compound Ulcers
some are plain, some sinuous. I call that a plain Ulcer, wherein the Skin is
eroded, and the subjacent flesh, and the whole Ulcer is presented to the sight,
being bare and uncovered. No compound Ulcer is to be accounted of an easy
cure: because both skill and experience are required in performing this.

And tho these plain Ulcers be fubject wholly to the sight, yet let no Man
imagine that all of them are of equal facility to be cured; for according to
the nature of Grief, the quality of the cause, and the invasion of the
symptoms, the Ulcers with which these things are complicate, are either of
more easy or difficult cure. A plain compound Ulcer has three scopes in the
cure of it; for First, that must be removed which makes it compound, whether it
be a disease, cause, or symptom: Secondly, That which is by erosion lost, must
be repaired; and Thirdly, The part must be cicatrized: How all these three
indications are performed, I have set down at large in the former Chapter, so
that I need not to repeat any thing.

Vlcus sinuosum, or a sinuous Ulcer, I call that which is like to a
Cony-burrow; for sinus, or sinuosity, is a cavity or hollowness of parts under
the Skin, separate by a Flux of an eroding Humor, which according to Nature
were united.

There be two causes of these sinuous Ulcers, to wit, Apostemes lying deep a
long time, or not timely opened, although they be not so deep, and wounds not
well cured: for Quittour lurking a long time, either in a Tumor suppurate, or
in a deep wound not well cleansed, must needs corrupt and get a sharp quality,
which makes to it self these cavities, which are not so easily filled with
Flesh and united: for unto the part affected, now weakened, excrementitious
Humors slow, not only from the parts adjacent, but from the whole Body also,
which make the Ulcer hard to be cured. These Burrows are found out by Probes of
Silver, or Lead, and wax-Candles: If there be more Orifices than one, by
Injections. They sometimes are superficial, sometimes deep; sometimes straight,
sometimes oblique; sometimes there is but one cavern, sometimes there be more.

Of these sinuous or cuniculous Ulcers, some have neither hardness nor
callosity, such I will term Vlcera cavernosa, hollow Ulcers; some have both
hardness and callosity, these are termed Fistulae. First, ^hen I will show you
how cavernous Ulcers are to be cured, and then how Fistula's. There are two
ways of curing of a cavernous Ulcer: the First is by Injection of Medicaments:
the Second is by opening and dressing, according to Art. If you go about to
cure such an Ulcer by Medicaments, without opening, then two scopes offer
themselves; to wit, the filling of the Cavity with Flesh, and the agglutination
of the parts disjoined. The incarnatives must be drying without erosion, and
the glutinatives must have astriction, besides desiccation. Both these
intentions you may perform with the Injection of this Medicament following, Aq.
decoct. hord. lb j. Mell is rosat. iij. Sarcocol. ij ss. Myrrh. Thur. an ij.
Rad. Termentill. Bistort. Symphyt, an. j ss. Balaust. j. Baccar. myrt. ij ss.
Sumach. i ss. Vini odorifer. vj. Bulliant ad consumptionem tertiae partis, ac
coletur decoctum, cui add Spirit. vini i. If you perceive that the Ulcer is
not sufficiently mundified, which you may conjecture, if the Quittour be either
stinking, reddish, pale, blackish, or thin and waterish, then apply this
Medicament: Vini, in quo infusa sint marrubium album, Centaurium minus,
Absinthium, Flores Hyrerici, and Carduus Benedictus ad lb, ss. Vnguenti
Aegyptiaci ij. Mel ros. ss. misc. inject this. You can hardly devise more
effectual Medicaments than these are for agglutination of a cavernous Ulcer:
Yet whosoever shall apply them, not dressing and binding the Ulcer
artificially, shall hardly cure any such Ulcer: Wherefore I think expedient
that I show you the way of dressing: First, lay upon the whole process of the
Cavity Diapalma cum succis, or Emplastrum album coctum, or Emplastrum contra
rupturam: Then inject your Medicament warm. Thirdly, in the Orifice put in a
leaden Tent, or Pipe: but short, hollow, wider in the upper than lower part,
and having the brims of the upper part turned. That it may be kept from
slipping in, shut the Orifice and the upper part of the Tent or Pipe with an
Emplaster; let it be one of those named before: the Emplaster must be snipt,
that it may give way to the Quittour which flows out of the Cavity: above the
Emplaster apply a piece of a Sponge, which must be soft, moistened with the
Medicament with which you dress the Ulcer, and wrung out: for the Sponge sucks
into it self the Quittour, keeps the brims of the Orifice dry, and preserves
them from excoriation: above the Sponge lay a pledget of Tow: the lower Cavity,
or from the bottom of the Ulcer to the Orifice, must be boulstered. Above all
lay a double soft linen Cloth. Begin your rolling at the bottom, where it must
be somewhat strait, to bring the sides of the Ulcer together, both to express
the Quittour, and to procure agglutination, but let it cause no pain; for it
would distemper the part: toward the Orifice the rolling must be somewhat
slack, that the Quittour may have way to issue out. Every third day (if much
water flow not) dress it, loose first the Rowler, the turnings whereof are
about the Orifice, take away the Sponge and Emplaster; First, that you may come
to cleanse the Ulcer; Secondly, that you may make trial whether Nature goes
about to agglutinate the parts: which you shall discern, if the excrementitious
Matter abate, be laudable in color and consistence, and have no ill smell, and
if the Cavity be without pain, and without any remarkable Tumor. On the
contrary, if the Quittour be plentiful, ill-coloured and stinking, if the
Cavity be painful, and a conspicuous Tumor appear, you may persuade your selves
that no unition is procured. Dress the Ulcer according to this manner, until
perfect agglutination be caused, which yo^ shall know by the signs before said
going before; if no Quittour or very little appear in the Orifice, i the Cavity
be equal without Tumor, and no pain be felt: when you perceive these signs,
then address your selves for the cicatrizing of the Ulcer. If after a dressing
or two, thin gleeting Matter appear, yet despair not; for oftentimes such
Matter is wrung out of the parts by reason of the Medicament drying; the nature
of the part, as being nervous, membranous, or glandulous; or Lastly, by
compressing of the Ulcer by bolstering and rolling. As for the Emplaster
applied to the Cavity it self, it is to be renewed, when it is defiled with
Quittour, or leaves cleaving. Dress the Ulcer as seldom as you can, contrary to
Empiricks; for often dressing gives way to cold Air, which is hurtful to
Ulcers, and hinders unition. Thus you may proceed in curing of cavernous
Ulcers, if the excrementitious Matter have way to flow from them freely; which
will be, if the Orifice be in a depending part, or lateral, the Cavity or Sinus
being lateral also; for then, such a posture may be appointed, as will further
evacuation of the Matter. But if by reason of other Figures of the Cavity, the
Cavity cannot discharge it self of the filth of the Ulcer, then until this
impediment be removed, no expurgation, incarnation, or agglutination can be
expected: wherefore way is to be made by incision or a caustic.

This you must do: First, if the Cavity be lower than the Orifice either
directly, or obliquely, but not very deep: Secondly, if it go very deep also,
as in Fistula's, and such Ulcers, penetrating in the Breast, where the Cavity
most commonly is lower than the Orifice. Thirdly, if the hollowness be very
broad. In these cases way must be made by these means for the Matter, that it
may be expurged: otherwise, if it be kept in, it will erode the parts adjacent,
and no incarnation or consolidation can be looked for. We may make way for the
Quittour two manner of ways: First, by opening the lower end of the Sinus only;
Secondly, by opening the whole Cavity.

The first course we are to take, if the Sinus be of an enormous bigness, or if
it be in a great joint; for great wounds in such Joints are mortal, according
to Hippocrates: or if there be great Vessels, Nerves or Tendons of Muscles in
the way; which are like to bring fearful fluxes of Blood, or lameness: which
things skill in Anatomy will teach you. If none of these cases hinder you, then
it is the surest way to lay open the whole Cavity, which is the second way.
These two scopes we may attain unto by two means; to wit, by a Caustic and
Incision.

The Caustic we are to use: First, if the party be timorous, and will not
admit Section: Secondly, if the Cavity be in a part, wherein a great sear may
cause deformity: Thirdly, if there be fear of a great flux of Blood: Fourthly,
if the diseased Party be sick and weak.

If a Caustic be to be applied, if the situation of the part wherein the Sinus
is, be in the upper side, then apply your Lapis internalis: for it corrodes
soonest, deepest, with less pain, and will not be so apt by running and
spreading to burn the parts adjacent, or to cause a greater solution of unity
than we intended. But if the Sinus be in the lower side, as in the sole of the
Foot, or in a part very depending; then I advise you to use a Caustic made of
strong Sope^lees and unslaked Lime, which will not run. It is an ordinary
practice of some to ^ub the part with a Caustick-stone, and when the part is
mortified then to open it: First, this is not to be done, but when the Skin is
very thin; besides this, this rubbing causes far greater pain than the
application of it to the part, being defended. Be ever of this mind in your
practice, to use the mildest means; the fruits which you reap by so doing will
be Respect, Love, Credit, and Gain. When you have perceived that the force of
your corrosive Medicament has mortified all to the very Cavity, then procure
the fall of the Eschar, with the application either of Dialthaea simplex, or
Butter without Salt. There is no substance comparable to this for this purpose,
When the Eschar is gone, then proceed in curing of the Ulcer, as has been
said, by mundificative incarnative, and cicatrizing Medicaments.

If the party be courageous and strong, use Incision: this is sooner performed;
has less pain, and sooner will be cured. When you have made Incision, arm
Dosils and Pledgets with a Medicament which strongly dries and mundifies; such
is this: Take of Al^e Hepatica two drams, of black Rosin and Amber, of each a
dram and a half, of Milldust two drams, of unslaked Lime two drams and an half,
with this Powder, and the white of an Egg, and the yolk beaten together, make a
Medicament in consistence representing an Unguent: then apply the Medicament to
the Sinus incised, filling it well, that the brims may be kept asunder. Open
not the Sore till the end of the Second day, at the least; for this Medicament
will both dry the superfluous humidity of the Ulcer, and will excellently
digest it. Afterward dress the Ulcer as the methodical indications of Cure
shall move.

If you find these Ulcers so handled, do not heal to your mind, then hold your
Patient to the decoctions of Sarsaparilla, Guajacum, and the China root, with
which mingle some of your most effectual Vulneraries, as Agrimony, St.
John's Wort, Sanicle, Avens, Ladiesmantle, Virga aurea, Solomon's seal, the roots
of Comfrey, Tormentil, Bistort, Horehound, Borage and Bugloss. I will not
conceal from you the description of a Decoction, whereof I have made often proof
in Ulcers of the Breast, Joints and Belly: Sals. paril. vj. Rad. Sassafras.
iss. Scob. Guajac. iij. Eupator. Scabios. Tussilagin. Sanicul. Hyper. an. man.
j. Rad. Symphyt. Tormentill. Bistort. an. ss. Rad. Borag. Bugloss. an. j.
Passul. major. enucleator. iij. Liquirit. ij. Infundantur infundenda per noct.
in aq. font. fervent. lb. xxiv. Sequente die coquantur lento igne cum reliquis
ad consumpt, lb. viij. Bibat aeger singul. dieb. lb. iiii. hujus decocti:
Hauriat: lb. ss. mane, ac tantundem hor. quarta pomeridiara: In prandio bibat
lb. j. ac tantundem in coena: Quum sit it, superest. lb. j. haurienda. The
Simples of this composition may plead for the efficacy of it. Let him continue
the taking of this Decoction for the space of One and twenty days: during which
time he is to use a spare Diet, and to eat Flesh affording a good juice, and of
an easy concoction. As for the local Medicaments which are to be applied to an
Ulcer, I have spoken of them already: too much repetition will breed loathing.

CHAP. X.
Of the Palliative Cure of a sinuous Ulcer with callosity in general.

HAving already treated of a sinuous or hollow Ulcer, without a callosity or
hardness of the inward Superficies of the parts disjoined. Now the order of
Doctrine requires, that I discourse of a sinuous Ulcer, which has a callosity
in these same parts.

In times past it was accounted such a masterpiece in the practice of
Surgery to cure such, that Mr. Boovie a Surgeon, who once dwelt in
Tower-street, set up above his Door a new Sign, with this Inscription: Here
dwells one who can cure a Fistula. And in truth not a small skill, or
ordinary proceedings, is required to effect this matter: for the greatest part
of such an Ulcer lies hid, and little is offered to the Eye. Besides this,
ordinary means are for the most part here ineffectual, and so magistral means
are required. Wherefore I have diligently labored to couch in this my
Discourse whatsoever can be required in the curing of such an Ulcer.

First then, I will deliver the general Doctrine of this kind of Ulcer: then I
will set down the cure of such in some particular parts of the Body, A sinuous
or hollow Ulcer with a callosity or hardness in the inner Superficies of the
parts disjoined and separated, is called in Greek (...), from the similitude
which it has with the long and hollow windy instruments of Musicians: in
Latin it is called Fistula, and so in the English Tongue for this same cause,

A Fistula then is a sinuous Ulcer, narrow and long with callosity. Here you
are to observe, that a Fistula besides sinuosity, must have callosity and
narrowness. It happens most commonly, when Apostemes have been opened, that the
inner Superficies of the parts, kept asunder by a sharp Humor, become in
progress of time callous. The Humor which causes this callosity, must be more
astringent than sharp; for it rather tanus the part by reason of its acerbity,
than erodes it by reason of its acrimony? besides this, Fistulas are for the
most part indolent, unless they end in parts very sensible, as Nerves, Tendons,
Membranes, and Joints. Wherefore the Chemists will have this Humor to be the
Saltpeter of the little World, or Man, separate from the natural Salt of the
Balsam, or radical moisture of the Body. That this Salt is cooling and anodyne,
Practicers of Physic do bear Witness: for in burning Fevers it is added to
Juleps, which are appointed for cooling, and asswaging of pain, under the name
of Sal prunellae: It does also, by reason of its stypticity unite the Spirits,
and stay the immoderate Exhalation of them.

The Signs are taken either from the Essence of a Fistula, or from the
Accidents. Callosity then with a Fistula, or Whistle-like Figure, is the
Pathognomonical Sign of a Fistula. The Signs taken from the Accidents are two
sold: for they are taken either from the Quittour, or the manner of pain. In a
Fistula the Quittour is ever virulent, ugly and stinking: as for the manner of
pain, it is but small; unless it be by reason of the sensibleness of the parts
named by me before.

As for the differences, or diverse kinds of Fistula's, I will only set down
those which further either the Cure, or Prediction. Let this then be the first
difference: Fistula's either go shallowly along under the Skin; or they pass
deeper to the subjacent parts.

Secondly, Fistula's end either in the Fleshy parts, or they pass to the Bones,
or to the Cavities themselves. Thirdly, some are straight, some crooked.
Fourthly, some are single, some manifold; yet proceeding from some one Orifice.
These are the most material, or profitable differences of Fistula's.

Now it follows, that I speak of the Signs of these Differences. 1. Whether
there be more callous Sinuosities than one, you may conjecture by the quantity
of the Quittour; for if more copious Quittour flow from a Fistula, than can be
expected from one Sinus, it not passing to any remarkable Cavity, it is likely
that there are more than one. The changing also of the position of the Body,
and compression of the part will show this; for the flowing of the Matter
having ceased, if after the changing of the position of the whole Body, or one
Member, it run out again, it is probable that there are more Sinuosities.
Moreover, if variety of Quittour flow, it is an Argument that sundry parts are
affected, and more Sinuosities like to be. But to what parts the Fistula
passes, receive these Signs: If it pass to the fleshy parts, the Quittour
appears white, smooth and plentiful; besides this, thy part whereon the end of
the Probe stays, seems soft. If it pass to a Nerve, a fatty and oleous Matter
issues out, the motion which is caused be that Sinew is impaired, and the
Fistula is more painful than others are; besides, the Probe touching the Sinew,
causes a pricking pain with a certain numness. If the Fistula pass to the
Veins and Arteries, yet so that the Coats of them be not eroded, then the
Matter which it yields is like unto the Lees of Claret wine; for Blood,
sweating through the coats or porosities of the Vessels, mingled with the
Quittour, causes such a substance.

If the Coat of a Vein he corroded, Blood issues thick, of a dark Color, and
without quavering and leaping; but if the Tunicles of an Artery be pierced,
then the Blood is redder of a more bright color, and comes forth with
ejaculation.

If a Fistula reach to the Bone, that which the end of the Probe touches
appears hard, and yields not to the Probe, neither is any pain felt. If the
Probe being pressed slip, no Cariosity has seized upon the Bone; for a sound
Bone is smooth and slippery: If the Probe stay upon it, appearing smooth, it is
disposed to Cariosity; but if the Bone appear unequal and rough, then it is
undoubtedly carious, Besides this, the Quittour which flows from a corrupt Bone
is thin, yellow, and ill smelling. So much then concerning the Signs, which
shows us the diverse kinds of Fistula's.

Now let me give some remarkable Presages or Predictions touching the curing of
them, that Men may become circumspect in undertaking the Cure of such as shall
be presented to them. Let this then be the first.

1. No Fistula is of easy Cure. First, by reason of the unaptness of the part
to admit convenient application of Medicaments: for unless they reach to the
very extremity of the Fistula, which is not so easy a matter (as you shall
find by practice) no good can be done. Secondly, by reason of the quality of
the Medicaments, which are able to remove the Callosity; for these must be
sharp and biting, and so cause pain: from whence come symptomatical Fevers, and
fainting very often, especially in tender and young Bodies. And thirdly, by
reason of the Humor, which causes a Fistula, which yields not to ordinary and
vulgar Medicaments. Let this be the second.

2. Fistula's which are shallow, passing no deeper than the Membrana Carnos, or
at the furthest than the Membrane of the Muscles or Muscle subjacent, are more
easily cured than those which pierce deeper; for those by Incision may easily
be cured, but these not so.

3, The third shall be this: Fistula's wreathed, or with multiplicity of
Sinuosities, require incision, that Medicaments may be conveyed to all the
parts.

4. The fourth, if a Fistula not passing further than the fleshy parts, be not
of a long continuance, and that in a young and a strong Body, it affords good
hope of curing: Imagine the contrary event, if contrary circumstances be
accompanied.

5. Receive this as the fifth. If the extremity of a Fistula end in the
Tunicles of the Veins or Arteries, or both, (the Signs whereof I have
delivered, when I spoke of the differences of Fistula's) then you are to meet
with the Symptom of Haemorrhage, the Coats being eroded; for if you labor
either to enlarge the Orifice, or to take away the Callosity by sharp
Medicaments, the Flux will be increased. This accident happens most commonly in
Bubo's of the Groyn, not speedily cured, and Parotides under the Ear, and
Phlegmons in the Armpits: These parts being Emunctorious, and near to the
divarication of the great Vessels, to wit, the Vena cava, and the Aorta,
descending and ascending.

6. Fistula's ending in very sensible parts, as Nerves, Tendons, the Bladder,
the Intestinum rectum, and the like, are carefully and mildly to be handled, by
reason of the Symptoms which often ensue, as accidental Fevers, Lipothymies,
loss of Appetite and Sleep: all which are apt to bring an extenuation unto the
whole Body, and so to defraud the part of more than requisite nourishment,
without which Consolidation cannot be effected.

7. Fistula's in remarkable cavities, as the Throat, Breast, Belly, are hard to
be cured, because the end is more dependent than the Orifice, which exceedingly
hinders Consolidation.

8. If in Fistula's of the back the Spina be carious, shun the Cure, for these
at length bring an extenuation of the Body, the animal Spirits not being in
requisite plenty communicated to the extremities of the Body.

Fistula's in the Joints are dangerous; for if great Wounds of the Joints, even
in Bodies of a good habit, be pronounced by Hippocrates to be mortal: what
shall we deem of Fistula's in these parts, where besides the enormous
dilations, that must be procured in Cure, there is of necessity an ill
complexion of the Body?

Secondly, seeing the Joints are framed of parts very sensible, as Tendons,
Nerves, Membranes and Ligaments, exceeding great pain must be caused by the
application of Corrosive Medicaments, without which a Fistula cannot be cured,
and so the party must exceedingly be troubled and perplexed. Thirdly, seeing
the Joints are seated in depending parts, and are not fleshy (and so, as they
are apt to receive Humors attracted by pain, they are less able to discuss the
Humors received, partly by reason of the thickness of the Membranes, partly by
reason of the weakness of Natural Heat) who may not easily perceive the
difficulty of curing of Fistula's in these parts?

9. Fistula's having sundry Sinuosities are more hardly cured than those which
have but one; both because the labor is the greater, and Medicaments cannot so
conveniently be applied.

10. Fistula's which have continued a long time, seated in a depending part,
remote from any principal, by which Nature has been accustomed to discharge
superfluities of the whole Body, and not painful, but rather slovingly or
sluttish, are rather to be kept open than cured; for they preserve the health
of the Body, and hinder the assault of other Diseases.

I know a Gentleman who had a Fistula in a^^ about twenty years, yet unknown to
his Wife, who lived notwithstanding very healthful to be (...) period of his
life: having sent for me a few days before his death, he acquainted me with it.
Having taken a view of it, and perceiving that it was dry, and of (...) color;
I pronounced his end to be at hand, which accordly fell out.

Now it is time to hasten to the setting down of the Cure of Fistula's in
general. In the sixth Section of the Treatise ascribed to Hippocrates, there is
one of Fistula's: In it he speaks somewhat particularly of a Fistula in ano,
and of the curing of it by Ligation. Whatsoever is delivered in that Treatise,
seems to be an exscription of notes out of his Adversaria or Notebook, rather
than a deliberate or methodical Discourse of the Subject. Howsoever, it is to
be embraced rather as a Pledge and Sign of his willing mind to pleasure his
Posterity, than a Patrimony to enrich the Knowledge, and further the Practice
of any one who shall go about to cure any mean Fistula. Peruse the Treatise,
and you shall find me to speak a Truth, if you show your selves impartial
Censurers. Seeing I have delivered unto you in the presages of Fistula's, that
sometimes it is most expedient to leave some Fistula's uncured, I must make
mention of a twofold manner of curing them: The one shall be called palliative
or cloaked; the other true and real.

The first affords some consolation and ease to the Patient; but the second
procures perfect health. A palliative Cure, I would have you to understand, to
be when a Sinuosity is inwardly dried for a time, and the Orifice seems to be
shut up by a thin Skin, until fresh and new Humidity bedew the inward
Sinuosity, and open the Orifice again. This kind of Cure is most sit to be used
toward those in whose Bodies a Fistula supplies the place of a Fontanel, to
discharge superfluous Humors, which Nature turns out from the principal parts,
for the preservation of the health of the Body.

You shall know this manner of Cure ought to be used, if the party immediately
before the opening of the Orifice find some distemperature, and afterward, the
Orifice being opened, ease. To compass this manner of Cure, three intentions
are required.

First, a convenient Diet must be observed: This is performed by feeding upon
such meats as are of easy concoction, and afford good Juice, and in such
measure as Leonardus Lessius in his (...) prescribes; and Lodovicus, Cornarus
observed from his constant to his decrepit Age. They advise moderation both in
Meat and Drink. Patients now a days would think themselves hardly dealt with,
if they should be stinted every day to eat no more Bread and Meat than a pound,
and to drink no more Drink than fourteen ounces. It is an easier matter to
satisfy Nature, than the Appetite.

Secondly, the Body is to be purged, not by an Eradicative Medicaments, wherein
Scammonie, Ellebore, or Colocynth enters; but a purging Diet, or a purging Ale;
I will deliver unto you a Pattern of both. Let your purging Drink be thus
Dispensed: Sars. iij. Rad. Tormentillae, Bistortae, and Symphyti, an. i.
Polypod. querc. iij. Hermodaclyl. fol. Sen. and Semin. Carthami, an. ij. Rab.
j. Semin. Anisi, Coriandri and faenicul. dulc. an iiij. G^ycyrrhiz. iss.
Infundantur infundenda in aq. font. fervent. lb. x. per noctem: deinde, additis
reliquis, lento igne coq. ad med. atque Ar^matizetur decoctum cinam. j. ac
coietur: Sumat aeger mane. lb. ss. calid. hyeme. ac tantundem hor. quarta
pomeriduana. As for the purging Ale receive this description. Scob. Guajaci and
Sars. paril. an. iv. Rad. Tormentill. Bistort. and Symphyti, an. iss. Polypod.
iij. Eupat. Sanicul. Alchymill. an. man. j. Fol. Sen. Hermodactyl. an. v. Rab.
j. Semin. Anisi. Coriand. and Fenicul. dulc. an. vj. Glycyrriz. ij. fiat ex
omnibus pulvis crassiusculus indendus sacculo laneo rarae texturae, qui
suspendatur in gadon. duobus Zythi non lupulati recentis and fortis. Let the
Patient begin to drink of this Ale the fourth day. He is to take half a pint in
the Morning, and to sleep upon it; and so much about four a Clock in the
Afternoon. When either of these Purgatives are ministered, let the Patient about
Ten a Clock in the Fore-noon take some Broth without Bread, made of a Chicken,
Mutton or Veal, wherein Mallow, Parsley, Fennil, and Succory Roots, with some
Raisins, Prunes and Dates have been boiled. Let him Dine on the boiled Meat;
but Sup with roast Meat. The purging Ale is more convenient for aged persons,
than the Decoction, and for such as have a weak Stomach.

Thirdly, convenient local Medicaments are to be applied, to further the drying
of the Sinuosity, and skinning of the Orifice. I will only set down two
Injections for the first. The one is this: Take of Aqua caicis, wherein some
Litharge either of Gold or Silver has been boiled iij. and of the Syrup of red
Rose leaves dried, or of Myrtil Berries one ounce: mingle these together. The
other is this; Take of Plantain water iij. of Roman Vitriol beat to powder, a
dram and a half: let the Vitriol dissolve in the Water: inject these
Medicaments warm; apply to the Orifice a pledget of lint, wet in either of
these Medicaments warm; and above the Lint Diapalma cum Succis. Dress the
Fistula every other day only, unless the Quittour which flows from the Fistula
be plentiful. So you have the palliative Cure of a Fistula.

CHAP. XI.
Of the true Cure of Fistula's in general.

NOw I will set down the Method of Curing truly and really Fistula's in
general, and the practice of the same in curing of some Fistula's in some
special places of the Body, which require some extraordinary considerations.
Such are Fistula's in the the great corners of the eyes, Fistula's in the
Breast, Fistula's in ano, and Fistula's in the Joints.

The means to attain to this manner of Cure are threefold Diaetetical,
Pharmaceutical, and Chirurgical.

As for the Diaetetical, I have set it down amongst other things which are
required in the Cure of an Ulcer in general. It shall be sufficient to
insinuate now only, that the Diet of those who are troubled with Fistula's must
be very sparing, and of Meats and Drinks which afford a laudable Juice, and are
of easy concoction, that Crudities and sharp Humors flowing to the affected
part, hinder not the Cure. And undoubtedly too liberal Diet, unto which the
Inhabitants of these parts are too much accustomed, is the cause of the
Recidivation of these, and other Griefs.

As for the Pharmaceutical means, they are of two sorts, to wit, Purgative and
Consolidative.

If the Body of the diseased party be Cacochymical, with some Plethora,
minister the purging decoction, or Ale, for the space of a Week, described by
me in the former Chapter. And while these are in preparing, you may for the
better operation of these, minister this or such like a potion: Garyocost. and
Electuarii de Succo Ros. an. iij. Syrup Ros. solut. cum Agarico j. Aq. Cichor.
iij. M. ut fiat potio, sumenda cum corporis custodia. These two Electuaries
purge the Body of thin, hot; and sharp Humors; the Syrup and Water correct the
malignity of the Humors.

The Consolidatives are either Simple or Compound. The principal Simples set
down by most authentic Authors, and tried by practice are these; Gentian and
the Roots of round Birthwort, a dram of either of these mingled with three
ounces of white Wine, and ministered every other day in the Morning, and fasting
three hours after taking of the Medicament. The lesser Centaury, Osmunda
regalis the Root of it, Agrimony, Virga aurea, white Horehound, the Roots of
Borage, Tormentill, Bistort, and Comfrey, Sarsaparilla, the rasping of
Guajacum, Plantain, Vinca Pervinca, and Equisetum. Of the Juices of these
Herbs, mingled with Ale, you may make Possets: the Drink whereof strained and
sweetened with some Saccharum rosatum, or the Conserve of red Roses, you may
minister Morning and Evening to young persons, and those who are either weak,
or abhor all Physical means, whereof there is no small number now adays, who
hasten by their own misdemeanors to bring on griefs; but when they are to use
means, esteem them harsh: not knowing that God of his infinite goodness and
providence toward Mankind, has appointed the means of recovering of Health to
be unpleasant to Nature, that Man should refrain from Sin, the primitive cause
of Griefs.

Of these Simples aforenamed, you may frame unto your selves sundry
Compositions: for a Pattern, I will set down one decoction: Sars. Paril. iv.
Scobis Guajaci, vj. Rad. Tormentill. Osmund. regal. Bistor. Symphyt. an. j. I
ipat. V^rg. aur. and si nil restat praeter consolidationem and cicatrizationem.
Summitat. Hyperic. and Sigill. Solomon. an. man. j. Passular. major. exacinat.
iij. Liquirit ij. Semin. Coriand. and Fenicul. dulcis, an. v. Infundantur
infundenda in aq. font. fervent. lb. xx. deindo coq. lento igne, additis
reliquis, ad consumptionem lb viij. ac coletur decoctum. If the party be
strong, let him drink three pints aday: One half pint in the Morning, and
another about four a clock in the Afternoon, for Dinner and Supper there
remains a quart. If the party be young, or cannot take such a quantity, by
reason of weakness of Stomach, make half of this quantity, which being vj lb.
add to the decoction of Sugar and Honey, of each j lb. and by gentle evaporating
away some Humidity, bring the Decoction to the consistence and taste of a
pleasant Julep, which minister according to the toleration of the party. This
Pharmaceutical course you shall (I dare assure you) find effectual, to your own
credit, and the patient's comfort.

The Chirurgical means afford unto us five intentions.

First of all then, the Fistula is to be dilated; for seldom does it fall out
otherwise, that this Indication is not requisite, unless it be in a Fistula in
the Cheek, which was caused and maintained by a corrupt Tooth, which being
drawn, the Fistula will heal of it self, a consolidative Emplaster being
applied to keep out the Air.

A Fistula may be dilated three manner of ways, by Incision, by putting in
Tents framed of such things, as swell, after they have imbibed the humidity of
the Fistula; and last of all by the Fistula tent.

As for Incision, it is to be used in strong Bodies, if the Fistula be not
deep, and only runs along under the Skin, no deeper than the Membrane of a
Muscle, if it be in a fleshy part. Secondly, if the Fistula have many
Sinuosities before the Incision is made, the Fistula is to be dilated by some
of the other means, which I will deliver presently: Secondly, the Medicaments
which remove Callosity (whereof anon) must be applied; both these Intentions
must be performed before Incision; otherwise you shall hardly know how far your
Incision is to be extended, and shall leave some part of the Callus still,
which will make way for Recidivation and Relapse.

The second way to dilate a Fistula, is to use instead of Tents such things as
swell, whereof there be sundry, as Gentian root, the pith of the Elder; or
Danewort; but the Sponge twisted with Thread, after that it is wrung hard and
wreathed, far exceeds all these: for it both imbibes more moisture, and dilates
much more. I will acquaint you with a preparation of the Sponge, which is
excellent: and this is it: Melt a roll of your simple Melilot Emplaster; when
it is very hot, let a thick Sponge imbibe it. This Sponge having so drawn unto
it self the Emplaster, put between two Trenchers, which Trenchers with the
Sponge put into a strong Press, and press them hard. After an hour or two, when
you think the Sponge to be cold, unscrue the Press and take out the Trenchers
with the Sponge, you shall find the Sponge become a firm substance, resembling
Green Cheese. Of this substance you may cut out Tents of what fashion you will:
This will not only exceedingly dilate the Fistula by sucking unto it the
Humidity; but will also digest the Callosity.

The third way of dilating a Fistula, I set down to be by the Fistula-Tent. It
is this way to be made; Make good store of sine Lint, from which draw away all
the Threads, that nothing remain but the Fluet, or the soft Down of it; of this
soft Down, with the white of an Egg beaten, make your Tents of what thickness
or length the Sinuosity of the Fistula requires, by adding still some of the
Down: Do this upon a piece of Deal-board smooth and eve^^. If you still enlarge
the quantity of the Tents, you may dilate the Fistula as much as you will; for
these Tents being dried, will pierce into any Cavity, as a Probe, without
bending (if they be well made) by reason of their stifness. Of this manner of
Tent there is great use, in taking away the Callosities of of some Fistula's,
and in healing of them, besides this use, as you shall hear anon.

The second Chirurgical intention is to remove the Callus: this is bred by
reason of the influxion of an Humor, not of an uniform substance: for besides
the thin parts, which are discussed or dried by both the natural and extraneous
Heat, it must have a thick substance to cause this Callus, it being indurated:
this must be either Phlegm, if the Callus be white; or Melancholy, if it be
livid, according to the dogmatical Physicians; the Chemists appoint it to be
Saltpeter, as I have said.

In the beginning this Callosity is bred rather in the external Orifice, than
in the inner Sinuosity: For first, the Skin, which is thick of it self, sooner
grows hard than the Flesh which is soft; Secondly, because Nature still labors
to thrust out Excrements to the Skin. In progress of time Fistula's having
become inverate, the whole passage contracts Callosity.

You shall know by this, whether the passage be fistulated or no: If by the
intrusion of the Probe great pain is selt, and Blood issues out, the Callus is
not confirmed; but if no Blood follow, and little pain is selt, be sure then
that it is confirmed.

The Callosity is removed either by Medicaments, or an actual Cautery. The
Medicaments are of three degrees: for some are more mild, and these are of an
emolliting and digesting quality, first if the Callosity be but small in a
fleshy part and young body: such are Dialthaea cum gummi, and Vnguentum de
poeto. Every ounce of either of them having a dram of Turbith mineral, or
Precipitate mingled with Alume with it, is effectual.

Secondly, some are more harsh, for they must mundifie strongly, if the Callus
be somewhat hard, and the party somewhat aged; such are Vnguentum Apostolorum,
Avicen. having Precipitate and Alume or Turbith with Alume mingled with it.
Egyptiacum is stronger than this, but I should rather use Vnguentum Apostolorum
than it, adding more of the aforenamed Cathaeretical Powder to it; for it
causes greater pain, and procures not so good Quittour as the Apostolorum.

Last of all, the Medicaments which are to remove an inveterate Callus, are
Caustic; and even of these some are more gentle, some exceedingly fierce. The
more gentle are these. I. Auripigmenti Sulphur. vivi, and Calcis vivae an. j.
siat Pulvis subtilis. II. Is Pulvis sine pari, cujus haec est descriptio.
Auripigmenti, and virid. Aeris, an. ss. Vitriol. catcinat. j. Almin. usti. ij.
siat Pulvis sabtilis. III. Turbith. Mineralis non leti, Vitrioli vomitivi, and
Boli orient. optimi, an. parts aequales.

Of the strongest of all I will deliver unto you two magistral descriptions
only, far surpassing all others. I. Is M. Hale his Powder, who was famous in
his time for curing of Fistula's: this is the composition of it: Aquil.
mineral. Vitrioli vomitivi, and Terrae rubr. oriental. an. part. aequales. II.
Is this, which I use in Fistula's and Struma's: Realgar. albi, Atripigment. and
Calcis vivae, an. part. aequales.

You may enquire how these are to be used; If you have dilated the Fistula by
Incision, besprinkle the Callus with some of the Powders; but if you have done
it by the second way set down by me, then use the Powders mingled with
Vnguentum Populeon, wherewith ann your Fistula Tent, or apply a Trochisk made
of these Powders and Populeon, and afterward dried.

After the application either of the Fistula Tent armed with the Unguent, or of
the Trochisk, two things you are to observe: I. That you apply an Anodyne
Cataplasm; the fellow to this which I shall now deliver unto you, shall not be
found. It is also matchless in raging pains of the Gout: Lact. Vaccin. lb. j.
Mic. Pan. albi, vj. coq. ad Cataplasmat. consist. tum add Vngnent Popul. ij.
Sem. Hyosc. ss. Croci-pulo. jss, fiat Cataplasma; quod applicetur parti
affectae mane and vesperi. ^I. You must not force out either the Tent armed, or
the Trochisk, before they pop out of their own accord: for so they bring the
Cal^us out with them, and the Tent with the Callus will present a Finger within
a Glove. If there be many Sinuosities, yet do not pierce to any remarkable
Cavity, as of the Breast and Belly, then you are to dissolve these Powders in
some Liquor, as in Aqua calcis, Plantain water, Metheglin, a gentle Lee; Alume
water, or Vitriol water. Alchymists exceedingly commend in this case the Spirit
of Nitre.

The second way to remove a Callus by an actual Cautery is an Invention of Ab
aqua pendente: He will have an Instrument like to (...) setting Iron to be
made, the case to answer the wideness and ^ength of the Fistula, and to be
^hrust into the bottom of the Fistula, then must the other round Iron sill the
Cavity of this, toward the point only, and be round an much long, and be put in
red hot. It is not to stay long where pain ^s caused, because there is no
Callus; but to be rubbed up and down where the place is indolent, until pain be
caused by reason of the removing of the Callus by the Fire. And although he
highly commend ^ectual Fire, and discommend the potential: yet I am not of his
mind in sundry cases: As for this Invention, whosoever shall go about to
practice it, I shall hold him much like to him who is to throw at a Cock
blind-sold.

The Third Chirurgical Intention is, to mundisie the part: this medicament will
perform it: Vini albi lb ss. Unguent. Aegyptiaci ss. Spirit. vini, vj. misc.
Inject this warm, but once a day. You may conjecture, that the Fistula is
sufficiently mundified, if the Quittour have no ill smell, if it be uniform,
thick and white.

Then you are to address your selves to the fourth Intention Chirurgical, which
is to unite and consolidate the parts disjoined. To accomplish this: first draw
by an Alembick the Spirit of these Herbs following, putting so much
Spring Water, as will be three inches above the Simples, to them; The Roots of
Aristolochia rotunda, Tormentil, Bistort, Comfrey, the lesser Centaury, Virga
aurea, Burnet, Plantain, Knot-grass, Yarrow, and Solomon's Seal. Reserve the
Spirit by it self: take the decoction remaining in the Pot from the Herbs by
straining; for every quart of this Decoction take half a lb of Honey, and so
much Sugar: This mixture being clarified with the whites of Eggs, and strained
again, let it be boiled by a soft Fire to the consistence of a Syrup. Take two
ounces of the Spirit, and one ounce of the Syrup; which mingle and inject into
the Sinuosity, and deal with it as I prescribed, when I delivered the manner of
dressing a sinuous Ulcer. If any man deliver a more probable way than this, to
consolidate a Fistuld after the extirpation of the Callus, I shall willingly
lend him mine Ears.

The last intention Chirurgical, is to skin the Orifice, which requires no new
directions. You shall know the Fistula to be near whole, when the Humor which
flows is little, thick, concocted, and the place void of pain and tumor: If it
be altogether dry, you may pronounce the Orifice to be skinned, and the Fistula
perfectly cured.

From the Premises you may gather that four things hinder the Cure of a
Fistula. I. Is the Afflux of a vicious Humor. II. Is the natrowness of it,
which hardly admits the Application of convenient Medicaments. III. Is the
deepness which hinders the conveying of the Medicaments to the bottom. IV. The
Callosity which contents ordinary Medicaments. I have showed you the way to
remore these Lets and Impediments. I^ the next Chapter I shall discourse of the
Cure of Fistula's in particular places, which when I have done, I will put an
end to this Treatise of Fistula's.

CHAP. XII.
Of Fistula Lachrymalis.

BEfore I put an end to this point, I will set down the Cure of some particular
Fistula's, differing only in the parts wherein they are seated, wherein some
special directions are required. I will only speak of three, to wit, of
Aegilops in the great corner of the eye, of a Fistula in the Breast, and last
of all of a Fistula in ano.

First then I will deal with Fistula Lachrymalis, the Fistula in the great
corner of the Eye. In Paulus Aegineta, De art meden. lib. 3. c. 22. there are
words in sound much like (...) and (...), but in signification different: He
will have (...) to be a Tumor or Apostem before it is opened. but (...) he
affirms to be when the Tumor is opened, whether it be fistulated or no: his
words are these: Aegilops abscess^^ est, qui inter majorem oculi angrlum and
nares fit: qui ruptus singligatur, usque ad os Fistulam aperit. Idem, priusquam
ruptum exulceretu^r, Apostema Anchilops appellatur. So according to the version
of Albanus Torinus, Thus it may be Englished: Aegilops is a^ Apostem between
the great comer of the Eye and the Nose; which it it be neglected, it makes way
to a Fistula, even to the Bone: this Apostem is called Anchilops, before it is
broken. All modern Authors, who have left any Monument of Surgery, follow
him. This kind of Fistula is called by the Neoterick. Surgeons Fistula
Lacrymalis. By Avicen lib. 3. can. sen. 3. tract. 2. c. 14. the Apostem is
called Kaktius, or Akilas, and the Fistula it self Garab or Alstarab. Fabricius
ab aqua pendente, de operat. chirurg. part. 1. c. 21. purposely handles this
matter, and Ambrose Parey lib. 6. c. 15. and Taliacotius in chirurg. curtor.
lib. 1. c. 15. The place then wherein this kind of Fistula is seated, is the
inner corner of the Eye: although it begin first at the holes of the upper and
lower Eyelid, from whence the Tears flow.

The signs are manifest to the Senses: for First, the Orifice offers it self to
view: Secondly, by compression the Quittour issues out: Thirdly, a small Probe
may be thrust within the Cavity to the very end of the Sinus.

As for the Prognostics: First then, all these Fistula's are hard to cure; for
the moistness of the place hinders desiccation, which is required in the cure
of Ulcers, Secondly, the part, (while one is awake) is in continual motion,
Thirdly, by reason of the niceness of the part, choice of Medicaments must be
had. II. If the Quittour has made way for it self to the inner passage of the
Nose, by that hole which passes through the Bone of the Nose from the corner,
then we are only to procure the shutting up of the upper Orifice, and not to go
about the scaling of the Bone by a fruitless labor, which will notwithstanding
cost the Patient great pain and grief. III. If a Fistula in this place become
cancerous, which you shall conjecture by the hard and livid brims, a stinging
pain, and stinking virulent Matter, you are only to use a palliative cure,
applying those Medicaments which are fit for a cancerous Ulcer, whereof in the
cure of a Cancer I will speak at large. IV. If this continue long, it causes a
Consumption of the Eye, called (...) sometimes blindness of that Eye, and
corruption of the Air, which we draw by the Nostrils, if the Quittour pass from
the Glandule, through the bone of the Nose to the Nostril.

Now to come to the differences of these Fistula's; some are malign, the signs
whereof I have delivered in the Prognostics. Some are not malign. Of these
wherein there is no malignity, some are without cariosity of the Bone, and some
with cariosity of the Bone. You shall know that there is no cariosity of the
Bone. 1. If the Apostem was not long continuing before it brake; for it the
Tumor was first an Oedema Scirrhodes, and continued a long time so before it
brake, then it is likely that the Humor corrupted the Bone before it brake. 2.
If the Probe rest not upon a part hard and rugged 3. If after dilatation of the
Fistula, the cariosity be not presented to the sight. If circumstances contrary
to these be offered, you may conjecture that there is a cariosity in the Bone.

To hasten to the cure of these Fistula's: If a Fistula lcebrymalis, without
corruption of the Bone, be offered to you to be cured, proceed after this
manner: First of all you are to dilate it: Secondly, you are to remove the
callosity: Thirdly, you are to mundifie it: Fourthly, you are to consolidate
it: And lastly, to cicatrize it.

You shall dilate it by the Fistula Tent framed (as I taught in the former
Chapter, according to the proportion of the sinuosity in the beginning: then
you shall enlarge it more by Sponges prepared with Melilot Emplaster, which I
likewise set down there. This manner of dressing will discover all corners of
the sinuosity. The Fistula having been thus dilated, you are to go about the
removing of the Callus. Now in performing this, there is not so great liberty
granted, as is in Fistula's of other parts. For First, stuid and running means
having a remarkable acrimony are not safe: for passing unto the Conjunctiva,
and from thence to the Cornea, they are able to erode it; from whence an Ulcer
may ensue, and so the grief be doubled. Secondly, even means solid carefully
must be applied, that they go no further than the sinuosity of the Fistula. It
is not unknown unto you, what horrible symptoms oftentimes afflict the Eye, by
reason of a familiar Humor only exalted in degrees of acrimony: What mischief
then is to be expected, if heterogeneal Bodies, endued with extraordinary
sharpness, as these must be which remove a Callus, do seize upon the Membranes
of the Eye, adjacent unto the part affected.

Some there are who cure these lacrymal Fistula's with liquid Medicaments, as
with the water of Elder, or Wall-wort flowers, in every pint of these
dissolving two drams of Mercury sublimate, or more, according to the hardness
of the callosity. The proportion of mixture you must conjecture by the
continuance of the Fistula, by the age of the party, and constitution of the
Body. If therefore a Fistula be offered to be cured in a body young, of a short
continuance, and of a tender constitution, then the water is to be mild; if
contrary conditions do offer themselves, then you are to make it more strong
according to discretion. If you take two parts of Plantain water, and one part
of the Spirit of Niter, you shall have an excellent Topic according to the
Principles of the Chemists.

One thing is to be observed, that these liquid Medicaments be sparingly
applied to the sinuosity, that no part of them touch the Membranes; to avoid
the accidents whereof I spoke before.

As for mine own part, I more commend the solid Medicaments than these stuid:
for First, their faculty is more durable: Secondly, they are more secure,
because they are not so apt to spread: If the Body be young and tender, this
Medicament will serve. Take Mercur. Praecipitati, aut Turbith loti ij. Aluminis
caicin. j. Exquisite misceantur; postea. Unguent. pop. j. Pulveris praedicli
ij. Mis. ceantur, ut resultet vnguentum. When you apply this Medicament, arming
a Tent with it, pull it not out forcibly; but suffer it to pop out of it self.
Continue the application of this Medicament until the Callus be removed, which
you may guess, if the process of the sinuosity appear soft, and th Quittour
which cleaves to the Tent appear landable.

The Callus being thus removed, you must mundifie it: To this purpose you shall
use this local Medicament:. Aq. Chelidoniae aut Rutae. ij. Syrupi e succo
rutae, aut Mellis rosati i. Misc. applicetur calefactum. Dress the Fistula but
once a day.

The part being mundified, which you shall know by the redness and tenderness
of it: Then go about the consolidation. This you shall procure by this
Medicament:. Aq. Plantag. ij. Syrupi Myrtillerum. aut. Ros. rub. siccat. i.
Misceantur. Apply this, and renew it but every other day, if no remarkable
store of Quittour flow

As for the skinning: Diapalma cum succis, de minio, or Emplasirum rubrum
astringens will serve.

If in an Aegilops or lachrymal Fistula, the bone of the Nose be corrupted by
the Humor staying in the embosement, then two ways of curing are offered unto
you.

The First is by actual cautery, the Second is by incision. Peruse all who have
written of the curing of this kind of Fistula's, and you shall find that all
with one accord subscribe to the actual cautery.

The actual cautery must represent in Figure the stone of an Olive: The parts
adjacent must be defended from the fire, either by an hollow Plate according to
Parey, or a Cane according to Ab aqua pendente; you may make choice of which
you will: you must effectually impress it, to dry the Humidity, and the sooner
to procure the scaling of the Bone. And although Authors, after the application
of the actual cautery, prescribe fatty things to hasten the separation of the
eschar, yet I advise you not to use them; for the part is moist of it self, and
so the application of such Medicaments would procure a sordid Ulcer: Apply
therefore only Pledgets or Tents dipped in Red Wine, and above all Diapalma or
Emplastrum de minio, or de Smegmate. When the Bone has cast a scale, then
consolidate and skin it, as I have set down before.

It is not unknown with what difficulty Patients admit the application of an
actual cautery, to a part much distant from any of the principal, and wherein
there is but small sensibility. What will a Patient troubled with this grief
do, if you make mention of cauterization to be made in this place, so near the
Eye and the Brain it self? If at any time you make mention of such a kind of
cure to a Patient, to try how he stands affected to this operation; let me
entreat you not to urge it too much, as if the cure of the Fistula could not
otherwise be compassed, if you find the Patient averse, lest you drive him
away, and so you loose both credit and gain. When in the Country I practiced
Surgery, sundry times this kind of grief having been presented unto me, I
ever found the Patients stricken into a terror and amazement, as soon as
mention was made of Cauterization; wherefore I set my imagination at work, to
find out a way to cure a Fistula lachrymaliss, less terrible, but more sure and
effectual, which I will not conceal from you, because this grief does often
come to your hands, and both great credit and gain is purchased by performing
the Cure.

My manner of cure is this: First of all, having with a small Probe bended,
found out the Cavity both upwards and downwards, I draw a line with Ink between
the Glandule of the Eye, and the Trochlea or the Pulley, through which the
small Tendon of the first oblique Muscle called Superior, or Ma^or, the
uppermost and greatest, passes, and ends obliquely in the uppermost part of the
Cornea: then I make incision to the Bone; the part incised I divide with the
Nails of the fore-singers, until the incision be so much dilated, that it will
without difficulty admit a pretty Pledget: this being done, I thrust in a small
Trochisk made of Turbith mineral before it be washed, the vomitive Vitriol, and
the best Terra sigillata wrought with Populeum to the form of a stiff Paste,
and afterward dried. About the Trochisk I apply a Pledget armed with Populeum,
which I keep to the Fistula by an Emplaster of Diapalma cum succis, malaxed
with the Oil of Henbane. Afterward filling the orbit of the Eye with little
bolsters made or soft Linen Cloth folded, and moistened in Aqua spermatis
ranarum caphurata, I roll up the Eye. The same dressings I use Morning and
Evening, until the Trochisk with the Callus fall out of its own accord: which
when I perceive, I diligently view the Bone, to see how much is carious, unto
it I apply the Powder of Euphorbium, if the diseased party be aged, and of a
firm constitution of Body; but if the party be young, and of a tender
constitution, I besprinkle the Bone with Pulvis Cephalicus. The cavity of the
part incised I fill up with a piece of the Sponge dressed with Melilot
Emplaster, as I delivered in the former Chapter: about it I apply a Pledget
armed with Populeum, all which I couch down close, with the Emplasters and
Bolsters kept to the Eye with a Rowler.

This manner of dressing I continue until the scale of the carious Bone casts,
which most commonly falls out about the Twentieth day. When the scale is
removed, I mundisie the part with Mel rosatum, or Mel rutaceum; then I procure
consolidation by the Syrup of Myrtles, or of red Roses dried, And last of all I
cicatrize the part affected with some epulotical Emplaster, whereof I have set
down sufficient store heretofore, and shall hereafter, when I shall discourse
of an Ulcer which hardly admits skinning. I have made sufficient experiment of
this manner of curing an Aegilops in sundry persons. And I truly affirm, that
I never missed of the Cure of any one with whom I thus dealt: neither shall you
(I hope) if punctually you observe these observations in your proceedings.

And this Practice is confirmed by Hildanus, Obs. 23. Cent. 5. Who cured a
Fistula lachrymalis in a Boy about Thirteen years old; he had been troubled
Four years with it in his Left Eye: the Bone was not only carious, but tears,
when he cried, trickled out at the Fistula, the Gland was so much eroded. This
Boy was so impatient and peevish, that an actual Cantery (which Hildanus
accounts the best remedy for a lachrymal Fistula) could not be used. Therefore,
having ordered his Diet, he purged the Patient, and made a Seton in his Neck. A
few days after, when the Seton run, he applied his potential Caustic, which
causes no pain. When the Eschar was fallen, he dilated the Fistula to the Bone
with an escharotick Unguent, and prepared Sponge. Then he strewed good store of
powdered Euphorbium on the Fistula, and upon it applied a Plaster of Gum Elemi;
when these things had been used for some weeks, the Bone scaled; and when the
Scale was extracted, half a drop of Balsam of Tolu was applied once a day to
the Ulcer, which quickly healed up, and continued sound and firm. And a little
after the Seton was dried and healed up. And by the way observe, that Hildanus
in this Cure ascribes most to Euphorbium.

It may fall out that the whole substance of the Bone of the Nose subjacent to
the Fistula may be carious, being of its own nature thin, and the Head of the
party besides very rheumatick, so that being often cured in the opinion both of
the Surgeon, and diseased party, yet it breaks out again. In such a case you
may demand of me, how you shall fall off from such a Cure with your own credit.
To this I answer, that there is yet a Subterfuge; and a way left to give
contentment to the afflicted Patient: To compass this, first dilate again the
sinuosity, until the corrupt Bone appear, as has been showed heretofore.
Secondly, pierce the bone of the Nose with a Gimlet, that the Quittour may have
recourse to the Nostrils, which are appointed as shoars to discharge the
phlegmatic excrements of the Brain, and to draw in fresh Air for the
refrigeration of the Lungs: and then cure the superjacent fleshy and skinny
parts, as I taught you, when I set down the palliative manner to cure a
Fistula. This manner of cure being the last refuge, it will undoubtedly give
contentment to the Patient: for the eyes of the beholders shall observe no
deformity external in him, and he himself shall not be able to discern the
turning of the Quittour from the Glandule outwardly, to the Nostril inwardly:
besides this, he himself shall perceive no smell that shall offend him; the
smell of Garlic is not offensive to those who have eaten of it.

Now to conclude this my discourse of a Fistula lachrymalis, if you perceive
any such Fistula malign, or to tend to a cancrosity, which you shall discern by
the signs set down, when I delivered unto you the Prognostics: then use this
Medicament of Heurmus the Father, set down in methodo ad praxin. lib. 1. p.
106. which he purchased both with Money and Entreaty, of one who got much Money
by it.

This is the description of it:. Ca^imin. ter ^sti atque in vini aceto extincti
j. myrrhae, plumbi usti ac loti an. ss. creci gr. v. opii gr. ij. aeris usti
iiij. decocti fe^ugraeci j. Misceantur exquisite omnia super lapidem picter^m.
If you mean to make an Ointment to continue long, instead of the Mucilage of
Femgreek, use new Swines-grease washed in Rosewater; this is an admirable
Eyesalve in all Ulcers of the Eyes: (whereof I have made often trial) whether
they be malign or no.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Fistula's in the Breast.

NExt to Fistula lachrymalis, Fistula Thoracis; a Fistula in the Breast does
osser it self. Of which Cornelius Celsus l. 7. Ambrosius Paraeus l. 9. ca. 31.
and Fabricius ab aqua pendente de operat. Chirurgic. part. 1. c. 47. have
written.

This kind of Fistula happens two manner of ways: First, by reason of a
penetrating wound of the Breast.

Secondly, by a Phlegmon possessing the intercostal Muscles, and the Pleura.

It is a superfluous matter to set down any figus, seeing they appear to they
Eye. and are easily found out, by applying the signs set down in the general
method of curing of Fistula's, to every Fistula in particular.

As for the differences; a Fistula ensuing a wound penetrating to the Cavity of
the Breast, has but one Orifice, the passage and sinuosity whereof is
according to the penetration of the wound; but a Fistula following after an
Aposteme, has frequently more Orisices than one; whereof some pass to the
Cavity of the Breast directly, some windingly.

To come to the Presages. All Fistula's of the Breast are hard to be cured, and
that for seven reasons.

1. For First, the Breast is in continual motion by reason of its dilatation
and contraction caused by the intercostal Muscles: now, that motion hinders the
curation of any Sore, it is so manifest, and confirmed by experience, that it
needs no proof.

2. Secondly, because in penetrating Fistula's of the Breast, the Pleura is
always ulcerate; which being thin, without Blood and membranous as the Bladder,
hardly admitts any consolidation.

3. Thirdly, seeing the Virus of the Fistula does often corrupt the Rib; and
seeing the internal substance of the Rib is cavernous and so apt to lodge
corrupt Matter, the difficulty of curing is increased.

4. Fourthly, in Fistula's of the Breast, the end of the Fistula is often lower
than the Orifice, which hinders the expurgation of the superfluous matter.

5. Fifthly, the Sinuosity within, in penetrating Fistula's does frequently
extend it self between the Pleura and the upper Rib, to the distance between it
and the lower Rib. Now how hard a matter it is to cleanse this Cavity, I refer
it to your own consideration.

6. Sixthly, that liberty of applying of Medicaments, which is permitted in
sundry other parts of the Body, is here denied, the Lungs and Heart being
lodged in this Cavity, whereof special regard is to be had, seeing upon the
safety of these parts the life of the Individuum depends.

7. Seventhly, because Fistula's bring an extenuation of the Body, and a
Hectic Fever.

Let this be the second Prognostic: If the party afflicted with a Fistula in
the Breast, be fallen into a Hectic Fever, and his Body begin to be extenuate,
pronounce the grief to be incurable; for if you use desiccative means, which
are required in curing of Ulcers, you shall increase these symptomatical
griefs, and hasten death.

The third prediction Celsus delivers unto us in these words, Solent quoque,
etc. Fistula's use sometimes, when they have passed by the Ribs, to corrupt the
Midrisf; which may be gathered by the place affected, and the greatness of
pain; in this case there is no hopes of cure.

As for the cure of a Fistula of the Breast; to it three means are required; a
convenient Diet, pectoral Decoctions, and local Applications. In a Fistula,
which has caused neither a Hectic Fever, nor extenuation of the Body, a
greater variety of Meats is permitted, than when these symptoms are annexed.
Howsoever Meats of easy concoction, and which afford laudable nourishment, are
to be appointed for the Patient, and a moderate use of them is to be
prescribed: of these two means I have spoken amply enough, when I set down the
general cure of Ulcers.

As for pectoral Decoctions, upon the use of which the greatest part of the
cure of such Fistula's depends, you shall find diverse descriptions of them in
diverse Authors.

The Simples whereof these Decoctions are made, are these; The Flowers and
Leaves of Coltsfoot, Maidenhair, white Horehound, Comfrey, Tormentil, and
Bistort-roots, Violet-flowers, Borage roots and flowers, Elecampane-roots,
Hyssop, Germander, the flowers and roots of Mallows, the roots of Parsley and
Fennel, Liquorice, Scabious, Valerian, Burnet, Sarsaparilla, Guajacum,
China-root, Raisins of the Sun, and blew Figs: of these Simples you shall find
sundry Decoctions set down by Authors, who have written of Wounds and Fistula's
of the Breast.

Amongst all others, the Pectoral Decoction of Franciscus Arcaeus you may most
safely and securely trust unto: He, while he lived, was so fortunate in the
practice of Surgery, that he drew that eminent Linguist and Divine Arias
Montanus, very often to be a spectator of his Operation. The Decoction I need
not set down, because you may fetch it out of the Author himself, who is
translated into the English Tongue.

I will not stick to commend unto you one of my own, whereof I have sundry
times made experiment. This is the Composition of it.. Sars. paril. vj. scob.
guajac. v. rad. Chin. iij. rad. enul. campan. 1. capil. vener. scabios. fol.
tussilag. scolopend. summitat. hyper. an. man. 1. flor. borag. buglos. viol.
beton. an. pug. 1. polypod. iij. liquirit. ij. passul. major. exacinat. and
sicuum pinguium incisar. an. ijss. Infundantur ista per noct. in aq. font.
ferventis lib. 24. deinde lento igne coq. ad consump. lib. 8. ac coletur
decoctum. Bibat aeger fingulis diebus lib. 4. Let the Patient every Morning
about five a clock, drink half a pint of this Decoction warm, and so much about
four a clock in the Afternoon: at Dinner let him take a Pint, and at his Supper
another: the third Pint he may drink between Meals. Marvel not at this
quantity, for a less will little avail; for strong desiccation is required in
this Cure.

Three things hinder the cure of these Fistula's:

The First, is the inconvenient situation of the Orifice, when it is higher
than the ending of the Fistula.

The Second is the extenuation of the Body.

And the Third is a Hectic Fever: Of these in order.

If then the ending of the Fistula be lower than the external Orifice, a lower
Orifice is to be made by incision. In this operacion two things are to be
diligently noted: The First is the place. The Second, the cautions to be
observed in the Section.

As for the regions of the Breast: The Left Side is safer than the Right: for
in this Side the Liver by its gibbosity bears up the Diaphragma, and
insinuates it self to the cavity of the Breast: If then either one of these, or
both should be wounded imprudently, it is an easy matter to prognosticate the
tragical event of this operation.

As for the determinate part of the Breast, which is to be opened, let it be
about the beginning of the next Rib, and not at the lower end of that Rib,
above which the orifice of the Fistula shows it self; for under it are couched
a Vein, a Nerve, and an Artery.

In your Section proceed thus: First, divide the Skin toward the upper part of
the lower Rib, then make way thorowout the intercostal Muscles: These things
being done, dry all things with a Sponge, and put into the new Orifice a
swelling Sponge, both to dilate it, and to draw to it self the Quittour. If you
go thus to work, you need not fear any danger, if you pass no further than the
division of the Pleura: so that neither the Diaphragma, nor the Lungs, nor the
Pericardium be touched.

If with a Fistula of the Breast a Marasmus or Hectic Fever be complicate, the
difficulty of curing is exceedingly increased; two Diseases jointly conspiring
to the ruin of the diseased Party, which notwithstanding for their Cure
require adverse indications, the Fistula requiring Desiccation, and Marasmus,
and the Hectic Fever craving Humectation. If then a Fistula of the Breast be
offered to any one, First of all be sparing in your promises, lest ye be
accounted Clouds without Rain: who but an Ignorant will give free reins to
liberal promises to cure a Fistula of the Breast, complicate with other
Deutero-pathetical griefs, of their own nature hard to be cured, when as it is
a difficult matter to cure a Fistula of the part?

Marasmus, in Latin Authors Marcor, is an immoderate dryness and consumption
of the whole body. by reason of the defect of the substantial Humidity,
according to Trallianus. According to Galen. li. de marc. there are two degrees
of it: The one is when this extenuation of the Body is in Fieri, in consuming;
the other is when it is in Facto esse, or consummate.

If it be in Fieri only, the Muscles begin to fall, the Skin bebecomes flaggy
and loose, strength and agility decay, and the party finds a manifest defect,
and impotency in all the actions of the Body, whether they be animal, vital, or
natural. Against this degree you may contend by instituting a Diet moistening.

If a Marasmus be in Facto esse, or consummate; then the Eyes grow hollow, and
seem to be hid in the pits; the lively color of the skin fades, the skin of
the Forehead seems dry, and stretched like the head of a Drum; the Eyelids seem
heavy, and scarce able to lift themselves up, as it happens to those who are
wearied by reason of watching; the Temples are hollow: in the cavities of the
Breast and Belly, one would think that there were neither Viscera, Members
contained, nor Guts: for the Muscles are so consumed, and the Cavities so drawn
in, that nothing seems to remain besides the Fibrae and the Skin. To conclude,
one having a consummate Marasmus seems to be nothing else but a walking
Skeleton. Whosoever shall undertake the cure of such a one, and perform it, I
will give him leave to give himself out for another Savior, and to publish a
Fifth Gospel.

A Marasmus is twofold: for one is accompanied with heat, and may be called a
dry Marasmus, and this is nothing else but a Hectic Fever, which has consumed
the radical moisture of the solid parts, and it is called (...), or an
extenuating Fever.

The other is accompanied with Cold. This is twofold: The one is natural, and
it is decrepit old age: for old age is defined by dryness and coldness.

The other is unnatural, and it is called Senium ex morbo, a decay by reason of
sickness: old age comes by the course of time.

This last is of a violent cause, for it follows after a burning or a Hectic
Fever; and that by reason of the sickness it self, or by reason of Medicaments
used in the curing of the aforementioned griefs: for a Hectic Fever does not only
wast the natural Humidity, but the natural Heat also seated in the Humidity:
wherefore the Heart it self, the wel-spring of this heat, must become colder
than it ought to be. In this case the Pulse is small and weak, and slow: in
like manner the breathing is weak, slow and cold. By reason of the use of
refrigerating Medicaments appointed by the Physician in curing of a Hectic, or
a Febris Marasmodes, many times Senium ex morbo succeeds: and this is more
intolerable, because, the heart being somewhat immoderately cooled, the less of
the Radical Moisture is spent, than would be, if the Hectic had its full
course.

A Hectic Fever, is an unnatural heat which has seized upon the solid parts,
and wastes the Moisture of them. But seeing there is a threefold Moisture in
the Body: to wit, Blood in the small-Veins and Arteries of every part, a dewy
substance in every part by which it is nourished, and gluten which keeps
together the Terrestrial substance of each part, moistens it, and keeps it from
falling to dust:

There are also three degrees of a Hectic. In the beginning when the two first
Humidities begin to fail, the Hectic Fever is not easily discerned, although
it may be without great difficulty cured: But if the Radical Moisture be
consumed, as it is easily discerned, so it is hardly cured. As long as this
Moisture is somewhat plentiful, sufficient to entertain the Natural Heat, the
Body seems well colored, of a comely Figure, and of a decent quantity.

If therefore you perceive the Body of any one having a Fistula in the Breast,
by reason of the defect of this gluten, or Radical Moisture, become
discolored, the Figure to be altered, some parts bunching out, some growing
hollow, and the thickness of the Members to become slenderer, the Flesh
colliquating; leave such a one to himself, that he may march peaceably to the
period of his life.

Having treated of a Marasmus or extenuation of the Body, and a Hectic Fever
(so much as is expedient for you to know in your Chirurgical Practice) without
the knowledge of which, you cannot possibly proceed, warily and circumspect, in
curing Fistula's of the Breast, I am to show you what uses you may make of what
has been delivered.

If therefore one having a Fistula in the Breast, be brought unto you, whose
Body seems to be nothing else but Skin and Bone, (as the vulgar proverb is)
acquaint him with the danger wherein he is, lest death seize upon him
unprepared. Nevertheless if he implore your aid of Christian Charity, withdraw
not what comfort you are able to procure unto him; appoint then a Diet
moistning and nourishing, if no Physician be at hand, which I will set down
anon; and dress him with those Medicaments, which are anodyne and healing.
Inject into the Fistula Plantain-water, having some red Rose-leaves dried
mingled with it; cover your Tent and Pledget with Diachylon simplex. If you
perceive that there is so much of the Radical Moisture remaining as is able to
cherish the Natural Heat (which you shall discern, if the color of the Body be
fresh, if the Figure be decent, if the proportion of the parts be according to
Nature, and the diseased party can in some good measure perform all actions)
you may conceive some hope of his recovery.

Wherefore if a Marasmus has extenuated his Body, appoint for him a Diet which
is likely to repair the Natural Moisture impaired. Let him then take Broths
made of Mutton, Veal or Chickens, wherein Damask Prunes, Raisins of the Sun
stoned, Currants washed and bruised, Mallow-flowers and Roots, Marigold-flowers,
Cinquefoil, Cowslip-flowers, and Colts-foot-leaves and flowers have been
boiled: Gellies are good, made of young Cockrels, and a Knuckle of Veal; use no
other Spice to it than a little Mace and Nutmeg. Let him between meals take
Almond-Milk made of Broth of a Chicken boiled with French-Barley. It is good
for him also every Morning and Evening, to take a draught of Asses or Goats
Milk: or in want of these, of Cows Milk, milked through the Conserves of
Borrage, and Bugloss flowers; Calves and Sheeps-feet stewed with Currants are
good: sometimes let him eat Pigs-flesh. If he have a mind to Fish, grant unto
him Whitingmops, Smelts, Perches, young Pickerels, Trouts, yea sometimes Eels:
the Sole, Flownder and Plaice may also be permitted; poched Eggs, and sweet
Butter without any Salt, or Almond-Butter, are good for breakfast.

If an extenuation of the Body do proceed from an Hectic Fever, then you must
not only moisten the Body, but cool it also. In the Broths then boil Borage,
and Succory Roots, common Sorrel, wood Sorrel, Primrose, Violet, Borrage, and
Bugloss-flowers: let his Sallets be Lettuce, Spinach, and Purselain boiled in
Chicken-broth. An Almond-milk made of the decoction of French Barley, wherewith
the Emulsion of the Seeds of the Pompion, Musk-melon, Cucumber, Purselain, and
White Poppy has been drawn, is excellent taken Morning and Evening. Permit no
Milk but Butter-milk, and that when it begins to be a little sowrish, with a
little of Sugar, or Borage, or Bugloss. If the diseased party complain of
immoderate heat, and watching, give him twice a week Philoninum Persicum, with
Syrup of white Poppy, red Poppy, Gilly-flowers, Maidenhair, Coltsfoot, or of
the juice of Limons, or Citrons in Aqua Spermatis Ranarum or red Poppy. If you
perceive that by the following of these courses the party has recovered his
strength, and a good habit of Body, then you may conceive a good hope of his
recovery, and put him in good comfort, and so boldly proceed in the Cure, still
endeavoring by following the Indications (as Thescus did the Thread of Ariadne
to come out of the Labyrinth) to restore perfect health to the Patient.

In setting down of local Applications I will be brief, because they little
differ from the general, if you except a few observations. You may safely
dilate a Fistula of the Breast, with the Fistula Tent and Sponge; but in
removing of the Callus you must he wary; for if you apply the Trochisk, it must
not reach to the Cavity of the Breast; for the point of it will relent, break,
and fall upon the Septum transversum, which undoubtedly will erode it, cause an
Inflammation, procure a sharp Fever, a Paraphrenitis, and at last death it
self. Apply then a Tent armed with Populeon, wherewith the Fistula Powder must
be mingled, as has been taught. The Callus being removed, mundifie the Ulcer
with Aqua calcis, and Mel rosatum mingled together: Take heed that you inject
no bitter Medicament, for such Medicaments are easily sucked in by the Lungs,
from whence by the Trachaea Arteria they easily pass to the Throat and Mouth,
from whence there is felt a horrible bitterness, a desire to vomit, and an
overthrow of the Appetite, Paraeus lib. 9. c. 13. affirms this to have happened
unto him twice, be you ware by the example of others. The Ulcer having been
mundified, proceed to consolidation; for sores in this part are not to be long
kept open: This you shall procure by injecting two or three days the Syrup of
red Rose-leaves dried, mingled with Plantain-water; and then only moistning a
Pledget wet in this Syrup, or the Syrup of Myrtles. Above the Pledget apply
Paracelsus his Styptick Emplastrum; for in this case it exceeds all others:
because it not only draws the brims together, but it skins also.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Fistula's in the Belly and Joints.

FIstula's of the Belly are twofold: for they are either in the Inguinal
parts, or else in Ano.

Of these in the Groins I will discourse; because they most frequently fall
out, being Accidents, for the most part, which ensue after Venereal Bubo's,
either neglected, or ill cured; yea, they fall out in Plethorick and
Cacochymical Bodies very often, wherein there is no Neapolitane Seed: and that
somewhat above the Emunctory it self; the Matter not coming to the Emunctories
themselves, which receive the Excrements of the Liver; but being hindered,
either by reason of the weakness of the expulsive faculty, or by the crossing
and thwarting of the Muscles, oblique and tranverse in those places, as they
who are skilful in Anatomy well know. It is no wonder that both Abscesses, and
Fistula's often fall out in these places, seeing the Belly is as a Draught or
Sink in a House, or a Keel in a Ship, whither all impurities flow. Yea, such
plenty of sharp Humors sometimes flows to these parts, that perforation of the
Guts is caused, and that the Excrements come out at the Orifice of the Fistula;
a lamentable case, noisome to the diseased party, and intolerable to the
company. It falls out sometimes that some of the Vertebrae of the Spina are
corrupted.

As for the Presages: Fistula's in these places, which pass to the Cavity of
the Abdomen, are hardly cured.

First, because the Liver is still apt to afford new Matter.

Secondly, because great circumspection is to be used, if you shall use either
Incision, or Corrosive Medicaments, by reason of the Fibrae of the Muscles, and
the branches of the Vena cava, and Aorta descending.

The second Presage is this: If the Vertebrae of the Spina be corrupted,
pronounce the Fistula to be incurable: you shall conjecture the Vertebrae to be
foul, if extraordinary store of stinking Sanies issue out of the Fistula, and
the party daily grow weaker, and more extenuate, notwithstanding that you use
all convenient both internal and external means.

The third Presage shall be this; If the Guts be eroded, and the Excrements
come out at the Orifice of the Fistula, the life of the diseased party is in
great hazard: because the Guts are thin, membranous, and destitute of store of
Blood.

Secondly, because the Fistula is apt to creep through the distances between the
Muscles, which in those places are many; to wit, the oblique and transverse,
one placed above another.

Thirdly, because in curing such Fistula's, we find little help of Hand and Eye.

Fourthly, because topical means can hardly be kept to the Guts, to help
consolidation.

As for the Cure of these Fistula's: If they be not deep, but run along
superficially, the best course is to make incision, and then to apply one of
the Fistula Powders described by me, care had of the age and constitution of
the party.

As for the Mundification, Consolidation, and Cicatrization of such, seeing no
special observation is required, you are to have recourse to that, which I have
copiously delivered heretofore. If the Vertebrae of the Spina be foul, you are
to promise no Cure.

Nevertheless, if persons of worth will (upon good consideration) entertain you
to dress them, they finding a comfort by your pains, make an injection of
Plantain, or Carduus Benedictus Water, adding some fragrant Water of
Medow-sweet, the Syrup of red Rose-leaves dried, and the Spirit of Wine, having
the tincture of Aloe, Myrrh, Mastick, and some Saffron. Let your Emplaster be
Diachylon cum gummi, or Paracelsus his Styptick. If the Guts fall out to be
perforated, having acquainted the friends of the party with the danger, yet
despair not, but go on, and use Methodical means. Let the party eat Calves and
Sheeps-feet stewed, Sheeps and Calves heads; for they afford a glutinous juice;
Rice boiled in Milk, wherein Steel has been often quenched, is also good.
Every Morning and Evening let the party take a draught of Allegant, warmed with
a Wheat Toast, when he has drunk off the Wine, let him eat the Toast. Make
injection of red Wine, having a little Alume dissolved in it, and some of the
Syrup of Myrtle-berries: keep the Orifice open with a Sponge, until the Gut be
consolidate: then proceed to the extirpation of the Gallus, Mundification,
Consolidation, and Cicatrization, as has been heretofore taught. Event
oftentimes falls out above expectation.

Not long ago a Country Youth, who had an Enterocele, was bound to a Barber in
Aldersgate Street; one applying to the Rupture a Truss somewhat strait, caused
a Sideration or Mortification of the part, so that the Excrements came out
plentifully, with much stinking Matter out of the Cavity of the Belly.
Notwithstanding, by diligence and application of convenient means, the Gut was
consolidate and the Youth kept alive. So much I thought good to deliver
concerning the Cure of Fistula's, which happen in the Inguinal Region.

Now it follows, that I speak of Fistula's in Ano which was said to be the
second kind of Fistula's invading the Abdomen, or the lower Belly.

This kind of Fistula very often follows after a Plegmon in the Anus, broken
and ill cured.

There be two sorts of these Fistula's, for some pierce not the Intestinum
rectum, and some do: and both these are either shallow or deep.

You shall conjecture the Fistula to pass through the Intestinum rectum: First,
if after breaking of Wind, part of it make way through the Sinus of the Fistula.

Secondly, if the Excrements appear mingled with the Quittour, or if the
Quittour smell as the Excrements use.

Thirdly, injection being made at the outer Orifice of the Fistula, if part of
it pass within the Anus.

Fourthly, the foregoing being put into the Anus, if you feel the Probe bare,
it being thrust through the Sinus of the Fistula, this is an infallible and
certain sign.

As for the Presages of these Fistula's: First, no Fistula any is easy to
cure: for this part being the Jakes of the Body, it affords great plenty of
Impurities, and much superfluous Moisture, which hinder the Cure.

Secondly, if a Fistula in this place be not very painful and noisome, by
reason of much stinking Quittour, but shuts and opens it self sundry times. It
is expedient for the health of the Patient, if such a one be left uncured: for
by this means the Body is discharged of superfluous Humors, and the Body kept
in health. I have known this Accident to have happened to sundry, and to have
continued to the end of their lives.

Now to come to the Cure of these Fistula's: The means to attain this are five:
Diet, internal Medicaments, Incision, Deligation and Topical means.

As for the Diet, and internal Medicaments, I have discoursed sufficiently
heretofore.

As for Incision and Deligation, they have place when the Fistula is shallow;
but if the Fistula be deep, neither of these means are to be attempted.

If therefore the Fistula be shallow, and pass not to the Intestinum rectum,
after you have dilated it, and removed the Callus, upon a Tent, incise all the
hollowness: then fill it with Dosels, armed with a Medicament made of a
restrictive Powder, and the white of an Egg, to keep the brims of the incised
parts asunder; for if you go about to unite the parts too soon, it may be
feared that a Cavity will still remain, and make way for Recidivation:
wherefore it behooves you, to see that sound and laudable Flesh be engendered in
the bottom. Let not your incarnative Medicaments be satty, for such will cause
loose and spongy Flesh: use therefore the Sanative Syrup made of vulnerary
Plants, having some Pulvis cephalieus mingled with it. If the Fistula go deep
inwardly, so that you cannot use conveniently incision, dilate the Fistula with
the Fistula Tent, and the Sponge: then remove the Callus with a Fistula
Trochisk; the Trochisk being come out, and the Callus quite spent, mundifie it
with Mel rosatum, mingled with Aqua calcis: when you perceive laudable
Quittour, endeavor to consolidate the part, by applying the Sanative Syrup,
and Pulvis cephalicus upon the Tents, which you must day by day shorten, until
at last the whole Sinus of the Fistula is shut up; which you shall conjecture
by the little and laudable Quittour which the Fistula yields. Then nothing else
remains, but to cicatrize the part with your Diapalma, or Vnguentum de minio.

If the Fistula penetrate to the Intestinum rectum, then cutting asunder of the
whole Sinus of the Fistula by deligation is most fit. But first of all, you
must dilate the Sinus, and remove the Callus (as has been said) for so the part
which is to be bound will be more thin, and so more easily cut asunder. As for
the Thread wherewith you are to bind the Sinus, two I commend unto you: First,
Sealing Thread, which is made of the best Hemp, unboiled, and unwhitened: For
is is exceeding strong, and will not rot before it has wrought its effect. The
second, is a strong Thread of Silk, twisted; there is no great Matter in the
color, whatsoever scrupulous Authors affirm: you may use either of these as
opportunity shall be offered.

When you go about to bind the Sinus, put in one end of the Thread in the Eye
of a small and flexible Probe, then thrust the Eye with the Thread through the
Sinus into the Intestinum rectum: this being done, put into the Anus your
Finger, and with it pull the Thread out of the Eye of the Probe, and draw it
out at the Anus, or having bent the Eye of the Probe, bring it without the
Anus, and then putting the Thread into the Eye, draw that end through the outer
Orifice of the Fistula. If the Sinus be not very thick and long, you may by one
strong Deligation bind off all the Sinus; but if the Sinus be thick and long,
you must use sundry constrictions, tying still the ends of the Thread with a
running knot, that it may be the more readily loosed. Some after one Deligation
only more and more draw in the ends of the Thread, with a round piece of a
Stick turned about. When all the Sinus after division by Deligation, lies open,
go forward in the Cure, as has been set down, when the Sinus was incised. Job a
Meek'ren in his Obs. Medico-Chir. Cap. 61. recites the following Case: Francis
Volkertsen, a melancho^^k Man, after a great commotion of Mind, felt a
defluxion run along his Back down to his Rump, and from thence to the meeting
of the Buttocks, where the Intestinum rectum lies upon the Os Caude. Presently
a swelling arose, which perforated the fat, the edge of the Muscle Glutaeus,
and the Intestinum rectum. When I came to the Patient, besides the Fever I
considered the violence of the Pain, the hardness of the Tumor, its redness and
extension. And because I knew these and other symptoms must be ascribed to the
Tumor, I presently applied this Cataplasm, to promote Maturation; Rad. Alth.
Bryon. Lilior. alb. an. jss. Fol. Malv. Bismal. Violar. a. M. j. Flor. Chamaem.
M. ss. Sem. Lin. ss. Coquantur and contundantur, addendo Faenugr. Sem. Lin. a.
ij. Axung. porcin. q. s. Butyr. recent. j. Vitell. Ovi n. j. M. f. Cataplasm. I
applied it hot to the Tumor. The second day I thought it advisable to open it,
and a great quantity of foetid purulent Matter ran out. Afterward I observed
Wind and Excrements to come out at the Tumor, whence I concluded, the Gut was
perforated. I applied several things to regenerate Flesh; but to no purpose.
Therefore I was forced to Incision, in which I was obliged to cut the rest of
the Gut that was sound, the Skin, and a Musculous portion of the Gut. When the
dissection was done, because there was a grievous flux of Blood after opening
of the Haemorrhoidal Veins, I applied an ordinary Astringent to the Wound. The
next day I found less Pus than usual in the Wound. All things promised well and
so they succeeded: for he was perfectly sound. Now nothing remains to conclude
these discourses of Fistula's, but to speak somewhat of the curing of Fistula's
in the Joints. These griefs, what pains they procure to the Patients, and
troubles to the Surgeons who dress them, it is so well known to those who
have been employed in such businesses, that I need not use many words to
persuade any to believe this: experience hearing witness.

The differences of the Fistula's are these. Some are without corruption of the
Bones and Cartilages, and some have these annexed.

Again, some of these are without any Tumor of the adjacent parts, and in some
there is a remarkable swelling of the parts adjacent; so that the Skin it self
is either brawny and hard, or loose and Oedematous; and some of the Tendons of
the Muscles are foul, and corrupted very often: such Tumors often fall out,
when Fistula's happen in the Wrists and Ankles.

Thirdly, in some of these Fistula's the Joint abides firm; but in some it
becomes loose and weak by reason of the relaxation of the Membrane which covers
it, and the Ligament by which it is strengthened.

Before I come to Prognosticate of the Events, let me acquaint you with one
thing, and that is this; that if ye be called to Children or Young Persons
troubled with a Fistula, or Fistula's in the Joint or Joints, that you make
trial of the Sinus with a Mallow stalk answerable to it; for this kind of
probation is of all others less painful, and will encourage the diseased
persons to commit themselves to your care, when they perceive that you searched
the Sores so easily, hoping that your proceedings will be according to your
beginning. The small stalk of the Mallow next to the Leaf is always slimy and
flexible, and so is apt to slip into the Sinus, causing either no pain, or very
little.

As for the Presages: 1. No Fistula of the Joint, although it be without
corruption of the Cartilages or Bones, is of an easy Cure: for first by reason
of the pain, which is caused by reason of the sensibleness of the part, and the
increase of it by reason the sharp Medicaments which must be applied to remove
the Callus, symptomatical Fevers, loss of Appetite, watching, extenuation of
the Body, and at last a Hectic Fever may be procured.

2. If a Fistula of the Elbow or Knee have corruption, either of the Cartilages
or Bones, annexed, it will require long time to have it cured: for the joints
themselves being very sensible, it must be gently dressed.

3. If in Fistula's of the Wrist the bones of it, or of the back of the Hand,
be carious, you shall find the Cure to be difficult: for these Bones are very
spongy, apt to receive superfluous Humidity, and so are hard to be scaled.

4. For these same Reasons, the Bones of the Joint of the foot, and the Instep
are hard to be cured.

5. If Fistula's in the Wrist or Instep be accompanied with large and hard
Tumors of the Bands and Feet, pronounce the Cure to be uncurable: for then the
Membranes, Tendons of the Muscles, and Bones commonly are corrupt.

6. If an extenuation of the Body, or a Hectic Fever do accompany Fistula's in
the great Joints, shun the Cure: for the Indications of curing, which prescribe
drying and cooling, in drying increase these griefs. Besides this, complicate
Diseases are more hardly cured then those which are solitary.

If you shall demand of me, what course is to be taken with those who are
possessed with such incurable Fistula 's, If you be entreated of the diseased
party, or the parties friends to do your best?

I answer, that if after some trial, you perceive the party to be incurable,
you ought to move the party to suffer extirpation and dismembring of the Limb,
whether it be Foot or Arm, before he grow weak, and become unable to endure any
such operation. In young persons you may attempt this operation (for I have
adventured it with good success) but in aged and crasie persons be not too
bold; for the loss of the Radical Moisture is more easily, by Diet and
Medicaments, restored in those, then these: the other may, but these must die.

Now to come to the Topical means, which are convenient for the curing of
Pistula's in the Joints (for as concerning the Diet, and internal Medicaments,
I have spoken of them sufficiently already) you must note that you must have
good Anodyne Cataplasms to assuage pain, and good, easy, and effectual means
to remove the Callus. If you apply Mercury sublimate, or Arsenick to remove the
Callosity of Fistula's in the great Joints, you shall always cause a
symptomatical Fever, and sometimes a mortification of the part, if the party be
of a Cacochymical constitution.

As for the means which mitigate pain, I commend unto you Fallopius his
Cataplasm, which he describes in his Treatise of Ulcers, c. 17. And it is this:
Ol. Lumbric. Chamaem, and Aneth. an. ij. Furfur. flor. Chamaem. Farin. hord.
Oesypi. an. ij ss. Vini Allcgant. x. Etat. Cataplasma. Renew it every twelsth
hour.

As for the removing of the Callosity, no Medicament is comparable in parity
with the Powder of Turbith Mineral before it be washed, being mingled with
Terra Lemnia sigillata, Oriental bole, and the vomitive Vitriol; this
composition may be applied, being made up in form of a Trochisk, or mingled
with P^puleon, and applied upon a Tent. This Medicament, neither procures
extraordinary Inslammation, nor any horrible symptom.

As for the Mundification, Consolidation, and Cicatrization of any Fistula in
the Joints, after the removing of the Callus, seeing these intentions may be
compassed by the means which I have delivered to you before, I will cease to
trouble you with the Repetition of them, and so will conclude this Treatise
concerning Fistv^a's.

If in Fistula's of the Joints there be Cariosity of the Bones, I will deliver
the means to obviate this Accident, when I shall discourse of the Accidents of
Ulcers, before I make an end of this subject.

CHAP. XV.
Of an Herpes exedens.

HAving delivered unto you, what I thought pertinent of compound Ulcers without
Malignity, Method requires that I speak fully in like manner of Malign Ulcers.

Malign is that, which differing from ordinary Ulcers, is not easily cured. By
Gal. de Crisib. l. 1. c. 3. not Ulcers only, but all Diseases which have a
Malignity annexed to them, are called (...), and (...). As a mild Grief has a
mild Cause, and no horrible or extraordinary symptoms, and yields to ordinary
Medicaments; so that which is Malign has a fierce Cause, extraordinary
symptoms, and yields not to ordinary Medicaments. These Malign Ulcers do
happen, when such a (...) has possessed the ulcerate part, that it corrupts
the good nourishment which is sent to the part affected. The Aliment sent to
the part is corrupted, either by putrefaction, or a venenious quality
communicated.

First, Then the signs of a Malign Ulcer are three: First, it corrupts the part
which it invadeth, either by Putrefaction, or a Malign fretting quality.

Secondly, It causes extraordinary Symptoms, as pain and plenty of virulent
stinking Matter.

Thirdly, It yields not to ordinary Medicaments.

The differences of Malign Ulcers are these: First, these Ulcers are either
Ancient or Modern. I call these Ancient, whereof mention is made by the Ancient
Authors: those I call Modern, which were only known to late Writers: such are
those Ulcers which appear in scorbutical, and pocky persons, whereof I mean not
to speak in this Doctrine of Ulcers, because they are symptoms of the Scurvy
and Pox, which cannot be cured unless the Griefs themselves be cured. Now the
setting down of the Cure of the Diseases, will require large and particular
Treatises.

Of malign Ulcers known to the Ancients, some are less Malign, some more Malign.

Of the less Malign there are three sorts: Herpes exedens, Phagedaena and Nome.
Herpes exedens, (...) in Greek, being caused of thick and sharp Choler, it
corrodes the Skin even to the subjacent musculous Flesh. It differs from
Phagedaena, because it erodes the skin only; but Phagedaena, both the skin and
subjacent flesh. Celsus lib. 5. and c. 28. thus describes it: Herpes. fit cum
cutis exulceratione, and est sine altitudine, latus, sublividus, inaequalis
tamen, mediumque sanescit, extremis affectis, etc. That is, a Herpes is caused
when the skin is ulcerate. It is not deep, but broad, of a livid color, uneven
notwithstanding, and the middle heals, the bruns remaining sore. Wherefore if
you perceive an Ulcer to spread and cause sundry other small Ulcers, which
reach no deeper than the skin, you may pronounce it to be Herpes exedens, or
Formica ambulativa; or Corrosiva.

One thing is to be noted in the words of Celsus, that a Herpes exedens may be
of a livid color; and so with thick and corrupt choler that melancholy must be
joined, which is bred of Bilis atra, and so it must somewhat participate with a
cancerous Ulcer. And in truth such Ulcers often show themselves in old persons
about the beginning of the tails of the Muscles of the Legs; and from these a
moist, noisome and stinking virulent Matter will flow, and the Ulcer it self
will be very painful, and rebellious.

The signs then of a Formica corrosiva are these: It only corrodes the skin,
and so is not deep, but broad; uneven it is, and sometimes of a livid or leaden
color, if Melancholy caused of Bilis atra be joined with thick and putrid
choler: otherwise the brims of this Ulcer, and the parts adjacent are of a
yellowish color, bewraying the Humor, which is the material cause of this kind
of Ulcers.

As for the Prognostics: First, that Herpes exedens, which is caused only of
thick and putrid choler, is not easily cured. For First, the Body which is
troubled with such an Ulcer, is not so soon altered; for the Liver, the Gall it
self, and the Porus bilarius must be much out of frame, when they cannot make
shift to dispatch this Humor, by the passages appointed for the Evacuations of
it; to wit, by the Guts, and passages of the Urine; but suffer it to pass by
the habit of the Body by the Vessels which carry nourishment; to wit, Veins and
Arteries.

Secondly, because this Humor being altogether contrary to Nature, it causes a
(...), or ill Constitution of the part, by which the profitable nourishment
which is sent to the part, for preservation of it, is corrupted: and so not
only the part affected is defrauded of Aliment, but the parts adjacent also are
drawn to the same society of corruption.

Let this be the third Prognostic: If a sincere Herpes exedens proceeding only
of thick putrid Choler, be hardly cured, as has been proved; then if Bilis
atra be annexed, surely the cure must be much more hard; for this is a Humor,
which causes more fearful symptoms; as extreme pain, greater corrosion, and
rebellion to ordinary Medicaments: and if the Body has gotten a habit of
breeding of it; it is hard, without regeneration, to reduce it to its natural
constitution, and to hinder the provent and increase of it. Alchymists promise
much, but for the most part they prove Clouds without Rain.

The Alchymist will have the efficient and material causes of all Ulcers, to be
the superfluity of the Salt of the natural Balsame of the Body, consisting of a
due proportion of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury.

This superfluous Salt being separate from the natural Balsame by the expelling
faculty, it is turned sometimes to one, and sometimes to another part of the
body, according as it is apt no be moved, according to its thinness or
thickness, volatility or fixation.

It settling in the part, is more coagulate and calcined (the expelling faculty
not being able to expel it by the Pores of the Skin) and so it acquires a
certain corrosion, and is the cause of those Ulcers, which have no malign
quality accompanying the Salt. They will have a volatile and subtle Salt, such
as is in the Nettle, and crowfoot, to be the cause of an Erysi^elas, and Herpes
miliaris; but a thicker and more fixed Salt, such as that is of Vitriol, to be
the causes of these Ulcers which corrode the parts adjacent: such a Salt then
as is not very thick, and thoroughly fixed, they will have to be the cause of
Herpes exedens: but such a Salt as is dense and thick, and thoroughly fixed,
having some malignity, to be the efficient cause of a Phagedena and Nome. This
is their Philosophy, concerning the efficient and material causes of these
Ulcers. And in truth it does sit^ly represent to the eye of the understanding
the nature of the Humor, which dogmatical Physicians will have to be the causes
of Ulcers. It is no heresy to maintain either opinion; but he deserves both
credit and gain, who shall perform the cure of those Ulcers, which he takes in
hand. Most Patients require rather speedy and easy cure of their griefs, than
learned discourses of them. Howsoever, these discourses are requisite for you,
who meeting sometimes with scrupulous Physicians and Patients, shall be drawn
to show your Theorical as well as your Practical parts.

As for the cure, Three intentions are required to cure a Herpes exedens: The
First is, that the Humor which slows to the part be stayed. The Second is, that
the Humor which is impacted in the part, be evacuated. The Third is, the Cure
of the Ulcer it self by convenient means.

The first intention, which is the staying of the Humor from flowing to the
part affected, is performed by purging of the Body from thick choler, and Bilis
atra, if the Formica corrosiva be of a livid color. To this purpose prescribe
such a Potion: electuar. lenit. vj. pulver. sancti. j. aq. endiviae iij. Misc.
ut fiat potio. Or if the Patient be of a dainty taste, and loath Electuaries and
Powders, then such a potion as this which I will set down will be convenient:
rhab. j. fol. sen. iij. zinzib. ss. spicae ss. Infundantur ista per hor. 2. in
aq sont ferventis vj. deinde lento igne exhalent iij. ao coletur decoctum, in
quo dissolve mannae and syrupi de cichor. cum rhab. dut syrup. Augustan. an. j.
Misc. ut fiat potio. If the Body of the party troubled with the Ulcer, be
plethorick and cacochymical, it is convenient that he take a purgative
Decoction for sundry days together. I will set down such a one as a pattern;
according unto which you may frame unto your selves, others like unto it in
efficacy., rad. cichor. malvar. borag. an. j ss. polypod. querc. j. flor.
borag. bugloss. viol. an. pug. 1. sol. sen. and hermodactyl. an. ij. semin.
anisi and foenicul. dule. an. vj. rhab. vj. liquirit. jss. Infundantur
infundenda per noctem: in aq. font. fervent. lib. 8. sequente die adjectis
reliquis, coq. ad medias, ac coletur decoctum, quod aromatizetur cinam. vj.
sumat aeger mane lib. ss. ac tantundem hor. quarta pomeridiana. Between ten and
eleven a clock in the Morning, let the Patient take some broth without Bread,
or a Caudle, or Aleber^ie. These Medicaments must be ministered cold in the
Summer time, and warm in the Winter.

The Second intention in curing of Herpes exedens, was said to be the vacuation
of the Humor impacted in the part. This is effected by cathaeretical
Medicaments, or such as correct spongy flesh: they are sharper than the
strongest Mundisicatives.

In the Monuments of the Ancients, we find the Trochisk of Andron, Polyides and
Musa, exceedingly commended in such fretting and creeping Ulcers: which I will
set down both to ease you of the enquiring of them, and the better to apprehend
and understand them. The Trochisci Andronis are thus described:. malicorii. x.
alumi^, iv. vitriol. xij. myrrh. iv. thur. aristol. rot. gallar. an. viij. sal.
ar. moniac. iv. siat ex omnibus pulvis, Trochisci Polyidae are thus set down!.
malicor. vj. myrrh. viij. alumin. v. thur. iv. vitriol. iij. The Trochisci
Musae receive these things:. alum. aloes. myrrh. vitriol. an. vi. croci. iij.
malicor. iv. I should advise to calcine both the Alume and Vitriol, which enter
into those Trochisks; because they more strongly dry than those which are
uncalcined. No substance is so fit as Vnguentum pepuleum to make up the
Troch^sks; When you are to use these Trochisks; you are to beat some of them to
a subtle powder, and to mingle some of the Powder with some convenient Unguent,
taking a dram of the powder for every ounce of the Unguent: but what Unguents
are most fit you shall hear anon. These are the magistral means which the
Ancients used in curing spreading Ulcers.

The modern and neoterick Surgeons, not contented with these, have found out
other means not inferior to these: The one is Mercury precipitate, first
nobilitated by John de Vigo, and since his time much used by all famous
Surgeons. This powder being washed with Plantain and Rose Water, and mingled
with sarcotical Unguents, does admirably heal rheumatick Ulcers in tender
persons. If it being unwashed be mingled with Alume calcined, taking two drams
of it, and one dram of Alume, it is a catheretical Medicament, and fit to be
applied to foul and spreading Ulcers, such as Horpes exedens, Phagedaena, and
Nome are. The other Medicament invented by the ^ate Chemists, is the Turbith
mi^eral precipitate by the Oil of Sulphur, or Vitriol; it is now much used both
in the practice of Physic and Surgery; it is ministered with good success to
persons, infected with the Neapolitane Lues; if they have either Cephalaea
Gallica, ex^ream pain in their Heads or venere^l Ulcers. After that precipitate
and ^alcined, it is very white, and is on ^scharo^ical Medicament, far
surpassing either Mercurio sublimate or Arseniok: for it is more safe, and ^s
not so painful; besides this, it does not cause such inflammation as these do,
neither does it pro^ure so promptly symptomatical Fevers. Being washed, it is
used to work these effects which Mercury precipitate does, but much more
effectually. To cause these Medicaments to evacuate the peccant Humors out of
the parts affected, ^ou are to mingle these with Pa^acelsus his Mundificative;
taking for every ounce of the Unguent, a dram either of the Mercury
precipitate, or of the Turbith mineral washed, if the parties grieved be of a
tender constitution: or a dram of either, washed and mingled with Alumen ustum,
in that quantity as has been said, if the bodies of the persons who are
troubled with the Ulcers be firm and hard, such as laboring Men have. You are
to continue the use of these topical me^ns, until the Ulcer spread no more, and
be red, and very clean. Having the two first Indications required in curing of
Herpes exedens, the Third Indication follows; which is the cure of the Ulcer it
self.

To this effect two scopes are required: The First is to fill up the Cavity
caused by the loss of the skin. The Second is to cicatrize the Ulcer.

As for the First scope, those Medicaments are to be used which dry strongly,
yet have no corrosive faculty. Paulus Aeginot. de art. medend. lib. 4. cap. 20.
has sundry Medicaments for this grief: if you peruse the Author, and consider
the descriptions; you will esteem them but sorry ones. Tagaultius in institut.
Chirurgici^ lib. 1. de tumoribus praet. naturam, has transcribed them, whom you
may see: he has done this, for no other cause (as I suppose) than this, that he
had no better of his own. Ambrose Pa^eus, lib. 6. cap. 84. has some
Medicaments for this grief, which are not to be contemned, The First is this:.
ceruss. and tut. prepar. an. j. ol. ros. and adipis caprae an. ij. cort. pini.
ss. cer. q. s. fiat unguentum. If you add to these things some lead calcined,
Pomegranate-rinds and flowers beat to powder, the Unguent will be more
effectual. The Second is, Vnguentum enulatum cum Mercurio, which he commends as
an infallible Medicament, if to every ounce of it you add a dram of the flower
of Brimstone, you shall not miss of your purpose. He gives one good note, that
if you perceive the brims of the Ulcer more and more to be eroded, you touch
them with Aqua fortis, Oleum Vitrioli, or Sulphuris, for by these means, Sores
which seem uncurable are often healed. Hieron. Fabric. ad aquapend. part. 2.
lib. 1. cap. 28. advises to minister inwardly either Goats-milk, or the
decoction of Sarsa-parilla; and without all doubt both are good; but there is
no parity between Goatsmilk, and the decoction of Sarsa: there is no
Surgeon, who is ignorant of the faculty of Sarsa in curing all malign and
creeping Ulcers: Goats-milk may have some place, if the party be extenuate, and
a Hecttick Fever feared.

As for the local Medicaments, he commends this cerat.. succi de peto, iij.
cerae citrinae. ij. resin. pini. jss. ol. mrrtini j ss. terebinthin. j.
Bulliant ista donec consumptus sit succus tobaccae, ac fiat ceratum molle. I
will not stick to communicate with you the description of an unguent of Tobacco
which I use mine own self, neither am I ashamed to prefer it before all others
of this kind; the description whereof I have seen. Thus then it is to be made;.
axung. porcin. viij. unc. colophon. iv. cer. iij. succi de paeto lib. 1. peti
contus. man. ij. coq. baec. ad succi consumpt. tum add Gummi ele^^ vernicis
alb. terebinthin. an. ^. ac coletur unguentum. It is an ercellent incarnative
in wounds as well as Ulcers: besides this no better Mundificative can be
devised (...) tender bodies; if one dram (...) Mercury precipitate washed, or
(...) the yellow Turbith be mingled with an ounce of it. When you perceive the
Ulcers to be filled up: then skin them with this Desiccative of mine:. Sevi
damar. lb. ss. Axung. porcin. iij. Cer. ternic. colophon. an. ij. hisce (...)
igne amotis insperge calaminar. i^ vino albo ter extinct. 1. Lyth^gyr. Plumbi
calcin. Aeris usti, H^^rici rub. an. ss. fiat ceratum. The two prime
Medicaments which are set down in Antidotaries to effect this, are Desiccativum
rubrum, and Vnguentum de minio, otherwise called Vnguentum rubrum caphuretum.
Your Emplaster de Minio does not come near to these in efficacy. Let this
serve for the discerning and curing of Herpes miliaris, or, Formica ambulati^^,
or corrosiva.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Phagedaena and Nome.

BEcause Phagedaena and Nome do much resemble one the other, I will treat of
them jointly, and deliver unto you what the Grecians, the Parents of Physic,
and of all other Liberal Arts and Sciences, have delivered Methodically: As for
the Medicaments that are to be applied, I will pick ^ut the best, which either
the Ancient or the Modern Writers have ^evealed to us: neither will I conceal
from you what I have found effectual in mine own practice.

(...) then is a Greek decomination, derived from (...), which is edo, to eat:
so that (...) may be called in Latin Vlcus exedens: in English an eat^g Ulcer.

It signifies two things: First, ^t is taken for all manner of corroding
Ulcers, which seize not upon the Skin only, but upon the subjacent Flesh also:
In this sig^ification it is taken by the Ancient Physicians, who flourished
before Galen's time. Secondly, it is taken for a special kind of Ulcer by the
latter Physicians, as Galen com^ent. in aphor. 45. lib. 6. Hip^x. witnesses.
And it is fit, that in discourses and writings all things be set down
distinctly, for this much helps the Memory.

It being taken thus for a particular kind of Ulcer, it may be described an
Ulcer tumefied without putrefaction, deep and corroding the parts adjacent; In
that it is said to be an Ulcer tumefied, it is distinguished from (...), the
third kind of eating Ulcers, which corrodes the sound parts near unto it,
without any remarkable Tumor, as more at large you shall hear anon. It is said
to be deep, because it frets not only the Skin but the fleshy part also under
the Skin. And by this circumstance is distinguished from Herpes exedens: which
is an exulceration of the Skin only. So this kind of Ulcer is not without cause
called (...), or Vicus exedens, because it eats and frets the sound parts near
unto it, making them of the same condition with the diseased.

It is caused of a bilious adust Humor inclining to that Melancholic Humor,
which is superfluous and not natural; yet it is not to be thought that it is
very thick, as is that which procures a Cancer: nor so thin as that which
causes Erysipelas and Herpes. This Humor, by reason of the plentifulness of it,
fills the brims of the Ulcer, and causes a swelling to appear; but by reason of
its Malignity and Acrimony, it fre^s the parts adjacent, which are sound.
Nevertheless this Humor is without Putrefaction, which is always in the Ulcer
called (...), or Vlcus depascens, an Ulcer which feeds upon the parts adjacent
that are sound; for in Phagedaena there is erosion proceeding of a malign
quality without Putrefaction, or Corruption of the whole substance, which is
always joined with Maligrity in a (...).

Then the Pathognomonical signs of a Phagedaena are these: First, it corrodes
not the Skin only, as Herpes exedens does, but the subjacent Flesh also: The
second is this, that in Phagedaenical Ulcers the brims are tumefied. The third
is, that tho there is Erosion of the sound parts adjacent, yet there is no
Putrefaction: And by these two last signs it is distinguished from (...), Vlcus
depascens, a consuming Ulcer.

(...) in Greek, in Latin Vlcus depascens, in English a feeding or consuming
Ulcer. It is derived from (...) Depascor, I feed upon: for passing from the
diseased parts, it seizes upon the found and whole parts, and feeds upon them
by communicating unto them both Malignity and Putrefaction. It may be thus
described.

(...) is a corrosive Ulcer, without any Tumor in the brims, endued not only
with Malignity, but Putrefaction, or Corruption of the part, also feeding upon
the adjacent sound parts, and that deeply. I^ that it is termed a Corrosive
Ulcer or Malign, it agrees in this with Herpes Miliaris and Phagedaena. But
whereas it is said to be without any Tumor in the brims, I mean remarkable, and
to have Putrefaction annexed, by these two signs it is distinguished from
Ph^gedaena, or Vlcus exedens, an eating Ulcer: for so I think fit to name it;
that in denomination also it may be known from (...), Vlcus depascens, a
consuming or feeding Ulcer. Last of all where it is affirmed that it corrodes
not s^perficially only the Skin, but the subjacent fleshy parts also: as it
has this common with Phaged^na, so by this it is known from Herpes exedens;
for this cause^ exulceration only in the Skin.

But seeing there is often mention made in the Monuments of the Ancient
Physicians, of (...) and (...), of Chironical and Telephian Ulcers, as Galen,
Paulus Aegineta, and others who follow them, it will not be amiss to discourse
a little of such Ulcers; that you may know what is meant by these
denominations, and be able to answer any, if you be demanded what is meant by
these terms.

Of these Ulcers thus speaks Galen. de tumorib. praet. not. c. 13. (...),
etc. whose discourse may be thus English: Those Ulcers which consume and medd^e
with the sound parts adjacent, (...) about, corroding them; all these are
called Phagedaenic. So that Phagedaena is framed of the Ulcer and the Tumor.
Herpes in like ^inner erodes the parts about it, rests in the Skin only: but
Phagedaena extends it self as well to the subjacent parts as to the Skin. But
it is to no purpose to call Vl^ers Chironian, or Telephian. It is sufficient to
call such Ulcers (...) Malignant: that is, of an evil condition or quality. By
this passage of Galen translated by ^^e, you may gather three conclusions.

The first is, that in a Phagedana there is an Erosion not only of the Skin,
but of the fleshy ^arts subjacent also, by which it is distinguished from
Herpes exedens, or Formica Ambulativa, whereof I discoursed in the former
Chapter.

The second is, that in a Phaged^na there is a Tumor in the brims of the Ulcer,
whereas there is none in a (...), or a consuming Ulcer, called by Latin
Authors, Vlcus depascens, to distinguish it from Vlcus exedens, an eating Ulcer.

The third is, that the denominations of Chironian and Tele^^^an Ulcers, do
signify Malign Ulcers in general; but no special ^ird of Ulcer in particular.
In P^^dus Aegineta de art. medend. ^ib. 4. c. 46. bearing this inscripti^n of
Ulcers of an evil condition, which are called Chironian and Telephian by
Physicians: these ^ords are read as I have transla^ed them. Old and inveterate
Ulcers, which hardly admit skin^ing, which are named (...), ^r malign, some
call Chironian, as ^f they did require the hand of the Certaure Chiron, the
most excel^^^ in the Art of Curing; others call them Telephian, such as
Telephus was troubled with which required the helpful hand of Achilles, who
cured him. So he jumps with Galen, that these Titles were ascribed to all
malign Ulcers; but did point at no particular kind of Ulcer.

Now it cannot be amiss briefly to show, what men Chiron and Telephus were,
seeing they are so famously recorded by the Poets: They who are Scholars cannot
but be delighted, when the Studies of Youth are brought to remembrance. Chiron
then was one of the Centaurs, who were a People that inhabited the places near
to Pelion, a Hill of Thessaly. These first began to break Horses, to sight on
horseback: wherefore the neighboring People, when it first saw them, believed
them to be strange Creatures, composed and framed partly of Humane, partly of
Horses Members: O strange simplicity! this Chiron was the Son of Saturn and
Philyra. It seems that he was called Chiron, because he had a singular
dexterity in the Manual Operations of Surgery: for (...), in Greek is an
hand. He taught Aesculapius the Art of Curing: Peleus, Achilles his Father, was
his Son-in-Law, of whose Daughter Thetis he begat Achilles, so much commended
for Valor and Strength by the Heathen Poets. He taught Achilles, being his
Grandchild, Surgery, Playing upon the Cithern, and Horsemanship. The two
kinds of Centaury, the greater and the less, Centaurium majus and minus are
named of him, whereof there is great use in Practice both of Physic and
Chyrurgery. It is like, that he was fortunate in the curing of malign Ulcers,
by reason of the great Skill which he had in the knowledge of the faculty of
Plants. He lived but two 2690 years after the Creation of the World, that is,
77 years before the destruction of Troy, which fell out Anno mundi 2767. Then
2685 years are expired since famous Chrion lived. This may serve to prove the
Antiquity of Surgery. posterity for his worth named the ninth Sign of the
Zodiac Sagittarius (who rules the Thighs) from him. From whence Vngil of these
twelve Signs: Armatusque aren Chiron, and corniger hirens.
Chiron armed with Bow, and the horny Goat.


By this we may gather how Virtue and Learning were regarded in the rude and
simple Ages, which are very little esteemed in these Civil Times, wherein most
Men are given to enjoy their pleasure, which will cost them too dear, when the
general account shall be made.

Telephus was one of Hereules his Sons, who being adopted by the King of Mysia
who then reigned, after his death, succeeded him in Government. When he would
have hindered the Grecians marching toward Troy, from passing through his
Country, in Combat he was wounded by Achilles; but afterward being reconciled
to Achilles, he was cured by him; he mingled with either an Unguent or a
Cataplasm, (for Malagm^ signifies both) the rust of his Spear. And it is not
unlikely; for most Surgeons know the faculty of Crocus Martis in cicatrizing
of Rheumatick Ulcers, it drying strongly without any sharpness; unto which the
rust of old Iron washed and prepared comes very near. So Achilles made
sufficient proof of his Skill in the Art of Surgery, which he learned of his
Grandfather Chiron. Go to then, let effeminate Hind-calves despise the Art of
Surgery, which, so eminent a Person as Achilles was, was not ashamed to
practice. From Achilles Millfod is called Sideritis Achillea, Achilles his
Star-woort: and it may be that it was one of the chiefest ingredients in the
Cataplasm; surely it is an excellent healing Plant. To conclude then this
Point; malign Ulcers which are not easily cured, are called Chironia, because
Chiron was able to cure them; and Telephia, because Telephus was troubled with
such an one.

Now time calls to go forward in the handling of these corrosive Ulcers: but
before I set down the manner of Curing, the Predictions of Events which are
like to fall out in the course of Cure are first to be set down. I. Neither of
these corrosive Ulcers are of easy Cure, upon what Body soever they light; and
upon three Causes: For first, there is a (...) an ill constitution and
temperature of the part, by which the Aliment, which is sent to the part, too
it be good, is corrupted. Secondly, a fresh supply of noxious Humors is sent
most commonly to maintain the Grief. Thirdly, because the ordinary Medicaments,
which are applied with good success most commonly to other. Ulcers, in these
Ulcers are ineffectual. II. If these Ulcers light upon a Cacochymical Body, the
case is yet worse: for the Constitution of the Body must be altered before
these Griefs can be cured, which is a matter of no small difficulty. III. If
these seize upon decrepit Persons, the case is in a manner desperate: for in
such the natural Heat is weak, and the Radical Moisture almost spent: so that
great store of corrupt and saltish Humors are bred in the Bodies of such, which
being sent to the weak parts ulcerate, increase these Griefs.

The Cure is performed by three means: to wit, a convenient Diet, internal
Medicaments, and local Applications: As for the Diet, those Meats and Drinks
must be used which afford a landable Juice; whereof I have spoken before: and
in that measure that the natural Heat may be able to concoct them, that no
superfluities be bred. Besides this, Meats which are easily corrupted in the
Stomach are to be shunned, as Milkmeats, Summer-fruits, and Salt Meats: slimy
Fishes, and Swines flesh are to be shunned, because they afford no good
nourishment.

Of internal Medicaments I mean not to speak much. If a person troubled with an
ordinary Phagedaena or Nome, be of strong Constitution, and Plethorick, you may
minister unto such Hiera Diacolocynthidos Magistralis; or Pilulae aggregativae
Majores. If the party be weak, you may minister Pilulae Stomachicae: Those
which I use are these: Aloes ij. Rhab. Agar. Trochisc. an. j. Myrrhae, ij.
Mastich. j. Syrup. Augustani, q. s. ut fiat massula. dos. Pilul. 2. pond. ss. a
primo somno; vel sumat unam paulo ante coenam, alteram paulo antequam ineatur
somnus. Whether the parties be strong or weak, who are troubled with these
corrosive Ulcers, they are to use Decoctions made of Sarsaparilla, Guajacum,
Radix Chinae, Tormentil, Bistort and Comfrey Roots, with which you are to join
some Vulneraries, as Agrimony, the tops of S. John's wort, Sanicle, our Ladies
Mantle, Mountain and Garden Avens, Solomon's Seal.

Nomae of the privy parts were known to the Ancient Writers, as we may perceive
by Paulus Aegineta de art. med. lib. 40.44. sub finem. In our times they seldom
are seen to proceed from any other Cause, than impure Copulation. Such are
often seen, in the which the whole Praeputium does sometimes rot away. These
corroding Venereal Ulcers require the general Cure of the Neapolitan disease,
besides effectual Topics.

Now follows the last indication of curing these corrosive Ulcers; which is the
Application of local Medicaments. In a Phagedaena wherein there is a Tumor of
the brims, you are to apply Vnguentum populeum, and Vnguentum albion
caphuratum, mixed together in equal quantity, to them. The second thing which I
would have you to observe is this, that N^me, or Vlcus depascens, does require
stronger Topics than Phagedana, or Vlcus exedens. Mark then these Medicaments
which I have picked out of Aegineta; Caleis vivae, Vitriol. Vomit. an. ij.
Auripigment. j. fiat pulvis subtilis ex his. For a Phagedaena apply the Unguent
of Tobacco, having some of this Powder mingled with it, as ij. for an ounce of
the Unguent. If you have to do with a Nome, make a Liniment of this Powder and
Oxymel, and apply it to the Ulcer. Vitriol. albi jss. Crcci Martis, vj. Gahar.
viij. Crocus Martis well prepared far exceeds Squama ferri, the Scales of Iron.
Receive this Medicament of my description: Calc. Viv. Vitriol. aibi,
Auripigmenti an. j. Malicor. Balaustior. cornu Cervi ust. Gallar. Pumicis
calcinati, Alum. usti, rad. Aristol. rot. an. ss. Croci Martis, Plumbi
calcinati, aeris usti, an. vj. cum melle despumato fiat elect^^arium. Let me
commend unto you an A^gyptiacum, which is not the vulgar: Primo infundantur
absynthium, Carduus benedictus, Centaurium minus, Scordium, Chamaedeys,
Malicorium, Ba^at stia, Gal^e, and rad. Aristol. rot. in acct^ fortissimo:
hujus Aceti colati vij. Aerug. v. Mel. xiiij. ceq. lento igne ad unguenti
consistentiom. This Medicament is effectual in Venereal Ulcers of the Throat,
and Privy Parts, and in all sordid Ulcers.

You are to continue the Application of these Medicaments, until you see the
corrosion stayed, and the Ulcers red and well mondified. When you have
perce^ved this, incarnate the Ulcers with some of the Consolidatives before set
down by me. Last of all, ^^catrize the Sores with such Epalotical means as I
set down in the former Chapter.

But to shut up the delivery of these Ulcers, which are of the mildest sort of
the Malign, so much as concerns the knowing and curing of them; let me advise
you that you promise no suddea Cure of any Ulcer, if it has continued but one
Month: For the Bodies of the Inhabitants of this Island are for the most part
Plethorick; they will observe no good Diet, and will not be estranged from the
sacrifice of Venus. It is a strange thing to see what corrupt and ugly stuff is
covered by the Curtains of a beautiful Skin, in a number of them. I make no
doubt but many, who are least employed in practice, have had sundry Patients,
who have come to them, pretending that they were only troubled with a Pimple on
the Forehead, a red Eye, a difficulty of swallowing, shedding of the Hair,
watching in the Night time, and pains between and in the Joints: whereas indeed
those Griefs were Venereal Pustules, the Neapolitan Opthalmia, virulent Ulcer^
of the Throat, Alopecia Gallica, the Vigils of Venus, and last of all the
Pocky-Joint-Ague. It is no hard matter to those who are judicious to find out
the symptoms of that Grief, which Vigo the Father of Empiricks does affirm to
be able to bring the Accidents of all Diseases in particular, according to ^e
diversity of the Constitution of ^e Bodies upon which it seiseth. (...) then
you see any Ulcers, in what ^arts soever, more painful than the ^lution of such
an unity requires, ^at they yield not to ordinary Me^caments appointed for
Ulcers, ^en suspect that there is a latent ^alignity. Value not therefore your
^redit for a trifle, be not too ^ountiful in promises, lest they be ^equired at
your hands: suspect and pronounce in doubtful Cases ^ways the worst: for the
best will ^ve it self. Thus doing, you shall ^ing in no new practice. Many
^racticers there be, it is uncertain whether of Ignorance or Policy, who
aggravate the Grief of those who wholly commit themselves to them, that the
greater Credit and Gain may redound unto themselves, if the Persons diseased
escape, and the less blame may be laid to their charge if they die. In these
proceedings there are two excellent Teachers, Skill and Conscience: The first
is to enable, the second is to direct practice. So much I thought good to
deliver of the three mildest kinds of malign Ulcers, to wit, Herpes exedens,
Phagedaena, and Nome.

CHAP. XVII.
Of a Cancer and a cancerous Ulcer.

NOw am I to discourse of those Ulcers which are accounted most Malign, and are
so ^deed. Of these there are two ^orts, a cancerous Ulcer, and a ^ep^ous Ulcer:
Of purpose I re^erred the handling of a Cancer and a cancerous Ulcer to this
place, because it fits them best, as you may perceive anon. First then, (...)
will discourse of a cancerous Tumor, and then of a cancerous Ulcer. A cancerous
Tumor is ^alled by Galen. de tumor. praet. not. c. 12. (...), in Latin
Cancrosits Tumor; It may be but defined:

It is a Tumor proceeding of Bilis atra, round, hard, unequal, of a leaden
color, hot, very painful to the Patient, and having full Veins implanted in
the adjacent parts. For as a Crab, in Latin Cancer, has a Body and feet of a
livid color, and whatsoever it claspeth with the claws, it holds it firmly; so
this Grief is of a livid color, and so girds the part which it possesses, that
it seems to be nailed to the part, and about it the full Veins exquisitely
imitate the Feet of a Crab: and from these similitudes the Tumor has its name.

In the description the Tumor is said to proceed from Atra bilis, or
Melancholy, or Choler adust; for it signifies both: for there are two sorts of
Atra bilis: the one is caused of natural Melancholy adust: the other is caused
of yellow Choler burned, and it is much more Malign than the former, See Gal.
lib. 3. de atra bile.

There are sundry efficient causes which engender these Humors in our Bodies:
First, a strong hot distemperature of the Liver, which burns the natural
Melancholy and yellow Choler, and so hatches this Bilis atra. Secondly,
according to Gal. c. 10. lib. 2. ad Glaucon. the Spleen by reason of its
weakness and distemperature, does not draw unto it self the superfluous natural
Melancholy, and so staying long without its own proper place, it is inslamed
and burned. Thirdly, sometimes this Humor is caused of the Menstrual. Courses,
and Hemorrhoids stopped. Fourthly, very often an ill Diet breeds this Humor, as
when one uses Meats of an ill Juice, and of a thick substance and hot quality,
as Garlic, Onions, Leeks, Snails, Venison, Pease and Beans, and such like. But
there is nothing more pernicious than the immoderate use of potent and strong
Wines, such are all kinds of Sacks, and Greek Wines, which exceedingly burn the
Humors in the mass of Blood. An hot Air and perturbations of the Mind set
forward also this Humor. But seeing there are degrees of Malignity in Atra
bilis; the cancerous Tumor, or Cancer not ulcerate, is caused of the milder
sort of it; but a Cancer Ulcerate is procured of that kind which i^ most Malign.

Take heed that you imagine not any sort of Cancer to be engendered of natural
Melancholy, which G^len. de art. curat. ad Glaucon. c. 10. lib. 2. affirms to
be that part of the Blood which represents the Wire Lees, when it is made by
the liver, which is drawn by the Splece, wherewith it is nourished: for
f^persluons natural Melancholy causes only a Scirrhus. Of the material cause
of a Cancer th^^ speaks Galen. De tumor. prae^ not. c. 12. When Bilis atra
seatech it self in the flesh, if it be sharp it corrodes the adjacent flesh,
and causes an Ulcer; but if it be milder, it procures a Cancer without
ulceration. Aeginet. lib. 6. c. 45. has these words: A Cancer is a Tumor
unequal, with tumefied ^rin^s, ugly to behold, of a leaden color, indolent,
sometimes not ulcerate, which Hippocrates called (...), or hidden; sometimes
ulcerate: And seeing it has its beginning from Atra bilis for the most part it
becomes ulcerate: So he,

Where you are to note, that h^ affirms a Cancer to be indole^^ or without
pain, which is contrary both to experience and reason Celsus also, lib. 5. c.
28. seems to grant some Caucers to be without pain. For first, there is a
Solution of Unity, by reason of plentiu^ Matter stretching the parts, and
pressing the sensible parts, Secondly, there is a very hot distemperature, by
reason of the Humor, that cannot be discussed which of necessity must cause
pain. The explication of the rest o^ ^he particulars set down in the
description, shall be set down ^n the delivery of the Signs, to a^old tedious
repetition of the ^ame things.

The signs then of a cancerous Tumor are these: 1. According to Galen, lib. 14.
method. c. 9. a Can^er in the beginning is hardly discerned: for the symptoms
are but mild, and sometimes it is no bigger than a Pease, or Bean, or a
Filbert-nut. 2. It is hard, by reason of the the thickness of the Humor, which
withstandeth the ^ouch. 3. It is of a leaden color, representing the color of
the Hu^nor whereof it is bred, yea, the more Malign it is, the more livid and
black it appears. 4. The Tumor is very painful: First, because Atra bilis the
material Cause of it is hot: Secondly, because no heat can breath out, the
substance of the Cancer being so compact. 5. It is round, because the matter
being thick, is not so apt to fleet abroad. 6. It is unequal, by reason of the
ebullition of the Humor, which notwithstanding is not equally active in all
parts of the Tumor. Last of all, a Cancer bath black or livid Veins extended to
the adjacent parts: for this atrabilious Humor cannot sueat out of the Veins,
which is the cause that they appear very full.

As for the parts which a Cancer invades, tho it may breed in all parts of the
Body, yet it is most often seen in the Breasts and Matrices of Women, and in
the Lips and nose of the Face. I have seen it also in an^, and in the top of
the ^ard.

The Breasts most promptly receive this atrabilious Humor, because they are of
glandulous and loose substance. Besides, the Mammariae Veins meet with the
Vterinae under the strait Muscles of the Belly, so that the Matrix may
discharge it self of adust and secuient Melnncholick Blood by regurgitation,
which may cause a Cancer if it pass to the Dugs.

A Cancer in like manner appears very often in the Matrix by reason of the
detention of the menstruous Blood, which staying above the ordinary time is
burned. The lips also are spongy and soft, and so apt to receive Atra bilis,
the material Cause of a Cancer, Gal. de art. curat. ad Glauconem, lib. 2. c.
10. has these words: Cancerous Tumors may be in all parts of the Body, but
chiefly in the Paps of Women, which have not their purgation accerding to
Nature, Aeginet. l. 6. c. 45. says, A Cancer happens to sundry places of the
Body, but chiefly to the Matrix and Paps of Women.

As for the Predictions before Curing, receive these: 1. Although Cancers may
appear in all the Quarters of the Year, yet most commonly they show themselves
about the ending of the Summer, and during the whole time of the Harvest:
because in these Seasons Melancholy exceedingly increases, and Humors become
adust. 2. No Cancer is easily cured; for if all ulcerate Cancers be incurable,
according to Galen, c. 5. lib. de Atra bile; no cancerous Tumor can easily be
cured, it having the same efficient Cause. 3. A Cancer not ulcerate, if it has
possessed any deep cavity of the Body, as the Matrix or Anus, it is not to be
dealt withal, according to Hippoe. lib. 6, aphor. 38.

You must understand that he means the curing by excision, caustical means,
or ustion: for the Ulcer will not admit cicatrization, and so the diseased
parties live in continual pain and filthiness, and at the last die miserably.
But he forbids not the application of local means, which assuage pain and
gently mundifie. 4. Cancerous Tumors in the outward parts, and only
superficial in the beginning, may be cured according to Galen, lib. 2. c. 10.
ad Glaucon. 5. When cancerous Tumors are come to a remarkable bigness, they
only can be cured by extirpation. 6. If a Cancer not ulcerate has possessed
the Matrix, the party feels great pain in the Groins, and has often a
difficulty in making of water: If the Cancer be ulcerate, it sends out a
loathsome and cadaverous smell, the vapor whereof ascending to the Heart and
Brain, causes sometimes fainting. 7. If the afflicted party be weak, and the
cancerous Tumor be inveterate, or of a long continuance, it is not to be dealt
withal with excision, adustion, or potential cautery: only lenitives are to be
used, to procure a palliative cure: for sundry have continued even to their
decrepit old age, with a Cancer not ulcerate.

Now it is time to address my self to the setting down of the cure of a
cancerous Tumor: The means appointed for it are three, Dietetical,
Pharmaceutical, and Chirurgical.

As for the Dietetical means, a^ thick and strong Wines are to be shunned,
course Bread, Cabb^g^, and Coleworts, Cheese, old and salt flesh, old Hares,
and Venison: Watching, immoderate Labor and Grief are to be shunned; as also
all other things which thicken the Blood, and inflame the Humo^^ Let the Diet
be cooling and moistning. Barley-cream is good, and prisan, Mallow-flowers and
roots, Borage, Bugloss, Violet-flowers, Endive, Spinach, Purslain, and a^^
sorts of Sorrel in Broths are good, young Mutton, Veal, Kid, Capo^^, Pullets,
Chickens, young Leverets, Partridges: Fishes which live i^ clear and gravelly
Rivers, and poched Eggs are permitted: let the Drink be Beer or Ale of a
reasonable strength, not too new not too old: small white Wine with Sugar,
Borage, and Burnet, is be^^ of all others.

As for Phlebotomy, it has been observed, that the most conve^ent time for
bleeding is the f^ll Moon; for it miraculously stays the ebullition of the
Blood, asswages pain, and hinders the increase of the Tumor. But you may demand
of me what Veins are to be opened? I answer: If the Tumor be in the Lip, open
the Cephalica; if it be in the Breasts, open the Basilica of the Right Arm, if
it be in the Right Breast; and of the Left Arm, if it be in the Left Breast. If
the Tumor be in the Matrix or Anus, open Vena poplitis, or the Saphaena.

As for purgation, minister Hiers diacolocynthidos, or Electuarium lenitivum in
Whey; the infusion of Sena in Endive-water, and ministered with the Syrup of
Succory, with Rhubarb, is very effectual: yea iss. of Pulvis sanctus, with an
ounce of the Syrup of Damask Roses in Whey is excellent. It is not sufficient
to give these Medicaments once; but at the first they are to be ministered twice
a week, and afterward, either a day before or after every Quarter of the Moon
and Full: for so not only some part of the Humor will be drawn from the Tumor;
but new Matter also will be hindered from flowing.

Now having set down the cause of the name of a Cancer, the description of it,
the Signs, the Prognostics, and the Dietetical, and Pharmaceutical means of
curing of a Cancer not ulcerate, only the Chirurgical or Topical means remain
to be set down.

But seeing the constitution of Bodies is not uniform, and the grief it self is
of a most malign quality, variety of local Medicaments is required: I will
labor therefore to answer your expectation in this: But first of all, seeing
in a Cancer there is a double poison, as learned Heurnius upon the 36. Aphorism
of the Sixth Book notes: for the one is putrefactive, the other corrosive: If
you apply hot and moist Medicaments, which usually bring maturation in
Apostemes, you shall procure putrefaction: if you apply corrosive Medicaments,
you shall assist the other poison, and increase the Grief. Wherefore those
which repel and digest, are aptest, as Galen has noted, 14 Method, Wherefore
no emplastick Medicaments can be good; for it hinders Perspiration.

Of all things which give a consistence to juices, Rye-meal and the Flower of
Lupines are the best: for by a secret faculty they tame the fierceness of a
Cancer. To proceed then in the setting down of local means, you may apply a
Cataplasm made of the juice of Nightshade, Rye-flower, and some Vnguentum
populeum, or the juice of Comfrey with the flower of Lupines: you may use in
like manner the juice of Horse-tail, Knot-grass, Plantain, Perwinckle,
Shave-grass, Millefoil, Tapsus barbatus, Clowns all-heal, and Dracontium.

A cataplasm of Snails and ground-Ivie is excellent. If the Tumor be very
painful, apply a cataplasm of the pulp of the roots of Henbane and Hemlock,
with Rye-flower and some Oil of My^tles: or a cataplasm of the flower of
Lupines; the water of the sperm of Frogs, and the Leaves of Herb Rebert, which
is a kind of Cranes-bill, exceedingly commended by sundry. If you take ij. of
the Oil of Quinces, and one ounce of the Vinegar of Roses or Elder, and work
them in a leaden Mortar, until they become of a Leaden color; you shall have
an effectual Medicament; you may also dissolve Diapalma cum succis with Oil of
Roses, that it may be brought to the consistence of a Liniment. Goats-dung with
Honey brought to the form of an Unguent is commended: as also Radish-seed
beaten and mingled with Vinegar. Many commend a cataplasm of Raisins stoned,
Rue. and the Leaves of Nightshade. This Fabricius ab aq. pendent. commends;
Solan. hort. virg. aureae, sonchi, an. man. ij. ^^ctis in aq. and contusis.
add far. siligin. lb. i. Ol. ros. v. fiat cataplasma. The Surgeons in Italy
had, in Fabricius his time, a Medicament of green Frogs effectual against a
Cancer, and in the Gout: thus it is made; Take a good number of green Frogs,
whose Mouths sill with sweet Butter, afterward put these Frogs in an earthen
Pot well glazed, having a cover, and the bottom full of holes: place this pot
in the mouth of another earthen Pot placed in the ground; lute these well
together, and the cover of the upper Pot: then for the space of three hours,
let a gentle fire of Charcole be set about the upper Pot, to drive down all the
moisture and fat to the lower: when the pots are cold, take up the Frogs out of
the upper pot, and beat them until you feel no roughness, between your fingers:
Last of all, mingle the Fat and moisture in the lower pot, with this substance,
and keep this mixture in a clean Gallypot. Receive also this Medicament from
Parey, Lib. 6. de tumor. praet. not. c. xxx. Theriac. veter. Succi. lactuc.e
and ol. ros. an. j. Succi cancrorum ss. Vitellos ovorum induratos numero ij.
Ducantur in mortario plumbeo ad unglienti consistentiam. He also in this same
Chapter commends a thin plate of Lead anointed with Quicksilver. The Cancer is
to be dressed Morning and Evening. So much then of a cancerous Tumor, or of a
Cancer not ulcerate; now am I to deliver the cure of a Cancer ulcerate.

A cancerous Ulcer is an ugly Ulcer, having a most stinking smell, thick Lips,
and turned outward, greenish and fretted, which yields a Sanies black, or of a
d^^k yellow color, and is exceeding painful. Riolan the Father in his
Surgery, in the Second Section of Ulcers, c. 13. affirms this sanious matter
to be a strong poison. No death could be devised too cruel for such a one as
should give it to a Man.

The particulars of the definition contain the signs of a Cancer ulcerate, so
that I need not to insist longer in the explication of this point.

Of a cancerous Ulcer there are two differences, Lupus and Noli me tangere:
that is in the Thigh or Leg, this in the Face. A Cancer in other parts of the
Body has no particular denomination; but detains the general appellation, with
addition of the part affected, as a Cancer of the Breast.

One thing is to be noted, that in other Countries, if a Lupus be troublesome,
they apply the flesh of a Hen, Chicken; Pigeon, Whelp, or Kitling, out asunder,
according to the length; for so the fury of the Disease ceases, the malignity
of the Sanies is eased, and the corrosion is stayed: See Riolan and Ambrose
Parey in the places before cited.

As for the Prognostics: First, if a Cancer not ulcerate be of hard cure, an
ulcerate must be of an harder. Secondly, if the Party be weak and Feverish, the
matter is desperate.

As for the cure, the Diet, Phlebotomy and Purging, which I have set down for
the curing of a cancerous Tumor, will serve here also; wherefore this only
remains, ^o set down the local Medicaments.

This then shall be the first: Phumbi usti and loti, Tutiae and Thuris, an. v.
Absynthii i. ol. Ros. lb ss. Cerae iss. Succi solani, q. s. Ducantur in
mortario plumbeo ad unguenti consistentiam. Apply this upon Pledgets of Lint,
or sine Tow: above this, to assuage pain apply a cataplasm of the Leaves of
Succory, Marsh-mallow, and white Poppy beaten, and tempered with Oil of Roses.

The Second shall be the application of the Juice of Nightshade, out of
Tagault^us, tractat. 3. ulcer. c. 19. Moisten a double cloth in the juice of
Nightshade, and apply it to the Ulcer; then apply above this Cloth a Pledget
of Tow or Wool moistened in this same Liquor. You may keep the juices of Herbs
all the year long, by putting them in a glass, having a Faucet in the bottom,
and pouring Oil upon the juice, that it may be three inches thick above the
juice.

You may also use the juice of our English Tobacco, and those which I named in
the cure of a Cancer not ulcerate.

The distilled water of the Herbs with Camphore, applied after this manner is
effectual.

If you dissolve the Camphore first in the Spirit of Wine, it will mingle the
better with the waters: Mell is verbascini ij. pulv. Malicor. iij. ol. Nuc. j.
Misc.

This Medicament of Fallopius is excellent: ol. Ros. and Omphacini, an. vj. ol.
Myrtini and unguent. popul. an. iij. fol. Solan. and Plantag. an. man. ij.
bulliant lento lentissimo igne ad Succorum consimptionem, tum colentur:
colaturae add cerae. iiij. hac eliquaca, omnia amoveantur, ab igne. Quum adhuc
tepent, add lithargy^ vj. Cerussae, ij. Tutiae, ij. Plumbi usti ij. ss.
Ducantur in mortario plumbeo per duas horas. All these Medicaments which I have
set down, only are to stay the increase of a Cancer, and to a bate the raging
pain in those Cancers which are large and deep.

If a Cancer be but superficial, it may be eaten out with Arsenick sublimed:
The manner of the sublimation of it and use, I did show when I discoursed of
Fistula's.

A Noli me tangere in the Lip; if it has not eroded a great quantity, it may be
cured as an Hare-lip, with little deformity.

As for a Cancer in the Matrix or Anus, use this Medicament: Stercor. bubul.
lb. iiij. herb. Roberc. Plantag. Sempervivi, Hyosc. Portulac. Lactuc. End. an.
man. i. Canc. fluviat. numero 12. Contundantur omnia, ac distillentur in:
Alembico plumbeo. Imbuatur caphura ac frequenter injiciatur, aut sola aut cum
aqua spermat. ranar. As for the method of the extirpation of a Cancer, I will
reserve it to that part of Surgery which teaches the way to remove things
incovenient to Nature, called (...).

The Medicaments in the Apothecaries Shops fit for Cancers, are Vnguentum de
tutia, de lithargyr. de minio, Desiccativum rubrum. Fabricius ab aq. pendent.
de tumor. c. 3. sets down a method whereby an Emperick cured sundry Noli me
tangere's and Cancers in other places: and it is this, Vitriol. lb iss.
Auripigment. Sulphur. vivi, an. iiii. Sal. gem. iii. cum aceto fiat pasta. In
olla terrea probe lutaeta siccetur in furno. with this powder he consumed the
Cancer, but by diverse applications.

You shall know that the Cancer is quite extirpate, if laudable flesh appear,
like to the seeds of the Pomegranate, if it yield good Quittour, and no sanious
and stinking Matter: then he healed it with this Unguent: Mell. despumat. iiij.
Sevi hirein. ^imatur. chalyb. an. iss. Litharg. auri. i. Misc. Another in Essex
some years ago, in curing of Cancers, used only the green Treat and white
Vitriol, for every ounce of the Treat taking i. of the Vitriol: and by all
likelihood the Medicament of one Pain a Smith, with the which he went about to
cure Noli me tangere's, was but a Medicament composed of Arsenick, Orpiment,
unslaked Lime, Bole and sweet Butter. You see how I conceal nothing.

Hildanus Obs. 88. Cent. 3. gives a History of a cancerous Ulcer cured in an
old Woman. The Ulcer was upon the concourse of the Sagittal and Lambdoeidean
Sutures very painful, foul, foetid, unequal; the Lips were hard, and as big as
ones Fist. She was prepared by Diet, Purging, and Bleeding. He shaved off the
Hair, and cut off the exulcerate mass, and all that seemed tainted with
Malignity, to the Cranium; and because the C^nium was carious, he abrased it a
while after. Then he strewed on it some Pulvis Catagmaticus, treated it as
other wounds of the Head, cicatrized it, and she lived long after. till she was
decrepit, and then died of the Plague.

The Chemists will have Arsenical, realgarian, and orpimental substances
separated from the ratural Balsame, or composition of the Body, to be the
causes of these cancerous Tumors and Ulcers, when they settle in the parts, and
cannot be discussed: however they represent fitly the nature of a Cancer: for
as it is, so are they of a putrefactive quality. Let no man marvel, that sundry
Minerals may be in the Body, seeing we see stores in the Gall, Ridnies, and
Bladder.

For the curing of Cancers, they commend Antimony so prepared, as it does not
vomit, or trouble the Body; but either procures Sweat, or purges downward: and
indeed it is an excellent Medicament: for it changes the constitution of the
Body, and mundifies the mass of Blood.

As for Topics, use the Oil of Arsenick, or whereof Mercurius vitae is made,
mixed with Oil of Roses in due proportion, and these two have no fellows; for I
protest I have often made experiment of both. If any be desirous to know, and
make use of any thing which I have delivered, I will not be nice to impart it.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Leprosy and Leprous Ulcers.

NOw follows the Second kind of Ulcers most malign; to wit, a Leprous Ulcer.
But first of all I will discourse of the Leprosy it self, and then of the
nature of a Leprous Ulcer.

The Leprosy in Greek and Latin Tongue is called (...) from (...) scaber,
rough: for it makes the skin rough and uneven: or from (...), squama, or cortex
a scale or bark, because it sends out scales, and makes the skin rough like to
the bark of a Tree. There be two sorts of Leprosy: to wit, the Grecian and
Arabian Leprosy.

The Grecian Leprosy may be thus described: It is a Tumor with a confirmed hot
and dry distemperature of the skin, both in the outer and inner part of it,
wherein scales, like those of fishes are sent out: so that Pruritus, Scabies,
and Lepra Graecorum the Itch, Scabbiness, and the Grecian Leprosy differ only
in degrees of Tumefaction: and distemperature.

In itching there is no remarkable Tumor, neither does any thing fall away from
the Cuticula, unless it be fetched away by hard scratching. In scabbiness there
is a remarkable Tumor, and whether we scratch or no, both sanious Matter and
Scales like to the cast skin of a Snake come away. In the Grecian Leprosy,
there are greater Tumors than in scabbiness, and Bodies like unto the scales of
Fishes, fall from such as are possessed with this grief: so that Avenzoar fitly
calls scabbiness Pruritum vesicalem, a blistery or powky itching; but the
Grecian Leprosy Pruritum squamosum, a scaly itching.

The signs of this Leprosy are these: the skin is dry, rough, and full of
small knobs, which itch exceedingly, and send out bodies like to the scales of
Fishes.

The causes of it are either the external efficient causes, or the internal
material.

The external efficient, are, 1. Unwholesome Meats and Drinks.

2. Slovenliness, Sluttishness, and Filthiness. Villanovanus the Poetical
Physician has comprised these two causes learnedly in two Hexameter verses,
thus;

Illotus sudor, and inopia nobilis escae Saepe gravi scabie correptes asperat
artus. Sweat not washed away, and want of good food often do make rough the
limbs being taken with noisome scabbiness.

3. The menstrual courses, or Hemorrhoids, which were wont to flow, being
suppressed, may cause this disease.

4. Fontanels, which have long been kept open, being shut up, may procure the
same.

5. Varices, the Veins tumefied by reason of melancholic Blood, being cured,
sometimes are the causes of this grief.

The material causes are discerned by the color of the grief: for if the knobs
be of a livid or lead color, superfluous impure melancholy is the cause; if
they be white, or of a greyish color, then salt Phlegm is predominant, which
is mingled with Melancholy: and because aged persons multiply salt Phlegm, they
are often troubled with this grief.

As for the presages, let this be the first: this grief, if it be habitual, and
of a long continuance, it is not easily cured.

Secondly, if it be neglected, it may turn to the Leprosy of the Arabians.

Thirdly, the scabbiness is more contagious than this grief; for it is more
superficial, and so the contagion is more readily communicated, if any lying
with a person infected lay his skin to the others.

This Grief is cured by a convenient Diet, purgation of the Body, and local
means. The Diet must be cooling and moistning, and afford a laudable juice,
whereof I have spoken sufficiently before in several Chapters.

As for the Purgation, minister Electuarium lenitivum, or Diacatholicum, or
Manna with pulvis sanctus, or diasenna: for an example receive this
prescription, Electuarii lenitivi, diacathol. aut mannae i. pulveris sancti i.
aq. cichor. aut endiv. iij. Misc. ut fiat potio.

As for the local means: One Topic cannot be convenient for all bodies: for
some have a tender habit of Body, and some an hard and firm: for those which
have a tender, these two of Minadous will serve: lithargyr. acerrimo aceto ros.
diluti, ac siccati, semin. althae. rad. lil. alb. contus. an. ij. ol. ros.
butyr. op. an. i. succi limon ij. caphur. gr. iiij. pulverizand pulverizatis,
fiat ung. s. a.

II. Elleb. utriusque, salis petr. an. ss. unguent. ros. j. succilimon. iij.
farin. lupin. ss. fiat. unguent. s. a. If you add j. of Sulphur vivum beat to
powder, to either of these Unguents, they will be the more effectual.

This of Renodaeus antidotar. l. 5. sect. 1. cap. 9. is good: axungiae suillae
in succo scabios. saepius lotae lib. ss. rad. oxylapathi in aceto ad
putrilaginem coct. and per setaceum traject. sulpbur. vivi in succo limon.
ablut. an. i ss. unguent. popul. ss. succi rad. enul. iiss. ex omnibus probe in
mortario subactis fiat linimentum. If it be a stubborn scabbiness, or the Greek
Leprosy, use Vnguentum enulatum cum Mercurio duplicate. So much I thought good
to deliver of Pruritus, Scabies, and Lepra Graecorum, of itching, scabbiness,
and the Greek Leprosy.

Now I will proceed to the Arabian Lepra; with the which whosoever is troubled,
he is called a Lazarous person.

This grief is called by the Grecians Elaphantiasis, and that for three causes.

First, because the skin is deformed with rough wrinkles; yea the chinks being
sometimes deep, appear like furrows in a Hide, representing the skin of an
Elephant.

Secondly, because if it possess the Legs, it makes the Leprous person go
stiff, as an Elephant does.

Thirdly, because as an Elephant of all Beasts is the mightiest; so this grief
is most rebellious: so that it was called Leontiasis according to Aetius,
because it is invincible as a Lion; and because the Forehead is wrinkled like
to a Lions.

It is also called Satyriasis, and that for two causes: First, because Leprous
persons Faces represent in Figure the Faces of the Satyrs, as they are
described by Poets: for their Lips are thick, their Nose swells; wherefore in
the ridge it seems low, their Cheeks seem red, and the Tumors in the Forehead
look like horns, all which express the Face of a Satyr, feigned by the Poets.

Secondly, because in the beginning of the Disease the persons affected are
very lecherous, as the Poets feign the Satyrs to be: See Galen. lib. de cause.
morb. cap. 7. In the Introductory Book ascribed to Galen it is said, that it
was called Dracontiasis, because as the Dragon is said to be the worst of all
Serpents, so this Disease is said to be the worst of all other griefs. Amongst
us Christians it is called the grief of Lazarus.

As for the causes of the Leprosy, I will divide them into the external
efficient, and the internal material cause.

To the external efficient, I refer the continual use of Aliments apt to breed
atra bilis; and for this cause the Germans have many Lazarous persons, and
Habitations appointed for them: for thorowout the whole year they eat Cabbage
salted, much Cheese, old Butter, and Flesh dried in the Smoke, but most of all
Bacon. In like manner it is familiar to Egypt: because there they eat much
Asses flesh, and drink standing and corrupt Waters, if you except those who
inhabit places near to Nilus. ^ucretius learnedly expresses this, lib. 6. de
nature. rerum.

Est Elephas morbus qui propter flumina Nili
Gignitur, Aegypti in medio, neque praeterea usquam.
The Leprosy is a Disease which is bred by the River of Nilus, in the middle
of Egypt, and no where else.

Hence it is, that Moses threatens the disobedient Jews thus, Deuteronomy. 28. verse.
27. The Lord will smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and with the
haemorrhoids, and with the scab, and with the itch, whereof thou can not be
healed. In the Hebrew Text, it is with the Ulcer of Egypt, whereby is meant
the Leprosy; by the Scab, he means the Greek Leprosy, whereof I have spoken.
In Spain and Africa it is more common than any where else. In Provence of
France, the Delphinate, Languedock, and in Aquitane it is more frequent than in
other parts of the Country, Paraeus l. 9. cap. 6. Before the time of Pompey it
was not seen in Italy, as witnesses Plin. not. hist. l. 26. c. 1.

Secondly, the Leprosy may be taken by having carnal copulation with an
infected person, see Gordon. l. med. particul. 1. cap. 22. and Philippus
Schopsius in his Treatise of the Leprosy.

Thirdly, the Arabians, Avicen, Albucasis, and Averroes, think that if a Woman
conceive while her Courses flow, the Child will prove Leprous, but it is not
likely: for that Blood in sound Women is good, and after Conception it is
retained to nourish the Child: so that if that Blood were venomous (as some
think) no Man or Woman could be sound. Fourthly, this disease being often
hereditary; it is propagated from the Parents to their Children.

Fifthly, continual conversation with Leprous persons cannot be but very
dangerous; for if one may become Pthisical by often receiving the breath of one
who is troubled with that grief, according to Classick Authors, much more may
one be infected by receiving the Air, infected with the breath of a Leprous
person, which is most corrupt and stinking: wherefore Lazarous persons in every
well-ordered place dwell by themselves, that they infect not others; and so God
himself commanded, Levit. 13.4. and Numb. 12. 14.

The internal material cause by all is concluded to be Bilis atra. Now seeing
this Humor is caused of three several Humors altered from their natural
qualities, three sorts of Leprosy do spring.

First, it is caused of the superfluous Melancholic juice burned; this
Leprosy causes the skin to be of a ruddy black color. This kind of Leprosy
comes on but slowly, and has milder symptoms.

The Second is of yellow vitelline choler adust: This speedily corrupts the
inner parts, chiefly the Liver and Spleen, and from thence passing furiously to
the habit of the Body, produces horrible symptoms: in this kind of Leprosy
the Skin is o. a yellowish color tending to Green.

The Third is caused of salt or nitrous Phlegm burned: In this, the color is a
palish white color; the Leprosy which is caused of this Humor, is not so
flerce as the former. There be two other differences taken from the progression
of the Disease: for a Leprosy is either in the beginning, or consummate.

The signs of a Leprosy beginning, are these: The Face seems to be of a livid
reddish color, the breathing is with some difficulty, the voice seems to be
somewhat hoarse, livid spots appear in sundry parts of the Body, the Skin
begins to lose its exquisite feeling, the Urine is muddy and thick. Pliny
affirms, that it was not seen in Rome before the time of Pompey, and began
first in the Nostrils, not exceeding the bigness of a lentil, and from thence
passed to the whole body, producing spots of diverse colors, making the skin
unequal, and raising scurfs, and hard scabs.

The signs of a confirmed Leprosy are these: 1. The Skin loses altogether its
feeling, so that you may thrust a needle through it, without any offense to the
diseased party; this happens because the Humor, by reason of its thickness,
stops the Nerves, and so hinders the animal spirits from passage. Nevertheless,
the Muscles move, although sluggishly; because they have Veins and Arteries, by
whose Blood and Spirits they are fed.

2. Knobs appear in sundry parts of the Body, but chiefly in the Face, about
the Forehead; the Ears become thin, the Nose flat upward, the Lips thick.

3. The Face is of a leaden reddishness.

4. The voice becomes very hoarse, the Lungs and Windpipe being affected.

5. The Eyes become round, the thickness of the Humor bearing in the corners.

6. When the grief is consummate, Warts very often do appear thorowout the
whole body, like to hailstones, as we see in measly Hogs.

7. Levinus Lemnius affirms, that the powder of Lead calcined, will swim in the
Urine of Leprous persons, but sink in the Urine of all others.

8. They are troubled with much belching.

9. Their Sweat and Breath is most stinking, their breathing is with difficulty
and stinking. by reason of the constriction of the Breast.

10. The Hair of the Head begins to fall, that of the Beard to grow thinner,
and those of the Eyebrows and Eyelids to fall also: this falls out, because
corrupt nourishment is sent to the Hair; for if you pull out a few of their
Hairs, you shall also pull out with the roots a fleshy substance.

11. The Nostrils without are tumefied, but within they are narrow, and
ulcerate.

12. The Veins under the Tongue seem varicous, small knobs also like to
hailstones appear there.

13. The skin is unctuous, and will not admit water.

14. The skin is full of wrinkles and chops; as an Elephants skin is.

15. The Muscles of the Thumb wast.

16. If the Body, the Fingers, and Toes have stinking Ulcers, and Chops, you
need not much to doubt.

17. If you open a Vein, it will be thick, burned, seculent, and have as it
were fat upon the top, and it being strained through a cloth, leaves a greety
substance behind it.

Now it is time to address my self to the Prognostics, whereof this shall be
the first: A Leprosy in the very beginning is hardly cured; for the material
cause of it is Atra bilis: now all diseases of Bilis atra are hard to cure.

Secondly, a Leprosy consummate is altogether incurable by Art.

Now the means of curing a Leprosy beginning, are three: Dietetical,
Pharmaceutical, and Chirurgical.

As for the Diet, that which I delivered for a cancerous Tumor and Ulcer, in
the former Chapter, in this Grief is also effectual. It is fit that leprous
Persons eat of the biggest Snails dressed, as Wilks, or Perwinkles, and Frogs,
and that for a Month together; for this food does exceedingly contemperate the
Heat of the Blood: the Water also distilled off them is good to be drunk:
Rodericus Fonseca commends this Drink: Rad. Chin. j. Succi Limon. iij. aq.
Cichor. lib. vj. Infund. per diem natural. deinde coq. in B. M. per hor. iv.
vase been clauso, decoctum postquam refrixit, coletur: The same China will
serve a second time, but to the third Decoction you must have new China. The
Flesh of Vipers or Adders eaten, is good: let them be boiled in Water with some
Salt and Oil; eat both the Flesh and Broth, but the Heads, Tails and Intrails
must be taken away: the Trochisks of Vipers or Adders are good, being ministered
in Cichory Water: Poultry also fed with Paste made with the Flesh of these and
Barley flower is good, if it be used a long time; Coral and Pearl prepared,
ministered in Broths, are excellent; young Hares in March are good. Galen
commends Viper Wine, and sets down the Histories of sundry who were cured by
the use of it. And Aretaeus lib. 4. cap. 12. de signis ac causis acutorum: but
as for preparations of Vipers ministered in a confirmed Leprosy, Erast. part.
4. disput. cont. Paracel. and Palmarius lib. de Morbis contag. witness them to
be ineffectual; for they made trial of them.

The Pharmaceutical means are of two sorts: for either they are Cathartic, or
Specific. Amongst the Cathartic means, j. of the extract of black Ellebore is
excellent: the next is Purgative, or Diaphoretick Antimony: the third is the
Flowers of the Regulus, ministering gr. viij. in conserve of Roses: The fourth
is the infusion of the Glass it self, mingling with it a spoonful of the Syrup
of Violets; Mercury precipitate with gold is admirable; gr. iij. are enough for
a Dose.

As for the Specifical means, these are commended; the Decoctions of the Elm,
Larix-tree, the Roots of Tamarisk, Ceterach, Fumiterry, and Juniper Berries,
boiled as Guajacum is, and drunk for a long time; iij. of Strawberry water or
of Cuscuta, Dodder, taken Morning and Evening. Crolli^s commends j. or ij.
Spiritus Tartari in aqua conveniente, or gr. vij. of the Spirit of Salt
ministered after the same manner, gr. vj. Bezoar similiter laudatur, for it
withstands Malignity.

As for Chirurgical means, they are two; Phlebotomy, and local Applications: If
Phlebotomy be required, open the Saphaen^ about the change, or the
Haemorrhoides, but take not much Blood at a time, for leprous persons are weak.

As for the local means, they are either Baths or Liniments; this Bath is
commended. Take of Crow-foot ten handfuls, of Coltsfoot five handfuls, of
Tobacco two handfuls and a half; boil these in a sufficient quantity of
Springwater; use this Morning and Evening, until the Body yields no filth.

Of all other Liniments Rodoric. Fonsec. consult. 1. commends this. Viperas
duas, quas, nulla part rejecta, inde phialae vitreae continent. lb ij. Ol.
Veter. exponatur phiala aestivis solibus: tandem sub sinem aestat. evadet Ol.
rubrum and foetens. hoc oleo inungantur axillae, inguina, and carpi. Intus
autem exhi^eatur j. Trochisc. ex Viperis, ^el colubr. in iij. aq. Card.
Benedict. and j. Syrup. acetosit. citri, per dies xiv. To these Ulcers apply a
Liniment made of this Oil, and Goats-suet, taking equal quanties of both. We
may make an effectual Oil of our Adders to this same purpose. Cardanus used to
anoint the Spind, Joints, and Pulses of the Hands and Feet with the Fat of
Vipers, for the space of seven days in a Hot-house, and affirms, that he not
only did mitigate the Leprosy, but did cure also Consumptions of Body, and the
Pthisis it self. If you have not these Medicaments at hand, you may apply such
as I set down for the curing of a Cancer, in the former Chapter, which requires
no repetition.

CHAP. XIX.
Of abating superfluous Flesh.

HAving set down the main differences of Ulcers, and the Method and Means how
to cure ^^em, I must discourse in the like ^unner of the Accident of Ul^ers,
which may hinder the prime ^tentions of curing them, and so ^rove a let and
impediment to you (...) your proceedings.

These Accidents are taken ei^er from things familiar to Na^^re; or from things
contrary to Sature.

Things familiar to Nature hin^er the cure of Ulcers, when they ^ecline from
that which is according to Nature. From these four ^fferences of Ulcers do
arise: for (...) Ulcer is either with excrescence of superfluous Flesh, or with
cariosity of the Bone, or with the color of the part altered, or varicous.
Thus you see, that although Flesh, Bones, Veins, and color be required to the
natural Constitution of the Body; yet they may become domestic Enemies, being
altered by the unnatural temperature of the part ill affected.

First, then I will handle an Ulcer wherein superfluous flesh grows. The Flesh
it self is either soft and loose, or hard. The soft Flesh is either but
beginning to increase; or else it is much arisen. If it do only offer to
increase, then strong Desiccatives will serve, such are Galls, Terra sigillata;
Terra Lemnia, Bole Oriental, Umber, Olibanum, Aloe hepatica, the Roots of
Tormentil, Bistort, Comfrey, the Flower de Luce dried. Metallic things, or
Minerals, afford greatest variety, and are most effectual, chiefly if they be
prepared and washed; such are Crocus Martis, Calaminaris, Tutia, Aes ustum,
Lead calcined with Brimstone, the dead head of Vitriol calcined, being well
washed, Minium, Cernss, Litharge, chiefly of Gold.

As for the use of Vegetables, although these which I have named may be used in
the form of Powders, yet they are not so effectual as the Decoctions: and then
you may add to these, Plantain, Knot-grass, Shepherds Purse, Yarrow,
Horse-tail, Bark of Oak, Owlar, and Willow. If you add to the Decoctions
strained a convenient quantity, either of Alume or Roman Vitriol, you shall not
only suppress the soft and fungous flesh budding, but shall incarnate the Ulcer
also, and bring it to Cicatrization.

Receive this Decoction, which I will deliver unto you as a Pattern, according
whereto you may frame the other, having a regard of the Age, and Constitution
of the party. Rad. symph. Tormentill. gallar. an. j. fol. plant^gin. Pelygoni,
Bursae Pastoris, Millefol. equiseti an. man. ij. Rut. Sylv. si malignitas
aliqua subsit. an. man. ss. Bulitant ista in lib. xij. aq. font. ad med. ac
coletur decoctum: Decocto colato si addideritis aluminis vj. habebitis decoctum
color vinum Malvaticum referens: si vero addideritis tantundem Vitridi Romani,
decoctum nigrescet. And although the black Decoction be not pleasing to the
Eye, and stains the Clouts and Rowlers; yet it is more effectual than the
other, but chiefly in malign Ulcers. You may add to such decoctions as these
are, Sumach, Myrtleberries, red Rose leaves dried, Pomegranate-pills and
Flowers.

If you mean to use these Decoctions, moisten either Pledgets of Tow or Lint in
them, warmed and wrung; and dress the Ulcer Morning and Evening. In your
practice you shall sind such Decoctions much more effectual than either
Unguents or Emplasters.

As for the use of Minerals, if they be applied in form of a Powder, tho they
are more effectual than Vegetables, yet they procure more pains to the
Surgeon to make clean the sore, and are not so pleasing to the Patients, as
when they are applied, being reduced either to the form of an Unguent or
Emplaster.

If an Unguent be fittest, as in a hollow Ulcer, receive this as a good one:
Minii, Litharg^ auri, ceruss. an. iss. Calaminar^ aeris usti, an. j. Tutiae
iij. Caphur. iss. Ol. Ros. and Myrtin. a^^ lib. j. and iv. Cerae alb. iij. fia^
Vnguentum s. a.

If you will have for a plai^ Ulcer an Emplaster, let this be (...) Pattern
unto you: Sevi O^^ lib. ss Axung. Porci iij. O^ Myrt. ij. Cerae Alb. iv. Cal^
min. j. Litharg. auri. Aeris ust^ Tutiae, Henrici rub. an. ss. fiat Emplastrum
ex p. a.

If the proud Flesh be grown to that height, that it will not stoop to
Desiccatives, then you are to have recourse to those Medicacaments, that are
called Cathaeretica; Auferentia, which take away superfluous fungous Flesh.
These are not so hot as either escarotical, or septick Medicaments, and those
which blister: yet hot they are, and burn, tho gently: being then hot and dry
in the fourth Degree, they are of a thick and astringent substance; wherefore
such Medicaments pierce not deep, partly by reason of their thick Substance,
partly by reason of their rebated Heat; wherefore these only superficially dry
and corrode the Flesh. Neither do they cause any great pain, because their Heat
is not very intense, unless they be graduate by the admixtion of some other
things. So we see Mercury precipitate, or burnt Alume, if either of them be
applied to any sore, do cause no great pain; but if they be used being mixed,
they both cause pain, and a small eschar. Such are A^^me calcined, Shells
burned, the Powder of Hermodactyls, Asphodell, Verdigreese, but Mercury
precipitate excells, and exceeds all these: for it works with small pain, and
by Concoction thickens thin and ichorous Quittour: yea, being washed, and
mingled in small quantity with incarnative Unguents, it furthers their
Operation. Yellow Turbith M^eral exceeds it in faculty, the Oil of Vitriol or
Sulphur, whereof Turbith Mineral is precipitate, is more familiar to Nature,
and astringent, than Aqua fortis, or Aqua regis, whereof the precipitate is
made.

Two Catheretical Unguents are much used, Vnguentum Apostolorum, and Vnguentum
Aegyptiacum.

Of these two, Aegyptiacum is the strongest: In plain Ulcers I would not advise
you to use it, for it spreads, and by touching the sound part causes great
pain. It is effectual in fretting sores of the Mouth and sinuous Ulcers, being
dissolved either in decoctions, or distilled waters convenient for the kind of
sores.

As for Vnguentum Apostolorum, if it be made according to Art, it is a
Catheretical Medicament in tender Bodies; but only a Mundificative in those who
have a firm and solid constitution of Body.

It falls out many times, that the supersluous Flesh is so hard and compact,
that it contemns all Catheretical Medicaments, and cannot be abated by them. In
this course we are to have recourse to those Medicaments which are called
(...), or Putrefacientia, or rotting the part; and to those which are not named
(...) or Crustam inducentia, which leave an Eschar or Crust after they are
applied.

As for Escharotical Medicaments which are called Exedentia, or eating
Medicines, seeing they corrupt the natural Heat, they must be hot above the
third Degree, and have a thick, viscous, and terrestrial Substance, the Heat is
to be durable and permanent. And we see that Pepper, Onions, and such like, tho
they be hot above the third Degree, yet they are not caustic; and the reason
is, because although they inflame, yet because their Heat is placed in a thin
and subtle Substance, it is more easily dissolved, and at last overcome by the
natural Heat of our Bodies.

So, when Causticks are applied, notable pain is caused: First, by reason of
their extraordinary and exceeding great heat.

Secondly, because by reason of their Terrestrial Substance, they are long in
piercing through the part.

Of these same Medicaments two are most used: the Lapis infernalis, and the
white Caustic. I mean not to trouble you with the setting down of their
preparations, because they are sufficiently known unto all who have profited
any thing in the study and practice of Surgery.

Of these two the Lapis infernalis is most effectual, and works most speedily;
wherefore it is most fit for making of Fontanels, where it may be conveniently
applied to the upper part of the Member, and be hindered from spreading: but if
a Caustic Medicament be to be applied to a depending part, and when there is
fear of running, then the white Caustic is most convenient. Besides these two,
two other Escharotical Medicaments I will commend unto you.

The first is Mercury sublimate, mingled with Roman Vitriol calcined, until it
become red, and the true Terra sigillata.

The second, Turbith Mineral mingled with these same; but whilst it is white
and not washed. These do work more gently, if they be mingled with any
Narcotical or anodyne Unguent, than when they are applied to any Sore without
mixture. But Turbith Mineral far exceeds Mercury sublimate, because it is more
familiar to Nature, and does not cause such pain; besides, it is not so volatile
and piercing as the sublimate is, which in tender Bodies assaulting the Heart
it self, does cause sharp Djaries, although they be but Symptomatical.

For the suppressing of rebellious excrescent flesh in Ulcers, the second means
I appointed, were called (...), or Putrefacientia, corrupting Medicaments.
These are not so hot as those Medicaments which procure an Eschar, or Crust,
they have a more thin substance, and subtle, and hare not so much Terrestreity,
or Astriction. These do more easily pierce, and so cause not so great pain: the
pain which these Medicaments cause is pungitive, as if needles did prick being
red hot, and it quickly ceases. And as caustic Medicaments leave the part
corrupted in manner of a Crust, so these leave that which they corrupt, soft,
moist, and of a blackish color. If you will require Medicaments moist, endued
with such a faculty, have recourse to the Oil of Vitriol, the Oil of Sulphur,
Aqua Fortis, and Aqua Regis. But if you will have solid and hard Medicaments,
the^ call to aid all sorts of Arsenick, a^ the white, yellow and red, passing
under the names of Ratsbane, Orpiment, and Roses ager.

As for the Septick Vegetables, because they rather mortify the inward parts,
if they be ignorantly or maliciously ministered, than abate proud Flesh in
Ulcers, as Dryopteris, the Fern of the Oak, and Aconitum or Leopardsbane, and
such like, I will leave them to the consideration of villainous Poysoners.

But having only made mention of abating of superfluous Flesh in Ulcers, by the
Application of Topical Medicaments, you may demand of me whether this may not
be effected by Chirurgical Instruments, as actual Cauteries, and Incision
Knives and Razors? Truly hitherto I have deferred the mention of this Kind of
curing, because God of his bounty in these later times has in all faculties
revealed many things which were kept from our Forefathers. If a Patient
resolute offer himself to a skilful Surgeon to be cured, let the Surgeon,
in Gods name, in extremities use Iron and Steel: yet let me advise him not to
be too forward in three Cases. 1. If the party be of a tender Constitution, and
unwilling: for if a Surgeon do altogether urge these extremities, he may
lose his Patient, who is prompt to hearken to the Syrenian speeches of deluding
Knaves and Queans. 2. If you cannot handsomely come to the part, as if the
Ulcer be sinuous. 3. If the superfluous Flesh require not only abating, but
drying also, it being mavelous moist, then a Medicament is better than the
Instrument, because it dries more powerfully:

Now I will deliver unto you a Medicament of famous Fallopius, which is
effectual both in correcting of stubborn superfluous Flesh, and in curing of
Cancers: the description of it is this: Arsen. Crystallin. O. Citrin. an. ss.
Aristol. rot. Aerugin. j. Opij. ij. Axung. Porein. jss. Misc. ut fiat
Vnguentum. One thing I had almost let pass, to wit, the description of
Cathaeretical Lint; use this of Fallopius his description: Aq. Plantag. Ros.
Solam. an. iv. Opii, j. Medullae panis, ij. Mercur. sublimat. iv. super
Porphyritidem triti. Omnia haec commixta bulliant ad consumptionem medietatis:
deinde colentur p^r pannum crassiusculum. Fila excerpta bulliant aliquandiu in
hoc liquore, postea eximantur, siccentur, exprimantur, siccentur, ac serventur
ad usum. So much then concerning a bating of superstuous flesh in Ulcers

CHAP. XX.
Of Scaling corrupt Bones.

HAving in the last Chapter set down the Fountains from whence all the
Accidents of Ulcers do spring, and having discoursed of the manner of curing an
Ulcer, wherein there is Excrescence of superfluous Flesh, which was set down to
be the prime Accident flowing from things according to Nature, I must be
carried to the second Accident, proceeding from things according to Nature,
which is the Cariosity of the Bone.

Now seeing the Bones are the stays and props of the Body, appointed not only
for local Motion; but for the parts also which further this Action, as Muscles,
Veins, Nerves, Arteries, I am with the greater care to set down the Cure of an
Ulcer with the Cariosity of a Bone, seeing so many things of importance do
depend upon the Cure of such an Ulcer. In running over the whole course of
Surgery, I have resolved upon this first Trial, to set down only the general
Practices, which they who are judicious may apply to all Persons and parts in
special. In handling of this Accident, I will set down these four Points. 1.
The Causes which procure the Cariosity of the Bones. 2. The Signs of a corrupt
Bone. 3. The Prognostics of an Ulcer, wherein there is a Cariosity of the
Bone: And 4. Of the means which are to be used for removing of this Accident.

Now the Causes which procure the corruption of the Bones, are either external,
or internal.

The external Causes are two, to wit, too great Cold, and too great Heat: for
as too great Cold quenches the natural Heat of the Bone; so immoderate Heat, by
discussing the natural Humidity, dries and corrupts the Bones.

The internal Causes which most frequently produce this Accident, are in number
three. The first is a glutinous and superfluous Humidity, first sostning, and
then corrupting the Bone, which oftentimes causes a distortion of the Member,
and a protuberance of the Bone, which I have sundry times seen, and have noted
not to have proceeded from any Venereal Cause. Such an Humor seized upon one,
whose name was James Wilkinson, who dwelt near to me, when I practiced in the
City of Chester, and caused a bending outward of both the Shin-bones, or Ossa
tibiae: this happened to him when he was above sixty years old: neither did
this Accident either cause Nocturnal or Diurnal pain, or hinder his going.
Before this did besal him, he had a great evacuation of Blood (by reason of the
Rupture of a Vessel in his left Kidney) together with his Urine, of the which I
cured him by the Decoction of some of the Myrobalans.

The second inward Cause of the Cariosity of the Bones, is a sharp and Malign
Matter, which by touching corrupts the Bone: this happens most commonly in old
and inveterate Ulcers: the Periosteum being once eroded by the Acrimony of the
Sanies, it presently corrupts the Bone. It is no marvel that a sharp Humor is
able to corrupt Bones, in other parts of the Body, when we see the Teeth to be
hollowed by a sharp Rheum, which a File of tempered Steel does with some
difficulty raze.

The third inward Cause is an hidden and strange quality of the Humor, adverse
to the Bones, seizing not only upon some particular Bones, but upon some parts
also of these Bones: for if it did with any manifest quality corrupt the Bones,
it would first have eroded the Flesh: this being most subject to the impression
of any sretting Humor. But the Bones very often are found to be carious, when
the parts covering the Bones, as the Cuticula cutis, and Membrana carnosa are
found whole. So when Nodes invade the Citizens of Naples, they appear most
commonly in the Os frontis, or in the Vlna, or Tibia, and that between the
Joints: Who is able to give a demonstrative Reason of this Invasion? He
undoubtedly, who is able to show, why the Loadstone draws Iron, and Amber and
Jet Chaff.

The signs discovering the Cariosity of a Bone, are either Sensual, or
Intellectual.

The Sensual are in number Five.

1. Is, if the Bone appear black and fretted: Blackness is caused by the
corruption of the natural Temperature, by which it is kept always white with a
ruddy glimps, or of an Horseflesh color almost. Cariosity is caused by the
Acrimony of Humor, fretting the substance of the Bone.

2. Is, when the Bone, being felt with a Probe, does not appear smooth, but
rugged.

3. Is, if the Probe slip not, being guided into the Bone, for then the
Periosteum must be gone, and so the Bone either more or less corrupted, partly
by reason of the Air, partly by reason of the Quittour settling upon the Bone.

4. Is, if the Flesh ulcerate above the Bone appear soft and spongy, or of a
livid color, it is to be doubted that the Bone is corrupted: for when the Bone
is carious, the Flesh is made soft and corrupt, so that any one may thrust a
Probe through it, without any great annoyance to the party.

5. Is this: If a Tent or Pledget reaching to the Bone stink the next day when
it is taken out, there is just occasion offered to suspect that the Bone is
carious.

The Intellectual Signs are in number Four.

1. Is, if more Quittour flow, from the Ulcer, than the bigness of it seems to
afford.

2. Is, if thin and stinking Sanies flow from the Sore, it is probable that the
Bone is foul.

3. If an Ulcer admit skinning, and often break out again, it may not without
cause be doubted that the Bone is foul: for an Humor still flowing from the
corrupt Bone causes a new inflammation, whereby the Skin is broken a new.

4. Is this; If an Ulcer has continued a long time, and is rebellious to
proper Medicaments, it may be thought that the Bone is carious, being much
moistened, and so made soft by the Quittour: and therefore must be scaled.

As for the Prognostics of such Ulcers as are accompanied with Cariosity of
the Bone, receive these.

1. No Ulcer accompanied with Cariosity of the Bone is of easy Cure: for it
has a Mallgnity annexed to the Solution of Unity.

2. If there happen a Cariosity passing the first Table in either of the Bones
above the Eyebrows, it will be an hand matter to cicatrize it. If this be a
true Aphorism in Wounds dividing these parts, how much more true in Ulcers;
those only causing a Solution of Unity by an external Cause; but these eroding
the parts by an inten^^ Humor, which for the most part is still supplied by
some notable Distemperature of some noble part?

3. Shall be this; If any of the Vertebra's of the Spina prove foul, shun the
Cure: for first the substance of the Vertebrae being hollow, they will hardly
escape: Secondly, It is an hard matter to come to apply a Medicament unto them,
by reason of the Muscles placed above them. Thirdly, because it is a hard
matter to shun the pairs of Nerves, which spring from the tranverse Processes
of them.

Let this be Fourth; If in Ulcers of the Breast, the Sternum or Ribs be foul,
be not too forward to meddle with them; for the Acrimony of the Quittour may
easily corrode and pierce through the intercostal Muscles and the Pleura, and so
lay open to the Air the Vital Parts, which ere it be long must cause an
extinction of the natural Heat, and so death it self.

The Fifth shall be this; Ulcers in the great Joints, as the Elbows, Knees or
Ankles, wherein there is Cariosity of the Bones, with loss of the Cartilages,
are for the most part uncurable, because the pain in the Joints is great,
depriving the diseased persons of their natural rest and sleep, and so of good
digestion and concoction of their Food: besides this, they seldom fall out
alone, but bring with them a Marasm^s, or extenuation of the Body.

Having set down the Causes, Signs and Presages of the Ca^iosity of a Bone. I
am to show ^he way how the Cariosity is to be ^enoved. To perform this Task,
two things are to be done: First of all, the Bone is to be laid bare, and no
less of it than is to be scaled: Secondly, the scaling of ^t is to be procured
by convenient means.

The discovering of the Bone is ^o be procured three manner of ways; to wit, by
Incision, Exe^son, Dilatation.

As for Incision: we are not to ^se it where the Bones lie deep, and have
Muscles, Tendons, Veins and Arteries above them, as in the Thighs and Arms,
chiefly in the ^ener parts. Secondly, although ^he Bones lie not deep, if they
^are many Tendons above them, ^^e cannot use Incision safely: such ^^e the
Bones of the Metacarpi^m, or the upper distance between the Wrist and Fingers,
and the Bones of the Metapedium or Metatarsus, which are articulate with the
Toes.

Exesion is performed by potential Cauteries; as Lapis inferna^^, the white
Caustic, the Powders set down by me, where I discoursed of Fistula's and
cancerous Ulcers.

These are not to be used where many Tendons or Nerves are, lest they deprive
some parts of their motion, and cause Contusions, by reason of their great
(...) which they procure, as also symptomatical Fevers. Potential Cauteries are
most convenient, when there is Cariosity in the Cra^^am, the Vlna, or Tibia.

Dilatation; or enlarging of a narrow Sore, by stretching out the Circumference
of it, is performed by such things as swell, when they have imbibed any
Moisture, as the Roots of Gentian, the Pith of Elder, and Sponges brought close
together, either by Thread, or Melilot Emplaster.

These are fit to be used in Ulcers which possess the back of the Hand, or the
instep of the Foot. The Bone being by some of these means laid bare, I am to
show you how the Bone is to be scaled.

This is to be performed three manner of ways, to wit, by Medicaments,
Instruments, or an actual Cautery.

The Medicaments which procure the Scaling of a Bone, ought to be very drying,
and of a subtle and thin substance: for the sound Bone, being assisted and
strengthened by such drying Medicaments, sends forth of its self Flesh, which
being increased, separates the corrupt Bone from the sound.

These Desquamatory Medicaments are of three degrees.

For some are mild, as the Root of Peucedanum or Sow-fennel, Aristolochia
rotunda, the Root of Iris and Myrrh: these will serve if the Cariosity of the
Bone be but Supersicial, and the Constitution of the Party soft and tractable.

Some again are yet more drying and strong, as that Medicament of Avicenna,
which is composed of equal parts of Aristolochia rotunda, Iris, Myrrh, Aloe,
the rind of the Plant Opopanax, whereout the Gumm issues, the Pumice-stone
calcined, the refuse of Brass melted, and the Bark of the Pine Tree. All these
being beat to powder may be applied alone, or mingled with Honey. Of this
Nature also are Aqua vitae, and the root of Dracontium or Dragons. Fallopius
has two Medicaments to this purpose: the first is this, Rad. Peucedani, Iridis,
an. j. Euphorb. j. fiat ex omnibus pulvis, qui excipiatur pasta panis molli,
atque ossi corrupto applicetur. The Second is this, Rad. Peucedan. Aristol.
rotund. Opopanac. Euphorb, an. ss. Terebinthinae j. Cerae ss. Aceti j. fiat
cerat. ex p. a. These and such Medicaments are to be used, when the cariosity
is somewhat deep and the party of reasonable firm constitution of Body.

Lastly, some are strongest of all, as Euphorbium, beat to powder, Aqua vitae
having the tincture of Euphorbium, the Oil of Cloves, or Petroleum wherein some
Camphore is dissolved, Aquafortis, Aqua regis, Oil of Sulphur, and Oil of
Vitriol, and Roman Vitriol calcined. These are to be used when the cariosity is
deep, and the constitution of the diseased party stubborn and strong. When
these Medicaments are applied, the fleshy parts adjacent must be very well
defended, otherwise pain and inflammation will be caused. If the Sores be well
dressed, and these Medicaments judiciously applied, the Bones will scale within
the space of Forty days.

Sometimes the cariosity of the Bone is very deep, so that a long time will be
required for the scaling of it: wherefore in this case we must have recourse to
instruments: the chief of these instruments are the Mallet and Chissels, and
Raspatories: First then, the corrupt part of the Bone is to be knocked off with
the Mallet and Chissel until you come to the sound Bone; which you shall know,
if the Bone bleed, and appear white and firm, according to Celsus. Secondly,
the Bone is to be made even with the Raspatories, and smoothed. In this case a
Leaden Mallet is best: for it is weighty, and causes a lesser noise: this being
done, some of the aforenamed Medicaments must be applied according to the
constitution of the party; for by it you must be led.

In Ulcers of the Head it often falls out, that both tables of the Scull are
foul, so that you shall be forced to remove a great piece of the Cranium: here
you must use the Trepan and Headsaw, the use whereof shall be delivered, when I
shall set down the Cure of the wounds of the Head.

The Third way to scale Bones, I named to be the actual Cautery: of it I will
set down three documents: The First shall be, when it is to be applied? The
Second sh^^^ direct, where it shall be applied? The Third shall teach, how the
Sore is to be dressed after the application?

As for the First: it is to be applied when superfluous Humidity flows to the
Bone; this we may conjecture; First, by the moist and cold constitution of the
body of the person affected: the signs of such a constitution I delivered unto
you, when I discoursed of a waterish Tumor: whither I remit you.

Secondly, if after the application of the desquamatory Medicaments, the Bone
still appear moist and soft, not changing its color.

The Second document shall be, where it is to be applied? You may apply it
safety to the Vlna and Tibia laid bare.

Secondly, you may use the actual Cautery in those places, where dilatation
only is permitted, and not incision, or potential Cautery, as in the back of
the Hand, and instep of the Foot: but this operation you must do through a pipe
of White Iron, to save the circumjacent parts from burning.

Thirdly, you may apply the actual Cautery to the Joints: if the cartilages be
foul, and way be made. This practice Ambrose Parey used when he had dismembered
one in the joint of the Elbow: the dismembered party found great ease and
comfort by the application of it: See the History, Lib. xi. cap. xxv. What
forms of Cauteries you are to use, the sigure of the Ulcer will show you. When
the actual Cautery is applied, you are to be acquainted with the manner of
dressing of the Bone, which was the third document.

How this is to be done Guido a Cauliaco shall teach you in his own words: I
(quoth he) after the application of the Cautery, apply for the space of three
days Oil of Roses tempered with the white of an Egg, and for three other, it
mingled with the yolk of an egg; and afterward Butter with Mel rosatum, and
ever above these applications some mundificative, until the bone scale.
Afterward, I incarnate and consolidate the part with Avicen's Medicament,
which I delivered unto you amongst the Medicaments exfoliative of the second
degree. Fallopius counsels after cauterization to use Pledgets moistened in
Rosewater and the white of an Egg, to hinder inflammation for some few
dressings: then to apply to the Bone Medicaments exfoliative. Beware of the use
of an actual Cautery, if the Scull, or any of the Vertebrae of the Back be
foul, by reason of the Brain contained in the first, and the Spinalis medulla
contained in the second; which being inflamed by the heat of the actual
Cautery, will bring alienation of Mind, and Convulsions.

CHAP. XXI.
Of a discolored and varicous Ulcer.

THE two last differences of Ulcers taken from things according to nature, were
said to be an Ulcer, wherein the natural color is altered; and an Ulcer
varicous. First then I will discourse of the Ulcer, wherein the color is
altered, and then of an Ulcer varicous.

As for an Ulcer having the skin adjacent, and the substance of the part
altered; The unnatural colors which possess the part altered are most commonly
four; red, yellow, livid, and black.

The red color proceeds always from heat, causing an Inflammation.

The external efficient causes of it are superfluous hot garments, too thick
boulsters, rowlers made of Wool, or of hard and stubborn linen Cloth, the hot
season of the year, too strait ligature, the use of hot Meats and Drinks,
surfeting, venery troubling the mass of Blood, extraordinary motion of the
part, perspiration hindered by reason of the suffocation of the part, or
incunneation of the Humor, and solemn evacuations suppressed, as of the flowing
of Blood from the hemorrhoidal Veins in Men, or the menstruous Blood from the
veins of the Matrix in Women, by the error of the Surgeon, applying things
actually and potentially cold.

The material cause of this color is Blood offending: Now the Blood may offend
two manner of ways, to wit, in quality, if it be too hot or fervid; or in
quantity, if the Body be plethorick. In removing then this red color, one of
the symptoms of Inflammation, our first care must be to remove the external
efficient causes.

The Diet must be moistning and cooling, until this accident be removed:
wherefore Broths made of Chickens or Veal, wherein Sorrel, sour three leaved
Grass or Allelujah, Endive, Succory, Purslain, Lettuce, and such like have beed
boiled, are very convenient. If the diseased party delight in roasted Meat, let
him use for his Sauce Sippets with the juyces of the common and Wood Sorrel,
with a little Vinegar and Sugar.

If the season of the year be extreme hot, let the room wherein he remains be
hung with Sheets, which must be still moistened with spring water: In this case
it is good to garnish the windows with Medow-sweet, called in Latin Regi^^
prati, and Gaul called Myrtus ^^rabantica.

Let his Clothes be neither heavy, ^or heating: let the Rowlers be ^f soft
linen Cloth, and moist^ed in Rose, or Elder Vinegar ^^d fair Spring Water,
taking two ^^rts of Water and one of Vinegar: ^et the rolling be somewhat
slack, ^oly to keep the local Medica^ents to the Ulcer; for strait ligature
causes pain, pain attraction of Humors, and the attraction of ^ot Humors
Inflammation. The party must abstain from sacrificing ^o the Cyprian Dame: yea,
he must ^^andon every violent motion. If this Symptom be caused by reason ^f
the suppression of any solemn ^^acuations, as the staying of the ^^enstrual
causes in Women, or the suppressing of the Hemor^hoids in Men, the accustomed
^^owings of these are to be procu^ed again.

The menstrual Courses are to be brought down; First, by opening of the
Saphaena in what foot it is most conspicuous; and Secondly, by exhibiting the
power of Steel, either in the form of Lozenges, or of an Electuary, or infusion
in White Wind.

The Hemorrhoids must be opened by application of Leeches, and m^nistration of
Aloetical Medicaments. That Medicament, which by Paracelsus is called Elixir
proprietatis, and by others Pilulae pe^ilentiales Arabum, composed of Aloes,
Myrrh, and Saffron, are excellent. These may be taken sundry Mornings together.
But seeing these things are at large set down by those who have written of the
Practice of Physic, I have only pointed at the best Indications, which serve
for the curing of these griefs, and the rather because the speculation of them
does belong to another Faculty and Art, to wit, Physic.

If the material cause of this symptom, which is Blood, offend in quality,
being too hot, then it is to be cooled by a refrigerating Diet, which I at
large set down, when I discoursed of a Phlegmon, to which place I remit you. If
in quantity it offend, first Phlebotomy, or opening of a Vein is to be used,
and Blood drawn, as the age, constitution of the party, and nature of the grief
shall require. Secondly, the part it self is to be scarified, and either
Ventoses or Leeches to be applied, that the Blood may issue out plentifully to
discharge the part.

A livid, or leaden color in an Ulcer follows: Two causes produce a livid
color in Ulcers: the First is black Blood impacted in the part: The Second is
external cold, or defect of the natural heat.

This livid color does happen most frequently by reason of black and corrupt
Blood settled in the part: for as a bright red color under white, causes a
lively blue, or azure color, as we may see in the Veins of sound and healthful
persons; so black under white causes a livid, or a leaden color. This
accident is to be removed by scarification, and application of Cupping-glasses,
Horns, or Leeches. Afterward the scarifications are to be fomented with Oxymel
dissolved in Carduus Benedictus water.

If the lividity proceed from cold: you shall perceive it by the cold
constitution and temperature of the part. In this case you are to apply such
local Medicaments as are able to reduce the natural Heat and Complexion.
Fallopius in his Treatise de tumoribus, c. 26. de Gangraena, affords a notable
one, and a parable, which is this: Take an ordinary Turnep; and a Raddish-root
of reasonable bigness, grate or scrape these two, and add to them of powder of
Mustard Seed j. of powder of Cloves iij. of Oil of Lin-seed and Wall-nuts very
old, so much as is sufficient, and make a Poultice, which apply warm; he calls
this Cataplasm, Medicamentum optimum and divinum; A most excellent and divine
Medicament; with which he affirms himself to have cured many: so that you need
not doubt of the efficacy and certainty of it: and the Ingredients seem to
promise no less.

The last unnatural color is a black color: this may proceed either from Heat
or Cold. If it has proceeded from Heat, then an inflammation went before; if
from Cold, then lividity did precede. The first betokens Adustion; but
imperfect: so we see Wood, before it be perfectly burned, and incinerate, or
turned to ashes, to become black. And in a Carbuncle the lower part is of a
dark red, the middlemost black, and in the top thereof is a white Pustule, the
Heat beginning the Adustion in the lowermost, increasing it in the middlemost,
and perfecting the Adustion in the top: for it is the property of Fire to heat
or mount up, and to be most effectual aloft. If before blackness lividity did
appear, it is to be feared, that the part begins to be mortified at the least,
if any feeling or heat remain: if these cannot be perceived, then you may
boldly say, that a Sphace^^s or Mortification has possessed the part.

In both these Cases, first the parts are profoundly to be scarified: Secondly,
they are to be fomented with a Decoction of Wormwood, the lesser Centaury,
Scordium, Carduus Benedictus, the Flowers of Chamaemil, Melilot, and tops of
Dill boiled in a gentle Lixivium. Thirdly, fill the Incisions of the
scarifications with some of the Medicaments following, using a Feather:
Oxymell. simpl. ij. Unguent. Egypt. iij. Spirit. Vini, ij. Misceantur.
Fourthly, this Cataplasm is to be applied warm. Farin. fab. herd. and Orobi,
an. iv. Lixivii mitioris, lb. iv. coq. haec ad Cataplasmat: consistentiam; tunc
all Oxymel simpl. ij. Unguent. Aegypiaci, j. Omnia probe misceantur. Continue
the use of this Medicament, until the parts be brought to their natural
temperature and color: then proceed as has been set down, when I spoke of the
curing of a compound Ulcer.

Having set down the methodical Cures of the three first Accidents taken from
things according to Nature; to wit, of abating superfluous Flesh, removing of
the Cariosity of the Bone, and reducing the natural color to the parts, I am
to show how the fourth Accident Varices, the Tumefaction of the Veins by reason
of superfluous gross Blood, are to be cured.

This Accident is called in Latin Varix, from the similitude and likeness which
it has with the protuberances that are seen in Trees above the Bark; called
Va^ices: according to Avenzoar, lib. 2. tract. 7. c. 25. Albucasis Chirurg.
part 2. c. 93. called this affection Vitis, or the Vine, because these pass
along the parts by windings, as the Vine does: In Greek it called (...) or as
it is found in Pollux (...). It is called by Hippocrates (...), and by Aristot.
3. de histor. animal. 11. and in sundry other places.

This affection may thus be described: A Varix is a Dilatation of a Vein
causing a Tumefaction of it, with windings and tortuosity arising in one or
more parts of the Body. It is called the Dilatation of a Vein, because the
Dilatation of the Artery is called (...). This Particle [causing a
Tumefaction]. is added, to exclude Veins which are naturally big. Galen de
method. medend. lib. 14. c. 13. numbers this affection amongst the Diseases
which proceed from the Quantity increased. It may be accounted a Disease,
because the Actions of the Parts which it possesses are hindered; for if it
possess the Legs, they become extenuate, and by reason of the heaviness of the
Humor, they become slow in motion. If this affection invades the Stones, the
party becomes barren.

The Causes of it are either internal or external. According to Aristotle, the
material Cause is Blood, being impregnate with Spirit; he affirms it proceeds
from Blood, lib. 3. de histor. animal. c. 19. where he notes, that Women are
not troubled with Varices; because they turn out their superfluous Blood by
their natural Fluxes, and that they are less troubled with the Hemorrhoids in
like manner. And the this does prove true in most Women, yet there may be
sundry Women found, who both have Varices, and are subject to the Hemorrhoids.
He thinks, that the Blood in the Varices is full of Spirits; and therefore
pronounces, Sect. 6. Problem. 3. and Sect. 4. Problem. 21. that they who have
their Testicles varicous are barren, because the Spirits of Generation pass to
the Varices, and so leave the Seed unfruitful, being deprived of Spirits. But
Hippocrat. 3. de Articul. Text. 4. and 6 Aphor. 21. and Galen. 4. de compos.
Medicament. think the material cause of Varices, to be gross and flatuous
melancholic Blood: yea, both Galen and Avicen are of the opinion, that Varices
may sometimes be caused of laudable Blood, only offending in quantity, and
dilating the coats of the Veins.

The antecedent Causes are in number Four.

1. Is a melancholic and pituitous temperature: so they who have a bad Spleen,
are most subject to this Disease.

2. An hairy and an hard habit of the Body.

3. The Masculine Sex: for Women are not so frequently troubled with this
affection, because monthly they discharge all superfluous Blood, if they be
healthful: as has been said out of Aristot. 3. de Histor. Animal. c. 11. and
Sect. 10. Probl. 29.

4 Either ripe or old Age: for according to Hippoc. in Coac. praenot. they
happen not before the fourteenth year of the Age, in the Legs; although even
Children may have Varices in the Testicles. Why Eunuchs are not troubled with
Varices, Arist. Sect. 10. Problem. 29. yields a reason; because they are
deprived of Seed and Spirits. Avicen adds to these, sharp Diseases going
before: for in these the thinnest part of the Humors being spent by sweat,
insensible perspiration, and discussion procured by Art; the thicker part being
turned to some particular places, may procure Varices.

The Primitive Causes are these.

1. A thick and impure Air; because it weakens the Legs, and makes them more
apt to receive superfluous Humors. And for this cause Hippocrates affirms, that
men who dwell in the Western part, are frequently troubled with this affection,
and Ulcers in the Legs.

2. Immoderate Exercise; so we may see Footmen and Porters often to have
Varices.

3. Long standing: according to Averr. 6. collect. 2. From hence Juvenal says;
Fiet varicosus aruspex: He shall become a varicous Sooth-sayer: for they who
took upon them to find out future contingences by the flying of Birds, were
enforced often to stand a long time.

4. Thick Wine and gross Food: such are old Flesh salted, or smoaked, Pease and
Beans.

As for the Presages, let this be the first:

1. If Varices appear in those who are mad by reason of the melancholic Humor;
the Grid ceases.

2. The Varices mitigate Gibbosities, or bunching in any part of the Body: for
the Humor which causes them, is by these means averted from maintaining of them.

3. The Varices appearing either in the right or lest Testicle, help a
squeaking Voice; the Humor being turned from the Breast to the Testicles,
according to Hippocrates, in the fifth Section of his Epidemicks. This may
happen for two Causes. 1. By reason of the consent which is between the
spiritual and genital Members. 2. Because Baldness, Stutting, Lisping, and a
Squeaking Voice, according to Hippocrates in the same Book, are melancholic
affections.

4. They who never become bald, have not large Varices. And again, if in those
persons who are bald, large Varices appear, Hair will grow again, Hippoc. 6.
Aplxr. 34. and Arist. 3. de Histor. Animal. 11. But you must understand this of
the Varices of the Testicles called Hernia varicosa, The cause of this is the
consent of the Brain, and of the genital Members, which is so great, according
to Avenzoar, lib. 2. tract. 3. c. 1. that Castration impairs both Wit and
Courage. Then Humors melancholic being gathered in the Testicles, Vapors
ascend to the Head, which afford sufficient Matter for producing of Hair. And
in Women, their Courses being stopped, Vapors ascend to the Chin, from whence a
Beard does bud out. As Hippoc. 6. Epi^ Of Sect. 8. does report of P^^^^usa the
Wife of Pytheus, who got a Beard by reason of her Husbands absence from her.

5. Varices caused by reason of some grief of the Spleen, are not to be cured,
lest the diseased party fall into some melancholic Disease, according to
Avicen. 22.3. tract. 2. c. 18. for seeing the Matter is lodged in the Spleen,
and the Varices of the Legs are stopped by Cure, the Humor must be turned to
some other parts.

6. Varices are hardly cured by Medicaments, according to Avenzoar, lib. 2.
tract. 2. c. 22. Although they may be cured by Surgery without danger of
Life, according to Celsus, lib. 7. c. 22. This is true, if the Varices be
caused of too copious laudable Blood; otherwise not, for the reason before
assigned.

The Cure, which is the last Point, is performed by two Indications, to wit, by
discharging the Body of the thick and melancholic Humors, and taking away the
tumefied Veins.

The first is performed by appointing a convenient order of Diet, and
administration of fit Medicaments.

The second is performed by Surgery.

As for the Diet, gross, tough, flatuous Meats are to be shunned, as Beef,
Goats flesh, Venison, Oysters, Fishes fed in muddy Waters, old Cheese, Beans
and Pease, Lettuce, Colewort, Cabbage, and all those things which Galen forbids
in melancholic Diseases, lib. 3. de loc. affect. c. 7.

As for Phlebotomy, the Liver or Median is to be opened in the Arm directly
opposite to that Leg wherein the Hemorrhoids are; or Leeches are to be applied
to the hemorrhodal Veins, chiefly if Blood was wont to issue from them.

As for purging, Lenitives mixed with those which purge gross Humors are to be
ministered: Take this for a Pattern, Electuar. Lenitiv. vj. Pulv. Sancti j.
Syrup. de Cichor. cum Rhab. j. Misc. ut fiat potio.

The Chirurgical Cure of Varices is performed by two means, Ustion, and
Exection; Ustion is to be used when the Varix is straight, and not much
tumefied.

The manner of Ustion is this: Incise the Skin until you come to the Vein, and
separate it from the parts adjacent; then shunning the brims of the Wound,
cauterize the coat of the Vein; four inches from this Ustion do the like, and
so still, until you come to the end of the Varix. This being done, dress these
Ustions as you use to dress parts burned.

Excision is to be used when the Varix is crooked, and has windings, according
to Celsus: but in my judgment a straight Varix is better cured by Excision than
that which has windings and creeks, because it is more easily separated, and
will admit a more beautiful Cicatrix: whereas in cutting the other there must
be horrible pain, and an ugly Cicatrix must be left.

The manner of Excision is this: you are to begin at what end of the Varix you
will, and to separate the Vein from the adjacent parts, until you come to the
other end; then bind the Vein hard at each end, and cut off what remains
between the two Ligatures: this being done, the brims of the Wound are to be
brought together, and to be healed with glutinative Medicaments. Plutarch in
the life of Marius writes, that he having this Grief in both his Legs,
submitted himself to this manner of Cure; and when he had put forth one, did
constantly endure the Excision of the Varix in it, that no Man should have
doubted of his Valor; but when the Chrurgeon would have done the like in the
other Leg, Marius answered flatly, that he meant not to buy Beauty with such
pain; it is not to be thought that any in this our tender^ Age will admit
either of ^or, two operations.

If a varicous Ulcer be offered unto you, which contemns ordinary means, my
counsel is, that you take up the Varix above and below, as you do the Veins of
the Temples in inflammations of the Eyes, and open (...) between the
Deligations, that the Blood may be discharged o^ of it. This Operation any
(...) will admit, if he be not too tender.

CHAP. XXII.
Of a verminous and lousie Ulcer.

HAving delivered unto you the two last differences of Ulcers taken from things
according unto Nature, yet changed from the natural Constitution, to ^uit, of a
discolored and varicous Ulcer; now I am to set down the differences of Ulcers
taken from things alien to Nature, and Strangers. These are two; Worms and
Lice; from the first an Ulcer is called verminous; from the second, lousie. The
Worms which ^reed in Ulcers may more fitly be called Maggots, in Latin Termites
and Galbae, as those of the Guts are called (...) in Greek, or Lambrici in
Latin; as we find set down in a learned Epistle of Alexander Trallianus
entitled (...), de Lumbricis, of Worms in the Belly, translated by that famous
and learned Physician Hierymus Mercurialis, which he annexed to his Treatise
written of the Diseases of Children.

They are engendered of putrid Humors, in unclean and sordid Ulcers negligently
dressed, but most frequently in hollow, deep, and sinuous Ulcers: for in such
the Quittour is longest lodged, and the putredinal Heat is greatest. And for
this cause they are seen in Ulcers of the Ears, for the Quittour is there long
detained by reason of the windings and labyrinths of the Ear

The material cause of these Maggots for the most part is a pituitous
Excrement, as Paulus Aegineta witnesses, lib. 4. cap. 17.

The efficient cause is Heat, and that of two sorts: The one is extraneous, and
putrefactive, causing corruption of the Humors.

The other is Natural: seeing, according to the Philosopher, lib. 3. de
generat. animal. cap. 2. nothing can be produced of Putrefaction only, unless
Concoction put to its helping hand; then in a verminous one which is
preternatural, there is Putrefaction, Heat and the Ulcer it self, besides
Worms, the effects of the first two.

As for the Signs, they are three: The first is the sense of Sight, for
oftentimes they are seen, if either the cavity of the Ulcer be ample, or that
they are voided with the Quittour.

The second is the motion of them felt by the Patient: their motion is called
Motus undesus, like unto the waves of the Sea, contracting and extending it
self.

The third is a pinching pain now and then: for living they must be fed, and
their feeding must of necessity cause more or less pain.

The fourth Sign is horrible stink, by reason of great putrefaction.

When you go about to cure such an Ulcer, attempt not the taking out of the
Maggots with any Instrument, for your labor will be fruitless, and the pain of
the Patient great; and grant that you take many away with your Instrument, yet
you must leave the putredinal Heat, and the corrupt Humor, for the breeding of
more.

I wonder, that even great Authors make mention of application of the actual
Cautery in this Case: they might be born withal, if these Ulcers were plain,
and shallow; for so the superfluous Humidity might be dried, and Putrefaction
removed: but they with an unanimous consent confess, that these Maggots are
most commonly bred in sinuous and hollow Ulcers, (as has been said) and most
frequently in the Summer time, and Southerly winds blowing: and so a great heat
would be induced, and the Patient put to great pain, if they could reach to the
cavity of the Ulcer, which cannot be.

These Worms then must first be killed, and then they will issue out of the
Ulcer without any difficulty.

Those things which kill these Worms, do it either by a manifest, or hidden
quality.

They which kill them by their manifest quality must be bitter, such are
Wormwood, Southernwood, Calamint, Aloe, Fern, Bulls gall, Meal of Lupines,
Leaves of the Peach-tree, Capers, the Roots or the distilled Water of the Roots
of Couch-grass, called Gramen caninum, Horebound, Scordium, Mugwort, Centaury
the lesser, Mints. Of these you may make Decoctions, whereof you may find
sundry descriptions in the Monuments of those who have written of this Subject.
Ambrose Parcy, lib. 12. cap. 8. sets down this Medicament: Absynth. centaurij
minor. and Marrub. an. M. j. decoq. in lib. j. aq. font. ad lib. ss. decoct.
coletur: In quo. dissolve Aloes ss. Unguent. Aegyptiac. iij. He puts in the
decoction ij. of Aloe, and j. of Aegyptiacum: but who may not perceive the
quantity of these to be too great? This of Ricla^^ the Father, in his
Surgery, d^ Vlcerib. cap. 8. is excellent: Ellebor. alb. rad. cappar.
gentlan dictamni alb. an. ij. centaur. mi^nor. scord. Absynth. Marrub.
Calaminth. an. man. ss. decoq. i^ sufficient quantitate aquae fen^ ac coletur
decoctum. In lib. j. (...) laturae dissolve Mellis ij. Aegypt^aci j. Above the
Ulcer he advises to lay Vnguentum Apostol^ rum. If a Tent may reach to the
bottom, use this commended b^ Fallopius in his Treatise de Vlceribus cap. 21.
ascribed to Arch^genes, as also Ambrose Parey, (...) the place aforementioned:
Cerussae, polii montan an. ss. pic liquid. q. s. ut fiat linimentum This cannot
choose but be effectual, for the faculty of Tar is known even to Hunts-men and
Shepherds.

As for those Medicaments which kill Worms from a hidden quality in Ulcers;
they are taken either from Minerals or Vegetables.

Amongst Minerals all Waters endued with the quality of Mercury or Antimony are
effectual: wherefore you may use Aqu. Aluminis Magistralis of Fallopius, set
down by him in his Treatise of the French Pox thus, Aq. Plantag.and Ros. or
lib. 1. Alum. and Mercur. sitblmat. an. ij. Pulverizat. These are to be mingled
together, and being put into a separating Glass, half of the Water is to be
evaporated away. Fallopius counsels the Glass to be set upon a Gridiron, and
Coals to be put under: but the safest way is to have this done in a Pan, with
some Sand set upon a little Furnace. After that half is evaporated away, the
separating Glass is to stand five days, and then the clear Water is to be
poured off, and kept for (...).

It is not to be used alone, but ringled sometimes with a double, sometimes
triple, sometimes quadriple quantity of Rose, Plantain, or Night-shade-water.
These A^tions of Crocus Metallorum, precipitate, and Turbith Mineral, are
effectual: Vitriols of all sorts, Reolved in fair Spring Water, and ^^ing some
Champhore added, ^re very good: for they not only ^ill Worms, but powerfully
correct Putrefaction in Ulcers.

Amongst Vegetables which kill Worms by a hidden and unknown quality, Tobacco
carries away the bell, and not only the Juice of the green, but the decoctions
of the dry also, do effect this, being applied to the Ulcers by injection, or
moistening the Tents or Pledgets with the same. Seeing you may find this
Medicament, whose faculty and operations are certain, I will not trouble you by
setting down a rabble of uncertain toys, Vnguentum de Paeto, having some
Mercury precipitate mingled with it, is excellent in such Ulcers.

Seeing Worms in the Belly by Erosion cause Ulcers in the Guts, in so much that
Worms have often come out at the Navel and Groins, whereof you may read
memorable Histories set down by Schenkius in his third Book, Page 407. titul.
de Lumbricis, it will not be a thing impertinent to discourse briefly of them,
seeing they often tro^^ Children, and procure sometimes death.

These Worms are called in Greek (...) and (...), ferae, because they cruelly
torment the Body; in Latin Lumbrici.

The efficient cause is the temperate heat of the Guts: for intemperate heat
rather burns the Humors, than produces any thing of them.

The material Cause, is the inconcocted part of the Chyle sent away to the
small Guts from the Stomach, and left undrawn by the mesaraical Veins. This
part of the Chyle, being crude, and left in the Intestines, mixed with the
pituitous Humor, is elaborate by the temperate heat of the Guts; and the form,
which lay hid in this Matter before, is brought forth afterward by this heat;
and according to the diversity of the latent forms, sundry sorts of Worms are
bred. In the aforenamed Title of Schenkius, you may read of the stupendous
figures of Worms, set down by learned and famous Men in their Monuments, who
have seen them.

As for the differences of them: they are either ordinary, or extraordinary.

Of the ordinary there are three sorts: The First is Teretes, the round ones,
not unlike to Earthworms in Figure; but in color different: for they are
whitish.

The Second are called, Ascarides: these are like unto Worms which grow in
Cheeses, and Maggots in Flesh: they are for the most part bred in the
Intestinum rectum.

The Third kind is called Lumbricus latus, the broad Worm; and Taenia, which in
Greek is called a Swadling-band, by reason of its Figure, for it is broad and
long, and it has sundry joints. This Worm will be of a strange length. Plin.
lib. 11. not. histor. cap. 33. affirms, that some have been thirty foot in
length. Conciliator diff. 101. says, one voided such a one fifteen Foot in
length. Alexand. Benedictus, in prooem. lib. 21. Practicae, says he saw the
like. If you desire greater variety of such Histories, peruse Schenkius his
observations, lib. 3. page 412. I my self when I was in the Newry, a Town in
the North part of Ireland, being desired to visit a young Man who had a Fistula
in Perinaeo, and whose Body was exceedingly extenuate; when I had ministered a
dose of 2 gr. of Mercur. vitae to him, he voided such a Worm, tucked like a
crabtree cudgel, about the thickness of a Child's finger, he kept it in a little
pewter Basin for my coming: when he was in voiding of it, he was in great fear,
thinking that his Guts came out.

As for the signs of Worms; you shall know any one to be troubled with round
Worms by these signs: the party finds gnawing and pinching pain in the Belly,
has gnashing of the Teeth, chiefly in sleep; is troubled with a dry and
continual Cough; the Nostrils itch: wherefore Children having them, are still
picking their Nose; the Face is evil colored, the Cheeks are sometimes of a
red, sometimes of a livid color: the Eyes are hollow; the Mouth is waterish;
the Breath is strong; there is a desire to vomit; the Hicket oftentimes;
Hunger; and heaviness of the Head; Drowsiness; Convulsions; starting in the
Sleep; stretching of the Belly: an extenuation of the rest of the Body;
horrible Dreams, looseness of the Belly; ugly and stinking Excrements do fall
out. This is holden for an experiment, if water be poured upon the stomach in
the Morning, the party being fasting, he or she shall find a drawing in of the
Belly, by reason of the shrinking of the Worms, shunning cold. All these signs
are not found in every person, but some in sundry.

If Ascarides, or small Worms be bred in the Intestinum rectum, a horrible itch
troubles the party, and they are often seen in the Excrements.

If Taenia, or the long broad Worm be in the Guts, the party has an insatiable
appetite, the Body consumes, and some substance comes from it like to the seeds
of a Cucumber. The falling Sickness oftentimes proceeds from the round Worms,
but seldom from the broad and the Ascarides.

Let us now come to the presages which the diversity of Worms afford.

1. Ascarides, if they be small, they are of all sorts least dangerous, for
they are farthest from the noble parts, and are most easily killed, by
Clysters, or injections of bitter things; it is otherwise if they be big, for
then they are engendered of a worse matter.

2. The Taenia is of all others the worst, because it is biggest, and hardest
to be killed.

3. The bigger are worse than the lesser, and many more dangerous than few, and
the red are worse than the white.

4. If in the beginning of sharp diseases round worms come out alive, they
betoken pestilent diseases.

5. It is good if round Worms come out, even when the Crisis is at hand, or in
the declination of the Disease.

6. If in persons not sick, Worms come out either at the Mouth or Nose, it
betokens no harm; because this they do for lack of food.

7. If this happen in sick persons, it is an ill sign, for it argues the
malignity of the Matter, which the worms labor to shun.

8. If Worms expelled, seem to be sprinkled with Blood, it is an (...) sign;
for it shows the Guts to be ill-affected.

As for the Cure, it is performed by two Indications; the First is by killing
of them; the Second by expelling of them killed.

They are killed either by internal Medicaments, or external Applications.

The internal Medicaments are either simple or compound; the simple are either
Vegetables, or Minerals, or Animals.

The most powerful amongst the simple Vegetables are these; Corallina, the Dose
of it is j. The seeds of Tansie, and common Wormseed, the dose of them is j.
the juice of Vervain; give a spoonful, the juice of Scordium, Wormwood, the
lesser Centaury, Cardnus Benedictus, or Beer or Ale brewed with these, Garlike,
the roots of Grass.

As for compound Medicaments, let this be the first: Corali^n. lumbric.
terrest. rasurae cornu cervi, semin. Santonici, and tanaceti an. j. rad.
dictamni albi, rhabarb. agaric. trochiscat, an. ij. fiat ex. omnibus pulvis:
dos. j.

The Second shall be that Medicament, which Quacks in Germany call Panis vitae;
the composition is this, mustacei iiij. semin. santonici v. mellis puri q. s.
ut siat pasta: dos. ss. ad j.

The Medicaments taken from Minerals: Mercur. crudus, dos. ij. Mercur. dulcis,
dos. a gr. iiij. ad xx. secund. ratienem aetatis and virium. Mercur. vitae,
cujus dos. a gr. ss. ad gr. j. vitrum antimcnii, crocus metallorum, in pulvere
vel infusione.

As for external Applications, receive these as patterns:

1. Aloes hepat. ij. fellis tanrini iiij. absinthii contus. ij ss. siat
cataplasma applicandum umbilico.

2. farin. lupin. j. myrrhalces an. j. pulp. colocynth. iiij. croci j. fell.
boum j ss. aceti acerrim. ss. mise. Applicetur cuminum pultum cum fell tauri,
quod commendat Sebastian. Austrius lib. de morb. infant. morb. 42.

The efficient cause of Lice, is the natural temperate heat, mixed and
concurring with the heat putrefactive.

The material cause, is the excrements of the third concoction, or
assimilation, which are hot; but not sharp or malign. This is the opinion of
Galen, lib. 1. de compos. medicam. secund. loc. cap. 7. and Avicen. lib. 4.
fen. 7. tractat. 5. cap. 26. That you may the better understand this opinion,
you must understand, that when Blood is turned to the nourishment of the parts,
diverse excrements are produced; of which some are discharged by insensible
Perspiration, some by Sweat, some cleave without to the Skin, as the Morphew
and the filth which cleave to the soles of the Feet, called Strigmenta; and
scales in the Head and other parts: some stay within the Cuticula, and these
are either sharp and of a malign quality, and these cause shedding of the Hair;
or they are destitute of both these qualities, and they produce Lice.

The disserences of these Lice are two: for some are most commonly without the
Cuticula, and some within the Cuticula; of those that are without, some are
familiar as the common sort; some are called (...), feri, wild and cruel ones.

As for the ordinary and familiar, most commonly in Boys and Girls, they swarm
in Ulcers in the Neck below the Suture Lambdoides: but sometimes, and in some
persons, they possess the distance between the Cuticula and the Cutis,
divelling and separating the one from the other. If one will know what store of
these movables may issue out of the Cuticula of one person, let him read
Amatus Lusitanus cent. 3. curat. 58. and schol. ad curationem eandem; where he
reports, that one of good note in Lisbon, called Tabora, was so troubled with
them, that two Negroes had enough to discharge him of them, and to carry them
to the Sea; and at last they procured his death.

The (...), or feri, Crab-lice, are most commonly engendered in the Armpits,
and in the Forest of Venus in nasty Men and Women.

These which are always found under the Cuticula, are called Sirones, unknown
to the Grecian Physicians: they draw a trench a^ Moles do in the Earth, under
the Cuticula, leaving Pustules behind them, as they march: their seat (when
they rest) is easily discerned at the end of the Trench, where when the
Cuticula is opened, they may with the point of a sharp pin or needle be taken
out: they resemble Nits in Cheese.

As for the Prognostics, 1. They who are troubled with any kind of Lice are
nasty persons.

2. In an Hectic Fever, they show that one is entered into the third degree of
it, and so is incurable.

3. In persons not diseased, if they abound, you may advise them to keep their
hands from their Mouth, and to labor to be cleanly.

When Lice swarm over the whole Body, the disease is called (...), a pediculis,
from Lice.

Three Intentions are required for the cure of them: Phlebotomie, Purgation,
and local Applications.

As for Phlebotomie, the Sex, Age, Constitution of the party, and Strength,
with the rest of the Indictions are to be observed.

When you purge, use rather Miterals than Vegetables, because they more
strongly evacuate, and are of a more subtle, durable, and penetrating Faculty.
These same will serve to hinder the increase of these, which I set down as
powerful to kill Worms.

As for local Applications, Amatus Lusitanus in the place afore^^med, affords
two: the one is a medicate Vinegar; the other a Liniment: The description of
the Vinegar is this: Lupin. amar. pug. iij. Staph. agriae pug. ij. Let these be
boised in a sufficient quantity of Vinegar, with it moisten the whole Body. The
Liniment is thus made: Staph. agr. part. 2. Sandarach. Gran. part. 1. salis
petrae partem dimidiam, postquam ista fuere infusa in Olei Raphanini part. 2.
and Aceti acerrimi part. 3. fiat linimentum, quod illinatur toti corpori.
Paulus Aegineta affirms, that he found good success in the application of Oil
and Vinegar.

As for Crab-lice, the waiting Maids of Venus rest contented with the
application of an Unguent made of sweet Soap and Quicksilver. If any one be
desirous to know more of the mystery of these movables. I will advise him to
repair to the Pilgrims of the tribe of Gad, in the Summer time to be found by
Hedges, and in Barns. If any be desirous to read a learned and Philosophical
discourse of this Subject, let them have recourse to Minadous, lib. 2. c. 9. de
turpitudinibus.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Ulcers of the Hairy Sealp.

SEeing I have set down the general Doctrine of Ulcers, sufficient to instruct
any one, how every Ulcer in particular parts is to be cured; yet seeing some
Ulcers in these parts require some special consideration, I will run through
them, and not omit any thing which shall shall seem material. I will begin at
the Ulcers of the Head, partly because some of them are incurable, and that it
is necessary that you know which be such; partly because it were a foul shame
that Women should go beyond a Surgeon in this business, who confidently take
upon them the cure of these Ulcers.

Ulcers of the Head are of two forts: for some are moist, and some are dry.

The moist are two, Achor and Favus. These dispositions of the Head are called
by the Arabians, Sahafati, by Avicen. 7.4. tract. 3. c. 1. Serap. lib. 1.
tract. 1. c. 3. Avenzoar, lib. 1. tract. 1. c. 7. and they are nothing else but
small ulcerate Tumors of the whole skin of the Head, caused by sharp
excrementitious Humors. All small Tumors, in Latin, Tubercula, by the Arabians
are called Bothor. So then as the Cuticula, or the scarfskin, is the seat of
Pthiriasis or the Lousie Malady, so the place of these griefs is the whole
Skin, both the Cutioula, and the Cutis.

The material cause is a sharp excrementitious Humor.

Now sharp Humors are of two sorts: for some are sharp of their own nature, as
Choler: and some by accident. By accident, Humors may become sharp two manner
of ways. First, by exustion and putrefaction, as Bilis atra, and Melancholy not
natural but excrementitious. Secondly, by admistion of a sharp Humor. These
ulcerous Tumors of the Head may be caused not only of simple sharp Humors of
their own nature, but also of Humors made sharp by accident.

The Chemist will have a Vitriolick Salt to be the material cause of these
Ulcers. See Joan. Faler. Chirurgiae Spagyricae, c. xv. Acber so called
according to Alex. Trallianus, lib. 1. c. 8. because from it a sanious Quittour
called (...) does flow. Galen in his book of Tumors thus discourses of it;
Acher also is a small Ulcer in the skin of the Head; you may think that it is
caused of a salt and nitrous Phlegm; out of it flows a sanious Matter, which
is not altogether waterish, nor so viscous and thick as Honey, which appears in
those Vleers which are called Favi^ for in these there is a certain Tumor, and
sundry holes, out of which flows Metter like unto Honey. He also in his Lib.
1. de compos. Pharmacorum secund. loc. affirms the holes in this Tumor to be
less than those are which are called Favi, and that out of them flows a thin
Humor with some clamminess. Oribas. lib. 4. ad Eunap. c. 4. thus speaks: Achor
is seated in the skin of the Head, and has but small boles, out of which a
thin and reasonable viscous Sanies does flow. That affection which is called
Favus is like to this; but it has greater holes, which contain a matter like
to Honey. Trallianus lib. 1. c. 9. subscribes to these in these words: We must
know also that Cerion, ( which is Favus in Latin) is a grief like to Achor,
yet differing in bigness; for the holes out of which to Humor issues, represent
the Honeycomb: wherefore by the Ancients it was called (...). The like has
Paulus Aegineta, lib. 3. c. 3.

So that Achor differs in three points from Favus: For First, in it the Tumor
is less: Secondly, in it the holes are less: And Thirdly, the holes in a Favus
are conspicuous; but in Achor not. Aetius lib. 6. c. 68. has these words,
Achor is seated in the skin of the Head, and has but small holes, out of which
a thin and viscous Sanies does flow. The grief called (...) or Favus, is like
to this, wherein there are large holes, out of which issues a Matter thick,
like unto that which is contained in Honey-combs: wherefore it is called (...).
As for Favus, (...) in Greek, Actuar. lib. 2. de dignosc. morb. c. 5. thus
describes it: Small Ulcers arise in the Head thick, and red like little dugs,
of which, that which is called (...) has but small holes, which sends out a
clammy Sanies; but (...) or Favus has greater holes, which contain an Himor
like to Honey.

Out of these passages, which have been alleged out of those ancient and
learned Authors, these descriptions of these two Ulcers may be gathered: Achor
is an ulcerous Tumor of the skin of the Head, red and dug-like, having small
holes, out of which issues a thin and viscous Sanies. Favus is the like Ulcer;
yet wherein the holes are larger, containing an Humor in thickness resembling
Honey, from whence it has its name.

The primitive causes are in number two: corrupt nourishment and contagion: of
the first I have discoursed heretofore; of the second there is doubt to be
made: for it may be daily seen, that these griefs are communicated by contact
and frequent conversation.

The material cause is a sharp and fretting Humor, viscous in both these
Ulcers, yet thinner in an Achor, than it is in that which is called Favus.
Galen and Aegine^a in the places afore-cited, affirm it to be a salt and
nitrous Phlegm. The Chemists affirm them to proceed from the vitriolick salt of
the lesser world, or Man.

The cause conjunct is the same humor impacted in the skin of the Head.

The signs of these two are these: First, in both these Tumors there is an
itching and a Tumor. Secondly, holes appear in both, but in an Achor less, in a
Favus greater. And although Lice are often seen in both; yet it is proper for
Favus to have scales.

As for the Prognostics receive these.

1. Young persons are most subject to these griefs, and amongst these Children
most frequently: The causes of this may be two. First, because they may have
received many impurities in the Mothers womb, which when they are come to the
light, the natural heat increasing, they labor to expel; or it may happen by
reason of the corrupt Milk of the Nurse, who uses an ill Diet.

2. These Ulcers, if they have continued long, and have much altered and
corroded the Skin, when they are cured, they leave behind them baldness of the
parts affected.

3. These griefs free Children from the Falling Sickness, according to
Hippocrates, Lib. de sacro morbo, Avicen, lib. 1. 3. c. de Epilepsia. For the
Humor which might cause this disease, is sent from the inner to the outer parts.

4. If these griefs be hereditary, they hardly can be cured: feeing this is
true in all other Maladies, how much more certain, when to the Humor a
malignity is joined, as in these, as all must confess?

The means which are appointed for the cure of these griefs are of two forts,
Physical and Chirurgical.

The Physical are three; A convenient order of Diet, Phlebotomy and Purgation.

As for the Diet, that is most fit which was set down in the Chapter delivered
concerning the cure of the Leprosi^^ for by some this is accounted a particular
Leprosy. All surfeiting, strong and sweet Wines; sharp, salt, and fried Meats
are to be shunned; and such as afford a gross impure juice, as hard Eggs,
Fishes living in muddy waters: Purslain, according to Avenzoar, exceedingly
furthers these griefs.

As for Phlebotomy, two Indications may induce you to use this: First, a
Plethora of the whole body: Secondly, much corrupt Blood settled in the vessels
of the Head. If there be a fullness in the whole body, then it is fit to open
the Medians of both the Arms: it matters not much at which you begin: Let some
days pass between the opening of the one and the other. Let the strength, age,
time of the year, and the like circumstances show you what quantity of Blood is
to be drawn. If much impure Blood be congested in the Head, open the Cephalica,
the Veins under the Tongue, the Venafrontis, yea, and the Arteries of the
Temples; for they powerfully derive corrupt Blood and foul Spirits from the
Head.

As for Purgation: if this must be general, then no Medicament is better than
Confectio Hamech, or Hiera Diacolocynthidos, with Syrup of Roses solutive with
Agarick in Betony, Eyebright, Strawberry, Cowslip, or water of Black Cherries.
Receive this description as a pattern: Confect. Hamech, aut Hier. Diacolocynth.
iiij. Pulv. sancti ij. Pulv. Holland. j. Syrup. ros. solut. cum Agaric. j. Aq.
praedict. iij. Misc ut fiat potio. If the party affect Pills, these, or such
like you shall find very effectual: Pilul. aurear. and aggregat. an j.
Trochiscor. Alhand. pultorum gr. vij. spirit. Vitriol. gutt. 5. Formentur
pilul. j. quae deaurentur. These purgative Medicaments are to be ministered once
every week, until the party be cured.

If you go about particularly to purge the Head, use Sternutatories made of
white Hellebore, and the best and strongest Tobacco, with a little of the
powder of the seeds of sweet Majoran and Lavander; or use Gargarisms: This
water drawn by a Quill into the Nostrils, which I will set down, is very
effectual: Pulv. Lap. mag^et. and calamin. an. ij. Virid. aeris and Euphorb. an
gr. vj. Lap. hamatit. j. Succini albi ss. Aq. major. j. Misceantur. Let this
Medicament be kept in a Glass, and drawn into the Nostrils every Morning, or
every other Morning, at the Patient is able to endure.

The Chirurgical means are the artificial dressings of the Ulcers with local
Medicaments. To attain to this, two things are to be noted: The First is, what
Meditaments are to be applied. As for the qualities of the Medicaments, they
ought to be astringent and repelling: when I discoursed of Tumors, I set down
an ample catalogue of them, whither I send you.

But seeing some magistral compositions are required in the cure of these
griefs, which often prove very obstinate and stubborn, I will not leave you
unfurnished, but will deliver unto you some which are very effectual. The First
is this of mine own: Butyri recent. lb ss. Axung. porc. iiij. ol. Scorpion. ij.
Sulph. vivi. Helleb. alb. and nigri. Rad. Enul. pulveriz. an. ss. Calcis vivae
iij. Mercur. cr^di jss. Misc. ut fiat linimentum. The second is that of
Gordonius, described by Renodaeus, Dispensator. med. l. 5. sect. 1. thus:
Elleb. alb. and nigr. Sulphur. viv. Auripig. Litharg. Calc. viv. Alum. Gallar.
Fulig. Ciner. Clavellat. an. ss;. Mercur. and virid. aer. an ij. pulveriz. and
pulv. coq. in Succ. Botrag. Scabios. Fumar. Oxylap. and Aceti, an. iij. ad
Succorum consumpt. deinde addantur Ol. veter. lb j, Picis liquid. ss. Cer.
liquat. q. s. ut fiat linimentum. I have made trial of it, and have found it
effectual. If you but consider the ingredients, you cannot but allow of it. The
Author commends it in a scald Head, in all manner of Scabs, and in Malum
mortuum it self.

When you are to apply these Unguents, which was the Second point of the
Chirurgical means: First, you are to mark whether the roots of the Hairs be
corrupt or no; for if the roots be corrupt, they must be pulled out: you shall
know this by pulling out of a few, and observing the roots: for if the roots be
thicker than ordinary, and moist, you may be assured that they are corrupt:
they are to be pulled out in Children, that you may the better apply your
Topics: In aged persons, not only to this end, but to open the Skin also, and
to make it more perspirable, that the corrupt Humors may be the more easily
corrected and spent.

The Hairs are readily pulled out, by application of an Emplaster of red Wax
new made, drawn upon Leather, and lying to the Ulcers twelve hours. Secondly,
above the Unguents you are to apply Sparadraps made only of Wax, to save the
Unguents, and keep them to the Sores without much waste. Thirdly, you are to
foment the Sores with red Wine, or Tanners woose, wherein Pomegranate Flowers
and Rinds, Myrtil-berries, and Sumach, with red Rose-leaves dried, have been
infused in a Pot set by the fireside, before you use the Unguents.

If Children be offered to you to be cured, you must have a care that you use
gentle Medicaments to them, and that their Caps be so tied to their Heads, that
they cannot pull them off. For Children, receive these Topics: the first shall
be that of Minadous, in his Treatise De turpitudinibus, l. 2. c. 10. which he
learned of a Woman, who professed the cure of these Griess, Suiphur. vivi,
Litharg. Argent. pu^verizat. an. j. cum aceto ros. terantur ac levigentur; tum
add^ Terrae Lemniae pulv. ss. Succi Plantag. and Limon. an. j. Ol. Lentisein,
and Myrtini. an. j. Misc. ut siat linimentum. If Ulcers in Children prove
obstinate, use this of mine: Pomati, Unguent. Pop^. and Vng. albi caphurat. an.
j. Ol. de vitell. ovorum ss. Ol. Scorpion. ij. Mercur. crudi ss. Misc. in
Vnguentum. You may add jss. of Alume calcined and beat to powder, if you will
have it stronger. These Ulcers are to be dressed once in twenty four hours, and
toward night: for then the Medicaments will prove most effectual. If these
Ulcers be very moist, and apt to be enflamed, by the application of an Unguent,
then you are to use a Medicament made of abstersive Powders, which the Ancients
called Smegmata contempered with Oxymel simplex: such are the Ellebores,
Sulphur vivum, Staphesager, the Pumice-stone, Cuttlebones, the Roots of Iris,
and Aristolochiarotunda, and Barley-meal: these being beat to powder, and by
the admixtion of Oxymel simplex brought to the consistence of a liquid
Electuary, must be applied to these Ulcers, and above the Medicament a Cap of
Ivy-leaves sowed together must be set.

Having spoken sufficiently of the two kinds of moist Ulcers, which are found
in the head, Achor and Favus, it is time that we reason of the dry Ulcer of the
head, which properly is called Tinea.

This is a crusty Ulcer, fretting the skin like a Moth (from whence it has its
denomination) without any great store of moisture, cerrupting the roots of the
hair, and sending out of the Skin a dry fillb which stinks: Videatur Hieron.
Mercurial. c. 14. de morb. cutan. But Petrus Joan. Faber, in his Chirurgia
Spagrrica, thus describes it, c. 15. de Tinea: It is a peculiar phagedaenical
and cancerous Ulcer of the Head, caused of the salt of the Vitriol of the Body
of Man, which frets the Skin, and produces Scales, sometimes white, and
sometimes yellow. The material Cause, and the manner of the generation of it,
he thus prosecutes. Vitriol in the great World, while it is calcined in the
Fire, it is coagulate into a mass; either white, if the calcination be but
modetate: or yellow, if the Fire be intreased. So in the little World (he
meanrith the Body of Man) the Vitriol, when it is separated from the Balsam of
the Body, it marches ^^ards the Skin of the Head, which it corrodes, and above
it produces a crasty and scaly substance. Thus he: and I protest very probably.

And if it be true, which Galen ard Aegineta affirm of the material Cause of
Achor and Favus, that it is a sharp nitrous Phlegm, as has been said, it may
very probably be affirmed, that the material Cause of Tinea is Phlegma
viniolatum, Phlegm endued with Vitriol, yet grosser than that which is the
cause of Achor and Favus. Avicen, Mercurialis, and the rigid Galenists affirm
the melancholic Humor to be the material Cause, accompanied with some sharp
Humidity, which pricking the expulsive faculty, moves it to drive out the Humor
to the Skin of the Head, and so to cause this Ulcer: but this opinion carries
no show of truth: For first, this Grief most commonly selses upon phlegmatic
persons; Secondly, it cannot be apprehended, how Melancholy, either by the
admixtion of any Humor, or by any degree of b^at in the Body of Man, being of
it self black, can produce such a colored Ulcer, to wit, white or yellowish.

The Primitive Causes are four; Error committed in the things not natural;
Heredity; the corrupt Milk wherewith Children are fed; and Contagion and
Infection.

The Signs are dry crusty Scales, most commonly white, sometimes yellowish, or
of an ash color, or greenish, never black altogether.

As for the Presages: let this be the first.

1. This Ulcer is hard to be cured, because it is Malign and Venomous.

2. Inveterate Ulcers of this kind are more Malign, and harder to be cured,
than those which have but lately invaded any person.

3. When they are cured, they often leave behind them an Alopecia or Ophiasis.

4. Sometimes they end in the Leprosy, and pedicular or lousie Disease.

5. If in a Tinea the Skin be hard, or of a shelly substance, and send out many
Scales, and the Hairs fall by reason of the corruption of the Roots of them, it
is of all others most hard to be cured.

6. If this Ulcer being once cured, return, pronounce it to be hard to cure:
for there must be some Seed of this malign Malady firmly impressed in the Brain.

In the Cure of this Grief, two Indications offer themselves: The first is the
removing of the Causes; but seeing the Causes are Primitive or Conjunct: The
Primitive Causes are removed, by rightly ordering those things which are called
Res non Naturales: The Cause conjunct is taken away by Purgation and
Phlebotomy. As for Phlebotomy and Purgation, although that may suffice which I
have delivered in setting down the healing of Tinea and Favus; yet let me
insinuate this unto you, that it is expedient that once a quarter you open the
Cephalica two days before the full of the Moon, and that for Purgation you call
Mercurial Medicaments to aid, when Vegetables will not serve. Parcy is of
opinion, that the means which are used in curing of the French Pox are
effectual in curing this Grief: use these then, Mercurius sublimatus duleis,
Turbith Mineral, Mercury precipitate dulcified, Mercury coagulate, and fixed by
Gold and Silver.

The second Indication is the cure of the Ulcer it self by local means.

But before you go about to apply any local Medicaments, observe these
passages: First, that you meddle not with tender Children, if they have a
malign Tinea, until they be able to abide sharp Medicaments; for you shall vex
both them and their Parents, and so shall procure a dismission to your selves.
In the mean time you may use a Liniment made of the Oil of Eggs, Crocus Martis,
and calcined Hartshorn to the part, laying above it either a cap of Ivy-leaves
or Colewort-leaves. Secondly, that you apply no repercussives to the Malady:
for the Humor causing it, is so thick that it cannot be repelled. The third is
that unto new Tinea's and mild, you apply mildder; but to those which are old
and malign, sharper and fiercer Medicaments.

In the Application of the Topics, three things are to be done: First you are
to procure the separation of the Scale: Secondly, you are to pull out the Hairs
by the roots: Thirdly, you are to head the Ulcer, You shall procure the fall of
the Scales, by embrocating them with a Medicament made of the Oil of Trotters,
and the Mucilages of the Root of Althaea, Linseed and Fenugreek, adding some
Oil of Arsenick or Mercury. How the Hair is to be plucked up by the root, I
have showed before. To cure the Sore, anoint it with Unguent. Enulat. cum
M^^cur. duplicato, and above it lay Emplastrum de ranis Vigonis (...) Mercurio
itidem duplicato. Or use this of learned Mercurialis: Succi Fumar. Scabios.
Berag. Oxylapathi, aceti, an. iij. Ol. antiq. lb j. coq. omnia ad (...)
consionptionem: postea inspergetur hi pulveres. Vtriusque Hellebor. Sulphur.
vivi. Chalcanthi; Auripigmenti, Cale. vivx, Alum. Gallar. an. ss. virid. aeris
ij Picis liquid. jss. Cerae, q. s. ut. si^^ Ceratum. Apply this to the part
affected: while you are thus busied, purge the party every eighth day.

Galen and the Greek Physicians, who wrote after, have made mention of other
affections of the Scalp. And tho they be not of that moment, of which the other
are, yet I thought good to acquaint you with them, to the end you may take
notice of them when they are named by Physicians: These are four: (...)
according to Trallianus, lib. 1. c. 5. are small knobs, like unto pushes, which
are above the Cuticula; but (...) are superficial exulcerations of the Skin,
somewhat red and rough, ibid. (...) according to Actius, are certain small
Ulcers, thick and reddish, like unto Teats, out of which flows an ichorous
substance. (...) seu Ficatio, is a suall Ulcer, round, somewhat red, sometimes
painful, like unto a Fig, from whence it is so called, wherein flesh buddeth:
See Aegin. lib. 3. c. 3. Galen lib. 11. de simpl. med. facultatib. Celsus, lib.
6. c. 3. makes two sorts of it: The one hard and round, out of which a little
glutinous Matter issues, which is seen in the Beard: The other moist and
unequal, out of which more comes, and has an ill smell. This appears in the
Hair of the Head.

The material Cause of these is pituitous Blood, but the Phlegm is saltish;
when you go about to cure these, you must first make them level with the Skin
by rubbing of them with the Caustic, or some Catheretical Powder. Afterward
they are easily cured with Vnguentum Enulatum cum Morcurio simplice, and
Emplastrum de ran^s of the same kind.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Ulcers of the Ears, and Ophthalmia.

IN the foregoing Chapter, I set down the diverse kinds of Ulcers of the hairy
scalp, and the ^^re of them, Empirical, as well as Methodical. Now the course
of proceeding requires, that I set down the Ulcers of the face. And feeing in
it are placed the Instruments of four special Senses, to wit, of Hearing,
Seeing, Smelling and Tading; I will, according to these, teasure the
diversities of the Ulcers of it: I will begin first with Ulcers of the Ear,
because in it are seated the Instruments of Hearing. And tho the sight be more
te^essary, if we respect the pleas^e which redounds from beholding the
multiplicity of Objects, or the commodity which it affords, in espying things
which might hurt the Body, that we may prevent and shun them: yet Hearing
excels it, for it is Disciplinae sensus, the Sense of Learning, according to
Aristotle; and the entertainer of Faith; for Faith is bred by Hearing,
according to the Apostle. And as the Sight furthers Invention, so by the
Hearing things invented are commumcated to others. Besides, by Hearing, the
perturbations of the Mind, as Anger, Envy, Wondering, and such like, are most
stirred up.

The Causes of Ulcers of the Ears, are either antecedent, or conjunct.

The antecedent are either External, or Internal.

The External Causes are two; to wit, a blow, or a fall: for by reason of
either of both these the part may be contused, and from hence Quittour bred,
which being stayed long within the cavities of the Ear, and having the Ear-wax,
and other sharp Excrements of the Brain mingled with it, may erode the parts.

The Internal Cause is a sharp Humor sent from the Brain to the cavity of the
Ear, which first of all causes Apostemation.

As for the Prognostics, let this be the first: These Ulcers are not to be
neglected, for if the Cure be prolonged, deafness may ensue.

2. If greater plenty of Matter issue out of the Ear than the part of its own
self is likely to afford, then you may pronounce, that the greatest part of it
is sent from the Brain ill affected.

3. If before Matter issue out of the Ear, the party feel pulsation, and great
pain, you may pronounce, that a Phlegmon has invaded the part.

These Ulcers are either without any excrescence of Flesh, or they have
excrescence.

In the Cure of Ulcers of the Ears, it is requisite that ever before the
Application of any local Medicaments the Head be purged by Cephalic Pills.
Receive a Description of those which are very essectual. Pilul. aggregat.
aurear. an. j. Trochiscor. Alhandal. and diagrid. an. ss. Spirit. Vitri^. q. s.
ut formetur massula. Ex hi^ massa efformentur pilul. iv. Deglutiat duas hor. v.
Matut. sequente die sumat totidem. Exactis iv. horis a sumptione pilula. rum
capiat jusculum sine pane, prandeat autem hora consueta.

In the Application of local Medicaments, these five Points are to be observed,
according to Petrus a Largeleta, Medicus Beneniensis.

1. Let no sharp Medicament be put into the Ear before the Body be well purged,
lest we procure a Fever, and cause an attraction of Humors.

2. Let all Medicaments which are poured into the Ears be neither too hot, nor
too cold; for they being (for the greatest part) framed of spermatick parts,
they can hardly endure any excess in heat or cold.

3. Let all the Medicaments, that are to be poured into the Ear, be of a liquid
substance, that they may enter the deeper.

4. After the party is dressed, let him or her lie upon the sound Ear, the ill
affected Ear being stopped with Cotton or Wool for a good space of time.

5. Let not fatty Medicaments be either poured, or injected into the Ear, for
it is composed of spermatick parts, and such things will cause a fordid Ulcer.

The local Medicaments which are fit to be applied to Ulcers of the Ears,
wherein there is no superfluous Flesh, are these: Trochisci Andronis in aceto
sambucino dissoluti: Haec autem est eorum descriptio: Balaust. Vitriol.
Aristol. gallar. an. ij. Alum. Myrrh. ^^is Ammon. an. j. Excipiantur ^^nia
Melicrato and fiant Tro^^sci. If you boil Crocus Mar^is in strong Wine Vinegar,
till both come to the consistence of a Li^iment, it is a good Medicine. A
Sinative Syrup made of the ^^erary Plants, as, Self-heal, (...) Ladies-Mantle,
Avens, Sanicle, Solomons-Seal, Plantain, Horse-tail, ^^row, Knotgrass, is very
effectu^^, ^ot only in Ulcers of the Ears, ^^t in all hollow Ulcers; in like
(...) Balaustia, Pomegranate (...), Sumach, Myrtle-berries, and ^^d Rose-leaves
may be added. ^^ee Medicaments are sure, and (...) has you may trust unto. In
(...) Winter time, if you boil a suf(...) quantity of dry Tobacco (...) strong
Ale, and boil the De^^cton strained, you shall have (...) effectual Medicine,
chiefly if ^^e Ulcer be foul, and have Worms; ^^th you may conjecture by
in^eable itching, that they will (...) by their motion. If these (...) afford
great store of Qui^^, they must be dressed every (...) and twentieth hour; but
if (...) yield but little Matter, it will efficient to dress them once in (...)
days.

I^ falls out sometimes, if Ulcers (...) Ears continue long, that ^^perfluous
Flesh does so increase (...), that it sills up all the (...) of the Ear, and
causes deaf^^. This happened to a Gentleman of the Race of the Fit^^ in
Chester, when I pra^^ed Physic and Surgery (...).

I thus cured her: First, I ministered unto her Cephalic Pills.

Secondly, This being done, I consumed the spongy Flesh by often Application of
the Fistula Powder, so that it did not touch any part in the Circumference. The
Powder I set down in that Chapter, wherein was set down the methodical cure of
a Fistula.

Thirdly, I made Injection into the Ear, made of two ounces of white Wine, one
dram of Aegyptiacum, and half an ounce of Mel rosatum.

Last of all, I healed, and cicatrized it with my vulnerary Syrup dissolved in
Plantain-water.

If such an Accident come to your hands, proceed thus methodically, and you
shall undoubtedly bring to pass that which you shall go about. So much I
thought good to deliver unto you concerning the dignotion, and cure of the
Ulcers of the Ears, which often prove troublesome to the Patient and
Surgeon, and loathsome to others, who approach to the party grieved, by
reason of the evil smell, which the Ulcer sometimes sends forth.

Now I will come to the Ulcers of the Eyes, which ought exquisitely to be
handled, seeing the sense of Sight, the Instrument whereof is the Eye, is so
pleasing and necessary to all Persons. Of all the Ulcers of the Eye, Fistula
lachrymalis, or Aegylops, first offers it self; but seeing I amply discoursed
of it, when I delivered the Doctrine of Fistula's, I will remit you to that
Chapter.

In this my Discourse of the other Ulcers of the Eyes I will first set down the
general Doctrine of them, and then descend to the particular handling of each
one of them.

In the general Doctrine, I will deliver three Things: to wit, their Causes:
Secondly, the Prognostics; And thirdly, the Indications of curing them.

The Causes are either External, or Primitive, or Internal.

The external Causes are two; to wit, a Blow, or a Contusion by reason of a
Fall.

The internal Causes are sharp and eroding Huniors.

As for the Prognostics, let this be the first: Ulcers of the Eyes in Persons
of an ill habit of Body, seldom end without leaving some scar, or infirmity.

2. For this Cause be wary what you promise; for bountiful promises can hardly
be called back; and the Patients, being for the most part careful of the
comeliness of their parts, will undoubtedly expect the performance of them.

3. If Children, or disordered Persons, be presented to you to be cured of
Ulcers in the Eyes, ever pronounce that the Cure will prove difficult and hard.

The methodical general intentions of curing these Griefs are in number four;
Good order of Diet, Phsebotomy, Purgation, and the Application of a Seton or
Fontanel, for Revulsion and derivation.

Having dispatched the three Points, which the general Doctrine of Ulcers
contains, I am come to set down how each one of these Ulcers in particular is
to be cured.

As for the differences of them, they are either mild, or Malign. The mild are
either of the Adnata, or Coniunctiva, or Cornea, or Wea. The Ulcers of
Conjuncti^s most commonly proceed from Ophthalmia.

Of it then I will speak, because it most frequently seises upon the Eye: (...)
in Greek, but Lippitudo in Latin, according to Galen 4. de Medicam. local. cap.
4. is an inflammation of that Tunicle of the Eye, which is called Adnata.

There be two kinds of it: One properly so called, proceeding from inward
Causes.

The other proceeding from external Causes, which properly is called (...), or
Perturbatio.

Again, Ophthalmia vera is either more mild, when only the Conjunctiva is
inflamed, or vehement, when as the Eyelid besides, is red, turned up, and
somewhat ulcerate.

This Grief is thus bred, according to Cassius Medicus 66. Prebl. medic. When
Humors are impacted in the Eye, they stop the passages, and keep in the heat:
the heat kept in, burns when it cannot breath through, and inflames the Humors;
and these inflamed, cause an Ophthalmia, and hinder the sight: for the
Conjunctiva being inflamed, great pain and heat are felt in the Eye. They draw
Humors into the Eye; the Humors attracted being dispersed through the Eye,
trouble the Humors and Spirits; and these being troubled, of necessity hinder
the sight. The Eyes are subject to these affections, according to Arist. Probl.
7. Sect. ultim. and Alex. 1 Probl. 35. because they are moist and (...) very
passible.

All sorts of Humors may cause a true Ophthalmia, but sundry ways; for hot
Humors, as Blood and Choler of themselves cause great Inflammations; but small
Inflammations may be caused of cold Humors mixed with hot.

The primitive causes are the heat of the Sun, pain of the Head, a burning
Fever, Dust, Smoke, great Cold binding the part, blows upon the Head,
blustering Winds, Ebriety, Venery, and according to Paulis, Oil. It brings an
Ophthalnia, because it cleaves fast to the Tunicles, and so stops the Pores,
and so the heat is kept in, and inflames the Eye.

Hippocrat. lib. de aer. aquis and lxis, writes, that they which inhabit the
South, and hot regions, are easily assaulted by such diseases, and easily
cured: and on the contrary, that they who dwell in the Northern parts are not
so easily tainted with this grief, but are more hardly cured. Avicen yields the
reasons for this, saying, that they who dwell under a hot climate, have their
Heads full of vapors and Humors, which being resolved by the hot air, fall to
the Eyes, and being there stayed, cause an Inflammation, which afterward is
easily cured. First, because their Bodies are more perspirable. Secondly,
because they have still a loose Belly. But in cold regions, tho they have
plenty of Humors in their Heads, yet they are congealed, and do not so promptly
flow to the Eyes; but if they come to the Eyes, and be there impacted, they
cannot so readily be discussed, by reason of the thickness of the Skin, and
constriction of the Pores. So inflammations of the Eyes happen more frequently
in the Summer to those who have their Heads stuffed with Vapors and Humors,
the heat colliquating them, and turning them to the Eyes. In like manner in
those diseases, wherein there is an ebullition of the Blood, Ophthalmiae are
forerunners, as in the small Pox, Measles, and sometimes the Plague, hot and
sharp vapors being carried up to the Head.

As for the signs of an Ophthalmia; they are general, or particular.

The general are these: according to Galen. 4. de medic. loc. 4. and lib. de
totius morbi tempor. and Rhazes lib. 9. ad Almans. a swelling of the Eye, a
redness of it, pain sometimes pricking, sometimes corrosive, sometimes tensive,
flowing of tears.

The particular signs of a true Ophthalmia are these: a great tumor and pain,
horrible heat, turning up of the Eyelids, which show a great Inflammation.

These accidents, in a more remiss degree, show a milder Ophthalmia: if the
Humor proceed from the Stomach, then the party will desire to vomit; if from
the Head, the Headache vexes him and seeing the Humor may be sent both from the
vessels within, and without the Cranium, if the veins of the Forehead, and the
rest of the Face be full, if the Arteries of the Temples beat, and if the
Eyelids be heavy, then the Humor come from the vessels without the Cranium;
but if none of these symptoms appear, and yet the party often sneezes, and
finds itching in the Nose, the Humor or Vapor is sent from the vessels within
the Cranium.

Signs of the Humors sent are these: If Blood be it, the Eyes and Face will be
red, the Veins will be full, the pain will be gravative, the matter that flows
will not be very sharp. If it be a vapor or flatuosity, there will be a
singing in the Ears, and a tensive pain. If it be pituitous Blood, the Tumor
will not be very red, but whitish, less heat and pain, great heaviness of the
Eyes and Eyelids, the Eyelids in the night time will be glued together.

This happens for three causes: First, because in the daytime the Eye is still
in motion, and suffers not the Humor to cleave to the Eyelids.

Secondly, because moisture is multiplied in the nightime.

Thirdly, because the Humor concocts in the nightime, grows thick, and so is
more apt to cleave to the Eyelids, they then being immovable. If Choler be
the cause, there will be but little redness mingled with yellowness; the Humor
which runs from the Eyes will be thin, the pain will be pinching. If flatuosity
or a vapor, then none of these signs will appear, yet the Eyes will be
somewhat swelled, and a noise will be noted in the Ears, and no humidity will
flow from it.

As for the predictions: 1. An Inflammation coming of external causes, is more
easily cured than that which comes of an inward.

2. When a continual pain of the Head is joined with an Ophthalma^ and
continues long, blindness mo^^ commonly ensues.

3. If in an Inflanimation of the Eye, the Humor which flows from it be thick,
it will not long continue: for it betokens the benignity of the Humor, and
strength (...) Nature.

4. If a mild Fever, or a fla^ seize upon one troubled with an Ophthalmia, it
ceases within a short time, the Humor being discussed by the first, and
revelled by the second.

5. If the Tumor of the Eye be great, the pain vehement, and the matter which
flows from the Eye be copious and thin, the Ophthalmia is like to continue
long; but short, if signs contrary to these appear. Thus much then concerning
the causes, signs, and Prognostics of an Ophthalmia vera shall suffice.

Now it remains, that we speak a word or two of Ophthalmia sp^ria a Bastard
Ophthalmia: This is caused only by external means, whereof we have spoken
sufficiently before, when we set down the primitive causes of Ophthalmia vera.
And if the accidents, as inflammation, redness and the like, be but moderate,
it will easily cease, and without great difficulty, by removing the extrinsecal
causes, and applying cooling waters, as Rose Water, or Plantain-water, with
Camphore.

In the cure of Ophthalmia vera, some Precepts are to be observed before the
application of local Medicaments.

1. The party must eat and drink sparingly, abstain from Venery, and keep the
Body soluble.

2. Let the party be kept in a dark room, and let his sleep be moderate;
because immoderate sleep draws vapors to the Head.

3. Let the objects, which the party beholds, be green, blew, or back.

4. Let anger, serious cogitations, and motion be shunned.

5. If the Hair be too long and heavy, let it be polled.

6. Let the Drink be small Beer, or Barley-water, wherein Fennel-seeds,
Coriander-seeds, and Eyebright have been boiled.

7. Let Meats salt, vaporous, sharp, and hard of digestion be shun^ed.

8. If the party be strong, open (...) the Median, then the Cepha^^^, then the
Vena frontis, and those behind the Ears; and in the Temples, if the
Inflammation be great: if circumstances will not admit Phlebotomy, apply
Ventoses to the Shoulders, and Thighs; and Frictions and Ligatures to the Arms
and Legs.

9. Purge according to the Hunor offending, as Choler with Pi^^^cechiae, or
Electuar. de succo ros. Folegm with Diaturbith cum aga^^, or Diaphoenicum, or
Diacar^^mum.

10. If you use Fomentations, these five things are to be observed.

1. That the Body be clean, otherwise the matter (being scattered by
fomentation) will run to the Eyes.

2. The Matter must be discharged into the Eye, and not in motion.

3. That it be used when the Matter is thick, for it attenuates it.

4. That it be used in the declination of the grief.

5. No astringent Fomentations are to be used; for they wedge in the Humor, and
exasperate the grief.

11. To stay the fluxion, you are to apply a strong defensative to the Forehead
and Temples.

12. Opiate Medicaments not well corrected, are not to be used; for if they be
but weak, they may procure a little case for the time, but the fluxion and pain
will return more fiercly: if they be strong, they may cause inevitable
blindess, by hindering the influence of the visive spirits.

The local Medicaments must have three qualities: they must be somewhat
astringent, cooling, and anodyne; such are the water of the white of an Egg,
the mucilage of Fenugreek and Quince-seeds drawn with Rose and Plantain-water,
with a little Saffron, Trochisci albi Rhasis sine opio (unless the pain be very
great) dissolved in Violet, or Succory, or Eyebright water. What I have
spoken, I would have you to understand it of an ordinary Ophthalmia.

If you perceive it to be Venereal, or a symptom of the Pox; you must first
cure the Disease, and then the accident will cease. If after the using of these
means, the Ophthalmia prove rebellious, you must blister the Neck.

If this will not serve, you must apply a Seton, or make a Fontanel in the Neck
or Arm. But a Seton is most effectual: For First, by reason of the great pain
which it brings, it makes a stronger revulsion: Secondly, it discharges the
Humor more plentifully, it having two Orifices; but a Fontanel only one.

Hildanus Obs. 16. Cent. 5. gives us an eminent Instance of an Ophthalmia,
cured by him in a curious Limner and Graver above Seventy years old. He was
(says he) afflicted with a grievous Ophthalmia in his Left Eye. The
Inflammation which was high, had not only seized the Eye and Eyelids, but
half the Face. Besides, there arose a Protuberance as big as a Bean, in the
Cornea, toward the greater corner, over against the Iris. His whole Head aked;
but the pain was most violent, acute and pungent about the tubercle. Wherefore
to hinder the afflux of Humors thither, having ordered him a cooling and spare
Diet, I gave him the following Pills, mass. Pil. aur. i. Luc. major. ij. trech.
Alhand. Didgrid. an. gr. iij. ol. faenic. gutt. vi. cum sir. res. f. Pilulae
vij. involvantur pulvere cinnamomi. After I had purged him, I bled him in the
Left Arm, and dropped the following Collyrium into his Eye. Aq. ros. plantag.
fragar. an. ij. sem. cyd. contus. faenugr. an. j. M. maneantque in infusione
horas 4. in expressierae dissolve Tutiae prepar. CC. preparan. i. Caphur. ss.
M. f. collyrium, instilletur and applicetur calid^ quater ant quinquies in die.
When the Inflammation was laid, instead of Strawberry and Plantain-water, I put
Fennel and Eye-bright-water into the Collyrium. The next day after his
Bleeding, I ordered Ventoses with much flame to be applied. Then I gave him the
Pills again, and breathed a Vein a second time, and applied Ventoses likewise.
By these means the Tubercle wasted by little and little, the Eye grew well, and
his Sight was restored, and grew more acute, especially in his Left Eye, than
before. For whereas before this illness he had used Spectacles above Twenty
years, he was then able to Read and Paint without Spectacles.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the rest of the Ulcers of the Eye.

NOw Order requires, that I should set down the Doctrine touching the Ulcers of
the Cornea.

These are either supersicial, or deep, corroding the substance of the Cornea.

The superficial are four, whereof the First is called (...), which signifies a
troubling of the Air: and it is a very thin, and superficiary ^^ulceration, of
a blush color, resembling a dark air, and possessing the greatest part of the
black of the Eye: the Latins call i^ Caligo, a Mist in English.

The Second is called (...), i^ Latin Nubecula: this is deeper than Achlys or
Caligo, yet narrower and whiter.

The Third is called (...), it (...) an Ulcer which grows about the circle
Iris, possessing part of the white, and part of the black of the Eye: without
the Iris it appears red, but within the Iris white.

The Fourth superficiary Ulcer is called by Aetius (...): this is a
superficiary Ulcer also, which makes the Cornea rugged by erosion, and to be of
an Ash Color, resembling a lock of Wool, for which cause it is called of
Avicen, the woolly Ulcer.

Of the deeper Ulcers of Cornea there are three sorts.

The First is called (...), and it is an Ulcer of the Cornea, hollow, narrow,
without filth, like to a round puncture: In Latin it is called Fossula; for
(...) in Greek signifies Fovea, a pit.

The Second is called in Greek (...), and it differs from s^^^etor, in that it
is wider, tho not so deep.

The Third, of the deeper Ulcers of the Cornea, is called (...) by Aetius; by
Scribonius Largus ustio; and by others inustio, it is an impure, and crusty
Ulcer of Cornea; through which sometimes the Humors of the Eye come out, when it
is made clean by cleansing Medicaments applied.

These Ulcers of the Cornea of the Eye, whether they be supersiciary or deep,
are not to be slighted, but carefully to be dressed; but those especially,
which have deeply seized upon the substance of the Membrane, lest they corrode
through the whole Membrane, and so the Humors issuing out, the Eye sink, and
both deformity and inevitable blindess ensue.

For the material cause of these Ulcers is a salt and nitrous Humor, as Paulus
Aegineta speaks, Lib. 3. c. 22.

If the Cornea be quite through corroded, then the Wea falls down, this
disease of Wea is called (...) procidentia.

Of this disease there are four kinds.

If it fall out but very little, it is called (...), caput muscae, the head of
a Fly, and of Avicen formicalis, like the head of a Pismire.

If it fall down yet more, and equal a Grape in bigness, it is called (...),
Wea, or Vvatio.

If it fall down yet further, and hang out like a little Apple; it is called
(...) malum the Apple-like Rupture.

But if the Wea fall down and grow hard, brawny and flat, it is called (...)
clavus, the nail-like Rupture. All these four kinds of the Rupture of the Wea
for the most part are uncurable: only the Apple-like, and Grape-like Rupture,
if the roots be small, and the party be of a good constitution, may be by
binding cured, to take away and mitigate the deformity of the Eye. For if the
sight be taken away before by these breaches of the Wea, Deligations will not
restore the sight; which must be intimated to the party before you go about
these operations, that he think not himself deluded, having hoped for the
recovery of his sight, as the reward of his patience, in enduring the manual
operations.

Seeing all Ulcers of the Eyes argue a cacochymical Body (for they are caused
of sharp corroding Humors) the constitution of the Body must be altered, not
suddenly laboring to remove the whole cause at once: but (...), and that is,
according to Gal. 9. meth. medend. when by little and little that is
discharged, which is faulty, that that which is good may succeed in its place.
Wherefore you are to shun all strong Cathartical means, lest they procure
Vomiting, which is very prejudicial to weak Eyes, such as are those which are
ulcerate. The Body having been gently purged, Nature very often corrects the
residue of the Humor, by turning that part which is benign into nourishment,
and expelling that which is superfluous, by Stool, Urine and Sweat. Those
twelve Observations which I set down in the delivery of the Cure of an
Ophthalmia vera, I commend unto you in the curing of Ulcers of the Eyes also,
which need not any repetition.

To set down all the local Medicantents, which are delivered by the Ancients in
curing Ulcers of the Eyes, were a fruitless labor.

Nevertheless, I will furnish you with a few approved Medicaments. Then in
superficial Ulcers of Cernea, use these, 1. Succi not. Foenicul. Chelidon.
Euphragiae an. ij. Vini Albi potentis iij. Sa^char. Cand. iij. Aloes,
Sarcoce^^. an. ss. Fellis Capon. ij. Distill these, and use the Water.

2. Aq. Chelidon. and rate an. jss. aq. ros. j. Croci metal. j. siat infusio.

3. Sucei Foenicul. rutae an. iij. Mell. optimi ij. Exponantur soli incliesa
vitro stricti orificii probe obturato per mensem temp^^e aestivo. Vtendum hoc
Medicamento, abjectis foecibus.

4. Axung. Porci, aq. ros. ablatae ij. Caphurae ss. Tutiae ^^epar. gr. x. Aloes
pulv. j. Sacdati Cand. gr. xvj. siat collyrium.

In deep Ulcers of the Cornea T^nica use this of Heurnius, which he bought at a
dear rate, and which he has set down Meth. ad Praxin, lib. 1. page 106.
Calareinar. ter usti ac bis in vini aceto ^^tincti j. Myrrhae, plumbi usti
(...) ^ti an. ss. Croci gr. v. opti gr. ij. aeris usti iv. decocti Foe^^gneci
j. terantur omnia super lapi^^m pictorum, ac fiat collyrium. Having first made
clean the Eyes with a Sponge dipped in the macilage of Fenugreek and Lin-seed,
dress the ulcerate Eyes twice in the Forenoon, and as often in the Afternoon.

C^llyrium de plumbo described by R^^^^^us, set down by him in Impensatorio
Medico, lib. 5. cap. 11. d^collyriis, is an effectual Me^^^ment: Plumbi usti,
Anti^^^. Tutiae lotae, aeris usti, pummi Ar^^ici, tragacanthi an. j. opii ss.
fiat ex omnibus pulvis, ex quo (...) Aqua Rosacea formentur Tro^^ci: dissolve
one of them in Fantain and Purselain Water, and dress the Eye with this
Medicament. When you are dressing Ulcers of the Eyes, minister once a Week a
purging Medicament. If you use Pills, minister (according to the advice of the
Arabians) Pi^^e Aloephanginae, or Pil. lucis majores and minores, or de
agarico, minister a dram made up into four Pills, which are to be covered
with Silver Foil: or use this Pill. Specier. hier. ss. Diagridii ij.
Trochiscor. Alhandal. v. Cum Syrupo Augustano fiat massa. One Pill of this
composition weighing twenty grains, will purge sufficiently. If the party
cannot swallow Pills, minister to him this Portion: Caryocostin. and Electuar.
lenitiv. an. iij. Pulv sanct. iij. Pulv. Holland. j. Syrup. Ros. solutiv. cum
Agarico vj. aq. Beton. Foenicul. aut Euphrag. iij. Misc. ut fiat potio.

To these Medicaments both inward and outward, the right use of those things
which are called Non naturalia must be joined, or else the Cure will be
protracted and prolonged.

The Air then must be temperate in its first qualities, as being neither too
hot, nor too cold, too moist, nor too dry. It is not good to abide in the heat
of the Sun, nor the Beams of the Moon, nor any open Air: the party is to shun
Southern and Northern Winds: for the Southern Wind, according to Hippocrates,
troubles the Sight, causes hardness of hearing, an heavy Head, dull Senses, a
lazy Body, it begets gross Spirits. And the Northern Wind is very sharp, and
therefore it stings and pricks the Eyes; neither must the Air be too lightsome:
for it scatters the Spirits.

The Bread must be made of clean Wheat, well leavened, and somewhat salted,
wherein may be put Fenil, Anise, and Coriander Seeds, for unleavened Bread is
accounted hurtful to the Eyes.

As for fresh Meats, these are good: Chicken, Capon, Hen, Partridge, Pheasant,
Pigeons, Larks; the Pie, the Swallow, and Gooseflesh are accounted good for the
Sight.

As for Fish, Trouts, Roches, Perches and Pickerels, of freshwater Fish, may
for variety of Diet be admitted: of Salt Water Fishes, Whiting-mops, and Smelts
are accounted the best. Baked and fried Meats, strong Spices, as Pepper,
Ginger, Mustard, and Roots of Horseradish are not to be used. To Meats
minister this composition instead of Salt: Euphragiae, Semin. Poenicul. an. j.
Cinnamomi and Macis, an. j. Salis communis j. siat ex omnibus pulvis. All
bulbous Roots, as Onions and Garlic; and Pulses, as Pease and Beans, are to be
rejected; as also moist and raw Fruits: Stewed Prunes, and Pears or Quinces
preserved, are permitted after Meat, to stay the ascending of Vapors to the
Head, and Marmalade of Quinces, with some Aniseeds, Fenilseeds, and
Corianderseed Comfits.

As for Drink, no Liquor is more convenient than six shillings Beer, neither
too new, nor too stale, having had a bag of Boultingcloth hung in it, filled
with Eyebright, Fenilseeds, Betony, Rosemary, sweet Majoran, and Sage.

If the party has been accustomed to Wine, let him use some small Wine, not
sharp or vaporous, wherewith some good Spring Water must be mingled; and
Borage-flowers, and Burnet-leaves are to be put into the Cup: and this will
serve for two purposes: for the color will comfort the Eyes, and the Herbs by
their property will repress the vaporousness of the Wine. The less one does
drink, the better will the Patient be, and the sooner cured. A small kind of
Mead made after this manner will not be amiss. Aq. font. lb xv. Mellis optimi
lb j. Foenicul. Euphrag. an. man. j. Macis j. Coq. ad tatiae partis
consumptionem, semper spamam auferendo, ac tandem colands. Immoderate sleep
fills the Head full of Vapors, and immoderate watching spends the Spirits,
cools the Brain, and hinders the Sight. It is good to go to Bed three or four
hours after Supper, and to rise early, and to walk softly up and down the
Chamber, to comb the Head, pick the Ears, and to empty the Excrements. Much
reading is not good, especially after Meals, and weeping is very hurtful.

The Body must still be kept soluble with lenitive Clysters of Diacathol. Syrup
of Althaea, and Oil of Lilies dissolved in the ordinary Decoction appointed for
Clysters. Take this for a pattern, Diacathol. jss. Syrupi de Althaea ij. Ol.
Lil. Albor. ij. Decoct. communis pro clysterib. viij. Misc^^t siat clyster. If
the party will not admit a Clyster, then mingle half an ounce of Electuar.
lenititum, in seven spoonfuls of Broth made of a Chicken. After Meals use this
or the like digestive Powder: Semin. Foenicul. and Coriand. Saccharo semel
incrustatorum, an. j. Cort. Citri, and Myrebalan. Kebul. condit. an. iij.
Euphrag. siccat. j. Macis j. Sacchari Resat. Tabellat. jss. fiat ex omnibus
pulvis: Dos. cochl. j. a singulis pastibus.

Hitherto I have delivered unto you the differences of mild Ulcers; now I will
treat of the diverse kinds of malign Ulcers of the Eyes. These are either not
contagious, or contagious. The not contagious are two; Nome, and Vlcera
cancrosa. The contagious are three; Carbunc^lesa, Venerea, Morbillosa. Of these
in order I will discourse briefly.

Nimae or Vlcera depascentia are malign Ulcers, which sometimes begin at the
corners of the Eyes, sometimes at the white, and sometimes seize upon the horny
Membrane. In corrupt Bodies they fret exceedingly, and go forward in such sort,
that oftentimes they consume the parts adjacent, as the Musoles and Lids of the
Eye: from them flows a stinking slimy Matter, the pain is grievous, and the
diseased party has an accidental Fever.

This Ulcer is dangerous, and seldom cured without deformity and loss of the
Sight: wherefore my counsel is, that you foretell the darger, if such an Ulcer
be offered to you to be cured.

Only I will acquaint you with some local means, having spoken sufficiently of
the general Intentiers. Apply then to the Ulcer the Juice of Plantain,
Horse-tail, Knotgrass, Nightshade, and Yarrow chrified with Honey, and the
whites of Eggs: Dress these Ulcers Morning and Evening dropping a few drops
into the affected Eye, covering the Eye with a Cataplasm made of Vnguentum
rosatum, the pulp of a Quince boiled, and some Oil of Poppies. If these Ulcers
prove very malign and corroding, you may correct them by instilling some Oil of
Vitriol, or Sulphur, mingled with Plantain-water, taking only the fourth part
of it. To assuage the pain, use this Cataplasm; Mala Cydonia numero 2. Sedi
major. and Solani bortens. ana man. ij. coq. in s. q. Lact. muliebr. vacc.
capr. aut asin. addatur Croci scrup. j. ac fiat Cataplasma.

Vlcus crancrosum, a cancerous Ulcer follows; which the Chemists pronounce to
be caused of an Arsenical Salt, and it is like to be so: for in this Ulcer,
besides corrosion, there is a septick or putrefactive quality. It begins in the
black of the Eye.

In it the black and white of the Eye are reddish, Lines seem to be sent from
the Black to the Temples: the Patient refuses Food, by reason of the exceeding
great pain, a thin darkish and sharp Humor flows from it, and it is
exasperated, by reason of the application of sharp Medicaments.

You can only promise a palliative Cure of this malign Ulcer, by the
Application of anodyne means, after you have used the general Indications
before specified. Paulus Aeginet. lib. 3. c. 22. affirms it to be an uncurable
Evil. He counsels to feed the Patlent with Milk, Panado's, and other Meats of a
good Juice, and of an easy concoction.

Mild Eye-salves are also to be applied, as this: Mucilag. Semin. Cydon. and
Paliur. Aq. ros. extract. j. Trochisc. albor. Rhas. cum opio j. fiat collyrium,
quod tepidum applicetur. Renovetur mane and vesperi. Desuper applicetur hoc
Cataplasma. Poma cocta number. 3. Cassiae recent. extract. ss. Croci j. Lactis
mulieb. j. Albumen ovi unius: siat Cataplasma. So much then concerning the
handling of malign Ulcers of the Eyes, wherein there is no contagion.

Ulcers which are caused of contagious Diseases follow, as the Small Pox, the
French Pox, and the Plague: If you fear that the Small Pox are like to cause
Ulcers in the Eyes (which you shall conjecture, if there was an Inflammation in
the Eyes, before any did appear in the Body; if the party feel pain in the
Eyes, and cannot open the Eyelids) then are you to apply gentle Fomentations
to the Eyes, and the Breast-milk of a sound Woman, having a little Saffron
mingled with it; or the Mucilage of Fenugreek, Lin-seed and Quince-seeds, drawn
with Rose Water, having some Safforn added to it. You shall not need to look
for any other Medicaments in these Ulcers.

If the Ulcers be Venereal, caused of the great Pox: then with all expedition
are you to go about the cure of the main Grief, lest blindness quickly ensue,
and then to labor to cure the Ulcers of the Eyes, which are but only symptoms
of the Disease, Renod. in dispensat. med. lib. 5. c. 11. sets down an excellent
Eye Salve for this purpose, ascribed to Lanfrank by the Neotericks, which he
could not find in the Works of Lanfrank (as he confesses) so that by all
likelihood it is a magistral receipt. The description of it is this: Vini albi
lb. j. aq. Plantag. and rosarum an. iij. Auripigment. ii. Virid. aer. j. Aloes,
Myrrh. an. scrup. j. Terantur ista subtilissime, and siat collyrium.

I will add a little of the Ulcer of the Eye caused of a Pestilential Carbo, or
Anthrax, and so end. In this Case, first there arises a small Tumor in the Eye,
hot, hard, painful, and contagious, caused of a thick, burned and venomous
Humor: It is hot, the unnatural heat causing an ebullition of the Humor. It is
hard, because the heat burns the Humor: It is contagious, by reason of the
venomous Humor which causes it: when it yields Matter, it stinks by reason of
the putrefaction of it.

It is accompanied with watching, drought, internal heat, raving, and the Urine
is sometimes of a fiery color, sometimes thick and troubled.

If these Symptoms appear, then are you first of all to minister such Antidotes
as are fit for a pestilential Fever, as Theriac. Andromachi, Antidotus de
sanguinibus, Electuarium de ovo, and such like, to tame the venenosity of the
Matter, and then to proceed to the curing of it. If you perceive a Pustule in
the top of it, open it with a Lancet: then to extinguish the immoderate heat,
soment it with Aqua spermatis ranarum, wherein Champhore is dissolved, and lay
a Cloth moistened in the same, to the Eye: above this Cloth apply a Cataplasm
made of Goats, or Cows Milk, Bread made of Bran, and the Juice of Plantain:
when the crust is fallen, mundifie and fill up the Ulcer, by applying Mel
rosatum dissolved in Plantain-water.

Last of all, skin the Ulcer with this Medicament: Vin. albi lb. j. tut. praep.
Aloes, an. ss. Sac^har. cand. ij. Haec inclusa vitro ^uctiorificii probe
obturato, expo^^^tur soli omnibus diebus cani^duibus. Guilmeau in the fifth
Section, c. 11. of his Treatise of the Diseases the Eye, confesses this Salve
to have been given and communicated to him, as an undoubted experiment, in
skinning the Ulcers of the Eyes, and procuring a comely Scar in the Cornea.

If it fall out at any time (as it often does by the negligence and ^^^ki
fullness of the Surgeon) that the Eyelids grow to the external Membranes of
the Eye, to ^it, the Conjunctiva and Cornea: when he has not a care in the time
of curing to keep them asunder, then the natural motion of the parts of the Eye
is hindered, a deformity ensues, and the Sight is much diminished.

It is called (...), and (...), (...) Galen. lib. de desinit. medicis, (...)
according to Aeginet. lib. 4. cap. 55. and (...); In Latin Coalitus, or
Intik^tio palpebrarum, in English the Cleaving or Growing together of the
Eyelids, Galen. then in (...) medic. c. 15. thus speaks of (...). The Eyelids
grow to the (...) of the Eye (he means the C^^junctiva, or the black, which be
names Cornea elsewhere.) If they cleave to the black, the Sight (...)
altogether hindered; but if they clear to the white only, the Sight is less
impaired. Celsus lib. 7. cap. 7. thus discourses of this Disease: Sometimes one
of the Eyelids grows to the other, so that the Eye cannot be opened: unto
which Grief this inconvenience is often annexed, that the Eyelids cleave to
the white, as when a Sore in each, or both, has been negligently cured: for he
has joined them together in curing, which ought to have been kept asunder: both
these Griefs the Greeks call (...).

Out of these words of Galen, and Celsus, we may gather, that there are two
kinds of this Grief. The one is, when the Eyelids cleave one to another: The
other is, when the Eyelids grow to the Conjunctiva, and Cornea. Guilmeau notes
that the first happens from the Nativity, as the Matrix is often shut up. This
I will leave to that part of Surgery, called by me (...) which teaches to
disjoyn and separate those parts which are unnaturally united. As for the
second, seeing it is an Accident which has happened to an Ulcer of the Eye
negligently cured, I am not to let it pass.

I marvel that Guilmeau, in the Book and Chapter aforenamed, pronounces out of
Celsus and Mesue (not noting the places of the Authors) this Grief to be
uncurable: Seeing not only Celsus and Aegineta, but he himself sets down the
manner of curing it, which he might well have spared, if he thought his labor
lost. Yea, Fabric. ab aq. pend. operat. chirurg. part. 1. c. 8. who in all
Chirurgical Operations is very wary, injects no such scruple; but boldly
proceeds in the Cure: you are not to be daunted then by his discouraging. If
the Eyelid cleave to the Cornea, against the Apple of the Eye, the Sight never
will be perfect; because the Scar will hinder the passing of the Species
visibiles to the crystalline Humor.

As for the manner of Cure; it is performed by Manuul Operation only: in this
Operation go on thus: Having placed the Patient in that posture as you shall
think most convenient for your hand, lift up the Eyelid, which cleaves to the
Membranes, and put between the Eyelids and the Membranes, in that part which
is free (for never does the Eyelid wholly cleave to the Tunicles, as Aq.
pendent. well observes) an Instrument, like to that which you call the capital
Instrument, the Gibbous or arched part being blunt, and having a back; but the
belly being as sharp as a Razor: when you have compassed all the part united,
having turned the back of the Instrument toward the Eyelid, cunningly separate
the parts united, neither offending the Eyelid, nor any Tunicle of the Eye.
But if either of these must be touched, it is best that the Eyelid, suffer,
than any Tunicle: for it may more securely suffer the injury. When this
Operation is performed, if you be not vigilant in keeping the parts separate
afunder, they will easily unite again, as Celsus notes.

In setting down the Operations, Celsus calls the Instrument Specillum. As for
that Instrument, which goes commonly amongst the Ancients under the name of
Specillion; it did absolutely represent your ordinary Spathula's, being on the
one end narrow and round, to serve for a Probe; ending in a round small button,
to hinder it from offending, when you are to try the depth of an Ulcer, or
Wound, and on the other broad and flat, to spread your Unguents: of the
broadest end Galen speaks, Method. 13. c. 5. where he advises to besprinkle an
Ulcer with the Powder, using lats Specilli mucrone, with the broad end of the
Specillum, or Spathula.

One thing is to be noted, that if (in putting in of the Instrument into the
Eye, to comprehend the parts united) you fear to hurt any part with the point,
then it is requisite to arm it with a little Wax, that it may be like the end
of a Probe.

To the parts thus separated, apply a Collyrium made of Plantain-water, and
Trochisci albi Rhasis sine opio: dissolving in an ounce of the Water, a dram
of the Trochises. Keep the parts asunder with small dosils of Lint put between
the parts disjoined, laying upon the Eyes a couple of Boulsters, cross-ways,
moistened with the aforementioned Medicament, and then rouling it up. Dress the Eye
Morning and Evening, to hinder Unition; and hasten the Cure, until the incised
parts be cicatrized, and no fear left of cleaving together again of those
parts, which by Mannal Operation were severed.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of an Ozaena.

HAving set down the Ulcers which ordinarily possess the Ears and Eyes, I must
not let those pass which sometimes trouble the Instruments of the other two
Senses, to wit, Smelling and Tasting, which are the Nose and the Mouth. Of all
the Ulcers of the Nose, I will only speak of Ozaena, omitting the rest; because
they require no singular consideration: for the general Indications of curing
of Ulcers, will serve to lead any man to the cure of these.

Ozaena has its denomination from (...), which according to Celsus, lib. 3. c.
11. is Faetor oris, the stinking of the breath.

Of it Galen, de comp. medicam. sec. lic. lib. 3. c. 3. so discourses:
Polypodes are bred in the Nostrils, which are Tumors unnatunl; but Ozaenae are
a kind of Ulcers, etc. First of all, I will speak of the Ozaenae, which are
produced of the influxion of sharp, and putrid, or rotten Humors. These Humors,
if they be only sharp, they produce Ulcers hard to be cured, but not of a
grievous smell: Out of Galen then you may gather, that Polypodes are only
Tumors in the Nose, but Ozaenae are Ulcers. Secondly, that there are two sorts
of Ozaenae; the one is of those which erode, being caused of the influxion only
of sharp Humors, but stink not. The other is of those which smell grievously,
and are caused not only of sharp Humors, as the former, but such also as have
Putrefaction annexed to the Erosion, Actuar. lib. 2. (...). c. 10. so speaks of
this kind of Ulcer. Ozaena manifests it self by its very name, which it has
taken from the stinking smell which it sends out. It is caused when rotten and
corrupt Humors gather about the Meatus colatorii, or the holes of of the
Ethmoeides, and communicate their Malignity to the adjacent part, and infect
others, which flow thither, with their ill smell. And tho at all times the
breath of the Patient stink; yet it is chiefly observed in strong expiration.
Cel. lib. 6. c. 6. thus writes: But if Ulcers be about the Nostrils which have
crust, and an evil smell (which the Grecians call Ozaenae) you are to
understand, that this Grief can hardly be cured: so that you see, that to
Erosion and Putrefaction Celsus adds crusts in an Ozaena. Gorraeus definitionum
med. lib. 13. affirms that this Grief is more frequent in our times, than it
was when the ancient Authors lived and practiced: by reason of the Lues
Venerea, or Pox, which has gotten sure footing in all Nations, and may be
accounted the badge and character of wandering Lusts, and Gods judgment
inflicted upon some for this heinous offense.

The Ozaena of the Ancients was only a malign Ulcer: but Ulcers of the Nose
which are seen in the Pox, are symptoms of that Grief which is contagious, and
by contact may infect others. Aegineta, lib. 3. c. 24. affirms Ozaena to be a
carious and rotten Ulcer, bred of sharp Humors flowing to the Nostrils, and
eroding them.

Out of the Discourses of the Ancients, this description of an Ozaena may be
framed, Ozaena is a malign Ulcer in the Nostrils, about the holes of the
Ethmoeides, caused of sharp Humors eroding the parts, if no evil smell be
adjoined; or having a putrefactive quality, if a noisome smell accompany the
Ulcer, sometimes without, sometimes having crusts.

The Causes antecedent are corrupt and sharp Humors flowing from the Brain, but
sent thither by the Veins and Arteries, wherein such Humors are contained.

The Causes conjunct are these same Humors impacted, and settled in the part.

An Ozaena is twofold: for it is either not contagious, such as the Ancients
knew, or it is contagious, a symptom of the Venereal Disease.

As for the Prognostics, receive these:

1. All sorts of Ozaenae are of a malign Nature, because such is the Humor,
which produces each one of them.

2. All such Ulcers are of hard cure: First, because the Brain still affords
plenty of these corrupt Humors. Secondly, because the part affected is of a
moist temperature. Thirdly, because the faculty of internal Medicaments, which
are prescribed for correcting of the malignity of the Humors, is much abated
before it come to the Head.

3. An Ozaena, a symptom of the Pox, is more easily cured, than that which is a
Disease it self: First, because the last comes nearer to a cancerous quality
than the first: Secondly, because we have more sure Medicaments against the
first than we have against the second: if this kind of Ulcer continue long, it
takes away the Sense of Smelling.

4. That which is apparent is of easier cure than that which is hid or latent:
seeing then ancient Authors, with unanimous consent, pronounce the cure of an
Ozaenae to be difficult, in setting down the Method of curing this Grief, my
part is to show what means Modern Practisers by their industry have found out
to remove this hardness of curing.

The means then which are appointed for the cure of this Malign Ulcer are
either Physical or Chirurgical.

The Physical are in number three: to wit, observation of a good Diet,
Phlebotomy and Purgation.

As for the Diet, that is most convenient which I set down in the two former
Chapters, wherein I discoursed at large of the curing of Ulcers of the Eyes. If
any one offer himself to be cured of such an Ulcer, let him be tied to these
Observations: First of all, that he shun all sorts of Meats, which are either
of an hard concoction, or afford a corrupt and evil Juice. Secondly, that he
use great moderation in the use of wholesome and convenient Food.

Fasting often in this case is very requisite; First, because it dries the
habit of the Body: Secondly, becauses it furthers concoction: Thirdly, because
by fasting those Vapors are digested, which otherwise would mount up to the
Head. And tho in the beginning, while the Body is fraught with sharp Humors,
the Sore may be exasperated by fasting; yet after that the Body is clean, and
discharged of such Humors, by frequent evacuations, you shall find the
commodity of fasting: howsoever, the Dinner must not be riotous, and the Supper
very spare.

The second Physical means is Phlebotomy: If the Body be pletherick. First,
open the Cephalica of the right Arm in Spring and Sammer; but of the Left, in
Harvest and Winter. Then three or four days afterward, open the Veins under the
Tongue, which will serve for derivation of the Humor, as the former did for
revulsion of the same.

This must much further the Cure: For first, Phlebotomy impairs the quantity of
the Humors contained in the mass of Blood: Secondly, it makes way for the
receiving of better Blood into the Vessels, which of necessity must ensue after
the appointing of a convenient Diet, and exquisite purging of the Body, which
immediately after Phlebotomy is to be performed.

The third Physical mean appointed for the cure of an Ozaena, was said to be
purging of the Body by Cathartical Medicaments: for vomitive Medicaments are
not so convenient as Cathartical, in the Diseases of the Head, unless the
Stomach be foul, and pestered with raw and corrupt Humors, which require a long
time for concoction: Vomitions (as is confessed by all Practisers) send up
Vapors to the Head.

These purging Medicaments are of two forts: for they are either Vegetable or
Mineral.

As for the Vegetable Medicaments, they must be of the strongest, which are
appointed for disburdening of the Head of ill Humors: such are Agarick,
Turpetum, Coloquint, Scammony, black Ellebore. But seeing the purgative Simples
are seldom ministered alone, I will show unto you what compound Medicaments are
sit to be used in this Case. The compound purgative Medicaments are either
Pills or Potions.

As for Pills: If the Humors be mixed, then use Extractum Panchymagogicum of
Paracelsus, or the Pilul. extract. Rudii; of them minister half a dram for a
dose: Let the Patient use this Medicament twice a Week. If Choler and Phlegm
corrupted be the material cause of the Ulcer, then minister the Pills called
Sine quibus esse nolo. If thick and gross Humors be the cause, minister Pilulae
anreae, and Cocciae, if corrupt Phlegm be the cause, minister Pilulae de
Agarico. Of these Pills minister one dram for a dose: let the number of the
Pills be according to the swallowing of the Patient.

If the Patient be hard to be moved to stool, you may actuate, and make the
Pills more effectual, by adding to every dose of the Pills four grains of the
Trochises of Albandal, and three grains of Diacrydium.

If the party cannot swallow Pills; then you are to minister Potions. The
Electuaries most fit for this purpose, are Diacatholicum, Caryocostinum,
Diaphaenicum, Electuarium de succo Rosarum, Confectio Hamech, Diacarthamum, Of
these Electuaries, and convenient Syrups, distilled Waters, or Decoctions, you
may make Potions fitting the constitutions of the parties grieved.

For one of a choleric Constitution minister such a Potion: Caryocestin. and
Electuar. de succo Ros. an. iij. Syrup. de Cichor. cum rhab. j. aq. Endiviae
iij. Misc. ut siat potio.

If the party be of a phlegmatic Constitution, minister this Potion: Diaphaen.
and Diacarthami, an. iij. Syrupi Ros. solut. cum Agarico j. aq. Beton. iij.
Misc. ut fiat potio.

If the diseased person be of a melancholic Temperature, then minister this
Potion: Confect. Hamech. iv. Diacartham. iij. Syrupi Augustani. j. aquae
Fumariae iij. Misc. ut fiat petio.

Thus you may purge the Body with vegetable Medicaments, if the Body of the
diseased party be weak, or if you fear the use of Minerals. But let me
insinuate so much unto you, that Mineral Medicaments, if they be well prepared,
are most effectual, and if they be ministered by a skilful Practiser, howsoever
they are slighted and despised by those who glory of the denomination of
Galenists, amongst whom some may be found, whose Skill is inferior to the Envy
of an Understanding Man.

Mineral Medicaments are more subtle and piercing than Vegetable, and sooner
alter the complexion of the party unto whom they are ministered. These
Medicaments are most commonly taken from Antimony and Mercury.

Antimony which purges most by stool is excellent. The Sulphur of Antimony
drawn by Art from the Recrements of the Regulus is good; as also the Regulus it
self calcined and sixed with Saltpeter, and brought to a white Powder. The
Glass of it, and Crocus Metallorum, are not so convenient and secure, because
they procure strong Vomitions.

There be diverse preparations of Mercury which are very effectual; as Mercury
precipitate with Aqua Fortis, the Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur, with Gold or
Silver, or precipitate, alone without the addition of any thing. There is
scarce a Surgeon, who is not able by one preparation or another of Mercury
to procure Saliration.

These Mercurial Medicaments are effectual, as well in an Ozaena which is a
primary Disease, or of it self, as in that which is a symptom of the Pox. You
have seen what Diet is most convenient, and what internal Medicaments are most
effectual in curing of an Ozaena: The last point which I propounded unto my
self, to attain the Cure of this Ulcer, was the right use of external
Medicaments.

These are in number two; to wit, local Medicaments, and an actual cautery.

As for local Medicaments, they are either Waters, or Decoctions, or Unguents:
But before you apply any Medicaments, to mundifie, incarnate, or cicatrize, you
must labor to remove the crusty substance, which does fix it self in the
forepart of the Ethmoides, or Os Cr^iriforme: and that for two causes: First,
because the Brain is hindered from discharging of the residue of the malign
Humor, which causes the Ulcer, and so the Cure is protracted: Secondly, because
the Medicaments cannot touch the affected parts, and so no alteration can be
procured.

For the removing of the crusty substance, I commend unto you two Medicaments:

The first is this: Ol. Amygd^^^um dulcium j. Spermat. Ce^ ij. exquisite
misceantur.

The second is this: Axung. Visi j. Pinguedin. Taxi ss. Ol. Senm. lin. iij.
Misc.

You must thus dress the Patient: Turn his Face upward, and let his Head be
bent backwards, then Morning and Evening with three Feathers tied together,
drop still some of these Medicaments warmed in a Sawcer, into the Nose, and let
the party grieved still draw in his breath, until he feels the taste of them in
his Mouth.

When you have perceived, that the crust is soft, Morning and Evening let him
snuff up into his Nostrils some of this sternutatory Powder: Ellebor. albi.
Nigellae, Tobac. an. j. Rorismar. Salv. an. ij. Moschi, gr. ij. fiat puivis
subtilis. Let him snuff a little up into his Nose every Morning, after you have
moistened the crust with some of the Medicaments set down before. When part of
the crusty substance is fallen out, dress it still after this same manner,
until all the crust is spent; then proceed to Application of these Medicaments
named by name.

Use these Waters.

First, the preeminence shall be given to Aqua Aluminis magistralis of
Fallopius allayed with Plantain or White Rosewater.

The second shall be this: Aq. Plantag. Card. Benedict. Ceras, nigror and
fragor. an. iij. Spirit. Vitriol. j. Misc.

The third shall be this: Aq. Aurifabror. and gemmar. quercus an. iv. Alum. ij.
Exquisite misceantur and depurentur.

The fourth shall be this: Aq. Alum. and Plantagin. an. iv. Mercur. dulcis ij.
Digerantur in cinerib. calidis per hor. 2.

As for Decoctions, I commend unto you these:

1. Flor. Ros. rub. pug. ij. Balaustior. ss. Rad. Tormentill. j. fol. Plantag.
Polygon. and Vincae pervinc. an. pug. 1. Boil these in six ounces of Spring
Water, until half be consumed; strain then the three ounces remaining, and
dissolve in them one ounce of Mel Rosatum.

2. Rhois Coriar. lb. ss. Alumin. ij. coq. ista, ac clarificentur albumine ovi
unius, ac colentur. Colaturae add Mellis Rosat. Syrup. Myrtill. and de Ros.
rub. sicc. an. j. I will not trouble you with great variety, as I might out of
the Monuments of the Ancients; seeing these will suffice, or else none.

The Waters and Decoctions you must inject by a Syringe warm, to make your
Topics answerable to the Air, which is drawn by the Nostrils, in the first
qualities, to wit, moist and hot: moist, I say, actu; but potentia, drying;
because Ulcers require such Medicaments: seeing both Water and Decoction, being
applied, do quickly evaporate, and leave the part affected dry, and thirsting
for other Topics.

Unguents now offer themselves; I will not supererogate in this point, but will
deliver unto you such as shall be effectual; and what is deficient in number,
shall be supplied by efficacy. Receive this as the first, out of David Sennert.
med. pract. lib. 1. part 3. sect. 4. c. 1. Plumb. usti, ^^thargyr. an. scrup.
j. Ceruss. (...) Armen. balaust. an. scrup. ss, O^ Ros. Myrtin. an. ss. C^rae
^^. scrup. j. Ducantur ista in m^rtario plumbeo, donce acquirant Vnguenti
consistentiam. The second shall be this; Unguent. de T^tia, and Unguent. Albi
Caphurati, an. j. O^. Myrtil. and Cydon. ^n. ij. Mercur. dulcis j. ss.
p^^^rizati, Misceantur. These Ulcers are to be dressed twice a day, Morning and
Evening.

Cancerous Ulcers also seize upon this part. This Grief hastened the end of
that famous Mathematician, Mr. Hariot, with whom I was acquainted but a short
time before his death; whom at one time, together with Mr. Hughes who wrote of
the Globes, Mr. Warner, and M^^ Turperley, the Noble Earl (...) Northumberland,
the Favourer of all good Learning, and M^^^nas of Learned Men, maintained
(while he was in the Te^^) for their Worth and various Literature. But seeing
those Documents, which I delivered for the cure of Cancers already, may
suffice, I will only set down the description of an effectual Water in this
Grief, which is this: Spermat. Ranar. and Iamae^^ an. lib. ij. gemmar. quercus
and hederae terrest. an. iv. Ex^^lletur aqua e stillatorio c^mmuns, under
prolici solet Aqua R^sacca in recipiens, cui immiss. sint C^phurae calcinatae
ij. Inject this Water into the Nose, and lay to the Sores either double Clouts,
or Lint moistened in this Water, as you shall think most fit, Morning and
Evening.

It only now remains that I speak a little of the Application of an actual
Cautery, which was ^^d to be the second external mean in the curing of an
Ozaera: this mean is only used when the Sore is rebellious to powerful onlinary
means; which happens either by reason of malignity or supersluous Humidity; for
according to Hippocrates, lib. 1. Aph. 6. Against extreme Griefs, extreme
Remedies are last.

The actual Cautery is applied for two purposes.

First, to cause an Eschar by impressing of it upon the Ulcer.

Secondly, it is used only to dry the Ulcer, by often applying of it, still
desisting before the party feel any pain, by reason of extreme heat.

If you mean to procure an Eschar, both the ends of the Pipe by which the
Cautery is carried, must be open: but if you intend desiccation, the end which
you apply to the Ulcer, must be shut.

If you have procured an Eschar, the fall of it is to be procured, as I did
show in removing of the Crust: this being done, proceed in curing of the Ulcer
as has been taught.

If you have only caused Desiccation by Iteration of the Application of an
actual Cautery, the manner of Cure is not to be altered.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Ulcers of the Mouth.

NOw am I to discourse of such Ulcers as befall the Instrument of Taste, which
is the Mouth.

It begins at the Lips, and reaches to the beginning of the Windpipe, and the
Gula, or Mouth of the Stomach.

It has four Uses: 1. It serves for Breathing, by sending fresh Air unto the
Lungs, and discharging suliginous Vapors sent from the heart by the Arteria
venosa.

2. It receives the Food, and having prepared it by the chewing of the Teeth,
and the Mandible, it sends it to the Stomach there to be chylified.

3. It serves for Speaking: the external and internal parts of it serving for
the framing of the Voice.

4. It serves for discharging of the excrements of the Brain, by spitting out
the excrements of the Lungs by expectoration, and by discharging the excrements
of the Stomach by vomiting.

Seeing then the Uses of it are so manifold and necessary, it behooves me to
discover such Diseases (belonging to our purpose) as deprive us of one or more
of these Commodities which it (...) us. But seeing some of the parts of it are
external, as the Lips; and some internal, as the Teeth, Gums, Roof, the Tongue,
the Almonds, the Uvula; I will only meddle with the Ulcers of the Lips, Roof,
Tongue, Almonds, Uvula, and the Ulcers of it beyond the Uvula, as only being
proper to my intention.

I will begin first with the Ulcers of the Lips: how hurtful the Ulcers of the
Lips are, you may gather from the Commodities, which they (being sound) afford
to Man.

The Lips afford a sixfold commodity to the Life of Man.

1. They serve for the convenience of Eating and Drinking, for they keep in the
Meat until it be chewed.

2. They beautify the Face, if they be well fashioned.

3. They keep in the Spittle of the Mouth.

4. They keep the Teeth and Gums from external injuries.

5. They serve for the framing of the Speech.

6. They serve for Kissing.

And tho the benefits, which re^^end to us by the Lips, being well affected,
may be hindered by s^ndry means; yet I will touch only but two sorts of Solution
of Unity befalling the Lips, as p^^per to the Subject that I have in hand,
which are the Chaps of the Lips, and the Ulcers of the s^^e.

Fissurae labiorum, or the Chaps of the Lips, proceed from a salt, ^^p, and
drying Humor, which (...) these narrow, but long small Ulcers, which are hot
and painful, chiefly when the party speaks, eats or laughs.

These Chaps, (tho they may without any great difficulty be ^^ed in persons of
a laudable con^^^tion,) yet in Cacochymical bodies they will give you somewhat
to do: insomuch that the Patient will wonder and fret, that such Toys and
Trifles cannot (...) speedily be cured; for so they term such Griefs,
considering not the quality but quantity of the Grief.

For the cure of these, I will commend unto you two Medica^^^^s of my own;
which I fami^^^ly use: The first is this: C^^. Flav. ij. Ol. Ros. Mell. and
Ax^^g. Por^. in Aq. Ros. lot. an. ^. Litharg. Argenti. Myrrhae, Zuzib. pulv.
an. j. fiat linimentar s. a. First moisten the part affected with the Liniment:
it is effectual, not only in Chaps of the lips, but in other Chinks or Fis(...)
in what part of the Body ^^^er they be, and it cures spee^^y.

The second is a Pomatum, the description whereof is this: Poma numero iij.
quibus insige Caryophyll. ss. Styrac. Calamit. iij. Benzoini ij. Ladan. iss.
Calam. Aromat. Cinamom. an. j. Axung. Porc. lib. (...) Lavendul. and Ros. an.
iv. Moschi, civetae an. gr. iss. Indantur ista vasi terreo satis amplo, ac
calore B. M. evaporentur aquae, and coletur Pomatum, quod in vase puro
servetur. You may conjecture the efficacy of this Medicament by the ingredients.

As for the Ulcers of the Lips, they are either mild, or malign.

As for a mild Ulcer, this Ointment described by Rened^^s, Antidot. lib. 5.
sect. 1. cap. 11. which he calls Vnguentum de minio, or Vnguentum rubrum
caphur^tum, is very effectual: compos. haec est: minii triti iij lithar.
argent. ij. cerussae ssj. tut. ij. caphur. ij. ol. ros. lb j. cer. albae, iij.
siat ung. ut ars praescribit. This Unguent is effectual against even old and
inveterate Ulcers, in what part soever of the body they be.

If you perceive an Ulcer of the Lip to be malign or cancerous, (which you may
conjecture if the color be livid, or blackish, if the brims be hard, if the
heat and pain exceed the quantity of the Ulcer, and it yield a sanious and ill
smelling Quittor;) then you are to look about, and to espy which are the most
powerful Medicaments.

When I discoursed of a Cancer, a Neme, and a Phagedaenical Ulcer, I set down
choice of local Medicaments: for such Ulcers, if they happen to invade the
Lips; here I will only give you a description of a distilled water, and of a
magistral Unguent.

The water is thus to be made: fol. plantag. solani hortens. veronic.
sempervivi major. and minor. an. man. iij. albumina ovorum conquassata numero
xij. alumin. contus. lib. ss. caphur. iss. Excoletur aq. calore balnei:
fomentetur cancrosum aut malignum ulcus hae aqua, quae and faciei ruborem
tollit. The description of the Unguent is this: plumbi iij. fundatur in
crucibulo, eique addatur Mercur. iss. postquam refrixit, in pulverem vertatur
massa, cui add unguenti de tutia vj. cerae ij. terebinthin. j. myrtil. jss.
fiat ung. quod ulceri post fotum applicetur. Delinatur ulcus singulis diebus,
qu^ties opus est. If you find the Ulcer to be rebellious, and not to yield to
these very convenient and effectual means, then are to you apply such
Medicaments as I have set down for the cure of a Nome, Phagedaena, and Cancer,
whither I remit you, to shun tedious and fruitless repetition.

To the Ulcers of the Lips, the Ulcers of the Palatum, the roof of the Mouth,
must be annexed. It is vaulted, that the Air being repercussed, the voice
should be the sharper: it is wrinkled and rough, where it covers the Bone, that
it might the more firmly cleave to it. and the better stay the Meat whilst it
is in chewing.

Now seeing all the internal parts of the Mouth are endued with the sense of
Tasting, but chiefly the Membrane which covers the Tongue; and have the
exquisite sense of Feeling by reason of the nervous Fibers, whereof they have
great store, you are to have a care that your local applications be not
distastful and loathsome, seeing the parts will abhor them. If then the
wrinkled skin, which covers the Os palati, be ulcerate: First, touch it with
Aqua Fallopii, allayed with Plantain water, if it be foul; or with this: aq.
plant. card. benedict. and sperm. ranar. an. iij. mallis ros. ij. ol. sulphur.
aut vitriol. j. Misc. Having touched the Ulcer with either of these waters
warmed sufficiently, apply this Medicament; syrup. e ros. rub. siccat. e baccis
myrti, and de su^es granatorum an. j. ol. vitriol. ss. Misc. Seeing the part is
moist, and will not admit the deligation, you are to dress it the oftener. If
you perceive the Os palati to be bare, then mingle some of this Powder
following, with these Syrups: far. hord. rad. irid. s^^phyti, tormentil. an.
ss. mastiche^, b^racis, sarcocoll. an. ss. fiat ex omnibus pulvis. If the rough
skin unite, as I have often seen, then have you obtained your desire.

If a small piece of the Os palati fall out; using these incarnative means, and
keeping the brims of the Ulcer raw, you may bring them together; but if a large
piece of the Bone come away, there is no hope of unition. In this case you are
to cause the party to wear a plate of Silver to supply the defect of the Bone,
that his speech bewray not the loss of it.

The third internal part of the Mouth, which uses to he ulcerate is the Tongue.

The Tongue affords four benefits to the Body.

1. It is the instrument of Tasting, by the benefit of the Membrane wherewith
it is covered.

2. It utters the Speech, by which we communicate our wants to others, and
implore aid in time of distress.

3. It helps chewing, by gathering of the Meat together, tossing ^it to and
fro; it turns also the ^eat down to the Stomach.

4. It serves for licking. To omit, that in our insancy we could not s^ck
without it: so we see, that if the fraenum of it come too near to the tip of
it, the sucking is hindered, ^^d it must be cut. Children who ^^e this infirmity
are said to be T^^gae-tyed. The flesh of it is (...), that it might receive the
(...) of the Sapors, and more ^^^rately judge of them.

If the sores of this part be but ^^^^ry and mild, this Medica^^^^ will serve,
if it be often ^^shed with it: hord. mundat. iij. rad. alth. ij. liquirit. iss.
B^^^ant. ista in lib. v j. aq. font. ^^^^dias, ac coletur decoctum, cui ^^^isce
syrup. viol. tussilag. and sca^^sa an. j ss. ac serva mundo vas^^d usum.

It falls out sometimes, that Sores i^ this Member prove malign and very
fretting, causing one of these Ulcers which are called (...) and (...), as it
once happened to the Lord Mayor of London, R^ph Freeman. He lacked neither
Physicians nor Physic, yet old age, weakness, and the malignity of the Sore
hindered the pro^^^ing of his Health, which his ^^ysicians and Surgeons aimed
at and wished for. The Ulcer was so corrosive, that it fretted asunder the
Veins and Arteries of the lengue, on that side which it possessed, and caused a
great flux of Blood, which exceedingly weakened him, for that present causing a
strong Syncope, so that afterward Nature could not recollect her self. When
such griefs befall great personages, their case is worse than that of the
poorest in the like infirmities, because Physicians and Surgeons are not
permitted to use the like liberty in the application of Medicaments to the one,
as to the other. If the like case fall out hereafter at any time, I advise you
so to use Medicaments borrowed of Vegetables, as that you contemn not Minerals:
What hurt I pray you can come from the use of Merc. dulcis, and Merc.
praecipitate with Gold? None I assure you, for these Medicaments are familiar
to Nature, and are true Balsames for malign Sores.

But you may ask what was the reason that these Medicaments were not used?

I answer, because there was no mention made of these Medicaments at the first,
and it was too late to minister them at the last, Nature being surprised; for
this only would have made the Medicament odious, and the Physician (who should
have advised this course) obnoxious to calumny and reproach.

Now time admonishes me to come to the Ulcers of the Uvula or Gargarion.

If they be mild and ordinary, the former Medicaments set down for the cure of
the Tongue will be sufficient.

But if it be a fretting Ulcer, first you are to admonish the Patient of some
accidents, which may ensue: and those are Two in number.

The First is, That if the Uvula be wholly fretted away, the party shall hardly
be able to speak clearly and distinctly. Howbeit both Bauhinus in his Theatr.
anatomicum, and Gulielmus Fabricius cent. 2. observe. 21. do affirm, that in
some they observe it to have been lost, not leaving any defect in their speech

The Second accident is, the danger of a Phthisis, or Cough of the Lungs; for
this is to be feared, seeing the member which did hinder the rushing in of the
cold Air into the Lungs, and put back from the Breast Humors distilling from
the Head, is wholly taken away.

Having acquainted the Patient with the Prognostics, I proceed to the Cure.

This is performed either by the application of convenient Medicaments, or else
by cutting it away.

As for the Medicaments, use first this Clargarisme: fol. plantag. veroni^. and
sigill. Solom. an. man. j. scord. orig. centaur. minor. an. man. ss. Bulliant
ista in lib. ij. aq. font. ad consumpt. lib. j. and coletu. decoction, in quo
dissolve oxymellis simplicis iij. Then touch the Sore Morning and Evening with
this liniment: ung. Egypt. ss alum. pulv. ss. mel. ros. i ss. Misc. applicetur
mane and vesperi.

If it proceed from a Venereal cause, use this Topic twice a day: aq. card.
benedict. and plantag. an. vj. aq. fort. j. Misc. You may also use the blue
Water, which you may buy for three pence a pint after the Silver is separate,
after solution, and has no other metal in it, but a little of Venus. If these
means will not prevail, then you must wholly cut it away.

But according to Valescus de Taranta, you must observe these five things
before you go about this operation.

1. You must purge the Body well.

2. No Humor must be in flowing to the part.

3. You must not attempt this operation as long as there is hope, that other
Medicaments will prevail.

4. Go not about this operation, unless it be small about the root; for if it
be thick, and red, or blue, such a flux of Blood may ensue, as will strangle
the party, and cause fainting.

5. Mark, how much of a necessity must be cut off; for a little remaining will
both further the Speech, and repel the cold Air from the Lungs. If after the
cutting of it off, a flux of Blood ensue, either apply astringent powders to
it, or else cauterize it with an Uvula Spoon made hot.

If the Tonsillae or Almonds be ulcerate by reason of the influxion of sharp
Humors, which your Eyes can discern, the Tongue being pressed down by your
Spathula, carry in mind these prognostics.

1. If these Ulcers be without a Fever, they are the more safe.

2. If these Ulcers happen in the Summer, they sooner spread.

3. If the Almonds become Scirrhous, they are hardly or never cured.

4. These Ulcers (as all other Ulcers of the Mouth) require stronger
desiccatives than Ulcers of the external parts. First, to hinder them from
spreading. Secondly, because they are still kept moist with the spittle.

For the cure of these Ulcers, I ^ill deliver unto you two local Me^caments:
The First is the de^oction of the root of the Devils^it, to be used instead of
a garga^^^. The Second is a liniment ^o be applied after gargarization ^^ed by
Sennertus, and set down ^^dicin. pract. li. 2. c. 22. cen^^r, minor. rad. irid.
stercor. carini. an. j. cum melle despumato fiat electuarium. As for the
faculty of a white Dogs-turd, read Galen. li. 10. de simpl. med. facult. c. de
stercore canino.

If the Throat beyond the Uvula be ulcerated, use this water instead of a
gargarism as a certain experiment. aq. plantag. l. 1. ros. rub. flor.
aurantior. an. j. pulv. Merc. subli. ij. digerantur in arena per horae
quadrantem, ac coletur aqua, quae in vase vitreo servetur ad usum. If by reason
of these Ulcers the party cannot swallow any solid meat, minister to the
Patient Mercurius dulcis for four Mornings together, and you shall perceive a
wonderful effect. Give it in new Milk.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Ulcers of the Lungs.

SEeing the Lungs very often become ulcerate, a solution of ^^ty in the
substance of them, or ^^apertion of the vessels of them, ^^ch are the branches
of vena arai^sa and arteria venosa, being ^^sed by a wound: I must not ^et such
Ulcers slip untouched.

Two causes of such Ulcers of ^^e Lungs after a wound inflicted ^ay be
assigned: to wit, a solu^on of unity in the substance and ^essels of the Lungs,
and effusion (...) Blood into the hollowness of the Breast. You shall discern
the Lungs to be wounded.

1. First, if srothy Blood issue out of the Wound and Mouth by coughing, which
shows some of the vessels to be wounded, and opened.

2. Secondly, difficulty of breathing troubles the party wounded.

3. Thirdly, pain of the Sides is grievous, which he felt not before.

4. Fourthly, It is more easy for the Patient to lie upon the wounded, than
the whole Side: so that often he can speak readily so lying; but being turned
upon his sound Side he can but with pain and difficulty speak.

You shall perceive and gather, Blood to have been poured out into the capacity
of the Breast by these signs.

1. If a heavy weight seem to press down the Midriff.

2. Secondly, if the party breath with great difficulty.

3. Thirdly, if the Fever increase.

4. Fourthly, if the wounded party void Blood at the Mouth.

5. Fifthly, if the breath of the party stink after a while: for that betokens
the Blood to be turned into Quittour.

6. Sixthly, the wounded person can only lie upon his Back.

7. Seventhly, the party has a desire to vomit, and strives to rise, from
whence fainting ensues; for noisome vapors arising from the clotted Blood
turned into Quittour assault the Heart, and weaken it exceedingly, and dissolve
the faculty of the Stomach.

After that the wound is inflicted, and that you have dressed it so long a time
as you have required in former times for healing of a penetrating wound of the
Breast, (which will be shorter in the Summer, than in the Winter: for heat
helps digestion) you may fear that a Fist^^la at the least, or a putrid Ulcer
of the Lungs will ensue: chiefly if a thin Sanies, and not a laudable Quittour
flow out, far in quantity exceeding the bigness of the wound.

Why in wounds of the Lungs, so much Quittour every day is ^^^t out, these are
the causes.

1. The vicinity and nearness of the Heart, which being the welspring of Blood,
sends too much of it to the part affected: And when as it cannot make use of
all of it, by reason of weakness, it turning the remainder by its ^^^^ral heat
into Quittour, discharg^^ it by the orifice of the Wound.

2. Because the sound parts se^d unto the diseased Blood and Spirits without
mean or measure.

3. Because the Lungs draw more nourishment to themselves by their motion,
heat, and pain, than they are able to digest,

4. Because the Ulcer like a devouring Wolf by its malignity and filth,
presently corrupts the Blood sent for nourishment unto the Lungs, turning the
greatest ^^^t into Quittour, and defrauding the part affected of maintenance:
from whence ensues an extenuation of the whole Body.

Now that you may the better foresee and foretell to the Patients the events of
such Ulcers, I would have you to mark these Progrosticks, which I shall deliver
unto you.

1. All Ulcers of the Lungs are hardly, or with great difficulty ^^red, and
that for four causes.

1. Because the Muscles of the Breast, Lungs and Heart, are in perpetual
motion: now motion hinders consolidation, as all by erperience know.

2. Because the Lungs are only ^nvironed by the Pleura, the skin inwardly
investing the Ribs, which is endued but with small store of Blood, and being a
spermatick part, to wit, a Membrane, is not easily united: and that only by the
second intention.

3. Because local means cannot be kept to these Ulcers, by rolling,
boulstering, and emplastering, as they may to Ulcers of the external parts.

4. Because the orifice of the Ulcer is not commonly in a depending part; but
either parallel, or higher than the Ulcer. How hard a matter it is for Quittour
to ascend, I leave it to your consideration.

5. If the party pine not away, if he expectorate easily, if he sleep
reasonable well, if he digest his Meat, if his Stools be orderly, if the
Quittour be indifferent good; you may conceive some hope of a Cure.

6. But if the diseased parties Breath smell ill, if he consume, if the
Quittour which flows from the Ulcer stink, if he has a grievous Cough, and
difficulty of breathing, if a ^ngring putrid Fever troubling Ear^ chiefly
toward night, and hindering his sleep, follow him, if his ^ppetite decay, and
concoction of the Aliment be empaired; if a ^otten piece of the Lungs, or of
the branches of the Windpipe, be thrown out at the Mouth, if he have a
whistling voice, as if he ^^ke through a Cane, his case is desperate.

7. If his Hair fall, which happens by reason of the want and corruption of the
nourishment: if the (...) grow crooked, the flesh of the tops of the Fingers
being spent, if the Cheeks grow to be of a leaden color; but when after meat
they seem ruddy, vapors mounting thither; if the Feet begin to swell, the
natural heat being spent, if Lice multiply by reason of the corruption of the
Humors, you may pronounce that a Diarrhoea or humoral Flux ensuing, the party
shall depart.

8. Although some have lived many years who have had an Ulcer of the Lungs, as
Avicen reports, that he saw a Woman who lived twenty three years, or
thereabout, with an Ulcer of the Lungs. And as Matthew. de Gradib. in 9. Rhas. c.
54. affirms, that he saw a Woman who still was busied about the fire, who lived
twenty eight years; yet be not you too forward to take in hand such persons as
have ulcerate Lungs; for the cure is uncertain, and that for four causes.

1. By reason of the symptoms which ensue, as a lingering Fever, and
Consumption of the Body.

2. Because the Quittour which is contained in the spongy substance of the
Lungs, cannot be voided by expectoration without coughing; which much troubles
the Lungs, and exasperates the Grief.

3. Because the Medicaments which are ministered to cure these Ulcers, cannot
come to the Lungs in their full force.

4. Because the Fever and Consumption of the Body require those things which
are moistning, but the Ulcer those things which mundify and dry.

If it chance, that by Art and good luck you cure an Ulcer of the Lungs, charge
the party that he walk circumspectly in the course of the residue of his life;
for many times when the Ulcer has seemed to have been cured, yet the Cicatrix
being removed by the ill carriage of the Patient, the Ulcer has gotten footing,
and been the cause of untimely death, as Oalen witnesses, lib. 4. de loc.
affect. c. 5.

When you go about to cure such Ulcers, you are to propose three Indications
curative to your selves.

The First is, the appointing of a convenient Diet.

The Second is, the ministering of fit pectoral Decoctions.

The Third is, the artificial dressing of the Ulcer.

As for the Diet: the party having an Ulcer of the Lungs, must eat meat of an
easy concoction, because Nature is much weakened; of good juice, lest
putrefaction be increased; and Lastly, of much nourishment, because the Body in
this Grief is most commonly much extenuated only I will briefly touch some
kinds of Food, which are endued with these qualities

The First that offers it self is Milk, for it nourishes the Body, it affords
matter for Blood, it corrects the acrimony of corrupt Humors; with the Wheyish
part it mundifies the Ulcer, with the Curdy part it consolidates, and with the
buttery part it moistens, and stays the desiccation of the Body; Woman's Milk
is most familiar: By the sucking of a Woman's Breast I saw a Weich Gentlewoman,
called Mrs. Price, recovered of a Phthisis, who could not turn he self in her
Bed, by reason of weakness, and could not take any other food. Asses Milk is
thinner and more wheyish, and so more apt to mundify. Goats and Cows Milk
obtain a mean between these two.

But lest it corrupt in the Stomach, you are to dissolve some Sugar or Honey in
it.

You are to minister it only when the Stomach is empty, and no other Meat is to
be taken before it be digested; otherwise it will curdle, become sour, and be
corrupted.

So much of it is to be given, as the Stomach of the party can well digest:
wherefore first prescribe a less quantity, and ascend to a greater.

Abstain from appointing of it, if the party be Feverish, have the Headache,
and be troubled with flatuosity.

Snails and Crabs are much commended in this grief; nevertheless seeing they
are of a thick, tesrestrial, and slimy substance, and afford corrupt and
excrementitious juice, it may be doubted whether they be good or no: to omit,
that they are of hard digestion; the broth of them boiled in Milk, and sweetened
with Sugar, and mingled with other broths, may be good: for so the nourishment
will be the more solid.

As for pectoral Decoctions, I will not trouble you with any great variety of
them; only I will set down a few, but the paucity thall be recompensed with the
efficacy.

8. rad. enul. ij. scob. guaiact lb. ss. hyssopi, marrub. a b^, an, man. ij.
Polypod. Liquirit. an. iss. Fic^um incisar. passul. major. excinat. an. iij.
Insundantur infundend: per noctem in Aq. Font. servent. lb xviij. deinde, addit
is reliquis, coq. ad consumpt. lb vj. a^ coletur decoctum, quod clarisicetur,
edditis sacchari and Mellis an. ij. Creci j. atque iterum coletur: ut^tur aeger
hoc decocto loco consueti p^^us.

2. Rad. Chin. iv. Symphyti, T^mentill. irid. an. j. Capill. Vener. Tussilag.
scabios. Marrub. alls, Hyssopi, an. man. j. Flor. Viol. B^ray. buglos. an. pug.
j. Flor. Herbae Para^s. pug. ij. Flor. Alth. pug. i. ss. Caricar. ping. iij.
Liquirit. ij. Sonin. Ceriand. Anis. an. vj. Inf^^^antur ista, ut superiora, in
pari quantitate aquae, ac decoq. ad ^^s^^pt. lb vj. ac coletur decocton, quo
utendum loco consuets paus.

Every Morning the Patient is to take half a pint of either of these Decoctions
warm, and to eat a logerge of Saccharum rosatum ^^^ell^tum, or two drachms of
the Conserve of red Roses, being a ^^elve-month old.

Now I am come to the artif^il dressing of Ulcers of the ^^^est.

The Medicaments which are sit^ct for the dressing, are Injections ^y a large
Syringe.

As for the Simples whereof the Injections are made, they must not be of bitter
things, as Worm^ood, the lesser Centaury, or Car^^^ Benedictus; for as
judicious (...) d^^gent Ambros. Paraeus notes, (...) lib. 9. c. 31. these
bitter (...) being injected, are first drawn in by the spongy substance of the
Lungs, and from thence are sent by the Trachaea Arteria, to the Throat; where
such a bitterness is felt, that it causes a desire to vomit, so that they
rather hurt than profit.

These Injections are either abstersive or consolidative.

Of abstersive Injections I will set down a few, as a Pattern, by which you may
make others.

1. Marrub. alb. Hyssopi, Scabios. an. man. ss. Coqu. in lb iij. Aqu. Font. ad
medietat. consumptionem. ac coletur decoctum; quod postea clarificetur addit.
mell. lb i. ss. atque iterum coletur.

2. Aqu. hord. lb j. Mellis Ros. ij. Sacchari Rubri iij. Misc. bulliant 3 aut 4
ebullitionibus, ut injectio clarificetur, quae postea coletur.

If you perceive, that the Ulcer is sordid, and affords much matter, you may
add either of Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, or the Oil of Sulphur, or Vitriol, so much
as you shall find fit to cleanse the Ulcer.

When you perceive that the Ulcer is sufficiently mundified; which you may
gather, if laudable Quittour flow, and in no great quantity; then hasten to
consolidate the Ulcer: I will in this case surnish you also with effectual
Topics, and but few: the first shall be this:

1. Decoct. pectoral. iv. Syrupi e Ros. rub. sico. j. siat injectio.

2. Head. terrest. stor and sol. Symphyt. Sanicul. Plantag. Polygon. Millefol.
vinc. pervinc. Equiseti, Hyper. Eupat. Beton. Valerian. an. man. ij. Limaces
numero xl. Cancros fluviatil. numero x. Addita Aqu. pluviali, instituatur
distillatio in alembico, ut extilletur Aqua. Aqu. hujus lb ss. Syrup. Myrtil.
and e ros. rub. siccat. an. iss. Syrupi Granat. j. ss. Misc. ut siat injectio.

These Injections must be warmed, when they are to be used. Into the Orifice,
which is in the Breast, somewhat must be put to keep it open: this then is to
be performed either by a Tent, or a Pipe made either of Gold or Silver.

The materials of the Tents are three; Lint, fine Tow, and a Sponge. Lint is
altogether unapt, for it is apt to fall asunder after that it is made up into a
Tent: if therefore a piece of it part, and rest upon the Diaphragma, it must
putrefie there, and send noisome sents unto the Heart, which cannot but bring
Faintings, and at the last shorten Life.

Good Tow then is better than it, because it cleaves fast together; but the
Sponge is best of all, because it does not only cohere sirmly, but draws also
strongly the Quittour, and imbibes it.

It is good so to form the Tent; that the outer end being broader than the
inner, it may be staid from slipping: it is not amiss to halter them with thread
for this same purpose.

A Pipe is best of all; it must be of thickness proportionate to the Orifice,
having two stays to hinder the slipping of it into the cavity of the Breast;
and sundry holes somewhat large about the end, to give way to the Quittour. It
must also be somewhat arched lest the Lungs butting against it, should suffer
any hurt. The outer hollowness is to be stopped with a Sponge dipped in Aqua
Vitae and Wine mingled together, and warmed, and wrung. Above the Teats and the
Pipe apply Emplastramd^ menio, or Diachalciteos.

(...) the Ulcer run much, it must be dressed twice a day; but if it run
little, once dressing will serve.

You may demand of me, when the Tents and Pipe are to be left?

I answer, when the Ulcer yields but a small deal of Quittour, and that good;
and seems to be almost dry: for siccum est sano pronimum, that which is dry
comes near to that which is whole.

If you keep the Orifice of the Breast too long open, it will fistulate.

It falls out many times, that it Ulcers of the Breast, the diseased person
grows lean. In this case you are to permit the party to drink some Almond Milk
made o^ Chicken broth, wherein have bee^ boiled Pompion, Cucumber, and
Muskmelon seeds, with Mallow roots, Cowslip flowers, Succo^ slowers, and
Marigold flowers, between Meals, and in the Night time after two a Clock; or
min^ ster a dram and a half of the Powder which I will set down every Morning
and Evening, in s^ ounces of one of the pectoral D^coctions, which I described
(...) the beginning of this Chapter.

The description of the Powder is this: Semin. Papav. albi. iss. Gummi
Tragacanth. Far. Oro^^ an. iiss. Semin. Alth. Portul. C^^en. Melon. Pepon.
Plantag. H^^^^am. alb. an. iij. Coral. rub. ^^eparat. Perlar. praeparat.
Succini ^^i. preparat. an. iss. Liquirit. iv. Sacchari rosat. Tab^llat. ad
pondus omnium: siat pulvis.

If these courses being used faithfully; do not prevail, acquaint the diseased
parties friends with the dangerous estate wherein he is; for no other
Medicaments are like to prevail.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of Ulcers of the Back, the Abdomen, and Joints.

ALthough one might rest contented with what has been ^^eady delivered
concerning Ulc^s; yet that none may justly say, that anything absolutely
necessary has been omitted, and to further the practice of those which are ^^t
so well versed in the curing of ^^p^ticular Ulcers, I will briefly (...) down
some notes concerning Ulcers of the Back, the Abde^^^, or lower Belly, and of
the J^^^^s.

Vlcra dorsi, or Ulcers of the lack, most commonly fall out after (...), or
^lematous Phlegmons, wherein Merbi acuti ex decidentia (...).

Now that you may the better understand what I mean, I must degress a little,
and show you what D^^eases are termed Morbi acuti, and how many kinds of them
there are.

Mer^i ac ti, or sharp Diseases, are properly called such as with great
expedition, force, and danger go on to their status and extremity of the
symptoms, as may be gathered out of Galen. 2. Aphor. 19. and 23.

Now there be three kinds of these Morbi acuti, or sharp Diseases; for they are
either peracuti; very sharp, acuti simpliciter, simple sharp, or acuti ex
decidentia, or sharp Diseases ending into other Griess.

Peracuti end at the furthest on the seventh day, and they are of two sorts,
exquisite peracuti, of perperacuti, or exquisitely very sharp, which end on the
fourth day, and non exquisite peracuti, which are not exquisitely very sharp,
which continue till the seventh day.

Now the simpliciter acuti in like manner are of two kinds: for they are either
exactly so, and end for the most part on the fourteenth day; or not exactly so,
which may continue till the twentieth day. You may, and (I make no doubt) do
see examples of these in burning and pestilential Fevers almost every Week.
Last of all are acuti, (...), ex deerdentia, which may be prolonged unto the
fortieth day: Diseases which continue longer than forty days, are called Morbi
Chr^^^^, or Diuturni, long or lingering Discases. Some of these Chronical
Diseases may end in sixty, some in eighty, some in an hundred, some in two
hundred days: some may continue a whole year, some seven years, some twice
seven years.

1. I law a Scotch-man, whose surname was Johuson, a Sadler by profession, who
followed the Court in Queen Elizaboth's Reign, who was troubled twelve years
with a Quartan Ague without intermission; neither can I affirm, that it left
him during his life time.

2. Being in the Isle of Shepp^, in Minster-street, curing one Clover an Aged
Man, whom I dismembered, there was a Girl brought to me, of seven years of age,
which for the space of six years was grievously tormented with an exquisite
Quartan. The Lives of these Persons may be well termed living Deaths. Some of
these lingering Diseases again continue in Boys until the fourteenth year of
their Age, and in Maids until their courses flow: as the Falling Sickness.

Now to come to Apostems of the Back, which leave Ulcers after they are brought
to suppuration and opened; They are for the most part critical Translations of
Humors, sent in Morbis acutis ex decidentia, sharp Diseases which continue
until the fortieth day; or in Chronical Diseases, the continuance of which is
uncertain, sent from the inner either noble or ministerial parts from within
outward; the Physicians say, this is done per diadosin: whereas if noxious
Humors be turned from without inward, as in pestilential and Venereal Buboes,
they affirm this to be done per metastasin.

Critical endings of Griess, are either performed by Excretion or Translation
of the Grief.

1. By Excretion Nature exp^^^s the peccant Matter sundry ways, as by Vomit,
Siege, Sweating, Bleeding at the Nose, the flowing of the Menstruous Courses,
and the Apertion of the Hemonholdal Veins, as you may observe every day in the
termination and ending of sharp Fevers.

2. In Translation, the peccant Matter is not altogether discharged out of the
Body; but is sent from the part affected unto another part by provident Nature.

But seeing the Humor may be sent from the outward parts to the inward, and
from the inner ports to the outward, this last Trans^^tion is most secure; for
if the first be done in malign and contagices Diseases, as in the Pox and
Plague, all understanding Practisers pronounce either Death, or pro^^^ction of
the Cure.

When therefore these Apostems appear either in the Back, or one of the great
Joints, which afterward degenerate into Ulcers, the motion of the Matter by
Nature is laudable, doing it by Translation; seeing she cannot by Excretion,
partly by reason of the weakness of the principal parts, or by the plenty, or
hard concoction of the H^mor.

But this is the misery, that the F^aends or Kinsfolks of such a dise^sed
person think him or her to be ^together safe and secure, when they see them
eased by the translation of the Humor, and therefore to spare charges call not
for ^ilsul Physicians, and Surgeons, by whose Skill and diligence the motion
of Nature might be furthered. And so it falls out many times, partly by reason
of the thickness of the Skin, as in the Back, or by reason of the thickness of
the Skin and compactness of the Mem^^anes, as in the Joints, that the Vert^^^ae
of the Back are corrupted, and the Cartilages, and Tendons of the Joints,
before remedy is sought for.

But that you may meet with these hide-bound Patients, and keep your selves
from incurring d^nger of discredit, mark these Prognostics, which I will
deliver unto you.

1. If after Inquisition you find that a Tumor in the Back conti^^ed a long
time before it did break of it self, or was opened, suspect the Ulcer to be of
hard Cure: for it is likely that the Vertebrae of the b^^k are foul.

2. If the Vert^brae be foul, which you may easily find out by your Finger or
Probe, the case is desperate: wherefore take heed, that you promise not a Cure.

3. If in Ulcers of the Back you see the parties Body day by day to become more
and more extenuate, advertise the Parties Friends of the danger: for it is an
evident Argument that the principal Parts are weakened, and cannot wholly
discharge the Humor which offends.

4. Ulcers in the upper part of the Spina dorsi are more easily cured, than
those in the Loyns^ Because the Abdomen or lower Belly sends out more
superfluities than the Thorax or the Breast, which is the middle Cavity.
Secondly, because they are nearer to the Heart, the Sun of the little World,
who by his heat is able to consume much superfluous Humidity.

I think it will not be unpleasant to you for me to confirm my last
Prognostics, by true relation of the Events which besell me when I practiced
in Wales in the like Griefs: seeing Examples leave a deeper impression in the
Mind, than Precepts, and lead best to the Cure of external Griefs.

In Denbigh-Town there was one Richard Price an Haberdasher, son to John Price,
who kept the principal Inn of the Town, who after he had been troubled with a
Chronical Disease, felt in his Back a little below the Shoulderblades, a Tumor
still increasing in the outward parts, as he was eased in the inward, until at
last it grew to the bigness of a Penny Loaf. I having been called unto it, by
opening of the Apostem, and using Methodical Indications, cured the Patient.
This Man (as I hear) having given over his Trade, still keeps the Inn, which
his Father did.

In this same Town about the same time, a lusty young man, whose surname was
Owen, whose Father was a retainer to Sir John Salisbury, had the like Tumor in
the Vertebrae of the Loins, after a lingering Grief: I having been entreated by
the truly Worshipful Sir John Salisbury, (who had not an ordinary Skill in the
knowledge of Plants, and in performing Chirurgical Cures) took a view of the
young Gentleman. After mature deliberation, I told Sir John and the young man's
Friends, that there was much Quittour in the Tumor, which must be discharged;
and that the event of the Cure would be uncertain, if the Matter were let out,
for the Reasons above specified. At the entreaty of Sir John Salisbury, and the
young Man's Parents and Friends, I opened the Apostem which was in the
Vertebrae of the Loins: And tho no means were omitted, which seemed to us
effectual for the recovery of the young Man's health, and that the Verte^rae of
the Loins were not foul; yet he fell into a Marasinus, or extenuation of the
Body, being otherwise a proper and valiant young Gentleman; and so ended his
Life before Age called for his dissolution, to the great grief of his Parents
(having no other Son but him) and the commise^ation of the worthy Knight. I
have delivered unto you my Observations in this Grief, whereof I hope you will
make good uses you having occasion ministered to be wary, by the Examples of
others, which is no mean benefit.

How I performed the Cure of the first Patient, now I will declare unto you:
First, I purged his Body with a gentle Medicament: It was this: Electues.
L^nitiv. iv. Electuar. de s^^^ Res. ij. Srrup. Ros. solutsci (...) Agarico j.
Aq. C^cher. Mise. ^^ fiat potio. Secondly, I applied the Lapis infernalis to
the depending part of the Tumor: Thirdly, I opened the Apostem, making (...) a
small Orifice through the Esch^^. Fourthly, every day I dressed the Sore, still
suffering a little of the Quittour to flow out, until all was discharged.
Fifthly, I used a m^ndifying Injection, until I per^^^e^ the Sore to be clean,
not slia^ing, and so to afford both laudable, and small store of laudable
Quittour. Sixthly, I used a ^^^solidative Injection, and Bo^^sters somewhat
thick, to comp^^^ the Sore.

The mundifying Injection was this: Vini albi lb. j. M^^s Rosati iij. Unguent.
Aegyp^^^^ ss. Misc. ut fiat injectio usapanda caada. The consolidati^^
Injection was this: Aq. Phetag. iv. Srrup? Myrttni and (...) Ros. rub. siccat.
an. ss. Tro^^^se aiber. Rhas. sine Opio. ii. Mis^^^ fiat injecsin, applicanda
item ca^^^^ All such Injections must be wauned; for cold, as Hipp^^^es
witnesses, is hurtful to the S^^na^^s Medulla. The Emplister which I used was
Diach^^^^ cum Gummi. By these mears I cured the party in three Weeks space.

Now Ulcers of the Abdomen, or of the lower Belly, do offer themselves only to
be but compendiously touched. Seeing there are three parts of it, Regio
Epigastrica, Vmbilicalis, and Hypogastrica, the upper, the Umbilical, and lower
Region; I am to show unto you what parts in these Regions most commonly suffer
ulceration.

I saw the Stomach of one Mishess Fern, together with the Muscles perforated
by the Erosion of a sharp Humor, in the Howlt, a Town distant from Chester five
Miles: the Meat, Drink and Chyle came through the perforation: the Ulcer also
smelled strongly. I being unwilling to deal with her, prescribed some local
means, which wrought but small effect; for she died of a Marasmus, or
extenuation of the Body, within a short time: the Ulcer hindering the
Chylification of the Aliment, and so defrauding the Body of nourishment. My
Opinion was then, and now is, that Ulcers penetrating into the cavity of the
Stomach are mortal, tho Wounds of this kind be sometimes cured: for in the
second there is but a bare Solution of continuty; but in the former there is a
Solution of continuity having annexed to it the sharpness and malignity of a
Matter. Here in London, in an Inn a little above Fleet-conduit, one Richard,
who was Tapster of the Inn, had for a long time a great pain in the right Side
of the Epigastrical Region of the Abdanen: In progress of time there appeared a
great hard Tumor, causing a sharp Fever: at last the Plegmon breaking of it
sell, sent out great store of Quittour. I then lodging at the Sign of the Naked
Boy, a little below the Conduit, was sent for, finding him in a strong Fever,
and having difficulty of breathing, the Tumor of the Liver hindering the free
motion of the Septum transversum, the Instrument of Natural Respiration, I
pronounced his Grief to be mortal, and so it fell out: for tho no rational
means were omitted, fit to have recovered the party, if the Grief had been
curable, yet the party died. It were but fruitless labor to set down the
Medicaments which were used, seeing they prevailed not.

This History I thought good to set down, that you may imagine what the Event
is like to be, if you should be called to the like Grief.

It falls out sometimes, that superfluous flesh grows above the Navel, if it be
slackly bound, and be left somewhat long, which does become ulcerate: This I
saw once in Tavestock, a Town in the West Country, in Devonshire, in a Child of
Master Moon's, a Draper of that Town. I having been called to the Cure, first
bound off the Navel by a strong Ligature, afterward I cured it by the
Application of Vnguentum de cerussa.

In the Groin after a Phlegmon of it opened, oftentimes an Ulcer is left,
penetrating through the oblique and transverse Muscles of the Abdomen: If you
perceive such an Ulcer, pronounce it not to be of easy cure, chiefly if it
fall out to be after a Venereal Babo: For first, there is Morbus cum causa, a
Grief having the cause annexed: Secondly, it corrupts the Fibers of the
Muscles: Thirdly, it corrupts sometimes the Vertebrae of the Loins, in which
case all Medicaments are fruitless, because the grief is mortal: This happened
to a young Woman, who dwelt with the Lady Lucie, whom Master Napkin dressed,
and opened after her death. Both Dr. Gifford and I were called to view the Sore
sundry times; and tho means were used for her recovery, yet they did not
prevail; so that she died of a Marasmus, the Body becoming extremely extenuate;
although she seemed to be of a firm and thick habit of Body, when the Tumor
first appeared. If any such Tumors come to your hands, after they are brought
to maturation, use the general means prescribed for the cure of a Lues Venerea,
lest the like event happen to you.

I will touch briefly the cure of Ulcers of the Joints, which differs but
very little from the cure of Ulcers in other parts, saving that they require
Medicaments of more desiccation without any sharpness, and more powerful
anodyne cataplalins for asswaging of pain, which is, an inseparable accident of
Ulcers, seizing upon these parts.

Apply then to the Sore Desiccativum rubrum, and anoint the brims with this
liniment: Unguent. popul. and albi Caphurati an. j. Ol. Cydonit. and Papaverin.
an. ss. Mise. ae fiat liniment. ex art. Before you apply your Medicaments,
foment the part with a fomentation made of Sumach, Pomegranate Pills and
Flowers, red Roses dried, and Myrtle-berries infused in astringent red Wine,
being put into a long and narrow Gallypot, and set it in a warm place, or in a
Posnet having in it boiling water.

In curing of these Ulcers often purging is required, to stay the flowing of
sharp Humors; but seeing every purgative Medicament is not of like efficacy, I
will set down one as a pattern, after which you may frame others: Car^ocestin.
and Elect. de succo ros. an. iij. syrup. ros. solut. cum Agaric. j. aq. Cichor.
iij. Misc. ut siat petie. You may either detract from the quantity of the
purging Electuaries, or add to them what you shall think sit, after you have
diligently considered the strength of the party.

THE PRACTICE OF SURGERY. BOOK III.
CHAP. I.
Of the description of a Wound, the differences, and general fountains of
special Prognostications.

I Having completed the Doctrine of Ulcers, which was the Second Treatise of
the First part of Surgery, called by me (...), which teaches the unition of
parts d^^oined; now order of Doctrine requires, that I discourse of Wounds in
like manner, whereby the appatent solution of the unity of the soft parts of
the Body is procured, as well as by Ulcers.

Of this Treatise there shall be Two parts. In the First I will set down those
things that concern Wounds in general. In the Second Part I will show how
Wounds of the several parts of the Body, which require special consideration,
are to be cured.

In the general Doctrine concerning Wounds, I will set down these three things;
The First shall be of the nature of a Wound: The Second of the general
Prognostics of Cure: The Third shall be of the last scope of the Surgeon.
The Nature of a Wound is made manifest by setting down, First, what a Wound is;
Secondly, which be the main differences of Wounds. In showing what a Wound is,
First I must deliver the denomination of it: Secondly, the description of it.

A Wound so called in English, in Latin is termed Vulnus, and in Greek (...).
Now to set down the variety of descriptions that are assigned by Authors, who
have delivered Monuments of this subject to posterity, it would prove a task
more laborious than fruitful: and the examination of them would serve rather
for ostentation, than edification. Most of them which are set down by modern
Writers, will not endure the trial of the Laws required by Logicians in a good
Definition. Wherefore I will leave the refutation of the escapes committed by
Authors in this matter, which only teaches what is not to be learned. Hieron.
Fabricius ab aqua pendente Chirurgiae suae part. secunda lib. 2. c. 1. thus
defines a Wound.

It is a solution of continuity caused in a soft part of the Body by an
external instrument: for explication of himself he adds. By a seft part,
whereby I understand every substance of the Body, the Bones being excepted.

But by his good leave, as a solution of unity in the Bone caused by erosion
and putrefaction, is called (...) or caries, and if it be caused by a violent
but blunt external instrument, it is called (...), or fractura; so if a
solution of unity be procured in it by a sharp incising instrument it may be
called (...), or ^^bius, a Wound. Truly Hippocrates in his sixth Section in
his Treatise of Wounds of the Head thus speaks: Vulnerum ossis capitis tot
sunt genera: Of the Wounds of the (...) of the Head, so many sorts there are,
etc. Besides this, in adding to a cariosity of the Bone caused of a corrupt
Humor, and to a fracture procured by the violence of a blunt instrument, a
Wound inflicted by a sharp instrument intising, the discourse will be more
methodical and plain: To the end then that you may fully know the nature of a
Wound, receive this description of it.

A Wound is a Solution of Unity, caused by an external Inst^^ment incising in
any part of the Body. In this description you are to note these four things;
The First is the Genus; The Second is the efficient Cause of it; The Third is
the Subject of it; The Fourth is the manner of making a Wound. The Genus is
comprehended in the first words, where it is said to be a Solution of Unity;
for this is common to a Tumor, Uker, Wound, Fractures of the Bones, and
Luxations of the same, because in all these there is a Solution of Unity; The
efficient Cause is said to be an external Instrument: An external Instrument, I
call that which is without the Cuticula or scarf-skin, and has no coherence or
familiarity with the parts of the Body, as a Sword or Knife. By the efficient
Cause it is distinguished from an Ulcer: For as an Ulcer is procured by a sharp
internal Humor eroding; so a Wound is caused by a sharp ext^^nal Instrument
incising. The Subject wherein the wound is received, I assi^^ to be any part of
the B^^, whether the part be exterral, as when the Head is woundal with a
Sword; or internal, as when the Stomach is cut, either by a piece of Glass, or
a Diamond swallowed, they being sharp edged or peinted. And if the Bone b e
incised, as well as the soft parts, a Solution of Unity in it is called ^^nus,
a wound, against Fab. ab ^^a pendente. The manner of inflicting a wound is
termed by me Incision, or Division by cutting: and this term makes the
difference between a Wound and a Contusion: for as a Contusion is caused by a
blunt Instrument forcibly separating; so a Wound is inflicted by a sharp
Instrument incising. Thus you have the description of a Wound, and the
explication of every part of it briefly set down: By which you may examine the
desiuitions of others who have written of this subject, when you shall take
them into your hands.

The Second point which I affirmed fully to make up the nature of a Wound was,
of the differences of it. And in setting down of these, expect not the full
enumeration of all which may be named, as those taken from the quantity,
whereby a Wound may becalled great or small; or from the time and continuance,
from whence a Wound may be said to benew or old, and such like, which must be
touched in the Prognostics of every particular Wound. Only I will deliver
such as are taken more inwardly from the nature of a Wound. Then a Wound is
either such a one as was known to the ancient Writers, or was unknown: the
Wounds known to the ancients are either simple or compound: the compound are
either mild or malign: the malign are either caused by a poisoned weapon, or
bitings, or stingings of venomous creatures. The Wounds which were not known to
the ancients, are those which are made by Gunshot. Here you have the requisite
and necessary differences of Wounds, which do cause some variation in the
cutting, represented to the Eyes of your Mind, as in a Table which in my
proceeding I mean to handle exquisitely. So much then shall be sufficient to
have been set down concerning the nature of a Wound, which I affirmed in the
beginning to be manifested, by delivering the description of a Wound, and the
diverse kinds of it: Now it follows that I speak of the Second general point,
to wit, of the general Prognostics of Cure in Wounds. Whenever then a
wounded person is presented unto you to foretell the event without error, you
are to consider that Wounds are twofold: for they are either mild, which are
easily cured, as a small wound in a fleshy part; or they are grievous, and
cured with some difficulty at the least. Grievous Wounds are either periculosa,
or malefica, or lethalia, or difficilia, Periculosa, or dangerous Wounds, are
such as sometimes are cured, tho for the most part they bring death; such are
superficial wounds of the Brain. Difficilia, or Wounds of hard cure, are such
as may be cured, if they be skilfully dressed; but if they be not handled by a
cunning Chi^urgeon, remain uncured, as some penetrating wounds of the Breast,
Malefica, or mischievous Wounds, are such as leave a hurt still after them,
when they are cured: such is a Wound by which a Muscle is cut transverse quite
asunder; for then the use of that part is taken away, which was moved by that
Muscle.

Lethalia, or deadly Wounds, are such as bring inevitable death: such are
Wounds which divide the great vessels near to the Liver or Heart. So the noble
D. of Buckingham was dispatched by a wound which he received in the Arteria
venosa.

If you would know to which of these a Wound (which is offered to you to be
cured) is to be referred, you must diligently examine these four things: First,
the part affected. Secondly, the adjuncts of the Wound. Thirdly, the habit of
the Body. Fourthly, the things not natural.

As for the part, you are to consider, First, its Dignity: Secondly, its
Substance: Thirdly, the temperature: Fourthly, the situation of it: Fifthly,
the quantity in the bigness and number: Lastly, the use of the part.

Adjuncts to be considered in a Wound are these: the bigness, the Figure, the
Situation, the Symptoms, and last of all, other diseases complicate with the
wound, as the French pox, or Dropsy.

As for the habit of the Body, you are to consider, whether it be good or ill,
of a loose or a firm substance, whether it be full or extenuate: neither is the
temperature of it to be neglected.

As for the things not natural, as Air, Meat, and Drink, sleeping and Watching,
and the rest of them, I will show the use of them when I am come to the
consideration of every particular Wound.

Now it follows, that I show you the use of these Prognostical Springs or
Fountains, by setting down some Predictions derived from them.

First, a noble part, the Origination of a Faculty, in continual motion, the
Body being of an ill habit, receiving a great wound, must of necessity cause
death: By Induction I will make this manifest.

Secondly, the Heart being deeply wounded, causes either a sudden or speedy
death. First, because it is a principal part: Secondly, because the natural
Faculty proceeds from it: Thirdly, because it is in continual motion: Fourthly,
because it is of a hard and compact substance, and so not easily united:
Fifthly, because it is a very hot part, and so very subject to inflammation:
Sixthly, because it is single, and there is no other part which can perform the
function of it.

Thirdly, Wounds of the Brain in like manner are deadly, if they penetrate to
the Basis: Because it is a principal part, the wellspring of the animal
faculty, in continual motion: and because Inflammation, and a sharp Fever
ensues. If a wound of the Brain be only superficial, it is to be accounted only
dangerous; partly because the motion is gentle, partly because the substance of
the part is soft, and so apt to receive Consolidation.

Fourthly, small Wounds of the Liver, tho they be dangerous; yet they may admit
Consolidation: First, because the substance of the Liver is like coagulate
Blood, and so may easily be united: Secondly, because if one part of it be
wounded, the other will do its Office; as we may observe in those, the part of
whose Liver is possessed with a scirrhous Tumor.

Fifthly, a Wound received in the Vena cava, within the Belly or Breast is
deadly: First, by reason of its substance; for being nervous, it hardly admits
Consolidation:

Secondly, by reason of the situation of it; for a Surgeon can hardly come
to it to apply any local Medicaments.

Sixthly, Wounds in the fleshy parts of the Diaphragma, or Mid^^ff, are
dangerous: First, because we cannot come to dress them: Secondly, because it is
in continual motion: Thirdly, because the parts within the Breast are easily
inflamed. But if it be wounded in the nervous parts, inevitable death ensues,
because a delirium by reason of the inflammation always ensues, and sometimes a
Convulsion.

Seventhly, Wounds of the Lungs are sometimes deadly, if a great vessel in them
be divided, as the Vena arteriosa. Yet if the party live, they prove most
commonly m^^chievous, leaving a Fistula: of the cure of which I discoursed in
my Treatise of Ulcers.

Eighthly, Wounds of the Spleen, if they be not great, and procure not an
Hemorrhage, they are not deadly: Because it is neither a principal part, nor
the Origination of any Faculty; but only appointed by Nature to be a Receptacle
of saeculent and black melancholic Blood.

Ninthly, Wounds of the Costis fellis bring death at last, tho slowly. First,
because we cannot come to it conveniently to apply sit Medicaments. Secondly,
because it is of a nervous substance, which does not easily admit unition.
Thirdly, because the Humor which it ought to contain until the time of
excretion; corrupts the parts, unto which it is sent.

Tenthly, a Wound in the mouth of the Stomach is grievous: First, because it is
of an exquisite Sense. Secondly, because fearful symptoms, and swoundings and
faintings ensue. Thirdly, because there must be a difficulty of swallowing.

Eleventhly, Wounds of the Kidneys, if they pass not to the Cavity, bring not
inevitable death: yea, some are of opinion, that (...), that is, extraction of
stones out of the Kidneys by incision, may safely be administered. Of this
operation I will speak in its own place.

Twelfthly, Wounds of the small Guts are for the most part deadly: First,
because they are of a membranous substance: Secondly, because they are of an
exquisite Sense. But Wounds in the thick, Guts are more easily cured; because
their substance is more thick and so admits more promptly agglutination; and
being not so sensible as the small Guts are, faintings and other fearful
symptoms do not so frequently invade.

Lastly, if one be wounded in the Mesentery, inevitable death must ensue:
First, because there must be a great Flux of Blood by reason of the multitude
of Veins in it: Secondly, because we cannot easily come thither, to apply local
means: Thirdly, because the Chyle is stayed from passing to the Blood; and so
Sanguification is hindered, without which the Body cannot subsist.

I did affirm some Wounds to be maligna, or mischievous, which leave some hurt
or imperfection in the parts after they are cured: of such receive these
Examples following.

First, a Wound above the Eyebrows, with a Fracture of the Scull, when the
Wound is incarnate, can hardly be brought to a cicatrice.

Secondly, if the Brain be remarkably wounded, the party remains foolish, and
more stupid than he was before.

Thirdly, if the bottom of the Stomach be wounded, imbecility and weakness of
Concoction ensues.

Fourthly, if a Nerve or a Ligement which ties Bones together, or a Muscle be
transversly cut asunder, motion is hindered.

Fifthly, when the Glarea, or the substance which is found in the great Joints
to moisten them, resembling the Whites of Eggs, is let out by a Wound, the
Joint grows stiff; and so the motion is impaired.

CHAP. II.
Of Symphysis and Syssarcosis, and the means of staying an immoderate Flux of
Blood in a Wound.

HAving in the former Chapter set down the two first Points of the general
Doctrine of Wounds, to wit, the Nature of a Wound, and the Fountains from
whence Prognostics of Wounds are fetched; and having by propounding some
Examples showed the Practice of them: Now I am to set down the third general
Point, which is the last scope and end which the Surgeon proposes to
himself, when he goes about to cure any Wound; and that is the Unition of the
parts joined.

First, then I will set down the diverse sorts of Unition or Union of the parts;
then the Causes which procure this Union.

Of Union then there are two kinds; the first is called Symphysis, or
Agglutination, or Concretion. The second is named Syssarcosis, Colligation, or
Concarnation. Symphysis is the Unition of parts disjoined, no middle substance
concarring.

This kind of Union is said by Surgeons to be performed by the first
Intention. And if the team of the first Intention or Scope were not so to be
taken, that would be absolutely false, which Hippocrat. 6. Aphorism. 19.
affirms, that the Praeputium or Foreskin being cut asunder, does not admit
Unition. But it is not to be doubted, but that it will admit Consolidation by a
fleshy substance ^^iting the parts disjoined: tho this cannot be done by mere
Agglutination. And whereas Galen, 90. Art. Medic. avers Union in the
instrumental parts to be impossible; to make this good which he affirms, we
must observe one thing, that in this place an instrumental part is not taken in
its amplest signification, by which it comprehends all parts that are
ministerial to other parts: and so Veins and Arteries are instrumental parts;
because they serve the the Heart for distribution of Blood and Spirits for the
maintenance and good of the Body. But an instrumentary part is here taken as it
is opposite to a simple part: for all the parts of the Body are either simple,
as the Flesh, Veins, Fibers, etc. or compound or instrumental, as a Finger; and
so instrumental parts taken in this signification are not united by Symphysis,
they being wounded; but by Syssercosis, that is, not after the first, but
second Intention. And so Galen in 91. cap. following explains himself: where
talking of a Wound in a Bone, he says, But if a Bone suffer Solution of Unity,
it cannot be united, as I said: And he adds this Clause, Yet may be united by
the second Scope. He means by the growing of a fleshy substance between the
parts of the Bone severed.

But you may demand of me, what parts admit Unition by Symphysis, or the first
Intention?

I answer, that the fleshy parts disjoined admit this sort of Consolidation in
all the Periods of Life, and the Spermatick Parts before the seventh year be
expired, a Bone being excepted: but they are only united by the second
Intention after the seventh year expired.

The second kind of Unition of parts severed by a Wound is called by Galen de
comp. Med. secund. loc. cap. de plaga, Syssarcosis: and it is nothing else but
the Union of parts disjoined, by a middle substance. Now this Substance is
sometimes like the parts which it unites, as in Wounds in fleshy parts: or it
resembles not the part which it unites, as in Wounds of the spermatick parts
after the seventh year.

Having delivered unto you the two kinds of the Union or Consolidation of parts
separated by a Wound, now I come to the Causes of Unition or Consolidation of
the parts separated. These Causes are either efficient Causes, or instrumental.
The efficient Causes are two, to wit, Nature, and the Surgeon. Nature out of
doubt is the chief efficient Cause; for she ever laboring to preserve her
self, sends unto the parts of the Body so much of the natural Balsam of it as
is sufficient to unite the parts disjoined. If you would know what I mean by
the term of the natural Balsam, I mean the Radical and Alimentary Moisture, the
seat of the natural heat, by which two every individuum or singular person is
maintained, and subsists.

Now there are four things which may hinder Nature from effecting of the Union
of parts disjoined: The first is an evil Conformation; as when the brims of a
Wound are not proportionally and handsomely united and set together. The second
is the continuance of this ill Conformation. The third is an unnatural Body
remaining in the Wound: this unnatural Body is either unnatural by Event, as a
shiver of a Bone separated from the whole, or by its own Nature; as when a
piece of the Weapon which wounded does stick in the Wound. The fourth is the
Distemperature of the wounded part: for if it be either too hot, or too cold,
the Distemperature must be removed, and the natural Temperature restored,
before Unition can be expected or procured.

The second efficient Cause of Unition of parts severed by a Wound, I affirmed
to be the Surgeon: he is the Minister, not the Lord of Nature, and is only
to further her designs, and to labor to remove the Lets and Impediments which
may hinder her from attaining her purpose, which is the Restitution of the
parts disjoined to their natural Union. The Surgeon then is to perform some
Duties. Now these Duties are either common to both kinds of Unition, to wit,
Symphysis and Syssarcosis, or they are proper to each. The common Duties are in
number seven, First, the staying of Blood. Second, the removing of strange
Bodies from the Wound. Third, provision that no such Bodies fall into the
Wound. Fourth, that he maintain the natural Temperature of the part. Fifth,
that ^e restore it, if it be lost. Sixth, the consideration of the Quittour and
Excrements, which flow from the Wound. Seventh, is the removing of general
Accidents.

In the staying of Blood the Surgeon is to set two things before his Eyes:
The first is, how much Blood he is to suffer to flow before he stay it, if the
wounded person must lose any Blood? The second is, by what means the Blood is
to be stayed?

As for the quantity of Blood which is to be suffered to flow; you may suffer
it to flow plentifully, if the party be of a sanguine constitution, have a
sleshy habit of the Body, if the Veins be large, and if the Season be hot; for
this hinders Inflammation to ensue. If you find Indications contrary to these,
then it must flow but sparingly; for it is the Treasure of Life.

The means of staying of the Blood are in number eight.

The first is, the application of Pledgets, or Dosils of Lint or ^^ow mo^stned
either in the Whites of Eggs beaten, or in Vinegar and Water, taking in tender
Bodies one part of Vinegar, and three of Water; but in hard Bodies you may take
one part of Vinegar, and two only of Water. This mixture is called Posca: it
must be applied warm; for cold Applications are hurtful to Wounds. Apply not
dry Lint, or Two dry, to a Wound bleeding in any way; for they cleave so firmly
to the brims of the wounded parts, that they procure often a new flux of ^ood,
when they are removed: seeing they must with some force be remored: Unless
Fomentation with some moistning and malaxing ^^^or be used, as with Milk or
^^tter, and Beer warmed: which ^e not to be used in Wounds in ^e fleshy parts.

The second is the Deligation of the Vessel, which sends forth ^ood, whether it
be a Vein or Artery: This is to be used when geat Vessels are wounded. Am^^se
Parey lib. 11. c. 20. would ^^^e this mean to be used after the Amputation of a
Member, (...) you may read: but in my ^^dgment his practice is but a ^^blesome
and dangerous toy: a be shall find, who shall go to ^de trial of it. In the
Deligation (...) a Vessel, two things are to be ^^fidered.

The first is, that if a Nerve ac^^pany the Vessel, which sends ^uth Blood, (as
you may see in the (...) Artery, which has the ^^^rent Nerve annexed to it,)
(...) are with your Nails to sepa^^e the Nerve from the Vessel; (...) the part
into which the ^e^e is inserted shall be deprived (...) ^^^ing, and feeling;
and ex^^^dnary pain will be caused.

The second thing to be considered, in the deligation of a Vessel is, that the
binding be not too strait, because so the Vessel shall be cut asunder too soon,
and so a new fluxion shall be procured.

The Thread, wherewith the Vessel is bound, must be either of strong Silk or
Steel-hemp, as they term it, such is sealing Thread: For these are not so
subject to putrefaction, and so there is less fear of a new Hemorrhage, which
would prove more dangerous than the first.

The third mean to stay bleeding, is the application of Sarcotical, or
Incarnative Medicaments. Such is that which Galen prescribes, 5. Method. 4. of
Aloes, Frankincense, the Down of a Hare, and the White of an Egg, all being
brought to the consistence of Honey. In tender Bodies, take one part of
Frankincense, and two of Aloes: In hard Bodies, one part of Aloes, and two of
Frankincense. In those, who have a mean habit of Body, use equal parts of both.
Olibanum in guttis is better than Frankincense. Apply this Medicament upon
Pledgets or Dosils of Lint or Two. The manner of dressing is this. Couch the
Vessel with the Finger, then cleanse the Wound from the clotted Blood, and all
moisture, with a piece of Sponge wet in red Wine, or any astringent Decoction.
Afterward besprinkle the parts of the Wound about your Finger, with the Powder
of Aloe and Frankincense. Then apply a Pledget or a Dosil armed with the
forenamed Medicament, which presently press down with your Finger. Last of all,
keeping down the Applications either with your Finger, or with a Probe, fill up
the Wound with Pledgets or Dosils armed. This being done, nothing remains, but
to apply a double Cloth moistened in some astringent Liquor, and wrung, to the
wounded part, and to roll it up; begin to roll below the Wound; when you are
come to the Wound, compass it with three or four Circumvolutions: Then ascend
and roll the part above the Wound, to press the Blood out of the Vessel, and so
the flux of Blood will be stayed. You are not to open the Wound afterward, but
either upon the third or fourth day. Then all the Pledgets or Dosils, except
the last, which immediately cleaves to the Vessel, are to be taken away, and
new ones to be applied; the wounded parts having been besprinkled with more of
the Powder. Thus you are to dress the Wound every other day, until the part be
incarnate, and no fear be left of any more bleeding.

The fourth way to stay bleeding, is the injection of astringent Medicaments;
if we cannot come to reach to the Vessel with the Finger, by reason of the
depth of the Wound, such are Bole Armenick, terra sigillata, marking stone,
Hypocystis, sanguis Draconis, new Galls, Juice of Sloes, Plantain, Comfrey,
Knotgrass, Milfoil, Horsetail, and Leeks; of these you may frame such
Compositions as this is: Succi consol. Major. Poygon. Equiseti an. ss. Succi
fol. porri j. Bol. Oriental. j. Sanguin. Dracon. ss. Misc. Such Medicaments are
powerful, when the Menstrual Courses in Women flow immoderately.

The fifth way to stay bleeding is in the tranverse section and cutting asunder
of a great Vessel, which pours out the Blood. Whenever a horrible essusion of
Blood follows after a Wound, you may gather that the Vessel is not cut asunder
tranverse, unless there be an enormous separation of the parts wounded, not
differing much from dismembring: for if the Vessel be cut tranverse wholly
asund^^ by a sharp Weapon, that part o^ it which is next to the radication of
it, shrinks up toward its beginning, and is covered with the flesh of the
adjacent parts. If suc^ a case be presented to you, follo^ Gal. his counsel,
who 5 Meth. ^ advises, that you lift up the Vess^ from the subjacent parts with
(...) silver Hook, and so divide it being separated; and that afterward yo^
twist the upper part of the Vesse^ which is easily done by laying ho^ of that
part of the Vessel which without the Hook. That kind (...) silver Hook which is
used in Anat^mical dissections, is sit: for the wreathing of the Mouth of
the Vessel hinders the effluxion (...) Blood.

The sixth way to stay Bleedi^ in a Wound, is to cause an Esch^ Now this may be
done either (...) an actual Cautery, or by an (...) charotical Medicament: But
(...) ought not, but upon great nec^sity, to have recourse to Usti^^ First,
because it is horrible to t^ sight and apprehension; for it do^ in a manner
exanimate cowar^ persons. Secondly, because the be^ fit of it is uncertain: for
oftentimes after that the Crust or Eschar is fallen, a new Hemorrhage ^^sues.
If you be driven to use the actual Cautery, then you are to observe two things
in the Action: The first is, that you cleanse the Wound from closted Blood,
that the Vessel may plainly appear, otherwise you having burned only the
coagulate Blood, you shall think the burnt Blood to be a Crust caused in the
Vessel, which is not so; and so the next day it being ^^ffolved, will give way
to a new f^^^ion. The second is, that you apply the Actual no more than ^^ce,
or twice at the most: for by the first impression of the Cautery, the Vessel
shrinks together; but by the second it is wrinkled, if you apply the actual
Cautery a third time, it is turned into a Coal, which being dissolved by the
^^istore of the Blood in the Vessel, will fall away, and so ^^ke way for a new
fluxion of ^^ood.

The Medicaments which stay ^^eeding by causing of an Eschar, ^ethese, Vitriol,
Alume, Ae^yptia^^ sharpened with calcined Vi^^^, Oil of Vitriol, and Oil of
S^phur, Aqua Fortis, and Aqua (...), the Trochises of Minium ^^^bed by Vigo.
But a Medicatant made of Umber, an Earth, which the Painters use, and Calx
(...), exceeds all these: for it c^^ses little pain, and mightily closes the
Mouths of the Vessels.

About twenty years ago return^^g from the Bath in Sommersetscare to the Howlt
five Miles from Chester, where then I remained, having lodged in Newport in
Shropshire by the way, I was called by the Lord Gerrard to Gerrards Bramley, to
take a view of his Tailor, who had fractured both the Focils of the Leg, a
little below the Knee, about the breadth of a palm, When I beheld a Fracture
with a Wound, and an extenuation of Body (for the Accident fell out ten Weeks
before) neither were the Bones united; and besides, there was a great Tumor in
the Knee; I pronounced a lingering death to the party, unless he were out of
hand dismembered above the Knee. Being entreated by the sick party and the Earl,
to perform this Operation, I yielded unto their request; but having by me
neither Instrument nor Medicaments, thus I supplied the defect of both: I made
a Medicament of Umber and unslaked Lime, taking equal parts of both, which I
found there, the House then being in reparation; I used a Joyners Whip-saw
newly touched: And in the presence of two Surgeons, Mr. Cole, who dwelt in
L^chfield, and Mr. Heywood, who dwelt in Newport, I dismembered the Lord's
Tailor, to whom the Lord gave ten pounds a year during his life time; who lived
many years afterward. When I dressed the Wound the fourth day, I found the
Mouths of all the Vessels shut by incarnation, so powerful was the restrictive
Medicament, made of equal quantities of Umber and unslaked Lime, rubbed to a
fine Powder, and reduced to the form of a Liniment by the addition of the
Whites of Eggs beaten, and the Down of an Hare. Fallopius in his Book of Wounds
has an ingenious device, which is this. He will have you to take a Reed, which
in bigness is answerable to the capacity of the Wound. The one end being
stopped with a Cork, he will have you to fill it with German or Hungarian
Vitriol melted; when the Vitriol is cold, it is to be thrust in one end an inch
without the Reed, and to be kept to the Vessel for the space of an hour; in
which space of time the Mouth of the Vessel will be shut firmly.

Seventhly, a Flux of Blood is stayed by opening of a Vein in the opposite
side, tho much Blood has been lost; but the Blood must be drawn leisurely;
Besides this, the extremities of the Body must be bound with reasonable strait
Ligatures, where it shall seem best to the skilful Surgeon.

The eighth way to stay Blood, is to cool tho whole Body: for so the Blood is
congealed, and made unapt to flow: This is performed two manner of ways: First,
in letting down the wounded party, laid in a Sheet, into a Bath of extreme cold
Water, to procure a Lipothymy or Fainting; and by this the Spirits return from
the extremities of the Body to the Center. Secondly, this is performed by
Narcotical Medicaments: Receive this one as a Pattern: Diascord. iij. Philon.
Persici ss. Syrup. Papav. albi j. Aq. Papav. errat. aut spermat. ranar. iij.
Mise. ut si^t P. sumenda frigida: After the Patient has taken the Potion, let
him be kept quiet, and let him compose himself for sleep. Although this Dose of
Narcoties may seem too large, yet it may be given again after twelve hours are
expired, if need shall require: These two last practices are excellent in
immoderate Hemorrhages at the Nose.

CHAP. III.
Of removing extraneous Bodies from a Wound.

THe second Duty which a Surgeon is to perform for Nature, in assisting her,
in furthering her inclination, and in procering Unition of the parts severel by
a Wound, is, to provide that to external or strange Body be suffered to be in
the Wound, which may hinder Unition. In this Point two things are to be set
down: First, the differences of strange or extraneous Bodies: Secondly, the
means by which they ^e removed. As concerning the differences of these Bodies,
they are extraneous either by Accident, (...) of their own Nature. Those which
are extraneous by Accident, ^e of three sorts: for they are either soft, as
pieces of contused or squ^ted Flesh, and clots of Blood; or they are hard, as
pieces of Bones or Cartilages; or they are of a mean substance, as pieces of
Membranes, Tendons, Chords and H^^t. Now these Bodies which ^e extraneous of
their own Nature, are either soft, as pieces of the wounded man's Garments; or
^^^d; and these are either metall^e, as pieces of Steel, Weapons and Bullets;
or not metalline, as (...) of Wood, Gravel, and such (...)

Having described, as it were in a Table, the diverse sorts of extraneous Bodies
(to help the Memory) which are able to hinder the parts disioyned in a Wound,
as long as they continue in the Wound; I am now to deliver unto you the ways
and means by which they are to be removed, and taken out of Wounds.

First, then, things extraneous accidentally, as clotted Blood, Hair, Dirt or
Gravel, they may be washed away with Claret or white Wine warmed, Aqua vitae,
Vinegar and Water, Oxymel dissolved in Water: or if you be in the Country,
where these things cannot be had, you may use Milk, or Beer, or Ale warmed. You
are not to omit cleansing of the Wound with a Probe armed with Lint. If splints
of Bones, or pieces of Flesh, Membranes, Tendons, or Ligaments stick in the
Wound, you are to take them out either with your Forceps or Ravens Bill.

Having showed you, how things accidentally extraneous, which might hinder
Unition of the Wound, are to be removed; now I must in like manner set down how
Bodies of their own Nature extraneous, which stick in the Wounds and hinder
Consolidation, as pieces of Weapons, Bullets, and such like, are to be taken
out. In the extraction of these Bodies, you are to set before your Eyes these
two things; to wit, the Circumstances and the manner of extracting of them; as
for the Circumstances, these two are to be observed.

First, that you attempt not the extraction of such Bodies as cannot but with
great difficulty, pain and danger be drawn out, and with the which remaining in
the Body the Wound may be cured; such are Bullets sticking deeply in the great
Joints, as the Elbow and the Knee.

The second is, that you go not about the extraction of such Bodies, if you see
the Wound to be Mortal, and that the Party must Die, the Prognostic of such
Wounds I delivered unto you in the first Chapter of Wounds, whither I remit
you: for if you draw out the Weapon wherewith a great Vessel of the Liver or
Heart is wounded, you shall hasten Death: so the pulling of Feiton's Knife out
of the Body of the Duke of Buckingham, the Arteria Venusa having been wounded,
procured speedy Death. So much then of the Circumstances to be observed, before
the drawing out of extraneous Bodies.

Now I will acquaint you with the means, by which they are to be removed: The
means are two: Medicaments and Instruments. We use Medicaments; First, when the
Extraction cannot easily be performed; as when we cannot lay hold upon the
extraneous Body by any fit Instrument: Secondly, when there is no suspicion
that the Weapon was poisoned, or that Apostemation is not like to ensue. If
therefore a Thorn, or a Needle so stick in a part, that they cannot be taken
out, without great p^^^ and large incision of the part, it is best to have
recourse to Medicaments. I saw one who carried a Thorn, which run into his Leg
above the Tibia, between the Periosteum and the Skin, (when he thrust through a
Hedge in Hunting,) five years. The Medicaments which have a faculty of drawing
out those Bodies, which of their own Nature are extraneous, are of two sorts:
for they are either Simple or Compound.

As for the simple Medicaments, they are of three sorts: for some effect this
by an hidden or occult faculty: Of such Paulus Aegineta, lib. 4. cap. 52.
writes thus: Pieces of Weapons, Ar^^u^s and Thorns, which stick in the Body,
these things under written (...) out; Both the Pimpernels, the Root of
Aristolochia rotunda, Ammonlacum, leaves of Henbane stamped, and applied in
form of a Cataplasm, Root of the Reed leaten and mingled with Honey. You may add
to these horned Poppy Leaves stamped, and used as Henbane.

Other Medicaments extract such Bodies by an accidental heat purchased by
Putrefaction, as Birdlime, stinking old Pigeons durg, Leaven, and such like.

The third part of such Medicaments are hot in the second or third degree, and
of subtle and thin parts, as Onions and Garlic roasted, Pitch, Rosin of the
Pine, A^^e Hepatica, Assa foetida, Elemi, Prep^^is or Bee-glew, the green
Leaves and Roots of Dittany, Sagap^nam, Galbanum, Euphorbium; but in a small
quantity, and mingled with other matters.

Of these simple Medicaments, s^^dry Compositions may be framed: but to omit
superfluities, I will only deliver unto you three compound Medicaments, whereof
the first two are set down by famous Fallopius in his Book of Wounds: The third
is Empla^^^m Sacrum. The first of Fal^pius is this: Propol. rad. reward
Diclammi, Sagapeni an. jss. ^^manti. flercoris Columbin. putris, (...). j.
Cepam coctam numero uram, Picis liquid. and Mellis an. (...)ut comma acquirant
formam Cataplasmatis, quae in mortario diligonter claborentur. The second of
Fallopius more strong than this, receives these Ingredients: R^^^^cent. Dictam.
pulv. Dictamni ^^t^ei, Sagapeni, Assae faetidae, Eleni an. j. Visci ss. Resin.
pim j. Euphorb. ss. Sulphur. vivi. ij. P^^^. liquid. and Mell. crud. an. q.
(...) metur Cataplasm. The third compound Medicament, which I promised to
deliver unto you, was Emplastrum Sacrum. The description of it is this:
Litharge. lb j. Ol. lb ij. Colophon. lb. ss. (...) iv. Ammon. ij. Galbani ss.
Aristol. rot. ij. Thuris iss. ^^^g. ^^d. Dictamni Cret. Alees lepra. squamae
Aeris, Propol. an. vj. R^^. Gentum. j. fiat Emplast. secundum artem. This is an
excellent Emplaster also against malign Ulcers, and dries moist Bones in
Ulcers, wherein the Bones are carious. Paracelsus undoubtedly framed his
stictick Emplaster after this description. Neither is it inferior to his in
Operation, with the which you may furnish your selves sufficiently, seeing it
has so manifold Uses. If you would have greater variety of such Medicaments,
you may peruse Aetius, lib. 15. cap. 14. and Galen. de Composit. Medicament.
secund. loca: But either these Medicaments which I have set down will serve, or
else none.

Cornelius Schylander, a Physician of Antwerp in his Practice of Surgery,
published anno Domini 1577. De vulnerib. lect. quinta, has these words: If by
reason of the Veins, Arteries and Nerves, the Wound will not admit any
dilatation, then we are to use Medicaments, which digest, relax and draw; or
Charms, which he calls Verba Constellata, by which he affirms, that all sorts
of Weapons may easily be drawn out with the Forefinger and the Thumb. He
professes, that he saw this done; yet the Charm he sets not down. It may be
that the party, whom he saw practicing this, did not acquaint him with the
Charm.

However, the use of Charms is very Ancient: For Homer, in his Hias, or Poem of
the destruction of Troy, shows, that Poda^irius and Machaon, sons to
Aesculapius, who went to the Siege of Troy with the Grecians, cured the wounded
persons not only with Salves, but (...) with soft words also. Now near 3000
years are expired since the destruction of Troy. But seeing such practices are
accounted by the judicious infamous, I will leave them to Empiricks.

Having then set down how extraneous Bodies, which stick in Wounds, and hinder
Unition, are drawn out by Medicaments, it follows, that I acquaint you with the
extraction of them by the help of Instruments. In this Operation I will set
down these two Points.

The first shall be of the Occasions, which may cause you to go about the
drawing of these Bodies out of a Wound.

The second shall be of the Circumstances remarkable in the drawing of them out.

The Occasions are three. First, if the Weapon may easily be drawn out.
Secondly, if we fear Apostemation, which may corrupt the wounded part. Thirdly,
if we fear the Weapon to be poisoned.

The Circumstances are twofold: for some are to be noted before you go about
the Extraction of these Bodies, and some are to be observed in the Extraction
it self.

The Circumstances which are to be noted before the Extraction are in number
four.

The first is, that the Surgeon mark the form of that Body which is to be
drawn out.

The second, that he observe how deeply the Weapon has pierced.

The third is, that the Surgeon be a good Anatomist, and know the frame of
the part; for so he shall be able to know which way Weapons, or such extraneous
Bodies, are to be drawn out.

The fourth, the Symptoms of the part wounded, are to be considered, as well
those which are to ensue, as those which are present: as for Example, if the
wounded party find great pain, the extraneous Body is without delay to be drawn
out. But if a fearful Flux of Blood must ensue after the Extraction, it is to
be deferred.

In the Extraction of these extraneous Bodies four things are to be observed.

The first is, when it is most fit to remove these Bodies?

The second is, by what way they are to be taken out?

The third is, the Figure of these things which are to be extracted.

The fourth is, by what Instruments they are to be drawn out? I will discourse
briefly of all these in order.

As for the time fit for Extraction, if the pain be intolerable, the Weapon is
presently to be taken out, although we must not add pain to pain; for this
being done, all pain will cease.

Secondly, we must not defer the Extraction, if the Weapon be poisoned, or
cankered, although we must divide the Muscles, Vessels and Nerves: for we are
to have a greater care of the whole, that it miscarry not, than of a part.
Neither need we fear the Application of a Cautery: for Fire consumes Poison,
and takes away all fear of a Convulsion: How you may conjecture the Weapon to
be poisoned, I will amply and plainly declare in the proper place. In five
Cases you are to delay the Extraction of the Weapon.

First, if there be a fear of a great Flux of Blood, which may endanger the
life of the wounded party: This does fall out, if the Wound be inflicted, where
great Veins and Arteries are placed by Nature.

Secondly, if fearful Symptoms, as horrible pain, a Convulsion, a sharp Fever,
or a Syncope, are like to ensue.

Thirdly, if the Weapon be round, we may more securely leave it in a Wound,
than if it were flat: for the edges of it will cause pain of a recessity,
whereas the other will not procure a pain so great.

Fourthly, if the Orifice of the Wound be made narrow by an Inflammation or a
Tumor, we are to defer the Extraction of the Weapon, until those Accidents be
removed: otherwise we shall torment the Patient, and procure f^oonings, and a
Fever, and it may be a gangrene or sideration of the part.

Fifthly, let us not attempt the Extraction of any Weapon, or part thereof,
unless we have at land a sit and convenient Instrument: Otherwise we shall vex
the wounded party, without any fruit, and make him the more unwilling to
suffer, when we are better prepared for the Action.

The second thing to be observed in the Extraction of these Bodies, is the way
by which they are to be drawn out. In three Cases the Weapon may be thrust out
the contrary way.

First, if it be almost through, but chiefly toward the depending part: for so
less pain will be caused, and the Quittour will more promptly flow from the
Wound.

Secondly, if the Figure of the Weapon will not suffer it to be drawn out the
same way, by which it was sent in, as appears in barbed Arrows.

Thirdly, if there be no fear of cutting great Vessels, or Nerves, In other
Cases we are to draw out the Weapons the same way they went in.

But you may demand of me, whether it be safest to draw them out whole, or by
piecemeal.

I answer, that all things brittle which stick in a Wound, as Glass, and Bones,
are to be drawn out whole, if it may conveniently be done: But if they cannot
be pulled out whole, but with pain and fear of Symptoms to ensue, they are to
be broken, and then taken out. As for Weapons, which cannot be broken, and are
like in their Extraction to procure some mischief, as barbed Arrows, you are to
take them out with such an Instrument as is able to desend the wounded parts
from harm; Of which I will speak by and by.

The third thing which I wished you to observe in the Extraction of strange
Bodies, was their Figure: for the Observation of this Point is requisite:
Because the Figure oftentimes makes the Extraction more easy or difficult, as
has been exemplified in a round and flat Weapon.

Now the fourth thing observable in Extraction of extraneous Bodies was by me
said to be the diversity of Instruments. Of them I could make several
Treatises; but I mean not so to mispend precious time. Necessity and
Observation invented them at the beginning, when Man being enraged by the
Instigation of the Devil, and the Perturbations of his own Mind, not contented
with his own Members, which Nature had granted him for offense and defense,
found out a mean, compendiously to send his Brother (the Image of God) to dwell
with Pluto for all eternity, and to be estranged from his Creator. O that we
could pack up injuries for the present, until the Day of Judgment, the great
Assizes come! Then we should see a number of injured persons sufficiently
avenged of their Oppressors (whom we shall see adjudged to Eternal Torments)
because they bid Patience farewell, and would by entertaining Revenge become
Judges of their own Causes, and deny God the Trial and Revenge. Many
Instruments used in our Forefathers time, are become now out of use. Man in
every Age does devise new Instruments of Death. A Compendium we have in our
Age, Gunshot, the imitation of God's Thunder; but the Example is more fierce,
and sends more Souls to the Devil, than the Pattern: Of Instruments, I will but
only point at a few, as necessary, referring the rest to the industry of
judicious Surgeons, which shall be employed in Military Affairs.

First, you must have a Blant book to lift up a Vein, Artery or Nerve, when a
Bullet or Arrowhead is to be taken out of a Musculous part.

Secondly, you must have a pair or two of Forceps, hollow, strong, and of good
Steel, to lay hold on barbed Arrows, or such Weapons as may hurt the parts, as
they are drawn out.

Thirdly, Goose-bills round and hollow at the points, double and single, to
take out Bullets in like manner.

Fourthly, the Ravens-bill, strong to squeese and take out Arrowheads, Bones,
and such like.

Fifthly, the Forcipes incisorii, which cut being dilated on each side: These
must be of good Steel, well tempered, and very sharp Some which are sold in the
Shops, are worth nothing. These may have use, when a Wound is to be incised, to
draw out of it any extraneous thing.

CHAP. IV.
Of the preservation of the Temperature of the Part, by the right ordering of
things not natural.

IN the former Chapter I discoursed of the second and third Duty, which the
Physician or Surgeon (called to cure a Wound) (...) to perform for Nature,
and Those were his care that no extra^^ous Body should be suffered to stay in
the Wound to hinder the Union of the Parts: and if it by Fortune were there
found, it should by his skill be removed.

In this Chapter, I am with the ^^e brevity and perspicuity to deliver unto you
the third and fourth Duty, which belongs to a Chirur^^^geon or Physician,
Natures friends, in assisting her in preserving her self, and laboring to shun
wrongs offered by her adversary, which has done the best to procure her
overthrow and dissolution, by disjoyning parts united. These Duties are two; to
wit, that the Physician and Surgeon first labor to preserve the natural
temperature of the part wounded: And secondly, that he labor to restore it if
it be lost.

The natural temperature of the Body, is preserved by two means. The first is,
the right ordering of those things which are called not natural: The second is
the Application of convenient Medicaments. But before I go about to deliver
unto you the means, either to preserve the natural Constitution of the part
wounded not being altered, or how it is to be restored when it is lost; I must
describe unto you the natural Constitution, that knowing it aright, you may be
able, using it as a Rule to see, as it were in a Glass, the defects which have
seized upon Nature, and the degree of their declination from that which is
secundum naturam, or according to Nature.

Now the natural temperature of the part is Naturalis ejus siccitas, or the
convenient siccity or dryness of it. So much we may collect out of Hippocrates,
who in that Treatise which he has left to us, de Vlceribus, or of Ulcers,
affirms that siccum est sano proximum, that is, that which is dry comes near to
that which is whole. In your practice by observation, you have learned to
prognosticate to your selves health to every Patient having either Ulcer or
Wound, when you see small store of laudable Quittour to flow from the Sore.

But you may doubt, and not without cause, why Hippocrates did ascribe the
natural temperature of the Body to dryness, a passive quality, and not to heat
or coldness, which are active qualities?

I answer, that this cause moved him to think so; because if the natural
siccity or dryness of the part does continue unviolate, the natural degrees of
heat and coldness are preserved in the Body; But on the contrary you have
observed, that if in the part wounded, by reason of pain, superfluous Humidity
be attracted, and extraneous heat be increased, that the natural heat
oftentimes is corrupted, and corruption of the part ensues; or else that it
being more than the natural heat can rule and dissipate, does cause a Schirrhus
of the part, either wounded or ulcerated; for so you see, if the natural
dryness of the part wounded be maintained, that neither the natural heat is
corrupted, nor the natural coldness is increased.

When I speak of natural coldness, I would not have you to think that I speak
of an absolute coldness, which quite extinguishes the natural heat, and causes
sideration or death of the part: but of a comparative coldness found in some
parts, which is so great in them, that if it be compared with the heat of other
parts, it may seem a privation of heat, tho not perfect. Such are the
spermatick parts, if they be compared with the fleshy, and amongst those the
Bones, if they be compared with the Muscles, your Senses will teach you so
much. Having spoken thus much of what is meant by the terms of a natural
temperature of a part wounded, as is needful for a Surgeon to know; I must
labor to perform that which I promised in the beginning of the Chapter, and
that was the setting down of the means by which it is preserved. I affirmed
them to be two; to wit, the right ordering of things not natural, and the
convenient use of local Medicaments.

As concerning the first point, receive these documents. Seeing then a special
care is to be had of the Air, Diet, Evacuation, Rest, and Exercise, Watching
and Sleeping, and last of all; of the Passions or perturbations of the Mind,
which he that is dangerously wounded is to observe, if he be presented to you
to be cured; I will briefly set down how every one of these is to be ordered.

As concerning the Air: That Air which is temperate, and so proportionate to
the temperature of the parts of the Body, is most fit for wounded parts:
Nevertheless some require both a hotter constitution of the Air, and warmer
applications than others do. Will you know which these parts be? Hippocrates
shall resolve you, Aphor. lib. 5. Aphor. 18. in whom these words are found:
Cold is an enemy to the Bones, Teeth, Nerves, Brain, the spinal Marrow; but
heat is pleasing to these. Heat principally delights the Joints, because
naturally they are cold, being framed only of spermatick, parts, as Tendons,
Membranes, Ligaments, Cartilages, and Bones, and that as well in the Summer as
in the Winter. A temperate Air is most convenient for other parts.

If any parts may endure cold, these are the Ventricles, according to Hippec.
lib. de Vlceribus: for the confirmation of this his opinion, two reasons may be
yielded.

For First, external Cold increases the natural heat, by keeping it in, by
sealing up the Pores, by which it might breath out; and so it causes the better
concoction, and makes them more able to expel all Excrements; but immoderate
heat eliquates or melts the Humors, induces an unnatural heat, which dissipates
the natural heat, and so makes the Ventricles unapt to excoute their Functions.

Secondly, in the Ventricles there are great vessels, that contain plenty of
Blood and Spirits, which are able to resist any cold impression. In the Breast
you have the Vena cava ascending, the Vena arterialis, the Arteria venalis, and
the Aorta. In the lower Ventricle you have the mesaraical Veins, the Vena
portae, the radication of the Vena cava, and the Aorta descending. What I have
spoken of the Air, I would have to be understood of the Surgeons Hand, the
Medicaments, and Linnens which are to be used about the dressing of the wounded
party. If the season of the year afford not unto you an Air answerable to your
desire, you are to procure it by Art.

Now it follows that I appoint a convenient Diet for persons wounded: As
concerning the Diet, receive these Aphorisms. First, in great and fresh wounds,
and in such as threaten an Inflammation, which happens most usually if the Body
be Plethorick, a slender Diet is to be prescribed. Secondly, in wounds of the
Ventricles and Joints, and in those which have been stitched, the like Diet is
to be used. Two Questions here may be moved.

The First is, what Victus tenuis or a slender Diet is?

The Second is, How long this Diet is to be continued?

A slender Diet is that which affords but little nourishment, and cools; for
such a Diet is most fit for contemperating the heat of the Humors, and staying
the influx of the same.

This Diet is to be continued until the Seventh day be past, which is the first
critical day in sharp diseases. Then the use of Wine, Flesh, and Eggs is to be
forbidden: Let the wounded party take thin Broths altered with Lettuce,
Spinach, Purslain, Endive, Succory, the common and Wood Sorrel, adding the
emulsion of the seeds of Musk-melon, Pompion and Cucumber. Thin Panadoes, and
Oatmeal gruels are fit. Sallets of the aforenamed Herbs, boiled and dressed
with Vinegar and sweet Butter, may be permitted: Apples and Pears, either
roasted or baked, cold, may be granted. Let the Drink be small Beer or Ale to
those who have used them in their health: But if you have in cure one, who
cannot abide this Liquor; then you are to appoint for him Water boiled with the
bottom of a Wheaten-loaf mingled with Oxysaccharum, or the Syrup of Endive,
Succory simple, or Violets, taking three Ounces of Water, and one of Syrup.
Receive the description of a parable Julep, which will serve all persons; aq.
font. lb iij. vini albi j. avenae mundat. iiij. Bulliant ista ad consumpt. lb
j. ac coletur decoctum, cui admisce aq. ros. cochl. iij. sacchar. opt. iiij. ut
paretur julapium clarum. In Wounds wherein there is no fear of (...) accidents,
you may grant poched Eggs, so that the wounded party eat as well the White as
the Yolk. Having showed unto you what Air and Diet are most convenient for
wounded persons, I am in like manner to talk of Evacuation. Of it there be two
kinds, Phlebotomy, and purgation by siege. As for Phlebotomy, the end of it is
to procure siccitle, or dryness to the wounded parts, according to Cells. lib.
6. cap. 16. Whether Phlebotomie be to be used or no, these things following
will show you: The wound it self, the habit of the whole Body, the passions of
the Mind, and the Air it self: From the wound it self, in this operation
receive these Canons.

First, in great Wounds from whence small store of Blood has issued, and when
weak parts are wounded, as the Joints (whither superfluous Humors may be
turned) Phlebotomy is necessary. The reason of the first part of the Canon is
this: If the Wound has bled but little, the part not being sufficiently dried,
Fluxion and Inflammation may be caused.

Secondly, If in a Wound, either deep or many stitches have been taken, a Vein
is to be opened: for the pain which is caused by reason of the stitching, is
like to procure attraction of Humors, and an Inflammation.

Thirdly, in Wounds wherein there is no great pain, and in which neither deep
nor any stitches have been taken, you may spare Phlebotomy.

Fourthly, in Wounds of the fleshy parts which are strong, as also in those
parts unto which a Humor can hardly be carried, as in the hairy Scalp and Face,
you may abstain from blood-letting.

As for the habit of the Body, take this Aphorism: if the Body be Plethorick
and Feverish, if Choler abound, boldly open a Vein; but not so, if the party be
melancholic; for this Humor can neither be so easily inflamed, nor flow, to
cause any Inflammation. You are in like manner to note the passions of the
Mind. If the party wounded be furious and hasty, if he sleep not well, if the
Spirits be extraordinarily moved, open a Vein; but if the wounded party be of a
dejected Spirit and fearful, and be but little moved, you may spare
Blood-letting.

Last of all, you are to observe the constitution of the Air: in hot weather
then you may more boldly use Phlebotomy than in cold; and so rather in the
Summer serson, than in the Winter; for in hot weather the Humors are h^ter and
thinner than in cold, and so more apt to flow to the wounded part.

As for purgation by Stool, it is appointed for staying of Humors from flowing
to the part wounded. But seeing the symptoms which arise by reason of a
Fluxion, are most commonly two, a Phlegmone or Erysipelas, it is evident that
those purgative Medicaments which evacuate Choler, called cholagoga are most
fit: such are manna, tamarinds, cassia, Syrup of Roses and Violets solutive,
Electuarium lemtivum, elect. de succo rosarum, Dicatholicum, Diaprunum, etc. In
five eases such Medicaments are to be ministered: First, in wounds of the
Ventricles. Secondly, in wounds of the Joints. Thirdly, if the part wounded be
troubled with an Inflammation, or Erysipelas. Fourthly, if the wounded part
has been stitched. Fifthly, if either incision, dilatation, or rasping of the
Bone have been used.

As for Rest and Motion, receive these admonitions: First, as in wounds of the
lower Limbs, it is ill to walk or to stand; so in wounds of the upper Limbs, it
is hurtful to exercise them. Secondly, if either the superior or the lower
parts receive a great Wound, it is good to keep the party in Bed: but let the
wounded party be placed in that posture, as is like to afford greatest ease. As
for example: If the Hand or Foot be wounded, let them be placed somewhat high,
to hinder flowing of Humors to them. If the member must be kept unmovable, the
use of it will show the best situation: for some parts must be kept bended, as
the Elbow and Fingers: but others must be extended, as the Knee and Foot: and
from hence sprung this observation, Cubitus ad collum, crus ad lectum, the
Elbow is to be tied to the Neck, but the Foot to the Bed.

As for Watching and Sleeping, seeing Watching dries the Body, as Sleep
moistens it, according to Hippoc. Aphor. it is not good for the wounded party
to take immoderate sleep, in two cases: First, if we fear that Humors will flow
to the part wounded, which we may conjecture they may do in plethorick Bodies.
Secondly, if a wound fall out to be in a Joint; for Sleep cools the Joints: but
if the pain be great, then it is good to suffer the wounded person to sleep;
yea, to procure it by anodyne means, inwardly ministered, and outwardly applied,
if you see Nature of her self inclined to sleep; for so the Spirits being
retired into the center, the faculty is at rest, and so the pain is eased.

Last of all I will conclude by speaking but sparingly of the Mind: we must
labor to remove all perturbations of the passions of the Mind from those who
are wounded. Wherefore no ill tidings are to be brought to those, who are come
to the years of discretion, and Children by all means are to be kept from
crying and weeping.

Above all other things, let Venus be abandoned: for it exceedingly hinders
Consolidation: for by it the Blood and Spirits are inflamed, and by motion
noxious Humors flow to the part: There are few Artists who have not by
experience in Patients observed the incommodities of this action.

CHAP. V.
Of the fifth and sixth Duties belonging to a Surgeon in curing a Wound.

IN the former Chapter I showed you as briefly and plainly as I could, how the
natural Temperature of a wounded part is to be preserved by the right ordering
of those things which are called Non naturales, or not natural. Now I am to
show you how this same is to be effected by the application of local
Medicaments: for in Plethorick or Cacochymical Bodies, all means being used
according to Art, will sometimes, but with difficulty prevail.

Seeing, as I showed you, that the natural Temperature of the part is nothing
else but the natural siceitie or dryness of it: It is out of all controversy,
that the Medicaments which are to be applied to wounded parts, ought to be
siccantia or drying.

But seeing there are sundry degrees of drying Medicaments, ^on may demand of
me, in what degree of dryness those Medicaments ought to be, which are to be
applied to wounded parts?

I answer, that both the Temperature of the whole Body, and of the part
affected, will declare this unto you. One thing is to be noted, that the
Medicament which is to be applied to a wounded part, ought ever to be somewhat
driet than the part it self.

As for example, if the Cheek of a Boy or Girl be wounded, you are to apply
Medicaments which are dry in the first degree, at St. John's-wort, Avens,
Chamaemil, Melilot, Saffron, Barley and Bean-meal: But if a Boy be wounded in a
Joint, or Nerve, you are to apply such things as are dry in the Second degree.
If these things happen to an aged person, or a strong clown; then you are to
apply such Topics as are dry in the Third degree. Wherefore in seft parts
wounded, as in the bellies of Muscles, and fleshy parts, a Medicament is to be
applied, which is of the strongest in the First degree. In parts which are
hard, as in the Tendons, or Cartilages wounded, you are to apply to the parts
wounded such Medicaments as are strongest drying in the Third degree. But to
parts wounded, which are of a mean Temperature, neither too soft nor too hard,
you are to apply for Medicaments the strongest Deficcatives in the Second
degree.

From what has been said you may gather, that neither Spring Water nor Oil, are
fit to be applied to wounds: because both do moisten and relax too much.
Besides this, if cold Spring Water be applied, it may procure a Gangrene by too
much refrigerating the part, and quenching the natural heat. Let me warn you of
one thing, that these desiccative Medicaments must have a moderate astriction:
for so the Blood being engrossed, more shall fot flow to the part than is
requisite for the nutrition of it. Seeing I have made mention of such simples
as are fit to be applied to Wounds, to procure their unition, you will expect
(no doubt) Thrief enumeration of such as are accounted the most effectual. I
kill only name them, leaying their description and other effects, to be
gathered out of the Monuments of such as have published Herbals, and have
discoursed of Animals or living Creatures, and Minerals, from whence these
means are fetched.

If you are desirous to know the nature of Plants, have recourse amongst the
Ancients to Dioscorides, who was a stipendiary Soldier under Cleopatra Queen of
Egypt, who was overcome by Augustus Caesar in Fight by Sea at Actium the
Promontory, about 42 years before the birth of Christ. As concerning Minerals,
Fallopius has left a Treatise of them, who has delivered so much of them as
is requisite for a Surgeon to know: If you have a mind to know what ^^fiety
of living Creatures there be, peruse the Monuments of Conradus Gesnerus,
Ulysses Aldrovandus, and Rondeletius, who have written of these Subjects. The
Simples then which are most effectual for the consolidation of Wounds, are
deduced either from Vegetables, Animals, or Minerals. As for those which are
taken from Vegetables, I commend unto you these; St. John's wort, St. Peter's
wort, Betonie, Agrimony, Birthwort, Vervein, both sorts of Avens,
Pomegranate-flowers, Horse-tail, Plantain, Knot-grass, Milfoil, Lunaria the
greater and lesser, Shepherdspurse, Perwincle, Larks-heel, both the Centauries
(but the greater is more effectual) Dittanie, Comfrey, Ladies-mantle,
Self-heal, Clowns All-heal, Serpentaria, Adders-tongue, Loose-strife,
Horehound, Myrtil, Red Rose, Myrrh, Mastick, Elemi, Olibanum, Frankincense,
Solomon's Seal, Turpentine, Pitch, Rosin, Willow, Rue, Sarcocol, Borax,
Ladies-Torch, Birdlime, wild bastard Saffron, Carduus benedictus, and Tobacco.
Of these Simples taking the Juices and the Herbs stamped, you may make Balsams;
and if you add Swines-grease, Wax, Rosin, and Gummt Elemi, you may make
Unguents effectual for the cure of Wounds.

Living creatures put to their helping hands: of them you have Mummia,
Earthworms, Snails, the fat of a Horse, Sheeps Suet, Swines Grease, Deers
Suet, Goats Grease, the extract of Man's Blood, the Spiders web, Bones burned to
white ashes, and Harts-horns calcined; if they be brought to an impalpable
Powder, being grownd upon a Painters stone, and made up into the form of
Trochisces, with the distilled water of Snails, and then being beat to powder,
and mingled with Vnguentum Basilicum, or aureum, they exceedingly further the
curing Wounds of the Joints, Nerves, and Tendons.

The Minerals also are no niggards in this case. The Litharges present
themselves first, without which hardly can any Emplaster be brought to a
laudable consistence. That which is called Litharge of Gold, affords a brighter
color to Emplasters, than that of Silver: yet the effect is all one. Copper
affords Aes ustum, Squamma aeris, and Aes viride, all very useful in the
practice of Surgery. Jupiter or Tin, yields his flowers by sublimation, or
if he be dissolved in a convenient Liquor, Crystals: which being dulcified and
brought to Powder, and mingled in a due proportion with convenient Unguents or
Emplasters, further exceedingly the healing of Wounds and Ulcers. Mars or Iron
affords unto us his Crocus, as it is termed: How powerful it is not only to
hasten Consolidation of solution of Unity; but in loosnesses, Gonorrhaeas and
other diseases also, there is none ignorant, who has had but a reasonable
practice in Physic or Surgery. What shall I speak of Minium, both the
Corals, Tutia, Calaminaris, and the Lodestone. By the enumeration of these few
means taken from Vegetables, Animals, and Minerals, for the curing of Wounds,
you may perceive how bountiful Nature is to Mankind in supplying his wants. O
that he were not wanting or deficient to himself* If we would take pains only
to prepare those things, whereof Nature has left us no small store, and
judiciously according to the prescript of Art apply them, we should find in our
practice a better success than sundry times falls out: Neither should we have
need to blame the irregularity of Patients, and the ill correspondence of those
things, which are called Non naturales, or not natural. Whosoever thinks that
he may without any stop or stay, go through the curing of all wounded persons,
in what part soever the Wound is inflicted, with the ordinary Unguents, carried
about in Salvatories, he deceives himself.

These for the present use must be in a readiness; but if he find these after
application not to answer his expectation, he must have recourse to others.
Which Medicantents are sit, the collation of the part wounded, and the
Topics will show, as I have told you before.

Having delivered unto you, how the temperature of the part is to be preserved
by the right ordering of those things, which are called Non naturales, or not
natural, as Air, Meat, and Drink, Evacuation and Retention, Sleeping and
Watching, etc. As also by the application of fit Topics to the part, you may
require according to my promise, how the natural temperature, if it be altered,
may be reduced to its own tenor again? Let me tell you, that by the same means,
it is to be reduced, by the which it is preserved. Only this is to be observed,
that the means which cure, must be more forcible, and more intended in their
qualities, than those are, which are applied to maintain the natural
Temperature.

As for example, if a wound prove very moist, and send out much Quittour, you
must labor strongly to dry the habit of the Body, by Bleeding, Purging, a
slender Diet, Watching, and such like, and by applying to the wounded part
Medicaments, which strongly dry, and are endued with a certain astriction. If
other elementary qualities, as heat, cold, dryness appear, they are to be
removed by their contraries, but intended in their qualities above that degree
which was sufficient to maintain the natural Tempetature of the part wounded.

Now the sixth Duty, which I affirmed to be required of the Physician or
Surgeon, when he is called to cure a wounded person, was the observation of
the excrements, which flow from the wound, and their true and natural causes: I
will deliver first unto you the diversity of Excrements or Quittour, which a
wounded part sends out, and then I will show unto you the causes of them.

The Excrements which flow out of a Wound, are in number three; liber, Sordes,
Pus: Ichor is a thin Excrement. The cause of it is Incoction. Of it there are
two kinds: for either it is an Excrement, issuing from the Veins themselves or
else it proceeds from the wounded part: If it issue from the Veins, then it is
a waterish and thin Humidity, flowing from the capillary Veins not altered, and
without my noisome smell, by its color showing which of the four Humors has
dominion in the mass of Blood. Wherefore if the Blood be very pure, it has a
certain bright redness representing Water, wherein flesh has been washed. If
yellow Choler be predominant, then the Ichor is of a bright yellowish color:
If Phlegm abound, then the Ichor is whitish: if Melancholy surpass, then the
Ichor or thin Humidity is of a darkish swarth color. If this thin Humidity
spring from the part wounded, because it is altered and corrupted by the part
which sends it out, it has an unpleasant smell, being an Excrement of the part.
As the first kind of Ichor is called serum Sanguinis, the waterishness of the
Blood, which is mingled with the Blood, that so being made more fluxible, it
may the more easily be distributed to the habit of the Body, to nourish it; so
the Ichor which is an Excrement of the wounded part, is called Sanies and
Virus, and according to the degree of the corruption of the part, it is more or
less stinking. If it flow from a part possessed with a Cancer, it is wonderful
malign and stinking: If it issue out of a part siderate or mortified by reason
of a Sphacelus, it is cadaverous. By the exhalation which is breathed out of
the pores of the Skin, raised from the serum Sanguinis by the natural heat,
Dogs find out their Masters, and will constantly hunt after that game, which
they are first set about: This be wrays the complexion of the Individuum; but
Sanies and Virus show the corruption of the part.

The Second kind of Excrement is called Sordes: This is a compact and viscous
Excrement, so cleaving to the wounded parts, that it will not be removed
without the use of a firm instrument: for lint upon a probe will not bring it
away.

Of this thickness three causes may be assigned: the First is the dry
constitution, both of the whole Body, and the wounded part also: the Second
cause may be the error of the Surgeon, who has applied too drying
Medicaments to the affected part: the Third cause may be the cold Air, which
having been let into the Wound, by the carelessness of the dresser of it, has
condensed, and thickened the Pus.

The Third Excrement which wounded parts fend forth is called Pus. This is an
Excrement white, smooth and equal or uniform, without any grumous or knotty
substance, having no ill sinell, not so liquid as Sanies, nor so thick and
viscous as Sordes. See Hippocrates lib. de Praedictionibus. Galen. 2. ad
Glaucon. 8. and 5. Method. 10.

Now to come to the causes of the Excrements which are sent forth from Wounds,
which was the Second point propounded concerning these Excrements, note these
Aphorisms. First, the causes of these three Excrements are either the efficient
or material causes. Secondly, the efficient causes are two, the natural and
unnatural heat. Thirdly, the natural heat is the cause of concoction, whereby a
laudable Put is engendered: but the unnatural heat working upon Humidity, causes
putrefaction, and an evil smell. Fourthly, the material causes are two, to wit,
contused Flesh, which by digestives must be turned to Quittour, and a Humor,
which most commonly symbolizes with the complexion of the party wounded,
whether it be natural or accidental. If then the natural constitution of the
party wounded be good, the Pus is laudable: but if by reason of errors
committed in the use of those things which are called Not Natural, in the
course of life a sickly Complexion be acquired: As for example, if one become
Hydropick, Pocky, or Leprous; then the Wound is like to cast out no good
Excrements; but either Sanies, Virus, or Sordes.

CHAP. VI.
Of the common Symptoms of Wounds.

AT last I am come to the last general Duty, which the Surgeon is to
discharge to Nature in assisting her, in joining disjoined parts procured by a
Wound, and that is the Seventh Duty in number, as I set down in the Second
Chapter concerning this subject of Wounds. This I affirmed to be the removing
of some general accidents which ensue, and oftentimes invade the wounded parley,
after that a Wound is inflicted: Now these are in number two; Pain, and
Swooning, or fainting; I call them general, because they may accompany all
forts of Wounds as well Simple as Compound. As for Pain, no Wound can be
inflicted without causing some pain, either more or less: This is certain, in
all compound Wounds, and agreed upon by the unanimous consent of all Authors
who have left Treatises of this Subject to posterity: besides this, seeing the
Skin at the least must be divided in simple Wounds, who can imagine this can be
done without pain, seeing the Skin is the instrument of touching and feeling?
As for Fainting and Swooning, it also often falls out in both Simple and
Compound Wounds: And in Simple Wounds daily observation does evince this to be
most true. Scarce an Artist has been employed about Blood-letting, who has
been so careful and Fortunate in performing the Operation, but that he has had
sundry who have fainted under his Hand, before any remarkable store of Blood
has been drawn. Now what Wound can be accounted more simple, than that which
is made with the Lancet or Phlegm, which will be united within the space of a
few hours after that the Vein is shut and bound up? It fell out once that I
sat at the Table with sundry Gentlemen, amongst whom there was one noted for
his Valor; he having but lightly cut his Finger, and by the advice of one, who
sat next unto him, applied a little Salt to the part incised, with his knife,
presently sunk down from the Table, and was carried away.

Of these two Accidents, I will first discourse of Pain, because it extends it
self farther than Fainting or Swooning do; for no Wound, whether it be Simple
or Compound, can be without more or less pain, when it is first inflicted, for
the reason which I yielded a little before. Whereas sundry have received
grievous Wounds, and yet have not fainted; for it must be not a small matter,
which will cause a stout or magnanimous Person to faint: Besides this, pain
very often is the cause of fainting; now the cause by Nature has the priority
of the effect. Pain then in Latin is called dolor, which is deduced from the
Verb doleo, which signifies to grieve or to feel pain. First, I will describe
unto you what pain is; Secondly, how this Accident is removed from the wounded
party, as by the Application of convenient local means, which most properly is
the Office of a Surgeon.

Pain is described by Galen to be tristis sensatio, a grievous feeling; this
description of Galen rather shows how Pain is caused, than what it is; for Pain
is procured by some offending Object, moving the Instrument of Touch: And in
truth we must acknowledge, that Pain is not the feeling it self simply;
wherefore Galen did not call Pain feeling absolutely, but feeling with a grief.
In Pain two things are to be noted: First, the apprehension of the sensible
Object, as it is sensible: The second is the apprehension of the same, as it is
pleasing or unpleasant. If we further inquire in which of these two the nature
of Pain does subsist; we must confess, that Dolor or Pain is not the very
apprehension of the sensible Object, but the Grief which is caused by the
apprehension of the unpleasant sensible Object, and the corruption of the
Organ. Wherefore, Pain may thus fitly be described; It is a grievousness, which
is felt in the Instrument of the Sense of Touching, caused by those things
which make a Solution of Unity.

In this description, three Arguments of Logic are to be marked. The first the
Genus, which is said to be molestia, or grievousness: for there are Griefs as
well of the Mind as of the Body; as Envy at the Prosperity of another, which is
Diabolical; and rash Anger, which is Bestial: but Pain is a Grief of the Body.
The second Argument is the Subject wherein Pain is seated, and that is the
Organ of Touch. The Causes make up the third Argument; and those are thought to
be such things as cause Solution of Unity in the Instrument.

Here a Question may be moved, whether Pain may not be felt in the Instruments
of other Senses, as the Hearing, Seeing, etc. as in the Instrument of Touching?

To this I answer, that two kinds of troublesomeness may be deprehended in
every Sense, besides Touching. The one is, when the Instrument of Touching it
self is offended, which is imparted unto all the rest of the Senses: The other
is, when the proper Sense it self is offended; as when a Scholar meditates and
is hindered by the ringing of Bells; or when one having composed himself to
sleep, it troubled with the unpleasant howling of Dogs, noises of Carts and
Coaches, and clamors of Drunkards, which is frequent enough here in London,
where the Hearing is offended; or when one with grief and commiseration beholds
his dear Friend extinguished with an Apoplexy, who sat with him at Table
immediately before his fall, which has been often seen, where the Sense of
Seeing is troubled. But there is a great difference between the pain in the
Organ or Touch, and these troublings of the other Senses: The first truly
deserves the name of Pain; but the second may be termed aversations or
dislikings of the Objects, rather than Pains. This moved Galen to say, 1.
desympt. cause. 6. Delight and Grief happen to all the Senses, but not with the
like evidence. But as concerning Pain, which offends the Instruments of
Feeling, thus he writes, de different. sympt. c. 3. The Sense of Touching,
above all other Senses, has obtained a most remarkable Symptom, to wit, Pain
in its Action. And tho other Senses may feel Grief, yet this Grief only
proceeds from their external proper Objects; but Pain may happen unto the Sense
of Touching, not only from external, but from internal affections also resting
within the Body, which sometimes have been so vehement, that sundry Persons
have dispatched themselves. I will not go about to confirm this last Point,
affirmed by Galen, seeing I am to deliver Chiturgical Doctrine, and not
Historical Narrations. But who will give himself content, let him peruse and
turn over the Volume of Schenkius his Observations, where he shall read
Examples more than enough. Thus much I thought good to deliver concerning the
nature of Pain, which is an Accident proper to the Organ of Touching: and
although it be somewhat Philosophical; yet it cannot but be profitable for you,
seeing it is able to enrich your Understandings, that you may be able to
express what is meant by Pain, when it is named, and to discern when it is a
proper Symptom of the Instrument of Feeling, and when by reason of the
Instrument of Feeling it is communicated to other Senses. It is now full time
to set down such topical Medicaments as are effectual to assuage Pain. These
Medicaments are of two kinds: for either they are Narcotical, or Anodyne.
Anodyne Medicaments by the Grecians are called (...) and by others (...),
asswegers of Pain. These Medicaments are temperate, answerable to the
constitution of our Bodies: and therefore they maintain the substance and
natural heat of the Body: By their pleasant heat they gently open the Pores of
the Body; by the subtilness of substance they enter into the pores, and make
all the Humors uniform, they soften and loosen the part, and so it becomes less
apt to receive Pain: And if they exceed in heat a little, they open the Pores
more effectually, and discuss some of the thinnest part of the peccant Humor,
which is most fierce, and so abate somewhat the cause of the Pain, The Simples
of this order are Chamaemil, Melilot, Dill, Elder, Wall-wort, ordinary Mallow,
Marshmallow, Roots and Flowers of Lllies, Fenugreek, Linseed, Barley, sweet
Sallet-Oyl, Oil of sweet Almonds, Mans-grease, Capons-grease, Swines-grease,
Goose-grease, Butter without Salt, Marrows, Cream and sweet Milk. Of these Oils
and Cataplasms may be framed fit for your purpose. This parable Medicament I
commend unto you, Reducatur Vnguentum album Caphuratum in formain linimenti
Oleo Lil. Anethino, aut Chamaemelino, and applicetur.

Narcotical Medicaments neither take away the cause of Pain, nor assuage Pain;
but stupefie the Part, that it cannot feel that which is painful: such
Medicaments are cold in the end of the third Degree, and in the fourth, which
drive away the natural heat and spirits from the part. Of this sort are
water-Lily, Henbane, Hemlock, Deadly Nightshade, Mandrake, Apple of Peru,
black Poppy and Opium, Darnel, and the Seeds of the former Simples, of which
Simples you may make both Cataplasms and Oils. In stead of all others you may
use this liniment, Unguent. Popul. and albi Caphurat. an. j. Ol. Hyoscyami and
Mandragor. an. jss: Misc. ut siat linimentum applicandum parti vulneratae.

Now comes the second general Symptom, which follows after that a Wound is
received, (...) and (...) fainting or swooning: Syncope is derived from (...)
concrdo, to cut together; because in it both moving and reeling are taken from
the Body, so that it lies for a time as if it were dead. Lipothymia differs
from it only in vehemence; for in this the party loses not altogether feeling,
and cold Sweat bursts out. Because that which cures the great Grief, is able to
cure the less in this same kind. I will only discourse of a Syncope, because
the nature of it being known, and the Cure of it learned, the less Grief,
Lipothymy or Fainting, is easy to be dealt withal.

Syncope then is a sudden decay (...) abolition of the strength of the Body,
according to Galen, 12 Method. cap. 5. As Lipothymia is only an imminution of
the same: the part affected is the Heart.

As for the Causes, receive these Aphorisms. First, a Syncope may happen when
there is not Matter ministered for the generation of Spirits, as in Famine.
Secondly, it may happen, when the constitution of the Heart is altered by
reason of some Disease, as in Pestilential Fevers. Thirdly, when a malign
Matter is communicated to the Heart, as it happens in a deadly mortification of
a Member. Fourthly, when the Spirits are spent, and dissipated by too great
Heat, Watching, Travel, or immoderate Evacuations. Fifthly, it may happen by
Antipathy, so it has been noted that some have swooned at the smell of a Rose.
Sixthly, Fear also may be the Cause. Seventhly, it happens when the Spirits are
suffocated by crude Humors or Vapors. Eighthly, it may invade, when a malign
Vapor is sent from another part of the Body to the heart, as in Fits of the
Mother. Ninthly, the sensibleness of the part wounded may be the cause, as if
it be a Joint, Nerve, Tendon, or Membrane.

The Signs of a Syncope are these: First, the Face grows Pale, the Pulse is
small, slow and unequal, a green or yellow color is represented to the Sight,
then the Sight becomes dim, the Hands and Feet become cold, Sweat breaks out
about the Forehead, and at last the Pulse altogether cease; Moving, Feeling
and Speech are taken away, and the Body ^es for a while, as if it were dead.

As for the Prognostics, receive these: First, if a man come not to himself
again after that he is rubbed with Rose Water or Aqua Vitae, has Wine or
strong Waters poured into his Mouth, and has had strong sneesing Medicaments
blown up into his Nose, the Syncope is accounted deadly. Secondly, if a Syncope
surprise one, who before was feeble and weak, it is dangerous. Thirdly, a
Syncope proceeding from an inward cause, is more dangerous than that which
proceeds from an outward cause. Fourthly, a Syncope which proceeds from
oppression of the Spirits is more easily cured, than that which proceeds from
the dissipation of the same, by reason of inanition. Fifthly, they who often
swoon without a manifest cause, at last die suddenly. Hipp^c. 2. Aphor. 41.
Sixthly, that Syncope which is a primary affection of the Heart is more
dangerous than that which happens by the consent of the other parts. Seventhly,
when a Syncope happens by reason of immoderate evacuation of Blood in Wounds,
we have no cause to despair, chiefly if the wounded party be of a good
constitution: for Blood by a good Diet is easily restored. Eighthly, when one
comes to himself after Swooning, if the Pulse and fresh Color return not, he
is like immediately to fall into it again. Ninthly, who goes not about to
prevent a Syncope, when he sees a Lypothomy to have possessed the wounded
party, he is to be accounted accessory to the death of him, according to some
Authors.

Now as concerning the Therapeutical Point of this Discourse, expect not
whatsoever may be said of it: for many things delivered would be impertinent,
no way belonging to the Practice of Surgery: I therefore will acquaint you
with those means only, which your Duty requires. The curative means then are
either External or Internal. As for the External, these which follow are
accounted most effectual: First, the Temples and Nose are to be bedewed with
Odoriferous Liquors. If the party be hot, apply such as are either temperate or
not very cold, as the Water of Orange Flowers, the Waters of Meadow sweet, Balm,
Roses, the ordinary sweet Waters. If the party be cold, apply the Spirits of
Balm, Mints, Wormwood or Angelica. If the party wounded be a Woman, you are not
to rub these parts with things Odoriferous, lest you bring on the Mother. To
these then use the Spirit or Extract of Castoreum and Rue, which are excellent.
Secondly, use shaking of the Body, frictions of the extremities, hard pressing
the parts adjacent to the Joints of the lower Jaw under the Lobes of the Ears,
shouting into the Ear, and calling upon the party by his own name, moistning of
the Tongue with Theriaca Andromachi dissolved in Cinnamome Water, having added
a few drops of the Oil of Sage and Amber. See Paraeus lib. 8. de Vulnerib. c.
14. Sennertus pract. l. 2. part. 4. c. 6. If it be a strong Syncope, it will
not be amiss to pull hard the Hairs of the Temples and Neck.

As for the Internal means, a Sop in strong Wine, as Aligant, Malmesey, Canary
Wine, or white Bastard, is very good, so that the Wine be drunk together with
the Toast. Confectio Alkermes dissolved in Cinnamome Water, or Treacle
dissolved in Aqua Coelestis and ministered are effectual. If these Medicaments
be not at hand, give Aqua Coelestis, Wormwoodwater, Balm-water^, Mint-water,
yea, the common Aqua Vitae must serve. I commend unto you this Composition. Aq.
Card. Benedict. iv. Aq. Theriacal. and Cinamomi an. ss. Confect. Alkermes ij.
Diamargariti calid. iiss. Lap. Bezoar oriental. j. Syrupi Acetositat. citri ij.
Aq. Ros. Odorifer. cochl. 3. Misc. ex l. a. Exhibeatur cochl. 1. 3ti^ quaque
hora post agitationem. If these means prove not effectual, seek for no other;
for you shall lose your labor.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Stitching of Wounds.

IN the second Chapter of this Subject of Wounds, I affirmed the last scope and
end which a Surgeon proposes to himself when he goes about the curing of a
Wound, to be the reunition of the parts disjoined by an external Instrument. I
set down also the differences of Unition, which were (...) or agglutination,
and (...) or concarnation: give me leave to use these terms to express the
Greek words.

Agglutination, I said to be the Unition of parts separate, no middle substance
concurring. This kind of Union Surgeons aver, to be performed by the first
Intention.

Concarnation, I desined to be the Unition of parts disjoined, by the
intervention of a middle substance: This is said by Surgeons, to be done by
the second Intention: for the better procuring of Unition in Wounds, I proposed
seven Duties, which a Surgeon is to perform to Nature, to further her
endeavor in this Action: which I hitherto have prosecuted in six several
Chapters. Now the Order of Doctrine requires, that I show, by what means
Unition is procured in Wounds.

First of all, I will show, how Agglutination is brought to pass. Then I will
show how (...) be Concarnation is procured. And this Order I have chosen, for
sundry reasons moving me thereto: For first, Agglutination is a more simple
kind of Unition, because it is performed without any middle coming between the
wounded parts severed. Secondly, because it is more speedily performed than
Concarnation: Thirdly, because in it there is neither such Art and Skill, nor
such choice of Medicaments required, as are in (...).

Now to bring (...) or Agglutination, the first kind of Union, to pass, three
curative Indications offer themselves: First, the brims of the Wound are to be
joined together. Secondly, the parts joined together must be so kept. Thirdly,
Agglutinative Medicaments must be applied.

The first Indication is to be performed by the Surgeon: for he is to bring
together with his hand the Brims or Lips of the Wound gaping: In bringing of
the gaping Lips of the Wound together, five things are to be observed.

First is, that he bring gently, and by degrees, not violently or suddenly, the
parts severed.

The second is, that the parts disjoined be equally brought together, not
stretching one more than another, unless one part will not admit dilating: as
when it cleaves to a Bone, the other being fleshy for a great distance, and at
liberty.

The third is, that if the Brims of the Wound have become stiff, by reason of
the cold Air (they having for a space remained uncovered) they be fomented with
Hydrelaeum, a Medicament made of Oil and Water. The proportion of the Oil and
Water is to be conjectured from the constitution of the whole Body, as well as
from the temperature of the part affected. As for Example: If the party wounded
be of a dry and thin habit of Body, more Oil than Water is to be taken, as one
part of Water, and two of Oil; but if the habit of the Body be fleshy
succulent, more Water is to be used than Oil.

Fourthly, in this Conjunction equality must he observed. So the Supersicies of
the one part of the Wound must exquisitely answer the Supersicies of the other
part: and there must be a due correspondence between the inner side: Otherwise
the Cicatrix will be ugly and unequal.

Fifthly, no Dosil or Pledget must be put between the parts of the Wound
separated, when you mean to consolidate the wounded parts by the first
Intention, for then you shall cause flesh to grow, and procure the Unition of
the parts according to the second Intention.

As for the second Intention, which is the keeping of united parts together, it
is performed by three means. The first is by Laqueatio or dry Stitching, as it
is termed: The second is by Sutura, or Stitching with a Needle: The third is
Fascus, by Rolling, Laqueatio or dry Stitching is, when pieces of Cloth being
placed on each side of the Wound, the parts of the Wound disjoined are brought
together, by drawing the pieces of the Cloth with a Needle and Thread.

This kind of Stitching we use in three Cases: First is, if we cannot come
conveniently to roll the wounded part, as in transverse Wounds. The second is,
when the external Beauty is like to be impaired, by making of new Scars, as it
happens in Wounds of the Face. The third is, when the parties wounded will not
admit Sutura, or Stitching with the Needle; as Women, and eminent Persons.

In the Application of the dry Stitch, three things are to be observed. The
first is the preparation of the pieces of Cloth. The second is the means by
which they are to cleave to the wounded part. The third is the form of them.

As for the first; the pieces of Cloth must be strong, that they yield not unto
the Thread, when they are drawn. Secondly, one must answer another: Thirdly,
they must be hemmed, or doubled toward the Wound; but they must be ravelled
where they are furthest from the Wound.

As for the second: The means by which these Clouts are to cleave to the Skin
firmly, ought to be wonderful emplastick Medicaments: I will set down a few
Examples of such.

The first shall be this; Dissolve Isinglass in Vinegar, and by boiling, bring
it to the consistence of Glue.

The second shall be this: Farin. volat. Mastiches, Gypsi, cocti, Armen. Aloes,
Gummi, Tragacanth. and Arab. an. j. fiat ex omnibus pulvis, qui ovi allumini
admistus consistentiam mellis referat.

The third shall be this, Mastich. ij. Bitum. Judaic. Carals. an. j. Colophon.
j. Ad ecto pauco Vernice, paretur emplastrum d^rum, quod igne liquescat, quum
usus venit.

The fourth shall be this: Agitetur exact albumen ovi in patina stannea:
pestea ita aspergat^r palvis calcis vivae albumini agitato, ut vix appareat. Si
pulveris plus satis d^ciderit, spiritu oris difsletur: Imbuantur telae
medicamento, ae partibus vulneratis applicentur.

As concerning the third, to wit. the form of these Clouts, let them be of the
form of the wounded part. If therefore the part be Triangular, let the Clouts
be Triangular. However, let the form be such, as is fittest to draw the wounded
parts together. As for Example, if the Cheek be wounded transversly, because
the upper Cloth must not be Quadrangular, (for so it should cover the Eye) it
must be cut Triangular, and reach to the Temple of the Head.

Now the tyings of the Threads ought to be distant one inch from another: So
much I have thought good to deliver unto you concerning Laqueation or dry
Stitching. Now I am, according to the order of Doctrine, set down by my self,
to discourse briefly de Su^^ris or Stitching with a Needle or Needles.

Of Stitching with Needles these five Points are to be observed. First, what is
meant by this Stitching: Secondly, the diverse Kinds of it: Thirdly, the Uses of
it: Fourthly, the Instruments which are used about this Operation: The last
Point shall contain the Documents, which shall inform you, how this Operation
is to be performed according to Art.

Sutura then or Stitching is the beinging together of the Lips of a Wound by a
Needle threaded, and the keeping of them together by these two means.

Of Stitching there are two differences; for either the Brims of the wounded
parts are kept together by the Thread only, or else the Needle also is left in
them.

Of the first sort of Stitching there are three kinds. 1. Is Sutura continuata
or the Glovers Stitch: This kind of Stitch we use in the wounded Guts, when the
Excrements come out of the Wound, and the Guts must be stitched. We use it also
when great Branches of the Aorta and Vena cava are wounded, and there is a
great Flux of Blood; if we can conveniently come to the Vessels wounded.

The second kind of Stitching is Sutura non continuata: This kind is performed
by taking, diverse stitches each being distant from another, so far as the
largeness of the Wound shall require, and the Surgeon shall think fit: So
many such stitches may be taken, as shall be able to bring the Lips of a Wound
to a proportionate smoothness and equality of the Skin. In every Stitch the
ends of the Threads are to be cut off near to the Knots, that they stick not to
the Emplaister.

The third kind of this Stitching is called Gastroraphia: This is used when the
great Muscles of the Belly, and the Peritonaeum are divided by a large Wound.
Of this I will discourse, when I come to the Wounds of the Abdomen.

The second kind of Stitching is, when both the Needles are left in the Wound,
and the Thread also is used. In this kind of Stitching when the Needles are
passed through the Lips of the Wound, and they are brought together, the
Needles are left there, and twisted about both the ends as Tailors do when they
fasten their Needles to their Sleeve: This Stitching is to be used in the cure
of the Hare-lip, and when the Trachea Arteria is wounded. In stead of Needles
we may use Silver or Brass Pins: And when they are twisted about, their ends
may be cut off with a pair of small Nippers, made for such a purpose, to avoid
the cumbersomeness of the sharp ends of the Pins.

The uses of Stitching are three; for either we use Stitching to procure a
quick Agglutination of the Wound: therefore it is called Sutura incarnativa.
And in this kind of Stitching the Brims of the Wound are to be brought near
together.

Or the second use of Stitching is to keep the Brims of a Wound in a reasonable
distance one from another. And it is called Sutura retentiva: this kind of
Stitching we are to use when a Wound cannot be united after the first, but
second Intention; wherefore in this the Lips ought not to be too far asunder,
lest the Air cool the parts too much; nor too near, because the Agglutination
is not to be expected.

The third use of Stitching is to stay Bleeding, as when a Vein or Artery is
wounded. This kind of Stitching is called Sutura suppressiva.

Now the Instruments requisite for Stitching are Needles, Thread, and the
Stitching-Quill. As for the Needles, they ought to be either of Steel or
Silver. Those of Silver will bend best, but then they must not be hardened by
beating upon the Anvil. The Steel Needles you may distemper by holding them
lapped in brown Paper wet for a while in the flame of a Candle. But it is good
to have still some in readiness crooked as well as straight.

Their Points may be round, slat, three square, or four square. The
square-pointed Needles pierce best. They ought to have good Eyes, and well
grooped, that they may receive the Threads readily, and couch them the better.

As for the Thread, we use most commonly White, or Crimfonsilk Thread: black is
to be rejected; for it is most commonly rotten, and frets. But the Low Country
white Thread made of the best Hemp has no fellow: for it swells in the Wound,
and cuts not as Silk does, which grows small, and cuts too speedily.

The Stitching-Quill, called in Latin Canaliculus fenestratus, ought for the
credit of the Surgeon to be of Silver. It has two Uses. First, it keeps the
Needles. Secondly, it stays the opposite part of the Wound, that the Needle may
the more readily pass through the adverse Lip. Now it only remains that I set
down, according to my Proposition, some Documents, which teach what remarkable
things are to be observed, when you go about to stitch. These are in number
thirteen.

1. We are to labor to stitch with the greatest ease that may be, that the
Patient may the better endure it.

2. Let the Lips of the Wound be with moderation brought together: for if they
be too straightly drawn together, the flowing of the Quittour will be hindered,
and so a Tumor will be procured: But if they be left gaping, the inner parts
will be cooled by the Air.

3. The Knots of the Threads must be sure: otherwise they may loose, and so we
must be enforced to stitch the second time, which will be more terrible to the
Patient than the first.

4. In Stitching we must beware of the Chords and Nerves: for if they be
touched, great pain will ensue.

5. If Ligaments be cut asunder, we are not to stitch them, for it is but
labor lost, because they are only united by the second Intention.

6. In all parts of the Body the Skin may be stitcht, yea even in the Joints,
deep Wounds, and Wounds of the Bones, after they have been smoothed with the
Raspatory: for by this means the Sperrutick Parts are covered, defended both
the Air, the natural Heat is lept in, and the Cure is better performed.

7. A reasonable quantity of the Brims of the Wound is to be taken by the
Stitches, otherwise if the Stitches break, we shall cause filthly tranverse
Scars.

8. Let the Stitches be distant by the distance of the breadth of the
Forefinger; or the least Finger at the least: for if they be too thick, they
will cause the more pain; if they be too thin, they will hinder Unition.

9. In deep Wounds of fleshy perts, we must take deep Stitches; for if the Skin
only be stitched, the Wound will only superficially heal; and the Quittour
settling in the bottom, will cause Apostemation and a hollow Ulcer.

10. In straight Wounds of the limbs we may spare Stitching: for the Lips may
be brought together by Laqueation and Rolling: But if the Wounds be transverse,
we are always to use Stitching, because the Flesh and all other Parts in such
Wounds shrink toward the sound Parts, and so gape much.

11. If Wounds be in the Joints; we are to draw a good quantity of Blood.
First, because the Joints are weak, and so apt to receive the influxion of
Humors. Secondly, because they require strong Desiccations. Thirdly, because
the Joints being weak, it may be feared that too much Blood may cause a
suffocation of the natural heat.

12. In Wounds of the Ventricles Phlebotomy is not so necessary. First, because
they require not great Desiccation. Secondly, because if we use large
Phlebotomy in them, we take away the fuel of the natural heat, wherewith they
abound.

13. In long Wounds we are to begin from one of the ends; but in short Wounds
(as in curing the Hare-lip) we are to begin at the middle; for so we shall shun
pursing together of the Lips of the Wound, which will cause inequality in the
Skin, and so deformity.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Agglutinative Medicaments, and Rolling.

IN the former Chapter I affirmed, that the Lips of the Wounds, which are to be
united by Agglutination, ought not only to be brought together, but to be kept
so also: I set down in like manner three means by which the Brims are kept
together, to wit, Laqueation or dry Stitch; Sutura, the Stitch with Needle and
Thread; and Fasciae, Rolling.

Having amply discoursed of the first two, now I am to speak of the third mean,
to wit, Rolling. Faseiatio aut deligatio per fascias, is when we labor to keep
the Lips of the Wound, that they may the sooner and more firmly be united
together by the means of Rolling. As concerning this mean, which industrious
Surgeons have devised, to attain to their end and scope, which is the
Unition of the parts disjoined, I will set down these three Points: The first
shall be of the matter of Rollers. The second shall be of the diverse kinds of
Rolling in Wounds. In the third Point I will show how they are to be applied
according to Art.

As concerning the matter of Rollers, they ought to be of Linen: for woollen
Rollers are apt to admit stretching, and so cannot make such constriction as
those of Linen do. Secondly, they cause itching, and heat the part too much,
by which means attraction of Humors is caused, which alters the natural
temperature of the part, and so hinders the Unition of the parts of it severed.

Now the Linen Rollers must not be of Cloth too new; for then they will be too
stiff and hard: nor of Cloth too much worn, for then they will be too weak.
Neither must they be of Cloth too thick, for then they will be too heavy and
boisterous; nor too thin, for then they will be most apt to receive wrinkles,
which is unseemly. They must also be of even Cloth; not having unequal Threads;
for so they will cause Pits in the Skin. Besides this, they ought to be clean;
for filth in Rollers stops the Pores, and hinders the Perspiration, and so may
bring Inflammation.

As concerning the Dimensions of Rollers, those which are appointed for the
Trunk of the Body, ought to be broadest: Then those which are ordained for the
Thighs: Next unto these those that are to be applied to the Arms: The narrowest
are most fit for Fingers and Toes. As for the length, it is to be found out by
the number of Circumvolutions as shall be found fit and requisite.

As concerning the diverse sorts of Rollings, Galen has left a whole Treatise
of them; by his Pains and Labor he has deserved a thankful Commemoration from
all Posterity. But all what he has set down, cannot be applied to this Subject
which we have in hand: Only four kinds do serve our purpose, to wit,
Incarnativa, Retentiva, Expulsiva and Aequans.

Fascia Incarnativa, or the manner of Rolling, appointed for Agglutination, is
of two sorts.

The first is performed by a Roller with two ends. Now in this sort we must
begin to roll in the sound part, opposite to the Wound, and roll upwards, and
so return to the wounded part with one end; with the other end we are to roll
downwards, crossing the former, that the Lips of the Wound may be artificially
brought together. In this kind of rolling, the Wound must be twice as broad as
the Roller, because by this kind of rolling, the Roller draws the Wound
together two times: Once rolling upward, and once rolling downward, and so to
avoid wrinkling, the Roller ought not to be as broad as the Wound.

The second kind of agglutinative rolling, is performed by one Cloth, which
must be broader than the Wound. The middle of it we apply to the sound part,
that the sides may meet above the Wound; then we are to sow the sides of the
Roller together with a transverse Stitch: But this kind of Rolling is not so
ready as the first, because at every dressing we must cut the former Stitches
and use new.

Fascia retentiva, is that kind of Rolling, which is used to keep close to the
wounded part, the Applications, as Pledgets, Emplasters, Boulsters, Clouts, and
such like. A simple Roller will serve for this purpose. This kind of Rolling
ought to be no stricter than is sufficient to stay the Applications; otherwise
it may hinder the influence of the nourishment to the part, and so procure a
sideration or mortification of the wounded part.

The third kind of Rolling is called Fascia expulsiva, or the repelling kind of
Rolling. This manner of Rolling suffers not any thing to lodge in the cavity of
the Wound. Now seeing defluxions most commonly invade the dependent parts, in
this case, we are to begin our Rolling in the sound parts below the Wound, and
so to proceed to the wounded part; whither when you are come, you are to use
fewer or more loose Circumvolutions, and so to ascend to the sound part above
the Wound, and then to use more strict rolling to hinder the descent of any
Humor; and so by this same kind of Rolling we wring out the Matter which has
already flowed, and hinder the influence of any new Matter.

Fascia aequans, or a smoothing Rolling, is that which reduces unequal parts,
whereof some are high, some low, to a decent equality: this is brought to pass
by Boulsters and a simple Roller.

There are other sorts of Rollings besides these; yet either not so necessary,
or belonging to other operations in Surgery, as fascia prohibitiva
apostematis, that kind of rolling which hinders Apostemation. In this case we
are to begin our rolling about the Wound, and to go upward to the joint of the
sound part. Contrary to this is fascia apostematis factiva, that kind of
rolling which causes Apostemation. There is also fascia disjunctiva, that kind
of rolling which keeps parts asunder, and fascia directiva, that sort of
rolling which reduces distorted and crooked Members to their natural Figure: Of
these I will discourse, when I treat of those points wherein they are required.

Now concerning Rolling, this only remains, that I set down some Duties which
are required of a Surgeon when he goes about to roll. The First is that he
be nimble and quick in dispatching, that the Patient be not wearied. The Second
is, That he carry a light Hand; for so he shall not hurt the Patient. The Third
is, That he roll handsomely to content the Eye. To perform this, we are to have
a care that threads hang not at the Roller, lest we might seem to have robbed
Beggars of their rags.

In the former Chapter I affirmed that (...) or agglutination was performed by
three Intentions: to wit, by bringing of the lips of the Wound together, by
keeping them together, and by application of agglutinative Medicaments. Having
set down how the two first Indications are artificially to be done; now am I to
deliver unto you what agglutinative Medicaments are sit to procure
agglutination.

Of these Medicaments I will deliver these three points: the First shall be of
their Matter: The Second shall be of the diverse kinds of them: The Third shall
set down the artificial application of them. As for their Matter, they ought to
be cooling or temperate, to hinder Inflammations; and astringent, to resist the
Influxion of Humors; and drying, to hasten consolidation. These Medicaments are
of two sorts; for they are either simple or compound. These which follow are to
be accounted simple: Hypericum, Sideritis Achillaea, Polygonum, Bursa pastoris,
Equisetum, sigillum Salomonis, Consolida major, Bugula, Ophioglossum,
Valeriana, Panax coloni, Contaurium utrumque, solidago Saracenica, Plantaginis
species, Pontaphyllum, Tobacco, Cardnus Benedictus, Sanicula, Alchmilla,
Cavyophyllata, Lunaria minor, Vinuin rubrum astringens, rhus coriaribrum, aqua
Aurifabrorum, Albumina ovorum clarificata, Humor melleus vosicis, quae
lateribus foliorum Vlmi monse Maio adherent, conclusus. It heals Wounds very
speedily; thus it is to be prepared: Fill a glass with this Liquor, then stop
it well; then bury the Glass a Foot deep in the Ground, and cover it with Salt;
suffer it to remain there for the space of twenty or five and twenty days;
last of all, separate the clear Liquor from the Faeces. Natural Balsame is
excellent; Of this kind are Burnet, Periwinckle, Bole, Terra sigillata, Lapis
haematites, Coralium utrumque, Gallae immaturae, Mrrtus, sanguis Dracons, omnes
Resinae, gummi Elemi, Sanguis Draconis. Of these you may frame unto your selves
compound and effectual Medicaments. The compound Medicaments are either in form
of Oils, which are called Balsanies, or in the form of an Unguent, or in the
form of an Emplaster. I will acquaint you with some patterns of all the three
forms: The efficacy of them shall recompense the paucity. This shall be the
pattern of a Balsame:. Ol. oliv. lb ij. succi Nicotianae lb. ss. gemmarum
Hyperici, Sanic^^e, Alchymillae, sigill. Solomon. Caryophylat. hortens.
Ophiogloss. Pyr^. Valerian. Panac. colon. an. man. j. Herbae minutim incisae
ad^isceantur oleo, and succo Nicotianae: p^stea coquantur omnia lento igne
(...) consumptionem humiditatis aqueae, and coletur Balsamus, cui admisce ol.
lumbricorum iiij. terebinthinae and vernicis clarae an. iij. Servetur Balsamus
in vase stanneo (...) vitreo, sc. mundo. I need not commend this Balsame unto
you, seeing the ingredients themselves do show of what efficacy it is in
consolidating Wounds, Fabricius ab aqua pendente exceedingly commends the green
Spanish Balsame; But I mean not to mis-spend time in setting it down, seeing
you may find the description of it in his Second part of Chirurgical
Discourses. As concerning Unguents, of all that you use, Franciscus Arc^us his
Liniment is the best. For this purpose: The Learning of the Author, and his
extraordinary skill in the practice of Surgery, does (I make no doubt)
persuade you of the efficacy of the Medicament. Nevertheless this shall not
hinder me from setting down the form of Unguents composed of the Simples
before-named by me, which you shall find effectual, not in Wounds only, but in
Ulcers also: I desire not to be credited, before experience show the excellence
of the one above the other: The description of the Unguent shall be this:
Axung. porcin. lb. j. Colophon. vj. cerae iij. gummi. Elemi ij. succi Tobaccae
ix. Sanicul^ Alchymill. gemmar. Hyper. Card. benedict. Ophiogloss. vinc.
pervinc. sigil. Solomon. Pimpinell. Valor. Centaur. maj. and minor. an. man. j.
Herbae incisae misceantur cum praedictis: postea coq. omnia lento igne ad
consimptionent humiditatis aqueae, and coletur unguentum: cui admisc. vernicis
clarae, ac terebinthin. Cypr. an. j. Tandem reponatur unguentum donec usus
poscet. The ingredients will show you, what benefit is to be expected from the
application of it to wounded parts.

As concerning Emplasters, I mean not to set down any curious description for
the curing of a Wound by the first intention, seeing a familiar one will serve
the turn; receive this then: resin. abiet. lb. iiij. cerae. lb. j. sevi ovilli
iiij. gummi Elemi iij. succi Nicot. and melilot. an. lb ij. Nicotian. contus.
man. ij. siat emplastrum secundum artem. This is not a little better than the
common Melilot, cheap, and parable. As for other ways of curing, know first,
that cold water is not fit to be used; although Celsus lib. 5. c. 26. affirm,
that it may serve for such Wounds as Nature her self is able to cure. For
First, Cold is hurtful for Wounds: Secondly, it may procure a Gangrene in
Bodies which have small store of natural heat. Oil in like manner is not
convenient, if it be simple, because it moistens too much. The whites of Eggs
also are to be rejected, when we mean to glutinate a Wound: First, because they
speedily dry: Secondly, because they do not penetrate; yea, if glutinative
Powders be mingled with them, they hinder their penetration. But what shall we
say of hallowed clean Clouts? I Answer, that they also are not to be used
because they only dry the Superficies, and pass not to the cavity of the
Wound: As for the hallowing or blessing, it is but a device of crafty knaves,
abusing the credulity and simplicity of the common people.

Now, to speak a word or two of the application of these Medicaments, which was
the last point proposed by me to be handled, concerning Medicaments: If the
Wound afford but small store of Matter, it is only to be dressed every other
day: but if plenty of Matter, it is to be dressed once every day: but never
twice a day, for then the Air will do more harm than tho Medicament good.
Wherefore they palpably err, who think often dressing to further
Consolidation. Secondly, if you perceive the Lips of the Wound to be
consolidate or agglutinate, straightways cut the stitches, whether this happen
the Second, Third, or Fourth day: For unition after the first intention is most
commonly performed in this time: The next day following, when you see the Lips
firmly to cleave together, pull out the threads with your Forceps or Fingers.

CHAP. IX.
How a Wound is to be cured after the Second Intention.

IN the former two Chapters, I have showed you, how Wounds are to be handled,
which are to be cured by Agglutination, or the First Intention: Now order of
Doctrine admonishes me to go on, and to teach in like manner, how Wounds are to
be dressed, which are to be united by the Second Intention, called by the
Grecians (...), which may be expressed by this word Concarnation. It is not
amiss sometimes to coin vocables of Art to express the matter which is in hand.

Now to cure a Wound after the Second Intention, three curative Indications do
offer themselves. The First is, to procure the filling of the Wound by new
flesh. The Second is, to abate the Flesh, if it become superfluous: And the
Third is, to skin the part wounded, when sufficient flesh is grown.

As for the First Indication, which is the filling of the gaping of a Wound
with flesh; of it you are to consider the Motives, which induce you to go about
this manner of unition, and the means by which it is brought to pass. In five
cases you are to go about the consolidation of Wounds by the Second Intention.

1. The First is, If there be loss of substance, whether it be flesh, or any
other substance, as Bone, Cartilage, or Ligament. Neither is this a general
rule: for if the parts be loose and flaggy, they may admit unition after the
First Intention: as we may perceive in the curing of the Hare-lip, and Wounds
of the fore part of the Neck.

Secondly, you are to attempt this kind of Cure, where you cannot conveniently
bring the lips of the Wound together by stitching or rolling: as in great
wounds of the Joints, and when the Ligaments are cut asunder, as the great
Tendon, which is called Nerv^s Hectorius, and is inferted into Os calcis.

Thirdly, this is to be done when we look upon the scaling of a Bone, or the
scparation of the piece of a Ligament or Cartilage.

Fourthly, we are to take this course, when otherwise a great and dangerous
Flux of Blood cannot be avoided, as in wounds of the Neck, where the internal
jugular Veins and soporal Arteries are divided.

Fifthly, we are to address our selves to this manner of Unition, when great
store of Quittour is like to flow to the wounded part; and this falls out in
four cases.

The First is, when we cannot hinder the influxion of Humors by rolling, as in
wounds of the Armpits and Joints.

Secondly, in cacochymical Bodies.

Thirdly, in persons who have a scirrhosity in the Liver and Spleen.

Fourthly, if the wounded party have a contagious Disease, as the Pox. In these
cases we are rather to attempt Unition by the Second, than First Intention,
especially if we fear no deformity by reason of a scarr: As it happens in
wounds of all the parts of the Body, if you except the Face.

The causes which ought to induce you not to attempt Unition after the first
Intention, when there is loss of substance, are these: First, Pain and
Inflammation will ensue, by reason of the violent bringing of the lips of the
Wound together: Secondly, there will remain a great deformity in the part
wounded, after that is cured. So much then concerning the occasions, which are
to admonish a Surgeon, when he is about to cure a Wound, whether he ought to
perform this by the Second Intention. Now I am to show you, what means are most
apt to generate new flesh: These means are in number three: the principal
efficient cause: The causes adjuvant: The material cause.

The principal efficient cause is the natural Temperature of the whole Body,
and of the parts affected also, which ought to incline to dryness: If it be
present it is to be maintained; but if you find it not, you are to procure it
by Phlebotomy, Purgation, and the right ordering of those things which are
called not Natural. But seeing I have amply discoursed of these points, when I
set down the methodical cure of Ulcers, I will remit you to that Treatise, and
will not trouble you with a fruitless repetition of the same things.

The adjuvant causes are two, to wit, the Surgeon, and convenient
Medicaments. As for the Surgeon, he ought to dress the party with as much
ease as may be. Secondly, he ought to have a care that the applications be
applied to the Wound very neatly: for by want of this, a slubberer and sloven
is discerned from a cleanly workman. This the Surgeon can hardly perform, if
he be not cunning in fitting of Liniments, upon which the Medicaments are to be
laid, which are to be applied to the wounded part.

Now the Liniments are of three sorts; Turundae, Tentae, and Splenia. Turundae
or dosils represent in Olive in Figure Tentae or Tents are long, and somewhat
small. Splenia or Pledgets ought to represent the Spleen of living Creatures,
from whence they have their denomination.

The Pledgets, which are applied, ought first to be somewhat larger than the
Wound: Secondly, they ought to be armed with Medicaments which have a moderate
tenacity or clamminess, and which ought to have a faculty to stay an
Inflammation, to assuage pain, and to repel Humors, which might flow to the
part. Such are Diapalma dissolved in Oil of Myrtles, Quinces or Roses,
Vnguentum de Tutia magistrale, Vnguentum de Minio. If for the present you be
destitute of these compositions, you may use the red astringent Wine, or
Tanners Woose, or Smiths water clarified, mingled with one of the Oils
befor-named: and then it is good to moisten the Rollers in this Medicament.
These Liniments are to be made of Lint or Tow; the Tow ought to be without
shivers: It dries more than Lint, if it be of Hemp.

The material cause of the generation of new flesh is laudable Blood, answering
the temperature of the part wounded. So if a spermatick part be wounded, the
Blood ought to be somewhat cold, thick, and dry, which is to gender a mean to
unite the parts severed. But if a fleshy part be wounded, the Blood is to be
hotter and more humid. Having set down the part of the Surgeon, whom I
affirmed to be the first adjuvant cause, in producing new flesh, now am I to to
acquaint you with those Medicaments which are termed by Artists Sarcotical, or
apt to engender new and tender flesh.

All Sarcotical Medicaments, as they ought to be of a drying faculty, so they
ought to be void of a sharp and biting quality. The differences of drying
Medicaments are either taken from the degrees of their drying quality, or from
the diversities of their kinds. From the degrees of drying, these three
differences are drawn: For either they are of a mean operation, and these will
serve when the Quittour is Album, Leve, and Aequate, white, smooth, and of an
equal substance, one part of it not being thin, and the other grumous. Or they
are somewhat stronger, as when the matter which flows from the Wound is thin
and ichorous; for then stronger desiccatives are required to incrassate or
thicken this thin matter. The Third degree comprehends the strongest
desiccatives: As when Sordes or a Sluch appears in the Wound, these Medicaments
are called Medicamenta detergentia the Chirurgeon's Mundificatives; and those
Medicaments according to Gal. 1 meth. 12. ought to be of a drying and
penetrating faculty; For those things which are united in the bodies of living
Creatures, are united by moisture: wherefore dryness spending the Humidity,
they are again separated; as we may for an example see in a Table glued
together, if it be too much dried by the fire.

Now there be two kinds of these drying Medicaments, for either they are simple
or compound. The simple drying Medicaments, according to Gal. 3. Meth. 3. are
of three sorts.

The First, dry in the first Degree, for those who have had but a tender and
soft constitution of Body, as are Children and young Gentlewomen. Children are
esteemed to be of this constitution, until they attain the Fourteenth year of
their age.

The Second sort is of such as are dry in the end of the First degree, and the
beginning of the Second.

The Third sort is of such as are dry in the end of the Second degree: and as
these befit bodies of very hard and firm constitution of Body, such as Sailers,
and Artificers of hard Trades have, as Smiths and Felt-makers: So the Second
sort of Desiccatives are fittest for such as are of a mean habit of Body,
neither too loose nor too hard, as Gentlemen in their consisting age.

Unto the First degree of Desiccatives these may be referred: Thus, Farina
Hordei, and Fabarum, ut and Zeae utriusque, Mastiche, Olibanum in guttis.

To these of the Second degree you may refer all sorts of Resines, as the
yellow, the black Ship-Pitch, and Elemi, clarified Honey, Farina Cicerum, and
metallica quaedam; ut Mintum, Lithargarus, Phanbum vstum; sed omnia lota.

To the Third degree you may refer: Farina Orobi amari, Lupinorum, Iris,
Aristolochia utraque, Myrrha, Sarcocolla, Lapis calaminaris, Tutia, Aesustum.

Thus those Simples which are drying in the First degree, serve for those who
are of a soft habit of body: Those which are in the Second degree, serve for
those who are of a mean habit: but those which are of the Third degree, are fit
for those who are of a churlish habit of Body, as I have noted. Now what I have
spoken of the habit of the whole body, I would have you to apply it to the
habit of every several part: So the fleshy parts are softest, although there be
degrees: amongst them: The Lips are softest of all: The Sinews and Membranes
are of a mean hardness, but the Cartilages and Bones are hardest of all.

Of these simple Sarcotical Medicaments, you may frame unto your selves sundry
compositions, as occasion shall move you: Only I will set down one for a
pattern, and it is this: Balsam. Hyperic. simpl. lb. ss. Resin. vj. Cerae iv.
Picis navalis. iij. gum. Elemi. ij. Vernic. and sevi ovil. an. iij. Terebin.
Cypr. iss. Olib. and Myrrh. pulveriz. an. j. This I have termed my Basilicum
Magistrale; I will not stand much upon the commendation of it; the effects will
praise it: If variety of such compound Sarcosical Medicaments does delight any
one, let him have recourse unto the dispensatories of sundry Men, and Nations:
If he be not by them satissied, I shall think that he has an Appetitus caninus
of the Imagination.

One thing is to be noted, that cathaeretick Medicaments, as Alumen ustum, A^s
viride, and Vitriolum calcinatum, may become Sarcotics, if they be mingled in
compositions with Sarcotics in a small quantity.

It is not enough in curing by the Second Intention to procure the growing of
new flesh in Wounds; but we must be wary that it do not overgrow. If this
happen, we must take order with it. The cause of superfluous flesh is too much
Blood sent unto the part. This is abated by appointing a strict Diet, and the
use of Aliments, which do not feed much. Secondly, cooling and astringent
Medicaments are to be applied to the sound parts adjacent to the Wound.
Thirdly, we are to use hard Frictions and strait Ligatures to the opposite
part: for by all these means the immoderate influence of Blood is stayed.

Now superfluous or proud Flesh is taken away three manner of ways. First, by
an Instrument, as an Incision-Knife or a Rasor, Secondly, by rubbing it away by
a rough Linen Cloth. Thirdly, it is removed by Cathaeretical Medicaments: such
are Alumen ustum, Vnriclum calcinatum, Mer. praecititatus. If the party wounded
be of a tender habit of Body. Merc. lotus will serve, being thus mingled: Vng.
Basilic. magisiral. j. Merc. praecipitati loti j. exquisite misceantur: But if
he or she be of a hard and stubborn habit, let this Medicament be made: Merc.
praecipitat. non liti ij. Aluminis usti j. Super ^ar^^^r Pictorum levigentur:
postea. Hujus compos. j. Vng. Basilici magistral. vj. Optime Misc. If you apply
the aforesaid Powders unmingled with an Unguent they will cause an Eschar if
need be. Whoever he be that has brought a Wound to that pass, that the
supercrescent Flesh requires a stronger Catheretical Medicament than these, he
must be a novice in his Art.

The Wound being thus sufficiently incarnate nothing remains, but to cicatrize
it. Concerning Cicatrizations these three Questions may arise. First, what
manner of skinning is most laudable? Secondly, when we are to go about
skinning? The third shall be of the causes which procure skinning. To the first
I answer, that the Cicatrix which in color and conformation best represents
the natural Skin, is most laudable. To the second Question I answer, that we
are not to go about the skinning of the Wound before the Flesh be somewhat
higher than the natural Skin: for otherwise the Cicatrix will be hollow, which
is unseemly. If a piece of a Bone either be taken out or cast, we cannot shun a
hollow Cicatrix. As for the Causes;

The efficient Cause is a faculty resident in the sound Skin, adjacent to the
Wound: So we see skinning to begin from the Brims of the natural Skin.

The material Cause is Flesh hardened.

The adjuvant Causes are Epulotical or skinning Medicaments.

As concerning the Medicaments, we are first to consider their faculty;
Secondly, to set down their kinds. As for their faculty, they ought first to
dry strongly, and to reach the end of the third degree of Desiccation; because
such Medicaments ought not only to consume the extraneous Humidity, but the
natural also. Secondly, seeing they are to stay the influxion of more Blood,
which might engender more new Flesh, they ought to be very astringent, so that
it may be discerned by the Tongue and Palate. Yet they are to have no Acrimony,
for then they would ^rode.

These Medicaments are of two sorts; for they are either Simple or Compound.
For wounded Persons of a soft Habit, these will serve; Frankincense, the bark
of the Pine Tree, Lead calcined and washed, Oyster-shells burned and washed:
for those who have a mean habit of Body these will serve, which are drying in
the beginning of the third degree; as are unripe Galls, the Flowers and Rinds
of wild Pomegranates, Sumach, Myrtil berries, Sanguis Draconis, Terra Vmbra,
Rubrica fabrilis. For those who have a very hard habit of Body, use Aes ustum,
Alumen ustum, Capue mortuum Vitrioli distillati ablutum.

The compound Epuloticks are in like manner of three degrees: For some are for
tender Bodies, as Vnguentum de Minis, Ceratum de Minio, Vnguentum de Tutia:
Some are for Bodies of a mean habit; these will serve for such: Diapalma,
Vnguentum de Tutia magistral. cujus haee est compositio: Ol Ros. xij. Ol
Myrtin. and Vng. Popul. an. iij. fol. Plantag. and Solan. hortens. contus. an.
man. ij. evaporet lento igne humiditas aquea, atque instituatur colatura, in
qua liquescat cer. alb. Quum incipit Medicamentum frigescere, insperge Litharg.
auri vj. Tutiae praepar. j. Ce^uss. ij. Minii vj. Caphur. j. Omnia haec
pulverizentur. Ducatur hoe Vnguentum per hor. 2. in mortario plumbeo. For those
that are of a hard habit of Body, use this Vnguentum de Tutia magistrali,
adding to every ounce of it, Abis usti j. or Vitrioli. ad rubed. calcinati ss.
You have in the Apothecaries Shops Vnguentum de bolo Armen.

CHAP. X.
Of a Convulsion in Wounds.

HItherto I have delivered unto you such Precepts as concern all Wounds in
general. Now the Method which I proposed unto my self in the beginning of this
Treatise of Wounds, does require that I set down in like manner such Points as
concern all particular Wounds.

The Differences of Wounds are taken from three things. The first from their
Accidents: The second from the Nature of Wounds: The third, from the parts
affected From the Accidents, Wounds may be said either to have been known unto
the Ancients, or not to have been known unto them. From the Nature of Wounds
these Differences are taken: Wounds are either Simple or Compound. A simple
Wound is that which has neither any cruel Symptom, (...) any other kind of
Grief, which may draw the Surgeon from going about the curing of it,
according to the intention set down in the general Doctrine of Wounds. Thither
then I send you: for I mean to avoid fruitless repetitions. A compound Wound
is, that which has either a cruel Symptom, or same Disease, or both annexed.

The Symptoms are in number five: Pain, Fainting, a Convulsion, a Palsy, and
Crudity. Of Pain and Fainting, I have discoursed already; because they happen
often, as well in simple as compound Wounds, as has been showed, Cap. 5.
Wherefore I am only to speak of the last three: of which a Convulsion is the
first: If you require a Description of it: receive this: A Convulsion is a
contraction or drawing together of the Muscles or Parts which are appointed for
voluntary Motion toward their beginning; which are either the Brain, or the
Spinalis Medulla or Chine of the Back.

A Convulsion is twofold: for it is either natural or unnatural: A natural
Convulsion happens when one of two Muscles appointed for Motion is contracted,
the other being tranversly wounded. This is to be seen in Wounds of the Head,
when one of the temporal Muscles is transversly cut asunder; and in Wounds of
the Fingers: for if the inner Muscle of a Finger be cut asunder transversly,
the outward Muscle is contracted. An unnatural Convulsion is that which happens
not because one of two Muscles, ordained to perform this same action, is
tranversly wounded. This is twofold, Motus convulsivus, and Convulsio vera.
Motus convulsivus, or the convulsive Motion, is caused of a thin and halituous
Matter, moving too and fro, tossing the Nerve: And it does not continue long,
for the Matter being kept in the part affected, the Brain and the beginning of
the Nerves are so affected that they lose their Action; from whence ensues the
Palsy on that side: then a malign Vapor being raised from hence, and passing
to the beginning of the Nerves of the sound part not altother spoiled, the
Nerves are shaken, and so Motus convulsivus is caused.

If any man demand, why a malign Vapor resting in the Brain procures not only a
stupidity, but a Convulsion, if the beginning of the Nerves be affected?

I answer, that this happens, because no Body can have Motion in it self, which
is not Fibrous: Seeing then the Brain is not Fibrous, it cannot have Extension,
and Contraction: But the beginning of the Nerves may, although they be soft:
for they are framed of many Filaments covered with a Membrane. Not unlike to
this is Spasmus flatulentus or the Cramp. This is caused of a thin Humor or
Flatuosity nipping the beginning of the Muscle: so you may observe, that they
who are troubled with a Quartan Ague, or who increase windiness in the Body,
are most subject to this Grief. This very often is a forerunner of a true
Convulsion: Wherefore it seems only to differ from a true Convulsion, that in
this the Matter is less sharp, and the Contraction endures not so long.

A true Convulsion is that which is caused either of a plentiful greasy Matter
stopping the Nerves, or of a dryness pursing of them; or by consent, a noisome
Vapor being sent to the beginning of the Nerves of the Muscles, and nipping
them. Of a true Convulsion there are four kinds, Emprostlxtonos, Opisthotonos,
Tetanos and Spasmus cynicus. (...) is when not only the Neck, but the rest of
the Body also is drawn forwards, so that the party cannot stand upright, the
Nerves of the Neck, and of the rest of the Spina, which move the Body forward,
being ill affected. (...) is when the whole Body is bent backward, so that it
cannot be brought forward; which happens when the Muscles which bend the Body
backward are hurt. (...) is when all the fore and back parts of the Body are
equally contracted, and so kept. This happens when all the aforesaid Muscles
are kept at a stay. In this kind of Convulsion the Body remains stiff as a
stake, so that it cannot bend it self to any part (...) Seu oris tortura, aut
oris distortio, according to Celsus, lib. 4. c. 2. is when the Mouth is pulled
awry; it is caused by the contraction of the Muscles of the Face. Now the chief
Muscles of the Face are those of the lower Jaw, the Nostrils, Lips and Cheeks,
which have their Nerves for the most part from the third Conjugation.

As for the Signs of a Convulsion, it is easily discerned: for in it the Nerves
and Muscles being drawn toward their beginnings against the Will, cause the
Member also, which they move, to follow this depraved Motion, so that it
continues stiff, and cannot be bent as the diseased person (...). This is the
only Pathognomi^^ sign of a true Convulsion. In a convulsive Motion this
distension is not performed at once, and so continues; but it comes and ceases
then, and shakes the part sundry ways.

The Causes of a Convulsion are three; Fullness, Inanition and Con^^t.

Plethora or Fullness, is thus discerned: The habit of the Body is ^ick and
fleshy, the Vessels appear full, the Pulse is strong, a constant Age, the
Spring time, a temperate Region, a full Diet of much nourishing Meats, a ruddy
color of the Chin, and if the party bleed little at the Wound, show the same:
the sleep is sound and long, dreams of red things and blood present themselves:
In motion the Body is not nimble, the Urine is laudable, and plentiful.

To cure such a Convulsion, both Physical and Chirurgical means are required:
As for the Physical means, first, Bleeding is necessary: In Phlebotomy, what
quantity of Blood is to be drawn, the Strength of the party, the Part affected,
the Age, the Season of the year will show, if no Physician be at hand to
direct. A slender Diet is also requisite: for little Meat takes away Lassitude
or Heaviness, and asswages Thirst, as it is noted. 6. Epid. com. 3. Text. 28.
Purgation is not to be admitted: Begin first with Clysters, which must be
reasonable strong, and have Anodyne Oils mixed with them. Receive this as a
Pattern: Diacathol. j. Confect. Hamech. ss. Spec. Hier. Picr. ij. Ol. Lil. alb.
and Chamaemel. an. j. decoct. communis pro clysterib. x. Misc. ut fiat clyst.
If you be enforced to use Cathartical means, use these two, the descriptions of
which are these: Caryocostin. and Elect. de succo Ros. an. iij. Syrup. Ros.
solut. cum Agarico j. Aq. Lil. convall. flor. Tiliae, vel Ceras. nigror. iij.
Misc. ut fiat potio. 2. Diaphoen. Elect. de succo Ros. and Caryocostin. an. ij.
Antidoti convulsivae ij. Turpet. alb. and rad. e Salv. major. an. ss. Diagryd.
iij. Castor. ij. Costi Zinzib. Caryophyl. an. j. semin. Cumin. Rut. Croci an.
j. Cum syrup. Ros. sol. cum Agarico s. q. fiat Elect. s. a. dos. ss. in
praedict. aquarum iij. The Composition of Antidotus convulsiva is this: Rad.
Paeon. maris convenienti tempore erutae, and Visc. quercin. an. j. Castor. iij.
Salv. v. Baccar. Lauri. Cranii humani an. j. Theriac. Andromach. and Mithridat.
optimi an. vj. Cum Mellis despumati xij. Fiat Electuar. dos. ij. In aq.
Salviae, Rorismar. Lavandul. aut aq. Epilept. Langii. aut aqua Hirundinum,
cujus hanc accipite descriptionem. Pullos Hirund. numero 50. Forfice auferantur
extremitates pennarum major. semin. Sesel. Card. benedict. an. ss. Calam.
aromat. Cyperi. an. ij. Fol. Majoran. Rut. an. man. ss. Flor. Til. and Lil.
convall. an. pug. ij. Visc. quercin. rad. Paeon. luna decrescente collect. an.
j. Castor. vj. Infundantur isti per dies iij. in vini Malvat. lb viij. Postea
instituatur distillat. in B. Mariae: dos. ab. ss. ad j. in aq. praedictarum
iij. Give also ss. Extracti. Castorei in aq. Salviae, Electuarium ad Spasmum.
This following Electuary is excellent: Castor. Sagapen. Opopanac. an. j. succi
Laseris vel Assae. faetid iss. Acori, Scord. an. ij. Trium Piper. Schaenanthi.
Carni. an. ij. Asari. Scillae assat. an. iss. Rad. Irid. semin. Apii. Mastich.
an. j. Staechad. iij. Cum. Mell. despumat. and Mellis anthosati an. v. fiat
Elect. dos. j. singulis diebus in aq. mulsa. Cardanus de curdt. admirand. c.
15. affirms that he cured one troubled with Opisthonos thus: He caused him to
refrain from Flesh, Wine and Eggs: he applied to the Neck, the whole Spina, and
parts convelled, Clothes moistened in Oil of Chamaemil and Lilies. Inwardly he
ministered Mithridate with the Electuary of Musk, with the which he mingled
Pearls, the Jacynth and Emerauld prepared. These things being done, we are to
come to the Topical means: These must resolve and discuss: such are Oils,
Liniments, Unguents; Fomentations, Bathes. Vtendum his Oleis, Vulpino de
Castor. de Catell. pinguibus, Philosopher. Juniper. Laurino, Rutaceo,
Terebinth, Petrol. de Spica, Lumbric. Hyper. cum Gummi, de Costo. Irine, Lil.
albor. Chamaemel. pingued. Vulp. Taxi. Anserum sylvest. humano, and ursino. As
for Unguents you have Aregon. Martiation, Dialthaea cum Gummi: of these and the
Oils you may frame unto your selves Liniments: as Axung. humanae, ursi, taxi,
anser. sylv. an. j. Vng. Dialth. ij. Ol. Lumbric. Vulpin. Hyper. cum Gummi.
Lil. alb. and Castor. an. iss. fiat linimention s. a. If great Desiccation and
Discussion be required, you may use this Liniment: Vng. Aregon. and Martiat.
an. j. pingued. human. and ursin. an. ij. Ol. Terebinth. Philosoph. and Petrol.
an. j. Ol. Salv. j.

As for the Fomentations, boil Mallows, Fenugreek, Scordium, Sage, Lavander,
Tansey, Germander, Thyme, Chamaemil, Dill, Bay Leaves, Flowers of white Lily,
Woodbind, and Betony, in Sack and Muscadel, taking equal measure of each.

Bathes you may make also of these Simples, boiling them in Water and Milk.
Last of all, let the parts be lapped with Fox, wild Cats, Conies, or Hares
skins dressed.

Having discoursed of a Convulsion proceeding from a Plethora or Plenitude; I
am to show how a Convulsion from Inanition is to be dealt with: whether it
proceed from Inanition or no, you are to examine those Signs which I set down
to find out a Convulsion caused of Fullness. If you find in the part wounded
Signs opposite and adverse to those, you may boldly pronounce that it proceeds
from Inanition.

In such a Convulsion abstain from Phlebotomy and Purging; only keep the Body
soluble with emollient Clysters, as this: Lactis, cui incoxeriut Althaea,
Violae, Parietaria, Rosae pallidae, bonus Henricus mercurialis, x. Ol. Viol and
Lini an. j. Sacchari rubri ij. Misc. ut fiat clyster. As for local Medicaments,
they must be of a remollient and moistning quality.

The Oils of this kind are, the Oil of Violets, Linseed, Quinces, Reats-foot
and Trotters, Eggs, of ^^eet Almonds, new Sallet-oyl, you may use also
May-Butter, new S^ines-grease tried: Of these you ^ay make Liniments; take this
Description as a Pattern: Butyri ^^^^lis and Axungiae Porcinae re^^tis an. ij.
Ol. ovor. Cydon. (...) Viol. an. ss. Misc. ut fiat lini^^^tum.

As for Baths, you may boil in (...) and Water a Sheeps Head and feet,
Mallow-leaves and flowers, ^^^et-leaves and flowers, Pellito^y of the Wall,
Linfeed and Fe^greek: when the Bath is ^^de, you may add to it some (...)
Neats-feet Oil, and Oil of Trot^ers.

Now last of all, a Convulsion (...) consent offers it self: This ^ay happen
three manner of ^ays:

First, by a malign Vapor offend^^^ the beginning of the Nerves, as (...)
happens in poisoned Wounds. (...) these the Wound is to be di^^ed, that the
venomous Matter ^ay have a free vent. Then ^^pping-Glasses are to be appli^^,
to stay the ascent of the Va^^^s.

The Medicaments which are to (...) applied to such Wounds must (...) a liquid
substance, that they may the more readily pass to the bottom of the Wound. They
must also be of a drying and digesting quality, to resolve and draw out the
virulency of the Matter: such are Theriaca Andromachi, and Mithridate dissolved
in the Spirit of Wine, or Aqua Theriacalis. It is not amiss to add some of the
Powder of Mercury precipitate well washed in Plantain and red Rose Water: for
in such Wounds it is an excellent Antidote. Now I only point at the Cure of
such Wounds, setting down but a few general Indications of Cure, because
hereafter I am to discourse of all sorts of poisoned Wounds in particular.

Secondly, a Convulsion by Sympathy or Consent happens, the Nerves drawing
themselves toward their beginnings, by reason of the great pain, which is felt
in the wounded part: In this kind of Convulsion Anodyne Medicaments, or such as
assuage Pain, are to be applied. But seeing I have at large discoursed of such,
Chap. 6. I will remit you thither, not willing to use idle repetitions.

Thirdly, a Convulsion by Consent may happen by reason of immoderate Cold,
making the Nerves stiff. In curing of this Symptom. 1. You must keep the
wounded party in a warm Room; 2. You are to use warm Medicaments, as Oil of
Chamaemil, Dill, Rue, Bays, Lilies, Rape-Oyl, Dogs grease, Bears grease, Horse
grease. Of these you may frame unto your selves Liniments, as this: Pingued.
caninae, ursi, and equinae an. ij. Ol. Raporum, Chamaemelin. and rut. an. ss.
Misc. ut paretur ^nimentum. In this case it is excellent to foment the part
with the decoction of Turnips being very warm; for it is a superficial
Medicament in this case.

Before I end this Chapter, I will set down a few Aphorisms concerning
Convulsions in Wounds, which will serve for Prognostics.

The first shall be this: A Convulsion or Raving, which ensues after
immoderate bleeding, is ill, according to Hippocrat. Aphor. 3. not only because
the Nerves are dried, but because Choler and corrupt Humors offend the
beginnings of the Nerves after the evacution of Blood.

Secondly, if a Convulsion ensue after a Wound, it is most commonly deadly 5.
Aph. 2. partly because sharp Humors nip the Nerves: partly because the Nerves
must be enflamed. Heurnius writing upon this Aphorism, sets down a dainty
Medicament in this Case, which I thought good to impart to you; and it is this:
first, press out the Oil out of the Seeds of Saint John's Wort; next infuse the
Flowers of the Herb in the same Oil, This Oil apply warm.

Thirdly, whosoever are taken with a Tetanos, they die within the space of four
days; but if they pass these, they escape, 5. Aph. 6. For first it is a most
sharp Disease, and such do end the fourth day: Second, Nature cannot longer
endure the horrible pain, which is caused by the strong Tension of the Nerves,
both of the fore and back part. One thing is to be noted, that they which die
of a Convulsion, remain long hot, because they die being stifled, the Muscles
appointed for respiration being also convelled: for the Muscles of the Neck
being distended, the Septum transversum also must suffert; for Nerves springing
from the fourth Vertebra of the Neck are inserted into the Midriff, and so the
Neck suffering a Convulsion, Respiration is hindered.

CHAP. XI.
Of a Palsy, and crudity in a Wound.

HAving delivered unto you in the former Chapter so much as was fit for a
Surgeon to ^^ow concerning a Convulsion, in the first proper Symptom of a
compound Wound: now I am (...) descend to the second, which (...) a Palsy, a
Symptom opposite to the other. Paralysis is deduced from (...), which is to be
resolved; because the Nerve, and the Muscle into which the Nerve (...)
inserted, are so resolved, loosened and weakened, that they become ^^fit
Instruments for voluntary Motion: This Particle (...) does in this composition
signify a Diminution; so that (...) may be termed such as are taken lame in
one side, or any ^^ce part: but (...) and (...), such as are taken throughout
the whole Body with such a Grief; such are Persons taken with an Apoplexy, or
are a dying: of which Hippocrates speaks, 2. Aphor. 47. It is called by Avicen
and his Interpreters Mollificatio, because the Nerves in this Grief seem to
become softer. (...) torpor aut stupor, Numness comes near to this Disease. And
tho this affection seems ^^ly to be a Dullness in Feeling, yet it is taken for a
Passion compounded of the difficulty as well of Moving as Feeling. It is often
a forerunner of the Palsy, and only differs in the degree of the Cause, it
being milder. Paralysis, or a Palsy, is the privation of Motion always, and
sometimes of Feeling also in one or more Parts, proceeding from the stopping or
intercluding of the animal Spirits, which are the efficient Causes of voluntary
Motion. By those who have written of this Disease a Question is moved:

How it comes to pass that in a Palsy, sometimes both Moving and Feeling are
taken away; sometimes the Motion and not the Feeling, and sometimes the Feeling
and not the Motion?

In those parts wherein there are diverse Nerves serving for Motion and Feeling,
the Answer is easily made; for in such parts if the Nerves appointed for Motion
be only affected, then the Motion is hindered, the Sense remaining sound, and if
the Nerves appointed for the Sense be affected, the Sense is hindered, the
Motion remaining: So in the Eye, if the Optic Nerves, the first pair be hurt,
the Motory, the second pair being safe, the Sight is taken away, the moving of
the Eye remaining; and in the Tongue, if the third and fourth Conjugation of
Nerves of the Brain be offended, and the seventh pair be found, the Taste is
offended, the Motion of the Tongue continuing, and on the contrary. If the same
Nerve do afford both Moving and Feeling unto a Part, the Matter is not so
plain. Authors do ascribe this to the defect of the Animal Spirits; so that
Moving may be abolished, Feeling remaining: for fewer Spirits are required for
Feeling, than Motion, which must have greater strength of the Faculty; and
therefore if Feeling be abolished, the Motion cannot be safe: for it is not
likely that the weaker Operation being taken away, the stronger should remain.
If a Nerve inserted into a Muscle be so affected, that the influence of the
Animal Spirit is stayed, it may fall out that both Feeling and Moving may be
taken away: but if a Nerve being inserted into a Membrane or into the Skin, be
so affected, the Feeling may be abolished, the moving of the Member remaining;
for these similary Parts are not appointed for Motion.

The immediate cause of a Palsy, I reckon to be some unnatural affection of
the Nerves, which are inserted into the parts, which are by Nature destinate to
voluntary Motion: for from the Nerve every Muscle has the faculty of moving,
which carries to it Animal Spirits.

Now a Nerve has a twofold consideration; for it may be considered, first, as
it is a similary part concurring to the composition of a Muscle; or secondly,
as it is an organical part carrying the Animal Spirit from the Brain to it,
which is the principal efficient cause of Motion.

As it is a similary part, it may suffer Distemperature, this Distemperature
all Practicers agree to be a cold and moist Distemperature; for such a
Distemperature relaxes the Nerve, and makes it altogether unapt to receive and
carry the Animal Spirits.

The external Causes of this Distemperature may be the cold Air, the North
wind, immoderate Venus, narcotical Medicaments, lying in Snow, or in Water,
Galen 4. de Loc. affectis, c. 4. affirms that one who in the Winter Season, in
cold and rainy Weather, had lapped his Neck with a wet Cloak, and kept it
somewhat too long, became paralytick in one hand, the Nerves of the fifth,
sixth and seventh Vertebrae of the Neck having been offended.

The internal Cause which brings a Palsy, is a phlegmatic, moist and cold
Humor; moistning and cooling the Nerves too much, and relaxing them, and so
altering their natural temperature, and making them unfit either to receive the
influence of the Animal Spirits, o^ to bring them to the Parts ordained for
Motion. If the Nerves (...) the Spinalis Medulla be so altered it is to be
thought that the Humor primitively falls from the Brain; for the Spanalis
Med^^^ is nothing else but a prolongatio^ of the Brain. So we see that (...)
Appoplexy which kills not, end in a Palsy of one side, the Humo^ being turned
down from the Hea^^ to the cavity of the Vertebrae of the S^i^n, wherein the
Spinalis Medulla is contained, and moistning the Nerves which proceed from
^^ence. Neither is it to be denied, fort the Marrow of the Back has two parts,
as the Brain it self, from whence it proceeds, to wit, the right and left, and
that one ^^^e may be affected, the other retaining sound. This Humor does
primarily affect the Nerves, and secondarily the Muscles.

Nothing does more promptly p^create this Humor, than frequent Ebriety, chiefly
if it be pro^^ed by Wine. One Ralph Fea^estone an Attorney at Law, by once
being drunk with Wine, the second day afterward became Pa^^ytick in his right
side, and so continued as long as life did last. ^^^cletius thinks Wine to
pro^^^e this effect, because it is hot, and of subtle parts, and so is able
(...) dissolve such Humors, and to ^^ing them to the Nerves: Rudi^^ thinks this
to come to pass, because the Wine becomes sharp and ^^ger in the Nerves.
Platerus is (...) this opinion, that Wine has a ^^cotical faculty in it, and
Fernel. ^5. de part. Morb. and Symptom. up. 8. affirms, that he saw one those
whole Skin became stupid by drinking himself drunk with Wine, and sleeping
long. In the (...) the Limbs become lazy, because the Nerves and Muscles are
no much moistened with a thin and ^^terish Humor.

Now if you consider a Nerve (...) an organical Part, appointed (...) the
carrying of Animal Spirits to the Muscles, the Instrument of ^^ntary Motion, it
may be the cause of a Palsy, if it become thicker and narrower, and so unapt
to receive the Animal Spirits.

This narrowness may be induced three manner of ways: By Obstruction,
Compression, Densation, and Solution of continuity.

By Obstruction it may come to pass, when as by a thick and a tough Humor the
Nerve is so stopped, that the Animal Spirits cannot pass.

The Causes of a Compression of a Nerve are sundry. First, from Humors bearing
down the Nerve. Secondly, from a Tumor doing the like. Thirdly, from a
Contusion. Fourthly, from a Laxation; yet if this Laxation, be not suddenly
performed, but by degrees, it brings not a Palsy, as we may see in those which
are Crook-backed. Fifthly, from a strait Ligature. Sixthly, too long leaning
upon a part, as when we Sleep leaning our Head upon the Palm of our Hand.
Seventhly, Cold may be the cause; for if it be able to bring a Mortification of
a Part, it may more easily cause an Infirmity or Weakness of the same.

Densation or thickning may be procured by two means; First, if the party has
been nourished by thick and slimy Meats: Secondly, if immoderate Cold has
congealed it.

Last of all, a Palsy may be caused by Solution of Unity, when the Nerve,
which brings the Animal Spirits to the Part, is either cut transversly, or
torn, or eroded with a sharp Humor.

The Signs of a Palsy are manifest, to wit, the privation of Moving, and
sometimes of Feeling also.

The part primarily affected is not so easily found out: But that you may
attain to this, receive these Aphorisms.

1. If one side of the Face be affected, and the Speech hindered, as well as one
side of the Body, both the Brain and the Spinalis Medulla are affected.

2. If only one side of the Face be troubled, the rest of the Body being
untouched, the Cause is only in the Brain.

3. If all the parts of the Head being sound, either of the sides be
Paralytick, the Cause is in one of the sides of the Spinalis Medulla.

4. If the Arms only be Paralytick, the Cause is in the fifth, sixth and
seventh Vertebrae of the Neck.

5. If the Disease be only resident in the Legs, then you are to conjecture
that the Cause is in the Vertebrae of the Loins and Os Sacrum.

6. If any several Part be Paralytick, then the Cause is not in the Brain, or
the Spinalis Medulla, but in the Sprig of some Nerve inserted in that Part.

As for the Differences of a Palsy; it is either Universal, when all the Parts
under the Head are seized upon; or of one side only, and then it is called
Hemiplegia.

As for the Prognostics, receive these.

1. If a Palsy happen because the Nerve is transversly cut asunder, it is
incurable; Hippoc. 6. Aphor. 19.

2. Every strong Palsy proceeding from an inward Cause is hard to be cured;
because it is caused of a gross, cold and viscous Humor, which hardly can be
removed.

3. A Palsy taking an old Person in the Winter, is hardly cured; because
Diseases in the Winter are more rebellious, and the natural heat in such
persons is weak.

4. A Palsy which follows after an Apoplexy is hardly cured, because the Cause
is vehement, the Parts are weak, and there is still a fear of relapse.

5. A Palsy wherein both Motition and Feeling are taken away is more
dangerous, than that wherein only one of these Symptoms happens.

6. A Palsy ensuing after a strong and sudden Luxation of the Vertebrae of the
Spina, is dangerous; because the Nerves are much bruised: and by reason of the
Inflammation following, they hardly can be reduced.

7. A trembling after a Palsy is good: for it shows that the passage of the
Nerves by which the Animal Spirits do pass, is somewhat pervious.

8. If the Paralytick Members be actually hot, there is some hope of cure.

9. If the Paralytick Member be extenuate, and the fresh color thereof be
changed, it can hardly be cured; because the Spirits must be few and the
natural heat weak.

10. If the Eye of the Paralytick side be weak, the Disease is incurable: for
this argues the defect of the natural heat, and of the Animal Spirits.

11. A Fever following after a Palsy gives good hope of Cure, because it
warms, dries and discusses the Matter.

12. A Flux of the Belly happening by the benefit of Nature may further the
cure of a Palse; it discharging the Nerves of Matter impacted.

In the cure of a Palsy, you must set down a convenient Diet: It must be such
as dries and warms the Body: The decoction of Gua^^^on is good, used in stead
of ordinary drink, for it digests and discusses the material Cause: (...) the
Party like not this Drink, let a Bag be hung in good Beer or ^^e stuffed with
Herbs, which strengthens the Nerves, as Cowslip-lowers, Chamaepitys, Sage,
Rosemary, Stoechas, Betony, Hypericon, Calamint, the lesser Centaury, Nut^egs,
Cloves, Cinnamome, and Calamus Aromaticus. Metheglin ^^d Mead may be
permitted. Wine is not convenient, for according to all Authors, it is
offensive to the Nerves. Let the bread be Biscoct: the flesh of Partridges,
Phesant, Chickens, Pige^^s, and of other Mountain Birds r^sted, is good, Sauce
being made with Cloves and Cinnamome.

Phlebotomy has here no place, because Paralytick Persons are ^ost Cold and
Phlegmatic: and because they are subject to costive^ess, Clysters are to be
admini^^ed: In this case then dissolve D^phoenicum, Benedicta laxativa, (...)
Hiera Diacolocynthidos, in the ^^coction of Sage, sweet Majoran, dissop,
Calaminth, the lesser Cen^^ry, Bay Berries, Cumin-seeds, the Flowers of
Stoechas, Melilot and Chamaemil. It is expedient that the Paralytick be purged
sometimes; but first you are to prepare the Matter by ministering the Syrups of
Stoechas, de 5. Radicibus, Bizant. de Hyssop. with the decoction of Paeony,
Ruscus, Asparagus, Iris, Betony, Sage, Savory, Peny-royal, Chamaepitys, the
flowers of Sage, Rosemary, and Cowslips, aromatized with Nutmegs, Cloves and
Cinnamome. Then purge with Pilulae de Hiera, de Agarico, Assaiereth,
Aloephanginae, Mastichinae. If you would use stronger, give Pilul. Cocciae, and
Faetidae, and extractum Panchymag^gon. If the diseased party require Potions,
minister Diaphoenicum, Diacarthamum, Hiera Diacolocynth, cum Agarico
trochiscato. Inwardly, to strengthen the party, give the Conserves of Rosemary
Flowers, Sage Flowers, Betony Flowers, Cowslip Flowers, Paeony Flowers, and the
Clove-gillover, Nutmegs preserved, Ginger preserved, Diambrae, Mithridat. Of
these you may frame Electuaries, adding the Syrup of Stoechas.

As for local Medicaments, ever rub the affected part with warm Cloths; but
gently, lest the Spirits which are attracted be dissipated. Secondly, apply
Ventoses to the head of the Muscle of the affected part; but let it be but
narrow, and stay but a little while. Thirdly, apply an Emplaister of Pitch and
Resin of the Pine Tree. Fourthly, touch the stupid Parts with quick Nettles.
Fifthly, rubefying Medicaments may be applied, to attract the Spirits. Sixthly,
Fomentations of the Nervine Herbs above specified may be used. Seventhly, you
may embrocate the part with these Oils following, Ol. Vulp. Lumbric. Chamaemel.
Lil. alb. Rut. de Euphorb. Castor. Spica, Oleo Juniper. Cerae, Succin. Salv.
Rorism. Thymi, Lavend d. Cariophyll. Chymico. Ol. de lateribus, sinapi per
expressionem factum. Eighthly, apply Vnguentum Martiatum, Aregon, Agrippae;
then apply the Spice, Emplaster, or any one of that faculty. Last of all, lap
the Member in hot Furs. Many commend the holding of the Paralytick Member for
the space of an hour every Morning, for the space of sixteen days, in the Husks
of the Grapes, left after the Wine is pressed out, in Harvest time. They in
this Country use instead of these, warm Grains, and Oxes Bellies newly killed.
Natural sulphurous and bituminous Baths are excellent in this case: This
Country ought much to exalt the benignity and bountifulness of God, who has
furnished it with the Waters of the City of the Bath profitable in this and
other Griefs.

Of crudity in Wounds.
The second thing which hinders the Unition of a Wound and makes it compound, I
affirmed to be erudity in a Wound. A crude Wound I call that which does not
afford laudable Quittour, which must be white, smooth and uniform: This happens
by six means. First, by reason of a continual flux of Blood. Secondly, by an
Instrument bruising, as in Wounds made by Gunshot. Thirdly, by reason of the
Nature of the Parts, such as deep Wounds in the Joints. Fourthly, by reason of
the coldness of the Air. Fifthly, by the Application of unfit Medicaments, as
cold Water, Bole, etc. Sixthly, by reason of too strait binding. How Blood is
to be stayed, I have declared in the second Chapter of this Subject. Contused
Wounds are to be digested: Medicaments drying without mordication are to be
applied to the Joints, to preserve the temperature of them: The Air is to be
corrected: Fit Medicaments are to be applied to the wounded part: And a mean
Deligation neither too strait, nor too slack, is to be used. Of all which
seeing I have already discoursed amply, I will repeat nothing.

Of the Disease complicate with a Wound.
The last thing which makes a Wound compound, is a Grief complicate with a
Wound, as the Dropsy, French Pox, and Leprosy; but seeing they belong to the
Practice of Physic, I will leave them to those who have written, and list to
write of that subject, lest I might seem to reap the Corn of another man's Field.

CHAP. XII.
Of a Wound made by a poisoned Weapon.

HItherto I have delivered you the Intentions which serve for the cure of mild
compound Wounds. Now am I to acquaint you with the means by which ma^gn
compound Wounds are to be cured. Such Wounds are commonly termed poisoned
Wounds. But before I descend to the hand^^g of the particular Differences of
them, it will not be amiss to speak of Poison and poisonable Diseases
ingeneral: for this will make way for the better understanding of the
particulars.

Venenum is nothing else but Med^^amentum mortale, a deadly Medeament. The
Greek Authors call it (...) Hippoc. 6. Epidem. C^m. 6. text. vocat (...),
maleficum, a mischievous Medicament: In his Oath he calls it (...) deadly:
Theophrastus, Dioscorides, and Galen call it sometimes (...), modo (...), modo
(...), cer^^pt^rium, or letale. Aristot. 1. Probl. 36. calls Poisons (...),
Medicaments which procure death. It may be thus described.

Venenum or a Poison is a compound Substance, not a natural, adverse to the
Heart, and which corrupts the nature of Man. In this description it is called a
Substance, and so it is: for contraries are contained in this same Predicament:
Now seeing alimentum or a nourishment is in the Predicament of substantia,
venenum or a Poison must be in the same, seeing it is contrary to nourishment:
for this maintains the nature of Man, the other destroys it. Gal. 3. de temper.
4. assigns this difference between these two, that alimentum is that which is
overcome by Nature, and turned into its Substance; but Venenum or a Poison is
that which overcomes Nature, and destroys it. In the description it is said to
be a compound Substance: for seeing according to this Philosophical axiom,
actiones sunt compositorum, actions are produced by things compounded; a Poison
must be a thing compound, seeing the actions of it are manifest. It is a folly
to think that a Poison is only an Accident, for an Accident may either be in
the Subject, whereof it is an Accident, or absent from it without the
destruction of it, which cannot be affirmed of a Poison; for being ministered it
kills the Party, unless it be hindered by Antidotes. One may think that the
Poison by the biting of a mad Dog, or by the stinging of a Scorpion, are
Qualities, rather than Substances: but in truth they are compound substances,
tho the Body seem small, and scarce to be discerned by our Senses. Gal. 6. de
Loc. affect. cap. 5. seems to intimate so much to us, when he says, that the
poison of a Scorpion is most forcible in efficacy, tho it be but small in
quantity.

In the description, a poison is said to be a substance not Natural, or
Preternatural: for things natural are always good; but things called
preternatural are always of their own nature ill, as Diseases, and the Causes
of them. Poison is said to be adverse to the Heart; because it aims chiefly at
the Heart: for as soon as one has either taken poison inwardly, or is outwardly
touched with it, he presently is taken with a palpitation of the Heart,
weakness of the same, and last of all Swooning and Fainting. In this they
differ from purgative Medicaments, because these only offend the Stomach:
wherefore their correctives ought still to be mingled with them. Last of all in
the description of a Poison, it is said to corrupt the Nature of Man, for
whether Nature according to Aristotle 2. Physic. be taken for the matter, form,
or the whole frame of Man, it corrupts all. The materials of the Body of Man
are the Humors, the Spirits, and the solid parts: that these are corrupted by
poison, no Man doubts. If in a Man you take the form to be the Temperament, or
what ever is different from the Temperament, it is overthrown in like manner by
Poison.

Last of all, a Man by Poison being deprived of Life, becomes a Cadaver, or a
dead Carcass.

But here a doubt arises, to wit, How it comes to pass, that some are not hurt
by Poison?

Sundry reasons may be alleged for this. The First, is the property of some
particular persons: for some have obtained such a constitution from Nature,
that hardly any thing can hurt them. (...) Empiricus. 1. Hypot^^se^^
^onpiricarum writes, That there was an old Woman, who without receiving any
harm, could take xxx of Hemlock at one time; and that there was one Lysides,
who would eat half an Ounce of Opium safely. Athenagoras was not hurt by
Scorpions. The black Moors, who dwell by the River (...), are said to feed upon
Scorpions and Serpents, without taking any harm; which falls out by reason of a
strange and hidden constitution of the Body.

The Second reason may be the preparation of the Body by Antidotes: So
Mithridates King of Pontus could not be poisoned; because he armed himself
against Poison, by often taking the Mithridatical Confection.

The Third reason may be the taking of slimie or fat Meats, or Drinks, before
the taking of the Poison; for these are apt to keep in Poisons, and to abate
much of their strength.

The Fourth reason may be the vomiting of the Poison before it could take hold.

The Last reason may be the small quantity of the poison; for Galen 3. de simp.
Medicam. cap. 23. writes, That all Medicaments whether they be deadly or
purgative, require a certain measure for the effecting of their operations. We
are to consider also why some poisons kill presently, some slowly?

The First cause is the strength of the poison it self. Nicolaus Flo^ertinus,
sermon. 4, tract. 3 summa 2. c. 9. and tractat. 4. c. 6. writes, that one
Franciscus Ordelaphus, a Captain, had a certain kind of poison, which if it had
been cast upon burning Coals, presently did (...) all the standers by.

The Second reason is the disposition of the Bodies; for they who have but a
weak Heart, are more easily killed by poison. They in (...) manner who have hot
bodies (...) soonest offended by poison; for they have wide and large passages,
and so the poison passes more promptly to the Heart.

The Third reason may be the quantity of the poison ministered, for a great
quantity sooner dispatches than a small.

The Fourth reason may be the time when they are gathered. Theophrast. l. 9. de
hist. plant. c. 15. writes, that poisons gathered in the Summer time, are
stronger than those which are gathered in the Spring time.

The Fifth reason may be the taking of a poison fasting; for then it kills
sooner, than when the Body is full.

The Last reason may be the composition of the poison. All Medicaments set down
in Dispensatories show, how requisite the manner of composition is: so
The^ph^ast. in the aforesaid Book and cap. 17. rejecting the composition of
Hemlock, which the Inhabitants of the Istand Chi^s used for poisoning, sets
down a more sure and quick way,

There is a question moved by those who have written of poisons, whether a
poison may be made, which not suddenly, but slowly, and at a determinate time
may kill, as within the space of a Month, or a quarter of a year, or a whole
year? Some are of opinion, that such a poison may be composed: as Theophrastus
lib. 9. de hist p^ant. cap. de Aconito: who writes, that it was wont so to be
prepared, that it was able to kill within the space of a Month; sometimes
within the space of two or three Months; yea, after a year expired.

For the determination of this question, it cannot be doubted, but that a
poison may be so prepared, that it may either sooner or more slowly kill; but
that it may kill at a determinate time, it seems altogether absurd: for actions
which are produced at a determinate time, proceed from a faculty that works by
discourse and judgment: But who can affirm that there is any such faculty in
poisons? Secondly, seeing poisons are contrary to the nature of Man, I see not
how they can be contained any long space of time within the body of Man, not
doing him any harm. Thirdly, it is more likely that a purgative Medicament
could be ministered to work at a definite time, seeing it is more mild than a
poison, but no such Medicament could ever hither to be found out. Only then
poison may be dressed to (...) more speedily or slowly. This we may perceive in
the biting of a mad Dog, and in the Pox, which in some bodies show their forces
speedily, in some slowly.

It may be, that you may ask by what means these Poisons and Deleteries do kill?

I Answer, that they neither kill by their excessive qualities, seeing we use
Medicaments hot in the Fourth degree, as Euphorbium, and Cantharides; nor by
their Temperature, resulting from a certain mixture of the Elements; but they
work by a more hidden and secret form, and by a certain nature or form infused
after the Temperature, which is not known to us by the constitutive causes, but
by the effects, as many other things are. This Nature (whatsoever Philosophers
say) they had from the Creation, and not from the Stars, or any new celestial
Influence, as Aponensis lib. de venenis.

If you demand what things in Man they chiefly assault?

I reply, that those things are chiefly the natural heat, and the radical
moisture; for they extinguish the First, and corrupt the Second. One then would
think it a strange thing, that the natural heat of the body of Man should stir
up this propriety of poisons, its professed Enemy, to quench it self. But
Nature has ordained, that the natural heat must go about the elaborating of
every thing which enters into the body of Man, to find how it may be made
profitable for preservation of the life of Man. Wherefore it finding poison,
goes about to digest it, not by the intention of Nature, but by the necessity
of its action; for it cannot be idle.

Now the subjects wherein this deletery Property is lodged, are three: a
Vapor, a Juice, an Humor, or a terrestrial substance; for what ever poisons
are taken either from Plants or Minerals, or living creatures, they are
resident in one of these three substances.

Now as for the diverse kinds of poisons; some are artisicial, some natural: If
I could show the innumerable differences of both the kinds, I would not: for it
were a heinous crime to further the wicked intentions of some malicious persons
of this desperate age, in this business.

One may wonder why God and Nature have ordained and brought forth poison. This
wonder we may easily qualify, if we say, that poisons may be considered two
manner of ways.

First, as they are natural Bodies, and so they concur to the constitution of
the World, and they have good uses. First, they are requisite in some Crafts or
Trades, especially in Painting and Dying. Secondly, they are appointed for the
feeding of some Creatures: So Starlings feed upon Hemlock, Swallows upon
Cantharides, the Quails upon Hellebore. Thirdly, they serve for the curing of
some Diseases in Man; so Hellebore cures Madness, Libbards-bane the stinging of
a Scorpion; Cakes made of Arsenick are used in the Plague-time.

Secondly, poisons may be considered as they are adverse to our Bodies, and
deadly, and so they have no use; but are abused by perverse and wicked persons:
Thus innumerable sorts of weapons are made of Iron and Steel, devised by the
wit of Man, furthered by the Devil, the enemy of Mankind, for the killing and
dispatching o^ Man.

As for the signs of poison, Gal^n 6. de loc. affect. c. 5. expresses them
briefly in these words: When a Man having sufficient store of good Humors, and
li^ing healthfully, dies suddenly (as it falls out when one has ta^en a deadly
poison,) and that afterward his Body becomes of a livid color, or black, or
spotted, or that it runs by reason of moisture, or sends out a noisome smell,
they say that such a man has taken poison, and not without cause. Mercurialis
de ^^rb. venenos. and venen. lib. 1. c. 16. adds these; Fainting, a panting of
the Heart, filthy Vomits, casting of black Blood, the Hicket, Trembling,
Stupidity, retention of Urine, a weak Pulse, burning in the whole Body, a
little before death Coldness, and casting of cold Substances, Spots throughout
all the Skin, Pustules, Tumors, gnawing in the Stoma^h; griping in the Guts:
These are signs of poison taken within the Body.

As for the Prognostics of pois^n, two shall suffice: First, if the poison
cannot be driven out of the Body, either by Vomit or siege, (...) remedies
prevail nothing, but that the symptoms continue, as (...) Fainting continue,
the whole Body grows cold, Cold Sweats break out, and the Pulse ceases, and the
whites of the Eyes turn up, ^^co^ding to Arist. 4. Probl. 1. there is no hope
of escaping, and death it self approaches. Secondly, if the poison be expelled
by vomiting or siege, if Antidotes bring ease, and the Symptoms cease, then
there is hope that the poisoned party will escape.

Besides these poisons, which do kill, being inwardly taken, there are some
which offending first the external parts, by degrees pass from thence by the
Veins to the Heart, and bring at last those symptoms, whereof I have spoken,
and death it self. There are two sorts of these external poisons, which
properly belong to the subject which we have ^n hand, to wit, Wounds: which are
solutions of Unity by a poisoned weapon, and by the bitings and stingings of
venomous Beasts.

Wounds inflicted by poisoned weapons, are thus discerned: First, they cause
unaccustomed and intolerable pain in the part wounded. Secondly, strange Tumors
appear. Thirdly, the part wounded becomes discolored, of a livid, black, or
spotted color, the part notwithstanding having not been contused. Fourthly,
the part putrefies in progress of time, and sends out a stinking sanious
Quittour. Fifthly, having passed from the affected part to the Heart, those
fearful Symptoms which I have set down do ensue.

As for the presages, no Wound made by a poisoned weapon can be secure; for
poison of its own proper nature is so adverse to the nature of Man, that it
ever threatens destruction. Secondly, if after the using of methodical and
convenient means the Symptoms begin to be abated, there is some hope of
recovery left.

If you would know what these means are; If the poison has not passed further
than the part wounded; if the party be not of an eminent quality, tender or
fearful, it is good to use the actual Cautery, for it does much stay the
activity of the poison. But that the Eschar may speedily fall, you are to use
deep scarifications, which must reach to the sound part: Then you are to use
Medicaments, which are fit to procure the fall of the Eschar, that the poison
may have vent to issue out. If the poison has passed deeply into the Body,
beware of using of the actual Cautery; for this were to add grief to grief. If
the party be tender and fearful, use Ventoses after scarification. To the part
use convenient Medicaments, such as Vnguentum de paeto is, or the Basilicum
described by me: But with these you must always mingle Mercury precipitate, or
Turbith Mineral washed, with some Theriaca Andromachi, or Mithridate or
Antidotus de sanguinibus, or Athanasia, or Electuarium de ovo. To the parts
adjacent, apply attractive Emplasters, as Oxycroceum, and such as receive the
hot Gumms, as Galbanum, Opoponax, Elemi, etc. This do, unless the wounded part
be so hot that it threatens a Gangrene: for then you must go about to obviate
this Symptom, leaving the cure of the Grief for a while.

In these Wounds, until three days be expired, you are to refrain from
Bleeding, Purging, Vomiting, and Clysters: The Party must sleep sparingly, and
use a moderate Diet, eating such meats as are of easy Digestion, and afford a
good juice. During this time you are to minister every day, Morning and
Evening, one of the Electuaries aforementioned, giving a dram or more, according
to the person of the party, in some convenient Liquor, as Carduus-water,
Strawberry-water, or Black-cherry-water, adding some Aqua theriacalis.

CHAP. XIII.
Of a Wound by the biting of a mad Dog.

IN the former Chapter, having first discoursed of Poison in geteral, I set
down the method of curing such Wounds as are made by a poisoned weapon. Now am
I therefore to descend to the other branch of malign compound Wounds, which are
procured by the biting or stinging of venomous Beasts: of these there are two
sorts; the biting of a mad Dog; and the biting or stinging of Serpents.

I will then first begin with a Wound caused by a mad Dog; because it most
frequently happens in these parts, and Physicians and Surgeons are oftenest
employed about the curing of this kind of a Wound. And tho other Beasts besides
Dogs may be mad, as Wolves, Foxes, Cats, Horses, and sundry other, and by
biting kill a Man; yet by most who have written of this subject, this kind of
poison has its denomination from the Dog, because he, of all other Beasts most
frequently runs mad. This poison, which is the cause of the Madness, does not
consist in the first qualities heat or cold, moisture or dryness; for Dogs and
Wolves run mad, as well in extreme cold weather, in the middle of Winter, as in
the Summer in the Dog-daies.

Wherefore it must be a specifical kind of poison which most frequently is
engendered in a Dog by a peculiar property, and inclination to this kind of
madness,, and to communicate it to other living creatures. Baccius in tractat.
de venen. writes, that he saw a Man killed by a mad House-Cock.

This poison is communicated two manner of ways: First, by biting and the
slaver: Secondly, by slaver without biting: This slaver is easily imparted by
kissing any mad Beast; for the skin of the Lips of Man are very thin and
tender, and so apt to admit this kind of poison; yet, sometimes this poison is
received by the thick skin of any part; Matthew. de grad. consil. 82. affirms one
named Johannes Coquinartus, by putting his Hand in a mad Dogs mouth, after many
days to have become mad.

After that this poison is received, some sooner, some more slowly become mad;
for some rage within the space of a few days, or a week; some a long time
after. Brassav^l. lib. 2. Aphor. comment. 23. writes, that in some this poison
has lurked Seventeen years, Guainerius in tract. de v^nen. cap. 12. protests,
that he heard of one of credit, that one was taken with madness the eighteenth
year after the poison was received; yea, Alzaharavius affirms, that he found by
experience this poison to have lain lurking in the Body Forty years.

The reasons which may induce us to believe this to be true are sundry. First,
the variety of the parts offended: As for example: If a Nerve, Vein, or Artery
be hurt, the poison may more promptly be communicated by these conduits to the
noble parts, from whence they spring, than by other parts ignobler, which have
no such consent with them. The Second, is the nature of the poison it self,
which sometimes is stronger, sometimes weaker, and so more or less active. The
Third, is the weakness or strength of the party bitten: and so if sundry
persons about the same time be bitten by the same Dog or Wolf, neither do they
all sustain the like harm, neither do the Symptoms appear about the same time
in all, because the bodies of some are stronger, and of some weaker to resist
the poison.

The Fourth is, because the poison is more fierce in one Beast, than in
another: and so two being bitten by two several Dogs, the one may sooner die
than the other, by reason of the vehemency of the poison. Fifthly, the season
of the year, and the constitution of the climate may much further, or hinder
the Symptoms: And so the poison of Serpents in hot Countries, and in the
Summer time is most fierce. Sixthly and lastly, the Diet of the diseased party
may much further or hinder the appearing of the Symptoms: for if he use a Diet
which abates the force of the poison, they must of a necessity appear more
slowly.

That the Dog that bit is mad, you shall know by these signs; A mad Dog does
refuse both Food and Drink; much slaver issues out of his Mouth and Nostrils:
He looks wild, his Eyes are red and fiery: he barks but little, and that
hoarsly: he becomes lean: he carries his Tail under his Belly: he hangs his
Tongue out of his Mouth, which appears either Yellow, as if it were dried with
choler, or blackish, or reddish: other Dogs shun them: sometimes they run
mainly, sometimes they stand still: in running oftentimes they strike against
Trees or Blocks: He knows not his owner, but runs fierc^ly upon all
indifferently.

If we cannot have the Dog to examine whether he be mad or no, Authors have set
down some means to find this out by the Wound it self. The First is, we are to
beat some Walnuts, and to apply them to the Wound, and to suffer them to lie to
it for a nights space: when they are taken away, they are to be given to a Cock
or a Hen. If the Dog has not been mad, they shall live; but if he was mad,
they shall die the day after. Secondly, others lay Wheat to the Wound: others
draw Blood and Quittour from the Wound, and adding to it flower make a paste,
which they give to a Hen; If the Dog was mad, the Hen dies. Thirdly, Avicen and
Rhases advise us to rub the Wound with the crum of a loaf, that it may imbibe
the Blood and Quittour of the Wound, and to offer it to a Dog; if the Dog
refuse to eat it, or to smell unto it; and if after eating of it he become mad
or die, it is ^kely that the Dog was mad.

Having set down the means by which we may find out whether a Dog which has
bitten a person, was mad; it is requisite also that I set down the Signs by
which you may find out, whether the party bitten is like to be mad.

The signs of madness beginning are these: The party becomes discontented and
angry without any just cause; he feels a gnawing and heaviness in the Stomach:
he complains of unseasonable weather, although it be fair, his Body becomes
heavy and lumpish: he is given to watching; and if he do sleep, his sleep is
troublesome, he fears without cause: he drinks less than he was wont: he begins
to murmr, and to speak to himself: he desires Candlelight by day: In the
part wounded, tho skinned, a pain will be felt, which mounts up toward the
Head: whither when it is come, a giddiness is caused, that the party cannot
walk steadily forward. When these last signs appear, be assured that mad^ess is
at hand.

These are the signs of madness confirmed: the Face and Body become red: the
party becomes troublesome, he foams at the Mouth, he has wild looks, he spits
upon those which stand by: amongst such persons some do bark like Dogs, and
offer to bite: It is common to all those who become and by the biting of a mad
Dog, to hate water, and all liquid things: the true cause of this, is the
antipathy between this poison and liquid things: for by such things it becomes
more fierce, and the diseased parties are more offended, the Pulses of such are
small, and inordinate: their Members become more and more lumpish; they become
costive: Their Urine comes away by dropping: their voice becomes hoarse: they
are troubled with difficulty of breathing; they put out their Tongues; when the
grief increases they vomit either yellow or black Choler: A day or two before
they die, some of them are troubled with the Hicket, and a little before death
with Convulsions, and a fearful gnashing of the Teeth.

As for the Prognostics of such Wounds, receive these: First, if the Wound be
not deep, and has not offended a Nerve, Vein or Artery, there is great hope
that it may be cured, if Art be used. Secondly, if the party bitten become mad
and fear water, there is small, or rather no hope of his recovery.

As for the Cure, the Surgeon is to set three Intentions before his Eyes:
First, that he labor by all means to draw the poison out of the Wound, that it
go not deeper into the Body. Secondly, the principal parts are to be
strengthened, that they may the better withstand and repel the poison. The
Third is, that he labor to overcome the malignity of the poison.

The First he shall attain to, if first he apply a Ligature three or four
Inches above the Wound; yet Celsus lib. 5. cap. 27. will not have this Ligature
to be too strait, lest the part be benumbed: But if the part will not admit a
Ligature, then is he to apply a Defensive to the parts adjacent made of Bole,
Terra sigillata, Sangu^s dracenis and such like; tempered with the whites of
Eggs. Secondly, he is to scarifie the Wound, if it be not large enough already,
and to apply Cupping-glasses with a large flame to make the stronger
attraction: If the part cannot be cupped, yet it is always to be scarified, and
the Blood to be drawn by a dry Sponge, not wet in water. Thirdly, it is not
amiss to pull the feathers from the vents of Hens or Cocks, and to apply them
often to the wounded part, or to apply young Pigeons or Chickens hot being cut
asunder.

After this he is to apply attractive local Medicaments, as cataplasms made of
Garlic, Onions, Pigeons-dung, Mustard, Walnuts, Treacle, Rue, Leaven, Salt and
Honey. Gal. lib. 2. de antidot. c. 1. highly commends an Emplaster made of
Pitch, Opopanax, and Vinegar, and affirms that he never saw any that died, unto
whom this Emplaster was applied: the composition is this: Picis lb j.
liquescat, cui add opopanacis in aceto acerrimo soluti, atque ad justam
consistentiam reducti iij. formentur deinde m^gd^leones. These attractive
Medicaments are to be applied before a week at the furthest be expired,
otherwise they will prove unfruitful. See Dioscorid. l. 6. c. 39. and Paulus
Aegeneta l. 5. c. 3. You shall know the poison to be overcome, if you use the
Experiments set down by me to know by the Wound it self, whether the Dog was
mad.

Bleeding is not to be used, because it weakens the Patient, and stirs the
poison.

Purgation in like manner in the beginning is not convenient; for it is like
that it will draw the poison to the inward parts: If the poison has possessed
the inner parts, then it will not be amiss to use evacuation sundry times
before the 40th day be expired: for Wounds caused by the biting of mad Dogs,
must be kept open 40 days at the least. The purgative Medicaments which are to
be used in such cases, ought to be strong according to all Authors: as
Antimonie, white Ellebor, Mercurius vitae, pilulae de lapide lazuli, confectio
Hamech, hiera diacol^cynth. Electuarium Indum majus, etc.

I affirmed that the Second Intention of the Surgeon in curing of these
Wounds, was to strengthen the principal parts for the repelling of the poison,
with Antidotes contrary to this poison: in the exhibition of these, you are to
give twice as much in curing as preventing. In the shops you have always in
readiness Theriaca Andromachi and Mithridatium. You may minister every Morning;
iss. of either of them for the space of 40 days in the Morning; but Theriaca is
most effectual: At night you may minister some other Antidote: I will only set
down three approved ones.

The First is Scaliger's the Father. Mithridat. and pulv. rad. aristoloch. rut.
an. ij. terr. sigil. ss. muscas quae de napelli fructibus victum quaerunt number
20. cum siaeci succi recentis s. q. fiat mistura. dos. iss.

The Second is set down by Pal^^lus lib. de morb. contag. thus:. fol. Rut.
Verben. Salv. Plantag. P^^p^d. Absinth. Vulgar. Menth. Ar^^^s. Melyssophyll.
Beton. hyperic. Centa^r. min. singul. aequale pon^^s. colligantur justo
tempore, ac s^centur, postea in pulverem redig^tur. d^s. iss. in principio
sing^^is diebus horis ante cibum, sed ij. aut iij, si post septimanam voce^ini.
This is a parable and effectual Antidote. He advises also to foment the Wound
with Wine or Mead, wherein iss. of this powder has been dissolved, and then to
apply your other local means. He adds in like manner, that neither M^n nor
Beast ever died which (...) this Medicament, although it were ministered long
after the Wound was received; so that the Wound was not in the head or those
parts which are above the Mouth, and not washed with cold water as soon as it
was received.

The Third is Antidotus de can^^^ ^l^^^tilibus, commended by (...). li. 6. c.
37. and Galen 2. (...) Antid^t. cap. 11. (...). 11. de s. (...) facul. Galen
affirms, that none (...) dyed who used the powder of these Crabs rightly. They
must be gathered after the beginning of the Dog days, when the Moon is (...)
days old, and calcined in a F^ying-pan of red Copper: then they are thus to be
ministered, ci^^^. cancror. lj. pulv. gentian. j. (...) merac. cyathos iiij.
Misc. ut f^t petio bibenda singul. dieb. ma^^ per dies xj. See Galen. lib. 11.
(...) facult: These Antidotes may be ministered not only in Wine, but in
Posset Drink, and Broths also to give the Patient content.

Hildanus Obs. Chirurg. 78. Cent. 1. relates, how Anno 1602. Jul. 30. a young
Man was wounded in the Arm by the bite of a mad Dog, and cured. The young Man
(says he) came to me the First of August. First of all I scarified the bite,
and applied a Cupping-glass with much flame, and extracted as much Blood as I
could: Then I washed all the Arm in Posca, wherein Treacle and a little
Sea Salt was dissolved. For the slaver of a mad Dog, if it dry upon any part
of the Skin, unless it be quickly and carefully washed, and wiped off, may
cause madness. After this I cauterized the bite all over very deep with an
actual Cautery. And by the way I would advise young Surgeons to take special
care, that they cauterize not such bites only superficially, but rather to err
in excess than in defect. For since it is a desperate Disease, it must have a
desperate Cure: I speak by experience; For the Daughter of Sebastian Cuisner
received no benefit by an old Woman's applying a Cautery to her; because it was
not impressed deep enough. But to the case in hand. After burning, I was not so
very solicitous to assuage the pain; because unctuous things, and such as relax
the Eschar, as Butter, Oil, etc. (much less cooling and repelling Medicaments)
are not much approved by me in such Ulcers. For they hinder the evaporation of
venom, and these repel the Blood, and with it the venom to the noble parts.
But since pain (as Galen testifies) attracts the Blood and Humors out of the
Body to it self, it is probable that pain, if moderate, may do good in such
Ulcers. Therefore after burning I applied Cotton wet in Aqua vitae, wherein
Treacle was dissolved, to the Ulcer. Afterward I laid the following Plaster to
it, spread upon a Cloth. Cep. aliquantum sub prunis coct. Ferment. Farin.
Sinap. an. ij. Theriac. ss. fol. Rut. Scord. an. M. ss. Misceantur in Mortario,
addendo parum mellis. The next day I cut the Eschar every where, as much as
might be, then I repeated the applications of the foresaid Medicines: and so I
proceeded, till the fall of the Eschar. Afterward, lest the lips of the Ulcer
might close, I put Pease in it twice a day, as we do in Issues, and applied the
prescribed Plaster: And thus I kept open the Ulcer for three Months. Yet in the
interim twice or thrice a week I strewed the following Powder upon the Ulcer;
Pulv. praecip. lap. Bezoardic. pulv. rad. Angel. an. j. Misce. For it
wonderfully attracts the malignity from within to it self. Inwardly I gave
Alexipharmacks, Treacle, Mithridate, burnt Hartshorn, Bezoar, and the following
powder in Bugloss and Borage water, which is highly commended by ancient and
modern Physicians. Ciner. Cancrer. Fluviat. x. rad. Gentian. v. Oliban. j. M.
f. Pulvis subtilissimus. I neither Bled nor Purged him, lest I should draw the
Poison inward. Thus by Gods blessing he was cured, and continues well till this
day. By the same means I cured this young man's Brother, who was bitten by the
same Dog, and lived in health a whole year after; and then died of a Pleurisy.

CHAP. XIV.
Of a Wound made by the biting of an Adder.

I Have told you, how Wounds made by the biting of mad Beasts were to be dealt
withal: In this Chapter I will show how Wounds caused by the bitings and
stingings of Serpents are to be cured. God has created a strange variety of
them: who, as they serve for the perfecting of the Vnivers^n or frame of the
World; so they are employed by God for the punishing of sinners. Read a
memorable Example of this, Numb. 21. verse. 5. ad. 9. where it is set down, that
for the murmuring of the People of Israel, God sent against them fiery
Serpents, by the biting of which much People died, until at last Moses set
upon a Pole the brazen Serpent, by the commandment of God; by beholding of
which, the bitten persons were kept alive: This brazen Serpent was a figure of
Christ crucified, as he himself testifies, John 14.15. in these words, verse.
14. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness: Even so must the Sin of
man be lifted up; verse. 15. That whosever believed in him should not perish but
have eternal life; for according to Isaiah, c. 53.^.5. He was wounded for our
transgressions; he was bruised for our iniquities: The chastisement of our
peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed: Lucan the Poet in the
ninth Book of his Pharsalia sets down the journeying of Cato and his Soldiers
through the desert of Lybia, where, out of Nicander the ancient Greet Poet and
Physician in his Theriaca, he makes mention of sundry Serpents. Lucan's Verses
are thus turned into English Meter by Mr. Thomas May, an eminent English Poet
of his Age.

First from that dust so mixed with poison, bred
Rose the sleep-causing Aspe, with swelling head,
Made of the thickest drop of Gorgon 's goar,
Which in no Serpent is compacted more.
In scaly folds the great Haemorrhous lies;
Whose bite from all parts draws the flowing blood.
Cherfydros then, that both in land flood
Of doubtful Syrtis lives; Chelydrt too,
That make a reeking slime where are they go.
The Cenchrys creeping in a tract direct,
Whose speckled belly with more spotts is decked,
Than ere the various Theban marble takes.
Sand colored Ammodites: the horned Snakes,
That creep in winding tracks: The Scytale,
No Snake in Winter casts her skin but she:
The double-headed Dipsas, that thirsty makes;
The water spoiling Newt, the dart-like Snakes.
The Pareas, whose way his tail does guide:
The Prester too, whose sting distendeth wide
The wounded's foamy mouth; The Seps, whose bite
Consumes the bones, dissolves the body quite.
The Basilisk, whose hiss all Snakes does scare,
You Dragons too, etc.
O, fearful Brood armed against the sinful sons of Adam! We who are born in
these parts ought to glorify God, who has freed the Soil of such mischievous
Creatures. I mean not to insist on the description of every one of these
Serpents, the Symptoms which ensue after the Biting, and the manner of Cure,
because it would be a fruitless labor, the Land being free from them, and so
from their harm. In this Country only the Adder, and the Slow-worm are found,
which oftentimes do great hurt. Of these then I will discourse, as also of the
Toad, because here is great store of them, and their Poison is able to procure
Death.

I will first deal with the Adder. It is called Coluber in Latin, either quia
colit umbras, because it haunts shadowy places, or a lubricis tractibus, from
her winding pace or path. It is long like an Eel, black on the Back, having
yellow spots on the Belly: the Head is more flat than the Snake's Head. It is a
crafty and venomous Serpent, biting suddenly those that pass by: whereupon
Jacob in his Testament, or last Will, Genesis 49. v. 17. calls Dan, by reason of
Sampson, who was of that Tribe, coluber in via, an Adder in the way.

When the Adder has bitten a Man, the part becomes of a leaden color, and
very painful, and if it be not presently cured, much black and stinking
Quittour does issue out from the Sore, like to that which flows from Vlcus
depascens, a fretting Ulcer. If it bite any Cattle, very often they die.

When I was in the City of Bathe in Sommerset-shire, nine years ago, a little
Land-Spaniel bitch belonging to one Mr. Lloyd who dwelt three Miles from
thence, being bitten by an Adder by the way, died the next day, having
intolerable pain and swelling of the whole Body.

The Poison of it is hot, for an Adder is more hot than a Snake; which is not
poisonable here with us, though it be in hot Countries, as Italy. The Adder
hisse^ and most nimbly moves the forked Tongue, as the Snake does.

As for the cure of the biting of an Adder, the Ancients have set down many
Medicaments, both Simple and Compound for the cure of Wounds inflicted by
venomous Beasts: you shall find great store of Simples in Dioscorides,
throughout the whole seventh Book, and Nicander in his Theriac^, and
Alexipbarmaca. Grevinus, l. 1. de Venenis, c. 36. and 37. has gathered them
together, whom you may peruse. Petrus de Abano in l. de Venenis, c. 4. sets
down seven Herbs effectual against Poison, and the bitings of venomous Beasts,
which are these, Hypericum, V^ncetoxicum, Enula campana, Raphanus, Dictamnus,
Arist^^^chia longa and rotunda. He affirms these to have equal faculty with
Treacle it self against Poison. The Ancient Physicians only used these and such
like, before Treacle and Mithridate were invented. The Juices or the Powders of
the Herbs they gave inwardly, to the Wounds or Sores they applied also the
Herbs. As for compound Medicaments, you may use Mith^^date, Theriaca
Andromachi; Theriaca magna Esdrae, Diatessaren, Electuarium Orvietani.

If you be called to cure one bit by an Adder: First, apply Ligatures three or
four inches above the bitten place; hold up the Member as high as may be,
scarifie the part, and apply Cupping-Glasses: If you cannot apply them, apply
defensives above the part.

Dress the Wound with Treacle dissolved in the Oil of Scorpions, inwardly
minister Treacle it self in Carduus, and Treacle Water, or Theriaca magna
Esdrae, which he is said to have brought from Bab^lon, when he returned from
his exile with other Jews to their native Country; Electuarium Orvietiani. The
Juice and Leaves of the Ash are highly commended.

It is a very strange thing, that if a Viper be compassed with the Leaves of
the Ash on the one side, and Fire on the other side, she will rather go toward
the Fire than the Leaves of the Ash. Such an antipathy is between the Viper and
the Ash.

Ambros. Pareus, lib. 20. c. 23. shows how he cured one bitten by an Adder:
because the History is memorable, I thought good to set it down. At what time
(says he) Charles the Ninth lay at Melines, I and Doctor le Fure, the Kings
Physician, were sent for to cure a Cook of the Lady of Gastroperses, who was
bitten by an Adder, as he was gathering wild Hops in a Hedge. The Cook as soon
as he was bitten in the Hand, sucked the Wound with his Mouth, thinking thereby
to mitigate the pain, and draw out again the Poison. But as soon as the Tongue
touched the Wound, presently it so swelled that he could not speak. Besides
this his Arm even to the Shoulder blade did swell, and caused such sharp pain,
that he swooned twice while I was by him, his countenance becoming yellowish,
and of a livid color like to a dead man: and although I did despair of the
recovery of the man, yet I forsook him not, but washed his Mouth with Treacle
dissolved in white Wine, and ministered it to him, adding Aqua Vitae. I
scarified the Arm with many and deep scarifications I suffered the Blood which
was waterish and sanious to flow plentifully from the parts about the sore; I
washed the scarifications with Mithridate and Treacle, dissolved in Aqua Vitae:
the sick Person I laid in his warm bed, and caused him to sweat, but forbade
him to sleep, lest the Poison should have been drawn to the inner parts. By
these means I so prevailed, that the next day all the malign Symptoms ceased.
Wherefore to finish the Cure I thought good that the Wound should be long kept
open and washed with Treacle: Neither was I deceived, for within a few days he
recovered. By it you may observe, that whether Poison be inwardly taken, or
externally impressed, it is good to watch until the force of the Poison be
abated, lest it seize upon the inward part.

They who catch Adders, apply the Powder of them to the part affected, if they
be bitten, and take this same Powder inwardly; as they who catch Vipers use the
Powder and Trochiscs of Vipers. Others commend the Powder of Tin, and commend
it as a secret and specifical Medicament. But the Method set down by me is the
safest way to cure: If you would make trial of the Powders of Adders, or Tin, I
would advise you to mingle them with Theriaca. Now a days the Adder and
Viper-Wines are in great request: But a Question may be moved, whether they be
wholesome.

Nicolaus Florentin. 1. de Venen. following Rabbi Moses, and others, writes
that Viper-Wine being often drunk, is effectual against Poison. Galen also
Sect. 6.6. Epid. Text. 5. affirms both Wine, and Viper the Flesh to be good
against Poison: So that Viper-Wine by these Men's Judgments, cannot but be good
for healthful persons. When I traveled in Bohemia, I observed that the Earl of
Rosenberg the younger, during the Summer time did eat the flesh of Adders, for
preserving the sight, and staying of old Age: But Dioscorides and others give
advice that care be had, that Serpents be not suffered to have access to Wine
Vessels, lest they poison the Wine; which if they do, then surely the Wine is
like to make a speedy way for the Poison to assault the principal parts.

This doubt I think may be thus resolved; If by chance Vipers or Adders be
drowned in the Wine; because the whole Body lies in the Wine, neither Head,
Tail, Guts nor Gall being taken away: and no time of fermentation being
granted, undoubtedly the Wine must be venomous: But if it be made by Art, these
parts being taken away, and the flesh well prepared, and fermentation
permitted; such a Wine must be wholesome, if a skilful Physician, unto whom
Diseases and Complexions are known, do order the manner of taking it.

It is now time to come to the Slow-worm: it is called in Latin Coecilia and
Coecula, because it is blind; and by Nicander (...).

It is a little slender Serpent, it has a hard Skin of diverse colors, For it
is partly of a bluish, partly yellowish, partly of a light purple between
these: It has small Eyes, and covered with a thin Skin. It has very small
Teeth, but more to be seen in the lower than upper Gum. Its Tongue is cloven:
It has a chink in the Belly, which being opened it lays Eggs: after the Eggs
are laid, the chink does consolidate again. They are in length about a span,
and about the thickness of a Man's Finger; toward the Tail it is more slender:
The Female is more black than the Male: The passage of the Excrements, and
place of conception, is transverse: It comes abroad in July: It is harmless,
unless it be hurt: It is seen most often in hilly places: In the Winter it lies
in the cliffs of Rocks, and cavities of the Ground. Storks do much prey upon
them.

It is very venomous, the bitings of it are very small, and scarce appear. The
place bitten is red, and the whole Body becomes enflamed.

As for the Cure, you are to scarifie the part, and to apply a Ventose. Then
you are to apply Mithridate, Treacle, or Terra sigi^lata, mingled with Oil made
of Vipers or Scorpions. Platerns affirms, that a Treacle made of the Trochiscs
of it, instead of the Trochiscs of Vipers is effectual against the Plague.

I will conclude this Chapter with setting down of the Cure of the Poison of a
Toad. In Latin it is called Bufo: The color of it is blackish, mingled of
black and a dark yellow; the black is bunched and full of knobs; the Skin is
very thick; the Head is broad and thick, and the color thereof about the Neck
is somewhat pale; the Heart is in the Neck, and therefore it is not quickly to
be killed, unless the Neck be cut asunder, or deeply pierced: Its Eyes are of a
flaming yellow color, like those of a Goshauk: It leaps not as Frogs, but
creeps slowly, partly by reason of its short Legs, partly by reason of its
sluggish Body; it is altogether dumb; it couples not only with Toads of its own
kind, but Frogs also; it delights in dry places, as in Stables, Dung, Beds in
Gardens, and Caves of the Earth; it feeds upon the Slime of the Earth,
Earthworms and Bees, which it draws out of the Hives by its venomous Breath: It
delights much to be in places where Sage is planted. It not only infects all
things over which it passes by its poisonous pissing, but by bespattering He^bs
with its venomous slaver. Wherefore, it is not to be wondered if Men die, who
have eaten unawares Herbs, Strawberries, and Mushroms infected by Toads: If one
do move it, it Swells, and looks ugly with flaming red Eyes, expecting
opportunity to dart out virulent pissing, and a white Juice out of the Mouth;
yea, if it can touch one, it does bite by the hard brims of the Lips: Being
pricked through the middle, it will live some days; and from it will drop a
bloody Poison mingled with a yellow Water.

The Enemies of the Toad are the Cat, the Polecat and Viper. If one be infected
with the Poison of a Toad, these Symptoms ensue. First, the color of the Body
is changed to an ugly pale color, which is seen in Box Wood; the Party has
difficulty of breathing, the Breath stinks, the Seed flows sometimes against
the will, the Hicket is troublesome: Caspar Schwenck feldius, in Theriotrophio
Siles. tractat. d. Reptilibus adds a sudden Giddiness, Convulsions now and
then, blackness of the Lips and Tongue, a froward Countenance, much Vomiting,
dimness of the Sight, a Dysentery, loathing of Meat, raving, the falling out of
the Teeth, a numbness of the whole Body, a deep sleeping, a cold Sweat, and at
the last Death.

As for the Cure, Diosc. loco citato commends Vomiting, the drinking of strong
Wine, running, and quick walking, and two drachms of the Root of the Reed or
Cane; whereby we may gather, that both the temperament of the Toad and the
Poison is cold. Schwenckfeldius loco citato, commends Women's Milk, Treacle,
Mithridate, Hartshorn, Aqua Theriacalis; Oil of Vitriol, Turbith Mineral, the
infusion of Stibium. The Body is to be washed with such a Laxivium as is
prescribed against Gangrenes: Often bathing is good, made of Seawater, wherein
Scordium, Hypericum, Art^misia, Wormwood, Germander, Lavander, Thyme, Sage,
Tansey, and such like have been boiled. It is not amiss to apply dried Toads to
the Armpits, the region of the Heart, and to the Wrists. Many think the
wearing of the Toadstone, and rubbing of venomous Wounds with it to be very
effectual.

CHAP. XV.
Of Wounds made by Gunshot.

HItherto I have discoursed of Wounds, which were known to the Ancient
Physicians and Surgeons: now I am come to ^eak of Wounds made by Gun^ot, not
known to them. Ber^^^^us Niger, Schwartz, or Black by surname, anno 1380. a
Fran^^can Friar, and an Alchymist, ^^und out the making of Gunpowder, and
Ordnances which ^ow are in use: He only perfected this mischief: for the use of
Guns, although rude, was before: For in the time of Carolus Magn^, Gamescus
King of Frisland, ^illed the Count of Holland, and two of his Sons, with a
Piece. And Rog^r Bacon, who died about the year of our Lord 1284. makes mention
of Gunpowder. Na^^^^us affirms Powder and Ord^ance to have been invented in
the days of Otho the fourth, and In^centius the Third, in the year ^f the
Redemption of Mankind, 1213. Froissard anno 1340. and 1353. makes mention of
Guns. Petrarcha, who died anno 1374. does the like. You may read in the History
of Alphonsus King of Castile; when he besieged Algezia, a famous Town of the
Moors, 3. August. anno 1342. that they in the Town shot out of it Bullets of
Iron out of Ordnances, according to Mariana. Yea, Petrus Matterus affirms, that
Brass Ordnance have been used by the Chinoyse many ages ago: So that the Friar
was not the Inventer, but Perfecter of Guns and Gunpowder.

As for the Wounds which are made by Gunshot, these Points concerning them
shall be set down; First, their Nature; Secondly, their Differences; Thirdly,
their Signs; Fourthly, their Symptoms; Fifthly, their Prognostics; Sixthly,
the Cure of these Wounds.

The Nature of them I will set down in these three Propositions: First, Wounds
made by Gunshot are not poisoned, if in the melting of the Bullets nothing be
added to the Metal. This is the Opinion of all Authors, if you except Vigo,
Alphonsus Ferrius, c. 8. and Franciscus Rota Bononiensis. This Proposition thus
I prove: Neither the Gunpowder, nor the Bullet is poisonous; therefore the
Wounds caused by them are not poisoned. As for Gunpowder, it is not venomous,
whether you consider each Simple whereof it is made severally, or them all
jointly in the Composition: For first of all, the Brimstone is not venomous,
Galen. 9. simpl. 36. affirms it to be effectual against the Itch, and daily
experience proves this to be true: It is good also in Diseases of the Lungs,
according to Dioscorid. lib. 5. c. 73. Saltpeter is used in the cure of burning
Fevers, there is none such a Novice in the Practice of Physic, unto whom the
faculties of Lapis Prunellae are not known; yea, it may be safely used instead
of ordinary Salt to Meat. The Coals either of the Willow, or Stalks of Hemp are
only dry, and have subtle substance, whereby they are easily set on Fire, by
the Match or Sparkles of Fire. Neither is the whole composition Poison, as Aqua
Fortis, or Aqua Regis are, whose ingredients, severally used, are not venomous,
for it may be ministered in Milk to kill Worms in Dogs or strong Children; yea,
the German Soldiers will drink it before they Fight; and it is good to be
applied to Scald Heads. As for the Bullet, it is in like manner harmless; for
the Powder made of it is good against malign Ulcers, and if it be beat out into
a Plate, it will stay the increase of Tumors in the beginning: Besides this,
Bullets have lain long in the Bodies of some Persons, not procuring any harm.

The second Proposition: Such Wounds are never without Contusion in the Flesh,
seldom without tearing of Tendons and Nerves, and often cause fractures in the
Bones, by reason of the violence and blunt hard substance of the Bullets. This
Proposition needs no confirmation: for these effects offer themselves to the
Eye in these Wounds.

The third Proposition: A Bullet may be so made, that it may cause a poisoned
Wound: it is the Opinion of Quercetan, Tractat. de his Vulneribus, c. 1. And it
may be made good by three Reasons: First, Weapons made of Steel, the hardest of
all Metals, may be made poisoned: much more than Bullets made of Lead or Tin,
soft and porous Metals. That Steel Weapons may be poisoned, these Authors
witness: Homer. 1. Odyss. Theophrast. lib. 9. de hist. plant. c. 15. de Scythis
idem affirmat. Plin. lib. 12. cap. 53. de Dabnatis and Dacis. Aeginet. lib. 6.
cap. 88. and generaliter de Barbaris Dioscorid. lib. 6. cap. 20. Secondly,
experience teaches us, that Metals may sundry ways be altered by mingling some
things with them, or quenching of them in some Liquors: so Brass is made of
Copper, Lead may be hardened, and Tin may be caused to leave its crackling, and
Copper be made white by addition of Arsenick, and Iron may be hardened, if it be
quenched in Vinegar, and the Juice of the Radish, or Smith's Water: It will on
the contrary be made soft, if it be quenched in the Juice of Hemlock, and
common Mallows, if a little Soap be added. The third Reason is this: poisonous
Spirits, and Oils drawn from Minerals, may be mingled with Metals, so that they
may participate of their venenosity-Wherefore, if Bullets imbibe such, if they
stay long in the Body, doubtless they may cause a poisoned Wound; for the heat
which the Powder causes in the Bullet, is not able to separate them: such is
the Oil of Mercury sublimate rectified from Arsenick: And though this be true,
yet it is strange that any Man should think every Wound made by Gunshot is
poisonous; seeing experience te^cheth that they may, yea and are cured by means
which have nothing effectual against Poison, as s^all be declared anon. Besides
this, they are not accompanied with s^^h fearful Symptoms as venomous Wounds
are.

The differences of these Wounds are taken from the diversity of the similary
parts which they offend; for either they make a Sol^tion of Unity in the fleshy
parts, or in both the fleshy and spermatick parts: The spermatick parts are
either soft or hard: The soft are Nerves, Tendons, Ligaments and Membranes: The
hard are two, Cartilages and Bones; the Nerves, Tendons and Ligaments are
contused and torn, the Membranes are divided and bruised. If the Bones be
affected, we are to consider what manner of fracture is caused by these Wounds.
Then according to Avicen. fen. 5.4. Tract^t. 2. c. 1. there are three kinds of
fractures; Transversalis, when a Bone is transversly broken, as it ^appens in
fractures of the Arms and Legs: Fissuralis, when a Bone is broken according to
the longi^de of it, as appears in chinks of the Scull; and Frustalis, when a
bone is broken into small pieces ^ shivers. Now it is manifest that the third
kind of fracture is most commonly seen, when a Bone is fractured by a Gunshot;
seeing the Instrument causing the fracture is blunt, and very forcible.

As for the Signs of these Wounds; they are taken first from the Figure: for
these Wounds are always orbicular: Secondly, from the color, for the part is
either of a livid color, or of a blew color mingled with green, or of a
violet color; sometimes the Wound is black, and the adjacent parts livid:
Thirdly, from the feeling of the Blow: for when one is wounded he feels as he
thinks a Stone, or a piece of some heavy and blunt Instrument entering into the
part. Fourthly, from little Blood issuing out: for the part being contused, the
brims quickly afterward so swell very often, that Blood is stayed from flowing.
Fifthly, from the heat of the part; which happens by reason of the quick and
vehement passing of the Bullet, or grievous contusion of the parts wounded.
Sixthly, from the adjuncts, as if burning appear: this is discerned, if
Pustules do appear, if a scorching heat, dryness, wrinkling, hardness of the
Skin, and burning of the Clothes do offer themselves to the sight; burning is
caused if the piece be discharged not far from the wounded party. These are the
Signs of Wounds made by Gunshot, if the Bullet be not poisoned.

If the Bullet be poisoned, these Signs will appear. First, an ugly color will
appear, as if it tended to mortification. Secondly, horrible pain, and
pricking. Thirdly, great inflammation. Fourthly, a heaviness of the whole Body.
Fifthly, a sharp Fever. Sixthly, Fainting. Seventhly, Raving, and especially if
no evident Cause can be given for these Accidents. Eighthly, the Bullet it self
will show the Poison; for if you put the Bullet into a sublimatory Vessel, and
put a strong Fire under it, a black stinking smoke will rise from the Metal,
and the upper part of it will be of a blackish or livid color. If you cannot
have the opportunity to do this, then cut the Bullet asunder; if it be
poisoned, it will be of a violet color.

The Symptoms of ordinary Wounds made by Gunshot are these; Contusion, Pain,
Inflammation, Convulsion, Heat, Palsy, (if the Instruments appointed for
Motion be torn) the natural color of the part altered, and sometimes a
Gangrene, and a Mortification, if the Wound be great, and in or near to a
Joint. If the Bullet be poisoned, all these Signs and Symptoms will appear; but
sooner and more vehement, than if it were not. But because I have discoursed of
most of these Symptoms in the general Doctrine of Wounds, I will remit you to
the Chapter wherein they are handled; of a Gangrene and a Sideration, because
they are Symptoms which may ensue after all sorts of Solution of Unity, I will
handle them when I have spoken of Fractures and Luxations in their proper place.

As for the Prognostics receive these, First, if a fleshy part be only
wounded, and the Constitution of the party be laudable, and the Air favorable,
the Wound may be cured without any great difficulty. Secondly, If the
Spermatick Parts be violently torn or broken, if the Temperature of the party
be not laudable, but Cacochymical; if the Air be hot and moist, which falls out
when the South Wind blows; and if Signs of Poison do appear, it is to be feared
that a Gangrene and Mortification will ensue. Thirdly, these Wounds yield a
stinking Sanies, if the parts be much torn, and much Humor be sent to the
wounded part, which quenches the natural heat. Fourthly, these Wounds are
harder to be cured than those which are made by other Weapons, by reason of the
Contusion which still does accompany them. Fifthly, these Wounds come more
slowly to Suppuration than others do; partly because the natural Heat is much
abated, and partly because the Spirits are much dissipated by reason of the
great Contusion.

It is now time to come to the cure of these Wounds. The first intention of
cure is to remove from the Wound all extraneous Bodies, as the Bullets, pieces
of Garments, Paper, pleces of Wood, or Metal, contused Flesh, clotted Blood,
shivers of Bones, and such like: But seeing I have showed in the third Chapter
concerning this Subject, which I now have in hand, how extraneous Bodies are to
be taken out of Wounds, let me desire you to have recourse thither.

The second Intention is to apply convenient Medicaments to the part affected.
Joubertus commends this Topic, Axungiae suill. depurat. vel Butyri recentis
viij. Praecipitati l^ti, ac in tenuem pulverem redacti j. Caphurae in aq. vitae
solutae ij. exq^isite misceant^. If instead of the Axungia you take Arcaeus his
Liniment, the Redicament will be more effectual: yet the Medicament seems to be
proper, for Axungia and Butter are suppurative, and Precipitate furthers
Suppuration, causing little or no pain, and the Camphore helps Penetration, and
resists Pu^^^ction.

Ambrose Parey commends Ole^^^ Catulorum, or the Oil of Whelps, cujus haec est
descriptio, Ol. Lil. lb ij. Catulos Caninos d^s vivos, coq. haec simul quoad
(...) ab ossibus abscedat, mox injiciatur vermium terrestrium in ^^o mundatorum
lb j. qui eous^aelixentur quoad arefacti omnem ^^on in ol^o deposuerint: tand^^
fiat colatura olei, cui admisce ta^^in. Venetae vj. Aq. vitae ij. ^^um si
parts nervosae aut arti^^s vulnerentur, plus terebinth. q^^m olei usurpandum
est, quia putes istae majorem quam carnosae d^^cati^nem requirunt.

In the dressing of these Wounds se^en Cautions are to be had.

First, we may use moderately, ^^cined Vitriol dissolved in Aqua Vitae if the
Southwind blow, and we sear putrefaction; for although it be not Suppurative,
yet it resists Patrefaction.

Secondly, we are to shun Escha^^tical Medicaments, for three C^uses. First,
because they procare Pain, Inflammation, Fevers, as^angrene, and such fearful
Symptems. Secondly, because they hinder Suppuration. Thirdly, because the
Eschar does keep in putrid Vapors, which may pass (...) the lesser to the
greater Vessels, and to the principal parts, and so cause a Fever.

Thirdly, the Tents at the first are to be made greater and longer, that the
Wound may be sufficiently dilated.

Fourthly, if the Contusion be memorable, and possess much of the adjacent
parts, they are to be scarified to discharge the part of congealed Blood, which
is apt to putrefie.

Fifthly, if there be any burning, such Medicaments are to be used as are good
against burning, such is this: Ol. Lil. albor. and lini an. ij. Infrigidantis
Galeni. iss. Ol. Laurin. ss. Fol. Sempervivi Major. Plantag. and Cort.
interior. Sambuci. an. man. j. Pingued. Ran. ss. Bulliant omnia lento igne ad
succorum cousumptionem, ac coletur Medicamentum, cui add flor. aeris j.

Sixthly, cooling and astringent Medicaments are not to be used after the first
dressing, because cooling Medicaments quench the natural heat, and hinder
Suppuration: and astringent Medicaments keep in putrid Vapors, which may bring
a Gangrene. Wherefore Medicaments Anodyne, emollient, and suppurative are
convenient: as this; Mic. pan. trit. iv. Lact. recent. lb j. Flor. Chamaemel.
and Melil^t. an. pug. j. Farin. Hord. and Fab. an. j. Coq. omnia ad
Cataplasmatis consistentiam: tum add vitellos ov^rum ij. Ol. Viol. and Ros.
an. iss.

Seventhly, it is sufficient to dress the Wound once in the space of twenty
four hours. If much Quittour flow, or if the party be severish and feel great
pain, it is to be dressed every twelfth hour; when little Quittour issues, it
is sufficient to dress it once a day. We may besides these Topics use to these
Wounds the Oil of Linseed, Lilies, Eggs, Saint John's Wort, Elder, Earthworms,
and Chamaemil, with Yolks of Eggs and some Saffron, until the Wound come to
digestion, which will be the fourth or fifth day. Then use abstersive
Medicaments, as Paracelsus his Mundificative, or Mundificativum de Apio: the
Wound mundified incarnate, and last of all skin it with Epulotical Medicaments,
proceed thus, if the Wound has only offended the fleshy parts.

If the Spermatick parts be wounded and torn, this Medicament is effectual:
Terebinthinae Venetae, Ol. Terebinthin. and Hyperic. an. ij. Turbith. flavi ss.
Tutiae, Euphorb. and Calcis vivae, an. j. misc. If the hard Spermatick parts,
as the Cartilages and Bones be shivered: Praedict. composit. Terebinth. Ol.
Hyperici and Terebinthinae j. Pull. Cephal. jss. applicetur medicamentum
calefactum. This Medicament will further Suppuration, and procure the scaling
of the Bone, if it must be so, and will save that which is found from cariosity.

If you perceive by the Signs set down by me, that the Bullet has been
poisoned, and so have caused a poisoned Wound; the brims are deeply to be
scarified, Ventoses to be applied, and Mithridate and Treacle inwardly to be
ministered in Carduus, Strawberry or black Cherry-Water, taking of Mithridate
and Treacle an. ss. aquarum praedictar. iij. Let the Wound be dressed with this
Aegyptiacum magistral. Decoct. Lupinor. ac Lentium an. lb iss. Aceti lbj. Salis
communis, Aluminis an. j. virid. Aeris ss. Mellis lbss. coq. omnia ad Mellis
spissitudinem, (...) add Theriacae. ss. Apply this Medicament, either upon
Tents, or by way of injection, as you shall think fit. This Medicament is good
in putrid Ulcers: Use this Medicament until all fearful Symptoms cease: Then
proceed with those Medicaments, which I have prescribed for such Wounds. In
poisoned Wounds you are neither to purge, nor to use Phlebotomy, until the
force of the Poison be abated: but in ordinary Wounds made by Gunshot, you are
to open a Vein, if the party be Plethorick; and to use purgations, if the party
wounded be Cacochymical.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the means to avert Humors from the wounded Head.

AT last I am come to the last Point, whereof I intended to discourse
concerning Wounds; which is, the cure of the Wounds of particular Members,
which reqaire any special consideration differing from the canons of Wounds in
general set down by me hitherto. These Wounds are either of the Ventricles, or
Extremities, or ^^mbs, the Ventricles are three, the Head, the Breast, and the
lower B^^y. Now Wounds of the Head either cause Solution of Unity in the very
seat of the Brain, or in other parts appointed to be Orgats of the Senses. As
for the Wounds, which are inflicted into the seat of the Brain, which is called
the Hairy Scalp, they shall be dispatched in setting down three Points. The
first Point shall be spent in discoursing of these things which are common to
most of these Wounds. The second shall set down the particular explication of
these Wounds. The third shall show what symptoms ensue after fractures of the
Scull.

The things which are common to most of these Wounds are in number four. First,
the aversion of the Humor from the wounded part. Secondly, the general
Prognostics. Thirdly, the description of fit Topics, which are to be applied
to assuage Pain, and stay any Inflammation. Fourthly, shall be set down the
manner of Rolling.

Aversion of the Matter which either has already brought Symptoms, or is like
to procure them, is performed by three means, to wit, by Blood Letting,
Purging, and the right ordering of the six things not natural.

Phlebotomy is either universal or particular. The universal is performed by
opening of a Vein. Of this kind of Phlebotomy these things may be demanded.
First, whether a Vein is to be opened, and Blood drawn? Secondly, how much
Blood is to be drawn? Thirdly, which Veins are to be opened?

As concerning the first demand, Blood ought to be drawn in three Cases. First,
if a competent quantity of Blood did not flow out of the Wound, when first it
was inflicted. Secondly, if it be a great Wound, and the party be strong.
Thirdly, if a great Inflammation has invaded the part, or a Fever has seized
upon the party.

As concerning the quantity, Blood is drawn either so much at one time as is
requisite, or at diverse times. If you go about to draw so much Blood at one
time as is requisite, you are to stop the Vein. First, when the Pulse appears
smaller, and flower. Secondly, when a faint Sweat issues out at the Forehead.
Thirdly, when the color of the Face is changed, and the Lips grow pale.
Fourthly, when a pain of the Heart does draw on, with yawning, and a desire to
Vomit, or to go to Stool. If you are to draw Blood sundry times for this same
Grief, you must continue the doing of this, until all ill Symptoms, as
Inflammation and Fever cease. See Parey lib. 9. cap. 14. Fallop. in Hippoc. de
Valner. Capitis, c. 26.

As concerning the Veins which are to be opened, you are to take those of the
same side, and those must be either the veins of the Arm, or the Veins near to
the wounded part, as the Vein of the Forehead, the Veins of the Temples, and
those which are under the Tongue. See Parey in the place before cited.

A particular detraction of Blood is when we take Blood from the part affected.
This is performed by scarifying the brims of the Wound, applying Ventoses, or
by laying to Leeches idem ibid. If the party be timorous, and loath to admit
any kind of Bleeding, then you may use strong frictions of the whole Body, with
course Linen Cloths, or of other parts of the Body, the Head excepted: for
these will discuss the superfluous Matter, and turn it into a halitus or Slime.
For superfluities must increase, the wounded party omitting the accustomed
exercises.

As for Purging, it is procured three manner of ways: First, by Cathartical
Medicaments given by the Mouth. Secondly, by Clysters. Thirdly, by
Suppositories. And as concerning solutive Medicaments which are ministered by
the mouth, these Points may be asked. First, whether purging is to be used?
Secondly, when such Medicaments are to be exhibited? Thirdly, of what hidden
faculty they must be? Fourthly, of what force they must be?

As for the first demand, a purgative Medicament is to be ministered in three
Cases. First, if the party have the Head^ach or Lumpishness. Secondly, if a
Tum^^ or Inflammation appear. See Fal^op. in Hippoc. de Vulner cap. 27.
Thirdly, if the Body be Cacothymical, so that there be strength, matter
prepared, and the Body open and passable.

As concerning the time which was the second demand, Purgative Medicaments are
to be minisied in the beginning. First, lest strength decrease. Secondly, lest
the Fever increase. Thirdly, to hinder the Humor stirred from ascending to the
Head. This H^pocrates advises in sharp Diseases, 4. Aphor. 10.

As for the third demand, those Medicaments which purge Choler, seem most fit
in Wounds of the Head: Because the Symptoms which ensue after these Wounds, as
Inflammations and Fevers, seem to be the effects of yellow Choler.

As for the fourth demand, we are to shun strong and eradicative Medicaments
chiefly in the beginting, lest that by too strong a commotion of the Humors, a
Pain, a Fever, and Inflammation be procured. See Parey lib. 9. cap. 14.
Wherefore we must use gentle Molicaments, and which do not increase heat. Such
are the infusion or decoction of Myrobalans mingled with Electuarium Lenitivum,
or de succo Rosarum, aut Dieprunum Solutivum. The Dose must not be great, you
may minister also the infusion of Rhub^rb, and Myrobalans, with the Syrup of
Roses solutive with Agarick. Myrobalans strengthen the Stomach and Head, as
also the Veins. See Fallop. in Hippoc. de Vidner. cap. c. 27. Arcaeus, lib. 1.
c. 4. prescribes such a form. Syrup. Ros. Solut. ij. Aq. Plantag. iij. Viere ut
ars praescribit. He is of opinion that no other purgative Medicament is to be
ministered, and that procuring Evacuations by Clysters or Suppositories will
suffice: But you need not fear to give the Medicaments which I have set down.

Having delivered so much as may seem sufficient to clear the doubts which may
arise concerning Bleeding and Purging: now am I to show you how those things
which are called not natural, are to be ordered; for the observation of this
Point does greatly further the Cure.

First then, as concerning the Air, it ought to be temperate, and thick,
according to Fallop. in Hippoc. de Vulner. cap. c. 25. For a hot and thin Air
does eliquate and melt the Humors, and so makes them more apt for Fluxion. A
cold Air is hurtful for the Brain, the Bones, the Nerves, and the Spinalis
Medulla, or Marrow of the Backbone. If then the Air prove cold, when you dress
the Patient, hold at a convenient distance a Chafing Dish with Coals above the
Head, to hinder the impression of the cold Air. See Parey lib. 9. cap. 14. Then
apply the Medicaments being made (...) lukewarm. If the Air be very (...) then
the room is to be cooled by hanging it with Sheets, and moistning them with
cold Springwater, or you may garnish the Windows with Medow-sweet, Gaul,
Burnet, Borage, Violets, Pri^^roses, Cowslips.

One thing is to be noted, that Wounds of the Head are sooner and more safely
cured in the Winter than in the Summer: and so concoct the Humors the better:
whereas on the contrary, in the Summer time the Humors are apt to be made thin,
Fuliginous Vapors are raised, and Inflammation does invade.

As for the Meat and Drink, Wine is not to be granted before fourteen days be
expired; for within this space all Symptoms usually cease.

In hot Regions where no Beer or Ale is, Barley Water is to be prescribed. If
the wounded party be of a queasie Stomach, or weak or aged. Sugar may be added,
or Oxysaccharum, or the Syrup of Violets, or of red Roses Simple, or of the
Juice of Limons or Citrons. Small Beer and Ale will suffice in those Countries,
where they may be had.

If there be a Fracture, neither Flesh nor Fish are to be permitted the first
seven days. First, because the wounded party must keep his Bed; and so being
deprived of wonted exercise, cannot so well concoct or digest the Food.
Secondly, to avoid fluxion of Humors to the affected part. Vide Fallop. and
Paraeum, lib. 9. c. 14. Let the wounded party eat Pauadoes and Ptisans; use not
Almonds, because they procure the Headache by filling the Head with Vapors:
stewed Prunes, Raisins of the Sun, Mallows, Asparag^s, Spinach, Succory,
Endive, are good boiled. Lettuce tho it be not good for the Head, yet it may be
granted, because it hinders the ascending of Vapors to the Head. After Meals it
is good to take some of such things as hinder the mounting up of hot Humors, by
shutting up and strengthening the Mouth of the Stomach: as old Conserve of red
Roses, Marmalade of Quinces, or Quinces preserved, Saccharum Violatum,
Boraginatum, Buglossatum, Pears stewed or baked; Coriander and Aniseeds, with
one covering of Sugar, are good to be eaten with Quinces and Pears. If Flesh be
permitted, then the Flesh of these Creatures following is to be eaten,
Chickens, yoling Pigeons, Veal, Mutton, Kids, Leverets, Mountain-Fowls and
Birds, as Partridges, Pheasants, Turtle-doves, Black-birds, Thrushes, Larks,
and such like. If the wounded party eat of these boiled, then you may boil with
them Spinach, Lettuce, Purselain, Sorrel, Borage, Bugloss, Endive and Succory;
but if they will feed upon them roasted, then make Sippets unto them of
Verjuice, the Juice of Oranges, Limons, Citrons, Pomegranats, or Sorrel with
Sugar. If the party will needs eat Fish, then let him have Trouts, Pickrels,
Smelts or Whiting-maps.

As for sleep let it be taken in the night time, and not by day, unless an
Inflammation has possessed the Brain, or the Meninges. The Signs of this you
shall have delivered in its own proper place; for seeing according to Hippoc.
2. Epidem. Blood rules in the Spring, and in the Morning, in this case it will
not be amiss to sleep from three a Clock in the Morning, till nine a Clock in
the Forenoon: for so the Blood shall be stayed, and kept from any extraordinary
motion, which otherwise would ascend to the Head, and increase the Inflammation.

If too much watching be troublesome, which corrupts the temperature of the
Body, procures crudity, and causes heaviness and pain of the Head, and makes
the Wounds dry and malign; then the Head, the Temples, the Ears and Nostrils
are to embrocated with such Medicaments as cool and moisten, according to
Galen. 13. Method. such are Vnguentum Pepuleum, Rosatum, Oil of Poppies,
Henbane, Mandrake, Oil of Roses beaten together, taking two parts of the Oil,
and one of the Vinegar. Inwardly you may give an ^mulsion of white Poppy Seeds
in Barley-Water, sweetning it with Saccharum Violatum, Buglossatum, or
Boraginatum: you may give also an and a half of the Syrup of white Poppy, in
two ounces of Lettuce-Water, l. 13. c. 14. This is to be done four hours after
Meat, to procure sleep; for sleep furthers concoction, repairs the loss of the
triple Substance caused by watching, asswages Pain, refreshes the Weary,
mitigates Anger and Grief, and restores reason troubled.

To this end you may minister also a small dose of Laudanum, but this must be
done discreetly, and warily. First, because the Opium (if the Dose be often
iterate) may cause a Stupidity or Lethargy. Secondly, because the Spices which
are added to correct the Narcotical Simples in the La^d^um, by eliquating the
Humors may offend the Head.

The room wherein the wounded party lies, must be somewhat dark; for too
bright a light dissipates the Spirits, increases Pain and the Symptoms, and
strengthens the Fever. Let his Lodging also be far from places wherein there
are immoderate ringing of Bells, roses of Carts and Coaches, and all sorts of
Smiths.

Rest and quietness is most con^^ient; for immoderate exercise moves and
agitates the Spirits, weakens the Body, and troubles the wounded party;
Wherefore soft walking will serve the turn.

Perturbations of the Mind are altogether to be abandoned; for the contraction
and dissipation of the Spirits cause great alteration of the Body.

Venery above all other things is to be shunned in Wounds of the Head, chiefly
if there be a Fracture; and that not only while the Wounds are in curing, but
also long after they are cured: for great store of Spirits are contained in a
small quantity of the Seed, the greatest part whereof flows from the Brain:
Hence therefore all faculties, but chiefly the Animal are resolved and weakened.
Parey in the place before quoted affirms, that he has known death to have
ensued in small wounds of the Head (even when they have been cured) by reason
of Venery.

As for the Excretion of the Excrements, the Body must still be kept soluble,
lest, if these should be retained, corrupt and noisome Vapors should ascend to
the Head: wherefore if Nature be dull and slow, Evacuation must be procured by
Suppositories and Clysters. If cathartical or purging Medicaments must be given
by the Mouth, such as I have set down in the beginning of this Chapter, are to
be ministered, whither I remit you.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the rest of the points common to most Wounds. of the Head.

THe Second general point concerning Wounds of the Head, shall be dispatched by
setting down the general Prognostics of them, which are these that here ensue.

1. Nulla capitis vulnera quantumvis exigua: No Wounds of the Head although
they seem small are to be slighted and neglected; for oftentimes it falls out,
that when a Wound is received without a fracture in the Head, a man may die, if
fearful symptoms or accidents appear: as a Convulsion, a Palsy of one Arm or
Leg, a Fever, Raving, Vomiting, faltring of the Tongue, Valeriol. lib. 3,
obseiv. 1. ^ungius tom. 1. ep. 10.

2. Wounds of the Head often become (...) easy or hard to be cured, bit reason
of the Countries (...) Ch^^^tes.

This happens either because the Air is hurtful by its elementary quality only,
as when it is cold and moist, as in Florence and Bononia, according to Amat.
Lusitan. Cent. 6. Curat. 100. Quercet. de Vulnerib. Sclopet. cap. 3. and in
Paris, according to Parey, lib. 10. cap. 8. Or this happens when the Air
uffends by a malign quality, as is observed in Gallia Narbonensis, and those
parts of Italy, which lie near to the Mediterranean Sea, by reason of malign
Vapors raised out of the Sea, and dispersed through the Air.

3. Wounds of the Head received by persons who have the Pox, Leprosy, Dropsy,
a Cough of the Lungs, a Hectic Fever, a Consumption, or ill habit of Body, are
hardest to be cured; partly because the Blood is not sit for unition, being
corrupt, as in the Pox and Leprosy; partly because there is not a sufficient
store of it, as in a Hectic, and Extenuation of the Body.

4. Wounds of the Head in Children prove sometimes rebellious; partly because
they are of a hot and moist constitution, which is most apt to admit
putrefaction; partly because the habit of their Body is thin, and so ministers
occasion to the breathing out of the Spirits.

5. In deadly Wounds of the Head, the parties live longer in the Winter, than
in the Summer: for in it unnatural heat is not so easily raised as in the
Summer.

6. If in Wounds of the Head a Swelling suddenly does vanish away, it is an ill
sign, unless some e^aeuation has gone before, or discussive Medicaments have
been applied.

7. A Fever which invades while Suppuration is procured, that is, before the
Seventh day, is less dangerous than that which invades after the Seventh day:
for about that time all accidents use to cease.

8. If a Fever in these Wounds do appear the Eleventh or Fourteenth day, with a
cold and groo^ing, it is dangerous, because it is to be feared lest some
putrefaction bath possessed the Brain, the Merurges, or the Scull; which a pale
(...) yellowish color of the Wound, or like to Water, wherein raw flesh has
been washen, will discover.

9. Wounds contused are more flowly cured, than those which are ixised, because
they require greater Suppuration.

10. Symptoms do sooner appear in the Summer, than in the Winter; for in the
Summer we look for them the Seventh or Fourteenth day; and the reason is,
because in the Summer the Humors admit sooner putrefaction, the unnatural Heat
being more readily stirred up. Vide Hippocrat. 1. Aphor. 15.

11. It is an ill sign, if the flesh of the brims look livid, for that is a
sign of the decay of natural heat: See Hippoc. Sect. 7. Aphor. 2.

12. If in Wounds of the Head Reason fail, if Speech cease, if Sight be lost,
if the party labor to tumble out of the Bed, when he is not able to move the
parts of his Body, if he have a continual Fever, if his Tongue be black and
dry, if the brims of the Wound be blackish or dry, if he have an Apoplexy,
Palsy, with an involuntary excretion of his Excrements, or an absolute
suppression of Excrements and Urine, a Frenzy, or Convulsion, then you may
pronounce death to attend at the Door.

13. Wounds of the forepart of the Head, are more dangerous than those of the
hinder-part. First, because greater store of Brain is contained in the part.
Secondly, because the containing parts are thinner there. Thirdly, because the
Meninges have Sinuosities or Cells in the forepart, but not in the back-part:
wherefore this inequality cannot but endanger the Membranes, which cover the
Brain, to be offended, if the Wound pass through the Scull, or if the Trepan be
to be applied. Fourthly, because if Wounds of these parts be deadly, he who
has a deadly wound in the forepart of the Head, dies sooner than he that
has a deadly Wound in the hinder-part. Fifthly, because more noxious Matter
may be gathered in the forepart, which may offend the Brain, than in the
hinder-part, by reason of the multiplicity of the Cells. Sixthly, because the
forepart has more Sutures than the hinder-part. See Fallop. in Hippocrat. de
vulner. capitis, cap. 7, and 8.

14. Wounds of the Temples are very dangerous, First, because the motion of the
joint of the lower Jaw, while we speak, eat, or drink, does hinder unition.
Secondly, because the passage of Hearing is in the Temples: now the instruments
of the Senses are very sensible. Thirdly, because vessels of Moment, as the
branches of the jugular veins, and soporal Arteries are distributed there:
Fourthly, because the temporal Muscle is placed in the Temple, whose offense is
not to be neglected. See Fallop. in Hippoc. de cap. vulnerib. c. 9.

15. A Wound in a Suture is dangerous: First, because the Scull is there
parted, and so more apt to opening than one solid Bone. Secondly, because in
the Suture there is a Ligament, by which the Memnges are tied to the
Pericrani^m: Wherefore a Wound being inflicted there, an Inflammation may
easily be communicated to the Meninges. Vide Fallop. in Hipp. de c. vuln. cap.
12.

16. Blackness in the parts near to the Wound, a Convulsion, Palsy, loss of
Appetite, much watching, and colduess of the extremities of the Body, portend
an evil event.

17. In these Wounds, if the brims tumesie not a little, it is an ill sign,
according to Hipp^c. 5. Ap^^r. 66. If the tumefaction be soft, it shows
concoction; but if it be hard, crudity. Secundum eundem 5. Aphor. 67.

18. Flesh is easily regenerate in all wounds of the Head, if you except those
wherein there is a feacture of the Scull a little above the Eyebrows: Three
reasons may be yielded for this: First, because in those places there is a
Cavity between the two tables of the Scull, which passes to the Sieve-like
bones of the Nose, full of Air, by which the generation of flesh is hindered;
for if you cause him, who has a Wound with a fracture, there to breath
strongly, his Mouth and Nostrils being shut, the breath which comes out at the
Wound will blow out a reasonable Candle held to it. Secondly, because the
thickness of the Bone will not suffer so much bloody juice to breath out, as is
sufficient for the generation of flesh. Thirdly, because there is a great
affluxion of Excrements to the part, which otherwise would be discharged by the
Eyes and Nose, which hinder the desiccation of the Wound, and so cicatrization.
Vid. Par. lib. 10. cap. 12.

19. In wounds of the Head you may hope well, if the Patient has no Fever, if
he be in his right mind, if he finds himself well when he takes any thing, if
he sleep well, and have his Body soluble, if the Wound look with a fresh and
lively color, if it yield laudable Quittour, and if in fractures the Dura
Matter has its motion free, and be not discolored.

20. In wounds of the Head with a fracture, we must not think that danger is
past before an hundred days be expired.

21. The Callus, whereby the parts of the Scull are united, tho it be sooner
induced in young, than in old persons; yet most commonly it is procured in the
space of 40 or 50 days.

The Third common point to be observed in Wounds of the Head, I affirmed to be
the appointing of Topics fit for the asswaging of pain, and the removing and
hindering of an Inflanmmation. Sundry Authors have set down sundry descriptions
of such Medicaments, which if one should gather together and set down, a
reasonable Book might be compiled.

To avoid tediousness, and not to leave you altogether unfurnished without the
description of any such effectual Medicament, I will set down the Receipts of
such Medicaments which will answer your expectation, and ease the Patient.

The First shall be this: farin. herd. iiij. poscae vj. coq. ad cataplasmat is
consistentiam: tune add^ntur ol. ros. ij. fiat Cataplasma s. a. Si desit posca,
substituendi in ^^ius locum acetum and vinum Rubeum, sumantur parts duae vini
and (...) aceti: Acotum rosaceum aut simbucinum praest antius est vulgari. This
Medicament of Hippocrates Fallopius extolls above all others, (...) lectionib.
in Hippoc. de capitis ^^lnerib, c. 39. Let this Medicament be used until the
Seventh, or Fourteenth day, as you shall perceive cause; Then apply other
Medicaments, whereof I will speak when I come to discourse of the Cure of
particular wounds of the Head.

The Second shall be this: Farin. board. and Fabar. an. ij aceti res. vj. ceq.
ista ad Cataplasmaus. consistentiam: tum addantur ^. ros. ij. This Cataplasm
cools, repells, dries, asswages pain, mitigates Inflammation, and hinders the
affluxion of Blood or hot Humors.

The Third shall be this: Medullae panis albi iiij. lactis recentis vj. coq.
ista. ad cataplasmatis consistentiam, tandem adae unguenti popul. ij. croci
pulv. ij. This Cataplasm is effectual, if the Inflammation and Pain be great,
if the party be of a dry and hot Complexion, or be any way Feverish. These
Cataplasms are to be applied above the Medicaments wherewith the Wound is
dressed, the hairy Scalp having been shaven for a reasonable compass about the
Sore or Wound.

The last general point concerning all wounds of the Head, set down by me, was
of dressing up of the Head after the application of the Medicaments. In the
dressing two things are to be observed; the covering of the Head, and the
rolling: As for the covering, A Cap must be made of a soft Linen Cloth, basted
with fine Surgeons Tow, but not quilted; and it must be of that bigness,
that it may compass the whole Head: it must not be too thick, too heavy, or too
hard; because the Head requires light, soft, and easy applications; yea,
Topics which are applied to Wounds of the Head must not be stubborn, as firm
Emplasters; nor too viscous: because the First will cause pain, and the Second
will not easily be taken off.

As for the rolling, it differs from the rolling of other parts because the
Head is somewhat spherical or round.

Of the Rollers these doubts may be proposed; First, of what Matter they ought
to be made? Secondly, of what breadth and length they ought to be? Thirdly, of
what Figure they ought to be? And lastly, what mediocrity of constriction is to
be used in the application of them?

As for the First, to wi^, the matter whereof the Rollers are to be made; it
ought to be of Flax and not of Wool, because it would be too hot, and cause
itching, which inconveniences would trouble the Patient. The Linnencloth
whereof the Rollers are to be made, must not be too new, for then it would be
somewhat too rough; nor too old, for then it would be subject to tearing:
neither ought it to be too thick, for then it would be heavy and boisterous,
nor too thin, for then it would be too weak.

As for the Second doubt, the Rollers ought to be three Inches in breadth, and
of a Fathom and an half in length, or of such a length as is sufficient to
compass the whole Scalp after manifold Circumvolutions and Rollings; for the
Roller must keep on the local Medicaments, and make some constriction of the
Head.

As for the figure of the Rollers, they must have two ends, that when they meet
they may by natural linking be strengthened and kept from slipping.

As for the mean of Constriction to be used in applying the Rollers (which was
the last doubt:) The Roller ought not to be too loose; for then it could
neither keep to the Medicaments, nor any way bind the Head: Neither ought it to
be too strait, for then these inconveniences might follow: First, the pulsation
of the Arteries would be intercepted. Secondly, fuliginous Exhalations could
not breath through the Sutures. Thirdly, the Blood would be driven from the
wounded part to the Meninges and Brain, from the outward to the inward parts:
from whence would ensue Pain, Inflammation, a Fever, Apostemation, a
Convulsion, Palsy, Apoplexy, and last of all Death. Neither wonder at this;
for Galen. lib. de Fasciis, relates, that one by too strait deligation of the
Head, lost both his Eyes; howsoever, great skill and circumspection is required
to dress the Wounds of the Head artificially.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Wounds of the parts placed above the Skull.

HAving set down those points which concern all Wounds of the Head in general,
I must now according to my intention descend to the handling of every
particular Wound of the same.

Wounds of the Head either offend the parts containing, or the parts contained
also. The parts containing are either common or proper. The common parts are
these, the Cuticula, the Cutis, and the Panniculus carnosus. The proper
containing parts are these; The Muscles, the Pericranium, and the Cranium. The
parts above the Cranium are subject to these offenses, a Contusion, a Wound,
and a Contusion with a Wound.

A Contusion is caused by a heary and obtuse, or a blunt instrument, as a
Cudgel, or by a fall from an high place, the Head alighting upon some blunt
Body: It is discovered by the Tumor without a Wound, and often a blackness or
blewness: If the Blood, by the violence of the Contusion, be poured out between
the Skin and the subjacent parts, it is called Ecchymosis.

If a Contusion without effusion of Blood be presented unto you, shave the
Hair, and apply this Medicament: Albumen ovi unius, ol. myrt. and pulv. myrtin.
an. ss. Misc. This Medicament is to be used until the part come to its own
temperature and confirmation. Dress the party twice a day: See Arcaeus, lib. 1.
cap. 1.

So you see, that repelling and astrictive Medicaments are in this case first
to be applied: For First, by these means Veins and Arteries are straightened, and
closed up. Secondly, the Defluxion is hindered. Thirdly, the part it self is
strengthened. You may use also this Medicament of Ambrose Party, l. 12. c. 4.
Album. Over. number. iij. ol. Myrtin. and ros. an. j. bol. Armen. ss. Sanguin.
Dracon. ii ss. nuc. Cupres. Gail. Alum. usti. an. ij. aceti rosac. satis, ut
paretur linimentum. If after the pain is gone, and the flux of Humors ceased, a
Tumor remain, use discussive means, such as this: Emplast. de Mucilag. ij.
Oxycroc, and Melilot. an. j. ol. Chamaemel. and Anethin. an. ij. fiat ex his
ceratum. s. a.

If by the application of these Medicaments the Tumor vanish not away, because
the effusion of Blood under the Cutis Musculosa has caused a separation of the
upper parts from the Cranium, which you shall discern by the fluctuation of the
Tumor and a fixed pain in the part: First incision is to be made; then if the
Skull be found, you shall finish the cure by moderate compression, and the
application of Medicaments which dry and mundifie; for moist Medicaments are
not to be applied to Bones, because they cause cariosity; use then such a
Medicament as this is; Swup. e ros. rub. siccat. and de absinthio an. j.
terebinthin. i ss. irid. Aloes, Myrrh. Mastich. and Farinae hord. an. ss. Misc.
ex praes. art. If the Scull be not sound, which you shall perceive partly by
the sight, for it will appear yellowish, livid or black, partly by the Probe,
or Finger, for you shall find it rugged and uneven, whereas it should be smooth
and slippery: First, you are to smooth it with the Raspatory: then to procure a
thin scale, apply this excellent Powder following. Rad. Irid. Gentian. Aristol.
rot. Dictamni, Farinae hord. an. ss. Aloes hepat. Sang. Drac. Myrrh. Mistich.
Sarcocoll. an. ij. fiat. exemnib. pulv. s. a.

In great Contusions sometimes Gangrenes ensue, by reason of the extinction of
the natural heat, which you shall conjecture if the part grow hard, and become
to be of a livid and black color; then thus you must go to work: First, the
part is to be scarified. Secondly, Cupping-glasses, or Horns, are to be
applied. Thirdly, such Fomentations and Topics are to be applied, as are
prescribed for a Gangrene, whereof I mean to discourse in a particularity, when
I have made an end of Fractures and Luxations; for it is a Symptom, which most
commonly accompanies solutions of Unity of all sorts. It shall suffice to have
spoken so much concerning a Contesion of the parts placed above the Skull, now
it follows, that we discourse of Wounds of the same parts.

Wounds then in the parts above the skull, are of two sorts: for in some of
them the Skull is not laid bare, and in some of them it is bared. You shall
know that the Skull is not bared, partly, by the Finger: if the Wound be large
enough; partly by the Probe, if no hard substance can be felt, and if the Probe
slip and slide, meeting with the Pericranium. As for such Wounds the
observations, which I set down in the point concerning the general Cure of
Wounds, will suffice for the curing of these.

Nevertheless, Wounds in the temporal Muscle require a special consideration,
by reason of the fearful Symptoms, which ensue sometimes after it is wounded.
The temporal Muscle then may be wounded three manner of ways: First, by a
puncture: Secondly, by being divided transversly: And Thirdly, by being wounded
according to the length.

If the puncture be deep, or the transverse Wound in like manner, it is a
dangerous Wound, and so ^^ be^accounted by the Chirurgon at the first, lest his
security king unto him discredit, and fruitless repentance at the last: for
^^ch wounds bring Vomiting, a Convulsion, and deep Slumbering, recording to
Fallop. in Hippoc. de (...) vulner^b. c. 9. The temporal Mascle being out
athwart, it loses its proper action, which is to move and lift up the lower
Jawe; and then the opposite temporal Muscle, being sound and whole, using its
strength the wounded Muscle not being able to use any resistance, it draws the
lower Jaw to it; whereby the Mouth, and all parts of the Face are drawn awry,
and suffer a Convulsion toward the found part, the other being resolved and
falling; for as often as the Muscles of one kind are equal in number, bigness,
and strength on each side, the resolution of the one part causes the
Convulsion of the other. Be^^les this, when we eat or speak, this Muscle is in
perpetual motion: whereby it comes to pass, that being once cut, it hardly will
admit unition; and the scaly Suture, Sutura squam^sa, which is the joining of
the Ossa petrost, or stony bones, so called from their hardness. If therefore
there be a fracture in this Muscle, let not the Surgeon be too hasty to
dilate it by incision, for the reason above specified; but let the Hair be
shaved, and the Wound dressed with the Oil of Hypericum, and the Oil of
Earthworms mingled together, with some spirit of Wine, all being made warm.
Take two parts of the Oil of Hypericum, and one of Oleum lumbricorum. If the
temporal Muscle be transversly cut, then the brims are to be brought together,
by using stitchings in the skin. Afterward dress either with the Medicament,
prescribed in a puncture, or with Arcaeus his Liniment melted: above these
wounds apply Paracelsus his stictick Emplaster, or Diachylon magman, brought to
the consistence of a cerate, by dissolving of either of both in some good and
approved artificial vulnerary Balsame. Although the wounded party be like to
die, yet according to Celsus his counsel, the miserable Patient is not to be
altogether left comfortless: for it is better to try a doubtful Medicament,
than none at all^ you may avoid scandal to the profession, and free your selves
from discredit, by acquainting his friends, or whom it most concerns, with the
danger wherein he lies.

If the temporal Muscle be wounded according to the length, then when you are
called, you are to perform two offices; First, if the Hemorrhage be of moment,
then you are to slay the bleeding, and then you are to unite the brims by
ordinary stitching. If the bleeding will not be stayed by the application of
ordinary means, (whereof I have set down some choice in a proper place) then
you are to pass a needle through the musculous Flesh into the Wound, and from
thence to the outward part of the Wound, compassing the great vessels with a
double thread in the needle: between the thread and the vessels you are to put
a little dosil of Lint, to shun the cutting asunder of the parts compassed with
the thread, and to avoid pain. This being done, cast a decent knot upon the
thread, before you sow the Wound; First, cleanse the Wound from the grumous or
clotted Blood, and all extraneous Bodies, and then few it, lest the part
wounded be cooled by the Air, and a Convulsion do ensue: when you have dressed
the party, let his Head be raised somewhat high with a Pillow.

It follows now, that I speak of wounds of the parts above the Skull, wherein
the Skull is detected, or laid bare. In these Wounds the Skull is either not
hurt, or hurt. If the Skull be not hurt, the Wound may be cured two manner of
ways, to wit, by Agglutination, or by Incarnation: If you mean to cure the
Wound by Agglutination, go thus to work: First, stitch the Wound according to
Art, then apply Pledgets moistened in the white of an Egg. The next day anoint
the brims of the Wound with Arcaeus his Liniment, or some good Balsame, warmed
in a spoon; use neither Tents nor Pledgets: for these hinder consolidation. If
the Wound yield much Quittour, dress it twice a day, until the Quittour abate;
continue this manner of dressing until the Wound be agglutinate, which will
fall out sometimes the fourth, sometimes the sixth day. See Arcaeus, lib. 1.
cap. 1. If you intend to cure such a Wound by Incarnation, or filling of the
solution of the Unity by ingendring new flesh: First, besprinkle the Bone with
the Cephalic powder set down by me before. Secondly apply dry Pledgets;
Thirdly, fill up the Wound with some Sarcotical Unguent, as Aureum, Basilicum,
or Arcaeus his Liniment. It is far better to cure such Wounds by Agglutination,
than by Incarnation; for the scar will be less, and the cure will be finished
in a shorter time.

If the Skull be hurt, it falls out three manner of ways. First, if it be made
extraordinary dry by reason of the Air, which will fall out, if the Skull lie
bare two hours. Secondly, if the upper portion of the Cranium be divided from
the lower, and cleave to the Cutis musculosa. Thirdly, if both the Tables of
the Skull be cut, and cleave to the Cutis musculosa, not separate altogether
from the parts adjacent. If the Scull has become dry superficially only, which
you shall perceive if it bleed not, being scraped with a Raspatory; this upper
Superficies is to be removed with the Raspatory, that Blood may come from the
found Bone: then the Wound is to be stitched, and the cure to be performed by
Agglutination. If only a portion of the Cranium separate from the rest, stick
to the Cutis musculosa, it is to be takenaway, and the Wound to be cured either
by Agglutination, or Concarnation, as you shall see cause. If a portion of the
whole Cranium be divided from the rest, so that the Dura matter offers it self
to the view, and sticks to the Cutis musculosa, that portion is not to be
separated from the Cutis musculosa, lest the Brain be deprived of its cover:
but must be reduced into its place, and there kept, by bringing together the
brims of the Cutis musculosa with so many deep and strong stitches as shall
suffice.

I cured a Warrener of Mr. Holland's of the Verdry, Thirty two years ago, of
such a Wound, by these means within a few days. Bones of the Head will suffer
unition being separate, as well as Bones of other parts of the Body.

At last I am come to the Third kind of Wounds, which happens to parts placed
above the Cranium, which is a Wound with a contusion. Of this sort of Wounds
there be two kinds; For either they are ordinary or extraordinary. These I call
ordinary, which are not accompanied with strange Symptoms: Such Wounds thus
you shall dress. First, you shall wash and soment the Wound with the spirit of
Wine; having drawn into it self the tincture of Myrrh and Frankincense. Then if
the Wound be great, stitch it with Needles: If it be not great a dry stick will
serve. Dress the Wound either with Arcaeus his Liniment, or some good
artificial vulnerary Balsame warmed. If the Wound be deep, a Tent must be kept
in the depending part until it yield laudable Quittour, and then it is to be
taken out: Then an Emplaster is to be applied: Emplastrum de gratia Dei will
serve the turn.

An extraordinary Wound is such an one as is accompanied with strange, and
unaccustomed Symptoms: such are a Fever, an Inflammation of the whole Head,
Neck, and Shoulders; as also the Breast: the brims of the Wound swell much, and
are of a livid color. The Wound casts forth a virulent, sharp, black, and
stinking Sanies, The party feels a great and pricking pain: Such accidents
commonly ensue after the bitings of Men or Beasts, which impress a malignity
into the Wound.

In such a case two things are to be done: First of all the malignity is to be
drawn out. This is performed by scarifying deeply the brims of the Wound, and
then applying either Leeches or Cuppingglasses. Then the Wound is to be washed
and fomented with this Medicament: Theriac. Andromachi ij. Mithridat. j. aq.
Card. Benedict. ij. Aq. vit. j. Misc^ex Art. Let Medicaments be applied hot.
With all the Medicaments wherewith you dress such wounds, mingle still some
Treacle and Mithridate, until all the aforespecified Symptoms cease, and the
wound yield a laudable Quittour: Then finish the Cure with ordinary Medicaments.

Secondly, in such Wounds you are to strengthen the principal parts, (that they
may be the more able to repel all malign vapors) with cordial Medicaments.
Take this as a pattern: There. Androm. ij. Mithridat. j. conserv. Ros. Rub. and
Bugloss. an. ss. Aq. Oxalid^s minoris iij. Misc. ut fiat potio. In ministering
internal Medicaments you must have a care of the age and strength of the
Patient. You must not forget to apply to the region of the Heart cordial
Epithemes. Let this be one example; Aq. Ros. Rub. and Nenufaris an. iv. Acet.
Scyllit. j. Coral. Rub. Sant. Alb. and Rub. Ros. Rub. Pulverizat. an. iss.
Flor. Cordial, Pultorum pug. ij. Croci j. Mithridat. and Theriac. an. j. Misc.
Apply double Clothes wet in this Medicament to the region of the Heart.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the general points to be observed in Wounds of the Scull.

IN the last Chapter I delivered unto you the method of curing such Wounds as
may happen in those parts which are placed and lie above the Scull; now I am to
show how solutions of unity in the Cranium or the S^ull it self are to be
handled. A solution of unity in the Scull is by all practicers called a
Fracture by a peculiar denomination.

I will first set down the things which are common either to all or most
Fractures, and then those things which are to be performed in every Fracture in
special. The things common are two, to wit, the signs of a Fracture, and the
Presages.

As for the signs, they are either found out by the Sense, or conjectured by
Reason.

The Sense, (if the Fracture be not presented to the view at the first) does
find out a Fracture by two instruments, to wit, the Finger, if the Wound be
large enough, and I a Probe. If then you perceive either by your Finger or a
Probe an inequality, depression or ruggedness in the Scull, you may suspect
that there is a Fracture. Ruggedness may deceive you, if the Sutures of the
wounded party do vary from the ordinary, as if the sagittal Suture do reach to
the Ossa cribriformia or Sieve-like Bones of the Nose. Some Idiots imagine the
Sculls of Women in this point to differ from the Sculls of Men: but their
imagination is erroneous: for this event is rare in either of both. That the
Suture may deceive one. Hippocrat. Sect. 6. de vulnerib. capitis. acknowledges
in these words: The Suture may deceive, being rougher than the rest of the
Bone. So that it is not manifest whether there is in that place a Suture, or
the point of the weapon, unless this be left somewhat large.

As for the signs which are sound out by reason, or rational conjecture, they
are taken from four things: to wit, First, from the efficient causes. Secondly,
from the manner of Wounding. Thirdly, from the wounded person. And last of all
from the Symptoms.

To the efficient cause are referred, First, the party who has inflicted the
Wound. So that if he be strong, and in his fury did inf^ct the Wound, it is
likely that there is a Fracture, if the Wound has reached to the Skull.
Secondly the instrument is to be reserred to the efficient cause, whose
leenness and weight are to be consdered. Thirdly, a fall upon a ^ard body from
a high place, fourthly, a strong dashing of the Head against a hard body.

As for the manner of wounding, it is to be considered whether it was done
violently, or moderately: For if the Wound was inflicted violently, it is
probable that a Fracture was procured; but if it was done with deliberation and
moderation, there (...) less fear of a Fracture. As for the signs taken from
the wounded party, you are diligently to consider; First, whether he received
the Wound being bare-headed. Secondly, whether the Skull be thin and weak, as
it is in Children, and so apt to receive a Fracture. As for those signs which
are taken from the Symptoms, they are of two sorts: for they are taken either
from the Symptoms conjunct, or those which after ensue.

The Symptoms conjunct are these: 1. A singing of the Ears after that the
Wound is received: 2. Falling after the blow: 3. Swooning for a time: 4.
Slumbering after the Wound is received: 5. A dazzling of the Eyes: 6. A
giddiness: 7. An issuing of Blood from the Nose, Ears, Eyes, or Mouth. 8.
Vomiting, peruse Hippoc. l. de vulner. cap. ac Fallop. on cundem c. 18, Paraeum
lib. 9. c. 2.

The signs which are fetched from the after following are these: 1. A constant
pain of the wounded part, so that the Patient often offers to touch it with his
hand: 2. A vomiting of Choler with a Fever: 3. A Convulsion: 4. Palsy of one
of the Arms and Legs: 5. Raving: 6. A faltring in the Speech: 7. Deafness: 8.
The empairing of the Memory: 9. Dullness of the Understanding: 10. Weak
judgment. Coiter. lib. observe. Anatom. and Chirurgicar. Fallop. in Hipp. de de
vuln. cap. 45. 11. An Apoplexy, Par. lib. 9. c. 8.

Those signs that are taken from the crashing, which Hipp. affirm^ the Patient
to feel, if he chew Paper strongly with both the sides of the Gums, and from
holding of a pack-thread strongly between the Teeth, if after jirking of it the
party wounded feel pain in the part: As also those signs which are taken from
the moisture of Emplasters, applied to the wounded part shaved, are all
uncertain. See Fallop. in Hippoc. lib. de vuln. cap. c. 23. But it the Hair be
cut asunder, and stick up in the Wound, the Skull of a necessity must be hurt;
for it could not be cut asunder without the resistance of the Skull. See Hipp.
in his former Book, and Fallop. upon him, cap. 18. and Parey lib. 9. c. 8.

It is sufficient to have spoken so much of the signs of Fractures of the
Scull, I will deliver unto you the Prognostics, by which you shall be
instructed to foretell the event which is like to ensue after a Fracture
procured in the Scull.

1. If one has received a Fracture in the Scull, pronounce not all danger past
before 100 days be expired; for many such wounded persons by experience have
been found to have died about this time, when as all things might have been
thought to have been secure. See Par. l. 9. c. 13. and Fall. in. Hipp. de
vulner. cap. c. 48.

2. Every wound of the Head accompanied with a Fracture is dangerous, although
no fearful Symptom does at the first for many days appear and discover it
self: for the strength of the party, the uncleanness of the Body, an exquisite
Diet, and the wholsomeness and temperateness of the Climat, are able to stay
for a long time the appearing of ill accidents.

3. If a Fever ensue, after a Fracture; if the Head become very hot, if it has
been subject to distillation, if the party has often been troubled with an
Erysipelas, pronounce danger: if the brims of the wounds in the second dressing
grow flat and do not swell, there is yet more danger: But if the Scull at the
very beginning of the Cure appear blackish, and the Patient having a
cacochymical Body cannot sleep, Death is like to ensue. See Fallop. in Hipp. de
vuln. cap. c. 24.

4. When the reason is weak, the Memory impaired, the Tongue falters, the Eyes
grow dim, the Ears become deaf, if the party either cannot move himself, or
falls still from the head of the Bed, when a continual Fever with raving
holds the Patient; if either the Tongue grow black, or clefts or pustules
appear upon it; if the wound grow dry, and yield no Quittour, or becomes of a
livid color; if the Excrements be suppressed; if a Convulsion, Palsy, or
Apoplexy do ensue; if the wounded party often faint and have a weak Pulse; if
(I say) all these Symptoms, or most of them do appear, you may boldly
prognosticate that death will ensue. These Symptoms, if they show themselves
even quickly after that the wound is received, they show that the substance of
the Brain it self is hurt: But if they appear about the Fourteenth day, or
after, they proceed from the Inflammation of the Brain, and a Phlegmon of the
same, by reason of the pouring of putrefied Blood upon it. See Parey lib. 9.12.

5. If one who has received a Fracture of the Scull be altogether void of a
Fever, if he digest his Meat well, if he Sleep well, if the Excrements be
discharged, no ways offending in color, quantity, time, other qualities, and
the manner of discharging: if the Wound appear of a fresh and lively color, if
it yield laudable Quittour, if the Lips of it swell a little, and be somewhat
soft, if the motion of the Dura matter be regular, you may hope well of the
recovery of the Patient, Parey lib. 9. c. 13.

6. If the Scull be fractured, the parts above must suffer a solution of
continuity, only this exception is to be admitted, if that kind of Fracture
fall out which is called Resonitus or Contrasissura, a countercleft, which
seldom happens, whereof I will speak when I shall deliver the manner of curing
particular Fractures. Vide eund. lib. 9. c. 10.

7. If much Quittour appear upon the Cranium fractured, if Pustules appear upon
the Tongue, by reason of a sharp Sanies falling upon it, having been sent down
from the Brain through the holes of the palate of the Mouth, there is small
hope of recovery, especi^lly if these accidents continue, and cease not. ^id
ibid. for these do snew, that the Brain it self is ill-affected.

8. If the flesh about the Scull scactured do appear of a leaden color, it is
an ill sign, according to Hippoc. 7. Aph. 2. for it is an argument, that the
natural heat (...) the part is extinguished, by reason of a malign Humor, which
has caused a putrefaction of it, or that it is quenched by a vehement
Inflammation or Phlegmon: if it has not fallen out by reason of the greatness
of the Contusion, if it become of a leaden color by reason of the Contusion,
it is not so dangerous, for it may be remored by suppurative Medicaments.

9. If in like manner the flesh about the Scull fractured be of a Rack color,
become dry, and afford not Quittour according to the amplitude or largeness of
the wound, it promises no good: for it is a sign of the mortification or the
part.

10. The Nowl-bone, and the O^ petrosum or stony, or hard B^me, behind the
Ears, are less subject to injuries, and so if they be wounded or fractured, the
danger is the less: First, because the Nowl-bone does only contain the
Cerebellum, which is not so noble as the Brain. Secondly, because less store of
Brain is contained in those places, than in other parts of the Scull. Thirdly,
because the Bones in these parts are thicker. Fourthly, because they are more
firmly covered, for the Skin in them is thicker, the flesh more plentiful; the
chords more in number, and the Ligaments strong to strengthen the Bones.

11. The callous flesh, by which the portions of the Scull separate, are joined
together and united, does require the space of 40 or 50 days for the
strengthening and hardening of it. Yea, the age and temperament of the wounded
party have great force in hastening and staying the confirmation of the same.
See Par. lib. 9. c. 13.

12. Why some escape of grievous Wounds, and some die of light wounds, if falls
out by reason of the differences of parts wounded; for some are more sensible
than others. Secondly, by reason of the diversity of Bodies: for some are
strong, some weak. Thirdly, by reason of the diversities of the Symptoms: for
in some Wounds the Symptoms are more mild, in some more fierce and fearful.
See examples in Hippocrates lib. 7. Epidem. peruse Bernhardus Suevus, in his
Treatise de Vulneribus cap. 2. Where you may read sundry examples of those who
died of very small hurts, and of sundry who escaped of grievous wounds.

13. The progressions or order of the Symptoms aforementioned is this: First,
pain is caused by reason of solution of unity. After pain follow Watching, loss
of Appetite, Weakness: Pain causes affluxion of Humors: affluxion of Humors
causes Inflammation: Inflammation procures a Fever, sometimes a Convulsion,
sometimes a Gangrene, and last of all a Mortification, if prevention be not
used.

14. Wounds with a fracture of the Sinciput, or Bone of the Forehead are more
dangerous than those of the Occiput, or Nowlbone. Six reasons may be yielded
for the confirmation of this presage. First, because the Bones of the Forehead
are thinner than those of the Occiput, and weaker, and so may be more easily
contused or fractured. Secondly, because most Brain is there contained.
Thirdly, because in the Bone of the Forehead there are sundry vaultings, so
that the Brain may easily be wounded, if it pass through both the tables of the
Scull. Fourthly, because the skin in this part is thinner than in other parts
of the hairy Scalp: so that the Bones and the Meninges may the more easily be
hurt. Fifthly, because there are many and large Veins in the Forehead, so that
the greater Haemorrhage may there be procured. Sixthly, because in the
forepart of the Head there are two Sutures, Coronalis and Sagittalis: So that
the Scull may there easily be fractured, and the Dura matter hurt, which sends
Filaments through the Sutures to make the Pericranium.

15. Next to these the Parietal or Ossa temporum are most dangerous. First,
because these Bones are thin and weak. Secondly, because there are remarkable
Veins, Arteries, and Nerves. Thirdly, because the Pericranium does clip the
temporal Muscle, and the Muscle it self has in the middle a Tendon of
exquisite Sense. So that the wounds in the sides of the Head may by consent
offend the Meninges, Brain and Nerves springing from thence.

16. Wounds without or with a fracture in the Sutures, are most dangerous.
First, because the Bones are not solid there, but divided, and so least able to
resist injuries. Secondly, because Quittour bred there may easily fall upon the
Meninges. Thirdly, because in the Sutures the Dura matter may promptly be
offended, which sends Filaments through them, for the framing of the
Pericranium.

Of what moment certain predictions are, I will acquaint you with Hippocrates
his words, lib 2. Prorrhet. I advise you that you carry your selves wisely in
every point of the Art, and in the presaging part also, and that you call to
mind, that if the event fall out according to the Prediction, you shall be had
in admiration with the Patient; but if you do err, you shall be both despised,
and accounted fools. Wherefore I command, that you use discretion in these
Predictions.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Section of the hairy Scalp, and opening the Scull.

HAving discoursed of the two general points to be observed in Wounds,
accompanied with a Fracture of the Scull, what were the Signs and Prognostics;
hereafter I am to show how every sort of such Wounds in particular is to be
handled according to Art. Now the primary difference of Fractures of the Scull,
is taken from the subjects, which are the wounded parties. These are either
Children, which have not passed the seventh year of their age, or those of
mature and ripe age.

Fractures then of the Cranium in Children, are either without a Wound, or they
are accompanied with a Wound. If they be both without a Wound and a fearful
Symptom, thus you shall go about to cure them. If then the Cranium be
depressed, and Blood expressed out of the Veins, does wave up and down under
the Skin when it is compressed, (which sometime falls out in hard labor when
the Midwise deals roughly with the Woman that is to be delivered) First of all
the Hair is to be shaved off: then a triple or fourfold soft Linen cloth, well
moistened in the Oil of Rosos, mingled with the whites of Eggs beaten, and a
little Vinegar is to be applied to the part: which must not be removed before
24 hours be expired. In the Summer time apply this Medicament cold, but in the
winter time warm; for by this means the afflux of Huntors will be stayed, and a
part of those which have flowed already to the part discussed.

After this until the Eleventh day, this Cataplasm is to be applied warm: Ros.
Rub. baccarum Myrti an. ij. Farin. Hord. and Fabar. an. j. Absynthii and Beton.
an. ss. Semen. Cumin. ij. pidverizandis pulverat. coq. omnia in vini Rub.
astringentis xij. ad Cataplasmatis consistentiam, tandem addantur Ol. Ros. ac
Chamaemelin. an. j. mellis ij. ut paretur Cataplasma ex A. P. It must be
applied Warm, and fresh, Morning and Evening. It must be applied large enough,
that it may cover somewhat of the parts ad^acent. In the application let this
moderation be used: Apply not too little of it, lest it grow too dry; nor too
much, lest it offend the affected part with the weight. From the 11th to the
20th day, apply Diapalma softened with some Oil of Lilies, taking iiij. of the
Emplaster, and one of the Oil. From the 20th. day till the Cure be performed,
apply Stictick Emplaster relented in Oil of Chamaemil, taking the
afore-specified quantity of the Emplaster and Oil.

Caesar Armitius in lib. Hipp. de vulner. c. and Arcaeus l. 1. c. 5. do advise
us to dress Childrens Heads in this case, after this manner; for the first
dressing they will have this Medicament to be used, Farm. Hord. and Fabar. an.
iij. pulv. Bac. Myrti ss. Aceti ij. coq, ad Cataplasmat. consistent, tum add
albumen ovi umus un^^ cum vitello conquassata. Ol. Ros. and Myrtin. an. ij.
Misc. Afterward they will have to be applied a Cerate made of Wax, Honey, Lapis
haematites, Cumin-Seeds, Wormwood, the Pumice-stone and Bran beat to powder.
But instead of this you may use Diachrlon maguum relented in Oil of Lilies:
These Medicaments are to be applied as the former.

If there be a Wound with a Fracture, but no fearful symptom, Arcaeus will have
no shiver, or part of the Cranium taken, if the Portions of it cleave together;
but only the Fracture to be anointed with his Liniment warmed, and applied by
three or four Feathers stripped, until you come within an Inch of the points of
them, and tied together with a thread.

If fearful Symptoms, as a Convulsion, a Fever, vomiting of Choler, or a
Palsy, etc. do appear, which show an offense to be communicated to the Brain
by the Cranium, then it is requisite that the Scull be opened. Vule Lang ep. 5.
tem. 1. and Fallop. in Hippoc. de vuln. cap. c. 47.

The Scull being opened, children are no other ways to be dressed than Men are.
How they are to be dressed, I will show hereafter. It shall suffice then to
have spoken so much concerning the cure of Fractures in the Sculls of Children.

Now I will declare unto you how these are to be cured in persons of ripe age.
In handling of this matter, I will set down two points. The First shall contain
those things which are common to every kind of Fracture. The Second shall
deliver those things which are proper to every sort of Fracture. Those things
which are common are two: the First is the Section of the soft parts placed
above the Scull: The Second is the opening of the Scull.

As for the First, it is an artificial separation of the soft parts above the
Scull, that we may come to dress the Scull fractured, to prevent the coming of
ill accidents, or to remove ill Symptoms present. Of this Section these things
may be demanded. 1. Whether it ought to be done. 2. Why it is to be done. 3. In
what parts it is to be made. 4. Of what form it ought to be. 5. What is to be
done after Section.

As for the First, three Reasons may induce us to administer it sometimes. 1.
The Authority of Hip. in lib. de vulnerib. c. and of all other rational
Physicians and Surgeons. Secondly, necessity it self: for if either Blood or
Quittour descend to the Meninges or Brain, inevitable death will ensue, if way
be not made for the expurgation of them, by making Incision in the soft parts,
and opening of the Scull it self. The third Reason is daily experience, which
shows by the death of sundry, who by reason of the omission of these Operations
end their lives, that they are to be administered.

The Causes which admonish us, that Section is to be administered, are two,
First, that the Cranium ^ay be discovered, if dangerous Symptoms do appear,
that the Surgeon may see whether it be hurt or no. Secondly, that way may be
made to remove such things as offend the Meninges and Brain, as Blood or
Quittour settling upon them, and pressing them down, as also pieces of the
Instruments wounding, or portions of the Scull wounding or pricking these parts.

As concerning the places wherein Section is to be administered safely, receive
this Proposition: Section may be made in all parts of the Hairy Scalp, if you
except the Sutures and the temporal Muscle.

For first, Section is not to be made in the Sutures; because those filaments
by which the Meninges are tied to the Pericranium, are of an exquisite sense,
and being torn, may be inflamed, and communicate the Inflammation to the
Meninges and Brain. See Hippoc. vulner. cap. and Fallop. upon him, cap. 19.

Secondly, Section is not to be made in the temporal Muscle, but chiefly a
transverse Incision is dangerous.

First, because a resolution of that side of the Head, which is wounded is
caused, and a Convulsion of the other side. By which an ugly distortion of the
parts of the Face is caused. The cause of this Symptom is this. Whenever one
of the two brotherly Muscles, appointed for sundry motions of the same part, is
transversly wounded, that which is wounded, must suffer a resolution, and that
which is not cut a Convulsion.

Secondly, we must be wary in incising the temporal Muscle transversly; because
it is still in motion, when we Talk, Drink or Eat.

Thirdly, because the Sutura squamosa, or the Scaly Suture lies under it; but
it wants not danger to make Incision in the Suture, as has been said.

Fourthly, seeing many Veins, Arteries, and Nerves, are spread throughout it,
it being transversly cut, many grievous Symptoms must ensue, as a great
Haemorrhage, Pain, an Inflammation, a Fever, a Convulsion because of the
inanition of the Vessels appointed for the containing of the vital and animal
Spirits; to wit, the Veins, Arteries and Nerves being tranversly cut asunder.
Vide Par. lib. 9. c. 19. Fallop. in Hippoc. de vulner. cap. c. 38. As for the
form of Section, it is either straight, triangular, or cross ways.

One thing here is to be observed, that we make no tranverse Incision a little
above the Eyelid, lest the frontal Muscle being transversly cut asunder, a
Palsy of the Eyelid do ensue, the Muscle not being able to elevate or lift it
up, wherefore the Incision in these places must be either straight or oblique,
not transverse. See Fallop. in Hippoc. lib. de vuln. cap. c. 23.

Now this remains wherewith you are to be acquainted, that I show unto you what
is to be done after that Incision of the soft part is performed.

First of all, the pericranium is to be separated from the cranium, either with
the Nails or the Splatter: you are to begin the separation from the Points of
the Incision.

If the pericranium be not separate, it will procure great Pain, an
Inflammation, yea, and a Fever, if it be torn either with a Raspatory or
Trepan. See Par. lib. 9. cap. 4. Fallop. in Hippoc. de vulner. cap. c. 38.

Secondly, the brims of the Incision are to be kept asunder by Dosils and
Pledgets of Lint, armed either with Medicaments apt to stay Bleeding, if it
offer to flow plentifully, or only with the white of an Egg beaten, according
to Arcaeus, lib. 1. cap. 4. or with both the White and the Yolk to assuage.
Pain, according to Fallop. in Hippoc. de vulner. cap. c. 29. if there be no
fear of any remarkable effusion of Blood. The Wound so dressed, must not be
dealt withal, until four and twenty hours be expired.

Having delivered unto you those Points which are considerable in making
Incision, to come to Fracture; now I must set down those things which are to be
noted, when the Scull is to be opened artificially with sit Instruments, that
you may come to remove such things as may offend the Meninges and the Brain.
Concerning the operation these things may be asked: First, why it is to be
opened? Secondly, when it is to be opened? Thirdly, what quantity of it is to
be taken away when it is to be opened? Fourthly, with what Instruments it is to
be taken away?

As for the first, the Cranium is to be opened in five Cases: First, that
pieces of the Weapon may be taken away: Secondly, that a portion of the Scull
may be removed, which is altogether separate, or offends the Meninges, if it
cleave to the rest: Thirdly, that a part of the Scull depressed, which bears
down the Meninges, and causes a stupidity, may be either reduced to its own
place, or wholly taken away: Fourthly, that either coagulate Blood or Quittour
may be removed, which has fallen upon the Membranes, by reason of a breach of
some Vessel. Fifthly, that way may be made to apply convenient Medicaments to
the Fracture. See Fallop. in Hippoc. vuln. cap. 31. and Par. lib. 9. c. 4.

As concerning the second, it is good to open it before the fourth day, Fallop.
ibid. c. 34. and Arcaeus. lib. 1. c. 4. and Par. lib. 9. c. 4. Yea, it may with
good success be opened after the seventh day, both in Summer and Winter-season,
if grievous Symptoms urge not. If therefore any one of you be called to one who
has a Fracture in the Cranium on the fourth day, (if ill Symptoms will permit)
you may defer the opening until the seventh day be past; yea, the ninth: for on
the fourth day the Putrefaction of the Humors begins, as also the insult of
Nature against the Disease, and so it is not good to hinder the motion of
Nature: But if for reasonable causes you fear lest delay will breed danger, you
are presently to open the Scull, even on the Critical day.

As concerning the quantity which is to be taken away, either the whole
fractured Bone is to be taken away, or only a part of it. The whole Bone is to
be taken away: First if the Fracture be in an upper part, as the Crown of the
Head, where no depending vent may be made to discharge the Blood or Quittour
from the Meninges. Secondly, in a Fissure, or Seeds, if it be not wide enough,
the whole Bone that you see is to be removed, at least to the second Table.
Thirdly, all the shivered Bones which cleave not together, are to be taken
away. Fourthly, so much of the Scull is to be taken away, as covering the Dura
Matter becomes black, that way may be made for the application of convenient
Medicaments.

In Fractures, wherein it will be sufficient to take away only a portion of the
fractured Scull, to make way for the discharging either of Blood or Quittour,
or removing of other hurtful things, let it be done in the depending part;
which Rule notwithstanding is to be omitted in two Cases.

First, if you perceive that the Meninges are like to be inflamed: for then
they should more readily swell above the Cranium in a depending part.

Secondly, if the Brain appear, the Membranes being wounded, we must shun
opening in the depending part; for according to Galen, 6. Method. seeing the
Brain is of a soft and fluid substance, it would easily fall down to the
depending part. Vide Fallop. in Hippoc. de vuln. cap. 35.

The chief Instruments with which we open the Scull, are these: Raspatories,
Levatories, Gemlets called Terebellae, the Trepan, and the Head-saw. Of the
sundry sorts of Raspatories, you may see choice in Par. lib. 9. c. 4.

When you will use Raspatories, you must observe some things before the
Application, some things in the Application, and some things after the
Application of them. Before you use them, First, you must place the Patient in
a good posture. Secondly, his Head being lapped in foulded Clothes, is to be
staid, and kept immovable. Thirdly, the Ears are to be stopped with Cotton, or
Wool, that the noise offend not the Instruments of Hearing. Fourthly, the
brims of the Wound are to be covered with pieces of Linen Cloth; First, to
keep them from the Instruments; Secondly, to defend them from the Air, which
otherwise would cool them.

In the using of Raspatories: First, we must begin with the broadest, and then
the less broad, and lastly the narrowest. Secondly, they are often to be
moistened with the Oil of Roses; first, that they may serape the more lightly,
secondly, that they heat not the Cranium: If Blood trouble the Work, use
Vinegar and Water. After you have used the Raspatories, use these same Topics
which are used after the Application of the Trepan.

Raspatories are to be used in Fissures or Chinks, and in a Seeds, when the
print of the Weapon is narrow. The second Instrument is the Gemlet, or
Terebellum: Coopers use the like Instrument to raise up the Staves of Vessels,
the point of it must be scrued. This has a twofold use; First, it serves to
take out the Bone cut by the Trepan, whereas it is not safe to cut the whole
Bone through, as in the Bones of the Forehead. Secondly, it serves for reducing
a depressed part of the Scull into its own place, by first making a small hole
in the Cranium with the Pin of the Trepan, and then scruing it in.

As concerning Levatories, you may see diverse fornis in Parcy, lib. 9. c. 5.
and 5. When you use them, have a care that you lift up equally every part of
the Bone; for if any part be depressed, it may hurt the Meninges.

As for the Head-saw, First, it may be used when there is a depression or a
Fracture on one side of the Bone; for one side being by a straight line divided
by it, both there will be way made to the taking away of the Bone, and the
discharging of Quittour, or Blood, with small loss of substance of the Cranium.
Secondly, it will serve to cut asunder the distance of the Cranium, left after
Application of the Trepan in diverse parts.

The last Instrument: It remains now then, that I speak of the Trepan:
Concerning it, these things may be demanded: First, to what end it is to be
applied? Secondly, in what places it is to be applied? Thirdly, what is to be
observed in the Application of it? Fourthly, what is to be done after the
Application of it?

As for the first, the Application of the Trepan has a threefold use: First,
it serves for the raising up of a Bone depressing the Meninges and Brain.
Secondly, it serves for removing of all things which hurt the Membranes and the
Brain, whether they be Quittour, Blood, Splints of the Cranium, or pieces of
the Weapon. Thirdly, it makes way for the Application of sit Topics. As for
the places, it must not be applied, First, upon the Fracture; for this will
increase the evil, chiefly if the fractured portions be severed. Secondly, it
is not to be applied upon a Suture, because the Nervous Fibers, and the Veins
and Arteries, by which the Dura Matter is annexed to the Perieranium, and gives
it nourishment, should be torn: from whence would arise Pain, Inflammation, and
flux of Blood; which might be communicated to the Membranes, and Brain it self.
Thirdly, neither is it to be applied to the places a little above the
Eyebrows; for the Wound ever afterward would remain unskinned. Fourthly, it is
not to be applied to the Temples, First, by reason of the temporal Muscle.
Secondly, by reason of the Sutura squamosa. Fifthly, it is not to be applied to
the lower parts of the Scull, if the Meninges be wounded, lest the Brain fall
out through the hole. Sixthly, it is not to be applied to the Sinciput of
Children, which are not above seven years old, seeing it is dangerous even in
these who are of ripe Age, unless great necessity urge.

In the Application of the Trepan, these things are to be observed: First, that
you take out the Pan, when you are come to the second Table. Secondly, it is be
moistened with Oil, that it may cut the better. Thirdly, the print of the Trepan
is to be moistened now and then with cold Water, lest the S^ull be lieated by
the rubbing of the Trepan. Fourthly, seeing it is impossible to cut all the
parts equally, the Scull being of a Sphereal Figure, you are to remove the
Blood, that you may perceive which part is most deeply cut, that you lean more
to the other. Fifthly, when the part cut by the Trepan begins to shake, it is
the sifest way to lift it up with the Levatory. Sixthly, if any ragged pleces
appear, which may hurt the Meninges, you are to take them away by Scalper
Lenticulatus, and the Mallet of Lead, after that the Trepan is applied above
the Durd Meter, apply a piece of Tafety or S^ttin, of a white or crimson
color, moistened in Mel Resatum, and Oleum Rosatum, until the seventh day;
afterward use the Oil of Roses, and the Oil of Hyperitum mixed; let the Crantum
be anointed with Are^eus his Liniment melted; sill up the hole with Dosils and
Pledgets, laying above such Topics as heretofore I have set down.

If in the Application of the Trepan, any remarkable Bleeding ensue, some
Vessel being cut, which did cleave to the second Table, then apply this
Medicament of Galen. 6. Method. Alce. ij. Thuris, Mastiches, an. j. ex is it is
pulverizatis, Pilis. Leporinis, and ov. Album. siat linimentum, quod
applicetur. The Scull will scale, according to Arcaeus lib. 1. c. 4. within the
space of four and twenty or five and twenty days, if his Liniment be applied to
the Bone. But according to Parey, not before forty or fifty days, but in truth
no certain day can be appointed, Hieron. Fabric. ab aq. pendent. part. 2. lib.
2. de vulner. cap. 18. counsels first to apply the Oil of Roses to turn the
Matter which falls upon the Dura Matter into Quittour; for Galen, lib. 2. (...),
c. 2. affirms, that we ought to use Oil of Roses, when we mean both to repel
and suppurate. It will be the more suppurative, if it be Oleum Rosaceum
Completum. He advises to mingle some Rosin with the Oil of Roses; for in
Digestives, according to Galen, lib. 5. Simp. cap. 19. there ought to be an
Emplastick faculty, which the Oil of Roses has not of it self, but of the
Rosin. In the first dressings, and in the Summer time, more Oil of Roses, and
less Rosin is to be used; but afterward when we mean to dry and mundisie, as
also in the Winter, more Rosin and less Oil is to be taken. When the Wound is
dressed, embrocate the parts of the Head with Oil of Roses warmed, as also the
Neck, chiefly where the jugular. Veins are, partly to assuage Pain, if any be;
partly, to contemperate the heat of the Blood.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the cure of Fractures appearing in the wounded part.

HItherto I have dispatched those points which frequently are common to all
sorts of Fractures, which do happen to those who are of ripe Age: now it
remains that I show unto you how all sorts of Fractures in such persons are to
be cured.

Now a Fracture in these persons is twofold: for it is either in the same part
which has suffered Solution of Unity, or in another part. If it be in the same
part, it is either Simple, Compound, or Complicate.

A simple Fracture is, when one only kind of Fructure happens. Of these there
are three sorts; Rima, a Chink or a Cleft, Contusio, a Contusion of the Scull;
and Seeds, a Sitter, when the print of the wounding Instrument is left in the
Scull.

Rima, or Fissura, a Chink or a Cleft, is twofold; for it is either Conspicua,
easily to be discerned by the sight, or Inconspicua, either hardly to be
discerned by the sight, or not at all; which is called Capillaris, a hair-like
Chink. Now a conspicuous Chink passes through either one or both the Tables of
the Scull. If it pass not deeper than to the spongy part between the two
Tables, the Chink it self is so far to be dilated. If the Cleft pass through
both the Tables, then the Chink is either to be dilated through both the Tables
of the Scull, even to the Dura Matter, or through the first Table at the least,
making way through the second Table also, leaving a competent apertion for the
discharging of clotted Blood, or Quittour, for the depending part of the Head,
through the second Table. Now the depending part is not to be taken from the
situation of the parts of the Body, but from the position or posture of them.

You must deal after this same manner with Rima inconspicua, or Capillaris, or
an obscure Chink. But it is not an easy matter to find it out. If therefore
you cannot discern it either with the Eyes, or the help of a magnifying Glass,
cuse the Patient to hold in his breath, and to stretch his Breast. If this be
done, either a thin Humer, or a bloody Sanies do issue out, it is an excellent
Sign: if this do not appear, then apply to the part most suspicious, Ink, made
thin with a little Vinegar, to make it pierce. The next dressing, dry the Scull
with a wet Rag or Sponge, and if you see any print of the Ink to remain in the
Scull, follow the besiness until you come to the uttermost of the impression
of the Irk, although you must discover the Dura Matter. Now Chinks must not be
dilated by the Trepan, but by Raspatories: for we ought not to take away more
of the Scull than necessity urges. Peruse Par. lib. 9. c. 4. and Fallop. con.
in lib. Hippoc. de vulnerib. cap. c. 3. When the Rima is dilated, dress the
Wound, as you do after the Application of the Trepan; whereof I spoke
sufficiently in the former Chapter.

Seeds, or a Sitter, is a Fracture caused by a sharp Instrument, which leaves
the print of it in the Scull: if it pass through both Tables, and no Splints of
the Bone prick the Meninges, and sufficient way be made by the Weapon for the
discharging of the Quittour, no further Apertion is to be made; but the Wound
is to be dressed, as I prescribed, after the Application of the Trepan. But if
either Splints of the Bones do offend the Dura Matter, or the passage be too
narrow for the discharging of the Quittour, a further Apertion of the Scull is
to be made by such Instruments as shall seem most fit for this Operation. If
the Seeds pass not further than the first Table, the Cranium is to be smoothed
with Raspatories, lest the Quittour settling in the Seeds cause a deeper
cariosity. Then the Wound is to be dressed with Arcaeus his Liniment relented
in a Spoon: It falls out many times, if the constitution of the wounded party
be good, that the Cranium does cast no Scale.

The third kind of a simple Fracture called Contusio, a Contusion of the Scull,
rests to be spoken of.

A Contusion is a Solution of centinuity in the Cranium, when as by the
violence of an external Instrument, the small portions of it are brought nearer
together than Nature has placed them, yet have returned to their own positure
after that this compression is caused.

This kind of Fracture is espied in the beginning, or in progress of time. In
the beginning it is found out by the alteration of the color of the Scull: The
color of a lively Bone is of a whitish color, mingled with a lively
ruddiness; but if it be mortified, it will be whitish without any redness: if
it be carious or rotten, it will be of a livid or blackish color. If therefore
such a kind of Fracture happen, the pleasant ruddiness of the Scull will be
gone, and white patches will appear in it, such as are seen in the Nails of
some Persons Fingers. In process of time, if it be left untouched, it will
become of a livid or blackish color, being carious: In this kind of Fracture
you are to take so much of the Cranium as is mortified by the Contusion with
Raspatories, and then to heal the Wound by Incarnation. So much then of the
three sorts of simple Fractures.

A compound Fracture is when some further inconvenience is annexed to the
Solution of Unity in the Scull, as the loss of substance, or removing of some
part of it from its own place.

Of this there are three sorts, Depressio, a depression, Concameratio, a
vaulting, and Excisio, or an absolute division of some part of the Cranium from
the rest.

A Depression is, when as the Scull is beaten down; in this kind of Fractures,
shivers of the Scull are quite separate from the hole sometimes: Again,
sometimes they cleave to the hole in one part, and are separate from the other.
Those which are altogether separate, you shall remove with Levatories: If the
fractured part cleave to the hole in one side, and if you cannot elevate it
with a Levatory; then you are to apply the Trepan as near to the fractured part
as you can, that as little as may be of the Cranium be taken away. Afterward
either reduce the depressed part to its own place, or altogether remove it, as
you shall think most expedient. In performing these actions, you are to use
great caution, that the Meninges be not hurt by the sharp Splints of the Bones
fractured.

Contameratio or vaulting is, when as the Scull by a sharp pointed Weapon with
force being pierced, and with might being pulled out is pulled upwards, leaving
an empty space or vacuity beneath. If this kind of Fracture go no further than
through the first Table, you are to smooth the Scull, and to heal the Wound
according to the Method set down before. But if it pass through the second
Table, you must open the Scull in the most depending part with the Trepan, to
make way for the discharging of the Quittour: for Sanies must of necessity be
lodged in the lower vacuity, or void space, if the Weapon it self has not made
sufficient way: if any ruggedness prick the Dura Matter, you are to remove the
whole Fracture, compassing it with a large Head of a Trepan, and then to cure
the Wound as has been taught.

Excisio is, when the part of the Scull wounded is altogether separate from the
hole; if the fragment cut away stick to the Cutis Musculosa, and the Wound go
no deeper than the first Table, it is to be separated from the Cutis Musculosa,
and the Crantum is to be smoothed with a Raspatory: But if both the Tables of
the Scull cleave to the Cutis Musculosa, they are not to be taken away, but to
be reduced to their own place, the Wound having first been cleansed with Wine
or Spirit of Wine warmed. Then the Cutis Musculosa is to be fastened to the
rest, with so many stitches of four twists of Silk or Thread drawn through with
a rolling Needle. See an Example of this in Parl. l. 9. c. 7.

A complicate Fracture is, when either sundry Fractures of one fort do concur,
or more of diverse kinds. Many Fractures of the same sort may happen, as sundry
Chinks. So many Chinks as are perceived by the Eyes are to be dilated with
Raspatories. In like manner sundry Fractures of diverse kinds may meet, as a
Chink with a depression. I^ such complicate Fractures you are to proceed no
other ways, than have been showed in solitary Fractures; for a Chink is ever to
be dilated if it be conspicuous, and the part of the Scull depressed must
either be wholly taken away, I the Asperities of the second Table prick the
Dura Matter, or if they do not, it is to be reduced to its own place, if it be
not wholly separate from the sound parts of the Cranium, According to these
Canons curative you may proceed hall Fractures of the Scull in what part soever
they happen, if you except the Sutures, and that part of the Scull which lies
under the temporal Muscle.

A Suture may suffer a Solution of Unity three manner of ways: by Separation,
Depression, and Collision. Of a Depression I have spoken sufficiently already.

A Dissolution of a Suture is, when as those parts of the Cranium which are
united by the Suture, gape, being separate by some external violence; if this
separation be large, the Nervous Fibers, which make the Ligament by which the
Dura Matter is tied to the Pericranium, must be torn, tho this appear not to the
sight: from whence often arises Inflammation, and danger of death.

A Collision is a Contusion of the brims of the Suture, and of the Ligament
which passes through it, caused of a violent compression of the brims of the
Suture. In these Cases if fearful Accidents, as a Fever, Vomiting, or a
Convulsion, etc. do persuade you that the Scull must be opened, then you are to
apply the Trepan on either or both sides of the Suture: for if you should set
it upon the Suture, horrible Symptoms first would appear, and at last death
ensue.

If a Fracture under the temporal Muscle be accompanied with a Wound, this
Wound is either a Puncture, or an Incision, transverse, or according to the
length: if it be a puncture, or transverse, it must prove dangerous, as has
been showed. If the wound be inflicted long ways, it is to be dilated by Dosils
or Sponges: If the Fracture be a Chink, it is to be dilated by Raspatories. But
if it be a great Fracture, wherein the Asperities do prick the Meninges, or the
depression of the Scull bears down them by its weight, then a triangular
Incision is to be made a little above the Fractures, shunning the temporal
Muscle, and the Trepan to be applied; then the shivers which are altogether
separate from the sound Scull, are to be taken away, and the rest which are not
separate to be reduced to their own positure.

After this, as often as you dress the wounded person, you are to cause him to
bend down his Head, to stop his Mouth, and Nose, and to labor to breath
strongly, that the Sanies may be expelled out of the Wound. When this is done,
you must make Injection of a mundifying Decoction with a Syringe to wash out
all impurities, which otherwise would lodge there. See a memorable Example of
this in Parey, lib. 9. cap. 19. He advises to keep a leaden Pipe in the Wound,
but seeing this by reason of the hardness must cause pain, and is not fit for
the dilation of the Section, a Sponge compressed is far better: for first it is
soft. Secondly, it sucks into it self the impurities: Thirdly, it dilates
powerfully the Wound, and keeps it open until the shivers of the Cranitan cast.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Fractures in other than in the place wounded, and those which happen when
the Cutis Musculosa is not wounded.

IN the last Chapter I discoursed of Fractures, which may fall out in the parts
wounded: now I am to show, how Fractures in other parts than those which are
wounded are to be handled, when they fall out.

Now Fractures, which fall out in the Cranium in another part than that which
is subjacent to the Cutis Musculosa wounded, are either in a part of the
Cranium adjacent to the Solution of Unity of soft parts of the Scull wounded,
or in a part somewhat distant or remote.

If a Fracture fall out to be not in the part wounded, you shall find it out by
these seven Signs. First, the Wound of the Cutis Musculosa, which covers the
Fracture, will not admit Cure in that part which is near the Fracture, whereas
in the other parts it will admit Cicatrization. Secondly, out of the part near
to the Wound, you shall perceive a thin and ichorous Matter to flow. Thirdly,
more copious Matter will flow out of the Wound, than the bigness of the Wound
can seem to afford. Fourthly, the Flesh which grows near to that part is spongy
and loose, not firm. Fifthly, now and then the party wounded will be feverish.
Sixthly, if you thrust your Probe between the Cranium and the Cutis, you shall
find the Cutis separate from the Cranium. Seventhly, some tumor and softness
will appear in the cutaneous part, which is placed above the Fracture.

A Fracture in a remote part, or much distant from the wounded part, is called
Resonitus, or Contra-fissura, a counter-cleft: This falls out, when the Cranium
is stricken upon one part, and fractured in another: This happens other in the
self-same Bone, or in fivers Bones: If in the self-same Bone, it may fall out
two manner of ways; to wit, either laterally, a when the right side of Os
Frontis is beaten, and the lest side cleft or contrariwise; or perpendicularly
from the upper to the lower part, as when not the upper Table which received
the blow, but the lower is fractured. If a counterclest happen to be in civers
Bones, this may fall out two manner of ways: First, if the right side be
beaten, and the lest fractured, as if the right Parietal receive the blow, and
the left be deft; or contrariwise. Secondly, this may happen, if the forepart
be stricken, and the hinder part cleft, as if the Os Frontis be beaten, and the
Os Occipitis be cleft, and contrariwise. This kind of Fracture which happens in
the Cranium in a part opposite to the Solution of Unity, does chance to to
those, who either have no Sutures at all, or such as are very obkure and very
close; for in such persons the Air may be carried more compact, and with
greater nolence from the part contused, or wounded, to the opposite part: for
when the Air which is within the Scull is strongly moved by a blow, and on
every side is driven by the force of the blow, it is entirely carried through
the substance of the Brain to the opposite part: when it meets with the Scull,
which by reason of its firmness cannot yield, causes a Fracture in the Scull;
even as two men in a violent race meeting together are by this violent meeting
beaten back. This is often seen in a Glass, which being knocked in one side is
cleft in the opposite part.

That the Sutures are not uniform, these Authors bear witness: Vesal. lib. 1.
c. 6. de human. corp. fabrica. Sylv. comment. in lib. Galen, de ossib. Columb.
lib. 1. c. 5. Par. lib. 4. c. 3. Hippoc. lib. de vuln. cap. and Fallop. in
eund. c. 5. and in lib. Galen. de ossib. c. 13. That Sutures again are either
hardly seen, being obliterate and worn out, or not at all, these Authors do
affirm, Arist. de histor. animal. lib. 3. c. 7. Cells. lib. 8. c. 1. Aley
Benedict. anatom. lib. 4. c. 7. Velsal. lib. c. 6. and Hippoc. and Fallop, in
the place before specified.

And although Paul. Aeginet. lib. 6. c. 90. and Guido with others more, deny
that a Resonitus or Contra-fissura can happen; yet these Authors against which
it were temerity to except, do affirm that it may happen, Cel. lib. 8. c. 4.
Nicol. Florent. Sermon. 7. Summa. 2. tractat. 4. c. 1. Valeriola append. loc.
commun. c. 5. Hippoc. lib. de vulnerib. cap. Fallop. commentar. in eundem. c.
14. Par. lib. 9. c. 8. Although it be a hard Matter to find out this kind of
Fracture, yet you shall go about to find it out by these means. First, if signs
of a Fracture do appear; as a Fever, vomiting of Choler, and such like, and no
Chink appear in the wounded part, then you are to take a view of the opposite
part. If a Tumor or Softness do appear in any part of it; then you may be
assured that the Fracture is in the Scull, subjacent to that part. Secondly, if
no Tumor or Softness appear in the opposite part, shave the Head and apply this
Emplaster following,. Pic. Naval. and Cer. an. iij. terebinth. j. Mastich. and
irid. pulverizat. an. ij. fiat Emplast. s. a. Draw this Emplaster upon Leather,
and apply it to the opposite part, and let it lie 24 hours. If after you have
taken it away, the Cutis musculosa appear in any place more moist, soft, and
swelled than the rest of it is, it is likely that there the Fracture is.
Thirdly, if the grieved person do often touch with his hand the part opposite
to that, wherein the solution of unity is, not thinking upon any hurt done to
it, you may suspect that the Fracture is where he touches. If the Second Table
be fractured, the first remaining whole, then you must apply the trepan, partly
that you may come to take away splints, which do prick the Dura matter, partly
to make way for the discharging of coagulate Blood, and the Sanies. If any
Patient having such a Fracture do die, the Surgeon is not much to be blamed:
for a Surgeon may be excused, if the Patient die, in Four cases. First, if
the Cranium by a violent Contusion be depressed, and the Scull presently return
to its own place. Secondly, if the chink be only capillar, and hard to be seen.
Thirdly, when the Second Table of the Scull is broken, the First remaining
whole. Fourthly, when a Fracture happens in the part opposite to that which is
wounded. In these cases the Surgeon may be excused, seeing the most skilful
Artist may be deceived in these cases. If you find out a Contra-fissura, if it
be but a mere Rima or chink, after you have made incision through the soft
parts lying above the Cranium, dilate the chink with the Raspatories, that way
may be made for the discharging of the coagulate Blood and Sanies: for these
will be gathered, out of all doubt, in all chinks.

I have showed how Fractures in a Wound happening in persons of ripe age are to
be cured: now I am to show you how Fractures in the Scull are to be cured, when
as the soft parts above the Cranium are not wounded; yet the Cranium offended.
If therefore by a contusion the Scull be fractured, the Cutis musculosa not
being divided, you are to ask of the party offended, whether he has vomited
choler, whether he lost his sight, whether he could not speak, whether Blood
did issue out of his Nostrils, and Ears, whether he seemed to be in a trance,
whether he perceived a giddiness after the blow these Symptoms do show that
there is a Fracture. And although no accidents do discover themselves, yet you
must not be secure, but ask whether the Patient in former times has not had
the Headache, for then there is less danger, or whether he was struck with a
heavy weapon, by the hand of a strong man enraged, or whether he felt a noise
in the Brain when he was stricken? If these signs appear, you must suspend your
Prognostics toward the best event. In this case so you are to go on. If no
fearful symptoms after the blow received do continue; then shave that part of
the Head where the blow was received: Then apply a Medicament which asswages
pain; dries, and is astringent: These Intentions a Cataplasin furthereth made
of Barley-meal, Vinegar and Water in the Summer, but Vinegar and Wine in the
Winter, having added the powder of red Roso, Myrtle-berries and Mastick, and
some Oil of Roses, when the Cataplasm is brought to a consistence: Secondly,
you must minister a Medicament which does purge Choler, as this: Caryocostin.
and Elect. de succo ros. an. ij. Syrup. de Cichor. Cum. Rhab. j. Aq. Endiv. ij.
Misc. ut paretur potio. Thirdly, the cephalic Vein of the same side is to be
opened, or Cupping-glasses with scarification, or Leeches to be applied.
Fourthly, Oil of sweet Almonds is to be dropped into the Ears, that the
Quittour which is gathered there may be discharged. In like manner the passages
of the Nose are to be moistened with this same Oil. About the fourth day you are
to use Gargarisms made of the decoction of Barley, red Rose-leaves,
Cowslipflowers, Betony-flowers, Eyebright Stoechas, and some Rue: With the
decoction you are to mingle Mel rosatum and Oxymel simplex. About the seventh
day you are to use discutient Medicaments, as Diachylon ireatum, or Emplastrum
de Betonica, made soft in the Summer with Oil of Roses, and in the Winter with
Oil of Dill. If having used these means, fearful Symptoms do appear after the
7th day you must not defer the incision of the Cutis musculosa, and the
opening of the Scull: for then it is not to be doubted but that Blood and
Quittour are fallen upon the Dura matter.

Although the soft parts above the Scull be not divided, yet in three cases you
must make incision, and open the Scull. First, if clotted Blood or Quittour be
lodged between the Cranium and the Dura matter, which you shall perceive, if
Blood did issue out of the Ears or Nostrils, after the blow was received, if he
be sleepy, stupid, or have a heaviness of the Head. Secondly, these things are
to be done when splints of the Scull do prick the Meninges, which the pain in
the part does discover. Thirdly, when a depression of the Scull remaining,
bears down the Meninges, and causes a stupidity, and a pricking pain, when the
party blows his Nose.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Wounds of the Meninges and the Brain.

HAving delivered unto you in the last Chapters the method of curing those
Wounds which may befall the external parts containing of the Head; now I intend
to show you, how Wounds in the internal containing parts, and the contained
parts are to be cured.

The internal parts containing are two; the two Meninges, or Membranes, which
compass and environ the Brain called by the Arabians Dura and piamater. In
wounds of the Dura matter, there is always a vehement pain. Five inconveniences
may happen to the Dura matter, to wit, a Wound, Pain, Inflammation,
Apostemation, and Discolouration.

If you perceive that there is an immoderate flux of Blood, the Membrane being
wounded: then immediately you must make way to come to the Membrane, if the
wounding instrument has not made way enough; and Galen's powder set down 6.
Meth. Medend. made of Aloe, Frankincense, Mastick, the white of an Egg, and the
Down of a Hare is to be applied.

If in a puncture of the Dura matter or after unskilful dressing drowsiness and
sleepiness seize upon the wounded party, death shortly will ensue. See Dodon.
ebserv. medic. cap. 3. Now seeing great pain follows the Dura matter being
wounded, you must with all expedition go about to assuage it.

In this case first Narcotical Medicaments have no place: for so both the
Membrane it self, and the whole Body would become stupefied; Secondly, unctuous
Medicaments which mollify are not to be used; because these will cause the
Membranes to become dull, to swell, and last of all to putiefie. Wherefore Oil
of Roses warm is to be poured upon the Membrane, until the pain be mitigated,
and Quittour appear in the Wound. Then Mel resation, or Syrupus e Ros. Rub.
Siccat. are to be mingled with Oil of Roses, in equal quantity, until the Wound
be perfectly digested. Last of all, the Dura matter is to be mundified and dried
with fit Medicaments. Such are Mel rosatum, Syrupus e Ros. Rub. Sice. Syrupus
Myrtin^, or Sanativus alone, having no Oil mingled with them. And although the
Pia matter, by reason of its softness, may be united and aggletinated; yet the
Dura matter, because it is hard, nervous and thin, will not admit agglutination:
for in agglutination the brims of the wounded part must be brought and kept
together, which is performed by rolling and stitchings, which in this case
cannot be used. Wherefore it must be cured by Incarnation, or procuring of
flesh to unite the parts dis-joyned.

An Inflammation is a red Tumor of the Dura matter with a distention of the
vessels of the some, so great sometimes, that it fills the hole of the Cranium,
and grows above it. This accident is dangerous.

Wherefore, First of all, Phlebotomy is to be administered, and a slender Diet
appointed: then the part is to be fomented with a decoction of Marshmallows,
Linseed, and Fenugreek, adding groundsell, and Violet-leaves, as also other
Herbs which are to be applied to a Phlegmon, if occasion shall require. This
being done, the Oil of Roses, Myrtils* or Quinces is to be applied. If you
prevail not by the application of these means, but you perceive that the Tumor
rather increases than diminishes, then you are to dilate the Scull, by taking
away more of it.

If Quittour be contained within the Dura matter, which you shall perceive by
the extraordinary whiteness of some part of it, as in pustles of the Skin, then
you are warily to open it, that you in no ways touch the Brain. Then you are to
apply drying and abstersive Medicaments, as Mel. rosation, and Syrupus e Rosis
siccis. Vide Fallop. Comment. in lib. Hipp^c. de vulnerib. cap. c. 43. and
Parae^on lib. 9. c. 21.

Discoloring or blackness may proceed from five causes, viz. From the violence
of the Contusion; From coagulate Blood; From the coldness of the Air; By the
application of unproper Medicaments; Last of all, from Putrefaction.

If the blackness proceed from the violence of the Contusion it seldom
continues above four days. In this case use Oleum rosacetom, and Mel rosatum;
or the Oil of Eggs, with a little Aqua vitae, and some of the Pulvis
cephalicus, with a few grains of the powder of Saffron.

If congealed Blood has caused a blackness, then apply this Medicament: Aq.
vit. ij. Pulv. Gran. tinctorum. ij ss. Croci. j. Mellis. Ros. ij ss.
Sarcocoll.. iij. leniter bulliant omnia: colatura utimini donce evanuerit
nigredo.

If unproper Medicaments have caused the blackness of the Dura matter, then it
is to be cured by the application of such Medicaments as are in faculty
contrary to those which have been applied; so if humid; unctuous, or fatty
Medicaments have been used, you are to change these, and to apply those which
are drying, as the Cephalic powders mingled with Mel rosation, Oleum rosation,
or both mingled together. If sharp Medicaments have been applied, instead of
these, mild and lenient Medicaments are to be used, as the Oil of H^pericum, or
of Earthworms, with a little Saffron: for it is certain that moist Medicaments
may cause blackness by increasing filth; and sharp Medicaments by their
immoderate heat, may cause the same.

If blackness proceed from putrefaction, which you may discern by the strong
scent of the Sanies flowing from the wounded part, then use these Medicaments
which follow: Aq. vitae i ss. Syrup. Absrnth. and Mel. Ros. an. lj. Unguent.
Egypt. ij. Sarcocoll. Myrrh. Alees an j. Vini albi potent. j ss. bulliant
omnia leniter, colentur, ac serventur ad usum. It. aq. Plantag. j. unguent
Aegyptiac. i ss. praecip. Mertur. i. Mise. applicetur istud Medicamentum
calefactum post agitationem. If by these means the putrefaction cease not, but
persevere, and the Tumor increase and grow above the hole of the Scull being
immovable, black, and dry; If the Eyes of the Patient appear of a fiery
color, bunch out, and be still moving; if the party still tosseth and tumbleth
himself in his Bed, and rave, the sick person will die, and the sooner if these
Symptoms continue constant and uniform. This must of necessity ensue, both by
reason of the. extinction of the natural heat, and likewise the Gangrene of a
noble part: Vide Fallop. loc. cit. c. 41. and Par. lib. 9. c. 21.

The Pia matter is very thin, and cleaves so fast to the Brain, that it cannot
be wounded, unless the Brain also be offended. Wherefore such Wounds for the
most part are deadly; for the Brain being laid open unto the Air, easily is
corrupted, by reason of the external cold, which extinguishes the weak heat of
the Brain, and by reason of the moisture which both falls upon the Brain, and
is gathered in the substance of the Brain it self, by reason of its weakness.

First then, if any memorable flux of Blood happen by reason of the multitude
of Veins which are in the Pia matter, it is to be stayed with Galen's
Medicaments set down by him. 5. Method. cap. 4. whereof I have spoken
heretofore. Then the part is to be cured with Medicaments warming and drying,
which I have sot down in the cure of the Dura matter wounded.

Now Wounds which happen in the parts contained in the Head, are to be handled:
These are two, Cerebrum and Cerebellum. To the Brain these griefs may happen; a
Wound, Apostemation, Putrefaction, Sideration, a Concussion, a Fangus, and a
Tumor by reason of Flatuosity.

Now as concerning Wounds of the Cerebrum, or Brain, these five points may be
demanded: First, which are the signs of the Brain wounded? Secondly, what
Symptoms do ensue? Thirdly, whether Wounds of the Brain be curable or no?
Fourthly, how they are to be dressed? Fifthly, what Symptoms usually remain
after that a Wound of the Brain is cured? Of these I will speak in order.

As concerning the First, the signs of the Brain wounded, are these which
follow: First, a Fever, and vomiting of Choler. Hippoc. Aphor. lib. 6.50.
says, if any have the Brain wounded, they must have a Fever, and vomiting of
Choler. The same he repeats, Coac. praenot. 500. and 507. This same Celsus
delivers in most cloquent words lib. 8. cap. 4. Secondly, loss of Speech.
Hippoc. Sect. 7. Aphor. 58. They who have suffered a vehement Concussion of the
Brain, immediately become dumb. Thirdly, a fall and slumbering. Coac. praenot.
499. Fourthly, Sensleiness, dimness of the Sight, Giddiness. 2. Prorrhet. and
lib. de vulner. cap. Fernel. lib. 7. Pathol. c. 8. has these words: If the
substance of the Brain be hurt, the Reason becomes weak, and all Symptoms
increase, and oftentimes a portion of the Brain comes out, not without danger
of life. Fifthly, you shall pronounce the Brain to be wounded, if the Meninges
being divided, a substance like to fat come out; which not withstanding does
neither swim above the Water, neither does melt with the Fire, as fat does. See
Parey lib. 9. cap. 22. Sixthly, if the Bram be hurt, the Quittour will be
thick, round, and like a Marrowy substance.

As concerning the Symptoms which ensue, the Brain being wounded, these are
they; Foaming at the Mouth, Darkness of the Sight, Giddiness, a Convulsion, a
Fever, Vomiting of Choler, Stupidity, Loss of Reason, Deasness, Dumness, a
Palsy, a Lethargy, and last of all, an Apoplexy.

As for the third demand, all wounds of the Brain are dangerous at the least,
and that for these reasons. The First is the Nobleness of the part, and the
necessary use of the Functions of it. The Second is Motion of the Brain; but a
wounded part requires Rest, if it be to be cured. Hip. l. de Vlcerib. circa
principium. The Third is the Humidity of the Brain; but the cure of Ulcers and
Wounds is performed by Exsiccation, according to Galen, lib. 4. Meth. Med. c.
5. The Fourth is the Coldness of the Brain, which engenders many Excrements,
and the more when a wound happens which weakneth the part. The Fifth is the
Consent of the Nerves which spring from thence. The Sixth, because Remedies
pass not readily to the Brain wounded. Three causes may be alleged, why some
persons escape sometimes, having received great wounds in the Brain. The First
is, the wholesome and strong Constitution of the Body. The Second is, the
artificial dressing of the Wound. For as sundry recover of great Wounds, if
they be dressed according to Art; so many die of small Wounds, if they be
negligently or ignorantly dressed. Thirdly, such strange events are to be
ascribed to the providence and mercy of the Almighty God, who of his infinite
Goodness by his secret Judgment prolongeth the lives of some, as he shortneth
the days of others.

Although all wounds of the Brain be dangerous, for the reasons which I have
alleged, yet great and dangerous Wounds have been cured. That this assertion
is true, I will prove by the Testimonies and Experiments of famous Writers,
both Ancient and Modern. Amongst the Ancients, Galen shall be the Ringleader:
He then writing upon the 18th. Aphorism of the 6th Book of Hippocrates, affirms
that he saw one healed who had a remarkable wound in the Brain, in Smyrna of
Ionia, while his Master Pelops was alive; he affirms this indeed to be very
rare, l. 10. de usu part. He makes mention in like manner, of a young Man, who
recovered when he had received a wound in one of the fore Ventricles of the
Brain. Paulus Aeginaet lib. 6. c. 88. affirms, that sundry have escaped death,
and have recovered their health, when they have been wounded in some principal
part, above all expectation. Christophorus a Vega, Comment. in Aph. 15. lib. 6.
Hippocratis, has these words; Wounds of the Brain, if they reach to the
Ventricles, they are not cured; but we have seen many others cured, which
passed to the substance of the Brain, and out of which some portion of the
Brain came out. Herat. Augenius l. 9. Epist. 2. writes thus; We saw once the
whole substance of the Brain wounded, and the Ventricles cut asunder, and that
a portion of the Brain came out of the wound as soon as it was made, and that
notwithstanding the party was cured. The cause of this event was the strength
of the Body Gem. ma l. 1. c. 6. Cosmog. says, It greatly concerns Physicians
to note, that even weak persons sometimes escape of grievous diseases, wherein
the signs threaten imminent danger. So lately, an ordinary person was by our
help healed, when as a shiver of the Scull passed through the Meninges, and
some of the substance of the Brain came out. Joan. Andreas a cruce, l. 1.
Chirurg. c. 14. a Venetian affirms, that he cured sundry whose Brains were
wounded, and names sundry witnesses. Fallop. c. 45. de curatione vulnerum c.
has these words: A great portion of the Brain may come out, and yet life
remain: Wherefore forsake not the wounded persons, for I my self have made
trial of strange things. Carpus tractatu de fractura cranii affirms, that he
saw six persons who recovered, when as a notable quantity of the Brain came out
of the wounds, and that They only deny such good events who have seen but a
little. Brasavola in comment. ad Apher. 18. l. 6. Hippocratis, affirms, that he
saw two who escaped after that their Brain was wounded. Nicol. Mass. com. 2.
Epist. 11. has these words: I take God to witness, and many yet alive can
witness, that I have cured sundry by convenient Medicaments and Art, whose
Sculls, Membranes, and Brains have been wounded, and immediately he names
sundry. Theedoricus lib. 2. cap. 2. Chirurgiae, affirms boldly, that he was as
sure that wounds of the Membranes, the substance of the Brain and Ventricles
may be cured, as he was of death. Volober. Coit. lib. Observe. Anatom. and
Chirurgiear. brings sundry instances that wounds of the Brain may be cured. The
like has Iacotius Comment. ad Apher. 3 lib. 1 Sect. 3. coac. Hippocrat. Peruse
also Arcaeus lib. 1. cap. 6. who does allege four examples of this truth; And
Ambrose Parey, lib. 9. cap. 22. alleges some. And, Gulielmus Fabricius
Observe. Chirurg. Cent. Observe. 13. sets down four. The Testimonies and
Experiences of so many famous Authors may persuade any man, not contentious,
that wounds of the Brain sometimes have been, and yet may be cured, or else
none will.

Seeing I have labored to persuade you, that the wounds dividing the substance
of the Brain it self, may be cured; I think my self bound to acquaint you with
the means, by which so dangerous a Cure is performed; which was the fourth
point which I set down to be discussed concerning wounds of the Brain. Joan.
Andreas a cruce Chirug. l. 1. c. 14. Until the 14th day be past, he will have
Oil of Turpentine, and Spirit of Wine to be applied: then he will have the
Wound to be filled with this Liquor following: Vim Montan. xx. sucet Beton.
iiij. sucei Calaminth. ij. Myrrh. Oliban. Aloes, Sang. Dracon. Centaur. min^r.
Semin. Hyperic. an. j. conumdead. contusis, macerentur omtia in vase probe
occluso: tum lento et claro igne exhalet tertra pars, accoletur decoclum, cui
admisce spir. Vici. vj. Ol. Terebinth. iiij. Reponatur Medicamentum in vase
^trco probe obturato. Above this Liquor apply Pu^is Cephalicus, and cover all
with some fit Emplaster, Coiter. l. Observe. Anatomic. and Chirurg. counsels
to foment the Brain with a convenient Decoction: such an one is this which is
made of Betony, Calamint, St. John's Wort, Chamaemil, Dill, Eyebright, etc.
boiled in red astringent Wine. The Wound he will have to be dressed either with
the natural, or some good artificial Balsame, whereof I have spoken
sufficiently before. Fall. Comm. in Hipp. de vuln. cap. c. 45. will have Oil of
Roses mingled with Oil of Turpentine to be poured into the Wound; and that not
without cause, for the Oil of Roses is Anodyne, and the Oil of Turpentine warms
and dries. This Medicament he will have to be applied until the 7th day be
expired; about which time most commonly appears a sequestration of the corrupt
portion of the Brain from the sound. If the substance of the Brain, it being
wounded, seem to be of a livid color, and a stinking Sanies flow from the
Wound, then those Medicaments which are dry and warm, are to be applied, such
is this which follows: Mel. Ros. and Ol. Ros. an. j. Aq. vit. ij. Misc. When
the Wound yields a laudable Quittour, then the Oil of Roses is to be admitted,
and only Mel. Resar. or Srrupus Myitinus, or Syrupus e Ros. Rub. siccatis,
mingled with Aqua vitae, are to be used. As it is an evil sign if the substance
of the Brain be of a livid color; so if the portion which must be separate,
represent whitish Hailstone, and have not a very stinking smell, it shows
that Nature is strong. Huron. Fab. ab aq. pend. part. 2. Claring. oper. lib. 2.
c. 20. delivers this Medicament as an experiment of his own: Farin. Milii ss.
Ol. Hispani j. Mithridat. vj. Balsami nigri navalis iij. Aq. vit. v. Ol. de
Chalcantho i ss. Misc. This is undoubtedly a good local Medicament, because the
ingredients powerfully dry and resist putrefaction.

This Medicament I dare commend unto you: Balsami nig^i, Vernicis alb. and Ol.
Hyperic. ^^bicundi facti ex mnltiplici infusione florum Hyperici an. ss. Misce.
This Topic will warm, dry, resist putrefaction, and hinder the entering of the
Air.

Now the fifth point concerning wounds of the Brain is to be touched, which is
to show what Symptoms remain most commonly after that a wound of the Brain is
cured. These then are they; The faltring in Speech, and a Palsy in the Arms.
Joan. Andr. a Cruce Chirurg. lib. 1. c. 14. Deafness, Par. lib. 9. c. 22. Decay
of Memory, Stupidity, and a weak judgment. Coiter. lib. Observe. Anatom. and
Chirurg. Et Fallop. lib. praedict. cap. 45. Brassavol. ad Aph. 18. lib. 6.
Aphor. Hippoc. The yellow Jaundice. Ar. lib. 1. c. 6.

The Second inconvenience which does happen unto the Brain, is an Apostemation.
That this may happen, these underwritten Authors do affirm; Valeriol. lib. 3.
Observe. 8. Coiter. in Observe. Anatom. in Chirurgicis. Fernel de lue Vener. c.
7. Par. lib. 9. c. 8. And although most Authors do pronounce this event to be
desperate; yet Arcaeus lib. c. cap. 6. relates of one, upon whose Head a stone
of a Cubit in breadth and length, and in thickness twelve Inches, but in weight
four and twenty lb. fell from the Engine, as it was hoisted up to the building
of a Tower in Valverda, and bruised, depressed and shivered the Scull: when
this Patient had lain desperate seven dales, the eighth day three Apostemes
brake out, and within the space of four Months the party was perfectly cured,
and afterward was married, for then he was but a young Man.

Putrefaction and Sideration are deadly Symptoms, which are not discerned but
by opening of the Scull, and that for the most part when the party is dead.

The first accident which happens to the Brain is a Concussion or a commotion
of the Brain: If it be vehement, it is always dangerous, and sometimes deadly:
If the commotion be violent, the party becomes speechless, according to Hip.
lib. 7. Aphor. 58. where he says; They who have suffered a strong Concussion
of the Brain, must of necessity become dumb: read Galen in his Commentary upon
this Aphorism. It is no other way to be dressed than a Fracture, when the Cutis
Musculosa is whole. Guliel. Fab. Obs. Chi. rurg. Cent. 1. Observe. 7. in this
case anoint the whole Scalp with Oil of Roses and Myrtils mingled together:
open a Vein in the Arm, and inject sharp Clysters. After that a Concussion is
cured, sometimes impediment of Speech, and Forgetfulness, may remain during the
residue of Life, as witnesses Parey, l. 9. c. 22. He will have Blood to be
drawn plentifully out of the Cephalica vena, according to the strength of the
wounded party, to assuage the Symptoms present, and to prevent the coming of
more grievous. The Head he will have to be shaved: then he advises to apply a
Cataplasm made of things cold and moist, as a Cataplasm of Barley-flower, Oil
of Roses and Oxymel. Those Medicaments which are very astringent, as Vnguentum
de Bolo, etc. are not to be applied, because they hinder the breathing of the
fuliginous vapors through the Sutures, and other places of the Scull; and so
they are so far from hindering of an Inflammation, as that they increase it, if
it has seized upon the part already, and bring one, if there be none: sharp
Clysters he will have too injected to draw sharp Vapots from the Head, and to
binder the ascent of them to the same, and the Vein of the Forehead, and those
which are under the Tongue, to be opened after the second day, if Blood abound.
He advises that strong Frictions be used downwards, and that Cupping-glasses
be applied to the Shoulders. He will have the cooling and moistning astringent
Medicaments to be used; of which Medicaments I have set down sundry forms
oftentimes heretofore. If you apply discutient Fomentations, then see that you
heat not the Head too much, lest you cause Pain and Inflammation.

The fifth inconvenience which may happen after that there is a Solution of
Unity in the Brain, is a Fungus, or the Mushrome of the Brain.

This is a Tumor sometimes hard, without Blood, and of small sense; sometimes
soft, of an exquisite sense, and of an ill smell, beneath narrow, and above
broad, a kind of a malign wart growing of the glutinous and thick Humors which
are half rotten, congealed in the part, partly by reason of the Air, partly by
reason of the coldness of the Scull, the Scull being opened, and the Brain
wounded: even as Mushromes grow upon Trees by a Juice which does sweat through
the Bark, Galen, lib. 1. de loc. affectis, does make mention of this Symptom;
and lib. 3. Ep. says, that those Excrescences which grow in Wounds, and are
called Fungi, are caused by the thickness of the Humor issuing from the
affected parts.

Although it fall off of it self sometimes, which Coiter. lib. Observe. Anatom.
and Chirurg. affirms that he saw the Flesh growing under it, depriving it of
nourishment, yet if it increase, as it often does, even to the bigness of an
Hens Egg in one Night, as happened to Guliel. Fabric. as he witnesses, Observe.
Chirurg. Cent. 1. Observe. 15. you must go about to remove it with Medicaments,
which strongly dry, and mildly fret; such are the Powder of Savin, Ocre,
Hermodactyls burned, the Juice of Purselain; Powder of yellow Turbith, warily
applied, surpasses all these. If it grow above the Cranium about the bigness
of an Hen-egg, then with a strong Ligature you are to bind it, to procure the
fall of it; then that which remains is to be consumed with the means above
specified. Beware that you use no strong Cathaeretical means. See Par. lib. 9.
c. 19. Gulielm. Fabric. cured the Fungus, which happened to his Patient, within
the space of fourteen days, with a Fomentation, and a Powder. The description
of the Fomentation is this: Flor. and Folior. Beton. Salv. Chamaemil. Melilet.
Aneth^, Ros. fol. Major. Rorisinar. an man. ^. semin. Anis. and Faenugr. an. j.
coq. ista lento igne in aq. font. and vini rub. astringent. an. lb iv. ad
consumptionem lb iv. deinde coletur decoctum. The description of the Powder is
this: Rad. Caryophyllat. Angel. Calam. aromat. an. ss. rad. Aristol. rotund.
Irid. Guajaci. an. ij. Salv. Rorismar. Major. an. ss. fiat ex omnibus pulvis.

The seventh and last Accident which happens when the Brain is offended, and
the Scull fractured, is a flatuous Tumor. Of it Guliel. Fabricius in the place
aforenamed so discoursed: A Tumor may be caused like to a Fungus of flatuosity.
If the weak heat of the Brain go about to concoct the Matter in and about the
Wound, it does raise up flatuosity, and seeing it can breath out through the
Pia Matter, it does puff it up; For, I observed (says he) that in all those in
whose Wounds a Fungus grew, that the Pia Matter was whole, and only the Dura
Matter torn; for when the Dura Matter is divided, Nature out of hand goes about
to engender Flesh upon the Pia Matter, to defend it from the Air: wherefore, if
superfluous Humors and Flatuosities gather about the Wound, they lift up the
Pia Matter and this Flesh, so that a Tumor like to a Fungus is caused: so he.

If you demand how it is to be cured? I answer, that the Fomentation and
Powder, set down by him to cure a Fungus, will serve.

Now to put an end to my Discourse, concerning Wounds of the Hairy Scalp,
seeing I have made mention of sundry Symptoms which ensue upon them; I will set
down the Causes of the chiefest of them, and so conclude.

Of these, the first is a Fall; this has two Causes: The first is the violence
of the Instruments which do wound: The second is the privation of the faculty
of moving, with the which Instruments of moving ought to be endowed.

The second Symptom is a Vertigo, or giddiness: this proceeds from the
Circulation, or Circumvolution of the animal Spirits; so when the Clouds are
driven, the Sun and Moon seem to move swiftly.

The third is dimness of Sight: the cause of this also is the dissipation of
the animal Spirits.

The fourth is Slumbring: the cause of this also is the dissipation of the
animal Spirits; but it must be both greater, and more durable than in dimness.

The fifth is Vomiting: this is caused by the communion of Vessels; for the
Brain being troubled, the affection is communicated by the Nerves of the sixth
Conjugation, which proceeding from the Brain, are dispersed through the whole
Body of the Stomach. So the offense being communicated to the Stomach, it is
drawn inward and pursed, and turned upwards: from this Inversion of the
Stomach; first, those things which are contained in the capacity of it are
rejected by vomiting; then those Humors which are drawn from the Liver and the
Cystis Fellis; and seeing Choler is most light, it offers it self first, and is
first expelled.

The sixth is a Fever; this is caused by an Inflammation, which has seized
upon the wounded part. This being communicated to the Heart by the connection of
the Arteries, it is sent from thence to the whole Body by the same Vessels.

The seventh is Torpor, or Stupidity; this is caused of ill Vapors, which by
reason of Putrefaction, or some other ill quality, assault the Brain, and
dissipate the animal Spirits.

The eighth is a Convulsion: this is caused of corrupt Vapors, which nip the
beginning of the Nerves, which either a putrid or malign Matter has sent out:
in this case the Neck, and the whole Spinalis Medulla, is to be anointed with a
convenient Medicament, such as this: Rut. Marrub. Rerismar. Ebuli, Salviae,
herbae Paralysis an. man. ss. Rad. Irid. Cyper. Baccar. Lauri an. j. flor.
Chamaemel. Meliloti and Hyper. an. pug. 1. Macerentur haec per noctem in vini
potentis, lib. vj. deinde coq. cum Ol. Lil. albor. Lumbricor. and Terebinthin.
axung. anser. and human. an. iij. ad consumptionem vini, igne lento, postea
instituatur colatura, cui add Terebinthinae Venetae iij. aq. vit. j. cerae
flavae ij.

The ninth is a Palsy; this happens, when as by a Matter kept in the part
offended, the Brain and the beginning of the Nerves are so affected, that all
motion is taken away.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the cure of Wounds of the Face.

HAving, delivered unto you, with what diligence I could, the Cure of the Hairy
Scalp. Now I am to show you, how Wounds happening in the parts, which are not
so garnished with Hair are to be cured. These are two, to wit, the Face, and
the Instruments of the Senses: By the Face I mean Skin, Membranes, Muscles, and
Vessels of the fore and lateral parts of the Head.

And although that might suffice for the curing of Wounds of the Face, which I
delivered in the documents concerning the curing of simple Wounds: yet because
the Face has two prerogatives above all other, which are not more principal
than it self; it will not be amiss to speak somewhat of the Wounds of it in
particular.

For the Face, first of all, is the seat of Comeliness and Beauty. Secondly, it
is the surest mark by which one is discerned from another. Seeing then the Face
does afford unto the beholders of it such contentments, you ought to have a
special care that you leave no foul cicatrix. after the cure of the Wounds of
it, if you be called to cure them.

Wounds of the Face are twofold; for in them either the soft parts only are
wounded, or the Bones also. If the soft parts only be wounded, then they are
wounded either according to the length, and the rectitude of the Fibrae of the
Muscles and Skin, or they are wounded transversly.

If the Wound of the Face be according to the longitude, the brims of it are to
be brought together by a convenient ligature, and glutinative Medicaments,
refraining from stitching with Needles, for when we use Needles, new Solutions
of Unity are procured, and so new Scars, and the Thread does transversly cut
the Skin, and causes an ill favored Cicatrix, if it be not speedily taken
away; besides pain is caused.

As for rolling, the Roller must not be broad, but narrow, and with two ends,
that by sundry circumvolutions, it may the better bring the brims of the Wound
together.

As for glutinative Medicaments, or dry stitching, as they are termed. I will
commend unto you two.

The first is an Emplaster, the description of it is this: Colophen. Pic.
Naval. and Cerae an. ij. T^reboith. iss. Mastich. Thur. farin. volat. cale.
vivae an. ij. fine emplastrum secundum artem.

The second is a Powder, and it is this: Thur. Mastich. Bol. Armen. Sang.
Dracon. Colophon. cale. viv. Alum. far. volat. an. ss. fiat ex omnibus pulvis
subtilis. This Powder is to be mingled with the white of an Egg, until it be
brought to the consistence of Honey, and so to be applied.

One thing is be noted, that the Hem of the Cloth, upon which these
Medicaments are spread, be applied toward the brims, and the raveled portion to
the places distant from the Brims. If the soft parts be transversly incised,
and the Wound be long, the brime must gape being far distant asunder. In this
case you must use stitching with Needles to bring them close together.

In stitching you are to observe these four cautions: the first, that they be
as thin as may be: the second is, that the Thread be rather of Flax than Silk,
but smooth, and waxed, that it cut not; the third is, that the Needles be as
small as may be, and either of Silver or of Steel distempered, which you may do
by holding of them in the flame of a Candle: the fourth is, that when the brims
of the Wound do abide together, and the Swelling and Inflammation of the brims
are gone, we remove these stitches, and apply the dry stitches, which will fall
out the third or fourth day: this you are to do to prevent ill favored Scare.
If the transverse Wound be not long, convenient rolling and dry stitching will
serve; for the bringing and keeping of the brims together.

When you go about to cure such Wounds, apply not Powders; for when the brims
are brought together, some small distance must of necessity be left, which most
be filled with Flesh: If you then apply Powders which are loath actually, and in
faculty drying, the incarnation will be hindered, the Powders drying both ^o
much and too soon, and so the Scar will be unequal being lower than the rest of
the Skin.

Wherefore for the agglutination of such Wounds, apply Medicaments which in
consistence are soft and moist; but in faculty drying; for by Application of
such Medicaments, Nature has time equally to agglutinate the brims, and the
Cicatrix will be more fair: which is that you ought to aim at i^ the curing of
the Wounds of the ^ace.

Such are Arcaeus his Liniment: The Spanish Balsam, Oil of Hypericum, having
some Turpentine or Vernice mingled with it, and tie natural black Balsam. In
the Winter time use the stictick Emplaster, but in summer Diapalma, or
Emplastrum de minio. If they be too hard, malax them with some of the Oil of
Hypericum. Frocure skinning after agglutinaton, with Vnguentum de Tutia, de
cerussa, aut de bolo Armeno, or eratum griseum.

When the skinning is almost induced, anoint the part with Man's grease: for it
procures by a peculiar faculty a fair Scar. See Aq. pend. part. 2. lib. 2. c.
21.

Now if a Wound be received in the Face, wherewith both the soft Farts and the
Bones are incised; we must in this case have a greater care of the security of
the wounded person, than of the beauty of the Face. In this case no kind of
s^tching has place, if the Wound be large, and the offense of the Bone great.
For the Bone must be smoothed with Raspatories, and the Wound be kept open
while the Bone scale, and the part be incarnate, even as has been taught in
Wounds of the Halry Scalp, wherein there is a Fracture of the Scull, I will
repeat nothing, because I am unwilling to lose any time.

If any enormous Wound fall out, whereby there is a Solution of Unity in the
Jaw-bones, as happened to Arcaeus in one, whose upper Jaw fell upon the Chin:
in this case all parts are to be reduced to their own posture, so that Bones
answer to Bones, and the soft parts answer the soft; then the parts are to be
kept in their natural position, with all manner of stitching, and convenient
deligation. Read the Authors in the Book, cap. 7. I have acquainted you with
the Methodical manner of dressing such Wounds before; so that now in this case
I will be silent.

So much I have thought good to deliver unto you, concerning the Cure of Wounds
of the Face in general. Now it remains, that I briefly discourse of the Wounds
of the Eyebrows, and Eyelids, and Lips, before I handle the Wounds which
cause Solution of Unity in the Instruments of the Senses.

Vulnus Supercilii, a Wound of the Eye-brow, is either caused by a simple
Incision only, or by Incision with the loss of some of the substance of the
part. If it be by simple Incision only, it is either according to the longitude
or latitude of the Fibrae, or tranverse.

If the Wound be caused by simple Incision according to the length, without
loss of substance, you may use the Cephalic Powders, and such as are
astringent and drying, having no sharpness to hasten the unition, and procure
skinning; for in this case you need not fear an ugly Scar, for the part is
decked and covered with Hair.

If the Wound of the Eyebrows be transverse without loss of substance, then
you must have a care that such a Wound be exactly agglutinate: and that the
brims of the conjunction exquisitely answer one another: for if these Cautions
be neglected, the wounded party shall not be able to lift up the Eyelid,
unless he use the aid of his Fingers, and the Eye shall still remain shut. In
this case then, you must take deep stitches, and so many as shall seem fit. The
brims having been thus joined together, procure agglutination with such
Medicaments as are able to reunite the parts severed.

If a Wound of the Eye-brow have caused a loss of Substance: then you must not
hasten the consolidation of such a Wound: for if you do, the Scar will become
so hard, that the Muscle shall pull up too much the Eyelids, and so the whole
Eye shall not be covered. In this case then you are to use such sarcotical
Medicaments as are soft in consistence, as artificial Balsom, of which I have
spoken sufficiently before.

If this inconvenience happen, that by reason of the hard Cicatrix, the Eyelid
cannot wholly be pulled down to cover the Eye; then you are to divide the
Cicatrix by a semicircular, or half-moon-like Incision, according to the
orbicular proceeding of the Fibrae of the Muscle of the Eye, which pulls down
the Palpebra.

Neither need you fear to make such a half-moon-like Incision, although it come
near to a transverse Incision: for this Muscle lies within the Orbit of the
Eye, near to the Muscles which move the Eye, and so it cannot be hurt by such
an Incision; for the Incision must not reach to the internal Tunicle of the
Eyelid; but only divide the Cicatrix and the round Muscle, which motion is not
taken away by such a half moon Incision.

Spigelius, lib. 4. cap. 5. will have two Muscles to shut each Eyelid, and to
be of a semicircular Figure: the one is seated in the upper Eyelid, and
draws it down, and is called the bigger: the second and lesser is seated in
the lower Eyelid, and pulls it only upward. The upper Ely-lid is drawn up by
the Muscle which proceeds from the upper part of the Fro^s, or Forehead, near
to the temporal Muscle, where the Hairy Scalp ends. It goes directly down, and
is inserted into the Eye-brow. This Muscle then being transversly cut asunder,
the Eyelid can hardly be pulled up, unless it be artificially united.

Wounds of the Eyelids are either straight or transverse: Those are straight
which reach from one corner of the Eye to the other: because this is the
position of the Fibrae of the semicircular Muscles of the Eye, although they
may seem transverse, if you behold only the Figure of the Face. Transverse I
call those which reach straight down from the Eye-brow, or supercilium, toward
the cavity of the Eye. These Wounds either divide the outward Skin and Muscles
only, or they cause a So^^tion of Unity in the internal Membrane of the Eye
also.

If the Wound has only divided the external Skin, and the semicircular Muscle:
you may use stitching, but then the Needle and Thread must be very small, and
the Thread well waxed. Agglufaction is to be procured by inspersion of
sarcotical and drying Powders, as Bolus Orientalis, Terra spillata, sargias
Draconis, Sarco^lla, etc. Thus you may mix them: Bol. Orient. and Terrae
sgllat, an. ij. sang. Dracon. Sarcroll. an. j. siat ex omnibus p^^^^s subtilis.

Above the Powders apply a piece of a soft linen Cloth, that it but not the
Eye by its hardness, moistened with the White of an ^^g, which both hinders
Inflammation, and stays the Powder. Above this apply Boulsters, moistened with
Plantain Water, and red Wine mingled together. Last of all roll up the Eye.

If occasion move you to apply to the adjacent parts Oil of Roses, or any
other, then you are to have a care, that no part of the Oil fall into the Eye;
for Oils do hurt the Eyes, and cause Inflammation.

If the Wound cause a Solution of Unity in the internal Membrane of the
Eyelid, which immediately does cover the Eye, you are to stitch this. For if
the Thread should touch the Body of the Eye, it would offend it, and procure an
Inflammation. In this case then, a dry stitch is most convenient.

Wounds of the Lips either cut asunder only the Skin of the musculous Parts, or
the Membrane also which internally covers the Mouth. If the Skin and the
musculous Parts be only cut asunder, then ordinary stitching will serve the
turn, and the application of such Medicaments as unite Wounds inflicted in
other parts of the Body.

If the whole substance of the Lip be separate, and gape; then you are to dress
such a Wound, as a Hair-lip, when as the brims are made raw.

First then, you are to pierce both the brims of the Wound with a Needle, or a
Pin, having on each side a thin and small piece of Lead: Through both these
pieces of Lead, the Needle or Pin must pass, then the Thread is to be twisted
about both the ends of the Needle or Pin.

Last of all, the point of the Needle or Pin is to be nipt off, that it hurt
not, with a pair of small steel Nippers well hardened. The Leads suffer not the
Needle or Pin, to break through the brims of the Wound: you must take this
stitch somewhat deep, and about the middle of the Wound, that the brims may be
the more surely kept together. Two ordinary stitches more will serve, one above
the Needle or Pin, the other below.

The Pin you may take out the fourth, fifth, or sixth day, as you shall see the
parts united. If you have Children in hand, it is not amiss to join to these
the dry stitch, because they are unruly, and by their crying cause often the
stitches to break.

The Medicaments Topical which procure consolidation in these Wounds, are
these: The black natural Balsam, and not the yellow; In Winter you may use it
alone, but in the Summer tempered with a little of the Yolk of an Egg. The Oil
of Hypericum, or Spanish Oil mingled either with some Cyprian Turpentine, or
the white Joyners Vernice, are excellent. When all parts are agglutinate, then
you are to remove all the rest of the stitches, and to procure a comely
Cicatrix by anointing the parts, wherein there was Solution of Unity, with Man's
grease (as has been said) if the wounded parties be Girls or Women: In Boys
and Men, because one may have, the other has Hairs to cover the deformity of
the Cicatrix, you need not to be so scrupulous.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the cure of Wounds which happen to the Instruments of the Senses.

IT is time now to come to those Wounds which offend the Instruments of the
Senses; and seeing the Sense of Seeing of all other is most admirable and
noble, the Wounds of the Eye which is the Instrument of it, must first be
handled: for it apprehends more excellent Objects, more in number, and of a
greater variety, with a greater celerity, than any of the rest of the Senses
does, and in a farther distance. It is necessary for all living Creatures to
espy and prevent Dangers and Enemies. Besides this, the eternal felicity of
reasonable Creatures shall proceed from the intuitive knowledge of the Sacred
Trinity.

As concerning Wounds of the Eye, two points offer themselves to be discussed.
First, the difficulty of the cure of such Wounds. Secondly, the cure it self.

Five things make the Wounds of the Eye of a hard Cure. 1. Is the excellency of
the part it self. 2. Is the exquisite sense of it. 3. The consent which it has
with the Brain: which you may easily gather; if either you respect the Optic
Nerve, or the Motory, or the Muscles of the Bye, which have many twigs of the
Nerves communicate from the first, second, third, and eighth pair of Nerves.
Fourthly, the flux of Humors, which promptly falls into the Eye after it is
wounded. Fifthly, the continual motion of the Arte^les.

In the cure of these Wounds too points are to be delivered. First, the
differences of them. Secondly, the artificial dressing of them.

As for the differences of them, Wounds of the Eye are either Superficial or
Deep. Superficial I from such as pass not through the C^nea: But deep, such as
pass strough the Cornea.

In the cure of Wounds of the Eye, these two points are to be diserved in
general: First, that you abstain from all Oils, and fat things, for they
inflame the Eye, and cause Pain. Secondly, that ^hen one Eye only is wounded,
you roll them up both; First, that the sound Eye may be kept from motion.
Secondly, that darkness may every way be procured; for light offends all fore
Eyes: Thirdly, that the Cure may be more easy; for when one Eye moves, the
other of a necessity must move, and so the wounded Eye being moved at the
motion of the sound Eye uncovered, the Cure will be hindered: for Motion causes
Inflammation, and protracts Healing. The third is, that the Head lie somewhat
high, not lending forwards: let the Pillow be of Turkey Leather, filled with
Chiff.

To cure a superficial Wound of the Eye, three intentions are required: First,
to prevent all Inflammation and flux of Humors into the Eye. Secondly, to
mitigate pain. Thirdly, to unite the parts separate.

To assuage pain, and repel the ^fflux of Humors, use these things following:
Ovi Candidum, aq. Spermatis ran^rum, (...) Plantagi Portulac. pluvialis, (...),
Mucilag. semin. Cydon. Psyllii, Tragaranth. Papaver, hyoscyam. decoct. nuc.
Cu^ressi, Gallarum, Balaust. Malicor. V^num Granator. Lac. Muliebre, Sarguis
Turturum and Pullor. Co^^^^ar. ex venis sub alis elicitus. Of these you may
have sundry compositions unto your selves, as need shall require.

In this case it will suffice to apply these Medicaments above the Eyelid, the
Eye being shut, unless Qulttour abound, and the Eye run much: for the Skin of
the Eye lid, the Muscle, and the internal Membrane, are thin; so that the
Medicament may easily penetrate. Besides, some will pass between the Eyelids.
If the former Accidents happen, wash the Eye with Rain or Plantain-Water,
wherein a little Alume, or white Vitriol has been dissolved: then apply
Boulsters made of old fine linen Cloth, because it is softest, moistened in
some of the Waters, wherein some of Stef album sine Opto has been dissolved.
If pain urge, use that which has Opium in it.

To the Forehead, Temples and Cheeks apply some anodyne and astringent
Cataplasm: such is this which follows: Pulp. Pomor. sub Cinertb. coctor. ij.
flor. Cass. extract. vj. Muccag. semin. Psyl. Alth. and Cydon. an. ss. far.
Hord. cribrat. Bol. Armen. sang. Dracon. an. j. Misc. ut paretur cataplasma.

One thing is to be noted, that if both the Eyelid and the Conjunctiva Tunica
of the Eye be wounded, that you have a care that they grow not together, which
happens if it be not prevented: You shall hinder this inconvenience, if in
tender persons you keep them asunder with some Leaf-Gold, but in other Bodies
either with Leaf Gold, or Tin-Foil.

If the Wound be deep, then either the Weapon passed through the broad and long
Chink about the ends of the Bones of the Orbita, through which the Nerves come
into the Brain, or it goes not so far.

If the Weapon pass into the Brain, then the Wound is mortal, because by reason
of the dissipation of the Spirits, Motion and Respiration are abolished.
Nevertheless, he is to be dressed, and the Surgeon is blameless, because he
neither can see the Wound, nor apply any Topical Medicament to the Brain,
unless he take out the Eye, which no wise man will attempt, nor can be
suffered, in whom the Sense of feeling remains.

An Example of this I saw in Chester, in a young Gentleman, whose Surname was
Fletcher, who in a Duel being so wounded in the left Eye, died about the
fourteenth day after he received the Wound. He continued well nine days, and
the tenth day went to a Play. The eleventh day the left Nostril began to run as
if it had been a Still, so that every night and day it wet a Pillow: and so it
continued until he ended this Life.

If the Wound be not so deep, then either the aqueous Humor only issues out, or
the others, as the Crystalline and Vitreous also.

If the aqueous Humor come out only, then it comes out wholly, or in part. If
all of it come out, the sight will be lost. If a small quantity only come out,
it may be repaired, and chiefly in Children, by reason of their moisture, and
so the sight remains. This Wound is cured as a superficial Wound.

If the other Humors, as the Vitreous and the Crystalline, come out, then the
sight must of a necessity be lost. In the cure of this Wound you are to use
sarcotical Powders, but beaten very small, and past through a fine searce, such
as Tutia prepared, Calaminaris quenched in white Wine, Terra sigillata, sanguis
Draconis, Aes ustum, Sarcocolla, Sandaracha Graecorum, etc. When the Eye is
healed, you may cause an artificial Glass-eye to be set in place of the
natural, to avoid deformity.

It falls out sometimes that part of the wounding Instrument sticks in the Eye.
If a portion of a wounding Instrument does stick so fast, that it cannot be
pulled out without the effusion of all the Humors of the Eye, and the procuring
of great Inflammation, and that does not prick the Eyelids, then it is best to
suffer it to remain, and to dress the Wound with anodyne Medicaments, until
the seventh day be past, and then to use agglutinative means. But if the piece
cause pain, and a continual weeping, and hurt the Eyelids, it is to be taken
out, and dressed as deep wounds of the Eye. See an Example in Fabric. ab aq.
pendent. Chirurg. operat. part. 2. lib. 2. c. 27.

Next to the cure of wounds of the Eye, I will show how wounds of the Ear,
which is the Instrument of Hearing, are to be cured.

The Ear is either wholly cut off from the Temple of the Head, or but in part
divided. If it be totally cut off, first of all, it is to be skinned with
strong Epulotical Medicaments, as the Cephalic Powder, Vnguentum de bolo, de
minio, and such like. Then the deformity is to be covered either by wearing a
long Lock, or a Cap under the Hat having a side latch. If it be divided but in
a part, if the separation be but small, a dry stitch only will serve; but if it
be large, a small Needle, and fine Thread must be used, that the part separate
may be proportionally brought and kept together. Then strong desiccative
Topics are to be used, because the part it self is for the greatest part
Cartilaginous.

In your stitching you are to observe two things: First, that the Needle only
bring together the parts of the Skin, on each side of the Ear within and
without, without wounding the Cartilage; for if this be done, an Inflammation
and Gangrene may ensue, as witnesses, Fabric. ab. aq. pend. oper. Chirurg.
part. 2. lib. 2. c. 33. and Par. lib. 9. c. 22.

Secondly, you must observe, that if the Wound reach to the first cavity of the
Ear, called Meatus Auditorius, the passage of Hearing, you still keep a
Sponge-Tent in it, partly that no spongy flesh grow in it, which might stop it,
and so hinder the Hearing; partly that no Quittour fall into it, which might
exulcerate the parts internal, and corrupt the Tympanum, and so procure
inevitable deafness.

Now I will briefly touch only the cure of Wounds with which the Nose (the
Instrument of smelling) may be violated. Wounds then of the Nose may only cause
a Solution of Unity in the soft parts, or in the hard parts also.

If a Wound happen in the soft parts of the Nose, a dry stitch will suffice: In
these wounds we must, to the uttermost of our endeavor, labor to procure a
fair Cicatrix, or Scar: seeing the Nose is the most eminent part of the Face,
and but a small Scar will easily be discerned in it: wherefore you are to
procure a fair Cicatrix with some Medicaments astringent: such is Vnguentum
album caphuratum, if it be faithfully dispensed.

If the hard parts be wounded, then this must fall out either in the upper
part, and then the Bone must be violated; or in the lower part, and then the
Cartilage must be hurt.

Wherefore if a Wound be inflicted in the upper part of the Nose, wherein the
Bone is cut, then there is a Wound and a Fracture. In curing of such a Wound,
two Indications offer themselves: for, first, the Bones must orderly be set;
then the consolidation of the Wound is to be procured.

In placing handsomely the Bones, you must put into the Nose a fit piece of
Wood, lapped with soft linen cloth, which must easily go in to bear up the
Bones: then outwardly you are to set the Bones in their best posture with your
other hand. This being done, you must put a pipe into the Nose of some light
substance, as of the branches of Flder, the pith being taken out, or made of a
thin plate of Silver: for the present necessity you may use a Goose-quill, or a
Swans-quill, or a Quill made of a Reed, such as Weavers use. These Quils or
Pipes must not be exquisitely round, but somewhat sharp above, and flat below,
to preserve the natural figuration of the Nose.

When you use these, you must observe two things: First, that they be tied to
the nightcap on each side, that they drop not out: Secondly, that you put them
not too far up, lest they cause sneezing, which much hinders the consolidation
of such Wounds.

These Pipes afford a fourfold use: First, they keep the Bones in their best
position: Secondly, they give way to breathing: Thirdly, they discharge the
excrements of the Brain: Fourthly, they make way for the sending of the
Quittour from the Wound. These pipes must be lapped up in soft linen Cloth, to
hinder the sinking of the consolidating Medicaments into the Wound.

The Bones thus set according to Art, you must labor to bring the soft brims
of the Wound together, either by a dry stitch, or with a small needle and
thread, according as occasion shall be offered unto you.

This being done, apply a desiccative Medicament to the Wound, as Sangais
Draconis, and Bole beat to a fine powder, and mingled with the white of an Egg
beaten: let the consistence be like to that of Honey.

If such a wound be transverse, First, you must apply to each side of the
Nostrils a fine little Boulster of soft, linen Cloth, moistened in red
astringent Wine, and wrong out: then you must stay these Boulsters with a
roller; having a hole in the middle to give way to breathing, and to receive
the tip of the Nose. This Roller must be sowed to the back part of the Head.

You must have a care of one thing, that it be no straiter than is necessary,
for the keeping of the Nose from falling; for if it be too strait, it will
procure a Polt-foot-like Nose steering upwards. Hard to the Septum of the Nose
apply another very narrow Roller, which bring about to the Neck, as you did the
other.

If the lower part of the Nose be deeply wounded, then the Cartilage must
suffer solution of Unity; which if it come to pass, then the Cartilage is only
divided, or quite out off. If it be only divided, then Unition is to be
procered, a pipe to be used, drying Medicaments to be applied, and the like
Rolling to be used, as I set down in the cure of a wound in the upper part of
the Nose, wherein the Bone is incised. If the Cartilage be wholly cut off, then
a new Nose is to be framed of the skin of the Arm. Of this Taliacitius has
written at large, and I will touch this practice in my (...), which I made the
third part of Surgery.

To make an end of this Chapter, I must show you briefly how wounds of the
Tongue the instrument of Tasting are to be cured.

If a portion of the Tongue be altogether cut off, the loss is altogether
irreparable: for being once deprived of life, being separate from the rest of
the living Particles, it cannot by any created power be restored. Our Savior
restored Malchus his Ear cut off by St. Peter; but we know that he was both God
and Man, the Lord of Life, able to give it, or to take it from any, according
to his good pleasure. If the part separate cleave to the sound part, although
it be but by a fleshy thread, so that it does totter hither and thither, yet
beware that you cut it not off, seeing the loss of Speech, (the mean of mutual
conference) will so ensue.

Such a Wound is hardly cured; partly, because we can neither use dry stitching
nor rolling; partly, because ordinary Topics, as Balsame and Emplasters cannot
be Employed.

In this case you are to use stitching with Needle and Thread. But first of
all, the Tongue is to be pulled out, being holden by the hand, it having been
lapped with a linen Cloth, or by hollow and rugged Forcipes armed with cloth.
Then so many and so deep stitches are to be taken as shall seem expedient to
keep the parts united. Neither let us be too scrupulous with Celsus lib. 5. c.
26. who thinks that the less flesh the Needle pierces, the Inflammation or
pain will be the less; rather let us bind sure that we may still find sure. We
may easily conjecture how the wounded party will be disheartened if the
stitches should break. The Wound being surely stitched; we must first cut off
the thread hard by the knot, lest the ends of the thread, being entangled
between the Teeth, should cause a renting of that which you did sow.

Secondly, we must use astringent means, such as are Plantain-water, wherein
the Syrup of Myrtles, or dry red Roses, with some Alum, have been dissolved. A
decoction of vulnerary Herbs, with Syrup of Quinces: Saccharum rolatum holden
still in the Mouth, etc. As for his Diet ^he must be fed with liquid things,
Almond-milk, yolks of Eggs dissolved in Broths, Gellies, Barley-cream, thin
Oatmeal-Gruel, and thin Panadoes.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Wounas of the vessels of the Throat.

HAving dispatched Wounds which may happen to the Head, I must now fall to
those wounds which may offend the Neck. Now these Wounds cause solution of
continuity either in the common parts of the Body, or the parts proper. The
parts common are the Cutis, and Membra^a carnosa. The parts proper, are the
vessels and the other parts. The vessels are three, the jugular Veins, the
soporal Arteries, and the recurrent Nerves. The other parts are the Larynx or
Windpipe, and the Gula, or the mouth of the Stomach, and the Spinalis medulla:
Of these I will discourse in order, as they are set down. Those Wounds which
happen to the common parts, the Skin, and the Membrana carnosa, require no
particular tractation; for they are cured by joining together the parts
dif-joyned, and by application of agglutinative Topics. Seeing these parts are
loose and flaggy, you may stitch these parts, although there be some loss of
substance. The rest of the Wounds which befall the other parts of the Neck,
requi^e a special consideration.

First then to come to the wounds of the vessels: If the internal jugular
Veins, and soporal Arteries, be deeply and largely wounded, the wounded party
can hardly escape. First, because the wounded party does flux to death most
commonly, before any Surgeon can come to stay the bleeding. Secondly,
because no strait Ligature can be applied to these Wounds, because it might
choke or strangle the wounded party. Cells. l. 5. c. 26. says, Periculosa sunt
vulnera ubicunque venae majores sune: those Wounds are dangerous wheresoever
great Veins are. Hip. prorr. l. 2. affirms those wounds to be deadly, whereas
the thick, that is the great and large Veins, are wounded in the Neck and
Groins. Of the danger of these wounds, Forest. Obs. Chirurg. l. 6. c. 4. thus
warns us: The jugular Veins receiving a great Wound, hardly and very seldom
are cured, because they deprive a man of the vital spirit, by reason of the
large effusion of Blood; and because these Wounds will not admit such rolling
for the staying of bleeding as is necessary. Guliel. Fabric. Cent. 4. Observe.
2. makes this manifest by an example: When a certain Empirick went about the
cutting out of a Struma in the Neck of a Genevan Maid, which had enclosed the
jugular Vein, and the recurrent Nerve, so great a flux of Blood issued, that
the Maid died in the very operation. The like chance happened to one Mr.
Blackwell, who going about the like operation in a young Gentlewoman, then
lying in Alderman-bury, had no better success. Doctor Gwin and I were then
present. Let these and the like examples procure wariness when you go about to
deal with Tumors in the lateral parts of the Jugulum, or Throat.

In such Wounds, a Wound of the Artery is more dangerous than of the Vein.
First, because the Blood of the Artery is more fluxible and more spirituous:
Secondly, because the coats of the Artery are hard, and are in continual motion.

You shall know an Artery to be wounded by these signs: First, the Arterial
Blood gusheth out sorcibly and leaping, when the Artery is dilated, but in the
constriction the Blood is drawn back. Secondly, the Arterial Blood is thinner;
but the Venal thicker. Thirdly, the Arterial Blood is of a bright red color;
but the Venal is blacker. Fourthly, the Arterial Blood is much hotter than the
Venal. Fifthly, the Arterial Blood when it issues out, is more full of spirits
than the Venal.

As for the cure of such Wounds, the first scope is to stay the flux of Blood,
which is the storehouse of the vital spirit: the Second is, to agglutinate the
Wound.

The Bleeding is stayed two manner of ways; by Medicaments and by Deligation:
The Medicaments are either restrictive or escharoticall.

This restrictive Medicament may serve instead of all others: Thur. ij. Aloes,
Sanguinis draconis, Telarum aranearum, quae in molis plenae sunt farina
volatili, Hypo. cystidis, Mastiches, Sarcocollae, T^rrae umbrae, pulveris
volatilis Fungorum an. j. siat ex omnibus pulvis subtilis.

The escharotical means are either Medicaments which procure a Crust, or an
actual Cautery. This Medicament which follows, shall serve for all other
escharotical means, Pull. praedi^l. ij, Calc. vivae j. Arsenic, sub^mat. and
Auripigmenti. ss. fiat pulv. s. a.

These powders, according to Galen, lib. 5. method. c. 4. must be mingled with
the whites of Eggs, so that the Medicament be of the consistence of Honey: Then
the hairs of a Hare are to be added; you must sill the Wound with dosils armed
with these Medicaments, and apply large pledgets above the dosils, and about
the Wound, armed in like manner with the same.

Seeing you cannot use strait rolling about the Neck for fear of choking, you
are to have in readiness three or four Servants to keep to the Wound the
Medicaments, that they fall not off by their turns, these Medicaments must lie
to the Wounds three days; then when you go about to removo them, when you are
come to the lowermost dosils in the Wound, if they stick, you are not to remove
them, lest a fresh flux be caused; only the rest of the Wound is to be filled
up with fresh stuff.

As for the actual Cautery, it must be red and glowing hot; for then it
procures a crust most speedily, and that the thicker. This being done, we are
with all expedition to procure incarnation, lest the crust fall before flesh be
engendered, and so the breach become greater, and the flux of Blood larger. If
you labor to engender flesh above an Artery, you are to use sarcotical
Powders, which strongly dry.

When the flesh is engendered, if you by applying your finger feel strong
beating, you are to fear lest an Aneurisma ensue: when you have performed all
these directions, it will not be amiss, above and round about the Wound, to
apply this Cataplesm: Fol. Sola^^, Hyosc^ami, Mandragor. contus. an. man. j.
Far. Hord. and Pulv. Malicer. an. q. s. ut parecur Cataplasma sine ulla
coctione.

If these means will not prevail, then you are to bind the vessel which bleeds:
First then you are to lift up the vessels from the subjacent and adjacent parts
with a small silver hook; then you are to bind them above and under the Wound
strongly, and to cut them asunder between the Deligations: This is the surest
way, seeing there are innumerable Anastomoses of the vessels in the body of
Man, and so Blood may easily flow from either side of the Wound: wherefore it
is necessary that they both be bound. Seeing these Wounds are extreme
dangerous, you cannot be too circumspect in curing of them: if therefore a
learned Physician cannot be had, you must see that he use a convenient Diet.

His Diet then must be sleader, cooling, glutinous, and somewhat astringent,
that no great store of Blood be engendered, that it may be cooled, made thick,
and so less apt to flow; wherefore Flesh, Eggs, and strong Drink are to be
shunned. The party may eat Lettuce, Purslain, Endive, Spinach, So^el,
Barly-cream, Pompions boiled. As for Fruit, he may eat Quinces, Medlars,
Pomegranates, Prunes baked or stewed, Sloes stewed. As for flesh, he may eat
Calves and Sheeps-feet stewed, Calves and Sheeps-heads boiled, and their Brains
with Green-sauce made of the common Sorrel, and Wood Sorrel, Vinegar of Roses,
and a little Sugar; Let the Bread be course and leavened: Let the Drink be
Spring Water, wherein Steel has been quenched, Beveredge of Vinegar and Water,
the juice of Pomegranates, Barleywater, Juleps of Roses and Vi^lets,
Spring Water and Verjuice. If the party be weak, let him, or her feed upon
Mountain-birds, poched Eggs, Partridges. In Springwater, wherein the bottom of
a loaf has been boiled, dissolve Syrup of Succory, Purslain, red Roses,
Myrtil, and such like: If Wine be required, let it be deep colored and
astringent: such are the red Wines, whereof here they make their Clarets and
Allegant. The Body must be kept soluble, and all perturbations of the Mind, but
chiefly vehement anger, are to be abandoned. If the party sleep not well, it is
to be procured by Art: this Medicament which follows is very convenient and
fit: Diascor. j. Philon. Persici j. Syrup. Papav. albi vj. Aq. Papav. cirat.
iij. Misc. ut paretur petio bib^nda fri^ida hora ix. vespertina you may
minister this potion every third night.

The third vessel which is to be sound in the lateral parts of the J^gulum, or
Throat, which is remarkable, is the Recurrent Nerve, so called, because it
comes down from the sixth pair of Nerves, and returns upwards toward the
M^iscles of the Larynx, using in the lest part the trunk of the Aorta, and on
the right Side, the axillar Artery, as Pulleys. If one of the recurrent Nerves
be cut asunder, the voice becomes house, but if both be divided, the Speech is
taken away; and seeing they greatly further the Speech, if they be whole, and
hinder it, if they suffer solution of unity, they are called not only Nervi
recurrentes, Recursivi, and Reversivi, but Vocales also.

To consolidate these, and the wounds of the Veins and Arteries, this Balsame
of Ambrose Parey set down, lib. 10. c. 29. is excellent: Ol. Hyperic. simpl.
iiij. Gum. Elemi. iij. Terebinth. Venet. lb. ss. liquescant ista simul ac
colentur. Cum frigere incipiunt, add Boli Armen. Sang. Drac. an. j. Irid.
Florent. Aloes, Myrrh. Mastich. Pulverizat. an. j. Aq. vit. ij. Misc. ex. l. a.
Apply the Balsame warm. Above the Balsame apply Diapalma malaxed in Oil of
Roses to hinder all Inflammation.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Wounds of the other parts of the Neck.

HAving delivered unto you in the former Chapter, the method of curing Wounds
which may happen to the vessels seated in the lateral parts of the Neck; I am
to show you how Wounds, which cause a solution of unity in other parts of the
same, are to be cured. Now those members are seated either in the forepart of
the Neck, or in the back-part: In the forepart the Trachaea arteria, or
Windpipe is placed; but in the backpart the Gula, or the mouth of the Stomach,
and Spina dorsi, or Spinalis medulla, the marrow or pith of the Backbone.

If the Aspera arteria, or Windpipe be wounded through: First, the breath will
come out at the Wound. Secondly, Blood will issue out at the Mouth. Thirdly,
the Speech will be hindered. Fourthly, Coughing will trouble the wounded party.

The Windpipe has three parts: First, the uppermost part of it, called
Larynx: The Second, Caudex, or the stump: the Third, the Branches spread
thorowout the substance of the Lungs.

Wounds of the Larynx, although they be not mortal of themselves, yet by
accident they may become such: First, by reason of the necessary use, for it
does receive and breath out the Air. Secondly, by reason of the fearful
Symptoms, or accidents which accompany such Wounds; for this part is near to
the jugular Veins and soporal Arteries: so that it can hardly be wounded,
unless these parts be wounded also. It has also sundry Branches of the
recurrent Nerves, and besides sundry Muscles; so that a great flux of Blood,
Pain, Inflammation, Pursing or drawing together, and at last strangling may
ensue. Thirdly, because this part can hardly be cured; for Medicaments cannot
easily be applied or kept to the part.

Wounds of the Caudex, vel Fistula, or of the Stump or Pipe, although they are
not so dangerous as those of the Larynx, for the reasons before alleged; yet
they are not without danger, for it is framed of a double substance; for the
rings called Anuli are cartilaginous, but the substance which ties these
together, is membranous. Now a Cartilage cut asunder, does not admit unition,
according to Hip. Aph. li. 6. Aph. 19. Who says when the Bone is cut, or a
Cartilage, or a Nerve, it neither grows again, nor is united; understand this
by a middle of the like substance. He repeats this same lib. 7. Aphor. 28.
Galen subscribes to this Aphorism, 5 Method. Med. c. 7. Three causes may be
alleged for this: First, because a Cartilage is a part dry, without Blood, and
hard. Secondly, because the cold Air does continually pass through the stump.
Thirdly, because it is seldom at rest, but still in motion. You may add another
reason, because the Air does not freely pass and repass by it, chiefly if the
Wound be deep and large. Of these Wounds thus writes Vidus Vidius de curat.
Morb. Membrat. l. 8. c. 6. Wounds which pass through the Windpipe most commonly
cause speedy death, by reason of the Blood which issuing out of the jugular
Veins, falls upon the Lungs, and hinders breathing: And Forest. Observe.
Chirurg. lib. 6. Obs. 4. thus writes of them: Large Wounds of the Aspera
arteria, chiefly those which divide the cartilaginous substance of it, seldom
are cured; for this part is hard, and without Blood: besides this, the wounded
party draws breath by the Wound, which hinders consolidation.

As for the cure of such Wounds: if the Wound be transverse, then the wounded
party must bend down his Head: if the Wound be straight, according to the
length of the pipe, then the party is to hold up his Head, that the brims of
the Wound may be brough. together: then the Wound is to be stitched as firmly
and artificially as you can: Pins in this case are best, as also in curing a
Harelip, for all kinds of thread will easily rot. This being done,
agglutinative Medicaments are to be used. Arcaeus his Liniment is good, and the
natural black Balsame: Above apply Dinchylon simplex malaxed with Oil of
Myrtils or Quinces. In your dressing you must have a care that neither Blood
nor Quittour fall upon the Windpipe, lest it procure choking; but that they be
outwardly discharged in the depending part. If after dressing, the party breath
with difficulty, and there is danger of Suffocation, because the cavity of the
Larynx, or Pistul^, is filled with Blood, or Quittour, or both; or because it
is straightened by reason of a great Imflammation: then the Wound is to be
dilated, and a silver pipe, a little bended toward the point, that it hurt
not, to be kept in it, until the wounded party be able to breath freely; then
let it be taken out. In this Wound Gargarisms are good: Take this as a pattern:
Hord. mundat. Cochl. iij. Flor. Ros. rub. Pug. 1. Sumach. Flor. Granat. an. ij.
Passulonajor. exacinat. Jujub. an. ss. Glycyrrhiz. j. Bulliant ista. s. a. in
lib. iij. aq. font, ad consumpt, medietat. ac coletur decoct, cui admisce Mell.
Ros. and Syrup. Myrtin. an. ij. utatur Gargarismate calefacto. It moistens the
Mouth, asswages pain, agglutinates the parts, and causes the party to breath
freely.

Wounds of the Gula, oesophagus, or mouth of the Stomach do follow. That the
month of the Stomach is wounded, you shall know by these signs: First, if the
Wound be deep, the Meat and Drink will come out of the Wound, Secondly, the
difficulty of swallowing. Thirdly, the Hicket and vomiting of Choler, Fainting,
a faint Pulse, cold Sweats, coldness of the Hands and Feet, according to
Fernel. lib. 7. (...). cap. 8. Fourthly, the vomiting of Meat and Drink
according to Celsus lib. 5. c. 26.

As concerning the variety of these Wounds, receive these kinds of them: First,
either the whole Gula is cut asunder, or it is only cut in part. Secondly, if
it be cut but in part, then it is wounded near to the Stomach, or far from it.
Thirdly, it is wounded either straightly or obliquely.

Concerning wounds of the Gula, receive these Prognostics. First, all wounds
of the Gula are dangerous: First, because they cause difficulty of breathing:
Secondly because it can hardly be wounded unless the Windpipe, the jugular
Veins, the soporal Arteries, and the recurrent Nerves be wounded also. Thirdly,
these Wounds which are but small, straight, and remote from the mouth of the
Stomach; are less dangerous. Fourthly. Wounds great, transverse, and near to
the mouth of the Stomach, admit no cure, according to G^udo tract. 3. Doct. 1.
c. 1. First, because the passing of the Meat and Drink does hinder the
consolidation. Secondly, because the place is still moist. Thirdly, because its
office, which is to carry Meat and Drink to the Stomach, is most necessary for
the sustentation of the life of Man. Fourthly, because an Inflammation may
easily be communicated to the upper orifice of the Stomach, which is very
nervous, which the Grecians call (...) the Heart, and whose pains are called
(...) or (...). Fifthly, if it be wholly cut asunder, the Cure is impossible,
for one part shrinks upwards and the other downwards. As for the cure of these
Wounds; The first intention is by stitching, to bring the brims of the Wound
together: yet care must be had, that an Orifice be left in the depending part,
to be kept open with a Tent, that the Quittour may be discharged, and that Meat
stick not there, which might cause Inslammation. Then such Medicaments are to
be applied as I set down for the cure of Wounds of the Windpipe.

In these Wounds a special regard must be had of the Diet: seeing then the
wounded party can hardly swallow, his Food must be liquid, and it must nourish
much. Such are Goats and Asses-milk, wherein Saccharum rosatum, or Violatum are
dissolved, Broths made of flesh wherein the yolks of Eggs are dissolved,
Almond-milk, and Emulsions of the great cold Seeds drawn with Chicken-broth,
etc.

If the party cannot swallow at all, then nutritive Clysters are to be
ministered: But first of all the Excrements are to be driven out of the Guts by
a purging Clyster. Receive this as an example: Elect. lenit. i ss. Mellis
rosati ij. Sacchari rubri iij. deco^t. communis pro Clysterib. x. Mise. ut
pa^^tur Clyster. Then inject Clysters made of such things as have been set down
for the Diet. Minister half a pound at a time, that the party may keep it the
longer: Into these nutritive Clysters no Oil must enter, because it will too
much lubrifie the Guts; nor Salt or Sugar, because they will procure too speedy
expulsion of the Clyster.

Now I am come to the Wounds of the Spina dorsi, the Backbone seated in the
back part of the Body: If the Wound pass not to the Spinalis medulla, sometimes
it divides the Muscles, and then the Wound is to be dressed, as those which
happen in fleshy parts: If the Bone be hurt also, then it is to be dressed as
Wounds of the Head wherein is a Fracture, of which I have discoursed heretofore
at large.

If the Spinalis medulla, or the Marrow of the Backbone be wounded, then it is
either wholly cut asunder, or but in part only: If it be wholly cut asunder,
then the whole Body is deprived of moving and feeling, and by consequence
breathing it self must be hindered, and so death must ensue. If it be not wholly
cut asunder, but wounded only, then a fearful Convulsion must of necessity
ensue, and so for the most part death.

Celsus lib. 5. c. 26. has these signs: A Palsy or Convulsion follows,
Feeling is lost, and after a while the party cannot retain Seed, Urine, or
Excrements of the Belly, yea, a total suppression of the Excrements sometimes
will ensue. The same signs has Ferneh^s lib. 7. Patholig. c. 8. If the
Spinalis medulla (says he) be wounded, the inferior parts become paralytick,
their Feeling, Moving, and Functions are lost; so that the Excrements, Urine,
and Seed, now and then come from the party against the will. If the Convulsion
happen to the Arms, then it is likely that the Nerves whick spring from the
fifth, sixth, and seventh Vertebrae of the Neck are wounded; if the Legs suffer
these accidents, then the Nerves of the Vertebrae of the Loins, and Os sacrum
are offended.

As for the Prognostics; seeing the Spinalis medulla is of the same nature
whereof the Brain is, Gal. l. 3. de Temperamen. c. 3. and near unto the Brain,
lib. 3. al. facult. and is derived from the Brain, lib. 16. de usu part. c. 2.
and resembles a compact Brain, lib. 1. de mot. Muscul. c. 1. and seems to be as
it were another Brain under the Head and Neck, lib. 12. de Vs-Part. c. 11. and
15. The Wounds of it are no less dangerous than those of the Brain. First,
because it has its original from the Brain. Secondly, by reason of its
composition, because it is covered with the Dura and Pia matter. Thirdly, by
reason of the Nerves which spring from it. Fourthly, by reaof the consent which
it has with the Brain. Fifthly, by reason of its action and use, because it
does communicate moving and feeling to the parts Sixthly, by reason of the
situation of it: for it lies deep in the Body, so that the force of the Topics
can hardly reach to it. Seventhly, by reason of the Symptoms; for it being
wounded, a Palsy, Convulsion, and privation of moving and feeling do ensue.

Forest. lib. 6. Chir^ag. Obs. c. 6. de his ita promanc^at. If the Spina^is
medulla be wounded about the beginning of it, death of a necessity must ensue,
because a Convulsion of the whole Body will follow; but if it be wounded in the
lower parts, the Wound is not always deadly, unless the wound be a large one,
or it be a puncture, although a Convulsion does always ensue; so that it is
not so dangerous as that which is received about the beginning; and Fallop. de
Vulnerib. capit is cap. 2. has these words: wounds of the Spinalis medulla are
accounted deadly by Hippocrates in Coac. Praenot. yet I have seen them
sometimes cured; but if the wound happen to be in the upper part, death and a
Convulsion of the lower parts must ensue.

Howsoever, seeing the wounded must be dressed, thus you shall go to work: you
are to pour into the wound such things as assuage pain, stay Convulsions, and
which procure Digestion without biting and sharpness: Such are unctuous and fat
Topics, as this Medicament is: Ol. Hyper. and de luteis ovor. an. j.
Terebinthin. ss. Theriac. Andromachi. ij. Misceantur. Secondly, you must anoint
the whole Backbone with such a Medicament. Ol. Vulpin. Hirundinum and
Lumbricor. an. j. Ol. Mastichini, and de Castor. an. ss. Misc. Thirdly, you
must embrocate the whole Scalp with this or the like Medicament: Ol. Chamaemel.
j. Ol. Lumbricorum ss. Misc. These means are to be applied warm.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Wounds of the Breast.

WOunds of the Breast are either not penetrating to the cavity of the Breast,
or else they do penetrate. Those that penetrate, are either without offense
done to any part contained therein, or some part or parts are wounded.

You shall know the wound to penetrate by these signs: If the Patient shut his
Mouth and Nose, the breath will break through with a noise, so that it will
move and dissipate the light of a Candle set near the wound; and the Patient
will be troubled with difficulty of breathing. If the parts contained be
wounded, you shall know which of them is wounded by the proper Symptoms, with
which the Patient is troubled, as follows.

If the Heart be wounded, much Blood gushes out, a trembling possesses all the
members of the Body, the Pulse will be small and weak, the color of the Face
will become very pale, a cold Sweat, and frequent swooning will assault the
wounded party; and when the Limbs grow cold, Death is at the Door.

If the Lungs be wounded, it will be discerned by these signs: the Blood which
comes out of the Wound is yellowish and froathy, a Cough ensues, the Patient
has difficulty of breathing, and a pain in the wounded side, which before he
had not; he lies at greater case when he lies on the wounded side; but being
turned on the contrary side, these easements are ^bated.

When the Midriff is wounded, these Accidents follow: The party is troubled
with a heaviness of that part; he is taken with a raving by reason of the
branches of the Merves of the sixth conjugation of the Brain, which are spread
through the body of it, difficulty of breathing, a Cough, a sharp Pain, and
Fever will trouble the party wounded; yea, the Stomach and Guts sometimes by
the vehemence of breathing, will be drawn up into the capacity of the Chest
through the Wound, as once happened to Ambrose Parey, as he confesses, lib.
10. c. 30.

That a Vessel is wounded, and Blood poured forth into the capacity of the
Breast, you shall know by these Symptoms: there will be a difficulty of
breathing; the Fever will increase; he will vomit Blood; after the Blood
putrefying the Breath will stink; his Appetite will be lost; he will have a
desire to vomit; he desires not to sit up, and often faints, noisome Vapors
assaulting the Heart, being taised up from the putrefied Blood.

As for the Prognostics of Wounds of the Breast, receive these.

First, Wounds of the Breast which either pierce not to the cavity, or if they
be penetrant, hurt neither Vessel nor Entral, are not deadly, but may speedily
and easily be cured, if a me thodical course be taken.

Secondly, if the great Vessels (whether they be Veins or Arteries) be wounded,
they cause death. See Celsus, lib. 5. c. 16. and Hippoc. prorrhet. lib. 2.
because they spend a man by great effusion of Blood, which can hardly be staid
for two Reasons: First, because they lie deep in the Body, so that neither can
they be bound, nor Medicaments convenient be applied to them: Secondly, because
the Coats of them are membranous, and so cannot be healed by the first
intention: yet if the Arteries be divided, the Wound is more dangerous.

First, by reason of the Blood contained in it; for it is more spirituous than
that in the Veins.

Secondly, by reason of the flowing of the Blood; for seeing the Blood of the
Arteries is more spirituous, and hotter, it issues out leaping, so that it can
hardly be staid.

Thirdly, because of the Coats of the Arteries; for they are harder than those
of the Veins, and sometimes become Cartilaginous.

Fourthly, by reason of the hard consolidation of the Coats of the Arteries;
for they are still in the motion of dilatation and constriction but
consolidation does require rest, as Galen observes, lib. 5. Method. c. 8.

Fifthly, by reason of an Aneurisma, which most commonly remains after that a
Wound is cured, wherein an Artery has been divided.

As for Wounds of the Lungs, they are either superficiary and small; or deep,
wherein the substance of the Lungs are wounded, and the great Vessels divided:
those may be cured; these are deadly for eight Causes.

1. Because they are in continual motion.

2. Because the Lungs are very moist, and so subject to Inflammation and
Putrefaction.

3. Because the Medicament can hardly reach to the bottom of the Wound.

4. Because the discharging of the Quittour (which is requisite for Cure) is
both hard and dangerous; hard, because it must be discharged by expectoration
by the upper parts; dangerous, because this must be performed by coughing, by
which the Wound is more torn.

5. Because a fearful flux of Blood must ensue, the Vena Arteriosa, and the
Arteria Venosa being wounded, and so many Vital Spirits must rush out together
with this spirituous Blood.

6. Because great plenty of Blood must fall into the capacity of the Breast,
which first by its heaviness must press down the Diaphragm, and cause
difficulty of breathing; and afterward, being turned to Quittour, acquires a
malign quality, and so may procure a Fever, Raving, and Convulsion; yea, in
process of time Empyema, and last of all a Phthisis and Hectic Fever, the
Acrimony of the Quittour corroding the tender substance of the Lungs: That a
Phthisis does ensue after an Empyema, Hippoc. lib. 5. aph. 15. witnesses.

7. Because the entering of fresh Air into the Lungs, and the expulsion of
fuliginous Vapors from the Heart are hindered.

8. Because the Heart must of necessity be affected by consent, for the Lungs
are instead of a Pillow, and fan to the Heart, to wit, Vena Arteriosa from the
right Ventricle, and Arteria Venosa from the left.

Secondly, Forest. obs. 4. lib. 6. in Schol. has these words. It is to be
noted (says he) that if the Lungs be wounded in the fleshy part, wherein there
is a remarkable branch of Arteria Venal^s, then a man must of necessity die,
because he is choked with Blood: You shall know this by the plenty of black
frothy Blood.

Thirdly, that dangerous Wounds of the Lungs have been sometimes cured, read
Plater. lib. 3. observe. page 690. Horstius lib. 3. observe. Medicar. de Morb.
Pector. observe. 11. Valeriol. lib. 4. observe. Medic. obs. 10. Acraeas, lib. 2.
c. 1. Guilhel. Fabricius observe. Chirurg. cent. 3. observe. 36. and cent. 1.
Epistol. epist. 52. Matthias Glandorpius in specul. Chirurgico observe. 24. See
sundry in Schenkius observe. Medic, lib. 2. de Morb. pulmon.

As for Wounds of the Heart, other the Pericardium only is ^ounded, or the
substance of the Heart also.

If the Pericardium be wounded, the Wound of it self is not deadly, for it it
but a ministerial and igroble part, and has both few and and small Vessels and
Nerves, and it does not cleave to the Heart, but leaves so much distance as
gives way to the pulsation of the Heart, and is fit to contain the waterish
Humor; yet by accident it may become deadly, if it be so great, that all the
waterish Humor ^ows out: for this wanting, an Hectic Fever seizes upon the
wounded party; seeing it is appointed for the cooling and moist^ing of the
Heart. See Example in Schenkius lib. 2. Observe. Medicar. and Cardan. comment.
ad aph. 18. lib. 6. aphor. Hippoc.

Secondly, if the substance of the Heart be wounded, the Wound is so be
accounted deadly. See Hippoc. lib. 5. aph. 18. and Galen. in comment. Cells.
lib. 5. c. 26. and Aristot. lib. 3. de part. animal. c. 4. Vidus Vidius, tom.
2. oper. Medic. lib. 7. de curat. memb. c. 2.

First, because the Heart is the beginning of Life, and so it being spoiled, it
can afford no help to the rest of the parts. See Arist. lx. citato. Secondly,
because it is the laboratory of the Vital Spirit. Thirdly, because it is the
shop of the vital Blood. Fourthly, because it is in continual motion, which
hinders consolidation. Fifthly, because it is a hot intral, and full of
Blood, and so very subject to Inflammation. Sixthly, because it has a
substance compact, hard and dry, which does not easily admit consolidation.
Seventhly, because coplous Blood does issue out into the cavity of the Breast,
by the which a man is suffocated.

Thirdly, superficiary Wounds of the Heart do not so soon kill as deep Wounds.

Fourthly, Wounds in the left Ventricle sooner dispatch a man, than those in
the right.

As for the Wounds of the Diaphragma; the Wounds of the Midriff, but chiefly in
the Nervour Center, are deadly, according to Hippoc. lib. 6. aph. 18. and Galen
in comment. and Cells. lib. 5. cap. 26.

First, because it is membranous and in continual motion.

Secondly, because the Wounds of this part are very painful, by reason of the
remarkable branches of Nerves which it receives from the lower Vertebrae of the
Neck, according to Gal. lib. 13. de us. part. c. 5.

Thirdly, because the Pericardium is tied to it; and although the fleshy
circumference wounded may seem to afford some hope of recovery; yet Wounds in
it are not without danger: First, because the principal parts must suffer also;
the Brain by reason of the Nerves, which are inserted in it; the heart by
reason of the vicinity, and the Arteriae Phrenicae; the Liver by reason of the
contiguity, and Venae Phrenicae. Secondly, because the whole Midriff is in
continual motion. Thirdly, because breathing is hindered. Fourthly, because
Blood must issue out into the capacity of the Breast, which may cause
suffocation. Fifthly, because fearful symptoms ensue, as the pulling up of the
Heartstrings, pain of the Spina, which reaches to the shoulder, difficulty of
breathing, for it will be slow, great, and with sighing; a troublesome Cough, a
Fever, and Raving, by reason of the affinity which it has with the Heart and
Brain. See Cells. lib. 5. cap. 26. Fernel. lib. 7. (...). c. 8. Forest. Observe.
Chirurg. lib. 6. observe. 47.

Now to come to the cure of Wounds of the Breast, those which do not penetrate
require no special consideration, but are subject to the Intentions which have
been delivered for the cure of Wounds in general.

In curing of penetrating Wounds, thus you must proceed.

First, you must lay the Patient in his naked Bed, his Feet being stretched out
at length, and the Orifice of the Wound downward.

The Patient being thus placed, let him lie still until the Surgeon has
made ready such things as are to be applied to the Wound: in the mean time let
the wounded party labor to further the discharging of the Blood, without the
Vessels fallen into the cavity of the Breast, by coughing, and holding in his
breath.

When no more Blood issues out, then put into the Wound (...) Flammula, dipped
in the white of an Egg, so that the greatest part hang without the Wound: for
this neither causes Pain, nor lets in the Air, and is sufficient for the
discharging of any hurtful moisture, Whereas a Tent may be swallowed up by the
Wound, hinders the flowing of the Matter, grieveth the Patient, and being
continued causes a Fistula: whereas the Flammula may be continued until the
fortieth day, the longest time required for ordinary penetrating Wounds.

In stead of a Flammula you may use a Silver Pipe, such as is used when a
Paracentesis is administ^ed; but it must have a stay on both the sides
hollowed, to receive a Thread of a reasonable length, lest it be pulled into
the capacity of the Breast, in the Diastole, Nature laboring to shun Vacuity:
But when the Wound does afford but a small quantity of laudable Quittour, it is
to be taken out, and the consolidation of the Wound to be procured. The Wound
and the Pipe are to be anointed, either with Arcaeus his Liniment melted in a
Spoon, or with some artificial Balsam warmed. Above, apply Diachylon simplex:
While you dress the Wound, it is convenient, chiefly in the Winter time, to
hold a Pan with hot Coals above the Wound, to hinder the expiration of the
natural heat, and the intermission of the cold Air.

One thing I would have you to observe, that both Blood and Quittour which is
lodged in the capacity of the Breast, may be discharged both by Coughing and by
Urine. If it be discharged by Coughing, first, the Matter is carried into the
Pleura, then into the substance of the Lungs; afterward it is carried to the
Windpipe, and from thence mounting up to the Mouth it is spit out. If it be
evacuated by Urine, then it passes first into the substance of the Pleura,
then into Vena sine pari, near to the Diaphragma, where a branch of it does
pass by a straight course to the Emulgents, and so to the Ridneys and Bladder.
See an Example of this in Fabricius ab aq. pendent. part. 2. lib. 2. c. 42.

One here may move a Question, why it is so dangerous a matter if Matter fall
into the capacity of the Breast, and so light if it fall into the capacity of
the Abd^men? Three Reasons may be alleged for this.

First, because the Matter which falls into the cavity of the Breast, is
easily inflamed; partly because it is still moved by the parts of the Breast;
partly because it is lodged near to most hot parts.

Secondly, because the Breast does require an ample and free capacity for
inspiration and expiration, to cool and preserve the natural heat of the Heart.

Thirdly, because it is a hard matter to draw by any passage the matter from
thence, unless it be in the depending part, even if you use a large and wide
Syringe called by Galen, Pyulcus.

These things being done, if Indications of bleeding move you thereto, first,
open a Vein in the contrary side, and then in the same side, as the strength of
the party, and the symptoms shall require.

Arcaeus, lib. 2. cap. 1. will have this vulnerary potion ministered afterward:
Rhab. ss. Rub. Tinct. Mammiae, an. j. Terrae sigillat: ss. aq. Scabios.
Bugloss. and Succi Granat. an. j.

After this he advises to prepare a decoction to procure easy breathing and
ease, such is this: Hord. mundat. iv. Passul. major. exacinat. iv. Rad.
Bugloss. iij. L^quirit. contus. ij. Jujub. n. xx. Pruna n. xv. Rad. Petrosel.
contus. man. 1. fiat. decoct. in lb xiv. aq. Pluvial. ad consumpt. 3. part.
Aromatizetur decoctum Cinnam. iij. ac coletur. In Colatura dissolve Penid. iij.
syrup. Ros. simpl. and de duabus radicib. sine aceto an. ij. Sacchari Candi iv.
Quarta quaque hora capiat aeger hujus decocti vj. This does nourish, wherefore
he is to take no other food for the space of three days, unless it be a Ptisan,
having the Emulsion of the great cold seeds wherein the Roots of Fenil and
Parsley have been boiled.

If any Matter offer it self to be purged by expectoration, then Galen advises
to further it by the exhibition of Vinegar and Water warm; for it powerfully
dissolves clotted Blood. If the Patient does cough with difficulty, then
minister unto him Syrup of Coltsfoot, and Liquirice, with Syrupus Acetosus.

Frambes. canon. and consultat. Medicinal. lib. 8. advises Morning and Evening
to minister a vulnerary potion, made of the leaves and Roots of Comfrey;
Plantain, Sanicle, Bugloss; (...) in Spring Water and some Vinegar. In the
decoction strained some Saccharum Rosatum is to be dissolved, and some good
Bole mingled.

He wills also that injections be made of Barley Water, Mel Resatum and Sugar;
as thus: Ptisan. iv. Sacchar. Rub. ij. Mellis Rosat. j. Misc. In your
injections you must have a care of two things: First, that no bitter thing be
put in them: for this would be unpleasant to the Taste, and overthrow the
Appetite. Secondly, that all the injection come out, for if a part of it should
be detained, it would putresie and annoy. It is not amiss for four or five days
to lay upon the Pipe or Flammula, a Sponge wet in Aqua Vitae, and wrung, both
to keep out the Air, and to extract the Quittour by its gentle heat.

Use not Pledgets of Lint, lest by breathing they be pulled into the cavity of
the Breast; from whence would ensue putrefaction, and death at last. According
to the small quantity of Quittour, or great which the Wound yields, dress it
once or twice a day. And when the Patient breaths freely, sindeth little
pain, and no weight toward the Midriff, but small store of Quittour, and that
laudable, does flow out of the Wound, it is time to shut it up.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the cure of a Fistula of the Breast following a Wound thereof.

IF after you have diligently and carefully used the means set down by me,
concerning the cure of Wounds of the Breast in the former Chapter, for the
space of ten days, you see that the Wound tends not to Unition, you may imagine
that a Fistula may ensue. That a Fistula will ensue (if it be not prevented)
you shall conjecture by these signs.

First, if during the aforesaid time, you have used both inward and outward
means, and yet the Wound sends out greater store of Quittour, than it did
before, it is a great sign that the Wound is growing toward a Fistula, and
that the Patient is entering into a Phthisis or consumption of the Lungs.

Secondly, if the Wound send forth a thin bloody Quittour, like to Water
wherein Flesh has been washed, the same is to be feared: for this is a sign
that much coagulate Blood is lodged within the Breast, which must be turned to
Quittour, and be discharged partly by expectoration, partly at the Wound; which
will require a long time, during which, the Wound may become fistulate, if it
be not well looked unto.

Thirdly, if the Quittour which issues out of the Sore, stinks vehemently, as
the breath also, a Fistula may be expected: for this shows that there is a
great putrefaction in some parts, which are contained within the capacity of
the Breast, which is not easily overcome; first, because no bitter Medicaments
which chiefly resist putrefaction, as Aloe, Myrrh, Wormwood, the lesser
Centaury, Carduus benedictus, etc. are to be injected, as has been said:
Secondly, because we cannot conveniently apply Topics to the parts affected:
Thirdly, because they cannot be kept to the wounded parts, by reason of the
motion of the Heart, Lungs, Midriff and Ribs, in Inspiration, and Expiration:
Fourthly, because the Body is like to fall into a consumption, so that it is to
be feared, lest a convenient supply cannot be afforded by Nature to repair the
Solution of Unity, which you have taken in hand to cure.

Fourthly, if a waterish substance, tho not bloody, do still come out at the
Wound, (do what you can) you are to fear lest a Fistula ensue; for it is to be
feared lest some Spermatick Parts, as Membranes or Fibers are wounded, which
admit not Unition according to the first intention, or that there is some store
of coagulate Blood in the capacity, which will require no short time for
suppuration and discharging. When you shall see these signs appear, then are
you to summon your Wits, and go about the prevention of a Fistula. This case
has been accounted very difficult, yea, desperate in great Wounds of the
Breast, by most Surgeons both Ancient and Modern. Nevertheless, Franciscus
Arcaeus arose in the last Age, a Spanish Physician, who by his Wit and Practice
found out a way of curing, not only Wounds tending to fistulation, but such
also as are de facto fistulate, and charitably has consigned it in his
Treatise of Wounds, lib. 2. cap. 2.

To compass this, he uses three Intentions: The first is a convenient Diet: The
second is internal Physic: The third is external Application.

As for the Diet, such a one he prescribes, if the party be strong, for eight
days and more, according to the toleration of the party wounded, he is to eat
nothing but Bread and Raisins: for he affirms, that his pectoral decoctions do
nourish; from hence until the thirteth day, he is to eat Flesh to Dinner, and
to rest contented with Bread and Raisins to Supper; from the thirtieth to the
fortieth day, about which time Fistula's of the Breast are for the most part
cured, he permits Flesh both at Dinner and Supper: If the party be very weak,
he permits unto him, even from the beginning of the cure, to eat Flesh both at
Dinner and Supper; but it must afford a good Juice, and be of easy concoction:
such is the Flesh of Chickens, Mountain-Birds, Kids, Lambs and Rabbets. As for
the internal Physic, it is of two sorts, Purging and Pectoral.

For purgation of the Body, he prescribes these Pills. Pil. Aggregativar. and
de Agarico an. ss. Diagrid. Gr. iij. fiat massula ex qua formentur pilul. v. He
is to swallow them about Six a Clock, and about Ten a Clock to sup some
Chicken-broth, and to Dine about Twelve a Clock. This is a Dose large enough
for the strongest person: you may detract from it as much as the constitution
and strength of the party shall move you. As for the pectoral Medicaments, they
are either merely pectoral, or healing also. Out of the description of his
Medicaments, one may conjecture that either he was not well verst in the
composition of Medicaments, or that he was negligent in setting them down.

Wherefore I am to take some pains to set them down according to Art: his
decoction merely pectoral, thus you shall prepare: Polypod. Quercin. iv. Rad.
Enul. iij. Hyssop. Capill. Vener. Recent. an. man. iv. Liquirit. ij. Epithymi
man. j. Fol. sen. iij. Passul. Major. Exacinat. iv. Decoq. ista in lib. xxiv.
aq. Font. ad Consumptionem lb viij. ac coletur decoctum: quod c ar^ificetur
addit. Saccari rubri in decoct. soluti, ac mell. despumat. an. lb ss. Let the
Patient drink half a pint warmed in the Morning, and so much about Four a Clock
in the Afternoon: At Dinner let him drink a pint, and so much at Supper. Let
this decoction be used eight days, within which time laudable Quittour is for
the most part procured.

His healing Decoction thus you shall make: Scob. Gua jac lb. ss. Cort. ejusd.
vj. semin. Cumin. iss. Glycyrriz. ij. Passul. Major. exacinat. iij. Decoq. ista
in lb. x. font. ac totidem, lib. vini albi ad consump. lib. viij. ac coletur
decoctum. Sumat Aeger mane, lib. ss. ac dormiat: sumat tantundem hora quarta
pomeridiana. In prandio bibat, lib. j. ac tantundem in coena. If the party be
dry, and desire more drink, then pour upon the Simples which remain after the
first Decoction, six pints of Wine, and so much Water, and boil away half of
the Liquor: this will serve for quenching of the thirst: let the wounded party
continue the taking of this Decoction, until the cure be finished. The Room
wherein he lies, he will have still to be kept shut and warm, and he advises to
lie in bed the first thirty days; if the Patient cannot endure to lie in bed so
long, then let him sit up the warmest part of the day, and go to bed again
betimes: by lying in bed the motion of the parts contained in the Breast is
moderated, and the Wound is kept warm, which must be observed in all
penetrating Wounds of the Breast.

If the party troubled with any such Wound be in a Consumption, or Phthisick,
then he prescribed to him this Decoction: Herd. Mundat. iv. Passul. exacinat.
iv. Rad. Bugloss. iij. Glycyrrh. ij. Card. Benedict. man. j. semin. Cumin. ij.
Jujubas numero xx. Pruna numero xv. Rad. Petrosel. man. j. coq. ista pari modo
in lib. xx. aq. Pluvial. ad Consumpt. lib. viij. utatur hoc decoct. ut
praecedente. Verum, postquam decoctum est aromatizatum Cinnamon. ss. addantur
Penidior. iij. Syrup. Ros. Rub. simplic. and de duabus radicibus sine aceto an.
iij. Sacchar. lib. ss. Now and then, whether the Body be costive, or no, he
advises to take a Dose of the Pills prescribed before.

As for the Topics he will only have an Emplaster laid to the Sore, and to be
wiped often every day by the Patient himself for the hastening of the Cure. This
Emplaster he sets down: Ceruss. Litharg. an. iv. Oliv. Antiq. Aceti Fortiss.
an. lib. 1. coq. omnia igne lento ad emplastri consistentiam. These Methodical
proceedings of Arcaeus, are not only effectual in preventing a Fistula, but in
curing of it also, if it be present. He deserves thankful commemoration of
Posterity for the supplying of this defect, which often for want of Art and
Means, did fall out in the Cure of dangerous penetrative Wounds of the Breast.

Sennert. part. 2. lib. 2. c. 18. holds these Fistulations to be of hard
Cure, and that not without cause: For first, the parts of the Breast, as the
Muscles, Ribs, Lungs and Heart, are in continual motion. Secondly, because the
Quittour cannot be promptly discharged. Thirdly, because much Quittour is
gathered: And they are more hardly cured, if the Orifice lie upward, and not in
the depending part: Two means he appoints for the cure of these; and because
they are very rational, they are not to be passed over in silence.

The Injection is this: Flor. Ros. Rub. Summitat. Hyper. Equiseti,
Cariophyllat. Rad. Ireos an. j. Veron. Valerian. Millefol. Pilosel. Eupat.
Sigil. Solomon. an. man. j. He advises to add to these the lesser Centaury, the
Root of Aristol. and Gentian, as also Myrrh and Frankincense; but seeing the
Myrrh and Frankincense must be used in Powder, and it is not sit to use any
Powders in the Injections which are appointed for the Breast, because the
internal parts are very tender, and because they, and the lesser Centaury are
bitter, which by reason of their bitterness may offend the Taste, they are to
be left out of the Injection. After a Nights infusion, then you shall boil the
Simples set down by me, in a Gallon of fair Spring or Rain Water to the half,
that is, until a Pottle remain. You shall first clarify every lb of this
Decoction with two ounces of Honey, and so much Sugar, adding the white of an
Egg beat to water. Last of all; having strained it, you shall reserve it in a
Glass Vessel to your use.

As for his vulnerary Potion, he will have it made of these Simples: Plantain,
Agrimony, Fluellin, Scabions, Hypericum, Betony, Lungwort, Ground Ivy,
Hart's-tongue, Sage, Avens; you may add the white Hoar-hound, Sanicle, and our
Ladies Mantle. Of these you may s^ame unto your selves such a Decoction: Eupat.
Seabios. Cariophyllat. Sanicul. Plantag. Pulmonar. Ling. Cervin. Alchimil.
Tussilag. an. man. j. Rad. Consol. Major. and Borag. an. j. coq. ista in lib.
x. aq. font. aut plu^ial. ad medictat. consumptionis, ac coletur decoctum.
Postea addit. Sacchar. ac Mel. an. iv. etc. Albuminib. ovorum clarificetur
decoctum, atque iterum coletur. Capiat Aeger singulis diebus hora quinta
matutina lib. ss. Calid. ac dormiat: capiat tantundem bora quarta Pomeridiqua.
If you well consider the faculties of the Simples, which enter into the
Injection, and the vulncrary Potion, you must confess, that it must be a very
obstinate Grief which refuses to be cured, if these means be methodically
used, and the Sore be dressed according to Art.

All Authors almost, who have discoursed of Wounds of the Thorax have made
mention only of Wounds received in the fore part of it; but have made no
mention of Wounds inflicted into the back, which pierce also into the cavity or
hollowness of it: whereas these are most dangerous by reason of the Spinalis
Medulla, which is placed there; and the multitude of Nerves which proceed from
thence. If such an event do fall out, first you are to dress the Wound in the
Back, as I have set down in the six and twentieth Chapter. As for the Wound of
the Breast, it is to be cured by Injections, and vulnerary Potions, set down by
in me the six and twentieth Chapter.

CHAP. XXX.
Of Wounds of the Abdomen, or lower Belly, which penetrate, and yet without any
hurt of the parts contained.

THese Wounds either pierce to the cavity through the Muscles and the
Peritonaeum, or else they do not penetrate. If they pierce, then either some
part starts out of the Wound, or else none does. The parts which start out, are
either the Caul or the Guts: if no part start out, then either some part
contained is wounded, or none at all.

You shall conlecture a Wound to penetrate: First, if the Probe, or a
Wax-candle go deep in streight-ways: in searching you must first see that the
Wound be not inflicted obliquely: for in this case you may thrust the Probe a
great way between the Muscles, the Wound notwithstanding not penetrating. 2.
You must diligently search, that the passage of the Wound be not stopped with
any of the super-jacent Bodies, as the Fat, the Membrana Carnosa, or the
Muscles.

Secondly, if the Injection be made with Wine warmed, if the Wound penetrate,
the Wine will be received within the cavity; but if it pierce not, it will
return.

Thirdly, we may conjecture by the Figure of the Weapon, whether it penetrate
or no: for if it grow broader from a rush point, and the Wound be broad in the
outer part, it is likely that the Wound is penetrating.

Fourthly, if the Caul, or one of the Intestines start out of the Wound, then
no doubt is to be made of the penetration of the Weapon.

As for the presages, receive these: First, a Wound of the Belly, not
penetrating, is void of danger, unless it be extraordinarily large; for in such
a Wound many parts must suffer Solution of Unity, the pain must be great, many
Spirits must be dissipated, and the party must be more subject to fainting.

Secondly, a Wound received in the middle part of the Belly, is more dangerous
than that which is received in the sides: First, because in the middle it is
more tendinous, and so the more sensible and subject to Inflammation and Pain.
Secondly, because the Intestines roll toward the middle part.

Thirdly, all penetrating Wounds are to be accounted dangerous: First, because
they are most commonly large, but always deep. Secondly, because the Air hurts
the Guts. Thirdly, because Quittour falls into the capacity.

Fourthly, when in a Wound of the Belly, any of the remarkable parts contained
are wounded, it is to be accounted a deadly Wound most commonly. Of such Wounds
Celsus thus pronounces; He cannot escape who is wounded in the basis of the
Brain in the Stomach, in the Portae of the Liver, and to whom the middle of the
Lungs, the Jejunum, the small Gut, the Kidneys or the Bladder are wounded.

As for the cure of such Wounds, First, a Wound not penetrating is cured
without any difficulty, as Wounds in other fleshy parts of the Body.

Secondly, if the Wound be penetrating, and any part contained start out, four
Intentions are required. The first is, that the part be situate in its own
place. The second is, that the Wound be stitched. The third is, apply
convenient Medicaments. Fourthly, that a course be taken for the removing of
ill Symptoms.

If the Gut start out, and you be presently called to it, then you are to
thrust it in with Hands and Fingers. But if it has long hung out, and by
reason of the cold Air be filled with flatuosity, and swelled, so that it
cannot be reduced; first of all you are to use an incarnative Fomentation to
discuss the Flatuosity, and then to try the reposition of it. The Fomentation
must be made of Chamaemil, Melilot, Dill, Peny-royal, Germander, Tansey,
Lavander, Wormwood, Mints, Bay Berries, Cumminseeds, Fennil-seeds and Aniseeds,
boiled in red astringent Wine, or Milk, if such a chance fall out in the
Country. If after sufficient Fomentation you cannot put in the Gut, then you
are to dilate the Incision.

If the Caul come out, and by reason of the cold Air it be much cooled, which
you shall discern by the unnatural hardness of it, or if it be black, or of a
livid color, then it is to be bound up near to the warm and sound part, and
the corrupt part must be cut away. Let the Thread hang out at the Wound, until
the corrupt part separate from the whole. Then draw the Thread wholly out of
the Wound. If the Caul be nothing altered, it will be sufficient to thrust it
within the Peritonaeum without binding. It is requisite that we use deligation,
when we cut away any portion of the Caul: otherwise much Blood would fall into
the capacity of the Abdomen: for the Caul seems to be a texture of Veins and
Arteries enterlaced with fat.

The second scope is to stitch the Wound. This kind of stitch is called (...).
Before you stitch, you must perform these three things. First, you must have a
elear light, that you may have a perfect view of the Wound: Secondly, you must
lay the Patient upon the side opposite to the Wound, that the Guts trouble you
not, while you are stitching: Thirdly, that you have your Servant by you, to
hold up the parts which you are to stitch.

These things being provided, go about your business: of this kind of stitch
there be three usual sorts.

The first is thus performed: First, the Needle is thrust through the Skin and
the Muscles, even to the Peritonaeum, not touching the Peritonaeum on that
side: then from within outward, the Needle is to be thrust through the
Peritonaeum and Muscles of the opposite side. Then within the distance of an
inch, the Needle is to be thrust through the Muscles of the same side, leaving
the Peritonaeum. Afterward from within outward the Needle is to be thrust
through the Perltonaeum and the Muscles. So you are to proceed until sometimes
piercing the Peritonaeum, and sometimes sparing it, you have sufficiently
united the parts disjoined. Some, of four stitches make one Ligature, cutting
the Thread, and tying the ends of it firmly together, and use as many Ligatures
as are sufficient.

The second is done by stitching the Muscles together, and the sides of the
Peritonaeum together. In this sort of stitch, first, the Needle is to be passed
through the Skin and the Muscles to the Peritonaeum: then the opposite side of
the Peritonaeum is to be joined to the side lying under the Muscles pierced:
this being done, the opposite Muscles are to be pierced, this course is to be
followed until all the brims of the Wound be decently united.

The third differs not from the stitch which is used in other parts of the
Body: For the Needle is to be thrust through two sides of the Muscles, and so
many of the Peritonaeum still, until sufficient stitches be taken. The first is
accounted the best. After stitching you leave an Orifice in the depending part
to admit a Tent, that the matter procured by supparation may be discharged.
This kind of stitch is used, because the Peritonaeum being a Membrane would not
admit Consolidation without the intercourse of flesh. And if it were left
unconsolidate, an uncurable Tumor would be left in the outer parts, the Guts
insinuating themselves into the Cavities of the Muscles.

One thing is to be observed, that you second and strengthen this kind of
stitch, by a dry stitch, and that very firm: for within a few days the thread
will cut asunder the brims stitched, and the stitches will become loose,
because the intestines continually do butt upon the Abdomen; wherefore the dry
stitch is requisite, as it is in the cure of the double Hare-lip.

The Third Intention was said to be the application of convenient Topics. Such
are all choice vulnerary Balsames, whereof I have spoken sufficiently before,
and agglutinative Emplasters, such are Diapalma, and Emplastrum de minio newly
made, and not too dry in the Summer-season. In the Winter Emplastrum sticticum
is the best.

The description of it is thus set down by Crollius: Ol. lini and Oliv. an. lb
j. Ol. Laurin. lib. ss. Litharg. auri and argent. an. lib. ss. Minii iiij coq.
ista ad Emplastri consistentiam, tum add Cerae, Colophon. an. lib. 1. Istis
Liquefact. injice Gum. sequentia in aceto scluta, atque ad justam consistentram
iterum reducta. Opopan. ij. Galban. Serap. Elemi, Anom. Bdel. an. iij. Istis
incorporat. injice sequentia in alc. redacta, Calaminar. iiij. Arist. long. and
rotund. Carab. Magnet. Lap. Haematit. Coral. Rub. and Albor. Vitriol. alb.
terrae Jigil. Croci Mart. Ceruss. Antimon. an. j. Oliban. Myrrh. Aloes hepat.
Mummiae, Sanguinis Dracon. an. ss. Istis probe commistis add Terebinthinae ij.
Vernicis j. Caph. iij. paretur Emplastrum, ex quo formentur magdaleones manibus
Ol. Hypericon. inunctis. I have altered the Doses of the Simples, I confess,
Art so requiring, and have set down the artificial Composition. The faculties
of it you may read in himself; for they belong not to the subject which we have
in hand. Fab. ab Aq. pendent. Chirurg. part. 2. lib. 2. c. 45. advises to use
astringent Powders as this: Sang. Dracon. Bol. Armen. Mastiches, bac. Myrti an.
siat ex omnibus pulvis. If Sarcocol, the root of Comfrey and Borax were added,
the Medicament would be the more effectual. The last Intention of curing of
these Wounds penetrating, wherein no contained part is wounded, was said to be
the shunning and hindering of evil Symptoms. Now these Symptoms are two: The
pain of the parts adjacent being continual, and the collection of Quittour or
Blood in the hollowness of the Abdomen.

To avoid the first, Gal. 6. Meth. c. 4. advises us to embrocate all the parts
from the Armpits to the Groins with Sallet-Oil warmed: But it were better to
embrocate those parts with the Oil of Chamaemil, Roses, and white Lilie, if
they be to be had: for so the Inflammation would be prevented, Pain would be
eased, and the parts kept soft and pliable.

As for the second accident, Blood and Quittour may fall from the brims of the
Wound into the hollowness of the Belly, and may offend, not the Guts only, but
all other parts contained also: for sometimes a Tumor is caused, and sometimes
the Dropsy is procured. You shall know that these things are contained in the
hollowness, First, by the Weight which is felt there, the Pain, the Tension of
the part: Secondly, if you crush the Belly, you shall perceive the Matter to
shift from place to place under your hands. Seeing this Matter cannot be
sensibly emptied, because the wounds of the Belly must not be kept open, for
the reason set down before, when I spoke of the stitching of these Wounds; we
must labor insensibly to dissipate it by Medicaments; which rarefie the parts,
and dissipate and draw out the Matter: wherefore you may embrocate the Groins
with Oil of Rue, Dill, Euphorbium, Wax, Castoreum, of Tiles, Then you may apply
Diachylum magnum cum Gummi sostned with Oil of Scorpions, or Oxycroceum, and de
Mucilaginibus mixed together.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of penetrating Wounds of the Belly, wherein some of the parts contained are
wounded, and First of the Wounds of the parts appointed for Chylification.

NOw the contained parts which are wounded, are either appointed for nutrition
or procreation. If for nutrition, then they either procure Chylification, or
help Sanguification. Those which procure Chylification are the Stomach and the
Guts. The Stomach has two parts, the Orifice, which is called Oesophagus, and
the bottom which is called Ventriculus.

If the Oesophagus be wounded, then the Wounds are either superficiary and
small, or else deep, and passing to the Cavity of it: And both these are either
straight or transverse, and these either near to the Stomach, or somewhat
remote from it.

Wounds small, straight, and which are somewhat remote from the bottom of the
Stomach, are less dangerous; But those which are great, transverse, and near to
the bottom, are deadly; and admit no consolidation. See Guido Tract. 3. Doct.
1. c. 1. for this these reasons may be given. First, because the passing of the
Meat and Drink does hinder consolidation. Secondly, because it is continually
bedewed with moisture descending still, either from the Head, or from the
Almonds. Thirdly, because its Office is absolutely necessary for the
preservation of life, that is, the carrying of the Meat and Drink to the bottom
of the Stomach. This carrying of the Aliment is performed by impulsion and
attraction. The external Membrane, which is fleshy, and has transverse Fibers,
does thrust it down; but the internal Membrane, which has straight Fibers,
does attract the nourishment. Wherefore the Fibers of both the Membranes being
cut asunder, the passing of the nourishment is stayed, and so the party
defrauded of Aliment. Fourthly, because the Meat and Drink must be discharged
by vomiting, seeing it cannot pass to the bottom of the Stomach. Fisthly, when
the upper nervous part of the Gula is wounded, which is nervous and of
exquisite sense, which the Grecians call (...), death does most commonly
suddenly ensue.

Celsus. lib. 5. c. 26. has these signs of it wounded: Vbi stomachus autem
percussus est, etc. But when the Stomach is wounded, the Hicket and vomiting of
Choler does ensue. If Meat or Drink be taken, it comes up again speedily, the
Pulse grows weak, thin Sweats break out, and so the extremities of the Body
grow cold. Fernel. lib. 7. Pathol. cap. 8. adds Fainting. Although I have set
down the methodical curing of such a Wound, Chap. 27. yet I thought good here
to touch a few things necessary to be known.

Wounds in the Oesophagus are more dangerous than those of the Ventriculus for
these reasons; First, because it is of a nervous and membranous substance, and
so is not easily united. Secondly, Because the pain is exceeding sharp, and so
depriveth one of rest and sleep. Thirdly, Because it has a great consent with
the Brain, by reason of the Nerves descending from the sixth Conjugation, which
are bestowed upon it. Fourthly, Because Topics cannot conveniently be applied
to such a Wound; yea, if you minister vulnerary potions, either they return by
vomiting, or slipping down make no stay, or else they issue out at the Wound.
Fifthly, Appetite is lost, and so the desire of Meat and Drink, without which
the life of Man cannot long continue. Sixthly, because Convulsions may ensue,
which are deadly, according to Hippoc. Aphor. Sect. 5.2. Seventhly, because
vomiting of Choler does ensue, according to Celsus, loco citato, which may
enlarge and tear the Wound.

Now as concerning the Wounds of the bottom of the Stomach, they have the same
differences which those of the Orifices have, which after the Prognostics, and
manner of curing these wounds, receive these presages.

First, small and superficial wounds are easily cured; but penetrating Wounds
are accounted deadly by Hippoc. Aphor. 18. Sect. 6. and Celsus lib. 6. c. 26.

Now this word Deadly has a threefold signification; for First, it signifies,
that brings inevitable death; Secondly, it signifies, that which most
commonly brings death; Thirdly, it signifies that which is dangerous, and may
bring death. Now Wounds in the bottom of the Stomach penetrating, are not
always deadly in the first signification, although they be in the second and
third signification.

Secondly, penetrating wounds in the bottom of the Stomach are hard to be
united: First, because it is of a membranous substance. Secondly, because Meat
and Drink keep asunder the brims of the Wound. Thirdly, because vulnerary
potions slip out at the wounds. Fourthly, because a convenient Ligature to keep
the brims of the wound together, cannot be applied. Fifthly, because the
Stomach is very sensible, from whence ensue Pain, afflux of Humors, Watching
and Inflammations. Sixthly, because the Body cannot be without the benefit
which it affords to it, for it is the pot wherein the nourishment of the
whole Body is boiled.

The Second presage: Penetrating wounds in the Ventriculus, are not so
dangerous as those of this kind in the Oesophagus. First, because the bottom is
more fleshy. Secondly, because vulnerary potions and other Medicaments may
longer stay here. Thirdly, because the dignity of this is not so great; for the
Orifice is the seat of the Appetite. Fourthly, because the bottom is not of
such an exquisite sense as the Orifice. That Wounds in the bottom of the
Stomach may be cured, read Crollius in praefat. Basil. Chymic. Schenkius, and
others. It were too tedious to set down their narrations.

You shall know that the bottom of the Stomach is wounded, First, if the Wound
be under the Diaphragma, or the Mucronata cartilago: Secondly, if the Chylus
come out at the Wound either sincere, or mingled with the Meat unaltered.

As for the cure of these Wounds, you must not suffer the Tent to enter into
the wound of the Stomach: it must only keep open the parts lying above the
Stomach. Let it be armed with a Digestive made of the Oil of Hypericum,
Turpentine, and the yolk of an Egg; for this asswageth pain, procures
Quittour, and is glutinative. The Stomach outwardly is to be embrocated with
Oil of Mint, Myrtils, Quinces, Wormwood, and Oil of Roses; Let him drink the
juice of Pomegranates and Quinces, or Syrups of them in the decoctions of
Horse-tail, Mouseear, and Periwincle or Plantainwater sugared. To poor people
you may prescribe Posset Drink, wherein these Herbs have been boiled: Let the
party Drink and Eat very sparingly; for the Wound will better unite when the
Stomach is somewhat empty and wrinkled together.

If the Guts be wounded, then they are either the small or great Guts. If the
small be wounded, the Chylus comes out at the wound, the Flanks swell and
become hard, the Hicket troubles the Patient; be vomits Choler; he has great
gripings in his Belly; oftentimes a cold Sweat breaks out, and the extreme
parts cold.

If the great Guts be wounded, the Excrements come out at the Wound. Now the
wounds of the Guts are either superficiary, or they pass to the Cavity. If they
pass to the Cavity, then they are either straight or transverse, and these
either great or small.

This being noted, you may thus correcture of the event: First, if the Wound be
but superficiary; yet it is not altogether without danger; because all the
external parts of the Abdomen are divided. Secondly, great Wounds of the Guts,
but chiefly if they be transterse, for the most part prove deadly.

First, because they are of a membranous substance, which has but little
Blood. Secondly, because the Chylus and excrements do continually pass by them.
Thirdly, because local Medicaments cannot conveniently be applied to them,
partly because they lie deep in the Body, partly because they conti^^ally
change place. Fourthly, because the brims are kept asunder, they being
distended by flatuosity, the Chylus and the Excrements. Fifthly, because their
Office is absolutely necessary for the preservation of the life of Man; for
either they distribute the Chylus, which is performed by the small Guts, or
else they contain and discharge the Excrements, which the great do: But these
are hindered, the Guts being wounded. Sixthly, because they are very sonsible,
and so Pain, Inflammations, Fevers, and Watching may ensue.

The third presage: Wounds of the small Guts are more dangerous than those of
the great: First, because they are more nervous and membranous than the great.
Secondly, because they are of a more exquisite Sense. Thirdly, because they are
nearer to the Stomach. Fourthly, because they have more mesaraical Veins.
Fifthly, by reason of their excellent Office; for they distribute the Chylus,
and more resine it, according to Galen 4. de us. part. c. 17.

The fourth presage: Amongst these are the Wounds of the Jejunum. First,
because it has more mesaraical Veins than the rest, which makes it look red.
Secondly, because it may be soon inflamed, by reason of the plenty of Blood.
Thirdly, because it is next to the Liver, and so soonest inflamed. Fourthly,
because it has a tenderer substance than the rest. Fifthly, because it
receives immediately and in full force, the sharp Choler from the Gall:
whereas the rest receive it but mediately, and the sharpness of it being much
abated.

The fifth Presage: The great Guts are more apt to receive Consolidation than
the small; partly because they are of a more fleshy substance: partly because
they are not so sensible: And Thirdly, the Excrements contained in them are
solider than the Chylus, and so not so apt to flow to the wounded part, and so
to keep the brims asunder.

As for the cure of these Wounds, they require four Intentions. The First is to
stitch the brims of the Wound with the Glovers-stitch; if the Gut be not
without the Wound, it must be drawn out gently: Let it be sown with good flaxen
thread not waxed; for then it will swell and not so soon cut the brims of the
Wound asunder.

Secondly, to reduce the Gut to its own place, but it must first be fomented
with red astringent Wine warmed: Secondly, an agglutinatory Medicament is to be
applied to the Wound, such is this: Mastich. Sarcecoll. an. j. Borac. and
Myrrh. an. ss. fiat. s. a. pulvis. qui aspergatur.

Thirdly, the external parts of the Belly are to be stitched, as I have taught
in the former Chapter. Better it is to stitch these parts than to leave them
open. First, because you cannot any more apply local Medicaments to the Wound;
for the Guts still shift. Secondly, because the Air will cause pain and
griping. Thirdly, because the cold Air may breed flatuosity, which distending
the Guts, may break the stitches. Fourthly, because the natural heat being kept
in, the Gut is sooner consolidated.

The Fourth Intention is; you must have a care that the Excrements hurt not the
Wound, they becoming hard by staying. To this purpose you must feed the Patient
with moistning Meats, and minister emollient Clysters, made of the decoctions
of a Sheeps-Head and Feet. In curing of these Wounds, you must not admit the
ministering of vulnerary potions.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Wounds of the parts that help Sanguification and Procreation.

WOunds of the Liver, which is a part assisting Sanguification in the
separation of Bile, are either superfciary, lightly hurting the outer part, or
they are deep and great, p^ercing even to the trunks of the Vena porta, and the
Vena capa. Celsus lib. 5. cap. 26. sets down these signs.

These are the signs of the Liver wounded, a great flux of Blood in the right
Side, the Sides all drawn toward the Spina: the Party de^ghts to lie upon the
Belly; prickings and pain even to the Neck, and to the side joined to it: The
Shoulder Blade stretched, sometimes vomiting of Choler does also happen.

Peccetius lib. 2. cap. 8. Oper. Chirurg. adds, after Meat they feel a
heaviness in the Side, they are unquiet, they have a sharp Fever, sometimes
they piss a bloody Urine: After some days also they discharge by siege rotten
Blood, the Face becomes discolored and wan.

What will befall, the Liver being wounded, these Aphorisms following will show
you. First, supersiciary wounds of the Liver may admit cure: but great and deep
Wounds will not. Hip. Aph. 18. lib. 6. has these words: If the Bladder, or the
Brain, or the Heart, or the Midriff, or a small Gut, or the Stomach, or the
Liver be wounded, it is deadly.

Sundry reasons may be alleged for this. First, is the great Flux of Blood
which follows. Secondly, the Inflammation which possesses it being wounded; for
it is a Member hot and full of Blood. The Third is the difficulty of Cure: for
Vulnerary potions lose much of their strength before they come to the Liver.

Topics cannot well be applied, it lying deep, and the Quittour cannot be well
discharged, and so it may corrupt the substance of the Liver, and so
Sanguification is disturbed, from whence ensue the Consumption of the Body, or
the Dropsy.

If you object that good Authors have in their Monuments set down Examples of
some who have been cured, who have received a deep Wound in the Liver.

I answer, that those Examples are rare, and come near to Miracles, God his
providence concurring with the extraordinary strong constitution of the Body:
wherefore let not these draw from you any bountiful promise of recovery.

The Second presage, If cold Sweats burst out of the Forehead and Neck, if the
wounded party often faint, if the Extremities grow cold, and the party become
very weak, then death attends.

Touching the Cure, let it be dressed with astringent Trochiscs dissolved in
Plantain-water, adding thereto Syrups of dry Roses, Myrtils, and Poniegranates:
for a doubtful hope is better than a resolved despair.

The Second part helping Sanguification, which may be wounded, is the Spleen:
for according to Arist. lib. 3. de part. animalium, it is a bastard Liver. The
wounds of it as of the Liver are either superficiary or deep. Signs of the
Spleen wounded deeply, are these according to Celsus lib. 5. c. 26. Black Blood
does issue out of the left Side, the Side it self and the Stomach become hard,
great Thirst ensues, and the pain reaches to the Neck.

Concerning these Wounds receive these Prognostics, First, deep Wounds of the
Spleen are for the most part deadly. Celsus lib. 5. c. 26. affirms, that they
who are so wounded hardly are ever cured: for this Prognostic these reasons
may be given: First, because a searful flux not only of the venal, but of the
arterial Blood also does ensue. Secondly, it is a worthy and necessary part, it
furthering Sanguification, and being a second Liver, if it perform not its Duty.

Thirdly, because it being a part full of Blood and hot, it may be easily
inflamed. Fourthly, because it has a great consent with the Heart, by reason
of the multitude of the Arteries communicate with it: for noisome vapors may
be sent to the Heart, from the Quittour and putrefied Blood.

The second presage; although deep wounds of the Spleen be deadly, yet I am of
the opinion that the Spleen may be cut out of a Man, or a Woman, and the party
may live. The experiment of this exsection in a Dog, Mr. Gillam and I made in
Dr. Bonham's House. First, incilion was made in the left Side, hard under the
short Ribs, four Inches in length through all the containing parts of the
Abdomen: then the Spleen was drawn out: Thirdly, all the vessels by which it
was bound to the adjacent and contiguous parts, we bound, to prevent the
immoderate flux of Blood: Fourthly, we cut away the Spleen near to the
substance of it. Fifthly, we stitched the parts of the Abdomen, and left the
healing of the parts to Nature; all the wounded parts were in a short time
healed. But about six weeks afterward the Cur became Mangie, the Spleen belike
not drawing unto it self the saeculent Blood. Vidus Vidius de curat, memb. li.
10. c. 10. thinks this operation to be impossible with keeping of life, by
reason of the immoderate flux of Blood which must ensue. But the binding of the
vessels does remove this scruple, which I wonder he did not consider.

The Third Presage: By reason of the Spleen wounded, the Sto^uch, Liver, and
the whole Body may become ill-affected: so that the Dropsy, Scabbiness,
Melancholy, and such Diseases may ensue.

The wounds of the Spleen are cured as those of the Liver: It falls out in
wounds of the Liver and Spleen, that much Blood falls into the Cavity of the
Abdomen. But this Blood is either discussed by the natural heat, or else it
causes an Aposteme in the Groin.

The Third part assisting Sunguification is the Kidney; This may be wounded
either superficially, or deeply; and so either where the Carunculae papillares
only are; or to the Pelvis also, and this last either without any hurt done
unto the Vein and Artery emulgent, to they being wounded also.

If the Kidneys be wounded to the Pelvis, clots of Blood will come with the
Urine: there will be a great pain in the part affected, and will reach to the
Groin and Testicle. See Celsus l. 5. c. 26. Fernel. li. 7. Patholog. c. 8.

If the Kidney be wounded through the Back, then it is not like that the party
can escape: for the Wound must pierce the Pso^, and the Nerves springing there
from the Spinalis medulla can hardly be free.

If the Wound be inflicted by the Side, and pierce but only to the Carunculae
papillares, it may be cuted, and yet not without difficulty, because the
Muscles of the Belly must be wounded, and the Peritoneum also, between the
Membranes of which it is lap^ed.

If the Wound pierce to the Pelvis, the Wound most commonly falls out to be
deadly: First, because the draining of the Serosity from the Veins and Arteries
is absolutely necessary: otherwise if it be stayed in the Body, it would hinder
the unition of the Wound, and procure waterish Powks and the Dropsy. Secondly,
because the substance of it hardly does admit consolidation, partly by reason
of the compactness of its substance, partly because it has within it self the
Carunculae papillares and the Pelvis, which are spermatick parts.

If the Vein and Artery emulgent be wounded, there is small hope of recovery,
because a fearful flux of Blood must ensue.

The Cure is performed by sanative injections, vulnerary potions, and the
ministering of Trochisci de alkekengi cum opio; or if the pain be not great,
sine opio in new Milk, having Saccharum rosatum dissolved in it.

The fourth part appointed for Sanguification, which may be wounded, is the
Bladder. It may be wounded first in the Neck, where the sphincter Muscle is,
which i^ fleshy: Secondly, in the body of the Bladder. If the Wound be in the
body of the Bladder, then it happens either in the sides about the Groins
where the Ligaments of it are, or in the other membranous parts.

The signs of the Bladder wounded are these, according to Celsus lib. 5. cap.
26. and Fernel. lib. 7. Pathol. c. 8. The Urine comes bloody and sparingly: if
the body of the Bladder be wounded, then the Urine falling into the Cavity of
the Abdomen, it will seem to be an Ascites, and the pain will be communicated
to the Groins and Stones in Men.

As for the Prognostics, receive these: 1. Wounds in the Neck of the Bladder,
where it is fleshy, are curable. This needs no confirmation, for we may see
frequent experiment of this in those who are cut for the Stone. 2. Wounds in
the lateral parts about the Groin are curable also in those who are young, and
of a good constitution of Body. 3. Wounds in other parts of the body of the
Bladder, which are membranous, are uncurable. See H^ppoc. A^h^r. 18. Sect. 6.
and Galen in his Commentary upon this place: He yields this reason, because the
Bladder is nervous, thin and has but little Blood. Of this same opinion is
Aristotle lib. 3. Histor. Ammal. cap. 15. who says, that the Bladder being
cut, cannot unite, unless it be in the beginning of the Neck.

Celyus ^^b. 5. c. 26. subscribes to these, affirming, that they hardly (...)
be healed whose Bladder is wounded: For the confirmation of this Opinion, these
reasons may be yielded: First, because it is membranous: Secondly, because the
Wounds of it are very painful, whence affluxion of Humors, and an Inflammation
do proceed: Thirdly, because it easily mortifieth: Fourthly, because it being
the Chamber Pot of the Body, the Urine contained in it, will not suffer the
Wound to consolidate, by reason of its Acrimony nipping, by reason of the
Quantity distending, and by reason of its Humidity relaxing. Fifthly, because
fearful Symptoms ensue after such Wounds, as Fevers, Watching, the Hicket,
dejection of Appetite, Convulsions and Faintings. Sixthly, if in Wounds of the
Bladder, a Fever continue, if the Wound become black, or of a livid color; if
the party cannot sleep, or continually slumber, and if a Convulsion do happen,
and the party become weaker and weaker, you may prognosticate that the party
will die.

When you go about to cure Wounds of the Bladder, minister vulnerary potions:
This which follows is excellent: Cydon. Incis. number. iiij. Equiseti, Sumach.
baccar. Myrt. an. iij. Ros. Rub. siccat. P^g. ij. Balaust. ss. coq. ista in
lib. 16. Aq. Font. aut Pl^vial. ad 3. partis Consumptionem, a^ coletur,
decoclum. In colatura disso v. Sy^up. e Ros. Rub. siccat. and Mell. Rosat. an.
vj. Syrup. Myrtini iij Gummi Tragacanth. ss. Nil capiat aeger praeter istud
d^coclum ante ^iem decimum si constent vires. Although the party be very dry,
yet let him not drink any water, for that will bring inevitable death.

As for the Topics, Anodyne and agglutinative Medicaments are best, as a
Digestive made of Cyprian Turpentine, the yolk of an Egg, and some of the Oil
of Eggs: you may use your artificial Balsames brought to a reasonable thick
consistence, with the white Joyners Vernice, and Turpentine.

Now only remains, of all the Wounds in the parts of the Abdomen, to speak of
those which happen to the parts destinate for procreation.

Those are the Matrix in Women, and the Genitals in Men. If the Matrix, then it
is either wounded in the Neck, or even into the capacity of it. If the Wound
pierce to the capacity, then Blood will issue out at the privy part, and the
pain will be about the Groins.

Celsus esteems these Wounds to be of difficult Cure: These Reasons may be
yielded: First, it is thin and membranous, unless the the Woman be great with
Child. Secondly, because it is of an exquisite seeling; and so Pain, a Fever
and Inflammation may ensue. Thirdly, because it has a notable consent with the
principal parts of the Body. Fourthly, because it is a moist place. Fifthly,
because it is, as it were for the sink of the Body to receive impurities, which
is the cause that these Wounds may become cancerous Ulcers. Ordinary Wounds,
even of the body of the Matrix, are not to be accounted deadly, because Infants
have been by Incision taken out of the Matrix, the Mother remaining alive. This
kind of delivery is called Partus Caesareus; And the whole Matrix has been
taken out from the body, the party living long afterward. Peruse Shenkius of
this matter, lib. 4. Observat. de uteri affectibus, where you may read of
sundry examples. Dress the Matrix as the Bladder.

Seeing the Genitals of Man may be wholly taken away, and yet the party live,
and that the Wounds of these are not deadly, as appears in those who have
been gelt, and have lost their Prick, I think it superfluous to discourse of
them, and the rather, because the dressing of them does not differ from that
which is used to other parts of the same nature.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Wounds of the Nervous Parts.

BY the Nervous Parts, here I understand three sorts of parts: to wit, Nerves,
Tendons and Ligaments.

That a Nerve is wounded, you shall know first by the part: If great and many
Nerves be in the place wounded, or pass by it; Anatomy teaches this. Secondly,
you shall know this by the Symptoms, for there will ensue a Pulsation,
Inflammation, Convulsion, Raving, if it be cut asunder, and at last sometimes
Mortification.

The Solutions of Unity which happen unto Nerves, are four; a Puncture, an
Incision, a Contusion, and a Distortion.

Of the Wounds of Nerves receive these Prognostics: First, Wounds of the
Nerves are dangerous. First, because they are of an exquisite sense or feeling,
both because the Membrane, wherewith they are covered, proceeds from Meninges,
and that they are impregnate with plenty of Animal Spirits. Secondly, by reason
of the consent which they have with the Brain, and the Spinalis Medulla: For
according to Galen, lib. 12. de usu partium c. 11. the Brain is the
Wellspring, the Spinalis Medulla the River, and the Nerves the Creeks.
Thirdly, by reason of the fearful signs, which follow after that a Nerve is
wounded, which are extreme pain, afflux of Humors, a Gangrene, a sharp Fever,
Raving, and a Convulsion.

As for a Puncture, it is either not conspicuous, not to be discerned by the
sight; or it is conspicuous: The first is called Punctura Caeca; the second,
Punctura Aperta: of the two, the Caeca is the worst; for local Medicaments
cannot so well be applied to the part wounded.

Before I come to the cure of this particular Solution of Unity in Nerves, I
will acquaint you with the general indications required in the cure of Wounds
of Nervous Parts in general: First, Blood is to be let. Secondly, the Body is
to be purged: See Galen, c. 2. lib. 6. Method. Aeginet. lib. 4. c. 54. these
prevent the afflux of Humors. Thirdly, the party must use a very slender Diet.
Fourthly, we must provide that the Air which the Patient does enjoy, be warm;
for if Air be cold, a Convulsion must ensue. Peruse Apher. 15. Sect. 5.
Wherefore when you dress such Wounds, you are to use warm Clothes and Stupes,
and the Medicaments warmed.

Now to come to the cure of a Puncture in particular: if it be Punctura Caeca,
these local Medicaments are apt. These Medicaments must be hot, drying, of
subtle parts, to digest, dry putrefaction, and attract. See Galen, lib. 6.
Method. c. 2. and l. 3. secundum genera: such are Ol. Rutaceum, Chamaemelinum,
Anethinum, Costinum, Liliorum Alh^rum, Vulpiman, de Castoreo, de Euphorbio,
Lianbricorum, Hyperici cum Gummi, de Scorpionibus, Terebinthinae. Galen
advises, to use Sallet Oil warmed, and applied with Wool; old Oil is best.
Paraeus lib. 9. c. 38. ^dvises to add to it Aqua Vitae; for the thin and
virulent Humor, which issues from the Nerve, is spent and dried the more.
Galen, lib. 6. method. c. 2. and lib. 3. secundum genera, commends a Medicament
made of Buphorbium, which is this: Cer. part. 1. Terebinthin. pic. an. part.
dimid. Euphorb. part. 12. According to the tenderness or the hardness of the
Body, more or less of the Euphorbium is to be used. You shall know your
Medicament to be proportionate to the grief; First, if the party feel a
pleasant heat, as is that of the Sun in temperate weather: Secondly, if the
party do pleasantly itch. If the party feel no heat, then there can be no
attraction; if it be immoderate, it will attract Humors, and cause Inflammation.

If by the Application of these Medicaments, the Pain and other Symptoms cease
not, then cross incision of the Skin is to be made, that the Medicaments in
their full force may be applied to the punctured Nerve. When the Puncture is
either thus laid bare by Incision, or at the first by the wounding Instruments;
it is not requisite to apply to it Medicaments so hot and drying, and when it
is hid to shun Inflammation: Wherefore your ordinary artificial Balsam dropped
in warm will serve; for by this Unctuosity they smooth the part, by their Heat
they make attraction, and so mitigate Pain by discharging the place of the
Sanies, and by their Moisture they open the Orifice, and keep it open.

The Incision of the Nerve is either straight and direct, or transverse. If it
be transverse, it is either quite cut asunder, or but in part.

A Nerve quite divided is less dangerous, than that which is but only cut in
part, according to Guide. Magn. Chir. tract. 4. docl. 1. c. 4. See Galen. l. 6.
methed. c 2. Av. ^ cen. l. 3. c. 4. Fen. tract. 4. c. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7.
The reason of this is, because a Nerve being quite cut asunder, cannot send any
harm to the Brain.

A Nerve quite cut asunder cannot admit any consolidation, according to the
first intention. See Hip. Aphor. 19. sect. 6. where he says, when the Bone is
wounded, or the Cartilages, or a Nerve, or the thin part of the Cheek, or the
Praeputium, it does not grow again or unite. He has the like Aphor. 28. lib.
7. Arist^t. lib. 3. Histor. Animal. subscribeth to him: for these Parts are
spermatick.

As for the cure of such a Wound, the Topics which are used ought to dry with
little mordication or biting, according to Galen, lib. 6. method. c. 3. and
lib. 3. secundum genera. c. 2. such are Vnguentum de ca^ce lota, and Vnguentum
Diap^mpholygos. If the whole Nerve be cut asunder, no Convulsion can ensue,
because both the ends give way. This kind of Wound is cured easily by
sarcotical Medicaments, whereof I have spoken heretofore sufficiently. In this
kind of Wound the motion of the part into which the Nerve is implanted to move,
is abolished. If the Nerve be cut asunder but in part, first it is to be
dressed with the Medicaments before prescribed; but if the Symptoms, as Pain,
etc. and a Convulsion he like to ensue, the best course is to cut the Nerve or
Tendon quite asunder rather than by deferring of the Incision to expose the
party wounded to the danger of death. This being done, use Anodyne and
desiccative Medicaments. When you have thus dressed the Wound above your
Pledgets, either in Diapalma or Diachylon simplex in the Summer malaxed with
the Oil of Roses, Quinces, or Myrtils; for the tenderness of the part will
hardly admit the application of any firm Emplaster. Last of all, you are to
roll up the part with Fascia Expulsiva, whereof I have spoken in its proper
place, partly to express the Santes which does gather in the place, partly to
stay the affluxion of new Humors.

Now it is time to come to the Contusion of a Nerve. This may be either a
solitary, or with some Solution of Unity. If it be solitary then you are to
foment the part with Sallet-Oyl hot, and to apply it with Wool. If the Skin be
divided, then Medicaments drying and uniting the parts are to be used. Such is
Emplastrum Fodicationis malaxed with Oil of Hypericum.

Last of all, a distortion may happen to a Nerve by a fall, extraordinary
motion, or some other violent external cause, which may hinder the motion of
the part. In this case apply Emplastrum de mucilaginibus, or Diapalma, having
Gummi Ammoniacum added to it.

After Contusion and Distortion of Nerves, a hardness often remains, which
causes a numness of the part. This proceeds from the settling of gross Humors in
the place. In this case you are to use Medicaments which soften and digest, as
the Oil of white Lillies, Goose-grease with Bd^llium; but the Oil of Sheeps and
Neats-feet impregnate with the Mucilage of Marsh-mallow, Linseed and Fenugreek,
exceeds all other Medicaments. Let the part be embrocated with this Medicament
warmed; and let Emplastrum magnum cum Gummi malaxed with Storax liquida be
applied. Now it remains that I speak somewhat of accidents which usually fall
out when a Nerve is wounded.

The first of these is an Inflammation: you must meet with this by applying
Medicaments, which are cooling and drying; for these both abate the
Inflammation, and correct Putrefaction, such are Bean-meal, Barley-flowre, the
Meal of Vetches, Cich-pease, or Millet boiled with sufficient store of Oxymel,
until they be brought to the consistence of a Poultice. But before you apply
this Medicament to the Member, embrocate it with Oil of Elders, having mingled
with it a little Rose-vinegar.

The second Symptom is Pain: Here you must use liberal Phlebotomy, purging, and
a spare Diet. If the party cannot admit Bleeding, then Ventoses with
Scarification, Leeches, Vesicatories in the opposite parts; for a local
Medicament, use a Cataplasm made of Bean-flowre, Mallows, Grounsel,
Violet-leaves boiled in Milk, and having Vnguentum Populeum mingled with the
Cataplasm, when it is taken from the fire.

The third Symptom which may trouble both you and the Patient is a Convulsion:
Of this Accident Hippocrates Aphor. 2. Sect. 5. so pronounces: If a Convulsion
ensue upon a Wound, it is deadly. But this must happen after too great effusion
of Blood, as he explaineth himself in the next Aphorism; for if a Convulsion
fall out by reason of repletion, it is cured by bringing the Body low, by using
the general curative means in that measure as the circumstances shall show. If
a Convulsion happen, then you must embrocate all the Spinalis Medulla from the
Head to the Coccyx with Sallet-Oyl warmed, and afterward applying Rolls of
Wool, or a Sheeps-skin, newly killed, to the part: Then the Member wounded is
also to be dressed; so if the Wound be in the hand, you must begin to foment in
the Armpits, by which the Nerves march, and then to proceed to the Vertebrae
of the Neck and Breast with Oil and Wool. But if the Foot be wounded, then you
must begin the Fomentation at the Vertebrae of the Loins, and Os Sacrum, and so
proceed to the ends of the Toes. It is not amiss to hold the whole Member in
warm Oil, as in a Bath, if it may conveniently be done. So much then of Wounds
of a Nerve.

If a Tendon be wounded, you shall perceive it by these two Signs: The first
is, if the Wound be near to the Joints, for the Tendons are the endings of the
Muscles, and the ends of Muscles ever end either at the Joints, or near to
them. The second is, if the Wound be received in parts which are not fleshy:
such are the Backs of the Hands and Feet. As for the cure of these Wounds, the
indications set down in the Cure of the Wounds of a Nerve will serve.

If Ligaments be wounded, seeing they are not so sensible as those of the
Nerves and Tendons, they procure not so fearful Accidents: only drying
Medicaments, and not too hot, are here to be used to consume the Sanies, lest
the Ligament rot. Stronger Medicaments may here be used, because a Tendon is
not so sensible; in this case use Oil of Mastick, the natural Balsam,
artificial Balsam, and drying and consolidating Powders; above apply Emplastrum
Fodicationis. In curing of these Wounds which happen to the Nervous parts, take
heed that you use not a Fomentation: for that moistens and increases
Putrefaction.

This one thing let me insinuate unto you, that if one be offered to you, who
has the great Tendon, inserted into the Heel wounded, that you suffer him not
to walk before it be perfectly united and skinned, for otherwise it will break
open again.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of Wounds of the Joints.

A Joint is the setting together of Bones for the performing of free motion
according to Galen, lib. de Ossibus in Principio.

Now Wounds of the Joints are made either by a Puncture or Incifion; and these
are either in the upper compassing parts, or else they pierce to the cavity of
the Joint. The Solution of Unity in the Joints is apparent to the Eye:
wherefore it is needless to set down signs.

As for the Prognostics receive these: All Wounds of the Joints are dangerous:
First, because they are of an exquisite sense; by reason of the Nerves,
Tendons, and Membranes: wherefore sharp pains do ensue, which procure affluxion
of Humors, from whence spring Inflammations, Fevers, watchings; loathing of
Food, Thirst, Convulsions, Gangrenes, weakness, and sometimes Death. Secondly,
as all Wounds of the Joints are grievous, so great Wounds piercing to the
cavity are most dangerous, yea most commonly, if they be inflicted into great
Joints, and the Aqua Articularis, the Jointwater issue out. Of this Water, see
Cells. lib. 5. c. 26. Par. lib. 9. c. 39. Lang. lib. 1. ep. in praef. and lib.
eod. ep. 4. Plat. tom. 2. prax. fol. 782. and 933. and 737. After that this
natural Humor is let out, then succeeds the issuing of an excrementitious
Humor. Celsus affirms it either to be a thin whitish Ichor, or to be a
glutinous and whitish Humor, like to white Honey, which he calls Meliceria.
This term by him, lib. cod. 5. cap. 28. is taken for a kind of Ulcer. Pareus
says that this Excrement is sometimes thick and white, and sometimes thin.
Langius likeneth it to Whey. Platerus averreth it to be a waterish Ichor. This
diversity does proceed from the diversity of the temperature of the Bodies of
wounded persons. It is cold and moist, and is caused of the elementary Juice,
which is sent to no^ rish the Joint: but it is corrupted by the weakness and
distemperature of the Joint wounded.

A Question may here be moved, why a greater quantity of Quittour does flow out
of a Joint wounded, than out of another part, if the quantities of the Wounds
be equal.

Many reasons may be alleged for this: First, the Pain which follows after a
Wound in the Joint, is so grievous, that it makes a greater attraction of
Humors: Secondly, the Joints are of a substance without Flesh and Blood, and of
temperature cold, so that they cannot concoct the superfluous Humors which do
flow thither, nor turn them to a laudable Quittour: Thirdly, by reason of their
weakness they cannot so forcibly repel the Humors flowing, as other fleshy
Members can, by reason of their heat: Fourthly, their situation furthers the
admission of superfluous Humors much, they being seated in a dependent part.

As for the Cure, if it be a Puncture, it is to be dressed as the Puncture of a
Nerve or Tendon: Shun cold, relaxing, moistning and unctuous Topics, unless
Pain enforce you to use Anodyne means. Cold nips Wounds, hardens the Skin,
hinders Suppuration, extinguishes the natural heat, causes blackness, brings
Aguish Fits, and Convulsions. Peruse Hippoc. Aphor. 20. Sect. 5. If the Wound
be procured by Incision, then either the brims are reasonable near one to
another, or else they gape much, being much separate. If they be far asunder,
then you must use stitching fust of all to bring the brims together; you must
only stitch the Skin in Persons of ripe Age, but in Children you may stitch the
subjacent parts; for in such they will admit Unition.

Galen. 2. de fractur. Affirms, that all parts of the Body delight to be
covered with the Skin, which Nature has provided for an universal cover. If
this may be affirmed of any, it may be most justly pronounced of the Joints,
for they have but small store of natural heat, which may be extinguished, if
the cold Air be suffered to pierce unto them; which is hindered by bringing the
brims of the Wound together by stitching. When the Wound is stitched, there
must be left a small Orifice in the depending part to admit a Tent, that the
Quittour may be discharged.

This being done, if the Wound pierce not to the cavity of the Joint, dress the
Wound with some good artificial Balsam, having mingled with it a drying and
healing Powder; such is this; Thur. san. Dracon. Myrrh. Aloes Hepat. Mastich.
an. ij. Rad. Symphyt. Centaur. Major. Borac. Sarcocoll. an. j. fiat pulvis,
capiat Balsami j. and pulv. iss. Above apply Emplastrum Fodicationis, or this
Cataplasm: Furfur. macri, far. Hord. and Fabar. an. ij. flor. Cham. and
Melilot. an. pug. ij. Lixi. vii communis, lib. 1. Acet. Sambucin. iv. coq. ista
ad. cataplasmatis consistentiam, tum addatur Vng. popul. Ol. Ros. and Myrtil.
an. j. This is excellent to prevent Pain, or to assuage it if it be present.
All the Applications must be actually hot: for actual heat does concoct and
discuss excrementitious Humors in the Joints and strengthens them. If the
Wound pierce to the cavity of the Joint, the Medicaments must be very drying:
first, because the Boues and Ligaments whereof the Joints are framed, are of
their own nature very dry, and so require dry Medicaments: Secondly, because
they have not feeling, and so may suffer very strong Medicaments: Thirdly,
because plenty of thin Quittour is gathered in Wounds of the Joints, a very
drying Medicament is required.

Use then greater quantity of the former Powder with the Balsam, or mingle it
with Arcaeus his Liniment, and above apply the former Medicaments.

Let me give you notice of one thing, that in curing of a Wound of the Joint
you have a special care of the position of the Member, for a perverse posture
increases Symptoms, and brings Distortion, Numness, and Contraction sundry
times, after that the Wound is cured. Wherefore if the upper part of the
shoulder be wounded, a large Boulster must be put in the Arm-pit, and the arm
carried in a Scarf to bear up the lower part of the Arm, that the brims of the
Wound may the more aptly consolidate. If the lower part of the Arm be wounded,
you must carry it in a posture, mean between extension and contraction. And
when the lips of the Wound begin to unite, you must cause the Patient to use a
moderate motion of the Arm, lest it prove less pliable to motion, after that
the Wound is cured. If the Joint of the Elbow be wounded, it must be so placed
that it be neither too much contracted, nor too much extended.

The German Surgeons here are very scrupulous in Wounds of the Musculus
biceps, which they call die Mauss, or the Mouse, for the likeness it has with
a Mouse, for it has a small tendinous beginning and ending, but a thick fleshy
Belly. They esteem the Wounds of this Muscle, which with the Brachiaeus does
bend the Elbow, to be deadly: Thus I would have you to distinguish. It may be
wounded both in the beginning or Head and Tail, and in the Belly also. Wounds
in the beginning and insertion of it are most dangerous, because these parts
are tendinous, and so of an exquisite feeling; it is double in the beginning.
If a Wound be inflicted in the Belly of this Muscle, it is less dangerous,
because it is fleshy, yet a great flux of Blood may ensue, because it has
remarkable Veins and Arteries, and great pain, because it has not small Twigs
of the Nerve. If the Wrests or Joints of the Fingers be wounded, they must be
kept half shut, moving a Ball in the Palm of the Hand; for if they be kept
still extended they may prove unable to gripe when they are healed.

If the Articulation of the Hip be wounded, the Thigh Bone must be kept in its
cavity, which may be done by laying the Patient on his back, and applying fit
Boulsters and Rollers. If the Knee be wounded, it must be kept extended, if the
party will not have the Member contracted after the Wound healed. When the
Joints of the Toes are wounded, they are to be in their natural posture, not
bending of them inwardly or outwardly. To conclude the Method of curing of
Wounds in the Joints, if they pass to the Cavity, although they be cured, yet
the Member will remain stiff.

Seeing Wounds are accounted great for four respects: First, by reason of the
greatness of the Solution of Unity. Secondly, by reason of the Excellency of
the part. Thirdly, by reason of the ill Constitution of the party wounded.
Fourthly, by reason of the grievous Symptoms. In the first and two last
respects Wounds of the Joints may prove great.

And seeing Wounds may four manner of ways cause Death. First, if the office of
the part be necessary, as that of the Lungs. Secondly, if the part be
excellent, as the Brain. Thirdly, if the flux of Blood cannot be staid, as are
the Wounds of the Liver, and the great Vessels. Fourthly, if evil Symptoms do
follow, as appears in Wounds of the Bladder. Wounds in the Joints, most
commonly prove deadly for the fourth cause.

Before I put an end to this Treatise of Wounds, wherein I have persisted the
longer, because it is an object whereabout Surgeons are most frequently
busied, I will speak somewhat of Vulnerary Potions, because I have often made
mention of them, and have set down the description of some in the cure of some
dangerous and great Wounds.

As for their qualities they are drying, familiar to the natural heat, and
radical moisture, and by a secret faculty they correct malignity.

The operations of them are these, they do purify the Blood, cleansing it from
all impurities, and excrementitious Humors, they cleanse Wounds and Ulcers
also, they agglutinate broken Bones, and unite Nerves, they hasten the scaling
of Bones; they procure the expulsion of strange Bodies in Wounds; they dissolve
clotted Blood; they dry up superfluous Humidity, and withstand Putrefaction.

Let no man wonder, that they have such admirable effects. We know that there
are Meats and Drinks, yea Medicaments which are hurtful in some Diseases, and
at some times, as in a burning Fever to drink Wine, or to minister hot or
obstructing Medicaments: Shall we not then think that Nature has provided
means helpful and profitable in Griefs, unless we will take her to be rather a
Stepmother than a loving Mother?

But seeing GOD, by his Providence did foresee, that Man would fall and become
mortal, and that Diseases (the means to bring a Man to his end) would increase;
of his own goodness, he, from the beginning, created means to second Nature
against Diseases, and to defer Death by prolonging Life by use of such things
as are familiar to Nature, and contrary to the Grief: such are Vulnerary
Potions in Wounds.

The chiefest of the Simples are these: Scabious, Sanicle, Bugle, Mouse-ear,
Burnet, Madder, Tansey, Comfrey, Vervein, Bistort, Tormentill, Periwincle,
Centaury the greater, Borage, Here-hound, Adders-tongue, Betony, Valerian,
Ladies Mantle, Avens, Carduus Bertedictus, the Cordial Flowers, Sp^edwel;
Agrimony; the capillar Herbs, Prunella, Osmund, Clarey, Gentian, Herniaria,
Scordium, Cats-Mint, Cinquefoil, Mead-sweet, Coltsfoot, St. John's wort,
Plantain, Knot-grass, She epherds-purse, Yarrow, B^ds of Briars and the Oak,
Pyrola, Lunaria, etc. Amongst these some are hot, and some temperate.

Those which are hot are not to be used until the seventh day be past, when
Symptoms most commonly cease, and Concoction appears: For they would heat and
attenuate the Blood, and cause defluxions. These Simples you may use two manner
of ways: First, in Decoctions: Secondly, in Infusions, using Wine, Ale or Beer,
as shall be thought fittest.

Let this be a Pattern of a Decoction: Sanicul. Bugul. Scab. Beton. Nepetae,
an. man. ss. Rad. Centaur. Majoris, Symphyti, Borag. an. ss. Passul. Major.
exacinat. ij. Liquirit. vj. semin. Hyper. and Card. Benedict. an. iij. flor.
Cord. pug. ij. Coq. ista in aq. font. lb viij. ad Medias, ac coletur decoctum:
Aromatizetur. decoct. Cinamom. v. Illique addantur. Mel. Ros. and syrup.
Myrtin. an. iss. Vini albi lb. ss. Dos. iv. mane, and tantundem hora quarta
pomeridiana. Some of the forenamed Simples may be boiled in the Patients
Broths. Thus you may frame to your selves Decoctions fit for the constitution
of the party, the time of the grief, the part wounded, and the time of the year.

AN APPENDIX Concerning Surgeons Reports Before a MAGISTRATE, Upon their
View of a Wounded PERSON.
SCET. I.
Whence the Reason of Mortal Wounds is to be taken, what Wounds are safe, and
what indifferent.

SEveral there are, who upon a slight, or however not a Mortal Wound, contrary
to all expectation die, which Case, when it comes before a Judge and Jury, may
not a little perplex them, in determining the true Cause of the Parties death.
Now if in the Verdict and Sentence the Aggressors are pronouced guilty of
uncertain Murder, Justice and the Laws are violated: But again should the
Guilty be acquitted, it would also be unjust not to give a Murderer his
desert. And because in such Difficulties Physicians and Surgeons are often
consuited, that Courts of Judicature may be their assistence proceed more
clearly in such Trials; my design in this Appendix to Wounds is, to show by
what Means and Methods it may be deprehended, whether the Party upon whom an
Inquest sits, died of a wound received, or the intervention of some other evil.
Now, that this enquiry may be full, I shall first say something of the
Mortality and other differences of Wounds. Afterward, how it comes to pass,
that sometimes Men die of very slight Wounds. And last of all; how the Partie's
death may be laid not so much to the Wound, as to several other occasions of it.

First therefore, in reference to my purpose, I make a triple difference of
Wounds. Some are mortal: Some safe: And others are of a middle nature, which
may be called dangerous. As for mortal Wounds, though Hippocrates and Galen
have plainly declared, what are so, and whence they are such: Yet because there
are some, and those men of Note, who have introduced I know not what
differences of Wounds, whereby perhaps some might be perverted in their
judgment of things, I shall say the more concorning this matter. These men, as
Franc. Valeriol. gener. med. cap. 8. write, that Mortal Wounds proceed not only
from the nature of the wounded Part, but also from the Essence of the Wound,
from its Magnitude, from a complication of Symptoms, and from the proper
differences of Solution of Unity. But upon my consulting the great Masters of
Medicine, and mature consideration of things themselves, it appears that Wounds
may not improperly be judged and called Mortal from the nature of the Parts
alone. And indeed it is sufficiently evident, that the Essence of a Wound,
which consists in the fresh Solution of Unity of some soft part, is the same
every where: for a Wound is as much a Wound in the Buttock as in the Heart, and
bears the same Character and Nature. Wherefore, were it true that any Wound
were in its Essence Mortal, all Wounds would always be Mortal, and none
Salubrious. Nor likewise is any Wound mortal from its magnitude; but only great
or little; (...) which differ much from Mortal: for oftentimes a great Wound
may be safe, and a little one destructive. Yet, whereas they say, a Wound may
be called Mortal from supervening Symptoms, this bears some semblance of Truth:
for if grievous Symptoms supervene, every one knows, such a man is mortally
affected. But in very deed no Wound has from the Symptoms any thing why it
should be mortal: For suppose one were wounded in his Finger, and an
Inflammation or Convulsion arising upon it, he should die, must the Wound
therefore be called mortal? So all Wounds might be said to be mortal: For, as
Hippocrates truly writes, 2. Praedict. Men die of all sorts of Wounds, though
in ignoble places, and that they seem in nothing grievous. Therefore
supervening Symptoms may bring Death; but they can never alter the nature of a
Wound. For the same reason also, if after a man has received a mortal Wound in
his Brain, he for all that recovers; yet a Wound can never be constituted
mortal for the presence of Symptoms, nor safe for their absence. And upon that
score I conclude the nature of a mortal Wound from the Parts. Besides,
Hippocrates, whose single judgment is to me worth a thousand, in 2. Praedict.
circa medium, 6. Aphor. and in Coac. Praenot. discoursing much of Mortal
Wounds, takes their differences from the nature of the wounded Part, and never
from any thing else. And as to this thing, whatever I could hitherto get out of
the nature of the things, the testimony of Authors, and my own observations,
the sum of all is this. All Parts that hold a Principality in the Body, and are
Fountains of the Faculties, namely, the Heart, Brain and Liver, If at any time
they be wounded, they make a Wound Mortal. I may also among these reckon the
Stomach, for the great necessity of its Action, since the Ancients, as Q.
Serenus Sammonicus, calls it Rex Corporis. Nor would I exclude out of this rank
the Spinal Marrow, as having much affinity with the Brain: For it is as another
Brain to all the Parts below the Head. In the second rank I place all those
Parts, which once divided never grow together again, and yet exercise some
necessary action of Life; such as the Diaphragm, small Guts, and the Bladder.
In the third I put such Parts as are endowed with an exquisite sense, such as
is especially the Mouth of the Stomach. And in the last place I put all such
Parts, as may by their large effusion of Blood or Spirits destroy Life, such as
the Veins and Arteries. But here you may stick a little in the Mire. For since
invisible Wounds in these parts scarce ever bring Death, without the
intervention of Symptoms, you might justly suppose that the differences of
Mortal Wounds might be taken from the Symptoms. To this I say, that these
Symptoms, through whose intervention wounded persons seem to die, do always
follow the nature of the wounded Part. For if the Mouth of the Stomach be
wounded, Syncope, by necessary consequence supervening, destroys the Party; so
the wounded Brain kills by a Convulsion, Apoplexy, or some such Symptom;
Arteries and Veins by effusion of Blood. Wherefore the whole reason of Mortal
Wounds depends upon the very nature of the Parts, and in their Wounds whatever
Symptoms supervene, they follow some certain property of the same parts.
Besides, Hippocrates and Galen their distinction of Wounds into Mortal of
necessity, and Mortal for the most part, if you consider it aright, seems to be
taken from the very nature of the Parts. For those Wounds are Mortal of
necessity, which are inflicted on the more noble or very sensible Parts, or
whose use is altogether expedient for the Animal: such are mortal for the most
part, as are inflicted on less noble parts: And such are safe, as Galen says
want danger, which tend, as much as in them lies, to recovery; but these have a
great Latitude on the account of Majority or Minority. They that are in the
middle place Galen calls dangerous; and he says, they are such as have an equal
tendency to Life or Death: Hither Wounds termed Cacoethe, or malignant, may be
referred, to wit, such as are contumacious to cure: And such as the Learned
have called indifferent, and of a middle nature. To this kind also these Wounds
may be reduced which we mentioned from Galen to be for the most part Mortal;
but from which their slightness deducts much of the danger; such are they which
slightly touch the extreme part of the Liver, or the Meninges. Thus much in
general, now I proceed to particulars, where all things shall be made more
clear.

SECT. II.
In what Parts of the Body Wounds are Mortal.

THat Wounds of the Heart are mortal is one of those things, Galen says, that
are taken for granted, and if the Wound reach to the Ventricle, presently the
man must of necessity die of a great flux of Blood, especially if the left
Ventricle be wounded. But if it reach not to the Ventricle, and stop in the
substance of the Heart, some continue that day, they were wounded, and the
night following, and then die of the Inflammation.

Wounds of the Brain are mortal upon two accounts; because it is a principal
part, and Original of the Animal Faculty; and because it usually causes many
and grievous Symptoms. For because it is a principal part, the Spirits are
quickly exhausted, and the harm is imparted to the whole Body: And grievous
Symptoms proceed from inflammation, and from interception of the Animal
Faculty. By Wounds of the Brain I understand such as reach to its substance,
and such as only reach to the Meninges. And the Nature of them is such, that if
the Wound be not all the bigger, they do not of necessity, but for the most
part carry a Man off. And lest I should be thought to speak without Book, I
will give you some Authorities. I have seen, says Galen, a wounded Brain often
cured; and once in Smyrna of Ionia a very considerable one: But this is very
rare. He writes also, that this person received the Wound in the fore Ventricle
of his Brain, but that he could not have recovered, had he been wounded in
both. Many such things have happened since Galen's time, which seem to exceed
all Credit. For Marcellus Donat^^ de med. hist. mirab. recounts many instances
of wounded persons, in whom not only the coats of the Brain were cut and
wounded, but the Wound had penetrated to the very substance of the Brain, and
which is wonderful, to the Os basilare. Nay, the very substance of it has
sometimes been lost, to the quantity of a Hens Egg. I think, all things
considered, wounds of the coats of the Brain are mortal (for the substance of
the Brain must partake of their annoyance) yet not of necessity, but for the
most part: For it has been observed, that several so wounded have escaped,
unless they fell into the hands of bad Surgeons. Wounds of the substance of
the Brain are in like manner mortal; but more dangerous, and so fewer escape of
them. And if the Wound be large and with loss of much substance, then either
none escape, or if any one does, it is by a miracle of Nat^re. Amatus Cent. 3.
cur. 83. has a remarkable History of a young Man, that received a wound in his
Forehead, the point penetrating to the ventricles of the Brain, who yet
recovered, without any Symptom arising, because the Sword entered betwixt the
very Ventricles of the Brain, its substance unhurt. For the Membranes that
cover the Brain, under the right Suture of the Scull, descend double into the
midst of the Brain, separating the right side from the left, by a manifest
Interstice, so that if the Sword were thrust in just between these two
Membranes, no wonder if the Wound were not mortal: for I suppose such Wounds to
be of the same rank with those that only affect the Meninges, the Brain unhurt.

Some say, that not only a deep Wound of the Liver, but that part of it cut off
has been cured. But such Wounds run much Blood, and therefore the party dies,
who is so wounded, before the Wound can be agglutinated. For they that say
shallow Wounds of the Liver, and the edges of it cut may be healed, seem in the
right. Therefore Celsus says, Wounds of the Liver are mortal only in the
Portae, and that People seldom escape when the thick part of the Liver is
wounded. And it is most certainly true, that a Wound is mortal only in the
Unequal or Concave part of the Liver: For as to the Limb, or edge of that Viscus
(for a Man's Liver has no Lobes) a Wound there is only dangerous; and unless
inflicted on a Cacochymick Body, or on one that commits some error, it may
easily be cured.

For the Stomach to be cut; Hippocrates says, it is mortal; tho Galen says,
some have made this Aphorism ambiguous: For some have been wounded in it, and
rarely cured; yet if the Stomach be but slightly touched, it will agglutinate.
You may consult Marcellus Donatus, who relates, how several wounded in their
Stomachs, have recovered. But Cornelius Celsus writes that a wound in the
Stomach is mortal. But I incline to Galen's opinion. And we must reckon
accordingly in all these Wounds: For if only the outer coat be hurt, it easily
heals; but if the Wound reach into the Cavity, the cure will prove difficult.
Also a wound in the bottom has lefs danger: But in the mouth of the Stomach
(which is very nervous) any considerable Wound is desperate upon several
scores, viz. of the excellence of the part, its singular Sympathy with the
Heart and Brain, and its exsanguous nature.

Wounds of the Lungs, if they be large, if they make a deep solution of
continuity, if they waste the flesh of the part, and if they offend the great
vessels, and notable branches of the Vena arteriosa and Arteria venosd, must
needs take life away, by the dissipation of vital Spirits, and effusion of
Blood, and by the clotting of the Blood which impedes circulation. If the
Wounds be small or mean, but not treated artificially, the case is the same.
When the great vessels are not wounded, but only the Assera Arteria, or the
Brenchia, such wounds do not kill suddenly, but certainly: For several causes
of death conspire, the sympathy of the Heart, dissipation of the vital Spirits,
putrefaction of the Lungs, difficulty of cure, continual motion, and the Cough
still enlarging the Wound. But if the less Blood Vessels be broke, or the flesh
of the Lungs divided, the Wounds neither suddenly, nor of necessity kill a Man,
unless the part be inflamed, tho more danger lies in a Wound of the substance,
than of the vessels; because a firm Cicatrix cannot be made in it. But we must
not forget what Galen 5. Meth. c. 2. says, that wounds of the Lungs are
incurable, not so much because the part is in continual motion (as those before
him thought) as because, that Pus and Sanies are difficultly gotten out of the
Lungs. Yet it has been observed, that when pieces of the Lungs have been
brought up, the party has recovered. Celsus 5. l. c. 26. says, the Wound is
uncurable only when the middle of the Lungs is wounded.

Wounds of the Diaphragm, according to the variety of its substance, have
various Events: for if a Wound be received in the nervous part, which is its
center, it proves mortal, its constant motion hindering consolidation. But if
the Wound be in the fleshy part, which goes round the inside of the Breast,
such an one has, as Galen says, been observed to heal up, notwithstanding its
motion: Tho he always thought the cure difficult, at whatever time an
Inflammation arose.

If any of the small Guts be wounded, Hippocrates 6. Aph. 18. says it is
mortal. And if the Wound reach into their Cavity, Galen says, it is very
seldom of the substance not only by reason of the substance of the Guts, but
because we cannot so well apply a Medicament to inward as to outward Wounds.
But above all, we find the Jesunum most incurable, if it be wounded; because of
the magnitude of the vessels, the thinness of the coat, its nervous nature,
vicinity of the Liver, and susception of Bile. Yet sometimes a Wound has been
cured, when it has only touched the outside. But slight Wounds of the other
Guts do heal up; because they are very carnous: And they seldom kill, unless an
Inflammation, or an Ileus supervene: But great Wounds and transverse are
mortal: because there is a great separation of parts, which are kept asunder by
the continual passing of vicious Humidities: and because there is no
convenience for application of Medicines.

Hippocrates 6. Aph. 18. says, A Wound in the Bladder is mortal. But here must
be some grains of allowance. If indeed all its coat be divided, and cut through
to the inside, with a notable Wound, the case is mortal; But a small Wound,
experience has evinced; may heal up by the intervention of Flesh, and that
exactly. If the Wound be incurable, it must be received in the nervous part: So
we see daily that Wounds in the neck of the Bladder, where it is fleshy, made
by cutting for the Stone, are cured. Yet it has been observed by some, that
Wounds are seldom cured, if they be received in that part, where the Bladder is
tied to the Os sacrum.

A Wound in the Spinal Marrow is as mortal as in the Brain: for Galen says, it
is a kind of Brain to all the parts that are below the Head. It is such
therefore because of the Nobility of the part, and of its nervous nature:
Besides, many and grievous Symptoms proceed from thence: Its sympathy with the
Brain, and neighboring parts is great: It is difficult to cure: And the Wound
proves the more mortal, by how much the higher it is in the Spine. For, as
Galen says very truly, if the Spinal Marrow be totally hurt in any of the
Vertebrae, all the lower parts are resolved: But if only one side is hurt, and
the other remain whole, the resolution seizes only on those lower parts, that
are on the same side. This holds good as to the structure of the Parts. But if
you consider the nature of the part, Wounds received in the lower part of the
Spine are far worse than in the upper, since the Marrow below is almost
nervous; but above, it is far softer and perfect Marrow. As the excellent
Anatomist Columbus has observed. But such Wounds must be very great, to make
them mortal: For one may be saved, when the weapon has not run deep in the
Spinal Marrow. If the Marrow be cut quite asunder transverse, it kills of
necessity.

Wounds in the large Veins and Arteries, which are in the inside of the Body,
prove mortal, such are the Vena cava, Magna arteria, the great Veins and
Arteries about the Throat, in the Leg and Thigh, the great Veins in the
Armpits, and Hams. Large Wounds in these must of necessity be mortal, by
reason of immoderate effusion of Blood. And the party dies the sooner, by how
much the less runs out of the Body; for then he is choked. The nervous nature,
and deep situation argue the difficulty of Cure, when no Medicine can arrive
there in its full virtue, Little Veins cannot so much exhaust the vital Spirits
when they are wounded.

Slight wounds of the Aspera Arteria are sometimes cured; great ones are
altogether mortal. And people dye of such, not because the breath contained in
the Breast, goes out at the Wound, but because being of a cartilaginous nature,
and in perpetual motion, it can never be healed. It is observed, that they are
the most grievous, if about the upper part of the Throat, where diverse Nerves,
Veins and Arteries increase the danger. For if the Artery be cut any where
else, it has a good event. And when people are taken with a dangerous Quinzey,
some very grave Physicians do successfully prescribe cutting of it.

Wounds of the Kidneys, because many vessels are disseminated thereabout, and
they receive a perpetual afflux of Excrement, and have a necessary use for
conservation of life, are generally mortal. Tho Ceisus thin^s them incurable.
But some skilful Surgeons have observed, these Wounds, if deep, are very
difficult to cure; yet if they reach only to the thick fleshy part, and are
slight, the party sometime recovers.

Many have thought wounds of the Spleen to be mortal. But since it has been
experienced, that the whole Spleen has been cut out of Animals, they still
living and surviving; and since Aristotle has reported, that an Animal may be
born without a Spleen: Therefore unless some great vessels be cut, I do not
think a wound in the Spleen mortal in its own nature.

Sect. III.
By what tokens Parts, whose Wounds are mortal, may be deprehended to be
wounded.

WE have, according to the best of our skill, declared in what parts Wounds are
mortal: Now we must produce some tokens, which set these Wounds before our
Eyes. For instance, suppose a Wound received in the Head or Breast, but no
conspicuous signs to show, whether the Brain or Breast is wounded, then the
cause of the parties death must be ascribed to some other thing than the Wound.
Therefore we must not be ignorant of this in general, that marks of Parts
disaffected are wont to be deduced from the Hurt of the action, Site of the
Parts, from the Excreta, from the property of the Grief, and from proper
Symptoms. So, if after a Wound Respiration be hurt, a prudent Physician will
say, that either the Lungs or Breast, or the Vertebrae of it are hurt. But if
Urine come out at the Wound, there is none but will acknowledge, either the
Bladder or Ureters, or Kidneys must be wounded. If Excrements, the large Guts.
If Chyle, the small. As for the Site; if the Wound be received in the right
Hypochondrium, the Liver may justly be suspected to be hurt; if in the Peclen,
the Bladder: and so in other places the subject part may be suspected. The
property also of the pain will ascertain you of the thing; for if the pain be
dull, the flesh of the Liver, or Spleen, or Lungs is hurt: if racking and
pungent, their vessels and coats: but if violent, you may say the Stomach,
Guts, and nervous parts are wounded. Regard also must equally be had to the
proper Symptoms of each part: for a Frenzy, Epilepsie, and such accidents
attend wounds of the Brain, Nauscousness, Vomit and Hickup, those of the
Stomach: Respiration hurt, those of the Breast. But now to particulars.

When the Heart is wounded much Blood comes away: If it he the right Ventricle,
the Blood runs black: If the Left, it runs more florid and light-coloured. The
Arteries flag, the color grows wan, Sweats cold and illsented, and at length,
when the parts grow cold, speedy death ensues.

If the Brain or its Membranes be wounded, Blood comes out at the Nose, and in
some at the Ears; generally vomiting of Bile follows: Some have their Senses
stupefied: The Eyes turn strangely in the Head: On the Third, or the Fifth day
a Delirium follows; Many have a Convulsion of their Nerves: A peculiar violent
Headache follows a hurt in the Membrane: which is enraged by shutting the Jaws,
and holding ones Breath. The Eyes are hot, the Tongue salters; the Mind doats:
but when the Brain is wounded, the Patient falls down; the Voice is lost, the
Face is drawn, there is vomiting of Bile, and a white Humor runs out of the
Ears, like Pap.

When the Liver is wounded, much Blood comes out of the right Side; the Bowels
are drawn to the Spine, there is a delight to lie on ones Belly, a pricking
pain runs up to the Throat; sometimes there is vomiting of Bile, the Patient
turns pale, coughs, and is in a Fever; Stool and Urine comes bloody; and the
Body at last consumes away.

If the Stomach be wounded, the Hickup and vomiting of Bile follows; the Meat
and Drink is thrown up immediately; there are Swoonings; the Pulse fails; small
Sweat runs off; the extreme parts are cold; a most violent Pain; especially if
it tend upwards.

If the Lungs be wounded, there is difficulty of breathing; frothy Blood comes
up at the Mouth; there is a noise in breathing; the Party likes to lie on the
Wound and then he speaks; if he lie on another part he is dumb. Paul says, if
the Wound be wide, frothy Blood comes out at it; if not wide, it comes up at
the Mouth; the vessels of the Neck are raised; the Tongue is of a strange
color, they draw in much breath; they crave cold things; and if it continue
long, a Fever and Consumption kill the Man.

When the Midriff is wounded, the Praecordia are drawn upwards, the Spine aches,
they breath slowly. Paul affirms, that the breathing is large, with sighing,
and pain all over the Shoulders.

When the Guts are wounded Meat and Drink come out at the Wound, the Praecordia
swell; Sometimes Choler makes a way at the Mouth: If the lower Guts are
wounded, the Excrements and Smell show it.

When the Bladder is wounded, the Groins do ache, they swell above the Os Pubis;
Blood comes away with the Urine, and Urine runs out at the Wound, the Stomach
is disaffected; therefore they either vomit Bile, or have the Hickup; they are
cold, and then dry.

If the Spinal Marrow be wounded, the Nerves are paralytick, or convulse; Sense
is lost; at times the lower parts void either Seed, or Urine, or Ordure.

If the Veins or Arteries, which are deep in the Body be wounded, the Veins
pour out abundance of black Blood, the Parties wax pale, and their death is
sudden? The Arteries pour out thin, yellow, and frothy Blood, the Pulse alters,
and Death quickly ensues.

When the Aspera Arteria is wounded, it bleeds but little; there is great pain
backwards; the Throat is by little and little filled with Blood; the Voice is
hoarse, and the Tongue is dry.

When the Kidneys are wounded, the Pain reaches to the Groin and Testicles;
there is difficulty in making water, and it is bloody, or all Blood.

When the Spleen is wounded, black Blood proceeds from the left Side; the
Praecordia and Stomach grow hard on that side; Thirst is violent, and there is
Pain in the Throat, as when the Liver is wounded.

And these are most of the Signs, whereby you may easily find, whether the
parts of the Body, whose wounds we have declared mortal, be wounded. If none of
these signs appear, you may conclude none of these Parts are touched; and you
must seek for the cause of the Disease somewhere else.

Sect. IV.
What Wounds may be called safe, and what dangerous.

WE said that those Wounds were safe, which are in their own nature without
danger, and in general they are such, as are received far from the aforesaid
parts: Of which kind Celsus makes those to be that only wound the flesh; but in
the same Author's Judgment these same are sometimes worse, sometimes better.
For whatever Wound is large, creates danger; and that is worst, which is beaten
against a thing, or out of which something is cut; or when the flesh is part
cut away, and part hanging on; a Wound is worst that is round; the safest, that
is in a right line. Besides, a Child is sooner healed than a Youth or elder
Person: a strong Man than an infirm; one of a middle habit, than one very gross
or very spare; one of a sound habit, than corrupt; one of much exercise, than
an idle person: a sober and temperate Man, than one given to Wine and Women.
The most seasonable time for cure is the Spring, or such as is neither hot nor
cold; therefore Autumn is most pernicious. And these are the things that render
Wounds, which are in themselves safe, dangerous. Tho in reality they never
change their Nature. For if only a fleshy part be wounded, the Wound is in its
own Nature safe; and if any danger arise, something else is in the blame.
Wounds of a middle Nature, if we may believe Guido, are such as are received in
the heads of the Muscles, in the Scull, in the Breast and Belly. And Galen
says, That all wounds of the Nerves and nervous parts are not indeed mortal,
but only dangerous. In another place he says, they are dangerous, that have an
equal tendency to death and life: and he calls them doubtful. It has been
observed by many skilful Men, that Wounds under the Clavicle, and the inner
process of the Scapula are formidable, and full of danger: for beside the
Basilick Vein and Axillar Artery, there is the fifth pair of Nerves, which run
from the Vertebrae of the Neck to the Arms. Of this kind are many of those
Wounds, which Celsus writes, difficult of cure, viz. in the Armpits and Hams;
about the Anus and Testicles; in the Thighs and among the Fingers: and any
Wound that has hurt the head, or end of a Muscle, a Nerve, Artery, Membrane,
Bone, or Cartilage, In this respect wounds in the Neck are dangerous; for often
it so falls out, that some remarkable Nerve or Tendon is thereby hurt
especially if the wound reach to the Spinal Marrow. It has been also observed,
that wounds which are near the Navil (for thereabout lie the perforated Tendons
of the oblique and transverse Muscles) are not without danger; tho they reach
not deep. And such as are received in the back part of the Breast: for tho they
reach not the Cavity; yet because thereabout no small Veins and Arteries, and
many Nerves are dispersed, they are dangerous. Whenever Joints are wounded,
they import danger, by reason of the Tendons and Ligaments that are found
there, for wounds in these parts use to produce malignant Symptoms, especially
if the inside of the Arm be wounded. Of this nature are the Armpits, the
bending of the Elbow, the inside of the Wrist; and the outside of the Leg: for
in these parts there are great Veins, Arteuies, Nerves and Tendons, which
usually occasion Bleeding, violent Pain, and several other mischiefs. But if
nervous parts are wounded (because this requires a skilful conjecture, and no
small diligence in a Surgeon) you may easily know it in this manner. When a
Nerve is either pricked or cut, Motion, and sometimes Sense is lost, or at least
hurt; and there is a nu^^ess in the parts under the wound; Pain is violent; the
part (...) inflamed; and by consent with the Brain a Delirium often arises: A
Convulsion often follows; and that oftener when the part is pricked, or partly
cut, than when it is quite cut asunder. The same signs, but more obscure,
happen in wounds of the Tendons and Membranes, which invest the Scull and the
rest of the Bones, especially when the Ligaments of the Joints are cut. We said
also, that many of those wounds, that are for the mostpart mortal, may be
reckoned among these, i. e. when they are small. If therefore the Lungs in any
part, the thick of the Liver, the Dura Matter, Spleen, or Womb be but slightly
wounded, they are in this rank. And whereas I say, Wounds of the Nerves are not
mortal; because some Men doubt of the matter, I shall maintain it by Reason. In
the first place we must take notice of this from Galen, that under the name of
Nerves, both the Nerves themselves arising from the Brain and spinal Marrow,
and the Ligaments and Tendous are comprehended, of all which he calls the
Wounds malignant and dangerous, never mortal: And those that are so wounded,
are so far from dying for the most part; that they oftener recover. For (says
he) not one died of a wound of the Nerves: wherefore he that joins experimental
Anatomy, and the use of Medicaments, he may always, as we do, cure wounds of
the Nerves without any danger; so that no principal part may be drawn into
consent; nor the wounded, or contused Nerve labor of an Inflammation; or if
they should come, much less shall either Putrefaction, or Lameness, or
Convulsion, or Death ensue. Besides it has been proved before, that mortal
Wounds can be inflicted only on those parts, that are either principal, or
afford a necessary use to the Animal, or such as are endued with an exquisite
sense, or destroy strength by large bleeding. Now consider every particular,
and you will find the Nerves none of them: For they are not of such an
exquisite sense, unless where there is a concourse of many sensitive Nerves.
You see an Hand, an Arm, a Leg and their Nerves cut off without loss of Life;
therefore without doubt Wounds of the Nerves should not be ranked amongst
mortal ones; but only among the dangerous. This also is to be observed, that
the greatness and smalness of the Wound makes no small difference. For Nerves,
which have their Original from the Brain immediately, or mediately from the
interposition of the Spinal Marrow, are more apt to cause Convulsion, than
Tendons, which are made up of a Nerve and a Ligament: But a wounded Ligament,
if it be one that proceeds from one Bone to another is not so dangerous; but if
it insert it self into a Muscle, the more of Nerve there is in it, except it be
very carefully looked after, the more danger there is in it, than in other
Ligaments. Tho, I confess some people may be met with, who have such
exquisitely sensible Nerves, that upon a slight Wound, especially in the top of
the Spine, they not only die, but that suddenly.

SECT. V.
Of what nature Wounds of the Head may be reckoned to be.

A Question may arise concerning Wounds of the Head, that are only in the
cutaneous part, or make bare, or break the Bone, but do not hurt the Menynges,
what such they are, whether they be altogether safe, and without danger, or
dangerous and of a middle nature? For it is an Argument they are safe, because
inflicted in a carnous part, or in the very Skin, no Principal, or Nervous, or
any such Part being offended: But it is an Argument they are dangerous, because
near the Brain, and they put a Man in more hazard, than any other parts, when
wounded. For my own part, I am of opinion, that Wounds of the Head have I know
not what peculiar to them, and different from diverse others, so that one must
have a great care, how he gives his judgment in them. For they produce many and
grievous Symptoms, the like whereof seldom occurs in others; so that the great
Hippocrates might very well leave us a whole Book of Wounds of the Head. And
there are several things, which admitting a parity in others, do show, that
these Wounds are worse and more dangerous than others; namely, the nature of
the Part, aptness to mistake, and difficulty of Cure. For the Skin (to speak of
that first) which is very thick, moist and rare, is exposed very much to the
injuries of the external Air: For since the the ambient Air is in its own
nature always moister and colder than the Skin of the Head and the Bone
underneath; no wonder, while it is whiffling up and down the Wound, if it be
able to convert the natural temperament of the part to immoderate moisture:
Which is more readily done, if the wounded party live in moist and therefore
unhealthy places; especially if the Skull be laid bare or opened, so as that
the Menynx appears. Besides the Skin of the Head has a manifest connection with
the Pericranium, and receives Nerves from the first and second Veriebrae of the
Neck, and from the third Conjugation of the Brain, which are disseminated all
through its substance: for which reason Paraeus thinks, that Wounds, Contusions
and Apostems of this Skin should be treated with all diligence. And the
construction of the Head is such, that whatever Disease is contracted in the
Skin, it may easily by a breach in the Skull, or by the next Sutures be
communicated to the Menynges, and the Brain it self. Besides, its constitution
is such, that, as Hippocrates writes, the Bone may be clest in another part,
than where it is struck, which they call Resonitus cranii, or Contrafissure.
Moreover Avicenna professes, that the Skull is often broken, the Skin remaining
whole: And Celsus says, that the Bone is perfectly whole, yet by the blow some
Vein in the Membrane of the Brain is broke, which bleeds. In these Cases the
most diligent Physician is at a stand what to do. And Surgeons oftentimes
are more then a little mistaken in curing such Wounds, unless they be both
learned and well experienced. For it is usual with them, while they endeavor
to alter the coldness of the Ambient Air, not only to stifle the room with
woollen Curtains, but in the middle of Summer to kindle a fire in it, and omit
nothing that may cause heat, which may easily occasion a Fever and
Inflammation. Nor do they know that Hippocrates, when he had commended a hot
Season for other Sores, yet for those in the Head he commends the time of
Aequinox. Then they often rashly dilate the Wound with many Sections; cut the
Veins, Arteries and Branches of the Nerves with Instruments and their Nails,
and tear the Pericranium; which is of great use. This is a certain Nervous
Membrane arising from certain Ligaments sprung from the very Menynx, and some
thin Membranes which come out at the Sutures, and join the Dura Menynx with the
Cranium. Mistakes also are often made about the Sutures; while they mistake the
dents that are made by the Weapon for natural Sutures, and open them not, which
is a work absolutely necessary. Tho in this fault they have Hippocrates for
their companion, in the case of Autonomus 5. Epidem. which makes the mistake
less dishonorable. They are much more to be blamed, who mistaking the Sutures
for Dents left by a Weapon, rashly trepan; and so endanger the Patient. And
there are other mistakes, common to other Wounds, which are of more danger in
these. The difficulty in curing makes these Wounds also more dangerous: For, as
Galen says, you cannot adapt that Ligature to the Head, which reason has
invented to prevent Inflammation, especially in other parts: Therefore you can
neither repress the affluent matter, nor express what is contained in the sick
parts. Besides, since the Bone of the Skull is very dry, and adjoining parts
moist, it is a difficult thing equally to preserve the natural temperature of
them all. Which has caused a difficult controversy among Physicians, whether
driers or midling Medicaments are proper in the cure of the Head? From all
which things Hippocrates might very well determine, that no Wound of the Head
should be slighted: for only a Contusion of the Skin, unless it be carefully
handled, may cause a Fever, and create the Physician much trouble, and the
Patient much danger. I conclude therefore, that Wounds of the Head are no ways
safe, but altogether dangerous; especially such as reach to the Bone, and lay
open the Menynx. For they have place among Nervous Wounds, which I have said
are dangerous. Yet I advise you, in giving of your Judgment, diligently to
observe the natures of Climes and Places, and other properties. For in a City
low situated, and where many use to die of such Wounds, you must pronounce them
dangerous altogether: But in a City high situated, and in a wholesome Air, you
may say they are dangerous, but not so very dangerous.

SECT. VI.
How it may be determined, whether a Man died of his Wound, or of some other
cause?

THings being in this manner stated, it will be no great difficulty to
deprehend, what I propounded in the beginning, i. e. Whether a man died of his
Wound, or something else occasioned his death? For if the Wound, under debate,
be known to be mortal (whether of necessity, or for the most part it be such)
without doubt the blame is to be laid on the Wound. If it be safe and without
danger, the Man's death must be imputed to something else. But if Wounds be of
the dangerous and middle sort; as they are of a doubtful nature, our judgment
concerning them should be such: For if they be great, they themselves occasion
death; if little, it must be imputed to something else. Thus therefore, if a
great Wound be received in the Joint, which has cut or torn the Tendons, Nerves
and Vessels, although of it self it be not mortal; yet because it is full of
danger, and admits of no errors without harm, and requires a most exact cure,
to be managed with all care and diligence, which Physicians are not every
where, tho they do their duty, able to perform (for never to mistake is above
Humane Capacity) nor can the Sick every where observe an exquisitely-regular
Diet. Therefore if the Party die, you will not do amiss, if you report the
Wound to have been the cause of his death; unless some egregious error has been
committed in the cure, whether the Surgeon, or Patient, or any thing else
occasioned it. Then indeed the Aggressor is much excused: for tho without that
error the wounded party might have died; yet because the case is dubious, and
where any doubt is, the conjecture should always be in favor of the Criminal,
whatever the error were, it must be said to have caused the parties death.
Concerning Wounds of the Head, which have something peculiar in them, as we
have shown before, you must make report in this manner. First, consider with
your self, how the Air and Salubrity of the place stand affected toward Wounds
of the Head; and if you find, that in all Seasons people die of these Wounds,
all Wounds, where there is occasion to open the Skull, must be reckoned among
the very dangerous; and such, unless some egregious and plain error have been
committed, must be concluded to have occasioned death. Other Wounds, tho they
be dangerous, draw nearer to the nature of safe ones. But when the Salubrity of
the Clime abates the danger of these Wounds, then all Wounds of the Head, so
that the Membranes be not affected, even if the Bone be broke and perforated,
must by no means be ranked among the very dangerous: Except much of the Skull
be taken away: For then, because it is impossible for the Membrane not to be
hurt, you must account such Wounds dangerous. Hence therefore it may be
determined, which I find to be the Opinion of grave Lawyers, (T. in. l. si ex
plaga, ff. ad leg. Aquil.) if a Servant not mortally wounded die (by mortally,
I mean very dangerously, as in great Wounds of the Joints) the Case will be an
action of Battery not Murder. Wherefore Guido, an ancient and learned
Physician thinks their Opinion vain, that say, a Man would never die, tho he
offend in the course of his living, unless he had received a Wound: So that
they seem to lay ones Death to the Wound, tho never so safe, and without
danger. But I shall confute their error by and by.

SECT. VII.
How it comes to pass, that Men die of small Wounds, and such as are not mortal.

NOw I undertake to declare, how wounded Persons die, not so much of their
Wounds, as of some other cause, which is a thing that falls most under
Controversy. I find six causes of this unhappy event. The first is, when the
wounded Party is of a Cacochymick Body. The second, when the wounded Part is
some way weak and infirm. The third, when Men offend in their way of Living.
The fourth, a bad constitution of the Air. The fifth, the Chirurgeon's
negligence. The sixth, some uncertain Accidents, which cannot be reduced to
Method. I shall demonstrate all particularly. As to the first; suppose a Wound
be inflicted on a Body full of bad Humors, such as are the Cachectick, People
troubled with a Leprosy, the Pox, Dropsy, Consumption, and such like; and
that not in a principal Part neither, but in a carnous, and one not liable to
danger: No Man is ignorant, what sharp Pain, great Inflammations, Fevers,
Convulsions, and other bad Symptoms do thence arise, the Humors flowing in
every way into the wounded Part. Nor can any Man doubt of the second: For if a
Man, for instance, get but a little Wound in a Joint, which had not long before
been troubled with a Defluxion: or if a Part once wounded, be offended in the
same manner again: or if there be some peculiar disposition and constitution of
Body, which naturally dispose a Man to some certain sort of Disease; is not a
small Cut able to put such a Man into great danger of his Life? And errors
committed in Diet, what do they not pervert and deprave, if after a Wound
received, a Man cram himself and drink Wine; if he addict himself unseasonably
to Venery; if he perplex his Mind with Cares, and his Body with unseasonable
Exercise? But how frequently is there a sickly constitution of the Season
abroad, which may irritate and exasperate even a small Wound, whether manifest
intemperature, or the aspect of some unhappy Star occasion it? For from thence,
even upon a slight occasion, Inflammations, malignant Fevers, and other
formidable Symptoms are deduced. I remember this has happened even in my time;
and several Ages before have seen it. Therefore Hippocrates does well advise
us, to consider in Diseases the strength of Epidemick Diseases; and to know the
condition of the Season. Perhaps Paul reckoned this among the latent occasions;
for when he had said, that an Inflammation happens in Wounds from the strength
of Liniments, from Cold, much Eating; or from drinking of Wine, he then
subjoins, or from some other latent occasion; which I think may not be
understood amiss of a certain constitution of the Heaven, which Hippocrates
called Divine. I need not say much of the Chirurgeon's ignorance or negligence,
I should rather condole the calamity of the Age, wherein a sort of unlearned
Men, and ignorant Barbers are called to cure Wounds, who the less they know of
Learning, the abler Practitioners they take themselves to be, impudently
vaunting that Learning is a hinderance to their Business. The last Reason, that
often exasperates a slight hurt, depends on fortuitous Accidents; as if the
Weapon which gave the Wound were rusty; if the Lint, which was used to the
Wound were infected with any bad quality; if any hurtful thing fell into the
Wound; if bad Medicaments be applied; and several other things which I know
very well put a Wound into a bad condition. And these are the Causes, why a
small Cut may much endanger a Man. And Hippocrates does not obscurely intimate
this, when he says, that Men die of all sorts of Wounds: for many Wounds are
seen in ignoble, and no bad places, which yet cause death, and no wonder; for
the Souls and Bodies of Men do much differ, and are of great force. But because
these are Generals, I shall instance in some particulars of such as have died
of slight blows. 5. Epidem. circa finem, Hippocrates says, that Philes son upon
a small denudation of the Os Frontis, a Fever arising the ninth day, died.
Besides, a fair Maiden, the Daughter of Nereus, being struck with a flat hand
on the Forehead by a Woman, her familiar, as they were a play, died the ninth
day. Also the Master of a great Ship, having broke a Finger with the Anchor,
died of it. A Boy, the Son of Metrophantus, being struck by another Boy with an
Earthen Pot on the Head, died, because he scratched the edges of the Sore. And
some of the most learned Interpreters of Hippocrates do hold, that all these
died, either through the mistake of the Surgeon, or because of a bad habit
of Body, or by reason of an unwholesome Season.

SECT. VIII.
On what days the secret Malignity of Mortal Wounds uses to show it self?

THat nothing may be wanting about this Affair, it will behove you to observe
some term of days within which some latent mischief from a Wound, if it have
lain lurking a few days, must show it self. If Mortal Signs do long postpone;
you cannot then of right blame the Wound; but something else. Guido, a man of
great experience, in his general Speculation of Wounds sets three terms,
wherein Mortal Signs show themselves; the Seventh, Ninth and Fortieth.
Tagaultius in this, as in all things else, follows him; only instead of the
ninth day he puts the fourteenth. Some of the most skilful among the Moderns
for the first days of the Wound suspend their Judgments; nor do they give their
opinion of the quality of the Wound before the ninth day is over: for they say,
within that time gentle or horrid Symptoms usually show themselves, according
to the condition of the Wound, the party hurt, and the ambient Air. Nor without
reason: for the ninth day, as Plutarch testifies, is judicatory of Diseases;
and he says, that Achilles knew, the Pestilence in the Army had no vulgar
cause, because it exceeded the ninth day. But tho I deny not these things to be
true; yet they create not Science. Therefore the best way is to pitch upon some
Method at the present, whereby a Surgeon may make perpetually a pretty sure
conjecture concerning Wounds. Hippocrates, lib. de vulner. Capitis, affirms, if
a man have broke his Skull, and commit an error, if it be neither raspt nor
perforated, a Fever seizes him before the fourteenth day in Winter; but about
the seventh in Summer; and if all things persevere bad, in Summer he will die
before the seventh, and in Winter before the fourteenth day. From which
passage, I think, I shall be able to gather the true way of judging: For he
says, that bad Symptoms begin and death happens later in Winter and sooner in
Summer. And as this is most certainly true, I am able to give no other reason
for it, than that in Winter our heat is more vivacious and strong; and
therefore resists nocent causes the more; for the Ventricles are by nature
hottest in Winter. On the contrary, since our strength is easily spent by the
ambient heat, it so happens, that then we are most liable to morbid injuries.
For the same reason, if things happen otherwise than well, I say, that mortal
Symptoms are longer in appearing in a strong Patient ^han in a weak one: for as
strength retards the approach of death, so does it of grievous Symptoms.
However therefore as by Age, Complexion, Sex and Time of the year the Strength
is firmer, the longer will the Symptoms and Death be in approaching. So if a
young Man of a good constitution, and in perfect health receive a Wound in
Winter, whose event may prove hazardous, I would wait for the beginning of the
Symptoms on the fourteenth day before I would give my judgment; which if they
persevere, I would predict death, on the next critical day, or on some other,
according as the malady proceeded flower or sharper. On the contrary, if an old
Woman be wounded, who is of a cold and dry complexion, and of a bad habit of
Body; I guess the Symptoms in reference to the Wound would arise about the
seventh day. And tho Hippocrates says, that in some Diseases, young people die
sooner than old, it holds true indeed in spontaneous and violent Diseases: for
old people generally die more of the tediousness of a Disease, and of a
relapse, than of the violence of it. But in Wounds it is as we said before. And
that you may not be rash in your judgment, we have given you both the nature
and times of Wounds.

SECT. IX.
How one may know, whether a Man died of a Blow, or Contusion, and some
Opinions about it.

THat many die suddenly of beating and Contusions, is so evident by several
such sad Events, that I need say no more of that: But if the manner of ones
death be unknown, it is not yet agreed by what way and means it may be found
out. The vulgar Opinion is, that Wheals, and black and blew Spots (these marks
are made, when the little Veins, that are disseminated under the Skin, being
broken and cut, do pour out Blood, which afterward being out of its natural
Vessels, contracts a livid color) are the only evidence of blows received. But
I think, they are much out: for every bruised part does not always appear black
and blew, unless it be endued with Veins, and those not lying deep. If a bruise
happen (as Avicenna says) in Nervous places; or in any other but Fleshy, you
shall neither find redness, nor any Ecchymosis. Besides, you may often find
blackness and blewness in the Body of such as died of Poison, and of internal
and spontaneous Diseases. And Hippocrates himself, l. 1. de Acutor. Regimine,
says, in Pleuriticks, who die of taking Ptisan unseasonably, their side looks
livid, like a bruise. And 4. Epidem. he says, one that died of a Dropsy, had
his Hypochondria look red, as if his Body had been beaten with stripes. And 5.
Epid. Nicolas his Son, when he had been ill of a burning Fever, and died the
seventh day, his Posteriors appeared red, when he was dead. Now the cause of
this Symptom (for I think it is worth the knowing) seems to me to be the effort
of Nature; which she violently exerts in Extremity. For she thrusts the Blood
thither, which being destitute of vivid Spirits turns livid. Paraeus also has
observed, that in some, after death, spots (called Peticulae) appear before the
Humors are cold, which are signs of Putrefaction. Therefore spots are no
certain evidences of blows received. There are some also who think voiding of
Blood is a perpetual sign of such a death. But they are out: for I have seen
some, that died of an internal cause, who spontaneously bled, as they were
about to be buried. Therefore we must ascertain our selves from something else,
if possible.

SECT. X.
What are the chief Signs of such, as being beaten died, but of no conspicuous
Wound.

NOw therefore we declare our Opinion of the Matter. Avicenna says, a Fall and
hitting against a thing (hither you may refer Blows and Bruises) hurt Men's
Bodies two ways, and cause death, namely, either because they tear the Bowels,
the Coats, Nerves and great Vessels, or because they occasion Pain; to which I
add a third, which is proper to a blow on the Head, because it produces most
grievous Symptoms in the Head, an Apoplexy, Catochus, and the like, occasioned
by the concussion and compression of the Brain, and interception of the Animal
Spirits. Things therefore standing thus, my opinion is, when a violent blow
upon a part, under which some great Vessel lies; as the Epigastrium, in which
great Veins and Arteries are contained, that Blood will be voided by Excretion
out of the Breast, or by the urinary Passages. But if it so happen that the
Mouth of the Stomach receives a blow, because a hurt in that part uses to kill
Men with the pain; it is not necessary that Blood come away; nor likewise must
you expect such a Sign in every blow on the Head. For the Head may be so weak,
that the slightest blow may endanger one. Such a constitution of the Head had
he, that died of a box on the Ear Apoplectick, and the Maid in Hippocrates,
mentioned before, who died of a flat blow given her in jest by a Woman upon the
Forehead, being taken with a Vertigo and want of breathing. But it is
otherwise, when one receives a violent blow on the Head; I grant Blood may come
out at the Ears and Nose. Wherefore I think it is evident from what has been
said, that they who die of a blow, do generally void blood; but this is not
always necessary; for a blow on the Stomach or on the Forehead, which according
to Hippocrates is the weakest part in the Head, and has most danger in it, and
on the Temples, which are also weak, does not always bleed. Nor must we
conclude there has been a blow, if blood do come; for I have often observed it
in such as have died of internal Diseases, especially of malignant Fevers.
Since therefore the true Signs of a Man's being beaten can neither be had from
spots nor bleeding, we can determine nothing for certain. Tho when these two
Signs appear, and there was no other manifest occasion of death, then there is
suspicion of a blow.

SECT. XI.
How many ways People may be suffocated by an external Cause?

IT has been observed that several, who have been secretly suffocated by their
Enemies, do not presently afford any sign of a violent Death. Wherefore he that
is called to judge of such Persons, and is not well verst in such Matters, will
either rashly fly to some internal fault, or he must need say much to little
purpose. Therefore I will say something of this thing. By suffocation for the
present I mean that sort of Death, which is accomplished by some external
violence, hindering the Office of Respiration. This is caused either by
drowning; or by a violent stopping of the Mouth and Nose; or by a String; or by
inspiration of a strong and hot Air. And you may know them all thus:

SECT. XII.
What are the Signs of external Seffocation?

YOu geneerally find drowned People thrown upon the Shore, or lying in Wellsand
standing Waters. But if the subtilty of Man should endeavor to remove all
suspicion of the Crime; yet an unusual swelling and flabbiness of the whole
Body cannot be hid; the Belly also will swell; some mucous Excrements will come
out at the Nose, and froathy stuff out at the Mouth; the Fingers ends are worn:
for they that are drowned, endeavor to get out, and scrabble in the Sand, and
so wear their Fingers. Whereas, I say, that drowned Bodies are swollen; it is
not so much by sucking in the Water, or by any Water contained therein, as by a
Vapor, into which the Humors are turned by a putrid heat, therefore this
swelling shows not it self, till after some time. There is another Suffocation,
in some places more frequent, which is acted by shutting the Nose and Mouth
violently, or by a strait cord. And that you may have no trick put upon you in
this, take it as a general Maxim, that it is a Symptom common to all who have
the use of Inspiration stopped, for them to froath at the Mouth: for the
expiration of fuliginous Excrements being intercepted by a Cord, or otherwise,
they are all violently impelled; whence it comes to pass, that part of the
proper humidity is expelled together with them, as you observe in letting
Blood. But if one be strangled with a Rope, the print of it will appear either
black or red, especicially where the Rope crosses. The Head of the Aspera
Arteria is often bruised, and there is a luxation of the second Vertebra of the
Cervix; the Arms, Legs and Face are livid; the Breast is swollen, and the Urine
is volded. Of all which things this Reason may be given. The swelling of the
Breast is caused by much Vapor raised by containing the Breath within; the
passage of the Urine by an unequal straining of the Muscles, which conspiring
for the common safety are contracted toward their Original; and therefore make
way for its passage. Also the Face is not pale, but of a violet or purple
color. But if you have a mind to search more narrowly, you will find the
diffected Lungs full of purulent froath, and all the other Viscera in good
order. And Anatomists in opening such Bodies do find the Head and Breast full
of Blood. But if the Breath has been stopped any other way, you will find the
same signs, except the print of the Rope. In these also you may observe spots
arise in diverse places. For the force of strangling is such, that the expulsive
faculty of all the parts of the Body is irritated, and therefore it forces all
the Blood and other Juices to the Skin; and especially to those places, that
have larger and more capacious Vessels, as the Back, Face, and such parts.

SECT. XIII.
Of such as are suffocated by inspiration of a hot and strange Air.

AS for those that are killed by a hot and suffocating Inspiration, such as lie
in a room newly plastred, because Fire is contained in the Plaster; or where
burning Charcoal has no vent; or such as come into Pits, and stinking Caverns,
or great Holes where Grain is kept: I will first show you the nature of such a
death, and then the signs, that you may not only produce the signs, but do it
according to Art. Erasistratus, as Galen says, thought, that such as perished
in Charonian pits, and in Houses new Plastred, by the steam of Charcoal, and
the like; it was because their breath was so thin, it could not be contained in
the body. But, says he, as there is a familiar quality of a liniment in Pulse,
Pot Herbs, Bread, etc. and a foreign one in Cantharides, the Sea-Hare, etc. So
Erasistratus might as well have said, that in some Air there is a quality
familiar to our nature; in another there is one foreign, and corruptive. Now
here Galen seems of the opinion, that People dye by drawing in an Air of an
inimicous and foreign quality to us. But in another place where he treats more
exactly of the thing; They says he, that tarry too long in the Bath, faint, and
at last dye; because the natural heat cannot be maintained: Now it is
maintained by Ventilation of its principle the innate heat, by a moderate
refrigeration, and departure of that which is fumous, for People in Baths dye,
not because the Spirits are evacuated out of the Body, but because of the heat.
And the reason why People dye in stinking Caves, in Houses new plastered, and
by the steam of Charcoal, is, because the cold Air is not attracted, which is
absolutely necessary for Respiration. But if you demand what kind of death such
People dye. Some famous Physicians think that all of them dye Apoplectick, and
that the Brain is affected in its Ventricles, they being filled with a foetid
and gross vapor, vellicating them by a malignant quality: for they say, the
Animal is deprived of Sense and Motion, and froaths at the Mouth. Yet to me
Galen's Opinion seems truer, who holds, that all who dye in stinking Caves, and
Pits, and such like places, dye not of any fault in their Brain; but for want
of cool Air, whereby the innate heat is ventilated and cooled. For whereas some
say, that in suffocations the Brain suffers, because the animal Spirit cannot
then be fed by the vital; Galen denies it, and shows, that to feed the animal
Spirit, there is no great need of that Spirit which is sent from the Heart: but
it is sufficient that there be an evaporation from the Blood; or which is of
more moment, that there be Inspiration at the Nose. And since there are two
things, which we attract by Respiration, namely, the substance and quality of
the Air, and when hot Air is inspired, enough of the substance indeed is
attracted; nevertheless the Animal is suffocated, as tho it inspired nothing at
all; therefore it remains, that a cool quality in the Air is chiefly requisite
to Respiration; for want of which, because the natural heat cannot be cooled
and ventilated, when it is beyond measure heated, it kills the Animal; And
Galen says, that frothing is a Symptom common to all them, that have the use of
Inspiration intercepted. But as for the signs, which is the thing we here
enquire after, I can find none, which all suffocated People have, but that of
frothing: only swelling in the Breast, and profusion of Urine do not appear in
this last sort: for they dye of a less violent death, than they that are
strangled with a cord; or they whose Mouth and Nose are stopped, And thus much of
suffocated Persons.

SECT. XIV.
Diverse effects of Thunder, whence signs of it may be taken.

Some company walked abroad out of the City: A Storm arose, and the Thunder
killed one of them. His Friends suspecting he was killed by his companions,
indicted them of Murder; nor could they be quit, till by the report of
Physicians it did appear, he must be struck with Thunder, and with nothing
else. Therefore that you may not be left destitute here, I will give you my
assistance: That therefore you may know the various effects of Thunder, so as
to gather the certain signs of dying by it, I shall take something out of
Seneca, which makes for our purpose. Wonderful, says he, are the works of
Thunder, and its wonderful power is also subtle: The Money is melted, the Purse
remaining whole and unhurt: The Sword is melted, the Scabbard remaining whole:
The Wood about Piles inviolate, all the Iron is run down: The Hogshead being
broken, the Wine stands; but its rigor lasts not above three days. There are
these sorts of Thunder, the terebrating, the discutient, and burning; The
terebrating is subtle and flammeous; it pierces thorough the most narrow place,
because of the sincere and pure tenuity of the flame. The dissipating is
conglobated, and has the violence of a compact and stormy Spirit mixed with it:
Therefore this Thunder passes and repasses frequently at the hole where it
enters; the force of this being dispersed abroad does break, not perforate. The
Third sort which burns is very terrene, and has more fire than flame, and so
leaves great signs of fire where it strikes. No Thunder indeed comes without
Fire; but we call that fiery which imprints manifest signs of burning. That
which burns or scorches, burns three ways. It burns, scorches, or blasts. etc.
So Seneca, whose Opinion, tho it be not unknown to the more skilful; yet
because there are some who do not so well understand his succinct way of
writing, I shall periphrastically illustrate the Author's Sense, about the
kinds and differences of Thunder. There are therefore three kinds of Thunder
(for it is found to do hurt three manner of ways) The First is, that which
terebrates, and makes as it were a hole in a body. The Second is that which
discusses, i. e. dissipates and severs the Body into diverse parts. And the
Third, which only burns. As for the First, whose property we said it was to
terebrate, it is subtle, and collected into it self, and not at all expanse.
The Second, which dissipates, has compact and conglobated Spirits, it does its
violence unequally, and like a storm tears and breaks all. The Third, whose
property it is to burn, has a terrene substance, and is liker to fiery matter
than to flame, and therefore leaves evident signs of burning. For tho other
Thunders burn; yet we call this burning, because it shows more signs of Fire
and burning than the rest. This is twofold, one chiefly burns, the other makes
the Body black. That which burns is threefold, some burns slightly, and only
blasts, i. e. as if a breath touched a body, and does little harm. The Second
burns and consumes. The Third kindles, and sets on fire. It is common for all
Thunder to burn, and to discolor, either changing the natural color a little,
or wholly changing the color, into blew, pale, black, or some other color.

SECT. XV.
Diverse marks of such as have been slain by Thunder.

NOw therefore that we are instructed by Seneca; and that it appears, Men's
Bodies are many ways affected by Thunder; yet two things are common to all
(which to know is much to our purpose) namely, to contract a brown color,
where the Thunder strikes, and to be somewhere burnt, Besides, it smells like
Sulphur, for, as the Learned Pliny observes, the flash of Lightning is
sulphurous. Also they that are struck, lie on the contrary side; and, as
Seneca observes, their Head lies from the Thunder. He that is awake, keeps his
Eyes shut, and he that is asleep, keeps them open. Bodies also struck with
Thunder, as some Experimentators have observed, are colder where they are
struck, than any where else in their Body. Some have written, that Bodies
struck with Thunder, grow dry; but never corrupt. Therefore that Poet might
very well be blamed, who fang, How Thunderstruck Phaethon putrefied in some
Valley. But I know not whether Seneca would grant this, who, l. de naturalib.
affirms. That People struck with Thunder breed Maggots in a few days.
Therefore, if you well observe what has been said, it will be no difficulty to
find out, when People are slain by Thunder. But whereas some think, that
Thunder must always batter, and that they who fall so, are always found with
their Limbs broken, they are much mistaken. For, says Aristotle, if you
consider the nature of Thunder, every sort of it is Spirit, which is either
thin and clear, and therefore not burning; or thick and fumid, and such
consumes by burning. And upon this place where Aristotle affirms, that all
Thunder is Spirit, and of such, Alexander Aphrodisaeus adds, and not a Stone,
or Bolt, or any thing solid, as some are of opinion. And whereas Iron, and the
most solid of things is often broken and dissipated by Thunder; that is not
done by any solid matter; but because the nature and violence of Thunder is
such, that it only hurts things which resist, and put a check to it; and like a
magnanimous Warrior, either it slightly touches, or quite neglects things that
give way. Therefore, because Man is all over covered with a fleshy softness,
you shall rarely find him bruised; but always burnt or blasted. For this reason
Seneca might well be persuaded, that there was a pestilential power in Thunder:
because People do not only fall by the blow, but likewise by blasting. It is
also observed, that Bodies slain by Thunder, are for the most part light;
because the moisture by that great burning from Heaven is dried up. And this
shall suffice for the signs of People being killed with Thunder.

SECT. XVI.
How a Surgeon may be able to predict some hurts of the Functions in some
wounded Parts? First, what is the Instrument of voluntary Motion?

IT sometimes so happens, that upon a Wound given, before the event be seen,
our Judgment is demanded in Court, whether it will lame a Man, or make any part
imperfect in its Functions? To which Questions it is not every one that is able
to give a satisfactory Answer: He had need be a skilful Artist, who knows
exactly the structure of the parts of the Body, and their use, and who has
carefully observed the various events of Wounds. This Treatise also may be of
use, tho you be far from any Court: For when, according to Art, you predict the
events of great Wounds, you will leave no room for reprehension to those
querulous people, that would lay the blame of the abolished Function upon the
Physicians cure, not upon the Wound received. The knowledge of this thing is
accounted very necessary to him that practices with his Hands, whether he be to
take out sharp things, and points of weapons, or to take away any thing, or to
cure Sinus's and Abscesses aright. Besides, it is so ablolutely necessary for a
Physician to know by what Muscles the Arm, Hand, Thigh, Leg and Foot are
extended, and again, by what Muscles they are bended, that an Empirick dare not
condemn this knowledge; but must confess, it is very useful. But here I would
have my Reader understand, that I shall not treat of all Hurts; but only of
those which principally have respect to the animal Function, nor of all them
neither; but of some external ones, whereby some conspicuous voluntary motion
is hurt. For the harm that is done to the vital and natural Instruments, we do
not meddle with here; because upon recovery of the Patient, no impediment is
left in doing his civil Affairs. For if the Heart, Lungs, Liver, Stomach, or
Veins receive a Wound, it either kills the party, or if he escape he can
perform voluntary Motion, and go about his Business. But I have discoursed of
this among mortal Wounds. Now therefore that I may have some foundation to
build my Discourse upon, I take it for granted, that a Muscle is the instrument
of that Motion, which is at the command of our Will, which we therefore call
voluntary or spontaneous. Nor is there any part any where in the Body (if it
have a spontancous Motion) but has Muscles inserted in it. Now there are three
parts of a Muscle, the two ends which are nervous, and the middle carnous. And
the beginning of a Muscle, which they call the Head and Rise, comes from the
Bones; but the middle which they call the Belly, has many Fibers dispersed in
it, which are derived from the Ligaments and Nerves. The end is called a
Tendon, because its action is to extend, and the Muscle ends in it. It is made
up of many mixed Fibers, and is inferted either into a Bone, or into another
Muscle, i.e. into that part of it, which is to be moved. Nor is it any obstacle
that Galen somewhere says, that a Tendon, not a Muscle is the instrument of
voluntary Motion; and that a Muscle is made for the sake of a Tendon: for a
Tendon is indeed part of a Muscle, and that to which action is principally
owing: and the Muscle is the entire instrument, so that it makes little matter,
whether the property of the Function be attributed to the one, or to the other.
For the Eye by all Men is reputed the instrument of Seeing; yet all the action
of Seeing is most truly ascribed to the Crystalline Humor, as to the chiefest
part of the instrument.

SECT. XVII.
What Cuts of the Muscles do hurt what Motions in general?

SInce therefore it is plain, that a Muscle is the instrument of voluntary
Motion; then the motion of that part, familiar to that Muscle, must needs be
hurt, when such a Muscle is hurt. When Muscles are cut asunder and transverse,
Motion must needs be lost in the subject parts: When they are incised, Motion
is only hurt; and the measure of the hurt is proportionable to the measure of
the Section; more Motion being lost in greater Sections, and less in less. And
I would have what I have said, understood also of the Tendons: for if you cut
them quite asunder, you destroy the motion of that part; if you make Incision,
you will so far hurt it, as you make Incision. And the same may be said of the
heads of Muscles. For Galen holds, that when the head of a Muscle is cut, it
performs its Function no more. Therefore if a Muscle have but one head, it is a
very easy thing by cutting that, to deprive it of motion; but if it have more
heads, you must cut them all. And whereas we said but now, that all the Muscle
must be cut asunder transverse, to deprive it of motion, I would not have you
take it carelessly, because it is not every cutting of a Muscle, that takes away
the use of a part; but only that which is transverse, and which (according to
Galen) is made at right Angles. This a Physician must know, who has a mind to
foreknow the hurt of a part, tho it be difficult: for all Fibers, as Galen
says, are not always alike according to the longitude of the Muscle; but
sometimes have a various composition: Thus some Muscles have a simple sort of
Fibers, others have a double, so that they look like several Muscles, one lying
upon another. Besides, sometimes the Fibers differ in length. And a Man ought
exactly to consider these things, who would complete himself in the predictions
about them. Nevertheless, this manifold variety of Fibers need not trouble us
much. For Muscles have generally their Fibers tending length-ways; you shall
but seldom find them transverse or oblique, considering the multitude of those
that run lengthways. And Vesalius attributes manifold Fibers only to three
sorts of Muscles; namely, to those that draw the Arm to the Breast; to the
Second, that moves the Scapula, which have twofold Fibers, and to those that
move the Cheeks and Lips.

SECT. XVIII.
Some general Instructions very useful for Predictions.

BEfore I come particularly to speak of wounded parts, I would premise
something in general, which will be of use to what shall be said afterward.
This therefore, First of all I would advise you of, namely that all Wounds
received in the outside, and forepart of the Body, do always hurt Extension;
and what are received in the inside, Flexion. For Galen has abundantly
demonstrated, that the internal Muscles serve for bending a part, and the
external for stretching it out. A Muscle so long operates, as it is contracted
toward its beginning, and draws the part moved toward that: whether it be done
by drawing the whole Muscle to that they call the Head, or when it is drawn in
a lump. Besides, this is to be taken special notice of, that whether it be the
external or internal Muscles that are cut asunder, in both, the figure of the
part remains immovable. For neither extension alone, nor flexion alone
perishes in a part, but both thrive, and both perish together. Not that the
operation really perishes, whose Muscles are entire; but because these motions
succeed one another by turns. For if the internal Muscle, which bends the part,
be whole, when the external which used to extend it, is cut; at first indeed it
may bend the part; but it cannot bend it again, unless you extend it with
something else; because Flexion is of a part extense. The case is the same,
when the internal Muscle, which is the bender, is cut, if the external be not
hurt; this will extend at first; but no more afterward: Unless with your Hand
you supply the lost operation of the wounded Muscle, by extending that which is
bent, or by bending what is extended; for then the sound Muscle will perform
its operation. This also I must not pass by in silence: since some parts of the
Body are distinguished by many Joints, that the function of that part where the
Wound is made, is not always hurt; but of an adjoining part, which is tied to
the wounded part by Articulation. For Muscles are derived from the superjacent
Bones, wherein there are Cotyle, and are inserted after the beginnings of the
subjacent, which are to be moved: and by these intense Muscles, when the Heads
are drawn upwards, the whole Member is drawn up with them. Wherefore if a Wound
will hurt the Functions in the Cubit, it must be inflicted in the Brachium; if
it will hurt those of the Brachium, it must be Inflicted in the Scapula, or
parts thereabout. And you must remember this also, that the use of a part does
not always perish by the cutting of one Muscle: for if the use be peculiar to
some one peculiar Muscle, and competent to no other, we must believe the part
will be made useless, because deprived of the action of that one Muscle. But if
several Muscles conspire to one action, the detriment of one of them is not
sufficient to destroy the whole action of the part.

SECT. XIX.
What harm Wounds of the Forehead and upper Eyelid do?

IF one receive a Wound in his Forehead, especially near the Eyebrows, where
the Fibers are carnous, if it be made length. ways, and according to the
rectitude of the Fibers, after it is brought to a Cicatrix there is usually no
hurt of the Function left. But if it be transverse, and more than superficial,
you may say, that the Eyebrows and all the contiguous Skin shall be drawn
downward; and thereby create no small trouble to the Eyes, which lie under
these parts; because the Eyes cannot afterward open freely, nor perfectly do
their Office. And this may be the bare and true report, as to the demands of
the Court. But that you may not seem only to have reported the truth, but to
have done it with judgment: It were best sometimes to show the rise and
insertion of the Muscle, which is the instrument effective of action, and the
duct of the Fibers; and several other things besides, which may seem proper
upon the occasion. If therefore at any time you are called to make a report
concerning a Wound in the Forehead, you may accommodate these things, to what
has been already said; Namely, that Galen calls this substance, which lies upon
the Forehead, and sticks most tenacionsly to it, not a Muscle, but a Musculous
Skin: And that Vesalius will have it to be not a Muscolous, but a Carnous
Membrane, full of many carnous Fibers. But Fallopius is of another opinion, and
says it is a perfect Muscle; because the Motion and Fibers attest as much.
Realdus also holds there are two Muscles, and he sometimes saw one side of the
Forehead Convulte, and the sound side entire in its Function: And in dissection
he has found the same thing; and moreover he says, that these Muscles are
terminated in that common Suture, which distinguishes the Bones of the Head
from the Bones of the upper Jaw. And these Muscles have no Tendon; because it
is not a Bone, but only a Skin that is to be moved. And Vesaiius says, that the
Fibers which are principally to be considered, do run in a direct line from the
top of the Nose to the middle of the Forehead. Cohonbus says, the Fibers are
not straight, but oblique from the top of the Nose to the middle of the
Forehead. The use of the part is, to draw up the Eyebrows. And thus what we
have discoursed concerning Wounds of the Forehead, you may accommodate to the
present occasion, as it shall offer it self. Tho here I must not omit what
Hippocrates mentioned in Coac. Prenot. viz. That the Sight is darkened by Wounds
which are inflicted on the Eyebrows, or a little higher; and the fresher the
Wound is, the better they see; and when the Wound is, after a long time healed,
the Sight grows duller. For, as Hollerius declares, the Eyes grow ill by reason
of the vicinity, and consent in the adjoining Bone by common Membranes, and
certain Veins, and they grow duller in the process of the disease, that is,
when the Ulcer is difficult, and flow in cicatrizing. Also the upper Eyelid
(for the lower is immovable) if it be wounded in the space between the corners
of the Eye; it is no difficult matter from the nature and site of the Muscles,
if the Wound be transverse, to predict the total loss of the Function in the
Eyelid, if the weapon reach deep: But if the cut be not deep, you may say,
that all the hurt which shall befall the Forehead, will be, that it cannot shut
close. Now there are two Muscles in the upper Eyelid: an oblique one reaches
from the greater corner at the Nose, reaching half way of the Tarsus, and this
draws the Eyelid: And another oblique one arising from the Eye-brow near the
less corner of the Eye, reaching along the rest of the Tarsus, whose Office it
is to lift up the Eyelid. And it behoved the rise of either Muscle to be such;
because it is necessary that all Muscles tend toward their proper principle.
And tho Fallopius does here observe, that the former Muscle arises not (as he
says, Galen and Vesalius thought) For oftentimes that place uses to be hurt and
cut, as in curing an Aegilops, and yet no hurt of the Eyelid follows. Then he
observes, that this Muscle has its original from the inner part, whence another
also proceeds, which raises the Eye upwards. But Galen himself, 10 de usu
partium, 10. First observed this; therefore Fallopius basely ascribes his
Master's diligence to himself.

SECT. XX.
The Functions of the Cheeks and Lips; also of the lower Jaw and Mastication,
by the wounds of what parts they are hurt?

ANd now to come to the hurts of the Cheeks: There lies a certain broad Muscle
under the Skin in the Neck, which Galen first of all observed: It is thin and
Membranous; which, if you please, you may call a Musculous substance, or a
Musculous dilatation. It is spread round under the whole Skin, which is about
the Neck: In the forepart it is carried downwards toward the Clavicle, and
behind along the ridges of the Scapulae to the beginning of the back. The use
of these Muscles is to draw the Cheeks from one another to the sides, without
moving the lower Jaw, or openin the Mouth, which Functions must of necessity be
hurt by a Wound of this Muscle. This sort of action is most apparently seen in
the Convulsion, they call Spasmus Cynicus: for in it this Muscle is extremely
stretched, and contracted toward its original. But that you may make no slip in
your Report; you must know, the Fibers of this Muscle do not every where
observe the same duct: for they are partly carried upward to the Lips, as in
that part of the Muscle, which ascends from the Os Pectoris, and the middle
Region of the Clavicle: and they partly run obliquely from the same; as in the
portion of it, which arises from the rest of the Clavicle, the top of the
Shoulder, the Scapulae, and the Region of the Neck. So that now you may see,
what way the wound must tend to cut the Fibers transverse, which sort of Wounds
only, as I said before, hurt the Functions. So Galen; but Columbus a diligent
Anatomist, disagrees with him: for he thinks, that the Muscles, which perform
the motions of the Cheeks, are situate between the Jaws, and arise from the
Gums, and end in the Gums; and that this broad Muscle only draws the Lips
obliquely downwards, and serves to open the Mouth. The motions of the Lips are
thus heart by a Wound. Whereas two Muscles descend obliquely from the Cheeks,
and as many ascend from the end of the Jaw, where the Chin is; the former are
constituent of and move the upper, and the latter the lower Lip. If therefore
the spaces contained within the aforesaid limits be wounded, without doubt the
said motions will be hurt. But here you must carefully consider, that the
Fibers of these Muscles are interwoven and complicate one within another: So
that let the Wound be given which way it will, it is always transverse, and
breaks the Fibers. It is no difficulty to find by the hurt of what parts the
Functions of the nether Jaw are hurt. For if you inflict a Wound in the Region
that lies between the Ear, the Forehead, and the Os Jugale, making an imperfect
Circle (it is called the Temples) you will then offend the attraction of the
nether Jaw upwards, and the shutting of the Mouth. For ther^ lies the temporal
Muscle, called Crotaphites, which arising from the Os Verticis, Frontis, and
Temporis, is fastened to the crooked point of the lower Jaw, and draws it up,
and shuts the Mouth. And the Fibers of this Muscle run from the circumference
to the center, such as are in no other Muscle besides. Here I would have you be
careful in your prediction: for a wound in this Muscle does not only spoil the
action of the lower Jaw, but, if we may credit Hippocrates and Galen, causes
Convulsions, Fevers, Sleepiness, and Doting: because these Muscles are near the
principle of the Nerves. And if you give a Wound from the Os Jugate and root of
the Ear at the beginning of the nether Jaw, you will manifestly hinder
Mastication: for there the mansory Muscle, called Masseter, lies: This is a
Muscle, which you may easily feel with your Fingers, when your Mouth is open,
and arising from that part of the Head, where the Processis Styloeides are; it
comprehends all the nether Jaw, and draws it round. But Galen is of opinion,
that both these, and those that are called temporal Muscles, might as well be
called Masticatory: for both of them conspire in the action of Mastication.

SECT. XXI.
By the Wounds of what parts the motions of the Head are hindered?

BY what Muscles being hurt the motions of the Head receive damage, take thus.
There are seven Pair of Muscles, that are destined to the motions of the Head:
Only one pair of these draws the Head forward: All the rest draw backward. But
all of them lie under some other external Muscles, the exterior under that
they call the Musculous dilatation, which we said moved the Cheeks, the
Posterior under the Scapular Muscle: Wherefore it must not be a superficial
Wound, that hinders the motions of the Head. And we must not be ignorant of
their Original and Progress. The two first, which incline the Head forwards
arise from the top of the Breast, and the end of the Clavide; they are long,
round and strong: They are apparent enough, before the Skin is taken off. They
are inserted into the Mamillary process: If they are both moved, the Head is
bent forwards; but if only one act, it is drawn on one side. But in the hind
part Anatomists have observed six pair of Muscles: All of them tend from the
Spines of the first five Vertebrae, and reach almost half way up the hind part
of the Head. If then a deep Wound be inflicted in the Neck behind, so as to
reach the parts under, you will manifestly hurt the motions of the Head,
according as these or the other Muscles are wounded.

SECT. XXII.
What functions wounds of the Arms do incommode?

WOunds of the Arms are both frequent, and prejudice the Functions that are
most useful to Man. Therefore that you may foresee the Event of each of them,
it is best first of all to recount the proper Functions of the Muscles, which
do diversely move the parts of the Arm: for so you may easily reckon with your
self, what hurts will ensue, I will begin therefore with the extreme parts of
the Arm. There are eleven Muscles in all, that move the Humerus or Shoulder (I
call all that is between the Throat and the Elbow the Shoulder, and the Cubit
all that is between the Elbow and the Palm) three ascending from the Breast to
the Arm: two from the Region of the Ilia: five proceeding from the Scapula: And
the eleventh lies upon the Epomis. All these Muscles grow together, and are
implanted, where the Humerary is one. But these are their motions. That which
lies upon the Epomis, draws the Arm right upwards. The two, that come by the
sides of this, from the Scapula on each side, do raise the Arm up; but not
straight; but they draw it backwards or forwards, according as they are on this
or that side. The Muscles that rise from the Breast, draw the Arm thither. The
rest of the Muscles turn it backwards, and that especially, which proceeds from
the lower end of the lowest Rib under the Scapula. Now you see, by the Wounds
of what parts what motions are hindered: for if the Muscles, that lift it up, be
wounded, without doubt that Function will be hurt; and so in the rest. The
Cubit is moved by four Muscles, which incompass round the Os Brachii; and the
two former bend the Joint, not straight; but one enclines it inwards and the
other outward. It is extended by that Muscle which manifestly appears near the
humeral Vein, especially in such as use much exercise, and it has two Heads,
one upon the edge of the Head of the Scapula, another upon the Process, and it
cleaves to the Os Brachii, and then to the Radius, and it has another under it,
assistent in the same action. Therefore when that Muscle is wounded, the Arm
cannot well be bended; but if a Wound be received in the hind part of the Arm,
which is opposite to the foresaid Muscles, and touches their ends, then the
office of bending the Elbow is lost: for upon that place the Muscle lies, which
extends the Arm; and whether you call it one Muscle or two, Vesalius thinks it
is no great matter. Moreover, if a Wound be received on the upper and forepart
of the Cubit, between that and the end of the Radius, in that long, but narrow
place, it will hinder the Radius from being raised supinely: for the long
Muscle lies there, which arises from the Os Humeri, and is implanted in the
lower Appendix of the Radius, and reckoned the second among them, that draw the
Radius forward. But if you wound the lower part of the Vlna, along to the lower
Bone of the Wrist, you will prejudice all the motions of the Wrist. For there
all the four Muscles are extended, the Authors of all brachial motion: Of which
nevertheless the two external, which are most liable to the injuries of Wounds,
arising from the external swelling of the Humerus, are inserted in the first
and second Os Carpi, and serve to extend it: Therefore when they are hurt, this
Function especially must be hurt. But if a Wound be inflicted in the inside of
the Cubit inclining a little back, then the second Joints of the four Fingers
cannot bend. For there runs one Muscle, the first among the internal, which
moves the upper part of the Hand, and which arising from the lower swelling of
the Humerus, is hid under others, till it come to the Elbow: but there it
starts out, and is seen under the Skin; except as much as the former Muscle
(which makes the broad Tendon, where it is thin, and turns into a Nervous end)
does pass over. This then having passed the Wrist, is divided into four
Tendons, each of which being sixth to the second Bones of the Fingers, are their
benders. But whatever of the internal Muscles you cut, which run down with the
first to the Wrist, von will manifestly hurt the Function of Contraction. The
Hand is manifestly extended by the external Muscles, i. e. by them that are
placed in the back part of the Arm. The first of these having past the Elbow,
starts up, and is conspicuous under the Skin; and if you remove another, which
lies above it, and extends the Wrist, you would say it lay uppermost and
foremost. This is most fiequently divided into four Tendons, which come to all
the Joints of all the Fingers, except the Foresinger, and dilate them. And the
second Muscle, by which the little Finger is drawn aside from the rest, and the
Palm is formed, having the same original with the former, is to be seen under
the Skin with the first: but it proceeds underneath to the Hand. Therefore in
what place soever the seat of this Muscle is wounded; either the Function of
the little Finger will be hurt, if the Wound be given in the lower Region, or
the Function of the three next, if it be inflicted a little above. And so much
for Wounds of the Arm.

SECT. XXIII.
What functions are hurt by wounds of the Hand?

BUt if a Wound be received in the Hand in the back part, where indeed not
Muscles, but the very Tendons creep along, as they pass to their Joints; it
will not be difficult to foresee, what harm will thence arise to the Fingers.
For that Finger will be hurt above all the other, next to which the Muscle or
Tendon is offended. Yet I have often taken notice, that when these exterior
Tendons have been cut, the Fingers nevertheless were extended; tho indeed they
were a little weaker in exercising their Function: For there are certain other
Muscles arising in the Palm, which exercising the same Function of extension
with the foresaid, make the loss of the foresaid less prejudicial to the
Fingers. When the Palm of the hand is wounded, you will often find the motion
of the Fingers hurt thereby. But thus you may foresee all. Under that Tendon,
which they call the broad one, and which lies next the Skin, there are four
Muscles, which are apt to be wounded from the middle of the Palm to the setting
on of the Fingers. And Columbus observes, that these extend four Fingers,
besides the Thumb, tho they be internal: Which makes Surgeons often admire,
how it comes to pass, that when the outer Tendons are cut, nevertheless the
Fingers are extended, not knowing that there are these besides, which partake
of the same Function. And they arise from the Tendons of that Muscle, which, as
we said before, bends the third Joint of the four Fingers: And then running to
the external part, and being implanted in the third Joint, they extend it. But
if you wound a man about the little Finger, that Muscle will be prejudiced
which arises from the fourth Bone of the Metacarpus, and draws it aside from
the other Fingers. If you wound the fleshy part of the Palm, which is the Ball
of the Thumb, you will hurt the Muscles (there are three of them) that bend the
Thumb. For the Thumb (as Galen says) has this thing peculiar to and remarkable
in it self; that nothing comes to it from any upper part; wherefore the wound
must be received either in the Thumb, or very near it, which must hinder its
function.

SECT. XXIV.
What harm is done by the wounds of the Thighs and Legs.

BUt, to come to wounds of the Thigh, if a Man be wounded any where in the
Buttock, in that region which reaches over half the Os Ilium from the Os Sacrum
and Coccyx; unless the cut be shallow, it will hinder the extension of the
Thigh. For this Muscle has its rise from the foresaid parts, ends at length in
the greater Trochanter, and makes the Buttock. Observe, nevertheless, that
since this Function requires much strength, other Muscles are assistent to it;
lest by the hurt of one Muscle all the Function of the part should be lost.
There are other Muscles to perform the rest of the motions of the Thigh; which
because they run along the inside of the Loins, a place not seen by the Eyes, I
shall pass them by. But Wounds of the Thigh do often hinder motions in the Leg.
If therefore you wound the Thigh in the forepart between the top and the
knee-pan, you will much injure the extension of the Leg. For under that place
there lies the seventh Muscle of them that move the Leg, and under that the
eighth^ Muscle, conspicuous above the Knee: yet because it has other Muscles to
help it in this common action, the perfect loss of extension in the part need
not be feared from the detriment of one Muscle. And if you wound that part
which descends obliquely almost from the Groin, like a border, along the inside
of the Thigh, and ends in the Shin, the Leg will find a great impediment, when
it is drawn toward the Groin on the other side, or to the Thigh. And if the
hind part of the Thigh receive a Wound, between the end of the Buttock and the
ham, it hinders contraction, especially if the cut reach to the Tendons, which
are so manifest in the sides of the ham, that when the Leg is contracted, they
may be plainly, felt by the Fingers. And here a History of Galen's concerning a
Runner must not be forgot; which because it is worth the remarque, and that
there are several opinions about it, I shall not think much to relate. It is
concerning the fourth Muscle that moves the Leg, which is not indeed in the
inside, but on the outside opposed to three others, and its carnous broad end
is fastened to the outside of the Leg; its Function is to twine the Leg
obliquely. I saw, says he, this Muscle broke in a certain excellent Runner, and
broke in the middle, as one was contending with him: There was a hollow place
in the middle, which the ends of the parted Muscle left, one being drawn
toward its head, and the other toward the Tibia. Yet this Runner, after the
pain was ceased, and the Inflammation abated, was not at all injured in
walking; nay, he durst run again. And when he found no inconvenience in it, he
ran Races again, and won them: Which might very well be; for in running there
is no occasion to twine the Leg about; but only to stretch and bend the Leg.
But Realdus has observed some wounded in this Muscle, who, tho they were cured,
yet it troubled them to bend their Leg: wherefore contrary to Galen, he
ascribes the Office of bending to it. But now to the damages of the Feet. If
you wound the Muscles, which after their rise, coming up about the Knee, do by
their ellies on each side of the Leg make up the Calf, and at last make the
strongest Tendon in all the Body, which comes to the Heel; then the Foot cannot
well stretch it self. But the hurt of this one Muscle is not sufficient to
destroy the whole Function: for four other auxiliary ones lend their
assistence. But between the Calf and the Os tibiae, viz. the Shin, two Muscles
are to be seen; one next the Calf, whose Office it is to extend four of the
Toes; but the other, which has in that place a tendinous Nature, runs by the Os
tibiae, its office is to extend the end of the Foot: If you wound either of
them, without doubt you will hurt the Functions that are peculiar to them.

SECT. XXV.
What Wounds of such or such Nerves, and of such or such parts of the Spine, do
hurt the motions of this or the other part?

NOw I think. I have mentioned almost all places, which being extrinsecally
hurt, use to hinder the motion of certain parts: so that, I suppose, I shall
have acquitted my self of this particular, when I have added this one thing
further; namely, that Motion of the parts is hindered, not only when the
Muscles, but the Nerves likewise are wounded, which being distributed through
the Muscles, are the chief Authors of that motion. For this (as Galen says)
must be understood as a maxim in all Muscles, that whether you hurt their
Nerves, or cut all their Fibers across, you will immediately deprive these
Muscles of all motion. Therefore it will be very necessary for you to know the
principles of the Nerves, that are distributed into them, and the site of their
Fibers. It is then a thing sufficiently known, that strength and faculty of
moving is derived from the Brain, as the Fountain, by the Nerves as Rivulets.
Which Nerves, because they are not sufficient of themselves for motion, Nature
has contrived Muscles, as a kind of Levers, that we may the more readily raise
weights. Therefore every Muscle has a Nerve inserted in it, from whence it has
its motion. If then you cut, press, bruise this, or any way intercept the pass
of the Spirits, all motion and sense shall be taken away. But as much as
remains after the cut, continuous to the Brain, so much will still conserve the
virtue of the principle: and whatever is below, can neither assord Sense nor
Motion to it: That therefore you may not be ignorant of the hurt Functions of
the Muscles, which proceed from their Nerves, I will briefly declare what
Nerves are derived into such and such parts, and from what Originals. But I
shall not mention all, for that would be too tedious. This I will say in
general, it is observed, that Nerves seldom come along the outside of the Body
into the Muscles; but affecting rather a certain safeguard and protection, they
run along the inside. Yet those that come to the Hand are observed to run along
the inside of the Arm: but they do not so in the Leg: for they all run along
the back part of the Thigh. You shall not therefore find a Nerve, neither at
the Elbow, because it has no flesh on it, nor at the Knee or Shin, but always
deep among the Fortresses of the Bones, Cartilages, Ligaments, or Flesh. As
therefore to the Original of the Nerves; they that come to the Arm and Hand,
creep from the fifth, sixth, and seventh Vertebra^ of the Neck along the
Armpit; and also from the first and second of the Breast, which if you reckon
from the beginning, you may call them the eighth and ninth. But these Nerves
from the very beginning do strangely cross and intermix one with another. Now
if you wound any of these Pairs of Nerves, as they come out of the Vertebrae,
it will certainly much hinder the motion of the Arms and Hands, according to
the bigness of the Wound: Yet you cannot well tell, what pair of Nerves being
in their original, will hurt such and such Muscles: for as their contexture is
manifold, so it is uncertain what Nerves of the Muscles depend on such or such
a hole of the Vertebrae. Yet it is sufficient to know, that Wounds received in
the foresaid Vertebrae do promiscuously hurt the Hands and Arms. Nerves proceed
from the Vertebrae of the Loins and Os Sacrum in the same complication and
confusion, to the Thigh, Leg, and Foot, as we said they went to the Hands, and
Arms. Wherefore whatever pair of Nerves proceeding from the foresaid Vertebrae,
you hurt; you will likewise incommode some of the Muscles underneath.
Furthermore (for this will not be useless to know) you may easily, according to
Vesalius, find out in a living Man, the Nerves which come to the extreme parts
of the Hand: For if you press hard with your Finger between the posterior
process of the Vlna, and the brawn of the Arm; then you will find that there
lies the fourth Nerve, which moves the Thumb, the fore, and middle Finger, by a
kind of numbness in the same Fingers: And if you press the end of the brawn on
the inside, you will for the same reason sind, that the fifth Nerve lies there,
which moves the little, and middle Finger by branches divided to the Hand. If
in like manner you press the forepart of the brawn of the Arm on the inside,
you will find the third Nerve, which comes to the inside of the Thumb, the fore
and middle Finger, if you consider, as we said before, the numbness in those
Fingers. If therefore those Nerves receive a wound about the Elbow, you may
easily foresee what Fingers will be hurt thereby.

Now there remains something to be said of the cutting asunder of the Spinal
Marrow, which Galen 8. de administrat. Anatom, has recorded very opportunely
for our purpose. If (says he) you cut the Spinal Marrow quite through in the
region of the third or fourth Vertebrae, the Animal will presently be deprived
of breathing, not the Breast only, but the whole Body below the Section,
becoming immovable. And it is plain, if you cut below the second or first
Vertebrae, or in the very beginning of the Spinal Marrow, the Animal will
suddenly fall down dead. But if you cut the Spinal Marrow quite through (for
you must always understand this) all the Muscles of the Breast immediately
loose motion: and the Animal then breaths only by the benefit of the Diaphragm.
They allow that in cuts of the Spinal Marrow, lower than this Vertebra, many
parts of the Breast may be moved: For the greatest conjugation of the Nerves of
the upper Muscles of the Breast, has a twofold original of both Nerves.
Therefore cuts about the seventh Vertebra hinder not the function of these
Muscles: much less cuts under the eighth or ninth. And the lower you go, the
more Muscles of the Breast will do their Office. Galen likewise says, if the
Spinal Marrow be cut lengthways in a right line from above downwards, none of
the intercostal, lumbar, nor crural Nerves will lose their use: but if it be
cut cross only half way, all the Nerves derived thence perish. But what need a
Man trouble himself with the hurt of the parts from wounds of the Spine, since
they generally prove mortal? Because a Wound here is as dangerous as in the
Brain. For the Spinal Marrow is a kind of Brain to the parts below the Head:
and both Hippocrates and Celsus do account wounds therein mortal.

SECT. XXVI.
Of Maiming.

SInce we have an Act of Parliament, Ann. 22. and 23. Car. II. to prevent
malicious maiming and wounding, wherein also disfiguring is comprehended, it
will not be amiss to explain, what Maiming and Disfiguring are: for we have
already shown sufficiently what Wounding means, of which, the two other are
effects. And First concerning Mai^ing.

Maimed, Mutilatum, curtum, decurtatum, descissum and truncaturn among the
Latins; and (...) with the Greeks, signify the same thing; but what the thing
it self is, does not sufficiently appear. Aristotle (to begin with the best of
Philosophers first) in his discourse upon this subject says, that Maiming, or
Mutilation comes not from the loss of every part (for if you take away Flesh or
the Spleen, a creature is not thereby maimed) but of some extreme part; and
that not every one, but such an one as being quite taken away cannot be
generated again. So that you see Aristotle places the nature of Mutilation in
the deficiency of the extreme parts, if they cannot be repaired again. But
Galen says, that is maimed, of whose Body any part is cut off: And he says,
that Mutilations are of the Lips, Ears, Nose, and of any fleshy parts, either
violently taken away, or putrefied and cut off. He says, there is a Mutilation
of the Tongue, when half of it is taken away, and of the Omentum and Privities,
of the Nose and Ears. Wherefore if you will follow Galen, you must say, that is
maimed, that has any part of the Body cut off; but especially these three
parts about the Face. Cornelius Celsus says, they are maimed, who have the
Ears, Lips, or Nose cut off. So the Latins call a Ram or a Goat, without Horns,
Mutili, i. e. maimed. In the same sense some have said, that Faemina veluti
mutilus mas a natura est producta. These things I have gathered, out of several
Authors; Now I will proceed to deliver my own Sentiments.

SECT. XXVII.
Three sorts of Maiming.

HAving well weighed and considered this subject, there seems to me to be three
sorts of Maiming. The First truly so called and exquisite: The Second is true
indeed, but not exquisite: The Third may be called improper. The true and
exquisite has these three qualities- 1. Some extreme part of the Face must be
cut off. 2. Disfiguring must arise from thence. 3. The action of the cut part
must be hurt. As when the cartilaginous part of the Nose is cut off, the Lips
or Ears, and (as some will have it) the Eye-brow. For in these, unless the loss
of substance be very small, there is the first sort of maiming. For an extreme
part is cut off; great disfiguring is caused it being in the Face; and the
actions are a little hurt. If any one demand, why I call this especially
exquisite Maiming, my reason is at hand: because in Maiming the savor must
chiefly be hurt, as several Authors hold; without doubt a Maim in the Face must
be the principal: for it disfigures the best favored part. Of this Galen de
Morb. differ. and in Meth. Cornelius Celsus, and Paulus Aegineta do treat. And
this I observe, that when Authors treat closely and nicely of Maiming, they
make it to consist in these three particulars. But tho three things are
required to Maiming; yet Disfiguring is the main thing requisite; and in the
next place the hurt of action. If therefore a piece of the Ear or Nose be cut
off, so that the least prejudice be done thereby to the Hearing, or Smell: yet
because a manifest disfiguring does result from thence, it is an exquisite
Maiming. And that is a true, tho not an exquisite Maiming, which is not indeed
in the Face, but in the extremities of other parts of the Body; as in the Hand,
Foot, Tongue, Secrets, and Breasts. It is called not exquisite, because it
reaches not any part of the Face, where because of the Favor exquisite Maiming
consists: But there is this in it; it may some way or other offend the Actions,
in respect whereof the Maiming may be slight or grievous. The Third is called
Improper, because it cuts off none of the extreme parts, which is requisite to
true Maiming: Nor does it disfigure: nay, sometimes it hurts no action; It is
sufficient that any part is cut off. So Galen said, that the Omentum was
Mutilum. Wherefore I cannot choose but wonder at some famous Physicians, who in
Maimed Persons require only a cessation and privation of use, without any loss
of part. But how dissonant this is to the opinions of Philosophers and
Physicians, (who must be judges in this case) may easily be understood by what
I have already said. And they that consider the Force, either of the Latin or
Greek words, will say as much. Since therefore thingstand thus, you must know,
that not every loss of substance makes a Man maimed: For if any one from his
Nativity want a Hand, Ear, or any other part, we may say he is lame, but not
maimed. And if no part be wanting, but a Limb be made useless for action, it is
weak or disabled.

SECT. XXVIII.
The opinion of Physicians concerning the signification of a Member.

THE Court does often consult us likewise about the appellation of a Member, in
the case of Maiming, disabling, or any way hurting a part. Therefore lest we
should report what the Lawyers will not admit in the case, it is best to treat
of this distinctly. A Member, if you consult Physicians, is often used for any
part of the Body without exception. For Flesh it self, a Nerve, a Vein, and any
of those we call Similar parts, are styled by them Members. But what a strange
thing would it be, should a Judge ask us about the name of a Member, if we
should tell him a Man were maimed, who had only a piece of flesh cut out? For
Lawyers, when they enquire about Members, mean only the compound parts of the
Body. In this they seem to follow Aristotle, who l. 1. de Histor. Animal. calls
only the compound parts, and such as have under them another subdivision of
parts, and Offices of their own, Members: as the Head, Foot, and Hand. And what
Aristotle calls a Member, Galen calls a Part: for 1. de usu partium he says,
whatever Bodies have on every side a circumscription of their own, nor are on
every side joined to others, these are called Parts. And about these Members or
Parts, which might more properly be called Instruments, you will not find all
Physicians of the same opinion. For sometimes you will find that part called an
Organ, or Instrument, which consists of similar parts; upon this account Galen
called a Muscle, Vein, and a Finger Instruments. Besides, that part is by him
called an Instrument, which is the principal cause of any action. So Galen
called the Crystalline Humor the chief Instrument of Seeing. But of these
Instruments in the appellation of a Member, you will find no account among
Lawyers. Therefore, not to detain you with many words, you may, as far as
relates to our present purpose, truly call that a part of a Creature (I mean
the external) which is able to perform a perfect action. For so Galen l. 1. c.
6. Meth. describes it. And thus an Eye may properly be called a Member of an
Animal, because it alone does entirely perform the action of Seeing: So the
Tongue, because it is the instrument of Speech: And the Legs, because they
perform Walking: And the Hands, because their proper office is to take hold of
things.

SECT. XXIX.
A more exact account of the true signification of a Member.

BUT that the nature of a Member may be understood more exactly, and according
to the Lawyers Sense; you must knows, that Action (which Galen calls Operation)
is nothing else but the motion which the part exercises, while it is doing, and
about its work. So when the Hand is moved to take hold of a thing, that motion
is its action: And the end of the action, in which the motion of the Hand
rests, is called Use: Wherefore Use is the end of the actions of the Body.
Therefore whatever part it is in Animals, that is able to perform this perfect
action of it self, and not by another, it may truly be called a Member. The
Eye, Tongue, Hand, Foot are chiefly such. But you must take special notice of
this, that there are many parts, which seem to be authors of performing
actions, and nevertheless are not Members. Many parts, says Galen l. 1. de usu
part. are required to the performance of actions: For some are called great; as
the Hands, Feet, Eyes and Tongue, which are made for the sake of the whole
Animal: And others are less, which are subservient to the foresaid parts: For
whereas the Eye is it self a principal Member, it has some parts by which it
sees; others without which it cannot see; some for better Sight's sake; others
for its conservation. Now all these Particles which serve the principal Member,
are not truly Members, but only parts of a Member. And if you consider these
things well with your self, it will not be difficult to find, what part in our
body is truly a Member in the Lawyers sense, and what is not. For tho Galen
said very truly, that the Tongue was a Member; because the instrument of
Speech: yet he never called the Lips or Teeth so: because these only serve the
Tongue to act the better, but are not able of themselves entirely to perform an
action. For the Lips, says Aristotle 2. de part. Anim^^. 16, are made chiefly
for the desence of the Teeth; and they a little also help the Speech. But the
Teeth do chiefly help the concoction of the Stomach, while they mince and grind
the Meat. Also the Legs, since of themselves they exercise going, are truly
called Members: But the Feet and Toes, because they only help the action, are
Particles subservient to the Legs. Wherefore when a Finger is cut off, I cannot
say that a Member is cut off: for the function of the Hand is not thereby taken
away, its action is only diminished: For the same reason I cannot call either
the Ears or the Nose Members: For the Ears are not the instruments of Hearing;
but only the end of the passage, where it is joined to the dilated Nerve: for
all things beside, that are without it in the winding passage, only help the
instrument of Hearing: Nor is the Nose the instrument of Smelling, nor
therefore a Member: Because the sense of Smelling is contained in the anterior
Ventricles of the Brain. For the cartilaginous part of the Nose, and the Bone
it self, or the inner skin of the Mouth, only do this for the Ammal, that
Smells may the better be perceived. Therefore if the Teeth, Lips, Ears or Nose
be cut off, you cannot say a Member is cut off: for tho these parts were taken
away, yet the Animal will be deprived of no action thereby. It is plain that
Women's Breasts, because they are the instruments of making Milk are Members; so
are Men's Stones, because they make Seed: And the Yard, because of the necessity
of it to Generation.

SECT. XXX.
Of Disfiguring.

HAving sufficiently discomsed of Maiming, now I shall procee to Disfiguring.
By which is meant the spoiling of ones Comeliness, Beauty or Favor: so that
Disfiguring is a kind of Ugliness, or hard-savou^edness canted by wounding. Now
since Beauty is the opposite to Ugliness or Disfiguring, I shall make a little
digression in showing wherein Beauty or Comeliness, or well-favouredness
consists.

SECT. XXXI.
The general notion and explication of Beauty.

PLato tells us, that Beauty is a Gleaming or Ray of the Supreme Good, immitted
first into Heavenly things; and then into Meant Minds, the Figures of their
Bodies and Voices, which moves and delights our Minds by Reason, Seeing and
Hearing. Here you see, Beauty is nothing else but the splendour of the Divine
Essence, conspicuous indeed in all things; but shining more illustriously in
the more noble, and in such as God has placed nearer himself; in other things
it is less illustrious. This is that Beauty, which every where we desire in the
things we love. And therefore Lovers are ever ignorant of what it is they love:
because it is GOD. Now this splendour, which is altogether incorporeal, our Soul
does not indeed perceive by Touch, Taste, or Smell, because these faculties are
very much immerst in Matter; but rather by Reason, Sight and Hearing, which are
more spiritual. And whereas this Beauty is discerned in three things, in the
Mind, in the Body, and in the Voice; that of the Body (which we have a design
only to treat of) is also a Gleam, or Ray of the Divine Essence: but
conspicuous only in a matter apt and prepared. This preparation consists in
three things, Order, Measure, and Features. By Order is signified the distances
of the parts. By Measure, their quantity. By Features, the lineaments and
color. The foundation of these preparations, is a temperate Complexion of the
four Elements. This then is the Beauty of the Body, which we perceive by the
Sight: for that of the Mind we must perceive by the Mind, and that of the Voice
by the Ear. And this is the Divine Philosophers Opinion concerning Beauty. But
Aristotle does not derive its nature from so high an Original; only those
things which Plato calls Preparations, them he calls Beauty. For 13 Metaphys.
cap. 3. he says, the species of Beauty are Ordo, commensuratio and definitum,
where he takes Ordo for the right disposition of the parts, whereby each is put
in its right place: Commensuratio, for the mutual proportion and just
intervalls of them: Desinitum, for the bound or limit of each part. So that
with Aristotle that is a beautiful Body, which has its parts aright placed, at
a due distance one from another, and of a just Magnitude. Tho the Philosopher
has said these things learnedly enough; yet the agreeableness of color, that
Plato mentions, and which contributes much to Beauty, he mentions not at all.
Wherefore I shall cite Galen, who has copiously and learnedly discoursed of
Beauty. Beauty, says he, according to the opinion of all Physicians and
Philosophers, consists in an apt connection of the parts, viz. of a Finger to a
Finger, of all the Fingers to the Palm, and Wrist; of them to the Elbow; of the
Elbow to the Shoulder; and of all to all. And tho in this place he have
expressed the proportion of pa^ts elegantly enough; yet of the determinate
magnitude of the Body, and of the Features, he has made no mention.
Nevertheless, what is omitted here, he has supplied in another place. For l. d.
def. Med. he says, that Beauty consists in a Symmetry and proportion of parts,
with a probity of color. And, c. 10. ad Thrasyb. he says, true Beauty consists
in a fresh color, moderate store of flesh, and in a congruous proportion of
parts. Thus far Galen, who when he had discoursed as to the rest concerning
Beauty very well; yet he makes no mention of the limits, and just magnitude of
the Body; because perhaps it was not his design there, to give an exact notion
of Beauty. If therefore you put Aristotle and Galen together, Beauty will be an
order or, proportion of parts, with goodness of color, and a decent magnitude.
Nor were it much matter if you said, that Beauty is neither the order nor
proportion of parts, but an affection of the whole, and a quality arising
thence: for great Authors take an honest liberty in speaking, and make no
difference between the order of parts, and an affection arising thence. But if
you should still urge, that the thing ought to be explained in more proper
terms, you may thus define it out of Plotinus, Beauty is an external perfection
of the dissimilar parts of Bedies, arising ^^om their agreeable order, measure
and bounds, accommodate to the Beholders Eyes. And these things briefly
collected out of the best Philosophers may suffice for the general definition
of Beauty, which might deserve a larger Treatise.

SECT. XXXII.
The definition of Beauty more particularly explained.

NOw I have a mind, for your sakes who desire to judge more exactly of things,
more particularly to discuss, what order and proportion is required to render a
person beautiful; lest while we are only in the contemplation of Universals,
the more evident knowledge of the thing, which is more apparent in particulars,
should be left to us unknown. Order therefore, or (if you had rather so call
it) Commensurateness, is elegantly described by Vitruvius in this manner.
Nature, (says he) has so made the Body of Man, that the Scull to the top of the
Forehead, and the lowest roots of the Hair is a tenth part, and the Hand from
the Wrist to the end of the middle finger as much: from the Chin to the crown
of the Head an Eighth part: as much to the bottom of the Neck: from the top of
the Breast to the roots of the Hair, a sixth: to the top of the Crown a fourth.
A third part of the height of the Face is from the bottom of the Chin to the
lowest part of the Nose: the Nose to the middle of the Eyebrows as much: from
thence to the roots of the Hair as much, which makes the Forehead. The Foot is
the sixth of the height of the Body: the Cubit a fourth: the Breast also a
fourth. The rest of the Members have their commensurate proportions, which
ancient Limners, and noble Statuaries used. Besides, three Nose lengths make
the length of the Face: the semicircles of both Ears joined together, make up
the circle of the Mouth open: the conjunction of the Eyebrows also does the
same: the length of the Nose is the length of the Mouth, and of the Ear
likewise. The two orbs of the Eyes are equal to one opening of the Mouth. Eight
lengths of the Head make the talness of the Body: And the extension of the Arms
sideways, shows the same; and so do the Feet extended. By following of which
proportion Pythagoras found out the Stature of Hercules exactly; as you may see
in Gellius. The goodness of color in temperate Men, as Galen, Art. Med. c. 51.
says, arises from a decent mixture of White and Red. For, because Blood is of
all Humors most abundant in us, which is Red; and because Phlegm is next in
quantity to it, which is White; it was meet that the color of the whole Body
should be made up of them two: for it is according to nature. And such a color
is required in the whole Body. Indeed in some certain parts there is a peculiar
beauty of color. For Aristotle commends Eyes colored like Goats Eyes: because
such Eyes are a sign of a good disposition, and are the best to see with. Galen
also commends yellow Hair above all. But one cannot well determine the just
length of Man's Body: for as to several Nations several Statures are more
familiar, so they may seem more beautiful. So Hippocrates l. de aere, loc. etc.
says, the Asiaticks are of a large Body: the Egyptians and Scythians are well
set. The Europeans are of a different stature. Moreover, Men are generally
taller than Women. And as for ages, in young Men, as Hippocrates 2. Apli. 54.
writes, tallness is comely and gentile: but in aged people useless, and worse
than shortness of Stature. Wherefore the peculiar nature of the place, Sex and
Age must be considered, before you can well judge of the just stature. But if
you desire to find some certain stature of Man, which may be most exact, and as
it were a rule, or standard for the rest (for all things that are, have their
peculiar nature, and determinate magnitude) I shall in some measure gratify
you, in acquainting you, that the measure of four Cubits is most convenient for
a Man's length: under which a Man must be called short; and above which, over
tall. Therefore the Spaniards, because they are shorter, and the Germans,
because they are taller, cannot well be called handsome: But the Italians and
Greeks, because they are of a stature between both, are upon that score
accounted handsome.

SECT. XXXIII.
The nature of Beauty yet further explained.

AS for these things, wherein we have before said, that Beauty did consist, I
think it is no great matter, whether you call them Species or Parts. For if you
exactly consider Beauty, Order, Feature, and a just Magnitude will be its
constituent Parts; none of which can be wanting in making up an exact Beauty.
For let one be endued with order of parts, and a good color; yet if he have
but a little Body, he cannot be called beautiful. According to Aristotle 4.
Mar. c. 3. who says, that little People may be called pretty, but not
beautiful. And Galen, l. 1. ad Thra^^b. plainly affirms, that these are the
integral parts of Beauty. But if your judgment be not so exact and severe, and
you think it sufficient, that what we call falt, have most or only some
Ornaments, but not all; I shall readily grant you, that a good Color, an exact
proportion of Parts, and the rest have each of them severally their peculiar
Beauty. And thus Men of a little Body may nevertheless be called Beautiful or
Handsome. This also is worth the marking, that besides this Universal Idea of
Beauty, different Ages, and different Sexes have their particular Beauties. For
the same Favor is not requisite in Women, that is in Men. As ingenuity of
Countenance, and assurance become Men; so a kind of Softness and Modesty
becomes Women. Besides, a Beard is an Ornament to a Man, but not to a Woman.
And as for Ages, Aristorse says it is the Beauty of a young Man, if his Body be
so made, that it is able to endure labor, or to run, or to act violently: tho
he must have a sweetness of Countenance, which may please the he^olders. That
of a Man grown is, to have a Body fit for Military Employments, and a sweetness
of Countenance mixed with something of Terror. That of an old Man is, to have a
Body sufficient for necessary Employments, to show no sadness, and to want
those Diseases, that usually deprave old Age.

SECT. XXXIV.
Of a Cicatrix or Scar.

BEcause Disfiguring, or the spoiling of one's Beauty, is occasioned by a
Cicatrix or Scar, it will be worth while, for avoiding obscurity, to declare
what a Scar is. A Cicatrix or Scar, in the common acceptance is Flesh
condensed and dry, and hard like a Callus, coming instead of Skin, which is not
true Skin, but very like it: for the Skin, because it is a spermatical part,
cannot be generated anew; and therefore something like it grows in its room.
But this account of a Scar makes little to our purpose: therefore we must give
another account o^ it. A Scar therefore is a certain Sign or Mark left in the
Face by a Wound, more or less spoiling the grace of it. It is either deform or
apparent. I call that deform, which manifestly offends the natural comeliness
of the Face; and that apparent, which does it but obscurely. The deform or ugly
Scar requires two things. First, it must spread over a good part of the Face.
Secondly, it must leave some unevenness in it, either bunching or hollow. If
the Scar be broad in the Face, I think no Man will deny, that it is ugly,
because so conspicuous; unless it is only in the Scarf-Skin: for in time that
will grow out, and therefore cannot be termed ugly. And it is a manifest
deformity, when some parts of the Scar stand out, and others fall in, and no
equality is observed. The Scar apparent is so called, not that the deformed
Scar is not apparent (for on that very account it is deformed) but because it
does but just appear, without much prejudice to ones Beauty. It is the property
of this Scar, that unless it be narrowly looked upon, it cannot be discerned:
Whereas the deformed may be seen, if a man cast but his Eye upon it.

SECT. XXXV.
In what Parts, and for what Reasons, a Scar is more or less deformed?

Whereas there are two notable differences of Scars; nevertheless the
condition of each is not always the same: For the deformed is sometimes more,
sometimes less deformed: and so the apparent is sometimes more, sometimes less
apparent. Now the reason of this difference is grounded (to omit nothing
material in the point) upon the parts of the Face, and the greatness of the
Scar. A Scar therefore in the Nose is in my mind the most deformed: next to
that, in the Cheeks: then in the Lips: next them, in the Eyes: then in the
Forehead: and lastly in the Ears. Because such Scars dissigure the Face
extremely. I put the Nose in the first place; not because it performs very
noble Actions; but because it is principally exposed to view, as being in the
middle of the Face, and prominent also. I know, some do maintain, that a Scar
in the Eyes is most deformed: Indeed if the Use of them be considered, I shall
not contradict them. But now, not the Use but the Beauty of a part is under
consideration: for sometimes an Eye that has the Optic Nerve obstructed and
sees nothing, may appear Beautiful to look on: so that Beauty depends not on
use or action. As to the gracefulness of the Nose, Melet^^s the Philosopher
says well, ^^do natura hominis, where treating of the Nose, he says, This part
above all others renders the Face either handsome, or ugly. Indeed the
necessity of the Nose on ones Face for action and use is small; only beauty and
gracefulness is most apparent in it: On the contrary the Eyes are of less
ornament, but of more use. And Virgil, who is extremely happy in expressing
things by apt names, describing the Wounds of Deiphobus, calls only that of the
Nose inhonestum or disgraceful, after he had excell^ntly well described the
rest, 6. Aen.

Atque hic Priamidem laniatum corpore toto
Deiphobum, vidit, lacerum crud^liter ora:
Ora, manusque ambas, populataque tempora raptis
Auribus, and truncas inhonesto vuner^ nares.
And (which more confirms me in my opinion) we find it recorded in the Laws of
the Lombards, that they who were caught in one Thest, should have one Eye put
out: and they, who were found guilty of two Thests, should have their Nose cut
off. So that from hence it is apparent, it is a greater punishment, and more a
mark of disgrace, to be without a Nose than without an Eye. It is also said,
that a certain King of the Aethiopians (according to Alexand. ab Alexand. l. 3.
c. 5.) punished some delinquents not with death, but by cutting off their
Noses; so that others beholding the ugliness of their Faces, might be deterred,
from their crimes. Thus it appears, some people account it more grievous to
lose their Nose than their Life. As for a blemish in the Eye, it does not near
so much disfigure a Man. The Ears are put in the last place, because they are
set behind the Face, and not easily discerned. As to the Magnitude of Scars,
whether they be deformed or apparent, there are three degrees, vir. ^arge,
Small and Middling. A great one possesses a great part of the Face, is very
hollow, or stands much up. A little one, takes up but a little part, and is
almost smooth. A middling one is between the two former extremes. And so you
may judge of Scars.

SECT. XXXVI.
Some Cautions in judging of Scars.

HAving discoursed sufficiently concerning the nature and difference of Scars,
I must now caution you in giving your judgment about them, that you do not
easily nor rashly judge of a fresh Scar. At first it always appears bigger and
more deformed. Wherefore it would be better to tarry a while, till the relics
of the Fluxion, and the proper Excrements of the Part, which swell and
discolor the Scar, are dispersed, and the part returns to its natural state:
for then the mark of the Wound will not lie; and so you may then make a true
Report. But if time will not be allowed you, and you must give your opinion
presently; You may say, that time will take off much of the deformity;
especially when the Party is young, and of a good complexion. This also you
must take notice of (as Celsus, l. 7. c. 4, has observed) tho a Cicatrix or
Sear may be brought upon most places; yet it proves otherwise in the Forehead
just above the Eyebrows, if the Bone be much hurt: for then an Exulceration
will go near to last as long as one lives, which must always be kept covered
with Lint and Plaster. Paraeus gives the Reason, viz. Because there is a cavity
under the Bone, which teaches to the Os Cribrosum of the Nose, full of Air,
which hinders the coming of it with Flesh: Or because the Bone is there so
thick, that enough of alible Juice cannot have passage out thence for the
regenerating of Flesh. Besides, there is a great conflux of Excrements into the
Ulcer, which used to run out at the Eyes and Nose. This also you must not
forget, that sometimes a foul Scar is left after a small cut. The blame whereof
lies sometimes on the Surgeon, who either closed not the Lips of the Wounds
as he ought; or applied improper Medicaments: Sometimes on the Patient's
intemperance, and other external errors: And sometimes on the foulness of the
Patient's body. And if sometimes we lay a man's death, though he were wounded,
to the bad Humors in his Body, or to a bad Diet, or to some external error, why
may we not do the same in Scars, when a small Wound leaves a foul Scar? One may
say then, that he does acknowledge indeed, the Scar is deformed; but it is not
so from the nature of the Wound, it being but small; but either from the
disorderliness of the Patient, or from some other external error. Moreover, if
the Scar be such as that it can be covered either by the Beard or the Hair; you
may call it indeed deformed; but by accident it may be so far from being
deformed, that it is not apparent. Since there is no deformity but what is
seen. And so a Man may sufficiently be informed in his judgment concerning
Disfiguring.

THE PRACTICE OF SURGERY. BOOK IV.
CHAP. I.
Of the Definition, Differences, Causes, and Signs of Fractures.

HAving, as we promised in the beginning, finished that share of the Synthetick
part of Surgery, which falls to the soft parts of the Body (comprehended in
the Doctrine of Tumors, Ulcers and Wounds) it remains, that we proceed to the
remaining portion of the Synthetick part, belonging to the harder parts of the
Body, the Bones, which either suffer in their continuity, as in a fracture; or
in their Contiguity, as in a Luxation. A Fracture in Greek is called (...); and
by Paulus Aegineta c. 89. l. 6. is defined to be a solution of continuity in a
Bone, proceeding from some violent extrinsecal cause.

The differences of Fractures, according to Galen, c. ult. l. 6. Meth. are
taken from the figure, magnitude, or diversity of Bones. From the Figure, a
Fracture is straight, which is made lengthways; transverse, breadth-ways; Or
oblique, which is compounded of both the former. From the Magnitude, according
as the Fracture is great or small. From the Bones themselves, according as a
Thigh, Arm or Rib is broke. Hippocrates says, a Fracture is made three ways.
(...), or transverse; as when a stick is broken short off. (...), when it is
split like a Plank. (...), when it is broken to powder, as Meal, or into many
little pieces.

The External Causes are usually Contusion or Flexure; and whatever things may
cut, bruise, break, shatter, or bend a Bone. Falls may be reckoned among such
causes. It is very rare, that an eroding instrument; as Fire; or a pungent one,
does break a Bone.

A Fracture without a Wound i^ known, First by feeling the pieces of Bones in
handling the part. Secondly, if the broken Limb be handled, it makes a
crackling and a noise in the broken part, by the rubbing of two hard bodies one
against another. Thirdly, there i^ a violent pain, by reason of the d^^ulsion
or straming of the Nerves, or the pricking of a nervous body by some part of
the Bone that sticks out. The Fourth sign is an Impotency of using the
fractured part, or of leaning upon it. The last sign is, if causes of Fractures
have preceeded, and the forementioned signs are present. These are perpetual
concomitants of Fractures. And sometimes there is a crookedness, and a
shortness in the part; but it is not always so.

If a Wound accompany the Fracture, besides the foresaid signs, the breach or
roughness of the Bone may be felt. And so much for a transverse Fracture.

If the Bone be split lengthways, the part is thicker than in its natural
state; and then there is pain, and an unevenness in it.

As to the Prognostic, No Fracture in the Bones is void of danger; because of
necessity, the solution of the continuity must be great. In a fleshy part
indeed, if a Wound be received, only so much is wounded, as the wounding
instrument cuts, and no more; but if a Bone be broke, it must, by reason of its
rigidity and continuity, be broke quite through. A Fracture also is dangerous;
because it lies deep, where the Surgeon cannot come at it with his hands.
But some Fractures are more dangerous than others: In a great Bone they are
more difficult to cure, than in a small: Matilfold, than Simple: With a wound,
than without one: And near the Joints, than far from them.

CHAP. II.
How an Inflammation in Fractures may be prevented.

THE Cure of Fractures requires Union. And Union can never be made, unless
Bleeding and Inflammation be prevented, according to Celsus, c. 26. l. 2. In
the Bones indeed Bleeding need not so much be feared, as in the fleshy parts,
unless the Fracture be with a Wound: for no considerable Veins or Arteries go
to the Bones: because they are hard Bodies, their heat is little, and little of
their substance can be wasted. Yet here we are mightily afraid of an
Inflammation, even more than in a fleshy part. The reason is, Pain causes
attraction, then because of their weakness many Excrements are both received
and bred there, which cannot be discharged by the fractured part. And that
which increases the danger, is, the Bones often lie deep buried in much flesh.
Now an Inflammation is prevented here, by removing its causes, as in a simple
Wound, which we have already treated of sufficiently, and therefore we will not
action agere.

CHAP. III.
Of curing a transverse Fracture, without a Wound; and First, of joining
together the parts of the broken Bone.

COme we now to these things that only respect the cure of the Fracture it
self. This sort of cure is in Greek called (...), in English Bone-setting.
First of all we shall treat of a transverse Fracture without a Wound. In this
Fracture the Indication is the union of the Bone, which cannot be done by the
first Intention, except in Children; but by the Second it may, i. e. by the
intervention of a Callus, growing over, and surrounding the fractured parts.
The intentions of Cure here are, First, to put together the parts of the
fractured Bone aright. Secondly, to keep the parts so put together. Thirdly, to
take care of the cure of the parts. Fourthly, to endeavor to breed a Callus.
Fifthly, to correct ill Accidents.

That the parts may be rightly joined together, there is need of extension and
coaptation. For in Fractures, especially the transverse, because the Bones are
distorted, and the streightness of the part is lost, it so happens, that some
parts stick out, and others are hollow. And because one part of the fractured
Bone lies upon the other, the Limb of necessity must be shorter: for the
Muscles ever draw the Limb toward their Original. Wherefore Extension is
necessary, whereby the Surgeon may set the ends of the Bones directly one
against another, which lie not direct, and may put the risings up into their
Cavities. And tho sometimes the Limb seem not to be too short, (as when there
are two Bones, and but one broken, or when one end of the Bone rides not upon
the other) nevertheless, if the Coaptation be made as it ought, Extension must
of necessity be made in all transverse Fractures; for the shivers of the
fractured Bone would be in danger of breaking off, should we without Extension
direct and turn round the distorted Bone, or rub the ends one against the
other. And if the shivers break off, then they either fall between the ends of
the Bone that should be joined, and so hinder Coaptation; or they slip besides
the Bones, and then they cause pain by distending and pricking the Nervous
Parts. And all these inconveniences are prevented in Extension.

However Measure must be observed in Extension: for if it be more violent than
is requisite, it causes great Pain, whence Fevers, Convulsions and Palsies
often ensue. Galen com. 1. l. 1. de fract. writes, that sometimes the Muscles
have been pulled asunder. If the Extension be less than it should, the Shivers
will rub one against another, and so break, or they will not be lodged in their
proper Cavities. Therefore big Bones and great Muscles, which draw a part
strongly toward their Original, require violent Extension: Such Bones are first
the Thigh, next the Shoulder and Leg, then the Arm, then in the top of the Hand
and Foot; especially if both the Bones be broke. The Radius in the Arm, that
is, the upper Bone, requires but small Extension; because this Bone has not
Muscles to draw upwards: for it moves any downwards and supinely. You must also
observe a due figuration, i. e. that the Limbs be extended in that Figure,
which causes the least Pain: And this is done, if the Fibers of the Muscles be
stretched directly, and the Muscle be kept whole in some part of the Limb.
Children, and such as are of a soft habit of Body, endure more violent
Extension: Grown People and hard, on the contrary. Then we must consider the
time of Fracture: for if the Surgeon come the first day, he may the more
powerfully extend. But if he come after the first day, he must either not
extend at all, or more gently; because of the influx of Humors, or for fear of
Inflammation, according to Celsus, c. 10. l. 8.

The Instruments of Extension are threefold. First, the Chirurgeon's Hands, for
a weak or small Extension. Secondly, Cords and Strings for a moderate
Extension. Thirdly, Instruments and Engines for a strong one.

When therefore you have let go your extending Instruments, a good coaptation
of the parts of the Bone must be made, which we may know by three Signs. First,
if the fractured Limb be uniform in Figure with the sound. Secondly, if no
hollowness, roughness, standing up, or inequality be observed in the broken
Bone. Thirdly, if Pain abate.

CHAP. IV.
How the Parts of the broken Bone may be kept united.

THe second intention of Cure is, to keep the parts united. This is done by
Bandage, which must be so made, as to keep the parts set together, and to keep
them from Inflammation.

Hippocrates uses three Rollers of Linen, not too course, lest it press the
part; nor too fine, lest it tear.

He rolls the first Roller thrice about the Fracture, a good way on the part,
so as to make three or four or more turns. By this means the Fracture is
fortified, while the Roller is turned thrice round it: Also the Humors are
liept off from coming into it, especially from the upper parts: therefore the
Roller is carried upwards.

The second Roller, which is twice as long as the first, he rolls the contrary
way: for if the first were rolled to the right hand, this is rolled to the
left, that if any Muscle were drawn too much to one side by the first Roller,
it may be restored to the contrary by the other, which must be rolled once
about the Fracture; then to press Humors out, it must be carried downwards a
good way of the Limb, i. e. by making three, four or more rollings, if there be
need; then it must return upwards again by the Fracture, making a
Circumvolution upon the very Fracture, till he comes to the end of the first
Roller, where the second also must terminate. This Roller, as I said, is first
rolled about the Fracture, that it may press the Humors from it; then it is
carried downwards, to stop the Humors, which might flow from the lower parts,
as to a weaker: And because there is fear of a descent of Humors from the upper
part; therefore Hippocrates does not end the Holler downwards, but rolls it
upwards, that it may end where the first ended. These two Hollers do more
prevent Inflammation, than strengthen the Fracture: for more Circumvolutions
are required to this.

Having done thus, Hippocrates puts over the Bandage Compresses of linen Cloth
three or more times double, of the form of a Roller, but narrow, that five or
six or more of them may be applied lengthways round the Fracture, of the same
length with it, as many of them, as are requisite about a Fingers breadth one
from another. They are to be spread with a little Cerote (for if there were a
great deal, they would slip, and not hold.) They are called Plagulae and
Splenia, from their oblong form. They supply the place of a glutinative
Medicine, and besides, they assuage pain, while they hinder the compression of
the Rollers.

The third Roller fastens the said Compresses. The first turn of this Roller is
made upon the fracture, then one head of the Roller is carried upwards, and the
other downwards. This is to be observed, That the Rollers must be drawn
straiter upon the fractured part, than any where else; that it may the better
be kept from defluxions.

Celsus c. 10. l. 8: has another way of Bandage. For first, he applies about
the Fracture linen Cloth dipped in Oil and Wine. Then he takes six Rollers,
whereof the first is shortest, this is rolled thrice about the Fracture, and
thrice also above the upper part of the Limb. The other Roller twice as long is
rolled from the Fracture downwards; and then turning upwards, it must end in
the upper part above the first Rollers. These are the two first Rollers of
Hippocrates. Over these a broad linen Cloth spread with Cerote must be brought
to fasten them. And where the Bone sticks out (for the broken Limb has always a
propensity that way, which it had a propensity to in breaking) evermore a
linen Cloth three or more times double; dipped in the same Oil and Wine must be
applied over against the part whither the Fracture inclines. Sometimes I use
Cloth, sometimes Tow, which I dip in rough black Wine, when I have a mind to
strengthen the part, and prevent Inflammation; or in the white of an Egg, if
the Fracture is without pain, and I have a mind only to keep it fast. Celsus
dipped in Wine and Oil of Roses, when Pain was grievous. Over this he brings the
four remaining Rollers. So that the following must always roll contrary to the
former, and the third must end below all the rest above.

Celsus his Bandage differs therefore from that of Hippocrates: For Hippocrates
uses three Rollers; Celsus six: Hippocrates uses Compresses; Celsus broad
linen Clothes: Hippocrates uses Cerote; Celsus Oil and Wine. If any
considerable pain afflict the part, Celsus his Bandage is best: but if there be
little or no Pain, Hippocrates his Bandage is better, which is most approved of
by Galen, cap. 5. l. 6. Meth. The Moderns presently take a Roller, and roll the
Fracture to both ends, not at all regarding what either Hippocrates or Celsus
says. But it is our best way, to follow the best of Physicians.

The Patient's good tolerance must be the measure in binding. the bandage must
press lightly, so as to keep the Fracture firm, and press out the Humors. But
there are other signs, which appear the next day. For if the Patient, that day
the bandage was made, found himself bound tight, and the next day a lax, soft
and small Tumor appear (in the Hand, if the Arm were broke; in the Foot, if the
Leg) the bandage is good: But if either no swelling at all, or a great and hard
one appear in the Hand or Foot the next day, the bandage is bad; because the
first does not keep the Fracture fast; the latter occasions Inflammation.

On the third day after deligation, Hippocrates unbinds the Rollers: for about
that time they grow slick, which is one reason why they are unbound. Another
reason is, because most frequently in Fractures, an intolerable Itch disturbs a
Man, because of Humors and Vapors detained by bandage, and grown sharp; which
itching usually ends in a painful and inslammatory excoriation. Then the
Rollers must be unbound, and the part troubled with the Itch, must have warm
water often poured upon it, to make the Humors and Vapors evaporate. Then the
Limb must be bound up again. Good bandage being made, and the Itch being no
more troublesome, the Patient must be kept bound from the third till the
seventh day: On the seventh it must be opened again, be bathed in warm water,
and bound up again.

But at this time, instead of Splenia or compresses, you must use Ferulae or
Splints (so Hippocrates calls them.) In our time, because we have no store of
Ferulae, Surgeons use thin slices of Wood called Scabbard, which they wrap
in Tow: Some use Pastboard: others use pieces of Wood an Inch thick. The use of
these is to keep the Limb not only immovable, but straight: And this Fer^ke
best do, which, as they are light, they do not press nor cause Inflammation;
and as they are stiff, they keep the Limb straight, where Scabbard is easily
bent, and Pastboard likewise, especially dipped in Oil or Wine; and thick pieces
of Wood press and cause Inflammation. Hippocrates used these after the seventh
day: because before the seventh day, the intention to prevent Inflammation was
more considerable than that, to confirm the part: but after the seventh day on
the contrary.

CHAP. V.
How the substance of the Bone may be kept sound.

THE third scope of curing Fractures is, to conserve the substance of the Bone
sound: for Nature, i. e. the temperature of the part, cannot unite the Bone,
except the part be sound. Because the fractured part then is weak, so as that
the Excrements of the Body do easily flow to it, by reason of its weak action
many Excrements breed, and cannot be expelled; and besides, because in a broken
Bone, tho never so well set, yet certain holes remain, that are afterward
filled with Sanies: Therefore to keep the part sound, we have need of
Medicines, that dry up the influxed matter, and repel the influent, which in a
word, are called Astringents.

The matter of this remedy is various: for Hippocrates uses Cerote; Celsus,
Linen dipped in Oil and Wine. Among the Moderns, some use Linen wrung out of
black rough Wine: some, combed Flax, wrung out of black rough Wine: others take
Oil and Wine, and with them mix equal quantities of Bol. Arm. Sang. Drac.
Myrtil. Balaust. Rosar. Rub. Others, besides these Powders, mix the white of an
Egg, and make a Medicine as thick as Honey, and apply it upon combed Flax, or
upon a piece of Linen. Some take the white of an Egg, and black rough Wine,
mixing the foresaid Powders without a Cloth or Stupe, and apply it round the
fractured Limb: And these Medicines, because of the white of the Egg, grow
presently dry, and stick fast to the part. Some wind Rollers, wrung out of
black austere Wine round them, to make them stick the faster.

As to the use of these, the intentions to be considered are, First, to prevent
Inflammation; Secondly, to preserve the tone of the part; Thirdly, to assuage
pain. Also the season of the year, the habit of the Body, the Age, and
Magnitude of the Fracture must be considered. If pain therefore be urgent, the
Cerote of Hippocrates, spread upon a piece of Linen cloth is proper: But over
this Cerote another Linen cloth, wrung out of black rough Wine, must be applied
to prevent Inslammation. If the Cerote be made of Wax and Oil of Roses, or
Myrtils, it will assuage pain by reason of the Oil; it will prevent
Inflammation, and strengthen the Fracture by reason of Astriction, Tho the pain
be but small, it must not be neglected: but our chiefest aim must be to prevent
Inflammation, and strengthen the Fracture: therefore we take Oleum Ros. Vinum,
and Ovi albumen, his pulveres dictos, ad mellis crassitudinem miscemus, and
linteo aut stupa apponimus. If there be no pain in a manner, then we use all
our endeavor to prevent Inflammation and strengthen the Fracture; and
therefore we abstain from Oil. If the habit of the Body be hard, the Summer
time, the Fracture great, suppose in the Thigh, with the white of an Egg we mix
the foresaid astringent Powders, additis corticibus granatorum, gallis
immaturis, succo hypocistidis, quae stupis imponuntur: over this we apply a
broad piece of thin cloth, wrung out of Wine; or if we care not to wrap so many
cloths about the part, we wring the first and second Roller out of black rough
Wine, and so roll them. And by these Medicines the substance of the part is
kept sound: all which must be applied before bandage is made.

Next to bandage, succeeds the position or collocation of the Limb. This
according to Hippocrates, must be soft, lest by pressing it cause pain; equal,
lest it distort the part high; and, lest the Humors descend. Therefore
Surgeons place the fractured Limb in Bed upon soft Bed-cloaths: or they tie
a Pillow stufft with soft Flocks or Feathers to the fractured part: Or they
make a Pastboard hollow, and line the inside with Tow, for the Arm, and such
Bones as do not oblige the Patient to keep his Bed. But if the Patient be
confined to his Bed, there is nothing better than to make a Case of thin
boards, and fill it sufficiently with Tow or Wool.

Besides, in the position, as also in the extension and bandage of a part, you
must consider the proper figure or posture of the part, i. e. such as is void
of pain, and keeps the Muscles entire on every hand: And this is a middle
Figure, in which, when we have nothing to do, we keep our parts; as an angular
figure in the Arm, a straight one in the Wrist, etc. that is, such an one, as
is intermediate between the extreme motions of every part. Unless this posture
be observed, in a little time the Limb will ache.

CHAP. VI.
Of breeding a Callusin Fractures.

THE fourth Intention is to breed Callus. This must be done, when all danger of
Inflammation is over: usually about the seventh day, according to Galen c. 5.
l. 6. Meth. tho it may sometimes be done sooner or later, according to the
greatness of the Fracture, season of the Year, Age, habit of Body. etc. just as
we said in the cure of a simple wound of the flesh. For while we are in fear of
a Defluxion, we cannot think of breeding a Callus; because the nature of the
part being hurt, it cannot breed Callus.

Now Callus is bred of the nourishment of the Bone, which owzing out of the
edges of the Fracture, grows concrete about the fractured Bones: And though it
be not Bone; yet it is so hard, that if that Limb chance to be broken again, it
will rather break in any other part, than where the Callus is bred. Here are
therefore two Indications, First, to supply congruous Matter, Secondly, to keep
it from being washed, or any way got off the edges of the Fracture.

As to the matter of Callus, the Food must be thick (because the aliment of
Bone is thick) and also viscid: wherefore we must use, Rice, Wheat boiled in
Water, Barley, the Feet, Stomachs and Heads of Animals, especially of Calves
and Weathers: The Skin also of a Kid or Weather may be given, and Neats-feet.
Wine must then be given, and that black and thick. And the Diet from low must
be altered to high.

Medicines also may be given inwardly, which are good to breed and harden the
Callus. So Succus primulae veris may be drank for several days together, Pulvis
radicum agrimoniae drunk in Wine, or Succus ejus drunk alone.

The applications must be Emplastick: wherefore for Children and Women we make
a Plaster e Farina volatili, and Ovi albumine. To grown persons we apply this
Plaster; Boli Armen. Thuris, M^rrhae, Aloe's, Acaciae, Tragacanthae, Ladani,
Gallarum, rucum cupressi, and part. aeq. in pollinem redacta, miscentur ovi
albumini, cum modico farinae volatilis. We use for perfusions, e decocto
Granorum and foliorum Myr^^, radicum uhni, and foliorum fraxini; also e succo
foliorum vit is albae. These Perfusions are used when the bandage is untied,
before the Plaster is applied, and the part bound up again. Among other things,
Surgeons use Emplastrum barbarum, and Oxycroceum in Winter, Spring and
Autumn, because they are hot; and Diapalma in Summer time. Thus therefore we
provide Matter apt for breeding of Callus, both by Diet and Medicines.

But lest this Matter, of which Cailus should be bred, might be thrust forth,
we must alter our bandage: for the part must not any more be so bound, as to
press out the Humors, but so as that they may continue there, and grow together
about the Callus. The Fracture therefore need not be bound so frequently as
before; once in five days is sufficient. The Rollers also must be drawn looser.
Yet in the first bindings, you need not tarry so long, but you may see how the
Callus in the Fracture proceeds: It is long enough therefore to tarry two days
between the openings: And then you must consider, whether as much, and such a
Callus breeds, as is requisite. But how you may help a Callus, when it is less
or greater than it should be, I shall show you afterward.

In a Fracture made length-ways, the same cure must be used as in a transverse:
Only the bandage must be straiter, otherwise it would be apt to slip.

CHAP. VII.
Of Symptoms attending a Fracture; and of a Fracture of the Knee-pan.

NOw we are come to the fifth Intention, namely the correction of Accidents,
which usually attend Fractures, and retard their Cure. And they are Pain,
Inflammation, Itching, Excoriation, Callus greater or less than it ought to be,
debilitation and slenderness of the Limb, the depraved Figure, a Wound.

If Pain then afflict, it must be assuaged by Anodynes, as Lana succida, infusa
in Ol^o and aceto simul mistis, and coctis; Spongia ex Oleo Rosarum expresa,
and imposita; anointing ex Oleo Chamaemeline, and Lumbricorum; then a Linen
Cloth dipped in black austere Wine, and applied; All which must be used actually
warm. Hippocrates uses a Cerote, which is best, if it be made with Oil of
Roses. A Fomentation also with a Sponge is proper, wrung out of Water, in qua
Malva and Chamaemelum Bullierint.

How an Inflammation not yet arisen may be prevented, we have shown already.
But if one be arisen, we apply this Medicament; rad. Althaeae, florum
Chamaemel. violarum an. M. ^. coctis in aqua and contusis add Farinae Hordei
iv. sapae iij. Ol. Rosar. Violar. an. iij. Vini nigri, aut aquae Hordei q. s.
Misce pro Cataplasmate. If the Heat be very violent, and the Inflammation in
its state; rad. Alth. iv. fol. Violarum balaustiorum, Plantaginis an. M. iss.
florum Chamaemel. M. j. decoquantur in aqua, and cum Oleo Rosar. ac Chamaemel.
aequis porti^nibus simul mistis, fiat Emplastrum. If the Inflammation be in the
declension, we use a Fomentation e flor. Chamaemel. and Beton. decoctis in Vino
albo; also a Fomentation e Rosis and Calamintha similiter decoctis.

If the Itch trouble one, because of detention of the Humors or Wind, the place
must be bathed with warm water, that when the Pores are opened, they may be
dispersed: Or the place may be somented with a Sponge dipped in warm water, and
wrung out. Bathing in Sea water is very good; which, by reason of the Salt, is
detersive, and opens the Pores.

When this itching is neglected, it usually terminates in a painful, and
sometimes an inflammatory excoriation, which must be cured by driers and
coolers. In Summer time therefore Vnguentum de Cerussa is good; in great heat,
Vnguentum de Cerussa caphuratum. If it be Summer, and the Body be excessive
hot, Vnguentum Populeon is good; also that they call Linimentum simplex; if it
be new made. At other times Vnguentum de Lithargyro, and Vnguen^^an de Minio
are proper. All these are cooling and drying; some more, others less.

The Callus sometimes is less or greater than it should be. The signs of its
being less than it should be, are, if the part be weak in motion, and if, when
the broken part is tou^^ed, no Callus, or very little is selt. Now this comes
to pass, because the Patient used too thin a Diet, or Meats either not thick,
or not viscid enough, but friable: or because the Rolle^s were drawn over
strait. It must therefore be increased by a fuller Diet, the bandage must be
slackened, the astringent Medicines must be more gentle. The Humors must be
attracted by bathing with warm water (not very hot, lest the attracted Humors
evaporate again) till the part looks red, and swells a little; for then we must
desist.

If the Callus be too great, the signs are, when it is handled it may be felt,
and by pressing the Muscles and nervous parts, it causes pain. And then it is
unapt for motion, by reason of the pain and compression. In this case the quite
contrary course must be taken, as to Diet, Rolling, etc. Then the Callus must
be softened and digested; for which purpose, these are good; Emplastra e
Radicibus Althaeae, foliis Malvae, and Meliloti, decoctis in aqua, cum axungia
anatis. But before the Plaster is appiled, Perfusion must be made with the same
decoction. When there is an Emollition, Perfusions must be afterward made of
water, wherein Betonica, Scabiosa, Scordium and Parietaria have been boiled.
These things must be done, not only till the part grow red, and swell a little,
but till it fall away and corrugate.

If a Gangrene arise, we must immediately bath the part in a Lixivium, wherein
Scordium and Plantain have been boiled: Then a Plaster must be applied, made e
farina Lupinorum, pulvere Scordii, and Oxymelite, cum modico lixivio.

If the Limb grow too small, because of the over-straitness of the Rollers, too
much bathing, too much motion, or scarcity of viscous Aliment; the Patient must
be nourished; then a Bath of fresh water must be administered, wherein if a
little piece of flesh be boiled, it would be better. Besides, Pication must be
made, viz. Pitch must be spread upon a Cloth, and applied to the part, and then
snacht off hastily for several times, that the plucking of the Hair may cause
pain, and so attract nourishment to the part. Then warm water must be poured
upon it.

But after Fractures are cured, oftentimes the part remains depressed in its
Figure, and distorted; because there was not a good Co^^tation of the Bones,
either through, the Chi^urgeons ignorance, the Patients disorderly motion, or
bad bandage. If the Limb be not hurt in its motion, the Patient must rest
contented. If the hurt of the Limb in its Operations be considerable, the
Patient old and weak, the Callus old too, and the fractured Bone great; the
Patient must likewise rest himself contented. But if the Patient be young and
strong, the Callus fresh, and the fractured Bone small, the only way will be to
break the Fracture again; yet for several days we must, as much as we are able,
soften the Callus by baths of Althaen, Malva, Lotura lanae, Oesypus, and Lutum
thermale: much Friction must be used by the Fingers anointed with Oesypus,
perfusions must be made of Water, wherein Hemlock was boiled. We may also use
Emplastrum e foliis cicutae cum axungia porcina. Then the Bone may be broke
again by the strength of the Hands or Fingers if the Callus be very hard, I
break it with an instrument drawing different ways; then I cure it; as I have
already shown. Tho some good Surgeons are timorous (as Albucasis) lest the
Callus should not, when broke, reunite.

The operations in all simple Fractures are so exactly alike, that to instance
in particular cases, would be but to repeat what has been already said. Only
the Fracture of the Patella or Knee-pan differs from all other Fractures in
cure, as that Bone differs from all others in site and connection. Hildanus Obs.
Chirurg. 88. Cent. 5. has this relation. A Man forty years old, strong, and of
a good habit of Body, by a fall broke his Knee-pan transverse, with a great
contusion of his Knee; but without a Wound. Though the Patient was all along
treated according to Art; yet most acute pain, and other Symptoms followed. At
length the pain and other Symptoms ceased; but he halted, and had an exceeding
great weakness in that Leg, so that he had much a do to walk, and if he climbed
any place, he could scarce lift his Leg up. Several things were used to
strengthen the Nerves; but all to no purpose. And here it proved, as Paraeus
has observed, that halting generally attends a Fracture of the Knee-pan. Some
are of opinion, that the cause of the lameness is, because the Callus, which
joins the fractured Patella, fills the Cavity underneath, and so hinders the
motion. But the extuberance of the Callus is rarely so great as to do this. And
in this Patient the Callus could not be the cause of lameness, as by what
follows will appear. It is therefore to be considered, that the Patella may be
broke transverse, obliquely, or lengthways in a right line drawn from the Thigh
to the great Toe. Now a Fracture lengthways will not cause lameness, if an
expert Surgeon have the handling of it: for he may easily join the disjoined
Patella, and keep it in its place, by Bolsters, Pledgets, and Rollers, when
joined. He may do it easily, I say: for the ends of the seventh, eighth, and
ninth Muscles, that move the Leg, do meet about the Patella, and terminate in a
very strong Tendon, which Tendon does so involve the Patella, that if it is
broke lengthways, the Fracture is apt to close of it self; because it is the
property of Muscles to draw toward their Original. So when the Fracture is
made, according to the rectitude of the Bone, Membranes, Muscles, and Tendons,
it is consentaneous to Reason, that they must return to their place again; and
when the edges of the fractured Patella are immediately joined, and that
exactly; there can be no extuberance of Callus, and therefore no lameness.
Provided the Surgeon has done his duty in applying proper Topics, and has
obviated Pain, and other occurring Symptoms.

But when the Fracture is made transverse, the case is quite otherwise: for
then the seventh, eighth, and ninth Muscles, draw toward the Hip, and the
Tendon inserted in the Patella, draws downwards; and then it is so disjoined in
the middle, that the edges of the Fracture, by reason of the strong attraction
of the Muscles and the Tendon can never be joined. And that the Fracture was
such in the foresaid Patient, both Ocular inspection, and Feeling with my
Fingers convinced me. For it was so disjoined in the middle, that one might lay
more than ones little Finger in the Cavity. No wonder then, if from this
disjunction of the Patella, lameness followed, and the Patient could scarce
draw his Leg after him; since the Muscles that move the Leg, especially the
seventh, eighth, and ninth, were deprived of their strength. Lameness likewise
follows a transverse Fracture. For the foresaid Muscles and the Tendon draw the
edges of the fractured Knee-pan up or down, or transverse, and so disjoyn them.
Hence it is evident, that a transverse or oblique fracture of the Knee-pan, can
never by Art or Industry be so cured, but the Patient will be lame. Yet Paulus
Aegineta de re Medica. l. 6. c. 103. will have the Leg extended, and the
Knee-pan joined with the Fingers, and so kept till the edges of the fractured
Bone touch one the other, and are grown together. This may indeed be tried; but
I can scarce believe, that the edges of the Patella can be so joined; or, if
they were joined, that the Leg can be kept stretched, and the edges of the
Fracture be kept together so long with the Rollers and Pledgets, by reason of
the pain, as till a Callus be bred. But thanks be to GOD, as Avicenna says,
this Fracture rarely happens. And thus we have done with simple Fractures.

CHAP. VIII.
Of curing a Fracture with a Wound, wherein neither the Bone is made bare, nor
the coming away of any piece of Bone is expected.

IN a Fracture with a Wound, either the Bone is made bare, or not made bare:
Besides, we either look for a piece of Bone to come away, or we do not. We will
first treat of a Fracture, wherein neither the Bone is made bare, nor we do
expect any piece of Bone to come away. In this case we must mind the Intentions
of the Wound, and of the Fracture one after the other.

First of all the Bones must be put together by extension, as we showed before
in the first indication of Fractures.

Then we must answer the Second and Third Intention of Wounds, i. e. the Lips
of the Wound must be closed, and then they must be kept close.

Afterward we mind the Third Intention of a Fracture, and the Fourth of a
Wound, i. e. we preserve the substance of the fractured and the wounded part
found, by applying Medicaments to the Wound closed, and the Fracture set, which
may assuage Pain, if there be any, and prevent Inflammation, i. e. which may
repel the influent Matter, and may dry up what is gathered there already, and
press out of the part; such as are astringents and glutinatives. Of which
formerly. If there be Pain, and in Winter time, we must use Ceratum picatum:
which according to Hippocrates asswages pain; In Summer we must use Ceratum; at
other times, Ceratum simplex. If there be no pain, we must most endeavor the
strengthening of the Fracture, and preventing an Inflammation. Therefore we
must apply combed Flax, wet in the Whites of Eggs, or a Linen Cloth wrung out
of black Wine, and Oil of Roses. If the part be void of pain, we may use the
foresaid astringent Powders, mixed with the white of an Egg.

Then we must satisfy another Intention of a Fracture, i. e. the Fracture must
be rolled, as we showed before. But here we must observe, that the Rollers must
be softer and broader than in a Fracture without a Wound, that they may reach
over the edges of the Wounds on each side, and so may close, not press the
edges of ^he Wound. The Rollers also are not to be drawn so hard, as if there
were no. Wound, lest by squeezing the Wound, Pain and Inflammation should
arise. Wherefore Hippocrates and Ceis^s use many circumvolutions; since it is
better to turn often about, than to bind hard. The band (...) must be unbound
every thi^^ (...), and must be bound loose, as long as there is fear of
Inflammation. Splints must either not be used, lest they should press the
Wound; or if they be applied, they must not be laid upon the Wound. In this
case Celsus his bandage, which is made with six Rollers, is most proper.

CHAP. IX.
Of a Fracture with a Wound, wherein the Bone is not made bare; but we look for
a piece of Bone to come away.

WE say, there is a recess or abscess of a Bone, when a piece of Bone is
separated from the main Bone, and is thrust forth by nature. This comes to
pass, First, when after an old Wound, the Bones are dry and withered; for then
the perished Bone is separated by the expulsive faculty of the part, and so
there is an abscess, or desquammation of the Bone: Which may likewise happen
without a Fracture, as in Fistula's and old Ulcers, by reason of much San^es,
tarrying too long upon the Bone, and corrupting it. Such a desquammation may
also happen in a Fracture not Set, by reason of much Sanies gathering there.
Secondly, Bones recede, when some piece by the violence of the Fracture, is
cither quite separated from the rest; or so shattered, that it is in a manner
separated.

The causes of this are either external violence, or corruption of the Bone,
either by Sanies tarrying too long there; or by the alteration of the external
Air, which corrupts the Bones, and destroys their natural temper.

The signs which show that a Bone will recede, are various. (...) 18. l. 3. de
Fracturis. The First is, too much Sanies comes away, not proportionable to the
magnitude of the Wound, which shows the Bone is corrupt, and will come away.
Secondly, the Wound looks as if it inclined to excretion, the the Lips of it do
not close; but are rather inverted; and if the Patient narrowly mind it, he
feels a tacit motion in the inside of his Limb. Thirdly, if the Bones have been
deprived of Setting, then by reason of the continuance of the Sanies, which
corrupts the Bone, a piece of the Bone will come away. The fourth sign is, if
the Bone be made bare of Flesh, it must necessarily recede; because Aliment
cannot be given, since neither Veins nor Arteries go to the naked part; and
also because the Bone is exposed to the external Air, and is corrupted by it.
The Fifth sign is laid down by Paulus Aegineta, c. cog. l. 6. If the Flesh,
which grows about the lips of the Wound, be lax, dull and spongy: for Nature
heals not the Wound, while it has something within it, which she cannot keep. A
Bone therefore will come away, whereabout the Flesh is lax.

The signs of a very quick recession are, when there is a quick suppuration in
the Wound, and an early and fair excrescence of flesh; for the way the Bone
does recede is, when Nature creates Flesh in the lips of the sound Bone, which
keeps off and thrusts forth the fractured. A great solid Bone, in a full grown
Person, in winter time, recedes slowly, in threescore days or thereabout. A
midling lax Bone in tender years, and Summer time recedes sooner, usually
within forty days.

As for the cure; If the Bone that will recede, be quite separated from the
rest of the Bone, and is fallen within the Wound, and sticks there, it must be
taken hold of with a pair of Pliers, and drawn out. And if a piece of Bone be
quite cleft from the main Bone, but remains in its place; yet nevertheless,
because it will never glutinate with the rest of the Bone, it must be taken
hold of and pulled out, if it can without violence. If it cannot be done
without great violence, it must not be extracted; because Pain, Inflammation, a
Fever, and Convulsion would be caused, and there would be a fistulous Ulcer
when such a Cavity was filled, after the extraction of the Bone, with Sanies,
which by corroding, hinders the flesh from breeding. Then therefore this
business must be left to Nature herself, which by degrees breeds flesh in the
lips of the sound Bone, and causes Bones to recede, as in the wounds of the
Head.

It ought also to be considered, whether the piece of Bone, that is to come
away, be great or little. This may be known by the intenseness or remissness of
the fore-meationed signs. For if Suppuration proceed slowly, and great store of
Sanies appear; also if much lax and dull flesh breed, a great piece is to come
away; if on the contrary, a little one.

If a small portion of Bone be to come away; First, we must take care, that the
gathered Pus tarry not long in the Wound, and so corrupt the sound Bone: The
Pus therefore must be evacuated, not by pressure of bandage drawn tight (as in
a Fracture without a Wound) for so Pain and Inflammation would arise; but the
Pus must be so evacuated, that it may flow out of the Wound. The Second scope
is, to help the recession of the Bone, which business nevertheless in a little
Bone, must be committed to Nature; but in a great one must be promoted by
Medicines. For these reasons Hippocrates approves of loose bandage, and
frequent, that the Pus may not be stopped, but may pass freely: He does not apply
Splints, lest by compression they might cause pain: The rest he leaves to
Nature. This is to be observed, that tho you look for a recess of the Bone,
nevertheless the Wound must be stitched: for Nature will not heal up the Wound,
where the Bone is to come out. The Fracture may be confirmed by many Rollers,
as has been formerly shown.

If a great Bone be to recede, the Cure differs in two things from that
foregoing: for Medicines are applied, and the manner of deligation is peculiar.
The Indications are; that the Pus be not kept in, but run freely, that the
Fracture be confirmed, Inflammation prevented, Pain not raised, and that a
speedy recess of the Bone be procured.

To do all these things; as to bandage, many Plagulae are to be taken of double
linen Cloth, longer than to go once round the Limb (for shorter would not keep
the Fracture stable) but shorter than to go twice round the Limb (for longer
would not be commodious, when the Limb is unbound, to renew the applications:
for then the Limb must be lifted up and moved) that so both the Fracture may be
kept firm, and without stirring the Limb, when both the Heads are loose, the
Wound may appear in loosing. The breadth of the Plagulae must at least be half
an hand; in some so great, as to take hold of both sides of the Wound. They are
to be carried round, so as to cross one another. There must be as many Plagulae
as are necessary, that no space may be left empty: I have often found, it is
better to use too many, than too few, for confirming the Fracture; yet so, as
not to press too hard. They must be wet in black, austere, and thick Wine; for
so they stick the better, they prevent Inflammation, and conserve the substance
of the part sound: upon which accounts, but especially to prevent Inflammation,
Galen not only so wet the Plagulae; but day and night kept the part wet with
such Wine; or he applied Clothes and Sponges dipped in such Wine; but that the
running of the Wine might not wet all the Chamber and the Bed, he laid
underneath, a Leather made like a Canal, to carry the Wine off.

But before we apply the Plagulae, it is necessary to apply Medicines, which in
the beginning, i. e. so long as the Inflammation lasts, may assuage Pain, and
are good for Inflammation, such as Ceratum rosatum, Ceratum picatum is likewise
commended, especially while Pus is breeding: for by helping Coction, and
causing Suppuration, it prevents Inflammation, because when the Matter is
Suppurate, no harm can ensue. Hippocrates sometimes uses Linen wet in Oil and
Wine mixed together, when there is pain, and danger of a Convulsion.

When the time of Inflammation is over, we must use all our industry, that the
receding Bone may with all speed be thrust forth; which though it may be done
by Nature; yet it may be helped by Medicines. Things manifestly hot do this; ut
Oleum vetus, Cera Citrina, sordities vasorum apum ad ignem liquata, cui
admiscebitur pars una euphorb ii, duae tith mali, tres Aristolochiae: this
Medicine must be used in Winter, in adult and hard Bodies, and it is commended
by Avicenna. In other Bodies and Seasons Ammoniacum and bdellium, dissolutum
cum oleo liliaceo, is good. Cinis lumbricorum terrae, melli admistus and
impesitus extracts a Bone, that is to come away, by a specific property. And
Ceratum Sacrum does extract Bones.

CHAP. X.
Of a Fracture with a Wound, in which the Bone is made bare.

THe Bone made bare must altogether be defended from the alteration of the Air,
lest it putrefy and recede. Therefore if the Bone made bare stick not up above
the Wound, it must be covered, not with abstersive Medicines, which irritate
and cause pain, nor with oily and mollifying Medicines, which make the Wound
foul, but with the natural covering, i. e. the Skin. The lips of the Wound
therefore must be drawn together till they touch, by stitching; then the Cure
must be proceeded upon, as in a Fracture with a Wound.

If the bare Bone stick out above the Wound, if it can with any ease be
restored unto its proper Cavity, by the benefit of due extension, without
violence, it must certainly be done; then the Wound must be stitched, as we
said but now. But if the bare Bone stick out to high, that it cannot without
violence be put into its place again; then of two evils the less is to be
chosen, and the Bone must be cut off with a File, a Saw, or some other
Instrument, and made a little shorter, and then it must be put together, by
making a moderate Extension: for this is better, than to leave such Bones not
put together, or by violent Extension, to occasion a Convulsion and Death. If
after the Bone is cut off it be difficult to put it together, and we fear
violent Extension, wherein because of the Wound, many Fibers are extended, and
great Pain is caused, so that a Convulsion may be expected: Hippocrates in this
case replaces the Fracture as well as he can, and puts in a Chisellike
instrument between the fractured Bones, and raises it like a Lever: and so the
Bones are more extended than the Muscles, and may be replaced.

THE PRACTICE OF SURGERY. BOOK V.
CHAP. I.
Of the definition, differences, causes and signs of Luxations in general.

LUxation, or putting out of joint, is called Dislocation. It is the slipping
of the Head of some Limb out of its proper Sinus, into another place. For
Dearticulation, or a Joint, which is designed for motion, consists of the head
of a Bone, and a Sinus; In the head it is observable, that all Bones which have
a round head, have all motions, as in the Thigh and Shoulder: In the Sinus,
that all which have a deep Sinus, as the Os coxendicis, are not so apt to be
put out of Joint; on the contrary, in such as have a shallow Cavity, as in the
Scapula. But lest the Bones might easily slip out of their Cavities, there are
also Ligaments: and some of them are orbicular, which in all Joints encompass
the head and Sinus round: others are round, and are only in such Joints as are
made for strong motions, as in the Thigh and Knee. These out of a deep Cavity,
are inserted into the head of the Bone. Now the Joints that have both sorts of
Ligaments, or that have only the orbicular, but very close, are difficultly
dislocated. In the Joints there is a sort of unctuous and viscid Humor, lest
the Bones by their perpetual motion should grow hot and dry.

In general there are three sorts of Luxations. First, when Bones gape, which
before were joined. This happens in three places; when the broad Blade-bone
parts from the Humerus; or the Radius from the Cubitus, or the Sura from the
Tibia, as Celsus writes, c. 10. l. 8. Rhases 15. contin. calls it Disjunction.
A Second sort is, when Bones are lengthened, through the laxity and distention
of the Ligaments; whence it comes to pass, that the head of the Bone starts a
little out of the Sinus; yet it is not quite out, but it may easily be put in.
I have often observed this Luxation in Beggars, in the Wrist and Elbow. The
third sort is properly called Luxation, when the head slips out of its proper
Sinus, of which there are no differences; but according as it is more or less,
Paul c. 11. l. 6.

If then the head do wholly and perfectly slip out of its Sinus, it is called
(...), by Rhases Dislocation: If in part, and but imperfectly, it is called
(...) by Rhases Distortura, or wrenching. The Joints of the Arm, Hand, Leg,
Foot, Fingers and Toes suffer both sorts of Luxation; only the Thigh and
Shoulder suffer a perfect Luxation: the reason whereof is the roundness of the
heads, and thinness of the Cavities; whence it comes to pass, that the heads do
almost touch the edges in a point, and so either quite slip out of, or come in
again to the Sinus. Yet Hippocrates says, the Shoulder and Thigh may be more or
less luxated, which must be understood of perfect Luxation, while they are more
less distant from their natural place. Moreover, this true Luxation may be made
four ways, upwards or downwards, to the right hand or the left, Galen c. 4. l.
de Constit. Art. adds forwards or backwards.

The first sort of Luxation is occasioned only by internal causes, i. e. by
Humors, mollifying and relaxing the Ligaments. The other two sorts, namely; the
wrenching and true Luxation, are occasioned both by an internal cause, to wit,
the Humors, flowing to the Joints, which by degrees fill the Cavity, and thrust
the head of the Bone out of its place: and by an external cause, which by
violence moves the Bone out of its place, as leaping, a fall, and violent
running. But we shall only treat of those Luxations that proceed from an
external cause.

There are diverse signs of Luxation. First, when the motion of the Joint is
lost: for as long as motion is not lost, tho there be suspicion of a Luxation,
yet there is no Luxation. But this sign is not enough, others must be added.
The Second therefore is an hollowness appearing in some unusual place, and on
the contrary an eminence on the opposite side: for the Tumor is ever on that
side unto which the Bone slipped; and the hollowness, from whence it is slipped:
This sign is discovered by the sight and touch, in the Joints, which are either
naturally without flesh, or emaciated. The third sign is, the Limb generally is
shortened: for the Bone being slipped out of its place, since it finds no
resistance, is drawn upwards by the Muscles; this happens in a perfect
Luxation. The fourth sign is; the Limb out of Joint is unlike the found one in
figure, site and longitude.

A perfect Luxation is distinguished from an imperfect one, by the intenseness
of the aforesaid signs. For if all the motions of the Joint be lost, if the
Limb be shorter, if there be a great Eminence, and a Cavity, if the Limb be
unlike the sound one, it is a perfect Luxation: On the contrary, when it is
imperfect. The most certain sign of a disjunction, where the Bones gape, is the
thickness of the Limb above its natural pitch; and where the heads of the Bones
meet, the extuberance is greater. That sort of Luxation, wherein the Limbs are
made longer, because of the softness of the Ligaments is known. First, because
the Limb looks, as if it were hung on by thread, and it dangles disorderly this
way and that, because the Ligaments are relaxed, and the Bones do not then
touch one another. Secondly, when the head of the Bone is put up, the Limb
returns to its natural length; and if it be let go, it returns to its
accidental length. Lastly, there is a Cavity quite round the Joint, into which
one may sometimes put ones little Finger.

The signs of a Luxation being removed, i. e. of a Joint well Self, are
contrary, which show the natural state: If there be no more signs nor causes of
Luxation. Besides, Avicenna brings another sign, namely the crashing, or snap
which both the Patient and the bystanders hear, when the Bone slips back again
into its Cavity. But this is neither a good sign, nor much to be desired;
because it has two bad causes. For either the noise is made while the head of
the Bone rubs against the edges of the Sinus, whereby those thin and
cartilaginous edges are broken, and so go into the Cavity before the Bone gets
into it again: and therefore true reposition cannot be made; because the head
can no more turn round in its Cavity, which makes Men lame. Or the noise is,
because the head of the Bone beats against the Sinus; which may cause an Ulcer,
and make the part putrefie, the Cartilages may grow hard, and be separated from
the Bone; and so the Bone remains rough, and difficulty in motion is occasioned.

CHAP. II.
The Cure of a Luxation in general.

THe Doctrine of Luxations is truly Chirurgical; because here all depends on
the Chirurgeon's Hand, and nothing on Nature. There are four scopes in a
Luxation; Extension, Reposition, Deligation, Collocation. Extension is
necessary; because the Muscles contract the slipped Bone, and make the Limb
shorter; because then it finds no resistance. Deligation is necessary, lest,
because of the Relaxation of the Ligaments, and the Extension of the Muscles,
the Bone might slip out again.

And the four aforesaid things must be so administered, that the due figure of
the Limb may be kept, and Inflammation may be prevented. The Limb must be put
in such a Figure, as that it may be void of pain. In Extension the Muscles must
on one side be kept as they are, lest the head of a Muscle should be in the
inside, and the end on the outside. In Deligation and placing of the Limb, we
must observe such a figure or posture of the Limb, as is the mean between the
two extreme motions of the Limb.

An Inflammation usually happens in Luxations by reason of the pain, that is
caused, both when the Luxation is made, and after it is made; when the Bone,
being out of its place, presses upon the nervous parts, and pain is caused in
the Extension, when the Bone is replaced. And an Inflammation must be
prevented, in respect of the part recipient, by proper figuration or posture;
in respect of the part mittent. i. e. the whole Body, by Bleeding, Purging, and
Diet.

First of all Extension must be made, as we have shown in Fractures. Secondly,
the Limb must be replaced gently, lest either Contusion, or Attrition of the
Head and the Sinus one against another should be made; also twining about of
the head of the Bone must be avoided, lest the edge of the Sinus be broke.
Thirdly the Limb must be bound, lest it slip out again. The binding must be so
made, as to keep the natural posture of the Limb, and prevent Inflammation, by
pressing out the Humors that are got in; and by hindering others from coming in.
But before binding be made, Medicines must be applied, which hinder
Inflammation, namely Astringents, which besides this advantage, do contract the
relaxed Ligaments, and strengthen the part, Such are Ceratum barbarum,
Diapalma, de Minio, Oxycroceum, Ceratum simplex, Ceratum rosaceum, Vnguentum
rosaceum, Vinum, Posca, Vinum granatorum, Succus hypocystidos, decoctum
corticum granatorum; Balanstiorum, ovi Albumen. A compound Medicine may also be
made e bolo Armena, Sang. Drac. Myrtill. Cortic. Granat. pulverisatis, and
mistis ovi Albumini ad mellis cunsistentiam, exceptum hoc stupis pexis circa
articulum imponitur. If there be pain, it indicates lenient and unctuous
Medicines, i. e. things contrary to an Inflammation: wherefore we must proceed
thus. If the pain be small, it must not be regarded, and astringents with
unctuous Medicines, as Flax with the white of an Egg, must be applied. But if
pain divert the Cure to it self, the part must first be anointed with things
that assuage pain, which yet must have an astringent Virtue in them, such as
Oleum Rosatum, Oleum Myrtinum, Mastichinum; then the aforesaid Medicine must be
applied, or a Linen cloth dipped in Ceratum Rosaceum, over which the aforesaid
Stupes must be applied. Cerotes must not be used in the beginning; because by
their hardness they press and cause Inflammation: for which reason Galen before
bandage applies Linen clothes dipped in some juice, lest by pressure they should
cause pain; When these things are done, the Limb must be laid in a middle
figure, lest it should occasion pain, The Posture must be soft, smooth, and
high.

The Limb thus bound, must (as much as may be) be kept immovable for three or
four days; But then the Rollers being slackened, and an itching arising from
the detention of the Vapors, the bandage must be unbound, and the itching part
must be bathed with warm water. Yet lest the warm water should loosen the
Ligaments, which rather want astriction, therefore, if there be no itching, we
must not meddle with fomentation. At the Second Deligation, if there be no
pain, we may apply some Ceratum, as in Winter. Ceratum barbarum: in Summer
Ceratum de Minio, Diapalma. About the same time also, we may apply splints of
Leather and thick Paper, to confirm the head of the Bone. And thus we must
proceed, till the Limb seem strong enough: About this time it must be unbound,
and fomented with a decoction of Wormwood, Roses, Chamaemel, white Oaken Moss,
which do strengthen. Then having applied a Cerote, the Limb must be kept for
some days without binding, and the Patient must be ordered to use his wonted
exercises, but moderately. Thus much of the general cure of all fresh Luxations.

Old Luxations have the same Indications. Yet these must be preceded by
sostning and discussing the matter, which is flowed into the Joint, and about
the Joint. For which purpose, Rad. Althee vj. Rad. Cucum. asinini iij. fol.
malvae M. ij. coctis in aqua and contusis add farinae Faenugnec. and seminis
lini ana jss. Olei communis vj. axungiae porcinae iiij. Decocti praedicti q. s.
misce and siat emplastrum. We likewise use Diachylon simplex, and cum Gummi,
when the Callus is great and hard: But first we must rub the part with our
Fingers wet in moist Oesypus, and we apply thick Oesypus. We often dip the Limb
in the washing of Wool warm, Morning and Evening for an hour or two. The Mud
of hot Bathes is also good; Those are Emollients. After them we must use
digesters, such as, in soft natures, Ceratum de betonica; in hard ones
Emplastrum sacrum. Before the application of the Emplasters, Fomentation must
be made e decocto Chamaemeli, Hyssopi, Betonicae, Staechadis; also e vino albo
generoso. When the Humors are much, and very hard, if they be first softened,
we must use a Fumigation e lapide pyrite or molari: also a Fomentation e
decocto Rad. Cucum. asin. Altheae, ivae, colocynthidos; which both by their
heat and dryness discuss the matter, and by an innate property attract the
Humors about the Joint. The Limbs may be held in the water of hot Bathes, and
in the steam of the same, which are very digerent: when these things are done,
you may manage all the rest, as in a fresh Luxation.

CHAP. III.
Of particular Luxations: and First of Luxations of the Jaw Bone.

When the Jaw Bone is out of joint, Mastication and Speech are depraved. It is
very seldom, that it is dislocated: because the head of the Jaw Bone, which is
contained in the Cavity, is encompassed on every side with Bones. Then the
Jaw Bone has many strong Muscles, which keep it in its proper place, and it has
two heads, which are not so apt to slip out, as one is. Thirdly, it has two
acute Processes. Fourthly, the Jaw Bone can only be dislocated one way, i. e.
forwards, Fifthly, there are few causes of the Luxation of the Jaw Bone.

For the Jaw Bone can never be out, unless its acute Process slip under the Os
jugale; and so cannot get back again: But this Process cannot slip downwards,
unless the Mouth gape very wide, and it cannot get upwards except in a
distortion of the Mouth. Yet I have often seen the Jaw Bone luxated: the cause
whereof may be a frequent and constant motion of the Jaw Bone, both in
Mastication and Speaking, whereby the Muscles are tired, debilitated, and so
give frequent occasion to the luxation of the Jaw Bone.

Gulielmus de Saliceto, and some other Surgeons, not skilled in Anatomy,
have written, that the Jaw Bone may be luxated to the left and right, but this
is false; for behind, the Bone hinders, on the right, the left head of the
Jawbone hinders; on the left, the right head of the Jaw Bone hinders. It
therefore follows, that the Jawbone can be luxated only forwards.

And either both its heads are luxated, or only one. If only one, 1. That part
of the Jaw is prominent only forwards. 2. The Chin enclines to the luxated
part. 3. The Mouth is distorted toward the part, contrary to the luxated part,
and the distorted Jaw Bone appears more eminent. 4. The Dentes canini stand
underneath the fore-Teeth. 5. On the luxated side, the acute Process appears
more eminent. 6. The Teeth cannot be shut. If the Jaw be out on both sides,
these are the signs. 1. The whole Jaw is prominent forwards, and not distorted,
but fore-right. 2. The Mouth keeps open. 3. The acute Process appears prominent
on both sides. 4. The lower Teeth stand out far beyond the upper. 5. The
temporal Muscles are very tight and hard.

Hippocrates writes, that unless it be replaced presently, there do arise
continual Fevers, Sleepiness, Inflammation, Pain, Convulsion, voiding of
Choler, and usually on the tenth day death. Tho I have had several such under
cure, I never met with any that fared so: Yet I believe Hippocrates did;
because it is rational enough, that such Symptoms may happen, by reason of the
Muscles and Nerves being primarily affected, and the Brain by consent.

In the Reposition of the Jawbone, motions must be made contrary to them, that
the Jaw Bone made, when it slipped out of its Cavity. First, the Jaw Bone slips
forwards, it must therefore be thrust backwards. Secondly, in opening the Mouth
it is drawn downwards; therefore it must be forced upwards. Thirdly, the
Muscles draw the acute Process upwards; therefore the Jaw Bone must be drawn
downwards.

If the Jaw be out only on one side; it must be forced to the contrary side. We
must begin with the last motions first. Therefore if both sides of the Jaw be
out; the first action of the Surgeon is Traction or Extension of it
downwards; the Second backwards; the Third upwards. To do these things, he must
put both his Thumbs in his Patient's Mouth, and with his Fingers he must take
hold of the outside of his Chin: then the Jaw Bone must be forced downwards,
backwards, and upwards. Thus it is easily and quickly replaced. But the
Patient's Head must be held fast, that it give not way, when the Jaw Bone is
forced backwards.

When the Reposition is done, things must be applied to the heads of the
Jaw Bone, i. e. to the Temples, which may prevent Inflammation, such as Ceratum
rosaceum: In violent distention, where there is more need of astringence, we
may apply Stupes wet in whites of Eggs, adding, if there be need, astringent
Powders. We must also anoint the parts of the Temples, i. e. the whole temporal
Muscle, with Oleum Ros. lumbricatum.

Bandage is made in this manner; a Roller is applied to the Chin, where it must
be slit a little, that it may take hold of the Chin on both sides; then on each
side at the Ears, the Roller must be slit again, and the Ear must be drawn
through; afterward the Roller is to be fastered at the Crown of the Head. And
the Patient must be kept thus, till the Jaw Bone be strengthened, which it is
in one, two, or at most three days time: All which time, if there be any
danger, the Patient had best abstain from Meat; nor must he omit Bleeding, and
those things we have mentioned in the general cure of Luxations. But to speak
the truth, I ever used to apply Medicaments to the place affected, and when
there was occasion to eat, I ordered the Swathes to be loosened.

CHAP. IV.
Of a Luxation of the Shoulder.

THe Shoulder is a great Bone, with a round Head, which is inserted into the
shallow Sinus of the Scapula. And this head is surrounded only with an
orbicular Ligament, which is loose enough. This Sinus has some Buttresses; for
on the outside of the Scapula it has a certain large Process, consisting of the
Spine of the Scapula: on the upper part it has partly the said Process, and
partly the Clavicle: in the inside it has the Processus anchoroeides. Hence it
is apparent, that the head of the Shoulder may easily slip out: for this Joint
is uniform and simple, not, as it is the Knee, double. Then the head of the
Shoulder which is round, is deprived of a long neck, is inserted into a Sinus,
that has no depth in it, and therefore is more easily put out of Joint, then
the Thigh, which has a long neck, and is inserted into a deep Cavity. 3. This
Ligament is only simple, viz. orbicular, (not round as in the Thigh) and it is
very lax. Fourthly, the Joint of the Shoulder is without flesh, and therefore
it is more apt to slip out of its place, than a fleshy Joint. But the Shoulder
can slip no way, except into the Armpits downwards: because there are no
Propugnacula there, as in other places, and the Shoulder is apt by its own
weight to slip downwards. Yet Galen says, that five times he saw the Shoulder
slip forwards.

If the Shoulder be slipped under the Armpit, it is in figure very unlike the
sound Shoulder. Secondly, on the top of the Shoulder there appears an unusual
hollowness, and under the Armpit, the round hard head may be felt. Thirdly, if
the Shoulder be in its natural place, the upper Process of the Scapula appears
round; but when the Shoulder is out, it appears acute: because the head which
made the roundness is slipped down. Fourthly, the Arm sticks far from the Ribs,
and cannot without much pain be brought to them. Fifthly, the Patient cannot
carry his Arm to his Head, because the Humerus cannot move upwards: and several
other motions of the Shoulder are hindered. Sixthly, the dislocated Arm is
longer than the other, if the Shoulder only slip downwards; but it is shorter,
if it be drawn upwards by the Muscles. Seventhly, the part is wrinkled at the
end of the Axilla, in the luxated Shoulder, far lower, and both more forward
and backward, than in the found Arm; which signifies that the head of the
Shoulder is slipped downwards. If the Shoulder be luxated toward the forepart,
these are signs; in the forepart there is an eminence, in the hindpart an
unusual hollowness: besides the Cubitus enclines backwards, nor are there any
signs of the Shoulder being out under the Arm.

Hippocrates says, that the Shoulder and Thigh can only be perfectly luxated:
This is true, if the Luxation be occasioned by an external cause. But if there
be internal causes, i.e. Humors gathering and hardening by degrees, these, while
they force the head to give way by little and little, may cause an imperfect
Luxation.

The ways by which the Shoulder slipped into the Arm-pit is replaced, are
according to Hippocrates ten in number, l. 2. de art. but they may be very well
reduced to three. The First way is by Circumrotation, or Circumvolution, while
either the Patient or the Physician, puts the Hand clench't under the Arm-pit,
so that the middle knuckles of the Fingers may force the head of the Shoulder
into its Cavity. This way is used only in Children, and such as have very lax
and moist Ligaments: But as by this way the Shoulder is easily reduced, so it
easily slips back again. This way Hippocrates says, is not according to nature,
because not so very safe. For while we turn round the head of the Shoulder upon
the Scapula, some membranous and nervous bodies may easily be torn, and so may
the edges of the Sinus, whereupon by reason of a conflux of Humors the
Surgeon is frustrated in Reposition.

The Second method is by a way contrary to that, by which it slipped out. If the
head of the Shoulder be dislocated; First, it goes out of the Sinus, and so
moves forwards. Secondly, it slips downwards. Thirdly, it is drawn backwards by
the Muscles. This way differs from the first, because in the first, motion is
made by Circumrotation in crooked lines; in the Second, motion is made in right
lines. In reposition therefore these three motions must be made by a way
contrary to the slipping of it out. 1. From behind forwards. 2. From the
forepart upwards. 3. Back again. First of all therefore the Surgeon puts his
head to the Patient's Shoulder. Secondly, he puts his Fingers under his
Armpits. Thirdly, he must press the Patient's Elbow with his Knee, the Patient
sitting all the while. Let us see now, how these operations answer the foresaid
Indications. The first motion, that must be made in reduction of the Shoulder,
is forwards, and it is done by putting the Fingers under the Armpits. The Knee
strengthens this motion, and makes it more easy, by pressing the Elbow toward
the Ribs, which by the dislocation stuck too far from it: For as when the head
of the Shoulder slips into the Armpit, the Elbow sticks out from the Ribs; so
again, when the Elbow is forced toward the Ribs, the Shoulder moves forwards.
By the benefit therefore of the Fingers and the Knee, the Shoulder is moved
from behind forwards. And the Surgeon lays his Head on the Patient's
Shoulder, lest, while with his Fingers he draws the Shoulder forwards, the rest
of the Patient's Body might follow: Or rather (as I have learned by experience)
lest the Scapula, which is moveable, should follow: for when the Shoulder is
dislocated, if the Luxation be not new, it is very difficultly replaced, for
this very reason, because when extension of the Shoulder is made, the Shoulder
does not stir out of its praeternatural place, but rather the Scapula does
move. Hippocrates therefore makes the first motion, i.e. he moves the Shoulder
forwards: but he makes no mention of the two other motions, because they are
effected by the Muscles: For while the Muscles are sound, and the Luxation
newly made, they draw the Shoulder upwards, and restore it to its proper place,
if that the head of the Shoulder be not hindered, as it is, while it lies behind
under the Armpit. This way may also be administered in another manner: for
because we cannot so well with our Knee force the Elbow toward the Ribs,
instead of the Knee we substitute a Servant, who with his Hand must take hold
of the Elbow and force it toward the Ribs. And this second way may be
administered in a third manner; the Elbow may be brought back toward the Spina
dorsi: for so the Shoulder is brought forwards: Then with one hand we must take
hold of the Elbow, that motion may be made upwards; and we must lay the other
hand hard upon the top of the Shoulder, lest the Scapula might give way, as we
said before.

The Third general way adds to the Second, Extension, which is very necessary,
if the head of the Shoulder be confirmed out of place; moreover the Muscles
always draw upwards, whence arises an Indication of drawing downwards by
Extension. This way is performed either with instruments or without.

Without instruments in a twofold manner. The First is, if the Patient lie, and
the Surgeon sit upon the same level, taking hold of the luxated Arm with
both his Hands, and putting his Heel under the Patient's Arm-pit (the right
Heel, if the right Shoulder be out of Joint, and the left, if the left be out)
but before he put his Heel in his Arm-pit, it is necessary to put a hard Ball,
like a Tennis-Ball under the Arm-pit. When this is done, a Servant must take
hold of the opposite Arm, and draw it downwards: And another having a strong
Roller or Girt (broad enough to take hold of the Ball) must take hold of both
its heads, and draw them upwards toward the Patient's Head; and with his other
Foot lean upon the top of the luxated Shoulder. Now let us consider, how the
Shoulder may be replaced by these operations. The First, who draws the Arm
downwards, and the other, who pulls the string upwards, make extension and
motion downwards. Motion forwards is made both by the Ball and the Heel:
wherefore the Heel must be put between the Ribs and the head of the Shoulder,
or the Ball, that the head of the Shoulder may be pressed forward: And the reason
why the Ball is used is, that whither the heel cannot reach, because of the
hollowness of the Arm-pit (which is made by the Muscles and Tendons placed on
all sides) yet there, by the benefit of the Ball, the Heel may operate. Two
motions are therefore made by the Surgeon, the first downwards, and then
forwards. The Servant, who draws the string upwards, makes motion upwards, and
pressing the top of the Shoulder with his Foot, he keeps the Scapula from
giving way. The third person, who draws the sound Shoulder downwards, keeps the
whole body from giving way to the Extension.

The other way without instruments is thus; A Man of a higher stature, than the
Patient, must lift the Patient from the ground, and place his Arm-pit upon his
own Shoulder, that so he may make Extension: Then he must bring the dislocated
Arm toward his own Breast, that the Shoulder may move forwards. Afterward a
Servant putting both his hands behind him upon the Patients Shoulder, must draw
and press that part, lest the Scapula might give way. Then a Boy must hang
behind on the other side, so as his Feet may not touch the ground, that he may
hinder the whole Body from giving way. Thus far of the ways of doing it without
instruments.

Instruments proper for the reduction of the luxated Shoulder are, the Ladder,
Coulstaff, Pulleys, Glossocomium, etc.

The way of Extension by a Ladder is, that the Patient climb up three or four
steps of it, and put his lame Arm over one of the Staves, placing it between
his Side, and the head of the Humerus; and that a strong fellow take hold of
that Arm, and pull it forcibly down backwards, whilst the Patient hangs by it.

The way by a Coulstaff is safer. The Staff must have a Bunch in the middle,
somewhat wedge-like, and be covered with a soft Boulster, fit to place under
the Patient's Arm-pit. In order to the Extension, the Patient must be seated
near some Post or Pillar, in which the Pulley must be fastened to extend his
Arm; and the bandage must be made a little above the Elbow; which being
fastened, and the Coulstaff placed, and supported by a couple of fellows, the
Surgeon must stand on the contrary side, with his hands on each side of the
Scapula, to press it downward, and keep the Patient firm in his seat, and
govern the operation, taking care the edge be placed right whilst the Extension
is making, lest they break the Bone, or otherwise mischief him.

The Glossocomium, commonly called the Commander, is of use in the most strong
tough Bodies, and where the luxation has been of long continuance, and will
not yield to the other ways of Extension. There ought to be great care in the
use of it, for many shrewd accidents have happened thereby.

The Humerus luxated by relaxation of the Ligaments and Tendons is restored to
its place, after some of the ways abovesaid: but does require your industry to
retain it, after it is reduced,

If the Humerus be to be reduced, when it is luxated forward, the motion must
be made contrary. And tho the Limb be not made shorter; yet because we ease the
head of the Bone, and disintangle it, some little Extension must be made.

In general we must know, if the Shoulder be newly luxated, it may easily be
replaced by the Fingers. But when the Luxation is old, it is very difficultly
reduced: because the Shoulder has fixed it self fast there, so that it is grown
something callous; and besides, the Cavity it self is filled with flesh, which
when the Bone is reduced, does nevertheless cause it to slip out of its proper
Sinus.

When the Shoulder is reduced, we must bind it up. But before binding, we must
apply things, which prevent Inflammation, and knit together the lax and
distorted Ligaments; such as we mentioned before; Bolus Armena, Sang. Draconis,
Myrtilli, balaustia pulverisata ovi albumine subacta, ad mellis consistentiam,
applied with Stupes or Clothes, And under the Shoulder-Joynt a Ball must be
put, made of Linen or Tow wrapped together, it must be wet in the foresaid
Medicines, and put under the Arm-pit, lest the Shoulder, by reason of its
weight, and the laxity of the Ligaments, might slip down again. Then a broad
linen Cloth, wrung out of black austere Wine, must be applied. Thirdly, a
Roller must be brought about it, which must keep fast the Ball, and always draw
the Arm upwards, or at least keep it so. First of all therefore the middle of
the Roller must go over the Ball, and be carried once or twice round the Joint,
then both the heads must be carried round the Neck on the other side. When
three or four days are over, the bandage may be loosed: and if all fear of
Inflammation be not over, or if the Ligaments continue lax, the like Medicine
must be renewed, till all fear of Inflammation is over, and the Ligaments are
strengthened. And then you may leave off the Roller, and the foresaid Medicine,
and apply some Plaster: in Winter Barbarum, and in Summer Diapalma.

CHAP. V.
Of Luxation of the Clavicle or Collar-bone.

THe Clavicle is a crooked Bone made in the figure of an S. one end of which
being thicker, and almost three square, is inserted into a Cavity purposely
sitted for it in the first bone of the Sternum, and bound in by a strong
ligamentous Membrane. The other end being broad and flat, is joined to the
Acromium, where it not only serves to keep the Shoulder at due distance from
the Sternum, but also assists these several Processes, which are provided by
nature to preserve the Shoulder Bone from slipping upwards from its Cavity.

This Bone is capable of a double Luxation, one at the Sternum, and that only
outwardly, where it rises from the Breast, and lies like a lump. The other at
the broad end near the Acromium, which is also subject to a twofold Luxation,
viz. upward and forward; being defended from all other distortions by its
neighboring Bones.

This Luxation is for the most part occasioned by a fall, and pitching upon the
Shoulder. It is discerned by the Prominence it makes.

The Clavicle is not so subject to Luxation as other Bones; but being luxated,
it is most difficultly retained after restitution, by reason of its smoothness
of its heads, and the little hold they have upon the Acromium and Sternum. And
if it be not restored, the use of the Arm is impaired in some of its motions.

The reduction of the Clavicle, which end soever of it is luxated, must be made
by drawing that Shoulder backwards, and by pressing the luxated end even with
the Acromium, or to the Cavity of the Bone of the Sternum, whence it departed.
Neither of the places affords it much room, therefore it will require your
greater care: for if you place it not exactly, it will scarce hold right till
you make your applications. Therefore you must have ready Emplasticks,
Compresses and Bandage. Splints are also of use, whether they be of Pastboard,
Scabbard; or Tin. The bandage ought to be a Roller with two heads to come over
the Shoulders, and under the Arm-pit, making so many circumvolutions as may
retain the Dressings close. This being well made, his Arm must be kept up with
a Napkin or Towel, and his hand placed under his Breast. If all be well you
ought not to loosen the bandage till you judge it united, which may be guessed
at by the ease and use of the Arm.

CHAP. (...)
Of the Luxation of the Elbow.

THe Elbow is very difficultly both luxated and reduced, according to Hippoc.
l. 2. de Artic. Gal. l. 1. de Fract. First, because it is multiform and
various, not round. Secondly, the Bones that make up the Joint, do mutually
receive, and are received one of another; wherefore this Joint is called
Ginglymoeides, because it is made like hinges. Thirdly, the Ligaments of this
Joint are very tight. Lastly, the Bones are not two, as in most Articulations;
but three, the Cubitus, Radius, and Humerus, which are mutually knit one to
another by membranous Ligaments.

Unless the luxated Elbow be quickly replaced, most violent pain ensues;
because its great head presses the circumjacent Muscles and Nerves that run to
the Hands, and the deep and sharp edges prick the said part. Besides, the
Radius increases the pain; for if it be out, there are more pressures; if it be
not out, there are great distensions of the nervous bodies. This pain is
usually attended with a Fever, vomiting of Bile, Numbness, etc.

The Cubit is luxated forward or backward, outward or inward: and the Radius
either follows, or abides in its place.

If the Radius follow, the parting of the Radius from the Cubit may be felt by
the touch. If the Cubit be luxated forward, these are the signs; we cannot bend
the extended Cubit, the Cubit is made shorter, an unusual Tumor appears in the
forepart, and an unwonted Cavity behind. If the Luxation be made backward, the
signs are the same; but that the Tumor appears behind, and the Cavity before.
If it be luxated outward, the signs are the same, but the Tumor appears
outward, and the hollowness inward. If it be luxated inward, on the contrary.

The luxated Elbow must speedily be replaced, otherwise a great Inflammation
arises, because of the pain, upon which the luxated Elbow is quickly grown
callous, the thin Matter being dispersed; but especially because the Elbow is
less nervous, and of a cold temperament. When the Elbow is grown hard, it
cannot be replaced, unless it be mollified with Medicines.

If the Cubit be luxa^^d forward, First, Extensio^ ^^^st be made in a proper
Figu^^ ^t directly, but obliquely, (...) the Caput humeri should touch the
Cornix, i. e. the high edge of the Cubit, and by Circumrotation it might be
broken. When this is done, the luxated Cubit may be replaced four ways. First,
if the Luxation be imperfect, it is replaced by a quick bending of the Arm.
Secondly, in a perfect Luxation, Extension must be made; then some hard and
round body, as of linen Clothes wrapped up hard, must be put in the bending of
the Arm, then the Elbow must be bent. Extension must be made by two Servants,
one of which must draw the Humerus up, the other the Cubit down, but obliquely.
And the round body put in the bowt of the Elbow, must be pressed, that when
Inflexion is made, Reposition may be made also. Thirdly, two Servants must
likewise extend, and a Girt must be applied to the luxated Arm, and bound so
long hanging down, that the Surgeon may put his Foot into it, as into a
Stirrup; Extension therefore being made, and the Girt drawn down by the
Chirurgeon's Foot, the Surgeon must then put his Hands to the Cubit, and
pressing it backward must bend it. Fourthly, this is usually done with the
Hands alone, taking the Cubit in one Hand, and the Humerus in the Other, the
Cubit must be bended, and put into its place again.

If the Luxation be backwards, having made Extension obliquely, a fresh
Luxation is easily replaced by the Hands alone. But because in this case
extension uses to prove difficult (for the exterior extending Muscles of the
Cubit, are very strong) the Surgeon must anoint his Hands with Oil, that the
Muscles may be the more pliable: And if the Strength of the Hands be not
sufficient to reduce the Cubit, we must use Hippocrates his Instruments, the
Ladder, etc. If the Cubit slip inward or outward, it must be forced the
contrary way. When reduction is done, Medicines must be applied to assuage
pain; to contract and strengthen the lax and distorted Ligaments, and to
prevent Inflammation: the first whereof is done by oily things; the rest by
astringents; where we must consider what is most urgent. If there be pain, we
must mix Oleum Myrtinum or Rosaceum with astringe^ Powders, and the white of an
Egg. Or we must use Ceratum Rosaceum, spread on a broad piece of Linen, and
then Stupes must be applied dipped in a Medicine e pulveribus astringentibus ovi
albumine subactis. Then proper Bandage must be made, like that which we
mentioned before in Fractures, always observing a middle posture.

The Radius usually slips outward. The Signs are, an apparent Tumor outward,
the Cubitus and Radius gape one from another. When extension is made, it is
easily forced in again.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Luxation of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Fingers.

THe whole Carpus, or Wrist, considered in it self, and joined to the Arm by
Diathrosis, may slip inward, outward, forward or backward, but principally
forward; the signs are a Tumor in the forepart, and the Fingers cannot be bent.
If luxation be made backward, the Fingers cannot be extended, because the
Tendons and Nerves are pressed upon by the Bones. If the Luxation be made
either inward or outward, a swelling appears on one side, and an hollowness on
the opposite.

If then Luxation be made either forward or backward, the Hand must be laid on
a Table, the back downwards, if Luxation be made forward; and the back upwards,
if the Luxation be made backwards: then extension must be made by two Servants,
one pulling at the Arm, and the other at the Hand. While extension is making,
the Surgeon must force the luxated part the contrary way, either with the
Hand, or in robuft Bodies, by pressing it with the Heel. Celsus lays some
linen Cloth rolled up hard, upon the Luxation, where it is to be pressed most,
that so the intrusion may be stronger, and the pain less. If the Luxation be
outward or inward, as extension is making, the Surgeon must force it the
contrary way.

A Luxation of the Bones of the Carpus or Metacarpus is easily replaced, in the
first by making no extension; in the second, by a moderate extension, the Hand
being placed on a Table, and some hard Body put under, and so the Bones being
thrust by the Hand or Heel into their places, either forward or backward.

The Fingers are luxated either forward, backward, or to one side. The signs
are very apparent, because the Joints have but little Flesh on them. As
extension is made upon a Table by two Servants, the Bone is easily thrust the
contrary way. When reposition is made, Medicines must be applied, the Limb must
be bound, put in a fitting posture, etc.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Luxation of the Thigh.

THe Thigh has a round Head, growing in a long Neck, which is inserted into a
very deep Sinus. The Thigh is bound to the Os Coxendicis by two Ligaments, the
one orbicular, and the other round. Hence it is apparent that only a perfect
Luxation can happen in the Thigh, and not an imperfect one, as we said before
of the Shoulder. The Thigh slips forward, backward, outward or inward. But it
is done with great difficulty. First, because of the very strong Muscles, and
abundance of Flesh upon those Muscles, which keep the Thigh in its proper
Sinus. Secondly, because of the depth of the Acetebulum. Thirdly, because of
two tight and short Ligaments. The Thigh is seldom luxated forward or backward,
because in these sides the edges of the Acetabulum are highest; sometimes
outward, because there they are not so high; oftnest inward, because there the
edge is lowest. And besides the lowness of the edge I may add the round
Ligament, which is inserted next the inside, and therefore will more easily
give way to Luxation of the Thigh inward.

If the Thigh be luxated inward; it appears longer than the other, because the
Thigh desconds. Also the Knee, Leg and Foot stand outward; For if one end of a
thing incline one way, the other end will incline the contrary: wherefore if
the Head of the Thigh be displaced inward, the Knee, Leg and Foot incline
outward. Besides, the Thigh cannot be brought toward the Groin; because the
inflexor Muscles are straightened and hindered, that they can neither lift nor bend
the Thigh. Another sign is, that on the Region between the Anus and the
Testicles, a manifest Tumor appears in the outer side of the Sinus. If the
Thigh slip outward, the signs are contrary: for that Leg is shorter than the
other, because the Head is more elate than its Sinus. Between the Scretum and
the Anus there is a hollowness; and toward the Buttocks there is a swelling.
The Knee, Leg and Foot stand inward. The Heel cannot touch the ground, because
the Leg is shortened: but the Patient can draw his Thigh upward, because the
inflexor Muscles are not hindered. If the Knee slip forward, the extended Thigh
cannot be bent, because the inflexor Muscles are hindered and pressed by the
head of the Thigh. Urine is stopped in such Persons, because the head of the
Thigh presses upon the Bladder. The Groins swell, be cause the head of the
Thigh is slipped into these parts. The Buttocks appear wrinkled and without
Flesh; because the whole Thigh, together with the Processes, is slipped forward.
If the Thigh be slipped backward, there are the contrary signs. The Leg cannot be
extended, because the extending Muscles, which are behind, are pressed; wherefore
they cannot be drawn toward their proper Principles; the Thigh affected is
shorter than the other, because the Head is got above the Sinus; the Heel
cannot touch the ground. The Groin appears lax, and the head of the Thigh
sticks out at the Buttocks.

It is very difficult to replace a dislocated Thigh; because, by reason of the
very strong Muscles, extension cannot be made: and the difficulty is increased,
if the Luxation be not new, but callous by reason of Humors running to the Os
Foemoris, and of the repletion of the Sinus. The Thigh being replaced, it is
apt to slip out again, because the Muscles are so weakened, that they are not
able to keep the heavy Thigh in its Seat; and because the round Ligaments is
either la^ated, or broken.

The Thigh may be replaced, either without or with extension. Without extension
two ways, but never unless the Luxation be new, and moderate, i.e. standing but
a little way from its Sinus, and in a Child's Body. The first way is, to turn
round the head of the Thigh about the Hium (as we did when the Arm was out of
Joint) and not to separate it, if it get into the Sinus. But this way is not
safe, for fear lest the head of the Bone should rub against the edges of the
Sinus, and so either bruise or break them. The other way is, to bend the Thigh
suddenly: for so sometimes it is replaced according to Paulus, c. 98. l. 6.

But the Thigh is best reduced with extension. If therefore the Thigh be slipped
inward, tho there seems to be no need of extension, since the Leg is longer
than it should be (not shorter, as in other Luxations, wherein the Muscles
moving the head of the Bone, have their Original far above it, and so draw the
head upwards) nevertheless a little extension must be made, as much as is
sufficient to stir and extricate the fixed head. This may be done with the
Hands, if the Luxation be new, moderate, and in a Child's Body. It must be
performed in this manner; one Servant must hold the Patient's Body by the
Armpits very fast; another must take hold of the Thigh with both his Hands
above his Knee, and extend it. In the mean time, while extension is making, the
Surgeon must with his Hands force the Thigh slipped inward, outward. When the
Head is thus extricated by means of this impulsion, the Muscles that draw
upwards, will easily put it into its place again; or, if the Muscles be weak,
the Surgeon may easily do it. If it be in a robust Body, we want stronger
extension, which must be with Girts and Ropes. A Girt then must be put on the
space between the Genitals and the Anus; but so, as that it do not take hold of
the head of the Bone. Then another Girt must be tied above the Knee, or another
above the Ankle: and these Girts must be drawn by the two heads, either with
the hands alone, or with a Ladder, to one of the staves whereof the upper Girt
must be tied, and the Patient must be laid on the Ladder, and the other Girt
must be drawn downward. You may also use the Scamnum Hippocratis. But these
violent Extensions are most proper in other Luxations of the Thigh, when it is
put outward, forward or backward: for when Extension is made, and the head is
forced the contrary way, the Surgeon may easily reduce it. After reduction,
Medicines must be applied, to prevent Inflammation, assuage Pain, and to
contract and strengthen the lax Ligaments.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Luxation of the Knee.

THe Knee is not easily put out of joint: because it has two Ligaments, and it
has a double head, and a Sinus. It undergoes an imperfect and a perfect
Luxation, and it slips outward, inward, or backward: only Celsus adds forward;
but so it is very hard for the Knee to be luxated, because of the Knee-pan,
which being tied by very strong Tendons, does wonderfully strengthen the Knee
forward, so that it cannot slip that way; unless there be a violent cause.

All the forts of this Luxation are manifested to the Eyes; because it is a
fleshless part: for there appears an unusual Tumor on one side, and a Cavity on
the opposite; the Figure is depraved, Motion is weakened and abolished.

If the Luxation be imperfect, little or no Extension is required, but only
forcing it to the contrary side. If it be perfect, Extension is necessary;
which may be made by the hand in a fresh Luxation, and in Childhood. One
Servant must draw upwards, and another below the Knee toward the Foot; and the
Surgeon must force the Bone to the contrary side. In a grown Man, and a
great Luxation, there is need of Girts or Engines, especially to draw downward,
and make sufficient Extension, etc.

CHAP. X.
Of the Luxation of the Ankle and Toes.

THe Ankle may slip out inward, outward, forward or backward. If inward, the
Sole of the Foot turns outward: if outward, on the contrary. If forward, then
the broad and strong Tendon in the Heel, is hard and tight: besides, that Foot
is less; because the Leg and Joint is moved forward, and takes up a great part
of the Foot; whereupon the Foot is less and shorter. If backward, the Heel is
almost hid, because the Joint is slipped to the Heel: besides, the Sole seems
greater, and the Foot longer. If these signs be manifest, the Luxation is
perfect; if they are obscure, it is imperfect.

The Cure is not difficult, if due Extension be used; with the Hands, if the
Luxation be fresh, and in a Child, one Servant must take hold of the Foot,
another of the Leg above the Ankle; and the Surgeon must force it unto the
opposite part. If good Extension cannot be made by the Hands, we use Girts, to
the Foot, and to the Leg above the Ankle; about the small. If very violent
Extension be required, we may use the Scamnam Hippucratis; or Paulus his way,
l. 6. c. 121. which is, to drive a stake deep into the ground; then to lay the
Patient on his Back, astride the stake, which must be driven in so deep and
firm, as not to give way, when Extension is made.

When the Joint is reduced, the Patient must be kept longer in Bed, than for
other Luxations, viz. Forty days; because the Ankle supports the whole Body,
and therefore unless it be completely restored, that is, unless the lax
Ligaments and distended Muscles acquire their pristine strength, the Patients
do either relapse into the same Luxation upon every slight occasion; or they
find their Foot very weak for a long time. We must therefore use aftringent
Powders, mixed with whites of Eggs, applied about the Joint with Tow. If there
be pain, then Lenients are required.

The Bones of the Pedium and Tarsus are so strongly knit together, that they
never suffer Luxation. The Toes are seldom luxated, because they are held by
many strong Ligaments and Tendons. They are reduced as the Fingers.

Partis primae Finis.
THE PRACTICE OF SURGERY. Part II.
BOOK VI.
Of separating things unnaturally united.

CHAP. I.
Of Cutting Tongue-ti'd Children.

HAving in the First Part of Surgery shown, how to unite solution of
Continuity; in this Second we must on the contrary teach how to separate
Continuity, when it is preternatural. This part of Surgery is called by some
(...), by others (...), Distinction or Separation.

The fiest preternatural Unition, that I shall treat of, is of the Tongue to
the parts under it, when the Membranous Ligament or Fraenum, which connects it,
is either too short, or extended to the tip of the Tongue: Then Children are
said to be Tongue-tied. But before I meddle with the separation of the Tongue
from the parts under it, by cutting the Praenum, I must make some just
Animadversion upon the temerity of some Midwives, who always wear one of their
Nails of a great length and being thus ready with an incision instrument in
their hand, wherever they come to do their office, they cut the new born
Child's Tongue, and unless they did this, they believe the Children could never
speak: As if Nature (O strange ignorance!) could not make a Man speak, which is
to perform a proper action, designed by her to Man, without the helping hand of
a silly Woman. Aquapendent says, he saw a new born Child, which was detained a
pretty while, till they got the after-burthen away, and it neither cried, nor
perhaps was sensible of any trouble all the while, till the Midwife cut the
Fraenum with her Nail, and then indeed it cried, because of the pain. But if
this were all, the matter were not great: The worst is, the Child, when this
Surgery of the Nail has raised an Inflammation, cannot take hold of the
Nipple, nor get any Milk, and so it dies. And which is yet worse, they impute
the whole cause of its Death, either to the Birth, or to its ^^ability to take
hold of the Nipple, or to any thing, rather than to the true, viz. the Midwives
claw. Let all People therefore, that value their Children, have a care, that
the Midwife meddle not with cutting then Tongues. If the Ligament be such as
requires cutting, it may be cut in time enough; but this rarely happens.
Because Nature had never designed Man to speak, had she not furnished him with
apt instruments. Of many thousands, that are born with this Ligament, searce
one requires cutting.

But if it so happen, that the Tongue is too strait tied, the way to cut it is
this; the Patient must put his Pongue out beyond his Teeth, then we must take
hold of it with a Forceps ( Celsus uses a Vosella.) But because we cannot use
these instruments in Children, who either know not, or are not willing to put
out their Tongue; we first make them cry, then with a thin cloth between the
Thumb and Forefinger of our left Hand we take hold of the Tongue and draw it
out, then we hold it up, or turn it back, that the Fraenum may appear: and with
our right hand we cut the Fraenum. We take an incisionknife, a little turning
back at the point, then we cut the Fraenum transverse twice or thrice, and the
parts on each side, taking great care, that the vessels thereabout be not
injured, which a Surgeon that has any skill in Anatomy, will not do, because
he knows the vessels under the Tongue. Then the place may be washed with a
little Claret and Diam^ron, and it will heal of it self. Several when they are
well again, speak readily, if the impediment depend only on the Fraemon; but if
some inward and abstanse cause concur, the essect does not follow.

Hildanus C^nt. 3. Obs. 28. says, that a Child of two years old, was brought to
him to be cut under the Tongue. When he opened the Child's Mouth, and lifted up
the Tongue, he found it very thick, but no nervous Ligament under it. Therefore
he sent away the Child, and would not meddle with it. About a Month after, a
Mountebank came that way. The Child was carried to him. He persuaded the
Parents, that the Tongue was tied with a strong, nervous Ligament, and he
boldly maintained that, if they would but give him a sum of Money down, he
would make the Child speak in a short time. He got the Money. Then the Impostor
places the Child in a Woman's Lap, and slashes the Tongue deep before, and on
each side; as the by standers told Hildanus. But the Child, who before could go
alone, in the very moment skrieked out and was contracted, so that his Knees
were drawn to his Belly, and his Hands to his Breast. And because of the
continued pain, and want of due administration of Medicines, the Child was
extremely wasted and weakened. When Hildanus visited him, his Legs and Arms
remained contracted, and if they were by force extended, they were immediately
drawn back again, and he could not go at all. He said he did recover a little;
but does not give account what the final issue of the case was. He gives an
account also of his own Brother, who when he was four years old could not speak
a word, and by cutting of the Fraenum was able to speak.

He says, the operation has no danger in it, if it be rightly administered, and
especial care must be had, that you cut not too deep; he lifts up the Tongue,
and with the point of a pair of Sissers he snips the Ligament in two or three
places: for so it is not so apt to grow together again, as when it is cut only
in one place. Then he cuts all that is nervous, so as not to touch any thing
that is fleshy. If enough be not cut at first, or if it grow up again, the same
operation may be performed again. when the Ligament is cut, the Nurse must dip
her Finger in Honey of Roses, or common Honey, and raise the Tongue gently with
it: for thereby agglutination is hindered. This operation therefore ought not to
be committed to Midwives, who with their Nails do not only tear the Ligament,
but the parts adjoining, which occasions Pain and Inflammation; then Children
cannot suck, but grow froward, pine away and dye: wherefore we ought to act
prudently, and this operation, tho it seem slight, ought not altogether to be
neglected. And it ought especially to be considered, whether, when the Tongue
is short, there be occasion for cutting or no: for oftentimes upon other
occasions besides the Ligament under the Tongue, Children cannot form any
articulate voice, even when the Tongue is not tied at all, which the preceding
case confirms.

CHAP. II.
Of the growing together of Fingers or Toes.

THe Coalition, or growing together of the Fingers or Toes, but especially of
the Fingers, falls next under our consideration. It is occasioned either by the
error of forming Nature in the Mother's Womb, or by an Ulcer on the inside of
two Fingers, negligently cured, or by burning.

The Cure may be performed by the Knife, or by an actual or potential Cautery.
Dissection is the best way for Fingers that are joined together by a narrow
Interstice, and by burning. On the contrary, the actual Cautery, or potential
Cautery, for such as are joined by a broad skin. But especially the potential,
for saint-hearted Men, Women and Children, who had rather venture the worst,
than undergo such terrible means.

When you use an actual Cantery, the part must be defended with some Cataplasm.
Cimolia, or Argilla mollis is the best of all.

By the potential Cautery it is done thus. First, they boil an Hempen thread in
a Lixivium of Lime and Ashes; then they take it out of the vessel, and lay it
upon a Marble, wetting it with a little of the Lixivium for an hour. The thread
thus prepared, must be laid both on the upper, and under-side; in the
interflice of the Fingers or Toes that are to be divided. Or the thread may be
fastened to a wooden ring about the Wrist, to make it keep tight to the part
that should be cut, without incommoding the sound parts. This is the way of
cutting by a thread.

The way of separating by a knife is thus. First, one must feel with his
Fingers, all along the coherence, especially in a natural one, whether there be
any hardness, or suspicion of a Nerve or Vein, which must be avoided;
afterward, when the Section is marked with Iule length-ways, it must be made
above half way toward the Fingers ends, and then the other half, viz. from the
roots of the Fingers to the place where you begun before. The Knife must be
long and small. The next thing is, with Liniments and Diapalma, to cicatrize
the Fingers so separated.

CHAP. III.
Of Imperforation of the Hymen.

CElsus performs the cure of this by overthwart incision, in manner of the
Letter X, taking great care, that the Urinary passage be not violated, which
lies near above it. I shall give you Aquapendent's way, who saw and cured an
imperforate Maid; and that I may be the more exact in it, I shall give it you
in his own words. In the space, says he, of so many years, i. e. of forty,
which I have been Professor of Physic here at Padua, I only once saw an
imperforate Virgin. And no wonder the case should be so rare, since Nature is
seldom wanting or mistaken in things necessary, because of the many
inconveniences and hazards of life which usually thence ensue. However, this
Maid, from the very day of her birth, had the Membrane called (...), Hymen,
imperforate, which closed up the the whole Orifice of the Womb. The Alae were
so little, that scarce any appeared, because they were contracted by the
continuity of the Membrane, and its Tension, caused by the internal repletion:
But when the Vulva was perforated, immediately the Alae were formed, as by the
Membrane loosed on either side. So that from hence we may conjecture, the use
of these Alae is to take upon them the defense of the pudendum muliebre, which
before was otherwise guarded by the Hymen. This noble Maid was very well till
she was Thirteen; but from that age she began to be ill, which illness was
occasioned by the keeping in of her Courses, which came down then about. She
felt great pains about her Loins, and about the bottom of her Belly, which were
communicated also to her Hips. Which made some of her Physicians treat her as
in the Gout, and for the Sciatica. Afterward her Body began to pine away, and
consume, she was continually feverish, and could not sleep, she had lost her
Stomach, and was at last delirous; a hard and painful Tumor arose at the bottom
of her Belly, in the region of the Womb, and all these Symptoms grew worse and
more violent, when the time of her Menses approached, At last, when she was
just at death's door, I being called, and having beheld her case with my Eyes,
I made a simple incision upon the Membrane, whereupon, immediately a great
quantity of thick, viscous, aeruginous and foetid Blood issuing out, she was
forthwith well, to a miracle. But I made a simple incision lengthway of the
Vulva or Scissure; lest, if I had cut Celsus his way, transverse in the form of
an X, I might have hindered the forming of the Alae, which results from the Lips
of the Hymen being cut, loosed on either side, and retracted to the place of
the Alae. And this is the Surgery which I used with the greatest safety and
success in a Maid imaginable, whose Hymen was not perforate. Hildanus also
Cent. 3. Obs. 61. gives this account, how he opened the closed Orifice of the
neck of the Womb. There was, says he, brought to me a Girl half a year old, who
had the Orifice of the neck of the Won ^ closed up with a very thick Membrane.
This Membrane stuck on all sides to the Nymphe, or Carunculae cuticulares, and
in the upper part had a little hole, by which she made water. The Parents
therefore imploring my help, the next day I set the Child on a Table upon a
Cushion, and drawing back and opening her Legs, I put in a Probe, made a little
crooked, and hollow on one side, at the forementioned hole, and brought it
forwards toward the Perinaeum to the end of the Membrane, then with a little
Penknife, resting in the hollow of the Probe, I cut the Membrane, without
hurting the adjacent parts, which was prevented by running the point of the
Knife along the hollow of the Probe. When I had made incision on the Membrane,
tho no Haemorrhage followed, yet I put in a Tent of soft Town, dipped in the
white of an Egg, mixed with a little Rosewater, and applied over it a folded
cloth, wet in the same Liquor, to assuage Pain, and repel the afflux of humors.
At last I put in a broad and thick leaden Tent, armed with Vnguentum
diapompholygos. And thus the Child was cured in a few days.

CHAP. IV.
Of the growing together of the Labia of the Womb.

SOmetimes a Woman, by reason of the glutination of the Orifice of the Womb,
may be unsit for Marriage, whether she be born so, or it happen afterward, by
a foul Ulcer or Wound not well healed, as it happened to a certain Man's Wife,
who when he came to lie with her, found no admittance, nor could not, till a
Surgeon had made it for him by separating the Coalition of the Labia. And no
wonder, if such a part, when ulcerated, grow up, since the Modesty of civil
Women is such, that they had rather dye, than expose themselves to a Cure; but
Stultorum incurata pudor malus ulcera celat. In this Case the Surgery must
be adminiured in this manner. The Woman must be laid on her Back, her Legs must
be brought divaricated to her Hips; her Arms must be brought under her Hams,
and tied with convenient bandage to her Neck (as Paulus Aeg neta advises) then
with a Knite crooked at the point, very sharp on the edge, but blunt on the
back, and a very long handle, Section must be made at once or twice; having
first marked a straight line along the middle of the Labia, directing the
instrument with the Forefinger outwardly, and with a hollow Probe
beforementioned, or some such instrument, inwardly. And Midwives, Nurses, and
all that are about Women in Childbed, ought to take great care, that if the
Woman have received any such hurt in her Travel, it be immediately taken into
Cure: Because Neglects herein often prove fatal, as the following instance will
prove.

Hildanus, Cent. 6. Obs. 67. relates, how a Woman at her full time was brought
to bed of a dead Child, with much pain and difficulty; and those pains most
exquisitely tortured her, at least six weeks after. At last, when he was called
to her, he found the Orifice of the Womb quite closed up, and the parts
extremely swelled. under the neck of the Bladder there was a great hole, that
reached into the Bladder, at which the Urine dropped out. The cause of this so
grievous an evil had been the Inflammation of the genital parts, not regarded
by the ignorant Midwife, which was turned to a putrid Ulcer, which had healed
up more by Nature's assistance, than the Midwife's skill; but the Orifice
remained shut up. He ordered her Clysters, Fomentations, anodyne Ointments,
internal and external Medicines, whereby the pains were assuaged, the swelling
abated, and her strength increased: But the mouth of the Womb could by no Art
or Industry Chirurgical be opened again, so that she was ever after
incapacitated for her Husband. She lived a long time after, and when he wrote
this Observation, she had not her Menses the usual way; but was sometimes taken
with the Gripes and a looseness, and voided Blood with her Excrements.

CHAP. V.
Of the Anus imperforate.

SOmetimes Children are born with the Anus not perforate, which happens in a
twofold manner. Either some mark of a hole appears, or none. When it appears,
the way to do it is thus. Cut cross ways at right angles, taking heed not to
hurt the Sphincter Muscle, as you cut along the appearance of the hole, then
put in a pipe of Lead or Silver, armed with some cicatrizing Medicament, till
the part is cicatrized. In this case, tho the place of the Anus is covered with
a Skin, yet there is some sign of an Orifice, which feels empty, if one touch
it. Albucasis l. 2. c. 79. following Paulus l. 6. c. 81. says, it may be
perforated with the Midwive's Finger; but it is better to do it with an
instrument, as I have proposed, than to commit such a business to the virulent
claw of an ignorant old Woman; unless the Pellicle be so thin, that the
Surgeon may do it with his Finger without difficulty. Paulus mentions the
cure of the Anus not perforate, through an Ulcer ill cured; But I cannot
believe that ever such a case happened; because the Anus must be opened too
often for an Ulcer ever to close it up in healing; because agglutination cannot
be made in so short a time. Besides, such a mass of Humors and Excrements is
always flowing thither, that it must hinder glutination. When a Child has been
born with the Anus not perforate in this manner, it has been cured.

For Hildanus, Cent. 1. Obs. 73. has a case of this nature. He was called to a
Child, which being born with the Anus not perforate, was till the sixth day
grievously tormented with the Gripes, and in great hazard of its life. For its
Belly wat puffed up and hard, it fainted, and had cold Sweats; the Anus was
covered with a hard Membrane, in which there was not any sign of an Anus,
besides a little livid speck. He made an Incision, with an incision-knife (that
the Sphincter might not be hurt) wrapped in a linen Cloth: then he put in a
Speculum any, and dilated the rest. The Child presently discharges a great deal
of Excrements; whereupon the Belly immediately fell, and the rest of the
Symptoms abated. He then for several days put in a pipe of Lead, armed with
some Desiccatory, as Vnguentum de Cerussa, de Minio, Diapomphologos, etc. It
cicatrized, andlie did well.

When no sign of an Anus appears, Aquapendent would not meddle with it. Who
says, he once saw a Woman born without an Anus, that voided her Excrements at
her Womb, there being a hole within near the Os Vulv^e. But he would not
attempt a Cure, lest, not well-knowing where the Anus lay, he might have hurt
the Sphincter-Muscle, and so have caused an involuntary excretion of Ordure.

CHAP. VI.
Of rectification, or setting straight parts that are distorted.

MAny parts of Man's Body are of a bad conformation: Some from their birth,
others afterward, either from a Disease, or from some external violence; as
from the Rickets and other Diseases, and from a hurt by a fall, blow, etc.

The parts affected are the Muscles, and in them the Nerves and Tendons
especially; or the Bone.

The signs of a Distortion are so manifest to the Eye and Touch, that I need
not mention any; however, it is good to observe rickety and morbid Distortions,
when they first arise: for then they may with the greatest ease be rectified,
especially when the Party is young, and consequently the parts more flexible to
a healing Hand.

As for the cure of Distortions; such as come from wounds in the Muscles and
their Nerves and Tendons, depend upon the right healing of those Wounds; and
such as come from Fractures, or Dislocations, depend upon the proper reduction
of those Fractures and Luxations: wherefore for such you must have recourse to
the Doctrine of Wounds, Fractures, and Luxations. But when the Distortion is
connate, or proceeds from the Rickets, or any inward cause, or from an outward
cause, and which might have been cured, had it not been neglected; then the
method of Cure is this. If the parts by continuance of time be grown hard and
stiff, they must be made soft and limber by Emollients, as Fomentations and
Bathings, ex radicibus and foliis Althaeae, Malvae, Fler. Chamaem. Melilot.
sem. lini. Faenigraec. addit. Betomca, iva artheti^^, florib^s primulae veris,
and hujusmodi, quae nervos roborant. Emollient Oils, Salves, and Plasters are
likewise proper. When the hardened parts are sufficiently softened, we must have
recourse to such things as strengthen the Nerves and Nervous parts Among things
that strengthen the Nerves, Succus lumbricorum, and Oleum Hildani ex floribus
are excellent, and so is the water of Betony, Sage, and Juniper Berries drawn
without Wine. For Hildanus says, he observed it in himself as well as others,
that Wine, even outwardly applied, is an enemy to the Nerves. When there is an
Atrophy in the part, Succus lumbricorum is best, of which take this account.
Johannes Wierus in tract. de Scorbuto takes fat Earthworms out of a Churchyard,
these he washes first in water, then in Wine very well, he shreds them small,
and puts them in a Glass covered with Paste, he bakes them in an Oven with
Bread, when the Glass is cold he sets it in water, and when the Paste grows
soft, and parts from the Glass, the Worms are found dissolved into Liquor. This
Liquor strained must be preserved for use, but it must be renewed every other
day: for it quickly corrupts, especially in Summer time. Nicolaus de Metri
prepares this Liquor the same way, only he adds a little Oil Olive to the
Worms. Cosmas Slotanus took these Worms, cleansed as aforesaid, put them in a
large Receiver, and poured to them a good quantity of Oil of Sweet Almonds and
Violets, then he dissolved them into Liquor upon Embers, which after strong
expression he used. This last composition seems to me the best, because so the
Virtue both of the Oil and the Worms is kept entire. The juice of the Worms by
its proper and peculiar virtue penetrates immediately, and passes to the
Nerves, and all that is nervous, and therefore to the Veins and Arteries, whose
coats consist of a nervous substance; and this juice strengthens, nourishes,
and moderately heats these parts, by removing the obstructions that are there.
Besides, in this composition there is a viscous quality from the Oils, by means
whereof, as soon as the juice has penetrated, the Oils shut the Pores, and so
the innate heat is kept in, and as it were pent up, in the part affected. But
before these things are used, universals, as Purging, Bleeding, etc. to cleanse
the Body, must first be used. Yet when all is done, the whole stress of the
Cure lies upon the right contrivance, making, and application of Instruments.
For unless Instruments be rightly adapted, all will be in vain, whether
Emollients or Corroborators. Wherefore first of all you must get your
Instruments made, and then as soon as you use your Emollients, your Instruments
must be applied. Thus by the forementioned Topics, Bandage and Splenia, may a
wry Neck be reduced.

CHAP. VII.
Of the reduction of the Fingers.

HAving in the foregoing Chapter given you the general method in curing of
Distortions, I thought it in the next place necessary to apply this method to
particular cases, which you will find exactly done in the following case by
Hildanus, Cent. 1. Obs. 83. There was brought to me, says this excellent
Author, a Child fourteen Months old. He had, when he was about half a year old,
fallen with his right Hand upon burning Coals: His four Fingers and the
external part of the Metacarpus were so burnt, that the ends of his Fingers
were drawn back to their first articulation, or roots. The Father had committed
the Cure to unskilful persons, so that the Fingers, with the skin of the
Metacarpus, were shrunk up into the form of a Globe, and grown together. About
seven Months after the Cure was made, they brought him to me. I first purged
him with Manna in broth, and then I proceeded to Chirurgical Topics. Then I
used the following Emollient Decoction, and Unguent for several days; radic.
Althaeae cum toto, Rad. Bryon. lil. Alb. an. j. flor. Chamaem. Melilot.
Hyperic. Chamaepit. Chamaedr. an. M. j. Sem. Faenigraec. lin. an. j. coquantur
in jusculo pedum and capitis vervecis aut vituli pro fotu. Then I anointed the
whole Hand and Arm with the following Unguent; Vnguenti Dialthaeae j. axungiae
humanae, gallinarum, anseris, ursi an. ij. succi lumbricorum ss. M. f.
Vnguentum. Then I wrapped the Hand in Emplastrum de Mucilaginibus. By these means
the Sinews and the Callosity contracted from the shrunk skin of the Metacarpus,
and the Fingers grown together on the outside of the Hand, being sufficiently
mollified; I then with a Razor cut away the Callus between the Fingers and the
Metacarpus and next I separated the Fingers. Then I strowed on my Powder to
stop Blood, and applied whites of Eggs mixed with Rose and Plantain water, and
Oil of Roses. I applied also a Defensative to the Wrist, and anointed the whole
Arm with Oleum Rosacoum, Myrtillorum, and Lumbricorum. The next day I laid upon
the Incisions the following Digestive with soft Lint, and anointed the Arm, as
before, with the abovesaid Oils, Terebinth. lotae in aq. Rosacea and
Plantaginis j. Oloi Rosacei and de vitellis ovorum an. ij. croc. ss. vitellum
unius ovi. Misce.

The Fifth day I applied an Instrument, and began by degrees to draw the
Fingers to their natural site. It was made of a Splint three Inches broad, long
enough to reach almost from the Elbow to the Wrist. At the end next the Wrist,
it had a stick fastened across it with four round pegs standing up. The Splint
was tied in two places round the Arm with a string. The Instrument therefore
being tied on, and well guarded with Lint and Cotton, I put Finger-stalls of
Leather upon the ends of the Fingers, with strings fastened to them. Then I drew
the strings tight, and fastened them to the four pegs aforementioned: And every
day I bent them more and more. And that I might the better do it; I anointed
the Arm and Hand with the foresaid Unguent, as often as I dressed the Wounds.
But, that the Fingers might not grow together again, I put Plates of Lead
between the Fingers. Thus by little and little the Fingers were reduced to to
their natural site. In the mean time I healed and cicatrized the Wounds, not
with very great Driers, but with Medicaments, that were also somewhat
emollient. And by GOD's Blessing the Hand was perfectly restored.

CHAP. VIII.
Of shrunk Sinews, and crooked Arms and Legs.

WHen, upon the falling down of some Humors the Sinews shrink, and the Joints
are bent, so that one cannot extend them, it ought well to be considered,
before the Cure be undertaken, whether the Joint be joined with a Calius, or
no, (the two ends of the Bones having been eroded by some Humor, and by an
intervening Callus grown into one, as in Fractures) for then, let the
Surgeon do what he can, he can do no good, as to the reduction of it; only
if he perceive it in time, as it is in growing, he may keep the Limb in the
most convenient posture; but it will ever after be stiff and useless. If it is
not joined by a Callus, the method of Cure is this. First, a good Diet must be
observed. Then the Body must be gently purged. Thirdly, the Nerves and nervous
parts must be mollified and moistened by all means possible. The following
Fomentation will do good. rad. Althaeae, liliorum alborum, Bryoniae, ebuli an.
ss. foliorum and florum Betonicae, ivae artheticae, rorismarini, Majoranae an.
M. ss. florum Chamaem. Melil. Sambuc. an. M. s. Sem. lin. Faenigraec. an. j.
ams. aneth. an ij. Incidantur and contundantur omnia grosso modo, coquanturque
in jure capitis and pedum vituli aut vervecis. The disaffected Limb must be
held an hour or two twice or thrice a day in this Decoction, as the Patient
pl^^ses. Or a Bag may be made of the foresaid Herbs, which may be boiled in the
foresaid Broth, and applied hot, and left on all night. When the Bag is taken
off, and the Limb wiped with warm Clothes, it may be anointed with the
following Liniment hot. Olei de Ranis ( cujus descriptio haec est, ranas
viventes man. XII. lumbricorum in aqua lotorum M. iij. storum and foliorum
Betonicae, ivae Artheticae an. M. ij. roris marini, Majoranae, Florum primulae
veris, Lavandulae, Salviae, Chamaemel. Melilot. an. M. j. Omnia cuni ranis and
lumbricis incid^ntur, and in mortario conquassentur, prosectis postea in
cucurbitam assunde aq. Juniperi sine vino distillatae lb vj. Olei Olivarum lb.
vij. a^ung. human. felis, canis, muris Alpini an. ij. Maneant in infusione
horas 24. postea cucurbita suo capitello tecta ponatur in arenam, and tamdin
coquatur, donec tota fore aqua fit extillata. Oleum adhuc tepidum per praelum
exprimatur, and reservetur ad usi^n) Ol. ex floribus an. j. Ol. Lumbric.
vulpin. am^gdal. dulc. pinguedinis muris. Alpini an. ss. Misce. Or, Vngu. de
Althaeae j. pinguedinis humanae, anseris, caponis, an. ss. ol. lumbricorum j.
Ol. granor^an Juniperi ij. M. After anointing, let some very emollient Plaster
be applied, as Empl. de Meliloto, de Mucilag. cum Gum. Or Empl. Oesypi
Philagrii. It must be dressed twice a day in this manner, till the Tendons and
Joint are soft enough. Then an Instrument must be fixed to it, well guarded with
Tow, Cotton, or Lint, which must be kept on night and day, and as you think
good, or as the Patient can bear it, it must be extended. But every, or every
other day the Instrument must be taken off, the Limb must be anointed, and the
Plaster also must be renewed. By means of this Instrument, the crooked Limb
must be exterded; but gently, lest Pain and bad Symptoms arise. For all
violence is dangerous. In the mean time, while the Instrument is fixed to the
Knee, the Patient must walk gently upon it, if he be in any measure able. But
if the Arm be crooked, then he must stie it sometimes forward, and sometimes
backward. The description of the Instrument is thus. There must be a wooden
case, or cradle made hollow, and fit to receive the Thigh about the middle, and
the small of the Leg a little above the Ankle. Then there must be an Iron hoop
fit to receive the Knee, with an hinge to open and shut, that it may let the
Knee in, and with a Button, and several holes to straiten or widen, as there
shall be occasion. Then a male Skrew must be put through a hole in the hoop,
just in the Ham, and a hole in the wooden Cradle which is placed behind, and
fastened with strings to the mid Thigh, and the small of the Leg. This male
Skrew must rest by a Shoulder in the Hoop, then the female Skrew must skrew on
behind the wooden Cradle, by turning of which the Hoop is brought to the
Cradle, and thereby the Leg extended as much as the Surgeon shall desire.
Hildanus says, that without the help of this Instrument he has reduced several
crooked Elbows in the manner following. He ordered, besides the foresaid
Emollients, that the Patient should every hour take some heavy things in his
hand, as a Kettle full of stones, and walk about with it. Though this be an
easy remedy, yet he would not have it neglected, because he has found the
great success of it.

CHAP. IX.
The Cure of a distorted Foot.

HIldanus, Cent. 6. Obs. 90. has an observation of the Cure of a distorted
Foot, which may serve as a pattern in the like case, viz. A Woman big with
Child, as she was going in Pattens, stumbled, and was disturbed, and out of
order at it. She was afterward brought to bed of a Boy, whose right Foot was
so Distorted, that his Toes, and all his Foot turned inwards toward the inside
of his Ankle. So that when he walked, he trod more upon the out-part of his
Ankle, than the sole of his Foot. Many means had been used by excellent
Physicians and Surgeons, but all in vain. When he was above three years old,
and all hope of restitution was past, they wrote to me, and begged that I would
use my utmost diligence and skill about the Child. When I had viewed and
considered the case well (to speak the truth) I despaired of restoring the
Foot, the Distortion being now old and confirmed. However, at the Parents
entreaty, I attempted the Cure in this manner.

First of all, because the Child was lusty and fat, I purged his Body with
Manna, and Syrupus Rosarum solutivus by turns, lest by Bathings and
Fomentations I might draw the superfluous Humors to the part affected. When
the Body was purged, I every day twice or thrice used the following emollient
Decoction, for ten or twelve days; rad. Althaeae, Malvae. an. ss. herb. and
flor. Betonicae, ivae artheticae. flor. Chamaem. Melilot. am. M. j. Sem. lin.
Faenigraec. an. j. coquantur in decocto capitis and pedum vervecis, fiatque
fomentum, cui bis in die ad semihoram usque pedem immergat. After Fomentation I
anointed the Leg and Foot all over with the following Unguent; Ol. Lil. Alb.
Amygd. dulc. an. ss. Ol. Lumbric. j. Ol. Granor. Juniperi ij. Misceantur. Then
I applied the following Plaster. Emplastr de mucilaginibus ijss. Gummi
Ammaniaci in Spiritu Juniperino dissoluti and percolati, iterumque ad
spissitudinem cocti j. cerae novae ss. Ol. de Vitellis ovorum j. dissolvantur
lentissimo igne; deinde admisce pulv. flor. Betonicae, ivae Artheticae, Rosarum
Rubrarum, an. ij. croci, pulv. Lumbricorum terrestrium, Masticis, Olibani an.
j. Misce, and fiat secundum artem Emplastrum, addendo parum Olei Rosacei, si
opus fuerit. This Plaster wonderfully mollifies and strengthens the nervous
parts.

The Foot being in this manner sufficiently mollified, I left off Emollients,
and applied Corroborants.

In the mean time while I used Emollients. I applied a Serperastrum or Boot,
hereafter described.

Moreover, although the Foot was wonderfully distorted; yet after the use of
Emollients, it was easily reduced into the natural form, and that without pain:
but as soon as ever the hand was off it, it returned to its former monstrous
Figure.

And whenever I extended the Foot (which I took special notice of) and reduced
it to its natural posture, I felt a great hollowness between the inner Ankle
and the sole of the Foot. For the Process of the lower Appendix of the Os
tibiae, which makes the inner Ankle, because it had rested a long time upon the
Os calcis, was depressed, and stood at a distance from the Os calcis. And the
Process of the Fibula, which makes the outer Ankle, was preternaturally
prominent, and twined the whole Foot inward.

Therefore to reduce the Foot to its natural posture and form, it was necessary
to depress the Prominence of the Fibula, and a little to prolong the defect of
the Process of the Appendix of the Os tibiae. That was done by Art and
Industry; this by the benefit of Nature. And that Nature is wonderfully
sollicitous for the maintaining her Individuum; I can visibly demonstrate by an
instance in my Study. For there I have the Sceleton of a Capon, in which the
wonderful providence of the Creator may be observed. This Creature had broke
its left Thigh Bone short off, and the one end of the broken Bone grew over the
other by a firm Calius, and therefore that Leg must have been shorter than the
other: but provident and wise Nature made the Os tibiae of that Leg so much
longer than the Os tibiae of the right, as the left Thigh Bone was shorter than
the right; and thus no inequality or deformity was left. And if it was thus in
Brutes, why not so in Children, while they are growing; especially if they be
of a good habit of Body, as this Patient was? But to return to him; the Foot
being thus sufficiently mollified, I was to think of something else. I then
therefore anointed the Foot and all the Leg with Succus Lumbricorum, aqua
Betonicae, ivae Artheticae, Sa^viae and Juniperi mixto, and applied the
following Plaster, which strengthens admirably; Emplastri Slotani iij. Gummi
El^mi purissimi, Cerae novae an. j. pulv. Mastic. Olibani, pulv. lumbricorum
aqua communi loterum and exsiccatorum an. ij. Rosar. Rubr. Balaustior. nucum
cupress. an. j. cum s. q. Olei Lumbricorum fiat Ceratum, quod supra alutam
extendatur, applicetur, and renovetur, de sexto in sextum diem. Afterward,
having replaced the Foot in its natural posture, which, (as I said before)
might be done without pain, I applied the following instrument so neatly to the
Foot, that the Foot could not get back into its former praeternatural posture,
unless the swathes and bandage happened to be loose. The Instrument was made
thus of Iron; it was shaped like half a Boot, but parted about the mid Leg, and
held together by two pins of Iron running into two Loops, and a Skrew between
them, to let the lower part down, or to draw it up right, as there should be
occasion. This lower part was so made, as to take hold of the Foot, and keep it
from starting any way out of its proper place. This was for the outside of the
Leg. It was fastened to a piece above the Knee by a pin to run on, for the
motion of the Knee. The inside of the Leg was covered with Splints, lined with
Tow or Cotton, and so the Instrument on the outside was fastened round the Leg
by strings.

The Foot being tied straight and fast in this manner, the Prominence of the
Fibula was depressed, or at least hindered from starting out. And the Process of
the lower Appendix of the Os tibiae, since there was an empty place, might grow
out, and so by degrees fill up the hollowness about the inner Ankle. Thus the
deformity of the Foot was rectified, so that when he walked no deformity
appeared.

But Cures of this nature require a long time and great care. For violence does
no good, it is Nature's work to correct such deformities, with the assistance
of the Chirurgeon's skill and industry. I found this true in the foresaid
Patient. The case was inveterate and deplorable; wherefore he wore the foresaid
Instrument a whole year. And I contrived another for him to wear afterward.
For Children when they are growing, must have new ones fitted to them, as they
out-grow the old ones.

The reason why the former Physicians, tho expert persons, could do no good,
was not for want of proper Medicines, but for want of Serperastra. Wherefore in
such cases a Physician must set all his Wits to work to invent apt Instruments,
without which, the best Medicines are used to no purpose.

CHAP. X.
The Cure of a crooked Back.

A Crooked Back most commonly proceeds from the Rickets, and may, if minded
when the Party is young, be cured. But then it must be done by Chirurgical
means. I shall therefore give you Hildanus his method of Cure in the following
Process, viz.

A Girl of eighteen Months of age, had the Vertebrae of her Loins beginning to
grow in a bunch outward. When some Barhers had for several Months endeavored
in vain to cure her by Ointments, Baths, and thin plates of Lead, but still the
Spine grew more and more into a bunch; at length Hildanus was called. He found
the third and fourth Vertebrae of the Loins extuberant, as big as a Ducks Egg,
which were followed a little by the second and fifth; so that the Spine was
grown into a huge bunch, especially toward the left Side: which made the left
Leg far weaker than the right. In the Cure he proceeded thus.

First of all he chafed the Back, and the whole Thigh and Leg with the water
following, to strengthen the Nerves. Aq. Granor. Juniperi sine vino distillati,
Aq. Salviae, Betonicae, lavandulae, an. ij. Pulv. radic. tormentillae, Rosarum
an. ij. Misce, fiatque infusio in ampulla magna per dies octo vel december. Dein
per inclinationem a pulveribus praedictis separata aqua ad usum reservetur.
After chasing, he applied the following Plaster, which he often uses in
Fractures of the Bones. Empl. Slotani v. Cerae novae ij. lapidis sabulosi, sive
osteocollae j. Pulv. radic. consolid. maj. Terrae sigillatae an. iij. pulv.
balaustiorum, nucum cupressi, Rosar. odoriferar. an. j. Misceantur lentissimo
igne, fiatque Emplastrum addendo Olei Rosacei aut Masticis, q. s. But all the
skill in curing a Gibbus consists in repressing the Extuberance of the
Vertebrae. To this purpose therefore he made an Iron plate a little bent, long
and broad enough to cover the whole Gibbus, and quilted it into a Bodice
between two Clothes. But he covered it first with a course Cloth, that it might
hurt the Child the less. The Bodice was worn upon the naked Body, and so
sitted, as to comprehend all her Belly to the Muliebria. It was tied on with a
long strap over the middle of the Belly. About the Breast it was tied gently,
lest it might have straightened the Ribs or Midriff. But below the bastard Ribs to
the bottom of the Belly, it was tied pretty tight, that the Iron plate might
repress the extuberant Vertebrae. And lest the Bodice should have slipped
upwards, two straps an Inch broad, were fastened on each side of the Groin, to
go under the Perinaum, and to turn up again upon the Buttocks, and so were
fastened by straps to the Bodice on each side. He renewed the Plaster and the
Chasing every fourth or sixth day. But he ordered all from the Hip to the Foot,
to be chafed with the aforesaid water every day. So by GOD's Blessing the
Gibbus was cured in six Months. But she wore the Bodice and the Plate, by
reason of the weakness and softness of the parts, two years, in which time she
grew pretty well.

Partis Secundae Finis.
THE PRACTICE OF SURGERY. Part III.
BOOK VII.
Of taking away things superftuous.

CHAP. I.
Of things superfluous in general; and concerning Women's Labors.

I Gave you in the beginning of the First Book, a designation of the whole
Work; and therefore shall not here trouble you with a repetition of what I
intend to treat upon in this Third Part. What I comprehend in this one, some
divide into two, making one to be (...), or an extraction of hurtful things
sticking in our Body; and the other (...), or a removing of what is
superfluous. But I am of Dr. Read's Opinion, that these two may very well be
comprehended in one, viz. in the removal of things superfluous. Things
superfluous are such either by event, as a dead Child, a mortified Limb, etc.
Or by their own nature, as Wens, the Stone in the Bladder, etc. The First thing
superfluous by event, that I treat of, shall be a dead Child, or a living one
staying too long, to the prejudice of its own, and the Mother's, life. And here
I shall show how to deliver, or bring Women to Bed artificially and safely,
treating of Labors natural and unnatural, with the way how to help Women in
the first, and the right means of remedying the last. It will therefore be
necessary to know what Labor is, and the differences of it, together with its
different terms.

By a Delivery we understand either an emission or extraction of the Infant, at
the full time out of the Womb. This definition may comprehend as well the
natural, which is accomplished by Emission, when the Infant coming in a
commodious and usual Figure, the Womb sends it forth without extraordinary
violence: as the Delivery contrary to Nature, extraction by manual operation.

As to the general differences of Labor, we must take notice, that the one is
legitimate or natural, the other illegitimate or against nature. To come to the
knowledge of each, we say, that four conditions must absolutely be found in a
Delivery, that it may deserve to be called Legitimate, or Natural. 1. That it
be at the full time. 2. That it be speedy, without any considerable accident.
3. That the Child be living. 4. That it comes right in a good posture or
situation. For if any of these four are wanting, the Delivery is against
Nature; and the more, by how much the more of them are wanting.

As to the due time of Labor, most Authors assert, that Nature has appointed
to all other Animals a certain limited time of going with young, and bringing
them forth; but that Women only, by a particular favor of the same Nature,
have none prefixed, neither for Conceiving, going with Child, nor bringing
forth. And as to Conception, it is most certain that a Woman can conceive at any
time, night or day, Winter or Summer, or any other season whatsoever; because
she can copulate when she pleases, which few other Animals can, who couple but
at certain seasons, when they become lustful. But as to the time they are
accustomed to go with young, it is no more precisely determined to them, than
to a Woman; for as she may be brought to Bed either in the 7th, 8th, 9th, or
10th, Month (but for the most part in the 9th.) so likewise, for example, tho
the ordinary time for a Bitch to puppy, is the 4th Month, or thereabouts, yet
some puppy sooner, some later. And the usual time of Ews yeaning their Lambs is
at five Months end: yet some advance or recede from that ordinary term,
according to the ground where they feed, and other particular disposition;
which happen to all others, as well as to Women. The first time that a Child
may live when born, is the 7th Month complete, and it may better from that time
till the end of the 9th Month; but as soon as that is passed, the stay it makes
afterward in the Womb, is no way beneficial to it, because it has then
acquired all necessary perfection, and strength to resist all outward injuries.
The Child born before the 7th Month, cannot live long, because of its weakness.
But he that is born in the 8th, may very well live, yea, and more likely than
one born in the seventh month (which is contrary to the general opinion of the
World) because it is more perfect, as I shall demonstrate afterward, where I
will particularly show the cause of this error.

The proper figure and situation of a Child is thus. It ought to come with the
Head first, in a straight line, having the Face turned downwards, that is,
toward the Mother's Back, the Arms couched along on its Sides, and the Thighs
stretched upwards; but any other part that may first present it self to the
Labor, makes it unfortunate and against nature; in which case there is often
great danger to the Mother or Child, and sometimes to both, if not suddenly and
duly helped.

CHAP. II.
The signs that precede and accompany as well a natural, as an unnatural
Delivery.

WHen Women with Child, chiefly of their first, perceive any extraordinary
pains in their Belly, they immediately send for their Midwife, taking it for
their Labor; who when she is come, ought to be well informed of the matter,
and careful not to put her in Labor before there is a disposition to it. For
many times both the Mother and Child lose their Lives, when (by breaking the
Amnios and Chorion) it is excited before the due time. Those pains, which may
be called false, are usually caused by a Colic, proceeding from Wind, which
come and go griping the whole Belly, without any forcing downwards, or into the
Womb, as those do which precede or accompany Labor: And this Colic is
dissipated by warm Clothes applied to the Belly, and a Clyster or two, by
which, true Labour-pains are rather furthered than hindered. A Woman may feel
other kind of pains coming from an Emotion, caused by the flux of the Belly,
which are easily known by the frequent Stools that follow.

The signs preceding a natural Labor few days before are, that the Belly,
which before lay high, sinks down, and hinders a Woman at that time from
walking as easy as she used; and there flows from the Womb slimy humors,
appointed by Nature to moisten and smooth the passage, that its inward orisice
may the more easily be dilated, when it is necessary; which beginning to open a
little at that time, suffers that slime to flow away, which proceeds from the
humors that strain through the thin substance of the Infants Membranes, and
acquires a viscous consistence by the heat of the place, or from the Prostatae.

The signs accompanying present Labor, (that is, showing, that the Woman is
effectively in Labor) are great pains about the region of the Reins and Loins,
which coming and reiterating by intervals, answer in the bottom of the Belly
with congruous Throws. The Face is sometimes red and inflamed, because the
Blood is much heated by the continual endeavors a Woman makes to bring forth
her Child; as also, because that during these strong Throws her respiration is
ever intercepted; for which reason much Blood has recourse to her Face. Her
privy parts are swelled, because the Infants Head (lying in the birth) often
th^usts and causes the neighboring parts to distend outward, which thence
appear swelled in this manner. She is often subject to vomiting, which makes
many believe, who know not the cause of it, that the Women to whom it happens,
are in danger: But on the contrary, it is ordinarily a sign of speedy delivery,
because the good pains are then excited and redoubled every moment until the
business be finished. This vomiting comes from a Sympathy between the Womb and
Stomach, by reason of the ramifications of the Nerves of the sixth pair of the
Brain, which are distributed both to the one and the other, and by which it
communicates the pain it feels at that time, arising from the agitation, which
the violent and frequent motions of the Child cause, and the strong compression
the Muscles of the lower Belly make during the Throws, for to help the issuing
forth of the Child. Besides, when the birth is near, Women are sometimes
troubled with an universal trembling, and principally of the Legs and Thighs;
not with cold, as at the beginning of an Ague-fit, but with the heat of the
whole Body; and the Humors which then flow from the Womb, are often discolored
with Blood, which with the signs abovementioned, is an infallible mark of the
nearness of the birth; it is that the Midwives usually call Shows: and if one
then put up their Finger into the neck of the Womb, they will find the inner
Orisice dilated, at the opening of which, the Membranes of the Infant,
containing the Waters, present themselves, and are strongly forced downwards
with every pain the Woman has; at which time one may perceive them to resist,
and again press toward the ^inger, being by so much the more or less hard and
extended, by how much the pains are stronger or weaker. These Membranes with
the water in them, when gathered (that is, when they are advanced before the
Head of the Child, which makes the Midwives call it the gathering of the
waters) presenting themselves at this inward Orifice, do then resemble very
well to the touch of the Finger, the abortive eggs which have yet no shell, but
are only covered with a simple Membrane: after this, the pains redoubling
continually, the Membranes are broken by the strong impulsion of the waters,
which incontinently flow away, and then the Head of the Child is easily felt
naked, and presented at the opening of the inner Orisice of the Womb. Now all
these, or the greatest part of them met together, at what time soever of a
Woman's going with Child it be, whether full time or no, one may be assured she
will soon be delivered; but great care must be taken not to hasten her Labor,
before the necessity of it be known by these signs; for that would but torment
the Woman and Child in vain, and put them both in danger of their lives.

Labor contrary to Nature is when the Child comes in an ill sigure and
situation; as when it presents any otherwise than the Head first; as also when
the waters flow away a long time before it is born, because it remains dry in
the Womb, and they are absolutely necessary to moisten the passage, and render
it more slippery. When the After-burthen comes first, it is an accident, which
renders the Labor always dangerous, by reason of the great flux of Blood
usually following, of which the Mother may dye in few hours, and the Infant
(because it receives no more nourishment) is quickly smothered in the Womb, for
want of respiration, which it then needs, if it stay never so little after. The
Labor is also grievous, when accompanied with a Fever, or any other
considerable distemper, which may destroy the Child in the Womb; as also when
pains are small, and come slow, with long interval and little profit, by reason
of which a Woman is extremely tired: but the difficulty most frequent and
ordinary comes from the Infants wrong posture.

CHAP. III.
Of the several natural situations of an Infant in the Mother's Womb, according
to the different times of pregnancy.

WHen we shall have explained the several natural situations of an Infant,
those contrary to nature, causing for the most part all ill Labors, will
easily be conceived.

It may be considered, that generally the Infants, as well Male as Female, are
usually situated in the midst of the Womb; for tho sometimes a Woman's great
Belly is a little higher on the one side than the other, yet that is, because
the globe of the Womb inclines more that way; and this situation on the side
must be understood only in respect of the Mother's Belly, and not of her Womb,
in the midst of which it is always placed; because there is but one only Cavity
in a Woman's Womb, marked with a small line in its length, without having two
or more separations, as is seen in those of other Animals.

There are some who would have these two imaginary Cavities to be the cause why
Women bear Twins, yea, and sometimes more; and that the Males rather lie on the
right, and the Females on the left side; which is Hippocrates his opinion in
the 48th. Aphorism of his 5th. Book, where he says, Foetus mares dextra uteri
part, faeminae sinistra magis gestantur, but without any certain reason for
it; because some Women have the Males on the left side, others the Females on
the right; and when there are Twins, sometimes both are of the same Sex,
sometimes not, and indifferently situated on the right or the left. This is all
can be said in general of the situation of the Child in the Womb.

But in particular, when we consider the several figures it makes, it differs
according to the different times of pregnancy. For when the Woman is young with
Child, the little Foetus, called Embryo, is always found of a round figure a
little oblong, having the Spine moderately turned inwards, the Thighs folded,
and a little raised, to which the Legs are so joined, that the Heels touch the
Buttocks, the Arms are bending, and the Hands placed upon the Knees, toward
which the Head is inclining forwards, so that the Chin touches the Breast. It
resembles, in this posture, very well; one sitting to void his Excrements, and
stooping down his Head, to see what comes from him. The spine of its Back is at
that time placed toward the Mothers, the Head uppermost, the Face forwards,
and the Feet downwards; and it extends by little and little its Members, which
were exactly folded in the first Months. It keeps usually this posture till the
7th or 8th Month, at which time the Head being grown very big, is carried
downwards by its weight, toward the inward Orifice of the Womb, tumbling as it
were over its Head, so that then the Feet are uppermost, and the Face toward
the great Gut; tho some Foetus never turn before the time of Labor, some
believe that only Males are so turned downwards when they are born, and that
the Females are with their Face upwards; but both the one and the other are
always turned downwards, with their Face toward the Rectum of their Mother, as
is abovesaid; and when it happens otherwise, it is unnatural, for the Child's
Face coming upwards will be extremely bruised, and the Nose wholly flatted,
because of the hardness of the Os pubis in the passage.

It may be noted that when the Child has thus changed its first situation,
being not yet accustomed to this last, it stirs and torments it self so much
sometimes, that the Woman, by reason of the pain she feels, is apt to believe
her Labor is at hand. And if this circumstance be well considered, we may find
it to be the first pretended endeavor, which Authors imagine the Child makes
to be bor^ in the 7th Month, and not being able to accomplish it, remains for
till the 9th, and that reiterating it in the 8th, if it be born, it lives not
long, because it was not able to endure two such puissant endeavors so near
together. But it is a mere abuse, for if the Child turns it self so with the
Head downwards, or rather is turned, it is but by a natural disposition of the
weight of the upper parts of the Body, or by a natural propensity; and if it
stirs much at that time and soon after, it is not from a desire to be born, but
from the inconvenience it receives from this new posture, to which it was not
before accustomed, as already has been mentioned. And it begins to turn thus
sometimes from the 7th Month, rarely before but by accident, oftnest about the
8th Month, and sometimes in the 9th only; and at other times also it turns not
at all, as we may easily perceive in those that come in their first situation,
that is, with their Feet foremost. From whence it is easy to conjecture, and I
hold it for a certain truth, that the Children are the more strong and robust,
and consequently may the more likely live, by how much the nearer they approach
to the more natural and perfect time, which is at the end of the 9th. Month.

The Infant then is turned on this manner with his Head downwards toward the
later end of the reckoning, to the end only that he may be the better disposed
for his easier passage into the World at the time of Labor, which is not then
far off: For in this posture all its Joints are easily extended in coming
forth, and the Arms and Legs cannot hinder its birth; because they cannot be
bended against the inward orifice of the Womb; and the rest of the Body which
is very supple, passes very easily, after the Head, which is hard and big,
being once born.

When there are many Children, they ought, if the Labor be natural, to come in
the same figure, as when there is but one: but usually by their different
motions they do so incommode one the other, that most commonly one of them
presents wrong at the time of Labor, yea, and before; which is the cause that
one comes often with the Head, the other with the Feet, or in any other worse
posture, and sometimes both come wrong.

But however the Infant may be situated in the Mother's Belly, or whatsoever
fashion it be that it presents at the birth, if it be not according to the
posture above described, it is always against nature: and the natural situation
is so necessary to a good and legitimate Delivery, that those which are against
nature, do cause for the most part bad Labors.

CHAP. IV.
What is to be done when a Woman first falls in Labor.

A Woman's Travel is only many Pains with reiterated Throws, by which she
endeavors to bring forth her Child. It is so called, because both Mother and
Child suffer, and take much pains in this action.

As soon as it is known that the Woman is certainly in Labor, by the signs
preceding, and accompanying Labor, before recited; of which the principal are
Pains and strong Throws in the Belly, foreing downwards toward the Womb; and
dilatation of the inward Orifice, perceived by touching it with the Finger; as
also the gathering of the Waters, which come before the Head of the Child, and
thrusting down the Membranes which contain them, through which between the
pains one may in some manner with the Finger discover the part which presents,
especially if it be the Head of the Child, by its roundness and hardness: Then
must all things necessary to comfort the Woman in her Labor be got ready; and
the better to help her, care must be taken, that she be not strait laced; a
pretty strong Clyster may be given her, or more than one, if there be occasion;
which must be done at the beginning, and before the Child be too forwards, for
afterward it is very difficult for her to receive them, because the Gut is too
much compressed: They serve to excite it to discharge it self of its
excrements, that so the Rectum being emptied, there may be more space for the
dilatation of the passage; as also to stir up the pains to bear the better
downwards, through the endeavors she makes when she is at Stool. And the while
all necessary things for her Labor should be put in order, as well for the
Woman as the Child, a Midwife's Stool, or rather a Pallet-Bed girted, placed
close by the fire, if the season require it; which Pallet ought to be so
disengaged, as to be turned round about, the better to help the Woman when
there is occasion.

If the Woman be Plethorick, it may be convenient to bleed her a little; for by
this means, her Breast being disengaged, and her Respiration free, she will
have more strength to bear down her pains, which she may do without danger;
because the Child being about that time ready to be born, has no need of the
Mother's Blood for its nourishment, which has been often practiced with good
success: Besides, this evacuation often hinders her having a Fever after
Delivery. In expectation of which hour she may, walk about her Chamber, if her
strength permits; and to preserve her strength, it will be convenient to give
some good Gelly Broths, new laid Eggs, or some spoonfuls of burnt or brewed
Wine; from time to time, or a Toast dipped in Wine; avoiding at that time solid
food. Above all, she must be persuaded to hold out her Pains, bearing them down
as much as she can, at the instant when they take her. The Midwife must from
time to time touch the inward Orifice with her Finger, to know whether the
waters are ready to break, and whether the birth will soon after follow: She
must likewise anoint all the Bearing-places with emolientoyls, Hog's grease, or
fresh Butter, if she perceive that they can hardly be dilated; and all the
while she must be near her Woman, to observe her gestures diligently, her
complaints and pains; for by this they guess pretty well how the Labor
advances.

The Patient may likewise by intervals rest her self on her Bed, for to regain
her strength; but not too long, especially little, or short thick Women, for
they have always worse Labors if they lie much on their beds in their Travail
(and yet much worse of their first Children) than when they are prevailed with
to walk about the Chamber, supporting them under their Arms, if necessary; for
by this means the weight of the Child (the Woman being on her Legs) causes the
inward orifice of the Womb to dilate sooner than in Bed; and her pains to be
stronger and frequenter, that her Labor be nothing near so long.

When the waters of the Child are gathered, which may be perceived through the
Membranes, to present themselves to the inward Orifice, of the bigness of the
whole dilatation, the Midwise ought to let them break of themselves, and not as
some, that are impatient of the long Labor, break them, intending to hasten
their business, which on the contrary they retard by so doing, before the
Infant be wholly in the passage; for by the too hasty breaking of these waters,
which ought to serve him to slide forth with greater facility, he remains dry,
which hinders afterward the Pains and Throws from being so effectual to bring
forth the Infant, as else they would have been. It is therefore better to let
them break of themselves, and then the Midwife may easily feel the Child bare,
by the part which first presents, and so judge certainly whether it comes
right, that is, with the Head, which she shall find hard, big, round and equal;
but if it be any other part, she will perceive something inequal and rugged,
and hard or soft, more or less, according to the part it is.

Immediately after (that being the right time when all Women ought to be
delivered, if Nature perform its office) let her hasten to deliver her Woman,
if she be not already, and assist the Birth, which ordinarily happens soon
after, if natural, and may be done according to the directions in the next
Chapter. But if the Child comes wrong, and she be not able to deliver the
Woman, as she ought to be, by helping Nature, and so save both Mother and
Child, who both are in danger of their Lives, let her send speedily for an
expert and dextrous Surgeon in the practice, and not delay, as too many of
them often do, till it be reduced to extremity.

As Soon then as the waters are broke, and the Midwife finds the Child to come
wrong, she must advise the Woman not to forward her pains, lest by bearing down
she engage the Child too far in the passage, and so give the Surgeon more
pains to turn it.

CHAP. V.
Of a natural Labor, and the means of helping a Woman therein, when there is
one or more Children.

WE have already taught, that there are four things requisite to a truly
legitimate and natural Labor, viz. That it be at the full time. That it be
speedy, without any ill accident. That the Child be alive. And that he comes
right. All which being found to be so, and after the Waters be broke of
themselves, as abovesaid, let the Woman be presently placed on a Pallet-Bed,
provided for her to this purpose near the fire; or she may, if she likes it
better, be delivered in her ordinary Bed. For all Women are not accustomed to
be delivered in the same posture: Some will be on their Knees (which is a
dangerous way) as many in Country villages; others standing upright leaning
with their Elbows on a pillow upon a Table, or the side of a Bed; and others
lying on a Quilt in the midst of the Chamber; but the best and sureft way, is
to be delivered in their Bed, to shun the inconvenience and trouble of being
carried ^hither afterward.

The Bed must be so made, that the Woman being ready to be delivered, should
lie on her Back upon it, having her Body in a convenient figure, that is, her
Head and Breast a little raised, so that she be neither lying nor sitting; for
in this manner she breaths best, and will have more strength to help her pains,
than if she were otherwise, or sunk down in her Bed. Being in this posture, she
must spread her Thighs abroad, folding her Legs a little toward her Buttocks,
somewhat raised by a small pillow underneath, to the end that the Coccyx, or
Rump, should have more liberty to retire back, and have her Feet staid against
some firm thing; besides this, let her hold some persons with her hands, that
she may the better stay her self during her Pains. She being thus placed near
the side of her Bed (with her Midwife by, the better to help upon occasion)
must take courage, and help her Pains the best she can, bearing them down when
they take her, which she may do by holding her breath, and forcing her self, as
much as she can, just as when she goes to stool; for by such endeavors, the
Diaphragm being strongly thrust downwards does force down the Womb and Child in
it; in the mean time the Midwife must comfort her, and desire her to endure her
Labor bravely, putting her in hopes of a speedy Delivery. Some would have
another Woman at that time to press the superior parts of her Belly, and so
thrust gently the Child downwards; but I am not of their opinion, because such
compressions will rather hurt than profit, by endangering the bruising of the
Womb, which is extreme sore at that time. But the Midwife may content her self
only (having neither Ring nor Bracelet on, and her Hand anointed with Oil or
fresh Butter) to dilate gently the inward orifice of the Womb, putting her
singers ends into its entry, and stretching them one from the other, when the
pains take her, thus endeavoring to forward the Child, and thrusting by little
and little the sides of the Orifice, toward the hinder part of the Child's
Head, anointing these parts also with fresh Butter, if it be necessary.

When the Infant's Head begins to advance into this inward orifice, it is
commonly said it is crowned, because it girds and surrounds it, just as a
Crown; and when it is so far, that the extremity begins to appear manifestly
without the privy parts, it is then said, the Child is in the passage, and the
Woman in Travail imagines (although untruly, and it may be is not so much as
touched by her) that her Midwife hurts her with her Fingers, finding her self
as it were scratched and pricked with pins in those parts, because of the
violent distention, and sometimes laceration, which the bigness of the Child's
Head causes there.

When things are in this posture, the Midwife must seat her self conveniently
to receive the Child, which will soon come, and with her fingers ends, her
Nails being close pared, endeavor to thrust (as abovesaid) this crowning of
the Womb back over the Head of the Child, and as soon as it is advanced as far
as the Ears, or thereabouts, she may take hold of the two sides with her two
hands, that when the pain comes, she may quickly draw forth the Child, taking
care that the Navel-string be not then entangled about the Neck, or any other
part, lest thereby the After-burthen be pulled with violence, and possibly the
Womb also, to which it is fastened, and so cause Flooding; or else break the
string, whereby the Woman may come to be more difficultly delivered. It must
also be observed, that the Head be not drawn forth straight, but shaking it a
little from one side to the other, that the Shoulders may the sooner and easier
take its place, immediately after it be past, which must be done without losing
any time, lest the Head being past, the Child be stopped there by the bigness and
largeness of the Shoulders, and be in danger of being strangled in the passage:
But as soon as the Head is born, if there be need, she may slide in her singers
under the Armpits, and the rest of the Body will follow without any difficulty.

As soon as the Midwife has in this manner drawn forth the Child, she must put
it on one side, left the Blood and Waters, which follow immediately after,
should incommode it, or, it may be, choke it, by running into its Mouth or
Nose, as it would do, if it were laid on the Back. After which there remains
nothing but to free her from the After-burthen, which I will show how in the
next Chapter. But before that, let her be very careful to examine, whether
there be no more Children in the Womb; for it happens very often that there are
two, and sometimes more, which she may easily know, by the continuance of the
pains after the Child is born, and the bigness of the Mother's Belly; besides
this, she may be very sure of it, if she puts her hand up the entry of the
Womb, and finds there another water gathering, and a Child in it presenting to
the passage: If it be so, she must have a care not to go about to fetch the
Afterbirth, till the Woman be delivered of all her Children, if she have never
so many: For if Twins be fastened to the same Burden, to which there are
fastened as many strings and distinct Membranes, as there are Children; and if
one should go to draw it forth as soon as the first is born, the rest would be
in danger of their lives, because that part is very necessary to them, while
they are in the Womb; and besides, it endangers Flooding. Wherefore the first
string must be cut, being first tied with a thread three or four double, as we
shall show more exactly hereafter, and fasten the other end with a string to
the Woman's Thigh, not so much for fear that the string should enter again into
the Womb, as to prevent the inconvenience it may cause to the Woman by hanging
between her Thighs; afterward this Child being removed, they must take care to
deliver her of the rest, observing all the same circumstances as was to the
first; which being done, it will be then convenient to fetch the Afterbirth, as
we shall show in the following Chapter.

CHAP. VI.
How to fetch the After-burthen.

MOst Animals when they have brought forth their young, cast forth nothing else
but some waters, and the Membranes which contained them; but Women have an
Afterbirth, of which after Labor they must be delivered, as of a thing
useless and inconvenient: Wherefore as soon as the Child is born, before they
do so much as tie or cut the Navel-string, lest the Womb close, they must
without losing time, free the Woman from this fleshy mass, which was destined
to furnish the Infant with Blood for its nourishment, whilst it was in the
Womb, and which at that time is called with much reason the Afterbirth,
because it follows the Child, and is to the Woman like another Birth; for being
brought forth, she is perfectly delivered.

To perform this, the Midwife having taken the string, must wind it once or
twice about one or two of her Fingers of her left Hand joined together, the
better to hold it, with which the may then draw it moderately, and with the
right Hand she may only take a single ^old of it above the left, near the
Privities, drawing likewise with that very gently, resting the while the
Forefinger of the same hand extended and stretched forth along the string
toward the entrance of the Vagina; always observing for the more facility, to
draw it from the side where the Burden cleaves least, for in so doing the rest
will separate the better; just as we see a Card, which is glewed to any thing,
is better separated from the place where it begins to part, than where it is
close joined.

Above all things, care must be taken, that it be not drawn forth with too much
violence, lest by breaking the string near the Burden, as sometimes happens,
you be obliged to put up the whole Hand into the Womb, to deliver the Woman; or
that the Womb, to which this Burden is sometimes very strongly fastened, be not
drawn forth with it: As also in drawing it forth with too much violence, there
may happen a very great Flooding, which would be of a dangerous consequence:
Wherefore for these reasons, it must be carefully shaken, and gently drawn
forth by little and little, after the manner we have just now described; and to
facilitate the better its expulsion, the Woman may blow strongly the whilst
into her Hands shut, just as one would into the mouth of a bottle to know
whether it be broke; or she may put her Finger into her Throat, as if she would
excite vomiting; or else strive as if she were going to stool, bearing always
down, and holding her breath, as she did to bring forth her Child: All these
motions and different agitations produce the same effect, and loosen and expel
the Afterbirth out of the Womb.

When all these circumstances have been observed, if notwithstanding you meet
with difficulty, you may, if need be, after that you know on which side the
Afterbirth is situated, command an experienced Nurse-keeper to press the Belly
lightly with the flat of her Hand, directing it gently downwards by way of
friction, above all, being careful not to do it too boisterously. But if all
this be in vain, then must the Hand be directed into the Womb, to loosen and
separate it in the manner hereafter-mentioned, where we show the way how to
draw it forth when the string is broke.

As soon as the Woman is delivered of both Child and Burden, it must then be
considered, whether there be all, and care be had that not the least part of it
remain behind, not so much as the skirts or any clods of Blood, which ought all
to be brought away with the first; for otherwise being retained, they cause
great pains: All which being done, things fit for Mother and Child in this
condition must be provided.

When a Woman has two Children, she must be delivered in the same manner as if
she had but one; observing only for the reasons given in the precedent Chapter,
not to fetch the Burden, till the Children be born; and then it may be done
without danger, shaking and drawing it always gently, sometimes by one string,
sometimes the other, and sometimes by both together, and so by turns till it
come, proceeding in it according to the directions already given.

When the Infant comes right and naturally, the Woman is brought to Bed, and
delivered with little help, observing what has been taught in the two last
Chapters, of which the meanest Midwives are capable, and oftentimes for want of
them, a simple Nurse-keeper may supply that place: But when it is a wrong
Labor, there is a greater mystery belongs to it; for then the skill and
prudence of a Surgeon is for the most part requisite, which we intend now to
treat of.

CHAP. VII.
Of laborious and difficult Labors, and those against Nature, their causes and
differences, together with the means to remedy them.

FOr the easier and better explaining these things, we say, that there are
three sorts of bad Labors; to wit, the painful or laborious; the difficult;
and that which is altogether contrary to Nature.

The laborious is a bad Labor, in which the Mother and Child (though it comes
right) suffer very much, and are harassed more than ordinary.

The difficulty is not much unlike the first; but besides, it is accompanied
with some accident which retards it, and causes the difficulty: But the wrong
Labor, or that against Nature, is caused by the bad situation of the Child,
and can never be helped but by manual operation, or the Chirurgeon's Hand. In
the laborious and difficult Labors Nature always does the work, being a little
assisted: but in that contrary to Nature, all its endeavors are vain and
useless, and then there is no help but in an expert Surgeon, without whom
she must certainly perish.

The difficulties of Labor proceed either from Mother, Child, or both.

From the Mother, by reason of the indisposition of her Body; or it may be from
some particular part only, and chiefly the Womb: or also from some strong
passion of the Mind, with which she was before possessed.

In respect of her Body, either because she may be too young, having the
passages too strait, or too old of her first Child; because her parts are too
dry, and hard, and cannot be so easily dilated, as happens also to them which
are too lean. They who are either small, short, or misshapen, as crooked Women,
have not a Breast strong enough to help their pains, and to bear them down; nor
those that are weak, whether naturally, or by accident; and crooked persons
have sometimes the bones of the passage not well shaped. They that are teuden
and too apprehensive of pain, have more trouble than others, because it hinders
them from doing their endeavor: And they likewise who have small Pains and
slow, or have none at all. Great Colicks hinder Labor also, by preventing the
true Pains. All great and acute Diseases make it very troublesome, and of a bad
consequence, according to Hippocrates, 3 Aph. Sect. 5. Mulierem gravidam morbo
quopiam acuto corripi, lethale. As when she is taken with a violent Fever,
great Flooding, frequent Convulsions, Dysentery, or any other great distemper.
Excrements retained cause much difficulty, as a Stone in the Bladder, or when
it is full of Urine, without being able to void it; or when the great Gut is
repleted with hard Ordure, or the Woman troubled with great and painful Piles,
and their ill situation sometimes retard it extremely.

As touching the difficulty proceeding from the Womb only, it must be either be
from its bad situation or conformation, having its Neck too strait, hard or
callous, whether naturally, or by any accident, as having had there a Tumor,
Aposteme, Ulcer or superfluous flesh whether on the Neck or inward Orifice; or
because of any cicatrice caused by a preceding bad Travail.

Bes^les, those things which are or may be contained in the Womb with the
Child, do also cause difficult Travail; as when the Membranes are so strong,
that they cannot be broken, which sometimes hinders them from advancing into
the passage; or so tender, that the waters break too soon, for then the Womb
remains dry. When there is a Mole, or the After-burthen comes first, which
always causes Flooding, and certainly the death of the Infant, if the Woman be
not presently delivered of them by Nature or Art; yea, and when the
Navel-string comes first, the Child is suffocated, if not speedily born; strong
passions of the Mind do likewise contribute much to it, as fear, sorrow, and
others of the like nature. The Woman that miscarries has more pain than a Woman
at her full time; as also than one that is hurt, although she be very near her
time.

As to the hindrances caused by the Infant, they are, when either its Head or
whole Body are too large, when the Belly is Hydropical; when it is monstrous,
having two Heads, or being joined to another Child, Mole, or any other strange
thing; when it is dead, or so weak, that it contributes nothing to its Birth;
when it comes wrong, or when there are two or more: besides all these different
difficulties of Labor, there is yet one caused by the Midwife's ignorance, who
for want of understanding her business, instead of helping, hinders Nature in
her work.

Let us now treat of the means, by which all these may be prevented, and the
Woman succored in her bad and difficult Labor, as may easily be done, if we
perfectly know all these causes and difficulties; as when it happens by the
Mother's being too young and too strait, she must be gently treated, and the
passages anointed with Oil, Grease, and fresh Butter, using these things a long
time before the hour of Labor, to relax and dilate them the easier, lest there
should happen a rupture in any part, when the Child is born; for sometimes
there happens a dilaceration to the Fundament, by which both are rent into one
outwardly. If a Woman be in years of her first Child, let her lower parts be
likewise anointed, to mollify the inward Orifice, and the Vagina or neck of
the Womb, which being more hard and callous, do not easily yield to the
necessary distension of Labor; which is the cause why such Women are longer in
Labor than others, and why their Children (being forced against the inward
Orifice of their Womb, which is, as we said, a little callous, and also for
remaining long in the passage) are born with great bumps and bruises on their
Heads. Small and misshapen Women should not be put to Bed, till at least their
Waters be broke; but rather kept upright, and walking about the Chamber, if
they have strength, being supported under their Arms; for in that manner they
will breath more freely, and mend their pains better than on the Bed, where
they lie all on a heap. Let those that are very lean, also moisten these parts
with Oils and Ointment, to make them more smooth and slippery, that the Head of
the Infant and the Womb be not so compressed and bruised by the hardness of the
Mother's Bones, which form the passage.

The weak Woman should be strengthened, the better to support her Pains, giving
her good Gelly Broths, with a little Wine and a Tossed in it; or other good
things, as the case requires.

If she fears the Pains, let her be comforted, assuring her, that she will not
endure many more, but be speedily delivered: On the contrary, if her Pains be
slow and small, or none at all, they must be provoked by frequent and somewhat
strong Clysters, that so they may be excited by strainings at stool; and
afterward let her walk about her Chamber, that the weight of the Child may
also help a little. If the Woman Floods, or has Convulsions (which is by many
too long neglected) she must be helped by a speedy delivery. If she be costive,
let her use Clysters, which likewise may dissipate a Colic, at those times
very troublesome, causing great and useless pains, very hurtful, because they
fleet to and again through the Belly, without bearing down, as they should do.
If she cannot make water, because the Womb bears too much on the Bladder, let
her try, by lifting up her Belly a little, or else by introducing a Catheter
into her Bladder to draw forth her Urine.

If the difficulty or flowness of the Labor comes from the ill posture of the
Woman, let her be placed in a better, more convenient to her habit and stature.
If she be taken with any distemper, she must be treated for it according to its
nature, with more caution than at another time, having always regard to her
present condition. If it proceed only from the indispositions of the Womb, or
from its oblique situation, it must be remedied as well as can be, by the
placing of her Body accordingly. If it be by its vicious conformation, having
the Neck too hard, and too callous, and too strait, it must be anointed with
Oils and Ointments, as above directed.

If it come from a strong Cicatrice, which cannot be mollified, of a preceding
Ulcer, or a rupture of a former bad Labor so agglutinated, it must be
separated with a fit instrument, lest another Laceration happen in a new place,
and leave the Woman in a worse condition than before; it must be made in that
place, where the case most requires it; taking care that it be not upwards,
because of the Bladder. If the Membranes be so strong, as that the waters do
not break in due time, they may be broken with the Fingers, provided the Child
be come very forward into the passage, and ready to follow presently after; for
otherwise there is danger, that by breaking these waters too soon, the Child
will remain dry a long time; and to supply that defect, you must moisten the
parts with Fomentations, Decoctions, and emollient Oils; which can never be so
well, as when Nature does its own work with the waters and ordinary slime,
which always happen well, when they come in time and place.

Sometimes these Membranes with the waters, press three or four Fingers breadth
out of the Body before the Child, resembling a Bladder full of water; there is
then no great danger to break them, if they be not already; for when it so
happens, the Child is always ready to follow, being in the passage; but above
all, be careful not to pull it out with your Hand, lest thereby you loosen,
before its time, the After-burthen, to which it adheres very strongly. If the
Navelstring comes first, it must be presently put up again, and kept up, if
possible; or else the Woman must be immediately delivered. But if the
After-burthen comes first, it must never be put up again; for being come forth,
it is altogether useless to the Infant, and would be but an obstacle and
hindrance in the way; if it were put up in this case, it must be cut off,
having tied the Navel-string; and afterward draw forth the Child as soon as
may be, lest it be suffocated.

If the Woman has had a fall, or is hurt, let her immediately keep her Bed and
take her rest. If it be any passion that retards the Labor, and cannot totally
be overcome, let them endeavor to moderate it. If it be shamefacedness or
modesty, the persons who are the cause of it must quit the chamber. If it be
timidity and fear of pain, she must be advised, that it is the will of GOD it
should be so, and that her Labor will not be so bad as she imagines,
persuading her to submit to the necessity, pressing on her the consolation of
the unfortunate, whose pain always seem more supportable by the consideration
that it is common; so she must be informed, that others endure the same pain,
and greater than hers. If she be melancholic, let her be diverted by some good
news, promising her such a Child as she desires. And in a word (tho she suffer
much) she must consider it but as a bad journey, which one quarter of an hours
good weather makes one forget all past, as she will, when she is brought to
Bed; assuring her chiefly, that she is in no danger, especially when it is not
very apparent, for then one ought to acquaint her with it, that she may settle
both her temporal and spiritual Affairs.

When the difficulty is only caused by a dead Child, the method mentioned in
the natural Labor must be observed; and besides, the Woman must do all she can
to further her Delivery, because the Child can do nothing, nor can it when it
is very weak. She must take in the-interim some Confortatives to prevent
Fainting, because of the putrid Vapors, ascending from the dead Child. But when
it has so great a Dropsy, either in the Head or Belly, as that it cannot be
born, because of the great distention and bigness of these parts, then we are
obliged to open these parts to let out the water. And if it be of an enormous
bigness, either Head or Body, or if it has two Heads, or is joined to another
Child, or to a big Mole, there is a necessity, for to save the Mother, either
to dilate the passage proportionable to the bigness of the monstrous Child, if
it be possible, or else, which is better, to draw forth the Child by pieces, to
prevent the Mothers perishing with the Child, which else would certainly
happen, if this course be not taken. And if there be two Children, the Rules
given before in that case must be observed. But if the Midwife cannot remedy
all these accidents, she must then readily send for an expert Surgeon, for
his advice, or to do what he thinks fit. Let us now pass to Labors contrary to
Nature, which can never be done without manual operation, and show what is then
to be done.

CHAP. VIII.
Of unnatural Labors, where manual Operation is absolutely necessary, and what
Observations the Surgeon must make, before he goes about it.

THose Labors which absolutely require manual Operation are, when the Child
comes wrong. A Child may come wrong four several ways, which are; First, any of
the fore-parts of the Body. Secondly, any of the hinder parts. Thirdly, either
side. And Fourthly, the Feet. All the particular, and different wrong postures
that a Child may present, can be reduced to the abovenamed four general ways,
according as they approach more to one than to any other of them. And as the
number of several wrong Births is very great, we shall be contented only to
treat of each of the principal of them.

Now the Surgeon (to behave himself as he ought) must make some
observations, before he undertakes his work. First, whether the Woman has
strength enough to endure the operation, which he may guess by the Pulse; if
strong or weak, unequal or intermittent. Whether her Face, and chiefly her Eye
be dejected, her Speech faint, the extreme parts of her Body cold. Whether she
often faints away with cold Sweats, has Convulsions with loss of Sense. In
short, if every circumstance persuades, that the operation would be in vain,
it is better to let it alone, than she should dye under his hand, and he be
blamed for it, and incurr the name of Butcher, as is most certain, when such a
misfortune happens. However, if there be any hope, tho never so little, either
for Mother or Child, we are obliged in Conscience to do what Art commands, and
not as some Physicians, who will rather suffer a poor Woman to dye without
assistance, than undertake a doubtful operation. Wherefore, it is better to
attempt an operation of an uncertain consequence, than to abandon the sick to
certain despair; for sometimes Nature recovers beyond Hope; but before the
Surgeon undertakes it, let him give his Prognostic, of the great danger of
death both Woman and Child is in. When the Woman has strength enough, the
Surgeon must not delay his help, for fear it abate, or be totally
dissipated. To which purpose, being well assured of her strength, he must
enquire of the Woman, her Midwise and Friends, whether she be at her full time,
or has received any hurt, which he may also perceive by the signs, observing in
what posture the Child presents, and what circumstances, whether alive or dead,
and but one or more? All which being examined, he must try to persuade the
Woman of the impossibility of her being delivered without his help; and to
resolve to put her self into his Hands, which he may do by fair words without
frighting of her, persuading her that the operation is nothing so painful as
she may imagine; and in fine, that for GOD's sake, her own, and her Child's,
she is obliged to suffer it; for else she and her Child may both perish.

The Woman being thus resolved, he must place her cross the Bed, that he may
operate the easier, she must lie on her Back, with her Hips raised a little
higher than her Head, or at least, the Body equally placed, when it is
necessary to put back or turn the Infant, to give it a better posture; but if
he resolves to draw it forth, he must place the Woman so as we have directed in
the natural Labor, which is, with her Head and Breast a little elevated above
the rest of her Body, that she may fetch her breath with more facility, and
help to the exclusion of the Infant by bearing down, when the Surgeon bids
her. Being thus situated, she must fold her Legs so as her Heels be toward her
Buttocks, and her Thighs spread, and held so by a couple of strong persons.
There must be likewise others to support her under her Arms, that her Body may
not slide down when the Child is drawn forth, for which sometimes a great
strength is required. The Sheet and Blankets must cover her Thighs for decency
sake, in respect of the assistants, and also to prevent her catching cold, the
Surgeon herein governing himself as well with respect to his own
convenience, the facility and surety of the operation, as to other things.

Some would have the Woman bound in this posture, that (as they say) she being
more firm and stable, the work may be done with greater certainty: but
Ligatures are so far from that, that on the contrary they are very prejudicial;
for the Woman being so fixed, and constrained as on a Rock, she cannot raise her
self, nor slide down, or be lifted up, when the Surgeon finds occasion for
it, to render his operation less difficult, which usually he does by partly
putting back, partly drawing forth, sometimes directly, sometimes obliquely,
for which reason her Body ought to be at liberty, only held in a posture to
these several Intentions by her Friends, according to his direction. But if she
must needs be bound, let it be with good reasons to persuade her patiently to
endure her Labor, and to contribute her whole strength to the operation,
promising her the speediest Delivery possible.

Let the Surgeon then anoint the entrance of the Womb with Oil or fresh
Butter, if it be necessary, that so he may with more ease introduce his Hand,
which must likewise be anointed, having the conditions above-specified. After
which he must manage his operations, after the manner I shall direct in each of
the following Chapters; having first recited the marks by which it may be
known, whether the Child be alive or dead.

CHAP. IX.
The signs to know whether the Child be alive or dead.

IF there be any case, wherein a Surgeon ought to make the greatest
reflection, and use most precaution in his Art, it is this, to know whether the
Infant in the Womb be allve or dead; for there have been many deplorable
examples of Children being drawn forth alive, after they have been thought to
have been dead, with both Arms, or some other Limb lopt off, and others
miserably killed by the use of Crochets, which might have been born alive, if
they had not been mistaken. Wherefore, before he resolve on the manner of
laying the Woman, to avoid the like misfortune, and the disgrace of being
Author of such a pitiful spectacle, let him use his utmost endeavor not to be
so deceived, and to be fully satisfied whether the Child be alive or dead;
always remembering that in this case, timidity is more pardonable than temerity,
that is, it is better to be deceived in treating a dead Infant, as if it were
alive; than a living one as if it were dead.

The Child may be known to be alive, if it be at the full reckoning; if the
Woman has received no hurt; if she has had her health well all her going with
Child; if she be at present in good health, and very sure she feels it stir,
which may be known by the Mother's relation: and the Surgeon may be better
assured of it, if he feels it stir himself, laying his Hand on the Mother's
Belly; to whose relation he must not always trust. If the Surgeon cannot be
assured by the Infant's motion that it is alive, he may as soon as the waters
are broke, gently put up his Hand into the Womb, to feel the pulsation of the
Navel-string, which he will find stronger, the nearer he feels it to the
Infant's Belly; or if he meets with a Hand he may feel the Pulse, but there
pulsation is not so strong as in the Navelstring, by which it is best to be
known. If then he finds thus the beating of the Pulse, he may be confident the
Child is alive; as also if by putting his Finger into its Mouth, he perceives
it to stir its Tongue, as if it would suck.

But on the contrary, the Child is dead, if it has not a long time stirred; if
there flows from the Womb stinking and cadaverous Humors; if the Woman feels
great pains, and a great weight in her Belly; if it be not supported, but
tumbles always on that side as she lays her self; if she faints, or has
Convulsions; if the Navelstring or Secundine has been a good while in the
World; or if by putting his Hand into the Womb, he finds the Child cold, and
the Navel-string without Pulse, and its Tongue immovable; and feeling the
Head, he finds it very soft, chiefly toward the Crown, where likewise the
Bones are open, and riding the one upon the other at the Sutures, because the
Brain shrinks, and is without Pulse when the Child is dead; which corrupts more
in two days in the Womb, than it does in two days after it is born; which the
heat and moistness of the place do cause, the two principles of corruption.

But we may only conjecture it, if the Woman has been hurt, or floods much, and
be not at her full time; if her water broke four or five days before; if her
Breasts flag; if her Complexion be of a Lead color, her Countenance
languishing and dejected; and if her breath stinks. We say that these things
may only make us conjecture it, but not, as the rest, certainly conclude it;
many of which happening together in one person, assure us that the Child is dead,
for want of which it cannot be very certain. Wherefore (as I have said) it is
good to be very careful before they undertake it, that so they may avoid the
abovesaid scandals.

CHAP. X.
How to fetch the After-burthen when the string is broke.

WE have placed the present way of extracting the Afterbirth amongst unnatural
Deliveries, because it is not sufficient to esteem it a good Labor, that the
Child be well born, unless also the Afterbirth be well come away. In respect
of the Child it may be called Natural; because after his Birth he has no more
need of his Burden; but in respect of the Woman it is very unnatural. I would
therefore first treat of this bad Labor; because it participates of a natural
Labor, in respect of the Child, who is in no danger, being born. After that I
will come to those in which both Mother and Child are in very great danger, if
not specdily and skilfully helped.

I have already showed, how a Woman must be delivered in a natural Labor,
where you may find the means; but sometimes the Midwife by endeavoring it,
breaks the string with pulling too strongly; or because it is very weak; or
else so putrefied, when the Child is dead, that the least pull breaks it off
close to the Burden, which by that means is left behind in the Womb; or
because it cleaves too strongly; or the Woman is weak and cannot expel it,
being much tired by a long Labor; or because it was not speedily after Labor
drawn forth, the Womb closes so as leaves it no passage, nor can it without
much difficulty be again dilated to have it setch'd, because it remains dry,
after the natural slime and humidities, which usually flow in Labors, are
sometimes past.

Since it is a verity indubitable, that the Afterbirth remaining behind after
the Child is born, becomes an useless mass, capable of destroying the Woman, we
must take care that it be never lest, if possible. Wherefore having endeavored
to bring it away, and the Navel-string happening to break near the Burden, you
must immediately before the Womb closes, introduce your Hand into it, being
well anointed with Oil or fresh Butter, your Nails close pared, to separate it
from the Womb gently, and draw it forth together with the clods of Blood that
are there. When the Navel-string is not broken, it will easily conduct the
Hand, by following of it to the place where the Burden is situated; but when
it is broken, we have no longer this guide; wherefore you must be then very
careful, that you be not deceived in taking one part for another.

As soon then as you have introduced your Hand into the Womb toward its
bottom, you will find the Burden; which you may know by a great number of
little inequalities, which are always made there by the roots of the umbilical
vessels, on the side where they terminate, which make it to be easily
distinguished from the Womb; if it yet cleave to it, notwithstanding that it is
then a little wrinkled and uneven; because its Membranes, which were very much
enlarged, contract themselves immediately after the Child and its waters, which
kept them extended, are excluded: But they that are expert in this Art, can
easily judge of it. If you find the Burden wholly loosened from the Womb, it
will not be difficult to draw it forth, when you have got it in your Hand: But
if it cleaves, find out the side where it sticks fast, and begin there to
separate it gently, by putting some of your Fingers between it and the Womb,
continuing by little and little to do so, till it be quite loose; and
afterward draw it out very carefully; observing always (if it cannot be
otherwise) rather to leave some part of it behind, than to scrape or scratch
the least part of the Womb, for fear of a Flooding, Inflammation, or Gangrene,
which cause death; being also careful not to draw it forth, till it be wholly
or the most part of it separated, for fear of drawing forth the Womb with it;
And preserve it as whole as the circumstances will permit, because of showing
it to the company, that they may know the operation is well done.

When the Chir^geon finds not the Womb open enough for to receive his Hand
immediately into it, let him presently anoint all the Woman's Privities with
Hogsgrease, that they may be dilated with more ease; afterward let him by
little and listle put up his Hand, but without much violence. The Woman may
likewise contribute to this dilatation, as also to the exclusion of the
Burden, if she bears strongly down, holding her breath, and exciting her self
to vomit, or snceze, and do those other things before directed: But if
notwithstanding all this she cannot void the Afterbirth, and if the Womb
cannot be dilated enough to fetch^t, or that it cleaves so fast, as it cannot
be separated, we must leave it to Nature, assisting her with remedies which
suppurate; Wherefore injections into the Womb are proper, made of Mallows,
Marshmallows, Parietary, and Linseed, in which is mixed a good quantity of Oil
of Lilies, or fresh Butter. This Injection softens and tempers, and by
moistning and mollifying, makes the O^^sice to be the easier dilated; and helps
by suppuration the loosening of the Burden. And to hasten the expulsion of it,
give her a strong Clyster, that so by the motions to go to stool, it may cause
the voiding of it; as it has succeeded with many, who have rendered it in the
Bed-pan, and sometimes when they have least expected it.

CHAP. XI.
To deliver a Woman when the Child comes footling.

MOst Authors advise, when the Foot, or Feet come first, to change the figure,
and place the Head so, as it may present first to the birth; but if they would
show how it should be done, we might follow their Counsel; which is very
difficult, if not impossible to be performed, if we desire to avoid the dangers
that by such violent endeavors the Mother and Child must necessarily be put in:
Wherefore it is better to draw it forth by the Feet, when it comes footling,
than to venture a worse accident by turning it.

As soon then as the waters are broke, and it is known the Child comes thus, and
the Womb is open enough to admit the Chirurgeon's Hand into it, or else by
anointing the passages with Oil or Hog's Grease, to endeavor to dilate it by
little and little, using to this purpose his Fingers, spreading them one from
the other after they are together entered, and continuing so to do, till it be
sufficiently dilated; then, having his nails well pared, and no Rings on his
Fingers, his Hands well anointed with Oil or fresh Butter, as also the Woman
placed as we have already directed, let him introduce his Hand, into the entry
of the Womb, where finding the Child's Feet, let him draw it forth in that
posture as we shall now direct: But if it presents but one Foot, he should
consider, whether the right or lest, and in what fashion it comes; for these
reflections will easily inform him, on what side the other may be, which as soon
as he knows let him seek it, and gently draw it forth together with the first:
But let him be very careful, that this Second be not the Foot of another Child;
for if so, he may sooner split both Mother and Children, than draw them forth;
which may easily be prevented, if having slided his Hand up the first Leg and
Thigh to the twist, he finds both Thighs joined together, and depending from
one and the same Body: which is likewise the best means to find the other Foot,
when it comes but with one.

All Authors, for fear of losing hold of the first Foot, advise to fasten a
Ribband to it with a running knot, that so it may not be sought a second time,
when the other is found: but that is not absolutely necessary, because usually
when one has hold of one, the other is not far off. They that will may use this
precaution; but such as are expert, use it but seldom.

As soon then as the Surgeon has found both the Child's Feet, he may draw
them forth, holding them together, he may bring them by little and little in
this manner, taking afterward hold of the Legs and Thighs, as soon as he can
come at them, and drawing them so till the Hips be come forth: the whilst let
him observe to wrap the parts in a single Napkin, to the end, that his Hands
being already greasy, slide not on the Infant's Body, which is very slippery,
because of the viscous Humors, which are all over it, and hinder that one
cannot take good hold of it; which being done, he may take hold under the Hips
so to draw it forth, to the beginning of the Breast, and then let him on both
sides with his Hand bring down the Arms along the Child's Body, which he may
then easily find, and be careful that the Belly and Face be downwards, lest
being upwards, the Head be stopped by the Chin over the Share-bone; wherefore if
it be not so, he must turn it to that posture; which is easily done, if taking
hold on the Body, when the Breast and Arms are forth, in the manner we have
said, he draws it, with turning it in proportion, on that side which it most
inclines to, till it be as it should be, that is, with the Face downwards; and
having brought it to the Shoulders, let him lose no time (desiring the Woman at
the same time to bear down) that so in drawing, the Head at that instant may
take its place, and not be stopped in the passage. Some Authors, to prevent this
inconvenience, advise that one Arm only should be drawn forth, and the other
left to prevent the closing of the Womb on the neck of the Child: this reason
is plausible, yet if the Surgeon knows how to watch his opportunity, he will
not need this shift to prevent this accident, which may sooner happen when one
Arm is left above; for besides that by its bigness it would take up so much
place, which is already too little, causing the Head to lean more on one side
than the other, it will stop it certainly on that side where there is no Arm.

There are indeed some Children that have their Head so big, that when the
whole Body is born, yet that stops in the passage, notwithstanding all the care
to prevent it: In this case he must not endeavor only to draw forth the Child
by the Shoulders, lest he sometimes separates the Body from the Head, but he
must disengage it by little and little, from the bones in the passage, with the
Fingers of each Hand, sliding them on each side opposite the one to the other,
sometimes above and sometimes under, until the work be ended, endeavoring to
dispateh it as soon as possible, lest the Child be suffocated; as it will
certainly be, if it should remain long in that posture; which being well and
duly effected, he may soon after fetch the Afterbirth, as above directed.

CHAP. XII.
How to fetch the Head, when separated from the Body, and it remains behind in
the Womb.

NOtwithstanding all the care possible had in the fetching a Child by the Feet;
yet sometimes one meets them so putrefied and corrupted, that with the least
pull the Body separates from the Head, which remains alone in the Womb, and
cannot be extracted, but with difficulty, forasmuch as it is extremely
slippery, by reason of the place where it is, and of a round figure, on which
no hold can be taken.

When then the Infant's Head, separated from, its body, remains alone behind,
whether because of putrefaction or otherwise, let the Surgeon immediately
without delay, whilst the Womb is yet open, direct up his right Hand to find
the Mouth of this Head (for then there is no other hold) and having found it,
let him put one or two of his Fingers into it, and his Thumb under the Chin,
and then by little and little let him draw it, holding it so by the jaw; but if
that fails, as it often will when putrefied, then let him pull forth his right
Hand, and slide up his Lest, with which he must support the Head, and with the
right let him take a narrow crotchet, but strong, and with a single branch,
which he must guide along the inside of his other Hand, keeping the point of it
toward it, for fear of hurting the Womb, and having thus introduced it, let
him turn it toward the Head, for to strike it into either an Eye-hole, or the
hole of an Ear, or behind the Head, or else between the Sutures, as he finds it
most easy and convenient, and then draw forth the Head so fastened with the
crotchet, still helping to conduct it with his left Hand; but when he has
brought it near the passage, being strongly fastened to the crotchet, let him
remember to draw forth his Hand, that the passage being not filled with it, may
be the larger and easier, keeping still a Finger or two on the side of the
Head, the better to disengage it.

You may try for the same purpose an expedient (which came lately into my Mind)
by which, without doubt, one may effect this painful and laborious operation,
without tormenting the Woman so much as she is, when either the crotchet or
crooked knife are used; which is a soft fillet, or linen slip, of the breadth
of four Fingers, and the length of three quarters of an Ell, or thereabouts;
then taking the two ends with the left Hand, and the middle with the right, let
him so put it up with the right, as that it may be beyond the Head to embrace
it, as a sling does a stone, and afterward drawing the Fillet by the two ends
together, it will easily be drawn forth, the fillet not hindering in the least
the passage, because it takes up little or no place.

But if the Surgeon cannot by either of these different means draw forth the
Head, because it is too blg, he will be necessitated (if he will finish his
work) to lessen it with a crooked knife. For to do this, let him slide up his
left Hand into the Womb, and with his right guide up the knife, always
observing that the point be turned toward the inside of the left Hand, for
fear of hurting the Womb; and afterward let him turn it to the Suture of the
Head, and chiefly the Crown, where he must make the incision with this
instrument, that having separated some pieces, he may the easier draw forth the
Head, or at least having emptied some part of the Brain, by the orifice so
made, the bigness of the Head will be much diminished by it, and consequently
the extraction of it less painful.

The left Hand, being thus in the Womb, will be very useful to help, striking
the knife into the Head, for to divide and separate its parts, as the
Surgeon judges necessary; as also to hinder (by inadvertency) the Womb's
receiving hurt; and the right without, for to hold the handle of this
instrument, which therefore must be long enough, and will serve him to move and
guide it on which side he pleases, in turning, thrusting, drawing, or slanting
it, as the case requires. Ambrose Parey, and Gu^ltemeau, would have this knise
to be so short, as to be hid in the right Hand, for to do the operation, after
it is so introduced into the Womb; but it is certain, that when it is filled
with a monstrous Child, or a Hend as abovesaid, the Chirurgeon's Hand will be
so pressed in the Womb, that it will be very difficult for him to use it
skilfully with one Hand alone, and do no violence to the Womb; which is the
reason why this instrument ought to have a long handle, that being introduced
into the Womb, it may be conducted to do the operation with the left Hand
within, as we have mentioned, and governed by the right Hand which holds the
handle of it without, which ought to be as long as the handle of an ordinary
crotchet.

Now when the Head is thus fetched out of the Womb, care must be taken, that not
the least part of it be left behind, as also to cleanse the Woman well of her
Afterbirth, if yet remaining. But a question of great consequence, and much to
the purpose, may be here started, Whether the Child's Head yet remaining so in
the Womb, and the Burden also, the Head ought to be extracted before the
Burden? To which may be answered with distinction, That if the burden be
wholly separated from the sides of the Womb, it ought to be first brought away,
because it may hinder the taking hold of the Head; but if it be still adhering,
it must not be meddled with, till the Head be brought away: For if one should
then go about to separate it from the Womb, it would cause a Flooding, which
would be augmented by the violence of the operation; for the vessels to which
it is joined, remain for the most part open, as long as the Womb is distended,
which the Head causes whilst it is retained in it, and cannot close till this
strange Body be voided. Besides, the Afterbirth remaining thus cleaving to the
Womb, during the operation, prevents it from receiving easily either bruise or
hurt.

CHAP. XIII.
How to help a Woman in her Labor, when the Child's Head thrusts the neck of
the Womb forth before it.

IF we only respect the figure the Child comes in in this Labor, we may say it
is natural: but when we consider the disposition of the Womb, which is in
danger of coming quite forth of the passage; or the extraction of the Infant,
we shall find it not so altogether: for its Head thrusting it forcibly before
it, may easily cause a falling out of the Womb, if the Woman be not skilfully
succored in time. Here may be seen the Vagina, or neck of the Womb bear forth
in great wrinkles, according as the Child advances.

Women troubled with a bearing down of the Womb before they conceive, and whose
Womb is very moist, are much subject to this accident, because of a relaxation
of the Ligamonts. The same method we have taught in the natural Travail must
not now be observed; for in this case the Woman must neither walk, nor stand
upright; but keep her Bed, with her Body at least equally situated, and not
raised a little, as is requisite in a natural Labor. She must by no means use
strong or sharp Clysters, lest they excite to great Throws; neither so much
humect the Womb, which is already too much relaxed: but to aid her at the
moment each pain takes her, when the Child begins to advance its Head, and
consequently tho neck of the Womb, let the Midwife keep her Hands on each side
of the Head, to thrust back by resisting the Woman's pains, the Womb only giving
way in the mean time for the Child to advance, doing the like at every Throw,
continuing it till the Woman of her self has forced the Child quite into the
World: for one must by no means draw it by the Head, as is meationed in the
natural Labor, for fear of causing the Womb to fall out at the same time, to
which it is then very apt.

If notwithstanding the Infant having the Head born, it yet stops there so long
as to endanger its suffocation; then the Midwife must call a second person to
her assistance, to draw it gently forth by the Head, whilst she keeps back the
Womb with both her Hands, to prevent its following the Infant's Body so drawn
forth. After the Woman is thus delivered, her Afterbirth must be fetched as is
above directed, being still careful for the same reason, not to shake or draw
it forth too rudely, and then let it be placed up in its natural situation, if
it bears down.

CHAP. XIV.
How to fetch a Child, when coming right it cannot pass, either because it is
too big, or the passages cannot be sufficiently dilated.

THere are some Women, whose Children (notwithstanding they come right) remain
sometimes four, five, and six whole days in the passage, and would continue
there longer, if they were left alone, without being able to be born, unless
assisted by Art; to which we are obliged, if we desire to have the Mother's
life. This happens oftnest to little Women of their first Children, and
chiefly, if a little too much in years; because their Womb being very dry,
cannot be so easily dilated, as others, who already have had Children, or are
not so old. When this happens, after that the Surgeon has done his
endeavor to relaxe and dilate the parts, to facilitate the Child's birth, and
that he finds all in vain, because the Head is much bigger than it should be,
and that besides it is certainly dead (as it for the most part is, when it has
continued four or five days in this condition, after the waters are broke)
which he may be more exactly assured of by the signs already described: He need
then make no scruple to fasten a Crotchet to some part of the Child's Head, and
rather about the hinder part than any other, to draw it forth by this means
directly, if possible; if not, let him make an incision with a straight or
little crooked knife, which is best, about the Sutures, to empty thence some of
the Brain, and so lessen the blgness of the Head, and immediately after fix his
crotchet fast to the Skull in the same place, whereby he will easily extract
the Infant.

It is very certain when the Child is dead, one ought to do according to my
direction, to save the Mother's life: But it is a very great question, Whether
a live Child ought to be so dealt with to save the Mother's life, after there
is no more hope that it can be born any other ways, because of the narrowness
of the passage, which cannot possibly be sufficiently dilated for its birth;
or, Whether one ought to defer the operation, until there is a perfect
assurance that it is dead? In this case I am apt to believe, that, since the
Infant cannot avoid death, neither one way nor the other (for staying in the
passage, without being able to be born, it must dye, and being drawn forth by
crotchets, it is killed) one must and ought to fetch it out alive or dead, as
soon as there is opportunity to do it; and when all hope is lost that it cannot
come any other ways, thereby to prevent the Mother's death, which could by no
other means be avoided. Tertullian (as Riolanus very well notes in his 38th
Chapter of the 12th Book of his Anatomical Manual) says upon this subject, That
it is a necessary cruelty, to kill the Child in this case, rather than to save
it from the danger it is in of dying, and so certainly cause the Mother's
death. Notwithstanding, this must not always be put in practice by the
Surgeon, but in such an extremity; and then he may do the work as dexterously
as he can.

CHAP. XV.
How to deliver a Woman when the Child presents the side of the Head to the
Birth, or the Face.

WHen the Child presents the side of the Head, tho it seems a natural Labor,
because the Head comes first, yet it is very dangerous both to Child and Mother,
for he shall sooner break his Neck, than e're be born in that fashion; and by
how much the Mother's Pains continue to bear him (which is impossible, unless
the Head be first right placed) the more the passages are stopped up. Therefore
as soon as it is known, the Woman must be laid with all speed, lest the Child
advancing further in this vicious posture, it prove more difficult to thrust
him back, which must be done when we would place the Head right in the passage,
as it truly and naturally should be.

For to effect this, place the Woman that her Hips be a little higher than her
Head and Shoulders, causing her to lean a little upon the opposite side to the
Child's ill posture, then let the Surgeon slide up his Hand, well anointed
with Oil, by the side of the Child's Head, to bring it right, gently with his
Fingers between the Head and the Womb: but if the Head be so engaged, that it
cannot be easily done that way, he must then put his Hand up to its Shoulder,
that so by thrusting them back a little in the Womb, sometimes on the one side,
and sometimes the other, as he sees occasion, he may give it a natural and
convenient position.

It were to be wished that the Surgeon could put back the Infant by the
Shoulders with both his Hands in this manner; but the Head does then take up so
much room, that he has much ado to introduce but one, with which he must do his
operation, with the help of his Fingers ends of the other Hand put up as far as
necessary. Afterward let him excite and procure the Child's birth, as directed
in the natural Labor.

At other times a Child comes with the Face first, having its Head turned back,
in which posture it is very difficult it should be born: And if it remain so
long, the Face will be so black and blue, and swelled, that at first sight it
will appear monstrous; which comes as well by the compression of it in that
place, as by the Midwife's Fingers handling of it too rudely, when she would
place it in a better posture.

Now to deliver this Birth, the same manner, as when a Child comes with the
side of the Head, must be observed, being careful to work gently, to avoid as
much as may be the bruising of the Child.

CHAP. XVI.
How to deliver a Woman when the Head of the Child is born, and the Womb closes
about the Neck.

THe Child comes naturally with the Head first, because that by the hardness
and bigness of it, the passage might be the better made and opened for the
other parts of the Body, which usually pass afterward without pain: but
notwithstanding sometimes the Head is so small, and the Shoulders so large,
that without a very great difficulty they cannot pass; which makes the Child
often remain in the passage after the Head is born. This accident may
likewisehappen sometimes, having not been careful, but losing time in drawing
forth the Child by the Head, as directed in the discourse of natural Labors,
to the end the Shoulders might at the same instant succeed in the place the
Head possessed.

When the Surgeon meets with this case, he must speedily deliver the Child
out of this prison, or rather this collar, in which he is caught; for a small
delay may there strangle the Child: to avoid which, let him endeavor to cause
the Shoulders to follow, by gently drawing its Head sometimes by the sides of
it, sometimes with the Hand under the Chin, the other behind the Head, and so
doing by turns on the one side and the other, to facilitate the operation the
better, being very careful the Navelstring be not entangled about the Neck; as
also not to draw it forth with too much violence, for fear lest the Head be
pulled from the Shoulders. If the Shoulders pass not with gentle pulling, slide
up your Fingers on both sides under the Armpits, with which turning them
inwards, you may by little and little draw forth the Shoulders; but when they
are in the palsage, and totally disengaged, if he cannot then draw the rest
forth, still keeping his Fingers under the Armpits, he may be confident there
is some other hindrance, and that it is certainly monstrous in some part of its
Body; or (as it for the most part happens in this case) that it is hydropical
in the Belly, for which cause it is impossible it should be born, before the
Belly be pierced to evacuate the waters, and then 'twill easily be accomplished.

CHAP. XVII.
How to Deliver a Woman, when the Child comes with one or both Hands together
with the Head.

FOr the most part when an Infant presents any part of his Body together with
the Head, it is usually one or both the Hands, rather than any other, which
hinders its birth; because the Hands take up part of the passage, and for the
most part they cause the Head to lean on one side. When the Child comes thus,
it is quite contrary to Nature.

To remedy this, so soon as it is perceived that one Hand presents together
with the Head, it must be prevented from coming down more, or engaging further
in the passage. Wherefore the Surgeon having placed the Woman on the Bed,
with her Head a little lower than her Hips, must put and guide back the
Infant's Hand with his Hand as much as may be; or both of them, if they both
come down, to give way to the Child's Head; which having done, if the Child's
Head be on one side, it must be brought into its natural posture in the middle
of the passage, that it may come in a straight line, proceeding farther, as I
have directed before, in that Chapter which treats of the Child's Head coming
on one side.

CHAP. XVIII.
How to deliver a Woman when a Child presents one or both Hands foremost,
without any other part.

WHen an Infant presents only one or both Hands to the Birth, or an Arm
sometimes out to the Elbow, and many times to the Shoulder, it is one of the
worst and most dangerous postures a Child can come in, as well for himself as
for his Mother; because of the violent force the Surgeon is oftentimes
obliged to use both to the one and the other, in searching for the Feet, which
are very far off, by which he must always in these cases, turn and draw him
forth; which will often make him sweat in the midst of Winter, because of the
difficulty in this Labor more than in all the rest, tho some others of them
indeed are more dangerous for the Infant; as when it presents the Belly, and
the Navel-string comes forth; but not so painful for the Surgeon, because
the Feet of the Infant being near the passage, and not so hard to be found, as
when he comes with a Hand; for then they are high, at the very bottom sometimes
of the Womb, where he must seek them, to turn it and draw it forth, as I am
going to direct.

When therefore it presents with one Hand only, or a whole Arm first; it must
by no means be pulled forth by that part; for the Member will sooner be
separated and rent from the Body, than the Child so brought forth, by reason
the Child is plucked obliquely and cross. And when both Arms present, if plucked
together, there would not be place for the Head to pass, which would by that
means be turned quite back. Wherefore having placed the Woman as is tequisite,
one must put back the Infant's Hand or Arm, which comes forth into into the
Womb again. Some Midwives dip it in cold water, or touch it with a wet cloth,
saying that the Infant will presently draw it in, if he be living; but he is
usually so pressed and engaged in the passage by this bad posture, that he has
not liberty enough to draw back his Hands so easily, being once come forth;
wherefore the Surgeon must guide them back with his own, which he must
afterward slide into the Womb under the Child's Breast and Belly, so far till
he finds the Feet, which he must gently pull toward him, to turn and draw it
forth by them, as has been already directed; observing to do it with as little
violence as may be, which is much more easy, sure and safe, than to busy ones
self in putting it into a natural situation.

As foon as he shall have so turned the Child by the Feet, if he has but one of
them, he must search for the other, that so he may bring it to the first; when
holding them both, he must govern himself afterward in bringing the Child, as
I have showed formerly, speaking of those Labors where the Feet come first:
But if the Arm be so far advanced (almost to the Shoulder) and big and swelled
(as it happens when it has been a long time forth) that it cannot at all, or
without great difficulty be reduced, Ambrose Parey in this case directs
(provided the Child be certainly dead) to cut off that Arm as high as may be,
first making an incision round the flesh, and then cutting off the Bone a
little higher, with a pair of sharp pincers, that so the flesh may be left
longer to cover the sharpness and end of the Bone, to prevent hurting the Womb,
when the Child is turned, to draw it afterward forth by the Feet as it should
be.

Notwithstanding if the Surgeon, not being able to put it back, is
absolutely constrained to cut it off (which must not be done but in such
extremity) he may effect it without much ceremony, by twisting it twice or
thrice about; for by reason of its tenderness he will easily separate it from
the Body, in the joint of the Shoulder, with the Shoulder Blade, by which means
he will neither need Pincers nor other instruments to cut the Bone and Flesh,
as the said Parey teaches, neither will there remain any sharpness, by reason
the separation will be just in the joint.

But above all, when the dismembring of an Infant is thus intended, or to draw
it forth with a Crotchet, let the Surgeon take great care that he be not
deceived; for what a horrible spectacle would it be, to bring a poor Child yet
living, after the Arm has been cut off, or any other part of the Body?
Wherefore let him make a double reflection on his work, before he goes about it.

CHAP. XIX.
How to deliver a Woman when Hands and Feet come together.

IF the Infant presents both Hands and Feet together at the Birth, it is
altogether impossible it should be born so. The Surgeon therefore guiding
his Hand toward the orifice of the Womb, will perceive nothing but a many
singers close together; and if it be not sufficiently dilated, he will be a
good while before he can exactly distinguish between the Hands and the Feet, by
reason they are sometimes so shut and pressed together, that they seem to be all
of one and the same shape: But when the Womb is open enough to introduce the
Hand into it, he will easily know which are the Hands and which the Feet; and
having well taken notice of it, let him slide his Hand, and presontly direct it
toward the Infant's Breast, which he will find very near, and by that let him
gently thrust back the Body toward the bottom of the Womb, leaving the Feet in
the same place where he found them; having therefore placed the Woman in a
convenient posture, that is, her Hips a little raised above her Breast and
Head, which situation ought always to be observed, when the Child is to be put
back into the Womb: Let him afterward take hold of him by the Feet, and draw
him forth, according to the way directed in its proper Chapter.

This Labor truly is a little troublesome, but nothing near so much as that we
have mentioned in the preceding Chapter, where the Child presents only his
Hands: for in that the ^eet must be searched a great way off, and it must be
quite ^^^ned about, before it can he drawn forth; but in this they are ready
presenting themselves, and there is not so much to do, but to lift and thrust
back a little the upper part of the Body, which is almost done of it self, by
drawing it alone by the Feet.

Some Authors who have written of Labors, and never practiced them, do order
all by the same precept often reiterated, that is, to reduce all wrong Births
to a natural Figure; which is, to turn it, that it may come with the Head
first: But if they themselves had ever had the least experience, they would
know that it is very often impossible, at least, if it were to be done by the
excess of violence, that must necessarily be used to effect it, it would go
near to destroy both Mother and Child in the operation. A Fiat in this case is
soon said and ordered; but it is not so easily executed as pronounced. For my
part, I am of an opinion clear contrary to theirs; and such as are skilful in
the Art will surely agree with me in it, that is, That (whenever the Infant
comes wrong in what posture soever from the Shoulders to the Feet) it is the
best way and soonest done, to draw it forth by the Feet, searching for them, if
they do not present themselves, rather than to try to put it in a natural
posture, and place the Head foremost: for the great endeavors often necessary
to be used in turning the Infant in the Womb, do so weaken both Mother and
Child, that there remains not afterward strength enough for to commit the
operation to the work of Nature; and usually the Woman has no more Throws nor
Halns fit for Labor after she has been so wrought upon; for which cause it
would be very tedious and difficult; as also the Infant, which is already very
weak, would certainly perish in the passage, without being able to be born.
Wherefore it is much better in these cases, immediately to setch it by the
Feet, searching for them, as I have already directed, when they do not present
themselves, by which a tedious Labor will be prevented to the Mother, and the
Child will be often brought alive, who without it will scarce escape death,
before he can he brought forth by the strength of Nature.

CHAP. XX.
How to deliver a Woman, when the Child comes with the Knees.

WHen an Infant (not being turned toward the latter Months, as he ought, to
come with his Head foremost) presents the Knees to the Birth, having the Legs
folded toward the Buttocks, one may easily be deceived, touching but one of
them, because of their hardness and roundness, and take it for the Head,
especially when being seated a little high, it can be reached but with the end
of a Finger only; but if it be touched and handled a little better, the Infant
being fallen a little lower, it will easily be distinguished.

As soon then as it is perceived, it must not be suffered to advance further in
this posture; having placed the Woman, the Knees must gently be put back, to
have the more liberty to unfold the Legs one after the other, which the
Surgeon may do, by putting one or two of his Fingers under the Ham,
directing them by little and little all along behind the Leg, until he meets
the Foot; and drawing always a little obliquely, to come the easier to the end
of it, that so having disengaged one, he may do the same to the other,
proceeding in the same manner as with the first; after which, having brought
them together, he may finish the work, as when a Child comes footling; always
observing to bring the Face of it downward, and such circumstances as are noted
where we treat of that Labor.

CHAP. XXI.
Of a Delivery when the Child comes with Shoulders, Back or Breast.

THe most difficult of these three sort of Figures and Situations, in which
Infants sometimes come, is that of the Shoulders; because it is furthest from
the Feet of the Infant, and the Surgeon must find them to draw it forth. The
next the Back. And the Breech for the same reason, causes least trouble, not
only because the Feet are nearer, but also because by this Figure, the Head and
Neck of the Infant are not so constrained and locked, as in the other situations.

For to remedy this birth of the Shoulder, some advise that it should be put
back, to make way for the Head of the Infant, that so it may be reduced to a
natural birth: but it is much better for the reasons above alleged, to try to
bring it by the Feet: to effect which, the Surgeon must thrust the Shoulder
a little back with his Hand, that so he may have more liberty to introduce it
into the Womb, and sliding it then along the Child's Body, either by the Belly
or Side, as he finds it easiest, he shall fetch the Feet, and turning it bring
them to the passage, and so deliver the Woman, as is already directed.

If it be the Back which presents to the birth, it is also impossible to be
born in that posture, what pains soever the Mother endures; and besides, the
Child having the Body folded inwards, and almost double, his Breast and Belly
are so pressed together, that he usually wants little of being suffocated: to
avoid which, the Surgeon must quickly slide up his Hand along the Back
toward the inferior parts, until he meets the Feet, to bring it forth the same
way as if it came footling.

But when the Child comes with the Breech, if it be small and the Mother big,
having the passage very large, he may sometimes with a little help be born so;
for tho he comes double, yet the Thighs being folded toward the Belly, which
is soft and gives way, it passes without much trouble. As soon as the
Surgeon finds the Child to come with the Buttocks foremost, he must not
permit it to engage lower in the passage; for it will not come, unless it be
very small, and the passage very large, as we have already said. This being
then in good time perceived, he must, if he can, thrust back the Breech, and
sliding up his Hand along the Thighs to the Legs and Feet of the Child, he must
bring them gently one after the other forth of the Womb, by folding,
stretching, wagging, and drawing them gently toward the Side, being careful
not to wind them too much, or cause a dislocation; and then let him draw forth
the rest of the Body, as if it came with the Feet foremost.

I have said that the Surgeon, perceiving the Child to come with the Breech
foremost, ought to put it back if he can; for sometimes he will be advanced so
forward in the passage, that you may sooner destroy both Mother and Child, than
reduce it back, when once strongly engaged. When this happens, he cannot hinder
it from coming in this posture, in which his Belly is so pressed, that he often
voids the Meconium by his Fundament. However, he may much help this birth, by
sliding up one or two Fingers of each Hand on each side of the Buttocks, to
introduce them into the Groins, and having crooked them inward, he must draw
the Breech just out to the Thighs, and then by drawing and wagging it from side
to side, he will disengage them from the passage; as also the Feet and Legs one
after the other, being careful of dislocating any part; and then he may extract
the rest as before, when coming with the Feet.

CHAP. XXII.
Of those Births, wherein the Infant presents Belly, Breast or Side.

THe Backbone may easily be bent and turned forwards a little, but by no means
backwards, without excessive violence. Wheresore, the worst and most dangerous
Figure that a Child can offer in the Womb to the bi^th, is the ^elly or the
Breast; for then its Body is constrained to bend backwards, and whatever Throws
or endeavors the Woman makes to bring it forth, it will never be accomplisked,
for she will sooner perish with her Child, than ever advance it in this posture
into the passage: wherefore it is in great danger, if not timely succored: And
in case it should escape, which would be very strange, it would be a long while
after its birth weak in the Back. But that which angments the danger much more,
is, that for the most part the Navelstring comes forth when the Child comes
with the Belly. Therefore as soon as it is discovered to be so, the Surgeon
must apply the sole remedy of drawing it forth by the Feet as speedily as may
be in the following manner.

Having placed the Woman, let him gently slide up his flat Hand (being well
anointed for the easier entrance) toward the middle of the Child's Breast,
which he must thrust back to turn it; this situation being already half
altered, the Feet being as near to the passage as the Head, when it pesents the
middle of the Belly; then he must slip up his Hand under the Belly, till he
sinds the Feet, which he must bring to the passage, to draw it forth in the
same manner as if it had come footling, being careful to keep the Breast and
Face downwards, which must always be observed before the Head can be drawn
forth, for the reasons often already given, which must never be forgotten.

When a Child comes with Breast or Belly, the Surgeon must always proceed
after the same manner in both, inasmuch as they require the same circumstances.
An Infant may likewise come with the Side, which way it is as impossible to
pass as the two former: but it is not so much tormented, nor is the situation
so cruel; for it may remain in it a longer time without dying, than in the two
former, wherein it is much more racked than in this, in which the Body may be
bended forward, and not backward, as in the other; neither does the
Navel-string come forth so easy as when it comes with the Belly first. In this,
as in the other two Births, the Surgeon must draw the Child forth by the
Feet in this fashion: having placed the Woman as she ought to be, he may push
back a little with his Hand the Infant's Body, the better to introduce it,
which he may slide along the Thighs, till he finds the Legs and Feet, by which
he must turn it, and afterward draw it forth, just in the same manner as
before, with the same Observations. Nor ought he to amuse himself in any of
these three births, to place the Head right, that it might come naturally;
because it is in great danger of dying in these unnatural positions, if not
drawn forth with speed; which can never be effected, unless it be by finding
the Feet, as I have directed.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Labors, wherein several Children present together in the different
postures abovenamed.

IF all the unnatural Figures and Situations, which we have hitherto described,
that a single Child may come in, do cause those many difficulties and dangers
mentioned; surely the Labor, wherein several together come in these bad
situations, must be much more painful, not only to the Mother and Children, but
to the Surgeon also; for they are then so constrained and pressed, that for
the most part they trouble each other, and hinder both their births: besides,
the Womb is then so filled with them, that the Surgeon can scarce introduce
his Hand without much violence, which he must do, if they are to be turned or
thrust back, to give them a better position than wherein they present
themselves.

When a Woman has two Children, they do not ordinarily both present to the
birth together; but the one is often more forward than the other, which is the
cause why but one is felt, and that sometimes it is not discovered that the
Woman will have twins, till going to fetch the Afterbirth, the second is then
perceived.

We have already showed, speaking of natural Labors, how a Woman should be
delivered of Twins, coming both right: It now remains to direct what ought to
be done, when they come either both wrong, or one of them only, as it is for
the most part: the first coming right, the second footling, or any other worse
posture: and then must the birth of the first be hastened as much as may be,
that so there may be presently way for the second (which has suffered much by
this unnatural position) to fetch it by the Feet, without trying to place it
right, although it were somewhat inclined to it; because it has been already so
tired and weakened; as also the Woman by the birth of the first, that there
would be more danger; that it would sooner dye, than come of it self.

Sometimes when the first is born naturally, the second offers the Head
likewise to the birth: In this case it is good committing a work so well begun,
to Nature to finish, provided she be not too slow; for a Child may dye, although
right, by lying too long in the birth; and the Woman who has been much
tormented with bearing the first, is usually so tired and discouraged, when she
thinks that but half her work is over, that she has no more Pains, or very few
and slow, nor any considerable Throws to bear the second, as she had done the
first. Wherefore if the birth of the second proves tedions, and the Woman grows
weaker, let the Surgeon defer it no longer, but direct his Hand gently into
the Matr^x, to find the Feet, and so draw out the second Child; which will
easily be effected, because there is way made sufficient by the birth of the
first: and if the second Waters be not broke, as it often happens; yet
intending to fetch it footling, he need not scruple to break the Membranes with
his Fingers, although elsewhere we have forbidden it; but that must be understood
with distinction: for when a Labor is left to Nature's work, they must break
of themselves; but when a Child shall be extracted by Art, there is no danger
in breaking them, nay contrarily they must be broke, that the Child may be the
easier turned, which else would be almost impossible.

Above all, the Surgeon must be careful not to be deceived, when both
Children together offer to the Birth either their Hands or Feet; and must well
consider in the operation, whether they be not joined together, or any other
ways monstrous; as also which part belongs to one Child, and which to the
other, that so they may be fetched one after the other, and not both together,
as would be if it were not duly considered, taking the right Foot of the one,
and the left of the other, and so drawing them together, as if they belonged
both to one Body, because there is a right and a left, by which means it would
be impossible ever to deliver them: but it may easily be prevented, if having
found two or three Feet of several Children presenting in the passage, and
taking aside two of the forwardest, a right and a left, and sliding his Hand
along the Legs and Thighs up to the Twist, if forwards; or to the Buttocks if
backwards, he finds they belong both to one body; being certain of it he may
then begin to draw ^orth the nearest, without regard which is strongest or
weakest, bigger or less, living or dead, having first put a little aside that
part of the other Child which offers (to have the more way, and so dispatch the
first whatever it is, as soon as may be) observing the same Rules, as if there
were but one, that is, keeping the Breast and Face downwards, with every
circumstance directed, where the Child comes Footling; and not fetch the
Burden, till the second Child be born; which if it were loosned from the sides
of the Womb, would cause a Flooding, for the reasons already alleged, that the
Orifices of the Vessels to which it was joined, would continue open by this
separation, as long as the Womb was distended by the other Child, yet within
it, and never close (as it often happens) till being quite emptied of all, it
begins to contract it self, and retire, (as a Man may say) within it self.

When therefore the Surgeon has drawn forth one Child, he must separate it
from the Burden, having tied and cut the Navel-string, and then fetch the
other by the Feet in the same manner; and afterward bring the Burden with the
two strings, as has been showed in the proper place. If the Children offer any
other part than the Feet, the same course must be taken as is directed in the
foregoing Chapters, where the several unnatural Figures are discoursed of;
always observing for the reasons abovementioned, to begin the operation with
the Child that is lowest in the passage, and in the most commodious Figure for
extraction.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of a Labor, when the Navel-string comes first.

AN Infant does not always present with the Belly, when the Navel-string comes
first: for tho he presents naturally as to the figure of his Body, that is,
with the Head first; yet sometimes the Navel-string falls down, and comes
before it: for which cause the Child is in much danger of death at least, if
the Labor be not very quick, because the Blood (that ought to pass and ^epass
through those vessels which compose it, to nourish and enliven the Child,
whilst he continues in the Womby being coagnlated, hinders the Circulation
which ought to be there ^ade; which happens as well by the Contusion, as the
Cold those vessels receive, being much pressed in the passage, when it comes
together with the Head, or any other part; as also because the Blood does there
coagulate (as is said) by reason of the Cold which it take; by the coming forth
of the Navel-string.

But tho this accident may cause the Infant's sudden death, it is not so much
for want of nourishment, without which he might pass a day or more, there being
Blood enough in his Body for that purpose; but because the Blood can be no
longer vivified and renewed by circulation, as it has continual need; which
being obstructed, always causes the Creature's sudden death, sooner or later,
according as it is more or less obstructed. Wherefore in this case the Woman
must without any delay be delivered; which if Nature do not speedily perform,
the Child must be drawn forth by the Feet.

Women that have great Waters, and a long string to the Burden, are very
subject to this mischief; for the Waters coming forth in great abundance at the
breaking of the Membranes, do often at that instant draw the string, which
swims in the midst forth, along with them; and much the easier, if the Infant's
Head be not advanced very forward into the passage, to hinder the coming forth
of it in this manner.

As soon as it is perceived, you must immediately endeavor to put it back, to
prevent the cooling it, behind the Child's Head, lest it be bruised, as we have
already noted, whereby the Blood may coagulate there; keeping it in that place
where it was thrust back, until the Head being fully come down into the
passage, may hinder the coming down of it again: which may be effected by
holding it up with the Fingers of one Hand on that side it comes down, until
the Head be advanced as abovesaid; or in case the Hand be taken away, to put a
piece of fine soft rag between that side of the Head and the Womb, to stop up
the way it came down by, always leaving an end of the rag without the Body, for
to draw it forth by at pleasure.

But sometimes, notwithstanding all these cautions, and the putting back of it,
it will yet come forth every Pain; then without farther delay, the Surgeon
must bring the Child forth by the Feet, which he must search for, tho the
Infant comes with the Head: for there is but this means to save the Child's
life, which it would certainly lose by the least delay in this case. Wherefore
having placed the Woman conveniently, let him gently put the Head which offers,
back (provided it be not engaged too low among the bones of the passage, and
that it may be done without too great violence to the Woman; for in that case
it will be better to let the Child run the hazard of dying, than to destroy the
Mother) and then slide up his Hand well anointed, under the Breast and Belly to
search for the Feet, by which he must draw it forth according to former
directions. This being dispatched, let him immediately take great care of the
Infant, which is ever in this case very feeble.

CHAP. XXV.
Of a Labor wherein the Burden first offers, or first comes quite forth.

THe coming forth of the Navel-string before the Infant, of which we have
treated in the foregoing Chapter, is often the cause of his death, for the
reasons there given: but the coming first of the Burden, is yet much more
dangerous; for besides that the Children are ordinarily Still-born (if they be
not affisted in the very Instant) the Mother likewise is often in very great
peril of her life; because of her great Floodings, which usually happen, when
it is loosened from the Womb before its due time, because it leaves all the
Orifices of the vessels open, to which it did cleave, whence flows incessantly
Blood, until the Child is born: For the Womb, whilst any thing continues there,
does every moment strongly endeavor to expel it, by which means it continually
voids and expresses the Blood of the Vessels, which are always open, when the
Burden is so separated, as long as the Womb remains extended and cannot be
closed, until it has voided all that it did contain, and comes by the
contraction of its Membranous substance to stop them by pressing them together.
Wherefore if we ought to be vigilant to succor an Infant, when the string comes
first, we ought much more to be so when the Burden comes forth first, and the
least delay is ever cause of the Infant's sudden death, if the Woman be not
speedily delivered, because the Infant cannot stay then long in the Womb
without suffocation, standing then in need of breathing by the Mouth, the Blood
being no longer vivified by the preparation made in the Burden, the use and
function of which then ceases, from the instant it is separated from the
vessels of the Womb, to which it was joined; for which reason there immediately
follows a great Flooding, which is so dangerous for the Mother, that without
speedy help, she soon loses her life by this unlucky accident.

When the Burden is not wholly come forth, but lies in the passage, some
advise to put it back before the Child be fetched; but I am not of that opinion,
for when it comes into the passage before the Infant, it is then totally
divided from the Womb, at the bottom of which it ought ordinarily to be
situated and fastened, until the Child be Born: but because (as soon as it is
wholly loosned, as it always is when it comes first) it becomes a Body
altogether unnatural; it must never be thrust back, but on the contrary, be
fetched away, and at the very moment after, bring the Child by the Feet, although
it come naturally with the Head first. For what reason can there be to put it
back, since it is of no use to the Infant, from the moment it is separated from
the Womb? And such a proceeding is so far from being useful, that this Burden
would much hinder the Surgeon from being able to turn the Child as he ought,
to bring it by the Feet.

Wherefore when it presents in the passage, which may be soon perceived, if
they find every where a soft substance, without the least resistance to the
touch of any solid part; finding likewise the string fastened to the middle of
it, and the Woman Flooding extremely, as is ordinary at such times. Then,
instead of thrusting it back, the Burden must be brought away, that so there
may be the more liberty and room to extract the Child, according to former
direction.

The Burden being quite loosened from the Womb, and coming first in the
passage, must not be thrust back into it again; much less must it be put back
when it is quite come forth of the Body. Care must be only taken, that the
string be not cut till the Child is born; not out of hopes of any benefit from
it to the Infant during the Delivery, but that so much time may not be lost
before the Infant be fetched, which is then ever in great danger; as also the
Flooding may be the sooner stopped, which happens for the most part, as soon as
the Woman is delivered; for which reasons it must be with all possible speed
dispatched.

Sometimes, notwithstanding this dangerous accident, the Child may be Born
alive, if timely succored: but it is then so weak, that it is hard to discover,
whether it be living or dead.

When it so happens, the Midwives do ordinarily before they separate the
Burden, put it into a Skellet of hot Wine, and imagine, with no small
superstition, that in case it comes to it self, the vapors of the warm Wine was
the cause of it, being conveyed by means of the string, into the Infant's
Belly, and so giving it vigor. But it is more credible, that being almost
suffocated for want of Respiration, as soon as it needed it, it begins now by
means of it to recover from that fainting. But nevertheless, there is no hurt
in keeping the custom, tho superstitious, since it can do no prejudice, and
may satisfy preingaged Spirits, provided necessaries be not neglected, in being
blindly carried away with this conceit.

CHAP. XXVI.
How to deliver a Woman, when the Child is Hydropical, or Monstrous.

A Child may in the Womb have either the Dropsy of the Head, called
Hydrocephale, or of the Breast, or of the Belly. And when these parts are so
filled with water, that they are much too big for the passage through which the
Child must issue; then notwithstanding any Throws or endeavors, by which the
Woman may attempt to bring it forth, it is impossible she should effect it
without the help of Art; as likewise when the Child is Monstrous, either by
being only too big in the whole Body, or in any particular part, or by being
joined to another Child.

If the Child be living that has the Dropsy, when the Woman is in Labor, it
must be destroyed to save the Mother, by making a hole in either the Head,
Breast, or Belly of it, where the Waters are contained, that being emptied by
the apertion so made, the Child may the easier be drawn forth, or else he must
necessarily dye in the Womb, not being able to be Born; and remaining there
will also kill the Mother. Wherefore to save her life, the Infant must be by an
indispensable necessity brought forth by Art, since it is impossible it should
come of it self; which may be done with a crooked knife sharp at the very
point, the Surgeon proceeding in the following manner.

After that the Woman is placed conveniently for the operation, he must slide
up his left Hand on the right side of the inferior part of the Infant's Head,
if the waters be contained therein; which he will perceive by the extraordinary
bigness and extent of it; the Sutures much separated, and the Bones of it far
distant one from the other, by reason of the distention made by the enclosed
waters, of which being very certain, let him slide with his right Hand along
the inside of his left his crooked knife, taking care that the point of it, ^n
introducing it, be always toward his left Hand, for fear of wounding the Womb;
and having conducted it close up to the Head, against one of the Sutures, let
him turn the knife toward it, and make an Apertion large enough to let out the
water: And then it will be very easy to bring forth the Child; forasmuch as
the other parts are then usually small, and much consumed.

If these Waters were contained in the Breast or Belly, then the Child's Head
being no bigger than ordinary, may be born; but the Body being exceedingly
swelled with the Waters, will stay behind.

The case being thus, let the Surgeon slide up his lest Hand, as aforesaid,
and the instrument with the right, just to the Breast or Belly, to make
incision, and to let out the Waters: after which, he may with much ease finish
the operation.

You must know, that it is much more difficult to deliver a monstrous Birth, or
two joined together, than one that has the Dropsy: because the bigness of the
Hydropick parts may be easily lessened by a single incision, which is
sufficient to let out the Waters which distend; and then it is easy to dispatch
the rest.

But when a monstrous Child, or a double one, is to be extracted, a single
apertion is not enough, but sometimes it is necessary to take off whole Members
from these Bodies, which makes the operation much more painful and laborious,
and requires more time and skill to effect it; in which case the left Hand must
be introduced into the Womb, and the sharp knife with the right just to the
parts that are to be divided and separated, and there with all the care that
may be, the member of the monstrous Child must, if possible, be taken off just
at the Joint. And when there are two Children joined together, the separation
must be made just in the place where they join; and afterward they may be
delivered one after the other; always taking them by the Feet, and if it has
but one, the same thing may be accomplished, after having lessened the bigness
of it, by cutting off some one of the Members.

The instrument ought to be as long as an ordinary Crochet, for the more surety
and facility; because that holding the handle of it with the right Hand, it may
be thrust, drawn, sloped and turned, without pain, to any side at pleasure; and
with the lest, which is within the Womb, it may be guided to cut and dismember
more skilfully and easily those parts which must be separated. Wherefore it
ought to have a handle so long, that the Chirurgeon's right Hand without the
Womb may hold and govern it as abovesaid, and conduct it the better in the
operation; which would not be so safely and conveniently done, if this
instrument were so very short, as all other Authors recommend: because in this
occasion the Chirurgeon's Hand is so constrained and pressed in the Womb, that
he can hardly there have the liberty to move his fingers ends, which is the
cause why he cannot without much difficulty govern such an instrument with one
Hand only, unless he would very much force and offer violence to the Womb, and
thereby exceedingly endanger the poor Woman's life. Let us now come to the
extraction of a dead Child, and show the several ways of doing it.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of delivering a dead Child.

WHen the Infant is dead in the Mother's Belly, the Labor is ever long and
dangerous, because for the most part it comes wrong; or, tho it comes right
with the Head, the Woman's Pains are so weak and slow in these cases, that she
cannot bring it forth, and sometimes she has none at all; forasmuch as Nature,
half overthrown by the death of the Child, which cannot help it self, labors
so little, that many times it cannot finish the business it has begun, but most
yield without the help of Art, of which at that time it has great need.
However, before you come to manual operation, endeavor to stir up the Woman's
Pains with sharp and strong Clysters, to bring on Throws to bear down and bring
forth the Child: But if all this prevails not, she must be delivered by Art.

We have already declared the signs to know a dead Child in the Womb, of which
the chief are; if the Woman perceives it not to stir, nor has a long time
before; if she be very cold, much pain and heaviness in the bottom of her
Belly; if the Child be not supported, but always falls like a mass of Lead to
that side on which the Woman lies, if the Burden or Navel-string has been a
long time in the World; and if no pulsation be there felt; and that dark and
stinking putrid matter comes away from the Womb. All these signs together, or
most of them, show the Child is assuredly dead; which when the Surgeon is
certain of, he must do his endeavor to fetch it as soon as possible he can, and
having placed the Woman according to former directions; if the Child offers the
Head first, he must gently put it back, until he has liberty to introduce his
Hand quite into the Womb, and sliding it all along under the Belly to find the
Feet, let him draw it forth by them, as is formerly taught; being very careful
to keep the Head from being locked in the passage, and that it be not separated
from the Body, which may easily be done, when the Child being very rotten and
putrefied, the Surgeon does not observe the circumstances often repeated by
us, that is, (in drawing it forth) to keep the Breast and Face downwards. And
if, notwithstanding all these precautions, the Head, because of the great
putrefaction, should be separated and remain behind in the Womb, it must be
drawn forth according to the directions given in the proper Chapter.

But when the Head coming first, is so far advanced and engaged among the Bones
of the passage, that it cannot be put back, then being very sure by all the
signs together, or most of the chief of them, that the Child is certainly dead,
it is better to draw it forth, than to torment the Woman too much by putting it
back, to turn it and bring it by the Feet. But because it being a part round
and slippery, by reason of the moisture, the Surgeon cannot take hold of it
with his Fingers, nor put them upon the side of it, because the passage is
filled with its bigness, he must take a crotchet, and put up as far as he can
without violence, between the Womb and the Child's Head, where he must fasten
it, endeavoring to give it good hold upon one of the bones of the Skull, that
it may not slide, forcing in the point of it, which must be strong, that it may
not turn; and after the Crotchet is well fixed in the Head, he may therewith
draw it forth, keeping the ends of the Fingers of his left Hand flat upon the
opposite side, the better to help to disengage it, and by wagging it by little
and little, to conduct it directly out of the passage.

It were to be wished that it were possible to introduce the Crotchet so far,
that one might fix it (for the better hold) in one of the Eye-holes, or
cavities of the Ears; but very often there is not room at first to carry them
beyond the middle of the Head, and then they must be fastened according to our
directions; and rather, if possible on the hinder part than any other, that so
it may be drawn forth in a straight line; and when by the first fastening of the
Crotchet the Head is drawn lower, and begins to be disengaged, you may loosen
it out of the first place to fasten it farther up, that stronger hold may be
taken, and so successively removing and fastening of it, until the Head be quite
born, and then taking hold of it immediately with the Hands only, the Shoulders
may be drawn into the passage; and so sliding the Fingers of both Hands under
the Armpits, the Child may be quite delivered, and then the Burden fetched to
finish the operation, according to knowledge; being careful not to pull the
Navel-string too hard, lest it break, as it often happens when it is corrupted.

If the dead Child (of which above all, there must be good assurance) comes
with the Arm up to the Shoulders so extremely swelled, that the Woman must
suffer too much violence to have it put back, it is best then to take it off at
the Shoulder-joint, by twisting it three or four times about, as we have
already taught in another place, by which means there is no need of either
Knives, Sawes, or sharp Pincers, as some Authors will have it; it being very
easily performed without all that provision, because of the softness and
tenderness of the Body. After that the Arm is so separated, and no longer
possessing the passage, the Surgeon will have more room to put up his Hand
into the Womb to fetch the Child by the Feet, and bring it away as has been
directed.

Although the Surgeon be sure that the Child is dead in the Womb, and that it
is necessary to fetch it by Art, he must not therefore presently use his
Crotchets, because they are never to be used but when Hands are not sufficient,
and that there is no other remedy to prevent the Woman's danger, or to bring
the Child any other way; because, very often, tho he has done all that Art
directs, persons present, that understand not these things, will believe that
the Child was killed with the Crotchets, although it had been dead three days
before, and without other reasonings or better understanding of the matter, for
recompense of his saving the Mother's life, requite him with an accusation, of
which he is altogether innocent; and in case the Mother by misfortune should
afterward dye, lay her death also to his charge, and instead of praise and
thanks, treat him like a Butcher or a Hangman; to which diverse Midwives are
usually very ready to contribute, and are the first that make the poor Women,
that have need of the Men, afraid of them. So much they are in fear of being
blamed by them, for having themselves been the cause (as some of them often
are) of the death of Infants, and many ill accidents, which after befall the
poor Women, not causing them to be helped in due time, and from the moment they
perceive the difficulty of the Labor to pass their understandings.

To avoid therefore these calumnies, let the Surgeon never use these
Crotchets but very rarely, and when there is no other way, as also to endeavor
his utmost (as much as the case will permit) to bring the Child whole, although
dead, and not by bits and pieces, that thereby the wicked and ignorant may have
no pretense of blame. I say, as much as the case will permit, that is, with
respect to the Woman under his hands: For to save her, he had better sometime
bring the dead Child with instruments, than kill her, by tormenting her with
excessive violence to bring it whole. But, in a word, we must in conscience do
what Art commands, without heed what may be spoken afterward: And every
Surgeon, that has a well ordered Conscience, will ever have a greater regard
to his Duty than reputation; in performing of which let him expect his reward
from GOD.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of extracting a Mola, and false Conception.

A Mole is nothing but a fleshy substance, without Bones, Joints, or
distinction of Members; without form and figure regulated and determined;
engendered against Nature in the Womb, after copulation, out of the corrupted
Seed of both Man and Woman. Notwithstanding, there are sometimes that have some
rudiments of a rough form. It has no Burden, nor Navel-string fastened to it,
as a Child always has; forasmuch as the Mole it self adheres to the Womb, by
which means it receives nourishment from its vossels. When Women miscarry of
them before the second Month, they are called false Conceptions: when they keep
them longer, and this strange body begins to grow bigger, they are called Moles.

Now since these things contained in the Womb, are totally Preternatural, their
expulsion must be procured as soon as possible, which is very difficult, when
these strange Bodies cleave to it, and especially the Mola, which not being
drawn forth, will often continue two or three whole years, nay, sometimes the
whole remaining part of the Woman's life, as Parey tells us in the story of a
Pewterer's Wife that had one seventeen years, whom he opened after her death.

To avoid the like accident, and abundance of inconveniences, which a Mola
brings, it must be endeavored to be expelled as soon as may be, trying before
you come to manual operation, to cause the Woman to expel it of her self: To
which purpose give her strong and sharp Clysters, to stir up Throws to open the
Womb to give way to it, relaxing and moistning it with emollient Ointments,
Oils and Grease, not omitting bleeding in the Foot, and half Baths, if there be
occasion.

The Mola will certainly be excluded by these means, provided it be but of an
indifferent bigness, or that it adheres little, or not at all to the Womb; but
if it cleaves very strongly to the bottom of the Womb, or that it be very big,
the Woman will hardly be rid of it without the help of a Chirurgeon's Hand; in
which case, after that he has placed the Woman conveniently, as if he were to
fetch a dead Child, let him slide his Hand into the Womb, and with it draw
forth the Mola, using (if it be so big as that it cannot be brought whole,
which is very rare, because it is a soft tender Body, much more pliable than a
Child) a crotchet or knife to draw it forth, or divide it into two or more
parts, as the case shall require. If the Surgeon finds it joined and fastened
to the Womb, he must gently separate it with his fingers ends, his Nails being
well pared, putting them by little and little between the Mola and the Womb,
beginning on that side, where it does not stick so fast, and pursuing it so,
till it be quite loosened; being very careful, if it grows too fast, not to
rend or hurt the proper substance of the Womb, proceeding according to the
directions we have given for the extraction of a Burden staying behind in the
Womb, when the string is broken off.

As to a false Conception, tho it be much less than a Mola, yet it often puts a
Woman in hazard of her life, because of great Floodings, which very often
happen, when the Womb would discharge it self of it, and endeavors to expel
it, the Floodings seldom ceasing until it be come away, because the Womb still
endeavors to exclude it, by which the Blood is excited to flow away, and in a
manner squeezed out of the open vessels.

The best and safest remedy for a Woman in this case, is to fetch away the
false Conception as soon as may be, because the Womb can very seldom, without
great difficulty void it without help: For it being very small, the Woman's
impulse in bouring downwards cannot be so effectual, when the Womb is but
little distended by so small a body, as when it contains a considerable bulk in
it; for then it is more strongly compressed with the Throws. Many times it is
exceeding difficult to fetch these false Conceptions, because the Womb does not
open and dilate it self ordinarily beyond the proportion of what it contains,
and that being very little, so is its opening. Which is the reason why the
Surgeon sometimes is so far from introducing his whole Hand, that he can
scarce put in a few Fingers, with which he is forced to finish the operation,
as well as he can, proceeding in the following manner, when he has introduced
them.

Having well anointed his Hand, he must slide it up the Vagina unto the inward
Orifice, which he will find sometimes but very little dilated, and then very
gently put in one of his Fingers, which he must presently turn and bend on
every side, until he has made way for a second, and afterward a third, or
more, if it may be done without violence; but many times one has enough to do
to get in but two, between which he must take hold (as Crabs do with their
Claws when they take any thing) of the false Conception, which he must gently
draw forth; and also the clotted Blood which he there finds. Afterward the
flooding will undoubtedly cease, if no part of this conception be left behind:
But if the inward Orifice cannot be more dilated than to admit but one Finger,
and that the Flooding is so violent as to endanger the Woman's life; the
Surgeon then having introduced his Forefinger of his left Hand, must take
with his right, an instrument called a Crane's-Bill, or rather a Forceps, and
guide the end of it along his Finger, and fetch with this instrument the
strange Body out of the Womb, taking heed that he pinch not the Womb; and that
the instrument be always conducted by the Finger first introduced, which will
judge and distinguish by the touch between this Conception and the substance of
the Womb: In doing which, there being no other way, he will certainly
accomplish his business.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the Caesarean Section.

WHen a big-bellied Woman is effectively in Labor, it is very rare but that an
expert Surgeon can deliver the Child dead or alive, whole or in pieces; in a
word, that he may do the work completely, if he behaves himself as the case
requires, and according to the directions given in each particular Chapter
foregoing, treating of the several unnatural Labors, without being
necessitated in a very inhumane, cruel and barbarous manner, to have recourse
to the Caesarian operation, during the Mother's life, as some Authors have too
inconsiderately ordered; but never practiced with success.

However, after the Mother's death, if there be any hopes to find the Child
alive (especially in those Countries, where the Laws forbid the burying a Woman
with Child, before it is taken out of her Belly) this operation may be
undertaken. To accomplish which as it ought to be, when he perceives the Woman
in the agony, he must quickly make ready all things necessary for his work, to
lose no time, because delay will certainly be the death of the Infant, which
else a few moments before might have been brought alive. There are some, that
when the Woman is just a dying, would have somewhat put between her Teeth to
keep her Mouth open, and likewise in the outer part of the Womb: to the end the
Infant receiving by this means some little air and refreshment, may not be so
soon suffocated: But all this mystery will avail but little; because the Child
lives only by the Mother's Blood, whilst it is in the Womb; but if he will
needs do so, it is rather to content the company, than out of any belief of the
good it will do.

As soon then as the Woman has breathed her last, and that she is dead (to
which all the company must agree) he shall begin his operation, which the
Greeks call Embryulcy. Most Authors would have it made on the left side of the
Belly, because it is more free from the Liver, which is on the right; but if my
Opinion may be authentic, it will be better and more skilfully made just in
the middle of the Belly; between the two right Muscles; because in this place
there is only the coverings and the white line to cut; when on the Side it
cannot be done without cutting the two oblique and cross Muscles, which being
couched one under the other, make a considerable thickness, besides that it
bleeds more than toward the middle of the Belly; not that the loss of Blood is
of any moment (which will flow when the Woman is but just dead) but because it
hinders by its flowing, the seeing distinctly how to make the operation as it
should be.

To dispatch then with more ease and speed, the Surgeon having placed the
dead Body, that the Belly may be a little raised, let him take a good sharp
incision knife, very sharp on one side, with which he must quickly make, at one
stroke, or at two or three at the most (if he will for the greater surety) an
incision just in the middle of the Belly, between the two right Muscles unto
the Peritonaeum, of the length and extent of the Womb or thereabouts; after
that he must only pierce the Peritonaeum with the point of his instrument, to
make an orifice for one or two of the Fingers of his left Hand, into which he
must immediately thrust them to cut it (lifting it up with them, and conducting
the instrument for fear of pricking the Guts) in proportion to the first
incision of the coverings, which having done, the Womb will soon appear, in
which he must make an incision in the same manner as he did in the Peritonaeum;
being careful not to thrust his Instrument at once too far in, thinking to find
the Womb a Finger or two thick (as all Authors affirm contrary to truth) in
which he would be deceived, as these are that never well considered it. For it
is very certain, that at the time of Labor, whilst it contains the Child and
Waters in it, it is not above the thickness of a half Crown, although they have
all sung to us, that by Divine Providence and a Miracle, the more it is extended
with the Child, the thicker it grows, which is absolutely false; it being (...)
true, that it is at that time a little thicker at the place where the Burden
cleaves, where its substance is then as it were spongy; but every where else it
is very thin, and becomes the more so, by how much it is more extended, until
being emptied by the birth of the Child, it begins to grow thicker in
contracting, and gathering to it self all its substance, which was before very
much extended. It being just like the Bladder, which being full, is very thin,
and being empty, it appears to us half a Fingers thickness, which filling
again, waxes thinner in proportion to the Urine that flows to it. Having then
so opened the Womb, he must likewise make an incision in the Infant's
Membranes, taking care not to wound it with the instrument, and then he will
soon see it, and must immediately take it out with the Burden, which he must
nimbly separate from the bottom of the Womb: And finding it to be yet living,
let him praise GOD for having so blessed and prospered his operation.

But the Children so delivered in these cases are usually so weak (if not quite
dead, as it often happens), that it is hard to know whether they be alive or
dead. Yet one may be confident the Child is living, if by touching the
Navelstring, the umbilical Arteries are perceived to move; as also the Heart,
by laying the Hand on the Breast; and if it prove so, means must be used to
fetch it to it self, spouting some Wine in the Nose and Mouth, warming it until
it begins to come to stir of it self, Midwives usually lay the Burden very hot
on the Belly of such weak Children; if that helps, it is rather because of the
temperate heat of it, than for any other cause: for it is impossible the Infant
should receive any Spirits from it, after it is once separated from the Womb,
and yet less when the Woman is dead. The best and speediest remedy is
immediately to separate it, and open the Child's Mouth, cleaning and unstopping
all the Nose, if there be any filth, to help it so to breath freely, keeping it
all the while near the fire, until it has a little recovered its weakness,
spouting some Wine into the Nose and Mouth of it, that he may a little taste
and scent it, which cannot hurt it in this juncture, if one observes some
moderation in the thing.

CHAP. XXX.
Of Ruptures in general, their differences, signs, and causes.

THe next thing which in our proposed method we shall treat of, shall be a
Rupture; in Latin called Ruptura, hernia, ramex; in Greek (...). Now tho
properly there be only two sorts of Ruptures, caused by the falling down of the
parts, viz. Intestinalis vel Omentalis, of the Guts, or of the Caul; yet in
regard of affinity, and of the place affected, other differences of Ruptures
may be referred hither; which have got Names according to the variety of the
illapsed matter.

These are the principal sorts of Ruptures. 1. Hern^^ incompleta, inguinalis,
(...), when the Gut or Caulcomes down no lower than the Groin. 2; Hernia
completa, when either of them falls down into the Cod, the Tunica vaginalis, or
Peritonaeum being broke: And if the Gut come down, it is called Ramex
intestinalis and (...). 3. If it be the Caul, Ramex zirbalis, or Omentalis,
(...). 4. If it be a Tumor from a slimy watery Humor, it is called Ramex
aquosus, (...), 5. If from Wind, Ramex flatulentus, or Ventosus, (...). 6. If
flesh grow about the Testicle, or in its substance, it is called Ramex
carnosus, (...). 7. If the veins being beyond measure full in the Cod and
Testicles, be distended in manner of Varices, it is called Ramex varicosus,
(...). 8. Avicen adds (...), that is, the starting of the Navel, or a Rupture
there. From these there arise several mixed or compound sorts, as (...), a
falling down both of the Guts and Caul; (...), of the Gut and Water; (...), of
Wind and Water; (...), of Water with Flesh, etc.

The common sign of all complete Ruptures is a swelling in the God.

Bubonocele, or an imperfect Rupture is known by a swelling in the Groin.

The signs of a Hernia intestinalis, according to Celsus, c. 14. l. 7. are 1.
When the swelling sometimes increases, and sometimes decreases: It increases
because either a greater portion of the Gut comes down; or it is over full,
either of Wind or Ordure. If the swelling increase because Excrements are got
into the Gut, then the Gut cannot be put back, there is a pain in the Cod,
Groin and Belly, by reason of solution of continuity; the Stomach is
disordered, and casts forth brown choler, then black, and last of all the
excrements; There is also an Inflammation of the Stories. 2. The second sign of
a Hernia intestinalis is, That the swelling is not painful. 3. The swelling
sometimes is almost quite gone. 4. Being compressed, it easily gives back
within the Abdomen, and then slips out again with a great noise. 5. The
swelling is smooth, slippery and round.

The signs of a Hernia omentalis are 1. The swelling is always the same, 2. To
the fooling it is uneven, soft and slippery, because of its Fat.

The signs of Hernia aquosa are 1. The swelling abates after fasting, 2. The
veins in the Ser^^um are swelled: And if it be squeezed, the Humor flows into
the vessels, which before were not full. 3. It shmes, and is pellucid, and if
you hold a Candle on the opposite side, it appears as if you looked through
Glass or Horn. 4. There is no pain. 5. It comes not on a sudden, but by degrees.

The sign of a Hernia ventosa are, 1. The Veins are swelled. 2. It looks
clearer than a Hernia aquosa. 3. It comes on a sudden.

The signs of a Hernia carnosa are, 1. A schirrhous hardness. 2. It changes not
the color of the Stones. 3. It abides always at the same bigness. 4. The lower
parts of the Testicle may be stirred.

The signs of a Hernia varicosa are, 1. The Veins are turgid on a cluster, and
wreathen, like Vineclaspers. 2. The Testicle hangs lower down, because of the
weight of the Humors.

The conjunct cause is the Gut or Cawl slipped down. The antecedent is either the
distention or breach of the Peritonaeum. And it is distended or broke by
causes, either internal, as the Humors that are contained in the Body; or
external, as by a blow, loud crying, leaping, keeping ones breath, pressure of
a weight, too much violence in embraces, especially when the Belly is charged
with Excrements or Wind.

As to the Prognostics, All Ruptures are difficult of Cure: Because a thin and
nervous Membrane is very difficultly united; nor is it cured by Medicines,
unless the Rupture be small, lately made, and in Children; but either with
Searing-Irons, or by Section.

CHAP. XXXI.
The eure of a Hernia intestinalis, when the Peritonaeum is either distended or
relaxed.

THE Gut comes down, because either the coat called Peritonaeum is distended,
or broke. The signs of its being distended are, 1. The coming down of the Gut,
not suddenly, but sticking in the orifice. 2. It comes not so low as the bottom
of the Cod. 3. The swelling is equal. The signs of the coat's being broke are,
1. The sudden descent of the Gut. 2. An unequal swelling. 3. The falling of the
Gut down to the bottom of the Cod.

In respect of the distention, two things are indicated, according to Avicen.
First, the reduction of the Gut up again within the Abdomen. Secondly, the
hindering it from sliping down again. The first design is easily accomplished (if
much of the Gut be not fallen, nor that filled with wind or excrements) for it
may be put up, and pressed back with the Fingers. But if it be full of excrements
or wind, a bath of warm water must be got ready, then Lenients must be applied,
and afterward a Fomentation with a cloth warm. Some Oil may be added to a Bath
of fresh water, or it may be made of Oil alone. Then some such lenient
Cataplasin may be applied. Radicum althere coctarum ex aqua and contusarum lb
ss. farinae sem, lini, butyri an. iij. Olei communis iiij. mulsae q. s. ad cut
aplasma. If these means will do no good, the Patient must be taken by his Hands
and Feet, and shaken that the Gut may fall back, he hanging with his Belly
upwards, and his Head downwards.

We answer the second Intention i.e. we hinder the Gut from fliping down again,
if we bind what is dilated, and remove all causes both internal and external.
The principal of the internal is an humidity relaxing and mollifying the Tunica
vaginalis; which must be dried, strengthened and bound. Care therefore must be
taken of the whole Body. Moist and windy meats must be avoided, and exercise
also. Bread must be used, that is well baked, adding some Anise or Cummin-seed.
Dry flesh must be eaten. The Drink must be astringent. The Diet being ordered
in this manner, the influent Humors must be evacuated both with Phlegmagogues,
Agaricum, manna, mel rosarum solutivum, etc. and with Purges of serous Humors,
Syrupus de Calamintha, de Hyssopo, de Betonica, cum decoctis faeniculi, Petrose
ini, etc. And afterward we must proceed to astringents, Glutinants and driers;
such as are, Herniaria seu Polygonum minus, Betonica, symphytum, Rosae Rubrae,
balaustia, plantago, nuces cupressi, cortex quercus, radix sigilli Salomonis,
Mastiche, bolus Armena, mumia, Sanguis Draconis, mala cydonia, cyminum, out of
which, posions, powders, and electuaries both dry and soft may be made. And for
greater exsiccation's sake Decoctum Sarsae parillae, cum modico ligni indici,
ex aqua chalybeata is good; it must be taken for many days.

Local Medicines must be drying and astringent. Avicen makes a Medicine e
nucibus cupressi, e foliis ejusdem, and sabina. Paulus cap. 35. l. 3. has this,
cort. granat. x. gallar. immatur. v. vini astringentis v. decoquantur, and
imponantur, prius ablutoloco aqua frigida: and quarto quolibet die renovetur.
Avicen commends this; nucum cupressi, aeaciae, balaust. gallarum immatur. an.
j. myrrhae, thuris, sarcccollae, tragacanthae, gummi Arabici an. iij. mumiae,
sanguinis Draconis an. ij. terantur cum aceto. Another excellent one malicorii,
boli Armenae, sang. drac. an. j. tegulae pulverisatae ij. pulveris bislinguae
ijss. cum ovi albo, modico aceto and colophonia fiat emplastrum. After this is
applied Avicen and Celsus apply a Truss, to keep up the Gut. And thus a slight
Rupture is cured in a young and tender body.

But if the malady will not give way to these things, the Patient must lie in
Bed full forty days, applying an astringent Medicine and a Truss. Let him
forbear much Laughter, Venery, and Bathing. Morning and Evening let him take
this Electuary; rhabarbari ass, consolide majoris, nucis moschatae, nucum
cupressi, cymini, trag acauthi, gummi Arab. mastiches, boli Arm. sanguinis
Drac. mumiae, picis Graecae, an parts aequales: Pulverisentur omnia
subtilissime, and cum melle despumato fiat electuarium, cujus dosis ss. Quidam
pulverem leporis combusti addunt. Let him drink upon it some austere black
Wine, water Chalybeat, or common, wherein Cypress or Myrtle Leaves have been
boiled. After forty days are over, let him rise; but in the mean time let him
wear the Plaster and Truss, till it shall be thought safe to leave them off.

CHAP. XXXII.
The Cure of a Hernia intestinalis when the Peritonaeum is burst.

THe intentions of Cure are the same here as in the former Chapter. The Gut
must be put up, and care must be taken, that it slip not down again; which is
done by uniting and glewing up the Rupture. It is united by astringents. And
here these must not be purely driers, but they must have also in them a
glutinous viscidity; such as this; Terebinth. iss. cerae, thuris, myrrhae,
ichthyccollae, carnis cochlearum, an. j. Gluten. triduo in aceto maceretur,
inde in mortario plumbeo laevigetur ac conteratur, post, igne liqueseat ac
misceatur caeteris. Another, Resinae aridae, Ammoniaci, thuvis, bituminis,
sulphuris vivi an. part. aeq. terantur terenda, liquefiant liquenda, deinde
sulphur adjiciatur: Applicetur vel linte^, vel corio, and sinatur donec sponte
decidat. Aetius highly extols charta, tribus diebus in aqua macerata: But it is
doubtful what this Charta is, whether Parchment or Paper, which being wet
stretches, and dry contracts, and by contracting may also deduce the parts to
mutual contact, and unite them. The course of forty days is also proper.

If these means will not do, according to Avicen, the place must be seared with
a hot iron. The searing must be strong, because so the skin is contracted, that
the Gut cannot any more come down. But you must have a care that the Intestine
feel not the strength of the fire, nor be burnt; for there would be danger of
death. The Patient therefore must be laid on his back, with his Head low, etc.
When the Gut is reduced, a Servant must lay his Hand on the bottom of his
Belly, and press it hard. The Patient must be tied upon the Table with many
Ligatures, on the Breast, Arms, Hips, Knees and Feet; the swathes of the Breast
must be broad. It is a hard matter to desend the spermatick vessels, by hurting
of which the generation of Seed is lost; but it is no prejudice to life. The
searing-Irons must be of two forms, semicircular and pointed, that they may
have a sharp point, and the figure of a Cone. We begin to fear at the upper
part, descending along the whole region of the Rupture.

The Cure is also performed by incision, which is twofold, Chiturgical, or
Empirical. True Surgeons cure it without extracting a Stone: Empiricks cut
off a Stone. Without extracting a Stone, it is performed in this manner. First
of all the Patient standing must hold his breath, that we may know how large
the Rupture is. Then the tumefied part must be marked round with ink, according
to the bigness of the place affected. Afterward the Patient must be tied upon a
Table, and a servant must press the bottom of his Belly. The Surgeon must
with his left hand lift up the marked skin, as much as he can, and with a
Penknife cut the circle diametrically, through the Skin and Membranes, to the
Tunica vaginalis, either burst or dilated, which must be sowed up afterward,
together with the Skin and Membranes. The seminal vessels must be kept unhurt.
After the Patient must be put to Bed, having first applied pledgets cum ovi
albumine, and then glutinants, as pulvis boli, etc. and things also that breed
flesh, as Terebinthina, etc. applying over all Emplastrum barbarum. When a
cicatrice is bred, the Patient may rise, and wear an astringent Plaster for
several days, and a Truss likewise.

The usual and dangerous way, with extraction of a Stone, is described by
Paulus, cap. 65. lib. 6. The Patient being laid on his Back, the Gut reduced,
he tied, and a Servant pressing the part, they make an oblique mark in the
Groin. Then they make a deep incision, so that the Stone and the spermatick
vessels may be taken out. They hold these with their left hand, putting their
singers into the hole, they separate all the Membranes, and extract the
Testicle at the hole. Then they take hold of the parts with hooks made for that
purpose, and sow all up. Then they cut off all above the Suture, and afterward
fear it with a hot iron, to prevent a Haemorrhage, and to glutinate the parts
the sooner. Which done, they leave along thread, putting in some concocting
Medicine. Afterward, they make a hole in the same part of the Scrotum, and put
in some concocting Medicine, they use Butter (which nevertheless putrefies)
they mix thus, aut ovi vitellum, and modicum resinae terebinthinae. Then they
endeavor to breed flesh, with Vnguentum de Betonica, aut Isidis, and bring a
cicatrice with dry lint.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of the Cure of a Hernia omentalis.

THis Rupture is not made by the breach of the Peritonaeum; because no great
portion of the Omentum comes down, it being fastened to the bottom of the
Stomach, the Gut Colon, and to the Spine. Therefore it is made by distention of
the coat; especially because the Omentium is fat, which may very well therefore
make lax and dilate, but never break.

The intentions of cure are two. First, the Omentum must be reduced within the
Abdomen, which is done with the Hands: Then, it must be kept from coming down
again, which is done by Astringents. And because dilatation is made by
moisture, or by a relaxing fat: therefore Ramex omentalis requires greater
driers than Intestinalis. This is commended; Aloes, malicorii in vino nigro
elixats, succi hypocystidos, thuris, glutinis fabrorum, an. part. aeq. gluten
passo incequatur ad integram dissolutionem, post teratur in mortario, and
caetera addantur. As to the rest, this cure differs not from the cure of a
Hernia intestinalis, and therefore here a Truss, the forty days course,
Causticks and Incision will be proper. It is to be noted, according to Celsus
c. 25. l. 7. That if a small portion of the Omentum come down, it must be
forced up again: If a great one it must be seared, that it may dye and fall
off: The readiest way is to bind, cut off and burn it. Yet we must not rashly
and too soon proceed to Section; because oftentimes a Rupture is cured beyond
expectation.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of the Cure of a Hernia aquosa.

THe causes of a Hernia aquosa are either occult or manifest, according to
Aetius cap. 22. l. 14. The manifest are percussion, collision, and breach of
the vessels in the Stones: for the Blood that flows to the vessels is then
turned into a watery substance, because of the weakness of the part. The occult
cause is from the vessels being filled with a watery Humidity. Guido adds, some
fault in the Liver, or Spleen, by reason whereof a Liquor gathers in the
Hypocondria, which easily falls down.

Percussion, Collision, etc. are apparent of themselves. If the color and
habit of the Body be bad, the Rupture proceeds from a fault in some of the
Viscera. If none of these, from Repletion: and Repletion proceeds from Drinking
too much. Aetius distinguishes the Causes by the Humor: which if it be
yellowish and pale, the Rupture comes from repletion of the Veins; if dull,
from Percussion; if white, from some fault of the Liver or Spleen. We must
know, that sometimes water is also gathered in the coat, which immediately
involves the Stones; oftentimes between it and the Elytroeides; sometimes
between the Elytroeides and the (...).

As to the Cures the causes must be removed, the faults of the Liver and Spleen
amended. If it comes from too much drinking, we must abstain from it. The
abundance of watery humor must be evacuated, both what is in the Hypochondria
and the Abdomen, and what is redundant in the whole Body. For which purpose
Sarsaparilla in decoctions is very efficacious. Besides, Diuretics and
Purgatives are good; but Diuretics are best. Diuretics are known, which must
be taken frequently; as also such Medicines as purge thin and serous Humors by
stool, such as Syrupus e rosis laxativus pilulae cochiae, and mastichinae, vel
aloephanginae, quarum scrupulus exhibere potest cum elaterri gr. ij.

As for local Medicines, the intent of them is to evacuate water contained in
the Stones: which is done, if it either give back to repellents, or be brought
out by Digestives through some patent place, or by Scarification. Digestives
are hot and drying, which must be used before Scarification. Aetius commends
this; Argenti spumae vj. salis fossilis, atramenti sutorri, an. x. cerusse
iiij. o'ci lbj. terebinthinae xj. Spuma argenti, cerussa, sal, mista cum oleo
cequi debent: addatur atramentum sutorium, cum aceto tritum, postea
terebinthina adjiciatur. A Cataplasm may also be made e baccis lauri, farina
fabarum, faenigraeci, sulphur, cumino, Ammoniaco, terebinthina, sapa and
oxymelite cum ol. laur. no simul mistis. This is excellent; stercoris bubuli
lbj. pulv. cymin. j. baccarum lauri, fimi columbini, castorei an. part. aeq.
coquantur cum ol. ros. and pauca cera. Yet first of all the place must be
fomented with a sponge dipped in decocto pulegii, calaminthae, origani,
foenigraeci, anisi, dauci, cymini, rutae, ameos, salviae. And after
fomentation, the place may be anointed with ol. de ruta, aut costo, aut
cuphorbio, aut castor. aut etiam de baccis lauri. Also aqua calcis vivae
digests very much. If there be water in the Hypochondria, we must the longer
insist upon driers and strengtheners of the Stones. Avicen uses fearing Irons,
in the region of the Groin, to corrugate the part, that the water may not fall
down. Moreover, in opening there is a twofold intention, to let the water out,
and to hinder it from gathering again. Apertion is made by incision or a
caustic. If by a caustic, it must be applled to the place where the water is.
Afterward we hinder the water from gathering again by some very drying
Medicine, such as this of Aetius; cerae iss. picis vj. Ammoniaci, thymiamatis
ij. aluminis liquidi iss. M. Galen c. 13. l. 14. met. keeps the part open a
long time, by putting in a pipe of Silver or Lead. Guido makes a Seton, and
keeps it long. Celsus shows the place for incision, where he says; If it be a
Boy that is ill, he must be opened in the Groin, and the water must be forced
upwards: If an adult person, in the bottom of the Scrotum, and the water must
be got out, and the place must be washed with salt water, or nitrous. But we
must observe, that the water be not lost too long in the Scrotum, lest by
carrying there, the Stone should be corrupted, or with the water there should
grow a Hernia carnosa, and flesh.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of the cure of a Hernia ventosa.

THis is cured by Digestives alone, not with searing Irons, no^ Incision.
Paulus describes this; piperis grana centum, lauri baccas number. Lxxx. nitri xx.
cerae v. olei iiijst. M. All things else may be administered here, as in a
Hernia aquosa.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of the cure of a Sarcocele, and a Hydrosarcocele.

A Sarcocele, or Flesh-rupture comes from a defluxion of thick Humors, which
are gathered between the coats of the Testicles. The thick Humors are two,
Phlegm and Melancholy, of which, Scirrhi, and fleshy hardnesses are bred in
other parts as well as in the Testicles.

This swelling is hard, resisting the touch, indolent, and if it be an
exquisite Scirrhus, it is without sense. If it come from Melancholy, the color
is sublivid: If from Phlegm, it changes not the color of the skin: If from
adust Melancholy, there is a pricking pain, and the swelling is not all alike,
but here soft, and there hard.

This requires the same cure with a Scirrhus; of which we have treated
sufficiently in the Doctrine of Tumors. Only here it is worth the observation,
that Pulvis radicis anonidis taken for several Months, wastes a Sarcocele: which
Matthiolus makes good by the History of a Patient, who by the constant use of
the said root recovered his health, when before his Physicians had given over
all hope in Medicines, and placed all they had in cutting and burning.

However, if the Disease do not give way to Medicines; you must proceed to
cutting, which is not without hazard, whether the Stone be left, or it be taken
out. And it must be observed in this operation, whether flesh grows about the
coats, or about the very Stones; and whether it stick firmly or loosely, to the
substance of the part. This being observed, you must cut quite through the
Scrotum, till you come at the concrete flesh; which, if it be not strongly
fastened, must by little and little be loosened with the Fingers ends, or the
handle of the knife from the Stone, or coats, and taken away: But if it be
grown firmly together with the part, it cannot be cured without cutting the
vessels and the Testicle. In this case therefore the vessels and the Testicle
must be drawn out, tied, cut, and seared. Some fear them with a red not Razor;
and so out and sear at once. The rest of the cure is performed as in a Hernia
intestinaelis.

The method is particular, when a watery Rupture is joined with a fleshy. For
then first of all, you must cut and make a hole in some part of the Sorotum
about the middle, not in the bottom, not must it be very large. Having got out
the water, put in a very long Tent armed with some suppur^tive Medicine, as
Resina, terebinthina, cum thure, ovs vitello and hutyro. Apply an emollient and
suppurative Plaster; as Diachylon cum gummi, and axungia porei. And when Pus is
bred, it must not be evacuated at the hole, but kept within on purpose, that by
its contact it may by degrees putrefy the flesh. Nor must the Medicaments be
changed, unless all the flesh be turned into Pus, which requires a long time.
Nevertheless this is the safest way: And it succeeds well, even in the greatest
Ruptures.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of the cure of a Hernia varicosa.

THe Rupture called Ramex varicosus, is, when the veins of the Testicles are
dilated and wreathen like Vine-claspers, by some melancholic Humor.

The cure, as to the whole Body, is the same as in a Scirrhus. The part
affected is helped by Medicaments and manual operation. The Indications are
three; To repel the influent Humor; To evacuate and dry it up, when slown in;
and to astringe the dilated vessels.

Astringents answer all these intentions; for as they are cold and binding,
they repel the influent Humor: As they are drying, they dry it up, when come
thither: And by their binding quality, they astringe the dilated veins. These
are approved Medicines; Succus hypocistidis, balaustia, gluten piscium,
malicorium, bolus Armena, sanguis draconis cum ovi albo, etc.

If the disease will not give way to Medicines, we must have recourse to the
knife and fire. Here we must observe in what place the Varices lie; whether in
the veins of the Scrctum, or in the next coat, or in the Tunica vaginalis, or
in the body of the very Testicle. If they lie in the Scrotum, the veins must be
seared with thin and sharp irons, which must be fixed in the dilated veins,
where they are conglomerated: Afterward things must be applied to take off the
Eschar: Then Lonticula cum melle: And at last Sarcoticks. If the veins be tumid
in the coat, which Paulus and Rufus Ephesius call (...), incision must be made
in the groin, and at it the Memb^ane together with the Stone must be extracted.
Afterward the dilated veins must be separated from the coat, either with the
Fingers, or the handle of the Penknife: Then the vessels must be tied in two
places, and cut off above the Ligature. If the Rupture be in the Elytroeides or
V^ginalis t^mica, and only a vein or two dilated, you must proceed in the same
manner as when it is in the Dartos, viz. Having opened the Groin, and the veins
being tied, and cut, the Testicle must be put up again: But if all the veins he
swollen, they must be tied and cut out with the Testicle. If the Rupture be
between the innermost coat and the Testicle, incision must be made in the
Groin, the vessels extracted, the Testicle cut off, and the place seared.
Paulus here uses a distinction according to the judgment of Leonides: If only
some of the vessels that nourish the Testicle, are become varicous, they only
must be cut off and separated, and the Testicle must be put up; but if all of
them are so, then the Testicle, as well as the vessels, must be taken away;
lest it, being destitute of nutrient vessels, should waste and ^ot away.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of Amputation of a Member.

THE next thing, which in my proposed Method I am to treat of, is the
Extirpation of a Part, when by a Gangrene, Wound, Fracture, or some other
accident, it is become not only useless, but dangerous to the whole, Ne pars
sincera trahatur. In this Case it becomes the Surgeon to acquaint the
Friends with this kind of Remedy, and withal to make his Prognostic
accordingly. But before we proceed in this Operation, we shall take notice of
what some knowing Authors have writ hereof. For in those places where
Amputation cannot be made, as in the Buttock, Shoulder, Back, etc. Fab.
Hildanus proposes the use of potential Cauteries applied to the mortified Part,
and often renewed, till the last Eschar reaches to the live Flesh. Yet he
condemns Arsenick, as being venomous, and producing many dangerous symptoms.
This method in Sarcomata has been used with good success: but in a
Mortification there appear to me many greater inconveniences that attend it.
First, from the Caustic it self, as he proposes it, of Salts: It will melt in
the working, and is more disposed to spread in the Skin, than penetrate deep
into the Flesh. This every young Surgeon knows in his making of Fontanels,
that he cannot apply a bit of Caustic so little, tho he use all his Art in
defending it, but that it will have spread much farther than he designed it.
Then, the separation of such Eschars is too slow to effect the design: and in
an ill habit of Body, such Medicaments are apt of themselves to procure a
Mortification rather than Cure. Whereas on the contrary, an actual Cautery
answers all Intentions: It not only consumes the Mortification, but dries up
the venomous humor, thereby preventing its further progress; and also
communicates warmth to the languishing parts, by virtue of which the separation
is much farthered. But where An^putation it self is feasible, nay altogether
necessary, as in the Limbs, there arises a new Question, whether it ought to be
done in the sound part, or in the dead. Fab. ab Aquapend. advises, the dead
within a fingers breadth of the live (as also do many others) then with a
Cautery they burn up all the remaining Mortification. Others perform the
Operation with a hot Knife. Aquapendent speaks so confidently of his success in
the practice of this way, that utterly to deny the thing, were to give him the
Lie. I shall only make this Objection, That the Sphacolus does seldom affect
the Member so equally round, as that an Operation in the dead part is feasible:
nay, which is worse, when once the Mortification seizes in the great vessels,
it runs up so fast under the skin, that before any considerable part of the
Member is outwardly gangrened on the one side beyond the Knee or Elbow, the
other side will have reached to the Inguen or Axilla. This, I confess,
frustrates all manner of Amputating, whether in sound or mortified parts. Yet
generally speaking, the Gangrene grows not so fast, but that if you make
Amputation two fingers breadth, more or less, within the live Flesh, you may
prevent it; and that for better than it is possible to be done by the other way
of operating. For if you work there by actual Cautery with a hot Knife, your
Knife will stick fast in the Flesh till the moisture be wholly driod up, and
then you must repeat many Knives and Canteries, in every one of which you will
meet with the same inconvenience: yea, before you can cut through with your hot
Knife, it is very probable that you will near the Bone meet with some parts
that are alive and sensible, especially when you come to the Periosteum, (for
the Membranes do not usually corrupt at the same rate of swiftness with the
Flesh) and then all your pains and trouble will be as great or greater, than if
you did it in the sound part. Hildanus mentions several other inconveniences,
who has taken pains to confute this opinion.

Both these ways of Amputation seem to me much more difficult and painful than
our common way; which makes me presume they proposed them, to prevent the
effusion of blood.

But modern Surgeons have answered this Objection, by good bandages and
deligation of the vessels, and when we cut above the knee by clapping Cauteries
to the vessels only; which sufficiently answers that intention. Now I shall
briefly deliver the whole Doctrine of Amputation.

In heat of Fight, whether it be at Sea or Land, the Surgeon ought to
consider at the first dressing, what possibility there is of preserving the
wounded Member; and accordingly, if there be no hopes of saving it, to make his
Amputation at that instant, while the Patient is free of a Fever, etc.
Therefore that you may the better make your judgment of the Wounds, I shall
give you some few Remarques of such as require Amputation, viz. If a Leg or Arm
he shattered by splinter or great shot, the loss of substance will direct you.
If the principal Muscles be torn off, and the Bone fractured in pieces, or if
the wound be with Musket Shot in the inside of the joint of the elbow, or in
the knee or ancle, with a fracture of the bones of the said joint, nay,
supposing it has not fractured them, yet if the Bullet be so lodged that you
cannot extract it, you shall then presently make extirpation of the part. If it
be the Arm, cut it off in the place where it is so shattered, and saw off the
end of the Bone smooth, your assistant the while pulling up the musculous Skin
and flesh. If the Ankle be thus maimed, you shall then cut off the Leg within
three or four Fingers breadth under the Knee, in regard so long a stump would
be troublesome. But if the Leg be shattered off by the calf, do not put your
Patient to the pain of new Amputation, for the shortning it a hands breadth, or
a little more. Save what you can of a shattered Hand. And if the Toes with part
of the Foot were shot off, cut off the lacerated parts smooth, but with care to
save as much of the Foot with the Heel as you can; it being much better than a
wooden Leg. But if the Arm or Leg be not so shattered, though the wound be
large on one side, and hang gaping down with great fracture of the bones, yet
be not discouraged; the largeness of the wound will make for your better
pulling out those extraneous bodies, shivers, splinters, rags or ought else,
and for the easier discharge of matter. Dress it as a wound by a splinter.

If the great joint be so shot by Musket-bullet, that you think it not
reasonable to cut off the Member, be sure you make extraction of the Bullet,
and free it of all extraneous Bodies, leaving not the least shiver to prick the
Nerves or Tendons: and make such way presently, that you may be able to dress
the wounded Nerves, Tendons, etc. without making new incision, when the part is
inflamed and unfit for it.

If after some days the wound do not digest, but inflame and Gangrene, and the
Gangrene do not yield to your applications; then, as in a Sphacelus, you are to
proceed with the extirpation of the rotten member, while the Patient is free
from Delirium, and has strength to bear the operation.

Seat him so as it may be for your convenience. At Sea they sit or lie, no
great matter which; nor has the Surgeon any body to hold them; but with the
help of his Mates, and some one or two that belongs to the Hold, he goes on
with his work. Yet where we have convenience to proceed more formally, we
always place the Patient to our most advantage, where he may be held firm, and
in a clear light, and so that our assistants may come better about us. The
Member is to be supported by some one, whilst another stands behind the
Patient, and draws up the skin and musculous flesh. Then make your Ligature two
fingers breadth, or thereabout in the sound part; so that if you amputate in
case of mortification, you may be sure to quit your self of it.

This Ligature is omitted by many of our Surgeons here in the City, they
only making a turn with a Tape, pinning it on as a mark to circumcide by: and
instead of the Ligature I propose, they make a gripe, which gripe is commonly
made by some assistent, who has strength to do it. Indeed this is good, where a
shattered Membrane is to be cut off, to smooth the stump; in which case there
is no great fear of bleeding. But in Amputations it seems to me to be very
inconvenient: for I never yet saw any man so gripe, but that still the Artery
bled with a greater force than was allowable. It being so, in what a huddle is
the stump then dressed? But suppose the uneasy posture, and the long griping
tires the griper; or that his hand be crampt the while, what condition is the
Patient then in? Whereas by this ancient way of Ligature, the vessels are
secured from bleeding, the member benunimed, and the flesh held steady, ready
to receive the impression of their crooked knife (or, razor, which many have
amputated with.)

This Ligature made, the assislent strengthens it, whilst he draws up the
musculous flesh. In the mean time the Operator, with a sharp crooked knife, by
a turn with his hand, cuts the flesh off round to the bone; then with the back
of it he scrapes the Pericsteum from the bone; if there be two bones, then with
a dividing knife he scparates the fleshy Membrane from them. The bones freed of
the Periosteum, Guido proposes a linen cloth, and Hildanus a kind of Purse, to
be brought over the upper divided flesh, to pull it upward, and make more way
for the Saw. But I think that needless. The flesh divided, the parts separate
enough of themselves; besides, the assistents pulling up the musculous flesh
and skin is sufficient. That done, you are at liberty, whether you will
cauterize the vessels by a Button-cautery, or by Ligature stop the bleeding, or
by agglutination. The use of Chalcanthum I do not approve. To apply
escharoticks to the ends of the Nerves and Tendons newly incised, causes great
pain, weakens the part, and makes way for Gangrene; it not being likely you can
so apply them to the Artery, but that you must burn the parts about, which are,
as I said, the Nerves, etc.

The way Hildanus proposes, by drawing the vessels out by a Forceps, is not a
work to be done in heat of sight, nor without a clear daylight. If you attempt
it on Land, his Arm would be bowed, and his Leg stretched out, that the vessels
may be the longer after extirpation, that you may the better take hold of them.
Ambrose Parey proposes a more easy and sure way of deligation, by passing a
Needle with a strong twisted thread through the skin near the great vessels, by
piercing through the raw flesh and skin: then make your Ligature upon a fold of
rag.

Thus you bind the Artery and Vein. These several ways have been practiced by
eminent Surgeons for the stopping the Blood in the Arteries in Amputation,
but the late discovery of the Royal styptick has rendered them of less use. But
in heat of fight it will be necessary to have your actual Cautery always ready,
for that will secure the bleeding Arteries in a moment, and fortify the part
against future putrefaction: they requiring after cauterization no such strict
bandage, as that thereby you need to fear interception of the Spirits. When we
cauterize the Artery, we do then touch the end of the bone, it hastening
exsoliation.

The next thing is the loosning the Ligature, and bringing the Lips close over
the stump. Then whether you should with a cross stitch hold them so, or content
your self by bandage, as well as you can, is by some controverted. They that
object against the former, say, it causes pain and inflammation. So does
bandage also, if it be made too strait. Therefore they should object against
that also. The most that are done without the cross stitch, are the next
dressing broad stumps, some of them with Lips turned outward by the bandage; in
the least of them the whole stump is bare: whereas in those in which the cross
stitch is made, the Lips are found close to the bone at the next dressing,
covering the great vessels, and a third part, or half of the stump is well
digested; and oftentimes by the second dressing near agglutinated, so far as it
lies under the skin, and without inflammation happily cured. Whereas the broad
stump is a certain sign of a long cure, and commonly the death of the Patient.
If the musculous flesh and skin are well pulled up in time of Amputation, and
brought over by a moderate extension as far as they will easily admit, you will
find it not painful. You ought to pierce the skin with a needle and strong
brown thread, ceared about half an inch from the edges of the Lips.

Having made them cross from side to side equally, tie them with a moderate
astriction, then apply a pledgit on the cauterized vessels with pulv. rad.
irid. succ. cepar. cum melle. But if no cautery was used, then buttons of Tow
spread with your restrictive, and dipped in pulv. Galeni, must be applied to the
mouths of the vessels.

Afterwaads sprinkle the stump thick with this powder; b^l. Armen, farin.
volatile. picis naval. an. iiij. aloes, thuris, mastich. sang. dracon. an. j.
gypsi jss. pil. lepor. corii raspats, an. iij. Misce s. a. You may mix some of
the same cum album. over. and apply it upon a thick round stupe, which has
first been wet in oxycrate and dried; and over that another stupe spread with
the same, so broad as to come over the first, and up a pretty height above the
stump. This latter must be snipt deep in the edges, that it may lie smooth
about the Member.

An Ox-bladder ready cut and wet is to be turned over^^t, and a cross cloth
next the Bladder, to hold the dressings ^eady.

Then with a Roller with two heads begin upon the stump, and roll up to the
next Joint, and so again about the Member, to retain your dressings firm. Then
fasten it so as that it may not be capable of falling off.

But before you make this bandage, you ought to apply your defensative over the
parts above the stump. Some apply it before they begin the Amputation: but then
it is apt to wrinkle, and to sit uneasy. In the dressing of the stump you ought
so to apply your Medicaments, that you may without much bundle roll up the
Member. Then place it to the ease of the Patient, one holding his hand some
while upon the stump. Your Defensative may be such as is used in Gunshot
wounds, or, far. hord. bol. Armen. an. iij. sang. dracon. iss. Flor. ros. rubr.
balaust. nuc. cupress. pulv. an. ij. acet. x. album. ovor. number. viij. ol. ros.
and myrtill. an. j. cerae q. s. Boil these powders in acetum, then add the rest
to it, to make it of the consistence of a Cerote.

The third day take off the dressings; and then you may cut the cross stit^h,
and sprinkle the wound with pulv. Galeni, and dress it with this digestive;
terebinth. lot an decoct. hord. iij. ol. lumbr. j ss. gum. elemi dissolut. in
praedict. ol. ss. farin. hord. eribrat. ij. vitell. unius ovi, croci pulv. j.
Misc. Apply to the bone a pledgit of dry Lint, or pressed out of spir. vini.

After the wound is digested, you may deterge with mundif. Paracels. or apii,
or this: Terebinth. Venet. lot. in spir. vin. iij. pulv. rad. irid. aristoloch.
rot. sarcocoll. thuris, mel. ros. an. j. Then incarn and cicatrize, as has been
prescribed in compound wounds.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of the extirpation of a cancerous Breast.

IF notwithstanding all your enendeavors to cure a Cancer, the Tumor increase,
and be like to ulcerate, you may do well to forewarn the Patient of the danger:
and if it be loose, and in a place where it may be safely extirpated, propose
it to them, lest afterward they desire it when it is too late.

That you may be the more successful in the operation, I shall offer to your
consideration these few qualifications. First, that the Patient be of a strong
constitution, and of a tolerable good habit of Body, and not in a declining
age, when the Menstrua are ceased. Secondly, that the Cancer be loose, and the
axilla free from painful glands. It were also to be wished, that the Cancer took
its original from some accident, as a bruise, etc. Thirdly, that the operation
be performed in the Spring, or Autumn of the year: lest through the great heat
of the Summer the spirits be resolved; or by reason of the extreme cold in the
winter, the native heat should be choked.

In order to the operation you ought to have good rollers, compresses,
restrictive powders, and defensatives, as in other amputations. The use of
Chalcanthum or other escharoticks I do not approve: for you cannot apply them
so to the mouths of the Arteries, but they will corrode the adjacent parts, and
cause pain, which ought not to be, especially in a Cancer. Besides, they
require a strict bandage, which is very troublesome on the Breasts. To avoid
which inconveniences, I propose the stoping of the Blood by a small
button-cautery; which I acknowledge is not done without some pain, but that is
momentary, and serves to correct the indisposition of the part: whereas the
other lies gnawing so long as it is upon the part, and renders it crude and
indisposed. There ought to be actual cauteries of different sorts ready heated
in some corner of the chamber, lest in the extirpation there happen to be lest
some relics of a cancerous gland behind. All things being ready, the Patient
must be placed in a chair to the light, and held steady. It is then at the
operators choice, whether he will make a Ligature about the basis of the
cancerous Tumor, or pull it to him with one hand, while he cuts it off with the
other. For the cutting into the Breast, and pulling out the cancerated knot,
rarely succeeds well: nor indeed is every Breast so capable of being freed of
the Cancer, when it is cut off by making a Ligature. If the Cancer be cut off
clear, your business is then to stop the blood as you please: but if any
scirrhosity remain, you shall do well to consume it by actual cautery. The
Ancients used in these operations to permit them to bleed freely; nay, provoked
them to it by crushing out the blood; after which, the actual cautery was
applied all over, then they dressed the wound as a burn: but according to my
method pulv. Galeni is most proper. Then palce the Patient in bed, and give her
an auodyne draught that night, to quiet the ferment. The second or third day
after you may dress her with some digestive, as that ex terebinth. cum vitello
ovi; or, terebinth. lotae iij. sir. de ros. siccis, iss. succ. plantag. solani,
an. ij. succ. apii j. coquantur ad dimid. succor. consumptionem; dein add far.
hord. and ciceris an. ss. croci ij. vitell. unius ovi. Misc. But if there be no
pain, dress it with Empl. e bolo. After digestion proceed with detergents, and
incarn and cicatrize as in wounds; remembering to keep the body soluble the
while by Clysters, or purge and bleed as you see occasion. And if they had no
Fontanels before, make them some now: for tho the Cure may seem successful, yet
if there be any evil quality in the Humors remaining, the Ulcer will scarce
cicatrize.

If in cicatrizing it the Lips do grow callous, attempt the eradicating timely
by actual cautery, whilst it is within a narrow compass, and lies in the
superficies: for if you defer it till it has siezed the Musculous flesh, it
will be too late, it being then scarce capable of palliation. Yet some Authors
have left us prescriptions, whereby they give us hopes to cure them or
extirpate them. Those they have offered to us for the cure are much the same
with what I have already set down, viz. ol ros. corae alb. an. ij ss. succi
granat and solani. an. ij. cerussae lotae ij. plumbi usti loti and tutiae
praep. an. ss. thuris, mastich. an. ij. fiat imguentum s. a. Or, unguenti
tutiae Vigonis iiij. theriac. Venetae j. sacchar. Saturni j. succ. geranii q.
s. ducantur in mortario plumbeo, etc. Others commend the juice of Mullein
boiled with Honey. Riverius tells you in one of his observations, that he cured
one by often dressing it with aq. ros. plantag. and rhoead. with a mixture of
mel. rosat. Aetius proposes extract. Sumach: but that is more proper in Cancers
of the Vterus.

Empiricks amongst us brag much of their skill in curing of them; and, by the
giving of Matthews's Pills, or Opium mixed with some purgative, they do now and
then alleviate pain, and thereby encourage diseased people to commit themselves
into their hands, whom if they can persuade to an Amputation, they get some
Money in hand: but their frequent miscarriages in that work, have taught the
more prudent people to avoid them.

Some eminent Surgeons, I suppose, after a fruitless endeavor to cure them,
have attempted the extirpating of them by Escharoticks. Guido has commended to
us Arsnick powdered and sprinkled daily upon them, the Eschar being first
pulled off. Riverius in his observations tells of a Cancer that was extirpated
by this application. aq. fort. j. sublimati crudi viij. salis Ammoniaci ij.
arsenici j. These are to be distilled ad siccitatem, then the caput mortuum
powdered, and the like weight of Vinegar to be put thereto, and distilled again
to the consistence of a soft paste for use. Ol. arsenici, aq. regia, ol.
vitrioli, lap. caustic, etc. have been proposed. When such are applied, there
will be need of good defensatives. By the Authority of some of these Authors,
young Surgeons have been sometimes engaged to their prejudice: and some
years since an eminent Surgeon, since deceased, undertook the eradicating of
an ulcerated Cancer in the Breast of a Woman that had strength and courage to
endure it. He applied the strongest of the forementioned Escharoticks: they
penetrated deep and made great sloughs, which he pulled off, and by repeating
the Escharoticks raised new; but the use of them was not long continued: for
the gleet partaking of the corrosives, ulcerated the adjacent parts; and the
Cancer was so enraged by the Escharoticks, as showed there was no good to be
done by them. Indeed if they had contrived Medicaments, that could have
penetrated deep with little pain, there might have been some hopes of success.
So cancerous excrescences and Ulcers in the Mouth are increased by touching
them with Oil of Vitriol, Sulphur, etc. Upon which consideration there remain
but two ways, either the actual Cautery, or palliative Medicines. If the Cancer
be in such a place as you may hope to eradicate it, the actual Cautery is then
a sure help: but not by applying it lightly upon the upper parts; but by
thrusting at the root with a scoop, or chisel-like Cautery, carrying it away
before you. If there remain any rags of it, with a proportionable
button-Cautery, burn it down to a crust: but if this cannot be effected, then
endeavor palliation by such Medicaments as above have been proposed. And in
case the Menstrua or Haemorrhoids be stopped, bleed by venaesection or by
Leeches, and make Fontanels: for by such means many people live tolerably well,
who have Cancers ulcerated; when others, who ailed less, by their impatience
are dead.

CHAP. XL.
Of taking away Blood by Venaesection, Scarification, and Leeches.

THo one would think that but little skill were required in opening a vein; yet
it often so happens, that this very thing creates trouble to the Artist, and no
small pain to the Patient, either when the Artist cannot undertake the work,
or, if he does undertake it, when he cannot attain his intended end.

When he does not undertake it, it is either because the Vein that should be
opened, does not appear, or the Surgeon cannot find it. In which two cases,
as the first saves the Surgeon blameless, so the latter argues either want
of skill, or dulenss of sense. In the int^rim however, tho not to undertake a
thing upon occasion offered, discovers the slenderness of the Chirurgeon's
skill; yet such an one is to be born withal, yea, in some measure to be
commended: Since it is better to do nothing at all, than to attempt any thing
timerously or rashly at another's peril.

But when he undertakes the thing, and attains not his desired end, this
happens either because the vein was not touched, or if it was, not as it ought.
It was not touched, either because it lay not there, or the Lancet reached it
not, or divided it not right. Which soever of these things happens, it is
absurd, and alien to Art; unless it happen through the Patient's fault in
snatching the Limb away before the Surgeon has done his work. If the
unskilfulness of the Artist be in fault, it is either because the bandage was
too loose, or some way incongruously applied, by reason whereof the vein cannot
be kept tight, but slips away from the hand: or because it is not full enough,
but falls down flat, and resists not the instrument: or because the instrument
is blunt, or wrong thrust in.

A vein is ill divided when the incision is too narrow or too wide, or not
correspondent to the incision of the skin. When the orifice is too wide,
bleeding in ones sleep may be feared. When it is too narrow, besides, that it
bleeds not as one would have it, a Tumor arises about the wound, which the
Greeks call Thrombosis. And the same thing happens, when the incision of the
vein and skin is not the one correspondent to the other; which happens several
ways. Either because the skin is drawn out of its place by the sillet; or by
the Thumb which stays the vein: or because the Lancet is put in too obliquely.

But there are worse mistakes than any yet mentioned, to wit, when the Nerves
are hurt, or an Artery is touched. And the mischief is, it afflicts the Patient
the more, for that he finds his calamity and destruction to proceed from what
he expected health or help by. Whoever therefore would be accounted a skilful
Artist in this thing, he must endeavor all he can to avoid those mischiefs:
Which he may easily do, if he will but rightly consider, what out of good
intent, and confirmed by frequent experience, I here set down.

First of all, the Artist's hands must be warm, and the Patient must sit upon a
Bed or in a Chair (but it is better in Bed, because of swooning) then either
the Limb must be so brought to the light, or the light to the Limb, that the
place of the vein may be so conspicuous, as that his hand, when he goes about
his work may not be in his light. Some may think this caution about the light
superfluous, but I have often observed Surgeons in a fault herein, and by
consequence mistake. Then bandage must be made, so as that the vein may fill,
and be extended.

But in tying the fillet two things must be observed, which are childishly
neglected by many. The first is, that the hand (if the vein be to be opened in
the Arm) be kept open till the fillet be tied as it should: for so it
afterward expresses the Blood out the better, when it is tied. Another thing
is, that when it is sitted, the skin over the vein be neither drawn up (as most
do) nor on one side, nor any other way out of its place. For this, when it
returns to its proper place, stops up the wound of the vein; and it returns
again presently, when the string is but a little loosened. In Bodies where the
veins are full of Blood, little skill serves the turn and every Boy is reckoned
an Artist sufficient: But in scarcity of Blood, or straitness of veins, or when
they lie deep, or are inconstant, more skill is required, both to find out and
know the vein, and to keep it, and also (which is the main thing) to open it
right.

When the fillet is thus fitly tied, if the vein be eminent, or conspicuous to
sight, or manifest to the touch, it must be opened as soon as there begins to
be any renitency in it; for by tarrying it grows more obscure, whereby the work
is also rendered more difficult.

The fittest place of Section is that which is safest, and most patent. I call
that safest, which is farthest from the Nerves and Arteries; and that most
patent, which is highest, and most manifest.

But when the fillet is tied, and the Limb a little rubbed, if the vein still
lie hid, recourse must be had to hot clothes, and somentations of warm water:
and if it be not found out by these, it will scarce appear by any other means.
Wherefore the Lancet perhaps must not be thrust in there; but some other
adjoining vein, if it be turgid, must be opened.

The narrowness of the orifice is helped by enlarging the wound; and so the
stoppage of it is helped by removing of what stops it. But greater care is
required in mending the narrowness, than if the vein had not been touched
before: because the Blood is continually diffused between the skin and the
vein, which by forcing up the skin disjoyns it from the vein. Therefore as soon
as the skin at the wound rises into a swelling, it must presently be softly
pressed with the Thumb, that the violence of the blood may be forced back, and
the rising swelling deprost: Then the Thumb must by degrees be taken off a
while, till the wound appears and gives room to the operating hand or
instrument to operate. Then the Lancet must be gently and carefully put into
the first Section, and the incision enlarged as much, as the first Section was
deficient. But great care must be taken in this operation, that only the skin
be not (as it often is) dilated without the vein; because then the labor would
be to no purpose. The instrument therefore must be put again moderately into
the cavity of the vessel, and the wound must be sufficiently enlarged according
to Art. But if the return of the skin hinder the efflux of Blood, it must be
gently reduced into the same place, where it was when the vein was cut, that
the division of it and the vein may meet together, and it must be kept there,
till as much blood is run, as you would have.

But it happens also, that the skin, or rather all that is over the vein,
covers the wound of the vein, which nevertheless is not drawn out of its place;
And this happens when the vein lies deep, and the Surgeon puts in his Lancet
too much slanting, and does not raise the point, but pulls it out the same way
he put it in. When this happens, if you would make the Blood run (supposing the
vein sufficiently divided) you must with a very small Probe or a pin's head,
either raise the skin, or depress it a little, till the Blood runs as you would
have it: for by this means, either the vein is a little separated from the
skin, or the skin from the vein, and way is made for the Blood.

When a sufficient quantity of Blood is taken, and the fillet is loosed, and
the vein on each hand softly expressed, or exgurgitated (if I may use a
Chirurgeon's word) that the lips of the wound may not gape, and may join the
better, laying the Thumb of the ministering hand on one end of the Section (it
is the best on the lower) the skin must be drawn according to the rectitude of
the wound, and a small pledgit of Lint or Cotton must be laid upon it, and
neatly tied, that it may not bleed again afresh, nor the Limb be pained by too
strait binding. But if it be difficult to stop the blood, either because of its
thinness (as when the blood is very serous) or because of the large orifice,
then with the Thumb, the fore and middle Finger of the left Hand, the skin must
be drawn to each extremity of the Section in a right line with the Section, and
so the blood is stopped: or, if you list, the edges may be closed up by applying
your Thumb and Forefinger, not to the ends of the wound, but to the sides: but
the first way, if it can be done, is the best, and fittest for the business.

When the blood is thus stopped, and the edges of the wound fitly joined
together, a bolster of Cobwebs, or (which is safer) half a Bean, or (which is
best of all) a piece of bole Armenick, made into the form of half a Bean or
half a hazle-Nut, may be laid upon the wound instead of a bolster; which being
covered with soft Lint or Cotton, must be so artificially bound on, that the
too great astriction hurt not, nor the too great laxity occasion its bleeding
again unawares. When these things are done, all bodily labor and motion of the
Limb must be forborne. This our advice may be contemned by several; but
certianly by such as little regard their Patient's Life: for sometimes it has
been known, that People have died through negligence in this very thing.
Wherefore since a Bean, or a bit of Bole is not of any such weight of bulk, as
to encumber a Surgeon much, no one should be without them, who frequently
lets blood.

And if an Artery chance to be cut, and it cannot be stopped the foresaid way,
nothing is more proper and safe for the Patient's safety, than to bring close
together, and exactly to join the edges of the Section, then to cover it with
the foresaid Bole, and carefully bind it, and then with the Hand gently and
constantly to retain and press it till it grows together, and this cure must be
used for several days.

We have already told you how to stop Blood, and how to rectify Venaefection,
when it is performed amiss, how many ways one may mistake, and how mistakes may
be avoided. Now it remains to show (a thing worth the while not to be ignorant
of) how an unexpected cutting of an Artery or Nerve, and the pricking of a
Tendon may be avoided: how many ways of opening a vein, how the Lancet should
be managed: and several other things.

We must therefore know that the veins, which Physicians order to be bled, have
no where Arteries, or Nerves, or Tendons lying above them, nor lying at an
equal height with them; but underneath them in several places, yet not in all,
which (besides the assurance an Artist has from dissecting dead bodies) is
easily seen in the Hands, Feet, Hams, Arms, and other parts of living People.
From whence it is evident, that he who pricks a Nerve or Tendon together with a
Vein, must have run his Lancet in deeper, than was necessary to let blood;
since to perform the business required, it had been sufficient to have cut the
upper part of the vein, next the Skin or one side of it, and not to have stabbed
it through on both sides.

A Nerve indeed, when in this case it is wounded, can hardly be discerned,
before it is hurt, and there is not another in the whole body, that I know of,
which is usually hurt; besides that, in the middle of the bent of the Arm, that
lies under the common vein (or rather the Tendon of the musculus biceps.) But
Tendons, because of their frequency and magnitude, are oftener touched, but with
less danger than when a Nerve is hurt. They are hurt sometimes by chance, when
the Lancet is run in too deep, and sometimes when the Surgeon mistakes, and
pricks a Tendon for a Vein. And as there are some who mistake a Tendon for a
Vein, so on the contrary there are others, who sometimes, when the Vein appears
not to sight, but only to touch, dare not open it, believing it to be a Tendon
and not a Vein.

When therefore a Limb is tied, and the Vein is not apparent in the place,
where it is usually found, and some round thing is perceived deep under the
skin, of which you doubt, whether it be a Vein or no, presently loose the
fillet: for when it is loose, the Vein will fall, and cannot be perceived
again, till the fillet is tied. Therefore if what you felt, appear the same,
both when the fillet is tied, and when it is loose, you must withhold your
Lancet, since this must needs be no Vein, but a Tendon, or the head of a
Muscle, or something beside a Vein. Wherever Arteries are, they beat; by which
both their place and depth are declared to any Artist, who has but competent
experience.

Swooning frequently happens in Blood-letting, which uses to create to the
bystanders, yea, and to unexperienced Physicians more fear, than hurt to the
Patients. Yet it happens through no fault of the Artist, but the
faint-heartedness of the Patient, which disturbs the spirits in the Body, and
checks them, which makes the Soul seem to depart. But this is immediately
prevented; namely, if the Patient lie along, and hold some liquor, as water or
wine in his Mouth till the blood runs. And if notwithstanding it seize one,
stop the blood with your Thumb laid to the orifice, and presently throw some
cold water in his Face: If it continue longer, you may also pinch the Nose; and
when the fit is over, take off your Thumb, and take away what Blood in prudence
you shall think sit, but stop it not, as some over-timerous persons are apt to
do. If it take one sitting, he must be helped the same way the other was to be
preserved from it: he must presently lie on a Bed, or be gently laid on his
back upon the ground, and have cold water thrown in his Face, as was said
before: For an Artist may easily perceive it coming, if he look in the
Patient's Face, or if he observe his Pulse; for that is pale, and this alters
its stroke. But as it may easily be perceived, and is raised on so slight
occasion; so neither is it hard to get off, nor when a Patient is seized by it,
is it difficult for him to be restored to his Senses, Tho at its coming it
cause some terrible motions of the whole Body, quivering of the Eyelids and
Lips, and other things of that nature; yet they are presently over. Which is
not so in Swoonings, which proceed from over emptiness.

Now we must speak of the form of Section, and its manner of performance. By
the form I mean the manner of its position, and its magnitude. By this we call
the Section either large, small, or midling: By the other, transverse, or
oblique, or length-way of the vessel. Long Section is better than transverse.
Oblique is the best, and easiest to be performed. As to the manner of doing of
it this way or that way, tho it may more easily be apprehended by once seeing
the work well done, and the observation of it, than by ten times reading it
with the clearest voice; yet because every Scholar cannot have an expert
Master, and reading (well understood) is of some efficacy to direct the Hand,
it will not be amiss to subjoyn somewhat of these things.

The Limb being the way beforesaid tied with a Fillet, and the Vein appearing
tense, either to the sight or touch, it must presently be opened with a
well-pointed Lancet; not perpendicularly, running the Lance: in suddenly (as
many do, who make more haste than good speed) but obliquely, and thrusting it
in gently. When the Vein is perforated, the Lancet must not be drawn back the
same way it went in: but suddenly the point must be raised, and the heel of the
Lancet depressed, which Surgeons properly enough call elevation. And that
you may do this the more commodiously, you must hold your Lancet at a good
distance from the point, about the length of a long Bean; not that all of it
should be run in, but to perform the thing the better, which when it is taken
too short, cannot well be done. Besides, it makes well for this thing, that the
operating hand, whilst it operates, be not pensil, but supported by the rest of
the Fingers which hold not the Lancet, leaning on the Patient's Limb.

A sudden stroke is to be condemned upon this account, because, besides that it
often fails the Artist, it is in danger of hurting a Nerve or an Artery,
because there can be no aim or measure in a sudden thrust.

Now if an oblique pertusion do not please you, the Vein may be opened
length-way or transverse. But as an oblique Section is preferable to all the
rest, so a transverse is worse than any. The Section may be called broad, when
it is broader than is necessary for a free efflux of Blood. Strait, when it is
straiter than it should, and in this some Tumor presently arises. And that is
midling, by which, without either Tumor, or superfluous Wound, the Blood passes
freely.

That all these things should be done as they ought, the Artist must be
Ambidextrous, because the Patient's right Arm and right Foot, and the left
Temple require the left Hand, and the opposite parts the right. Yet all Veins
may be opened, either with the right hand or with the left, if the Artist be
but handy in either of them; tho not so commodiously. Wherefore it will become
a good Surgeon, to have both hands ready and well exercised, not only in
opening of a Vein, but in any other business proper for a Surgeon, which can
scarce well be done, when one Hand is useless.

There are diverse places in Man's Body, and many Veins, wherein Physicians
advise Bleeding. In the Forehead, one at each Temple, which has often two
branches, one in the middle of the Forehead, which has sometimes two, sometimes
three branches. Behind the Ears, and at the Nose by the great corner of the
Eye. Sometimes bleeding at the tip of the Nose by putting a Lancet about the
depth of a Pumpion-seed between the cartilages, does good. Two under the
Tongue. Two Jugulars, which sometimes also have branches. Three in the bent of
the Arm, of which the Basilick or Hepatick Vein branches into several twiggs.
In the left Arm this is called the Splenitick. The Cephalic has seldom any
branches in the bending. The common arises from the Cephalic and Basilick, it
is called the Median, Purple and Black Vein. From this comes that they call
Funis brachii, from which comes the Salvatella to the Ring-Finger, and another
to the Thumb. One in the Yard, and sometimes two. One at each Ham and each
Ankle, where if they cannot be found, they must be sought at their ends, namely
toward the Toes on the upperpart of the Foot. Of all these if that cannot be
had, which is sought for, the next must be taken, and of those that are divided
into several branches, the largest is to be chosen, except in the Jugulars.

The form and use of the fillet is the same, to demonstrate and keep tight the
Vein, in all parts below the Neck. Nor is the other obscure, which is put about
the Neck, for the Veins above the Breast. For the manifestation of which, a
Towel is put about the Neck, and the ends of it brought forward, which are
given into the Patient's Hand, and twisted like a Cord, till the Veins appear:
Holding ones breath is also good for this.

Now we must treat of scarifying and Leeches. Scarification has one general
cause, namely the discharging of the part, where it is made. Therefore
according to the magnitude of the Part, the vehemence of the Burden, the depth
of that which should be got out and its faultiness, the wounds must be more
frequent, deeper, larger, or straiter, shallower and thinner: for thin, small,
and cutaneous scarifications are proper for Diseases, that lie not deep nor are
grievous; but for stronger Diseases, as for a Gangrene, other Scarifications
are more suitable.

There is no part of the body but may be scarified, if either it be Gangrened,
or troubled with an old Inflammation. Scarifications are sometimes used, where
there is neither Gangrene nor Inflammation, but where they are feared, as in
venomous bitings and stings, suppose of the Aspe, Scorpion, or other venomous
beasts; for which nothing is better, than to make speedy scarification upon the
very sting or bite, and near about it, making two, three, or at the most four
wounds. In the stinging of a Scorpion, if there be but one pricle, one
scarification made upon the prick is enough. In the biting of Asps, because
they bite with several Teeth, or in other bites or stings, in which more than
one print of a sting or tooth is left, one may make a wound upon every prick or
bite. When there is neither Gangrene nor Inflammation, nor suspicion of either,
scarifications are used for derivation, with Cupping-glasses or Horns.

All scarifications are better made with a Rasor than with any other sort of
instrument: But with Cupping-glasses, the German Lancet is the best.

The application of Leeches is not effectual enough for Gangrenes of the
greater Limbs; tho it serves the turn well enough, when a Gangrene invades the
less parts of the Body, as the Ears, Nose, Fingers, Yard, and the Piles either
inward or outward; but scarifying is quicker and safer than Leeches: However,
for soft and effeminate persons (who are affrighted at the very name of an
instrument) they are often used instead of the knife.

They will not stick unless the skin be clean, and free from filth and ill
scent. Wherefore if they be to be applied to any part, where there has been an
Ointment or Plaster, it must be clean wiped, so that it may resemble nothing
but pure flesh. Sometimes a slight scratch is made, like that where
Cupping-glasses are applied, that the sense of the Blood there may make them
stick. They will hardly fasten in winter time, unless they be kept in a warm
place.

They are kept in a glass, or earthen vessel full of water, and well covered,
that they get not out; but so as to admit the Air. They may be used at any
time, namely, either the very day they are taken out of the River or Lake
(unless they have been newly fed; for then they would not readily stick) or
when they have been kept several days. They will hold good for half a year, but
elder they are ineffectual, either through hunger or sluggishness, or for some
other reasons. Wherefore, when you can renew them, it is better to do it every
second or third Month.

When a Leech is fastened, it must be let stick, till it fall of it self, or if
it must be taken off sooner, strew a little Salt or Ashes on it, and it
immediately leaves the skin. If you would take away more Blood, than it can
contain, snip the Tail with a pair of Scissers, and it will nevertheless suck
Blood still, which runs out at the wound: Yet it will fall off of it self, or
by laying Salt or Ashes on its Back.

CHAP. XLI.
Of the couching of a Catarrhact.

A Catarrhact is called in Latin Suffusio, in Greek (...), the Arabians call it
water, it is commonly called a Catarrhact, the denomination, as I suppose being
taken from Catarrhacta a Portcullis, which being let down stops all passage.
For a Catarrhact falling down from the Head into the Eyes, stops all passage of
the light and vision, whereupon the Patient afterward grows blind.

This impediment is caused by a pituitous humor growing within the Eye like a
tunicle, or a speck, or drop, or film, or water, which appears like a white
coat to them that look on it, and this is so, when it is confirmed; for in the
beginning when it is growing, it looks not like a coat, but like smoke, or
vapor, or a mist; whence it comes to pass, that according to the various
density of the humor, the Sight is hindered, as when one sees through a thick
Air and Smoke, or through a Mist. The various position of the humor likewise
makes a great difference; for tho it be always opposite to the Pupilla or sight
of the Eye, yet it is sometimes exactly against the middle, and the space round
about is free; then in the middle nothing is seen; but round, all things
appear. In short, according as the humor possesses this or that part of the
Pupil, so the sight must needs vary.

This humor grows in the Eye chiefly by reason of the weakness of the Eye,
occasioned by a fall or blow, or some other cause, that weakens the Eye, which
since of its own nature it is cold, by weakness it is made colder; wherefore no
wonder if signs of coldness afterward appear in it, to wit, the breeding of a
cold humor, its concretion, density and obduration, I say, of a pituitous
matter, which at length grows hard in the weaker part of the Eye, such as is
the aqueous humor, which Galen makes to be the excrement of the Eye, so that
from what has been now said, It appears why Phlegm becomes concrete in the Eye,
and why in the aqueous humor, though there be various opinions in what part of
the Eye exactly it does congeal. Celsus l. 7. c. 7. will have it grow between
the two coats, the Cornea and the Wea, where he holds there is an empty space,
which I think not altogether so consentaneous to truth. Paulus l. 6. c. 21.
holds it to be in the Membrana cornea, as appears from his own words, A
Suffusion, says he, is the concretion of a superfluous humor in the Membrana
cornea near the Sight of the Eye, which I take to be false, tho Paulus says
otherwise, l. 3. c. proprio, namely, that a Catarrhact is an effusion of
humors, which congeal between the Tunica ceratoides and the crystalloides.
Galen de usu partum c. 1 and 4. writes that it grows between the Cornea and the
Crystalline: which saying of Galen's is so general, that by it we are no wiser
than we were. But it has been frequently observed both by operators themselves,
and by such as have looked on, when the needle has been put in backwards behind
the Wea tunica, that it has appeared before the Suffusion; which persuades me,
that the Humor congeals at the hole of the Tunica uvea, or about its
circumference, or a little behind it in the aqueous humor. But since the hole
of the Wea is dilated, one would think, the concrete humor should lie just
behind the hole of the Wea, because if it grew in its circumference, it could
not be dilated. However, this objection is answered by Paulus, who will have
the suffused Eye pressed with the Finger, and if after the compression and motion
the pupil be dilated, it is a sign of no confirmed Catarrhact; if it be not
dilated, it is a sign it is confirmed, which it is convenient to know in order
to a cure.

The best way of cure is by Medicines, when it can be done; and it may well
enough be done by them, when it is fresh, and not perfectly congealed. In this
way of cure innumerable Medicines are found in Authors, called Eye-salves or
Collyria; but all to no purpose, because whether they be Powders, Liquors, or
Ointments, the Eye has such an aversion to them, that it will not suffer them
to be applied, or if it be forced to receive them, yet in the twinkling of it
they are turned off; for the motion of the Eye cannot be hindered. All which
things considered, leaden rings have been invented, to keep the Eye steady; but
to no purpose: for the Eye would have its motion, and then the Medicines slipped
off. At length it was found possible to keep Medicines on the Eye, tho it
should move. This is performed by a Glass vessel, or Cupping-glass, whose mouth
is just as big as the ball of the Eye: In this Liquors and Waters, and with
them Powders may be put; and the Cupping-glass may be applied first with the
Eyes shut, and then by degrees opening the lids; by this way it is experienced,
that Medicines will tarry long on the Eyes, and do good. This is a general
course, whereby most diseases of the Eyes may be cured, whether external or
internal. First of all, Cupping-glasses were used, which would let some of the
Liquors run out; but afterward oblong Glasses were more exactly sitted to the
Eye, with Ears, through which strings are put and fastened behind the Head, And
because Water, which is applied to the Eyes, ought to be lukewarm, to the end
the cold may not offend the Eye, but may raresy it, and cause the Medicine to
penetrate, and since warm water evaporates, and the vapor not finding a
passage out, may draw the Eye, and bring humors thither; therefore the glasses
were made with a pipe at the top, to let out the expiring vapor. And thus a
most apt and convenient vessel is invented, viz. to keep a thin and watery
medicine to the Eye, whose contact the Eye will easily endure: It is also
useful to put in more Liquors at, as by a Funnel. Among those infinite
Medicines, which are proposed by Authors for the cure of Suffusions, this is
one of the best, used in manner aforesaid. It is this, Aqua eufragiae,
chelidoniae, and rosarum cum medico Aquae vitae primae distillationis. In this
there is a dissolving, attenuating, and penetrating faculty, which are the main
intentions in the proposed case. So far the Medicinal part, now we proceed to
the Manual operation.

When the Suffusion is perfect, then all are for having it cured by Surgery,
because Medicines do but irritate the Eye, but do no good, because of the
concretion and hardness of the Suffusion; whereas the Needle will do the work
by couching it. But first, I say, the Cure must be tried by Medicines, while
the Patient has some glimmering of Sight, as through Smoke, or a Vail, or Mist:
For if there be any further loss of sight, the Suffusion is consummate, wherein
because of the concretion of the Humors, and the thickness of the Membranes,
the Sight is quite hindered, which can only be helped by Surgery. And this
operation is one of the nicest in the whole Art. In Latin it is called
Catarrhactae depositio, in English Couching of a Catarrhact. For, as I said, it
so happens, that a Membrane or very thin pellicle, such as comes upon Wine or
Beer, does sometimes stick to the inner part of the Tunica Wea, where the hole
is, that we call Pupilla, or the Sight of the Eye, and it covers the
Crystalline humor, and hinders the inlet and the outlet of the rays. This,
when it has acquired a due consistence, and is neither too fluid, no: old and
tough, may be taken away and couched by the benefit of the Needle. The Body
therefore being purged, in the decrease of the Moon, on a clear and serene day,
the Patient must be set on a seat in a clear place, against the light; over
against him the Operator must sit, but a little higher: A Servant must stand
behind the Patient, and hold his Head immovable. The sound Eye must be bound
up with a Ribband. And the Surgeon, after having chewed a little Fennel in
his Mouth, must breath upon the Eye affected, and rub it a little with his
fingers, and bid the Patient turn his Eye toward his Nose. Then the Needle
being often pricked into a flannel or woollen cloth, to make it warm, must be
forced (with the right Hand, if the left Eye; and with the left, if the right
be ill) at one thrust through the Conjunctiva, about the thickness of a Crown
piece, just by the Iris, and by degrees, as it were by drilling and turning it
round, must be got through the Cornea. When it is come to the empty space, any
who has but moderate skill, cannot be mistaken, because when he presses he
feels no resistance. Then the Needle must be inclined toward the suffusion,
and with its point must by little and little be separated from the edge of the
Wea, and then by turning it gently must be wrapped about it, and must be
couched, and violently forced beneath the region of the Pupilla, to the outer
corner of the Eye, till it stick there. When this work is done, the Needle must
be drawn out gently, and the white of an Egg beaten up and mixed with Honey, to
hinder Inflammation, must be applied between two fine silks, and so the Eye
must be bound up. After this, Rest, Abstinence; and a moist and cooling Diet
will be proper.

CHAP. XLII.
Of Lithotomy, or Cutting for the Stone.

THE next thing in our proposed method, which we are to treat of, is the Stone.
And because the extracting it, or incision for it, called Lithotomy, is an
operation so difficult, that Hippocrates by his Oath, obliged himself not to
meddle with Lithotomy; but to leave it to Men skilled in that operation: I
think we cannot do better, than in our discourse concerning it, to venture on
nothing upon our own Authority or Credit, but to rely wholly on them who have
made it their main business to cut for the Stone. And tho several have writ on
this subject; yet I shall only make use of what one of my Colleagues, Dr.
Groenevelt (of whose Lithotomical administrations I have been an Eyewitness,
and of whose success therein, not only I, but multitudes are witnesses) has
made public on this subject.

As to the Etymology, according to the Philosopher, (...), We must first
enquire the names of things. Now the Stone, called Calculus, is derived from
Calx, for it is a concrete body hardened like Chalk into a Stone. The Greeks
call it (...), and the pain proceeding from it (...); only the Stone in the
Kidneys they call (...), because the Greeks call the Kidneys (...). And tho any
disease in the Kidneys might properly enough be called Nephritis; yet since the
violence of the Stone causes the most exquisite pain, it is (...) peculiarly so
called.

From what has been said it is apparent, that by the word Stone we mean a hard
Body, grown into the form of a Stone, especially in the Kidneys and Bladder.

Here to be solicitously inquisitive, whether the Stone be a Disease,, or the
cause of a Disease, or a Symptom, would be fruitless: For these are but mere
curiosities about the name, and in a different respect may be differently
resolved, I think, (tho Galen thinks otherwise) it can scarce be called a
Disease, since it is no bad disposition of any part. It must be owned to be a
cause, since it is apt to occasion obstruction, exulceration, racking pains,
and the like: And when it is voided, it may be reckoned among symptoms.

What the subject of the Stone is, I suppose all Men know well enough, namely
the Kidneys and Bladder, which, as if they were wombs designed for that very
purpose, are found pregnant with Stones, and are often delivered of them with
most violent Throws. Here a question may arise, whether the Stone be bred in
the Cavity, from whence the Ureters proceed, and in the Tubuli, or in the very
Parenchyma of the Kidneys? I know not how to deny either, because not only my
own experience, but several great Men's experiments, such as Eustachius,
Forestus, and others evidence the same. But it is to be observed, that the
Stone which is bred in the very substance of the Kidneys, if it be of any
bigness, cannot fall into the Pelvis, without dilaceration, since the
Caruncles, which Anatomists call the Mamillary Processes, and through which
alone the passage lies, are so small, that they will scarce admit a hair of
ones Head. And what has been said of the Stone in the Kidney, the same in a
manner may be understood of the Stone in the Bladder, to wit, that it has two
places; one in the cavity of the Bladder, in the midst of the Urine, another in
the ends of the Ureters, between the double coat of the Bladder, where falling
small from the Kidneys, it sticks and sometimes grows: For the Ureters are
implanted in the Bladder not far from its Neck, and before they come into the
cavity of the Bladder, do pass the double Membrane of it a fingers breadth, in
the ends whereof within the very duplicature of the Membrane a Stone sometimes
grows, not floating in the Cavity, but sometimes firmly knit to the coats of
the Bladder.

Yet here we will not deny, but that Stones may grow in other parts of the
Body, since the Authority of Hippocrates 5. Epid^m. Hist. 25. makes it good,
and so many experiments of famous Men, and my own experience evince the same.
Joh. Van Horn of blessed Memory, formerly Professor of Anatomy and Surgery
at Leyden in Holland, in my Memory and Presence also, took several Stones out
of the Brain of Adam Stuart, who while he was alive was Professor of
Philosophy. The famous Fernelius observed Stones of different hardness in the
Lungs. Twice at an Anatomical Dissection here in London, I found diverse Stones
in the Gallbladder. I saw a Stone as big as a Walnut voided by a Woman in her
Stool, who before that had been continually troubled with the Heart-burn.

Mr. Tolet a Surgeon of Paris says, he saw a Man who twenty years before
that, had voided a Stone at his Navel. Capiv^ccius. Parieus, Senn^rtes,
S^^^^ger, and other famous Men, will furnish the curious Readers with several
such Observations.

The opinions of Physicians in assigning the Cause of the Stone, we found
repugnant and contrary one to another; for some, who have raised their
contemplations to things Divine, endeavor to fetch the cause of the Stone from
the beginning of the Creation, inflicted as a punishment of our Aposta^^e by
the Almighty Power on Mankind, thinking it nothing strange, that what had its
original from Earth should turn into Earth Vndeg^nto d^r^on sum^s, --

As O^^d sang Met^m. 1. Fab. VII. Whence we are said to be of a terrene
Constitution, and carry Bones about us equal in hardness and solidity to
Stones, such as is the Os petr^s^m in the Organ of Hearing, and the Teeth, to
which the most wise Creator has assigned a middle nature between Stones and
Bones. But the most common and received opinion, both among the Ancients and
Modern, is, That the cause of the Stone in the Kidneys must be ascribed solely
and only to the burning heat of the Kidneys. For they will have it, that thick,
viscous, pituitous, and tartarous excrements, as they call them, which they
hold to be the material cause of its generation (for they assign a twofold
cause, the material and formal,) are by little and little dried, and when the
thin and moist parts are wasted, that they are converted into the form of a
Stone; just as we see Chemists and Surgeons bake their medicamentous and
corrosive Stones out of several juices of Herbs and Minerals, by exhalation in
a gentle heat. But in how great difficulties this opinion involves Men, is
apparent enough to all, but such as veneration for Antiquity has quite blinded:
for does not daily experience show, that Stones are bred in old Men, in
phlegmatic Women, and in others of a cold Constitution? See Hippocrates Sect.
3. Aph. 31. They farther urge; If a viscous and tough Matter may by the heat of
a Furnace be hardened into so hard and stony a matter, why may not a viscous
matter he hardened into a Stone, by the preternatural heat of the Body? I
Answer, First, is any mortal able to endure such a heat in his Body, as the
heat of an Oven is, which is required to (...) the viscous Matter to so great a
hardness? Secondly, is the case the same with the Stone, which is drowned in
Urine, and with Bricks which are dried in a red hot Kiln? If Stones were bred
only by a moderate heat, (as some are of opinion) they would dissolve again in
water; as we see Clay, dried in a moderate heat, dissolves, if it be wet again.
If they came from heat, Fevers Continual, Symptomatical, Habitual, and I may
say Marasmoides, would ensue. And this Quirk gives but little satisfaction, An
intense heat is perceived here, since the heat does not precede the Stone, but
does occasionally arise from it, as we find heat, when a Thorn is got into the
Finger, but the Thorn is not caused there by the heat.

To think here to recount the various opinions of dissenting Authors, would be
superfluous; while some think the Stone grows from excess of cold, (tho in a
Body, and in parts, hot enough) and congeles like Ice. Others fly to the refuge
of occult qualities. And some, who like not such words, maintain that a certain
saline l^pidisick Spirit, and the natural volatile earth of Urine, as they call
it, are coagulated, and so a kind or new Entity, by Helmont called DUELECH, is
produced in the Kidneys or Bladder; just as Wood, Plants, and Animals thrown
into some waters, are said to be turned into Stone; and, as they say, whole
Troops of Horse and Foot (if we may credit History) have in some places been
turned into Stone by a certain Spirit expiring out of the earth; but in the
mean while they consider not, that this lapidisick and penetrating Spirit
(granting such an one to be in the Urine) does not so much produce the Stone in
it, as it rather imbues the Kidneys and the rest of the Body with a lapideous
Nature, and must, as in the example alleged, change it into Stone. Le^ it
suffice us now to add something, and (with deference to better judgments)
briefly to lay before you the most simple and most intelligible Cause.

From the Analysis of Urine it is evident, that it consists of various parts,
for besides the great quantity of water found here, which makes up the basis of
the Urine, and a small portion of bile, giving it a golden, or rather a ci^on
color, and also a pituitous matter, swimming on the surface, and sticking to
the pot, which makes that part, they call the Corona; there is moreover a
saline and certain earthy portion, which from the necessary Aliment is mixed
with the Urine, and by the t^ste and contents is found to be in it, and resides
naturally in all Urine. Now this gross, earthy, and less agitated part (which
we make to be the material cause of the Stone) with which, perhaps to make it
thicker, a little Salt is mixed, whether it be over-luxuriant in the body
through some taint in the Viscera of Chylification or C^^mification, or that it
is not sufficiently mixed with the ^^st of the parts of the Body, or that
through the excessive quantity of it, in what it is taken in (where with many
Aliments must needs abound) it cannot be mastered and separated in the Stomach,
and that it passes thence with the Chyle through the Guts into the Veins, and
being carried with the Blood through the ventricles of the Heart into the
Aorta, it at length gets into the Emulgent as they call it; there this stops,
either in the very little extreme branches of the Artery, or in the flesh next
them, or if it be able to get out of the Caruncles, that are extuberant like
little paps, it stops in the T^buli and the Pelvis, and is apt to stick there,
it becomes contiguous, and at length continuous, and there it becomes first a
small Particle, which (with Fernelius) we may call the Nucleus, and do believe,
as he does, that it is the rudiment of a larger Stone, which afterward a like
matter and new food gathering there more and more, it daily grows one shell
over another, till at last, no gluten intervening, besides the immediate
contact of the least Particles, it becomes a Stone, made up as it were of many
plates, as we see in peelings of Onions, and in the Bez^ar Stone, which is made
up also of many coats, and so it increases gradually, as is evident to the
curious searchers of Nature.

That arenous and calculous constitution of the Kidneys, which Fernelius and
most of his Adherents insist upon, if you will give it a favorable
interpretation, may be allowed, understanding by it not a certain occult
quality, and lapidifick virtue (which some would make fiction of) differing
from the manifest causes; but rather an over-straitness of the Pores, and it
may be of the little vessels which are in the Kidneys, and through which the
Urine ought naturally to be transcolated, whether one has it so from the day
of his birth, thither also we refer an hereditary disposition to the Stone; or
that as he grows in years, he gets it by the res non naturales, as they are
commonly called; for we may easily imagine, that this less moveable and
agitated matter, since it is gross and of an earthy nature, whenever it finds
the ways strait, through which it ought to have an open passage, is apt to
stop, (Of this we have a familiar instance in the churning of Butter, where
only by agitation the Butter is separated from the serous part of the Milk,
because the particles of the Butter are less apt for motion than those of the
Serum. The most ingenious Des Carts Princip. Philosoph. part. 4. p. m. 14.
does very learnedly show, that such a separation is also made in Must) and at
length, in process of time, after the manner aforesaid by further and further
accretion it is formed into a perfect Stone.

As to the Stone in the Bladder, whose generation differs not from the
formation of the former, we have no difficulty to struggle with; only we may
observe, that it has not always its rise in the Bladder; but sometimes owes its
rudiment to the Kidneys. About three years since we took two Stones from a
certain boy, and when we had searched whether there were any more Stones in the
Bladder, we found none: Two days after a third came out at the wound, the Boy
was tormented with continual pain, and want of sleep, so that being troubled
with a vomiting, a continual Fever, Looseness, and such like symptoms, he at
length expired. We dissected him, and found the Pelvis of the right Kidney full
of diverse Stones, and the Ureter as wide as a small Gut. But to our business, a
Stone grown in the Tubuli or the Pelvis, and sometimes a little one in the very
Parenchyma of the Kidneys passing the canal of the Ureter, when at the end
thereof it comes to the straits between the duplicature of the Bladder, it may
sometimes stick, and there stopping that Cavity, tho it can scarce hinder the
passage of the thinner and more slippery Particles, yet it retains the grosser,
and being thus increased, does often stick very fast to the coats of the
Bladder, and breeds a secondary Stone (if I may so call it) therein: The same
we suppose may be done in the cavity of the Bladder. For if a small Stone of
the Kidneys find passage through that narrow passage, we mentioned; and if it
be detained in the Cavity, when it is not voided by the Vrethra, it acquires an
increase through the continual apposition of new matter in manner aforesaid. As
to the primary Stone of the Bladder, as they call it, I have no occasion to add
much, since we must acknowledge the efficient and material causes to be the
same with those of the Stone in the Kidneys; nor do they differ in any thing
except in the subject. Yet some cannot choose but admire, what way a Stone can
be formed in the midst of that flood of Urine, by means whereof one should
think a dissolution of the Stone must rather be promoted, (whereby perhaps
Fernelius was inclined to derive all the rudiments of the Stone from the
Kidneys) but the wonder will easily cease, if one have ever seen the tophous
concretions, and sometimes the perfect Stones, which grow upon the Sea-shoar
and Rivers Banks, not unlike the Stones that are formed in humane Bodies.

The remote and mediate causes, by means whereof a calculous matter is
communicated to the mass of Blood and the Kidneys, are intemperance, and a
disorderly way of living; for excess in eating alone, as in Children, is
sufficient to afford matter for the Stone. Because it often so happens, that
through this excess, abundance of Humors flowing through so many vessels, the
Glands being filled beyond measure, and the passages of the Chyle being either
obstructed or compressed, the public coction is much endammaged; or there
being a gathering of corrupt and putresied Juyces, the Mesentery becomes the
seat of slow Fevers and stubborn diseases. And this corrupt mass does not only
occasion an intemperature of the whole Body, but it also causes an ill
constitution of the Organs, breeds matter for the Stone, weakens the Stomach,
extinguishes its spirituous serment, and gives rise to sour belchings,
fluctuations and rumbling in the Guts. Such a food I account Bread, not well
fermented nor well baked, to be; and Cheese, which is hard of concoction,
breeds sour belchings and wind, it can scarce enter the passages of the chyle
out of the Guts through the lacteal veins, it breeds obstructions, it makes the
Blood tough, and out of its terrene salt breeds the the Stone. Hereby I do not
prescribe to strong, found, and lusty Men, whose Affairs will not admit of a
Medical way of living. To such (because according to Hippoerates, Sect. 2. Aph.
50. Things to which one has been accustomed, tho worse, use to giveless
disturbance, than things to which one has not been accustomed, or because
custom is a second Nature) I would recommend the best sort of Cheese in
moderation. Beef, Pork, Goatsflesh, pickled, and smoak-dried Meats, are hard of
concoction, and afford an earthy juice. Ducks, Geese, and other Waterfowl
breed superfluities and excrements. To these you may add all Pulse, raw Herbs,
boiled Wheat, and Rice, unless they be mixed with inciders and detergents. Hard
Eggs, stony Pears, Crabs, Cornelian Cherries, Medlars, and such like Fruits, of
a gross and austere nature, straiten the passages very much, and afford an
exceeding thick juice. Sharp Spices, as Pepper, Ginger, Cubebs and Mustard are
bad. Among Drinks apt to breed the Stone these are of the number, new Beer, and
too much hopped; for Alder boiled in large Coppers with Hops, and covered with
Sand in a Cellar for three years turns to a hard Stone, of which we make the
best Whetstones to sharpen Anatomica^ instruments upon. Also sweet Ale, foggy
and not fermented, thick and fenny water, or of melted Ice, and any that has a
remarkable taste, which argues the nature of the place whence it comes, and
brings along with it the virtues of Alume, Sulphur, Iron and the like, and
therefore ought not to be accounted merely Drink, but medicated also. Drinking
cold water is bad for such as sweat after labor. Wine that is red, troubled,
sweet, the Moravian, Hungarian, Cretian, Italian, Malmsey and Spanish, in which
a saline tartar never fails, gets into all the vessels of Man's Body, sticks to
the Kidneys and Joints, and breeds knots and stones. For in Wine there is a
thick substance, which in tract of time sticks to the sides of the vessels, and
is called Tartar, which is found in a great quantity in Rhenish Wine, and
causes much hurt. But it is not the gross Tartar alone that breeds the Stone;
for besides the Water and Tartar in Wine there is a Spirit, from whence all
Wine has its strength, as the Austrian Wines have less Tartar than Rhenish, yet
they do more mischief; and no wonder, because Spirit of Wine is nothing but
Tartar resolved into its Principles; for this Spirit consists of a little Oil,
much acid, and a volatile Spirit, which is the reason why tartarisate Spirit of
Wine is far stronger than simple Spirit. And hence also a reason may be given,
why Spirit of Wine, and several generous Liquors further the breeding of the
Stone.

And besides Meat and Drink, the rest of the res non naturales breed the Stone.
Neither satiety nor fasting, nor any thing else that exceeds measure, is good,
according to Hippoc. Sect. 11. Aph. 4. Hither may be referred excessive study
and care. And the use of Venus is exceeding hurtful. If you would know the
reason, there is in us (according to Hippocrates) something that is salt,
sharp, etc. which by the immoderate use of Venus is made sharper, so that
thereby it is increased more in quality than in quantity: for the sweetest or
fat part of the Blood is partly wasted with the Spirits, partly with the Seed,
and what remains is made sharper and sharper, and so being separated and by it
self, it is more violent, and does the more mischief. Hither you may add
immoderate motion after eating, dancing, riding, fencing, etc. whereby rumbling
in the Stomach is caused, concoction is hindered; crude Chyle is carried out of
the Stomach, and the heat is forced outward. Idleness does as much as
excessive motion, the powers of the body are thereby as it were suffocated, the
matter being retained within; whence it is, that we find slothful and fat
Persons, and such as live a sedentary life, frequently subject to the Stone.

Traveling in Winter through stony and mountainous places; for it is well
known that Travelers, especially upon an empty Stomach, and in wintertime,
fall into a Bo^limus, which makes them subject afterward to diverse
obstructions. Retention of the Excrements and Urine gather abundance of
crudities in the Body, chill the natural heat, produce noxious vapors, and so
cause the Stone. The Spaniards confirm the same, who void a great deal of
Gravel with their Urine; and therefore are not subject to the Stone, as
Riverius upon this subject writes, Violent passions of the Mind are bad,
especially Grief, Anger, and Fear; Grief does insensibly, and by little and
little, waste Men's strength, cool and dry the Body, hinder Digestion, and beed
sower and bad humors. Anger breeds Fevers, moves Choler, and disturbs the
Spirits. Fear breeds an Acid, wastes strength, and diminishes the vital
effervescence. Boethius gives good advice; Gaudia pelle,
Pelle timorem,
Spemque fugato,
Nec dolor adsit:
Nubila men's est,
Vinclaque fraenis,
Haec ubi regnant.
And an hereditary disposition derived from the Seed and Blood (as it were by
right of Succession) contributes to the breeding of the Stone. This consists
chiefly in a weakness of the expulsive faculty, and in an innate fault of the
Blood. Astrologers add to these causes the conjunction of Saturn with Mercury
in the eighth House, which, they say, disposes the Child so born to the Stone.
But whether the influx of the Stars be able to effect so much in our Bodies, I
submit to better judgments.

If we consider the differences of Stones, they are various and diversely
distinguished. In regard of quantity, a Stone is said to be elther large or
small. In respect of color, red, yellow, ash-colored or black. This diversity
of colors depends on the external figure of the concurring Particles, or on
some extraneous Matter putrefied, as Pus, Blood, or Slime. In respect of the
Figure it is round, oblong, (such an one as I lately took from a Noble
Countess's Son in this Land, in the presence of several Doctors of Physic)
Angular, Triangular, Quadrangular, or slat. But the various figure of the
Superficies is owing either to chance, or motion, or to the site of the
adjoining parts: hence the Bladder breeds round ones, the Ureters oblong ones,
and some seem to resemble exactly the cavity of the Pelvis of the Ridneys. Yet
the principal differences are taken, either from the Subject, hence it is
called either the Stone in the Kidneys or Bladder; or from the Matter, which is
either thinner or thicker, whereof there be four degrees, Sand, Gravel, Tophus,
and the Stone. 1. Sand differs from the Stone only in Magnitude, and it
receives its minute shapes in the pores of the Kidneys, which (as Fernelius
says) gathering together and cementing makes up the Stone. 2. Gravel, which has
its rise from coagulated Sand with a Mucus. 3. A Tophus, tho it has the form of
a Stone, and is larger than Gravel; yet it is softer and more friable or
b^ttle. 4. The Stone properly so called is solid, hard, and firm as a Rock, And
the more plenty there is of a saline and earthy Matter, and the more exactly
this is petrified, the harder the Stone is; and the softer, when otherwise.

Tho properly there be no Pathognomonick signs of the Stone in the Kidneys;
they being aequivocal, and common to other diseases; yet these following may be
observed in Practice, as discovering it most. 1. A fixed and standing pain in
the region of the Loins; and this is dull, and causes a sense of weight, when
the Stone is lodged in the very Parenchima of the Kidneys, it being endued with
a dull sense; but when it is got into the head of the Ureter, the pain is
sharp, cutting, and exceeding cruel. Not many years agon a Patient, who was ill
of a stoppage of Urine, for he voided none but what he vomited, and that had an
Urinous smell, was extremely weakened by it. He consu^ted several great
Physicians, and took several Medicines, but to no purpose, for he died of it;
and when his Body was opened, the Pelvis of his right Kidney was filled with a
Stone, whose lower end was protuberant like a nipple, and quite stopped up the
Vreter; a sharp Stone was so exactly fixed in the head of the left Vreter, that
neither Kidney could do its office, and so he died. 2. There is a difficulty in
stooping, the Nerves or Muscles of the Spine being thereby compressed and
distended. 3. A very troublesome pain in the Back. 4. A numness of the Thighs
and Leg on the same side, because of the compression (by the weight of a great
Stone) of the Muscle called Psoa, or of the Nerve that is branched out into all
the Muscles of the Thigh. 5. A retraction of the Testicle on the same side with
the Kidney affected, because of the drawing up of the vessels, which proceed
from the Kidneys to the Testicles. 6. Reaching and Vomiting, because of the
consent of the Kidneys with the Stomach, not so much by means of the
Peritonaeum, (as some would have it) of whole Membrane each participates, as
because of that common Nerve, from the Stomachich branch of the sixth pair,
implanted into the proper and inner coat of the Kidneys. 7. Urine oftentimes
bloody, the little Veins; dispersed through the substance of the Kidneys, being
torn and opened by the attrition of the sharp Stone: And sometimes about the
beginning, the Urine, comes thin, watery, and in a small quantity, because of
the obstruction of the Kidney by the Stone: but when it passes through the
Vreters into the Bladder, then a thick, troubled and watery Urine is voided. 8.
I would have this accounted a main sign of the Stone, when Stones or Gravel are
voided by Urine, (which do not stick to the sides of the pot, but presently
sink to the bottom) whereupon the Patient finds sensible ease. And because the
Stone and Colic are so much alike, that not only an Emperick, but even a
rational Physician may be mistaken; I would have these marks of distinction
well observed. If the pain be above the Kidneys, it belongs not to the Kidneys,
but to the Bowels. The pain of the Stone tends outward, nor does it ever
depart from that one place, unless the Stone be displaced and slip into the
Vreter. The Colic wanders, changes place, runs through all the Guts, and comes
down to the Twist. Those that have the Stone are better after Eating, and those
that have the Colic are worse.

Hippocrates lib. 4. de Morb. does thus recount the signs of the Stone in the
Bladder. When he would plss, he is afflicted with pain, and his Urine dribbles
from him as in the Strangury, it is bloody, when the Bladder is exulcerated by
the Stone, or inflamed. But this sign is not very manifest; however, the end of
the Prepuce shows it. Sometimes he pisses Gravel. Boys troubled with the Stone
rub and pull their Privities. But since these signs are a little obscure, I
will produce other circumstances, that in so difficult a case the truth may
better appear. 1. In the beginning when the Stone is but little, the Party
troubled with the Stone, after making water, feels a dull pain in his Glans,
which pain passes from the Glans along the Vreter, to the Bladder, just as if
he had the Strangury. For tho the Stone be but little, yet by its asperity it
pricks the neck of the Bladder, and so causes a pain in the Glans, which pain
returns from the Glans to the Bladder. He that is troubled with the Stone does
always in a manner, but especially when he is about to make water, rub the end
of his yard with his fingers, squeeze and draw it; hence it is, that Children
troubled with the Stone have always their hands on their Privities, and by
plucking their yard, make it as long again as usual. 3. If the Stone be heavy,
the Party finds a heavy pain, just as if there were a weight hanging at the
bottom of his Belly between the Intestinum rectum, and the Os pubis, which
pressed them down; besides, he then finds a pain about his Navil, because the
bottom of the Bladder is joined to the Navil by the Vrachus. 4. If the Stone
does not quite obstruct the passage of the Urine, Nature is often irritated to
discharge the Urine, but in vain; sometimes a little comes away; sometimes,
whether he will or no, away it comes, but with pain all the time. 5. Turning
the Heels upwards and the Feet to the ground, it often happens, that the Stone
slips back to the bottom of the Bladder, and the Urine finds a free passage. 6.
Out of the Fit, we often see him that is afflicted with the Stone sitting
cross-legged; for by that means the Stone is in some measure raised from the
neck of the Bladder, so that the Urine has a free passage. 7. The Urine being
kept, and grown sharp and hot, by the excess of pain which it causes, draws
spirits to the yard, and so the virite member both in Children and adult
Persons is erect, not out of any Venereal appetite or Lust, as otherwise one
would be apt to think. 8. From the consent of the Anus and Bladder, because of
the communion and connection of Nerves, which they receive from the same branch,
the calculous Person has both a motion to go to stool, and to make water at the
same time. But these irritations are in vain; and if any thing be voided, it is
but little, and with great pain. In Infants there is often a violent falling
down of the Arse-Gut. 9. Most calculous Persons are continually athirst, and
often desire much drink: for tho they void but a little Urine at once, yet
because they make water often, they discharge a great deal, and so the Scrum of
the Blood is wasted, which Nature endeavors to supply, so as she may keep the
inwards in that due temperament and symmetry. By reason also of their continual
pains, watching and inquictudes arise, the salt part in the humors is made
sharper, and the mass of Blood grows hotter every day than other, which
requires much and frequent cooling: Sometimes the Jaundice, Dropsy, or some
such disease does ensue upon it. 10. Calculous persons are better after
Opiates, and worse after powerful Diuretics. 11. Hippocrates Aph. 79. Sect. 4.
judges them to have the Stone (...), etc. and Johannes Zechius in consult. med.
lib. cons. 58. by (...) understands thick Gravel, or a dirty Excrement (like
snot) sticking to the bottom of the pot, which is a Pathognomonick sign of a
large Stone in the Bladder, and that it has been growing there a long time. 12.
It is good to be sure, when a Man puts his Finger into the Anus of Children, or
a Catheter along the Vrethra into the Bladder of grown persons, and to search
well, if there be a Stone, whether it be large or small, and whether there be
not more than one. For it behooves a Man to know these things exactly. Here also
the antecedent causes fall under consideration, namely, of what complexion the
Patient is, what his Diet has been, and what Symptoms he has had; for without
doubt he must have had cruel pain, if the Stone be great, hard, and uneven.
Moreover, tho it be necessary to know, whether Stones be enclosed in a bag, and
by it stick to the Membrane of the Bladder, yet it is very difficult, unless by
searching with a Catheter or the Finger. And thus having briefly examined the
Diagnosticks, we now proceed to the Prognostics.

Children, as Hippocrates says 6. Epidem. are most subject to the Stone in the
Bladder, and old Men to the Stone in the Kidneys. And Aph. 6. Sect. 61 Diseases
of the Kidneys and Bladder are difficultly cured in old Men. A disposition to
the Stone from Parents to Children, through some primigenial taint in the Seed
does clude all Medicine, be it never so generous, whether intended for the
prevention or cure; which made Aretaeus think it a thing much more difficult by
the help of Art, to hinder the Kidneys and Bladder from breeding the Stone,
when they have a disposition to it, than to prevent a fruitful womb from
conception. The Stone in the Bladder in respect of Medicines is more difficult
to cure than that in the Kidneys; but in regard of Surgery, it is much
easier; however sometimes, the pain tending outward to the Muscles of the
Spine, and an abscess arising, it has been known that Stones have been
discharged that way, and the Ulcer has been healed. The Stone is a violent and
dangerous evil, causing Inslammations, Exulcerations, cruel Pains, Watchings,
Fevers, stoppage of Urine, and other most violent Symptoms. If the Stone be
not great but small, not in a Body cachectick, nor abounding with humors apt to
breed the Stone, and if the disposition to it be not hereditary, we may draw a
good Prognostic thence; if on the contrary, a bad one. If the Stone be
considerably large and hard, the Patient must of necessity, if he will be eased
of it, submit himself to Chirurgical operation, tho it be hazardous. But if the
Stone be of an unusual bigness and weight, such an one as at the opening of one
who died of it near St. Thomas's Hospital, I took out, which weighed nineteen
ounces and three drachms, such are to be esteemed desperate, and must not be
meddled with, while they live. They that have the Stone enclosed in a coat, or
without one, and sticking to the Membrane of the Bladder, are in the same
predicament, as also are old Men, and young Children also, if they be infirm.
On the contrary, if the Patient have strength, if he have good Viscera, if the
Stone be not too big, though he have several, yet through GOD's assistance, the
operation may be courageously undertaken, and good success may be expected.
Stones in Women are voided and extracted with better success and security, than
in Men, because they have a short and wide passage for their Urine.

Thus much in reference to the Theory being premised, we proceed now to such
things as may be produced from Practice, the fountain of Cure, in order to
prevent the invasion of the enemy, and to beat him out again, when entered.

To perform this methodically, we have a threefold care upon us. First, that
the causes which are any way able to breed the Stone may be removed, and that
so its generation and increase may be hindered. Secondly, that when the Stone is
bred, it may be got out. Thirdly, that the Symptoms, the cruel pain may be
assuaged, and the difficulty of Urine which usually attends it, may be kept
off. These things may be accomplished by means taken from Diet, Pharmacy and
Surgery.

In the prevention we must first of all take care, that the bad Diet
beforementioned among the causes of the Stone be avoided; and on the contrary,
that a convenient one be made use of. Meats therefore must be used which are
easy of digestion, afford little excrement, and have an attenuating and
inciding virtue. To this end Mutton or Capon-broth, boiled with Chervil,
Sorrel, Barley, and the like, especially in Spring time, are very proper. And
if Sobriety and Moderation be requisite in any disease, it is in this,

Illud quod medium est, atque inter utrumque, probatur. Moreover, the passions
of the Mind must be so moderated, that their excess do no prejudice to the Body.

Now we proceed to the proximate matter, that is, the load of crude and gross
humors imprudently gathered by a disorderly Diet, or from some other cause,
which that it may not get to the Kidneys, must be revelled and evacuated; to
which end it will be proper to give Purges, such as Manna, Cassia, Diaprunum,
etc. Repeated vomiting also is good, (especially for such as are made for
vomiting, and who perceive great crudities in the first concoction) which if it
come of it self, must by no means be checked; if not, Medicines must be given to
provoke it; for by means of it a noxious humor gathered in the Body is often
successfully carried off, and Revulsion is forthwith made, so that it falls not
on the Kidneys. But if any such like Matter be gotten into the Kidneys, it must
presently be discharged by means of Diuretics. For this Intention, Turpentine,
and Medicines prepared out of it, are proper. Amatus Lusitanus reports, how a
certain Monk by the use of it was cured of the Stone and Gout. The famous
Bevarovicins in his Treatise of the Stone mentions an excellent preparation out
of I evinus Lemnius; strong French White Wind, having red hot Flints often
quenched in it, expels the tartarctis Matter out of the Kidneys, before it
grows to a Stone. Also Mineral waters, Timbridge in England, and the Spa^
beyond Seas are excellent, because they have an inciding, attenuating, opening,
dissolving and abstersive virtue, Bathing also the Body in River water up till
above the Loins, promotes evacuation of Gravel, before it grows into a Stone,
especially if some proper Purge be given the day before, and the same day, if
some specisique Diuretic be taken.

The next scope in curing is, to discharge the Stone, when bred. Yet here we
must consider, that if there be a large Stone in the Kidneys, it ought not to
be removed, but if there be a small one, especially in the Cavity, it must be
got out quickly: For when a large Stone is got into the Vreters, by the
violence of pain that attends it, it often causes Convulsions, and Swoonings,
so that if the pain be not quickly assuaged, as well by internal Remedies, as
external Fomentations, the Patient sometimes perishes. But before a little
Stone be removed, Clysters must be given, which may mollify and smooth the
ways, by which it is to pass, To which end Henry IV. King of France did often
take a Bolus of fresh Butter and Sugar Candy, drinking after it a glass of
small Wine. Some commend Oil of Sweet Almonds, or Oil-Olive, Cassia fistula,
and fat Broths, drunk in large quantities. Physicians do with great success
prescribe mollifying Clysters, made of emollient Herbs and Roots, adding
sometimes Diuretics, or only Oil of Chamaemel, Lilies, Sweet Almonds, etc.
Avicen believes, that the repeated injection of Clysters eases Nephritick
pains. Externally they apply Cataplasms made of Emollients and Fomentations of
the same, to which they add coolers, lest pains might be exasperated. They also
use Oil of Sweet Almonds, and of Scorpions, with ointment of Marshmallows, for
a liniment. It is evident also, that bathing in fresh water with emollient
Herbs, adding things also that are good to break the Stone, is a most effectual
remedy to make lax the passages. These things being done, Medicines are further
prescribed to help the motion of the Stone, such as are, all that provoke
Urine, and are properly called Diuretics, of which you may find a copious
Catalogue in Authors, and therefore I shall forbear naming them. But we use to
add to these, Anodynes, and lest any inconcocted Matter should be carried to
the Kidneys, we a little before give some gentle Purge. And if this method does
not dislodge the Stone, when bred, as in other cases, so in this, the utmost
remedies must be tried, namely a Vomit must be prescribed: For by this means
all the lower parts are exceedingly pressed, and things are expelled, which could
not by any former means be removed. But we must remember to add specisique
Diuretics to our Vomits.

When the Stone is big, whereas we have already said, that we may not remove
it, now it remains, that we say what we may do. Whether in nature any remedies
are to be found, which perfectly dissolve the Stone, many do dispute, and are
at daggers drawing about it. If the Stone be brittle, of a loose and soft
substance, and coagulated of Mucus and Sand, it is evident by manifold
experience, that such an one may be broke and wasted. Matthiolus and Dodonaeus
do for this purpose greatly commend Goldenrod, and the Chemists their Salts of
Rest-harrow, Millet, Bean-shells, Salt of Egg-shells, Salt of Urine, of the
Stone taken out of a Man, of Juniper, Ash, volatile Salt of Amber, etc. The
Medicine made of Millepedes seems to excel all the rest, for which consult
Hartman. I am certainly convinced by experience, that Spirit of Nitre does
easily dissolve the Stone, when it is taken out of Human Bodies, to the
admitation of the beholders. If there has been a calculous disposition lodged
in the very Seed and menstruous Blood, no cure by Medicine must be used, but
only by Diet. For the whole foundation of Health is laid as it were in the
Conception, and the good or bad Principles of the future state of Health are
thence derived to the offspring.

The next Indication is answered, if the violent pain (the true rack and
torment of Man,) be mitigated, which is commonly done with one trouble by the
Medicines before prescribed to lubricate the ways; and if these prote
ineffectual, in excessive violent pain we may have recourse to Narcoticks, such
as Philonium Romanum, re^^^es Nicolai, Landanum optatum, etc. I happened to be
called to a Woman above 40 years old, who at first had a great pain in the
region of her Loins toward the Puves and Groin; shortly after bloody and
purulent Urine followed, also heat and dribling away of her Urine, she had a
violent pain when she made water, she had a motion to Stool and Urine both at
once, yea sometimes her exerement came involuntarily from her, she was restless
and awake night and day, she answered impertinently to what she was asked, she
had a fierce wild staring look, which moved the bystanders to compassion the
disease growing worse and worse (several Medicines, yea and Narcoticks, as in
an extreme case, being often, but cautiously, given) she at last died. When we
had opened her, we found her Bladder full of stinking slimy Pus, and very red,
and eroded with an Ulcer besides. We found the U^eters more fleshy than usual,
full of Pus and Stones, the right had four white, large, soft Stones, joined
with a saltish, viscid, and filthy Matter; and the left had little black
Stones, but harder in it. But in her left hidney we found bloody Pus; and
several small Stones, in figure like those in the Vreter of the same side. But
now to our business; Difficulty in making water oftentimes occasions great
trouble in this case, to avoid which both Diuretics inwardly (but with great
caution) and liniments outwardly of Ointment of Marshmallows, Oil of Sweet
Alinonds and the like; as also Fomentations and Cataplasms, accommodated to
this end, may be used. But if it so happen that the Stone get into the neck of
the Bladder, and so hinder the passing of the Urine, it must by lying on ones
Back, with the Legs high, and by shaking the Body, be removed thence; and at
length, if this will do not good, it must be forced back into the Bladder with
a Catheter.

The Dimetick and Pharmaceutick remedies being thus briefly dispatched, it
remains now that we discourse of the last remedy, namely the Chirurgick. We
judge that letting of Blood, if there be a Plethera, or an excessive
Fermentation of the Blood, may be of use. I have often by experience found that
Cupping-glasses set to the Loins, have in a Nephritick Fit brought down one or
more Stones into the Bladder. If the Stone in the Bladder be too big to be
expelled, nor for want of a requisite Medicine can be dissolved; if the
violence of the disease will yield to no Medicines, then a desperate disease
must have a desperate cure. Here I cannot choose but laugh at Mountebanks and
Empericks, who brag, how they can break the Stone in the Bladder by giving
Medicines inwardly; of whose fruitless attempts I could give you plentiful
instances. But at length we are come to the last remedies, and if we will use
them, we must proceed to Cotting (of which Paraeus, Schultetus, Hildanus,
Cornelius Celsus and others have written) But for some days before, the Body
must be prepared by Diet, he must eat but little, and that wholesome food and
not glutinous; among other things let him use exercise, to the end the Stone
may come further down to the neck of the Bladder, as Celsus advises. When we
are certain of the thing, the body must for a day or two before be kept with a
low Diet, and then the Cure must be administered in a warm place, which may be
performed diverse ways. The first is called the Apparatus minor. All things
therefore being in readiness, the fore and middle Finger of the left hand must
be put into the Anus, and with the right the lower Belly must be pressed
toward the Bladder, (avoiding violent compression in the case, which might
occasion cruel pain, Inflammation, yea, and a Gangrene,) whence it comes to
pass, that the Bladder being squeezed into a narrow room, the Stone may the
better be taken hold of, which being taken hold of, incision must be made in
the Perinaeum, upon the Stone, and if the Stone be small, it may be thrust out
with the Fingers; but if large, it must be extracted with an hook. Here we must
make no more haste than good speed, for when the Bladder is hurt, it causes
distention of the Nerves, with danger of death. The second way is Hildanus's,
which is performed in this manner; all things being in readiness, the Operator
puts in his Catheter (I mean not such an one as we use for suppression of
Urine; but one that has a furrow or hollowness in it, such an one as is
described in Paraeus l. 17. c. 44.) upon the Stone, then with a Razor half
wrapped up he makes incision to the Catheter; afterward upon the Catheter he
puts into the wound a Director; that the Yard may be free, he takes out the
Catheter; with the Director, if there be occasion, he di^ates the wound, and
then by the side of the Director he puts in his scoops, and drawing out his
Director, and putting his Finger into the Anus, he takes hold of and extracts
the Stone with a hook, either whole, or piecemeal, if it be either large or
brittle. The third way is, when the wound is made in manner aforesaid, and he
puts a Forceps upon the Director; he takes out the Director, takes hold of the
Stone, and so extracts it, this way is of use, when it cannot be gotten out
with an hook. The fourth way of operation is called the Franconine Lithotomy,
from its. Author Peter Franc, which is performed in this manner; Incision being
made in manner aforesaid, the Lithotomist meddles not at all with the
extraction of the Stone unless it appear in the wound, but binds up the wound
after the usual manner. After a few days (except the Stone come away out at the
wound, of its own accord, which Peter Franc the Author of this invention says,
in his practice has often befell him,) he endeavors to extract the Stone, which
operation ought to have place, when the Patient is very weak, as Hildanus
judges. The fifth way is, when the Stone is so big that it cannot pass by a
wound made in the neck of the Bladder, unless either the membranous substance
of the Bladder, or its Sphincter be hurt. This, the Author Peter Frane does not
propose for any Man to imitate; He only did it in a desperate case at the
request of the Child's Parents, upon which he performed the Operation. The
Patient was a Child of two years of age, who had a Stone in his little Body, as
big as a Hen's egg, (the Author would have it observed, that this operation has
no place in adult persons,) he made Section in the Groin, and the upper part of
the Os pubis, as is usually made in a Caesarean Birth, and so cut the bottom of
the Bladder, and extracted the Stone. The Child, tho he was much weakened,
recovered, and the wound was cured. Hildanus also, in his Observations,
mentions such another example. The sixth and last way is performed by an
instrument, which Hildanus invented; Incision being made in manner aforesaid,
he puts his instrument through the wound upon the Stone; this, when it is put
in, may be dilated, (like the instrument which we call Speculum matricis) after
dilatation, the Operator endeavors to take hold of the Stone, and to extract
it, when taken hold of. The famous Lithotomist of Paris, called Collet, cut
several very successfully this way; from a curious inspection of whom, and of
others likewise, the Author of this Treatise has made such proficiency, that
among the rest he has adventured on this way of operation, and daily continues
to practice it. In the Female Sex, whether the Party be a Maid or Married, one
may with far less trouble, and without Section or much effusion of Blood
undertake and perform this operation. Because the orifice of the Bladder occurs
presently to sight in the Pudendum; it is sufficient to put in a Catheter, and
below its furrow to put in a Dilator, and then to extract the Stone with a
Forceps. Sometimes nevertheless, because of the over-bigness of the Stone, a
small incision must be made in the orifice of the Bladder, from which and a too
violent dilatation, there is danger lest the Sphincter should be hurt, and an
involuntary emission of Urine should follow.

Now it remains, the Stone being extracted, that we discourse, in what manner
the Patient must be treated. He must not presently be put to bed. If his Body
be strong, the Blood may be suffered to run a while, that the Inflammation may
be less. Then he must sit in a Semicupe, so that he be up in it from his Ruees
to his Navel, (all else must be covered with Cloths,) to the end his bleeding
may be stopped. In a weak Body the Haemorrhage must immediately be stopped,
sometimes a Cupping-Glass must be set to the Groin and Hips, and to the Pubes,
if the bleeding cannot be stopped; which when it is stopped, the Patient must be
laid on his back in bed. In the mean time the lower Belly from the Navel to the
Loins, and the Privities also, must be well anointed with proper Oils, made a
little warm. A Linen Rag two or three times double, wet in some astringent
Medicine, may be applied to the Wound. Sometimes a Pipe is put into the Wound,
whereby Grave^ and extravasated Blood may more commodiously be discharged
afterward: By it also a Syringe may be put in, wherewith, upon ^^gent
occasion, the Bladder may be syringed, and so whatever preternatural is
contained in the Bladder may be presently discharged. If a Lipothymy supervene,
it may be removed by Cordials, and the Patient may be laid quietly to rest,
which unless it come of itself, must be promoted by moderate Anodynes. And
thus, if strength will permit, ( Celsus expressly says it,) within four and
twenty hours, he must be set again in the bath, and as he is able he must tarry
in it; and if he sweat, he must be wiped with a Sponge. In the mean while, if
sleep be kindly, breathing free, if the Tongue be moist and thirst little, if
he goes well to stool, and but moderate pain with a small Fever, you may be
certain the cure will succeed well. Finally, as much as is possible, we must
endeavor, both in regard of Meat and Medicine, that Nature, which supplies the
most wholesome Balsam, may be strengthened, and so the Wound may be healed.

And now, all things belonging to the Stone in the Kidneys and the Bladder
being briefly described, one thing remains, namely, the way of taking a Stone
out of the Vrethra, which we shall briefly describe. It happens sometimes, that
it is voided out of the Bladder; but when it is gotten into the Vrethra, it
sticks there, and stops the passage of the Urine. In this case, all means must
be tried and applied, which are proper to bring away a Stone, without Incision.
Among these, first of all occur Diuretics, Emollients, Fomentations, and Baths
of a relaxing quality, by means whereof Stones of no small bigness have been
brought from the Vrethra. The second way is, Extension of the Vrethra by Wind,
tying that part of the Yard, which is next the Pubes, in the same manner as it
was frequently used by the Egyptians; for when the Vrethra is dilated, the
passage is more free for the Stone. The third way is by sucking, when by
drawing the breath with great violence, the Stone is drawn with it. The fourth
way is to break the Stone by the help of a Forceps and Probe, which is often
used with success, and therefore much to be commended. But if all these ways be
fruitless, we must proceed to Incision. Among Authors there is a great Contest
about the place, wherein Incision should be made. Some choose the Side, for
fear, if the lower part should be cut, there should be a Fistula. Others are
for the lower part, lest the Nervous Bodies should be hurt. We have used both
these ways, and found the cure easy, nor could we perceive any detriment
accrue to the Patient, when we made Incision in the Nervous lateral part. After
incision is made, the Stone may be extracted with a fine little Hook. When
these things are done, the Wounds after Extraction of the Stone whether of the
Bladder or of the Vrethra,) must be cured. But since we have already in the
beginning of this Work treated sufficiently of Wounds of all sorts, we shall
here sc^bear repetition.

Partis tertiae Finis.
THE PRACTICE OF SURGERY. Part IV.
BOOK VIII.
Of supplying Defects in the Body.

CHAP. I.
Of supplying the Nose, Ears or Lips, when deficient.

HAving in our proposed Method finished the three first Parts of Surgery, we
now proceed to the fourth and last, which is the (...), Additrix, or supplying
Part. And we will begin with the addition of the Nose, Ears or Lips, when
wanting. Upon this subject several both of the Ancients have written, as Galen,
Paulus Aegineta, and Celsius; and of the Modern, as Alexander Benedictus,
Vesalius, Ambrosius Paraeus, Stepha^^is Gourmelius, and Johannes Schenkius. But
Gasper Taliacotius, Professor of Anatomy in Bononia, was the first that ever I
perused, who described this Operation in a plain and practicable way. The
forementioned Authors indeed in general terms describe a method; but so
ambiguously, that he, who upon their credit should undertake the reparation of
any of these lost parts, would lose his own; and perhaps the Patient his life.
Therefore without troubling you with what others say on this subject, I shall
in short give you what Taliacotius says more at large thereon.

As that Man's Endeavors are to be admired, unto whom nothing seems hard or
difficult, which upon Grounds of Reason, and by Industry is attainable: So he
is to be pitied, who in attempting nothing betrays his Sloth, and not only is
of the Opinion, that all things, especially in Physic, are so fully found out
already by the Ancients, that there can be no room for further Invention; but
(which is more hateful,) does by Calumny and Detraction discourage, as much as
in him lies, all laudable attempts. But not regarding ill-natured Persons, some
Men of Ingenuity and Resolution, have ventured upon this difficult Operation;
taking the hint from Horticulture, that, as Grafts or Buds are ingrafted or
inoculated into Stocks, so in Animals one part might be ingrafted upon another,
to supply a defect, where any should happen. And tho this Animal-ingrafting
agree in many things with the Vegetable; yet they differ in several, and the
Animal must be aided by the Artift's Industry. As in Vegetable-Grafting or
Inoculation the Stock must be cloven, or the Bark perforated, so must the part
in an Animal be wounded, upon which the traductive part is to be grafted. And
the part, out of which restitution of what is deficient must be made, may be
likened to a Tree or Scion from whence the Graft is taken. But in a traductive
part of an Animal there must be moreover Conformation according to the part
which it supplies. Now that we may the better comprehend our Business, we will
consider what matter is proper to supply parts deficient; from what place this
matter should be taken; the quantity of it; and the manner of agglutinating one
part to another.

The matter, out of which the foresaid defects must be supplied, is the Skin,
(which palpably detects the mistake of such as thought, a Nose must be supplied
out of solid Flesh.) If you ask, Why the Skin? I answer, All Physicians hold,
when we would supply a lost part, that we must put in the room of it, something
like in substance to it; or, if we cannot do that, something as near it as may
be; as when we breed a Callus for a broken Bone, which supplies the room of a
true Bone. Wherefore since the Lips, Nose and Ears do much resemble the
substance of the Skin; and since, when part of them is cut off, it is
impossible they should of themselves shoot or bud out again, so as to remove
the deformity; therefore the first Authors of this Art, took the Skin of
another part, and accommodated it to their use. This they thought, in imitation
of grafting in Trees, was possible to be done: And they thought no part could
with less inconvenience to Life be separated from one place, and translated to
another, than the Skin. But since there be four sorts of Skin, it will be
requisite to know, which of those sorts are for the purpose in hand. One sort
of Skin is bare of Hair, of exquisite sense, difficultly separated from the
Bodies underneath it, and will not fold as the rest will, such is the Skin of
the Palms of the Hand, and of the Soles of the Feet. Another sort has a Muscle,
and that but a thin one, immediately underneath it, such is the Skin of the
Forehead. A third, by reason of the various and manifold Implication of carnous
Fibers, you may either call it a Cutaneous Muscle, or a Musculous Skin, no
matter which, such are the Lips and Cheeks. The last sort is the common
covering of the whole Body, somewhere hairy, other-where without Hair, every
where void of motion, and may without difficulty be separated from the subject
parts. Of these four sorts the last is only proper for our use. For the first
cannot well be removed, without hazard of Life; nor (were it possible) could it
be shaped into the fashion of the lost Member. In like manner the two
middlemost sorts are rejected, as alien, for they are to be met with but in few
parts, nor can they commodiously be joined to the defective part. But the last
sort may, and therefore is the fittest for our purpose.

The place from whence the Skin is taken, must be covered with a Skin like the
lost part, and big enough to supply the defect. And since it must have time to
unite with the defective part, the Skin must be taken from such a part as may
be brought to the other, and, with as little inconvenience to the Patient as
may be, may continue there. The only part to supply the Nose and Lips, is the
Arm above the Elbow; and to supply the Ears, the Skin behind the Ears. For
neither disfigures a Man, since the Arm is covered with Clothes, and the new
Ear does indifferently well cover the place behind it, whence it was taken.

What quantity of ingrafted Skin one should take, is hard to define. For it is
observed, that the Skin after the second cutting from the Arm, sometimes shrinks
an eighth, a sixth, or a fourth part both in length and breadth, by reason the
Nutriment is not so plentifully brought to it, as when it was close united to
the Arm, or because the Nutriment does not assimilate aright. But tho it be
thus difficult to be exact in our quantity; yet we should take the best measure
we can, proportionable to the part we are to supply, and rather incline to
excess than defect.

The way to unite the parts, is by stitching, and by that sort which is called
by some interscissa, and by us sutura non continuata, which we treated of in
our discourse upon Wounds.

There remains one difficulty to be resolved, which is, Whether the ingrafted
Skin should be taken from ones own Body, or from another Person's. There are
good Reasons, why it may be taken from another Person's. Plants tho of
different Natures may be ingrafted one into another; what then should hinder a
piece of one Man's Body from being ingrafted into another's, seeing both are of
the same kind, and nothing near so different as one kind of Tree is from
another? But this supplying of a part from another's Body, having never been
practiced, nor likely to be practicable, we will conclude, that it is best to
supply the defect from ones own Body. For a long time is required to unite the
supplemental par^^o the defective, and all this while the two Bodies must be
fast bound one to the other. But I know not any contrivance possible, to keep
two Person's Bodies so bound together, but that they would rend one from the
other, long before Coalition were made, and so our Intentions would be quite
frustrated.

These things being premised to general, we will now proceed more practically
to the Subject here under Consideration.

CHAP. II.
Intentions of Cure in supplying Defects, and how the Body ought in general to
be prepared.

THe main Intentions of Cure are, First, to prepare the Cutaneous Graft.
Secondly, to insert it into the defective part. Thirdly, when it is ingrafted,
to keep both parts bound together, till the time of Coalition. Fourthly, to cut
the ingrafted part from its ancient seat. Fifthly, to shape the new parts.
Lastly, to defend the parts from Injuries, and when the work is brought to
perfection, to make it durable.

Before we meddle with the traductive Skin, we ought to consider the complexion
of the Patient, and his habit of Body; and then we must cleanse him well. If
the Body be healthful, and replenished with good Juices, we must abate their
Turgescence by bleeding, lest the part might be inflamed. A low Diet will be
proper; but not purging.

If the Body be Choleric, the best way is to clear the first ways with a
gentle Medicine, as Pulpa cass. jss. vel Flectuarium Lenitivum, or Sir. Ros.
Solut. or Violar. Solut. dilured with Decoctum Cordiale, or some cooling
Waters. Tamarin^s and Prunes are good in Potions, and both more pleasant and
safe for such Persons. This done, the Bile must be corrected with Syrup. Endiv.
Oxalid. Cichor. Oxysacch. Simpl. etc. in Decoctis Herbarum ac Seminum; vel
aquis ad ea destinatis, ut sunt Aq. Oxalid. Endvo, Capil. Ven. Roll. Cichor.
Sonchi, etc. Whise we are preparing the Bill, we may ^eed. About five or six
days after ^leeding we may purge the whole Body with some thing stronger than
the first; such as Elect. Cathol. Diaprum. Solut. ad^^ixto vel Elect. ex Succ:
Rosar vel Rosar. Mesues. Or, if you like a Potion better, use Manna cum
Rhabarb. Or Decoc^^m ex Pu^p^ Tamarind. Myrobal. Citrin, cum Rhabarburo per
noctem insushm. The cour^e of Life must be such as hinders the increase of
Bile, and cools the Liver. All the Res non Naturales must tend to cooling and
moistning. The Drink must be small. Barley Cream, Emulsions of Pumpion Seeds,
boiled Rice and Gourds are good. Veal, Kid and Chicken boiled, and not roasted.
Saxatil Fish. Sallets of Borage, Endive, Cichory and Sorrel. And in their
season, Figs, Grapes, Damsens, and Pumpions. Pears and Apples are good,
provided they be baked. Let the Patient avoid watching, care, and trouble of
Mind; but Venus especially, as a thing that weakens the Body ^^reamly. If the
Body be costive, eat Raisms, and use Lenient Clysters.

In a Phlegmatic Constitution give first some Hiera or Elect. Hier. cum
polline Trochiscorum Agarici. Potions may be given of Mel. Rosar. Solut. and
Cathol. ex decocto cymarum Absinth^i. But in this case avoid Cassia. Then the
Phlegm must be cut, and Obstructions opened by Preparatives, such as Oxymel,
Sir. de Beton. Mel. Rosar. Sir. Byzant. ex quinque Radic. etc. About three
spoonfuls may be given at at me in decocto Beton. Abfinth. Meant. Grigan.
S^aechad. vel sure Passulm. ^el eori^dem aquis. Then stronger Purges may be
given, as Mel. Rosar. cum modico Dinphoenic. vel ^ect. Cathol. cum Didacarthami
ss ver infusio agarici irochis^ati ex Oxymelite. I would not here exclude the
use of Rh^barb. Some Pills may be taken once in eight or ten days, such as ex
^^era came agarico, de tribus cum Rhabarb. Cochiae, and it there be pain, ex
Hermodac^^^^. We must streng then the Stomach by outward Applications. We must
abstain from Phlebotomy, unless there be great occasion. The coldness of the
inwards must be tempered with Diagalanga, Rotulae ex Aromatis Galeni, Theriaca,
seu Mithridatium, alternis diebus. We must have a care of Diet. A cold and
moist Air must be avoided. Meat must be roasted rather than boiled, and
seasoned with Spices. Most Fish is bad. So are Beef, Pork, Lamb, Mutton, the
Feet and Extremities of Animals, Cheese, Milk, horary Fruits, and the like. We
allow a little generous Wine. The Patient must never eat his fill; it is good
sometimes to go supperless to Bed. Venus is more pernicious than any thing.
Motion and Exercise is good, if not presently after Meals, (for then it is
bad,) but in the Morning, till one sweats.

In a Melancholic Constitution we proceed in the like course, beginning with
Electuarium Diasen. Sir. de Polypod. sero ex infus. fol. sen. and passul.
decoct. The next day we may give Syrup. de Borag. de Lupul. Fumar. in aquis co
destinatis, aut decoctis, ex Borag. Melissophyl. Callitrich. Glycyrrhiz.
Asplen. etc: Purges may be given ex confect. Hamech, decocto Myrobal. Indor. ex
infusione fol. Sennae, Sir. de Epithymo, aut Polypodio. It will be good
sometimes to give Pilulae de Lapide Cyaneo, or de Fumaria. Bleeding with Leeches
at the Haemorrhoids is good. If the Patient (as such People usually are,) be
lean, he must use a Milk Diet. The Diet must be moistning, of Veal, Mutton,
Pullets, small Birds, and the like, rather boiled than roasted. Borage and
Capers in Sauce are proper. Apples and Pears coddled and strewed over with
Sugar, are good. His Drink must not be thick and feculent. Sleep is good. Venus
is naught. Thus the Cacochymy is to be removed from Bodies by peculiar
remedies, accordding to the nature of the peccant Humor. When the Body has got
a Venereal taint, the Patient must for about four Months be treated as such,
that his Body may be rid of all impurities, and so be made fit for this
difficult Operation.

CHAP. III.
An Enumeration of what things are necessary for the delineation of the
traductive Skin, and the provision of all Implements.

BEfore we talk of the administration of this Work, we must first of all
enumerate distinctly, what things are necessary for the performance of the
Work, that Surgeons may be fully informed, with what Implements they must be
furnished, before they undertake the delineation of the traductive Skin. For
these things considered, and rightly ordered, they will perform their work with
credit, and avoiding all confusion, they will prevent all occasion of mistake,
which might otherwise arise. Some of these things respect the Artist; others
the Patient's Wound. What respect the Artist, they are the Servants, and his
fellow-helpers. For one Artist alone is not sufficient to perform this
operation; because many things must be done at one and the same time, which
require the assistance of several Persons. The Surgeon therefore must have
at least two Servants; who must be, not only nimble in their Body and Hands;
but of a vigilant Eye to observe their Master's Commands, and to perform them.
These must of necessity be either well skilled in this sort of Surgery; or
they must be very prudent and diligent. For the Surgeon does not only stand
in need of their help in the preparation of Medicines; but in making
Dissection, in deligation of the delineated graft, and then in inserting of the
same into the curt parts, which one work is more difficult than all the rest,
that are necessary to this sort of Surgery. Let the Artist therefore, if he
cannot get such as are Learned and Experienced, at least procure such as are
apprehensive in their Mind, quick in their Senses, and nimble of Body: And if
they be raw in the business, before the operation let him inform them now and
then, of all things that are to be done in the operation. For so he would have
them more ready in his Service, more at his Beck, and exceeding Obedient. It is
of moment besides, to choose an opportune place, wherein to perform the
operation, and to take care of a Bed for the Patient to lie on, with all things
belonging to it. For it is of no slight concernment, what sort of Light there
is, what its Position is, and what Pillows there are. First, therefore the
Chamber, wherein the Bed is set, must be very light, because the Work requires
a clear light: But the delineation of the traductive Skin, does especially
require it; for tho other things might be done by Candlelight; yet the
delineation of the traductive Skin must be done by daylight, and all People but
the Operators must be put out of the room. The Patient most be placed on the
Bed, with his Face against a large Casement, and the Bed must stand from the
Wall on all hands, that the Operators may go round any way, as there shall be
occasion. There must be three Pillows in readiness, whose use we shall show
afterward: They must be stuffed with Flocks, and not with Feathers; because
Feathers are apt to grow too hot, and by reason of their softness, to give way.
The Bed is better than any Chair or Seat.

And having reckoned up all things in respect of the Chirurgeem, we will now
proceed to what things are necessary in respect of the Patient; and the
delineation of the propaginous Skin. Some things are to be performed, before
the work is undertaken; others in the doing of it, and others after it is
finished. Among the preceding requisites, the principal is; to contrive by all
means how to stop the Blood when we cut the Skin: Because in cutting the Skin,
tho we wound no part else; Yet even this Wound may be feared, if an
Inflammation, or an ^r^sipelas, should arise. For Anatomy shows us, that
several Vessels of all sorts run along the Arm, and lie under the Skin, which
if we have not a great care, may be wounded. Beskles, there is danger in the
largeness of the Wound, which the supplemental part must be of. For tho you
make the wound at one cut, yet as soon as the Forceps is let go, a large Hiatus
appears, and all under the propaginous Skin lies bare. Then the Air comes in,
and the part lies bare to various defluxions. Wherefore, to avoid these
dangers, no small care should be taken, and we must make provision aforehand
against the worst. There are several things proper in this cafe, such as,
Lacluca, Trifolium, Polygonum, Auricula muris, Lenticula palustris, Psyllium,
Vmbilicus Veneris, sempervivum, portulaca, Ovi liquor; Omphacium, Solanum,
Rubus, Capreoli vitium, Plantago, Sorbi, Corni, Mespili, Cydonia, Myrti folia
co^umque fructus, Rosarum capita, Balaustia, Sumach, acaciq, Bolus Armena,
Nuces cupressi, Galla immatura, etc. To these you may add the Posca Graecorum,
which is nothing but Vinegar and Water, so mixed and proportioned, as that it
may be grateful to the Taste; So Galen defines the Symmetry of it. As for the
place where these things are to be applied, the nature of the thing shows, they
must be applied near the Part, especially above it, (for so we hinder any
conflux to the Parts below.) They must be applied round the Humerus; And
because the Armpits have a vast in let of Blood into the Arm, (whence a vast
inundation of Blood, upon these parts might be feared,) we must take the more
care of this place; which is best done by cutting away the Hair, and plying it
continually with Medicines for the purpose: It is best to do it half an hour
before the operation, while other things are getting ready. We must take care
to renew them before they grow warm. These may serve for Repellents; Ol. Ros.
Omphac. jss. Myrtin. v. Sang. drac. terr. sigill. an. j, Bol. Arm. v. Camphor.
j. Cerae albae vj. Contundantur quae contundenda simt subtilissime, and cera
cum oleo eliquetur ad lentum ignem, addantur pulveres, ubi parum refrixerit,
and reficiantur s. a. We may make these things more cooling and astringent, if
we wash them in Vinegar of Roses. Spread this on a Linen cloth, and apply it
all over the Humerus. Or if you like a Liniment. Ol. Ros. jss. Myrt. j. aceti
nigri ^cerrimi v. pulv. Bol. Armen. j. agitentur omnia in mortario plumbeo,
quousque consistant, and oblinatur undiquaque humeri articulus. Or this, Succ.
Plantag. Sempervivi, Solani, an. ij. aceti nigri acerrimi aq. Ros. vel
pedunculorum Ros. plantag. an. jss. Infundantur lintea in liquorem hunc, atque
illis actu frigentibus universus articulus circum late foveatur. Or, if you
like a Decoction, Sumach, Summitat. Rub. Myrtill. Gall. immatur. Balaust. Ros.
an. M. j. f. decoctio in vini nigro austero, quousque tertia pars superfuerit,
infundantur lintea, and dicto jam modo applicentur. And this may serve for
things necessary before the operation.

As for things requisite in the performing the operation, they are these, viz.
A Forceps, and Knives. The Surgeon must take care that they be sharp, and
whether they be convenient this way or another, he must lay them in a dish for
the purpose all in order; lest there might be any confusion in the operation,
the blame whereof will be laid on the Operator, and not on his Servants.

When the work is done, these things must be in readiness, viz. Linen to put
into the Wound; Stupes to defend it and the adjacent parts, store of Medicines
to take up in the Stupes; a broad Linen cloth to lay over the Stupes and the
Wound; and a Roller to roll over the Stupes, and to bind the Wound. I shall now
briefly show you the use of these things. First, there must be a piece of Linen
cloth, to put between the raised Skin and the parts underneath, to keep them
asunder, lest they should grow together again. And there is one benefit more in
the Linen cloth; that one may lay Medicines upon it to stop and repel Blood.
It ought to be exactly of the same dimensions with the Wound. You should have
pieces of several dimensions in readiness, that you may take one which suits
best. You must also have flaxen Stupes, to guard the Wound; some broad and
long; others narrow and short, all of an orbicular shape, with their sides a
little compressed. Of the larger there must be four at least, about three
Inches broad, and six or seven long. They must not be over thick, for then they
are cumbersome, as they swell with the liquid Medicine, and the Blood which
they soak up, and when they once grow up, they inflame the Parts. The less must
be two Inches broad and three long. It is convenient to lay all these on, and
to guard the Wound well. But it may not be improper to make more than we have
mentioned: For it is better to have too many than too few. Then it is proper to
have a Linen-Cloth to go round all and stay the Wound. It must go round the Arm
and the Wound, and it must be larger than the Wound: All these must be wet in
Whites of Eggs, which must be well beaten, adding Rosewater, a little
Dragon's-blood, and Terra Sigillata, mixing and beating them well together.
Then you must have a Roller ready, thin, and all of an evenness, about three
Inches broad and four Cubits long. Either to bind the Wound too tight, or too
slack, is inconvenient: Wherefore we must so order the matter, that what it
wants in tightness, may be suppliad by often rolling, and that there may be
nothing, but the Roller takes hold of it, let the Roller be neither broader nor
narrower than we have mentioned; if it be broader, we cannot straiten the Parts
with it; if narrower, it will twine and twist like a Cord, and so hurt the
Parts. It must not be rolled dry, but wet in Posca; for when it is wet, it will
be more pliable, and will be instead of a Medicine, to stop blood. We have been
the more copious and particular in these things; because it is an odious thing
to have ought to seek, when we go about such an Operation as this.

CHAP IV.
In what manner the cutaneous Graft must be delineated.

WE have already discoursed of all things that should be in readiness for the
Operation; now we will proceed to the Operation it self. The delineation of the
Skin, is the Basis of all the rest. Therefore here we must be exact, and do all
things by Polycletus his Rule. However it is hard to define the quantity of the
Skin exactly, since it depends on conjecture. But diligence and prudent
circumspection, will go far toward ascertaining it is dimension. And after
mature consideration, let the Artist go courageously about his Work. First, let
him place the Patient on his Bed, and let him remove all Impediments, either to
the Patient, or to himself. Next, let him appoint those that are to help him,
their Stations and Places, every one in their order. Let the Patient lie on his
Back upon the outer edge of the Bed. He may change this place, either for the
convenience of the Chamber, or of cutting the Arm, if so be the light fall
well. Thus he must be placed ready for the Surgeon and his Assistents, when
they are about to begin the Operation. The Arm, whence the Skin is to be taken,
must be made bare. The Assistents must be in their places. One must sit on the
upper end of the Bed behind the Patient's Head, at the Artist's right Hand. He
must with his right Hand support the Patient's Arm, and with his left, when
there is occasion, hold the light, or do any thing else, as occasion requires.
Another Person's Office is to lift up the Skin, to fasten the Forceps, to help
the Surgeon, to hold up the Forceps, while the Artist cuts, and when the
Work is performed, to take it away. And he must be at the Chirurgeon's left
Hand, or on the contrary side, if the opposite Arm must be cut. For thus each
of them by the opportunity of their Places, will be enabled more readily to do
their Duties, and observe the Chirurgeon's beck; for several things, while the
Operation is performing, must be intimated by a Nod, and not by Words. Because
for the Patient's sake, Words must be forborne. In the Interim, the Surgeon
having his Hands free from all Entanglements, must come near his Patient,
always standing; that on any occasion he may turn which way he list, and buckle
himself to his Work. And first of all, let him gently handle the Skin on the
forepart of the Humerus, whence he means to borrow his Graft, let him lift it
up and let it fall again, and in the same manner raise it, and let it go again,
that by this gentle Contrectation, it may be prepared for Separation with more
case, when we should cut it, and lift it quite up with the Forceps. But ever
use moderation, lest too rough handling before Section, should make the Humors
flow with greater impetuosity after it shall be performed: For great Veins and
Arteries lie near this place. And since the main business is the Symmetry of
the Graft, you would do well, (especially where the Operator is a Novice in the
Practice of Addition,) to mark the Skin with Ink, and when he has taken up as
much Skin as the case requires, he shall give it to his Assistent on his left
Hand to hold, then he shall take the Forceps in both his Hands, and within the
Assistent's Hands he shall fix it on the traductive Skin. Yet in the mean time,
if he have departed from the prescribed quantity, he must raise it and take it
up again, and having looked well on both sides, whether all things are right,
he must straiten his Forceps, and fasten it there with an Iron Ring. He shall
give this again to the Assistent on his left Hand, and then he may proceed to
Section. Presently therefore let him take the Knife in his right Hand, and
thrust the point in gently through the Skin, about the middle of the slit in
the Forceps, and so cut on each side to the very corner of the slit, if need
require. When Section is thus made, which is the first step in the Art, and as
it were, the Rudiment of the whole Work, and when the Knife is laid down, or
given to one of the Assistents, he must with the end of the Probe thrust a
piece of Linen Cloth through the gaping skin. The Assistent on his left hand
must get this ready. He may take measure by the slit of the forceps, and out of
the great variety lying by him, may choose the fittest. When it is put through,
if it be wrinkled any where, it must be made smooth, and distended along the
whole space, so as that the ends may hang at equal distances from the forceps.
Then the Artist may loosen his forceps, by taking off the ring which held the
two handles together, and give it to the Assistent on his left Hand to hold up
gently, and presently let him put his right Hand under the Humerus, in the
inside, and let him raise the Arm a little, that the place may lie better for
the cure, which must be used to it by and by. In like manner, between the
Plates of the Forceps, when it is opened, let him lay his Hand on the Wound,
and with his Fingers expanded let him hold down the Cloth on both sides, which
is still in the slits of the Forceps. For so he hinders the Cloth from being
pulled out with the Forceps, when the Assistent takes it away, which he must do
as soon as the Artist lays his left Hand on the Wound. When these things are
done, the Artist must compose his Graft and six it in an even Situation. I call
the Graft, all that Skin which is separated from the Muscles underneath, and
which is circumscribed by it is internal and external Superficies, and on each
Hand by the sides of the Section, This, for causes which we shall mention
afterward, the Lips turning inwards, does sometimes swell strangely. It will
therefore be convenient either with a Probe, or with the inside of the Hand to
smooth down all unevennesses, and lay them right, that the Grast may be equally
extended, according to all its parts, and presently to go about its proper
Cure. For here any delay is dangerous: Wherefore the Artist must put the
shorter stupes, which he has in readiness, to the Wound innermost, and others
outwardly, and over these he must lay the large ones, one at each side, and one
at each end. And when he has in this manner guarded the whole Wound, then he
must lay a Linen Cloth double for a common guard to all, and that the Wound
may be the better bound. But this must be done by Rollers. Therefore taking the
Roller in his Right Hand, and opening the end of it, let him apply it to the
upper part of the Grast, laying his Left Thumb on the end of it, and roll
downward toward the inside of the Arm. When this is done, let him straiten the
Arm a little, and ^oll again, rolling gradually downwards, till the whole
Graft, and the broad Linen Cloth, which is brought over it, be by rolling from
one end to the other all covered. And the Artist must take care, that in
binding, he neither straiten nor slacken the part too much. If it be over
slack, the Blood will run to it, and the Medicaments off it. If it be
over-tight, it will weaken the part, and destroy the i^^ate heat of the Skin:
Whereupon the Graft dies, because all manner of passage for the Aliment is
stopped. And moreover, because strait binding causes pain, this will cause an
afflux of Humors, and (which is the utter ruin of the Graft,) will occasion
Inflammations, Erysipelas's, and other Swellings. Wherefore moderation must be
used. Let him turn in the end of the last Roller about an Inch, then tie the
end over with Thread; so there will be no fear of its undoing; and thus is the
administration of the delineated Graft performed. But still there is a care
incumbent on the Artist, to keep both the Arm and the Patient himself quiet and
undisturbed. And for this, a middle posture is most proper; so the Arm must be
bent. This I would have observed, that as the Humerus hangs down a little, so
the Vlna may be gently raised, and in the same moderation the Hand must be
above the Vlna. For this reason, as we said, care must be had of Pillows,
Bolsters, and such Furniture. Therefore while the Artist lays the Pillows, both
his Assistents must stay the Patient's Arm. He that is uppermost, and sits at
the Artists Right Hand, must put his Left Hand under the Patient's Armpit, and
lay his Right upon his Elbow; the other must with his Right Hand stay the
Patients Cubitus, and with his Lest Arm go round his Body. By thus doing, they
will on both sides keep the Arm steady and quiet, which is the principal thing
we desire, because of the violent terdency of the Blood to any disturbed part.
All things being in this posture, the Artist must bend the Arm, the Assistents
helping, into a safe and opportune posture, and, according is the season is
either hot or cold, cover it with Linen or Woollen. It will also be requisite
for the Patient not to stir in the least, lest the quiet of the Arm be
disturbed, and put the Humors in motion, which of themselves are too apt to be
moved. Therefore a profound rest both of the Arm and the whole Body is
absolutely necessary. But this is not all, we must likewise give check to the
violent motion of the Humors. Therefore we must endeavor to defend the part by
pouring on refrigerants and repellents all over the Region of the Wounded
Humerus, especially toward the Armpits for an hour or two. Of which sort of
Medicines Posca is best, provided it be in quantity sufficient: For I have
found by good success that it stops the most impetuous Fluxes of Blood.

CHAP. V.
The Cure of the delineated Grast.

NOW it remains, that we lay down the cure of the delineated Skin, as soon as
the whites of Eggs are taken off, and what course of Diet the Patient ought
exactly to observe, till all fear of Inflammation be over. And the Cure of the
Wounded part does chiefly consist in suppuration, not neglecting the use of
Repellents in the mean time. For since Humors are perpetually running thither,
and abundance of them, through the weakness of the part, do gather there, the
Chirurgeon's chief aim should be to disenss by Suppuraters whatever is gathered
there, and to hinder by Repellents whatever comes from any where else. This
Hippocrates does intimate, where he says, that an Ulcer the s^^nest suppurated
is the safest from Inflammation, and the soonest Deterse and siled with Flesh.
Now since there are several sorts of suppuratives, there may be as many several
sorts of Medicaments, which according to the Heat and Cold, and the several
Seasons of the year, may as occasion requires be made choice of. In the later
end of Spring, and all Summer, Sallet Oil drawn from ripe Olives, pure Wax and
Turpentine in equal quantities will be proper. For these mightily promote Pus,
and I frequently use it. For the wealthy and delicate you may use this
following.. Terebinth. let. ex Rosac. v. ol. res. comp. j. Addatur cerae
albissimae, quod par fuerit his omnibus excrpiendis, and ex art conficiatur
unguentum. But in a cold Season, when the heat retires inwards, we must use
much stronger means. Therefore in the later end of Autumn and all Winter, you
may use such a Medicine,. cl. commun. viij. cerae pune ij. colophon. picis
naval. sagapen. a. j. mastich. thur. galb. terebinth. a. v. ubi oleum cum cera
ad ignem probe liquata fuerint, injiciatur colophonia primum, deinde pix
navalis, sagapenum, terebinthina, mox and reliqua, and refrigerata recondantur.
This also is good,. cer. alb. resin. pin. sevi vaccin. pic. naval. terebinth.
th^^. myrrh. a v. M. and in pulverem, quae convenit, redactis, cum ol. q. s. f.
Vngu. ex art. Next follows the use of Repellents, which (because they are
applied only to the outside of the Wound, and the suppuratives to the inside,)
may best be applied to the upper part of the Humerus. But before we proceed to
them, we will discourse of the administration of suppuratives. Within a day or
two, or after all fear of a Haemorrhage is over, in the Morning the whites of
Eggs may be removed, and that very gently, lest any little branch of a Vein
might upon a slight touch bleed afresh. Wherefore it were good to have some
singed cotton to apply to the Wound. If the Clothes be hard and dry, and do
stick fast, they must be softened by moistning. Posea is good for this use, and
then Oil of unripe Roses. These may sometimes be mist and applied either cold or
a little warm, having always regard to the Season, and other Medical
Circumstances. For Medicines when they are moderately warm do better insinuate
themselves, and by the moderation of their quality perform what we desire. But
the Artist must have a care they be not too hot, lest the Blood being
stimulated thereby, burst out again. Let therefore the Assistents stand on each
Hand, one of which must hold a Basin to receive what comes from the Wound, and
the other must have liquor, fit to moisten the Clothes. In the mean while the
Roller must be taken off, with all the gentleness imaginable, so as not to
disturb the Arm or the Patient. Wherefore it were best to clip it with
Scissars, not all the Rounds at once, but one by one, and rather on the outside
than the inside of the Arm. For in so doing we shall neither disturb those
parts by its motion, nor shall we come near those great Vessels of the Arm,
which it is the best not to touch at all. When the Rounds of the Rollers are
stiff with Blood, it is the Assistents part to irrigate them by dropping liquor
from on high. Then he may take them off with a Probe, or, when joined, he may
gently sever them with his Fingers, and throw them into the Basin, and when the
Wound is laid bare, he may cover it with a white Linen Cloth made warm, while
the Artist is making ready for the rest of his Work; who must take that Cloth
off, and apply another to the Wound, spread with suppuratives. Where note, that
the first Cloth must not be taken off, till the other is ready to clap on,
which must be done as near the same instant as may be: Which is a rule ever to
be observed. Then the Artist must take up the end of the Linen. Cloth, which is
run under, in the outside of the Arm, and sew another of the same bigness to
it, running the Needle along, and no where sewing double, lest by its bulk it
might exasperate the Wound. Then with his Right Hand taking hold of the inner
end let him raise it, and draw it through till all the old is come through, and
the new is drawn into the Wound. Then one of the Assistents must clip off the
Old, and throw it into the basin with the rest. But if the Lips turn inwards,
then let the Artist with his Probe spread it again gently, and drop in a little
Turpentine either alone, or mixed with Oil of Roses, then let him apply Lint
dipped in Suppuratives, and upon that Linen Cloths, wet in Repellents, warm; then
in the same moderation that was formerly prescribed, let him bind all up again,
and place the Arm in a middle posture. These Repellents differ nothing or but
very little from the other. If they do, it is best to apply gentle ones to the
Graft, and stronger to the Shoulder and Armpits. These are proper for the
Grast;. olei Ros. omphac. olei Ros. comp. a j. M. Or,. olei ros. comp. myrt. a.
j. M. These you may use singly, and, with a Cloth dipped in them a little warm,
you may irrigate the Graft all over. For the Shoulder this is good;. ol. omph.
myrt. a p. ae. And this Liniment;. Sant. rubr. gran. myrt. ros. rub. a. v.
ungu. ros. Mes. jss. redigantur in tenuissimum pollinem santali, mnti and
rosae, pareturque ex art linimentum.

As for Diet, it must be very spare in the beginning, and so continued for
about four days, till the Humors are settled. The Drink must be small. Wine
must not be touched. After the fourth day is over, you may advance a little.
After the seventh is over you may indulge your self yet more liberally. And
this may suffice for the cure of the Skin, when first delineated.

CHAP. VI.
The Cure of some Symptoms, which sometimes befall the delineated Skin.

THree sorts of Symptoms do sometimes befall the delineated Skin. A Mortification
of some of the edge of the cutaneous Graft, an Inflammation of it, and of the
parts adjacent, and profusion of Blood. There are several causes of
Mortification in this case, a Diseased and Veneral habit of Body; a lax and
thin Skin, where the innate heat is weak; too violent pinching with the
Forceps, and too strait binding. Unless therefore the Patient be of a good
habit of Body, especial care must be had, in taking up the Skin with the
Forceps, to use such moderation as but just to keep it up, and not let it slip
and hinder the operation. It is a good way to take enough of the Skin, that if
a little Mortification should happen, there may be still enough to serve the
turn. Great care also, as we have said before, must be had in binding, that it
be neither too strait nor over slack. But when you have a suspicion of this
mischief, (as you very well may in the forementioned Bodies,) the Wound must be
opened, and not let alone till the third or fourth day, you must look very
narrowly to the edges, that timely care may prevent the worst. You may know it
is beginning, when upon trial by a Probe, sense is either small or quite lost,
and if the part look very pale or livid. It must therefore be resisted by
things that dry strongly, and destroy Putrefaction. Such is Vnguentum
Aegyptiacum, whereof there are several sorts; but this is the best;. Alumin.
virid. aeris, mellis, aceti acerrimi a. p. ae. M. Praecipitate is good either
alone or in Oynment of Roses, and other Ointments. Sometimes pulvis aloes
strowed on the Skin has quite destroyed the Malady. It is best to use a
decoction of Lupiues, wherein Aloes has been boiled. This is also a very safe
Ointment;. terebinth. letae ex succo absinth. j. farin. board. cretae j.
pollinis aloes purissim. ij. mell, albi sincerissim. q. s. agitetur mel,
excipianturque singula, and ex art paretur extergens medicamentum. You may use
it in Ointments and apply them to the parts that are tending to Putrefaction.
Great care must be had of the Patient's Diet, especially were the Body is
Cacochymick or Venercal. All things therefore must be drying and consumers of
excrementitious moisture.

The next Symptom, which sometimes ends in the former, is an Inflammation. For
because the Blood runs plentifully to that part, all there about is swollen,
red, and painful, and if not prevented, threatens certain ruin to these parts,
especially to the Graft. This is most apt to arise in the Spring time, and when
People have fared plentifully before; wherefore it is altogether proper to
prepare Folks Bodies before the operation. When an Inflammation does arise, the
best way is to bleed in the contrary Arm. The Patient's strength must define
the quantity. Diet must be prescribed. The Patient must abstain from all hot
things; and things of a penetrating substance. Coolers and Astringents are
best. No Drink at all must be used; Spoon-Meat is sufficient. Rubbing the lower
parts with course Clothes, Cupping either without, or with very small
Scarification, when too little Blood has been taken away. Lotions of the
extreme parts are good, a little warm, with cooling Herbs boiled therein.
Bleeding the Haemorrhoides with Leeches is proper.

The next Symptom is, profusion of Blood, which may be stopped by letting Blood
in the opposite Arm, if the Patient's strength will bear it; by Cupping,
Scarifying Ligatures and Frictions. It is good to roll several Rollers pretty
hard, not dry, but wet in Posca, hereby I have known Bleeding several times
stopped. In this case it is best not to open the Wound till the fourth day. Next
of all, the whole Region of the Shoulder must be fomented with Posca, and
Cloths wet therein, frequently renewed, before they grow warm. When the Wound
is opened, it is good to have things in readiness that stop Bleeding, if it
should happen, such as singed Cotton applied either to the Wound or close by
it. Castane^ cortex exiccatus, and in pollinem subtilissimum redactus, and
gluten Galeni, quod aloos, thuris, mastiches aequas portiones continet, and ovi
albumine excipiuntur, and Bol. Arm. sang. drac. and pil. lepor. in pollinem
redacta. Abstinence both from Meat and Drink is here good. What is eaten should
be Cooling and Incrassating. When the Patient rises he must keep his Arm steady
in a sling made of a broad Roller. After the Seventh day is over, he may feed a
little more plentifully till the Fourteenth, and then it will be time to take
up the Graft.

CHAP. VII.
Why the taking up of the Graft is deferred, and not done at one Section, what
time is proper for the Administration, and what Provision must be made for it?

THE reason why all is not done at one Section, but part of the Operation
deferred, is, because the cutaneous Graft, if it were cut quite off at the same
time that it is delineated, would shrivil up all on a heap, which might
occasion a Mortification, for that Medicaments could not then so well be
applied, as when it is explicated: Besides, the great Muscles would be laid
quite bare, which would produce the like inconvenience, if they were exposed to
the open Air. Wherefore it seems most proper to perform the Operation gradually.

As to the time, when the cutaneous Graft should be taken up, it cannot be
desined by days or hours; it is requisite corpulence and the intermission of
Symptoms will best determine that. For upon affluence of Blood, and it is being
by heat compacted into carnous Fibers, the Skin grows thicker, so that when it
is cut off it does not ^^^ivle up together; which (as I said before,) was the
reason why the Skin was not both delineated and cut off at one and the same
time. We must therefore tarry till the Skin grow thick and compact enough,
which (if we may set any certainty to things uncertain,) it usually is within
Fourteen days. In which time the subject Parts have the benefit to be clothed
with a new Skin, whereby they are fenced from the Injuries of the external Air.
And another main reason for deferring it, is, the abatement of the violent
Symptoms, which must needs fall out in that time, and which would otherwise
spoil the whole business. A breathing time therefore is requisite for a second
Operation, and Sat c^to, si sat been.

And because it is good for an Artist to have his Tools about him, we will
consider what Provision there must be made for the Operation. Now since the
Skin must be cut at one end, and that sometimes Veins inter^ur, the same things
therefore must be in readiness here, which were prepared for the Delineation of
the Skin: Ovi aibumen rosacea dilutum in great plenty; it will be good to put
some Sanguis draconis and Bole Armeni^k into it. Two broad pledgets of Lint;
their quantity must be measured from the amplitude of the Section; they must be
large enough to cover the whole Section, both of the Graft, and of the Arm,
whence it was taken. Besides, there must be Medicaments and Liniments in
readiness for the cure of the Wound underneath; the compass whereof, because it
is the ground whence the Graft was taken, we call the Bed. That therefore we
may heal it, there must be in readiness Cloths spread with Suppuratives, and a
Cloth exactly of the dimensions of the Bed; there must also be other Cloths,
for the inside of the Graft, and they for this time must be single, and spread
with suppurative Medicines. There must likewise be two Rollers of the same
bigness as before: One to keep fast the Medicines upon the Bed; the other for
the Graft. This must be rolled over all the Arm, therefore it must be longer
than the other. There must also be a smooth and sharp knife or two. There must
be a Needle and Thread to sew the end of the Rollers; and so much may serve for
the Apparatus.

CHAP. VIII.
The manner of taking up the Cutanous Graft.

IN the Graft there is a twofold Superficies, the natural, which is smooth, and
well-colored; and the ascititious, which is uneven and red. Therefore the
Graft must be so applied to the curt parts, that the natural Superficies may be
outermost. Besides, it is to be considered, at which end it must be cut, so as
to be best fitted to the Part; If the Nose or upper Lip must be supplied, then
the upper end toward the Armpit must be cut; If the nether Lip, then the lower
end next the Elbow must be cut. But as to the administration of the Section, it
is twofold; either it is right from the inner angle of the Graft, to the outer
Superficies; or it is sloping from the inner Angle of the Graft, toward the
Shoulder, sometimes so, as to take in an Inch and an half more of Skin. For when
we find that the delineation of the Graft falls short, and that it shrinks,
then is the time to eak what it wants by an oblique or slant Section. Because
Nature endeavors Unition, as much as she can, at both ends of the Graft, which
shorten it much. And when the Skin is loose and thin, this Section is proper,
as we may gather by its shrinking in breadth. But when there is no ground for
Fear, then a right Section, without any sloping is best.

The Patient must be set on his Bed, in the same place and posture, as we
advised for the delineation of the Skin, against the Light, at a distance from
the Wall, and on the side of the Bed, for the more convenience of the
operation. The assistents must observe their stations; one at the Artists right
hand, the other at his left. the one must hold the Patients Arm leaning on
Pillows, with the Hand upright, from the Elbow: The other must handle the
Humerus, according as the Artist shall direct, and as the Graft must be cut
right or sloping. If the Artist make a right Section, he must order the
Assistent at his right hand to compress the Skin next the Graft. For often the
Skin gives way, and hinders the right Section. Now the Assistent will hold the
Skin right, if he put one hand under the Armpit, and the other as near as he
can to the Cutaneous Graft. Then the Artist must with a Probe lift up the
Cutaneous Graft, putting his left Forefinger underneath, and carrying his left
Thumb over against it, let him hold the Graft gently up. Then let him take the
knife in his right hand, and cut even, and at a right Angle upwards. When the
Graft is taken up, let him turn it back toward the Elbow, and guard it well
with Lint, where it is wounded. For sometimes, when a Vein is cut, it will bleed
much. And this is the manner of right Section. But in the oblique or sloping
Section, the Assistent lays no hand on the Patient's Arm, only the Artist puts
his knife between the Graft and the Muscle, underneath, and cuts slanting
upwards. As Soon as he has considered how much he will add to the Graft, let him
take it up between his right Thumb and Forefinger, and give it to the
Assistent at his right hand to hold. He must then put his Probe under the
Graft, putting gently under it his left forefinger, laying his Thumb over
against it, and then he must raise the Skin gently, so as the knife may have
room to go in. Which he must take in his right hand, and with some strength cut
slanting, as far as he shall think good. When the Graft is taken up, he must
turn it back to the Elbow, and where it was cut off, he must cover it with
Lint, and fence it well. But he may immediately commit this to be done by his
assistent. And the Artist himself may look to the other Part, may lay on Lint,
and take care by all means to stop the bleeding. Then my advice is, to cover
the whole Bed with diverse Liniments, and then to lay on the broad linen Cloth.
He may give the Graft to the Assistent on his left hand, who may conveniently
hold it in his right, and, with warm linen Clothes, keep it constantly from the
injuries of the Air. In the mean time, the Artist must be covering the whole
Bed, by rolling it with one Roller, whose end must be fastened with a needle and
thread on the outside of the Arm. When this is done, let him lay some Ointment
over the Roller, as far as the cutaneous Graft will reach, and then let him lay
back the Graft upon it. Great care must be taken to spread it well both in
length and breadth. When the Graft is turned back, laid smooth, and placed as
it ought, the Artist must order an Assistent to lay his middle and fore Finger
on the top of it, and bid him take care that it shrink not. Then let him take
another Roller, and apply it where the Graft grows to the Stock, and there
begin to roll, till he has covered the whole Graft, and bound it to the Arm.
Here is the difficulty of the business: For if the Graft be bound too tight, it
dies; if too slack, it shrinks. Therefore great care must be taken herein. And
because it is difficult to hit right at first, the Artist, that he may be sure,
must, whenever he opens the the Part, diligently take notice of the whole
Substance of the Skin, whether it be as it ought, or whether it dies, or
shrinks. This the Eye will show; the other is known by paleness and
senselesness. Because an Error herein is very hard to amend, therefore I would
by all means advice the Artist to be careful in it. When all is done, he must
place the Arm in a middle posture, as before. And so the Administration of this
Operation is performed.

Here it will not be amiss to mark out the parts of the Graft, and assign to
them, and to some other things, names, that when we have occasion to mention
them, we may not use Circumlocutions. Horticulture directs us best in giving
Names. For from it the best hints of any such operation were taken, and by it
we have been hitherto directed. All therefore that is the subject of our
operation, we call the Graft, the Cutaneous Graft, the Propagmous Skin, or the
Brachial Skin. Its length and breadth are considerable; but so is not its
depth. The length exceeds the breadth usually one Third. The length we may
divide into three parts, the upper, middle and lower, and we may give every one
its name. By the upper part we mean that, which was last cut from the Arm,
which we call the top of the Graft. We might more properly call it the
insititious end or top, because it is ingrafted into the cut parts. The lower
part, which grows to the Arm, we may call the root of the Graft; for from hence
Aliment is carried into the rest of the Graft, as from the Root into the Tree.
What is between the Top and the Root, we may very well call the body of the
Graft. As to the Superficies, we call it either Internal or External, the
Inside or Outside, or the later we may call the Cutanous Side. The edges of the
Graft we call either Interror or Exterior, or the Internal or External linear
Confines, We may properly enough call them Lips; because both in roundness and
thickness, they much resemble the Lips of the Mouth.

This we thought fit to mention concerning Names, that all confusion might be
avoided, and obscurities cleared, which might otherwise arise about Names.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Cure of the New and Old Wound, both in the Graft, and in the Bed, and
also of rearing the Graft.

WHen we took up the Graft, our care was first to stop bleeding. The next day
it will be proper to open the Wound, and to look well about, what should be
avoided, and what should be done further.

Now there are two Wounds in each part, viz. in the Bed, and in the Graft,
altogether diverse, each whereof requires its proper Cure. That which was made
at the first delineation, both in the Bed and Graft, is old: The other is new,
both at the top of the Graft, and at the upper end of the Bed. Any one may see,
these require different Remedies. The Part newly wounded requires Suppuration.
But the old Wound, after the abundance of Humors gathered by Affluxion and
Congestion is spent, dies by reason of the weakness of the Part caused by
wounding, instead of Suppuraters were Driers, and these no ordinary ones, that
all that is soft may turn into Skin or Callus. In the mean time care must be
taken, that both the top of the Graft, and the upper edge of the Bed, be
brought to perfect Suppuration, which is usually done in nine days, or at most
in eleven, sometimes in seven. For here we do not allow so long a time for
moving of Pus, as before, because we have another design now; and there were
several sufficient reasons then to protract the Suppuration of the Wound. As
the grievousness of the Symptoms, whose rage ought first to be appeased. And
the thickning of the Skin, or at least, the hindrance of its decrease. For no
small strength accrews to it from the growth of carnous Fibers, which put a
stop to the decrease of the Graft. Wherefore you may sooner leave off
Suppuraters, and use Driers, when the Parts begin to have a Callus or Skin. It
is a sign, Wounds are sufficiently suppurated, when the Artist sees, what
Celsus learnedly observes, An equal Redness all over, moderation in Dryness and
Moisture, and little or no pain. For then it is time to leave off Suppuraters,
and to endeavor all you can to cicatrize the Wound, which is done both in the
Bed and Graft by the same Remedies. Only the Bed, as Experience has taught us,
requires stronger Medicines; because the Wound in the Arm is moister and
fouler, by reason it is upon the Muscles, to which the adjacent Vessels give a
liberal supply of Vapors and Humors, and so hinder the drying of the Sore, in
which it is Cure chiefly consists: But where (a, in the cutaneous Graft,) there
is but little moisture, it grows callous sooner; and therefore the Graft
requires much gentler Medicaments, than the Bed. It is best therefore, when it
is at the Artist's choice, (however his scope may be the same,) to protract the
Cure of this a little, since each Part has now and then it is proper Symptoms.
But let us pass the Cure of the Graft, and proceed to that of the Bed. There
are several cicatrizing Medicaments; but this we have had Experience of,
Vnguentum ex pompholyge. Here is the description of it, Cerae Albae, Ol. Ros.
an. lb V. succi fructus solani sat. iiij. Plumbi usti and loti, pompholyg. an.
j. Thuris puri v. Coquatur oleum cum solani succo ad hujus consumptionem, tune
adjiciatur cera, qua liquata, addantur caeterarum rerum pulveres, ^ique
tenuissimi, subigantur in mortario omnia, and ad unguenti formam reducantur.
This Unguent is spread upon Cloth, and applied to the Wound. There is another,
which I have experienced to be no less successful. Lap. Calamin. terrae Lemn.
an. iiij. Litharg. aur. Ceruss. an. iij. Succi Semperviv. ij. cerae v. Ol. Ros.
Omphac. lb j. M. and S. A. F. Vnguentum. Several other things are proper, as,
Vnguentum ex minio, ex lithargr^^ ex cerussa, ex calce lota, and others of the
like nature, which because they dry much, do therefore harden the Flesh into
Callus. When proud Flesh arises either in the middle or edges of the Bed, it
will be the part of a prudent Artist to have recourse to other means, whereby
he may destroy this proud Flesh. This mischief is fomented by a too moist diet,
and other Errors therein. Therefore a drying diet must be ordered; and such
Medicaments as these may be used. Terebinth. cerae Alb. Resin. Ammon. an.
xiiij. Flor. Aer. Opopan. an. ij. Aristoloch. long. Thur. mascul. Bdell. an.
xvj. Myrch. Galb. an. iiij. Litharg. jx. olei si aestas fuerit lb ij. si byems
lb iij. Bdellium, Ammon. and Opo^anac. in Acet. q. s. per unam noctem macerato,
calefactis terebinthinam permisceto; in oleo, adjecta cera, caeterisque in
pulverem redactis, coquito and s. a. f. Vnguentum. Spread it on a Cloth and
apply it to the Wound. For it wonderfully dries up moisture and wastes proud
Flesh. Here is another as good and much experienced; Resin. Pin. lb j. cerae lb
v. olei comm. iiij. aeruginis j. ss. resinam and ceram in oleo liquato,
aeruginem studiose terito, oleo addito, f. Vnguentum. This also is Excellent;
Vngu. Ros. Mes. j. Praecipitat. Opt. Pulv. j. ss. M. It insensibly consumes the
proud Flesh, and cleanses the Ulcer without pain. But it sometimes happens, That
as the Bed is skinning over, Pustules do arise suddenly, which sometimes are
painful and sometimes do itch. This happens in Choleric Persons and in hot
Seasons; and sometimes in Phlegmatic Persons, who have a sharp Serum. It often
hinders the Cure; therefore we must endeavor to prevent it by a good Diet and
Medicaments. This following I have had great Experience of: Ol. Ros. Comp. lb
v. Ol. Ros. Omphac. iiij. Succor. Fol. Plantag. Solan. Hortens. Centaur. min.
Lapat. an. j. ss. Olea bulliant cum succis ad eorum consumptionem. Add Cer.
Alb. q. s. f. Vngu. molle. Asperge domum Litharg. Pulv. j. ss. Pompholyg.
Praeparat. ij. Recrem. Pliambi. Pulv. iij. Pulv. hordei cremats j. ss. Bol.
Arm. Pulv. Camphor. an. ss. Vngu. infrig. Galeni. Popul. an. j. M. F.
Vnguentum. s. a. Here is another good one: Litharg. j. ceruss. v. cerae Alb.
iiij. Ol. Ros. lb j. Album. ovorum recent. No. iiij. Liquefiat. cera cum oleo
in olla vitreata, addatur Lithargyrum and cerussa, continuoque misceantur: Vbi
autem refrixerint, ovorum albumina, eaque probe agitata, injiciantur, and f.
Vnguentum. It cools the heat of the Humors, and by gently drying cicatrizes
Ulcers. There is another very bad Symptom; viz. When upon a conflux of ill
Humors to the Bed, it is eaten into several Ulcers. This is helped by good
diet, and purging the Body, and by good Medicaments outwardly applied. Among
diverse I shall mention but two: Resin. Pin. Terebinth. cerae citrinae, Olei
commun. an. j. ss. Dissolve ceram and resinam in oleo, tand^mque terebinthinam,
omnia colentur, and in cacabo ad lentum ign^m bulliant, a^rique exposita demum
refrigescant. The other is this: Terebinth. Mell. Ros. col. an. j. Thur. Alocs.
Sarcocoll. Farinae Hord. cribrat. sub. an. v. Dissoluta terebinthina cum melle,
addantur pulveres, and agitentur in defesso, usque quo exact commisceantur.
These are the principal Symptoms, and they proceed from impurity of Humors,
which must be corrected by good diet and purging. Wherefore it is best to
prepare the Body well before the Operation be undertaken. If any Purgatives be
given afterward, they must be very gentle. But a well-ordered diet is the main
thing, being both easiest and safest.

Now we will proceed to the Cure and rearing of the Graft. The chief of the
Cure consists in breeding a Callus by good Medicaments. The rearing of the
Graft consists in nourishing it by plenty of kindly Aliment. When the Cicatrice
is bred, it is fit for ingrafting. But we must first suppurate the new Wound in
the Graft, and then cicatrize it. The Medicaments are the same as before. So
dry Linen Cloths, and those medicated, or Lint, are good, prepared in this
manner. Take fine thin Linen Cloths, wet them in the Liquor, which we shall now
describe, dry them in the shade, and so wet them and dry them three or four
times. This is the Liquor: Gallar. immatur. Sumach, Myrtill. Balaust. Cortic.
Granat. an. Mj. Acac. Hypocyst. an. j. Alumin. ij. bulliant omni^ in vino nigro
austere, quousque tertia saltem pars supersit, macerentur in co linteamina, and
in umbra exi^centur. And because all things relating to the Cure are done in
order of time, we shall distinguish the time of the cutaneous Graft into four
Ages. For as the time of all Animals living is circumscribed by certain
Intervals, wherein their Bodies receive notable Changes; so the time of the
Graft may very usefully be distinguished into it is Ages, wherein it undergoes
considerable Alterations. The Infancy of the Graft is the time from it is taking
up till the Wound is dried; so long as there is no dryness in the Carnous
Fibers, but they are all soft, flaccid and moist. For whereas before it was
nourished at both the ends, now it receives nourishment but at one, and so must
needs languish and be subject to diverse Symptoms, Ulcers, Inflammations, and
Corruption of part of it; all which are obviated, as we have taught formerly.
The youth of the Graft is, when signs of Dryness show themselves; for then the
Skin neither receives the Excrements of other Parts, nor breeds any in itself.
This is a great sign of Strength: The Eggs grow callous first, and then the
rest; and the top before the root. The Manhood of the Grafting is, when the
Cicatrice is come to the root, and all it is inner Superficies is turned
callous. The old Age is, when the Graft is all over callous.

Now it remains, that we treat of the ill Accidents that befall the Graft; And
first of all we will treat of that which comes through the Artist's fault, viz.
The decay of the Graft through the uneven laying and binding of it up. For when
it is turned either to the right or left, and the Skin lies on rucks, Ulcers do
arise and so the Graft is fretted. You may know it by the bandage being on
rucks, or the Skin it self, for there Ulcers are most apt to arise. Whereupon
the Graft is starved, the passage of it is Aliment being intercepted. Wherefore
great care must be had in binding, about the Position of the Graft, that it lie
even; and then Ulcers are prevented. But if any one should prove so supinely
imprudent, as to commit such a mistake, he must help it thus. Suppose the Graft
be turned to the left; this turning must be put even; it may be reduced by a
Linen Cloth about an hand's breadth folded, till it be but an Inch in breadth;
lay this on the Graft when you have laid it right, at the roof, then bind it up
with Rollers, as before, thus with Bolsters you may reduce it; and when there
shall be no further occasion, you may leave them off. The Ulcers, if there be
any, may be cured as those in the Bed.

When the Graft fades, and grows more languid than it ought, this happens
sometimes through too strait binding, sometimes from a Callus, obstructing the
Passage of Aliment. When the fault is in the binding, the Artist may easily
help it. But when the cause lies in some fault of the Graft it self, or of some
other Parts, having well considered where it lies, we must endeavor to remove
it. When it lies in other Parts, the remedy lies in carrying off Impurities by
purgings. When it lies in the Intemperature, suppose in the Frigidity of the
Graft it self; then it is best to use gentle Frictions to the Part: For that
brings Nutriment into it from the root, by opening it is Passages. You may rub
till the Part grows red, and swells a little, which are signs you have done it
good. Whatever you do more, you do thereby but discuss and waste it is
Nutriment. You must rub from the root toward the Graft. You may excite the
languishing heat by irrigating the outer Skin with hot Oils made actually warm.
The Artist may do it thus, he may take some Cotton dipped in the said Oils, and
anoint the Graft over all the outside, then with his Hand he may rub from the
root to the top several times, then wipe it, and bind it up. A Fomentation also
of generous Wine may be prepared, especially in Winter Cold, and in Phlegmatic
Persons. No moist thing, especially no Oil, may be used to the inside of the
Graft, because it hinders Callus.

We may soften the hardness of the Callus by Plasters, such as Diachylon,
Diapyritid. Diapahna, cum mucilag. rad. Althaeae, and rad. Cucum. agrest.
Diadictamn. etc.

CHAP. X.
The time of Ingrafting, that is, of what Age a cutaneous Graft must be chosen,
to ingraft withal.

WE told you before, there were several Ages of the Graft, in one of which
Incision must of necessity be made. No Man, I think, will grant, it may be made
in all. For upon what account we deferred the taking up of the Graft after it is
Delineation, upon the very same here we protract Incision. Because the Graft
has not strength enough to undergo the violence of Incision, and to preserve it
self likewise from sudden withering away, for the Flesh is not firm enough. And
other Symptoms were to be obviated, Inflammation and Bleeding, whose violence
were enough to distract the Operation. Wherefore it could by no means be, that
as soon as ever it was cut off, and in it is Infancy, it could be implanted into
the curt Nose. Nor is the time of it is youth proper, since the violence of the
Symptoms is not quite assuaged, nor is it strong enough to endure the violence
of Incision, nor, were it implanted, would it well unite. For it not being yet
dry enough, but moist and continually moistened with Excrements from the Brain,
no wonder, if it should putrefy, or at least heal with much difficulty. But it
is not worth while to tarry for it is old Age. For we require a Graft firm and
robust, not flaccid and feeble. For what, I pray, should we do with it? The
Nose is perfectly to be repaired, which we can never do with a soft, wrinkled,
pale, juiceless, and diseased Part, (for old Age is a disease to every thing,)
nor can we imagine it. We must therefore take the Graft, and ingraft it into
the curt Parts, when it is grown hard, and begins to decline, but is so strong
as to endure the violence of the Operation well enough.

CHAP. XI.
Of things necessary for Ingrafting.

AMong things requisite for Ingrafting, some are for convenience, others for
necessity; and these are necessary, either in the very operation, or after it
is performed. We will begin with those that are for convenience. And first of
all, the Head must be shaven, made clean from Dandriff, and kept from Lice. The
Beard must be shaven. All this should be done the Evening before the intended
operation. Things necessary for Ingrafting, are Knives, Scissars, Needles,
Thread, Head-rollers, a Chair, Cloth, and Lint. The use of the Knives is, to
excoriate the curt Nose, and the cutaneous Graft. They must be very sharp, and
several of them; and those of several shapes, straight and crooked, according
as the operation shall require. The Scissars must be sharp; their use is, to
clip off the remains of Flesh or Skin, which cannot be cut off with a Knife.
There must be a Roller, an Ell and an half long, and eight Fingers broad. This
must be doubled, it must go round the Forehead and tie behind. Its use is, when
the Graft and Nose are stitcht, to stick the Needles in order, lest they might
otherwise be confounded and entangled. The Needles must be very sharp and
triquetrous, such as Glovers use: They must be strong, and there must be three,
or more, above the number you have occasion for, that, if any break, you may
not want. The Thread must be midling and even; but it must never have been
boiled. The Thread for each of the Needles should be about five Else long. The
Chair may be an ordinary one, without Arms to it, upright in the back, to the
lowest Vertebrae of the Neck; but then it must be a little reclining, for the
Head to lean upon: For it is better to perform this operation in a Chair, than
on a Bed. There must be a Cloth to wrap about the Patients Neck and Breast, to
receive the Blood, and to keep him clean. There must be Rags and Lint, to wipe
the Blood off the excoriated Parts. These things are necessary in the operation.

Things necessary when the operation is performed, are either for the Cure, or
for the Conservation of the Parts, when they are sewed. The first is performed
by Medicaments. There are two Parts, which we must take care of, the Bed, and
the Suture of the Ingrafted parts. There needs no alteration be made in the
Cure of the Bed; but the same things may be used as before. And whatever is
good for a green Wound, and for a Suture, the same is good to cure the
ingrafted parts. We must therefore repress an afflux of Humors, and an
Inflammation. This may be done with the white of an Egg and Rose Water in the
same proportion as before. There must be two Pledgets of Low, about an Inch
broad, and as long as the Nose, to guard the Suture. The other must be as long,
but broader, to guard the adjacent parts from Inflammation. And because the
Suture penetrates to the inside of the Nose, there may be two Tents made, big
enough for the Nostrils, and long enough to help the Cure, but not so long as
to cause Sneezing. Both the Pledgets and the Tents must be dipped in the whites
of Eggs, when there is occasion to use them. Thus much for the Cure.

Now we proceed to the Rollers, and such things as are for the conservation of
the Work, when performed. But before we say any thing of the Rollers, we will
show the posture of the Arm, which these Rollers are to keep it in. And it is
thus; We must raise the Humerus as much as we may, and apply that part of the
Arm, where the Musculus triqueter ends, to the Face, or near the Nose. Then the
Cubitus must be bent in a little, it must also be brought upwards, and at the
Wrist it must lie just on the top of the Forehead. The Hand must be clapped on
the Head, along the S^tura Sagittalis, so that the Brachiale may be almost upon
the Sutura coronaria, the Metacarpium upon the crown of the Head, and the
middle Finger may almost reach the angle of the Lambdoeides. And because the
Arm must be continued in this posture till the parts are united, and that
without motion, (for otherwise the coalition of the Parts would be hindered,) it
must be so contrived, that, be the Patient never so willing, he cannot move his
Arm. But besides, the motion of the Head must be considered; for if the Head be
not kept steady, the case will be the same. Now the Head may be kept steady by
a Hood fixed to the Doublet behind, coming a little over the Forehead, down
along the sides of the Cheeks, with holes for the Ears, and fixed tight to the
Doublet again before. The Doublet must be well fastened to the Breeches, because
there is the stay of all. There must be several Rollers, to bind the several
parts of the Arm, of which that is the chief, which comprehends all the back
part of the Arm; and from which, as branches from a Tree, all the other
proceed. This may be called the Royal Roller. Its rise is from the
Shoulder-joynt and Armpit, and it goes from thence along the Humerus to the
Elbow; from thence to the Cubitus, and so to the Wrists and Finger's ends. Its
office is, by the help of other Rollers fastened to the edges, to keep the Arm
fast to the Head, and to give rise to the other Rollers, of which there are
four in number. The First begins behind the Humerus, comes under the Armpit,
and so goes along to the other Armpit: This may therefore be called the
Axillary Roller. It must be three Fingers broad. Its office is to guard the
Shoulder-joynt. The Second is the Elbow-Roller; it must be as broad as the
former. It comes from the edges of the Royal Roller, and both on the right and
left fastens the Arm to the Head going behind, and it is fastened to the Hood
about the Lambdoeidal lines. And it is of such moment to keep the Arm fast,
that there is another Roller, which comes from the infide of the Cubitus, a
little above the Elbow-roller, and so goes across the Breast, and is fastened to
the Doublet about the Hypochondria. This may be called the Pectoral Roller.
Last of all, there is a Roller which fastens the Arm to the Head at the Wrist:
It may be called the Brace-Roller. And these are the things we would have in
readiness before Incision.

CHAP. XII.
The Administration of Insition.

When the Artist has a mind to perform Insition, let him choose the Forenoon
for the time, because then Crudities are concocted. Therefore the Patient would
do well to eat but a light Supper before. A Tailor should be at hand, to fit
the Insititious garment to the Patient. Let the Patient therefore first put on
his Breeches, then his Doublet and Hood, let him tie his Doublet to his
Breeches with points; then let him button his Doublet. Then put on the Hood,
put the Ears out at the holes, and fit it right to the Head. Then let the
Artist raise the Patients Arm, (letting the Graft alone as it is,) and let him
put it in the posture, we mentioned before. The Assistents must keep it thus,
while the Artist fits the Rollers. Let him first open the Royal Roller, bring
it behind the Arm, obliquely along the Face, and fasten it to the Hood upon the
sides of the Lambdoeidal Suture. There must be two strings, and three or four
Fingers breadth between each. These eyelet-holes must be overcast by a Tailor,
lest they should tear, and give way. He must do the same on the other side.
Then take the Second Roller, which we call the Brace-Roller, and tie it on each
side to the Hood. Then take the Third, i. e. the Axillar Roller, carry it
forward toward the Pap on the contrary side, and tie it with strings. Then
carry the Pectoral Roller from the Cubitus to the opposite Hypochondrium, and
tie it to the Doublet with strings. (...) let the Artist examine all things
well, that nothing be loose or gaping, and see that all things be ready for
Insition. When he finds all things sit, let him then loose and untie the
Rollers, and put off the Hood, and throw it back on the Shoulders. The
Assistents must set the Chair ready and the Cloth. The Artist must rid himself
of all encumbrance. The Patient must sit right against the light of the window.
The Assistent must tie the Cloth about the Patient's neck, to save the Blood
from running down his Breast. The Artist must stand before the Patient, and
appoint his Assistents their posts. One of them must stand behind the Patient,
and hold back his Head, so that it cannot move any way: The other must stand at
his right Hand, and reach the Artist his Knives on occasion. For they must be
often changed, because this operation blunts them much. The Assistent should
keep them, as much as he can, out of the Patient's sight. He must also reach
Rags and Lint to wipe the Wound. Before the Artist sets upon Excoriation, he
ought to consider the breadth, depth, and ^renness of the Wound. And here take
notice, that the amplitude of the Wound affords the greatest hope of Insition.
The Wound must be deep enough to bleed well, since Blood is the only Glue and
Cement to unite the Parts. It must be even on the edges, without notches or
angles, in an even line, but oblique. Sometimes the Artist must put his
Forefinger into the Nostril, to keep it steady for cutting. The outside must
be first cut in an even line, then he must go deeper on the inside; and if at
the end of the Wound any thing stick which cannot be taken off with a knife, he
may clip it with a pair of Scissars, and so bring it to an evenness on the
inside. Then he must proceed to the cutting of the Graft, which he must not do
at a venture, but in proportion to the curt Nose, He must therefore wipe the
Wound, and clap a paper on the end of the Nose, which may serve, when
fortified, for a pattern to cut the Graft by. Great exactness is required here.
When he has fortified the Paper, let him give it to his Assistent. Let the
Patient hold a linen Cloth to the Wound, to stop the Blood and keep out the
Air. Then the Artist must open the Graft, and commit the Arm to one of his
Assistents. Who must put his right Hand under the Elbow, and with his left keep
the Vlna and the Wrist upright. The Artist must apply the Paper to the Graft,
and well consider how the Section must be made. Let him cut off what is
superfluous, let him take off the Callus within, and make it of an exact
measure with the foregoing Section of the Nose. Here the greatest diligence and
exactness imaginable is required: For there is no room to amend a mistake here.
Then let him bring the Graft to the Nose, and try whether they exactly sit, so
that there may be neither eminency nor vacuity in the edges of the Wounds. And
when they are exactly made fit, by taking away all unevenness, he must proceed
to stitching. Where observe, that the stitches must be all at an exact distance
in the Nose, but both at less, and not at even distances in the Graft. When he
goes to stitching the Nose and the Graft, let him set the Patient on a Chair in
a clear light, let him put on the Hood, and then the Roller, as we mentioned
before, over the Forehead, and fasten it behind in the Neck. This serves to
stick the Needles on in order, to avoid confusion after stitching when the
threads are tied, lest one might be taken for another. When this is done, let
him pass his Needle through the Parts; First through the Graft, and then
through the Nose. But before he passes his Needle, he must mark out the
stitches. Let him begin with one in the middle of the Graft, and then take the
rest equally on each hand of it. He must take care to observe just distances in
his stitches, that all may exactly sit; for the certainty and speed of
Coalition, and the beauty of the Cicatrice, depend all upon exactness in
stitching. The Artist may begin his stitching, either on the right or left side
of the Nose, first passing the Needle through the Graft, then through the Nose;
let him bring it out directly toward the Forehead, and stick it in order on
the Roller. When this is done, then comes the tying. But the Patient must first
be laid in his Bed, lest moving afterward should break or stretch the
stitches. First, the middle stitch must be tied, and then the rest on either
hand. The manner of it is thus. The Artist must turn the Arm into the posture,
we mentioned before, when he cut the Graft equal to the Nose, he must bid the
Assistent that holds the Patient's Head, to hold his Hand on the crown of his
Head by the Wrist, the other must keep the Cubitus, and the Elbow steady, while
a third takes up the Graft, and applies it to the curt Nose. The Artist must
with his left Hand take the end of the Thread that hangs out of the Graft, and
with his right, the Needle that belongs to it. Then let him draw the Thread
gently, and see whether it be that which he designs to tie or no, let him tie
it once tight, and tie another single knot, to keep it from slipping, and then
cut off the thread almost at the knot. And thus let him do with the rest in
order. When this is done, he must dip the Tents in the Whites of Eggs, and put
them into the Nostrils, and then dip the Pledgets, and lay them on the Sutures
outwardly. Then the Patient must be bound up with Rollers fastened to his
Clothes, so that he cannot stir any way. First of all, the Roller which fastens
the Wrist to the crown of the Head, must be tied on each side with its strings,
then the Elbow, then the Axillar, and then the Pectoral Roller. I would advise
the Artist himself to do this, and not to commit it to Servants, be they never
so skilful. This done, let him advise his Patient to lie as still as he can,
not to stretch out, or pull his Arm, nor stir it any way, lest it should cause
an Inflammation, which after so much slashing, stitching and tying, is apt
enough to come of itself. Wherefore to avoid this, it would do well, for an
hour and an half to clap some linen Clothes dipped in Whites of Eggs and
Rose Water in equal quantities to the place of Insition, changing them as they
grow hot: For nothing is better to prevent an Inflammation. And so is
Ingrafting performed.

CHAP. XIII.
The Cure of the Insition, and what Course of Life must be observed.

MEdicaments, proper for the Cure of the Ingrafted parts, are of a middle
nature between such as cicatrize, and such as incarnate: For they must be
drying, and moderately astringent, such as Ebulus, sambucus, sideritis, palmae,
pini, tedae cortices, draconii folia recentia, quae fraga gignit herba, anagall
is, salix, androsaemum, astragalus, philomunculus, telephium, symphytum
petraeum, arancae tela, sed ea praecipue, cui e pistrino pollen insederit,
(haec enim valentius exiccat) equisetum, chamaepytis, arnoglossum (quod in
jungendis vulneribus nulli remediorum cedit) isatis, centaureum minus, folia
pentaphylli, mumia, folia bederae recentia, gummi ceu humor glutinosus
folliculis ulmi inclusus, ceratum ex cerussa and emplastrum barbarum. Those are
good for the Cure of the outward Wound; but that on the Inside requires another
course; for you must for three days at least tent this with Suppuraters a
little drier than ordinary, such as Vnguentum ex Pompholyge. It is good to
strew Myrrh, Frankincense, and Dragon's Blood powdered upon the stitches, to
keep them from ouzing. When the Pledgets are taken off, it must be done with
all gentleness; therefore they must be suppled with some Liquor, but sparingly,
lest any moisture should insinuate into the Insition. Afterward Linen Cloths
spread with Medicines must be applied outwardly, and Tents dipped in some
inwardly, till the fourth day; and then we must proceed with Driers, as we said
before. This must be carefully observed, that in dressing, they loose the Elbow
Roller very carefully, especially at the first, lest the Insition should be
separated. Therefore an Assistent must with all diligence keep the Patient's
Arm in its former posture. As to the stitches, the time when they are to be
loosed, is, when manifest tokens of Coalition do show themselves, which they do
in Summer, and a dry Season, on the third or fourth day; But in Winter and
Autumn, not till the fifth. It would be absurd to loose all the stitches at
once. For tho the Principles of Union show themselves in all parts; yet it is
best to keep some stitches fast, till all be more firmly united. You must begin
to loose them first, where the Union is not confirmed. This will be manifest,
where the Part is driest. The fleshy and upper Parts usually unite the first.
The lower, because they are excarnous and dependent, and so receive the
moisture that falls from above, are flower in uniting. Tho sometimes it falls
out otherwise. The stitches must be clipped with a pair of keen little Scissars,
near the hole, and the thread must be drawn out by the knot. It would be
improper to let the stitches alone till the Nose were cicatrized; for so the
lips of the holes would grow callous, and would never cicatrize, but the Marks
would remain: All which is prevented by taking out the stitches in time. But
where the stitches are taken out, we must apply Sarcoticks and Agglutinants.
The first stitches are taken out about the fourth day, and all the rest before
the seventh; for within that time the Parts do cicatrize. When the stitches are
thus taken out, apply dry Lint with Ceratum ex Pompholyge, till the fourteenth
day, in which time the Parts unite and clcatrize, as their dryness does most
certainly testify. The course of living is either low or midling: For the
first week use a low, and for the second, a midling Diet. All must be
Spoon-meats, to avoid chewing, which would disturb the Nose. Keep quiet. Be
cheerful. And be moderate in Sleep and Watching.

CHAP. XIV.
How the Symptoms, attending Ingrafting, are to be corrected.

THE Symptoms attending this Operation, are either proper to the Ingrafting, or
common to other parts. Symptoms proper to Ingrafting are Proud Flesh and
Excrescence on the inside, and gaping of the Suture. The First is Nature's
fault, the Second is the Artist's. Proud Flesh arises in illhabited Bodies, and
in cold and moist constitutions. We must not cicatrize, till this Proud Flesh
is taken away; and it may be taken away by Tents dipped in Vnguentum Isidis,
Apostolorum, or Damascewan, and put up the Nose. If there be any gaping of the
Suture, it was the Artist's carelessness in taking his stitches, that occasioned
it. The only Remedy is, to do it quite over again, as we directed in Insition:
For be it little or more that is amiss, the case is the same, the Operation
must be performed anew.

The next are the common Symptoms, namely pain occasioned by binding the Arm in
the aforesaid posture, for which the only Remedy is Patience, since it may not
be loosed, nor can Medicaments be applied. Unless changing sides to lie on may
give a little ease. The pain in the Wrist arises from its being tied down to
the Scull, upon a rough hood. The Remedy is to put Cotton under the Wrist
between it and the Head. Thirst, want of Sleep, and other general Symptoms may
be cured in this, as in other cases.

CHAP. XV.
Of Cutting the Graft quite from the Arm, and how it must be Cured.

AS soon as the curt parts are united with the Graft, it is time immediately to
take it from the Arm, and to commit it to the new Stock. We must consider
therefore, when we may reckon them united, and so at what time the Graft must
be cut off, then how it ought to be done, and how cured, and lastly how
Symptoms may be helped. The time of full unition is about the Twentieth day.
Therefore we should cut it off within Twenty days at the furthest. Sometimes in
dry Weather, and a good Constitution, it may be done within a Fortnight or
thereabout.

Before the Artist sets upon the Operation, he must have in readiness Whites of
Eggs, and Rosewater with a little Powder of Dragon's Blood, to stop Bleeding;
round Pledgets and Rollers both for the Arm and Nose. Those for the Arm must be
of the same breadth and length as before. For besides the new Ulcer, which
arises upon cutting of the Graft, the whole Bed must be oovered, which it may
with a plate of Lead and drying Medicaments. The Roller designed for the Nose
must have its ends long enough to tie behind the Head. It must be about four
Fingers broad. As soon as it reaches further than the Nose, it must be divided
into two, and so must have a double end on each Hand. Two of them must be tied
above the Ears, upon the tip of the Lambdoeides: And the other two must pass
under the Roots of the Ears, and be tied behind on the beginning of the Neck.
But the ends on each Hand must cross one another, the lower being tied above,
and the upper below. This also must be observed, that where the Roller is
whole, and lies upon the Graft, it must, about a Fingers breadth from the
bottom, be cut transverse, and another must be put under Perpendicular to it;
so that it may reach no farther than the top of the other Roller. For when the
Graft passes through this way, it does not turn up, but being pressed on each
side makes way forward, so that gradually it receives the shape of a Nose.
There must be several square pieces of Linen in readiness at the Fire upon
occasion of the Graft, as we shall show by and by. Then there must be a very
sharp Knife or Rasor, wherewith to cut off the Graft. When all things are thus
ready, let the Artist proceed to his Administration. He must order two
Assistents, one on his Right Hand by the Patient's Face and at the upper part
of the Bed; the other on his Left, on the outside of the Bed. First, all the
Rollers must be untied, and the Hood must be thrown off the Head upon the
Shoulders; and while the Artist is about Cutting, the Assistents must keep the
Arm in the same posture, it was in before. He must take the Knife in his Right
Hand, and apply his Left to the Graft. He must hold the Root of it between his
Thumb on the outside, and his Forefinger on the inside, and with the Knife cut
it off by the Root close to the Arm. When this is done, three things remain:
The first whereof, which is the Artist's part, is to dress the Graft: The other
two, namely, to bring back the Arm, and to dress the new Wound, belong to the
Assistents. These actions must not be divided. For each of them requires its
Cure immediately; nor can the Artist apply himself to so many Operations all at
once. Therefore these charges must be committed to several Persons at one and
the same time. And that every one may know what his duty is, we shall first
proceed to the Cure of the Graft, which is the principal thing. But here two
things give us a great deal of trouble, one is the fresh Wound, the other is
the refrigeration of the Graft, after its being cut off. This later is apt to
affright People that are unexperienced in the affair, because in the very
Moment that the Graft is cut off, they see it turn pale and white, and stiff
and cold, as if all its heat were expired. But these fears presently vanish, if
we apply but warm Linen Cloths to the Graft, changing them for hot as they grow
cold. How long this is to be done, is hard to determine, because of the several
Complexions of Men's Bodies; it ought to be continued till the Graft is revived,
which we may know by its growing a little redder and more fresh colored. Then
clap on warm Cloths, and underneath some dipped in the Whites of Eggs, then bring
the Roller over the Pledgets, and lie it behind the Head, as aforesaid. As for
the Assistents parts, he on the Lest Hand must apply a Compress dipped in Whites
of Eggs to the fresh Wound; and if there is any Wound remaining in the Bed, he
must apply its Medicaments, and roll it all over with a Roller, and sew the end
at last: For the Roller must not be tied on a knot. After dressing, it is
advisable to draw the Arm from the Head, and bring it to a middle posture:
This must be done by degrees, and not at once. He that dressed it may most
conveniently do it, by taking hold of the Patient's Elbow with his Right Hand,
and of his Wrist with his Left, and so bring it into its posture. The other may
put Pillows underneath, and support and gradually compose the Arm into a middle
posture. We will now say something further in reference to Cutting. We advised
to cut off the Graft close by the Arm, if it were but for the better cure of
the Arm. If you think, that there will be more than needs of the Graft to
supply the Nose, you may either the very same day, or the next, cut off what
you think will prove superfluous; but have a care that you take not too much
away: For then the Nose would still be deficient. We must have a care likewise,
that we tie not the Graft too hard: For that might repress the Blood and so
cause it to perish. The Patient must live on a wholesome Diet, but eat little.
He must have a care of cold and uncertain Weather, which often causes the Nose
to perish.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Shaping the Graft, so as it may represent the Nose.

THE shaping of the Graft consists principally in three things, viz. In forming
the Nostrils and the Bridge, in its Insition, and last of all in conforming the
whole Graft according to Nature's Model. Nothing of this kind must be
attempted, till fourteen days are over from the Graft's Cutting off, and then
it will be time to begin this Operation. In the mean time the Graft must be
carefully guarded by Medicaments and binding. Tents, as we said before, must be
dipped in unguentum ex succis or ex pompholyge, either alone or mixed together,
and put into the Nostrils. But the end of the Graft, that is, the fresh Wound,
requires Suppuration for the first Week; and the later Week unguentum ex succis
or de pompholyge may be applied. The Artist must also take care, that the
external parts cicatrize neatly. He may accomplish this by several means, of
which I shall mention the most experienced and successful. They are either
Plasters applied outwardly, or Fomentations used before the Plasters are
applied. In Summer time ceratum diaphaenicinum and ex cerussa are proper. It
will be better, both for the comeliness of the Cicatrice, and the strength of
the part, if a little oleum de Beta be mixed with it. And this is no ordinary
Plaster; Styrac. liqu. iiij. cerae flavae ij. thuris, myrrhae, olibani, ligni
aloes a v. redigantur singula in tenuissimum pollineni, and oleo amygd. dulc.
recenti, and cera cum resinae, q. s. ex art paretur ceratum. But before we
apply the Plaster, we have often with good success fomented the part with
generous Wine warm, in half a Pint whereof five Grains of Musk were steept. The
Graft may be fomented either with a Sponge or with Rags dipped in this Wine,
which, when their warmth begins to fail, must be changed for new. For so the
Pores are opened, and the Blood is drawn into the Graft. This done, the Artist
must cover the whole Skin, and the Nose also, a Fingers breadth, with his
Plaster. In the Winter and Autumn we Foment with this; Vini Cretic. lb ij.
oliban. styrac. liquid. an. j. adipis asini ij. Infundantur omnia per noctem in
vino Cretico supra dicto, deinde his ebulliant, mox colentur and colata
serventur. Ceratum Barbarum is good. And this; Galbani, opopanac. thur.
aristoloch. long. mastic. myrrh. an j. Ammoniac. jss. litharg. aur. ol. commun.
an. xviiij. bdel. ij. lap. calamin. haematit. an j. olei absmth. iiij.
terebinth. lb v. ol. rosac. j. redigantur in tenuissimum pollinem quae
religenda sunt, and gummi aceto dissolutis cum cera, s. a. f. ceratum. This
also is excellent good, Aristoloch. rotund. been alb. and rubr. an. v. rad.
lil. v. cicer. rubr. lupinor. combustor. an. p. s. nucis moschat. cinnam. an.
ss. amygd. amar. contusar. ij. ol. tartar. iij. aqu. pluvial. lb. ii. contrita
distillentur, mox liquoris ij. ol. caryophyll. de spic. an. j. Styrac. liquid.
v. ambr. j. mastich. ij. terebinth. v. bulliant olea cum liquore, deinde
additis reliquis cum cerae q. s. f. ceratum. s. a. Another thing requisite to
the guard of the Graft, is the Binding, which must not be inartificial. For
because the Graft must come as near the shape of the Nose as may be, it is
requisite to make it gradually pliant, to bend it a little, and to form the Tip
and the Bridge. In Nature's Model of the Nose there are these things
considerable, the Length, the Tip, the Bridge, ^he Alae or sides of the
Nostrils, and the Holes or Nostrils themselves. The length of the Nose is
reckoned to be the third part of the Face's length, namely the spac^ between
the Tip-end of the Nose to the middle of the intercilium is equal to that of
the Forehead from thence, and to the space between the bottom of the Bridge,
and the end of the Chin. The Tip is the round end of the Nose. From hence the
Bridge is inserted transverse to the upper Lip; and its length is the space
between that insertion and the edge of the upper Lip. The proportion of the
Alae or sides is such, as that they pass on either side down to the upper Lip
in the shape of an (S), only the bought is far larger where it descends to the
upper Lip. The Holes or Nostrils are of an Oval Figure, more acute toward the
Tip, and more obtuse toward the lower end. After this Model of Nature
therefore must we always form the Cutaneous Graft, when ever the Bridge and the
Alae are cut off. And if any part of them remains, the Graft must be formed
proportionable. When therefore the Artist would shape the Nose, having first
considered its length, let him mark that part with Ink, which he designs for
the Tip. Then let him mark the Confines of the Alae, from the Basis to the Tip;
and then mark the Bridge from the same Tip to the Basis. When he has done this,
let him consider well, whether all things be exact, and then let him take his
Knife, which must be very sharp, and cut, as he had designed, the Graft. But he
must observe this caution in the Section, to the Bridge he must cut in a right
line, but toward the Alae in a bow, deep and oblique. He must put small Tents
dipped in Whites of Eggs into the Nostrils, and he must bring the Bridge between
them. Then he must put an orbicular Compress below the Nose. This is done to
keep the Bridge from starting, and the Tents from slipping out. He must not
take away these Tents till the next day. And take this for a rule in forming
the Bridge, always take it long enough and broad enough; for one may take away
from it, but can never add to it. Therefore of the two extremes the excess is
less dangerous than the defect. The reason why the Bridge is cut in a straight
line, and the Alae in an oblique or sloping inwards, is because this is best
both for the Nostrils and the Bridge. For whatever is taken from the thickness
of the Alae, as much is added to the Amplitude of the Nostrils. And we may do
it the more boldly, because proud Flesh is apt to grow there. Besides, when the
Ulcer is healed, the Skin turns inwards, and so the circumference of the Alae
being Skin and not a Cicatrice looks the handsomer. The reason why we Cut the
Bridge straight down, is, because so it is the stronger, which would otherwise
fade away. But the Cutaneous Graft must be well hollowed out toward the Alae,
otherwise you can never make a decent Nose. Wherefore whether there be proud
Flesh or any thing superfluous of its substance, it must be taken away thus.
The Patient must sit against the light, and lean his Head back upon one of the
Assistents. Then the Artist having turned up his Nostrils, and diligently
viewed whether there be any thing superfluous; if there be, he must take it
away by little and little and very moderately with keen little Knives. He must
repeat this often, for upon Cutting, proud Flesh is apt always to arise, the
growth whereof must be checked with Tents dipped either in unguentum isidis or de
pompholyge, and clapped into the Nostrils, as soon as the proud Flesh is taken
away. Every day the Tents must be twice taken out and new ones dipped afresh put
in their room, having first wiped the Nostrils with Cotton or soft Wool. Let
the Artist have an Eye to the largeness of the Cavity, and if it be not big
enough, let him not fear to cut out enough to enlarge it, till the Graft be
proportionable to Nature. To this action I can assign no certain term, I commit
it to the Artist's prudence. Only let him take care, while he turns his Knife
inward, that he no way hurt the Bridge. For its tender substance could not bear
it. Therefore the safest way is never to turn the edge of the Knife that way;
but to begin the Section at the Tip, and when he is gone half way, to take the
Knife out, and put it in at the Lip, and so make the Sections meet. For if he
should carry the Knife round and it should slip, it might endanger the Bridge.
You need not fear that this tormenting work will spoil the Graft; on the
contrary the oftener it is Cut, the harder and stiffer it grows, when once it is
Cicatrized. The time of Cicatrization is uncertain, sometimes three weeks (which
is soonest,) sometimes, Forty, Fifty or Threescore days and above; according as
the season or the Patient's Constitution is hotter or colder, drier or moister.
But this time needs not seem long, since the Patient may all this while go
abroad, and live at his Liberty, provided he abuse it not by excess. The warm
Air cannot injure him, but a cold one may; wherefore in Winter and Autumn he
must be the more careful.

CHAP. XVII.
The Insition of the Bridge.

AFter the Bridge and the Cavity of the Nostrils are formed, and a Callus is
bred, it will be time to ingraft the Bridge. The reasons why we defer the doing
it so long, are various. When the Bridge is ingrafted, we cannot turn up the
Nose, nor look into it, nor put a Knife deep, or with any safety into it, all
which may very well be done, while the Graft is not inserted into the upper
Lip. Nor could it be done, till the Wounds on the sides are healed. Besides,
should the Bridge be ingrafted before it were confirmed by a Callus, it would
shrink, and draw down the Tip, and so make the Nose imperfect. Therefore it is
convenient, to defer it is Insition till the thirty eighth day in Summer, and
till the sixtieth in Winter. Though sometimes in each season one may do it
sooner. Before we set upon Ingrafting the Bridge, several things must be got
ready, as a crooked Needle and a Forceps, which are peculiar to this Operation:
Other things also, common to the Insition of the Graft, are here requisite, as
sharp Knives, Thread, Whites of Eggs mixed with Rose Water, round Compresses,
and Tents dipped in Whites of Eggs and Rose Water. We never use the Forceps, but
when the Basis of the Bridge is quite gone. For then we must excoriate the Part
which is to receive the Bridge; and this could never be done without this
Instrument: For the Callus would hinder one from doing it without the help of a
Forceps to take up the Part. This Forceps has two long handles, one with
Notches, the other with a Ring fixed at the end, and another Ring running loose
in that, to slip over the Notches, and so to hold the Forceps tight. From the
joint a circle arises, large enough to encompass the Parts about the mouth.
From this divided in the middle, arise thin Plates with a blunt straight edge
sharp-pointed, that they may the better be put into the Nose. With this we must
take up the Skin, and then cut it. The Needles must be bent Semicircular. It is
good to have two or three of them in readiness, though there be but occasion for
one, if that holds without breaking. There must be also a pair of Scissars, to
clip a little off the Bridge, when part of it remains; for it will not bear
cutting with a Knife, because of it is acute sense. When the Operation is
undertaken, the Patient must sit in a clear light against the Window, and the
Artist standing right before him, must open his Forceps, and put it gently up
the Nose to the Circle. Then he must try to take up the Skin, which is the
Basis of the Bridge, between the Edges of the Forceps, so as that the pressed
Skin may start out above the sides of the Forceps. When he has taken it up, let
him squeez the Forceps, and put the Ring upon the Handle to keep it fast. Then
let him cut off the Callus and the Skin, that stands up above the Forceps, with
a small sharp Knife. He may leave off, when the Blood comes freely all over.
Then he must take off the Ring, loose the Forceps, and give it to the
Assistent. But first let him take care to see, that the Wound of the Basis
corresponds to the bigness of the Bridge, before he loose his Forceps. For it
is far better, that the Wound should be larger, rather than less, than the
Bridge; because the largeness of the Wound is the ground of Unition, and if it
be larger than needs, it is no great matter, since the Cicatrice is covered by
the Nose. But when the Bridge is not quite gone, but part remains, he must then
take a pair of Scissars and clip it off at once, as much as needs, which, if it
were cut, would put the Patient to intolerable pain. After excoriation, or
clipping, the end of the Bridge (or if it be too long, a little more) must be
cut off. Effusion of Blood terminates this operation, as before. The reason,
why we excoriate the Basis first, and then the Bridge, is, lest if we should
cut the Bridge first, the Blood falling down might hinder the other operation.
When things are thus administered, the Artist must take the Needle in his right
hand at the middle, and pass it in at the top of the Philtrum (or the dent in
the upper Lip,) or, if the bottom of the Bridge be standing, underneath that,
till it comes out at the upper part of the Wound on the other side; when he
sees the Needle appear, let him thrust it further; but with his left hand let
him hold the Nose aside, that he hurt it not; and then taking hold of the
Needle with his Fingers, let him draw it quite out, with a little piece of the
thread. When he has done this, let him wipe the Needle, that it slip not out of
his Fingers, and let him take the Bridge by the end, and pass his Needle
through that, taking good hold, lest the holes should break. Then he must tie
the thread, and cut off the ends. When he has done stitching, let him put in
the Tents, and put underneath the Compresses. He must apply the usual Plaster
to the outside of the Nose, and then bind all carefully up. Let the Patient
keep himself quiet for one day, either in Bed, or at least in the House. It
would not be amiss to cut short his Diet till the fourth day; about which time,
especially in warm weather, signs of Unition appear. Wherefore then abouts it
will be proper to take out the stitches. But in cold weather, and in moist
Bodies, not till the sixth day. As to the rest of the Cure, you have it before
in the Cure of the Graft. Every day it must be dressed with Tents dipped in
Vnguentum ex pompholyge, or with such things as were applied to the Graft, dry
Lint, etc. which, after the striches are taken out, must be continued till the
Parts are strongly united.

CHAP. XVIII.
The further Conformation of the cutaneous Graft.

When the Bridge is firmly united, which in Summer is about the fourteenth
day, and in Winter about the twentieth, the care of Conformation ensues, which
is a constant molding of the whole Substance of the Graft into the shape of the
Nose. For though by the foregoing Configuration, the cutaneous Graft has in a
good measure acquired the shape of a Nose; yet it falls far short, both in
solidity and shape; because as yet it is but soft and flaccid, and has little
in it of the grace of a Nose. For hitherto it has had enough to do to live; but
now that the Troubles are over, it begins to provide for it is own strength, and
to be clear of another nature. Now the Tip begins to have life in it, and the
Nostrils being strengthened inwardly with a Cicatrice, the whole Nose grows
more compact and solid. But this will not be complete till a long time,
according to the diversities of Bodies, and of the ambient Air. This last Work
depends upon two sorts of Means, viz. upon Tubes inwardly and a Cover
outwardly, made in the shape of a Nose, wherewith the cutaneous Graft being
guarded in it is tender Age, may insensibly grow into the shape of a Nose. As
for the Tubes, their Figure is circular, oblong, and unequal. It is circular,
but not exactly, for where it comes to the Bridge it is flattish. It is broader
below toward the Alae, and narrower above toward the root of the Nose,
growing narrower by degrees. Below, they turn back a little, and take hold of
the Alae, and toward the Tip they run out like a Myrtle-leaf. They also in a
straight line enclose the Bridge, meeting like two Boards exactly plained.
Their length is unequal, for on the upper side, toward the ridge of the Nose,
they run out farther in length, (to compress those Parts as they swell with
proud Flesh,) than on the opposite side, where there is no heed of them.
Wherefore that end comes sloping downwards. But on both sides they must be
equal in Bulk, Length, and Figure, not too big or long, so as to squeeze the
Bridge and kill it; nor too little or short, so as not to be able to repress
proud Flesh, and help the Callus. At first they must be made of Lead very thin;
afterward, as the Callus comes on, a little thicker, which it usually does in
three months from the time of Coalition. But when the Nose is a little hardened,
they must be made of a stiffer substance, either of Silver or Gold. The Cover
must be of the same substance with the Tubes, either of Lead, Silver or Gold,
according to the time. As soon as ever we use the Tubes, this must be applied
to the Nose. It must be of the exact shape of a Nose. It must cover the tip and
the Alae, and then run down the Bridge to the upper Lip. But holes must be left
in it for the Tubuli to stick out, and for respiration. The Cover must come up
above the Insition, and rest upon the bony Part, to keep all the firmer, and to
defend the Cicatrice from external Injuries. It must be lined with Silk or thin
Cloth, and the Lining must be changed every, or every other, day. Though this
Lining is not needful in hot and dry weather. The Cover is kept on with five
Strings, whereof four are in pairs and one single; the single one runs up just
between the Eyebrows, along the Forehead, and the Sagittal future behind the
Crown of the Head, underneath which it is fastened behind to the other Strings.
The upper of the lateral Strings comes from the middle of the Cover, passes the
Cheeks and the Os jugale, and so above the Ear, and is fastened with it is
opposite upon the Occiput at the tip of the Lambdoeides, and to this is the
single string fastened; so the lower lateral strings come likewise from the
middle of the Cover, and are carried cross the Cheeks under the Ears, and are
tied behind in the nape of the Neck. The strings should be of Silk, about a
Finger broad. Rings must be fastened to the Cover, whereto the strings must be
fastened. Now we will show, how the Cover is to be tied on. We must consider,
that in the tip of the Nose there is a dent; wherefore it must be bound tight
to the Graft there, that it may represent a Nose. For this purpose, lest the
string should slip any way, we have fastened a Ring to the top of the Nose,
through which this string must pass. We have added two more in the sides,
through which strings must pass thence along under the Ears, and tie behind in
the Neck, to keep the Cover close down to the Nose. This Cover makes the
Cicatrice even, and repels the Humors from it. By these two things, the Tubes
and Cover, is the fashioning of the Nose completed. They should be used for two
years; and if toward the later end they grow irksome, the Cover may be left
off in the day time (but not the Tubes,) and put on again at night. And because
strings may fret the Flesh, the Cover may be tied on with a Roller, especially
in the night time. It must be long enough to the behind, and broader than the
Cover, so as it may comprehend the Cover, the Tip, and the Alae. That part
which (...) upon the Nose must be whole; but about a Fingers breadth from the
Nose on either side it must be slit, and the lower part must be carried above
the Ears, and the other below, along the Cheeks, and both must be tied behind.
And thus is the whole Art of Engrafting a new Nose fully described. Only it
remains, that we inform you, how the Color and Cicatrice of the Nose may be
amended. There is nothing better than, in the heat of Summer, for an hour or an
hour and a half, to sir with your Nose against the hot Sun. Do this every day
for a good while together. And the heat and dryness will strangely confirm the
Callus, and add to the beauty of the Nose. The things following are good for a
Cicatrice; Fell bubulum, vitulinum, caprinum, vel testudinis. Illud ladano
oportet excipere and coralli pollinem admiscere. This is an excellent Water;
Aq. vitae quarto dest illatae lb v. sem. lupin. eruc. au ij. rad. rut. j.
Medullam panis albissimi, all. ov. No. iiij. Macerentur per drem and noctem
simul, and extrahatur liquor, quem usui servare oportet, and leviter alternis
saltem diebus cicatricem illinere. Saevum asini makes a beautiful Cicatrice.
Huic prisci fell vituls cum myrrha, melle and croco addebant, and pyxide aerea
recondebant. Alii storem aeris addebant. We prepare an effectual Liquor thus,
Sevi asini, mell. alb. aqu. ardent. lupin. an. j. aq. flor. fabar. iij.
macerato biduum, and mox liquorem per alembicum extrahito. If to this Water we
add some ceratum ex cerussa, and a few drops of the Oil of Ben, it will be very
efficacious. Aqua ex vitibus destillans is good, and so is that, quae ex
geniculis arundinum effluit. With this and asini sevum and Oil of Ben, we make
a Liquor, which, if added to the Plaster, makes it most effectual. In the day
time you may anoint, and in the night apply the Plaster. Astringents must be
applied just in due time: For when they are applied too soon, they make a
hollow Cicatrice; and when too late, a tumid and uneven one. And thus much of
Engrafting the Nose.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Curing the Hare-Lip, and supplying a Lip deficient.

LIps are curt, or deficient, either from the Birth, and then they are called
Hare-Lips, or by accident without loss of substance, and then they are called
curt Cicatricose; or lastly, they are truly curt, where substance is deficient.
And only these last need engrafting. But first we will begin with the Hare-Lip,
because this is the most simple evil, and easiest to cure. If both Lips be
such, the same method of cure must be used for both. And what that should be,
the nature of the Disease shows, namely, the separation of those parts which
should be joined. Something indeed seems to be lost, and so there seems something
to be needful to supply the place of what is lost. But we may very well obtain
our end, and perform a cure, without the superaddition of any thing. Now that
the disjoined parts, which ought to be entire, should be united, the seat of
the Disease indicates. And this work of unition is owing first to Nature and
then to Art, which removes what hinders Nature, and assists her in her
Operations. It is Art's task, to excoriate the parts, and keep them close
together, that they may unite in their Blood, to sew them when united, to keep
them sewed, and to reduce them to a right temper and health. Let the Artist
therefore take up that part of the Lip, which must be excoriated, in his Left
Hand, and then take off the Skin equally with a very sharp Knife, till the
Blood comes, to the very Angle of the Hiatus, and then he must smooth the
Wound. This Operation may also be performed very quickly and safely with a pair
of Scissars. The same must be done on the other side. Then he must draw the
parts together with his Hand, and stitch them. We must observe this, not to
take our stiches superficially, but through all. The Artist must therefore pass
his Needle straight through the Lip from the outside inwards, and on the other
side he must pass the Needle from the inside outward. He must tie the threads
and fasten the ends, and then cut them off. He must take his stitches not too
near the edges of the Wound, but at a good distance, lest the hold should
break. The number of the stitches is best defined by the amplitude of the
Wound. After stitching is done, some compresses, dipped in Whites of Eggs and
Rosewater, must be applied both to the inside and outside of the Wound. Then a
thin, soft, and even Roller of about three Fingers breadth, dipped in Posca, must
be brought along obliquely above the Ears, and must be tied tightly behind the
Head. A piece of Linen Cloth also, dipped in mild Posca, must be applied to the
inside of the Lip, to defend it likewise from Fluxion. Within a day or two the
compresses must be removed, and conglutinants must be applied. The outside may
have such things applied to it, as are mentioned before in the cure of a curt
Nose, as with Lint and unguentum ex cerussa, and a Plaster of ceratum ex
cerussa applied over it. But the Medicaments for the inside are Srrupus ex
rosis siccis, syrup. myrtin. and where there is much foulness, julep. violarum
or mel rosaceum. These used either alone or mixed hasten Coalition. It will do
well to add a little pollen myrrhae to them. Sir. ros. sicc. j. Mell. ros. v.
pollinis thuris j. M. We must spread a rag with it, and apply it often to the
inside of the Lip. About the beginning of the fourth day we must loose some of
the stitches, where the parts seem best united. But then it is best to keep the
parts together with a glue, which may stick, till there is a perfect Coalition.
And as soon as the Glue sticks, the stitches may be loosed. Flos calcis with
the white of an Egg is a good Glue. You may use this. Gum. tragac. mastic.
Arab. thur. an. v. albumina ovorum No ij. agitentur albumina diligentissime
usque dum spumam ejiciant, hanc blande detrahere convenit, and quod subter est
limpidum, and aequale, retinere, mox reliquorum pollinem inspergere, atque
totum ad quandam inter extrema mollia and aura studiose permiscendo
consistentiam perducere. The way of applying it is thus. Two Linen Cloths must
be got, double, and about three Fingers long, and as broad as the Lip, with
threads fastened at small, but equal, distances in both, as many on the one
side as on the other. They must be spread with the Glue, and the ends, where
there are no Threads, must be applied wet to the Lip. With this proviso, that
the Threads meet at four Fingers distance from the outmost edge of the Linen
Cloths, and that the ends of the Linen Cloths be an Inch at least from the edge
of the Wound. About six hours after the Glue is applied, (in which time it
fastens to the Lips,) we must tie the Threads gently. You may know they are
close enough tied, when the Lips of the Wound meet, and when there is no pain.
Then we must dress the Wound with drying Liniments, such as we used to the Bed.
While he does this, the Artist must loose the Threads, wipe the Wound and apply
Medicaments, then he must tie the Threads again, apply a thin Cloth, and then a
Roller. This (...) be done twice a day, for fourteen days, in which time the
edges of the Wounds will be strongly united. But I would advise the Patient,
that, when he goes to Bed, he would apply ceratum ex cerussa, and bind it with
a Roller. He may likewise use the same things here as in the Cicatrice of an
engrafted Nose.

When a Lip is curt Cicatricose, the Callus must be quite cut away, which you
may know to be done by the bleeding every where. That day it must be dressed with
Medicaments, that stop Blood, and after that with suppuraters. The Lip must be
brought into its proper place. Which that you may do, you must fold a Linen
Cloth several times in manner of a compress, you may lay Medicaments on it, and
keep the Lip higher or lower, as is fit, and then fasten all with a Roller.
After Seven days, Sarcoticks and Epuloticks must be used. A thick leaden plate
of the shape of a Lip, with Medicines upon it, may be applied. And when it is
cicatrized, the business is done. It will be best not to leave off the leaden
Plate too soon; but to wear the same in the Night and tie it on fast. For so in
time it will be perfectly well, without any fear of breaking open again.

When a great part of the Lip is wanting, it cannot be supplied without a
Graft. Therefore I would advise him, that intends this Operation, diligently to
peruse what has before been said in engrafting the Nose. For the delineation of
the Graft is exactly the same, and the taking of it up partly the same,
(namely, when the upper Lip is to be supplied,) and partly different, when the
under Lip is to be supplied: For then the Graft must be cut off at the end next
the Elbow. Moreover, the method of Cure is the same from the taking up of the
Graft till it is Insition. Only you must take care, that the Callus be well
grown on the inside of the Graft. For the moisture, that comes from the Gums,
hinders the healing of that Part very much. Insition must be made with crooked
Needles; and the Stitches both in the Graft and Lip must be at equal distances.
Nor must the Graft be cut from it is Stock, till it is well united with the curt
Parts, which it is in Summer within Four and twenty days after Insition; but
much a longer time is required in Winter and cold weather. The method for
Conformation must be such as the substance of the Lip requires. This will be
much helped by binding, which must be with a Roller carried above the Ears for
the upper Lip, and underneath for the lower Lip: Or, with a double-headed
Roller, when both the Lips are to be bound. A plate of Lead will be also as
necessary for the Lip, as it was to cover the Nose. And this may suffice for
the Cure of curt Lips.

CHAP. XX.
Of Supplying curt Ears.

THE business of supplying a curt Ear consists in taking up the Graft, in
Engrafting, Curing and Forming of it. Here the Graft is not taken from the Arm,
as it was for the Nose and Lips, but from the Region adjacent, behind the Ear.
It is at one and the same time delineated, taken up, and engrafted. There must
be in readiness Knives, Needles, Thread, Whites of Eggs mixed with Bole Armenick
and Terra sigillata, and Compresses. Two things are peculiar to this Operation,
viz. Gossypium ustulatum, to stop Blood upon cutting the Artery; and a Roller
to go along by the Ears under the Chin, which must tie on the Crown of the
Head: The Basis of it, that is, the Part below the Ears, which goes under the
Chin, is whole; but from the Roots of the Ears, or lower, it is parted into
two, the Part toward the Face, is called the Forepart, and the Part behind,
the Hind-part. That behind keeps on the Dressings, and the Forepart is
assistent to it in keeping all fast. The place whence the Graft must be taken,
is the place behind the Ear without hair. The dimension of the Ear will show
the quantity of the Graft. It is best here also to take it large enough. The
curt Parts must be carefully scarified all over, and the Graft must be stitcht
to the Part, beginning at the Concha interna where the Skin rises from the
Head, and not at the Helix externa. The Passage of the Ear must be stopped with
Cotton. But first of all the bleeding of the Artery, when the Graft is raised,
must be stopped with Gossypium ustulatum, and Compresses wet in Whites of Eggs,
and Rose Water must be applied to the Bed, and great care must be taken to
prevent an Inflammation, by applying Clothes about the Neck wet in Posca, and
changing them as they grow warm. The Patient must live very temperate, and use
Spoonmeat to avoid chewing. Sometime on the third day the Wound may be opened,
and the Compresses may be removed; but this may not be done till a Caruncle is
grown at the end of the Artery, to plug it up. When these are taken away, the
Bed must be treated with Suppuraters for fourteen days as formerly, And the
Graft must be exiccated carefully, both in the Coalition, and on the backside
where the Wound is, which must turn to perfect Callus. The very same
Medicaments are proper here as in the former Cases. One thing must be taken
care of, that the holes of the stitches he filled with strewing on some Powder:
And they must be loosed in order, as formerly has been directed. Bolsters must
be put between the Head and the Graft, which may both keep it in the shape and
posture of an Ear. The Artist must have a care of the proud Flesh that rises in
the Bed, especially about the Root of the Graft, which Part is long in healing.
As for the Medicaments, what they are, and when they should be changed, what
the Symptoms are, and how they should be cured, you may find all in the
foregoing Discourse Of Supplying a curt. Nose.

CHAP. XXI.
The History of a Nose artificially Engrafted.

ANN. 1590. When the Duke of S^v^y made War upon G^neva, a Virgin fell into the
hands of the Soldiers, whose Chastity when they had attempted in vain, they
being e^^aged cut her Nose off. About two years after she went to Lausanna;
where Mr. John Gr^ffonius, a most ingenious and successful Surgeon, then
^ved. He undertook to cure her, and restored her Nose so artificially, that, to
the Admiration of all, it appeared rather Natural than Artificial. I my self
have seen her several times, and she continues unmarried at Lausanna this
present year 1613. It Is true, in the cold of Winter the Tip of her Nose looks
livid; but it is nourished as other Parts of the Body, and endued with sense.
Griffonius had some hints of the method from an Italian, as he traveled
through Lausanna, who had conversed with the famous Taliacautius; though he had
neither seen the Operation performed, nor Taliacautius his Works, before he
cured this Maid. But he performed the Cure in the same manner as Taliacautius
describes it. Hild. obs. chir. 31. Cent. 3.

AN APPENDIX OF THE Venereal Disease.
THat, we call the Venereal Disease, with whose Name one Nation now upbraids
another, was first brought from the West Indies into Europe Ann. Dom. 1493. and
till then was not so much as known by name to our Parts of the World. At it is
first arrival it was attended with tremendous Symptoms; but within an hundred
years last past, they have been in some measure changed, and much altered.
Within the said time, and at the present, it generally shows it self first by a
virulent Gonorrhoea, only now and then a Shanker gives the first Notice of the
Disease. But when it does not discharge it self by a Gonorrhoea, it quickly
infects the mass of Blood.

This Venereal Disease is propagated either by descent from Parents to their
Children; or by contact of some soft Part, whereby a Virulence and Inflammation
are insinuated into the Body upon the Occasions following. First, in sucking,
viz. either the Child infects the Nurse by the open Pores of the Nipples; or
the Nurse the Child by it is tender Mouth Secondly, Children may get it by lying
naked in the same Bed with infected Persons: For though adult Persons can
scarce contract it without impure Coition, albeit they lie in Bed together; yet
Childrens flesh, being of a more lax and rare texture, is easily susceptive of
the venom from infected Persons. Thirdly, the most usual way of contracting it
is by impure Coition. The most usual signs of the Taint, are a Gonorrhoea,
Shankers, Inflammation, and heat of Urine. So long as it goes no further than a
Gonorrhoea, it falls far short in Malignity of a confirmed Pox, when the whole
mass of Blood, and several Parts of the Body are infected. Therefore the Cure
of a Clap and of the Pox is different.

In a Gonorrhoea, therefore (or, as the Town calls it, a Clap,) the stress of
the Cure lies upon purging, and especially with such Medicines as carry off
bile and serous Humors. A Cooling Diet also must be prescribed all along. This
is a good Purge, Mass. pil. coch. m^j. iij. Extract. Rud. j. Jaap. Diagrid. an.
ss. cum s. q. Opebalsami f. Pil. e singulis drachmis vj. The Dose of these
Pills is four, to be taken every Morning about four or five a Clock, (so that
the Patient may sleep upon them,) for Twelve or Fourteen days or longer, if
there shall be occasion, that is, till the heat of Urine, and the yellowness of
the Running are gone; which when it has succeeded according to expectation, the
Patient may take the Pills every other day for a Fortnight longer; then he may
take them twice a Week, till the Running is quite ceased: For there is danger
in the least Gleet, if one cease purging, before that is gone. If Pills will
not do, you may try a Potion and Clysters. It is good to give Twenty five drops
of Balm of Gi^ead in Sugar, or the quantity of a Wallnut of Turpentine every
Night at Bedtime. In the mean while the Patient must abstain from all Salt
Meats. He may eat Mutton, Veal, Chicken, Rabbet, or any food easy of
Digestion. He must drink no Wine nor strong Drink, nor any sour Liquor. His
Drink may be Water boiled three parts, and Milk one in four; only at Meals he
may drink a draught of small Beer. Emulsions of the cold Seeds are good to
allay Heat of Urine and Inflammation in the intervals of Purging. After a Month
is over, and not sooner, it will be proper to bleed a Sanguine Constitution.
Injections are not very safe; only toward the later end an Injection of
Rose Water may be used. This course generally succeeds: For the Cure depends
upon good Purging; if so be the Patient drink not the Waters; for they are
injurious. If the Prepuce swell, use Emollient Fomentations, Ointments and
Plasters. If the Scrotum swell, use a Cataplasm of Oxycrate and Bean-Flower.
And this method may do well enough for a Clap.

But when the Disease has got footing, so that it may deserve the name of a
confirmed Pox, the only way (as Dr. Sydenham says,) is, to salivate; which may
be done thus: Axungiae porcinae ij. Mercurii crudi j. M. With this let the
Patient himself chase his Arms, Thighs and Legs, with his own Hands for three
Nights one after another. Let him have a care, the Unguent come neither at his
Armpits, Groin, nor Belly. He may tie a Flannel therefore about his Belly and
Back, to secure it. On the morrow after the last anointing, give of Turbith.
miner. gr. viij. in conserva rosar. rubr. After the third anointing, or at
least after giving of the Turbith, the Gums begin to swell, and the party
Spits. In the mean time, it is the Physician's part to carry on the Salivation
with Judgment and an even hand, lest, by raising it too high, he endanger Life.
When the Salivation is come to the height, (at which time two quarts of Spittle
are discharged in four and twenty hours,) or when the Symptoms, tho the Patient
spit little, are vanished, (which usually happens about four days after the
Salivation is at the height,) his Shirt and Sheets, in which he lay before,
must be changed: Because they, being dawbed with the Unguent, may carry on the
Salivation too far. But if the Salivation fail, before the Symptoms disappear,
it must be quickened now and then with a Scruple of Mercurius dulcis in a Dose.
If upon the Mercury's getting into the Blood, the Gripes ensue, you must hold
your Hand, and use no more Mercury either inwardly or outwardly, till they are
stopped; which is done by giving now and then a Dram and an half of
Diascordium, and by setting the Patient on an empty close Stool over a Fume of
Cephalic Herbs, boiled in Canary Wine. When the Patient begins to recover, you
must not stop the Salivation either by Purgers or diet Drinks: For such
stopping of it often occasions a Relapse. Only when the Salivation rises too
high, it may be depressed by a Purge. When the Mouth is much exulcerated in
Salivation, it may be often washed Night and Day with aqua rosarum Damascenarum,
or with Lac aquae permistum, or with decoctum hordei, radie alth. and sem.
Cydon. The same Diet is good in Salivation, or was ordered before in the
purgative ^urse. And last of all, (...) Dr. Syderham be much against the diet
Drinks, so much and so generally celebrated by most Pra^, yet I think a course
of them is very safe, yea requisite, after ^alivation is over.

AN APPENDIX CONCERNING EMBALMING.
EMbalming goes among the Learned under several Names. It is called Balsamatio
a Balsamo; because the medicinal Ingredients, which preserve Bodies from
Corruption, are endued with a balsamic Virtue. It is also called Conditura a
condiendo: And Mumisatio a mumia, for it is Analogy. Some call it Vnctura
feralis or Medicatio cadaverum aromatica. The Ancients called it Pollinctura,
and those that practiced it, Pollinctores from pollingere or pollincire, quod
est, poliendo ungere, vel pellem ungere. It may be defined to be An artificial
Operation, whereby a human Body is so prepared by a skilful Artist, either with
or without Embowelling and Dissection, by the balsamic Quality of medicinal
things, that i^ will endure whole many years, and may be kept free from
rottenness and corruption.

That the Hebrews had the Art of Embalming, is apparent from Scripture: For
Genesis 50.2. Joseph commanded his Servants the Phy^icians to embalm his Father:
And the Physicians embalmed Israel. It is very probable, they learned the Art
from the Egyptians, and that in process of time they lost it. For if we
consider the manner of Embalming among the Jews, as it is described by
Maimonides, and as it was used about the death of Christ, it looks more like a
respectful Ceremony paid to the dead, than any Preservative from Corruption.
Maimonides words are these: The manner in Israel about the dead and their
burial, is this, when any one is dead, they close his Eyes, and and if his
Mouth be open, they keep it shut with a Mus^ler, tied about his Jaws. The place
also by which the Excrements are voided, is stopped up, but it is done after the
Body is washed. Then he is anointed with Ointments made of several sorts of
Spices, and, after the Head is shaved, the Body is wrapped in white Linen Shrouds
made for this purpose, which are of no great value, that a mean may be kept
between the rich and the poor. After this manner, in all probability, was
Lazarus embalured before his burial, he being none of the meanest Jews; and yet
Martha feared he would stink in four days time.

But the accuracy of Embalming is owing undoubtedly to the Egyptians. The best
account whereof, now extant, we find in Herodotus. lib. 2. Histor. Euterp. His
words are these; Then they carried the dead Party to be Embalmed. There are
certain Persons appointed on purpose to perform this Artifice; who, when the
Corpse is brought to them, show to those that bring it, wooden Moulds in the
shape of the dead. They say one sort of them is most curiously wrought. A
Second is meaner and cheaper. And a Third is of a very small value. When they
have shown these Moulds, they ask, in which Mould they will have their Dead
put. When they are agreed of a price, they depart. And they, with whom the Dead
is left, do Embalm the Body very carefully, in this manner. First of all, with
a crooked Iron they draw out all the Brain through the Nose, and so fill up the
place with Medicaments: Then with an Aethiopick stone they cut about the Ilia,
and that way they take out all the Paunch; which, when they have cleansed and
filled with Phoenician Wine, they stuff again with beaten Spices; then filling
the Cawl with pure Myrrh and Cassia, and other Spices (except Frankincense,)
they few it up again. When they have done this, they salt it up close seventy
days, for they may not salt it longer. After seventy days are over, when they
have washed the Corpse, they wrap it in fine Linen cut into slips, laying on a
Gum, which the Egyptians commonly use instead of Glue. When the Body is
restored to the Relations. they make a wooden Coffin in the shape of a Man,
into which they put the dead, and entomb him. But they that would save charges,
prepare the Body thus; They give a Clyster of Oil of Cedar. Then after this
they neither cut nor draw the Belly of the Dead; but fill it by the Vent, and
salt it the aforesaid number of days; on the last of which days they draw out
the Oil of Cedar, which they had put in, which is of such Virtue, that it
brings the Guts wasted along with it. And Nitre consumes the flesh, and leaves
only the Skin and Bones. When they have done this, they restore the Dead, and
do nothing further. The third way of Embalming is for the poorer sort; They
cleanse the Guts by Purging, and dry the Body with Salt for seventy days; and
then they restore it. And if an Egyptian or a Stranger be either killed by a
Crocodile, or drowned in the River, the City, where he is cast up, must embalm
him, and bury him Honorably in the Sacred Monuments, whom no one, no not a
Relation or Friend, but only the Priests of Nile, may touch; because they bury
one who is something more than a dead Man. Now, tho, in this account of
Herodotus, one cannot easily imagine, how the Brain could be got ou^ at the
Nose; nor how Salting could contribute so much to the preserving of Bodies; he
being a Historian more than a Philosopher, may be excused, as reporting things
by hearsay more than from experience. However, from the account he gives, and
from what other Historians say; and withal, from a curious inspection into the
Mumies brought from Egypt, it may be concluded, that the Egyptians and their
followers had two sorts of Embalming, the one curious, and costly for great and
rich Men; the other cheap, for the common and poorer sort. In the costly way,
they used as well outwardly for anointing and dipping the linen Shrowds in, as
for stuffing the three Ventricles, diverse aromatic Spices, which, by their
innate Balsamic Virtue, by their bitterness also, and oleous Sulphur, or the
penetrability of their volatile Salt, resist putrefaction; and by their sweet
Smell prevent stench and offensiveness; such as Opobalsamum, Oil of Cedar,
Aloes, Myrrh, Saffron, Cinnamon, Cassia, etc. This was for the Rich. For the
poorer sort, they used either Asphaltus, which is the Bitumen Judaicum, that
comes off the dead Sea; or Pissasphaltum, which is a mixture of Pitch and
Bitumen.

The Babylonians buried their Dead in Honey and Wax. And the Persians interred
their Dead, but ence^ed them first. This was also the custom among the
Grecians; for in X^nophon we read, that Ag^lilaus of Lacedaemon, who died of a
Fever, was embalmed in Honey. And so was the Body of Alexander the Great, as we
may gather from Statius in Sy^vis.

Due and ad Aemathi^s manes, ubi belliger urbis
Conditor, Hyblaeo perfusus nectare durat.
Thus far of the Embalming used by the Ancients; Now we will proceed to the
modern ways of Embalming; and First of Embowelling, concerning which, I will
give you Paraeus his Sentiments in short; First of all, the Body to be
embalmed, must be embowell'd. The Heart may be embalmed apart, according to the
Relations pleasure. The Skull must be sawn asunder, and the Brain must be taken
out. Then deep gashes must be made along the Arms, Legs, Thighs, Back, Loins
and Buttocks, especially where the larger veins and arteries run along; First,
that the Blood may be got out, which otherwise might occasion corruption;
Secondly, that there may be place to put in the Spices. Then the Body must be
washed with a Sponge dipped in Aqua vitae and strong Vinegar, wherein Wormwood,
Aloes, Coloquintida, common Salt, and Alume have been boiled. Afterward, these
gashes, all the passages, and openings, and the three Ventricles must be filled
with the following Spices grossly powdered. pulv. rosar. chamaen. melilot.
balsam. menth. salv. lavandul. rorismarin. majoran. thym. absinth. cyper.
calam. aromat. gentian. ireos Florent. assae odoratae, caryophyll. nucis mosch.
cinnam. styrac. calam. benzo. myrrh. alo. santal. omnium q. s. f. pulvis. The
gashes and open places must be sewed up, that the Powders shake not out. Then
the whole Body must be anointed with Turpentine melted with Oil of Chamemel and
Roses; adding, if you please, some Chemical aromatic Oils; and bestrew it
again with the foresaid Powder. Then wrap it in Linen, and after that in
Cere-cloth. And put it into a leaden Coffin well sodered, and filled with
aromatic Herbs. But if none of the said Spices can be got, as it happens, when
Towns are besieged; you must be content with powder of slak'd Lime, and common
ashes, suppose Oak. For thus, if the Body be washed in strong Vinegar, or
Lixivium, it will keep a long time, provided the season be not very hot, nor
that it be laid in a hot and moist place. To embalm the better, it is a good
way to prick the Body, when embowelled, with sharp Bodkins, that the Liquor
preserving it from corruption, may penetrate the deeper. When it is pricked, it
must be laid in a wooden Tray, filled with a decoction of Vinegar, and
aromatic, and bitter things, as Aloes, Rue, Wormwood, and Coloquintida, and it
must be kept there Twenty days, pouring upon it six quarts of Aquavitae. Then
set it upright in a close and dry place.

Balthazar Timaeus a Guldenkle^, a Man famous for Embalming, writes thus to his
Son, Lib. 6. Epist. Medicinal. Ep. 10. The method of Embalming dead Bodies,
which you desire to know of me, is various, and is ordered according to the
Parents or Kindred's pleasure. Sometimes the whole Body, and all its Cavities
and Limbs are artificially embalmed, oftentimes the middle and lowest Venture,
and sometimes only the lowest i^ taken out, and preserved by convenient Remedies
from rottenness and corruption; which are also various, and of diverse kinds.
Some use Aloes and Myrrh, some Spirit of Wine, some Vinegar and Salt, some a
Lixivium and quick Lime, and others use compound Powders, distilled Oils,
Ointments and Balsames. I have embalmed several persons in the following
method, upon which I now also insist. First of all, I take care to provide
necessary Implements, Knives, Razors, Scissars, Tweezers, Bodkins, Needles,
Thread, Hooks, Cords, Swathing-bands, a Saw, Sponges, Tow, Linen, Vinegar,
Aquavitae, Salt water, Cerecloth, Oils, Balsams, a magistral Powder, described
hereafter, etc. These things being all ready in order, when the Corpse has been
well washed and cleansed with warm Wine from the external filth; I order it to
be laid on a convenient place, then I cut the lower Belly crossways, and take
out the Guts and Mesentery, the Stomach, Kidneys, Spleen, Bladder, and Womb,
and order a Servant to empty them. By and by I open the middle Venture or
Breast, I take out the Lungs, Heart, Veins, Arteries, Diaphragm, and the
Oesophagus to the Epiglottis, and carefully empty all the Vessels. Then I wash
all the Cavity of the Belly and Breast, first with cold water, and wipe it well
with Sponges; and then with strong Vinegar, and lastly with Aqua-vitae, or
Sp^ritus Solomonis, which is very effectual in preventing of rottenness and
corruption. These things being done, I strew the Powder hereafter described
upon all the parts, and rub it in well, then I apply every where Pledgets of
Tow or Cotton dipped in Aquavitae, and, strewing on more Powder, I fill the whole
Cavity of the Belly and Breast, and then I sew up the Skin, which was cut. The
Head I embalm thus; I separate the Skull circularly with a very sharp Saw, or I
open it only from the Crown toward the Occiput; then I take out the Brain, and
wash the Cavity in the same manner, as I did the Belly; First, with cold water,
then with Vinegar, and last of all very well with Aquavitae, or Spiritus
Solomonis; then I wipe it with Sponges, and fill it with the Powder and Tow.
When I have cleansed the Jaws well with a Syringe, I fill them with powder of
Cloves and Cinnamon; I plentifully and iteratedly anoint the Face with Balsame
of Peru, or Spiritus Solomonis. Then I divide the musculous and carnous parts
with deep incisions, especially about the Buttocks, and, having carefully
squeezed out the Blood, I bestrew them with the Powder hereafter described.
Last of all, I wrap the Body up in hot Cerecloth, and anoint it all over with
Pix navalis, Resina pini, and St^rax liquida melted at the fire. If the Body is
to be kept a long time, the fleshy parts must be taken away and buried with the
Entralls. If it be the Friends pleasure either to put the Heart in its place
again, or to keep it apart in a box, let it first of all be washed with Aqua
nostra Balsamica ex aloe and myrrha, afterward with Spiritus Solomonis, and
then let it be anointed with Balsamus Peruvianus, But these things must be
observed; 1. The Embalming must be hastened after the Parties death, and not be
deferred above Four and twenty hours, especially when the weather is hot. 2.
The Body must be kept in a cold place, and must not be exposed to the Rays of
the Sun. 3. It must not be put in a Coffin of Wood, but in one of Lead, with
Tinn or Silver over it. For Wood rots, and in moist or subterraneous places
swells, and so bursts the Tin or Silver Coffins. 4. Great care must be taken in
the Embalming, lest any putrid exhalation should come out, and offend those
about the Funeral; as I remember it once happened, to the disgrace of a certain
eminent Physician. 5. Those that are employed about this operation, must have a
care that they take no harm from the Essl^via, and Vapors that arise from the
corrupt Viscera, especially when the Bodies of such are to be embalmed, as have
died of some contagious Disease, or of a Consumption, or Empyema. In Summer
time this operation is performed in a Room, with the Windows open to the North.
In VVinter it may be performed in a Room with a Fire of Ash, Oak, or Juniper in
it; but not in a Stove. He that goes about this work, must take some
Alexipharmacks, whereby he may defend his Heart and Brain against hurtful
Exhalations. Let him anoint his Nostrils with some Balsam, or hold to them a
Sponge impregnate with Bezoardick Vinegar. Let him hold in his Mouth some
trochisci de zedoaria, de corticibus citri, or some other preservative. Or, if
he have none of these things, let him take some Meat, or a Mouthful of Bread
dipped in Wine. I think, it is better to begin with opening the Lower Belly, than
the middle; and that it is best to abstain from quicklime, and other corrosive
things: Because Bodies are not kept but consumed by such things. The Powder to
fill the the Cavities of the Head, Breast and Belly; Myrthae electae lb iiij.
Croci sylvestr. lb ij. Styrac. calamit. lb ij. cinnam. acutissim. lb j.
caryophyll. lb ij. Alo. caball. lb v. rorismarin. siccat. lb ij. Thuris lb j.
fol. laur. arid. rosar. rubr. an. lb ss incidenda incidantur, fiatque pulvis
grossus. A Cerecloth to wrap the Body in, and to line the Coffin withal; Cerae
flavae lb xxv. Terebinth. Venet. Colophon. resin. an. lb iii. pic. noval. lb
ijss. vi^id. aeris lb j. thur. styrac. liquid. an. lb ij. ol. spic. lb ss.
Laquefactis and mixtis add sevi lb ij. mixturae huic immergantur telae lineae.
The Powder to be strewed on the Cerecloth: Absinth. vulgar. abrotan. lavandul.
rorismarin. fol. laur. an. M. vj. salviae, majoran. ocymi, origan. thym.
saturej. hyssop. flor. chamaem. an. M. iij. rad. Ir. Flor. lb. iiij. calam.
aromat. angel. cyper. cortic. aurant. citr. an. lb j. lign. Rhod. lb iij.
Junip. Sassaph. an. lbjss. santal. citrin. lign. alo. an. lb ss. cinnam.
caryophyll. an. lb j. flor. ros. rubr. lb ij. alo. myrrh. thur. styrac. benz.
opt. an. lb ij. salis lb iiij. M. f. Pulvis, qui irroretur olei spicae lbss.
Ol. rorismar. lign. rhod. an. iij. caryoph. jss. absynth. origan. an. j. Misce
exactissime pro balsamo. Styr. liquid. vj. Balsam. Peruvian. ij. ol. mac. ss.
lign. rhod. jss. M. f. Balsamus.

But the greatest Master in Embalming in our Age, was Bilsius, who held strange
opinions about the Lymphatick, Lacteal, and Thoracick Vessels, and about his
Ductus Roriferus; wherein he contradicted the most famous Anatomists of his
time, Bartholine, Sylvius, and Van Horn. He had found out a method of
Anatomizing Bodies without effusion of Blood, after a new and unheard of
manner, with an accurate separation, and manifest demonstration, of all the
parts and little Vessels, tho they were less than Hairs. But he was chiefly
skilled in a new and curious way of Embalming Dead Bodies, after they were
opened or dissected, replacing the embalmed Bowels in their Natural places,
viz. The Brain in the Skull, and the Guts in the Abdomen, and more than that,
not any embalming Spices stuck to the parts of the Body. These new secrets of
his drew the King of Spain into such admiration of him, that, by his Governor
in the Low Countries, he ordered Twenty Thousand Crowns to be paid him, upon
condition that he should declare ingenuously upon Oath to the three Estates of
Brabant his admired Art; and he, as an Honorary Prosessor in the University of
Lovain, should teach Anatomy publicly according to his Manual Operation, for
which he was to have a Pension of Two Thousand Crowns per Annum; and he was
also obliged to communicate his said peculiar method to some skilful Anatomist,
that after his Death it might be perpetuated for the good of the public and of
Physicians. And tho Bilsius had got so vast a Sum of Money, and went to Lovain,
to perform his agreement; yet the University of Lovain made bold to refuse him
a reception into the Society of the Professors, upon this pretense, that
Bilsius being of the Reformed Religion, it might in so doing lay it self
obnoxious to an Excommunication from the Sea of R^me, according to the
Statutes. There was great bickering about the matter, till at last By sius,
laden with his Money, bid Lovain farewell, and returned to his United Provinces,
where (as far as I can learn,) his famous Secrets were buried with him.

Next to Bilsius comes Clander, who, after various Experiments, gives us this
process for Embalming; after the Body designed for Embalming has been dead
Eighteen, or at the most Twenty four Hours, let it be laid in a long Tray of
Oak, or of some hard Wood. Then get ready some Spiritus salis Ammoniaci
balsamans, which may be prepared ex tempore in the manner following. Take of
Potashes one Pound, pour on them of common Water Six Pounds, let them stand an
Hour, and shake them sometimes for the better dissolution. Into this solution
put half a pound or something more of Sal Ammoniack powdered. Shake them
together sometimes, for the better dissolution of the Powder, and in a stopped
Vessel, lest the Volatile parts should fly out. Then filtre it through a brown
Paper. Upon the Body thus placed in the Vessel, let as much of this Spirit made
in the foresaid proportion be poured, as will stand a quarter of an Ell above
the Body. Now because this Spirit, as it is sated with an Alcalick Salt, does
immediately r^ise the Body, and will not let it sink for some days or weeks, by
reason of Crudities, which puff up the Belly like a Tympany, and because
Corruption may be feared in the upper part, which the Liquor does not cover;
therefore either the Vessel must be every day shaken moderately, that the
Balsamic Liquor may come at all the parts. Or, which is better, the Corpse may
be pent down under the Liquor, with a piece or two of a wooden lathe. Then the
Vessel must be most exactly covered, and the chinks must be stopped close with a
Paper and Paste; partly that the Volatile Spirits may not fly away; and partly
that the external Air may not get in and corrupt it. The Body being placed in
the manner aforesaid, if it be a large one, must be left three Months. Six
Weeks is sufficient for little Creatures. Yea a Month is time long enough for
some. Then you must look whether the Flesh of the Body be hard or soft. They
must be kept, if possible in cool places, rather than in hot and moist. This
must be observed especially in Summer. After two or three Months, the Vessel
may be opened, and the Liquor gently poured off, or taken out. The Body must be
tenderly handled. When it is taken out of the Vessel, it may rest for eighteen
or four and twenty hours. Then, to dry up the superfluous moisture, you may lay
it in a stove moderately hot, or sometimes upon an Oven; sometimes also you may
lay hot Bricks upon the Belly; or you may wrap it up, and put it in hot Sand,
or you may strew hot Sand upon it, especially on the Lower Belly. In Summer
time it may be exposed to the vehement Rays of the Sun. You must take notice,
that every day you must turn the Body on a new side; that the moisture in every
place may the better be dried up by the external Heat. And last of all, it may
be washed with a Sponge, to clear it of filth, if there be any.

FINIS.

