THE Careless Lovers: A COMEDY Acted at the Duke's THEATER.

Written by Edward Ravenscrofts, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for William Cademan, at the Popes Head in the Lower Walk in
the New Exchange, 1673.

THE EPISTLE To the READER.
EPistles Dedicatory, and long Prefaces are of late much in Request; no Person
of Quality, how remote soever, can escape the Impertinences of Poets; for
though they be Hundreds of Miles off, they shall be pursued, and persecuted
with Dedicatories over and over, even by the same Authors: which is a scurvy
Compliment, like that of desiring a Man to be Godfather to every Child that is
Born, though their Neighbors perhaps Club'd to the getting them; These
Troubles, liberal Patrons, and kind Godfathers, draw on themselves: But this
is excusable in them that Write for Bread, and Live by Dedications, and
Third-Dayes. If once in a Year they meet not with a good Audience, or a
Bountiful Moecenas, we are to expect no Play from them the next; because they
want Money to keep the great Wits company; from whose Conversation, once in
Twelve Months, they pick up a Comedy. Yet this sort of Writers, or
Wit-Collectors, are Bloodily angry, if you will not allow all the Wit in their
Plays to be their own; and if they see another Man's Play take, Swear and
Bluster, and Bite their Nails; that you would wonder how they do to Scratch their
Heads, to bring forth the next: But I suppose their Nails soon grow again, and
so that is no great Harm. This sort of Men you shall hear say in the Pit, and
at the Coffee-House (speaking of an Author) Dam me! How can he Write! He Is a
Raw Young Fellow, newly come from the University; How can he understand Humor
or Character that is just come from a College? Of another they Cry, God's Death,
he is no Scholar; he cannot Write true Grammar: Then strutting, and looking Big;
S'blood, says he, I understand Greek, as you may see by the Quotations in my
Preface, and at the Front of my last New Play: But if they can neither Talk,
nor Write a Young Poet out of the Humor of Making Plays, they give him over
for a peremptory Fop* and so fall to writing Siedges and Opera's --

But, Reader, lest by the ensuing Prologue, thou should think Me one of that
Envious Tribe; know it was Written in Requital to the Prologue, before the
Assignation, or Love in a Nunnery, and not without Provocation, Laesit prius:
But Devils of Wit are not very dangerous, and so we both sleep in whole Skins.

If you are Inquisitive to know why there are such continual Picques amongst
the Poets, I can give you no other Reason than what one Whore told the other --
Two of a Trade can seldom agree -- Now by way of Excuse for this Comedy, let
me acquaint you, that it was written at the Desire of the Young Men of the
Stage, and given them for a Lenten Play; they ask't it not above a Week before
Shrove-Tuesday: In three days time, the Three first Act* were Made,
Transcribed, and given them to write out in Parts -- The Two last Acts, took me
up just so much time* one Week completed it. If this will not excuse it, Thou
art as Uncons^onable and Malicious as the Writing Critics, who say all they
can for themselves, and will hear nothing in Defense of others. But I would not
have Poets make this a President; for shortness of Time ought not to be pleaded
in excuse of Ill Plays, unless on the like Occasion: For the Town I am sure
will allow a Man ten Months, nay, ten Years, rather than ten Days, if he will
but bring a good One at last. I have much more to say, and as little to the
Purpose, as any thing the best of my Fellow- Poets have said; but I Will consider
on it a while, and some other time, when I have more Leisure, you shall have it;
till then, Reader --

Your Humble Servant.

PROLOGUE.
THey that observe the Humors of the Stage,
Find Fools and Heroes best do please this Age,
But both grown so extravagant, I scarce
Can tell, if Fool or Hero makes the better Farce:
As for Example, take our Mamamouchi,
And then Almansor, that so much did touch ye;
That Bully Hero, that did kill and slay,
And conquer ye Ten Armies in one day:
He that from side to side played Runnegade,
That Fought and Loved as if he had been mad.
He that gained Victory at every Stroke,
And made Kings tremble at each Word he spoke;
He that could Kill and Damn you with a Look.
Such are the Heroes, that with you are taking,
But such as never were of Heavens making:
Thus, whether Grave or Comic Scenes we write,
All Is turned to Farce, by Hero, or by Knight.
Without one of these Two it is decreed
By all of you, that no Play shall succeed.
An Author did to please you, let his Wit run
Of late, much on a Serving-Man and Cittern,
And yet you would not like the Cerenade,
Nay, and you Damned his Nun^s in Masquerade.
You did his Spanish Sing-Song too abhor,
Ayeque locura con tanto rigor.
In fine, the whole by you so much was blamed,
To act their Parts, the Players were ashamed;
Ah! how severe your Malice was that Day,
To Damn at once, the Poet and his Play;
But why, was your Rage just at that time shown,
When what the Poet writ, was all his own?
Till then he borrowed from Romance, and did Translate,
And those Plays found a more Indulgent Fate.
We fear you will be incensed again to day,
But consider, our's is a Lenten Play.
It was on purpose for the Young Men writ,
And all that is in it is Extempore Wit.
The Poet says, because he did not aim
At Credit, that he cannot meet with shame;
We Young Men too, hope to be free from Blame;
For we do not design to please the Town
So much, as to get every Man's Half-crown:
And boldly we presume, that your Intent
Of coming now is for Encouragement.
Resolve then to be Kind to Us to Day,
And if You will, to Morrow, Damn the Play.
THE Actors Names.
Mr. Muchworth, An Old Alderman. Mr. Norrice. Mr. Lovell, A Well-bred
Gentleman. Mr. Cademan. Mr. Careless, A Town Gallant. Mr. Smith. De Boastado A
Conceited Lord, and Traveller. Mr. Angel. Toby, A Servant to Mr. Lovel. Mr.
Sherwood.
WOMEN.
Iacinta, Daughter to Mr. Muchworth. Mrs. Borough. Hillaria. Mrs. Clough.
Beatrice their Maid. Mrs. Leigh. Mrs. Clappam and Two Wenches of the Town. Mrs.
Osbor^* Mrs. Breedwel Mrs. Norris.
A Pa^son, a Tailor, Ghosts, Fiddlers, Drawers. The Scene Covent Garden. THE
Careless Lovers.
The First Act, Scene First.
Enter Lovell and Carless. Carel. COme back! Prithee Lovell, come back, and
let us to the Tavern.


Lov. Unconscionable Man! I tell thee I am going to see my Mistress.


Carel. Pox o'thy Mistress; if thou were going to a Wench, I would excuse
thee; But I should think my self Damned, should I consent to thy going to
solicit any Woman in the Way of Matrimony.


Lov. Will thou never leave this lewd wild Humor?


Carel. Not upon the score of Matrimony; Why, Jack Lovell, I Will tell thee I Am
now like a Colt in the Fenns, that stragles every where, and feed where I like
best: But should I Marry, I should be tether'd to my Spot of ground; at best,
confined to an Enclosure.


Lov. But the Horse that is loose often falls into a foul Ditch; or is put in
the Pound for 'straying into his Neighbors ground: Marriage is honest and safe.


Carel. Yes; if all Wives were honest, I Will undertake a Miss shall love thee
twice as long as any Wife thou can find; nothing choaks Love like the Surety
of Possession; Love is an excellent Meat, but Marriage is an ill Sauce; and
believe me, it is the worst Estate of Mankind. If I was going to Tyburne, I
would cry, Drive on Carman; and choose to Sing my Penitential Psalm at the
Gallows, rather than return to say, For Better for Wors^.


Lov. Atheists (...) Love, ^^ke (...) in Religion, are not to be reclaimed by
Argument; yet now and then are converted by some Accident or other. Thou may
one Day see a Beauty, that like a Burning-Glass, shall draw all thy loose
Flames within a narrow compass.


Carel. Beauty is mo^^ ^ittle than the Glass thou talk of; and Man's
Estimation of it less Durable: I may perchance, Love only one at once; but not
that one always: And whilst I am in my right Wits, I will not leave Delightful
Variety for the Unsavory Insipid Bitts of Constancy.


Lov. Well; Iacinta, has a Kins-woman for her Companion, so Beautiful, her Eyes
would fix thy wandring^ Thoughts, and make thee abandon all Women for her (...)


Carel. So thinks the Devout young Novic^ newly entered into his Cloister; He
has no sooner forsaken the World* the Flesh, and the Devil, but imagines he is
able to persw^de the greatest Debauchee, to make himself a Fool in the like
manner.


Lov. I have not seen my Mistress these three Days; and my Mind is not
composed enough, to return an Answer to every thing* You urge But venture thy
Body within these Doors, and if ever thou return'st the same Man --


Carel. I know myself so well grounded in Sin, and have ^^sted so much the
Sweets of Wickedness, that I dare venture my Self into any Temptations to the
contrary: And for this once, I will suffer my self to be seduced by thee into
Civil Company; And if they do debauch me --


Lov. Come then --


Carel. But I know not how I shall forgive my self the Sin of forsaking Wine,
Women, and Dice, for the Conversation of Damned Virtuous Women.


Enter De Boastado and his Man, combing his Wigg, and adjusting his Garniture.
Lov. Careless, we are undone!


Carel. What Fantastic is this?


Lov. It is the Vain, Idle, Simple, Conceited, Impertinent, Talking, Traveling
Lord De Boastado (as he calls himself.)


Carel. He looks like a good Subject for Mirth, let us hear his Character more
at large.


Lov. I never saw him but twice in my Life; but once is enough to know what he
is, for like a Word writ in Text, you may Read him all at first sight.


Carel. So --


Lov. He much values himself upon his Traveling; many Countries have taken
Notice of him, and he of a few; he passed them over as some Men do a great
Library of Books; who Read the Title Page, then turn to Finis: He carried more
Money out with him, than he brought Wit home: His Observations are of Modes,
Fashions and Women: He speaks some few words in most Languages, but Sense in
none: He has Baptized himself with the Honorable Titles of most Countries: His
Name is as long as a Coach and six Horses.


Carel. Let Us fall upon him.


Lov. Shun him as you would the Plague.


Carel. Thou shall stay, he makes full at us.


Lov. He, he has pruned himself, and comes with a full Swoop.


D. Boast. Mr. Lovell, good Morrow to you.


Lov. Good morrow to your Lordship.


D. Boast. What Gentleman is this?


Lov. A worthy Friend of mine.


Carel. One that has the Ill Fortune to be unknown to your Lordship.


D. Boast. My Friend's Friend must not be a Stranger: I am covetous of your
better Acquaintance.


Carel. Pray do me the Honor to let me know to whom my Services are owing.


De Boast. My Name is Mounsieur, Heiro, Signioro Countalto, Donno D'Boastado.


Carel. Bless me! De Boastado, what Arms bears that Family?


D. Boast. Sir, they are very famous, and thus blazoned; but first imagine the
Escutcheon in a Frame of beaten Gold, richly Enameled, set with Pearls,
Rubies, Diamonds, and other precious Stones of great value and number,
Incredible -- for such an one have I hangs up in my Dining Room against my
Embroidr'd Hangings, that were presented me by the Emperor; betwixt a Golden
Watch in a rich Case, given me by the King of Spain, and a great Medal, with
the Pope's Image on it: And underneath all this, hangs the Golden Armor I won
in France, at the head of Four Thousand Men; I must confess there was not any
one could do the like, though they all tried one by one -- But no matter for
that, let that pass.


Lov. I have heard much of your Fame, but as to your Heraldry.


Carel. You do well to put him in mind of his Text, for he was run too far from
it, to come to it again under the turning of an Hourglass.


D. Boast. Well; now as to my Arms --
The Supporters of this Frame are
The Griffin and Tiger Couchant, for on their two Backs it is borne up at each
Corner: in the middle, by the Flower De less Crescent; on each side, guarded by
the Dromadary and Elephant Rampant, which stand upon a Castle Guardant; on the
Top of the Frame, is the Helmet Militant, held up in the Talet of an Eagle
Volant, bearing a Crown upon her Head Triumphant.


Carel. The Flourish of all Christendom!


Lov. This is a strayn beyond what I ever heard yet.


Carel. His Heraldry has run him out of breath.


D. Boast. Then Gallants, in the Escutcheon, is only a Man with a Spade Foclant
in a Field Gules.


Carel. A Silver Brim to a Wooden Dish.


Lov. Or a Leek Enchas'd in Gold.


Carel. That would be a fit Arms for him, for by the length of his Name, he
should be a Welch-man -- But my Lord, these may be said the Arms of Adam.


D. Boast. They are so; ours is a very Ancient Family, and we are lineally
Descended from him -- And our Motto is

Dii Vendent Omnia Laboribus.
In Italian, Ciascunno e figliolo Del sue opere.
In English, Without Pains, no Gains.

Carel. We have trespassed on you Lordship's Patience.


Lov. We beg your Pa^don, and take our leaves.


D. Boast. I hope your Friends better Acquaintance.


Carel. You honor me much.


D. Boast. How far walk you this Way?


Carel. No farther than this House.


D. Boast. Thither I am going too.


Lov. Are you acquainted with Mr. Muchworth.


D. Boast. His Daughter will be a great Fortune, and I am in Treaty with him
about a Marriage.


Lov. About Marriage!


D. Boast. Great Persons of mean Estates choose Wives out of the City; they are
covetous of Honor, and we of Money. And here comes the Alderman.


Enter Muchworth. Muchw. Good morrow to your Lordship.


D. Bost. How does your fair Daughter?


Muchw. You honor me with enquiring after her -- Oh Mr. Lovell, a word with
you in private. Sir, you have for some time made Addresses to my Iacinta: But
for the future, I desire you would be a stranger to her -- To me you shall be
always welcome, but she is otherwise engaged?


Lov. It is less in my Power not to love her, than to hate you; Though she should
follow your Example, and turn me off too.


Muchw. You know my mind, and shortly she will let you know hers, -- your Servant
-- My Lord, I Will wait you in -- my Daughter and my Niece are but gone to buy a
few Trifles at the Exchange; they will be back soon.


D. Boast. Gentlemen, your Servant.


Exeunt Muchw. and D. Boast. Lov. Iacinta engaged! false faithless Woman.


Carel. Prithee think no more of her. Come now, go with me and be merry; we will
have Women in abundance.


Lov. Hang them Jilts.


Carel. No; such Women as your Mistress is, are more like Jilts. These are good
Conscionable Girls, that will not let you spend your Money for nothing with
the others; you waste your Gold and Time, and at last, like young Heifers when
they come to be milk'd, they Spurn at you in Defiance, and away they frisk.


Lov. Ah Iacinta! Have thou forgot my Vows? Unhappy Lover.


Carel. Damn this pineing, whineing, puleing, peaking, sneaking, sniveling
Love: I Will carry thee where thou shall see merry, gay, jocund, sprightly Love.
Thou shall have it in Arm-fulls, and Dilate thy self in Pleasure.


Lov. My Soul is out of Tune!


Enter Toby. Toby. Sir, Master, Sir, Madam Iacinta, and her Cousin Hilaria are
just turned the Corner of this Street; I suppose they are coming home.


Lov. I Will meet her, and tax her with her Inconstancy.


Tob. They have both their Masks on, but you will know them by Beatrice; my sweet
Beatrice.


Enter Jacinta, Hilaria, Beatrice. Carel. These are they. Lovell, accost thy
own Natural, and leave me to manage the other Impertinent.


Lov. My Heart's my Guide. Iacinta stay, stay Iacinta; Speak, though but one
word, and tell me the Cause of this sudden Alteration: Pull off your Masque,
and let me see if your Face is altered as much as I hear your Heart is. Unkind
Woman, do thou fly me! I Will pursue thee as a Ghost does the guilty Murderer.


Tob. Now you and I, like Squire and Damsel, will follow Beatrice; if thou have
lost thy Tongue too, you and your Mistress are a Blessed pair; for were it not
for your Tongues, you would all be Angels.


Beat. Da, da, da --


[ Ex. Jac. Lov. Bea. Carel. Nay, nay, Madam! You are not to pass so.


Hill. What would the man be at?


Carel. The Man's at what he would be; he is at you.


Hill. What do you mean?


Carel. Faith I cannot resolve you till I see your Face; pull off your Masque,
and then I Will tell you what I mean.


Hill. Suppose I wont.


Carel. Nay, if you are good at Suppositions, suppose I am resolved to see it
off.


Hill. Then I should suppose you very Rude.


Carel. And if you don't, I shall suppose you very Ugly; for I never knew a
Woman that had a handsome Face could endure to hide it.


Hill. Yes, if she like not her Company.


Carel. Yet, she would have her Company like her; I trust more to a Woman's Pride,
than her Love or good Nature: For though they are ugly, they think th^mselves
handsome, and would be thought so by others.


Hill. Why then do they maintain the Humor of Vizard-Masques?


Carel. Because under them they Sin concealed: I Will engage Vizard-Masques ruin
more Women's Virtues than all the Bawds in Town --


Hill. Your Reason for that.


Carel. Under the Vizard the Wife goes to the Play, Ball, or Masquerade
undiscovered to her Husband; the Maid unknown to her Mistress; the Daughter or
Niece unperceived by her Relations: The Masque invites the Gallants: And though
at first you come but out of Curiosity, to hear what Men will say; Our Alamode
Repertees, our Gentile Bawdry, and brisk Raillery tickles your Ears; your
Bodies are buxome, your Bloods grow wanton, your Fancies strike firmly on some
Man or oother; the Gallant grows Importunate, and you are Conquered.


Hill. Do you find Women then so frail?


Carel. A Woman's Ear is the Out-work to her Chastity; get but there, and the
Fort is more than half taken. When once a Woman hears what you say, she will soon
do what you would have her.


Hill. Then you take a Parley for a Surrender.


Carel. No, but after a Parley they soon yield.


Hill. Now have I a mind to stay and talk with you, but must be forced to leave
you to avoid your ill Opinion.


Carel. Nay, if you have a mind to it you 'ido't; let me think what I will. And
if you will not pull off your Masque, I Will even begone and leave you. Fare you
well.


Hill. And fare you well.


Turn from each others, and looks back over their Shoulders. Carel. Nay, if you
look over Shoulder after me, I Will turn again, for you have no mind I should be
gone I am sure.


Hill. Why did you look back at me?


Carel. To see --


Hill. If I would look at you, and so we even caught one another; and what can
you say to me of that which I cannot Retort on you again.


Carel. But I Will be judged by your self, if I have not more reason to think,
you desire my stay, than I yours; You have a full sight of me, and see what I
am, and now whether you like me or not: You are all Vizard, long Scarf, and
Petticoat; for ought I know, you may want a Nose, a Set of Teeth, be
Squint-eyed, or Blobber lip'd.


Hill. You Will make me as ugly as the Devil.
Am I not Cloven-footed think you?

Offers to look on her Legs. Carel. I Will tell you that presently --


Hill. Nay --


Carel. A handsome Leg and a Foot I Will be sworn; and here is a well shaped Hand
and Arm; and what Breasts are here? How round and plump?


Hill. Hands off, your enquiry begins to grow troublesome.


Carel. If you have a Face and Features answerable to your Limbs, you are a prime
piece of Woman's Flesh.


Hill. Do you think I have?


Carel. Gad do I.


Hill. Then to keep you in your good Opinion, I Will begone, and you shall not see it:
Nay, nay, no Attempts, hands off.


Carel. I have sworn to see it.


Hill. And I have sworn you shall; but stand at greater Distance: Farther,
farther yet -- See


Hill. gets her back close to her Uncles Door, pulls off her Masque, steps in,
and shuts it. Carel. Excellent Creature!


Hill. Fare you well.


Carel. Ha! are you so cunning? She has locked the Door against me.


Enter Toby. Toby. My Master, Sir, is gone out the Back-way, and sent me to
give you Notice.


Carel. I Will be with him presently.

[ Ex. Toby. By her Wit, I did not judge she had so good a Face; for Wit and
Beauty seldom go together in a Woman: She has a large stock of both, and I
could wish my self in Bed with her: but the Thoughts of her are Momentary.

I Will keep my Soul free as the Bird that flies in the Air,
I Will never love one, till I of all besides Despair.

[Exeunt. The Second Act.
Enter Lovell and Toby, Beatrice meeting them. Beat. MOst luckily met, I am sent
Embassadress of good News, and was just coming --


Lov. Return, and Attempt not to deceive me with fair Words. Return, I bid
thee, and tell thy Faithless Mistress her Unhappy Lover will not long be the
subject of her Scorn: Bid her practice her Receipt elsewhere.


Beat. My sweet Face, tell me, What Humor is this has possess't thy Master?


Tob. Your sweet Face, you Impertinent: Go, do as you are bidden, Be gone, go.


Beat. Hey! Are you in the same Tone?


Tob. Be gone Baggage: Speak not a Word more for your Life.


Beat. What a Vengeance ails you both? Well, I Will go inform my Mistress how
Sq^^res go.


[Exeunt. Lov. Thus to treat a Lover, and one that was the most passionate, and
most faithful of all Lovers.


Tob. It Is strange to me they should treat us so.


Lov. I have showed the greatest Love and Tenderness for her that can be
imagined; I loved Nothing in the World but her; Thought of Nothing but her; and
Sleeping, dreamed of Nothing but her: She was all my Desire, all my Joy; I
spoke not of anything but her: And is such a Love thus Rewarded! These three
Days I have not seen her, seemed so many Ages for me: And am I in three Days
forsaken and forgotten? I meet her, and she will not speak to me, not look at
me; but shun me as a Thing she hates.


Tob. Ah Sir, I may say the same, for Beatrice will follow her Mistress; Honey
or T -- as she is.


Lov. Can Iacinta be matched for Ingratitude?


Tob. Or that Baggage Beatrice?


Lov. To forsake me after so many Sighs and Vows which I have offered to her
Charms.


Tob. To leave me after so many good Offices and daily Services I have done for
Her.


Lov. After so many Tears shed at her Feet.


Tob. After so many Payles of Water lugg'd up Stairs for her, to wash her
Rooms.


Lov. After I had expressed so Ardent an Affection, and so generous a Flame for
her.


Tob. After I have so often kindled a Fire for her in her Mistress Chamber, and
Scortch'd my self with taking her Heaters for her out of the Fire.


Lov. Does she after all this, refuse to speak to Me?


Tob. Does she for all this turn Cat in Pan?


Lov. And fly from my sight.


Tob. And turn her Backside with a Pox to me.


Lov. Her Unkindness deserves my severest Resentments.


Tob. Her Pettishness merits a hundred Kicks in the Breech.


Lov. I charge thee never speak to me of her, nor for her.


Tob. I, Sir! not I by Grandsires Beard.


Lov. Never attempt to excuse her Infiedlity.


Tob. Never fear't.


Lov. I Will be Deaf to all you can say in her behalf.


Tob. I think not any thing often.


Lov. I will cherish my Anger, and break off all Intimacy with her.


Tob. Agreed: And I Will break off my Intreigue.


Lov. Perhaps she is taken with this Foolish Lord, and puffed up with Hopes of
being a Lady -- Ambition is the Vice of her Sex; but she shall not boast an
absolute Glory; for I Will Abandon her as she does me.


Tob. I much approve your Resolution.


Lov. Do thou lend it Aid against all that Love can urge to the Contrary; I
conjure thee, find all the Faults in her thou can, and Lampoon her to me in
a Description --


Tob. Shaw waugh; -- You may find a thousand prettier Women than she. In the
first place, her Hair inclines to Yellow.


Lov. That Is but the Lustr'e of her Hair.


Tob. Her Forehead's low.


Lov. But smooth and Delicate.


Tob. Her Nose is too bigg.


Lov. But well shaped.


Tob. When she speaks, she draws her Mouth from Ear to Ear. --


Lov. Which discovers such a fine Set of Teeth, so white and even; and her
Lips so red.


Tob. And keeps her Teeth close, which makes such a Jarring in her Speech.


Lov. That breaks the fullness of the Voice, and makes a pretty kind of Harmony.


Tob. Her Face is a White clumsey big-face.


Lov. But every Feature is so excellent, the greatest Crittick in Beauty knows
not where to take away, or what to add.


Tob. Then she has a peaking way of holding down her Head.


Lov. But at the same time, appear such a pattern of Modesty and Innocence.


Tob. Her Breasts are too bigg.


Lov. But are firm and white, and such delicate blew Veyns, Their Bigness seems
Graceful.


Tob. She Is Lanck Buttock'd.


Lov. Finely turned about the Hipps.


Tob. Her Stature is low.


Lov. Aug^^l of a fine middle Size; not so Tall to over, ^^p a Man, nor so Low
as to be or'e-look'd.


Tob. She Is of too dull and serious a Humor.


Lov. That which you call Dullness, is her Modesty; and her Seriousness, is the
Effect of her Sage discreet Behavior.


Tob. But she is very pettish --


Lov. Which shows she has a Spirit. But in the Fair nothing seems amiss, and in
them we easily pass over small Faults.


Tob. Lord Sir! She Is a Book without an Errata; never did such a perfect
Impression come from the Press of Nature: I see how things will go. Whom we
excuse, we Love --


Lov. Love her! I Will rather Die. I Will more disesteem her than ever I prized her.


Tob. This is not the right course you take.


Lov. In this my Revenge will show it self; the more full of Charms she
appears, the more Glorious will the Conquest be: When from my Heart, I drive
the Sentiments of Love, and plant in their Room, Contempt and Disdain.


Enter Jacinta and Beatrice. Tob. Here she comes; now stand your Ground.


Beat. His behavior Madam was such, I have nothing to say in his Excuse.


Iacin. He Is here.


Lov. I Will not so much as speak to her.


Tob. I Will follow your Example.


Iac. What makes you so strange?


Beat. Why stand you at so great a Distance?


Iac. What distrubs your Mind?


Beat. What a murren ailes you?


Lov. Perfidious Woman.


Tob. Hah! Mrs. Judas.


Iac. I see my Company is troublesome to you; was my Silence this Morning the
ground of your Anger?


Lov. Let me tell you, you shall not Triumph in your Infidelity; I will banish
the Love I have for you from my Heart, and leave in it no Impression your Eyes
have made.


Tob. No nor I neither.


Iac. I will acquaint you with the Cause why I held not discourse with you this
Morning.


Lov. I Will hear nothing.


Beat. I Will tell you why we were Mu^.


Tob. I am deaf.


Iac. My Father -- Lov. I care not.


Beat. My Mistress -- Tob. My Master.


Iac. Hear me! -- Lov. No.


Beat. Hark you --


Tob. No, hark you --


Iac. Mr. Lovell --


Lov. Mrs. Iacinta.


Beat. Dear Toby --


Tob. Sweet Beatrice.


Iac. Stay. --


Lov. Not I.


Beat. Come back --


Tob. I will not.


Iac. Pray hear me --


Lov. Excuse me.


Beat. One word --


Tob. Not a Syllable.


Iac. You Will begone --


Lov. Yes.


Beat. You wont stay --


Tob. No.


Iac. Well, since you will not hear me speak, Remain in your Ignorance, and do
as you please.


Beat. Since you are so frumpish, a Pin for you.


Tob. And a Fart for you Mrs. Turd-pie.


Lov. Well then, say what you would say.


Iac. My Mind is altered now.


Tob. Come tell your Tale.


Beat. No matter now.


Lov. What was it?


Iac. Nothing.


Tob. Begin.


Beat. I have done.


Lov. Pray speak.


Iac. Excuse me.


Tob. Come out with it.


Beat. Let me alone.


Lov. I entreat.


Iac. In vain.


Tob. I petition.


Beat. To no purpose.


Lov. I conjure you.


Iac. Pray go.


Tob. In the name of Jupiter Speak --


Beat. Be gone.


Lov. Iacinta.


Iac. Lovell.


Tob. Beatrice.


Beat. Toby.


Lov. You Are resolved.


Iac. I am.


Tob. You Will be obstinate.


Beat. Yes.


Lov. Lay aside your Anger.


Iac. Never.


Tob. Let your Gizzard leave grumbling.


Beat. I Will have nothing to do with you.


Lov. Since you are so Averse, to let me know the Cause why you treated me so
Ill, and proved so false to your Faith, This is the last time you shall ever
see me, for I will turn Wanderer, and spend my days in Travel.


Tob. Ay, and so will I.


Iac. But Lovell.


Lov. Your pleasure.


Beat. But Toby.


Tob. 'Say you.


Iac. What are your Intentions?


Lov. To banish my self from my Country.


Beat. What mean you?


Tob. To turn Vagabond.


Iac. You must not go.


Lov. Your Unkindness drives me hence.


Beat. You shall not be gone.


Tob. You Are grown so Turdy the Devil would not endure your Company.


Iac. Lovell, it is you are unkind, to condemn me unheard.


Lov. You refused to speak for your self.


Iac. It was not then convenient: My Father both this Morning, and e're since I
saw you last, charged me never to admit you more in Conversation, nor to see
you; could I help it? And says his Curses shall be my Portion, if I disobey
him.


Lov. Will you be so unjust?


Ready to shut the Boult. Iac. Never; though you should prove so to me!


Lov. By your Father's words, I understood you were as willing to retreat from
my Love, as he to have you --


Iac. I saw, e're since that Foppish Lord made his Pretentions to me, that my
Father was resolved to put a Stop to our Proceedings. I seemingly complied --
for had I urged his Anger with my Denyals, he would not only have banished you
from his house, but have, Immured me in my Chamber, till I had been disposed
of; Then I should have lost the satisfaction of seeing you, which I now may
have if things be managed discreetly. --


Lov. You acted prudently --


Iac. I durst not speak to you this Morning: when I returned,

I spied my Father at the Window.


Beat. Look you now, the Secret is out.


Tob. 'Twas even so, I verily believe.


Lov. Ah Iacinta! See what power you have over me, that can with one word
appease all the Mutinies in my Mind: and with what Facility, we let our selves
be persuaded by them we love.


Tob. Ah these White Devils have as great power over their Servants, as the
Black Devil over Sinners.


[Shut the Boult. Beat. Madam, the Door begins to open.


Iac. Begone Sir. I fear it is my Father.


Lov. Adieu --


Ex. Lov. Tob. Enter Hillaria. Hill. Ha, ha, ha.


Iac. You have a happy time on it Cozen, you are always merry!


Hill. I vow Coz. I have so laughed at his Lordship.


Iac. How can thou laugh at such a Fool?


Hill. He Is one of the most pleasant Comedies Nature ever brought into the World.


Iac. He Is but a mere Farce!


Hill. His Tailor is come after him with a New Suit, but of the oddest Fashion
-- he is putting it on, and will soon be here to show it you; he says it is of
his own Invention.


Iac. I wish thee in my place; you would know how to manage him.


Hill. I would my Uncle had ordained him for my Lover.


Iac. And do you wish he were to be your Husband too?


Beat. There Is a certain Reason, Madam, why a woman should wish to have a Fool
for her Husband.


Hill. Yes Beatrice, but I do'nt; he is not Fool enough for that!


Beat. For my part I believe it to be a Vulgar Error.


Hill. Some are so skilful, as to judge of those matters from the Features; but
Experience is the best Mistress.


Beat. Ay Madam! -- from thence comes the most certain Knowledge.


Iac. You talk so I don't know what you mean.


Hill. Alas poor Innocent!


Beat. Why Madam, we may talk or mean what we will; we are alone.


Iac. I blush at your Answer.


Hill. Dear Coz, you are a very Wag at your heart, or you would not blush at what
she said.


Iac. Here comes your Animal.


Enter De Boastado in his New Suit, and a Tailor. Tailor. Never let me have
your Custom, if it be not exactly to your Description!


D. Boast. I think it is; Madam Iacinta, I come to show you my Gallantry. It Is
an odd Fancy, but new; It Is my own Invention. How does it please you?


Iac. Wonderfully well.


Hill. It is well quartered.


Iac. We want a Herald to blazon it.


Beat. I never liked Suit better.


D. Boast. I am glad you all like it, for I would not let my Tailor go, till I
had got your Approbation. Hark you! How many Artists sat in Consultation about
it?


Tail. According to your Lordships Appointment, Twelve.


Iac. A Jury of Tailors to make up one Fool.


D. Boast. How make you up the Number?


Tail. Four French Tailors.


Hill. Why four French?


D. Boast. Because they are the best Mathematicians at Cutting out. Go on --


Tail. Three Spanish.


Iac. Why Spanish?


D. Boast. Auh! Their deliberation in proceeding does much. They set not a
Stich without Thought, and their Gravity is a good Allay for the French
Mercury. It gives Fixation to their volatile Spirits. Proceed --


Tail. Two Italians, one German, and one Polander.


Beat. And why those my Lord?


D. Boast. Because I passed through their Countries in my Travels, and have
here something of the best of all their Garbs.


Hill. Good.


D. Boast. In this Suit Ladies, you may read all the Countries of my Travels; I
designed it on purpose, to give the World Intelligence where I have been.


Hill. I vow 'twas a pretty Contrivance --


Iac. Yes very Ingenious --


Tail. And to make the Number, the Twelfth was an Englishman, and that my self.


D. Boast. Go thy ways, and carry thy Bill to my Steward, and bid him pay thee
thy Money.


Tail. I thank your Lordship.

[ Ex. Tailor.
Iac. Now do I wish to be well quit of him.


Hill. Go you in, and I Will endeavor to detain him.


D. Boast. Going away, it is Unkind not to take me with you.


Iac. I am going about a small Affair my Maid tells me of.


Hill. Accept of my Company till she returns.


Exeunt Jac. and Beat. D. Boast. Oh Madam, It Is most agreeable.


Hill. I would it were my Lord.


[Sighes. D. Boast. Why sigh you, Madam?


Hill. Would I was as handsome as my Cozen.


D. Boast. You are, Lady.


Hill. And as good a Fortune too.


D. Boast. Your Fortune is large, your Uncle tells me.


Hill. But not answerable to hers. I would it was.


D. Boast. Repine not Fair one.


Hill. Hi ho!


D. Boast. Pray why sigh you so?


Hill. I wish my Lord.


D. Boast. What pretty one?


Hill. That you had never seen my Cozen.


D. Boast. Why?


Hill. Because I think she'^ love you --


D. Boast. And I Will love her --


Hill. But I wish you would love some body else.


All Muchw. Jacinta. D. Boast. And why do you wish it?


Hill. Because a Friend of mine loves you.


D. Boast. You mock me. Ha, ha, ha.


Hill. No my Lord, it is too true -- That you may know I do not, I could tell you
of more than one that loves you passionately.


D. Boast. I must confess it has been my Fortune to be beloved by considerable
Persons, in all places wherever I have traveled -- At Rome the Pope's Neice
fell in Love with me, and sent me her Picture richly set in Jewels. In Tuscany
the Grand Duke's Sister. I could tell you something of an Intrigue with the
Sultana, when I was at Constantinople, but it is something incredible.


Hill. Nay, I have reason to believe it, for no Woman sees you without some
concern; even in this very Street lies a young Lady that has Forty thousand
Pounds to her Portion, and she but saw you pass along the Street once or twice,
as you came hither, and is fallen in Love with you: And hearing of your
pretensions here, is since fallen sick, and has kept her Bed these two' days.


D. Boast. I protest I am sorry; but is she so great a Fortune.


Hill. My Uncle knows her, and all her Concerns as to those things.


D. Boast. Humh --


Hill. I could tell you of some body else too. But it is not convenient.


D. Boast. That Is her self -- this may be worth enquiry.


Enter Muchworth. Muchw. My Lord, my Lawyer's within; if you please, we will
look over some Particulars of your Estate, that we may forward the Settlement
of a Joynter for my Daughter.


D. Boast. I have some reason to think, she and I may not disagree. Your
Servant Lady.


[ Ex. Muchw. and D. Boast. Enter Jacinta. Iac. I had not returned to you, but
that I saw my Father come this way.


Hill. You missed the Relation of his foreign Amors: But I have persuaded his
Lordship, that you and I are in love with him, and that a great Fortune has
kept her Bed this two days, hearing he pretends to you --


Iac. And is sick for love of him.


Hill. Yes! he believes it.


Iac. He Is a most credulous Coxcomb -- But should he find you out to be a Liar.


Hill. Not a greater than himself, he cannot I am sure!


Iac. How can thou in Conscience make such a Fool of him.


Hill. Heaven ordained every thing for some use or another; and he can serve for
no other than our Pastime.


Enter Careless. Carel. Ha! these are they!


Iac. Here comes Mr. Lovell's Friend.


Carel. Now which of them is she that I am in love with?


Iac. He Is at a stand.


Hill. He Would fain know me again; but prithee take up a Brisk Humor, and let us try
to puzzle him.


Iac. No! Prithee let us go in.


Carel. What, are you upon this Wing? Do you come out a Grazing like Rabbets
just at the Burrows mouth; that as soon as any body comes, you may pop into
your Holes again.


Hill. We had need be watchful; when such Pochers as you are abroad.


Carel. Your watchfulness signifies little: I come now like a Ferret to creep
into your Holes, and scare you out of your Burrows.


Iac. But if instead of a Burrow, you should run into a Warreners Trap.


Hill. And that you may easily do; for we are no Out-lying. Conies, we keep
within Heart of the Warren.


Carel. I, but I know your Musees, your In-lets, and Outlets, and wherever
the Rabbets pass, the Ferret or Weezel may venture. You see I come just to the
same place; 'twas here you pop't in from me before; but now I am got between
you and the Hedge.


Iac. But how do you know that we are the same Pair?


Hill. And which of us is it that was too nimble for you?


Iac. You had best have a care on which you adventure, for in such cases, you
ought not to spoil your Friend's Game.


Carel. It Is one of you!


Hill. I see you are no good Hound. You cannot follow the Scent well.


Carel. Many a good-Nos'd Dog is at a loss when Scent is crossed; but if I
catch one, and my Friend another, if we are mistaken, let him say which is his,
and we will make a change.


Iac. But which of us two, do you think, would fall to your share.


Carel. IN Gad I do'nt know.


Hill. Do'nt you know a woman's Face when you see it a second time --


Carel. She showed it with-such a Leger-De-Maine; her Masque was no sooner off,
than on again; and she was gone.


[Pass. Iac. Observe us well.


Carel. Let me see -- Faith not I -- If you had your Masks on, I should know
her from a thousand, at the very sight of her Vizard, my Heart would go
Pitty-pat.


Hill. If you are so in Love with the complexion of Velvet, you should have a
N^gra for your Mistress.


Carel. There is Beauty in Black; Why else do Ladies put (...) Patches? And
some love Black-hair better than Light, and (...) why not Black ^aces as well.


Iac. But you would be for a White one at this time, if you knew but which was
under the Vizard.


Hill. It Is well for us he does not, for then he would pretend Love to one of us.


Carel. Gad but I would not to you, nor never a Woman in the World.


Iac. I dare swear you would.


Carel. Perhaps I might make you believe I was in Love with you.


Hill. No, that you could never do.


Carel. Why, don't you think your selves handsome enough to be loved?


Iac. Yes; but we think you have more Wit.


Carel. What, then to love one of you.


Hill. Yes, or any body else that is never like to love you again.


Carel. Are you an Enemy to me or to Love?


Hill. To love. I think it is a very foolish thing.


Carel. But it is Marriage makes it so. Give me Love as Nature made it, Free and
Unconfined. -- Observe but Mistress, and Gallant: How Brisk, how Gay, how
Fierce they are in their Amors! Whilst Marriage-love comes like a Slave
laden with Fetters, dull and out of humor.


Hill. For my part, I am rather for a Gallant than a Husband.


Iac. So am I clearly --


Carel. It Is well dissembled on one side; one of you I am sure speaks against
her Conscience, but if you are as you say, you are Girls for me.


Iac. What both?


Carel. Both, 'I gad both --


Hill. Hold, one's enough; and if you will be a Gallant to one of us, we expect you
should be constant.


Carel. That Circumstance makes it too like Marriage.


Hill. The Constancy is while you pretend; not but that either Mistress or
Gallant may choose elsewhere, but they must love but one at once.


Iac. But which of us will you choose?


Carel. Faith I Will be for her I talked to in the Masque.


Enter Beatrice. Beat. Madam! Dinner's on the Table.


Iac. Already.


Beat. My Master has called for it, he is in haste to go out.

Ex. Beat.
Hill. We come: Well Sir, when you find which of us two is she; claim her for
your Mistress.


Carel. Adien.


Hill. Come Hilaria.

Ex. Jac. Hill.
Carel. Ha! Hilaria, in faith, that is she. But they are gone. Iacinta I
remember, is the Name of Lovell's Mistress, till now I fancied the other was
she, because she was more brisk and airy. Well, I^le find out my Friend, and
we will give a visit in the Afternoon.

If for a Wife my Liberty I loose,
One of these Two should catch me in a Noose.

Exeunt. Ends the Second Act.
The Third Act.
Enter Muchworth, Jacinta, Hilaria. Muchw. YOur Jointure is agreed on; and
Directions are given for the Drawing of the Writings; therefore put things in
readiness, and dispose your self for Marriage; for it must be within a day or
two.


Iac. Sure Sir, if you loved me, you would not be so hasty to be rid of me.


Muchw. It is the great Care and Love I have for thee, makes me solicitous to
see thee well-dispos'd. My Lord is a Person of Worth and Honor, and thou will
be happy in his Love; Iacinta thou wilt be a Lady --


Iac. My Lord merits, I question not, a Wife much above me in Desert; But how
do you think I can on the sudden, resolve to leave the Family of him that got
me, bred me, and brought me up to what I am.


Muchw. Your Mother did the same before You; and for this thou have had all thy
Education: This is the last great Act a Father can do for his Child; in this
his Care ends, and when we give a Daughter in Marriage, it is supposed, we give
her to more than a Father, for such is a Husband; Husband and Wife are one.


Hill. That rule Uncle, will not hold in Arithmetic, for according to the first
principle, one and one make two.


Muchw. Mad-cap Neice, meddle with your own matters. Let me see --


Hill. Nay Uncle, never put on your Considering-Cap, for an Answer. What I say
is true; and I Will give you a further Demonstration, that Man and Wife are not
one: For in this Age they are seldom, or never together; the Man's in one
place, and the Wise in another* as far asunder as ever they can get. And you
know it is impossible for one and the same thing to be at the same time in
several places.


Muchw. She has a very unhappy Wit. I am glad, Daughter, that you are going
from her, for she is enough to spoil all the Young Women she meets with; but I
hope she will have a Husband will meet with her.


Hill. Never of your Choosing, Uncle.


Muchw. Likely so, for you are Hair-brained enough, to do things of your own
Head. But your Father when he Died, left you to my Care, and bid that you
should be Ruled by me; and if you are not, your Disobedience will come home to
you one day or other.


Hill. This is but talk. Do you think, Uncle, I have not as much Wit to choose a
Husband as you?


Muchw. Well, well, follow your own Course; but I hope you will get a Husband one
day will Cudgel your Bones for you. --


Hill. But Uncle, it is not now as it was in your young days, Women then were
poor sneaking sleepish Creatures. But in this Age, we know our own strength,
and have wit enough to make use of our Talents. If I meet with a Husband makes
my Heart ache, I Will make his Head ache I Will warrant him.


Muchw. Nay, I am apt enough to believe one house will be too not to hold you
long. I doubt not but your Husband (who e're has the ill fortune to be so) will
in a short time be as weary of you as I am.


Hill. If he should prove but half so ill-natured as you are (which certainly no
Young Man can) I Would swear my self a Virgin, and consequently, Sue a Divorce
against him for Impotency.


Muchw. I must be gone, this Wen^h will never hold her prattle; she would out-talk
them at a Bake-house.

Ex. Muchw.
Iac. Well, you are a mad Wench to talk so.


Hill. Pish! I Will have Women say and do what they will: Have not we Rational
Souls as well as Men; what made Women Mopes in former Ages, but being ruled by
a company of old Men and Women: Dotage then was counted Wisdom, and formerly
called Gravity and good Behavior.


Iac. What can thou advise me to in this extremity. I hate this Foolish Lord.


Hill. Let him know your Mind, and if he will not believe you, tell him he is an
Unmannerly Fool.


Iac. If I break with him, my Father will conclude I affect Mr. Lovell, and to
cross me, never consent I should have him; And he is the only Man I can Love.


Hill. See! he is here, and our Gallant with him; we will conspute the Bu'sness
with them.


Enter Lovell, Careless. Iac. Mr. Lovell, how durst you venture here.


Lov. This Gentleman told me your Father was to go abroad this Afternoon; and
by his persuasion and my own Inclinations, we adventured to wait on you, and
just as we came into the Street, my Lord and he passed by us in a Coach.


Hill. And who sent for you Gallant?


Carel. I hope, Madam, you will allow a man to look after his Heart when it is gone
a'stray.


Hill. You could not find it the last time you were here.


Carel. You conspired to juggle me on it; but I know well enough which of you
had it.


Iac. You are beholding to Mr. Lovell for your Knowledge.


Lov. No, Madam, upon my word, but he has told me his Adventures.


Carel. Well, Madam; I hope you will stand to your Bargain.


Hill. We are no Flinchers; we will not be worse than our words.


Carel. Well then, you I challenge for my Mistress; you were the Lady I talked
to in the Masque.


Iac. I am not her I Will assure you --


Carel. takes Jac. by the hand. Carel. I am well assured it could be none but
you; I knew it when I was here before, though I did not then own it.


Iac. Take nay word Sir.


Carel. Lord that you should think to deceive me; why all the while I was in
the Company before, my Heart beat all on that side you stood, and my Cheek next
you burnt and glo'de.


Hill. Ha, ha, 'slife he has not found it out yet.


Carel. Ha!


Lov. No, I Will be swore Careless have not you.


Carel. I Will be sworn Madam, Hilaria was the Person.


Hill. Ha, ha, ha: But that is my Cozen Iacinta.


Carel. No, no, no, did not you call her Hilaria as you went in.


Hill. Ha, ha, ha!


Iac. Ha, ha, ha!


Hill. I thought how well you know; and did that on purpose to try you --


Carel. Ba --


Lov. Now Careless thou art caught --


Carel. What would I give now to come handsomely off: I must be impudent: Well,
Madam, to let you see that I did, go both of you out of the Room, and come in
Masqu'd, and if I don't choose the Right, I Will be content to resign the Hopes
of a Mistress.


Iac. There is but right and wrong.


Carel. To give you a greater Proof on it, I Will make my choice Blindfold.


Hill. 'Twill still be an even Wager that you hit on the right.


Lov. Careless, thou art Outwitted in faith.


Hill. Servant, our Covenant is void for Nonperformance of the Conditions.


Carel. But calling of me Servant after the Condition is broken, is a
Confirmation -- and will make it stand good in Law.


Lov. No Careless, that Quirk will not do neither.


Carel. But Madam, I hope you will give a man leave to retreat, when he finds his
Error; your self occasioned the Mistake, 'twas an Error of my Hand, not of my
Heart, for at the same time, I told you Hilaria was she, and you are Hilaria;
Therefore 'twas you I meant.


Hill. Yes, yes, 'twas me you meant; when your Cheek glo'd, and your Heart beat
on the left side!


Hill. Ha, ha, ha.


Iac. Ha, ha, ha.


Iac. Cozen, you are too great a Tyrant.


Lov. You pursue your Victory too severely; it is generous to give the
Vanquished quarter.


Hill. I do more; I give him Liberty to make his retreat.


Enter Beatrice. Beat. Ah Madam, your Father has met with his Lawyers Clark,
who told him his Master was not at home, and he is returned already.


Iac. Convey Mr. Lovell out quickly Sir; will you go with him?


Beat. It Is not possible, Madam, he is just coming into the Room.


Iac. What shall we do?


Enter Muchworth. Muchw. Ha! Mr. Lovell -- Daughter, I see you observe my
Commands well: Sir, I beseech you; What makes you here?


Lov. Sir, I come to wait on my Friend.


Carel. Yes Sir* I had much ado to persuade him; but considering the business
I came about, required some Body to give you an Account of me, which none could
do better than he; he did adventure to trespass on you to serve me.


Muchw. What Business, pray Sir!


Hill. Ay, what indeed?


Carel. It was my Fortune twice or thrice, to have a sight of your fair Niece,
as she went abroad.


Iac. Sure he is not so mad to tell him.


Carel. To whom, Sir, I took so great a liking, that Day nor Night, I could not
rest, till I had found who she was, and where she lived; which I had no sooner
done, but engaged him to come along with me, to acquaint you who I am, and what
my Fortunes are, hoping to gain your leave, to make my Addresses to this fair
Lady --


Lov. This I hope Sir, will gain me your Pardon.


Muchw. Do you, Sir, know this Gentleman --


Lov. Yes, his Name is Careless; I believe, Sir, you might know his Father.


Muchw. I did so, he was a worthy Gentleman; it is now some eight years since he
died.


Carel. It Is so long; peace be with him.


Muchw. He left some Twelve hundred a Year to his Son, then not at Age.


Lov. This Gentleman is that Son.


Muchw. But has he that Estate?


Carel. Every Acre, Sir.


Muchw. I heard you were a little wild.


Carel. I have my Froliques as most young Men have -- but I keep my Estate out
of the Devil's Clutches; I have yet not sold one Foot of Land, or cut down one
Stick of Wood.


Muchw. Nay Sir, if you were as wild as wild could be, you would meet with your
Match there, my Niece is as wild as you can be, she is Vain, Idle, Careless, and
Talkative.


Hill. Uncle, you should do in driving Bargains for Marriage as they do in
Selling of Horses; tell their good Qualities, and leave it to 'em to find out
the ill.


Muchw. These are Faults will be discovered in you at first sight.


Hill. Sir, I hope you will like me never the worse for what he says.


Muchw. Instead of his getting you for a Wise, you intend to get him for a
Husband.


Hill. It is more to the humor of the Age; if you will not commend me, I Will
commend my self; and if I thought but half so well of him as Id' of my self,
we would soon shake hands for to have and to hold without your leave.


Muchw. You see her humor Sir, if after this you dare venture on her, I shall
not counsel her against you; provided what Mr. Lovel and your self say be
confirmed by good Authors; for I wish her well Married.


Hill. Stay Uncle, now I think on it, you may take him with you. Marriage is
quite out of Fashion, and I hate to be out of it, as much as you do to be in it;
if he had Ten or Twelve Thousand a year, would keep me a Coach and six Horses,
and all things suitable to that Grandeu^r, I might admit him as a Gallant, and
all that --


Muchw. I Will leave you to her; at this mad rate she talks all the Year round.

[ Ex. Muchw.
Lov. I did not think Careless, thou had had a Lie so much at command.


[ D. Boast. with a Letter. Carel. It was to serve my Friend and these Ladies.


Hill. But the Jest would be, if your Lie should prove true, and you should play
such a Simple trick, as to fall in L'ove with me indeed and indeed.


Carel. Make your own words true, and accept me for a Gallant, I know not what
may follow --


Hill. But you know what you must have first -- A huge Estate; but because you
brought us so handsomely off? There Is my Hand to Kiss, and I confer on you the
Title of my Servant.


Iac. He cured a present Evil. I wish he could as easily divert what I fear
will follow.


Carel. Madam, we must court Fortune as we do a Mistress; never leave her when
she is in a good humor. Let Us hear your Grievance:


Iac. It Is the Match my Father drives on so eagerly with that Lord.


Carel. Will he not be satisfied, if you tell him you cannot love him.


Hill. He Will not take that Answer from her, nor never a Woman alive.


Iac. He thinks we are both in love with him.


Hill. Since Dinner I writ a Love-Letter to him; I have made him believe too,
that the Rich Heiress that lodges in this street languishes for him.


Iac. And he pitties her extremely.


Carel. Hark you Lovel; Let Us put him upon courting this Great Fortune.


Lov. But it may be he will not quit his hold here.


Carel. For so great an Advantage he may: And it must be your parts, Ladies, to
give him sufficient grounds to conclude, that neither of you love him.


Hill. Let us alone to give him proof of that.


Carel. Then we will contrive to bring him in Disgrace with your Father. Lady
of the Bedchamber, you must act a part in our Comedy, attend us to the Door;
you shall receive Instructions as we go.


[ Ex. Carel. Lo^. Beat. Enter Muchworth, De Boastado. Iac. Here Is my Father;
let us retreat and consult about our Affairs.


D. Boast. You know this Lady I suppose.


Muchw. I have seen her: But I am very well acquainted with her Uncle.


D. Boast. And has she so great a Fortune?


Muchw. Yes, it lies in the three Banquers hands we were but now speaking of.


D. Boast. I'know it does; for when I parted with you, I made enquiry, and they
confirmed it: She lodges in the middle of this street. Mrs. Rich is her Name.


Muchw. Right: But my Lord, do you think she has so great a Kindness for you?


D. Boast. I speak not without good Reason; and were I not Engaged by Love and
Honor to your Daughter, I would make an Attempt.


Muchw. Her Uncle trusts her not out of his sight.


D. Boast. I could find ways to speak to her, but I prize Mrs. Iacinta above
all Women. Though there are others have no small Kindness for my Person, and one
you know too^ but she shall be nameless; yet I Will show you what a passionate^
Letter she sent me. You shall hear it.


Reads. My Lord:

Your Person is so Taking, and your Obligements so conquering, that no Woman
living, and you beholding, can resist Loving: Therefore since of this you are
knowing; I doubt not your pardoning her, that with Blushing tells you her
Ailing; the Joy of whose being, is, when you and she is seeing: Yours
remaining for Everlasting.


Muchw. This is a very Odd strain.


D. Boast. Ah, it is very Amorous, and I pity the Lady for your sake.


Muchw. Is she Related to me!


D. Boast. The first Letter of her Name is Hilaria.


Muchw. My Niece, this is some Trick of hers; but I dare not tell him he is
abused, lest he should take it ill, and think my Daughter had a hand in it --
But of all that love you, your Lordship can have but one.


D. Boast. True; yet 'twou'd vex a Man to Discard Trumps, but it is a forced
Put: This I tell you, to give you a Proof of my Love for your Daughter. I know
poor Thing she loves Me.


Hilaria and Iacinta appears. Iac. My Lord! You Are a happy Man, we have over
heard your Amors.


D. Boast. I did not think you had been so nigh.


Iac. Without Doubt, you were wrapped in your Mothers Smock.


Hill. Hey -- Ho!


D. Boast. Observe that Sigh, and how she eyes me. Lady you are Melancholy.


Hill. You called my Thoughts from a pleasing Contemplation.

I was thinking --


D. Boast. Of what Madam? --


Hill. Of you my Lord.


D. Boast. I saw you look wishly on Me.


Hill. I was thinking what good Eyes your Lordship has.


Iac. O fine Eyes! if they stood but more out, and were not sunck in's head,
like Candle-Snuffs in their Sockets.


Hill. And did not squint so much.


D. Boast. Mine, mine Ladies.


Muchw. Why Baggages.


Iac. He has a handsome Nose too.


Hill. Was it not an Inch too short.


Iac. And turned up at the end with the Air of a French Dog.


D. Boast. How Is this?


Muchw. Why Girls, what mean you?


Hill. Pretty good Cheeks -- Were they not so lean and pale!


Iac. And fallen in for want of Side-Teeth.


Muchw. The Devil's in them both.


Iac. A handsome Mouth were it not so wide.


Hill. And his Lips not so Thin and Bluish --


D. Boast. I am abused.


[ Call Beatrice. Muchw. Have done, or I Will lay my Staff about your ears.


Iac. His Gums not so worn away.


Hill. And his Teeth not so rotten.


Iac. His Mouth not so ^urr^d.


Hill. His Breath not so scented with the French Hogo.


D. Boast. Disgrace to my Dignity.


Muchw. They are Mad, Distracted. They know not what they do.


Hill. He Is Leather-jaw'd -- Chap-falne.


Iac. And has a Swarthy, Tawny, Tallow Complexion.


Muchw. Peace, and have done in the Devil's name.


Iac. In fine, was your Lordship but ten times as handsome, you would be a pretty
well-favour'd Man.


Hill. And fit to be loved by a Woman of Sixty and upwards.


D. Boast. Intolerable, insufferable, insupportable!


Muchw. Ho! Within there!


Enter Beatrice. [Bring Napkins and stop their Mouths.] Beat. What Is the matter?


Muchw. You Huswifes you, say you are Mad, say you are Drunk, or any thing; or
I Will swinge you.


Hill. No, no, Uncle; We are neither mad nor drunk.


Muchw. Husie; your Reason for this.


Iac. Why does he make his Brags that we are in Love with him, and so fond of
his Company?


Hill. We have given him Proofs of our Kindness. In Love with him!


Muchw. Get you up to your Chambers; Go! Husbands;

Halters you deserve --

[Hil. Iac. Ex^ Have Patience, be pacified, the Baggages shall down on their
knees to you.


D. Boast. Ha, ha, ha! This is only to blind you. Ha, ha, ha, 'Twas your Nieces
Frolic; they love me as they love their own eyes -- and because I told you
on it -- Ha, ha, ha -- See what tricks they play to cozen you, ha, ha, ha.


Muchw. I Will instantly know the truth on it, or --

Ex. Muchw.
D. Boast. Henceforward, I will hate their whole Sex for their sakes, I will
defame the Living, revile the Dead, and leave a Curse to the Generation of
Females to come.


Enter Beatrice. Beat. My Lord, my Lord --


D. Boast. Avoid thou She-Devil; thou art a Satan in Petticoats.


Beat. Ah my Lord; if you knew my Errand, you would say I was an Angel; I have such
News for your Lordship.


D. Boast. News! What is it?


Beat. If a Woman might but trust your Lordship with her Secrets.


D. Boast. I hope she is in love with me; she is a Bit will serve to stay a man's
stomach when he is hungry. What Secrets Pretty Beatrice? Do thou love me?


Beat. Ah dearly, dearly, my Lord -- But --


D. Boast. But you are ashamed to tell me your mind.


Beat. I am afraid --


D. Boast. Thou should have a great Belly --


Beat. No, my Lord, that you should tell --


D. Boast. No: I Will tell no body; go, go up to your Cham^er, and I Will steal
after you --


Beat. No my Lord, I can do the Business here --


D. Boast. Art thou a Virgin?


Beat. As to Deeds a very Innocent; but in Words and Thoughts, I have been a
little waggish.


D. Boast. Come into the next Room.


Beat. No, no, I am only to tell you --


D. Boast. No matter for telling, we will talk afterward,


Beat. See this Gold, my Lord here are Twenty pieces.


D. Boast. And you would have as much more.


Beat. I shall deserve it.


D. Boast. Will thou go then, go.


Beat. This Gold my Lord was given me.


D. Boast. For that, that thou have more mind I should have.


Beat. No, my Lord; it was given me to betray my Mistress.


D. Boast. Hau -- Who has Plots upon her Body?


Beat. No body; it was given me to deprive her of you, my Lord.


D. Boast. What mean thou?


Beat. To tell your Lordship that -- But I am so afraid, you shoud tell again.


D. Boast. I Will be secret on my Honor.


Beat. That there is a rich Heiress not far off in love with your Lordship.


D. Boast. Humh -- And is not this a Plot laid --


Beat. Yes, my Lord, it is a Plot laid.


D. Boast. To betray me --


Beat. Yes, my Lord --


D. Boast. And you will discover it.


Beat. To none but your Lordship: It is to betray you, but will your Lordship
be sure not to speak on it again?


D. Boast. I will not.


Beat. To betray your Lordship into a Marriage with this great Fortune.


D. Boast. How!


Beat. I am to tell her Name too, and how you shall come to see her, for all
the Dragon her Uncle; and how you shall steal a Marriage and all.


D. Boast. What say thou Beatrice?


Beat. Nothing but truth: Her Name is Mrs. Rich, she lives in this street, and
is sick in Bed for love of you. She sent for me and gave me this Gold, with
promise of much more, if I would be true to her, and acquaint you with her
Condition; and be instrumental in helping her to see you --


D. Boast. How Beatrice; may I come to the sight of her.


Beat. She has bribed her Physician to join in the Conspiracy; he will pretend
to bring an able Doctor of his Acquaintance to see her, that with him he may
consult of her Disease and Cure. You are to be this Physician, and the Person
in the habit of an Apothecary -- which you are to provide, for we know none.


D. Boast. Let me alone for that!


Beat. Then if your Lordship like her; you may there Marry her.


D. Boast. A very neat Invention! Oh subtle Woman!


Beat. This my Lord was my Plot.


D. Boast. It Is well laid.


Beat. She has promised I shall live with her when I am Married.


D. Boast. Thou shall -- But Beatrice, thou wilt keep thy Maiden for me, will thou not.


Beat. If I find you can keep Secrets; I will trust your Lordship with any
thing.


D. Boast. I know thou did love me better than thy Mistress, or her Flirking
Cozen -- Well, were it not for what thou have told me, their Affronts would
drive me to my Country House; where I Would live like a Hermit, and leave half the
Town languishing.


Beat. You would leave my Lady a bleeding. But I hope your Lordship is better
Natured, and more just, than to revenge the Faults of a few upon the whole Sex.
I Will go put my Affairs in a posture for my getting abroad to wait on your
Lordship.


D. Boast. And I the mean time, will disengage my self from all concerns here,
and to Iacinta's Father resign the Interest he gave me in her.


Beat. Go thy ways, Lord Credulous; how greedily he swallows the Bait with
which he was caught before.

A Fool will often run into the Snare,
But once escaped, the Wiseman does beware.

Exeunt. Ends the Third Act.
The Fourth Act.
[Hall continues. Enter De Boastado, Muchworth, Jacinta. Muchw. COme Huswife;
ask Forgiveness.


Threatens Jac. with his Cain. Iac. I have Sir.


Muchw. But on your Knees.


Iac. Sir.


Muchw. Quickly down; down on your Knees, Baggage.


Enter Hilaria with a Cain in her Hand. Hill. Courage Cozen Iacinta, I am come
to your aid: Look you Uncle, I have got as Tuff a Cain as yours.


Muchw. Get you out of my Doors Huswife -- So down, down on your Knees.


Iac. I do Sir --


[ Iac. kneels. Hill. Down, my Lord, Come you must down too.


D. Boast. Hold! hold! hold!


Muchw. Why Niece --


Hill. Nay, it is very true Uncle, if you lay't on there, I Will lay't on here with
a Vengeance: Down on your Marry-Bones --


D. Boast. Why look you Lady to serve you --


[D. Bo. kneels. Muchw. Get you out of my Doors; get you out of my House.


Hill. Nay Uncle, keep off, I am resolved to stand upon my Guard.


Muchw. Get you gone I say, and never come near me more.


Hill. But don't you think to Domineer when I am gone, if I hear you do, I Will
have abo^t too with you Uncle, as old a Cock of the Game as you are, I Will have
a Sparring Blow too with you.


Enter Beatrice, and Toby following in a Disguise, a Suit of Four Quarters,
representing the Four Parts of the World, with his Head habited like a
Spaniard. Beat. Here Is a Stranger enquires for you my Lord.


Hill. Here Is a Cavilere to Defend us; Cudgel lie thou there.


Tob. I am your Humble my Lord.


D. Boast. Sir, I am yours.


Tob. I have had the Honor to see your Lordship in many Countries abroad, and
you appeared so pleasing to me; That returning from Travel, I could not but
take England in my way -- (Though I had formerly lived here six years) that I
might receive the Honor of Kissing your hand; and making my self Familiar in
your Lordships Acquaintance.


D. Boast. Which I covet abundantly. A Traveller cannot but be worthy my
Knowledge. I venerate a Pilgrims Shoe as much as they do Saints, whose Shrines
they go to visit, because it has trod the Dust of many Countries; shall I beg
Cognizance of your Name, Sign^or.


Tob. My Name is Signior, Simplaio, Folio. Del no no, Wittesso At-Allo.


Muchw. Bless me!


Hill. The Co^nts Name is but Monosillable to this.


D. Boast. This is a noble Family as I take it.


Iac. And you are a great Fool for your pains.


Tob. It Is a very Noble one in Spain. I was borne at Castile, Christened at
Rome, Educated in Paris, returned to Italy, left my Virginity at Venice; Sailed
from thence to Constantinople; Traveled to Jerusalem, and there I first Shaved
my Beard.


Hill. Uncle, he may well have a long Name, that went as far as Rome to be
Christened.


Muchw. He appears to be a great Traveller.


Iac. His Face shows it.


Hill. He has indeed a right Olive-Complexion; which is a sign he has much in
the Sun.


Tob. My Lord, I hope you will command my pardon for this Gentleman, and these
Ladies, if my Respects to your Lordship makes me appear uncivil to them.


Muchw. Not in the least -- My Lord merits all --


Tob. My Lord, don't you remember to have seen me in your Tra^els?


D. Boast. I begin to call you to mind, as I take it, I saw you in the Court of
Spain.


Tob. Right, you did so; I was then playing a Game at Chess with the King!


D. Boast. And at Vienna, the Emperor's Court.


Tob. The Emperor and I, the first Morning I saw you there, were at Tennis: I
remember I lost a Set for a thousand Pistols to satisfy my Curiosity of
looking upon your Lordship; that was the second time I had the Honor to see
you.


Muchw. This is a Great Person; behave your selves with Respect.


A Bottle of Sack, and Glass ready for Beatrice. D. Boast. And as I take it, I
saw you as I Accompanied Cardinal Palavicina, the Popes Nephew, to the
Consistory; I was at that time in his Coach.


Tob. I think you were; and I well remember, I Rid with his Holiness in His --
And your Lordship gave me the Grace of a Bow, which I returned your Lordship
with so great Obeisance, that had not his Holiness caught hold on me behind; I
had t^mbl'd out over the Boot of the Coach.


D. Boast. You did much Honor my Civilities.


Tob. Now we have increased our Acquaintance; I Will obtrude the trouble on you,
to go with me to Court some Day, and present me to the King, that I may have
the Honor to kiss his Hand.


D. Boast. I swell with the Ambition of waiting on so Noble a Cavaliero; Now I
perfectly remember you.


Enter Lovel. Lov. I beg your Pardon --


D. Boast. Sir, pray advance, here is only a Noble stranger, one that is a great
Traveller, and of my former Acquaintance: He Is worth your knowledge, O Sir
Cavilliero; pray receive this Gentleman into your Arms.


Lov. Ha! sure I know that Habit -- Ha -- Sirrah -- You Rogue, What make you
here?


D. Boast. Sir! Your Language is too bold.


Muchw. You take too great a Liberty to affront any Man in my House; besides,
he is a Man of Quality.


Lov. I Will fetch his Qualities out of him, with a Pox to him.


[ Beats Toby. Tob. Ah good Sir, hold Sir, or you will make a Discovery.


Lov. Ah Sir, I Will make you discover what Tricks you are playing here?


[Strikes him. D. Boast. Hold, hold, Sir, hold --


Muchw. Hold, hold, Sir, hold --


Tob. Ah, ah, Good Sir -- Nay Sir -- Good Sir -- Pray good Master.


D. Boast. How!


Muchw. How!


Iac. Ha, ha, ha, he!


Hill. Ha, ha, ha, he!


Beat. Ha, ha, ha, he!


Tob. Ah Sir, I ask you Forgiveness on my Knees.


Lov. Sirrah; what makes you loytering here, when I send you about Business?


Tob. Ah Lord Sir, I only put on your Masquerading Suit to come to Mrs.
Beatrice in, to see if she could know me!


Hill. Ha, ha, ha, he! Toby! Ha, ha, ha, ha.


[Knock ready. Iac. Ha, ha, ha, he! Toby! Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Beat. Ha, ha, ha, he! Toby! Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Lov. I thought I should find you here; go get you home you Rogue, go.


D. Boast. Would I was gone too.


[Women laugh, Ha, ha, ha. Hill. My Lord, will not you follow, and wait on your
Cavaliero to Kiss the Kings hand; Ha, ha, ha --


D. Boast. Ha, ha, ha, ha --


[A forced Laugh. Iac. Your Lordship saw him in Spain, Germany and Rome; Ha,
ha, ha.


Hill. And bowed to him out of the Cardinal' s Coach; Ha, ha, ha.


D. Boast. Ha, ha, ha.


Muchw. I am amazed; Ha, ha, ha --


Lov. What mean you, Ladies?


D. Boast. Ladies, Gentlemen; a good Jest -- Ha, ha, ha -- Laugh at it, Ha, ha
-- Laugh heartily, Ha, ha, ha. --


Iac. Ha, ha, ha.


Beat. Ha, ha, ha.


D. Boast. He Is a witty Knave, Ha, ha, ha, my sides will burst with Laughing,
Ha, ha, ha.


Lov. I am afraid the Rogue has played some Unlucky Trick --


D. Boast. No, no -- Ha, ha, ha, a Jest, a very good Jest, Ha, ha, ha; I
protest my Laughing has made me Sick. I Will take my leave, Sir.


Muchw. Beatrice, fetch in a Bottle of Sack. My Lord, pray drink a Glass of
Sack, if you are not Well.


D. Boast. No matter.


Muchw. Oh, by all means! my Lord, how came you to be so mistaken in him?


D. Boast. There was a Noble Cavalier, that I often met in my Travels Sir, like
this Knave, Ha, ha, ha. I protest, I thought it had been he -- Well Sir, Your
Man's a Witty Knave --


Lov. I am glad he has made you all Merry; I was afraid he had played the Rogue
-- For which, I would have so beat him -- My Lord, your Servant; your Servant
Sir; Ladies your Servant --


[Exeunt. Knocking at the Door.] [Knocking within. Enter Beatrice. Muchw. Come
Beatrice, Fill my Lord a Glass of Sack. See who Knock's at the Door, Beatrice.


[D. Boast. drinks. Beat. Here Is a Woman would Speak with my Lord --


[ Beat goes to the Door. Muchw. Bid Her come in.


Enter Mrs. Breedwell. Jenny, Sarah. Two Children. Breed. Ha! Have I found you
at last? Are you come again, after so many Years Absence? Could you, wicked
Man, think to Forsake me for ever?


D. Boast. What means the Woman!


Breed. Ah, Hard hearted Lord, You know well enough what I mean! Can you see
me, and not Blush? Was it for this, that you pretended Love to me, and caused
my Poor Parents to break off my Marriage with the Viccar's Son? And did you
Marry me your self, only to leave me, and make me Wretched?


Muchw. How Is this?


Iac. Married!


Hill. Married!


D. Boast. Woman! what in the Devil's name do thou mean?


Breed. I mean, your going away, and leaving of me -- After you had Married me:
as soon as you saw me with Child, you pretended Business to London: You left me
Money to keep me Six Months, but before the time expired, you ran beyond Sea,
without letting me know whether you were gone; not sending me any thing to
Maintain me in that Condition: And to increase my Misfortunes, I had two
Children at a Birth.


Muchw. Does not your Lordship know me?


D. Boast. An impudent Queen! I never saw her before. I know her not.


Breed. Not know your own Wife! Shameless Lord! You are a Dishonor to the Womb
that bare you: Have my Cares and Miseries this Seven years so altered me, that
you don't know me? Yes, You know me, but you will not. Ah that I had never known
you, then I should not have known Sorrow: You were in Hopes it would brake my
Heart; but I live to plague you.


Iac. Alas poor Woman!


Breed. Heaven help us poor Wretche^, if we must have such hard Fortune! To be
forsaken by our Husbands, and left without Money in our Pocket, Clothes to the
back, and Meat or Drink for the Belly.


D. Boast. The Woman's Distracted; send her to Bedlam.


Muchw. The Woman talks sensibly.


Breed. Ah! How do think I have maintained my self, and these Two poor
Children, these six Years and more: Even with the Work of my own Hands -- God
help me.


[Cries. Hill. Alas poor Woman!


Iac. It g^ieves me to see her Weep.


Muchw. What should this mean?


Hill. It appears by the Story, that she is his Wife!


Knock here. D. Boast. Not my Wife, I protest.


[Knocking at Door. Beat. Here Is another Woman with Child enquires for my Lord.


Enter Clappam, Tommie, a Child as out of Breath. Clap. Let me come in -- Hau,
hau -- I am almost dead; I am out of Breath -- Oh wicked man; it is after you,
that I run thus up and down, Hau, hau, hau -- But now I have found you, you
shall not escape me.


D. Boast. What mean thou now?


Clap. I mean to cross your Marriage; you thought I was dead, or far enough
from England, never to trouble you more, Did you?


Muchw. What Is your Business?


Clap. Ah that Wretch of a Husband there; that Unnatural Wretch; he Sold his
own Wife, Sold his Child, Sold his own Flesh and Blood.


Muchw. This is some Mistake.


Hill. Are you his Wife?


Clap. Yes Madam, he Married me, and carried me from my Friends; he carried me
with him beyond Sea, and when he got me there, and I began to grow Big with
Child, he pretended to send me by Sea to England -- To live with my Friends
till he returned -- But instead of that, I was carried to Iapan; he had Sold me
to the Master of the Ship, who was a Dutchman: he Sold me, and this poor Child
that was in my Belly, to Slavery and Bondage.


Breed. Which do you say is your Husband?


Clap. Even this; this is he, let him deny't if he can.


Breed. No, it is I am his Wife.


Clap. You his Wife too! What, has the Wretch two Wives? That will Hang him.


Breed. Hang him; no, you are none of his Wife.


Clap. Yes, he is my Husband.


Breed. I say, he is my Husband, and I can prove it.


D. Boast. Are ye both possessed? I am Husband to neither of Ye.


Breed. We have been Married this Seven Years.


Clap. It is Six, since he Married me.


Breed. Is this true, you wicked Lord?


D. Boast. Yes, yes, one's as true as the other.


Breed. Ah shameless Man! Do thou confess thou have Two Wives? Come hither
little Ienny, come hither Sarah; Look you, these are the Fruits of our Marriage.


Clap. And here is my Child too.


Breed. Look here upon these Two sweet Babies.


Clap. And look here too: here is thy own Flesh and Blood which thou did so
Barberously sell.


D. Boast. Never were two such impudent Carrions seen.


Hill. They are as like you, my Lord --


Breed. Yes Lady, and so they are.


Iac. This has the very Eyes and Mouth of him; he is so like his Lordship --


Muchw. They are sweet Children indeed.


D. Boast. Ye all dream; they are neither Like me, nor Pretty, nor Nothing.


Breed. Kneel Ienny, kneel down little Sarah, and ask Father Blessing; and
let us see if he can be so Unnatural to Disowne you.


Clap. And do you kneel Tommi^, ask Blessing; it is thy own Daddy.


3 Child. Father, Father, Father --


D. Boast. The Devil take you for Whore's-Birds --


3 Child. Father, Father, Father --


Breed. Don't you think to be gone, and Leave them; I Will follow you, and
Proclaim it to all the World.


Clap. And I Will haunt you where^e're you go; I Will be satisfied, if she is your
Wife too: and if I find it true, I Will have Recourse to Justice; you shall be
hanged, if all the Law in England will hang you, for having Two Wives.


3 Child. Father, Father --


Breed. Justice, Justice, Justice, etc.


Clap. Justice, Justice, Justice, etc.


D. Boast. Father, Father, Father, etc.


Beat. Now must I bestir my self.


D. Bo. Breed. Clap. 3 Children, Beat. Run out. Muchw. I am so amazed, I know
not what to think of all that we have seen, and heard.


Iac. They are both his Wives for certain.


Hill. This would have been a fine Husband for my Cozen. Now Uncle, Are you not
beholden to Fortune, or your Wisdom, for her Deliverance? Cozen, let me choose
a Husband for you the next time.


Muchw. Iacinta, be not ruled by her, nor hearken to her Counsel; but on all
occasions, show all ready Compliance to my Commands; for your Niece may stay in
my House. I forgive you.


Hill. Ah Uncle, and I pardon you -- Come Old Man, Let Us shake Hands; you see I
am good Natured. So now we are all Friends.


Muchw. Well, I must be gone abroad.


Hill. Fare you well, Uncle --

[ Ex. Muchworth. Now he is gone, we will be gone too. Come Cozen, we will spend this
Afternoon in a Frolique: we will go see a Play at the Nursery; I Will put on the
Boys Habit I made for a Masquerading Suit.


Iac. Let Us go in our Scar^s, Vizards, and Masks.


Hill. You shall; but I Will have my own Humor: I Will Cock, and Strut, and so
Hector the young Cits, if they come to disturb us with their Impertinences --

[ Ex. Hill. Jac.
Coven-garden.] [Muchw. House. Enter Careless and Lovel, meeting. Lov. You come
luckyly, our Plot succeeds rarely.


Carel. Have we Routed the Enemy?


Lov. Horse and Foot; he will never be able to appear in the Field again.


[ Call. D. Boastado. Carel. Our new Alderman Rich, and his Neice, are ready to
receive them if he comes --


Lov. His Wives followed him so close, I am afraid they have scared his
Lordship out of Town, if not out of's Wits.


Carel. We must find out Beatrice, and recover him; for all things are so well
prepared --


Lov. She Is after him where er'e he is. But by what means have you compassed
the business we last spoke of?


Carel. I sent a Letter as from an unknown friend to the Alderman, to let him
know there was an appointment made by his Neice, and some Gallants, to steal
her away to Night; this he easily believed, because it is but what he always
fears and is jealous of; he presently out of pretense to carry her abroad in's
coach to take the air, has conveyed her to his Country House, which is but
Eight Miles from London.


Lov. Good.


Carel. This the Landlady told me; for she is my friend, and I have feed her, to
let a Lady of my acquaintance have the command of the lodging for this night;
and thither I have conveyed our counterfeit Heiresse.


Lov. And Toby is now a Grave Alderman.


Carel. I sent him one of her Uncles old suites, which I borrowed of the
Landlady.


Lov. He Is at the Tavern here waiting for orders.

Enter Beatrice. Here Is Beatrice now --


Carel. But where is my Lord?


Beat. In my pursuit I saw him give his pursuers the Dodg. I gave them the sign
to make a fault; he turned clear back this way, and they keep at a distance,
and I am come a nearer way to meet him here.


Lov. We are ^eady to receive him.


Enter D. Boastado. Beat. That Is well -- here he comes, lets slip in there,
that he may not see us together.


[they retire. D. Boast. With much a do I have at length got clear of them. The
Jades, and their bawling Bastards -- Father, Father, Father -- I have run my
self almost out of Breath.


[Beat. appears. Beat. I am glad I have found you, my Lord; I have run my self
almost off my Legs to o're-take ye.


D. Boast. 'Pox o'th Whores; my Shirt sticks to my back.


Beat. But my Lord, are you Married to any of them?


D. Boast. O the Devil! Not I.


Beat. Nor promised them Marriage neither?


D. Boast. Not I.


Beat. If it should appear so hereafter, it would be an injury to the Lady; and
I would not have a Hand in doing her any Wrong for the World: I Love her as my
Life!


D. Boast. I never saw either of them before. Upon my Honor, I did not.


Beat. Now I believe your Lordship; but if any thing of this this should come
to the Ladies Ear, it would Ruin our Design.


D. Boast. But I hope she will not hear't so soon.


Beat. We must out-fly Report: Come, my Lord, let us instantly about it, to
prevent Danger --


D. Boast. But I have got no Parson yet.


Beat. It cannot be helped: I hear her Uncle will be abroad all this Afternoon,
and we will persuade her to Counterfeit a Fit of Illness; and the Doctor shall
tell the Landlady, and the Servants, that she must presently take the Air, or
she will dye; that she has an Oppression of Spirit about her Heart, and that the
Jogging of a Coach will relieve her; and when we get her abroad, we know what
to do.


D. Boast. Yet I wish we had a Parson ready, for fear her Uncle should be at
Home, or come in by accident; then we might do it, and he in the House.


Beat. At worst, you may contract, and break a piece of Gold betwixt you.
Within, 3 Child. Father, Father, Father --


D. Boast. Hark! The Beagles follow us; they have taken the Scent afresh, and
come with a full Cry. Within, 3 Child, Father, Father, Father --


Beat. The Cry comes this way -- Follow me with all the have you can, that they
not come within view of us.


[ Ex. D. Boast. Beatrice. Enter Mrs. Breeder and Clappam. Breed. So, now the
Children are sent home, let us to the place of Rendezvous.


Clap. Here Is the Tavern; Enter --


[Ex. [To the Tavern. Lovel and Careless appear. Carel. Come Lovel, they are
gone to the Tavern to look for us.


Lov. I am the worst man in the world, to Converse with this sort of Cattle.


Carel. Thou ought to be civil to them upon Account of the Kindness they have
done for thee at my Request.


Lov. Will not my Money excuse my Company.


Carel. Did not I condescend to visit a Pair of Honest women at your request?
Aye, and visit them a second time; and can you in Conscience refuse to
Accompany me now --?


Lov. Your first Visit was made by my persuasions; but the second, was the
Effect of your own Inclinations.


Carel. Well; but come along, if you like not your Company, be gone as soon as
you will.


[ Ex. Lov. Carel. Enter Hilaria, and Jacinta. Hill. It Is even so; your Lover
and my Gallant are gone in after them: We Will put off our Frollique of going to
the Nursery, and I Will adventure into the Tavern; to see after what manner they
Treat them.


Iac. But should they know you --


Hill. They know you: they cannot in this Disguise; but if they do, 'twill pass
for a Frolique --


[Exeunt. Tables, Chairs, Candles, Bottles. Enter Mrs. Breeder, Clappam, Drawer
in Tavern. Draw. What Wine do you please to drink, Ladies?


Breed. Sack and Claret; Is it good?


Draw. We have as good as any is in England.


Clap. But you Son of a Whore, shall we have any of it?


Draw. I Will bring you that shall please you --


[Exeunt. Breedwell and Clappam, both Sing and Dance about. Enter Lovel and
Careless, Singing. SONG.
I found a Thief a Managing
My Natural on a Chair,
I pulled out Focus speedily --
Carel. Ha: Merry Lasses!


Clap. As Merry as Birds in a fair Morning.


Breed. Or Crickets in a warm Chimney.


Lov. Fill some Wine Boy -- This will increase your Mirth --


[Drinks. Breed. Here Careless, you Son of a Whore, here is to you.


Carel. I thank you Mrs. Breedwell.


Lov. Lady, my Service to you --


Clap. Damn your Complement. My Service to you -- You Would have said as much as
that to an Honest Woman --


Lov. Ladies, I cannot talk at your rate; but if you are for downright Drinking
-- have at you.


Clap. Here Careless, you Damned Confounded Dog, give me your Hand.


Breed. Pray mind your own Intrigue; we are agreed.


Clap. Mrs. Breedwell -- What right have you to choose your Man before me?


Breed. I have been acquainted with him longer than you --


Clap. Mr. Careless, do you like a Woman e're the better for being an Old
Acquaintance?


Breed. He chose me, and that is a sign he likes me better than you --


Carel. I took the first that came to my hand.


Clap. Yes, she is so forward.


Lov. I am then shut out for a wrangler.


Breed. Rot your humor! that you will be so disobliging to any Gentleman.


Clap. He Is as Dull as an Alderman.


[Enter Drawer. Draw. Madam! there is a young Gentleman at the door desires to
speak with you.


[Clap go's to door, Car. Come Lovel, here is both their Healths to you.


Hill. Madam, I had a sight of you as you came up stairs, and was extremely
taken with you: pray oblige me so far as to own me for your acquaintance, and
introduce me into the Company, which I much desire, for your sak^.


Clap. Sir, you may Command me. Lord it is the prettyest man -- Nay Sir, you
shall come in -- here are none but friends.


Lov. Sir, you must not refuse a Ladies Invitation.


[Musick ready below Hill. I fear I shall be uncivil.


Car. That you can hardly be in our Company.


Lov. Sir, these Ladies Healths to you --


Hill. Come on Sir, Ladies, To your good Healths.


Breed. And here is Mr. Lovels Health.


Clap. I am ready to pledge it.


Lov. And to make it go down the pleasanter, there is That to sweeten your Wine
and yours.


[put's 4 or 5 Guinnies into the glass. Clap. Were we but sure such sand lay at
the Bottom of the Sea, we would drink the Ocean off.


Breed. Look you Sir.


Lov. And now Ladies, I thank you for the good service you have done for me.


Breed. Will you leave us then?


Lov. My absence is no Injury, now you have got another Man --


Clap. But Sir. --


Lov. And I have a little Business.


Hill. Damn Business; when Wine and Women are in the case*


Lov. It is of great Concern --


Hill. Sir, can there be affairs of greater Importance than Drinking and
Wenching?


Carl. To tell you true Sir, he is going to see a Lady that he is in Love with.


Hill. What sots Love makes of men.


Lov. Your servant Gallants --


[Ex Lovel Breed. Your servant.


Clap. Your servant.


Hill. I hope he will find Compunction of heart e're he gets there, repent of's
sin, and so come back again.


Breed. As I live, this is the prettiest youth -- Come let us be freely merry --


Hill. I love freedom in my Mirth; Come Sir, will you pledge me on that Ladies
Lips? Ten go downs upon Reputation.


Carel. Sir! I Will pledge you here, and there, and every where.


Kiss each other woman, and then change and kiss their own. Hill. I here
Music.

[Musick plays Come in you sons of Melody.


Breed. Come my little Squire of the Body, You and I will have a Dance together.


Clap. Nay, keep to your own man.


Breed. I have as much reason to Dance with him as you --


Clap. You Lie -- and you take Tobacco, and I am satisfied.


Breed. What Interest have you in him, I wonder?


Clap. To beat you with your own Cudgel: know that I am his old acquaintance,
and he chose me.


Breed. That was because he thought I had been engaged elsewhere.


Carel. So, now they Quarrel for him. And I am in the Condition my friend was
just now.


Hill. Ladies, I am ready to serve you in any kind, but then you must take me
by turns.


Carel. I Will ease you of half your Burden; Mrs. Breedwell, you and I will not part
so.


Hill. Strike up you Rogues.


[A Dance here of four. Breed. Now Sir, let me oblige you to Dance a Jigg.


Clap. Lord, Mrs. Breedwell, you are so forward -- I can oblige him to it as
well as you.


Carel. They are at it again. A pox of this smock-fac'd Rogue. I must be forced
to kick this fellow out of Company. Some Wine Boy. Mrs. Clappam, you are not so
obliging to day as you used to be.


Clap. Not I Sir, I Swear, I beg your pardon: I Will pledge you Sir.


Breed. How your Dancing has made you sweat: Let we wipe your face. How long
Sir have you known that Lady?


Hill. Some few days.


Breed. Have you ever bin concerned with her?


Hill. No, but it is my present business.


Breed. Have a Care how you venture: I would not say so much but that I have a
kindness for you.


Hill. Is she not well?


Breed. Pretty well again now: but she is not quite out of the Surgeons hands yet.


Hill. I am just now in the humor, but I had rather have your Company.


Breed. Take your leave, and I Will follow you to the next Tavern --


Car. You must pledge me now --


Hill. That they may not suspect, go you first --


Clap. That Is not fair play Mris. Breedwel.


Breed. If you are Jealous, wipe his face your self Some. Some Wine Boy. To
your good Thoughts. --


Clap. How do you like Mrs. Breedwell?


Hill. Well enough.


Clap. On my word you will not find a finer Woman in Town of her age: How old do
you think she is?


Hill. Eighteen.


Clap. Gemine! I am as much.


Hill. I may be mistaken.


Clap. Why she lay In a year a go of her fifth Child, and were it not for some
defect in her Teeth which taints her Breath a little, she is not to be disliked.


Hill. How malicious are Women against one another! Let us alone to discover
each others faults.


Clap. Has she not acquainted you with her Lodging?


Hill. You need not be Jealous, let me but know where yours is.


Clap. Hark you Sir.


Carel. I must be forced to kick these two out of the Room; I hate whispering,
it spoils good company.


Hill. Enough -- we have done Sir -- slip from the Company and go home. I Will
come to you.


Breed. Again. --


Clap. What are you for?


[Enter 2d. Drawer. 2. Draw There are a Couple of Seamen in the next Room
desires to Entertain you with a Dance.


Hill. Bid'em come in -- Play away, Give them what Wine they will drink, and clap't
to our reckoning.


Car. Bid'em come in -- Play away, Give them what Wine they will drink, and clap't
to our reckoning.


[The Dance of Seamen. Hill. One of you Two Ladies I hope will entertayn us
with a Song.


Car. Mrs. Clappam, you have a good Voice.


Hill. Before you hear't I Will lay a Wager it is either a Drinking, or a Bawdy
Song.


Carel. Is there not Phillis in it?


Clap. No?


Carel. Then it may not be Bawdy. Come, let us hear your Old out-of-Fashion Song.


Clap. It Is Called the Agreement.


Breed. Now I Will steal away.

[Ex. Breed.
Clap. Sings. Clap. Come peevish Lovers, hear and see
How my Love and I Agree:
We are in sweet embraces twined;
I am Constant, and she is Kind.

Enter second Drawer with a Letter, and gives it Careless. 2. Draw. Sir, a
Porter has brought this Letter for you, and stays for an Answer.


Clap. I Will take this occasion to slip away.

[Ex. Clap.
Hill. I Will over take you --


Careless Reads. Carel. Gallant, I know not what is the Cause, but I am very
Mellancholly: pray come and spend the rest of this afternoon with me; for I
find an Inclination to your company, perhaps the sight of you may cure me:


Hilaria. Carel. This it is to have the acquaintance of honest Women, they
presently grow troublesome.


Hill. Why Sir?


Carel. Why, if they be of the dull sober sort, a man can hardly get acquainted
with them, but they fall flat in Love with him: if they be of a sprightly gay
humor; they presently grow impertinent, they will ever be sending such Notes
as these to a man, or running after him.


Hill. But is she handsome that sends you this Invitation?


Carel. Yes: hang her, she is well enough.


Hill. Then you should take it for a kindness --


Carel. Yes: just as a Husband does when his Wife jogged me by the Elbow, and
asks him the Question. I wonder Women han't Wit enough to know when a Man
cares for their Love, or their Company: to be sure, when he has a mind to
either, he will be coming or sending to them.


Hill. But will not you go?


Carel. Do think I Will leave good sociable Company to go to a dull honest
Wench?


Hill. She Will take it ill.


Carel. I have a better opinion of her Wit, than to think she would desire me if
she knew how the case stands. It would be as unreasonable in her, as to invite
a hungry Man from a well-furnish'd Table, to go and look upon the Picture of a
Banquet, where he can only feast his eye, but never allay his appetite. Boy,
bid the Porter tell her he cannot find me -- I Will make such Visits when I can
have no better Company.


Hill. But where are our Women?


Draw. One of them went out just before the Song, and bid me tell you --


Carel. Speak out you Rogue --


Wispers with Hilaria. Draw. That she was gone to the place appointed.


Carel. Young Squire, you don't play me square play. You ought not to take up
another man's Dice --

And where is she that sung? --

[Enter 2d. Drawer Do you know where the Lady is that was here but even now?


2. Draw. She Is gone Sir.


2d. offers to whisper Hilaria. Carel. Whither? Are you going to whisper too?
speak out --


2. Draw. I suppose that Gentleman knows. She sent to desire him to make haste?


Carel. Get you both down; We Will pay at the Bar -- [Ex. Drawers Sir, you make
too bold with me; to take one Mrs. from me, was Ill-manners; to Rob me of both,
Malice and Ill Nature --!


Hill. I do it by way of Reprizal; you have took one from me, and I have got two
from you.


Carel. I take one from you --!


Hill. Yes; I have had a long Intrigue with the Lady named Hilaria: And I hear
you are become her Servant --


Carel. Hilaria!


Hill. Yes.


Carel. I was ignorant of any such pretensions.


Hill. I shall spoil your Markets there too: I shall tell her, that she is
Impertinent to send after you, and all that -- and when you can find no better
Company, you will come to her, and all that --


Carel. Nay then; I Will take another course with you. Come Sir. --


[Draws Hill. Surely, you will not be so mad to fight for one you don't love?


Carel. Look you Sir, though I scorn to tell her so, or any of her Sex: yet I do
love her, will love her, and must love her: and no Body else shall love her --


Hill. But I do -- shall, and will love her -- better then you --


Carel. Come: give me a proof on it then --


Draw -- Hill. Yes Sir, I will give you a proof of 't -- ha, ha, ha. --


[discovers her self. Carel. Hilaria!


Hill. Alas poor Gallant -- ha ha ha -- observe, now you are Cheated of three
Mrs's. ha ha ha -- fare you well -- Gallant.


Carel. Hark you, stay --


Hill. No; Women are so impertinent -- Men will come after them, when they love
them -- adieu --


[Ex Hill. Carel. Gad -- she is too unconscionable, to deprive me of two Mrs's.
and then to run away her self -- and now she knows I love her, she will insult
over me -- and those Damned Whores to serve me such a Dog trick -- I thought
they had some honor in them; But I find that Women are by Nature guilty; For
be they Whores, or no Whores, they will jilt ye --


[Exeunt Ends the Fourth Act.
The Fifth Act.
Covet Garden. Enter Deboastado in the Habit of a Physician, Toby like an Old
Rich Alderman. Tob. MR. Doctor, I desire no more of your Consultations with my
Neice; I say no more, but I smell a Fox.


D. B. What do you mean Sir?


Tob. I say no more: but some Wiser than some.


D. Boast. That Sir, was the very reason, why the Doctor brought me with him,
thinking I might observe some Circumstances which might discover the Nature of
your Neices Disease, of which he yet remains doubtful.


Tob. And you discovered, that it was good for her to go Abroad in a Coach, to
take the Air.


D. Boast. Yes Sir, and I Will give you a Reason for it; for want of Exercise the
Blood grows thick, and corrupts in the Veins, which are the Channels Nature has
designed for: Sir, does it not stand to reason, that Motion and Exercise which
opens the Veins, rarifies the Blood, and gives it a free Passage; should it not
in some measure work it is Effects on your Neice.


Tob. Well, Sir, I say no more, but that some are Fools, and some are
Physicians.


D. Boast. I will maintain it against the Learned Professors in Town, that
it will do your Neice more good to Joult about one Hour in a Coach every
Morning and Evening for a Month, than to take Ten Purges a day.


Tob. I am much of your mind, Mr. Doctor; and I say no more, but that it is not
good for Sick Folks to go abroad in the Air.


D. Boast. Her Sickness is for want of Air.


Tob. And I say no more, but that some peoples reasons for her going Abroad,
is, that she is an Heiress.


D. Boast. I hope you don't think that I am an Instrument in any Design.


Tob. I say no more, but that there are Blades upon the Randan, that would Feel
her Pulse, and stir her Blood to some purpose; and that is one reason why it is
not good for her to go Abroad.


D. Boast. I beg your Pardon, Sir, I spoke as a Physician in Consideration of
her Health, and Mr. Doctor within was partly of my mind.


Tob. He was of the mind too, that my Cook-maid would not dye yesterday: and I
say no more, but that she dyed within two hours after.


D. Boast. Physicians sometimes say what they think will best please their
Patients.


Tob. And you thought 'twould please her best to be Gadding abroad; I say no
more, but that if her Blood want stirring, I Will get her a Husband.


D. Boast. Yes Sir, that will do best of all.


Tob. Sir, Then we agree at last: and I say no more, but that his Lordship
shall go without her.


D. Boast. What Lord, Sir?


Tob. A Friend, a Neighbor of mine sends me word, that she is in Love with a
Foolish Fantastic Lord.


D. Boast. What is this Lord?


Tob. I say no more, but that he has been a Traveller, is very conceited, and
very ridiculous.


D. Boast. What is his Name?


Tob. You may as soon call over a Troop of Horse as Name him; I know no more,
but that he has two Wives already, that he is a very great Fool; and I say no
more, but that I Will have my Neice into the Country to Morrow.

[Toby Ex.
Enter Beatrice. D. Boast. Let me tell you Beatrice, this Alderman is an old
Rooke, he smells Powder a great way off.


Beat. Does he suspect you?


D. Boast. He suspects every body: he has heard the whole Story of her being in
Love with me.


Beat. It comes from our House, I warrant you* but was it not very Unfortunate
for us, that he should come Home just as we had convinced the Landlady and
Servants, that it was necessary for the Lady to go abroad?


D. Boast. The Coach sent for, and all.


Beat. And when he came, he was so earnest for you to be gone, being a
Stranger, and kept such a fidling about his Niece, that you could not break a
Piece of Gold as we designed, and make a Contract.


D. Boast. Fate was indeed very malicious.


Beat. But how does your Lordship like her?


D. Boast. She Is a Miracle! I protest I saw not so great a Rariety in all my
Travels.


Beat. What a pretty Mouth she has, so Little; and her Neither-Lip so
Cherry-like; and then she is such a Pattern of Modesty and Innocence, one would
wonder how she got the Confidence to be in Love.


D. Boast. She Is a rare Creature!


Beat. She loves the very ground you go on.


Call Lovel, Careless. D. Boast. O Beatrice, if I had her --


Bet. She Is resolved by some Stratagem or another, to get to you to Night;
therefore be sure you be not out of the way.


D. Boast. I Will go directly to my Lodgings.


Beat. Be careful you are not seen in the Streets; for if those two Women once
get sight of you, their Tongues will blow up your Credit.


D. Boast. I Will be gone, lest they should come and find me here.

[Peeps at the Door.] [D. Boast. Ex.
Enter Toby. Beat. You may venture forth, he is gone.


[Call Hilaria. Tob. 'Twas damned ill Luck, that we had never a Parson here;
The Business had been done.


Beat. He failed of bringing one with him; and if we had provided a Parson, our
Forwardness might have given him Cause of Suspicion; but Disappointment does
make Men more Eager.


Tob. So much for that now, Beatrice; being at Leisure, let us examine how
Matters stand 'twixt you and me.


Beat. Just as they did, on my part.


Tob. But methinks now you have seen how well ^ Acted the Gentleman, Traveller,
and the old Alderman, you should love me much better for my Ingenuity.


Beat. In the first Shape, you appeared so much like a Gentleman; and in this,
so like an old Rich Alderman, that I shall never endure to see you your own Man
again.


Tob. When I am neither Gentleman, nor Alderman, I shall be Toby still; and I
am no more now.


Beat. But if we Two should Marry, how should we do to Live?


Tob. Live, well enough; we will live by our Wits.


Beat. Then I must maintain you and my self too.


Tob. Why Beatrice? do think I have not as much Wit as Thee?


Beat. No marry have not you.


Tob. This day I have given the World sufficient Proofs of my Wit.


Beat. I doubt not but e're Night, to give you a better Proof of mine, than any
you have, or can give of yours.


Tob. P'shaw, p'shaw -- Yonder Is my Master, go and acquaint him how Matters
succeed.


[Toby Ex: Enter Lovel and Careless. Lov. The truth is, she played the Tyrant
with thee; but you deserved that, and more.


Carel. Well, were not the Use and Conversation of Women absolute necessary for
Man, I would forswear the whole Sex.


Lov. I know by the Constitution of your Body, that you would not be able to keep
that Oath: but, I advise you to Forswear all but one.


Carel. That is; you would have me Marry.


Lov. Yes; you will find more Comfort in a Wife, than in Ten Mistresses.


Carel. If what you say, be true, Why do most Husbands in this Age, (which I
take to be wiser than any that is past) Turn away their Wives, and keep Wenches?
at least, those that are so Civil to keep a Wife, they keep a Mistress besides?


Lov. And if it be not true, Why do the great Wenchers at last forsake all
their Mistresses for a Wife? for, we find most of them Marry at the Long-run;
Nay, generally they prove the best Husbands: And the reason is, they have
experimented the Folly of that Lewd Course of Life.


Carel. I had never so good an Opinion of Marriage as now; for, this Dog-trick
that these two Gilting Jades showed me in Leaving me so in the Lurch, has
lessened them in my Esteem, to the degree of Honest Women; and now the Scales
are equal, the first of either Party that oblidges me, draws it down on that
side.


Lov. Then I hope Hilaria will turn the Balance.


Carel. If the Devil is minded to lose a Gamester, let him venture to make her
and me Friends.


Enter Hilaria. Beat. Sir, We are still Successful in our Designs; it is
drawing to a Conclusion, therefore be in a Posture to receive us.


Lov. I Will give u'm Notice within: you will take Care of the rest.


[to Carel. Carel. The Parson and the Fiddlers, I believe, are Drunk togeth^r,
and fallen asleep in the Tavern; but I Will Marshal them presently.


Bea^. And I Will back to my Employment.


[ Lov. Beat. exeunt severally. Enter Hilaria. Hill. How now Gallant.


Carel. O Madam.


[Sings, and walks about. Hill. You are very merry Gallant.


Carel. I have no reason to be otherwise. Why do you Josle me?


Sings, and walks about two or three times, and Iosle one another. Hill. And why
do you Josle me?


Carel. You walk in my way.


Hill. It Is you walk in my way.


Carel. Get farther off.


Hill. Go you farther off.


Carel. I was here first.


Hill. Then you may be gone first.


Carel. I have Business here.


Hill. What, to see me?


Carel. No --


[Sings, and walks about carelessly. Hill. Yes, in my Conscience, you was coming
to see me.


Carel. Now I think on it, so I was, on purpose to let you see that I am alive;
for I believe you thought I had either hanged my self (for the Trick you put on
me to day) or had broke my Heart with Sighing for your Absence, with whom I am
too desperately in Love; but believe me, I have not yet broke so much as a
Butten, and may I brake my Neck, when I do, either for Love of you, or any
Woman alive.


Hill. Yet you love me.


Carel. It Is true, I love you well enough, because you are Unlucky; and was not
Honesty in the case, I should love you better; but as it is, your are in a
desperate Condition.


Hill. Must I then despair?


Carel. You are for Matrimony, and that I hate; I can no more endure a Wife,
than a standing Dish of Meat.


Hill. You think then I am in Love with you.


Carel. Think it, Ha, ha, ha -- As though I did not know That by your following
me up and down; what came you to the Tavern for after me? And for what came
you hither now, if you an't in Love with me? And what made you seduce the
Ladies from me, but that you had a mind to have me all your self?


Hill. I vow, now you put me in mind on it, I may be in Love with you: but you
say my Case is desperate; then desperate must be the Cure, and I must e'ne
resolve to be your Mistress or Wench; or what you will.


Carel. That Is your only Remedy. I am a Bird of prey, and fly at all.


Hill. Nay, then I Am a dead Woman still; for, you will s^on take a Flight from me,
to another.


Carel. But when I have caught my Prey, I take my Belly full of it; I never
leave it till I am Gorged.


Hill. And will your Stomach come to you again?


Carel. Yes sometimes, but Generally some Ravenous Fowl or another picks up my
Leavings, and flies away with it.


Hill. But would you have no more care of me?


Call Careless, Music, Breed. Clap. Carel. My Care would signify but little;
for, a man seldom finds either* Money or a Woman in the same place he left them.


Hill. But they say it is a Rule amongst you Men, not to leave the Women you
Debauch; but if they prove Constant, to provide for them.


Carel. Provide for u'm! Is it not enough we Teach them a Trade, by which they
may get their Livings? but you will not want providing for, you have a good
Portion: but if I would, you your self, in a short time, would be for Change.


Hill. Well Careless, we will do nothing rashly; I Will in, and consider on it; and
some other time I Will tell you more of my mind.


Carel. But let me give you this Caution; be not deceived with the vain
Considerations of Virtue, Modesty, Honor, Chastity, Reputation, and the like;
these are Bugg-Words that awed the Women in former Ages, and still fool a great
many in this; and if once these idle Notions get into your Thoughts, I shall
give you over for a lost Woman.


Hill. The common Practice of my Sex may prevail much evil Example makes twenty
Sinners to the Devil's one -- Adieu.


Carel. Adieu.


[Ex. Carel, and Hill. severally. Enter D. Boastado in Masquerade, Reading a
Letter. My Lord,
This Night is to be the Burial of one of my Uncles Maids, who dyed Yesterday
Morning; put your self in Masquerade, and stand over against Mr. Muckworth's
House, for near to that is the Churchyard; when you see the Corpse pass that
way, Sing these Words -- ( Hums to himself) then whatsoever you see, be not
startled; for, it is all but Design to affright the People, and make them Run
away; come you to the Coffin, and instead of a Corpse; you shall find Her, that
for Love of you, Attempts thus to make an Escape.

This is notably contrived; what a Witty Wife shall I have?

I am informed by Beatrice, that there will be Dancing at Mr. Muchworths; we
will venture in amongst them as Masqueradors, and she has promised there shall
be a Parson ready to Marry us, and then in spite of my Uncle, I shall for ever
be

Yours, Grace Rich.


Here comes Company; I will Retire till they are gone past.


[Ex. D. Boast. Music pass the Stage. Enter Careless, Leading in Mrs. Breedwel
and Clappam, Musicions playing before them. Carel. Now Ladies, you may pull off
your Masks; you are no strangers to one another.


Breed. Mrs. Clappam.


Clap. Breed. pull off their Masks. Clap. Mrs. Breedwel.


Carel. I know you wonder to see one another here, but both of you came to the
Tavern on the same account.


Breed. On what account.


Carel. To see what was become of the young Gentleman.


Breed. I love you for that --


Carel. Nay, Mrs. Breedwel, I was behind you when you asked the Drawer what was
become of him; it seems he failed you both, of your Assignation.


Clap. S'life! did she dare to have an Intrigue with my Man?


Breed. Your Man!


Clap. Yes, my Man, you impudent Hussy; I Will scratch your Eyes out.


Breed. Touch me if you dare.


Clap. If I dare?


Breed. Clap. Fights, and tare one another about. Carel. So, so; enough,
enough; Brave Girls both --


Clap. Dare me!


Breed. You, what are you?


Clap. A Degree above you, I think.


Breed. Yes, to you are; for I am not Whore and Bawd too, as you are.


Clap. You have not Wit enough to be a ^^wd; and scarce Beauty enough, to Drive on
the Vocation of Whoring: And let me advise you to make much of those Clothes
you have on, for that Face will not be able to bring you a New Gown again.


Breed. And do you make much of the Embroidered Bodies you use to run to Plays
in the last Summer; neither your Beauty nor your Wit will ever bring you such
an other Pair: You may speak French long enough, before you get such again.


Clap. My Back is not my Wardrobe, as yours is; I had a New Gown but a Month
ago.


Breed. What, the Mourning^Gown you bought at Second Hand. A Woman of the Town
needs no Curses, when she once comes to a Black-Cloath-Gown, and Plain Linen;
that is their Last Refuge in point of Clothes; and when that is worn out, she
must on with the Stripped Semar, and turn Bulker: at which Trade I hope to see
you suddenly.


[ Beat, on the Beir ready. Clap. And I as suddenly expect to see you so
Miserable, as to abuse Charity, to relieve your own necessities, and go up and
go up and down with a purse to all your Acquaintance, to gather relief for some
pretended poor Woman that is sick, or in Prison.


Carel. Enough, enough; bravely performed on both sides, you faught well* and
you scold well.


Clap. If you had been here, I would have so tew'd that spawn of a Sempstress
--


Breed. And I would so have clawed off that Shooemakers Daughter, that she
should have thought it worse than her last Child, or her last Clap, or the
scuffle she had with the Sedan-men, when they tore the Clothes off her back for
4 s. which she owed 'em at least half a year.


Clap. And you should have escaped no better than you did when the Coachman met
you at the New Exchange, that you bilk'd off his Fair after five hours Ramble.


Carel. No more, come a Truce, a Truce; you served one another no more than you
both served me, I have reason to be angry with you on account of your leaving
my Company for that fair, smooth, Chitty-fac'd Stranger, that neither of you
ever saw before.


Clap. Ah, he was such a pretty Gentleman, and had such a boon Mien --


Carl. But the Devil a penny of money in his Pocket: I paid the whole
reckoning; I had a good mind to have sent him to you in revenge, that he might
have bilked you both, for his jilting me.


Breed. And Bilking is so used now a days, that it is not more hard for a man to
find a woman with whom he may safely venture, than it is for a woman to meet
with a man, who the next morning, or as soon as she has been kind to him, will
not say, Y'gad Madam I have got no money about me, I had damned ill luck at
play, but I am going to receive some this Afternoon, and if you will let me know
where I shall be so happy as to meet you anon in the Evening, you shall find
none more a Gentleman --


Clap. And if you make an appointment, he meets you no more; then he goes to
pay off his Tailors Bill at the day promised: hang me if I was not served so
three times the last week.


Breed. Men are grown so base, that it is enough to make any woman for swear
keeping Company, -- but if that young Gentleman had served me so, I Vow, I
should not have been vexed.


Clap. And I had rather he should have served me so, than failed of coming, as
he promised.


Carel. I find both of you have a kindness for him; (...) am persuaded, when
you see him again, that you will not be so fond of him. Come shake hands and be
Friends, and I will carry you to him; he shall have his choice, and I Will be
content with the other.


Clap. Mrs. Breeder, come Kiss and be Friends.


Breed. With all my heart.


Carel. Now put on your Masks, and in here with me.


[Carel. Breed. and Clap. Ex. Enter Deboastado. D. B. So, they are gone, and in
good time: Here comes the Burial, I Will stand close.


T^by in the habit of a Bearer, 4 Bearers with a Coffin on a Bear; 4 Maids in
white, bearing up the 4 corners of the Sheet; they walk round the Stage, set
down the Corpse as to rest themselves; attended with some few followers. Tob.
Come let us rest a little.


3. Bearer, Ay, set down, set down.


[Set down the Corpse. 1. Maid: Ah poor Betty.


2. Maid: Ay, she was as good a natured Maid --


3. Maid: And as pretty a Servant as ever lived in the Parish.


4. Maid: She Is in Heaven, I hope, poor Wench.


Deb. Wake all the Dead, what ho, what ho --


[Deb. sings. Tob. and all the Bear. Hark --


Beat. Who Is there?


Beatrice in the Coffin speaks with a mournful voice. 4. Maids. Hark, Hark.


Deb. The Windows are op't, the doors unbar'd, come from the Church, and the
Churchyard.


[ Deb. sings. d. Bearer: The Voice is this way.


Beat. Who Is there?


[In the Coffin. Is It Bearer: No, it is in the Coffin, in the Coffin Neighbor.


Music rea^^. Enter 4 Ghosts, a Men, and 2 Women. 4 Ghosts: Make room, make
room.


Deb. The World's at an end --


4 Ghosts, Beat. And we come, we come.


The Women in long winding Sheets, the Men with Mufflers, Caps, white Clothes,
Wastcoats, Drawers, Breeches, Stockings and Pumps. Tob. and all the Bearers.
Look, look, look.


Beatrice rises upright in the Coffin, in a Winding Sheet. All 4 Maids: Ah, ah,
ah, ah, ah, ah,


Bearers, Maids, and Followers, all run out speaking. 4 Ghosts: Away, away,
Lovers away.


Ghosts Ex. Deb. helps Beatrice down, and carries her into Muchworth's house.
Deb. Beat. Ex. Hall-Table and Candles, 4 Chaires. Enter Lovel, Jacinta, the
Scene changes, and a Room in Muchworth's House. Lov. Why Iacinta, do you fear
your love will wrong your duty.


Iac. You know my Fathers command; if I marry you, I disobey him.


Lov. And if you do not, you are unjust to Love:


Iac. I will still be true to Love: I will never Marry any other man for your
sake.


Lov. But if your Father Command, will you not obey?


Iac. Never --


Lov. Not to obey his Commands in Marrying, will have the same event, as to
disobey him now in Marrying me.


Iac. 'Twill not then be disobedience, though Parents have power to command us
not to Marry.


Lov. Ah Iacinta, was your Love like mine, you would not stand upon such
nicities; a perfect Love inspires those minds with courage, where it inhabits.


Iac. I love you so well, I will not make you unhappy: Till I can bring a
Portion with me, I will not be your Wife.


Lov. I was discarded to make room for that Pretender, whom we have now
defeated; he being removed, your Father will soon be reconciled.


Iac. Endeavor then to get his consent.


Lov. 'Twill be a greater expense of time and labor to get his consent before
Marriage, than to reconcile him after: when all things are once done, and not
to be recalled, Men are soon pacified.


Iac. It may be more easy, but not so secure; Old Age is very exceptions,
wherefore excuse me if I dare not venture to disoblige a Father, whose Love may
be considerable, and an Advantage to me.


Enter Hilaria. Hill. Come leave off your Sneaking pitiful Love; my Gallant has
brought some Company, Let Us Dance, and be Merry; here mey come, strike up
Music.


Flourish below. Enter Careless, Clappam, and Breedwel. Lov. But we want Men --


Carel. You Will have more Company presently; the Parson is doing Execution in the
next Room.


Enter Muchworth. Hill. Here Is my Uncle; we will have him in. Come Uncle, will you
make One in a Country-Dance?


Muchw. What Is the matter here? What are you doing here? What, are Candles
Lighted in every Room? And what does Music here?


Hill. I believe you are Fudled, Uncle, you are so full of Questions.


Muchw. I say, What is all this for?


Lov. Give me leave, Iacinta, to pretend this our Wedding-Night; and that all
this is on that Account.


Iac. If he resents it ill, I shall soon undeceive him.


Muchw. What, will no body speak? Daughter, what is the Occasion of all this?


Lov. The Occasion, Sir, is such, that she is afraid to tell you; and I should
be loath to let you know it, but that we hope your Pardon; without which we
cannot be truly Merry.


Muchw. What Is the Matter, Mr. Lovel?


Lov. and Jac. Kneels. Lov. From this Posture you may guess.


Muchw. What mean you by it?


Lov. To beg at once, your Pardon and your Blessing.


Muchw. Ha* Is it so --


Hill. It will be otherwise with u'm anon, Uncle.


Muchw. You are Married then?


Carel. It was their Fate, Sir; the business is done.


Hill. Now do I hope my Uncle will take pett at the Marriage, and give Me all
his Estate when he dies, to vex his Daughter.


Muchw. Rather than you shall see a Groat on it, I would give it to Hospitals,
which is the worst use a man can put his money to; because the Poor are always
Cheated on it, -- Mr. Lovel, rise. If you do well, and prove a good Husband, I
have all I can desire; which is, to see my Daughter well disposed of; and I
shall do well by you: If you prove an ill Husband, she may thank her self, and
her Disobedience will be punished in the event.


Hill. Lord, Uncle, that you should do this on purpose to spite me.


Muchw. I believe, you was an Instrument in the design.


Hill. Nay, Uncle, I must confess you have over-reached me clearly.


Carel. But, Sir, my being here, is on another account. I come to desire you,
to use your Authority with your Niece, and keep her at home; for I can be no
where, either about business, or taking my Recreation, but she presently comes
and disturbs me; insomuch, that if you don't take some speedy order with her, I
must be forced to leave the Town to avoid her company.


Muchw. Pray take her along with you, and you will free me of a greater trouble,
for she is my Vexation all the day long.


Hill. It Is true, Uncle, that Gentleman and I have been a little troublesome to
one another; for you know, he came to solicit me in the way of Matrimony,
which I don't much approve of; for it makes Folks fall out: The first day of
Marriage, is the last day of Love. I liked him well enough for a Gallant, and
if he would accept of me for a Mistress or so? but he had a foolish scruple of
Conscience, nothing would serve him but Marriage, and so away came I* this is
all, Uncle.


Muchw. If you will have my Opinion in the case, you were cut out one for the
other, and it is pity two houses should part you; therefore, if she will agree to
your desires, or you conform to hers, it is all one to me, you have my consent
to either; all that I desire, is, that you will make an end quickly, that I may be
clear of her company.


Hill. Then Sir, you may either go into the Country, or stay in Town, if you
please, with danger of being troubled with me; for, I absolutely declare
against Marriage, and if nothing else will serve your turn, you may go where
you will, and do what you please, ^'le have nothing to do with such an
unreasonable man as you are.


Carel. To Convince you, Mr. Muchworth, that what she says is not true, but
what, on the contrary, I am for having Her for a Mistress, and She is for being
my Wife; here are a couple of Ladies, to whom, on or off, I have been Gallant
this 7 or 8 years, and they can witness, I have coutinually railed against
Marrying Mrs. Clapham, Mr. Breeder, what say you?


Breed. Yes; Sir.


Clap. Yes.


Carel. Now Lady, if you are not for what I proposed, you may e'n keep your
Maidenhead till it stinks, and is not fit for man to meddle with.


Hill. I except against your Witnesses, they are bribed, and rather than such a
Lying man as you shall have it, i will keep it still.


Enter De Boastado, Beatrice like a Ghost. Muchw. What new Masque is this?


Lov. Some Masquers, hearing the Music as they were passing by, are come in to
Dance with us.


D. Boast. Do you know me?


To Jacinta in a squeeking voice. Iac. Not I Sir.


Beat. Do you know me?


[To Careless. Carel. You should be a Catt, by your little squeeking voice.


Lov. Iacinta, let us take this occasion to slip into the next Room to the
Parson; now with security we may perfect our desires.


D. Boast. Do you know me?


[To Muchworth. Muchw. When I see your face, i will tell you.


D. Boast. Look you Sir.


Muchw. Is It your Lordship?


Hill. My Lord:


Carel. Has your Lordship (out of a ^rollick) robbed the Churchyard for a
Companion? If so, you have but a cold Bedfellow.


D. Boast. No, feel here, she is warm flesh and blood.


Carel. Marry Sir, she rellishes well in the hand.


Hill. Pray my Lord, who is she?


D. Boast. She is my Wife, Lady, my Wife; I have Married a Lady, a Lady, that
has some forty or fifty thousand pounds to her Portion; I took her by way of
Cordial, to revive my Spirits, much weakened by the grief I had for loosing
your Daughter.


Enter Toby, Alderman-like, three Bearers, one having Toby's habit in his hand.
Toby. Neighbors, here, here she is; Aye, here she is.


Muchw. Who are these?


Carel. You Will see anon.


D. Boast. Keep off the Ministers of Death, this is a living body.


Toby. She is my Maid, i will have her again, she shall serve her year out.


D. Boast. Good Mr. Alderman, you are deceived, this is your Niece.


Tob. My Niece is at home in Chamber.


D. Boast. No, Sir; but your Maid is at home, and as dead as a Herring; it was
not a Corpse, but a Quick Body, that came out of your house in the Coffin: it
was not your Maid you suppose, but your Niece: and now, I think, my Wit has
bin too quick for you all.


Tob. Niece, come away from him.


D. Boast. You cannot have Her, she is my Wife.


Tob. Are you married then already?


D. Boast. Yes, Sir.


Tob. For certain?


D. Boast. The Parson is still in the House.


Tob. Then, Sir, see your Alderma^, your Fellow-T^aveller and Toby, all in one.


D. Boast. Ha!


Hill. Toby!


Carel. Toby!


Muchw. This's some new Trick.


Tob. And now, I think our Wits have been too quick for your Lordship. Who have
I married here? I would fain see, but I dare not.


Carel. I will inform your Lordship who your Wife is, as yet I know her better
than your Lordship. I had here in Town three Mistresses, of which, one of 'em
was very young and very pretty, and but newly debauched: I thought it great
pity, she should drive that Trade: and therefore advised her, to get her a
Husband before she had quite ruined her Credit: to advance her Design, she took
the Name of Alderman Rich's Niece, and this morning took the same Lodging too;
and, by the Story, I guess, this must be She you have married.


Muchw. The Alderman and his Niece went this morning out of Town.


D. Boast. O! I am undone --


Hill. Ha, ha, ha -- if your Lordship has any Grief at your Heart, go to bed,
and take a Sup of your Cordial, ha, ha, ha --


Carel. Since your Lordship has bin so kind, to take one of my Mistresses of
off my Hand, I Will make you some requital in releasing you of your Wives. See,
My Lord, these are my other two; they shall never trouble your Lordship more,
upon the the account of Marriage.


Breed. All the right of a Husband, that I have in You, I resign to that Lady.


Clap. I do the same.


Carel. Now, my Lord, you have got one Wi^e, and lost two.


Enter Lovell and Jacinta. Lov. Now Marriage has made us one, our Wishes are
complete.


Hill. My Lord, now you have drawn your Lot, see whether Fortune has sent you a
Blank or a Prize.


Tob. Ay, ay, come, Mrs. Grace, you may even show your Face.


D. Boast. Married to a Wench -- I am abused, cheated --


Beat. Yes, my Lord, and so they are all -- Beatrice discovers herself Omnes
Beatrice!


Tob. How, Mrs. Beatrice!


Beat. Beatrice I am, but not your Beatrice now.


Tob. Are thou married then?


Beat. Yes, to a Lord. Who has most Wit now, Toby?


Tob. Am I then forsaken? Oh! that the Fates would be so kind, to lend a
Dagger, or a Knife, to an incensed Lover.


Beat. What would you do?


Tob. I would kill my self, to be revenged on thee.


Beat. There are Knives enough for that Execution in the Table-basket that
stands in the Hall.


Tob. Are there? --


Toby runs out. Lov. But how came you to surprise us with this new Turn?


Beat. Out of pure Kindness to his Lordship; rather than he should marry a
Wench, I cast my self away upon him.


Carel. My Lord, comfort your self with the old Rule, Since it is no better,
it is well it is no worse.


Hill. Take her to you, My Lord, had She not bin your Friend, you had bin in a
much worse condition.


Muchw. Though my Daughters Servant, she is a good Gentlewoman born, and near
related to us.


Iac. It Is well your Lordship has light of an honest Woman.


Beat. One proof of my Honesty is, I promised your Lordship my Maidenhead, and
now it is at your Service.


Enter Toby. Tob. Look, look here, ungrateful Beatrice, look how on my Breast
thy Perfidiousness revenge.


Beat. Ay, I see.


Tob. Then, Toby, die, die the Death of a faithful Lover.


Beat. Ay.


Iac. Ay.


Hill. Ay.


Toby strikes himself on the Breast, and falls down. Beat. Ay, Toby, what have
thou done? -- Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha --


Beat. looks on his Breast, and takes up a great Candle. Hill. What do laugh
at?


Beat. Look here, he has mistaken a great Candle for a Case-Knife.


Omne^. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,


Beat. He scared me: it gave way, and, I thought verily, I had seen it run into
his Body.


Lov. Rise, Toby, you have only greased your Doublet.


Tob. I durst have sworn, I had left a Knife in my Heart.


Beat. If you go to the Basket again, be sure you bring a Knife with you.


Tob, No; me thought, Self-Murder was a great Sin; and now I have considered
on it a little, I Am glad to see my self alive again: and now, rather than kill my
self for You, or any Woman breathing, I would first see the Souls of a hundred
thousand of 'em ramm'd into a Morter-piece, and shot into a Duth Fire-ship, and
so I leave you to his Lordship; and to let you see, I am my own man again; I
and my Friends will dance at your Wedding* Come, give me my habit.


[ Toby puts on a Bearers habit. Beat. My Lord, you see I did not any thing for
want of an Husband* what I have done, was purely out of Kindness to your
Lordship.


D. Boast. Beatrice. I have considered on it, and I will own thee for my Wife,
and as my Wife thou art a Lady, and know your State, and take the upper hand of
your two (...): it is some Revenge to see thee take place of those two proud
Minxes.


Carel. Come, play away for the Dance.


All the Company seat themselves, Beatrice takes place of all the Women. `A
Dance. Toby, in the habit of a Bearer, and (...) 3 Bears dance with the 4
Maids. Muchw. So, Mr. Lovel and Daughter, I wish you much Joy together: the
Match is of your own making; and when either of you repent it, you must blame
your selves.


Lov. That Marriage can hardly know Repentance, in which both parties had their
choice.


Much^. My Lord, I entreat you, let my House have the Honor to treat you to
night.


D. Boast. I embrace your Kindness: give me your Hand, now no more Beatrice,
but my Lady, we will suddenly down to my Country House, and there fix our
selves, and visi^ London but seldom; the Town is not a place for Wives to live
in, that bring no Portions.


Beat. I shall like a Country-life very well, if I have but the Honor of your
Lordships good Company; and, I doubt not, but in few years to raise a Portion
out of my good Huswi^ery.


Muchw. Come, I Will lead you the way to a better Room, Mr. Careless, Ladies, and
all, pray follow.


Hill. Hold, hold, Uncle, Sl^fe, you are for rising from Table before Dinner's
done, the third Course is yet to come up.


Carel. Pray, lead on, Sir; I beseech you, lead on, Sir.


Hill. Come, come, Careless, never halt before a Cripple.


Carel. Good Madam, you are sharp set, I dare not trust my self with you,
unless they will all stay.


M^chw. Niece, wha^ say you to me?


Hill. It come just now in my mind, that I have lost my Bedfellow; and now my
Cousin is gone, I know not what I shall do; for, I vow, I dare not lie alone.


Carel. O no, it is dangerous, for after seeing Marriages and new Married folks
put to bed together, as strange dreams and fancies will be apt to run in your
mind, as after seeing bloody Executions and dead people at the Gallows: and who
knows what a taking you may be in in the night, and what strange fits you may
have.


Hill. Aye, some e'^e rave upon the like occasions, and bite, and gnaw, and tear
the very sheets in pieces.


Carel. O Madam, aye so they do.


Hill. Well Uncle, you may go, I Will e'ne send for one of the Neighbors
Daughters from the next door to lie with me.


Carel. O Madam, it is a hundred to one, but she may fall into the same fits and
fancies too, and that will be more dangerous still, to have two mad folks in a
bed, and neither able to allay the others ^ury.


Hill. O Sir, do you begin to ^ome about, would you beat off others, that you
may be my Bedfellow your self? I perceive that you are for having a Wife.


Carel. I for a Wife?


Hill. Nay, ^ay, it is so, never deny't. Well Sir, give me your hand, rather then
lie alone to night, I Will do any thing.


Carel. I knew 'twould come to this.


Hill. ^ w'll be your Wi^e, and since I cannot have a Gallant before Marriage,
I Will do like other Wives, and have one after; and, now I think on it too, a
Husband is very necessary, if it is only to save the trouble of being asked
questions over and over, as who is the Father, who go i^? and besides, what
Children the Gallant gets, the Husband must keep.


Carel. I can be even with you there, for you can bring me none to keep, but
what are your own at least; and if you expect I should be Father to all your
Children, I expect you should be a Nurse to all mine, and I may have 'um
brought home to me on all sides, from twenty several women; for I intend to be
a great getter and Father of many.


Hill. Well, I have but this thing more to say to you; whosoever I choose for my
Gallant, you are not to quarrel, or ^all out with him, but on the contrary, to
make him your particular intimate Friend, to be always inviting him home to
Dinner, and the like.


Carel. And also, whosoever I like for a Mistress, be the Maid, Wi^e, or
Widow, you are to get acquainted with her, to Visit her often, to speak^^^ my
praise, and tell my good qualities, to commend my abilities; and in fine, to
use the utmost of your power to bring us together, gain us opportunity, and if
need be, to watch at the Stair-head, and in case of necessity, to hold the door.


Hill. In Company, you shall never call me Wife, or Dear, or Sweet-hear^, but
Madam.


Carel. In Company you shall never call me Husband, or by my Christian Name,
but Mr. Careless.


Hill. In none of these particulars will I ever offend Mr. Careless.


Carel. In none of these particulars will I ever offend you, Madam.


Hill. This it is for Folks to meet that understand themselves; Marriage with
these Circumstances* I like well enough, and mu^t certainly be very pleasant
and delightful.


Carel. Sir, I beg your pardon, for detayning you and the Company so long; but
you will excuse it, being a business of concern; and each party ought to
understand the other before they set their Hands and Seals to the Engagement.


Hill. Uncle, pray con over the Articles, for you are to be summoned for a
Witness upon occasion.


Muchw. It is like to be a fine Marriage.


Lov. Yes, if it go on according to Agreement.


Carel. You shall see our Marriage (which you think is clapped up out of a
frollick) go on more cheerfully than yours, made out of stark Love and
desperate Affection; we, like two Birds (though we Roo^t together at Night)
will have our freedom all Day, and fly Ch^ripping about, whilst you like two
Domestic Animals, ti'de too close together in a string, shall still be
snarling and biting one another.


Hill. And we have the trouble every now and than to part you; mark the event
on it.


Carel. Mrs. Clap. and Mrs. Breedw. you must not think you have quite lost me,
because I am Married, and so pray tell the rest of my Acquaintance; I am
entered into Matrimony, but not in to Bondage.


Hill. He has, as it were but one Mistress the more: L ead away Uncle.

Whilst other Wives, and Husbands, Scold and Rant,
We two will live like Mistress and Gallant.

ERRATA.
Page 1. line 13. for my, read one. p. 4. l. 17. for four r. fou^score. l. 32^.
^. Tall^^. r. Tallent. p 5. l. 1. ^. fo^lant, r f^dant. p. 7. l. 8. ^. you, r*
you W^men. p. 10. l. 6. ^. receipt, r. deceit. l. 26. ^. for me, r. 19 me. l.
28. ^. shun, r. shuns. p. 11. l. 24. r. my Grandsires. p 12. l. 23. ^. appear,
r. appear^ p. 23. l. 15. ^. ^* r. l' de. p. 3^. l. 4. f. sleepish, r. sheep^sh.
p. 34 l. 29. f. sw^re, r. s^orn. l. 35. f. know, r. knew* p. 3^. l. 22. ^. Id',
r. I do. p. 39. l. 28. dele and. p. 36. l. 13. ^. know, r. knew. l. 14. ^.
fl^king, r. flirting. l. 18. ^. my Lady, r. many a Lady. p. 38. l. 3. dele
Habited. l. 34. r. has been. p. 42. l. 17. ^. know me, r. know her. p. 45. l.
8. dele not. l. 13. for your Niece may* r. for you Niece you may. p. 47. l. 26.
^. Spirit. r. Spirits 15. s. know you, ^. know me. p 52. l. 17. dele some. p.
54. l. 7. ^. j^gd me, r. j^ggs him. p. 56, l. 14. ^. for it. l. 17. dele it. p.
53 l. 29. dele Be^. Sir we are still, etc.

EPILOGUE, By Mr. Settle.
GAllants, it is feared, after our last Loud Play,
You will be Deaf to all Low Wit can say.
Lightning, Machine and Noise your Favorites are.
Those Murdering Plays, the Stage's Men of War,
Drive all before 'um, like an English Fleet:
All Is Prize that in their Thunders-reach they meet;
Their mighty First-Rate Strength so great appears;
We Younger Actors seem but Privateers:
And like true Pickroons, this time we choose;
Where the Great Ships lie by, the Capers Cruze.
Yet we engage with full as much Devotion,
Though with less Hope, and far less Execution.
How e're we' Adventurers so little Stake,
It Is all clear Profit whatsoever we Take;
Whilst they from the large Booty they had got,
Pay Tribute to the Force that Set them out:
As if Gay Plays, like Navies, had this Check,
In a Rich Prize to Plunder but one Deck.
Yet their Fame's greater, though their Gain be less,
You kindly say, they merited Success.
Their Triumphs so much above ours prevail,
You Will own, they Won your Money, which we steal.
They Conquer a more Honorable way;
Their Spoils are Victory, and ours but Prey.
Now has our Damned dull Epilogue ill used you;
I Am sure, it has not pleased; that is, abused you.
-- But that small Fault to Day
May be excused, we have don't enough inth' Play.
FINIS.

