THE PATTERN of Pure and Undefiled RELIGION, Exhibited in the Preaching and
Life of the HOLY JESUS: Showing the true Genius and Spirit of Christianity.

WITH An Introduction Concerning the restoring of true Religion by Jesus
Christ, and his Kingdom.

Non enim qui immaculatas Hostias caedit, qui thuris Acervos dat igni
concremandos, Numina censendus est colere: Cultus verus in pectore est, and
oppinatio de Deo digna, etc. Arnob. contr. Gentil. l. 4. By GEORGE RAYMOND, M.
A. Minister at St. Lawrence in Ipswich.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1689.

Imprimatur.

June 20. 1689. Guil. Needham.

To the Honorable PEYTON VENTRIS, Esquire One of the Justices of Their Majesty's
Court of Common Pleas.
SIR,
WHen I had once determined to let these Papers see the Light, I could not in
the least hesitate about their Dedication. Not that they are worthy of your
Name or Patronage, upon any other account, but their subject matter, and pious
design only; but that custom has prescribed to men of our Function this way,
(as seldom having any other) of confessing their Obligations, and expressing
their Gratitude. In compliance with such custom, I chose rather to incur the
censure of Presumption, for affixing your Honorable Name to so small a
performance; than that of Ingratitude, by passing over in silence the great
Obligations you have laid upon me. However, I perceive I must not descend to
particulars, nor yet attempt the Blazonry of your Merit; not for fear of being
suspected of Flattery, but of offending your Virtuous Modesty; and of swelling
the Dedication into a greater Bulk than the Treatise it self.

I therefore only take leave to Congratulate, not so much Your self as the
Public, your being placed in that Eminent Station, in which, as I am sure you
will always be an Eminent Example, and assiduous Patron of Pure and undefiled
Religion; so I doubt not but your great Worth, by becoming more conspicuous,
will command that Esteem and Veneration from all Men, that it does from

Your most obliged, Humble and Affectionate Servant, Geo. Raymond.

TO THE READER.
THE Knowledge of God in Jesus Christ, contains not the resolution of
Philosophy Curiosities, and Scholastic Disputes; such as the Order of the
Divine Decrees, the consistence of the divine agency with Man's liberty, and of
the divine Providence with the contingence of Events; with other such like
Speculations, of which yet some Systems of Christian Religion are wont to be
compounded. This is to me most evident, from the declared necessity and
usefulness of the Christian Doctrine; which cannot be affirmed of those
fruitless speculations, without the knowledge whereof Men may (and must, if at
all) be wise and happy; as also, from the deep silence of sacred Writ
concerning those points, and the quite different tenor of its voice and
instruction; and from the remaining Disputes about those things, the questions
continuing still in the same undecided state, in which the Pagan Philosophers
left them, and rather embarass'd and puzzled, than dilucidated and resolved by
later Schoolmen.

But the effusion of Gospel-Revelation and Grace, is certainly vouchsafed by
God, to render men truly wise and eminently good: to add a new light and
authority to the Principles of true Religion, and obligation and assistance to
the Practice, and to furnish and maintain a quick and powerful sense thereof.
We therefore ought to search the holy Scriptures, and acquaint our selves with
them; not that we may be provided for subtle Disputes, but that we may be
impregnated with a divine nature and Heavenly dispositions: Jud. 20, 21.
that we may build up our selves on our most holy Faith, and keep our selves in
the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto Eternal
Life.

To assist in such a use of the holy Scriptures, ought to be the scope of all
Books of Religion; and is the mark aimed at in this. In which I have
endeavored such a representation of the general design of Christianity, and in
particular of the Doctrine and Life of Jesus; which being received and becoming
familiar, may lead men into a wise understanding of their holy Religion; and
direct and help them to draw from the sacred fountains the true and proper
nourishment of the divine life. This taste of the sincere milk of the Word, may
serve to prepare and excite the appetite; that it shall covet only such repast
as is agreeable and good, and have a quick sense and savoury relish of that
which is so.

Intending such a taste only, I was obliged to couch things as close as I
could; and to offer brief hints rather than a strict discourse upon each
particular. Yet I hope this brevity has not hindered, but that most things may
be sufficiently plain to the understanding of attentive Readers; and I fear too
plain for the Consciences of most, who had rather dwell in Clouds and thick
darkness, finding nothing but matter of self-accusation and reproach, in such
intelligible Notions of Religion.

Two Requests I have to ask of the Reader. The one, that he be not too hasty
and severe in censuring this Essay; which does not pretend to exactness and
perfection: but is (so far as I know) the first in its kind, and offers it
self to be improved and finished by better hands. Yet withal, if the Censurer
please to try, he shall be forced to confess, that it is not possible to draw
the moral, any more than the natural Picture of our blessed Savior to the
Life. The other Request is, that he will afford this Discourse more than a
Cursory reading; and that if any thing strike him upon the first view, he will
allow it a farther consideration. For my hope is, That the hints here offered,
will become more useful, the more familiar they are made; and may instill by
degrees, a true relish of the wisdom and goodness of our holy Religion; and a
true tincture of the excellent temper and spirit thereof.

To which good effect, God Almighty prosper the labor and pious intention both
of the Author and the Reader; for his mercy in Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen.

Introduction Concerning the restoring of true Religion by Jesus Christ, and
his Kingdom.
THE Messiah was promised for a light unto the Gentiles, Isa. 42.6. by that
name the Jewish Masters call him, and John the Baptist proclaims him, Joh.
1.9.
the true light which lights every man that comes into the World: and our
Savior averreth frequently of himself, Joh. 8.12. c. 9.5. c. 12.35, etc.
that he is the light of the World, and he that follows him shall not abide
in darkness, but shall have the light of Life. By this is signified to us the
extreme necessity, the glorious Excellency, the quickening and refreshing
Influence of his Doctrine and Example: whereby when the World lay in
Midnight-darkness, they had their Eyes opened, and were marvellously
enlightened, their Ignorance relieved, their Errors and Prejudices
dispossessed and driven away; and they being raised from the deep sleep of sin,
were turned from darkness to light; from the power of Satan unto God.

This Light of Life, dispersed throughout the Gospel of our Savior Jesus
Christ, it is the design of this little Tract to collect, for instruction in the
true Spirit and Genius of Christian Religion. For since to be a Christian is to
put on Christ, i. e. to imitate him, by copying out the Excellencies of his
Spirit, and Holiness of his Life; it is necessary we should have the true Idea
of his Mind and Spirit, and the true Characters of his holy Conversation in
intimate knowledge and constant remembrance, as well as in highest veneration
and love. Our profession obliging us to walk as he walked, and the efficacy of
Example consisting much in being acted before our Eyes, it is highly necessary
that we look unto Jesus; form to our selves such an exact Idea of his Life,
that seeing him (as it were) walking before us in every path of Virtue, we may
follow him more accurately, treading in his steps.

In this consists the true study and use of the holy Gospels; not in learning
to make or defend Systems and Scheems of Orthodox Opinions, but in receiving
the light of Life, or as the Apostle calls it, in 1 Cor. 2.16. the mind of
Christ, i. e. the imbibing the true sense and tincture of his Heavenly
Doctrine, and partaking of his Spirit therein lively expressed, that beholding
as in a Glass the glory of the Lord, we be changed into the same image from
glory to glory, by the spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18.

In order hereunto it must be ever remembered, that Jesus was manifested to
destroy the works of the Devil; to rescue Religion from that depravation, which
was the dishonor of God, and reproach of Man; and to restore Men at once to
Truth and Happiness. The Mind therefore and Spirit of his Doctrine will be best
conceived, as opposite to those pernicious Errors, which had depraved
Religion, debauched the Lives, and enslaved the Spirits of Men; which had
brought them to become Vassals of Satan, the Author and Abetter of such false
Opinions and wicked Practices. Christianity is to be considered as a supplement
to natural Religion, restoring it from depravation, adding a new light,
authority and sanction to the truths and precepts thereof; and by confirming
what was doubtful through the ignorance and prejudices of Men, clearing what
was dark, rectifying what was abused or mistaken, reducing Men to the true
knowledge of God, and rendering them true Worshippers of him.

To this restoration of Religion, and of Man, it was necessary; first to set
them upon a firm basis and foundation, by enlightening their darkness,
satisfying their doubts, and helping their infirmity; and then to prevent their
falling again (which they are extremely prone to do) into these pernicious
conceits by which they had departed from God, were captivated unto Satan, and
enslaved in his Kingdom of darkness.

In order to the first, viz. the fixing Men's Minds upon a solid foundation, by
satisfying their important Doubts, relieving their Ignorance, and helping their
Infirmity; 'twas necessary for the Savior of the World, 1. To reconcile God to
Man by a propitiatory Sacrifice. 2. To demonstrate the Immortality of the Soul,
the certainty of a future Life and Judgment. 3. To reveal the object of
Worship. 4. To set a perfect Example of Life. 5. To succor Men with
supernatural Grace, a strength Divine.

First, A propitiatory Sacrifice, and the most solemn Declaration that could
be, of God's being reconciled to returning Sinners, was necessary to pacify
Men's guilty Consciences, to satisfy their diffident and doubtful minds, to make
an end of all that anxious, busy, and fruitless Religion of Expiations, which
could neither purge the Conscience, nor improve the Man; which by becoming the
chief subject of religious solicitude, jostled true Religion, i. e. Wisdom and
Goodness out of the World. Natural Religion knows no Sacrifice but
Eucharistical; it is a service of Love and Gratitude: but guilt is diffident and
anxious; sin begets dread of God, as well as alienation from him; and he that
knows himself sadly in arrears to the Divine Justice, and obnoxious to Almighty
Anger, must first be satisfied, that that Justice and Anger appeased, and God
reconciled, before he can be prevailed with to love, and thankfulness and holy
imitation; that is, before he can be made to repent and return unto God.

2 Co. 5.19. Romans 3.25. 1 Jo. 4.10.
God therefore was in Christ, reconciling the World unto himself; setting him
forth a propitiation for the sins of it; declaring himself reconciled, and
publishing an Act of Oblivion, and Patents of Grace and Pardon ratified and
sealed, with the blood of that most inestimable Sacrifice. By the most solemn,
sacred, sensible and affectionate pledges of his love, he has assured us that
he wills not the death of Sinners; but his will is their return and happiness;
that he will communicate himself to his Creatures, according to their capacity;
and that Repentance is a sure Capacity for his greatest Blessings, but
impenitence the only accursed thing that separates from God; and that because
it renders incapable of those blessed streams, which are ever flowing from the
inexhaustable Fountain of Divine Goodness.

And as by the blood of Jesus he has pacified the Conscience of Sinners; so by
the revelation of his divine Mercy and Goodness, by the Promise of the holy
Spirit, and of Eternal Life, he has revived their desponding Hearts; he has
begotten them again to a lively hope, that they may be filled with joy and
peace in believing, 1 Pet. 1.3. Romans 15.13.
and abound with hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost: that they may
return with humble Confidence, and cheerful readiness to him, who waits for
that happy opportunity to show them mercy; and being reconciled to God by Faith
and Repentance, may be inseparably united unto him, in love and hope, and the
participation of his holy Spirit.

Secondly, To the Restoration of true Religion, 'twas fundamentally necessary
to banish all doubtfulness about the immortality of the Soul; and to render the
future Life and Judgment indisputably certain. Men lost, with their Innocence,
their hope in God; and the sense of those immortal Capacities the divine
goodness had bestowed upon them. They corrupted also that Tradition which
should have supported their hope; and forgot both what their Reason, and their
Fathers had told them from God, concerning his design to make them Eternally
happy. And the Arguments of Philosophy were too fine and artificial, to
encounter the prejudices of Lust, and jealousies of guilt; and to persuade
minds that knew very little of God or of themselves; that rather dreaded the
presence than desired the enjoyment of the Divinity; and whose secular Religion
taught them to look for no other rewards, than the averting a misfortune or a
plague, or the procuring the comforts and emoluments of this Life. Vt
averteretur imminens ira, vel ut jam tumens and saeviens placaretur. Caecil. in
Minut. Foelic.
And with the Philosophers themselves, their most labored Discourses did not
conclude strongly; but inferred only a feeble hope, and a disputable
probability. They proved Man capable of Immortal Happiness; but a mind
overgrown with corruption, depressed with guilt, and a terrible dread of the
Divine Majesty, could not strongly conclude, that God will finish that
Capacity, and confer so great a Blessing; nay, could scarce entertain a thought
or desire of it.

God therefore sent his Son from Heaven, that he might bring life and
immortality to light; to make a plain discovery of the important truths
relating to Eternal Life: and to make Faith of them in an easy and convincing
method, rational and sure in it self, and yet aptly accommodated to the meanest
understandings. God has pledged his veracity for the truth of what Jesus
taught in this matter; by the Miracles which he and his followers wrought; and
confirmed our Faith, by raising him from the dead. His Resurrection is a
demonstration of the possibility and certainty of ours; and a pledge of his
coming to judge the World. And if we believe not, we make God a Liar; because
we receive not the Record that God gave of his Son: and this is the record,
that God has given to us Eternal Life; and this life is in his Son, 1 John
5.11, 12. Moreover the Declaration of the Divine Goodness, and the propitiation
and redemption, through the blood of Jesus, by exciting our love of God, and
creating a hope in him, do facilitate our Belief of this his gracious Promise,
how vast soever the contents of it be.

Thirdly, It was also necessary, in order to the restoring of true Religion, to
reveal and declare the object of Worship; the true, but (to the generality of
Mankind) unknown God: whom they served not at all, or ignorantly worshipped.
The service of innumerable Patron deities, as immediate superintendents of
humane affairs, had jostled out the service of the supreme God; who had no
public offices, nor proper Rites appropriated to him: and the worship of wrong
objects, alienated the minds of the Worshippers from the true one. They served
Creatures so much more than the Creator, and gave his glory in such sort unto
them; that 'twas impossible, for understandings so anxiously superstitious and
given to Idolatry, strongly to intend the true Deity, or to retain any
tolerable knowledge of him. The worship proper to God, was rendered to Angels,
or Heavenly Intelligences; and to the Sun, Moon and Stars, their reputed Seats
or Temples; to Aerial Spirits the Messengers and Ministers of the Celestial
ones; and to Baalim, or the Cannonized Ghosts of departed men; and such too,
(according to the report of their own Writers) whose Lives had nothing worthy
of God in them. And what was still worse, the Spirits of darkness, these
Enemies of God and Man, exacted divine honors from their ignorant Vassals; who
offered to them the dearest pledges of their Lives and Fortunes: they
sacrificed their Sons and Daughters unto Devils, Psalm. 106.37. They served
these with mournful, barbarous, cruel and unnatural Rites, as authors of evil;
they atoned them, that they might not hurt, His ne noceant, etc. Arnob. adv.
gent. l. 7.
or might drive evil from them. Yea they paid their homage, not only to
intelligent beings, but to Images and Shrines, to inanimate and irrational
Creatures; to bruit Beasts, and to the most vile and mischievous of them; to
Dogs, Oppida tota canem venerantur, etc. Juvenal, Sat. 15.
and Serpents and Crocodiles. Yea they superstitiously venerated every thing
that looked high, or great, or strange; lofty Trees, thick Groves and dark
Grots, great Rivers, Lakes and Ponds, were regarded as having Divinity in them.
Lucus frequens arboribus altissimis, specus in magnam laxitatem excavatus,
animam quadam Religionis suspicione percutient. Magnorum fluminum capita
veneramur. Stagna quaedam vel opacitas vel immensa altitudo sacravit. Senec.
Epist. 41.
To such madness does superstition indulged carry men; to such reprobation of
mind are they liable, who depart from the spiritual service of God, and by
sensible objects of worship, change his Glory into a Lie; who first serve the
Creature beside, and then more than the Creator who is Blessed for ever.

Whilst the minds of men were thus debased with unworthy, and distracted with
various objects of worship; God set up his memorial with the people of Israel;
and taught them to direct their worship aright, to the Maker of all things, the
Possessor of Heaven and Earth. Who also was the God that redeemed them from
Egyptian Slavery, by terrible wonders, and a mighty power; that appeared
gloriously on Mount Sinai; that went before them in the Pillar of Cloud and
Fire; that afterward sat down between the Cherubims, as on a Throne; and dwelt
in the Temple as in a Royal Palace, the God and King of Israel. The Laws he
gave, and the Rites he appointed them, had this name intent, to be signs and
bands of unity between God and them; to direct their worship to the true
object, and to restrain them from wandering after the Gods of the Nations that
were round about them.

But as this remedy was appropriated to one people, so neither did it
effectually cure their Idolatry; but they continued still fond of the way of
the Heathen, and made frequent Apostasies into it. God therefore in the
fullness of time, sent out of his Bosom his Son; That Eternal Word, and Prince
of Angels, neither unbegotten like God, nor created like Man, who unites the
Creator and the Creature, and is the Mediator betwixt them, as Philo describes
him. Phil. Jud. lib. de Haered. rer. divin.
This eternal Lord, and Heir of all things, who presided over the Israelites in
the Cloudy Pillar, who appeared to Moses and the Elders on the Mount burning
with Fire, who exhibited a glorious presence in the Tabernacle and Temple, and
delivered infallible Oracles from between the Cherubims; he in the fullness of
time tabernacled in our Flesh, and dwelt among men as one of them; and
exhibited a more true and divine Sheckina, or presence; for his glory was as
became the glory of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth,
Joh. 1.12. In him the Father was manifested, and revealed by him; who has
expressly commanded all men to repent of their Idolatry, and to worship God
only; to direct their Prayers to God in Heaven, and not to seek him in any
symbol on Earth; nor through any medium, but that of his Eternal Son, Heb. 1.3.
Colos. 2.9. Joh. 10.30, 39.
who is the brightness of his glory, the express image of his person; in whom
the Godhead dwells, the Father being in him, and he in the Father, so that the
Father and he are one.

Right reason confesses the Unity of God, inasmuch as he being supreme, knows
no equal, and being All-sufficient needs no Partner; and necessity of
Existence, cannot reasonably be affirmed of more than one most perfect Essence.
But understandings depressed by sense, and depraved by Worldly Lust, first
sought God in a Symbol; and chained him to a place, for the better resort to
him on all emergencies. And when they had framed in their imaginations a local
God, their Fancy multiplied Deities, as their Superstition did Shrines; and
'twas a pleasure to think, they had so many Patrons of their persons and
affairs, Gods to address themselves unto, or to go before them upon all
occasions. This gross but pleasing delusion, could not be sufficiently
detected, but by a light from Heaven; God from thence revealing, and asserting
the perfection and unity of his Essence; letting the World know assuredly, that
there is none beside him; nor any other Image or Symbol of his Divinity, but
the Eternal Son, who is the brightness of his Glory, and never to be conceived
of without the Father, nor any other Minister of his Providence, worthy of
divine honor; but that the Holy Ghost, the Author of all divine gifts is so:
being the Eternal Spirit of the Father and the Son. Upon this Basis he has
fixed the wandering minds of Men, determined and directed their worship;
condemning the conceit of many Gods, and many Lords or Mediators, as false and
wicked; for that there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and
we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him, 1
Cor. 8. 5, 6. This one God, that made the World, and all things therein, is
Lord of Heaven and Earth, and dwells not in Temples made with hands, neither
is worshipped with Men's hands, as though he needed any thing; but he it is that
gives unto all, Life and Breath, and all things, Acts 17.24.

Fourthly, To restore true Religion, 'twas necessary to redeem Men from their
vain conversation, received by tradition from their Fathers, by setting them a
perfect pattern of Life; both to demonstrate what is the service agreeable to
God, and that such holy living is practicable by Man. False Religion was not
only wrong in the object, but also in the matter and instances of worship; it
lost the true God amongst the crowd of lesser Deities, and his true worship
amongst the heap of childish and unprofitable Ceremonies. Its Votaries were
very busy, and its service full of noisy labor, of pomp and pageantry: but the
Rites, some of them were unreasonable and foolish, much below, not only the
Majesty of God, but the dignity of Man; others lewd or cruel, magical and
unnatural, contrary to humanity, a reproach and provocation to the Author of
our Beings, but singular symptoms of reprobate minds, and badges of slavery to
wicked Spirits. And whilst their Gods were represented as Patrons of Vice, and
their most sacred mysteries were shameful works of darkness, their Religion
engaged them in lewdness and inhumanity; what could be expected in common
conversation, but such a deluge of wickedness as is described, Romans 1.29.
filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, covetousness, maliciousness,
envy, murder, deceit, malignity; void of Piety, Charity, Mercy, Faith, yea,
even of natural Affection.

This vain conversation was received by Tradition, and confirmed by custom; and
better Examples were very rare, and those extremely defective: and the
Discourses of Philosophers (whom the vulgar regarded as a few singular and odd
men, and suspected of Atheism) were of little force against the torrent of
custom, in which themselves too were not a little involved. Tradition, Law and
Custom, had made Religion to consist in performing the wonted Rites; but solid
virtue, as no part thereof, but a needless and impracticable theory, was
abandoned to the speculation of the Learned. Jesus therefore came to restore
Religion, not only by the light of Heavenly Doctrine, but by the Luster of a
great Example. His Life demonstrated wherein the Kingdom of God consists; the
Works that are acceptable, and the Persons that are dear to him. His Example
exhibits an invincible conviction, of the necessity, the beauty, and the
practicableness of a holy Conversation; of a Life, wise, and good, and useful;
of a Spirit unbiased by the interests of the Flesh, and the World, deaf to
their solicitations, and unshaken by all their terrors. He demonstrated to the
World, that the Servants of God must not be slothful, or idle, but busy
Ministers of his Providence and Grace; and be showed too, that their business
did not consist in operose Ceremonies, Bodily exercises, In operosis
Ceremoniis, and ritibus ad digitos tantum pertinentibus. Lactant.
or trivial Rites; but in doing good, and distributing the gifts of Heaven, in
watching over our selves and others, in a persevering practice of Godliness,
Righteousness and Sobriety, in charitable and humble ministrations unto men,
and a professed service, and constant imitation of the true God. By his own
Example, and that of his immediate Followers, as so many concurring Lights,
making a path to shine after them, he described the way to Heaven, and the
enjoyment of God; demonstrated beyond exception, the necessity of holiness to
the Vision of God, and the possibility of that purity which qualifies for the
enjoyment of him.

Lastly, To the restoration of Religion, and of Man, 'twas necessary to
quicken those who were dead in trespasses and sins, not only by a great
Example, but with a divine Principle and supernatural strength. Instruction and
Example were proper to awaken the understanding, and to excite the Conscience;
but the Law in the Members, is not so easily subjected to the Law in the Mind:
Inclination and Passion is too strong for the efforts of naked Reason; beloved
Lust, and enslaving custom, will not give place to wiser emulation; so that
this struggle between the Flesh and Spirit, does but demonstrate the power of
corrupt inclination, and the strength of vicious habit. They who with the mind
served, i. e. approved and consented to the Law of God; were still by reason of
the Flesh, subjected to the Law of Sin. Though the Conscience was awakened, the
Will was enslaved; and whatever feeble desires and imperfect choice, Romans 7.
an enlightened understanding might produce; yet they that were accustomed to
do evil, could not find how to perform that which is good: the good they would,
they did not, but the evil they would not, that they did. Their judgment
condemned their practice; but though an awakened Conscience set the Man against
himself, yet inclination and custom mastered the judgment, and carried all
before them; and held them in Captivity to Sin, and thereby to the powers of
darkness.

Under this wretched Slavery, the generality of Mankind was insensible, and
hardened; but those that felt their yoke, were nevertheless subjected to it:
and whilst they disputed about the origin of Sin, submitted to the dominion of
it: They could not tell, whether Man in his present state, were the ruins of
somewhat that had been great; or whether his nature had only the Rudiments and
Foundation of some greater excellencies to be built upon it: (...). de Isid.
and Osir. (...). Simpl. in Epictet. c. 34.
whether there were two first Principles, the one of good, the other of evil;
(which was the most ancient and universal opinion, as Plutarch tells us) or
whence else those lapses and errors of the humane Soul, should proceed; whence
it was, that the brutish part had enslaved the rational, and the sensitive
appetite broke loose from the governing power. They knew not the head of this
overflowing Nile; but found themselves involved in the Inundation: whilst
their understandings reasoned tolerably well of Virtue, their inclinations
engaged them powerfully in Vice: So that either despairing of liberty, they
tamely yielded to the torrent of inclination and custom, or else with great
perplexity, but little success, strove against the mighty stream; and in so
great a straight (as was natural) looked up to God, Plutar. de superstit.
((...)) who is the hope of Virtue, but not the Patron of Sloth and Cowardice.
Although they sometimes magnified humane nature, yet experience of their own
infirmity, at other times extorted this confession from them, that a divine
impulse was necessary to make a Man truly great and good; Nunquam vir magnus
sine divino afflatu. Cicero. (...). Pythag. Aur. Carm.
and that there is something divine in holy men, that informs and guides them.
Which differs but little from that of St. John, 1 Ep. c. 2.20. Ye have an
unction from the holy one, and know all things. But the knowledge of their
remedy, was not equal to the sense and pressure of their Disease: they could
cry out with St. Paul, Oh wretched Man that I am! who shall deliver me? but
could not answer with him, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

It is the Redeemer of the World, who by a divine strength has relieved the
weakness of Man; and by the law of the spirit of life, Romans 8.2.
made them free from the law of sin and death. The Sun of Righteousness, just
before his rising upon the benighted World, had emitted some twilight Rays
into the darkness of it; by raising up some eminent Philosophers, (Preachers of
Righteousness) to check the superstition and madness of the Priests: and to
scatter some rays of knowledge among the people, thereby to prepare the way to
the Eternal Word, who was to bring with him the treasures of divine Knowledge
and Wisdom. But when this glorious Sun was risen, he not only shed a divine
light, but quickening heat and influence upon the benumbed and frozen World. He
revived the dead, restored the languishing, redeemed the Captive, and enabled
Slaves to break off their Fetters: Joh. 8.36.
and those whom the Eternal Truth set at liberty, were free indeed. He
plentifully poured out that Spirit that rested on himself; even the Spirit of
wisdom and understanding, Isa. 11.2.
of counsel and might, of knowledge and the fear of the Lord. By the miraculous
effusion of the Holy Ghost, he awakened the stupid World, and called them into
his Church, an unconquerable never-failing Principle of Eternal Righteousness.
By the abounding of this grace he has provided, Romans 5.21.
that (as sin has reigned unto death, so) righteousness may now reign unto
Eternal Life. The Gospel preached in the demonstration of the Spirit, made a
speedy and wonderful reformation, in the understandings, tempers, and lives of
Men; and yielded a most powerful conviction, that God was both able and willing
to restore his lost Image in them. And all the treasures of this divine Spirit,
are promised to those that humbly ask, and are willing to receive them. The
Conscience therefore awakened by the light of Truth, is no longer amazed or
distracted; but confiding in the divine aids, and strengthened with his
Heavenly Grace, pursues its conflict with the Flesh to a complete Victory.
Every good motion is from the same Spirit of Truth and Grace, which has made
such admirable Conquests over Ignorance and Lust; and he that has the same
Principle in himself, cannot but have a good hope of the same blessed Fruits.
The Soul that feels a divine strength, cannot but expect from the same
Fountain, a constant supply; and thus united to God in the same design of
restoring his Image, and animated with the holy Spirit, cannot fail to master
all opposition; for greater is he that is in us, than he that is in the World.

This therefore is the Foundation, on which Christ's Kingdom of Righteousness
and Grace is built; viz. Faith establishing the heart, by a full and certain
persuasion of these Fundamental Points, viz.

That, God is Reconciled, and Pardon and gracious acceptance sure to returning
Sinners.

That, a future Judgment and Eternal Life, and consequently the difference of
moral good and evil, are indisputably certain; and unquestionable realities.

That, there is but one God, the Creator of all things, and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ; the only object of worship, and Fountain of Blessing: whom we
must glorify in, and worship through, as he blesses us by the Eternal Word,
and Spirit.

That, the true service of God consists in the imitation of him, of which the
Life of Jesus is our Pattern; that such Holiness is indispensibly necessary,
certainly practicable, and can never fail of the divine acceptance.

That, the corruption of nature, and the power of inclination and custom, are
infallibly conquerable by the grace of God; and God most ready to prevent, and
follow us with his grace; and that he will never fail to assist and prosper our
endeavors, till they are crowned with Everlasting Success.

This is the Gospel; (...).
upon these fundamentals of religious Belief, must the Superstructure of
Holiness and Happiness be raised and built. Now Christians even of the meanest
Capacities, believing Jesus to be the Son of God, and receiving that account
the Evangelists give of him, have thereby most evident demonstration, lively
persuasion, and certain knowledge of these fundamental truths: such as the most
learned Philosophers could not attain unto; and the generality of the World
were extremely far from.

This Foundation being laid sure, God having made Faith of these truths to all
men in a most easy and certain way, and most powerfully and solemnly attested
them, by the miraculous effusion and demonstration of the Spirit; that which
remains for restoring Religion and Man, for perfecting the Kingdom of Christ;
is, to build upon this holy Faith, the true Image of God, and Spirit of
Holiness: to pluck up those prejudices that debauched Men's minds, the Sources
and Tap-roots of false Religion; and to inculcate those truths which contain
the true Spirit and Genius of pure and undefiled Religion. With this design the
Doctrine and Life of Jesus travail, viz. to introduce amongst his Followers,
that excellency of Spirit, that was in himself; which is the true Image of God,
the glory and the perfection of Man. And as this spirit obtains, so his Kingdom
comes with effect; and when it shall rest universally upon his Followers, then
shall come salvation and strength, the Kingdom of our God, and the power of his
Christ: Rev. 12.10. c. 11.15.
for the Kingdoms of the World shall become his; and he shall reign for ever
and ever. This is the Sum and Accomplishment of all these glorious Prophecies
concerning the Kingdom of the Messiah; That the Knowledge of the Lord shall
fill the Earth, as the Waters cover the sea, Isa. 11.4.

The plentiful effusion of this spirit upon the primitive Christians, made them
hope for the speedy accomplishment of these Predictions; and speak of the
perfection of Christ's Kingdom as near at hand. But so great a Reformation was
a work of time, and Christ had foretold, not only a failing of the spirit of
Christianity, but a reviving of the Kingdom of darkness; an Apostasy from the
Faith, such a return of the ejected prejudices, and depravation of Religion, as
should undermine the very Foundations; 1 Timothy 4.1, etc.
and subject men again to the ignorant infidelity, anxious Superstition,
abominable Idolatry, and foolish Lusts of the benighted Pagans. But that
himself in due time, will again set up his Kingdom, and restore to his
Followers, 2 Timothy 1.7.
the spirit of power, of love, and a sound mind; make truth, righteousness and
peace to reign, and so break the Empire of Satan, that he shall never be able
to erect it more. In the mean while he has left with us his Heavenly Doctrine
and holy Life, as an Antidote against those delusions, which are the passages
to, and the very Sinews and Strength of Satan's Kingdom, whether Pagan or
Antichristian: and powerfully to inculcate the contrary truths, which
constitute the genuine Spirit of Christianity, building men up into the Image
of God, and into the Glorious Kingdom of his Son Jesus Christ.

First, Sensuality and the Love of Sin, is the inlet of error, the root and
sap of false Religion; but Purity and the Love of Righteousness, inculcated in
the Doctrine and Life of Jesus, is the Friend of Truth and Wisdom, and the way
to be filled with the knowledge of God. They who love their Lusts, cannot love
the truth that is contrary to them; nor endure the light that discovers their
vile deformities. An impure mind is unmeet to receive the knowledge of a pure
and holy God; and a guilty mind cannot bear it. The effect of such knowledge
upon impure spirits is dread; and that quickly converts into Superstition. For
a guilty Conscience (like a drowning man that catches hold of every twig)
embraces every expedient offered, to compound with an offended God; and will do
any thing to please, save only the rendering that holy obedience that he
requires of him. If atonement may be made by Sacrifice, the Altars shall flame
and smoke continually; their Flocks and Herds be all devoted, they will make,
if possible, Rivers of Oil to run from the Sacrifices: yea they will not spare
their own Bowels; but give the fruit of their body, Mich. 6.6.
an expiation for the sin of their Soul. They will not fail to build Temples
and adorn Shrines, nor to visit them devoutly; nor think much of a costly and
painful devotion; if they may have but hope to fatisfy God for the arrears they
are in to his Justice. And when they have labored it hard, they begin to hope
it may do; and that God will surely be pleased that they have done so much to
gain his favor. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
And just it is with God, to send them strong delusion, and give them over to
the belief of lies; who loved not the truth, nor were obedient to it. But the
Spirit of Obedience, is the Spirit of Children; to be followers of God makes us
dear to him; and the doers of his will shall know the Doctrine: this is the
Lesson which Christ inculcates. A pure mind has a lively perception of truth;
is very apprehensive of Errors, dishonorable to God, and that deface his
Image: and such purity it is, that the Doctrine and Life of Jesus travel to
produce; all Knowledge is of no further value than as ministering to, proceeding
from, or accompanied with it. All the Sacrifices of the wicked are declared an
abomination, but the delight of God, is in those that love him, and do his
Commandments; for they shall be loved of God; he will manifest himself unto,
Joh. 14.21, 22, 23.
and make his abode with them.

Secondly, Sense and Imagination, Fondness for external show and pomp, is the
way of Superstition, and false Religion: but the love of spiritual worship, and
a rational service, is the spirit of Christ, and that way of his Kingdom. God
is a Spirit, and chiefly to be worshipped with ours. And although, so long as
we are clothed with Flesh, our Religion must have a Body as well as Soul; yet
by an uninstructed fondness for the Bodily part, Men have ever departed from
God, into dotage and superstition; and rendered themselves a prey to the powers
of darkness.

This is the mistake of the vulgar especially, or of Souls as mean and
unimproved as theirs, though hanged with better trappings. By this fondness for
representation, pomp and solemnity, the Patriarchal Rites which were few and
grave, grew up at length into a theatrical and magnificent Religion; that
required a great Ministry, and a huge body of Rubricks for the exact
performance of it. For now the height and magnitude, and shape of the Altar,
the number of its steps, and horns, and innumerable things of like sort, entered
into Religion; and exercised the servile Superstition of the Worshipper.

At this door came in Images, with all their train of Foppish and Idolatrous
Ceremonies; and became stumbling blocks to the souls of men, and snares to the
feet of the unwise; the singular diligence of the Artificer helping forward the
ignorant to more superstition. This devising of Idols was the beginning of
spiritual Fornication; the invention of them the corruption of life. Wisd. 14.
The proneness of the Jews to revolt unto the way of the Heathen, the fondness
of those that became Christians for their old Rites, whether of Paganism, or
Judaism, the great multitude of these early obtaining in the Christian Church,
together with the necessity that the Apostles and first Reformers found of
indulging for a time the accustomed Rites and Ceremonies; these are convincing
demonstrations of the power of this Childish fondness, for somewhat sensible
and pompous in Religion; and of the danger of falling into false Religion, by
multiplying Rites to the subverting of spiritual worship, or laying the stress
of Religion on such bodily service.

But Christianity teaches a spiritual worship, and rational service; viz. that
of the Mind illuminated with true Knowledge, and quickened with a lively sense
of God, and referring all unto him. And the very bodily part is either the
spiritual Sacrifice of Prayer and Praise; or the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments for spiritual ends and purposes; for the help of Faith, Devotion and
Resolution, and the more effectual uniting the heart unto God in fervent love,
in thankful and dutiful affection. Romans 14.17.
The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost; for he that in these things serves Christ, is accepted
of God, and approved of men. But he that has a mighty opinion of bodily labor,
that values a Ceremony before a Virtue, his opinion about a Rite before Charity
or Peace, that acts his fancy more than his understanding; is more nice and
curious about the bodily than the spiritual part of worship; such an one is
departed from the genuine spirit of Christianity, entered in at the gate of
Superstition, in danger of all the extravagance and dotage thereof, and thereby
of Apostatizing into the Kingdom of darkness.

Thirdly, 2 Timothy 1.7.
A dark and servile dread of God, is the temper and spirit of false Religion;
but the Spirit of Christianity is light and love, and a sound mind. When Men
become alienated from God by wicked works, and serve him chiefly with their
vain imaginations, then they lose the true and amiable notion of him; they
consider him only as terrible and dreadful, (...), Plutarc. de superst.
who is the supreme good, and only happiness of his creatures. They conceive of
him altogether as arbitrary power, who is Eternal mind and wisdom, and the
glory and perfection of whose nature it is, that as he can do whatever he will,
so he can will nothing but what is wise and good. The Dreams of such dark and
timorous minds, are very frightful, wild and extravagant; they worship the Idol
of their own brains, express their own ill nature, and disturbed imaginations,
in that worship, which should be a confession of the excellency and perfection
of the Deity. Hence Men came to place Religion in solemn darkness, in cloud and
mystery, venerable because hidden or unintelligible Rites, obscure Oracles,
sacred Paradoxes, and Arks and Clefts full of divine and wonderful secrets: of
which the Priest and the Devil taking advantage, made themselves absolute
Masters of the belief and reverence of the people, and by these of their
Estates and Fortunes. But this is the Message which we have heard of Christ, 1 John 1.5.
that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. That the Principles of
his Service are Knowledge and Love; and he regards not the Religion of those
that worship they know not what, nor why. That we direct our Service and
Obedience, by what we clearly know of him; and that the more we know, the
better we shall please him; who will not be served with a blind submission, nor
with unintelligible mysteries, but with our best understanding; not with a
servile Flattery, and Court-like Address, by many Intercessors, with a ritual
niceness, or a pompous Pageantry, or any such devices of ignorant and
superstitious Minds; but with purity of Heart and Life, with a spirit of Love,
and of a sound Mind; not with Terror and Melancholy, but with Hope and
Alliance; not with scruple and perplexity, but generous Resolution; not as an
Arbitrary Tyrant, but as a wise and loving Father.

Fourthly, The Devil is the God of this World; and the Spirit of error is an
earthly and secular one, but the Kingdom of Christ is Heavenly; and such is the
spirit and genius of his Religion. The love of the World, and an inordinate
estimate of the goods thereof, was ever a mighty source of Superstition, and
Pillar of Satan's Empire. With such Worldly-minded Men Interest is always more
ponderous than Truth; and that Religion best that most effectually provides for
their temporal concerns. To such secular Spirits, 'twas a very agreeable
conceit, to imagine, that every business of theirs was under the especial care
of some Patron Deity; whose Rites, if they carefully performed their affairs,
should succeed according to their wish. The multitude of such Tutelar Gods, for
Cities, Families, and particular affairs, the superstitious regard to Oracles
and Prodigies, the observation of times, and all the Arts of divination and
augury, which made up the Pagan Superstition, plainly show the spirit of its
Votaries: viz. that their hopes and fortunes were Embarked in this World, and
that they regarded the good and evil thereof, as the sole reward of their
labor, or punishment of their negligence in Religion. This principle the
Idolatrous Jews plainly avowed to the Prophets Head, (when he expostulated with
them concerning their sorsaking of God, Jer. 44.17.) that they would burn
Incense to, and serve the Queen of Heaven as their Fathers had done to good
purpose; for then they had plenty, and saw no evil; whereas since they had left
off their service, all things had gone to ruin. Nor was this a vulgar conceit,
but the best defense the greatest Men among the Pagans could make for the
worship of those many Lords; Caecilius in Minut. Felic. Orig. c. Cells. l. 8.
Jul. Ep. 51.
that by their singular care the good things of life are distributed to men: so
Caecilius, Celsus, and the Emperor Julian defend the Cause of Daemon-worship.

It is also a mighty temptation unto Men, to imagine that God must needs love
such Riches, Magnificence and Glory in his Service, as they find themselves to
be extremely delighted withal; that the long flourishing of a Religion is a
demonstration of the truth of it, and the misfortune and calamity of Men, an
argument against their way of serving God. Thus they are apt to conclude, who
mind Earthly things, and over-rate the concerns of this Life, and judge every
petit affair thereof worthy of a divine decision.

But Christianity teaches us to consider our selves as Strangers and Pilgrims
here; whose estate and interest does not lie in sublunary things, but in
spiritual Promises, and Immortal Hopes. We are Citizens of Heaven, and only
traveling through this World thither. Upon this our Heavenly Relation and
Interest only, we may value our selves; and ought to love our Religion because
it secures these to us, and designs the improvement of our Spirits for the
eternal Vision and Enjoyment of God. We are instructed therefore to have our
affections very moderate and cool toward Earthly things, but warm and tender
toward Heavenly Objects. This is the finishing Lesson, and most excellent
effect of the Christian Religion; which is a Heavenly Philosophy: and to make
it truckle to the affairs of this Life, or turn it into Maxims of secular
Policy, is the greatest abuse and subversion thereof.

Lastly, The spirit and genius of false Religion, is selfish, narrow and
stingy; but that of Christianity, Charitable, and generous and large, as the
Kingdom and goodness of God.

Superstition converts Religion into a private Commerce; imagining God to gain
by the service done him, and expecting the return of that service only in
personal and private Blessings. And no wonder if they who conceive God to seek
himself in the homage he exacts from his Creatures, imitate the Deity they
worship; and center in themselves in every thing they do: or that they who
serve an arbitrary Deity, should expect to oblige and render him partial to
their interest, by the multitude of their services. Hence arose the conceit,
that the divine favor and beneficence might be monopolized by certain persons,
was appropriated to particular places; or annexed to the performance of
peculiar Rites: and happy they, that had the secret of that Monopoly, the
mystery of engrossing the divine protection and care. Hence every Family had
its tutelar Gods and singular Rites, and they changed the Shrine, the Rite, or
the place, when any ill success defeated their expectation. Fugiuntque penates
quisque suos, sua cuique domus funesta videtur, and quia causa latet, locus est
in crimine notus. Ovid. Met. l. 7.
So Balaak repeated the Sacrifice, and shifted the place, in hopes at last to
make the God he supplicated favorable to his request, Numb. 23.13. He said
unto Balaam, Come I pray thee with me unto another place; and Curse me them
from thence. So the Syrians having fought unsuccessfully with the Israelites
upon the Hills, resolve to change the place, and to have recourse to the Gods
of the Valleys, in hopes of better success, 1 Kings 20.23. Their Gods are Gods
of the Hills, therefore they were stronger than we; but let us fight against
them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they.

Hence such who found, by success, that their interest in their Gods was great,
boasted this reward of their Superstition, and trampled upon such who seemed
neglected of the Deity, or greatly fallen from his favor and protection. Whom
God had forsaken (either for their neglects of his service, or for the
arbitrariness of his own will, casting them out of his protection) they looked
upon as abandoned to neglect and contempt, and cruel treatments. If kindness
were due to any, it was only to those whom God distinguished by his Favors, or
who served him in the same manner with themselves; and that kindness too was
arbitrary and precarious as well as partial, and ever gave place to the efforts
of a narrow, stingy, and selfish Spirit. Hence also the Spirit of Persecution
became an ingredient of false Religion, the Friends and Favorites of God (as
they thought themselves) conceited they did him service in destroying his
Enemies; or at least, that they had right to use as they pleased, to crush and
ruin those despicable Wretches, who were reprobated and out-lawed, and fallen
from the protection and care of Heaven.

But Christianity teaches us to serve God, not as if he needed such service,
but for the reasonableness and excellency thereof; because his service is
perfect freedom, and true Religion the perfection of Man. It teaches us to
seek our improvement and happiness in subjection to those laws of God, which
are the transcript of his most perfect and blessed nature, and are designed for
the perfecting and felicitating ours; and contains in them the true Elements,
the certain principles and necessary means of such felicity. It teaches us to
consider God, not as a respecter of persons, but as God both of the Jews and
Gentiles; the universal Father of the whole Family of Heaven and Earth,
governing by the eternal measures of Wisdom and Goodness, and by Laws that
respect and provide for the welfare of the whole: As the inexhaustible Fountain
of Goodness, ever communicating himself to all his Creatures, according to
their Capacities; and requiring only such service as capacitates for the
enjoyment of him. It directs us to seek the glory of God, not in the triumphs
of his Arbitrary Power, but in the consummate effects of his infinite wisdom
and goodness; the perfection of his works, and especially of that grace he has
bestowed on Men; in the most perfect communication of himself to them, which is
life and happiness everlasting.

And as our God, so our Religion is love; Charity is the sum and substance of
it, generous goodness, the most courteous gentleness, the most perfect
humanity, the truest greatness of Mind, and largeness of Heart, are the genuine
and excellent fruits thereof. It obliges us to consider our selves but as
stones in the great building of God, disposed by the wisdom of the Almighty
Architect, with regard to the whole Fabric; and that we become useless and
insignificant, by centring in our selves, and minding only our own things,
without respect had to the common interest. Romans 12.3, 4, 5.
Just as the members of the body are beautiful in conjunction, and considerable
in their operations, conspiring to the common welfare: for the Eye does not see
for it self, but looks out for the whole Body; and the hand is useless whilst
it grasps to it self, but its ministrations to the Body are necessary and
excellent. It obliges us to account all the gifts of God, as designed to
render us useful to others; not to make us glad and full of our selves. In
short the whole economy of the Gospel, travels with this design, to better the
Societies of Men, and perfect the Communion of Saints; to edify the Body of
Christ in the Spirit of Love ruling in all its Members, to render Believers of
one Heart and one Soul, as their God, their Faith, and their Hope, their
Profession, Business and Interest are one; that they may be one as the Father
and his Son Jesus Christ, by a Communication of the same excellent nature and
communion in the same divine riches and treasures. And the Christian thus
instructed values himself, and expects his approbation from God, not by his
enjoyments, but by his usefulness; not by the number of his talents, but by the
improvement he makes of them.

This is the true spirit of Christ's Religion and excellent proceed of his
Kingdom; the true Members whereof being by a right and lively Faith fixed upon
a solid Foundation, firmly persuaded of the mercy of God, and of Eternal Life,
of the necessity of Holiness, and the efficacy of the divine Assistance, are
built upon this Faith into a most excellent temper; informed and governed by
the spirit of sincerity and purity, delighting in the spiritual worship of God,
united to him in filial trust and affection, placing their Happiness, and
seeking their Interest not in the things of this World, but those of a better,
pursuing them with tender and warm affections, having their spirits enlarged by
the knowledge of God, and filled with generous goodness in imitation of the
divine beneficence, do seek their own felicity in the perfection and
consummation of the Kingdom of God. For the effecting hereof, Christ has left
with us the Record of his Doctrine and Life; that we beholding therein the
glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18.
may be changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, by the spirit of the
Lord.

To minister hereunto is this Tract designed. First, By exhibiting the true
Principles of Christian Doctrine, levelled against the most pernicious errors,
and restoring true Religion, as they are contained in the Sermons and
occasional Discourses of Jesus, recorded by the Evangelists: and by considering
how Jesus inculcated and abetted this holy truth, as a pattern to us, how we
should hold, and profess, and propugne such his Doctrine. Secondly, By
exhibiting the true spirit and genius of the Christian Life and Practice,
collected from the Example of Jesus. And that first, By drawing the great lines
of his Life, as the admirab^^ pattern of ours. Secondly, By app^ying the light
of this Example for o^r Instruction, in the necessity, nature, extent and
excellency of true holiness. Thirdly, By showing what obligation and
encouragement the Life of Christ contains, to render us followers of him;
concluding with an Exhortation to that purpose.

THE PATTERN Of Pure and Undefiled RELIGION.
CHAP. I. Containing the Principles of Christian Doctrine.
JEsus being a Teacher sent from God, the Informing Soul of true and undefiled
Religion. As,

First, Concerning the Nature and Government of God. He that lay in the bosom
of the father, Joh. 1.18.
has revealed him to us. Whom Men rather conceived of, as a powerful, than as
a good Being; a God of wrath, and the object of their dread, rather than a God
of perfect Wisdom and Goodness, the object of their love and holy imitation:
One whom they might possibly appease by Gifts, and atone by servile
performances; little apprehending in the mean while, that He was most easy to
reconcile, and forward to do them good, and sufficiently pleased if they were
but willing to be made happy by him.

This was the degenerate and misshapen notion of God, that informed the
Religion of the World, and rendered it servile, superstitious, unsavory, and
uncomfortable. As for the Jews, God was their King, and they considered him as
the Lord of their Hosts; dreading his Power, and limiting his goodness. Whilst
they reverenced his Sanctuary, hallowed his Sabbaths, and paid his tyth and
oblations, they were safe under his Almighty Protection; and to them possibly
he might make some allowance, and bear with the transgressions of his peculiar
people: but the Nations of the World they looked upon as the people of his
Wrath, and either devoted to destruction, or not regarded by him; who, whatever
goodness he had in his nature, had appropriated that to the Jews only. Jesus
therefore who has showed us plainly of the Father, inculcates worthy
apprehensions of God; teaching us to conceive of him, as the Father of Mercies,
as kind to the unthankful, and freely good toward all; and that Universal
Love, the most generous and fervent Charity, the most tender Bowels of Pity,
these are his true Image, and make us like God, the children of our Father
which is in Heaven, Math. 5.44. He therefore tells the Jews, that God loved not
them only, but the whole World; and that to such degree, as he sent his only
Son into it, for the Salvation of all, that should become willing to be saved
by him, Joh. 3.16. That He came to seek and save that which was lost; and that
Repentance and remission of Sins, should be preached in his Name, to All People
without exception, Luke 24.47. that God is gracious and reconcilable in his
nature, and that there is Joy in Heaven at the conversion of a sinner, Luke
15.7, 10. In a word, the true notion of God is, that he is indeed to be
Reverenced for his excellent Greatness, but that he is especially to be loved
for his Goodness, as being the excellent pattern of all that is good, and
original of all perfection, whom to know is Life Eternal; to be like him is to
be as perfect as we are capable, and to see God our supreme felicity; and that
Vision is the portion of his Children, that strive to imitate the Being they
Adore and Love, that Copy out his Purity, his Righteousness, and Mercy; they
shall be blessed, for they shall see God, Mat. 5. such are the excellent
notions of God, which the Doctrine of Christ inspires, banishing those narrow
and stingy, mean and servile conceptions of him, that had infected the minds,
and vitiated the Religion of Jews and Gentiles, and which Mankind are exceeding
prone to fall into.

Secondly, Jesus in his preaching,

God he tells them is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth,
with the Mind and Soul, without shadows and ceremonies, Joh. 4.23. as he will
not be honored with Images, so he little regards any external performances.
That he values neither place nor time, but every where, and at all times, he
will have Men call upon him, holding up pure hands, with sincere and fervent
minds. That he prefers Mercy to Sacrifice; and is only glorified by our
being fruitful in good works, Joh. 15.8. that the Gentile Image Worship was
abominable, and the Jews Ceremonies trifles, and the Pharisaick superstition
intolerable with God. To turn Religion into noise and show, to place it in
Fringes and Phylacteries, in distinguishing opinions, or unprofitable
speculations, in regard to Altars and Shrines, to difference of meats and days,
and such like Traditions of Men; this was an offense and scandal that moved the
Spirit, the meek and gentle Jesus, and made him reprove sharply, and lash
severely, the abetters of it, Math. 23. Especially they having advanced these
trifles and superstitions, into the place of Justice, Mercy and Faith, and the
greater things of the Law, and made void the Commandments of God through their
traditions.

There is nothing (our Savior tells us) entering into the Man that can defile
him in the estimate of God, but the evil things that proceed out of the heart,
these defile the man, Mark 7.18. nor can any thing on the other hand avail him,
but what proceeds from a mind full of God, and is a genuine fruit of the true
knowledge of him. That true Religion and true Happiness (its natural issue)
consist in, and are the results of a due temper of mind; the poor in spirit,
the penitent Mourners, the meek, Math. 5.3, etc.
the merciful, the pure, and peaceable; these are the true Worshippers, and
truly happy Men. That God needs not our Prayers to inform him of our wants,
or to move his pity; nor are we heard the sooner for our much speaking, but
that our due apprehensions concerning God, and humble confidence in him,
fervent application of our Soul toward him, and a ready obsequiousness to his
Will, these render us capable of his Blessings, and secure them to us. When our
hearts are full of the sense of his power and goodness, and our Prayers oblige
us to honor him in our Lives; when we forgive others as heartily as we desire
God to forgive us, and pray to our Father in secret, with a full trust to be
heard and approved by him; then we worship him aright, and shall be the better
for such our serving God, though he that is infinitely perfect needs not our
Service, nor can be profited by us, Matthew. 6.

Jesus instructs us therefore to make our Prayers short and grave, fervent and
apt to excite Devotion, after the Pattern he taught his Disciples, Mat. 6.9.
And that we pray continually and importunately, for those things the desire
whereof does greatly exalt and improve our Spirits, Luke 11.1, 13. thus did
this great Instructor call Men back to the true worship of God, admonishing
that they no longer should trust in Sacrifices and oblations, in pompous Rites,
and ceremonious Addresses, or any thing of that nature; but worship God in
Spirit and Truth, and be followers of him as dear Children, and then they might
rely upon it, that their Heavenly Father both knows their needs, and will most
readily succor them in all their distress, and bestow upon them all his goods.

Thirdly, Another main Principle Commodities of Life. The Jews would not serve
God for naught, but were encouraged to expect affluence and prosperity as the
reward of their Obedience. The wicked Pharisees had prevaricated to the utmost,
and presumed they might satisfy for Injustice and Oppression, by a strict
observation of the Ceremonies of the Law, and Traditions of the Elders. The
people generally expected from Christ secular Immunities and Privileges, they
followed him for the Loaves. Their Fathers (they tell him) did eat Manna, were
wonderfully fed and protected in the Wilderness, and planted at length in a
land flowing with Milk and Honey, but what sign show thou? Joh. 6.30, 31.
Upon which, and all apt occasions, Jesus instructs them in the true reasons,
motives and ends of obedience to God, telling them, that to make Religion a
Cloak to secular designs, is to prostitute and profane it; and to procure to
themselves an inevitable and great damnation, Matthew. 23.14. That they should
not seek any longer the meat which perishes, but that which endures to
eternal Life, Joh. 6.27. That his Kingdom was not of this World, nor did he
promise his Followers extraordinary immunities in it: but rather it would
frequently so happen, that they should be hated, reviled, and persecuted for
their adherence to him. There is indeed a true and great felicity, the natural
result, and inseparable consequent of the righteousness taught by Christ, but
then poverty of Spirit, and contempt of the world, are parts of that
Righteousness, and Ingredients of that Blessedness; and being reviled,
disgraced, afflicted, and persecuted, Math. 5. Mark 7.34.
are well enough consistent with it. Blessed are they that suffer for
Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, and their reward shall
be great in Heaven. That his Disciples must take up the Cross; and no Man can
be his Disciple, that is not resolved to part with all for his sake, Luke
14.33. and the hundred fold restitution that he promises, is such as consists
with persecution, Mar. 10.30. That therefore his Disciples ought not to have
the interests of this World in mighty Reckoning; nor value themselves upon any
thing, besides their interest in the future and better Life. Nay even those
miraculous gifts they were endowed withal, far exceeding all the gifts of
Nature, or of Fortune, yet were not a sufficient foundation for any great
complacency, or rejoicing in themselves; Luke 10.20. Rejoice not in this that
the spirits are subject to you, but rather rejoice because your names are
written in Heaven. His Promise to his Followers is, that he will Raise them up
at the last day, that where he is they shall be also, that they shall have a
beatifical Vision of God in Life Everlasting; that in the mean while, they
shall b^ the Children of God, and have the lively hope of his Favor, the
Conscience of their own Integrity, the feeling of a happy temper and excellent
state of mind, and the consolations of the Holy Spirit for their support and
encouragement. Upon these motives, and from the principles of equity and
ingenuity, love and gratitude to God, and a desire of being like him, and of
attaining that perfection they are capable of, he wills them to practice all
Righteousness, he recommends their duty to them. And this is it which
constitutes the Spirit and Soul of Christian Righteousness, and gives the true
stamp and complexion to all our Obedience, viz. that it being founded in a
right knowledge of God, cherished by a holy Acquaintance with him, expressed in
those things that are Worthy of him; making a due difference between the
greater and lesser matters of the law; be acted from love and gratitude, from a
conviction of the excellency of Holiness, and with delight in it, from the hope
and desire of Eternal Life, and a full persuasion of the necessity of holiness
to perfect our nature, and make us capable of seeing God, and meet to enjoy
him. This is the Truth as Jesus taught it; which he that heartily imbibes, and
suitably expresses in his Life, he is a Christian, a Disciple indeed, and
shall receive the end of his Faith, the Salvation of his Soul.

Lastly, The Doctrine of Jesus has Righteousness, and extent of our duty, with
respect to some allowances made to the Jews, or such things as God winked at in
former times of Ignorance. For we are assured by him, that unless our
righteousness exceeds the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, we shall
in no case enter into the Kingdom of God, Math. 5.20. That not only murder and
maiming, but hatred and revenge, yea causeless and immoderate anger will
certainly expose us to the judgment of God. That ineffectual Lust makes us
guilty before him, as well as actual Adultery. That the occasions of evil must
be avoided, and the first motions of Lust repelled, or we perish by our
indulgence, fondness and softness, as well as by accomplished wickedness. That
although God tolerated the hard-hearted Jews, and winked at the ignorant
Gentiles, in the matter of Polygamy and Divorce, yet from the beginning it was
not so: nor should be for the future among the Disciples of Jesus. That trivial
and common swearing makes guilty as well as Perjury; but such truth and
faithfulness ought to be amongst Christians, that their credit might not need
the support of an Oath. This is the substance of our Savior's Sermon, in
Matthew. 5.20. to the 37 verse. Farther he enjoins, that his Disciples should
excel in meekness, and patient bearing of injuries, not resisting evil, but
overcoming it with good. That they should not violently impose their Religion
on Men, nor yet endeavor the destruction of such as with violence opposed it.
To call for Fire from Heaven on the Churches Enemies; to kill extrajudicially,
a bold Seducer of the Brethren from true Religion, were acts of holy zeal, once
commended and rewarded; but Christians are required to be of another spirit,
Luke 9.55. And the son of man came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them.
He calls his Followers to the most excellent heights of all virtue, that they
may shine as Lights before Men, and become as the salt of the earth to season
the manners of others, and keep them from stinking corruption. So that
wherever his Religion should come, it should produce many eminent lights, and
incomparable Examples; and should have such a general influence, as to render
the Conversations of all more tolerable and savoury.

Such is the instruction contained in the preaching of Jesus, exhibiting to us
the true Principles of Christian Religion, declaring the genuine spirit and
temper of it. He moreover asserted his own Authority and Mission from God to
restore his true Religion and Worship; he confirmed the former Revelations, and
taught a just Reverence of them; he revealed many things concerning the
following state of his Church, and promised farther information in those
matters by the pouring out of his Spirit upon it. But these are things foreign
to our present business. I shall therefore here shut up the first Chapter.

CHAP. II. The manner of Christ's teaching, instructive to us, how we ought to
profess, abett and maintain his Doctrine.
JEsus the great Prophet that was to come into the World, did by his Preaching
Inlighten the Darkness, and dispel the gross prejudices of it: he did moreover,
by the manner of declaring his Doctrine, recommend it to our regard, and
instruct us how to profess and propugn it.

For first, It is frequently taken Matthew. 7.29. Luke 4.32. Mark 1.22.
that he taught as one having Authority, and not as the Scribes; that the
people were astonished at his Doctrine, because he spoke with Authority, i. e.
as became the Majesty of divine truth; without affectation or artifice, without
ostentation of Wit or Eloquence; not dealing in subtilties, nor descanting upon
the traditions of Elders, or referring to the testimonies of famous Rabbis;
but he delivered plain and useful Instructions, in a grave, sincere, and
authoritative sort, as a Messenger of God, fully satisfied of the truth of what
he spoke, and referring to the Conscience of his Auditors, appealing to the
Scriptures, and demanding audience and credit for his works, which proved his
Mission from God. The things of God must be reverently handled; his truth is a
sacred depositum, which as we must not be ashamed to own, so we must not
triflingly expose. It Is too great and noble a thing, to be brought forth,
barely to entertain or divert the Company; it carries its own Authority when
solidly proposed, and confirmed by Sacred Writ, but it is enfeebled and
diminished when dressed with exquisite art, as if it needed trimming or
varnish: It is profaned, if we so blend it with Fancy, Wit, Eloquence, or other
small Arts; that it serves only for an occasion of showing our selves, or that
it appears not in its native beauty and majesty, by reason of the spots and
bedeckings that we bestow upon it; to show our art not to serve the Interest of
the truth. Religious truths are venerable, they had their proper seat in the
Conscience, must be received thither with a full Conviction, and rule there
with a divine sway; and we must endeavor to transmit and fasten them in the
Conscience of others, with all that Authority and venerable regard, that they
have, or ought to have in our own.

Secondly, It Is noted of Jesus, that way of God in truth, not regarding the
person of men, Matthew. 22.16. He concealed no necessary or useful truth for fear
of offending. He freely and sharply reproved the Scribes and Pharisees, though
the most potent Faction, of greatest interest and repute. He neither courted
the people, nor their Rulers; he desisted not from refuting popular Errors,
though they more than once took up stones to cast at him; nor was discouraged,
when he was told that Herod sought to kill him. Go ye (says he) and tell that
fox that I cast out devils, and do cures to day and to morrow, and the third
day I shall be perfected, Luke 13.31. There was nothing more offensive to the
Jews, than his healing on the Sabbath days, and the Pharisees who were
exceedingly Superstitious in that point, watched him with an evil Eye; yet he
cured the sick in their presence, and confounded their superstition with his
free discourse upon that subject: Is it not lawful to do good on the Sabbath
days? and which of you having an Ox or an Ass fallen into a Pit, will not
streightway pull him out on the Sabbath day? Luke 14.1, 5. Thus he taught us
sincerely and freely to profess necessary and useful truth, and boldly to
refute Error, and reprove Vice; not to hold the truth with respect of persons,
nor in the just defense of it to fear the Faces of Men.

Yet thirdly, Jesus taught with pointed and barb'd an Arrow, which flew more
directly, and stuck the faster in their Consciences, for the Parable it was
winged with. Such was the Parable of the two Sons, whom their Father commanded
to work in his Vineyard, representing the inexcusable obstinacy and impenitency
of the Pharisees; and that of the Husbandmen miserably destroyed, for refusing
to their Lord the fruits of his Vineyard, for killing his Servants, and at last
his Son, whom he sent to reclaim them; for they themselves confessed the
justice of the proceed against those wicked Men, and therein past Sentence on
themselves, even whilst they knew, that he had spoken these Parables of them,
Matthew. 21.41, 45. With like Wisdom he defeated their captious questions, and
put them to silence with his Interrogatories. Thus he asserted the Rights of
God and the King; and yet avoided the snare of the Herodians; when they asked
him concerning paying tribute to Caesar, Matthew. 22.21. So he asserted his own
Divinity, and silenced his Adversaries; by questioning with them, how Christ
could be both the son and the Lord of David, v. 45. So he silenced the
Sadducees in their own way; for if they from the relation between the Woman and
her seven Husbands, argued against a future state, much more reasonable was it
to prove a future state, from the Relation that God owned between himself and
good men, even after their death, viz. that he is the God of Abraham, etc. for
that relation is real and effectual, and therefore requires the existence of
the Subjects, that they live to God in a capacity of his love and favor. For
he is not the God of the dead but of the living, Mat. 22.31, etc. 'Twere
endless to observe all the instances of that wisdom and prudence, wherewith
Jesus refuted errors, and vindicated truth; not showing himself afraid of his
Adversaries, and yet prudently avoiding them. After which Example, he has
willed us to be wise as Serpents, though innocent as Doves. Not to be ashamed
of him and his words in an evil and adulterous generation, and yet not to cast
Pearl before Swine, nor holy things to Dogs, nor imprudently to provoke the
untreatable and unreasonable.

Fourthly, The Holy Jesus in all his zeal of thine house has even eaten me up,
Joh. 2.17. he used diligence in teaching, and sharpness in reproof, when the
case required it. Ye Hypocrites! Ye generation of Vipers! How can ye escape the
damnation of Hell? So he rebukes the self-conceited, wicked Pharisees, Matthew.
23.33. Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense to me, for thou savourest
not the things that be of God; was the earnest reproof he gave to Peter, who
opposed his own fancies and prejudices to the wisdom and truth of God, Matthew.
16.23. He loved to do the work of God, and refused not to travail for the
Conversion of a poor Woman, and she a Samaritan; neglecting his meat at a time
when he was both hungry and weary; for this was his meat, to do the will of him
that sent him, and to finish his work, Joh. 4.34.

the multitude; when he saw that they were scattered abroad as Sheep having no
Shepherd, and fainted for lack of instruction, Mat. 9.36. He did bear with the
weakness and prejudices of his Disciples, though he was grieved for, and
complained of the dullness of their understanding, and hardness of their heart.
He repeated his Instructions, expounded his Parables, heard and Answered their
Questions, and endured their Infirmities. He wept over the infidelity and
obstinacy of the Jews, with passionate wishes, that they would have known the
things of their peace in the day of their Visitation. He foretold their
destruction with sadness, and all the expressions of pity and compassion.

From all which we learn, not only to receive the Christian Doctrine with
forwardness and readiness of Mind, as that wherein the glory of God, and the
interests of our Souls, are nearly concerned: but also to profess it steadily,
as those that are fully persuaded, both of the truth, and the high importance
of it, being very zealous and in earnest in teaching and defending it; using
all wisdom and prudence to gain, or silence the Enemies thereof; to defeat
their designs, and avoid their snares; fearless of whatever may betide us in
the regular, and necessary confession of the truth; and with meekness,
tenderness, and long-suffering, endeavoring to conquer the contrary errors
and prejudices of Men.

This is the instruction we reap from the preaching of Jesus; we are thence
admirably enlightened in the true Principles of pure and undefiled Religion;
and instructed how we ought to hold, profess, inculcate, and defend them.

CHAP. III. The Life of Christ considered as our Pattern and Example.
THE Son of God came into the World, to restore Religion and plant Holiness in
it, not only by the instruction of his Doctrine, but by the luster of a great
Example. He has not only guided us with his Mouth, but led us also by the
hand; as we must abide in his words, so we must tread in his steps. Therefore
he dwelt among us, that he might give the World (what it never had before) a
perfect and unerring Example of Life; and therefore his Life is upon record by
the care of the Holy Ghost, that we might have the instruction and the
encouragement of it; and be obliged and persuaded to make it the pattern of
ours. In order to which, we shall first make an extract out of the holy
Evangelists, of the Life of Jesus, as an admirable pattern of all Virtue; and
then consider the instruction and the obligation of it.



First, Christ has left us in his Life an Example of Piety; of a conversation
led much with God, testifying a right knowledge, an affectionate sense, a
superlative love of God, by all proper expressions and genuine fruits thereof.
His Life was visibly devoted to the service of God, his fixed resolution, and
his professed business was to do his will. I came into the World, says the
holy Jesus, not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent me, Joh. 5.30.
Most ready he was to fulfill all Righteousness, and execute every command of his
Heavenly Father, Matthew. 3.15. this he accounted fit and becoming; 'twas more
necessary in his esteem, and pleasant in his sense of it, than his necessary
food, Joh. 4.32, 34. I have meat to eat, that ye know not of, for my meat is to
do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. Nor did his resolution
flag when tried to the utmost; for he refused not to drink the Cup which his
Father gave him; Matthew. 26.39.
he prays that God's will may be done, with full consent, and without any
reluctance of his own; and he bowed his head upon the Cross in humble
submission to the Execution of the Divine Will.

He left us an Example too of constant and fervent devotion, testified by a
reverence for, and adherence to the holy Scriptures, that contained the mind of
God; by a diligent frequenting the public Assemblies for the worship of God,
both in the Temple and the Synagogues; by having recourse to God upon every fit
occasion, and praising him and giving him thanks in all things; by
extraordinary Prayers and Fasting, and watching thereunto upon extraordinary
occasions, by a religious care of his Family, or constant attendants, praying
with them and instructing them; and all this practiced in the most intense
degree, and reverent manner. He spoke with all manner of regard and deference
to Moses and the Prophets, Search the Scriptures, for in them ye have eternal
life, Joh. 5.39. and think not that I am come to destroy the Law, or the
Prophets; for whosoever shall break one of the least of these Commandments, and
shall teach men so, shall be called least, i. e. shall have no part in the
Kingdom of God, Matthew. 5. he constantly worshipped in the Synagogues on Sabbath
days, Luke 4.16. and was daily, that is, frequently in the Temple, Mark 14.49.
and a religious observer of the Passover and other Festivals, Joh. 10.22. he
discoursed much of God, gave him thanks at his Meals, retired frequently for
private Prayer and Heavenly Solitude; he taught his Disciples to pray, and he
prayed with them; the Garden in which he was apprehended, was a sort of
Family-Chappel, or Oratory, whither Jesus was wont to resort, with his
Disciples, for the Exercise of their Family-Devotion, Joh. 18.1, 2.

In the Life of Jesus, we have a pattern of zeal for God and his Glory, tender,
and earnest, and constant; though pure from affectation, and from bitterness,
not transporting him beyond just, and peaceable, and charitable bounds. Careful
he was that God might have the glory of all that he said and did, Joh. 14.13.
he never showed himself so concerned as when the honor of God was at stake,
nor angry but when that was violated. This made him, who was meekness it self,
so sharply reprove those Monsters of Men, the Scribes and Pharisees, who made
bold to serve themselves of God, and made void his Commands by their
Traditions, Matthew. 23. therefore he seems transported at the profanation of
the Temple, the House of Prayer being turned into a Den of Thieves, Luke 19.46.
Joh. 2.15. he rejected the Devils proffer of the Kingdoms of the World, the
price of Idolatry, with holy indignation, Get the behind me Satan, Matthew. 4.10.
and he rejects Peter as if he had been another Devil, when he opposed the will
and the glory of God, Matthew. 16.23. Get thee behind me Satan, for thou art an
offense unto me, for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those
that be of Men.

So fervent and zealous was the piety of Jesus, it was unaffected, yet great
and constantly professed, not boasted, but unshaken; that was not imprudently
importune, and troublesome to others, but steady and even, and absolutely
conquering all opposition it met withal. To love God with all the heart, and
Soul, and strength, includes somewhat more than a right knowledge, or
honorable opinions of him; it implies fervor, and delight, and constant
resolution. Religious and holy Men, must put on a presence and greatness of
Mind, and not be afraid or ashamed to appear what they are, such as love God,
and desire, and seek, and delight in him above all things. Thus Jesus teaches
us by his Example, in which also, we see a Life of Godliness and Devotion, not
led in a Cloister, but (which is more perfect) in the World in a busy station,
where Godliness and Charity went hand in hand, and took their turns; and he
that was so zealous for God, was also useful and profitable to Men.

For secondly, In the Life of Christ them the greatest good they are capable
of, reconciliation to God, and Eternal Life. To collect therefore the instances
of his Charity, would be to recount all his Miracles, which St. John says, the
World could scarce contain the voluminous account of; 'twould be to recite the
story of his whole Life, which was one entire demonstration of good will, a
most useful and benign conversation. But to hint some particulars, He
exemplified his Charity by a free and obliging Conversation; accessible and
affable to all sorts of men, complyant with their Customs, and easy in his
demean toward them, so far as might consist with Innocence and Prudence. For
this frankness of his Conversation, he underwent the reproach of a Wine-bibber,
and a friend of sinners, Matthew. 11.19. And the supercilious Pharisees were
offended at this, that he accepted the Persons and the Invitations, and made
himself a Guest to Publicans and Sinners, Matthew. 9.10. If he were a Prophet
(say they) he would have known who touched him, for she is a Sinner. But our
Savior answered them, that the Physician is proper Company for the sick; that
he conversed with all sorts of men, because he sought the good of all; for he
came to seek, and to save, and to call to repentance, Matthew. 9.12, 13. Nor
indeed is it the property of Charity to be shy and estranged, morose and rigid;
but to be complaisant and accessible, and to please all Men, in all things that
are innocent and inoffensive. A good Man cannot indeed chose his intimate
Friends among the dissolute and profane rout; for what agreement has Light
with Darkness; but he is affable and courteous to all, and separates not
himself from their Conversation, unless in great Charity, by order of
Church-Censure, for the bringing a Sinner, by shame, to Repentance and
Amendment.

Again, Jesus full of good will and Charity, studied quietness, and to preserve
peace and order amongst Men. He espoused no Party, nor provoked any by busy
pragmaticalness; he would not be a judge or divider, Luke 12.14. Tender of
giving offense, he was gentle and mild in his reproofs, where the case would
admit of it. Why are ye fearful, O ye of little Faith, Matthew. 14.14. He both
taught and practiced Obedience and subjection to Government; that Piety should
not be a pretense to the discharge of Loyalty, but that Caesar have his rights
as well as God, Mat. 22.21. He paid the tribute of the Sanctuary, at the
expense of a Miracle, rather than he would give offense, notwithstanding he
might have held himself excused in strict right from that payment, Matthew.
17.27. He rebuked Peter when he drew the Sword against the Officers of the High
Priest, though it was to defend his innocent Master; and denounced upon that
occasion destruction to all that shall usurp the Sword without legal
Commission; They that so take the Sword, shall perish by it, Matthew. 26.52. Thus
he taught us by Example as well as Precept, to follow Peace, to study the quiet
and welfare of Societies, to do what in us lies to render Government easy and
prosperous; as a noble instance of Charity and good will to Mankind. Farther,
Jesus exemplified his Charity, and instructed ours, by that pitiful and
compassionate sense that he constantly expressed, of the Needs, and Miseries,
and Misfortunes of Men. He had compassion on the multitude, and healed their
sick, Matthew. 14.14. His Bowels were moved, when he saw the desolate Widow
mourning over her only comfort, then departed, and in his pity he restored her
Son to life, Luke 7.13. He wept over the City of Jerusalem, at the thought of
that desolation that was to come upon it, though as a just punishment for their
outrageous injuries against himself, Luke 19.41. much more was his tender
spirit grieved, and troubled for the hardness of their hearts, Mark 3.5. and
because they knew not in the day of their Visitation, the things of their
Peace. This is Charity like that of God; who is the Father of pities, and full
of Bowels, James 5.11. and such must ours be if we be his Children; we must put
on as the elect of God, bowels of mercy, be tenderhearted, and compassionate
one toward another, Colos. 3.12.

Nor did the Charitable Jesus only pity, but he relieved also the needs of Men.
His Charity set on work all his powers, and drew forth all his treasures for
the help and succor of the miserable. He went about doing good, Acts 10.38.
his very Garments were tinctured with benign influences; and all his Miracles
were works of Charity, demonstrations of his love; and he did these good turns
most readily and cheerfully, in the most obliging manner, and most profitable
kind. He gave Alms to the Poor, out of his small and precarious Revenue, Joh.
13.29. He relieved at once the bodily and spiritual wants of sick and sinful
Men; and taught us to judge our Charity by the good fruits of it, by our
readiness to every labor of love.

Again, the Charity of Jesus exemplified was of the right Stamp, not soon
angry, nor at all revengeful, but showed it self in meekly bearing affronts,
and forgiving injuries. When his Disciples would have fetched fire from Heaven,
to avenge the rudeness of the Samaritans; they mistook (as he tells them) the
Spirit of their Master, for he came not to destroy, but to save, Luke 9.55.
Therefore as all the contradiction and opposition of brutish men, did not alter
the sweetness of his disposition toward them; so when he fell into their
malicious hands, he endured their mockery and cruelties, without ever reviling
them, or answering again to their taunts and derisions, and when they put him
to death, he forgave the most ungrateful Enemies that ever were; he mildly
ascribed their wickedness rather to Ignorance than an obstinate malice, and
prayed for them to his Father; Father forgive them, for they know not what they
do, Luke 23, 34.

Thus the Holy Jesus is become a pattern to us of a busy and fruitful Charity,
full of good fruits, and of a meek, long-suffering, gentle and forgiving
Charity; that could no more revenge ill turns, than refuse to do good ones. And
this his beneficence and love to men it was universal; not confined to a Party,
to his Followers and admirers, but extending it self to all men; and to all
their needs. He did good to the unthankful and to the injurious; to those that
did him all the evil they could, and this good he was constantly ready to do,
for his Charity was fervent and unwearied; he sent none away ashamed that had
recourse to him for succor, but rather wondering at his kindness, blessing God
who had raised him up, and blessing him for so frank and great relief as he
bestowed on them. No opposition could make him give over his charitable
designs, and he pursued them with all manner of condescension as well as
industry; making himself a Servant, or as one that served; bearing the follies,
the prejudices, and the weakness of men, and denying himself his own liberty,
and ease, and times of refreshment; spending the day in charitable employments,
and redeeming time as he could from the night, and from sleep, for Heavenly
Solitude, which no doubt was very delightful to him that so perfectly knew God,
and the happiness of enjoying him; and therefore 'twas the greater self-denial,
to cut himself short in those divine pleasures, for the sake of doing good to
Men.

By this Example of Christ we learn, that it is more blessed to give than to
receive, that it is better to forgive injuries than to revenge them, that we
have no reason to except against any labor of love, and that true Charity
cannot be cold and indifferent; that it is insolent pride and folly to stand
upon punctilio's of place or prerogative, but that rather after the example of
Christ, he that is greatest should become servant of all.

Thirdly, Jesus has left us an Example of spotless Innocence and purity, from
all the defilements of the Flesh and the World; of the due governing those
desires and affections that respect pleasure and delight. John the Baptist put
on the habit of a Hermit, professed abstinence and severity, Matthew. 11.19. but
Jesus came eating and drinking, not forbearing the use, but the excess of
comfortable enjoyments. He neither retired from the World, nor yet ran eagerly
into the embraces of it; his conversation was grave, but not morose; he was
above the vanities and impertinencies of the World; but was not troublesome in
quarrelling and censuring such as were innocent and tolerable. He ever
expressed a mind full of the sense of a better World, and too great to be
allured or cheated with the gaieties of this. He with holy indignation rejected
the proffer of riches and honor, yea all the Kingdoms of the World, when his
Innocence must be the price, and God must be dishonored for them, Luke 4.6. He
chose not his pleasures and delights from sense, and the World, but from Reason
and Religion, from spiritual enjoyments and well doing. He lived upon the
Providence of God, and the benevolence of his Followers, who ministered to him
of their substance, without solicitude or complaining; though he had no settled
Revenue nor fixed abode; not so much as where to lay his head, Matthew. 8.20. Yet
he had a cheerful, generous, and hospitable mind in that mean condition, and
was better pleased in it, than Worldly Men are in their greatest affluence and
superfluities. His conversation was useful and charitable, savouring of God,
and Reason, and the Spirit, not of the World and Flesh. He chose too some
severities and hardship, fasting and watching, and self-denyals; not because he
needed them, but to show us the way of keeping the body tame and governable;
that it may neither clog and hinder, nor boldly interrupt the application of
our minds to God and things divine. From which Example we learn the true rules
and measures of Temperance, how we are to estimate, pursue, and use the
pleasures and delights of Life, viz. that in our settled judgment and fixed
choice, preferring the things of another Life before all the interests and
delights of this, and keeping a constant acquaintance and conversation with
those better things; we abstain from all that use and enjoyment, not only which
makes an Inroad upon Justice or Charity, but from that too which deadeneth and
palls our taste for Spiritual things, and abates our delight in them: Such
pleasures as make the mind soft, and feeble, and trifling, and leave a fondness
for, and awaken our passions toward this World, but cool and trash us in our
desires and pursuits of a better. Moreover, that we not only be cheerful and
contented in every lot, but that we daily contract our desires and Appetites,
and have our minds more free from importune and violent longings. And then (as
the consummation of the habit) that the sense of carnal and secular delights,
be swallowed up in the brighter and more gustful pleasures of Virtue and
Holiness. When we are crucified to the World, and almost wholly indifferent, as
to the delights of it; when we neither dote, nor long, nor fret, nor envy, nor
yet swell with hope, or seem ravished with enjoyment; but rather think meanly
of all the entertainments of this World, as having nothing agreeable to our
Heavenly Mind, nor worthy of a passionate regard. To this consummate State we
must be daily pressing forward, and judge of our safety by our approach to it,
viz. as the sense of Worldly delights cools, and that of Heavenly ones grows
and swells.

Fourthly, In the Life of Christ, we broken by the troubles and misfortunes of
Life, than softened by the enjoyments and pleasures thereof. He is become an
Example to us how to maintain our Resolution and Integrity; and to keep a due
decorum in the midst of great sufferings, or great fears; and not to be
vanquished by the frowns of the World, any more than by the blandishments and
allurements of it.

For Jesus was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs; he drank deep of
the Cup of Afflictions, being assaulted on every side; afflicted by God, and
persecuted by Men, and pursued by the utmost art and malice of Devils. He
suffered contempt, and contumely, and the blasphemous contradictions of
Sinners; their insolent mockeries and barbarous insults and triumphs over him,
as baffled and conquered: Save thy self, thou King of Israel, and come down
from the Cross, and we will believe on thee, Luke 23.37. and when he was not in
their hands, yet he had always reason to apprehend their malice, and to fear
their power. His condition was mean and friendless, and his Adversaries potent,
such as had persecuted former Prophets, and openly declared their hatred of
him; such as had the Government in their hands, and had used it against him, by
decreeing to Excommunicate those that should own him.

But in the midst of these his frequent Sufferings, and continual fears, he
maintained a firm Resolution, and a venerable decorum; and left us an Example,
that we should tread in his steps. He was neither fearless of evil, nor
stupidly insensible under it. When his Passion drew nigh, his Soul was
troubled, and sore amazed, heavy and exceeding sorrowful, Matthew. 26.38. Though
he refused not the Cup, yet he prayed, if possible, it might be removed, Matthew.
26.29. He resented the Hypocrisy, the Ingratitude, and Cruelty of his Enemies;
Many good works have I done, for which of these do ye stone me? Joh. 10.32. He
did not dare, and provoke their rage, but prudently avoided it, whilst
innocently he might do so. But he did not so fear the power of his Adversaries,
as to omit his duty; or to do any evil thing for the avoidance of it. He
resolutely professed and taught the truth, which they were not able to bear; He
encountered the errors and prejudices of the Age; and reproved the Vices of it.
He did not sooth or flatter any party of Men; but dealt plainly, and spoke
freely, and lanced smartly the ulcerated Hypocrisy of the Scribes and
Pharisees, that were the most potent and popular Faction. He would not shrink
from the truth, nor mince the matter, though they heard him with malice in
their hearts, and stones in their hands, Joh. 10.31. He would venture again
among them to raise Lazarus from the dead, though they had so lately sought to
stone him, Joh. 11.8. He would go up to the Passover, according to the Law,
though he fall thereby into the hands of the Chief Priests, who will be sure to
Sacrifice him to their rage.

When he was overtaken with evil, he did not struggle and complain; he was not
overborn and sunk with it; he endured all their taunts and reproaches, without
being discouraged; and when he was reviled he answered not. And he suffered
with undaunted Courage and resolution, and unbroken Patience, a violent,
shameful, and cruel Death. Nor was it lowness of Spirit that made him silent;
for he was not afraid to confess the truth to the last. But his Mind was
exalted above the impression of evil, by divine consideration, Faith in God,
and reverence of his Government. He knew the power they had against him was
from Heaven, Joh. 19.11. and he acquiesced in the equity and goodness of the
divine determination and disposal. Hence he maintained his Empire over the
Passions, free from the disquietude of anxious Fear, or the torment of
ouragious Anger, the smart of peevish Impatience, or the sinking load of
melancholy despair. He possessed his Soul in Patience, steady in the greatest
change of condition, as one that expected it, that was not mightily concerned
at it, that considered chiefly how he might adorn every Lot, and honor the
supreme disposer of it.

From whose great Example we learn, not foolishly and imprudently to provoke
Enemies, or to throw our selves into their hands, or bring our selves into a
state of suffering; but that we cheerfully take up the Cross, when God lays it
in our way, so as we cannot, with a safe Conscience, step over, or beside it.
We learn too, to consider the state we are in, and not to flatter our selves
with a constant immunity from the afflictions of it, to expect as Jesus did,
the hour and the assaults of the powers of darkness: At least always to
remember, that there is nothing unchangeable but God, nor constant but his
favor. That we ever mix with the considerations of this state, our lively
hopes of a better; for then only will these momentany afflictions seem light
and short, when the massy Crown of eternal glory is put into the
counter-ballance. That we learn to value our selves altogether upon our
interest in God, and in the World to come; that so we may neither inordinately
fear, nor resent the loss of such things as leave our greatest concern and
interest entire and untouched, and secure to us. That we may then rejoice in
our better portion, and be thankful to the donor of it, when he cuts us short
in the possessions and interests of this Life. Yea, that we rejoice in every
condition of Life, so far as it may administer to our Eternal Salvation; and
that we be upon our guard to do nothing, that is unbecoming the dignity we are
advanced unto by the grace of God and the expectations we have from him. That
therefore all our contrasts with the evils of this World, may be as
unpassionate as is possible; and we our selves as calm, unmoved, and generous,
as becomes the Heirs of a better.

We see that all the Afflictions of Jesus did not lessen him with God nor good
Men; no more can ours, if we bear them as he did. Nay he shone brightest in
suffering, by the Evidence he gave of a great Mind in a narrow Fortune, and an
afflicted State. So that we are invited to wish for his Portion, and to be in
his stead; rather than to pity him, or dread his condition. We see too that
though his sufferings were incomparably great, the divine strength and
consolations were sufficient for him, and the same God has promised not to lay
upon us more than he will enable us to bear, and we shall be ashamed to sigh
under our pettit burdens, if we consider how holily and composedly Jesus bore
those vast and heavy loads. There is also no provocation to anger, fear, or
impatience, which Jesus has not conquered; and thereby made it easy for us to
do so after him. For how can we complain of any portion, that is far less
bitter than that of the Son of God was. How shall we complain of God, if he
chastens us gently for our sins, and for our profit, that we may be partakers
of his holiness; when he so grievously bruised his own Son for our iniquities,
who himself was innocent and pure. Or how can we think much of any ill
treatment from Men, after that which Jesus met withal. Never any person
deserved so well from the World, never any suffered so barbarously from it. But
nothing can harm that does not provoke us; and we see from the Example of
Christ, and a multitude of his eminent followers of all conditions, that it is
both possible and glorious to surmount all the afflictions of this life, to
expect the changes and tempestuous Calamities of it, without anxious fear; and
to bear them, without murmuring and despair.

Fifthly, In the Life of Jesus, we learn of him to be meek and lowly, Matthew.
11.29. the Apostate Angels became such, by aspiring to be higher; but the Son
of God emptied and humbled himself, to the form of a Servant, to the portion of
Sinners, to the Death of the Cross; he made himself of no reputation, Phil.
2.7. He was not ashamed of the meanness of that state he had descended into;
nor did he seek to appear other or greater than he was. He sought not his own
glory, but the honor of him that sent him, Joh. 8.50, etc. When the people
admired his Works, he took care that God might have the praise of them,
professing that he had received all from the Father, who was greater than he;
that he could do nothing of himself but as the Father gave him commandment and
power. In his whole Life there is not the least passage that savours of
vainglory. He concealed his Works of Fame and Wonder as much as might be, and
laid restraints on the publishers of them. He would not permit his Disciples to
publish his glorious Transfiguration till after his Resurrection. And when to
fulfill a Prophecy he rode in triumph to Jerusalem, he was still a humble King,
riding upon the foal of an Ass, and going then to humble himself to the
shameful death of the Cross, Joh. 12.15. He disputed not the will of God,
whatever pains or condescentions were implied in doing or suffering it. He came
not to be ministered unto but to minister; and he yielded himself with courteous
condescension to all sorts of Men. He disdained not the poorest or the vilest,
nor stood upon punctilio's of state or distance; for he had taken upon him to
be the Servant of God, and a dispenser of his grace to Men. He stooped
therefore so low as to wash his Disciples Feet, the meanest office of a
Servant; and he did this to give us an Example, that we should learn humility
of him, Joh. 13.15. And as he was sweet and lowly toward all, and entirely
submitted to the will of God, so he could bear to be ill thought of, and evil
entreated, endured meekly the contempt and obloquy, that he most unjustly met
withal. He did not aggravate the affront, by suffering pride and self-conceit
to mix with his resentment of it, but mildly expostulated with those that
affronted him, in such sort as might convince and melt them: If I by Beelzebub
cast out Devils, by whom do your Children cast them out? Matthew. 12.27. so he
refutes the most blasphemous imputation of the Pharisees; who ascribed his
Divine Works to a Confederacy with Hell. He mildly censured persons that were
in a fault, if there were hopes to bring them to Repentance, and cast a
covering over their shame: Go and sin no more. And he that is without sin let
him cast the first stone, Joh. 8.7, 11. Thus was he at once free from any high
conceit of his own Excellencies, and from being a proud and censorious Remarker
of the defects and faults of others; gentle toward all Men, lowly in his own
esteem of himself, and a humble Servant of the will of God.

Now from this Example we learn, that true humility consists not in Satirical
Declamations against our selves; which are often rather the effects and
instruments of spiritual Pride: but to be humble, is to have a high veneration
of God, and a profound submission to him; it is to estimate and consider our
selves as absolutely depending on his free goodness; it is to ascribe all that
is good wholly unto God the Author of every perfect gift, and to call nothing
our own but our Folly and Sins; to be content to be disparaged and meanly
thought of; and to be willing to give to others that praise that is their due:
It is to be free from ostentation and vainglory, to be courteous and
condescending, to love to be concealed, to be modest and treatable, content
with a low station, and submitting to rule and government; to be moderate in
our designs, and calm in our pursuits, patient of disappointment, and candid
toward the faults and infirmities of our Neighbors. And all this because we
are self-diffident, and depend upon God, and acknowledge him to be all, and our
selves but Vanity and nothing.

And what temptation can we have to Pride, when Jesus was such a Pattern of
Humility? Never was there such Knowledge, Wisdom and Power in any Man; nor was
there ever any so full of the spirit of God, and yet he was meek and lowly: Who
was the Heir of all things, the desire of all Nations, the Consolat on of
Israel, the glory of the Gent^^ and whom the Seas and Wind, and ll things
obeyed, he having all Power in Heaven and Earth. What can we possess of
comparable value to all this? or what can we contrive or bring to pass,
comparable to the undertaking of Christ, and the great design of his Doctrine
and Miracles; of his Life and Death? But we have much more reason to be humble,
for whereas the great indowments of Jesus were not blemished with any fault of
his, we have nothing but folly and shame to call our own. Repentance is our
best Wisdom, and that is a conviction of Sin and Folly; and yet we are unsteady
in our Repentance, and frequently depart from our better purposes, and have
reason to blush and be humbled for so doing. Besides, it was the Wisdom and
Perfection of Jesus, that kept him from being cheated, or imposing on himself:
Pride is all error and delusion, but humility is truth. 'Twas humility that
made all his other excellencies illustrious, and rendered him at once highly
beloved of God and Men. And from his Example we learn, that he that humbles
himself shall be exalted; for we see Jesus for his humility exalted to the
right hand of God, and Crowned with glory and honor.

Lastly, As for particular relative self-denying Meekness and Humility; and he
that follows him thus far, will need no farther instruction; but may easily
become his own guide. He in whom Christ is thus formed, will certainly adorn
every relation, and excel in it. 'Twill be natural and easy for him to
conceive, what the holy, and charitable, the meek and lowly Jesus, would have
done in such circumstances, if he had entered into them; and then he has his
pattern to go and do likewise. Nor yet are we without the Example of Jesus for
our direction in several instances of this sort. His subjection to his Parents
is upon record; and his tender care of his Mother, even in his last
extremities, making provision for her on the Cross, by recommending her to the
care of his beloved Disciple, Joh. 19.27. His quiet subjection to Governors,
when unjustly prosecuted by them. His pious care for the instruction of his
Family, and training them up in Religion and Piety. But (as I said before) he
that has received the Spirit of Christ, will not fail to express it in every
condition; and he that acts by the measures of Piety and Charity, Purity and
Humility, shall discharge himself of the duty of every relation, and be a true
Follower of Jesus in it.

This therefore may suffice for an extract of the Life of Christ, as a perfect
unparalled pattern of all Holiness, Virtue, and Goodness; that which follows
is, That we apply the Light of this Illustrious Example, for our instruction,
in the absolute necessity, genuine nature, due extent, and admirable excellency
of true Holiness and the Christian Life.

CHAP. IV. The particular instruction we reap from the Life of Christ.
THE Life of Jesus considered as absolute necessity of holiness, in order to
the Vision of God; and that the undertaking of Christ for us will no farther
avail us, than as we are made partakers of his Spirit, and do copy out the
Excellencies of his Life. 'Twas a design worthy of the Son of God, to plant and
restore Holiness in the World, by his Doctrine and Example, by his Life and
Death, by all that he said and did to minister instruction and help thereunto,
and to bind it upon us with such sacred Obligations, and fast ties, as are not
easily to be broken. It is true, that Holiness in general, that Piety, Justice,
Charity, Sobriety in particular, do attract us with their native Beauty, and
proper luster; we cannot but discern the necessity of these Virtues to the
perfection of our nature, to the attainment of Peace and Happiness, to the good
and welfare of Society, and to the rendering us capable of enjoying God. But
because the voice of reason is too faint and low, and its representations too
languid and feeble to be much regarded, in the crowd and noise of impetuous
Lusts and Passions; and authority, example and custom, false notions and
prejudices, and levity of mind, oppose themselves strongly to the dictates of
Conscience, and endeavor to hide the shame, and abate the folly and absurdity
of Vice: Behold therefore God has spoken from Heaven to awaken our drowsy
Faculties; and sent his Son to show us the only way thither. We may now be
infinitely certain, that there is no entering into the glory of God, by any
other path, than that which Jesus walked in; that we can become the Children of
his love no other way, than by being conformed to the Image of his dear Son;
that we are not capable in this life, of any greater good than to have Christ
formed in us; for this was God's ultimate design in giving his Son to us; that
we through him might be made partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.3. What a
veneration for Religion, and love of Holiness should this consideration beget
in us; that it is the best thing we are capable of, the sum of all God's
merciful and kind intentions toward us; that best of Gifts, which the
charitable Jesus, by his Incarnation, Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, (by
all that he has done, or shall do for us to the end of time) does aim to
bestow upon us, to indow us withal. What a foolish and wretched judgment do we
then make, if in opposition to the Wisdom and goodness of God we prefer Lust
and Folly, and sensual delights? What divine Light and Grace do we resist and
despise; if we still abide in darkness, continue in sin? And how foolish,
false, and insignificant, are all our pretenses to be Christians; whilst we are
led by another spirit than that of Christ; and follow any Example sooner than
his? For this is to reflect upon the Wisdom of God, and to despise his Grace,
to reject his counsel for our Salvation, and to judge our selves unworthy of
Eternal Life.

Secondly, From the Life of Christ unerring Example; such as the World needed,
but never had before, nor should receive again. There can therefore be no
heights nor degrees of perfect goodness, which his Life was a stranger to. But
from his practice we learn, what are the things most agreeable to the mind of
God; and most effectually recommending us to his love. And from him we learn,
that the Essence of true Religion consists in spiritual holiness; that the most
perfect Life, is a life of Charity and well doing; that to lay out our lives,
and to be ready to lay them down, for the glory of God, and the good of Men;
this is the top and consummation of Religion. When the inspired Writers of the
Life of Jesus propound him to our imitation, they do not show him in a
Cloister, ranting at the World, and disdaining the Society of those that live
in it, as unclean or less holy: we hear nothing of ecsttasies, and raptures,
and passive unions with God in the fund of the Soul, of whippings and rolling
himself upon thorns and nails, and other severe Penances; of Miracles done in a
private Cell, merely for his own reputation, and to show how dear he was to God
upon the account of his austere and retired Life. After this sort, the Saints
of the Roman Church are propounded as patterns of the most Heroic Deeds and
perfect living. But if this be perfection, and the height of that Religion
which Christ designed to encourage; the holy Evangelists have quite mistaken
the account of his Life; which was (as they report it) an exact transcript of
his Doctrine: teaching us to seek perfection, by being like God in wisdom and
goodness. In a word, to practice all Virtue as we have opportunity, and above
all others to excel in Charity, to have our intentions and affections pure and
holy, and to value our selves altogether upon the interests of another Life,
but very little upon any advantage of this; herein consists the true spirit,
and height, and perfection of Religion, as it was taught and exemplified in the
Life of Christ. It does not then consist in a blind submission of our judgments
to unintelligible Mysteries; in a zealous adhering to a party, or in any
particular Mode of worship, much less in the pompous splendor of external
rites; in beautifying and enriching Altars, Shrines, and Images; in
distinguishing days and meats, in vows of obedience, in voluntary or imposed
Penances, in devout gestures, or any thing of that sort: in all which
unprofitable exercises, a man may be extremely busy and zealous; and yet not
transcribe any part of the Life of Jesus. And a Man may on the contrary walk as
Christ walked; and yet have little or nothing to do with the forementioned
matters. He accepted indeed the oblation, and the penitential affectionate
address of Mary Magdalen, when she anointed his Feet; Mat. 26.10, etc.
he vindicated the Woman and her deed; and taught us not rashly to censure the
devout persons, striving sensibly to express their inward fervent Resentments:
but at the same time he grants that Charity to the Poor is the most acceptable
and indespensible Offering, and in ordinary the better Test of Religion. As for
himself he went about doing good; and taught us by his Example that the Kingdom
of God is not Meats and Drinks, or any thing else, but Righteousness, Peace,
and Joy in the Holy Ghost: a pure, a charitable, humble, and godly Mind and
Life; without which nothing else can avail us, and with which in Sincerity and
good Degree, nothing else can be wanting to render us accepted of God, and
happy in his Favor. In short, if Religion were whatsome men make of it, the
life of Christ is very far from being an excellent Draught and Copy of it: and
on the other hand, if the life of Christ be a true guide in Religion, then it
will be found at last to be quite another thing than too many foolishly and
wretchedly take up withal.

Thirdly, From the Life of Christ height, and brightest luster. He has
required that our Righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees; even such of them, who not only pretended, but did indeed live
according to the strictness of their Sect, Matthew. 5.20. And he will take an
account of us what we have done more than others, and what approaches we have
made toward the Heavenly Pattern, the perfection of God, Matthew. 5.47, 48. If
you love them that love you, what do you more than others? Do not even
Publicans so? Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven
is perfect. To abstain from scandalous Crimes, is but the first Element of
Christian Life; if we had learned of Christ, Ephesians. 4.17, etc. Galat. 3.27.
Galat. 4.19. Phil. 2.5. 1 John 2.6.
we must not only put of the old conversation, stinking with corrupt manners,
but we must become new Men, and bear the Image of God in Righteousness and true
Holiness. To be Christians is to put on Christ, to have him formed in us, to
have the same mind in us that was in Jesus, to be led by his spirit, and to
walk as he walked. And that certainly implies more, than the forsaking of
Idols, and the grosser debaucheries of those that knew not God; it signifies
too, that Christians should be as conspicuously and eminently good, as those
miserable Pagans were notoriously and infamously wicked. That we be rich in
good works, filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are to the praise of
the grace of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 1.11. That we shine as lights before
Men, and become the Salt of the Earth; such Examples of all that is good, as
may restrain, direct, provoke, and influence others; season their Manners, and
preserve them from stinking.

Christ who has set us so admirable a Copy, will expect of us a proportionable
imitation; and he that walks in the flats of Virtue, upon the Borders of Vice,
that indulgeth himself in the utmost of what he judges may be innocent; does
not walk as Christ walked, who busied himself in the best things; chose what
was most severe toward himself, but most for God's honor, and toward others
most kind and charitable. He that barely studies to be free from those sins
that are clamorous in his Conscience, does not answer the design of the Gospel;
which has a farther aim, to render its Votaries more perfect; partakers of the
divine nature, and Heavenly minded.

CHAP. V. The Obligation and Assistance of the Example of Jesus.
HAving seen what instruction the Life of Christ contains, how it demonstrates
to us the absolute necessity of Holiness, the true nature and greatest
instances thereof. Let us now consider, what obligations to Holiness, and what
encouragement and assistance therein, is derived to us from this great
Exemplar, and admirable Pattern of the Life of Jesus. For

First, What else could be the design of God in thus giving his Son, not only
to be a Sacrifice for sin, but also an Example to us of holy living? What, but
to oblige us most powerfully and indispensably to be followers of him in the
Excellencies of his Spirit, and of his Conversation. God gave his Son to be the
Light of the World; not only by the Introduction of more excellent Rules of
Life, but also by the luster of a great Example; and his purpose and decree
was, that we might thereby be conformed to the Image of his Son, that he might
be the firstborn among many brethren, Romans 8.29. Therefore Jesus has
commanded us to learn of him, Matthew. 11.29. and he that says he abides in
him, ought himself to walk as he also walked, 1 John 2.6. the sum of our
Christian Profession and Duty, is to put on Christ, Romans 13.14. i. e. to
imitate the whole Body of his Sanctity; to bear the Image of the Heavenly, to
resemble our Lord and Master in the Excellencies of his Spirit, and in the
actions of his holy Life. And this was the end, not only of his Life, but his
Death too, he suffered for us, leaving us an Example that we should follow his
steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. His Blood was the expiation of our Sin; but his Death too
was a great Example of Self-denial, and Charity, of Constancy in the truth, of
resignation to God, of Patience and Meekness, and other suffering Graces; and
the design was to reconcile our wills, as well as our Persons to his heavenly
Father. It Is of great use to us to have a living Rule; an unerring Pattern of
the divine and happy Life. Such a Perfect Exemplar the World wanted, all that
had gone before having been blurred and blotted: the best of Men were Examples
of Vice as well as Virtue, and the Precepts of wise Men, though short of
perfection, were held for impracticable, because they themselves lived not as
they taught; the Wisdom of their Discourses serving but to reproach the folly
of their actions. Nor could Virtue plant and support it self by Philosophy and
argumentation; whilst Vice had got the reputation of custom, and the advantage
of mighty Examples. God therefore sent his Son from Heaven, to redeem men from
their vain conversation received by tradition, confirmed by the custom of their
Fathers; not only by laying down Rules and Precepts of a Divine Life, and holy
Conversation, but by setting a perfect, amiable, and inviting pattern of it.
Now he that has vouchsafed us so great a grace, has obliged us to use it; and
he that gave the Example wills us to follow it. Beside, since the Life of
Christ is but the transcript of his holy Precepts, our imitation is obedience
and duty; and if we neglect to walk as he walked, we at once renounce his
authority and despise his grace, and frustrate the design of his undertaking
for us.

But secondly, The obligation of so singular influence, and eminent advantage
to recommend and assist Piety and Goodness. For

First, In it the whole circle of our duty is represented, as possible, and
easy, and suitable to our Life and State. Jesus so conversed with Men, that
they after his Example might converse with one another. He propounded himself
to our imitation, as a Man of the same mould with our selves; in a Conversation
fitted to our circumstances, and complying with the weakness and necessities of
our state. His Life was Natural, Easy, Innocent, Useful, well consistent with
humane Society, and greatly advancing it. We cannot indeed arrive at his
spotless Purity; but we may Copy out his Integrity, his Constancy, his fervent
Devotion, and industrious Charity; he has shown us by his Example, that his
Yoke is easy, and his Commandments are not grievous. The Life he led, approves
it self to our Reason and Judgment, as fit for us; and therefore practicable by
us. It is not a Life of transports, and prodigious Sallies; there wants nothing
but a reasonable resolution and holy prudence to make us followers of him and
he has promised his Spirit to supply that to us; and therefore has in all
things chalked out a way for us proportioned to our strength, complying with
our needs, and suitable to our Capacities.

Secondly, In the Life of Jesus we discern the Beauty of Holiness, to attract
and invite our love and pursuit of it. How lovely, and with what majestic
Beauty did his Innocence and Goodness shine? How magnificent and generous did
his Charity, and his unshaken resolution; how amiable, decorous, and inviting,
did his whole Conversation appear? With what assurance of Mind, serenity of
affections, greatness of Spirit, did he discourse, and act, enjoy, and suffer,
pursue all his designs, and bear all that befell him. Who can consider his
demean in the hardest circumstances, even when opposed, reviled, and
persecuted, and would not wish to be in his case, and do as he did; who
acquitted himself so well in every point, and enjoyed so much of God in every
Lot? Instructions may gain the understanding, but such an Example possesses
our choice and affections; and draws the whole Man to follow willingly in those
ways that appear on all sides so beautiful and pleasant.

Thirdly, Every difficulty in our way is easily removed or conquered by looking
unto Jesus. Pride and backwardness to condescend, must needs be ashamed and
blush, and vanish; when we consider Jesus the Son of God, in the form of a
Servant, ministering to the needs of all Men, and humbling himself to the Death
of the Cross. Impatience at affronts or injuries, will no longer seem
reasonable or tolerable; than till you look unto the meek and patient Jesus,
and see him unmoved at the greatest Calumnies and Insolences; praying and
dying for the most outrageous Enemies. We shall cease to complain, and repine
under our hard fortune; when we bethink our selves that we are Sinners, and
that Jesus who was free from Sin, bore with perfect submission those heavy and
grievous loads, which God laid on him by reason of ours. The timorous and
bashful, the faint-hearted must be confounded, or else inspired with vigorous
resolution; if they but cast their Eye upon Jesus standing before the Chief
Priest; witnessing a good Confession before Pontius Pilate, hazarding his Life
frequently in publishing the truth, and shedding his Blood willingly for the
confirmation of it. For in all this we are to consider, that it is pride and
mistake of our selves that creates the difficulty of doing, or suffering the
will of God; we have reason we think to resent affronts, or to deny such
condescensions, or to complain, or to shift for our selves, and to be excused
from hazardous employment. And yet Jesus who was the most perfect and
excellent, the best of Men, and the Son of God, served God without reserve;
resigned himself to him without conditions; and by his Example has taught us,
that in such an entire surrender of our selves to God, we can only find our
Interest and our Peace. For

Fourthly, From the Life of Jesus, we are assured of the wisdom of being holy;
that when we chose and act as he did, we cannot be mistaken. He who was the
wisdom of the Father could not be deceived, nor deceive us; the Life that he
led must therefore be wisest and fittest, most agreeable to the nature of Man,
and most conducing to his Happiness. He perfectly understood the nature of
things, and the needs of Men; the real and appearing worth of all the
enjoyments of Life; and of what consideration all the afflictions of it are,
both in themselves and compared with that glory that shall be revealed. He
could have made the best of a prosperous state; yet he neglected the pleasures
of Life; he chose the Cross and the Afflictions of Righteousness; he preferred
the pleasures of Innocence and a good Conscience, and the enjoyment of God. The
reason was because his understanding was exalted above all the deceptions of
Sin and Satan; he saw through all the false Colors and disguises of the World
and the Flesh; and knew the real difference of things. He knew that Holiness is
Truth and Wisdom, and Perfection, but Sin the Error, Delusion, Ignorance, and
Folly.

Fifthly, The Example of Jesus is recommended to our imitation, from the
consideration of his love; for he that loved us to the death, could have no
other design, in giving us an Example of Life, but to oblige us to pursue our
own good; and to secure our greatest interests. The love of Christ constrains
us to confess the goodness of those paths he leads us in; let the World say
what they will, these will have the safest Issue; best secure our present and
our Eternal Interests. If Humility were not better than Pride, Charity than
Hatred, Mercifulness than Revenge; if indifferency to the World did not more
consult our Peace and Happiness than the grandeur and the affluence of it; he
that loved us so entirely as to lay down his Life for us, would not have led us
in such a way; and by his authority and love have obliged us to follow him in
it.

Sixthly, When we consider that Jesus was both God and Man; we must consider
the Life he led, not only as wisest and best, but as God-like, and as near to
Divinity as was possible. So that it is both our Wisdom and our Interest, and
our highest Dignity, the greatest Exaltation and perfection that we are capable
of, to put on Christ, and to walk as he walked. We are therein Followers of
God; we do what he did in our nature, or would do if he could enter into the
present circumstances of our state. We do that which has a tendency to exalt
our Minds into the nearest resemblance, approach and union, with the Divinity
it self.

Such is the Influence and Energy of the Example of Jesus; that (while we set
it before us) as we have an excellent pattern of the most noble and difficult
Virtues, so it represents the whole Circle of our duty, as possible and
natural, an easy, even and steady path and course of action; as Amiable and
Lovely, as reasonable in all its difficulties which Jesus had conquered for us,
as the wisest and best measure of Life, which the Wisdom of God and his tender
love has chalked out for us, and as the highest dignity and advancement of our
nature, whereby we become like God, resemble as much as may be the Heavenly
Pattern, and are partakers of the Divine Nature and Life.

CLOSE.
NOW the inference from all the Premises is this; That we run with patience the
race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus, Hebr. 12.2. That we suffer the
Divine Light of his Doctrine and Life to shine into our Souls, that we be
affected with the true Spirit of his Religion, and in love with his amiable
Conversation. That we study the holy Gospels for this end, that we may thence
receive the Light of Life; that being filled with admiration and love of the
fervent Godliness, and insuperable unwearied Charity of Jesus; his
condescending Humility, Peaceableness and Gentleness, his unshaken Resolution,
unvanquish'd Fortitude and Patience; and frequently comparing our selves with
this admirable Pattern, we may blush for our Nonconformity, and endeavor to
write more exactly after so fair a Copy.

Let this consideration have a place in all our self-reflections, whether we
have duly imitated and well represented, our dearest Savior; or have not
rather cast a scandal and reproach upon him. In all our deliberations propound
we him for our Example; and let us form our designs and prosecute our business,
as we verily believe he would have done. Let us always remember, that to be a
Christian is to be made like Christ; that to know God as he has declared him,
and to serve him as he did, this is the sum of our profession and substance of
our Religion. This is the saving knowledge of Christ to have the true Idea of
his Spirit and Life, continually directing and influencing ours: to acquaint
our selves with God, and with the true measures of Holiness and Righteousness;
to have our hearts affected with the Beauty and excellency thereof, and to
study to approve our selves unto God, after the Pattern that he sent us from
Heaven; according to the Instruction and Example of his well-beloved Son.

But what cause of reproof, of self-judging and humiliation is this, to the
most that call themselves Christians; and yet follow any Example sooner than
that of Christ; or else make heavy blots and blurs, whilst writing after so
fair and admirable a Copy. What a scandal is it to see how Christians mistake
and misrepresent their Master and his holy Religion; and what a fatal delusion
is it to think to reconcile contradictions that can never consist. That he who
calls himself a Disciple, a Follower of Jesus, should industriously conform
himself to the guise and custom of this World, should be led by the Examples of
Impudent Vice, afraid to abet forsaken truth and virtue; that the Disciples of
the Innocent and Spotless Jesus, should wallow in carnal delights, lead
sensual, vain and voluptuous Lives: that the Friend, and those that say they
have interest in the Merciful, Self-denying, and devout Jesus, should be
heaping up Riches by rapin and oppression, or by fraud and unjust gain, utter
strangers to bounty and works of mercy; or else ungodly and profane, or
trifling, cold, and formal Devotionists. These things can never consist; if our
tempers and our lives be not the transcript of the Mind and Life of Jesus, we
may call our selves what we please, but Christ will not know us; he will call
us Children of the Devil, if we bear his Image and do his Lusts and Pleasure;
and our judgment will be more severe, for taking upon us the name of Christ, to
dishonor and profane it. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk
in darkness, we lie and do not the truth, 1 John 1.6. If we walk contrary to
his Example we frustrate the design of his appearance, we reproach the Wisdom
of God, that sent us from Heaven this Light of Life; and if he had not come and
spoken to us, it had been far better for us; for then we had had no Sin, in
comparison of that heavy load of guilt that will sink and crush every ungodly
and wicked Professor of the Christian Name. But if we would adorn our
Profession, and honor the Author, and reap the Fruits of it, we must walk as
Children of the light, Ephesians. 5.8. or as we are exhorted, Romans 13.12. Let us
cast off the works of darkness, and put on the Armor of Light; let us walk
honestly as in the day, not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and
Wantonness, not in Strife and Envying; but put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof.

And that, (to enforce the Apostle's Exhortation with his own Argument) knowing
the time, Romans 13.11.
that now it is high time to awake out of sleep: for now is our Salvation
nearer than when we believed. That the time is coming, when the Members of
Christ shall be universally filled with his Spirit, and our Blessed Lord be
more worthily imitated by, and glorified in his Saints: is an Article of the
pious Belief, and hope of good Christians. The Prophecies concerning the
excellent effects of his holy Religion, have not yet had their accomplishment
in any tolerable sense; and yet are too plain to be any other ways evaded, than
as the Jews may equally avoid the Predictions, from whence we prove, that the
Messiah is already come. For it is not enough to say (with them) that our
selves are in the fault, that the Prophecies cannot be accomplished, and hinder
the production of that beautiful Issue, which Christianity (according to the
Divine Predictions) labors and travels withal. For those Prophecies are
express, that it shall be delivered of that happy Birth; and bring forth by the
Power of God. Who will set his hand to this work, and cause the Branch of
Righteousness to grow up; and cleanse the iniquity of his people, and cause the
Captivity of Judah and Israel to return; and bring them health and cure by
revealing unto them the abundance of peace and truth: Jer. 33.6, 7, 8, 14, 15,
etc.
For behold the days come; says the Lord, that I will perform that good thing
which I have promised; and this Prediction (as it follows) is sure as the
Covenant of the day and night, firm and irreversible as the Ordinances of
Heaven and Earth. This Epiphany of the Branch, and Reign of Righteousness,
Truth and Peace, the New Testament-Prophecies teach us to expect at the close
of the Christian economy; as the Consummation and finishing Scene thereof:
When Christ shall plead his own Cause against the powers of darkness, against
Sin and Satan which have hitherto reigned; and so break their Empire in pieces,
that it shall never be able to erect it self more.

And now to infer the Conclusion; this Salvation is nearer than when we
believed, Rev. 14.15, 18, 19.
the night of Pagan and Antichristian darkness is far spent, the Harvest of the
Reformation is already past, and we have encouragement to hope the Vintage is
approaching: when all the Grapes of Sodom shall be gathered, and cast into the
Wine Press of the wrath of God; when Christ shall entirely purge his holy
Religion from all depravation, and inspire all that profess it with the true
Spirit, and fill them with the genuine Fruits thereof. Hebr. 10.24.
Let us therefore consider our selves and one another, to provoke to love and
good works, so much the more as we see that day approaching. By a diligent
conforming our selves to the mind and life of Christ, showing forth the
Excellencies of his Spirit and Conversation, we shall prepare the way of the
Lord, and walk as those that look for and love his appearance. By this we shall
verify our Prayers, that his Kingdom may come; and confirm in our selves and
others the hope of its approaching. For when the Spirit that rested on Christ,
shall abide on the generality of his Followers, and his Life be manifested in
theirs, then shall our blessed Savior be satisfied concerning the travel of
his Soul, and glorified in his Saints. Then shall his Kingdom come (as we daily
pray) and his Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven, Amen. Even so come Lord
Jesus; for thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, for ever and ever.

FINIS.

