THOMSON THE GREAT KILLED, Or a Perfect NARATIVE OF The total Routing of the
Levellers near VVellingborough toward Rutlandshire, where were taken all the
whole party, with the desperate Death of Captain THOMSON, also his last Speech
before his Death;

Being a full RELATION of all the proceedings between His Excellency the L.
Fairfax and the Levellers* since his Excellencies advance from London, Thursday
May 10. to their Routing and surprisall May, 21.

With the particulars of that engagement, and the Prisoners taken.

Also his Excellencies the Lord Generals Letter to the Speaker concerning the
same.

Published by special Authority.

LONDON, Printed for George Roberts dwelling on Snow-hill. 1649.

Oxford May the 20, 1649.
THis morning as the General was going to the Church Capt. Moody brought a
Letter from Col. Reynolds, who was s^nt in pursuit after Thompson, wherein it
was signified that Major Butler being sent with a select party of horse to fall
into Thompsons quarters, he being gone from Northampton to a Town near
Wellingborough toward Rutlandshire, where he surprised all his party in the
Town, but Thomson mounted and got into a wood, where they found Thomson well
mounted, who being alone, yet rid up to our party desperately, shot the Cornet,
wounded another and retreated to his Bush, having also received two shots, when
they began again to draw near unto him, he charged again with his Pistol
and Tuck, Received another shot and retreated the third time that he came up,
for he said he scorned to take Quarter; Major Butlers Corporal had Reynolds
his Carbine, which being charged with seven Bullets gave Thomson his Deaths
wound. The Lieutenant of Oxfordshire troop, who joined with Thomson is
likewise taken, it seems he seized of the Magazine of Northampton, and the
Exoize money, and with thirteen men kept that walled Town in awe, a Town of
blew Character.

Yesterday the General, Lieutenant General and other Officers were very nobly
entertained in Maudli^ College at a great Feast, and afterward took their
degrees in the Schools, receiving great respects from the Vice chancellor; the
heads of the Colleges, and the rest of the University,

Your most humble Servant, J. R.

SIR,
I Thought it my duty, having received another pledge and token of the mercy
and goodness of God to this poor Nation, to give you a speedy account thereof;
when I came to Andover, after so tedious a march, ten Troops of the Mutineers
marched from Salisbury to Marlborow, from thence to VVantage, and to the end
they might get a conjunction of Col. Harrisons Regiment they lay all this day
between Abington and Oxford, at a place called Blagrave, expecting to have more
Troops come, but there came only to them Cap. Pecks and Cap. VVinthrops, and
marched all the day toward Abington, some of the Quarters being 22 miles from
thence; and when I came near Abington they were marched away, being in all
twelve Colors, toward Newbridge, where Colonel Reynolds, Major Shilburne and
others kept the Bridge, which they would have forced; but when they saw they
could not do it, they marched up the River and got over at a Ford near a mile
from the Bridge. Some three hours after they were gone I marched toward
Bampton in the Bush, and from thence to Burford, where, and in the adjacent
Villages we took (I think) almost the whole party; the particulars I shall
give you an account of (God willing) hereafter more exactly. Those Troops at
Salisbury of Col. Scroops Regiment did wholly reject their Officers, except one
Lieutenant, and two or three inferior Officers. Sir, I hope this is none of
the least mercies, I pray God you and we may make a good use of it, it will be
your glory and your honor to settle this poor Nation upon foundations of
Justice and Righteousness, and I hope this mercy will the more encourage you
to do so: for the poor people, how ever deluded by some cunning and turbulent
spirits, yet they may see you will improve your power for their good, and then
your Enemies shall be found liars, which I am confident you will: so I cease
your further trouble, and remain

Your most humble servant, THO. FAIRFAX.
Burford, May 14. midnight, 1649.
For the Honorable William Lenthall, Esquire Speaker of the honorable House of
Commons.
AN Account in general is already sent of the surprising and dispersing of the
mutinous Regiments at Burford; a more particular account thereof will also come
from the General very shortly, yet thus much in brief. That as they were
surprised in the very nick of time (when as one day more would have given them
opportunity to have joined with other Regiments: so it was very happy it was
done with so little bloodshed, there being but one of their party slain (who
fought it out to the last) and one of ours.

The first Horse that entered the Town were those under Col. Reynolds, the
Dragoons under Col. Okey, and Major Shelburne, with the Buckinghamshire horse.
The General brought up as a Reserve his own Regiment of Horse, and Col. Scroop
the Rear. Cap. Fisher was sent with a Troop of Horse on the further side of
the Town, where he offering to charge two Troops of the Enemy (who were
likewise in a posture to charge him, with their Swords drawn and Pistols cockt)
upon his advance, and offering them quarter if they would submit to mercy, they
all submitted but one, who discharged his Pistol, but did no hurt; (which two
Troops he brought to the General.) Cap. Packers Troop was very diligent, and
this is observable, that he had but one man who joined with this party, yet he
did engage himself to his Captain to be faithful, and it was his hap to take
Col Eyres, who was very earnest with him to let him go, but because of his
engagement to his Captain, he brought him prisoner to the General.

Yesterday Cornet Denn, and Cornet Thompson (brother to Thompson the great) was
tried at a council of war, and condemned to die. Denn has bought himself a
winding sheet, and is so sensible of his error, that he does not desire to
live; he does acknowledge the just hand of God upon him, and is putting forth a
Declaration to the world to show the wickedness of the design, and by what
means it was contrived.

There are between three and four hundred prisoners in the church, the rest
escaped in the dark; many of them are very resolute, and say (as the Cavaliers
used to speak) it is our day to day, it may be theirs tomorrow; others of them
are very penitent. The Soldiers that beat up their quarters had their Horses
and Arms for prize, and Crookback (who fought it out so stoutly) being
heretofore of Masseys brigade, had 30 li. about him when the Soldiers pillaged
him; they had frequent advertisement from their friends in London and in the
Tower, how to manage their business, and as some of them confessed) had promise
of money for the carrying on of their design; but more of this hereafter.

The General and the Officers are very weary, having never in all the time of
the former wars marched 45 miles in one day (in which the Foot went a great)
part) and to conclude the day to beat up quarters.

Two of col Harrisons Troops under cap. Peck^, joined with these men, and had a
handsome cudgelling with the rest, and are dispersed.

We had one Dragoon shot, and some wounded; Col. Reynolds made good Newbridge
with a small party of his own and Major Shilburnes horse, and parlyed with the
Mutineers, and forced them to ford the River about a mile below. Col. Reynolds
behaved himself very resolvtely both there and at Burford; more prisoners are
to be tried to day.

Burford, Wednesday May 16. 1649.

The General has sent a Warrant to all the Justices of peace in these parts
to apprehend all such of these Mutineers as have escaped in the dark, and to
secure their persons till they be brought to trial.

The Copies of several Letters sent to and from the Mutineers, since the
Generals advance from London.
The Mutineers first Letter to the General.
May it please your Excellency,
A Proposition has been made unto us for the service of Jreland with a
declaration of your Excellencies pleasure, that it was lawful for us, either
to consent or deny, for no man was to be forced. Although many of us were very
willing to put our lives in your hands for that service, it is a breach of
former engagements to suffer many of our fellow soldiers who could not go, to
be disbanded without a competent pay in hand of their Arrears to carry them
home, and enable them to follow their occupations, we perceive such a
representation of the business, has been laid before your Excellency,
rendering us so vile in your eyes, that the next news we heard was of forces
marching toward us to subdue us, which has put us upon an unusual yet a
necessary way, for our own preservation, least we should be distroyed, before
we could be heard to speak to relinquish our officers, and fly for our
present security, and now we do earnestly beseech your Excellency patiently to
hear us, and to take us under your protection. All that we require is the
performance of our Engagement made at Triplo-heath, and we shall promise never
to depart from your Excelencies Command in any thing which shall not be
contrary to the said Engagement, professing our selves very sorry, that we
should have no better Esteem in your Excellencies Judgment.

Subscribed by the Agents for Comisary Genesis Treton and Col. Scroops Regiment.
12 May. 1649.
Gentlemen,
I Have received a Letter from you of the 12th of the instant, among other
false suggestions, whereby I believe you have been abused, that is a mistake
and untrue surmise which you mention as an intendment to disband some of the
Soldiery of the Army, without a competent pay in hand of their Arreares, it
being never so thought, but otherwise taken care for, and put into as hopeful
and settled a way as could be devised. I had rather pretermit, than take notice
of your grounding this usual course you have taken, upon the marching of
Forces toward you to subdue you, when as some if not all of you, by your
disorderly precipitance into such an irregular way, the first and sole occasion
of marching with Forces. However, since you now desire to be heard and taken
under my protection, I have given way to Col. Scroop to receive you under
protection, and am ready to hear you in any thing concerning the engagement by
you mentioned.

May 13. 1649. T. Fairfax.

To the Officers and Soldiers of Commissary Iretons, and Col. Scroops
Regiments.
WE have received two letters from your Excellency, the one by the hands of
Major White, the other by Colonel Scroope, both which we have received with
thankful acknowledgement of your Lordships clemency toward us, and care over
us; the consideration whereof cannot but produce in us (unless we should be
very ungrateful) a more than ordinary respect toward your Excellency. And
that we may prevent jealouses subject to be begotten by misinformation, we do
confess that next unto the great disturbance which is likely to be the fruit
of these divisions, our second grief is that we should be forced to procure
your Excellencies discontent, which does appear unto us by the heavy charge
laid against us of Rebellion and disobedience; we do assure your Excellency,
that we have done no more than our Solemn Engagement did enforce us unto; this
is the testimony of our conscience in the presence of God, concerning our
Engagement. We do acknowledge our selves your Excellencies soldiers, who have
engaged our lives under your conduct through all difficulties, in order to the
procurement of peace of this Nation, whereof we are a part: But being lately
designed by lot to be divided and sent over into Ireland, for the prosecution
of that service which we think necessary to be performed, but looking back unto
our former Engagement, we find that we cannot in conscience to our selves, in
duty to God, in respect of this Nation, and our fellow soldiers, undertake
that service, but by such a decision as may be agreeable to our Solemn
Engagement, made at Triploe heath, June 5. 1647. where we did with one consent
solemnly engage one to another in the presence of God, not to disband nor
divide, to suffer our selves to be divided until satisfaction were given
according to a Council of the Army consisting of two Officers and two
soldiers of every Regiment, indifferently chosen, together with the General
Officers concurring; And being now departed from our obedience to you, because,
(according to our apprehensions) you kept not Covenant with us in performing
the engagement, we do promise not to harbor any evil thought, nor use any act
of hostility against you unless necessitated thereunto in our own defense,
(which the Lord prevent.) All that we desire (the searcher of hearts is our
witness) is that your Excellency would call a General Council, according to
solemn engagement, to sit once in 14 days at the least, according to an Act
made in the General Council at Patney. In the judgment of this Council
acquiescing, we will not refuse to give account of our proceedings; and we will
every man with cheerfulness return to our obedience, and submit to your
Excellency and the judgment of the Council, in all matters that concern us
as soldiers. This we beg earnestly of your Excellency to grant in respect of
your duty to God, this Nation, and the Army; that we may thereby recover our
peace, and procure the happiness of this Nation. Mhis is the desire of our
souls; if you deny this we must lay at your door all the misery, bloodshed,
and ruin which will follow.

May it please your Excellency,
IN our last, we gave you information that the Regiments were marched to
Abingdon, and intended to quarter there this night, but in our marching thither
we found them quartered at Wantage and in the Villages adjacent. We have had
some conference with them, and communicated your Excellencies letter, which is
to be communicated to them all to morrow at the Randezvous intended at Stanford
plain, near Farringdon, at ten of the clock, where Collonell Harrisons
Regiment had engaged to meet with them, as they said; and that there are the
agents of 6 Regiments with them, and are trusted for the managing of the
affairs of the whole; the chief thing they seemed to insist upon, is the
procuring a General Council, consisting of two Officers and two private
Soldiers of each Regiment, as is agreeable to the Solemn Engagement, by which
Council they said they will be included in matters to which that Solemn
engagement referres unto; and say that they were now justly put upon the claim
of the same, being commanded to divide or disband. There are many honest men
among them, and some too furious and impatient in their desires, and express
much dissatisfaction at the disbanding Colonel Hewsons men with a fortnights
pay, and that there was the like offered to them, if they would not engage for
Ireland; some spoke dissatisfaction at the proceeding against Mr. Lockyer, and
of the strict dealing with the prisoners in the Tower. They think themselves
much injured by reports, which they intend to declare for the King; if there be
moderate proceeding, the differences may probably be taken up, but certainly
there is nothing more probable to prove destructive then furious proceeding,
but we shall pray to God to direct your Excellency and Council in this matter
of such weighty concernment, and entreat that hostility may be prevented,
until all other just means indefectuall; we now hear that they remove
quarters from Wantage this night, and promise to direct us to their rendezvous
in the morning. We have no more at present to inform your Excellency, but that
we are your Excellencies humble servants.

We have given them some hint of the Declaration that was drawn to be printed,
if your Excellency have thoughts of it, for their view, we humbly conceive it
might do well to have it against too morrow.

May it please your Excellency,
WE the Officers of Col. Engoldesbyes Regiment being very sensible of the sad
disasters which are like to fall upon this Nation, by the distractions and
divisions which are at this present in the Army and People of the Nation; And
when we consider that the differences are amongst those which have always
fought under one Banner, in subduing the common Enemies of the Nation, which
Enemies we conceive are again ready to take the opportunity (by these our
differences) to involve this wasted and languishing Nation in a new War (if
God by his Providence do not prevent the same) and in regard that we are
likewise very sensible of the danger and calamities which threaten to fall upon
us, and the whole Nation (by reason of the irregular proceedings of those of
your Army, who have thrown off discipline and government (which proceedings we
do dislike) in case those divisions and breaches be not made up) we have
humbly addressed our selves to your Excellency, that in your wisdom, and with
the advice of your General Council, there may be no good way left unassayed,
in endeavoring the making up those wide breaches: And to that end we have here
presented to your Excellency such things as we conceive may very much tend to
accomplish the same, and likewise may conduce in taking away the occasion of
suspicion of such honest men as are persuaded that your Excellency nor the Army
will not endeavor the settlement of this Commonwealth, according to what your
Excellency and the Army have often declared, but especially in the Remonstrance
made at Saint Albans: And therefore we shall only set down these things
following, which in our apprehensions are of great concernment in the laying of
a foundation to the establishment of a Government of Peace of this
Commonwealth, as also to the composing of the differences now in your
Excellencies Army; to wit,

First, that so short and limited a time may be fixed, wherein this Parliament
shall certainly end, as may stand with justice.

Secondly, that this Commonwealth may be settled by an Agreement made amongst
the faithful People of this Nation: In which Agreement, we desire that
provision may be made for the certain, beginning and ending of all future
Representatives, and for the removing of Grievances.

These particulars we humbly conceive have a very necessary attendancy to the
settlement both of your Excellencies Army, as also to the well-being of the
whole Nation; we have therefore presented the same to your Excellencies serious
Consideration, further acquainting your Excellency, that our Regiment is at
present in a quiet and peaceable condition, and under good discipline, and that
we may keep them so, and prevent them from falling into those irregularities
that others are run into, and that we may give your Excellency a good account
of this Garrison, has been one of the grounds in offering the premises to your
Excellencies Consideration: All which we leave to the wisdom of your
Excellency, and subscribe our selves,

May 14, 1649: Your Excellencies most humble servants.

WHereas through Gods mercy a mutinous Party against the Army, and in Actual
Arms against the Peace of the Nation, whereby they are guilty of Rebellion and
Treason, are lately routed, and some of them taken Prisoners, the rest escaped
and fled, these are therefore to desire you to cause diligent search to be made
after those who have so escaped, whether they be found on Horseback or on Foot:
And also to cause hue and cry to be made after them, and such of them as shall
be found, to secure and in safe custody cause to be kept, either in Jail, or
otherwise, as shall be most fit for securing of them, to the end, for the
future safety of the Nation, Justice may be done according to Law.

Given under my hand and Seal the fifteenth day of May, Anno Dom. 1649. Tho:
Fairfax.
To all Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, High and petty Constables, and all
other Officers whomsoever.
After the apprehending of any Persons, by virtue hereof, I desire notice may
be given unto me with all convenient speed.



FINIS.

