Gerizim Election And Ebal Reprobation.

OR THE ABSOLUTE GOOD Pleasure of Gods most holy will to all the Sons of ADAM
specificated, Viz. To vessels of mercy in their eternal Election, AND To
vessels of wrath in their eternal Reprobation.

BEING An answer to a spurious Pamphlet lately crept into the world, which was
fathered by Thomas Tazwell.

Wherein the Texts of Scripture by him perverted are Vindicated, His corrupt
Glosses brought to light and purged, His Shuffling and Ambiguous dealing
discovered, and the Truth in all fully cleared.

By JAMES RAWSON Mr. of ARTS and Preacher of the Gospel at Hasilbury Bryan in
Dorset.

Romans 9.13. Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated, v. 18, Therefore has he
mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens.

August. Super Johannem, lib. 3. cap. 161. Quare hunc trahat and illum non
trahat, noli velle judicare si non vis errare.

London, Printed by John Owsley, for Henry Shephard, and are to be sold at his
shop under St. Swithins Church in Canning street near London-Stone. 1658.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE And truly Noble Lord, ALGERNON Earl of Northumberland,
Lord of the Honors of Cockermouth and Petworth, Lord Percy, Lucy, Poynings,
Fitz-pain, Bryan and Latimer; Knight of the most Noble order of the GARTER.
Right Honorable,
I Am no pretender to that threadbare Apology of the importunity of friends, in
the committing of this worthless nothing of mine unto the press; for had I
hearkened to some, this had never come into the light, so inconsiderable is he
that bears the name of my Antagonist, though, (as I am ascertained) one of
greater eminency shrowds himself under my nominal adversaries wing, and yet
has not the confidence to appear in public.

But whosoever it is that took up the Gantlet, since it is ^lear that the Holy
Truths of God are by him stricken at through my sides, and that many poor
deluded people are seduced by his plausible miscarriages; I could not do less
in justice and conscience, then to show my self in public, both for the
vindication of the cause of God, that it may not suffer by my silence, and that
I may in some measure undeceive the lightheaded, tottering and unstable
people. It Is very true, I was decoyed into this engagement, there being only at
first desired of me to write down my resolves unto certain Positions, for the
private satisfaction of some staggering persons; which being rudely because
suddenly conceived and drawn up, not having time to clothe that Embryon in any
curious dress, my adversary by subtilty seiseth upon it, and after a twelve
months travel brings forth rudem indigestamque molem, a misshapen answer unto
(some part only of) my resolves, and steals it through the Press.

Now because I was surprised in that, I held it needful to vindicate both my
self and it, which howsoever in the outward accoutrements it be ragged and
torn, yet for the matter of it I doubt not but that it has truth to support it.

But yet alas! who am I that I should adventure to undertake this task, being
less then the least of all the Saints, and especially seeing the subject matter
thereof is of so great concernment? The well is deep, and my fathoming is but
shallow, I must confess I am so low a man in the esteem of the world, and so
obscure every way, that I fear the truth may sustain some loss through my
weakness; my only hopes are that that God who begun that good work in and by
me to the satisfaction of a few, will now perfect that work which he has begun
to the resolving of others.

And whereas custom has so far prevailed for the dedication of Books to some
noble Personages, my next hopes are that your Lordship will be graciously
pleased to honor me your unworthy servant so far as that I may shelter my self
under your Honors Patronage. And I do the rather take hold of this occasion
upon this ensuing consideration.

Right Honorable, Twice have I had a large experience of your goodness and
bounty in the settling of me in the Parsonage of Hasilbury Bryan, first in
recommending me to the Committee of the County upon the delinquency of the
incumbent, and afterward upon his death by the free granting of me your
Lordships Presentation thereunto, notwithstanding the interposition of some to
the contrary; hereby freeing me from many of those snares, wherein many of our
coat are (in these corrupt times) very much entangled: and hitherto I had no
opportunity to give any evidence of that thankfulness I owe unto your Lordship.
I know it were injustice in me to smother it, for, si ingratum dixeris omnia
dixeris. Neither could I so satisfy my self, in bare expressions, and that in
a private manner, to testify a thankful acknowledgement, unless I did withal
set the same upon record; that as this poor tract of mine passes abroad in the
world, it may stand up every where as a public testimony of my private
obligations unto your Honor. And however I am confident you take no pleasure
to have your goodness published, but that you are rather satisfied with the
peace of a good conscience then with the gaudy outside of specious Encomiums,
yet it becomes an ingenuous spirit to profess how and by what hand mercies are
reached forth unto him. God make me truly thankful to him for his good
providence over me herein, and for all other his mercies toward me.

And I could heartily wish, that all the world might understand your noble
disposition and Christian conversation in the midst of your worthy family, how
you make your self a pattern unto them in godliness and honesty, both in
public and private, that so every man might be provoked by your gracious
example, and therein as in a glass behold how immeasurablely you exceed the
painted sepulchers of this our age, both in reference to God, in giving him the
honor due unto his great name; as also in reference to man, by a distributive
justice rendering to those who have a dependency on your Lordship according to
their deserts.

But I must withdraw, lest that in setting forth your praises I derogate from
your worth, which deserves the pen of a ready writer to advance it to the
height. My Honored Lord, I hope and humbly crave, that your Lordship will be
pleased to accept this small and simple present, as a signal testimony of that
great observance and thankfulness I owe unto your Honor, professing my self so
deeply engaged, that I shall be ever studious how I may do you any faithful
service in the Lord; which whiles I am wanting in any other means of
manifestation, my supplication shall be at the throne of grace, to grant you
length of days, continuance in and increase of all true honor, and comfort
therein, amidst all the shakings of this present evil world; and the crown of
glory in that world that is to come: which shall be the daily prayer of,

My Honored Lord, Your Lordships humbly devoted, as by duty thereunto most
Obliged James Rawson.
From my Study in Hasilbury Bryan.
The Epistle to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Cannot do less then give thee an account how this whiffler has dragd me on
the stage against my will: It was not my ambition (especially in this
censorious age wherein we live, and at best privy to mine own weakness) ever to
have appeared in Print amongst a crowd of such learned writers, I might perhaps
have gone for somewhat, when as now my nothingness will be discerned. But the
occasion of it was this. About two years since, at what time this Pamphleter
had a meeting place in the parish of Whitchurch commonly called Cuckolds-pit,
where most Lords days diverse of that Parish and of other places adjacent came
to hear his teachings: He had then Proselyted diverse of Milton Abbis, (where,
amongst others I was one of their weekly Lecturers) to the receiving of his
crude dictates, and many were dipped by him; who having sucked in and digested
that venom of rebaptization, easily then might he persuade with them to
ingurgitate any of his other principles. So that he adventured to tender to
them eight positions, which I have caused to be placed at the end of this book,
which they likewise were to receive from him as so many necessary truths: they
were at a stand as unsatisfied what to do. But one who was indeed a wel-wisher
to Religion, and an honest man, took a copy of those Positions and brought them
to me to Hasilbury, and desired my opinion of them; which when I had read I
gave him my thoughts of them severally: But then he further desired of me, that
I would deliver my judgment of them in writing, which within 3 or 4 days I
did, and gave to him the rough draught which I at first did make, having no
other copy thereof in mine hands, (a particular whereof you have affixed to the
end of this book subsequent to his Positions) which when he had received, he
communicated it to the fraternity at Milton who were Tazwels constant and
confident hearers; which when they had perused, their former hesitation did
amount unto a flat opposition against his Positions, and then they began to
decline his teachings; which he perceiving, and being informed of those papers
of mine, he came to Milton among his old disciples, and desired to have a copy
of those papers, which at last he obtained, and a twelve month after about the
beginning of December 1656 sent me one of his printed Pamphlets; I was (I must
confess) at the first sight thereof amuzed and amazed, not well resolving what
to do, as to what was past, nor as to what was to come. For that which was
past, I mean as concerning my rash and rough draught of answer to his Positions
in so short a time, not having had leisure lambere foetum, or seriously to
revise what I had so suddenly written, so that I saw my self wonderfully
surprised by a rash-braind man, in his exposing that to public view, which I
had only drawn for the satisfaction of private friends at their earnest
importunity; And for what was to come, I was in a long debate with my self, and
sought the advice of diverse worthy friends, whether I were best to undertake
the answer to that Pamphlet yea or no, wherein my Arguments were pressed pro and
con, and the result of all was not to leave it unanswered, 2 Cor. 9.10. Psalm.
8.2.
both in respect of others, and likewise in respect of my self; so that now
jacta est alea, I have both undertaken and gone through with the work through
his help alone that ministers seed to the sower, and that out of the mouths
of babes and sucklings has ordained strength; 1 Samuel 2.6.
and so it seems God would have it to be thus, but that it pleased God (who
kills and makes alive, brings down to the grave and raises up again) to put a
rub unto my procedure by visiting me with two dangerous sicknesses, 2 Cor. 1.9.
in both of which I conceived that I had the sentence of death in my self; but
it pleased his goodness and mercy to deliver me from both, in whom I likewise
trust that he will yet deliver me from some troubles I lie under, howsoever, I
do humbly and heartily beseech that good God, who has so far enabled his poor
potsheard, his lump of clay, to wade through those unfathomable mysteries, that
he would make this worthless nothing of mine serviceable for his own glory, for
which it was mainly intended, and instrumental for the peace, joy and comfort
of his own people; and that withal it may put some Remora, that this corroding
gangrene of such unsavory Positions may spread no further among the heads and
hearts of poor seduced people, Zeph. 3.9. Zach. 14.9. Ephesians. 4.3.
but that the Lord may turn to the people a pure language, that they may all
call upon the name of the Lord, and serve him with one consent, that so the
Lord may be one and his name one, and that all that belong to him may endeavor
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; which shall be the daily
prayer and endeavor of

Your humble servant in the work of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. JAMES
RAWSON.
Hasilbury this 2 of September. 1657.
To the READER.
Friendly Reader,
I Must ingenuously confess, that as my too much reflecting on my own credit,
and therein so far seeking my self, did in part impose this task upon me, as
thinking it below me to be knocked down with the jaw bone of an ass, Judge.
15.16.
so my too much slighting of the work when it was upon the wheel, (as in
reference to the inconsiderableness of my nominal Antagonist) unavoidably
occasioned many overslips, not only in the structure and polishing of it, (my
thoughts and studies being otherwise diverted, through extraordinary acts of
divine providence) but also when it was grown up to that bulk you now see it,
and that it was committed to the hands of the Stationer to pass it to the
Press, there likewise it groaned under diverse imperfections: for partly through
the illegibleness of my hand, being overhasty in that work, and partly through
the inadvertency of the Composer, I having no leisure to afford my personal
attendance at the Press. And besides, my directions not being observed with
distinct Characters as I appointed, these have necessitated some confusion in
the tract, and caused it to swell to this ensuing excrescency of Errata's,
which if the Reader please to correct with his pen before he undertakes the
reading, it will make the sense more intelligible, which else in many places
will appear little better then nonsense. As for instance, page 25. line 6. it
runs thus, If you were well put to it, you would find more difficulty in the
baptizing of Infants, which being corrected should be thus, If you were well
put to it, you would find more difficulty in your proof by precept for the
baptizing of women, then we shall for the baptizing of infants. And one caution
more I desire to add, viz. that in the reading there be not sometimes a
mistaking of that which is Tazwells for mine, which yet I hope the sense will
direct the understanding Reader to, for else it is in many places not
distinguishable either by difference of Characters, nor by any other eminent
mark. These things thus premised, Consider what I say, 2 Timothy 2.7.
and the Lord give thee understanding in all things,

J. R.

The ERRATA.
PAge 1 Line 15. for ingenious, read ingenuous. p. 5. l. 36. for grave, r.
grand impostor. p. 12. l. 16. for r. and. p. 15. l. 20. me, r. we. p. 17. l. 31
for delivered, r. continued. p. 18. l. 12. theirs, r. yours p. 24. l. 22.
equipend, r. equipond. p. 25. l. 6. after difficulty in your, r. proof for the
baptizing of women then we shall for. p. 27, l. would, r. wave. p. 27. l. 15.
Islington, r. Osmington p. 31. l. 9. peribis nunquam, r. redibis nunquam, p.
41. l. 11. Faswell, r. Tazwell, p. 41. l. 29. objecto, r. adjecto, p. 44. l. 5.
fumbles, r. jumbles, p. 45. l. 24. eternol, r. external, p. 57. l. 32. metti,
r. memento. p. 59. l. 6. learners r. hearers. p. 61. l. 29. sent r. Close. p.
62. l. 4. me, r. one; p. 63. l. 5. to wit, r. to which, p. 65. l. 29. certify,
r. rectify. p. 67. l. 19. I curtail, r. I shall curtail, p. 67. l. 25. back r.
bare. p. 84. l. 11. for which, r. but has been, p. 87. l. ^. for a heavenly
writ, r. oh heavenly wide, p. 92. l. 3. for refused, r. refuted, p. 94. l. 15.
for much, r. may, p. 109. 11. Comma at understood, and at consequently, and for
yet r. not, p. 110. l. 27. for that, r. the, p. 115. l. 20. for affectati, r.
affectation, p. 121. l. 40. then thus sin, r. than thus to sin, p. 133. l. 40.
for rate, r. rank, p. 139. l. 18. for first, r. force. p. 139. l. 34. for child
in infancy, r. child dying in infancy, p. 150. l. 17. for understanding, r.
undertaking. p. 150. l. 24. for the word, r. your words, p. 251. l. 35. for to
r. the p. 152. l. 14. for had preached r. had not preached, p. 153. l. 38. for
the, r. that, p. 156. l. 25. for those, r. these, p. 156. 36. for for, r. from,
p. 162. l. 30. for infective, r. infective quality. p. 169. l. 5. for rom, r.
from, p. 169. l. 15. for proposition, r. position, p. 197. antiquestion 12. to
relate to Tazwels 6 Querie, p. 203. l. 31. for indiscriminate r.
indiscriminable, p. 205. l. 8. for sin, r. him, p. 206. l. 44. for most, r.
mostly, p. 208. l. 10. for truly, r. only.

Thomas Tazwells POSITIONS.
GOd did in all eternity before any thing was brought forth,

God also saw some men embracing this means, and some rejecting

So God saw some men rejecting the means of salvation, continuing

Those whom God has elected unto life and salvation, shall never

Those whom God has reprobated to condemnation shall never

All men are sometimes convinced of sin and the state of nature,

Christ has redeemed all men from the first transgression, and Adams sin, yet
the pollution of that sin is upon all men, but not the condemnation also: Adam
did not fall for want of power, but for consenting to Satan, not improving the
power.

Christ has laid his life, and shed his blood for every man in the

The first answer to Tho. Tazwells POSITIONS.
WE cannot but wonder that the Grandees of this Nation have seemed, as Acts
17.30. to wink at the spronting Errors of these times, and not rather to have (
Cant. 12.16.) killed the foxes while little, and ( Esa. 14.29.) crushed the
serpent in the root; for doubtless they in their grave wisdoms do prudently
foresee that such Meteors or Ignes fatui are more easily suppressed by slightings
and contempt then by strength of opposition; neither will they honor the
broachers or fomenters with any condign punishment, lest they should unjustly
glory in a pretended persecution, and so their rabble might the more increase
under affectation of singularity; for surely it is very visible to all exact
observers, that those who were the prime promoters, incendiaries, and blew the
coals first of these strange opinions, they have many of them either withdrawn
from the heat of the contest, and deserted the cause, or else have changed
their judgments, or otherwise are so divided amongst themselves, that many of
them know not whom to follow, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, but leave
their Conventicles to be gulled and deluded by the dregs of men, such as
wisemen would disdain ( Job 30.1.) to have set with the dogs of their slock, an
evident symptom that their kingdom is of no long time for standing for Matthew.
12.25. If a kingdom, etc. and if Satan cast out Satan, etc.

What particular opinions these fanatic spirits do maintain, (besides
rebaptization) I have been hitherto blessed from entering into their secrets (
Genesis 49.6.) until this week a friend of mine presented me with a dish of their
crude and unsavory Positions, no better then Coloquintida. That I may well say
of them mors in olla (2 Kings 4.40.) death is in the pot; but I conceive it
well bespeaks what qualified persons they are from whence they come, Similes
habent labra lactucas, like lips like lettices.

They dropped I believe from the pen of a younger brother in profession; so that
I resolve to wink at small faults; and though the ill digesting and composing
of them will not deserve a Scholars eye, much less answer; yet because (if it
be possible) that the Author may not further befool himself, or further delude
his over credulous proselytes, and lead captive (2 Timothy 3.6.) silly women laden
with sin, I will draw a line of confutation over his more remarkable Errors,
and willingly pass by his smaller faults of incongruous or improper expressions.

First, I do consent that the most holy and high God, from all (not in)
Eternity, by one sole and single act did see all whatsoever he purposed to do,
or permitted to be done by any of the creatures he intended to create; for else
he could not be Omniscient, Omnipresent, Infinite and Eternal.

But whereas it is said;

That God saw some men embracing the means of salvation, and those he elected
in Christ, from the foundation of the world to everlasting life: this is so far
from soundness that it is flat Pelagianism, an old Heresy exploded forth of
the Church for many ages since; by which it must be concluded, that the eternal
decree of Gods unchangeable election, must be dependent on the intervention of
man's liberty of willing and working; but no proof from Scripture brought to
evidence it, nor appearance of any color of reason. Whereas the Scripture when
it speaks of election, makes it to be altogether independent on the creature,
or from ought at all wrought by or in the creature, but wholly resting for the
ground thereof in the bosom and holy will of God himself; and therefore it is
called, Ephesians. 1.5. the good pleasure of his will, and Ephesians. 1.11. the purpose
and counsel of his will.

Nay so absolute and irrelative is this decree of election from any thing out
of God besides his good pleasure, as to be any motive or incentive for which
God elects, as a meritorius or a procuring ground or cause of it, that even
Christ himself is excluded, as for whose merit man should be elected, and
therefore we are said to be elected in Christ, not for Christ.

But because Socratical discourses are not so convincing, I shall produce some
irrefragable Arguments, to which if the adverse party shall give any the least
color of answer to satisfaction, then I shall say, as they believe, that
learning is good for nothing but to puff men up, and gull the world; but till
that be done (which I am certain will never be) I shall bless the God of my
salvation, who (Ephesians. 4.8, 11.) has given such gifts unto men.

1. Arg. If the rise of our election be grounded in the free grace of God, then
it is not upon Gods foresight of man's embracing of the means of salvation: but
it is founded on the mere mercy and free grace of God: therefore not upon the
foresight of the embracing of the means. The first proposition or major, is
unquestionable, for that there is but one cause to produce the effect: The
second proposition or minor, viz. that our election is founded on the mere
mercy and free grace of God, see for proof hereof, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. The Lord thy
God has chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, the Lord did not set
his love upon, or choose you, because you were more in number, etc. but because
the Lord loved you; where the single love of God is pitched upon as the cause of
their election, exclusively from any other outward causes. See further Deuteronomy.
10.15. Matthew. 20.15.21. Luke 12.22. Romans 9.11, 18, 21. Ephesians. 1.5, 11. 2 Timothy
1.9.

2. Arg. If the Patriarch Jacob was elected merely out of grace, without any
respect had to any of his faith, works, or use of means, then all others are
likewise so elected, for there is the one alike motive for the election of all
as of one.

But Jacob was elected merely out of the good will of God, without any respect
to faith, works, or the use of means, at least for the moving of God to elect
him; Therefore all others are so likewise elected.

The minor proposition is confirmed out of Romans 9.11. for the children being
not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God
according to election might stand, not of works, but of him that calls, It
was said, the elder shall serve the younger.

3. Arg. If the decree of election be absolute without any respect had to
faith, works, or means. Then God did not elect upon a foresight of the
embracing of the means: but the decree of election is absolute, etc. Therefore.

See for proof, Romans 9.11. Romans 11.5, 6, 7. Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 11. Matthew. 20.16.
and 22.14.

4. Arg. If faith and works be the fruits and effects of election, then they
are no ways causes of it, for which God should elect; but they are fruits and
effects, Acts 13.48. as many as were ordained unto life believed, Ephesians. 2.4,
7, 8, 9, 13.

5. Arg. If our foreseen faith, works, or embracing of the means, were the
cause of our election, they should be likewise the cause of our vocation and
justification: but the later is false, therefore the first. The major is proved
by that undeniable axiom.

Quicquid est causa causae est causa etiam causati, That which is the cause of
a cause, is also a cause of the thing caused (i. e.) of the effect.

The minor is proved, 2 Timothy 1.9. and Ephesians. 2.8. Romans 3.24. justified freely
by his grace.

6. Arg. If our election were dependent on man's embracing of the means, then
these absurdities would follow.

1. Then the will of God should be moved and determined by an external cause
(i. e.) the first cause should be ordered and guided by the second, and thereby
the first is made the second cause and e contra; which is against the rules of
all Philosophy and Divinity.

2. God hereby is supposed to be capable of passion, (i.e.) when thus moved,
but God is altogether immutable and impassible.

3. Then there should be somewhat in the creature out of God, before, greater,
and better then God, because that every cause is before and better then the
effect.

4. If there might be imagined to be any thing in the creature which might move
God to the decreeing or appointing of this or that, then it would follow that
the actings or issues of things have not a dependence upon the decree of God,
contrary to Iam. 3.37.

5. Then man might have just cause of boasting in himself.

6. What then would become of children dying in infancy before they had the use
of faith or works, or any embracing of the means, and which never were to have
a being to act? therefore they were never to be foreseen.

For the third Position, That God saw some men rejecting the means of
salvation, continuing in sin and unbelief, those he reprobated to everlasting
destruction: But this has the like unsoundness in it as the former of
election, there being no other ground or reason assigned for it, either of sin
or unbelief, or rejecting of the means, but the mere good pleasure of Gods most
holy and righteous Will, who will do with his creature what he will do, neither
can any expostulate, why have thou done thus? Esa. 45.9.

It is true that sin and unbelief, and the rejecting of the means, are just
causes why God decrees such persons to hell and eternal torments, but yet not
the causes of their reprobation; that is solely and singly in the good pleasure
of his Will, Ephesians. 1.5. which I prove by these Arguments.

1. Arg. That which the holy Ghost in the Scripture ascribes unto the sole will
and good pleasure of God, that we are not to assign other causes to: But the
Scripture assigns reprobation solely to Gods will. Therefore. For proof of the
minor proposition see these texts, Romans 7.18. whom he will he hardens. ver.
20, 21. Nay but O man! who art thou that replyest against God? shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has not the
potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honor
and another unto dishonor? ver. 22. What if God willing to show his wrath, and
make his power known, endured with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath
fitted (or made up) for destruction? Matthew. 11.26. Even so O Father, for so it
seemed good in thy sight. Matthew. 10.15. Is it not lawful to do what I will with
mine own? ver. 16. Many called, few chosen. Prove. 16.4. The Lord has made all
things for himself, yea even the wicked for the day of evil. Romans 9.11, 12, 13.
for the children being not yet born. ver. 17. for this same purpose have I
raised thee.

2. Arg. That which is the efflux and consequent of Reprobation, cannot be the
cause of it: But sin, unbelief, and rejecting the means is the efflux and
consequent of Reprobation. Therefore.

The major is as clear as the sun. The minor proposition is proved from these
texts, Math. 11.25, 26. I thank thee father, etc. for so it seemed good in thy
sight. He hid those things not outwardly but inwardly.

Ioh. 6.36, 37. Christ to the Capernaites, I said unto you that ye also have
seen me and believed not: all that the father gives me shall come to me;
signifying that they are not given to him of the father, and therefore
reprobated. Ioh. 8.46, 47. Christ to the Pharisees, If I say the truth, why do
ye not believe me? he that is of God hears Gods word, ye therefore hear them
not because ye are not of God, (i.e.) ye are reprobates, Ioh. 10.26. Ye believe
not because ye are not of my sheep (i. e.) not of the number of my elect, Ioh.
12.39, 40. Of the whole company of the Jews; Therefore they could not believe,
because Esaias said, he has blinded their eyes and hardened their hearts, viz.
God according to his decree, Romans 9.18. whom he will he hardens, and ver. 33.
Behold, I lay in Sion a stumblingstone and rock of offense. Romans 11.7, 8. the
election has obtained it, the rest are hardened; for God has given them the
spirit of slumber etc. 1 Pet. 2.8. which stumble at the word, being
disobedient, whereunto also they were appointed.

3. Arg. If sin and unbelief, and rejecting of the means of salvation, are the
only causes why God reprobates any, then there is no such mystery in the
decree of reprobation, neither are Gods ways herein so unsearchable and past
finding out, but that the true and undoubted cause may be assigned: But yet
they are mysterious and unsearchable. See Romans 9.14. What shall we say then, is
there unrighteousness with God? God forbid, Romans 1.33, 34. O the depth of the
riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his judgments,
and his ways past finding out! for who has known the mind of the Lord, or who
has been his Counselor?

4. Arg. If the foresight of sin and unbelief, and rejecting the means of
salvation, be the causes of Reprobation, then these absurdities will
unavoidably follow.

1. That no child dying in infancy can possibly be reprobated.

2. Neither such Gentiles, or Turks, Indians, or Salvages, that never heard of
Christ, who never enjoyed the Gospel, nor ever had the means tendered to them;
for how can they believe in him on whom they have not heard? Romans 10. and how
can they reject that which was never tendered unto them? as many nations in the
world, who are strangers from the life of God, Ephe. 1.12.

3. If the foresight of sin should be the cause of Reprobation, then the elect
should be equally liable to the decree of reprobation as the Reprobates
themselves; they all being alike in the corrupt mass and lump of Adams
transgression, Romans 9.21, 22, 23, 24. John 15.19, 20. If ye were of the world,
etc. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. children of wrath as well as others, Romans 3.10. and
there is none righteous, no not one.

4. Then Paul was mistaken, Romans 9.11. in not assigning sin to be the cause of
Reprobation.

5. The same Apostle then answered very unsoundly to those objections, Romans
9.13, 14.

The first is, if God reprobated Esau because he hated him, then he was unjust.

The second, ver. 19. Why does he yet find fault, for who has resisted his
will?

For he might in one word have answered to both the objections, and said, that
sin was the cause of reprobating both of Esau and Pharaoh; but he says the
contrary, ver. 11. When they had done neither good nor evil, Jacob have I
loved, and Esau have I hated, Mal. 1.2.

6. Hereby we confine Gods infinite sovereignty over his creatures to the
narrow scantling of our subordinate power, as though he might not do with his
own what he lists without our control, and not make a vessel either of honor
or of dishonor, unless he were accountable to us for the reason of his so
doing.

For the fourth and fifth Positions, These may pass with a grain of Salt, and
bating some impropriety in the expressions; and I am not so at leisure to teach
such men to express themselves after a Theological manner, either in their
teaching or writing.

For the sixth Thesis, I must ingenuously confess, it is such a Mystery or
Paradox, and so involved with seeming contradictions, that I want an Oedipus to
unriddle the meaning of it; I have been a little acquainted with the opinions
of the Pelagians, Semipelagians, Papists, Arminians, Socinians, and
Anabaptists, and amongst them all can observe none of them jumping in with this
man's judgment, for thus he writes;

[All men are sometimes convinced of sin, and the state of nature;] What his
meaning is by the state of nature, I cannot divine; If his sense be, that every
man is at one time or other convinced that by nature he is a child of wrath and
disobedience, and dead in trespasses and sins, and so it is false: for most men
have not such convictions. Next

[And are made alive by the works of the spirit] by this all men should be
actually saved, for if in Christ (1 Cor. 15.22.) all are made alive that are
alive, and that he that is alive lives unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Romans 6.11. then (as Christ himself) such dye no more, sin has no more dominion
over them Romans 6.9. for they live unto the Lord, Romans 14.8. and 1 John 3.9. his
seed remains in him. Being born again, 1 Pet. 1.23. not of corruptible seed
but of incorruptible, by the word of God which lives and abides for ever.
Next.

[And Christ renders the light of the Spirit of Grace to every man in the
world] Its true we have some expressions Ioh. 1.9. that Christ lights every
man that comes into the world, but that is to be understood of the common
light of nature, or the actings of reason, as the two next following verses do
evince, for the world knew him not, and his own received him not, they had not
the spirit of grace and faith; for 2 These. 3.2. all men have not faith.

But how does Christ tender the light of the Spirit of grace to every man?
surely after that ordinary manner that God has sanctified, to wit, the
preaching of the Gospel, for Romans 10.14. faith comes by hearing, and how shall
they hear without a Preacher? then that is apparently false, for it is too well
known that there are many thousand thousands in the world, yea diverse nations
which never enjoyed the blessing to hear of Christ, or the Spirit of grace, but
Ephesians. 1.12. lived without a God in this world, and at last shall go ( Psalm.
49.19.) unto the generations of their fathers, and never see light.

If the meaning be that Christ tendreth the light of the spirit of grace
inwardly and after an extraordinary manner, this is but petitio principii (as
they say in the Schools) a plain begging of the question, without any proof of
Scripture, or probability in common reason.

Nay it is flat against the Scripture, for Luke 16.19. they have Moses and the
Prophets they are to hear them. Esa. 8.26. to the law and to the testimony,
etc. 2 Pet 1.19. We have a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well
that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place.

Next, [God also gives a Talent to every man, and power to improve it, but man
not improving it when received with a power, is the cause of man's destruction.]
Now what weight this talent bears with this Dictator, or what power is given
unto frail men to improve it, and how far and to what or whom either of these
talents or power is extended, when he has better studied the point, and comes
to understand his own meaning, if he please then to communicate it, he shall be
sure to receive a further answer; but in the mean time, (by way of
Anticipation) if his, sense be as I conjecture through his clouded and dark
expressions.

That God has afforded sufficient means of grace and power to improve that
means to every man whereby they may come to the knowledge of the truth and so
be saved, then I utterly deny it; and my ground of such denial rests upon these
ensuing Arguments.

1. Arg. If God do purposely for the raising of his own glory harden some,
blind others, and make fat the hearts of many, then a sufficient means of
salvation nor power to use the same is administered to all indifferently: But
God does blind some, hardens others, and makes fat. Therefore.

The major or first proposition is undeniable, because blinding, hardening, and
making fat, is destructive to the use of means. The minor or second proposition
is proved from these express texts, Ex. 4.21. and 7.3. and 14.4. Romans 9.18.
whom he will he hardens, Ex. 9.16. and Romans 9.17. even for this same purpose
have I raised thee up. Ioh. 12.40. he has blinded their eyes, and hardened
their hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with
their hearts, etc. Esa. 6.9. Romans 11.7. election has obtained it, the rest are
blinded. Esa. 6.10. make the hearts of this people fat.

2. Arg. If God willingly suffers Nations to walk in their own ways, and
winkes at, or lets them alone in their sins and ignorance, then God does not
exhibit a sufficiency of means, nor inables them with a power of acceptance
of life and salvation. But the first is true, therefore the latter. For the
proof of the major is unnecessary; for the minor, see Acts 14.16. and 17.30.

3. Arg. If the preaching of Christ crucified in the doctrine of the Gospel, be
the only, ordinary, sufficient means to bring men to life and to salvation;
and that many nations never enjoyed that means, then God has not afforded a
sufficiency of means to all men: but the first is true, therefore the latter.

That the Gospel is the only ordinary means, Romans 10.14. How shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? etc. Acts 4.12. there is none other
name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved. Ioh. 14.6. No man
comes to the Father but by the Son. 1 Ioh. 5.12. He that has the Son has
life, and he that has not the Son has not life. 1 Timothy 2.5. One mediator
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. Now that many nations want this
means it is too evident, and therefore no sufficiency.

The Seventh Position, That Christ has redeemed all men from the first
transgression, and crossed the score of Adams sin, I cannot well interpret what
this dreamer means, for if his sense should be by way of limitation [in all
men] to all the elect of men, then I embrace his Position, and should much
enlarge it.

But I suspect worse that he covertly denies the being of original sin,
secretly insinuating, that the death of Christ has blotted out ( Col. 2.14.)
that handwriting that was against us, from any further imputation of Adams
sin, or obligation unto punishment, only the guilt and pollution thereof still
remains inherent in us, However it is, I will shoot at rovers, and adventure an
argument or two in defense of the truth.

1. Arg. That unto which the Scripture does apply the name and nature of sin,
deserving punishment, that without controversy must be sin indeed. But unto
original sin both the name and nature of sin are applied in the Scripture;
Therefore. For proof hereof see Psalm. 81.7. Romans 5.12, 14, 16, 19. Ioh. 3.6.
Romans 7.7, 8. and 8.13. Iam. 1.14.

2. Arg. If temporal death has been the lot of every one which yet has not
sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, then there is original sin
still in being in respect of punishment; for Romans 6.23. the wages of sin is
death, and every sin is either actual or original: but temporal death has
been the lot of many who yet have not sinned actually, Romans 6.14. and this we
may see instanced in the death of Infants which die without actual sin.
Therefore.

The last Position is, Christ has laid his life and shed his blood for every
man in the world. In this likewise the novice leads me in a mist; for if his
meaning be, that the death of Christ and the shedding of his blood is
sufficient for every man in the world, but effectual only to those to whom it
is intended, then I join with him; but if he be otherwise minded, then the
close of that Position trips up the heels of the former part.

But I could have heartily wished that this Seraphical Doctor had not so
magisterially dogmatized, and after an Apostolical manner sat in his Cathedral
Chair, by delivering his dictates like an ipse dixit, I say unto you; but
rathet that he had endeavored to have proved out of the sacred Scriptures what
he has so crudely ventilated; so might we better have tried the spirits
whether they be of God or no, 1 Ioh. 4.1. Truly I do profess, by what I find in
these positions, I cannot discern of what sect he is, for by what he writes he
is neither pure Pelagian, Papist, Arminian, Socinian, nor Anabaptist, but a
hotch-porch of them all jumbled together. And that as it is written of Mahomet
at the first, he framed his Alchoran by the advice of Sergius the Monk a
renagado, partly of the Jews, partly of the Christians, and partly of the
Gentiles opinions, so has this Evangelist composed his doctrinals.

So that in this we may see what fruits may be expected at Cockolds-pit, and
all such places of such illiterate and confused assemblies, ex ungue leon^m, ex
pede Herculem, If the blind lead the blind both must fall together into the
ditch, Matthew. 15.14. But so it was in the Apostles time, there arose such
amongst them, who desiring to be teachers, 1 Timothy 1.7. understood not what they
said themselves, nor whereof they affirmed; yea this was foreprophesied, 2 Pet
2.1. that false teachers should arise up amongst them who should bring in
damnable heresies, but never so fully accomplished as in these our days,
wherein many unheard of formerly and blasphemous opinions are daily ventituted
under some specious appearances of truth and holiness. The God of love and
truth lead us into all truth. So prays he that is the less then the least of
all Saints

James Rawson,

Short heads of the subsequent discourse.
THe title of the Pamphlet examined. Page 1, 2 The Preface examined. 4
Toleration rightly stated. 5 Magistrates power to interpose in matters of
Religion. 6 Bishops vindicated. 7 Matthew. 23.29, 30. interpreted. 8 Whether the
doctrine of the Anabaptists be tolerable. 9 Who are inconstant in their
profession. 11 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Examined. 12 Ephesians. 6.11, 12. Examined. 13
Universal redemption offered to consideration. 14 Isa. 53.4, 5, 6. Interpreted.
15, 16 Psalm. 145.8, 9. Cleared. 17 Joh. 3.16, 17. Opened. 18 Romans 5.18. 19 2
Cor. 5.14, 15. Interpreted. 20 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. Discussed. 21 Tit. 2.11.
Examined. 22 Heb. 2.9. and 1 Pet. 3.9. Opened. 23 Baptism of Infants
confirmed. 24, etc. Whether the Anabaptists be fixed to their principles. page
27 Or at unity among themselves. 28 Thom. Tazwells first position questioned.
29 Whether the second position be not Pelagianisme. 30 Ambiguity in the stating
of the position. 31 Psalm. 4.3. Explained. 31 Who they be that are elected. 32
Psalm. 37.9, etc. Opened. 34 Pro. 3.33. and Mar. 16.16. Discussed. 34 Of the
decrees of God. 35 Of Gods foreknowledge and predestination. 36 Of election. 38
Of reprobation. 39 My first Argument confirmed. 40 Gods foreknowledge
Independent. 41 The pamphleter plowes with another man's heyfer. page 42. As God
decrees the end, so likewise he decrees the means. 43 Election to be
distinguished from justification. 44 Arminians make faith a foreseen cause of
election. page 45, etc. Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. Expounded. 48 Faith no foreseen cause of
election. 50 What place faith has in justification. 52 Romans 9.1, etc. ad ver.
19. Analyzed and interpreted. page 53, etc. The laws impotency to satisfy. 57
What efficacy faith has in justification. 58 How God a respecter of persons to
be understood. 59 Absolute justification flows from Absolute election. 60 Faith
as much as works excluded from election. 61 Gods alone will the cause of cause
of election. 62 Grace flows from the decree of election. 63 Acts 13.48.
Vindicated. 64, etc. Absurdities following foreseen faith in election. 68 Other
absurdities following that doctrine. 69 What God did foresee in election. 71
Marks of election no causes of election. 72 Instrumental causes of salvation no
causes of election. 73 As God decreed the end, so he decreed the means. 74 Joh.
16.27. Explained. 75 Of reprobation. 76 Ephesians. 1.5. Discussed. 77 Of the decree
of election. 78 Isa. 45.9. Opened. 79 No contradiction in what I do assert. 80
What place Gods foresight in election and reprobation. 81 God as he decrees the
end so he decrees the means. 82 The pamphleter begs the question. 83 A twofold
reprobation, one before all time, another in time. 84 The pamphleter interferes
with his own positions. 85 Could Reprobates truly believe they might be saved.
86 Reprobation includes both a denial of the end and means of salvation. 86 God
the immediate worker of all spiritual graces. 87 Sin foreseen not the cause of
Reprobation. 89 Sin the efflux not the effect of reprobation. 90 Sin the
consequent of reprobation. 91 Our doctrine intrenches not on the divine
attributes. 92 Reprobation inforceth not to sin. 93 A threefold necessity. 94
Reprobation as by us stated not against the mercy of God. 95 Nor against the
truth of God. 96 Ezekiel. 18.23, 32. and 33.11. Explained. 97 Absolute reprobation
and exhortation to repentance argue no Hypocrisy in God. 99 Absolute non
election not against the wisdom of God. 100 Isa. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
Interpreted. 101 God may expect the performance of our duty though we cannot do
it. 103 Matthew. 11.25, 26. Vindicated. 104 What God does in time, he decreed to
do before all time 105 What power we have to do good we have from God the
redeemer 106 Those whom God decrees to save he decrees to save them by faith.
108 Sin the cause of positive reprobation, viz. of damnation. 109 1 Pet. 2.8.
Vindicated. 111, etc. Romans 9.19, etc. Analyzed and interpreted. 116, etc. Thom.
Tazwells uses upon the doctrine of reprobation. 124 What use the Saints may
make thereof. 125 Though there be no external, yet there is an internal cause
of reprobation, viz. the will of God. 128 Arminian positions very aequivocal.
129 Romans 11.33, 44. Vindicated. 139 Mill narianism not inconsistent with the
Articles of faith. 132 Absurdities cleaving to Tho. Tazwells positions. 132
Whether sin foreseen be the cause of reprobation. 133, etc. Whether Infants may
have faith though not the use of faith. 135, etc. Whether any Infant can be
damned. 137 Infants elected or reprobated as well as others. 138, etc. Hope
only of such Infants as are within the covenant. 140 The Spirit of God and not
the word that does regenerate. 141 Romans 4.15. and 5.13. Opened. 142 Luke 18.16.
Explained. 144 2 Cor. 5.10. and 1 Cor. 15.22. Opened. 145 Ezekiel. 18.20.
Discussed. 146 Infants may have some faith. 148 Mat. 18.6. Perverted. 148 Romans
10.18. and 16, 25, 26. Discussed. 149 Christ not preachable to all but to whom
he is sent. 151 Many that never enjoyed any saving means, 153 Gentiles judged
by the covenant of works. 154 No salvation to them without Christ. 155 Nor have
they any desires after Christ. 157 Of original sin. 158, etc. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3.
Discussed. 162 Romans 2.14. Explained. 164 Romans 1.31. Interpreted. 165 What it is
to be a child of wrath. 167 The pamphleter confounds reprobation before time
with that in time. 169 How God is said to have hated Esau. 170 How God may be
said to hate without a cause. 172 Sin may be a cause of temporal reprobation.
173 Vain repetitions. 174 The pamphleter touches not the matter in charge. 175
According to the Arminians all may be saved or all may be damned. 177 The
decree as published may have a tendency to salvation. 178 Means of grace not
sufficiently extended to all. 179 Whether a liberty to choose good. 180 Deuteronomy.
39.19. Opened. 181 Heb. 11.24. Luke 10.42. Explained. 182 Of personal election.
183 2 Timothy 2.21. Discussed. 184 God may punish though he be not provoked. 185
No satisfactoriness in the teachings of the Anabaptists. 186 Exotic
expressions. 188 The pamphleters Absurdities cannot be removed. 189 The
Conclusion. 190
Gerizim and Ebal, OR, The absolute good pleasure of Gods most holy will to all
the Sons of Adam.
Sir,
HAd you first consulted with that divine Oracle, Pro. 3.5. Romans 12.16. Prove.
3.5. Romans 12.16 Pro. 26.12.
Be not wise in your own conceit; for there is more hope of a fool than of such
a one, you might perhaps have desisted from soaring above the clouds, and thus
to pry into Arcana imperii, and to intrude your self as one of Gods
Cabinet-Councel, whereas your parts and gifts (too well known) considered, you
had need of milk your self, Heb. 5.12.
and not to give such strong meat unto your seduced Proselytes; At least more
corresponding would it have been to your present condition, to have kept within
your own sphere, and if you had met with any temptation to more sublime
speculations, to have drawn back the reins with that ingenious acknowledgment,
I am no Prophet, neither am I a Prophets son, Amos 7.14.
but I am an heard-man, and a gatherer of wild figs.

But probable it is, you were tainted with that Epidemical disease a wanton
itch of being a -- in print.

And whereas for the giving vent to that exuberant humor you could pitch upon
no other object but my self to make your Antagonist, I do (though with much
reluctance, as conscious to my own wants and imperfections) undertake the
defense of that truth, which in this Pamphlet of yours you have much depraved
and eclipsed by your false glosses and perverted interpretations, and therein
before I undertake the battering of your Castles in the air, it will not be
unseasonable to blow down your outworks.

Sir, the Frontispice of your book is worded thus, The free Grace of God to all
the Sons of Adam vindicated.

Genesis 27.22.
Sure your voice sounds like the voice of Jacob, but I doubt your hands will
prove like the hands of Esau; you give a specious title, which promises much,
howsoever you come off in matter of performance look you to that, Grandia
loquuntur inanes, the emptiest barrels make the greatest sound, parturiunt
montes, nascitur ridiculus mus.

But I pray Sir, what mean you by the word Grace? If you mean those natural,
outward, and common Graces, and so I join with you that they are Catholic and
Universal, Ps. 145.9. Eccl 9.2. Mat. 5.45. Act. 17.28.
for God is good to all, and those outward things come alike to all. He makes
the same Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just
and on the unjust, for in him we live, and move, and have our being; we see
many Heathens to excel even Christians themselves in many moral virtues: Even
the wild Barbarians enjoy more plenty of gold, and have a fruitfuller soil than
the choicest Christian; Cain, Judas, Achitophel, Simon Magus, or cull out any
other of the worst of Reprobats, and tell me whether he does not participate in
some degree and measure of Gods free Grace and general love to mankind? All
that a man is, has, or can do proceeding from free Grace and general love,
and then I pray tell me whom have you in this to be your adversary, you can
find none in me.

But if you intend it of inward, proper, spiritual, and special graces, such as
are Redemption, effectual Vocation, Justification of men's persons by faith in
Christ, and Sanctification of their natures by the renewing of the Holy Ghost,
and perseverance unto the end, then I affirm that there is no such love of
complacency in God unto the universality of mankind, that any of these are
communicated but to a peculiar people foreknown according to his eternal
purpose.

But what is this to the dispute before us? The controversy is about those
glorious, eternal, immanent acts of Gods Election and Reprobation, therein
discriminating the universality of the world (as your own positions do
distinguish) by parting them into two ranks or stations, some elected, some
reprobated. But your title page speaks it, Gods free Grace to all the Sons of
Adam; I pray Sir the next volume you commit to the Press provide your self of a
more Homogeneous title which may suit more adequately with the business in
debate.

Your Title farther brags, And the Arguments written by Mr James Rawson, a
national Minister for personal election confuted etc. Virus crescit eundo, what
cannot this man do? But ante victoriam noli cantare triumphum. 1 King. 20.11.
Let not him that girdeth on his harness, boast himself, as he that puts it
off. Confident I am that all those arguments by me produced will prove
impregnable and cannon proof, notwithstanding all those pot-guns of yours shot
against them.

Next, In your endeavors to answer my Papers, your first adventure is upon the
Proem, whose language is thus, I cannot much wonder that the Grandees of this
nation, etc. Your answer speaks thus: [I must tell you, that I do as little
wonder as you, that the Grandees of this Nation are not persecuting of people
for their conscience in matters of Religion: but I am persuaded the reason is,
because that doubtless they in their grave wisdoms have seen that such a
practice in them that were before them, being not a little deluded by your
fathers the Bishops, and their Adherents, did thereby beat down the truth under
the name of Heresy, and doubtless they have learned, that it is the
Prerogative Royal of Jesus Christ to rule in the Consciences of men in the
things which concern his own kingdom; and that the wheat and the tares should
grow together in the world until the harvest, Mat. 13.29, 30.]

Ans. Truly Sir, you have made a fair progress, and are honorably preferred,
from being a common Trooper in the Kings party thus to become a Candidate to
the Council of State, yea, not only to know their actings by the effects, but
to be made acquainted with their reasons of so doing, the very mysterie^ of
State; For here you determine of their resolves in not punishing (which you
phrasifie persecuting) in matters of Religion, and next you affix their reasons
thereof.

Their resolves (as you tacitly imply) are not to interpose in matters of
religion by way of punishment.

But Sir, you are too precipitate in your conjectures, or conclusions, and this
is grounded on a false Hypothesis, namely that indulgence of Toleration:
Wherein if it might be lawful for me to cast in my mite, and make a gloss on
such Edicts, I should rather say that it is:

1. Either that those that are approved may be known. Or,

Act. 16.3.
2. To bear with the infirmity of the weak, as Paul caused Timothy to be
circumcised and not to support the refractory. Or,

3. For the avoiding of offense, as the Apostles in the Council at Jerusalem
inhibited, Act. 15.23. 1 Cor. 6.12
strangled meats and blood, for though all things may be lawful, yet all things
are not expedient. Or,

Mat. 19.8.
4. For the hardness of peoples hearts, as Moses permitted a bill of divorce: Or
as our Statute Law tolerated usury, not approving of the fact, but dispensing
with the punishment, but ab initio non-fuit sic; rather, I say, should I make
these favorable conclusions then hence to infer, Toleration of Religion is
indulged to some, Therefore the Magistrate may not punish offenders in the case
of Religion. And the more easily am I inclined to be of this judgment, because
of these convincing Arguments.

1. From the express law of God concerning blasphemers, Number. 24.14. Number. 14.14.
Deuteronomy. 13 5. v. 11.17. Deuteronomy. 18.20. 1 King 15.12. 2 King. 11.16.
and confirmed by a rule for the punishment of Apostates and inticers to
Apostasy, Deuteronomy. 13.5, 6. the reasons whereof are given v. 11, 17. Concerning
false Prophets, Deuteronomy. 18.20.

2. From the examples of Kings and Prophets in the old Testament. Asa took away
the Sodomits. 1 King. 15.12. Jehojada Athalia. 2 King. 23.5. Elijah the
Prophets of Baal, 1 Kings 18.40.

3. From the examples of the Apostles in the new Testament, who inflicted
punishment on several persons both for life and limb, Acts 5.5. Act. 13.11.
Acts 5.5. At the word of Peter, Ananias and Saphira were stricken dead, Acts
13.11. Elymas the Sorcerer was smitten with blindness at the word of Paul;
which more remarkable acts of justice though they were done by special
instinct, being allien from their calling to inflict corporal punishment; yet
then how much more suitable were it for a Christian Magistrate to put in
practice that authority God has committed into his hands.

Neither does it any whit elude the strength of this Argument to object that
the Apostles used the Word and not the Sword: Because it is thus far
satisfactory that they inflicted corporal punishment on refractory
transgressors.

4. From the Office of the Magistrate, qui custos est utriusque tabulae, the
safeguarder of both the Tables, Romans 13.
yet in distinction from the Church Ministers, and therefore Romans 13. he is
said to be ordained of God for their good not only corporal but spiritual, and
hence it is that he ought to vindicate the injuries done by those that
profanely hinder the spiritual good, and thereby disturb the peace and unity
of the Church of God.

5. Thefts, Murders, Adulteries, and other like crimes are daily rewarded with
poenall and Capital punishments, and therefore much more ought Blasphemies,
Apostacies, Perjuries, etc. be punished with some such like condign punishment,
and the rather for that the one are committed immediately against the good of
our neighbor only, but the other immediately against the honor and glory of
God; by the one a loss is contracted to our bodies or fortunes, but by the
other a danger to our souls.

6. From the very light and dictates of nature: The Gentile Governors
interessed themselves in matters of Religion, and would never suffer their Gods
to be blasphemed, Exodus 8.26. Ex. 8.29.
Shall we sacrifice the a^^omination of the Egyptians, and will they not stone
us? Socrates was put to death for blaspheming the multiplicity of their gods;
yea, the records of our own Scripture testify so much, Ezra 7.26.

7. Yea, the contrary hereof is obvious to every discerning eye, by the late
procedure of the highly honorable Court of Parliament against that grave
Impostor and Blasphemer your brother Naylor, wherein notwithstanding all your
interests and overbold confidence you are forced to sit besides the Cushion.

8. At least I would have said, that there were some intrinsecall mysteries of
State involved in that Edict of Toleration, which it is not fit for you and me
to pry into, and adventure to give a reason thereof.

And thus having left your concealed assertion bleeding, I proceed to your
reasons, which are as barren and empty of truth and honesty, as they are full
fraught with malice and ignorance. The first tends to this purpose, [That the
grave Senators of this Nation, in whom resided the Legislative power, did
heretofore beat down truth instead of heresy, being instigated thereunto by
our fathers the Bishops, which crime being espied by those now in authority,
they have therefore given a Toleration for any Religion.]



What man, were our Nobility and Magistracy so besotted that they should be
brought into a fools paradise by the delusions of others? Did they only see
with the Bishops eyes, and were they not quicksighted enough of themselves to
discern between good and evil, light and darkness, truth and heresy?

Fie man, fie, I am ashamed of your insolence, this sure is no better than
Crimen laesae majestatis.

And for the Prelates, who (by a simple sarcasm) you call your Fathers the
Bishops, cannot you see and read as in a lively character more piety, zeal, and
sincerity, in the words, and works, and lives of those reverend pillars of the
Church, than to say, that they were acted by a spirit of delusion? What think
you of Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, Farrar, etc. who gave up themselves as
a sacrifice for the testimony of the truth, as it is in Jesus?

Or what make you of those nearer within our own cognizance, as of Jewel,
Bilson, Morton, Usher, Hall, Davenant, the glorious Lights of this Nation in
their Generation, and the splendour of Europe to all succeeding ages? Can your
goose quill dash out their luster, and make their memorials to rot? No, I
cannot endure that such a mushrome as you are should detract from their
learning, piety, and intergrity; for as Learning has no greater enemy than a
Dulman, or an Ignoramus, so piety and honesty find no greater adversaries than
a profane walker or licentious liver.

For your second Reason, doubtless it is the Prerogative Royal of Jesus Christ
to rule in the Consciences of men, always provided they be consciences orderly
regulated, and that instead of Jesus Christ in the conscience, the strong man
armed, Luke 11.21. 2 Cor. 11.14.
that is, the devil be not there, who often transforming himself into an angel
of light pleads conscience, when alas in many it is nothing else but
wilfulness, or affectation of singularity, and then he ought to be unroosted,
and the man reduced to conformity, notwithstanding his plea of conscience. It
is not every pretender to Conscience that is to be indulged with an immunity
from coaction or coercion.

For suppose a man irregular in his course and conversation, or that in other
things he has a Cheverill conscience, and can swallow down a Camel, shall
this man's plea of conscience be accepted in case of Religion?

Or suppose a man in the opinion that he holds, or practices that he uses,
making a plea of conscience for his so opining and doing, shall yet be
imperious, scornful, proud, turbulent, self-conceited, these are strong
presumptions of what spirit that man is of. No such who have a just plea and
title to conscience and privileges thereof, they are meek, lowly, humble,
jealous over their own hearts, thinking others better than themselves: And that
with all he fasts, prays, hears, reads, using all possible means better to
inform him, that so if it be possible he may keep the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace.

That Text of Scripture which you bring to evidence what you would have, makes
but little for your purpose, if without inforcement it may speak the mind of
Christ, wherein though I might say that parabolical argumentations prove no
more than for what they were first spoken: Yet to take our Saviors
interpretation, the tares are children of the wicked one, i.e. the devil; and
then from thence with as much strength of argument we may conclude, that no
thief, nor murderer, nor adulterer, nor any other malefactor is to be punished
or removed before the end of the world, any more than he that blasphemes the
name of the high God; give a reason against it he that can, why a Heretic
should receive any more indulgence from that Text than a notorious Malefactor.

But doubtless the scope of our Savior in that parable is, to signify unto us
the lot and condition of the Church of God in this life, and that there can be
no expectation of an universal purity in this life, but that there will be
still tares amongst the wheat, bad men will be intermingled amongst the good,
neither can they be totally rooted out till the end of the world.

And as that Text does not inhibite reproofs from the ministry toward evil
workers, Romans 13.
so neither does it restrain punishment from the Magistrate, for he bears not
the sword in vain.

And one thing is remarkable, that Christ who forbad the plucking of the tates
up, did not yet forbid the Magistrate to hinder the sowing of them, but that in
his wisdom and godly care he may put a restraint both upon the Pulpit and
Press from such incendiaries that promote and propagate such uncouth doctrines
and opinions, without any prejudice to the liberty of conscience.

And thus from your Text I come to your Conclusion, which is, [And therefore
they have tolerated all Religions that (...) peaceably in the Commonwealth,
except Popery and Pre^^^y whose principles and actions also have been made
appear to be against the present Government.]

They have, as you say, tolerated such Religions, and I wish from my soul that
they may not repent too late of such Toleration, for if we may judge of things
by the issues and events there were never heard of the like hideous and horrid
blasphemies in any age of the world more than since Toleration was on foot;
They might perhaps whisper them before, but now they speak them with a full
mouth: So that England which not long since was accounted as an immaculate
Virgin, and so the glory of the world for soundness of Doctrine and purity of
Conversation, is now looked upon as a Babell and confusion of opinions, and the
sink of all Heresies.

And one thing I cannot let slip without some observation, that such are
concerned in this Toleration who live peaceably in the Commonwealth and whose
principles and practices are not inconsistent with the present Government.

I am much amazed then how it comes to pass that your sect of all others, the
Anabaptists I mean, should come to have any share in this indulgence, since
that of all heresies that ever I have read or heard of, there is not any one
that carries such a diametricall opposition and direct antipathy against the
public peace of a Commonwealth as do the principles and practices of the
Anabaptists.

I would not willingly (if I know mine own heart) bear false witness against my
neighbor, no, though mine own interest were concerned in it, much less against
a society of men, and that especially in the case of God.

And therefore what I write are either collections from your own Authors, or
from men who are of unquestionable authority and fidelity in their relations.

And first for their principles, and therein I shall give you only but a taste;
as

1. That it is not lawful for a Christian to bear the office of a Magistrate
with the safety of a good conscience now in the times (...) the New Testament,
if he do, they put the question, whether such a one can be saved. 2. That the
office of a Magistrate extends only to the duties of the second Table. 3. That
it is not lawful for a Christian to go to warfare, nor to have imposed upon
them any watches or wardings. 4. That it is not lawful for a Christian to bear
any arms offensive or defensive, either for the defense of his Country, or
himself, or to offend his enemy. 5. That it is not lawful to go to law. 6.
That it is not lawful to take an oath before a Magistrate. 7. That it may be
lawful to have more wives than one at one time. 8. That it is not lawful to
punish any Malefactor with death. 9. That there ought to be a community of
goods. I willingly overslip their other more horrid opinions, as not so suitable
to my purpose.

And for their practices, let but the Annals and Records of the Low Countries,
and upper and lower Germany, especially of Helvetia, and in them of the
occurrences that befell in the fields of Turingia, the Towns of Alstet and
Munster, Moravia, Belgia, Suevia, Franconia, drilled a long by the subtle
practices of those incendiaries, the ringleaders of that factions, Pheiffar,
Habmeierus, Joh. Matthias, Melchior Hoffman, Rotman, Muncer, John of Leyden,
Knipperdollin, the outrages by them committed, murders, rapes, polygamies,
blasphemies etc. Let the Annals, I say, be taken a survey of, and there will
not appear in all the Christian world a generation of men more opposite to
public peace, and more full of turbulency, in the State wherein they live,
than the Anabaptists are; and how can it be otherwise when their principles are
so destructive to the very being of a Commonwealth?

But you will say, we find them not so here; O they are not full winged yet,
their affairs are not full ripe: Dic mihi si fueris tu Leo qualis eris; they
want but time and opportunity, which they long and wait for.

And as it is in respect of the body politic, so much more in cases
Ecclesiastical: They have endeavored to overturn the very essence and
constitution of a Church, so that where it was and is the Ordinance of Christ,
To the Law, and to the Testimony; and that we have a sure word of the Prophets
whereunto we must give heed, as to light shining in a dark place. These men
depend upon Enthusiasms, dreams, visions, revelations, apparitions, etc. So
that hereby is introduced amongst poor souls a very a taxie and confusion; and
now let the world judge whether this society of men in any Christian prudence
stand in any capacity to receive the benefit of a Toleration. And that I may
not be thought to feign any of this, Let Sleydan be consulted with Lambertus,
Hortensius, Montfortius de Tumultibus Anabap. Joh. Wigand, Joh. Knox in an
answer to an Anabaptist, Spanhemius de origin, progressu, sect is, nominibus
and dog matibus Anabap. Alex. Rosse, John of Leyden; where he shall find
abundantly more than I am willing to express for the insufferableness of that
society.

And yet to deal ingenuously with you, I cannot accuse you, or others that I
know of your judgment, that in all things you do concur with those formerly
recited, both principles and practices, you may perhaps come short in some,
only this I know, that there is such a concatenation, combination, and
confederacy among their positions, so dependant they are one upon another, that
for the most part it so falls out, that hold one, hold all; one of their
distinguishing principles being sucked in, easily will they ingurgitate the
rest. He that is a known and professed Anabaptist, though that conclusively a man
cannot fasten on him all the tenants that are held by some of that party, yet a
man may dangerously suspect that a little time will work him into all, at least
if his own Interest may be concerned in it.

You have not yet done with Toleration, it pleases you so well, for thus you
further write. [But this Toleration or liberty, for people to worship God
according to the light they have received, without having things imposed on
their consciences, contrary to what they believe, is that which serves not
your turn, for take him jailer is the best Argument with you to convince the
rude multitude of carnal minded and self-seeking people, who are resolved to
be of that Religion, in which they can best be freed from trouble: And as you
that are called the Clergy, to be like the reed in the Tide, to turn as the
tide turns, and that in a moment from Episcopacy to Presbytery, if it be but
once signed by humane authority, and have the stamp of a Parliament upon it, so
that you are indeed but the Parliaments Prophets, and the peoples Prophets, and
not the Lords Prophets, for you obey the Parliament, and turn this way and that
way, even as they direct, and you study to preach such things as are pleasing
to the rich men of your Parishes, laying aside the Commands and Oracles of God,
yet you are so impudently bold as to say, The Lord says, when the Lord has
not spoken, Jer. 22.28.]



But let me speak unto you in the words of the Prophet Isaiah, wherewith he
comforts Hezekiah against the blasphemous railings of soul mouthed Rabshekah,
Esa. 37.23.
Whom have thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom have thou exalted
thy voice? Surely against such a called and chosen society of persons as that
before whom, for their learning, piety, zeal, holiness, sincerity, and
uprightness of walking, you cannot have the confidence to appear in their
presence, and cast the least of these aspersions, but what will not impudence
attempt at such a distance?

For your [Take him Goaler] is a flash of nonsense as to the carnal minded
and self seeking people. If you relate it as to your selves; the Lord knows our
hearts we bear no grudge to your persons, and our daily prayers shall be for
your conviction and conver^ion; For that levity you would seem to impose on us
of turning with the tide, this way and that way, now for Episcopacy, then for
Presbytery. Sir, we have learned in things lawful and indifferent to be
subject to principalities and powers, and to obey Magistrates, for that
whosoever resists the power resists the Ordinance of God. Act. 5.29.
But if it be in things sinful, we are taught, and so practice to obey God
rather than men. But surely Sir, Qui alterum incusat probri ipsum so intucri
aportet: Romans 2 21.
Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self etc? for as for levity,
inconstancy, warping and wheeling about let but your Commanders be examined
under whom you served in the Kings Party, and they will give such a lively
Character of you, as may bung up that black mouth of yours from asper^ng any
with turning with the tide; But I delight not in personal reflections: I shall
only answer your railing accusations as Michael did the Devil, Jude 9.
The Lord rebuke thee.

Exodus 10.7
For your close with that S riptures, Ezekiel. 22.38. I shall only return this,
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain forth^ lord will not
hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain; God himself intends no such
thing to justify that for which you allege that portion of holy Scripture.

You further proceed* [But we have learned, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. That the weapons of
our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of
strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thought, that exalts
it self against the knowledge of God and brings into captivity every thought
to the obedience of Christ: And where we read of the whole armor of God, that
the Saints are to put on Ephesians 6.11. there is not any mention, nor the least
intimation of a sword of steel, or ^rmour of flesh, not any carnal weapons
whatsoever: but the spiritual ways of Jesus Christ expressed in the New
Testament must be defended with spiritual weapons notwithstanding all that can
be said to the contrary, by you which desire to have those ways and works,
which are devised by men, and found in the Testament of Christ to be upheld by
an earthly power.

Cor. 10.4, 5. I grant you, for I know no Minister of the Gospel arrogates to
himself the power of the sword, except the Pope with his Ecee duo gladii.

No Sir, your carnal weapons we commend unto the civil Magistrate, whiles we
labor with the sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. Mat. 22.21.
which is the word of God; we give unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's and
unto God the things which are Gods.

The next Text of Scripture cited by you is Ephesians. 6.11, 12, 13. here you say is
no mention nor the least intimation of a sword of steel, but in the New
Testament the spiritual ways of Jesus Christ are only to be defended with
spiritual weapons.

Here is a true tang of your brethren of Munster, and doubtless as occasion
would offer it self, you would speak plain English in the rest, but to the wise
enough has been spoken of it before, where it has been manifested that the
Magistrate is Custos utriusque tabulae.

But whereas you say, there is no mention of a sword of steel, what follows,
must not these therefore be put on? I Will propose a like Argument. The Apostle,
Romans 13.14. Romans 13.14.
bids us to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, we are not there commanded to put on
our cloths, to put on our gowns, to put on our cloaks etc. What follows must
they not therefore be put on? O irrational arguing.

I tell you Sir that as a Christian that puts on Christ may put on his clothes
and cloak also; so he that puts on spiritual armor, may likewise put on a
sword of steel; I pray tell me of what metal Peter's sword was made, Joh. 18.10.
wherewith he did cut off Malchus his ear?

And so I bid farewell to your act of Toleration, your dearest Helena, your
City of refuge, your Sanctuary for any your blasphemous opinions, and erroneous
tenets, and proceed to examine what you answer to that of mine: That it is very
visible to all exact observers that those who were prime promoters
incendiaries, and blew the coals first of those strange opinions, etc.

To which you say, Now if by strange opinions is meant the universal love of
God manifested to the sons of men in the death of his son, as a way and means
by which glad tidings of great joy is held forth to all people, and the
baptizing suc^ in the name of the Lord Jesus, who confess faith in him, the^
you are much mistaken, for these are not strange opinions, bu^ precious truths
which concern the salvation of every man and woman in the world, witnessed by
the Holy Prophets, by Christ himself, and his Apostles, which have been the
prime promoters of the same.

viz. Universal Redemption, and Baptism of Infants, there is as much said in
them already by diverse learned men of our side, and particularly by Dr Kendal
against Goodwin, and Mr Baxter against Tombs, to the satisfaction of any
reasonable men that are not blinded through prejudice, and even to the
silencing of their very adversaries, that it would be but casting water into
the sea for me to cast in my mite. Yet because that every man has not the
opportunity to read their works, and that you may not have cause of glorying if
I should slide over this, I shall undertake, through the guidance of Gods
spirit, to give in the genuine sense and scope of those Texts of Scripture
nakedly mustred up by you in favor of your Universal Redemption, and thus you
begin:

[The former is witnessed by Isa. 53.4, 5, 6. where it plainly appears, that
the iniquity of all that went astray are laid on him, that is, on Jesus Christ.
Likewise by David in Psalm 145.8, 9. The Lord is gracious and full of
compassion, slow to anger, and of great mercy. The Lord is good to all, and his
tender mercies are over all his works. Yea, Christ himself witnesses to this
truth in Joh. 3.16, 17. And by his Apostles, Romans 5.18. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. 1 Timothy
2.1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Tit. 2.11. Heb. 2.9. 2 Pet. 3.9. And the Angel of the Lord
also, Luke 2.10, 11. And for the later, which is the baptizing such in the name
of Jesus Christ, who confesses faith in him, it is so highly promoted by
Christ, and his Apostles, that there is neither precept nor president for the
sprinkling or washing of Infants in his name.]

Isa. 53.4 5, 6. I know not what it should be, unless the just judgment of God
to infatuate these men, 2 These. 2.11.
and give them over to such strong delusions that they should believe a lie,
and to blindfold them, so as they should adventure to produce in evidence such
a Text of Scripture as does directly trip up the heels of their own assertion
as this does, no one Chapter in the whole old Testament more limiting the
suffering, and thereby satisfaction of Jesus Christ to a peculiar people as
this.

And first, whereas you say, that it plainly appears that the iniquity of all
that went astray were laid on Christ is notoriously false, and to make my
charge good, as the Eunuch asked Philip, Acts 8.34. Of whom speaks the Prophet
this? Act. 8.34.
You, I imagine, by the help of the Particle All, will extend the scope of this
Chapter to all men of all sorts: But I say, and that with better reason, that
the word Us restrains the universal Particle to a definite number. And
therefore take this rule from me for your better understanding, in giving or
taking the sense of a Scripture: That when the Prophets, Apostles, and holy men
of God speak to others, including themselves (as by way of privilege, and
partaking of the benefit of a promise) by these terms of Us, Our, or Me, they
commonly and constantly understand persons under the same consideration and
capacity people under one relation and qualification, such who are nearly
related, as fighting under one Captain, sheep fed under one shepherd, 2 Cor.
6.14. 1 Cor. 12.13.
knit together by one bond of the spirit, joined together in one Communion of
Saints; for what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness, etc. By
one spirit baptized into one body, having one Lord one Faith, one Baptism etc.

Now of what sort and condition of men can this be spoken but only of the
elect, of those that have, do, or shall believe.

And thus this our Prophet, an elect person, a believer speaks all this Chapter
over of himself with other Elect and believing persons. And lest you should
say, it is true that believers are included, and yet are not unbeleevers
excluded; I shall prove, and that only out of this Chapter that hereby is meant
all believers and only believers, or at least those that have, did, or shall
believe.

Arg. 1. I draw from v. 5. The chastisement of our peace was upon him, i.e. his
chastisement procured our peace; whence I argue thus, That chastisement for sin
that was laid upon the person of Jesus Christ procured peace for them for whom
he was so chastised.

But there was no peace procured for the Reprobates, or those who should never
believe, Isa. 57.21. There is no peace to the wicked. Ephesians. 3.14. He is our
peace, Ergo.

Arg. 2. From v. 5. By his stripes we are healed, whence I reason thus: The
stripes inflicted on Jesus Christ are intended and do become healing medicines
for them for whom they are inflicted; but they never become healing medicines
for the Reprobates or unbeleevers. Nahum 3 9. There is no healing of their
bruise, Ergo.

Arg. 3. From v. 6. All we like sheep have gone, etc. whence I ground: If in
all the whole Scripture by sheep are understood the Elect and Believers, then
so it should be here, but the former is true, Ergo, for either sheep or goats.

Arg. 4. From v. 8. For the transgression of my people was he stricken: whence
I raise this, Those for whom Christ was stricken were in Gods account his own
people. But the Reprobates were never in Gods account his own people, Mat.
7.25. I never knew you, Ergo.

Arg. 5. From v. 10. He shall see his seed: whence I bottom this, That which
Christ had as a wages or reward for the making of his soul an offering for sin
was a peculiar seed, His seed, Isa. 65.23. The seed of the blessed of the Lord,
Genesis 3. The seed of the woman, and not of the Serpent. Mal. 2.15. A godly
seed; now the Reprobates are not of this seed Ergo.

Arg. 6. From v. 12. He bare the sins of many. All this Chapter hitherto the
Prophet has used words of the first person, Ours, Us We, and to these he
attributes the universal Particle All, including with himself all believers.

But now when he comes to the third person he only speaks of Many, so that
hence it is plain that Christ as a Redeemer bare the sins of many of the
universal world, and that he is a Redeemer of all the elect or believing world.

So that it is undoubtedly true, that not only this Text, but this whole
Chapter makes most mainly for me against your self.

It is a bad omen of ill success in a man's business, when at the very first
onset a man's supposed best friends should fly in his own face and fight against
him.

The second in the list is, Psalm. 145.8, 9. The Lord is Gracious and full of
compassion, slow to anger, and of great mercy. The Lord is good to all, and his
tender mercies are over all his works.

ver. 8. are some of the Divine attributes, wherein there is neither difficulty
nor question.

And for the former part of ver. 9. that the Lord is good to all, There is no
doubt but that the Lords goodness has and does, show it self to all the work
of the creation they being all Good yea very Good. But the great knot sticks in
these two things, Genesis 2.
1. how far all his works may be extended, and 2. unto what tender mercies must
be limited. First, If you insist upon the term of universality all and so
labor to extend it to the Reprobates as well as the Elect, Then by the same
reason you may extend it as well unto the Devils, they being likewise the work
of his hands, as the Reprobates are, and where the Text does not distinguish
neither should you.

And truly I must acknowledge that even the Devils themselves do in some degree
partake of Gods tender mercies. They have in them a kind of goodness for ens
and bonum convertuntur. Their nature and essence is good as Gods workmanship,
it is only sin which is their own and none of Gods making, that renders them
evil and so hateful to God and man. Is it not a tender mercy to have a native
excellency beyond all the rest of the creatures (Christ and the elect Angels
only excepted) to have such spiritual substances equal (in their nature and
creation) to the holy Angels themselves, and through the dexterity and agility
of those natures to be able to understand so far and to do so much, as being
permitted therein the parts and gifts of all the men in the world are not to be
weighed in the balance with them, yea and withal to have that excellency so
many ages past to be preserved and delivered notwithstanding their daily
sinning and provoking the most High?

And according to this rule of tender mercies I confess there is a great bulk
of tender mercies manifest to the Reprobates. Act. 17.28. Psalm. 145.15. Wisd.
11.24, 25. Matthew. 5.45. Eccle. 9.2^
In God we live, move, and have our being, The eyes of all wait upon thee and
thou give them their meat in due season.

Thou love all the things that are, and abhorrest nothing which thou have
made etc. He makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, etc. and all
things come alike to all.

But Secondly, if by tender mercies you will understand such mercies as concern
eternal life and salvation, as effectual vocation, justification, adoption,
sanctification, etc. then I deny that these are over all his works: Deus
diligit omnes homines, in quantum vult aliquid bonum: non tamen quodcunque
bonum vult omnibus though God is good to all and his mercy is over all his
works, yet he extends not the top and height of all his bowels of compassion
and his inmost tenderest mercies to every mothers Son; there h^^ reserveth for
his own chosen people those whom in Jesus Christ he has before all time
elected to eternal salvation.

And more then this you can never draw out of this fountain of love, pump
whiles you will, not enough I am sure to establish that Chimaera of theirs, an
universal Redemption.

That Third in the rank is John 3.16, 17. God so loved the world that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but
have everlasting life, for God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the
world, but that the world through him might be saved.



Yet I say that this love here spoken of may be said to be universal in respect
of the Elect, and of believing persons answerable to that Romans 3.22. Romans 3.22.
The righteousness of God which is of faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon
all them that believe, and yet withal particular in respect of the whole mass
and lump of mankind, according to that Romans 9.13. Romans 9.13.
Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, and ver. 18. he has mercy on whom
he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens.

Neither does Christ intend any other universality here then this mentioned,
first because that those for whom Christ came into the world are also saved,
for what shall be able to hinder his purpose or resist his will?

Secondly, because believers only are saved, Romans 8.19 Phil. 1.2 Mat. 13.11.
and shall not be condemned, only to the Elect it is given that they shall
believe, Phil. 1.29. Matthew. 13.11.

And thirdly, to what purpose was this pretended love and affection in God, if
it never did nor can take any gracious effect in saving any reprobate?

That which takes the fourth place is Romans 5.18. As by the offense of one
judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of
one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life.

(i. e.) the elect and believers. For the Apostle here makes a comparison
between the first Adam and the second Adam, as being two roots either of whom
do communicate unto their several branches, (i. e.) unto a certain company
descending from them what they have, do, or shall enjoy, and therefore says,
that as the first Adam by his carnal generation did communicate two pestilent
evils, Sin and Death, unto all descending from him: So Christ the second Adam
by his spiritual generation did communicate two contrary blessings, viz.
Righteousness and Life, to all that did believe in him. The truth of this
interpretation is clear from the scope of the Apostle, which is to compare
Christ the Author of Righteousness and Life, with Adam the Author of Sin and
Death, from ver. 12. to the end of the Chapter, and therefore hereupon, ver.
19. repeating the same matter, (which in probability should be more clear) the
word all is interpreted by many.

For had it been otherwise, the Apostle would have pulled down what before he
had built up, and clearly contradicted himself in that doctrine which he had
before delivered in the third and fourth Chapters, therein asserting the
justification only of believers, and therefore here is but little advantage to
be gotten from this Antithesis.

But you will say, if more perished in Adam then are saved in Christ, his Grace
then should be weaker then Adams sin, where is then the much more abounding
grace spoken of ver. 17.?

To which I answer, that the greatness and power of grace above ^n, ought not
to be esteemed according to the multitude of those that are condemned in Adam,
and of those that are justified and glorified in Christ, for so Grace should be
equal only, and nothing at all stronger then sin, if every of these should be
made righteous in Christ, as many as were born sinners in Adam.

But herein consists the extensiveness of Grace, beyond what sin did, First in
that whereas sin brought forth death, and grace righteousness and life, now its
well known it is easier to destroy and condemn an innumerable company then to
quicken and save one single person; all the world compacted together could not
save one, but Adams single sin could make obnoxious the whole world.

Secondly, In Adam all the whole world are involved and made liable to
condemnation, by his one only offense, but Christ does emancipate his little
flock, not only from that one original sin contracted by stain and imputation,
but likewise from all actual sins, wherein they themselves are personally
culpable, neither is there any Righteousness besides Christ, as there be some
sins besides the sin of Adam, And how mighty is this gift which innumerable
sinners cannot withstand? and this is that which the Apostle hinteth ver. 17.
and not as etc.

And so I proceed to your fifth Text pressed to give in evidence, which is, 2
Cor. 5.14, 15. For the love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge,
that if one died for all, then were all dead: and that he died for all, that
they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which
dyed for them, and rose again.

True it is Christ is said here that he died for all, but for what all, therein
lies the doubt, truly then the resolve must be that Christ died, first for
those all, to whom his death is imputed, viz. such who through the virtue and
efficacy of the death of Christ, which he underwent for them are accounted as
dead, and secondly, Romans 13.14.
for such as do repent (i. e.) whereas before they did indulge their pleasures,
and lived to the satisfying of the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, now they
live no longer to themselves, but do endeavor to live conformably to the will
and honor of him that died for them. Now whether this can be extended to any
but believers let my adversary judge, for it were blasphemy to think that
Christ could not obtain the end of his death, had it been intended by him for
any else besides believers, yea even those to whom he had purposed to give them
power to believe and to become sons of God.

The sixth Text forced by you to give its vote is, 1 Timothy 2.1. etc. I exhort
therefore that first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving
of thanks be made for all men, for Kings and for all that are in authority,
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, for
this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who will have all
men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth: for there is one
God, and one mediator between God and man, the man Jesus Christ, who gave
himself a ransom for all to be testified in due time, etc.

In answer to which it will be expedient for me to make some Analysis on this
part of the chapter, according to the mind and scope of the Holy Ghost: In the
former chapter the Apostle had been treating of matter of Doctrine to be
proposed to the Church: and now begins with the treatise of public prayer, and
first setting forth the question, for whom they ought to pray, he asserts that
they ought to pray for all, and namely for Kings, and those magistrates that
were in Authority: Now because it might be doubted, and perhaps was not
practiced, to pray for such by reason that for the most part the magistrates
were heathenish, and so wicked in their lives and persecutors of the Church, he
resolves that for such they ought to pray, and this he confirms by several
arguments. The first is drawn from the advantage that might ensue thereof, for
if by and through (as it might be possible) their prayers, the hearts of those
Magistrates were turned to a liking of Christianity, they might thereby lead a
godly and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

A second Argument is drawn from the comfort that would accrue to themselves
ver. 3. Matthew. 5.44. 1 Pet. 4.19.
For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior: that men pray
for them that persecute them and despightfully use them, committing the keeping
of their souls to him in well doing, as to a faithful Creator.

And this Argument he confirms from the end proposed, for he that wills the end
wills likewise the means conducing to the end. But it is the good will and
pleasure of God that all sorts of men should be saved, and therefore his will
is that some of Kings and others in Authority should be saved, as well as
others and upon that account prayers to be made for them, that they may come to
the knowledge of the truth and so be saved, ver. 4.

Now that God would have all men (i. e.) men of all sorts saved, this he
confirms by a double reason, ver. 5, 6.

The first is, because God is one, even the God of all men (i. e.) because God
in every sort and condition of men has his elect ones whom he tenderly loves.
Secondly, because God is one Mediator of God and man who gave himself a ransom
for all, viz. for all sorts of men, high and low, rich and poor, one with
another, where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision,
Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free, but Christ is all, and in all. For certain
it is, that for those alone Christ offered himself unto the Father, for whom he
prayed unto the Father* but he prayed only for those who were given to him of
the Father (i.e.) only for the elect and not for the world (i.e.) the
Reprobates, as Ioh. 17.9.

Another Argument is used by the Apostle, ver. 6, 7. From the Ordinance of
Christ in the preaching of the Gospel; for it is the good pleasure of God that
this should be as an instrument by which he would exert his own power in
creating and infusing faith into such whom he purposed to save.

When therefore this preaching is designed for the Gentiles likewise, and that
Paul received a Commission for the Preaching of it to the Gentiles, it follows
therefore that there were elect ones among the Gentiles who were to be
converted to the faith that they might be saved; and upon this occasion does he
assert his Apostleship, and confirms it with an oath.

So that to conclude this point, it is Gods will that some of all sorts of men
should be saved, because all sorts of men are to be prayed for. But we are not
to pray for all and singular men of all sorts, for there are some that 1 Ioh.
5.16. we are commanded not to pray for, and Ioh. 17.9. Christ excludes some out
of his prayers, and therefore it is not his will that all men of all sorts
should be saved.

Of a like tendency is the Seventh Text, Titus 2.11.

The grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared to all men. Where the
word all, as in the text before, does not conclude all of all ^^^s, but of all
sorts and conditions of men some, of whom he had been ^^eating in the beginning
of the Chapter, and because (...) ^he had been speaking of servants, to the
comforting of (...) ^^ings this Argument, that the Grace of God that brings
(...) has appeared to all men, without difference hereby inti^ (...) holds not
despicable, even the most abject estate (...) ^dition of men, but that even to
them also, as well as to the greatest, may the free grace of God appear, for he
is no respecter of persons in regard of their outward condition.

Of the like aspect with the former is that allegation out of Heb. 2.9. He
tasted death for every man.

The whole context does evince that the extent thereof concerns only all the
elect or all believers, for who are these all or every man but who ver. 10. he
calls sons brought unto glory, ver. 11. persons sanctified, ver. 11, 12.
brethren of Christ, ver. 13. Children given by God unto Jesus Christ? Now if
these appellations be attributable unto any but to the elect and believers, let
any unbyassed person judge.

Your next encounter is, with what strength you can squeeze out of 2 Pet. 3.9.
wherein I believe you would insist upon the last words, not willing that any
one should perish, but that all should come to repentance.

But if you would light the candle at the former part of the verse, that will
discover who those all are, viz. the elect and believers. The Lord, says the
Apostle, is long-suffering to us ward (i. e.) us whom he has called by the
Gospel, and now does call, not willing that any, viz. of us should perish, but
that all, viz. of us come to repentance.

And for this cause he defers his coming to judgment, at which profane scoffers
say, Where is the promise of his coming? He defers it not for the sake of the
Reprobates for he will come too soon for them, defer the Lord so long as he
please: But he defers it for the sake of the elect, that they all may be
gathered into a fullness of one body unto the unity of the faith, not willing
that any of those elect should perish or be uncalled, but that all of these
elect should come to repentance and to be saved by such means as were
fore-appointed.

That which brings up the rear of all your great achievement, is Luke 2.10,
11, etc. I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to all people,
for unto you is given this day in the city of David a Savior which is Christ
the Lord.

This was the first Sermon that was preached of God incarnate, of Christ
Immanuel God with us, wherein the universal particle All does not signify all
and singular the elect and Reprobate, but only all and singular of those for
whom Christ was born to be a Savior, as appears by these words Mat. 1.21. Mat.
1.21.
where the Angel says with a limitation, He shall save his people from their
sins. Therefore by all people must necessarily be understood o^ all believing
people no^ of the Jews only, but of the Gentile^ also: Besides we find it
otherwise that this joy was not communicated to all and singular, some there
were that had no portion in it, Mat. 2.3.
because Matthew. 2.3. when Herod heard hereof he was troubled, and all Jerusalem
with him. and Pro. 14.10. tells us that the strangers intermeddle not with this
joy.

Mich. 4.11.
And thus having thrown down all your strong holds wherein you trusted as to the
support of that notion of Universal Redemption, I proceed to that other denied
by you, viz. the Baptizing of Infants, wherein you say there is neither precept
nor president of the sprinkling or washing of Infants in his name.

Suppose now that I should tell you that what as to the proof of an ordinance
of Christ here is not sufficient enumeratio partium, for a thing may be at the
appointment of Jesus Christ, and yet neither express precept, nor exact
practice for it standing upon record: I pray Sir tell me if you can, what
precept have you in the letter of the word or practice hanging on the file, for
the change of the seventh day Sabbath, for the abrogation of the one, or
substitution of the other in its stead? No Sir, we have a greater and yet
warrantable latitude in our probates of divine Injunctions, that if a thing can
be proved by a necessary and undeniable consequence, it will equipend with
either precept or president: I could give Instances, 1 Cor. 11.16.
but that is bootless at this time, 1 Cor. 11.16. We have no such custom
neither the Churches of Christ, is a good Argument with the Apostle negatively.
We have such a custom, and so have the Churches of Christ is as good an
argument with us affirmatively, yea even now since the times of the Apostle.

But lest that you should take this rather as a tergiversation than an answer,
I will apply my self more particularly to say some what as to satisfaction. And

1. That there is, a command extant Mat. 28.29. Of Baptizing all the members of
the Church, whereof children are a part, the promises appertaining to them as
well as to those of years.

Acts 2.39.
If you look for a special command and shall deny that Infants are comprehended
under that general command, because they cannot be taught, I must tell you,
that whosoever proposes a thing in general terms, he does thereby comprehend
all specials, unless he make a particular exception: and whatsoever is, and
has been of a perpetuated and continued right and use in the Church of Christ
once established viz. that the covenant of God should be sealed upon the
covenanters, there will be no need of any repetition of any sort or condition
of persons who they are or should be that are intended to be those covenanters:
And yet truly Sir in my judgment, if you were well put to it, you would find
more difficulty in your baptizing of Infants.

And for the qualification you require of these which are to be Baptized, that
is appliable to the primitive Church which was gathered of persons of ripe
years, and as in reference to such they were first to be taught before
Baptized: But for Infants who follow the condition of their parents, the
promises appertaining to the parents being entayled to the children another
course is had.

And as to matter of president, we have examples for the Baptism of whole
families, Acts 16.45, 33. and 1 Cor. 1.16. out of which Infants cannot be
excluded: show me else when and where and upon what grounds that privilege
that Infants formerly had was reversed and repealed, and then you will say
somewhat.

And yet if this will not satisfy, I will put you one argument to boot.

Arg. To whomsoever God is pleased to be a God in covenant, and to make a
covenant-promise, those are to be Baptized by the command of Christ: But to the
Infants of those which are in covenant, God has been pleased to express
himself to be in covenant, and to make covenant-promises unto them: Therefore
such Infants are to be Baptized by the command of Christ.

Both the propositions are confirmed out of Acts 2. The Major from ver. 38. and
39. compared together. Repent and be Baptized every one of you in the name of
Jesus Christ, for the promise is made to you and to your children. The minor
proposition is likewise proved from ver. 39. for the promise is made to your
children. But because that the strength of the Argument may more evidently
appear, I will annex somewhat for Illustration of the text.

1. There is set down the command of being baptized, Be Baptized every one of
you: 2. There is added a reason of the command [for] which is not to be
restrained to the last words in the former verse of receiving the gifts of the
holy Ghost promised in Joel, but of all other gracious blessings of the
Covenant, which will appear by comparing of those places, Acts 3.25. Genesis 17.7.
Ier. 31.33. 3. There is the subject, receiving the promise, which is amplified
by a distribution, where to the parents are joined children, indefinitely
without any manner of difference either of sex or age.

4. Both of them viz. Parents and Children their receiving into the Covenant of
Grace, is most clearly to be gathered from the first Covenant entered into with
Abraham the father of the faithful, whether of Jews or Gentiles, ratified from
Romans 4.10, 11. Where the Infants are accounted in the same condition with the
Parents, and the males were circumcised the eighth day, Genesis 17.10, 11. And
therefore likewise in the New Testament the Infants of Christians are to be
esteemed in the condition of their Christian Parents: they are sanctified in
them, 1 Cor. 7.14. and therefore with them are to be baptized.

More I have written on this subject, and committed it to some of your friends
to reading, which if you desire to peruse, no question you may have the view of
it, but in the mean time do you chew the cud upon this.

Having done with these impertinencies to the business in contest between us,
you proceed to Revolters, of whom you wrote thus. [But that some who have been
professors of the truth have withdrawn themselves from the same it is evident,
and proved Traitors thereunto, as did Judas for love of money, and as Demas, to
embrace this present world; yea, some have been so far corrupted with covetous
practices in these our days, that they have forsaken the right way, and are
gone astray, following the way of Baalam the son of Bosar, who loved the wages
of unrighteousness, for some have withdrawn themselves from the truth, that
they might be partakers with you in their tithes and offerings, and some also
have been led away by the temptations of Satan, and good is the word of the
Lord which has said, Acts 20.30. that of your own selves shall men arise,
speaking perverse things to draw away disciples after them.

But it may be as truly said, that Jesus is not the Christ, because one of his
ministers left him and betrayed him, as it can be said that this is not the way
of Christ, because some turn from it, and prove traitors thereunto.]

of such a society; Yet withal I must tell you, when I see a man taking (as it
were) a lap at the opinions of any one sect tanquam canis ad Nilum, and so
would that, and so goes on to another sect, and after to another, as by woeful
experience we have found in our days, that such unfixed men never set a period
to themselves in their innovating of their opinions, but by a lamentable
gradation jumpe from one to another, and so they may ad insinitum; and this
methinks should be an evident sign to me that such Positions and societies were
somewhat unsavory.

The like do I say for matter of division, of which thus you write; neither is
the division which you talk of amongst the servants of Christ, any safe
argument to conclude that therefore they are not the servants of Christ, for
such things have fallen out amongst those that have been called saints and p
ecious in the sight of God, in that some have been, and are weak, and some are
strong; and so as there are degrees of knowledge amongst the Saints it does
o^casion some difference, as it has formerly done: do we not find that even
two of the Apostles, to wit, Paul and Barnabas, Acts 15.39. (men that truly
feared God) were at some difference, when the men of Ephesus that were
Idolaters, can ry all with one voice, Acts 19.34. Great is Diana of the
Ephesians?

Chard, Islington, and those of yours; but all of them jointly so destructive
to public peace, I may probably con^ecture that i^ is a shrewd prognostic
that their Kingdom is not long to continue.

For that which you say further, and whereas you say that they have left their
Conventicles to be gulled and deluded by the dregs of men etc.

I must tell you, that those dregs of men, as you are pleased disdainfully, and
in scorn to call them, will prove to be those, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28. foolish things
of the world, which God has chosen to confound the wise, and weak things of
the world to confound the mighty and base things of the world, and things which
are despised, which God has chosen to confound those that boast so much of
their own wisdom, and learning, which has been bought for money.

vox and praterea nihil, a great crack of words that signify nothing; they
would have passed better if they had proceeded out of any man's mouth besides
your own. Phil. 2.3. Prove. 26.12.
Sir, where the spirit of Christ is, it is still accompanied with humility and
self-denial, and such esteem of others better then themselves. See thou a man
wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool then of him.

1 Cor. 8.2 1 Cor. 13.9 Act. 8.20.
And for what learning and wisdom God has been pleased to endow any of us
withal, we do, and must acknowledge, it is all beyond desert, and that as yet,
We know nothing as we ought to know, for in this military course of ours, we
know but in part.

Nay it is God especially who illuminates our weak understanding; and therefore
their money perish with them, that think that the gift of God may be purchased
with money.

To con lude the preface; you write, [But it seems that this man, by his
writing, has not been much acquainted with that which is held by those which
he is pleased to call Lunatic spirits, and therefore that which he at the
first sight hastily judges to be error, may upon better trial prove to be
truth; which uses to be unsavory to those that delight in worldly gain, Act.
16.19. and are exercised in a craft by which they have their wealth, Acts
19.35. therefore I do not much wonder that my Position; are unsavory to Parson
Lawson: and so having examined those Arguments which are brought against them,
with much boasting of being unanswerable; I shall endeavor by the assistance
of the most High God to answer to his Arguments, in order as they are stated.

Gen: 41.6.
O my soul, come not thou into their secret, into their Assembly mine honor be
not thou united.

And having thus routed your Preface, and laid it even with the ground, I apply
my self to enter the listes with you about your Positions, wherein you assault
me thus;

The first of the Positions is by this man granted to be a truth, viz.

Position 1. That the most holy and high God did from all eternity, by one sole
and single act, see all whatsoever he purposed to do, or appoint to be done by
any of his creatures.

you will find, that as it is thus stated, it is only my concession and not
your Position; indeed I was ashamed to see such high mysteries to be put into
such an ugly dress, so manacled, tortured, and unjoynted, that a man could not
well distinguish between head and heel, and therefore (by your good leave) I
made bold to new model your Position, and put it into this ga^be as now you see
it, and so as here posited I own it, and do affirm it true; but as by you first
asserted, it may be liable to many exceptions, which because you seem to wave,
and by disclaiming your own, have adopted this as legitimate, I will not put my
self to the trouble to fight against your vain shadows, and so exit your own
Position, Et valeat ut valere potest.

Your next advance is to the rescue of your second Position, viz.

Position 2. That God saw persons embracing the means of salvation, and those
he elected in Christ from the foundation of the world to everlasting life, etc.

This is so far from soundness, (you say) that it is flat Pelagianism, an old
heresy exploded out of the Church for many ages since, by which (you say) that
it must be concluded that the eternal decree of Gods unchangeable election must
be dependent on the intervention of man's liberty, of willing and working, etc.

To which you frame this answer;

What it was that Pelagius the Monk held, you may see in the Ecclesiastical
Chronography of Eusebius Pamphilus page 595. also it makes no matter to me in
these things, it is possible he might hold a truth as well as Calvin: But the
Fathers of whom we have learned these things, are those that have not erred in
their doctrine, which are those before mentioned, to wit, Jesus Christ himself,
the holy Prophets and Apostles: but the Scripture when it speaks of election,
makes it to be altogether independent on the creature, so as that nothing acted
or done by the creature is to be accounted of as a motive, incentive,
meritorious or procuring ground or cause (as this man does endeavor to cast
upon me) I freely grant to be a truth according to the Scriptures by him
brought in, Ephesians. 1.5, 11.

Pelagius, cried down by all antiquity as well as by all our modern^ for his
detracting from the free grace of God, and exalting of the liberty of the will,
and placing it in Gods stead, at least putting them cheek by jowl together.

For though by other several Chronographers the grosseness of his heresy be
more copiously painted out, yet in the tripartite History according to you
cited, there is to be found so much as to abominate even the name of the man,
by reason of his cursed opinion, being there ranked out in the column of
Heretics; and therefore it seems a wonder to me, that any one that is but a
pretender to Religion, should have so much impudence, and be so Galliolized,
Act. 18.17
as not to care for these things. But to put him into the scales with reverend
Calvin, Psalm. 112.6.
whose good name shall be had in an everlasting remembrance, and whose luster
will dazzle all your new lights, I know none besides your self would have had
the face of brass to have done it.

For the latter part of this paraphrase, in your confession of Gods
independency on outward things, and that he has not from thence any motive or
incentive, etc. for his election of any; I heartily thank you, especially if I
could imagine that this did not proceed ex labiis dolosis, but that it were
done in reality and truth; but when I find that this acknowledgement of yours
does so much interfere with your often dictates, I shall only judge of you as
of that clown in the fable, who blows both hot and cold with one breath: here
you seem to ascribe all to the good pleasure of Gods will in the business of
election, but otherwhere (as I shall hereafter manifest) a man's free will
(according to you) in working and believing must be joynt-parceners with God,
so that the vote shall be, as was the Harlots which came before Solomon to
determine of the dead child, 1 King. 4.26.
nec mihi nec tibi, sed dividatur, let it be neither mine nor thine, but divide
it.

You go one with your discourse [neither is there any thing in this Position
tending to the exaltation of the creature, to be any motive, or incentive
cause, for which God elects as a meritorious or procuring ground or cause of
it; for to say God saw some men embracing the means of salvation, or that the
embracing the means of salvation is a meritorious or procuring ground or cause
of our election, any more then the words of the holy Spirit, spoken by David,
Psalm. 4.3. But know that the Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself;
should be a meritorious cause of the godly man's being set apart, or chosen to
the Lord; neither is there any more ground or cause, to call the words of this
Position flat Pelugianism, or an old heresy, then there is to call the words
of David so.

Delphian Oracle (whether out of curiosity or necessity it matters not) that
the responses of the Flamens were so abstruse and equivocall, that which way
soever the success did fall, yet they might have a starting hole to preserve
the credit of their Oracle. As for instance, in one of their answers, Ibis,
redibis, nunquam per bella peribis; the issue thereof being contrary to
expectation, they made another sense of the words only by pointing of them
thus, Ibis, peribis nunquam, per bella peribis: and truly howsoever all those
Oracles ceased at the coming of Christ in the flesh, yet methinks I see the
same spirit of delusion now working in these children of darkness; for look
upon this man as to his Positions here, so by others his accomplices, the
Arminians, and Socinians, when they find themselves pincht by any Argument,
that they can find no subterf ge for evasion, then they betake themselves to
shifts of Amphibology, and fall to denying of the proper sense and scope of
their own tenets, because perhaps not comprehended in express syllables and
words of their Positions; for this man with whom I have to deal, though he
wants not that face of brass to deny, that there is nothing couched under the
Position, to exalt the creature, as in whom there should be somewhat which God
should look upon as a motive or procuring ground or cause for God to elect such
so qualified: Yet by the assistance of my God I shall clearly make it to appear
in my defense of my first Argument, that (according to these men) believing or
faith, and perseverance therein, is such a condition prerequisite, and so looked
upon by God in the Act of election, as without which he elects not, and for
which he does elect, and so becomes a moving or procuring cause why he does
elect any one, as is generally by them maintained.

For that Scripture alleged Psalm. 4.3. is nihil ad Rhombum, being quite alien
from the case depending; we are now treating of the eternal and Immanent act of
God in electing before all time, and the place quoted is to be understood of
Gods effectual vocation, a transient act of God in time: where he actually sets
apart him, (i. e.) him that is in existence and being: him that is Godly, (i.
e.) such who by the inward working of his spirit he has made Godly: For
himself (i. e.) to do him service, and live to his glory. See Exodus 33.16.

Or else this may be understood, and that the scope of the place bears
necessarily; That the Lord has set apart for some place (...) of eminency,
office and trust, him that is Godly as David was, for to be more Instrumental
for the glory of God and good of his people. What you write that there is no
more ground or cause t^ call the words of this position Pelagianism, or an old
heresy, tha^ there is to call the words of David so, is but mere vapor and
smoke, because the words of David bear no proposition, nor do not in the least
degree carry any correspondence with the position.

To what you write, [for if him that is Godly (or believers o^ those that
embrace the means of salvation) be not those that God has elected in Christ to
eternal life, then show me by plain Scripture Proof (if you can) who they be,
and what be their names that we may know them] I answer roundly thus.

(i. e.) that are Godly, that are believers, and that in sincerity and truth,
such carry the evidence in themselves, their faith and Godliness are arguments,
symptoms, signs to them that they are elected: And that as Ephesians. 1.4. he is
said there to elect some that they should be holy; so God has elected such
numerical persons that he will with^l in his good time make them godly, make
them believers, make them to embrace the means of salvation by working all
their works in them. Esa. 26.12


Yet God has not elected any whom he foresaw that by the power of his own free
will, and liberty of choosing and refusing, would be Godly or would believe, or
would embrace the means; no, the object of election was of men in their blood,
Ezekiel. 6.16. enemies, Romans 5.10. ungodly, Romans 4.5. sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15.

And this indeed is the main that I so zealously contend for, to beat down all
worth or excellency in the creature, and to ascribe the sole glory unto God in
making him the Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, in the whole
transaction of man's salvation, and which my Adversary implicitly denies,
though in express terms he is ashamed to profess it with a full mouth; 1 Samuel
15.14.
what mean else the bleatings of these words in my ears, page 13. I should sin
against Christ if I should say that believing in him were no cause at all: and
page 39. as it is the good pleasure of God to let the sons of men enjoy a
sufficiency of means, etc. so he gives them liberty in the right use thereof in
the day of Grace, to choose or refuse; and it cannot be otherwise, so a choice
must needs be at liberty, and if there were not a liberty given of God in these
things, etc. Mary has chosen the better part, etc. But of these in their
several places,

What further you write [Shew me by plain Scripture (if you can) who they be,
and what be their names, that we may know them] is a question more suitable to
be proposed by a boy of four years old,, for if he had been older, a rod had
been fitter for him then an answer. And yet let me tell you, Rev. 2.17. Rev.
5.1. Kev. 20.12.
that those which are elected, when once they come to be believers, they have a
new name given which no man knows, saving he that receives it, and the book
wherein their names are written, is as yet a sealed book. But when the book
shall be opened, which is the book of life, then it shall be legible, even in
such great Characters, that he that runs may read who they be, and what be
their names. In the mean time the secret things belong to the Lord our God,
Deuteronomy. 29.29.
but those things which are revealed, belong unto us, and to our Children for
ever, that we may do them.

You further say [and if these Scriptures, to wit, Psalm. 37. from verse. 9. to
verse. 21. Prove. 3.33, 34, 35 and Mar. 16.16. together with many other of the
sayings of the holy Spirit in the Scripture, that have the like sound, be not
for substance a true copy of Gods decree of Election and Reprobation from the
foundation of the world, then show us a true Copy of it if you can.

2 Timothy 3.6.
endeavor to obtrude upon a simple people, by creeping into houses, and
leading captive silly people laden with sin: But tell me Sir, though it may be
possible for you to delude your dull-sighted proselytes with such fopperies as
these; is it with you imaginable that men of parts and gifts will swallow down
such gudgeons, such Camels; revise the Scriptures that you there cited, and see
whether any part of any one of them breath the least air, as to matter of
Election or Reprobation whether any of them; carries any import, either in
express words, or by way of consequence, to these eternal decrees.

And that it may appear that I charge you not unadvisedly, let us take a view
of the Scriptures apart.

1 For that Psalm. 37.9. to verse. 21. The scope of that Psalm is to direct the
Godly how to deport themselves, especially in reference to the wicked when
flourishing in prosperity, and to this end 1 He sets down what their duty is.
2. He presses that duty by several Arguments. Their first duty is that they
beware of ang^^ and envy, whereto they might be tempted upon that occasion o^
the wickeds prosperity, ver. 1.7.8.

2 That on the contrary they fortify themselves with faith and hope in God,
ver. 3, 5, 6.

The arguments he uses for confirmation are drawn

1 From the end and issue of both their conditions, how both the Godly and
wicked shall succeed. viz. it shall fall out well for the Godly, but ill for
the wicked, ver. 9, 10, 11.

A 2. Is drawn from the cause of this issue and event, viz. the efficatious
providence of God, from the 12 ver. to the 21 ver. which is illustrated by the
effects, as 1. The confusion of the wicked in their evil counsel, ver. 12, 13,
14, 15.

2 By blessing of the little which the righteous man has, beyond all the
riches of many wicked ones. 3 by a protection and deliverance of the Godly man
from those evils wherein the wicked are overwhelmed, verse. 20, 23, 24. now what
is all this to Election or Reprobation?

For the place of Prove. 3.33, etc. Solomon in all the former part of that
chapter exhorts to an endeavor after diverse Graces, as the contents thereof
do imply. The argument whereby he presses it, is from the diverse end and
issue of those who are adorned with, and those who want those graces, which are
expressed in these three last verses by you cited: But what is this, likewise, to
election or Reprobation? which are eternal acts before all time, and these are
transient acts being wrought in time.

For that of Mar. 16.16. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, but
he that believes not shall be damned.

I do readily acknowledge it a point declaratory of the Gospel, for the way and
means that God himself has designed for the saving of souls; but mark the
manner of the discovery; it says, He that believes shall be saved, but it
says not, he that believes shall be elected, which is the business you are
about.

It shows that faith or believing is an ingredient, and enters into the decree
of the means conducing to the end, which is salvation, but it is not the decree
it self of election, which all along you shamefully confound; jumbling together
the decree and the means, so that for want either of wit or will, you do not at
all distinguish, between the Decree of election it self, of saving a certain
company, which is the end, and the decree of the execution of the means tending
to that end.

And thus any one may see what a fair copy you have drawn of Gods decree of
Election and Reprobation, by such impertinent proofs, which give no light at
all to the point controverted.

Which does much amaze me, that a man that arrogates to himself to be a teacher
of a selected company, that shall make his brags (as I have heard you have
done) that with his own hands he has dipped so many, should yet feed his
over-credulous auditors with such extravagancies as these are.

Truly Sir, if your luck be not better in your popular teachings then you are
in this, you will neither reap credit, nor the people profit.

And unless you can bring more apposite texts of Scripture to prove your
Doctrinals, then you do here for the proof of your Polemicals, you will make
but blew work of it.

And whereas you say, [shew us a true copy of it if you can] Sir, for the
satisfying you in this, and that my procedure may be the more regular in what
shall follow, I conceive it will be no digression to give you a preliminary, in
brief Characters, of the Decrees of God, of Prescience, of Predestination, of
Election, and Reprobation.

1. The decree of God, is an action of God out of the counsel and purpose of
his own will, determining all things, and all the circumstances, and order of
all things from eternity, in himself; certainly and unchangeably, and yet
freely, Acts 2.23. and 4.28. and 11.18.

For whatsoever either the creature does, or God about the creature, that from
eternity was decreed, that it should be so done.

This decree of God, we find it under several appellations in the Scripture,
sometimes styled the Counsel of God, Acts 4.28. sometimes the determinate
Counsel, Acts 2.23. sometimes Good pleasure, Ephesians. 1.9. sometimes Good
pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1.5. sometimes the counsel of his will, Ephesians.
1.11. sometimes the purpose of God, Romans 9.11. 2 Timothy 1.9. sometimes
foreknowledge of God, Romans 8.29. and 11.2. sometimes the will of God, Romans 9.18.

Wherein yet we use that one and accustomed word of Decree, to help our weak
capacities, as being the Judgment, Counsel and Will of God, which is indeed
God himself willing and decreeing.

Not that we do conceive any ratiocination, deliberation and collection from
premises to conclusion, proceeding from one thing to another, which are usually
incident to antecede the edicts and decrees of men; no, we dare not reduce God
to such straits, for what God herein does, it is by one single simple and
eternal act of the will determining and decreeing what himself will do or
permit to be done.

And for those decrees of God, such is the freedom and liberty of that will of
his (which is himself willing) that there can be assigned no cause at all,
either efficient, meritorious, or final, without himself, he being the primum
movens, which moves all things, and is moved of none.

But if we have a respect to the effects of those Decrees in the creature, and
so there may be assigned causes both efficient, meritorious and final: for so
has God decreed to confer salvation and glory on the elect by, for, and
through the merit of Jesus Christ, and so likewise eternally to punish the
reprobate for their sin, both of these to be manifested to the praise of his
free grace and justice.

Having spoken thus of the decrees in general, I proceed next to the
foreknowledge of God as the effect following its cause.

I mean not that which is indefinitely called in the Schools simplicis
intelligentiae, which is the essential knowledge of God, and which is extended
to all things knowable, both possible and impossible; but that which is
definite and intuitive, called Scientia visionis, and that is;

A certain and infallible knowledge of things which are to come to pass: of
this you may see Acts 15.18. Job 28.24. Heb. 4.13. Psalm. 139.2, 12. 2 Timothy 2.19.

For whereas no forgetfulness can befall the Deity which by his decree he has
determined: so is his foreknowledge certain.

Yet this foreknowledge is so to be understood, not that it is dependent on the
things that are to come to pass, but merely on the decree of God determining of
the futurity of things, and this is called practical foreknowledge.

But whereas all the decrees of God are as himself, Immutable, as Numb. 23.23.
1 Samuel 15.29. Psalm. 33.11. Genesis 14.24, 27. Mal. 3.16. Heb. 6.17. as being acted
by him that is most wise and Almighty, and that this foreknowledge resting on
this immutable decree is infallible: Hence does arise a double necessity of the
futurition of things, but both Hypothetical and conditional; the one is a
necessity of Immutability, as in reference to the decree; the other a necessity
of infallibility, as in reference to the foreknowledge: this is clearly
gathered out of Luke 24.26, 27, 44, 46. and 1 Cor. 11.15.

But this they have in respect of the first agent; but in themselves, and as by
reason of secundary agents or causes they may still continue contingent and
free.

The third in order is Predestination, which I define to be an eternal,
immutable, most wise and efficacious decree wherein God according to his mere
good pleasure, out of the whole lump of mankind, fallen and lost in Adam, has
decreed to save some by Jesus Christ the mediator, to the praise of his most
glorious Grace, and the rest to leave in that miserable state, and at the last
for their sins to reward them with eternal punishment for the manifestation of
his liberty and justice.

That this is dependent on the mere good pleasure of God, see Matthew. 11.26.
Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. Luke 12.32. It is your
fathers good pleasure to give you a kingdom. 1 These. 5.9. the Apostle there
comprehends both Election and Reprobation in a few words: He has not appointed
us unto wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ.

All which shall tend to the glory of God, for to that end was man created,
Prove. 16.4. Ephesians. 1.15.

And therefore neither have the elect cause for which they should boast,
because what they do receive is of undeserved grace; 1 Cor. 4.7.
neither are those who are pretermitted cause to complain, whiles they have but
their deserved reward, Romans 9.
the Potter having power over his lump of clay, to make one vessel to honor
another to dishonor.

That which has the fourth place is Election, which is not to be understood of
an election to a civil or sacred place or office, as 1 Samuel 10.24. John 6.70.
Nor of a people separated to a special Covenant, as Deuteronomy. 4.37. Nor only of
such as were called to the outward profession of the Gospel, whereof a Church
may consist, as 1 Cor. 1.27. But it is,

A personal, definite and immutable separation of certain singular men, from
the rest of mankind, and preordaining them to salvation, by such means as it
has pleased him to appoint in his most wise decre, Matthew. 20.16. and 24.24.
Mar. 13.20. Romans 11.7.

And means for the execution of this decree of election are Redemption by Jesus
Christ, effectual vocation, justification by faith, and sanctification joined
with perseverance, Romans 8.29, 30. Ephesians. 1.4. 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. 1 Pet. 1.2. Act.
13.48. Tit. 1. 1. Phil. 1.6.

In election Christ is the basis and head thereof, Ephesians. 1.4, 5. both in that he
was designed by the Father as a Redeemer of the elect, 2 Cor. 5.18. Esa. 12.2.
As also because that such so elected were given to Christ to be redeemed by him
and to be brought unto glory. Ioh. 17.6. and 10.16. So that Christ is enrolled
in the decree of election, not as a meritorious cause of it, nor as the
foundation thereof, but as executing that decree, and the meritorious cause of
grace and glory to be conferred upon the elect according to the decree of God.

Faith likewise, sanctification, good works and perseverance, are ingredients
in the decree consequently, as means ordained to the end by that decree, but
not antecedently, as the foundation or causes upon foresight whereof our
election does depend.

For if upon the foresight of our faith, or foreseeing who would believe, or
embracing of the means, or continuance therein, our election should depend,
then were it necessary that the same should be foreseen in us, either as those
graces or works, wrought in us by our selves, and of our own innate strength,
or else wrought in us only by God, and of his grace and gift alone: If youl'
say they proceed as from our selves, as from the innate activity and choice of
our own free will, then have we whereof to boast, and then have we made our
selves to differ from others, contrary to that of 1 Cor. 4.7. for what makes
thee to differ from another, and what have thou that thou did not receive?
now if thou did receive it, what do thou glory is if thou had not
received it? But if we have received that grace from God, and that it be only
of his working in us to give us faith and repentance from dead works, etc. Then
God has decreed to give us those graces, which since they are infallible means
unto salvation, therefore they are to be drawn and derived from infallible
election, wherein salvation is decreed unto us; for the further clearing whereof
consult these places, Matthew. 11.25, 26. Luke. 12.32. 1 Timothy 1.9. Romans 9.11, 12.
and 11.5. Ephesians. 1.4. Romans 8.29, Ioh. 15.16. Acts 13.48. 1 Cor. 7.25. Ioh. 6.37.
and 8.47. 2 Timothy 2.19. Matthew. 24.24. 1 Ioh. 2.19.

The last proposed is Reprobation, which is the eternal, Immutable, and most
free decree of God, wherein a certain company of men, considered in an alike
lump and mass of corruption and guilt with all others, he has decreed to pass
them by and not to have mercy upon them, neither to confer on them the means
tending to salvation, but leaving them in their sin whereinto they had cast
themselves, for the same sin to condemn them, for the manifestation of his
liberty, and justice, and power.

This reprobation (by a metonymy) is styled in Scripture Hatred. Romans 9.13. So
the purpose of God, Romans 9.11, that determined counsel of God, Acts 2.23. the
good pleasure of God, Mat. 12.25, 26. And the Reprobates are called vessels of
wrath fitted to destruction. Romans 9.22. men of old ordained to condemnation,
disobedient, whereunto they were appointed, 1 Pet. 2.8. Appointed unto wrath, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. wicked made for the day of evil, Pro. 16.4.

All which do argue, that God is the efficient cause of Reprobation, and that
hell fire is prepared for such Goats as well as for the Devil and his Angels,
Matthew. 25.41. that God must be the efficient cause of Reprobation, as well as
of election, appears in this, that as he elects (i. e.) decrees to save some,
so likewise he decrees to Reprobate (i. e.) to pass by and leave others, and
not elect them, as Matthew. 24.40, 41. For else had not he fore-determined what
to do with a great part of mankind, but to have left them to an uncertain
event, which is unsuitable to his wisdom.

Now the act of God in Reprobating may be distinguished into a negative and
privative act (i.e.) of not granting salvation, nor conferring means of
salvation; and into an affirmative or positive act (i. e.) of inflicting
damnation, and of blinding and hardening.

After both these ways the Scripture sets forth Reprobation.

1 Negatively, Mat. 7.23. and 25.12. I know you not. Ioh. 10.26. you are not of
my sheep. Ioh. 17.19. I pray not for the world. Matthew. 13.11. to them it is not
given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven: 2 Affirmatively, Romans
9.13. Esau have I hated, Romans 9.22. vessels of wrath sitted to destruction.
Romans 9.18. whom he will he hardens. Ioh. 12.39, 40. They could not believe,
because he had blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts.

So that if it be demanded wherefore God when he saw all men in an alike
condition, sinners and children of wrath, Reprobated some (i. e.) did not elect
them, or suffered not his face to shine on them, as he did on others, viz.
those which he did elect, no reason can be assigned for this, but the absolute
good pleasure of his will.

But if it be demanded, why he does not confer salvation on them, or glorify
their persons in heaven, but contrarily inflicts upon them eternal torments in
hell, here the cause is assigned to be their own sins. Matthew. 25.41, 42. Go
ye cursed into everlasting fire, for I was hungry, etc. and Romans 6.23. the
wages of sin is death.

And therefore in the matter of Reprobation God is to be looked upon partly as a
sovereign, who has the sole power and dominion over his creature, Psalm.
145.17. Genesis 18.25.
and partly as a Judge, who is righteous in all his ways and does right to
every man: As a sovereigne, and so according to his absolute power and liberty,
dependent on his own will and accountable to none, it is lawful for him to do
what he will with his own, etc.

Mat. 29.15. Romans 11.35.
As a just Judge, and so he punishes none but for sin, Romans 1 32. 2 Thessalonians.
1.6.

And thus having drawn you a fair copy of election and Predestination, I am now
at leisure to see what you will say to my first Argument, which in form is
this.

If the rise of our election be sounded on the mere mercy and free grace of
God, then it is not upon Gods foresight of man's embracing the means of
salvation.

But it is founded in the mere mercy and free grace of God, therefore not upon
the foresight of the embracing the means.

To which you frame this answer.

The first proposition or Major he says is unquestionable, and that is all the
proof that we have from him for it, saying, there is but one cause to produce
the effect. The Minor he brings Scripture for the proof of it, the truth of
which I do not question; the Scriptures are, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. and 10.15. Matthew.
20.15. Luke 12.32. Romans 9.11, 18, 21. Ephesians. 1.5, 11. 2 Timothy 1.9.

The Minor it appears you give fair quarter to, and let it pass upon its
paroll. It Is the major you quarrel at, as having nothing to second it but this,
saying that there is but one cause to produce the effect; and truly Sir, I
believe that might have been unquestionable to any but you and your comrades,
who do nodum in scirpo quaerere. I had thought it might have past for
unquestionable divinity, that God is so jealous a God that he will not
communicate his glory to any other, and that if any act of Grace pass singly
and solely from himself, that then no other creature could have been a
copartner with him, and that if of grace, then not of works, (which is nothing
else but the embracing of the means.) And to that foundation (which was laid
before all time) other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, especially
in time. And that, as to the foreknowledge of God or his foresight, God does
not foresee any thing which he has not decreed either efficaciously to do, or
permit to be done. So that his foreknowledge should rest upon the decree, and
at no hand to depend on the things to be done, but that all things depend upon
that, and that God did see nothing in their causes, which he did not before see
in his decree, these I thought had been unquestionable truths, till Thomas
Faswel calls them into question, pretending that though grace may be of free
and mere mercy, yet there may be a concurrence of man's actings in the embracing
of the means.

And whence does all this arise but from an embasing of the Majesty of God, by
measuring his corn by your bushel, Isa. 55.8, 9.
making his ways like our ways, and his thoughts like our thoughts?

No Sir, I would have you go to school and learn the vast difference between
humane and divine knowledge; humane knowledge does depend upon the existence of
things, and things are the measure thereof; but for divine knowledge, that is
the measure of things, and things depend upon that, not that on them.

And certainly unless this be granted, the foundation of divine providence must
needs come to wrack, God could not hold his prerogative royal of being the
first cause of all things; yea second causes would be made independent in many
acts, yea consequently in all: for how the second cause could work, or be
appointed to work without the concourse of the first cause, it looks like
contradictio in objecto.

Or how else could God certainly foresee such things to come to pass, which are
supposed only to be foreseen, and not withal to be provided for and
preordained? For as the things are, so is the knowledge of the things, and that
which has not certain causes of futurition, cannot certainly be foreknown; for
certainly to foreknow what is not certainly to come to pass, is to have a
knowledge of a thing, not as what it is, but as what it is not, and what will
then become of Gods foreknowledge?

But whereto tends the design of the adversary? surely that an in let may be
made, and beds of roses trodden out, to introduce that great Diana, the liberty
of the will, to choose or refuse what shall be presented to it, notwithstanding
all prescience or decree and to make that a ^oynt-share with God, nay if not to
have the greatest predominan y in the whole work of man's salvation so placing
nature in the stead and room of grace; but let God b^ true and all men liars.
For mine own sake, yea even for mine own sake will I do it, and I will not give
my glory unto another, Isa. 48.12.

You double your alarm against my Major thus.

But notwithstanding he sets such a strong guard upon his Major, saying it
is unquestionable, yet I must needs question the the man's meaning in the sequel
or consequence of it, Then it is not upon Gods foresight of man's embracing the
means of salvation.]

Non veniunt e pharetris istae sagittae tuis.

Sir, you are too well known, then that any man can believe you that you can
spit out Greek, and speak in a dream, of propositions Categorical,
Hypothetical, antecedent, consequent, Major, Minor, sequel, etc. It was not the
Serpent that spoke, but the Devil in the Serpent. Judge. 14.18.
Doubtless you plough with another man's heifer.

Not that I atttribute any such excellency to the piece, for as it will appear,
it is full gorged with abundance of falsities, incongruities, inconsistencies,
that no professed Scholar might own it, and therefore what Davus soever it was
that was your confederate, he thought it best to lie coucht under the shadow of
your wing, and so make you his Bellerophon, his packhorse, to bear all his
absurdities, shame and scorn; and so you must, for I know none else that will
proceed as you do.

[Now if his meaning be that God does not at all respect the embracing of the
means of salvation, then it is by me denied: for although man's believing, and
obeying the Gospel, or embracing the means of salvation, be not to be accounted
of as a motive, incentive, or a procuring ground or cause for which God elects
men and women to eternal life, yet it has been the good will and pleasure of
our God, through his loving kindness and freeness of his grace, even when he
was at liberty, and might have left mankind in that lost and perishing
condition that man's sin had brought him into, and have been just in so doing
but I say, it has been his pleasure, when he was at liberty, to engage himself
by purpose and decree, to elect, justify and save all those men and women,
that did or should in time embrace the means of salvation, which from before
the foundation of the world he did intend to tender unto fallen mankind by his
son Jesus Christ, and did not look at any thing that was in the creature, or
should be acted by the creature, as any motive by which he was drawn thereunto;
but the moving cause was the fountain of everlasting love that was in himself
toward his poor perishing creature, freely to enter into an engagement, by
purpose and decree, and from that purpose and decree, to make forth promises in
the Scripture, that are, 1 Cor. 1.20. yea and Amen in Christ Jesus, to the
glory of God by us, that all sort or kind of people that do embrace the means
of salvation, to wit, the free tenders of grace in the Gospel, and continue in
the faith and way of Jesus with a single heart and humble mind to the end of
their lives, Matt. 24.13. shall undoubtedly be saved: and God can as soon cease
to be, as that he should fail in making good these promises to that sort or
kind of people aforesaid, because they flow from his purpose and decree which
is unchangeable like unto himself, as I shall by the assistance of God,
hereafter make appear in the following discourse.]

viz. salvation, to which there was no motive or incentive, whether of faith
foreseen, or embracing of the means, or continuing therein, or any thing else;
yet withal (as before hinted) I do maintain that the same God that determined
of the end, did likewise decree unto such persons so elected fit and suitable
means conducing to that end, viz. that he would send his Son to become a
propitiation for them, that he would effectually call them by his Gospel, that
he would give them faith to answer that call by believing, that he would
justify their persons and sanctify their natures, and keep them by his power
through faith unto salvation.

And whereas he writes, [although man's believing and obeying the Gospel, be not
a motive, incentive, or procuring ground or cause, for which God elects etc.]
who would not think here, but that this man meant plainly and honestly; but
tuta frequensque via est sub amici fallere nomen; for mark what follows: [but
it has been the good will and pleasue of God to engage himself by purpose and
decree, to elect, justify and save all those men and women that did or should
in time embrace the means of salvation.]



It is very true, and it is a Gospel-declaration, that God will save all those
that he does justify, and who do embrace the means in sincerity and truth,
Romans 8.29. Ephesians. 6.24. But if he prove out of any part of the Bible from Genesis
to the Revelation, that God will elect all those that do or shall embrace the
means of salvation, I will give him the cause, and cry peccavi: and it is to be
marked, that we are about the point of election, and not of justification, and
therefore all such proofs that speak only of justification, and not
specifically of election, are alien to the point.

For all the rest of his words, if the grant may gratify him, I will freely
give him, viz. that all sorts of people that do embrace the means, to wit, the
free tenders of grace in the Gospel, shall undoubtedly be saved. But what is this
to the Argument of Election?

You further add [But if by these words, Then it is not upon Gods foresight of
men's embracing the means, but only that the embracing of the means is not a
motive or moving cause for which God elects, then his Argument is true in every
part of it; but I have some cause to except against the sequel of his major
proposition, viz. then it is not upon Gods foresight of men's embracing the
means; not so much in respect of any untruth I find in it, if his meaning be as
aforesaid, but the exception that I make against it, is in respect of the terms
of it, because it varieth from the position, not answering the expressions of
it; for the position does not say, that God elected men upon the foresight of
their embracing the means, but the substance that is in it, is that God saw
some men embracing the means those he elected; and therefore if it had answered
to it, it should have spoken thus, Then God has not elected those men which he
saw embracing the means of salvation; and then it had been so palpably false,
that it must needs have been denied without any further trouble; but as it is
it may be a truth, and yet proves nothing in the position to be false.]

Sir, what need all these frothy words to wast time and to spoil clean paper?
you know my sense is, that the embracing of the means is not a motive or moving
cause for which God does elect, and howsoever it is that you are ashamed to
outface so much clear light of the Scripture which confirms this truth, but
that your pretense is, that you except against my Argument in respect of the
terms of it, because (as you say) it varieth from the Position, not answering
the expressions of it:

The substance whereof is this, that God saw some men embracing the means,
those he elected. Therefore now I must deal plainly and roundly with you, and
shall unkennel you our of yout fox-holes.

You know the Watermen on the Thames when they cry Westward Hoe, they have
their faces Eastward; So whiles you here pretend against motives, incentives,
or procuring causes of election, yet in very deed and truth, you are most
mainly for them, as I shall, God assisting me, make plainly to appear.

Sir, possible it is, that you may not dive into the bottom of this mystery of
Iniquity, nor foresee at such a distance as you are, into the depth of this
design, and therefore may with the more confidence protest against, and utterly
disclaim all motives, incentives, or procuring grouds or causes why God elects
any, but ascribe all to the good pleasure of his will, as in words you seem to
assert.

But if we cast a reflexe eye upon this Heresy [I mean for eternal causes of
election] as it was at first hatched by Pelagius, though shortly after it was
crushed by a Council, and next again revived in part by the Semipelagian
Papists, and at last refined and put into a new garb, by those Interpolators,
your correspondents the Arminians, it will be very visible to all considerate
men, that howsoever in words you deny any moving cause in respect of election,
yet so long as the substance thereof is contained in your Positions, and that
you grant the force and virtue of a moving cause unto faith in respect of Gods
electing, it must thence be concluded that you assert some moving causes, and

That faith is looked upon by you as a moving cause will appear by these ensuing
Arguments.

1. I know it will not be stood upon by you, nor any of your gang, that faith
is a condition or qualification so looked upon by God, as that without which he
does not elect, no (as we affirm) that to such persons so elected he decrees to
give it, but (according to you) that where he finds it (which is the sense of
their foresight) there or those he will elect; and if thus, tell me in sober
sadness, what difference can you make between a qualification or condition
wherein God places his purpose and decree, and that which we call a moving
cause.

2. In election you make believers the adequate object thereof, and faith is
made the formal reason of this object; now this is a known axiom to those
versed in these controversies, Ratio formalis adaequati objecti semper est
specificans causa illius habitus, potentiae vel actus cujus est objectum. That
the formal reason of the adequate object is always a specifying cause of the
habit, power, or act whereof it is the object. So a thing that is good, being
apprehended by the intellect is the cause of willing, because it has the
reason of its formal object.

So after the same manner when you set down faith in respect of election as the
formal reason of the object, and that (as you teach) God has from without
himself proper causes of willing, you can give no just reason why we may not
say, that you make faith the cause of election.

3. This moreover I believe you will not deny, that what place infidelity has
in the point of Reprobation, the like should faith have in the point of
election (as being opposite species:) But (according to you) infidelity is not
only affirmed to be the cause of Reprobation, but the contrary doctrine is
cried down by you as most abominable, and therefore in election, should faith
be the cause thereof.

4. If faith does determine the will of God (being otherwise indifferent) to
choose one rather then another, then it is a cause of election: But (according
to you) faith has this determining power, for (with you) besides faith and the
embracing of the means nothing antecedes the decree of election which is not
common to the non-elect, and nothing that is common does determine; and
therefore it is necessary, that the reason of the determination be placed in
faith and embracing of the means; so that notwithstanding all your fair
flourishes of denial of motives, causes and in^entives, I must needs conclude
that you do (at least implicitly) assert faith foreseen in those that will
believe is the motive cause and procuring ground of Gods electing any to
salvation.

And thus I conceive my first Argument stands in its full strength
notwithstanding the assaults of your dudgeon dagger drawn aginst it: So that
this may be enough to those who are wise to understand that which is good; and
for others I shall sit down quietly upon Solomon's account, Prove. 27.22. Though
thou should bray a fool in a mortar with a pestle, yet will not his
foolishness depart from him.

But in the close of this you except against some of those portions of
Scripture by me cited, saying [It is to be minded that the people spoken of in
those Scriptures by him quoted out of Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. and 10.15. are said in the
first verse of the seventh Chapter, to be a holy people unto the Lord their
God; and those people which are said at that time to be a holy people, and
chosen to be a special people unto the Lord their God, above all the people
that were upon the face of the earth, afterward, for their murmuring against
God, and tempting of him ten times, and not hearkening to his voice, were
destroyed in the wilderness, and their carcasses fell in the wilderness through
their unbelief: and doubtless, says God, you shall not come into the land
concerning which I swear to make you dwell therein, Numb. 14.29, 30. and thus
they came to know his breach of promise, verse. 34. See also Heb. 3.16, 17, 18,
19.

Sir, this excursion of yours I imagine is intended upon another account, viz.
to lay a stumbling block in the Saints way that they may fall away from grace
received: for in so far as I made use of them to prove that there was no
external motive in the object, neither of holiness nor believing, for which God
did set his love upon them to elect them, those places alleged will carry it
clear enough.

And therefore to what you mind, that they are called, ver. 6. a Holy people: I
hope you will distinguish of the holiness of a people.

There is first, an external and federal holiness, and this they had by
circumcision, outward profession, and as being visible covenanters.

Secondly, Internal and real holiness, wrought only by the finger of God, in
changing of their natures, and making of them new creatures: it is the first that
is here meant, and not the second.

And whereas you write (that these people which are here called a holy people
fell in the wilderness through unbelief) Sir, I must tell you, that I do not
take you to be so excellent at Chronography, as to make it appear, that they
were these numerical people here spoken of, See 1 Cor. 10.5. with many God not
well pleased.
that so fell in the wilderness. But admit they were, it is said, their
carcasses fell in the wilderness, (i. e.) they died in the wilderness; but what
follows hence? did they all therefore fall into hell? Absit, God forbid that
any one should make such a desperate conclusion.

But youl'e say, they fell through unbelief, yet I must tell you that though
they wanted that historical faith in not believing the relations of the
searchers of the land of Canaan, See 1 Cor. 10.4. they drank of that spiritual
rock and that rock was Christ. Numb. 23.19.
yet they might have a saving and justifying faith in believing Christ should
be crucified for them, notwithstanding what is here or can be alleged to the
contrary.

But why you set these words [and thus they came to know his breach of promise]
in words at length and not in figures, I am unwilling to deliver my thoughts;
But do you think that God is a man that he should lie, or as the son of man,
that he should repent? has he said, and shall he not do it; or has he spoken,
and shall he not make it good? Isa. 46.10.
no, his counsel shall stand, and he will do all his pleasure.

But this is spoken by an Anthropopathy, bringing in God to do after the manner
of men, for our weak capacities.

For the temporal promises of God are but conditions, as 2 Chronicles, 15.2. 2 Chronicles. 15.2.
The Lord is with you while you be with him: and if you seek him he will be
found of you, but if you forsake him, he will forsake you.

God had promised them, sworn to them, that they should enter into Canaan, but
they brought up an evil report concerning that land, they murmured against God,
who hereupon told them, that they should not come into that land, but wander
forty years in the wilderness, till their carcasses were wasted, and so they
should know his breach of promise, or altering his purpose (as the margin has
it.) Had they made good their promise he would have made good his promise, but
because they brake with him in sinning, he brake with them in punishing, and so
here was exact justice, lex talionis. The like we have Ezekiel. 16.59. I will even
deal with thee as thou have done, which have despised the oath in breaking the
covenant.

Having set this buttress to my first Argument, and thoroughly fortified it
against all your crooked engines, I am now ready to attend to what you have to
say against my second argument, which is this.

If the Patriarch Jacob was elected merely out of Grace, without any respect
had to any of his faith, works, or use of means, then all others are likewise
so elected, for there is the one alike motive for the election of all as of one.

But Jacob was elected merely out of the good will of God, without any respect
had to faith, works, or use of means, at least for the moving of God to elect
him: Therefore all others are so elected.

Whereto you begin thus to answer, First, I cannot but mind those words that
fall from his pen in the close of his argument, at least, says he, for the
moving of God to elect him; certainly either it was his mind to give out
something, as though the position had said that men's faith, works, and use of
means did move God to elect, then when the word works was not there at all; for
had it been in it without an explanation of it, I should not have vindicated
the position, but as it is, I must maintain the truth of it against all
opposers whatsoever, neither is there any thing in it as that faith, or use of
means does move God to the electing of any men, or else surely his heart smote
him, or his own conscience did accuse him, that he had excluded the use of
means wholly in the electing of men to life and salvation, as if God had no
respect to it upon any account whatsoever, and yet should take pay for
preaching, as if it were a thing of great worth upon that account.



And I now shall tell you this, that these words (for the moving of God to
elect him) did neither casually nor by check of conscience drop from my pen,
but very considerately, for the better illustration of the sense of the
Argument; and therefore whatsoever your disclaimer is, as that nothing is
implied in the position, whence to conclude your admitting of external motives
in the object, by way of condition, qualification, or thing prerequisite for,
or according to which God does elect, and thereby become a motive or incentive
for Gods electing, and so not singly and simply his bare and mere good
pleasure. Yet as I have by sever^^ arguments made to appear in the defense of
the former Argument, that in reality of truth (according to you) faith,
embracing of the means, etc. are concauses or incentives for God to elect.

And why you should grumble (as in this and several times after you do) that I
insert works, with faith, and use of means in my argument, I know no cogent
reason you can have for it; for as for works (whereby I mean a conformable
walking according to the mind and will of Jesus Christ) they being via regni,
Heb. 11.6. Heb. 12.14.
they are every way as necessary unto salvation as faith it self is: for as
without faith it is impossible to please God; so without holiness no man shall
see the Lord.

And therefore that I yoke the Papist with the Anabaptist, I shall only say,
Matthew. 20.13, 14.
friend I do thee no wrong, toll quod tuum est et vad^ for ought I see you are
no holier then they; their foreseen works carry as much color of truth as
your foreseen faith, and both alike, both of them necessary, and concurrent to
salvation, but both of them and all things else (out of God) excluded from
election, his alone will and good pleasure being the sole rise and fountain why
any is elected, and yet as God does elect unto glory and salvation as the end,
so he does elect unto grace, unto faith, unto good works, as the way and means
conducing to that end.

You second what you have begun, and say [that the Patriarch Jacob, and all
others that are elect, are elected merely of grace without any respect had to
their works, if it be meant merely the works of the Law; but that Jacob, or any
other man or woman whatsoever is elected without any respect had to faith or
use of means I do deny.]

This to me seems a bold attempt, and a plain contradiction, that any thing
should be merely (i. e.) solely and singly of grace, and yet with a respect had
to faith and use of means. If the Apostles Argument be good, Romans 11.6. If of
grace then not of works, because grace excludes all other things besides it
self, if it be merely grace then certainly it must be as concluding here, if of
grace then not from any respect had to faith or use of means (which last in
plain English is nothing else but good works) which God has ordained that we
should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10. That same grace excluding all other things
besides, as to the decree it self of election, Though I always did and shall
affirm, that the same gracious God, that so freely, without any respect had to
any thing in those he did elect, did decree to save them; So he did decree to
save them by faith in his Son, and through good works to bring them to glory.

The next thing you endeavor, is to commit a rape upon Romans 9. and to defloure
the purity of that Scripture, by your false gloss upon it, which you dictate
thus.

[For the Scripture in Romans 9.11. which is that which he brings to prove his
Argument, proves no such thing, but the contrary; for although it was said to
Rebecca before the children were yet borne, neither having done any good or
evil, that the p^rpose of God according to election might stand, not of works,
but of him that calls yet, there is nothing at all about excluding faith or
use of means; for the Apostles drift in that very text is, to exclude the works
of the law that the Jews would dwell upon for justification, that so he might
set up faith in the room and place thereof, which I shall have occasion to
speak of hereafter: In the mean while, consider, that Paul is so far from
confusion in putting faith, works, and use of means altogether, and shutting
them all out of doors together, as having no place at all in that great and
weighty work of our election to eternal life, as this Babylonian does, that on
the contrary, he in beating down the works of the law, and casting it out from
having any place at all in that thing, viz. the election or justification of
persons in the sight of God to eternal life, does in the 9th of the Romans,
together with many other sayings by him recorded in that Epistle, and other of
the Epistles written to the Churches of the Saints, endeavor to set up faith,
and the use of means that is leading thereunto in the same things]

1 Timothy 1.7
yet you understand not what you say, or whereof you affirm.

For this I so positively affirm, Matthew. 5.17.
that as all works are not excluded from a justified person, they being for
necessary uses, Tit. 3.14 Christ not coming to destroy the law but to fulfill
it, Romans 8.3.
and to cast down the merit of our works, and to declare that they could have
no justification by them as being weak through the flesh.

So neither is faith ushered in by Paul here in the room (as you phrasifie it)
of works, as by the excellency thereof it could justify us before God,) much
less be any ways instrumental to our election, as this Athenian babbler seems
to innovate.

For whereas you contradistinguish the Law of faith (spoken of under that term,
1 Thessalonians. 1.3. and 2 Thessalonians. 1.11.) to the law of works.

You must know that the Gospel is called a law of faith, because the promise of
Grace in Christ is propounded with Commandment that men believe it: But now we
deny that faith justifies us, as it is a work which we perform in obedience to
this law; It justifies us only, as the condition required of us, and as an
instrument of embracing Christ's righteousness; no Sir, it is not the (...)
credere or the act of believing that has any such efficacy, for so it is a
work of our own, and so as much turned out of doors, as any other of our good
works, Our believing being impure and but in part; Lord I believe, help mine
unbelief, and so altogether unable to justify, for that must be done by a
perfect righteousness. But whatsoever is here or any where else in Scripture
spoken to the advance and honor of faith is to be understood of faith
objectively (i. e.) Christ believed on by faith, that does supply to our
perfect justification, Isa 64.6. Phil. 3.8.
when all the merits of our Righteousness are but as filthy rags, yea dung and
loss compared with Christ.

So that it is not properly faith, that is, a believers evangelical
Righteousness, whereby he is justified, but Christ set up as the brazen
serpent, and laid hold on by faith the souls organ and hand, to receive him
that is our Righteousness, Ier. 23.6. the Lord our Righteousness. and 1 Cor.
1.30. Christ is made to us wisdom, Righteousness.

But that I may more clearly rescue this eminent portion of Scripture out of
such soul fingers who lay violence upon it, and by their tricks of legerdemain
make a Babylonish confusion of election; with justification, as this jugler
does here, and all along as you shall find, forcing upon election that which is
peculiar to Justification, not distinguishing the decree of election from
justification, which is only the means for the execution of the decree; the
ordinary slur that this society of people would put upon us. I shall by the
assistance of Gods Spirit, give you the genuine scope and sense of the Apostle
in this Chapter.

In the former Chapter the Apostle had been treating of Justification, in these
three next Chapters he treats of Predestination, but this is occasioned by way
of Anticipation. For against the Doctrine of Justification it might be
objected; If the Doctrine of Justification by faith alone were true, then it
would be received by the Jewish nation: But the Jews disclaim that Doctrine, at
least the greatest part of them, (ergo) it cannot be true.

The first Proposition the Apostle denies, and answers to the reason of it,
teaching that not all the Jews are to be accounted the people of God, who are
partakers of the outward promises, but only those who do believe the promises
of grace; and that whereas they are but few that do believe, and that most of
the Jews do not believe, this does wholly rest on the secret will and
Predestination of God, who has elected some unto salvation for the
manifestation of his mercy, and has not elected or reprobated others,
according to his unfathomable justice.

Upon which Reprobation did depend the rejection of the greatest part of the
Jews of that time, and the calling of the Gentiles in their stead. This is the
general scope of this Chapter.

Now because a doctrine of this nature must needs be a stumbling block of
offense unto the Jews, therefore in the five first verses he insinuates into
their good opinion, intimating his tenderest bosome-love unto them, and extols
them for many prerogatives wherein they did outstrip other nations: and yet
withal he expresses his sorrow when he considers that they were rejected of
God and appointed to destruction.

In the six and seventh verses he meets with an objection which in substance
was thus, If the Jews be rejected, then the Covenant that God made with Abraham
and his seed is of no effect.

But this is not so, (ergo) not the other.

The Apostle here denies the sequel of the Major Proposition, and renders a
reason of such his denial, by a distinction of a double sort of the children of
Abraham, viz. 1. Children of the flesh. 2. Children of the Promise; and thence
informs them, that the Covenant does properly belong to the children of the
Promise, (i. e.) to the elect Jews. Therefore howsoever the children of the
flesh for the most part of them be rejected, yet the Covenant of God remains
sure and firm toward the children of the Promise, (i. e.) toward the elect
Jews. This distinction he confirms by a special example of the two sons of
Abraham, viz. Ismael and Isaac, whereof the first was only a son according to
the flesh (i. e.) begotten carnally of Abraham and Hagar, the other was a son
of promise (i. e.) by virtue of the Promise begotten by Abraham, on Sarah. Now
the Covenant of God or only appertain unto Isaac, and the rest of the sons of
Promise (i. e.) the elect prefigured by him, which the Apostle proves b^ the
testimony of God himself, Genesis 21.12.

Now from this special example of Isaac, in ver. 8, 9. The Apostl^ gathers a
general Doctrine, to wit, that the p omise of Grace made unto Abraham, did
belong only to the elect, which he ca^^ children of the Promise, because as
Isaac by virtue of the Promise was begotten of Abraham and Sarah: so the elect
(i^ which number Isaac was) are new begotten through the power of the holy
Ghost, by the promise of the Gospel, and of singula^ Grace and mercy are
adopted to be the sons of God. And that Isaac was a son of promise (i. e.)
begotten by virtue of the Promise, he proves by the testimony of Moses, Genesis
18.10.

Again, to the confirmation of the former distinction of the twofold
filiation, he produces another example of two brethren, Esau and Jacob, who
though they were both of them begotten by Isaac, and of the same mother
Rebecca, and at one time, and the same birth, and that Esau had the privilege
of primogeniture, yet Esau was rejected of God, and Jacob was accepted and
admitted, and that before they were born, and therefore had done neither good
nor evil: this example the Apostle adjoynes unto the former as by a line of
gradation, as more efficaciously corroborating his intended purpose, viz. that
the promise of Grace does not indifferently and equally belong to all the
children of Abraham, but only to the elect.

For in the former example of Ismael and Isaac, the Jews might except against
it, thus, that Ismael was deservedly rejected, because he was not born of
Abraham's lawful wife Sarah, but of the handmaid Hagar; but that they, viz. the
Jews, were by lineal descent the undoubted posterity of Isaac, the lawful Heir
of Abraham and Sarah. Therefore the Apostle showed that the Promise of Grace
does yet neither belong to all the children of Isaac, for that Esau was
rejected, the brother of Jacob, one copulation, one conception, one birth; and
if any precedence, that falls to Esaus share, for that he was the firstborn.

The Argument which the Apostle uses, looks thus.

If the promise of grace, ( viz. I will be the God of thee and of thy seed)
should promise adoption or filiation to all the children of Abraham and Isaac,
it should equally appertain to Esau as well as Jacob: the reason is, because in
all things there is a parity, one father, one mother, one birth, and to boot,
Esau the firstborn. Therefore the promise did not belong to Esau, but only to
Jacob, and this he proves by two texts of Scripture. Therefore the promise of
Grace does not promise (as the Jews falsely thought) adoption and eternal life
to all and every mothers son of the Jews begotten after the flesh either by
Abraham or Isaac, and therefore God is no covenant-breaker, if he do reject the
stubborn and unbelieving Jews.

Neither could the Jew: allege against this, that Esau was a profane person,
and behaved himself ill, therefore was deservedly rejected, and on the
contrary, that Jacob was godly and religious, and therefore was he accepted and
adopted, and from whom they derived their Pedigree.

The Apostle likewise overturnes this objection, and teaches, that there was a
discovery of the purpose of God concerning them both, even then when they had
done neither good not evil, yea even before they were born: Yea and least they
might object, that this the Lords purpose did arise from a foresight of their
works, the Apostle clearly rejects this, and denies that it was of works, or
for their works that the one was adopted and the other was rejected,; but
affirms the contrary, that both the adoption of the one, and rejection of the
other, did singly and simply flow from the purpose and counsel of God; which he
confirms by the testimony of God himself out of Mal. 1.21.

In the 14.15.16.17. and 18. verses: Here is another objection, that if the
Lord deal so unequally with persons so suited in an equal rank as Jacob and
Esau, in loving one and hating another, then God seems to be unjust. But the
Apostle looks upon the consequence as no less then blasphemy, ver. 14. and
afterward demonstrates this denial of the consequence, ver. 15, etc. and
therefore the Apostle teaches that though God seem to deal unequally with
persons in an equal consideration, yet he still continues just; and for proof
hereof adduceth this reason, The Lord has a most free power of doing, not
bound, (as he is a Sovereign) and therefore has mercy on whom he will have
mercy, and whom he will, he hardens: either of which parts he proves by several
Scriptures; that for mercy, v. 15, 16. that of Hardening, v. 17. but both are
contracted and concluded verse 18.

Yet ver. 16. as a consectary from the testimony of Mos^ which he had produced
to answer the objection, he makes thi^ conclusion of the principal question,
viz. on what does depend the salvation of man, which he resolves thus, that
man's salvation does not depend on his own free will or endeavor (which before
he had demonstrated by that notable example of Jacob) but singly and solely and
only on the free mercy and grace of God.

For the rest of this Chapter, I shall suspend till I meet my Gentleman,
undertaking to paraphrase upon this chapter, beginning at ver. 19. and
therefore Haec sufficient pro nunc.

So that this being the genuine scope of the Apostle in this Chapter, any one
may see whether faith, works, or the embracing of the means have any the least
stroke in, or be at all considerable by God, in the great work of his election
of any to salvation, as this man would have it.

But you proceed thus, [yea in that very ninth of the Romans, shows clearly
and plainly in the conclusion of all, what he says in the former part of the
chapter, setting down these very words in the 30, 31. and 32, ver. What shall
we say then, that the Gentiles which followed not after righteousness, have
attained to righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith: but Israel
which followed after the law of righteousness, has not attained to the law of
righteousness? Wherefore? because they sought it not by faith, but as it were
by the law, for they stumbled at the stumbling-stone.

Isa. 8.14. and 28.16.

You hold on at the same rate as you have begun thus, and in chap. 3. where he
wholly excludes the deeds of the law in the business of justification, saying
v. 20. Therefore by the deeds of the law shall no flesh living be justified in
his sight, for by the Law is the knowledge of sin; but shows that faith is
for another end and use, in the following verses: and then in making inquiry
in the 27. ver. Where is boasting then? it is, says Paul, excluded: By what
law? of works? Nay: but by the law of faith. In which words of the Apostle it
is clear, that faith and the deeds of the law are different, and the law of
works and the law of faith have different ends, and as he concludes in ver. 20.
that by the deeds of the law shall no flesh be justified in the sight of God:
So in ver. 28. he makes that a sure ground, by which he certainly concludes,
that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law. And so also in
chap. 4.5. But to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies
the ungodly, his faith is accounted to him for righteousness. And so preferring
faith, or showing that as faith was counted to Abraham for righteousness, so
faith is counted to all that believe for righteousness; and the promise that he
should be the heir of the world, was not to Abraham, or to his seed through the
law, but through the righteousness of faith. ver. 13. For if they which are of
the law be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise made of none effect. ver.
14. Because the law works wrath: for where no law is there is no
transgression. ver. 15. and then concludes again in ver. 16. That in regard,
That to be justified in the sight of God, or to be the heir of the world, was
not through the law, nor of the law, nor by the deeds of the law, therefore
says he it is of faith, that it might be by grace to the end that the promise
might be sure to all the seed. See also chap. 5.1, 2.]



Let me for hereafter give you this for a Motto, Hoc age, remember what you are
about.

I do readily acknowledge that there are different ends of the law and of
faith, the most exact and strictest observers of the law could never obtain
perfection thence, Heb. 7.19. Heb. 10.1.
The law made nothing perfect: The sacrifices that they offered from year to
year could not make the comers thereunto perfect. There was an impotency and
beggarliness in the observances of the Law to justify their persons and make
them accepted of God: and truly Sir, so is faith, so far as it is ours, Cor.
our graces are all imperfect, we know but in part, our faith is mixed with some
doubtings hence, Lord I believe, help mine unbelief, O Lord increase our faith,
for we are of little faith.

Nay were any the best of men, nay, or of all the men in the world their graces
put all in a lump together, the excellency of all those graces, of all those
persons could not amount unto such a value, as to justify any one person, and
render him acceptable to God.

Ephesians.
But when Christ is received by faith, his merit, mediation, and intercession,
presents them to God the Father, holy and without blemish, they are complete in
Christ. Col. 1.28. and 2.10. and 4.12. Even by those ornaments he has put on
them, Ezekiel. 16.14.

It Is Christ who is our Passover, our peace, our propitiation, our
righteousness, our justifier, that reconciles God and man together.

Faith of it self is but a creature, and has no such omnipotency; and though
it be an uniting and an excellent Grace, yet it is a gift wrought in us by the
immediate finger of God, and not of our own strength; yea it is a part of the
purchase of Jesus Christ, merited by his death and passion, and he gives it to
those sheep that little flock which were given to him of the father, and those
sheep he knows by name, Joh. 10.3.27. and 13.18.

You draw near to a conclusion and say, [so that we may see, that although
election to life and salvation, and to be justified in the sight of God, be not
of the law, nor through the law, nor by the deeds of the law, nor yet for
faith, and yet it is by faith, and through faith, and in believing, and no
where said to be without it, by which it does appear, that the putting off
faith and works, and the use of means altogether, and to say, that God had no
more respect to faith, and the use of the means of salvation, then he had to
the works of the law, in electing and justifying persons in his sight to
eternal life, is a mistake at least, if it amount not to an error.

viz. election and electing, and I Will freely give you (without begging) all the
rest.

But truly Sir, this is no fair play, especially in divine things, this
trajection and slipping from one species of a mercy to another, so unworthily
to foist in (to give it no harsher a term) the word election, as though those
places before quoted by you had spoken to it, when there is not one word
mentioned that looks that way, but only speaks of Justification; all which as
to that I give you gratis: deal more faithfully hereafter with your
over-credulous learners and readers.

And now you conclude what you have to say against this Argument, thus.

[For if God respect not faith, and use of means in the electing of men and
women to life and salvation, then show by plain Scripture Proof, if you can,
what it is that he respects, for we have learned already that he respects not
persons, Acts 10.34. Romans 2.11. 1 Pet. 17. 1. Col. 3.25.]

Ephesians. 1.6. to the praise of the glory of his Grace, etc. Romans 9.23. and 11.35,
36. 1 Pet. 2.9.

But whereas you say [God respects not persons] it is falsely alleged as from
those places, and you deal in this as the accuser of the Brethren, the Devil
did with Christ in citing Psalm. 19.12. Mat. 4.6.
He curtails the words, and so do you, for look on all those Texts by you
mentioned, and whereas you say he respects not persons, the Scripture has it,
he is not a respecter of persons, or not an accepter of the face of any man,
for (...) does properly signify the face, and it is the usual phrase of the
Scripture, to accept the face of any one (i. e.) to do any thing in the favor
of another, upon a consideration had of the external adjuncts of such which are
obvious to the eyes, and render him worthy or commendation. See Lev. 19.15.
Deuteronomy. 10.17. 1 Samuel 25.35. 2 Kings 3.14. Prove. 6.35. and 18.5. The sense of all
which is, that God takes no account or reckoning of a person in regard of any
outward quality whereby he may be moved to do him good before another, nor of
the unworthiness of any person whereby he may be moved to punish him rather
then another.

And I pray Sir, tell me now sadly, what you have gotten by you^ own quotations,
whether your own sword be not thrust into your own bowels, and whether I have
not beaten you with your own weapons. And thus (through your own provocation)
having gored your sides deeper, by establishing of the strength of my second
Argument, I shall put to my hand (through Christ that strengthens me) to
emancipate my third Argument from that captivity yo^ keep it under, through the
mist of darkness you eclipse it with, by your slubbering exceptions. My
Argument is;

If the decree of election be absolute without any respect had to faith, works,
or use of means, then God did not elect upon the foresight of the embracing of
the means.

But the decree of election is absolute etc. Therefore. See for proof, Romans
9.11. Romans 11.5, 6, 7. Ephesians. 1.4. to 11. Mat. 10.16. and 22.14. To which you
answer [that the decree of election is absolute, without any respect had to the
works of the Law: for we shall ground upon Paul's conclusion, Romans 3.28.
therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith, without the deeds of
the law; for he that believes on him that justifies the ungodly, and
continues in that faith, shall absolutely be saved, and he that is absolutely
justified and saved, must needs be absolutely elected: For that sort or kind of
people that are called and accounted believers in his Son, and endure to the
end, or remain faithful unto death, shall absolutely be saved, Math. 24.13. and
have the crown of life, Rev. 2.10. For as I have before showed, the promises
flow from the decree of election, which is absolute like God himself, that
cannot change, and all that sort of people before spoken of, are concerned in
it, and not one of them shall ever be excluded from it; but it is not of
persons simply considered, as distinct from those qualifications before spoken
of, as has been already sufficiently proved.

Diruit, aedificat, mutat quadrata rotundis, that which you build with one
hand, you pull down quickly with another.

First, you grant the decree of election to be absolute without respect had to
works, and for a reason of such your concession allege Romans 3.28. Therefore we
conclude etc. And I must tell you Sir, we are not acquainted with such sorry
ways of proving that which we assert, we are upon a business of election, and
your proof is from matter of justification. Sir, remember how you are upon the
public stage, and by this your Printing you have exposed your self to the
censure of all the men in England that have either eyes to see, or ears to
hear, and that you are not now at Cuckolds-pit, dictating it there to your
Coridons.

But if you think to mend the matter by saying such are absolutely justified
and saved, and therefore they are absolutely elected, I say the consequence
follows on the other hand, they are absolutely elected, and therefore they are
or shall be absolutely justified and saved, because that Justification and so
salvation, transient works of God in time, flow from the absoluteness,
certainty and immutability of Gods immanent and eternal decree of election
which was before all time, as an effect following its cause, as you seem your
self to confess, saying, The promises flow from the decree of election, which
is absolute as God himself that cannot change] and so much for your building up.

Now for your pulling down [But it is not of persons simply considered, as
Persons distinct from those Qualifications.

ab alio solutum, pure, Inconditional, not depending on another; but if you
will have election to be conditional, respective and relative to faith or
believing, and use of means, then you utterly hurl down the absoluteness of
Gods election, it ceases further to be absolute, then when it depends singly
and solely on the good pleasure of his will which is his decree, without
respect had to any external motive; and where you have proved any such
qualifications as essentials to election, read it he that can, for no such
thing is to be found in these your papers.

You sent up this bundle of exceptions after this manner [neither do the
Scriptures by him brought prove any such thing, for although the Scriptures do
exclude the works of the law wholly in that thing, as has been already
granted; yet they afford us not one word to prove that faith, and the use of
the means of salvation should be cast out with it; for he may as well say, That
because Ismael was cast out of Abraham's house or family, therefore Isaac must
be cast out also, as to say, that because the works of the law, or deeds of the
law, in the business of election, justification, and salvation of the sons of
men is cast out, therefore must faith and the use of the means of salvation be
cast our also.

whether that with works, all other external motives, be not alike cast out of
doors, from having the least stroke, either as active or passive in the matter
of election, and that the disparity and discrimination which is made by
electing of me rather then another does not rest in any prevision or foresight
of any condition or qualification to be found in the object, either of faith or
embracing of the means, or of any preparation or disposition thereunto, but
solely in the bosom of the God of heaven, who according to the counsel of his
own will, from all eternity, differenceth one person from another, Jacob from
Esau, decreeing and destinating, both unto glory as the end, and likewise unto
saving grace as the means conducing to that end.

For if besides the act of God thus specifying or distinguishing, man should
have any stroke, as that through his own strength or acting at all, Ephesians. 2.9.
Hab. 1.16. 1 Cor. 4.7.
as to his own being decreed to salvation then a man had whereof to boast, then
might he sacrifice to his own net, and burn incense to his own drag, then man
had made himself to differ, and he had that which he never had received.

And if those former Scriptures by me alleged seem not to you of full weight,
Luke 6.38
take these following to the bargain, which doutbtless will make it good
measure, pressed down, shaken together and running over.

First, as to the exclusion of all creature-interests, besides the alone will
of God which is his decree of election, Mat. 11.25. Luke 12.31.

Secondly, as to the confirming of this grant ad numerum numeratum, as to a
set, definite, and known number, The Lord knows who are his. 2 Timothy 2.19. he
knows whom he has chosen, Ioh. 13.18. he knows his sheep, Ioh. 10.27. yea he
knows them by name, Ioh. 10.3. their names are written in heaven, Luke 10.20.
yea in the spirits book. Rev. 13.8. even in the book of life, Phil. 4.3. Rev.
21.12.

So that having discharged this Argument likewise from the burden you cast upon
it by your crude exceptions, I am now at liberty to come to the relief of

My fourth Argument, which is this.

If faith and works be the fruits and effects of election, then they are no
ways causes of it for which God should elect.

But they are fruits and effects, Acts 13.48. as many as were ordained to life
believed. Ephesians. 2.4, 7, 8, 9, 16.

To which you answer.

[First, See here what ado the man makes with works and causes, as the position
never mentions.]

works into any of my Arguments, I have given the reason thereof in my defense
of my second Argument, to wit for the avoiding of vain Tautologies I must refer
the Reader; and as to causes, to my first Argument: and though it be true that
totidem verbis, causes are not expressed in the position, yet by an unavoydable
consequence they are implied; and therefore if the man had holden fast the
form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13. 1 Timothy 6.3
and consented to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, much of this contest would
have been spared. The holy Scriptures, and this man's learned writings were not
calculated for the same meridian, they will not easily suite for one
hemisphere: where find you in all the holy writings such a style as this,
especially as to matter of election [God saw some men embracing the means, and
those he elected] I have not found the like in Scripture, whatsoever this man
has done in his rarer observations: but sure I believe he laid it purposely as
a gin to catch woodcocks; no Sir, when you set forth any doctrinal truth, by
way of a position, you ought to keep as close to a Scripture Phrase as possibly
the subject matter will bear.

Secondly, you answer by way of a demand [what ground he has to say that faith
and works be the fruits and effects of election, except it be this, that
because election goes before, and faith and works follow after? and by that
way of reasoning he may as well say, that Abels death was the effect of Cains
birth, and that may be accounted the cause of it: but yet Cains being born had
not effected it, if he had not afterward rose up against him and slew him, and
so he came to his death, it being effected by that means: so likewise
notwithstanding the Decree of election was before man had any being, yet faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, Romans 10.17. as a means
appointed by God for the effecting of it, that so men might fall under the
decree of salvation that is appointed by God to be the portion of believers,
from before the foundation of the world.]

Luke 19.22.
Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee thou wicked servant.

But even now did you consent Promises did flow from the decree of election,
and yet though we had not reum confitentem, we are not so barren and empty of
solid grounds for what we say or do affirm, Ephesians. 1.3
that all those spiritual blessings in heavenly places, th^^ a believer from
first to last is made partaker of, they all flow unto us and are conferred on
us as fruits and effects of election, Romans 11.7. election has obtained it,
that Christ was given of the Father, that he was incarnate, crucified, dead,
raised from death to life, that he ascended up on high, and that now he sits on
Gods right hand, and acts now daily as an intercessor, all these flow from
election, Gal. 4.4. 1 Pet. 1.20. Luke 24.26. Phil. 2.6. etc. That any are
effectually called according to purpose, it is the effect of election, Romans 8.28.
and ver. 23.24, etc. Justification is from election, 8.30, etc. Sanctification
from election, Romans 6.22. Your fruit unto holiness, Ephesians. 1.4. Chosen that we
should be holy: All which Graces and privileges as they are fruits and effects
of election, so are they all of them, in their several stations and relations,
causes of salvation; and every antecedent grace is a cause of its consequent
grace, and the salvation of the elect, which is their consummate Glorification,
is the common effect, both of the first cause, as of all the intermediate and
secondary causes.

At last you bid defiance to this Argument, by having a fling at that Classical
text of Scripture, Acts 13.48, retorting it upon me thus [To his Greek that he
writes in the margin of his paper, from Acts 13.48. As many as were ordained,
etc. I do desire him to look once more into his Greek Testament, and then let
him as he will be willing to answer it before the Judge of the world, the Lord
Jesus at his appearing, when he shall come in his glory, and let him speak
according to his conscience upon that account, whether he cannot read the same
words in the Greek from which the word ordained is translated, to be the same
with that in 1 Cor. 16.15. from which the word addicted is translated; and also
I shall appeal to the consciences of reasonable people, whether it be not a
suitable, and an agreeable kind of reading, it being directly contrary to what
the Jews did, v. 45. they spoke against those things which were spoken by Paul,
contradicting and blaspheming; and so it will sound forth good sense that the
Gentiles were addicted to eternal life, and believed.]



Sir, I shall answer you, not as by virtue of your spell, but as setting the
fear of God before mine eyes, when first I alleged that place for a proof to
what I did intend it, and sure it is no ways enervated, but rather gathered
strength by your opposition.

The word I readily acknowledge used Acts 13.48. comes from the same primitive
(...), which in its proper and primitive signification is to ordain,
constitute, appoint, determine; and whereas you say that in 1 Cor. 16.15. it is
translated addicted, I confess it is true, but under submission I conceive they
so render it rather as Interpreters, Expositors, then Translators, when as
withal they kept the sense and scope of the holy Ghost, and that they foresaw
no great controversy or article of faith did depend upon it.

But when once Soeinus, lib. 4. de servat. cap. 13. (not able otherwise to
resist the power of the Spirit speaking in that text) had found a starting-hole
by rendering of it, dispositos, praeparatos, proclives, sive been affectos; the
whole crowd of A^minians treading in his steps pervert the genuine
interpretation of that word, and speak in his language; whose apes the
Anabaptists are. But if we take a view of that place, and there behold the mind
of the holy Ghost, it cannot properly be rendered otherwise then according to
the native sense of that word, viz. ordained. And then why should such a shrimp
as you, incline to the false gloss of a forreiner, an Heretic, and wave the
common received translation of those reverend Orthodox Divines, our own
contrymen, but only out of an affectation of singularity?

I know youl' say (as before) of the pragmatick Pelagius, comparing him with
blessed Calvin) why may not Socinus be in the right, and our Translators in the
wrong? and therefore to certify your judgment, I shall make the contrary to
appear by these convincing Arguments.

1. This signification which I assert; is most frequent with this Evangelist,
see Acts 15.2. (...). They determined that Paul should go up; and Acts 28.23.
(...), when they had appointed him a day, so Romans 13.1. (...), the powers that
be are ordained of God; and therefore why not so here?

2. It Is most consonant with the text it self, where the ordination there spoken
of, intimates a relation to the end, and not a disposition of the subject.

3. Hereby the scope of the Evangelist is best preserved, who speaking here of
diverse of the Jews and Gentiles, proselytes, ou^ of curiosity coming to hear
Paul preach, he shows that whiles the Jews contradicted and blasphemed, diverse
of the Gentiles were brought to believe in Christ, but some did not: now to any
who should demand, why the rest of the Gentiles should not likewise be
converted, the reason is employed in the text that only some of them were
ordained unto life (i. e.) elected, the rest were not; as many as were ordained
unto eternal life believed.

Wherein is a plain Antithesis, not only of the persons, ver. 45, 48. viz. of
the Jews contradicting and blaspheming, and of the Gentiles being glad and
glorifying the word of the Lord: but also of the first cause, according to Gods
ordination, viz. that some were ordained to life, others were not.

4. To render it addicted or disposed is gross Pelagianisme; As many as were
ordained (i. e,) addicted, prepared, or disposed to eternal life; for the same
preparation either it must be of our selves or of God: 2 Cor. 3.5 1 Cor. 4.7. 1
Cor. 2.14.
If you say it is of our selves, that contradicts the evidence of such places
as teach that we are not sufficient to think any thing as of our selves: and
who made thee to differ? neither can any unregenerate man have any disposition
to faith before he actually believe. If you say it is of God, then we have what
we desire, that God alone prepares, disposes, and ordains us unto life.

5. The Evangelist uses not a participle active, as thus, as many as ordained
themselves to eternal life believed; but a participle passive, as many as were
ordained believed; and therefore it speaks not of any action whereby they had
disposed themselves, but as they were ordained of God.

6. There is no good consequence from that place of 1 Cor. 16.15. the house of
Stephanus have ordained themselves, or addicted themselves to the Ministry,
therefore it is in the power of an unbeliever to dispose himself to faith or
eternal life; for there is one way of those which are believers in disposing
themselves to the ministry of the Church, and another of those which as yet do
not believe, in respect of their disposition to faith and life eternal.

And thus Sir, howsoever hand over head, you have by tradition swallowed down
the feculent dreggs of Socinus his interpretation, yet it is too palpable that
Glossa corrumpit textum, and that it sounds plain nonsense that the Gentiles
were addicted to eternal life, before they believed.

And thus having thrown you out of your triumphing Charet, wherein you marched
so furiously against my fourth Argument, I have leisure to attend to what you
shall say against my fifth Argument, which is this.

If our foreseen faith, works, or embracing of the means of salvation, were the
cause of our election, they should be likewise the cause of our vocation and
justification: but the latter is false, therefore the former. The Major is
proved by that undeniable Axiom, Quicquid est causa causae, est causa etiam
causati, that which is the cause of the cause, is the cause of the thing caused.

The Minor is proved, 2 Timothy 1.9. and Ephesians. 2.8. Romans 3.24. justified freely
by his grace.

To which you offer an answer, thus;

[That this argument may tend to the confutation of them that hold foreseen
faith, works, or the embracing of the means to be the causes of their election;
but it hits not us, for we hold no such thing, neither is any such thing
asserted in this position.

terque quaterque recocta, but shall desire him to revise my defense of my
first Argument, and so impartially to judge, whether foreseen faith and
embraing of the means be not implicitly asserted in your Position as motives to
election; so that the Argument not only hits you on the back, but so gores
your sides, that your Position staggers, and expects a better cordial then
either your wit or art are able to administer to keep life in it.

Your next advance is against my sixth Argument, which is this; If our election
were dependent on man's embracing of the means, then these absurdities would
follow; then

1. The will of God should be moved and determined by an external cause (i. e.)
the first cause should be ordered and guided by the second, and thereby be made
the second cause, and e contra; which is against the rules of all Philosophy
and Divinity.

2. God hereby is supposed to be capable of passion, (i. e.) when thus moved,
but God is altogether immutable and impassible.

3. Then there should be somewhat in the creature out of God before, greater
and better then God, because that every cause is before and better then the
effect.

4. If there might be imagined to be any thing in the creature which might move
God to the decreeing or appointing of this (...) that, then it would follow
that the actings and issues of things h^^ not a dependence on the decree of
God, contrary to Iam. 3.3^

5. Then man might have just cause of boasting in himself.

6. What then would become of children dying in infancy, before they had the
use of faith, or works, or any embracing of the means, and which never were to
have a being to act, therefore they were never to be foreseen? To which you
frame this answe^

[If our election were so much dependent on man's embracing (...) the means, as
that there might be imagined to be any thing in the creature, which might move
God to the decreeing, or appointin^ of men and women to eternal life, then I
deny not many absurdities would follow: and this Argument may do something
where it hits; but as it happens, it hits not us, for we hold no such thing,
neither is there any thing asserted in this Position, as that our election is
dependent on man's embracing the means, (...) as that God should be thereby
moved to elect.]



Nor is that ere a jot the better which follows.

[But any rational man that shall read these Arguments with a single eye, and
with an honest and upright heart, and with a single mind compare them with the
Position they are brought to answer, cannot certainly but judge, that either
the man did not well mind what was in the Position, or else had forgotten what
was in it when he writ his Arguments, or otherwise it must be his folly; for
all the expressions he seems to quarrel at, be of his own making, for not one
of the expressions be found in the Position, as that anything wrought in, or by
the creature is any motive, or incentive for which God elects, as a
meritorious, or procuring ground or cause of it, but the whole substance of it
is, that God saw some men embracing the means of Salvation, and those he
elected in Christ, etc.

in terminis, motives and incentives and causes are not therein expressed, yet in
that you say that God saw some men embracing the means, and those he elected,
it is necessarily employed that those must be singular and numerical persons who
must be elected, for or because of their embracing of the means; for why God
did choose those that he did foresee would embrace the means, rather then those
rhat he did foresee would reject the means, and whether in this is not
embracing of the means (according to you) a cause of election, I leave it to
any unbyassed man to Judge.

Besides, I do demand whether in this your supposed foresight that you ascribe
to God, did he foresee that which he himself would work in them, viz. this
embracing of the means, or did he only foresee that which they themselves that
were so foreseen would wo^k by their own power, viz. that they would of
themselves embrace the means: If you ascribe it to God, then I demand, why he
works that power in one rather then another? 1 Cor. 4.7.
wherein at last you must ascend to the good pleasure of his will. But if you
ascribe this power to man himself, then man has made himself to differ, and
has that in himself which he has not received, and has cause whereof to
boast.

But upon this account besides the absurdities before mentioned, the whole
doctrine of predestination would be quite overturned; for

1. So it might come to pass that notwithstanding any decree (with you) yet
possible it were that no one might be saved, viz. if no one would embrace the
means, which was in their own power to resist.

2 So might there be an election unto life, and yet no one elected to life.

3 Those only should be the persons designed to salvation who were objectively
and antecedently believers and embracers of the means before their election,
and not considered as such, who by virtue of their election, should
consequentively and effectively be made to be believers, and thereupon the
effects of election to be taken for antecedent conditions necessarily
prerequired in the object

4 So should the whole fabric of divine predestination be dependent on the
free will of man, which is abhorrent to all religion.

5 So there would not be such a considerable difference between Jacob and Esau,
those to be saved and those to be damned; as to a mere performance of the
condition under which men are to be saved and damned.

6 Upon this account predestination and election of men is to be adjourned even
to the moment of death, it being suspended not only on the embracing of the
means, but continuance therein.

I could burden you with many more absurdities and evil consequences flowing
from your opinion, but these are enough for you to bear.

That of yours which follows, is a chip of the same block, [But if he do, or
shall at anytime say in plain words, that which he seems to intimate in his
Arguments, that we hold, that our faith, works, or embracing of the means is a
motive, incentive, or procuring ground or cause for which God elects, or that
there is any such thing held forth in this position, that God elects men in
Christ for these things, then let him receive the words of Solomon for an
answer, in Prove. 10.18. he that hides hatred with lying lips, and he that
utters slander is a fool.]

Prove. 24.7.
Sir, I shall only return upon you in Solomon's language, that wisdom is to high
for a fool: these absurdities, and many more do unavoydably follow upon the
position, though your eyes be so blinded that you cannot see it: Prove. 26.3.
and therefore, a whip for a horse a bridle for the ass, and a rod for the
fools back, that when he is told of it, yet will not see his own error.

Psalm. 4.3. a godly man: which godly man is every one that hearkneth to the
counsel of God given forth by Jesus Christ, and embraces the means of
salvation, even the free tenders of Christ in the Gospel] has come under
consideration already, in the interpretation of Psalm. 4.3. page 33. where it
shows that God sets apart actually in time, for some place of trust, or office,
him that is godly: but what has this to do with election before all time? You
make your oration longer, saying,

[For I dare boldly affirm, that the Lord Christ spoke the mind of the Father,
even that which was the purpose and decree of God, when he said, John 3.15, 16.
That whosoever beleiveth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life:
and so every one that believes in the King of righteousness, may in the laws
of the same King read or find their title good to the everlasting inheritance;
and thus, 1 Ioh. 5.10. he that believes on the Son of God has the witness in
himself: God giving the holy spirit to those that obey him, Act. 5.32. to wit,
Jesus Christ, and as many as are led by that spirit of God, up in obedience to
the Son of God, Christ Jesus, are the sons of God, Romans 8.14, and all this is
made known unto us that are believers in Christ, that we might know, who or
what sort or kind of people they are, that God did freely set his love upon,
and in his purpose and decree, even when he might have left us as lost
creatures, chose us unto himself, not for these things, or for any thing he saw
in us, or acted by us in the least, as any motive, incentive, or procuring
ground, or cause of our election, but the purpose, decree, and promise came
freely from himself, even to decree himself to be the God and father of such a
sort or kind of people as aforesaid in Jesus Christ.]

Ioh. 3.15, 16. Whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life, etc.

But Sir, you must remember that the question is not whether there be any such
purpose and decree, viz. that every one that believes shall be saved, and that
every one that believes not shall be damned:

But whether these be all the decrees that God has made concerning man's final
and everlasting estate, yea and to speak properly, whether this be any decree
of predestination at all, wherein no body is predestined, elected nor
reprobated.

Sir, these expressions that you represent, are only declaratory publications
of the Gospel, propounded under conditional terms, and obvious in all the
Evangelists.

But tell me where I shall find, Et eris mihi magnus Apollo, If any man does
believe and embrace the means, he shall be predestined, or he shall be
elected.

Faith is a product of election, an effect in time flowing from the eternal
decree, and not a foreseen condition or qualification, drawing after it Gods
eternal election.

It Is beyond all question, and we dispute it not, that God in the same eternity,
whereby he elected some, and passed by others; foresaw in his decree (because
he foresaw what he would either do or suffer to be done) he foresaw I say both
what the elect, and what the non elect would do, and what contrary ends they
would come unto, he being the orderer of them both, of Esau as well as Jacob.

But here sticks the knot of the question, whether the different actions of men
foreseen, caused the different decrees of Election and reprobation, which we
utterly deny, and this is incumbent on you to prove, which you will do ad
Gracas calendas.

And therefore it is but a wild expression, altogether incongruous with the
Scripture Phrase, to say, [that God decreed himself to be the God and father of
such a sort or kind of people as should embrace the means] give me its parallel
and I Will ask you pardon: But Sir, now I remember my self, you have a toleration
to speak nonsense.

For you run along in the same strain thus;

And so absolute and irrevocable is this decree of Gods unchangeable election,
that even the worst of men, in their natural condition, or any men or women in
the world, which do consider how great things God has done for them, as they
are sinners, and lost creatures by reason thereof, and return unto their maker
in embracing the means of salvation, in being changed from their evil course of
life, departing from sin, and leaving the vanities of this world, and believe
in Jesus with an upright heart, and with a willing mind; they coming to be so
changed as aforesaid, fall into that decree of God that changes not, and so
that which was in the purpose and decree of God before rhyme, actually comes to
be put in execution in time, and so all the promises of God in Christ
unavoydably come to be the portion of such a changed people, which are Act.
26.18. turned from darkness to light, that they may receive forgiveness of
sins, and an inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith that is in
Christ Jesus.]

of your rank are licentiates for such pranks. That which does ensue in a
qualified sense may be digested, viz. when you say, But although our embracing
the means of salvation, and believing in Jesus, and obeying his voice, be no
meritorious or procuring ground or cause why God made such a decree, but that
which was the moving cause thereof, was his love, as has been already granted;
yet the embracing the means, and believing in Jesus, and obeying his voice, is
of necessity to be done by those that have the Gospel preached unto them, as an
instrumental cause by which the purpose and decree of God in order to their
everlasting good comes to be put in execution, as a way and means appointed of
God for that end: and one would think that this man were a little of my mind in
this, by what falls from him in the close of this second Argument, using
these words, at least for the moving of God to elect.]

Sir, If here, where you make mention of any Instrumental cause, you intend
only the Instrumental means of salvation then I join with you; for as I have
before asserted, That as God has decreed the end, so likewise has he decreed
the means conducing to that end: But as there is no external cause at all, and
therefore none Instrumental for which he does elect before all time, but all
arising from within himself, even his own love and good pleasure; so when that
decree comes to be put into execution in time, then there are subordinate
causes, but all set on work by the first cause which is God himself, but not as
to election, but all as tending to salvation: And therefore that fell very
advisedly from me when I said, (at least for the moving of God to elect) where
I place a vast difference between election and salvation; God elects without
respect had to faith, works, or use of means, as to the decree, but yet he
saves with, by and through faith, works, and use of means as in respect of the
end. 2 These. 2.13. 1 Pet. 1.2.

You pack up these your fardles of exceptions thus.

[Now if he do not hold that it is some cause by which men come to be more
peculiarly interessed into the favor of God by believing then they are without
believing, why did he not rather say, it must not be accounted any cause at all
upon any account whatsoever? But it is that which the Lord Christ has said, in
Ioh. 16.27. which persuades me to be of that mind, in that he has said, the
Father himself loves you, because you have loved me, and have believed that I
came out from God: and therefore If I should say, that loving of Jesus Christ,
and believing in him were no cause at all, by which we came to be chosen into
the Fathers love, I should sin against Christ in speaking contrary to his word:
But this is more then was in the Position, and yet it is no more then truth.]



For in election God looked upon men as sinners, enemies, ungodly, in their
blood, in a doleful plight, and the objects of pity and compassion, and not as
on believers.

And therefore my words carried this sense, that though there were no cause or
motive at all, why he should elect one rather then another, because all were in
an equally lost condition; yet in the decree of election wherein there was a
love unto and a purpose to save some, he likewise decreed to save them by such
means which in his wisdom he had ordained to be suitable for the attaining of
the end, so that salvation should have adequate causes for the effecting of it,
viz. faith, works, and use of means, though election it self had none but
singly and simply the love of God arising only out of his own bosom. And
therefore it excluded causes as to election, but did admit of causes as to the
accomplishment of salvation.

For the rest of this paragraph of yours, it trips up the heels of all the
former your seeming fair concessions, and plainly discovers the secret guile
and fraud of your heart.

For now you begin to speak plain enough, saying [If I should say believing
were no cause at all by which we come to be chosen into the Fathers love, I
should sin against Christ] Here indeed is plain dealing, though all along
before you have juggled with me, and denied all causes as to election. And this
indeed (though you are not aware of it) mo^lders to nothing all your former
exceptions, which have still denied all causes, motives, etc. And now you grant
loving and believing to be causes; and confirms every argument that I have
raised, and fortifies every of those absurdities that I have charged upon you,
as following upon your position, to any of which you make not the least
appearance of an answer.

But I tell you as before, God in electing looked upon men as in the corrupt
mass and lump of perdition, regarding nothing what they could be as of
themselves, for they must unavoidably be in a lost condition, till by his own
act transient flowing from that of Immanent in himself, he made them believers,
by giving of them faith, and all of this for the greater advance of his own
free grace, which he did not do to others.

For that place of Ioh. 16.27. brought to confirm their purpose, I answer, that
the love of God has a twofold acception.

The first is amor benevolentiae, which is the foundation and fountain of all
the good his people have and receive; it is the womb that conceives and sends
forth all the good things we do enjoy; of which Ier. 31.3. I have loved thee
with an everlasting love, and so 1 Ioh. 4.10. we love him, because he loved us
first, and of this no cause or reason can be rendered, besides the good pleasure
of his will. The second is amor complacentiae, when in time the Lord is
delighted with the persons of those that he loved from eternity, Ezekiel. 16.14.
thy beauty was perfect through the comeliness I put upon thee. Cant. 3.1.
Behold thou art fair, etc. and thus the Lord crowns, rewards, and delights
himself in those graces given to his elect ones: and of this love of
complacency is this text to be understood, and not of the everlasting love
spoken of, Ier. 31.3. in electing of us before all time, and whereof only this
controversy is.

And now gather up altogether, and make up your accounts, and see to what an
excrescency of advantage your numerous exceptions against my arguments will
amount unto, and you shall find that the Summa totalis will be just -- o

Hitherto have we failed in that still river, the streams whereof shall make
glad the city of God, Psalm. 46.4. Psalm. 87.7. Romans 11.33.
and from whence all our springs flow, viz. Gods electing of us to life eternal.

But now we are to lanch into that (...), that unfathomable gulf of the wisdom
and knowledge of God, whose judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past
finding out, viz. that of non-election or Reprobation.

Concerning which this Gentleman's Position did assert this, viz.

That God saw some men rejecting the means of salvation, continuing in sin and
unbelief, yet happily not without the exact form of godliness but denying the
power, those he reprobated to everlasting destruction from the foundation of
the world. But In nova fert animus mutatas dicere formas
Corpora, etc.


Having taken counsel of his pillow by his second thoughts, he has transformed
the terms of his position, by putting it into a new dress, and at his peril be
it, if it prove to his own disadvantage.

The Position is new molded thus.

God saw some rejecting the means, to wit, the free tenders of Christ in the
Gospel, continuing in sin and unbelief, denying the power of godliness, those
he reprobated to everlasting destruction; but the foresight of God did not, nor
does necessitate the thing seen.

To which my answer was.

why have thou done thus? Isa. 45.9. It is true, that sin, and unbelief, and
rejecting of the means, are just causes why God decrees such persons to hell
and eternal torments, but yet not the causes of their Reprobation, that is
solely and singly in the good pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1.5.

His reply is this, especially to that Text of Ephesians. 1.5.

[This Scripture says nothing at all of Reprobation, or man's destruction, but
of the Predestinating, or appointing of believers to the Adoption of children
by Jesus Christ.]

in terminis expressed in that text cited, of Ephesians. 1.5. but if by a necessary
and an unavoidable consequence it may be thence concluded, I hope it will be as
sufficient as though in express words it had been so declared.

The words are recorded, as for the comfort and encouragement of elect
believers, in beholding of the certainty and stability of their Predestination,
and Election, resting in the bosom of God and the counsel of his will: So
likewise to keep them in an humble posture, and engage them to a continual duty
of thankfulness, that when as they were in the same corrupt mass and lump of
perdition with others the worst of men, yet the Lord merely out of the good
pleasure of his will, and from no other argument or motive out of themselves,
did fix his love upon them and predestined them to the Adoption of children.

But was there not then the same good pleasure of his will, in the preterition,
non-election, or not predestinating to the Adoption of children, the rest that
were past by, who in respect of themselves, were in as great and as good a
capacity of partaking of any indulgence, as those that were elected? and what
will this then amount unto, but to be non-elected, which is the same as to be
Reprobated, according to the good pleasure of his will, I presume all the art
you have cannot assign a medium between the decrees, or at least make two
decrees, of predestinating of some men, and the not predestinating of others,
but that if some men were not predestined or not elected, they must thence
necessarily be reprobated.

He give you a familiar instance; Suppose ten men for the evil deeds that they
have committed be arraigned, indicted, convicted, and adjudged to death, but
that immediately before the time of execution, an act of Grace or special
Pardon issues out from the supreme Magistrate, and relaxes and freely remits
the punishment to five of those ten, I hope you may hence safely conclude, that
the other five shall be executed.

So let us suppose that the number of mankind are two Millions of men; If out
of these by the eternal and unchangeable decree of God, one Million only be
infallibly appointed and ordained to eternal life, (they being all alike
equally culpable and liable to eternal wrath and death) who can deny but that
the other Million are also as absolutely comprised under that sentence of
eternal death, whereinto they had hurled themselves? as the decree of
predestination or election saves some of mere good pleasure, so the same decree
of preterition, non election, non predestination, leaves the rest where it
found them, weltring in their own gore, and so reprobates them.

I hope you will not (with the Papists in another like kind) make a limbo non
praedestinatorum seu non electorum, such as shall neither go to heaven or hell.

And this of the decree of God before all time.

But when it pleases God who separated such from the mothers womb to reveal
his Son unto them in time, Gal. 1.16.
then it is after this manner: He brings his elect ones to eternal life by
giving of the^^ faith, repentance, and perseverance; and the manner of Gods
permitting the non-elect to run themselves on the rock of eternal death, is by
leaving them in their own natural blindness, and perverse enmity of their own
imbred corruptions, and nor supplying them with any restraining, assisting, or
saving grace, being not bound unto his creature so to do, without which they
must unavoydably wallow in their own mire, and out of which they are never able
to extricate themselves, but are justly by God suffered to continue in their
infidelity and impenitency.

Farther I say, that the formal decree of election contains an absolute and an
eternal decree of preparing of effectual grace for those that are so elected:
But the formal decree of negative Reprobation or non-election, an absolute and
eternal decree of not preparing this effectual grace for those who are so
pretermitted. From whence is plain, that the divine prevision of faith, works,
and use of means in the elect, so likewise the continuing in sin and unbelief
in the nonelect, does not nor cannot go before the forementioned decree as you
vainly imagine, but are concomitant and coordinate in and with the decree; and
that when some are predestined and elected to the Adoption of children, out
of the good pleasure of Gods will, Ephesians. 2.12.
Others are not predestined, not elected, but reprobated according to the
same good pleasure of his will, and still remain aliens from the Commonwealth
of Israel, strangers from the covenant of promise, having no hope, and never
made partakers of the joy of the elect. Pro. 14.10.


From the canvassing of this text you proceed to another, but with the like
success, of which thus you dictate.

[Neither is that In Isa. 45. at all to the purpose, for it speaks not at all
of Reprobation, or man's eternal destruction, but of Gods calling and raising up
Cyrus to subdue nations before him, and that he would direct all his ways,
that he should build his City, and let go his Captives, and it was his will so
to do: and therefore woe be unto him that should strive with his maker, to go
about to hinder or frustrate the design of God in that thing, as does appear
from ver. 1. to ver. 15.]



From the 1. ver. to the 20. of it is comprised a prophecy of deliverance to
the people of Israel from the captivity of Babylon. In the 6 first verses this
is declared that God will do it. That which was the main obstruction which
hindered the work, was the murmuring of the people that they were so long in
captivity, as though that God had dealt unjustly with them, in suffering the
Babylonians to oppress them so long. Against this, God asserts his own justice,
partly from the baseness and vileness of them that did so murmur, partly from
the Majesty of him against whom they did murmur; both of which he illustrates
by two examples, one was feigned, where is brought in the potsheard contending
with his maker, ver. 9. woe unto him that striveth with his maker, let the
potsheard strive with the potsheards of the earth; shall the clay say to him
that fashioneth it, what make thou? or thy work, he has no hands?

Wherein expostulating with the murmuring Israelites, because he suffered their
captivity so long, he vindicates his own power and sovereignty over all his
creatures the work of his hands, and therefore that he has a free disposing
power over them, to do with them what shall seem good in his own eyes. They
were but as clay in the hands of the potter, base, vile, contemptible,
(compared with God their maker) framed of a lump of earth: and therefore if the
potter have so much power when he has made a vessel to dash it in pieces; has
not God much more power to dispose of his own fabric, without a dispute had
with sinful flesh, and to be made obnoxious to render an acount for his so
doing?

And I pray, wise Sir, revise my writing again, and see whether this text of
Isa. is not most apposite to prove so much as I intended it for, which
howsoever it was not specifically to Reprobation in terminis, yet it clearly
proves the absolute sovereignty and power that God has over all his creatures
that he has made, to put them into what condition he shall please, without any
replication to be made by the creature: he is Lord Paramount of our lives,
estates, and fortunes, and has the Keys both of Hell and death, Rev. 1.18.
and as he is Lord of his creatures may dash in pieces, and send to hell the
greatest majesty on earth, without the control of any: Job 9.12.
who can hinder him, or who shall say unto him what do thou? And did I cite
that text to any other purpose then to prove this absolute sovereignty? as most
expressly it does, notwithstanding your put blind eyes could not discern it.

That which follows is a chip of the same block, and has as little marrow in
it as this which is before; where you write:

[And how this which he has here set down will agree together I shall leave to
reasonable men to judge, viz. That there is no other ground or reason assigned
for Reprobation, either of Sin, unbelief, or rejecting of the means, but the
mere good pleasure of Gods most holy will: and yet say, it is true, that sin
and unbelief, and the rejecting of the means are just causes why God decrees
such persons to hell and eternal torments.]

viz. That there is no other ground or reason assignable for Reprobation but
the mere good pleasure of Gods will, and that sin, and unbelief, and the
rejecting of the means, are just causes why God decrees such persons to hell
and eternal torments. If these two positions be (...), why had not your wisdom
assigned where the irrecon^ileable discord did lie? Judge. 7.22.
1. If they are like those forelorn Midianites that sheathed their swords in
each others bowels, and like Jacob and Esau, trip up the heels one of another;
why had not you like another Solomon determined the controversy, Hos. 12. 1
King. 4.16.
but leave things thus as you found them, and so to the judgment of reasonable
men?

And surely Sir, if you be a man of reason (whereof your writings give me cause
to doubt) I must tell you that your supposed error either must be in the first
assertion, viz. That there is no other ground or reason assigned for
Reprobation, either of Sin or unbelief, or the rejecting of the means, but the
mere good pleasure of Gods most holy will, and this is but Idem per idem, a
trifling of words, or barely without proof of contradiction to deny, it is but
petitio principii, a bare and base begging of the question: Or else it must be
comprehended in this, viz. That sin and unbelief, and the rejecting of the
means, are the proper and meritorious causes why God decrees such persons to
hell and eternal torments, which, so far as I perceive by you, neither of us do
deny.

And yet I must put in some caution (because you are so apt to misunderstand)
1. That Gods foresight of sin, unbelief and rejecting of the means (which he is
no ways bound to prevent) is not affirmed to be a cause why this man rather
then another is not elected, it is only as a certain note and infallible
consequent of men not elected.

Causa probationis non rei ipsius; And whereas I do assert that negative
Reprobation which is Gods absolute, eternal and immutable decree of not
electing, depends only on Gods free pleasure, as he is Lord and Sovereign over
all his creatures, and may annihilate all, or do with them else whatsoever he
pleases.

Yet damning, or decreeing, such persons to hell and eternal torments, being an
act of Judiciary power and proceeding according to the tenor of the revealed
Gospel, that never proceeds according to the forementioned good pleasure, but
is suited according to men's several actions and demerits.

2. I do not affirm that this decree does impose any necessity upon the
non-elect, or reprobated, that they should unavoydably sin, or that it excludes
all such persons from all possible means of salvation, that so they may justly
and immutably be damned; Only I assert, that together with this free good
pleasure of non election or reprobation, God foreknoweth that such persons not
elected or reprobated, will out of the freedom of their own wills, neglect and
abuse such means of their salvation, and thereby commit such sins, as, for
which so foreseen of God, is unto him a just cause of their damnation, whereby
he will glorify himself in the manifestation of his justice upon them.

In short, I do readily acknowledge that God as he adjudicates none to eternal
torments, but sinners, unbelievers, and rejecters of the means, so has he not
decreed to adjudge any but such unto hell and eternal torments; from both of
which it follows, that sin and unbelief is the cause of the adjudication to
hell and eternal torments, and that by the decree of God, but is by no means
the cause of the decree it self that singly proceeds from his good pleasure.

And as it is an undoubted truth, that God, as he never saves any adult person,
but such as are penitent and studious of good works; so he has not decreed to
save any but such so qualified with repentance and good works; whence we argue,
that repentance and good works are truly the causes of salvation, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.
and that by the decree of God, who has from the beginning chosen us to
salvation, through sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth: but
it does not thence follow, that repentance and good works are causes of the
decree; for upon that account, election should be dependent, not only upon
faith foreseen, as you would have it, but likewise upon good works as
antecedent to it, which hitherto (for ought I see) you have not that impudence
to affirm. The like must be said of reprobation.

That as he never damns or decrees to torment and adult person* but such as are
impenitent unbelievers and rejecters of the means: so he has not decreed to
damn any but such so qualified: and whence the like Argument may likewise be
taken up, that impenitent unbelief and rejecting of the means are truly the
causes of damnation, Heb. 11.6. Heb. 12.14.
and that by the decree of God, who has declared that without faith it is
impossible to please him, and that without holiness no man shall see the Lord:
But it does not thence follow, that impenitence, unbelief, and the rejecting of
the means are the causes of the decree; reprobates were not sinners (at least
in existence) when the decree of non election or reprobation first p^^ upon
them, which was from all eternity; as the elect were not penitents at the first
instant of their election: in the mean time, God has not decreed to adjudge
any but sinners and unbelievers unto eternal torments, as he has not decreed
to reward any with eternal life but penitents. For what God does or permits
to be done in time, the same and no otherwise has God decreed to be done, or
permitted to be done before all time; so that the prevision of sin and
unbelief, and rejecting of the means, did no more antecede negative
reprobation, then the prevision of repentance and good works did antecede the
decree of election.

So that I hope reasonable men will or may now judge that I have reconciled the
enmity that your dim deluded sight had imagined, and broken down that
partition wall which your Panick fears raised between these two positions, and
by the good hand of God have so reconciled your supposed difference between
them, that they go near like Hippocrates twins, hard ^n hand together, though
that the one ordine naturae, not temporis, have a priority before the other, to
which the last is subservient.

So that now I am at liberty to attend to what you will say to my first
Argument, which is this.

That which the holy Ghost in Scripture ascribes to the sole will and good
pleasure of God, that we are not to assign to other causes: But the Scripture
assigns reprobation soley to Gods will: Therefore,

To which you answer.

His Major proposition he brings nothing at all to prove; for proof of his
Minor he alleges these Texts, Romans 9.18, 20, 21, 22. Mat. 11.25. Matthew.
20.15, 16. Romans 9.11, 12, 13, 17. Answ. to which I answer, The Scriptures which
he quoteth, and all that he can find, in all the book of God, cannot prove his
argument, for it is false in the Minor proposition, and therefore the Scripture
cannot prove it, for 1 Ioh. 2.21. no lie is of the truth; although the
Scripture does speak of the will of God, as a cause concerned in man's
reprobation, in having his eyes blinded, and his heart hardened, and the like,
yet the Scripture does not assign it solely and singly to the will of God,
without assigning it to any other cause; but on the contrary, it does assign
the continuance in sin and unbelief, and the rejecting the means of salvation,
as a cause thereof.]

i. e. would you have me beat the air, and fight against mine own shadow? No
Sir, it is the Minor that sticks in your sides so, that you cannot breath out any
one thing in a probable way of contradiction to any one of those texts by me
alleged: Yet with a face as full of impudence as ignorance, you adventure to
say, but do not, to which I answer, etc. This passage of this Doctor-like
undertaker, calls to my mind a Doctor of Oxford, whom I well did know, and to
this day he is well remembered for it by some, who in an University sermon of
his, falling upon a point of controversy, wherein he found Bellarmine his
adversary, uttered words to this effect, I will (says he) confute him in two
words, mentiris Bellarmine: and mark I pray, whether this Gentleman tread not
in the same steps, he begs the question, by saying it is false, and therefore
the Scripture cannot prove it. And what does he do less than give the lie to
the Spirit of truth, when (by his own confession) the Scripture ascribes
reprobation to the will of God? which though afterward he palliates by saying
that it does not assign it solely to the will of God, but that sin and
unbelief are concomitant causes, yet he might have showed some ingenuity in
alleging of such places of Scripture which had done as he did say, that so
there might have been some appearance of an answer, and not that
Pythagoras-like his ipse dixit should be taken for current coin, when as I am
certain it is but counterfeit; but to give the lie, and that to his betters
(as I am informed) is as ordinary a dish with him, as his daily bread.

Well Sir, but to attend your procedure, which is thus;

But whereas he says, that sin and unbelief, and the rejecting the means, are
just causes why God decrees such persons to hell and eternal torments, but not
the causes of Reprobation.

I do understand that the decree of God which was before time, rests for the
ground thereof more peculiarly in the will of God, without assigning other
causes to it than reprobation it self, which is the execution of the same
purpose and decree of God in time, ^^en and where the continuance in sin and
unbeleif, and the rejecting of the means of salvation is found in men.]

ex cathedra, you tender your simple sense of the decrees of God, wherein your
mistake is, supposing that we confound the decrees of God with the execution of
those decrees, which is not ours; which has been your error all along: For
this reprobation which I insist upon, is to be understood, not for the
execution of the decree, but for the decree it self of non electing, which we
call negative reprobation, though I will yield you thus far, that according to
some places in Scripture, and acceptance of Divines, the word reprobation may
be understood either of temporal reprobation in time, which is a denial of
effectual vocation, but in stead thereof a hardening of the heart, and a
withdrawing of Grace and favor formerly bestowed upon a man, 2 Chronicles. 15.2
in poenam peccati, in regard of his ingratitude, and other sins; and in this
sense, Deus non deserit nisi desertus, when we forsake him then he will forsake
us: Or otherwise it is to be understood of eternal reprobation before all time,
which is Gods eternal and peremptory decree of not preparing for some that
grace which would preserve them from forsaking God; and consequently permitting
them to lose eternal life, which we deny to be founded upon any foreseen sins,
or unbelief of men, but refer it wholly to the absolute good pleasure of his
will, for the alone cause of it. Now good Sir, if you will vouchsafe to call
your self to remembrance by looking into your own position; the matter in
debate between you and me is not about this temporal reprobation, that
transient act, which is or may be done in time, after the grace of the Gospel
rejected; But it is only about that reprobation which is eternal, immutable, and
immanent in God before all time, even before the foundations of the world were
laid.

And therefore I cannot blame you to write what follows, for I dare affirm that
notwithstanding any decree that God had made before time, there should be none
reprobated in time if they did not continue in sin and unbelief, and the
rejecting of the means of salvation till the day of Grace were at an end, which
God is pleased to give unto them, accompanying of them with means in the same
day of grace in order to their everlasting good]

and so cleave unto God with a purpose of heart, Act. 11.23. 2 Cor. 6.2.
now whiles it is the accepted time, and whiles the day of salvation is shining
on them.

Nay I shall add further; had Esau, or Pharaoh, or Cain, or Judas, To. 1.28.
or cull out any other, or take all of those forelone hope of caitifes and
cast-awaies, that are given over to a reprobate sense, had they or any of them
in their several generations truly repented of their sins, and from the heart
believed in the Lord Jesus Christ for pardon and acceptance, not one of them
so repenting should have been damned: And indeed to affirm otherwise, were but
to throw stones against the Gospel of Christ, the terms whereof are delivered
indefinitely; Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, Act.
16.31. If you confess with your mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy
heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved, Romans 10.9.
Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, Act. 3.19. And
indeed there was so much of the Gospel revealed even under the law, Ezekiel.
18.21. If the wicked man will turn from all his sins that he has committed,
and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall
surely live, he shall not die. But then worthy Sir, if you go along with me thus
far, I must lead you a little farther.

We have an infalible axiom in the Schools (wherein you are a stranger) that
Suppositio conditionalis nihil ponit in esse, Conditional propositions infuse
no hability, or put no capacity in the subject to accept of or to perform the
condition. Further, we have commonly in use a vain saying, if the sky fall we
shall catch Larks; now it does not hence follow, that either the sky shall
fall, or that a man may catch Larks; where shall a man set his footing, or hold
his larking-net, if the sky falls?

My allusion is this, that whiles I do consent, that such who are Reprobated
before all time, if they did believe and repent, should not be Reprobated in
time, nor damned after time, yet I do not say, that therefore it is in their
power either to believe or to repent, notwithstanding they may be accompanied
with never so much outward means in the day of grace, in order to their
everlasting good. Nay, I say it is impossible that ever they should either
believe or repent, if once the decree of non election was past: Do you chew the
cudde upon those words, Ioh. 10.26. You believe not, because you are not of my
sheep: and Ioh. 12.39. Therefore they could not believe because that Esaias
said, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that they should not
see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and I
should heal them.

Sir, for your own sake, let me persuade you to understand a little better,
that non-election or negative Reprobation is not only a denial of salvation it
self unto those that are non-elected, but pretermitted, and left weltring in
their own corruption, but likewise that it is a decree of withholding of all
grace, which would be de facto effectual unto the avoidance of sin, and such an
ordering of circumstances and occasions, as God certainly knows will make
them freely run into their sins, and obstinately continue in them. And
therefore here is that stumbling block which becomes an offense, yea in truth
it is the main knot in this business; you very fondly imagine that whiles God
accompanies persons non-elected or Reprobated, with outward means in the day of
Grace (as you phrasifie it) in order to their everlasting good, that then it is
in the power of that man's freewill, to accept or refuse of that means so
tendered; whereas this is a heavenly writ from the truth of Gods revealed will
in the Scriptures.

God in his eternal purpose has denied, decreed not to give to such the use of
that freedom to good which was lost in Adam, 2 Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2.13.
so that now we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our
selves, but our sufficiency is of God, who works in us both to will and to do
according to his good pleasure; Joh. 6.44. Phil. 1.29. 1 Pet. 1.21. Tit. 1.3.
and no man can come unto Christ except God the Father draw him.

So that when a man believes, it is given him to believe, and faith is the gift
of God, Ephesians. 2.8. and peculiar to the elect.

And so likewise, it is God that gives repentance unto Israel, Act. 5.31. and
so he grants it to the Gentiles, Act. 11.18. 2 Timothy 2.25.


Now tell me in sober sadness, how it is in right reason imaginable, that God
will give these things, which in his eternal purpose he has decreed not to
give, but to leave them in their own lost and ruined condition, for the
manifestation of his glory, when he shall render justice upon them according to
their demerits?

They are held as captives to the devil fast coopt up in his prison, 2. Tim.
2.26. Isa. 45.13.
so that unless the Lord by his almighty power shall let go those captives, and
open the prison door, and proclaim liberty unto them, they have not so much as
a will to help themselves; Isa. 61.1. 1 Cor. 2.14.
for the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned.

And in vain it is to talk of a day of grace, Deuteronomy. 3.6. Act. 16.14. Ezekiel.
36.26. Ezekiel. 11.19. Psalm. 110.3.
and means of salvation, for except the Lord circumcise the heart, and open it
and pour in his spirit, and cause them to walk in his statutes, and take away
their stony hearts, and give them hearts of flesh, and of an unwilling people
make them to become a willing people in the day of his power, all the outward
means in the world, though never so powerful and effectual elsewhere, when God
is pleased to add a blessing to it, yet without this particular operation of
the Spirit of God, inwardly enlightening, inclining, persuading, new molding and
new creating and sanctifying the inner man, all the outward actings do become
like water spilt on the ground; 2 Samuel 14.14. 2 Cor. 3.6.
It is but a dead letter, it cannot work that which it has not in it, and of
it self.

It is only the finger and almighty power of God that must effect it. And now
you seem to make a retreat or be at a stand, for thus you write.

[But I shall forbear to proceed any further in this place by way of proof,
because it will fall in to be spoken to more at large in answer to his
following arguments, in which I shall have occasion to show the plain sense of
those Scriptures in Romans 9. and others that have the same sound with them which
are mustered up for the proof of every Argument.]



In which I shall by the help of the most high God, make it appear, that Gods
act of Reprobation in time, in hardening the hearts of men, giving unto them
the Spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should
not hear, breaking them off from their olive tree, hiding the things which did
belong unto their peace from their eyes, that they could not attain unto the
law of righteousness, giving them up to their own hearts lust, and to all
uncleanness and vile affections, and to a reprobate mind, and the like, comes
not upon men merely, solely, singly, and alone by the will of God, as the only
and alone cause, without assigning any other thing as a cause thereof, but that
these things come upon men, as the just and righteous judgment of God upon
them for their continuing in sin and unbelief, and rejecting of the means as
aforesaid.]



I pray, kind Sir, be pleased out of your vast knowledge to inform me, what
foregoing or foreseen sin was there in our first Parents, Adam and Eve, for
which God, out of his vindictive Justice, did give them over to the liberty of
their own wills, and so suffered them to eat of the forbidden fruit, thereby
breaking the most holy and righteous law of God? Or those non-elect Angels who
are now reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, Jud. 6.
what antecedent sin can there be imaginable to that their first sin, for which
they were forced to leave their own habitation, and were delivered unto chains
of darkness to be reserved unto judgment? 2 Pet. 2.4


And what I say of these the like may be spoken of all the non-elected, there
is not any one sin that the heard of Reprobates ever did or shall commit, but
that Gods decree of suffering them to fall into those very same sins, is
antedated infinitely before any such sin is acted. Though I shall withal
confess, that in the very Reprobates, God often in a judiciary way, punishes
sin with sin, turning malum culpae into malum poenae, and so Vons avez to my
first Argument.

Your next motion of course is to my second Argument, which is thus.

That which is the efflux and consequence of Reprobation cannot be the cause of
it: but sin, and unbelief, and the rejecting of the means are the efflux and
consequence of Reprobation. Therefore.

The Major is as clear as the Sun.

The Minor is proved by these Texts, Matthew. 11.25, 26. Ioh. 6.36, 37. Ioh.
8.36, 37. Ioh. 10.26. Ioh. 12.39, 40. Romans 9.18, 33. Romans 11.7, 8. 1 Pet. 2.8.
Whereunto you say,

[To which I answer, first, by distingushing upon his Major proposition, and to
enquire into his meaning therein: now if he mean by Reprobation, the decree of
God before time, distinct from Reprobation in time, or Romans 1.28. Gods giving
them over to a reprobate mind, which is the execution of the decree, then I
deny that sin and unbelief is the effect of it; for God is so far from
decreeing and appointing men to commit sin, or that sin is an effect that
comes to pass by his decree and appointment, that he does not so much as tempt
any man to sin, as we may see Iam. 1.13. yea the Apostle James is so far from
laying sin upon Gods decree, as if that should be the cause that should produce
such an effect as sin and unbelief, that he says v. 14. that every man is
tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed; and then, v. 15. he
says, when lust has conceived it brings forth sin, and sin when it is
finished brings forth death: By which we may see that the Apostle does not
make Gods decree the cause of sin* but that indeed which is the cause which
brings it forth is even lust.]

Quem recitas meus est --
Sed male dum recitas incipit esse tuus.


[That which is the effect and consequent of Reprobation] is and so should be,
[That which is the efflux and consequent of Reprobation] which one word of
effect for efflux does much vary the case, and overthrows, at least silenceth a
great part, if not all what you have said against it; for I utterly disown the
word effect; I know sin follows negative Reprobation or non-election, not as
an effect the cause, but as the consequent flowing from and following its
antecedent, and therefore I protest against the word as spurious and
illegitimate, and no brood of my brain.

But yet if cause may be looked upon in the latitude it is many times used and
taken for, I see not, but that in a large sense Reprobation may be said to be a
cause of sin. viz. causa sine qua non; for had there not been such a negative
reprobation or non-election, as the mother, sin, at least actual sin, had never
been born nor brought into the world as the daughter. Had God elected all, at
least, had not God decreed to permit the sin of Adam and of his posterity, he
had not permitted it at all; for whatsoever he purposed to do, or permitted to
be done, in time, the same he did decree before all time so to do, or to permit
to be done; and if he had not permitted sin at all, and so decreed to permit
it, sin would never have been, but it must have been hindered.

But I insist not upon this, but apply my self to that member of your
distinction of Reprobation viz. that which is before all time.

Wherein, for so much as is contended for by you in this paragraph, if I may
gratify you in it, I will s^bscribe unto it, abating me but this, that whereas
you say lust is the cause of sin, I say the devil combining with the corruption
of man's nature, which is originally and totally depraved, and has little of
other proper and innate quality but to sin; and so I come to the other member
of your distinction, which is worded thus.

[Secondly, if by Reprobation he means the act or execution of Gods decree in
time, which is Gods giving up of people to their own hearts lust, and to a
Reprobate mind, as aforesaid, then also we find that Gods act in the first
place, is not the cause of man's sin, but man's disobedience in the first place
is the cause why God does execute the same as his just and righteous judgment
upon them for their continuance in sin, etc. as it is expressed in this
Position, as appears Psalm. 81.11, 12. Romans 1.22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. and
yet I do not deny but sin and unbelief may be the effect and consequence of
Reprobation in this sense, as men's delaying, and not coming in while the door
is open, is the cause of the door being shut against them, and the door being
shut against them, is the cause of their abiding still without: Wherefore
strive to enter in at the strait gate, before the good man of the house be
risen up, and has shut to the door, Luke 13.24, 25. While it is called to day,
lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.13.]



But I do partly believe that his meaning by reprobation in his argument, is
that which is generally held amongst them, That Gods will and decree before any
thing was brought forth in order, or before man had any being, is the only and
alone cause of Reprobation, and so consequently of sin and unbelief, and the
rejecting of the means of salvation; and that no other fruits at any time can
be brought forth by them, notwithstanding all that they can do, but that these
things must unavoydably follow, they being bound up thereunto by the decree of
God; and that which does make me inclinable to believe that his meaning is so,
is because I find his Arguments tend much to the maintaining of such a thing.]

that is interwoven. viz. [That being bound up thereunto by the decree of God]
which in my subsequent discourse shall be clearly refused. But as though that
in thus affirming I had maintained some formidable doctrine abhorrent to the
Churches of the Saints, he seems to bless himself from it, thus.

But as I tender the honor and glory of God, in the exaltation of his, Psalm.
145.8, 9. tender mercies over all his works, and the purity of that truth and
sincerity that is in himself, together with his faithfulness in his upright and
sincere dealings toward the sons of men; and also when I think upon the
excellency of his wisdom, I cannot but stand up in detestation of such a
doctrine which strikes at the very being of these attributes in God.]

crimen laesae majestatis, that you seem so passionate or is it only an
affected garb, of one of your Hypocritical raptures? No Sir, I doubt not
evidently to make it so appear, that our doctrine dorh not in the least degree
entrench upon any of the Divine attributes, but that it gives to the most High
God the honor due unto his name, by exalting him infinitely beyond all the
creation, showing their necessary dependence on him in all they have, do, or
hope to enjoy: Whereas your Doctrine whatsoever offers and fair pretenses it
makes, yet it is no better then Iaels bottle of milk to Sisera, Judge. 4.19.
when ready to perish with thirst, she administers withal a nail, and with a
hammer beats it into his temples; for howsoever you make a fair flourish of
vindicating the free grace of God, yet the issue of all tends to this, namely
to usher in that mincing minion free will, and so to set her cheek by jowle by
God himself; neither are you contented with this alone, but that in those grand
determinations of man's salvation or damnation, you plainly give the casting
voice to her, so that the result of all must be as she will please to accept or
refuse grace offered, so that all the while you will make God as an Idle
spectator, till she has been pleased to interpose her umpirage, and yet all of
which must be suspended until the moment of death; for according unto your
principles, which unto me is a paradox, Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera
debet dici beatus --

What prejudices you muster up as in defiance and detestation of our Doctrine
you do reduce unto three heads, as striking at (as you vainly imagine) first
the mercy, secondly the truth, thirdly the wisdom of God; but all of these are
built on one and the same false and rotten foundation, and therefore the labor
is not so great as to lay it all even with the ground, and for the original of
it, to return it to hell where it was first forged. I shall then in your own
order wait upon you in your march, and so examine what you have to say for your
self and cause, which begins thus.

First, if God has by an absolute decree brought forth such an effect, as a
continuance in sin and unbelief, and the rejecting the means of salvation, so
as the greatest part of men must be cast into the lake of fire, which is the
second death, for doing nothing but what they must do by the decree of God, and
cannot do otherwise; then where is the tender mercy of our God, which is over
all his works?]



He is the true and principal cause of any effect or event, who imployeth his
faculties and endeavors to bring it into being, and not he who only resolves
not to hinder such evil effects, though he foresee they will come into being
if he prevent them not.

The infallible prevision of God sees from all eternity the actions of men and
their ends, and yet this makes not the modus agendi to be necessary or
compulsory, but leaves the agent most free, as if he had never foreseen it: so
that the absolute decree of not giving faith, final perseverance, and eternal
life unto the non-elect (which he is no ways bound to do) howsoever it deny
them that grace which would effectually and infallibly make them bring forth
fruits meet for repentance, Mat. 3.8.
yet it depriveth them not of their own natural freedom and liberty, neither
does it necessitate, compel or constrain them unto any their unbelief or
committing or continuing in sin.

It Is he and he alone, or chiefly, may well be said to be invincibly drawn into
sin, and plunged into and cast into the like of fire, who fights against sin
with all his strength, and striveth to avoid damnation.

And yet by the overmastring power of another is thrust into the one, and hurld
into the other; which the consciences of the most wicked in the world can tell
them, that there is no such forcing power in non-election or reprobation: Yea
the non-elect Angels (which are now Devils in hell) cannot upon their
non-election, charge God that either their transgression or damnation, was
invincibly enforced upon them, they endeavoring to escape it.

Take a view of any of the men of the world, whom you much conceive may be
ranked among the number of such castawaies, and therein see whether the decree
of reprobation had any such influence upon their outward wi^ked actions, that
they might say for excuse they were necessitated thereunto.

The decree of reprobation did not compel or necessitate Cain to the murtherous
act of the killing of his brother, neither was there any obligation upon
Absalom incestuously to defile his fathers Concubines. Neither did it
unavoydably enforce Judas to the selling and betraying of his Master; all these
sinful actions, and all the like committed by other the like reprobates,
proceed merely out of their own election, having a power whereby they might
have abstained from the committing of them.

And therefore, my kind neighbor to help you one of this mire, that you sink
not into grosser absurdities, (as it is too incident to those of your Tribe,
who open every casement to entertain all your new lights, though many of them
prove but ignes fatui) It will be expedient to take notice of a threefold
necessity which may have a dependency upon a subject person, and by means
whereof a man may be said that he must do so, and that he cannot do otherwise:
There is a necessity of immutability, a necessity of infallibility, and a
necessity of coaction or compulsion; I shall explain the terms.

I call that a necessity of immutability, which does befall all such things as
are appointed by the eternal and immutable decree of God, for God cannot change
his counsel, but it must of necessity come to pass, Psalm. 33.11. The counsel of
the Lord stands for ever, and the thoughts of his heart to all generations.
Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not. Secondly, necessity of infallibility is
that whereby God does certainly and infallibly foresee the futurition of all
things; for whereas the foreknowledge of God cannot be deceived, as resting on
an immutable decree, therefore whatsoever he necessarily foreknoweth, the same
must necessarily come to pass, Act. 15.18. known unto God are all his works
from the beginning of the world. Thirdly, necessity of coaction or compulsion
is that, wherein any patient by violence is compelled by an external agent to
do this or that which otherwise he is unwilling to do; so Matthew. 27.32. they
compelled Simon to bear the cross of Christ: so Luke 14.23. at the great
supper, the guests are compelled to go in that the house might be filled: so
Acts 26.11. Paul compelled some to blaspheme.

These things thus premised, I do hence infer, that if the decree of God did
produce such an effect as from a proper cause thereof, as the continuance in
sin and unbelief, and the rejecting of the means of salvation, by way of
coaction or compulsion, so that though they would they could not do otherwise,
then well might you fall into that admiration, Where is the tender mercy of our
God! But the decree of God leaves not men under such necessity of continuance
in sin, etc. as though it either compelled men or solicited any unto sinning;
but those that sin, sin as voluntarily, and sin is acted as freely by them,
according to their own perverse wills and desires, as though there were no such
decree or foresight of God at all.

And yet it is very true that sins do come to pass according to the decree of
God by a necessity, first of immutability, in as much as they are permitted,
determined, directed and limited by the eternal decree of God, which is as
himself immutable.

Secondly, by a necessity of infallibility, in as much as the foreknowledge of
God concerning such future things cannot be deceived.

But they do by no means come to pass by any decree of God necessarily
enforcing, infusing, persuading, or soliciting to sin.

But Non cuivis homini contingit adire Corinthum, all of your complexion are
not equally capacitated to digest such notions, and therefore Qui potest capere
capiat, he that is able to receive it let him receive it. If these speculations
be too sublime for your thick noddle, blame not me for it.

And for that portion of Scripture by you cited, it has come under
consideration already, and has received a full answer, page 17. to which I
must refer the Reader; only I shall add this;

That non-election or negative Reprobation does not contract the mercy of God
into such strait terms, but that every man in the world has some share in it,
though not an equal share.

And if Gods mercy and love may be understood secundum effectum, and not
secundum affectum, I would have you find out any creature in the world which
has conferred so many and so great effects of mercy and love upon his young
ones, as God did upon Cain, Judas, or any other Reprobate, and then I Will give
you leave to say that our Doctrine of Reprobation is destructive to the tender
mercies of God.

No Sir, the decree of Reprobation, as it relates to the permission of sin in
those non-elected, argues no want at all of mercy in God, though it import a
denegation of some mercies, even the top, and height, and bowels of his tender
mercies, which God (had he been so pleased) might have bestowed on them; but
Ratinabiliter negatur, quod nulla ratione debetur, and with this I shall relax
my shoulders from the burden of this gravamen, and so proceed to the next,
which is but the second part to the same tune.

For thus you write, [Secondly, If God has brought forth such an effect as a
continuance in sin and unbelief etc. by his decree before man had any being, so
as that the greatest part of men must be eternally damned for doing but what
they must do, and cannot, neither ever could do otherwise: Then where is the
truth of God, who has said, Ezekiel. 18.23. Have I any pleasure at all that the
wicked should die, and not that he should turn from his ways and live?

Now if this man should undertake to resolve this question, and be true to his
own principles, he must say, there can be no other reason assigned for it,
either of sin or unbelief, and the rejecting of the means, but merely the good
will and pleasure of God: But God himself, whose word I shall believe before
this man's arguments, has said, Ezekiel. 18.32. I have no pleasure in the death of
him that dies.

And if this be not sufficient, yet lest men should distrust him, he confirms
it in Ezekiel. 33.11. say unto them, As I live, says the Lord God, I have no
pleasure at all in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his
way and live; turn ye, turn ye, why will ye dye, Oh house of Israel.]



There remains therefore little else to be done as to this, only to examine
his texts of Scripture, wherein he insists much upon such expressions, that the
Lord has no pleasure in the death of him that dies, or, in the death of the
wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live, etc. Now the mind of
the Prophet in this place, is to stir up such as had declined from God, to
return unto him by true repentance; and because their iniquities were so many
and their offenses so great, that justly they might have despaired of
remission, mercy and grace, therefore does the Prophet (for the better assuring
of those that should repent) affirm that God delights not in, nor wills the
death of the wicked; but of what wicked does the Prophet speak this? Doubtless
of such wicked that truly should repent; and in the death of such wicked God
does not nor never will delight: But he delights to be known a God that
shows mercy, grace and favor, to such as unfeignedly call for and desire the
same, how grievous soever their former offenses have been: But such as continue
obstinate in their impiety, have no part nor portion in these precious
promises, for them will God destroy, and them will he thrust by the power of
his word into that fire that never shall be quenched. Secondly, suppose, I say,
that the death spoken of here is to be extended no further then a temporal
death, and I am sure it is more then you are ever able to prove, that properly
and directly it can be applied to eternal death, and what will that avail you
then as to matter of damnation?

Thirdly, it is true, God wills not the death of the wicked, with a desire of
destroying, or that he delights in the destruction, vexation or perdition of
such creatures, neither would he it, or would effect or cause it if it were
nothing else but a naked destruction or perdition: But he wills it and works it
(if they do not repent) and delights in it, as it is the punishment of sin, and
a vindictive act of divine Justice, and work of God; for God has pleasure in
all his works: The destruction and ruin of Babylon is called his pleasure,
Isa. 48.14. he will do his pleasure on Babylon, and his arm shall be on the
Chaldeans: and Prove. 1.26. I will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your
fear comes: and Ezekiel. 5.13. thus shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will
cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be comforted.

But to this you make some additions, saying,

[But now, if God have so disposed of those that live and die in sin and
unbelief, as that they never could do otherwise, because of that decree of God
which was before they had any being, then I say, what truth were there in all
those shows of love that come from God in saying, as he lives he delights
not in the death of the wicked? etc. were it not dissembling, false dealing,
and hypocrisy, as bad as can be found in the worst of men? But I have better
thoughts of God, and so I trust has every sincere soul that truly fears God:
Romans 3.4. Yea, let God be true, and every man a liar, as it is written, that
thou might be justified in thy sayings, and might overcome when thou art
judged.]

that he has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, were not this
dissembling, and false dealing, and hypocritical as bad as can be found in the
worst of men? (Horres^o referens) Sir, in this you shoot much besides the mark,
we suppose no such decree of God so necessitating any man by way of coaction or
compulsion, but that every man that lives and dies in sin and unbelief, might
have lived and died in a better condition, if their own corrupt wills had not
freely carried them on to such exorbitancies; Reprobatio aeterna nihil ponit in
reprobato. The eternal act of Gods non-election, insists, infuses no sinful
acts or qualifications, and therefore every aberrancy or deficiency that is
found in man, as in reference to his obedience unto the most holy and righteous
law of God, cannot in the least degree be put upon the account of the decree of
non-election, but must be reduced only to the malignant will of man, totally
depraved and deprived of the glory of God.

And to what you say as to matter of dissembling and Hypocrisy, this is that
which I say, that if God should, as his ultimate end, by an immutable decree
determine and appoint a man to sin, or by an irresistible power plunge a man
into a course of sinning, and in the mean time make a protestation, that he
delights not in the death of the wicked, here you may say were dissembling
indeed.

But when God has decreed to create a man in righteousness and true holiness,
and then to leave him to the liberty of his own will, though in the mean time
he know, that being so left to himself he must unavoidably fall, and that he
has decreed to permit him to fall, for the manifestation of his justice, which
fall will draw after it many other gross sins, and for which at the last to
give him the full wages of all his unrighteousness; here is no false dealing
nor hypocrisy, though when he is so fallen God do require the exerting of
those graces wherewith he had at first endowed him, and which he wilfully
deprived himself of.

The confiding creditor is not to be blamed nor charged for want of pity, who
having lent some money to his neighbor who spends it all and squanders it away
in prodigality and lasciviousness, if when his time of payment comes he expects
a return of his money, and for want thereof casts and debtor into prison; He
that has wilfully made himself either blind or lame, who can bemoan such a
man's condition? For those expressions so obvious in the Scripture, setting
forth Gods not delighting in the death of the wicked, it may be inferred
thence, that their death and damnation are not things primarily well pleasing
to God; but it were ill concluded that God must become a hypocrite and a
dissembler if he have eternally decreed to permit them to incur death and
damnation by their own default.

Gods ultimate and primary end in the non-election or Reprobation of some, is
mainly to raise glory to his great name by making his power and justice to be
known and not that he creates a man on purpose to destroy him. But enough, if
not too much, has been spoken about this already: I shall now proceed to the
examination of his last gravamen, which is of the same import with the former,
only it has pleased this Merchant-venturer to clothe it in a distinct livery
diffe^ing little in substance from his fellows, but only in language whi h is
this.

[Again thirdly, If Gods decree of Reprobation before man had any being, does
produce, or bring forth such an effect or consequence, as a continuance in sin
and unbelief, etc. so as that men cannot, neither ever could repent, or believe
the Gospel, to the saving of their souls, nor do that which God has required
to be done in order to the obtaining of the forgiveness of sins, and
everlasting life, then where is the wisdom of God? Is it not below the wisdom
that is in the men of the world, which do not gather grapes of thorns, nor figs
of thistles? they do not wait in expectation of grapes, where they plant
nothing but brambles, neither do they look for a harvest of Wheat in the field
in the which they sow nothing but Tares; for if they should so do, and also
complain against the brambles because they brought not forth grapes, and
against the field because it brought not forth Wheat, would it not be folly in
them? judge ye that have understanding.]

Gravamen, which will supply the place of a Catholicon, or universal antidote
against all the grievances he can muster up in prejudice of our Doctrine of
non-election or Reprobation, where he shall be abundantly satisfied, that the
decree of God is no cause producing any such effect as sin and unbelief,
neither does the decree obicem ponere, so that by reason thereof men cannot
repent; it only denies the supply of those graces without which they cannot
expect such graces necessary to salvation.

But I wonder much what vertigo possessed this man's brains when he writes thus
of the wisdom of God, Is it not below the wisdom that is in men of the world,
etc., do they expect grapes when they plant nothing but brambles? do they look
for an harvest of wheat in that field in which they sow nothing but tares? etc.

Reverend Sir, be serious, and tell me, who own such a doctrine as teaches
that God plants brambles and sows tares? No Sir, for the brambles and tares
they were never of Gods planting and sowing, but the envious man (i. e.) the
Devil did it, and man's nature freely contributed assent unto it: we say with
Solomon, Eccles. 7.29. God made man righteous, but they have found out many
inventions.

The decree of reprobation implants no evil what it finds not, but it does
only deny to remove that evil that it does find; God in that decree sows no
tares, but as a righteous Judge, he appoints the tares to be bound in bundles
and cast into the fire; and now let those that have understanding judge what
nerves or sinews there are in this your crimination.

Neither is there much more in that of yours which follows, thus.

[But God that excels in wisdom does not so: read and consider, Isa. 5.1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and see what the Lord himself says, ver. 4. what could have
been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it? wherefore when I
looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes. See
also verse. 7. and he looked for judgment, but behold oppression: for
righteousness, but behold a cry. See also Ier. 2.21. Yet I had planted thee a
noble vine, wholly a right seed, how then art thou turned into the degenerate
plant of a strange vine unto me?]



1. That here hence the doctrine of absolute non-election or negative
reprobation is strongly confirmed, in that those who are so reprobated,
notwithstanding all the outward means used toward them, yet they will not,
cannot believe or repent, but continue in their sins.

2. That nothing more on Gods part could be expected either of desert or of
right, then what he had done to his vineyard: only this, that God did do more
to that part of the vineyard which he did make fruitful, then toward that part
which remained barren, and that in order to, and that antecedently to its
fruitfulness.

3. That something more was necessary to the conversion of them that were not
converted, it manifestly appears from hence, because that God beyond that which
was common to all, made a reservation of some according to the election of
grace. Romans 9.19. and 11.4, 5. viz. by taking away the vail from off their
hearts, 2 Cor. 3.45. Isa. 25.7. and by giving of them a new heart and a new
Spirit, and writing his laws in their heart, Ier. 31.33. Ezekiel. 11.19. and
36.26, 27.

4. That howsoever it be taken, yet might God well demand of those unprofitable
and disobedient people, what could he do more then he had done that he might
make them fruitful?

1. Because he owed them no more, nor so much in exact justice, though he might
have done more, of mere grace and favor.

2. Because those means already used, were the chiefest in respect of outward
means.

3. Because they had not done so much as by reason of the means they both ought
and might have done.

4. Because that none of them (herein appealing to their own consciences) had
asked any thing more of God, which he had not granted to them.

And this I hope will be satisfactory to the ingenuous; and from hence I could
willingly proceed to his exceptions against my third argument, and pass a slur
upon some of his frivolous objections and answers, wherein he does only verba
dare, wastes time, and spoils clean paper with nothing but vapor and smoke. But
because it may be pretended, 1 Cor. 3.12.
that there was something substantial in it; what wood; hay, stubble, I can
find in it, I will bring it to the fire that it may be burnt.

The first objection is thus languaged.

[But it may be objected, that God knew that such effects would follow
notwithstanding, and therefore he could not wait in expectation of better
things.

Answ. I deny not but that God in his foreknowledge did know what would come to
pass, and does know what men will do before they come to act, and yet nothing
as from God, in respect of his foreknowledge or decree before man had any
being, does necessitate or is the cause that does produce any such effect as a
continuance in sin and unbelief, etc. and therefore I say, that the oppression
and unrighteousness that was committed by the house of Israel, and men of
Judah, was not unknown unto God before it was ^ommitted, or that it came to
pass without; or contrary to his knowledge, but it was brought forth directly
contrary to the mean: that God used toward them or afforded unto them, which
was of such a nature and tendency, had it not been abused, to b ing fo^th those
good things that God said he looked so, but the contrary was b o^ght forth by
them; and upon this a^co m i^ is, th t the Lord has said to Israel, Isa. 65.
2. I have st^e^c^ed forth m^ hands all the day unto a rebellious people which
w^^^^ in away that was not good, after their own thoughts: Yea so ^^ w ^th ^
^ou^in ^^^ce in ^n from being the effect of Gods de r^^ of reprobation from
before the foundation of the world, that he plainly says, Ier. 19.5. that he
commanded it not, nor spoke it, neither came it into his mind.]

(necessitate immutabilitatis et infallibilitatis) that such things would
follow, notwithstanding expectation of better things; which word expectation is
used by the Prophet but by an anthropopathy after the manner of men, for our
better apprehension, which signifies nothing else, but that God expects and
requires from us what our debt and duty is, which yet nevertheless is done
without any frustration of his end, though that be not done which he requires
of us.

What you write of the means, that they were of such a nature and tendency, had
they not been abused, to bring forth those good things that God said he looked
for, etc. I grant it true in respect of the outward means, viz. soil fruitful,
place fenced, stones gathered, choycest vine planted, tower built, and a
wine press in it; But all these were but outward graces, common to all the
Israelites alike, for there was that unum necessarium wanting, viz. the inward
working of his holy spirit in their hearts by changing of their natures, and
making of them new creatures, taking away their stony hearts, and instead
thereof giving of them hearts of flesh, Ezekiel. 11.19. and 26.26. without which
all the other outward means, though elevated to the top of Pisgah, will prove
altogether ineffectual.

Your progress holds yet further after this manner.

But that it does sometimes seem good in the sight of God to hide the things
concerning the kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus, from the wise and
prudent men of this world, according to the Scripture by him quoted out of
Matthew. 11.25, 26. I freely grant; as he did hide these things from the men of
Corazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum, as a great woe unto them, or as the just and
righteous judgment of God upon them, because they repented not; for proof
thereof read ver. 20. and so downwards, Then began he to upbraid the cities
wherein most of his mighty works were done, Because they repented not; and it
does appear, that as mighty works were done amongst them, and great means given
forth of God by Jesus Christ unto them, the greater is their condemnation
because they embraced it not.]



2. The truth of the thing is by you concealed, which rests principally in the
distinguishing of persons into two ranks, and that arising merely from the will
of God; it so seemed good unto him: 1. Because to some it is said that it is
revealad, to others not, and that not so much by the preaching of the Gospel,
for that was common to them both alike, but by the inward illumination of their
minds by the spirit of God. 2. Because the discrimination that is made in the
rendering of it to some, and hiding of it from others, is attributed to Gods
separating those parties in the decree of election and reprobation. 3. The
prime and chief cause of that separation is placed in the good pleasure of Gods
will, which is the alone foundation and cause of election and non-election,
Ephesians. 1.4, 5. Romans 2.11, etc.

And upon this account was it that the place was by me quoted, and so by you
slubbered over.

And the like fair dealing I find in that which follows, in your English, thus;

[And thus I do confess that God gives to men the spirit of slumber, darkeneth
and blinds their eyes, not outwardly but inwardly, as this man has said, and
also hardens and makes fat their heart, but not from before the foundation
of the world, or from eternity, as some do vainly imagine, but as the just and
righteous judgment of God upon them in time, when they come to shut their own
eyes, and harden their own hearts against the truth in their day of grace: see
the words of Christ, Luke 19.42. saying, If thou had known, even thou at
least in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace, but now they are
hid from thine eyes. Also read and consider well for the better clearing of
this truth, Ps. 81.11. to the end, Luke 13.34, 35. Romans 1.24. to the end: and
mind well the 26. ver. for this cause God also gave them them up to vile
affections: and also ver. 28. and even as they did not like to believe God in
their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind. And in this sense I do
not deny but that sin and unbelief may be an effect and consequence of
reprobation; but this reprobation or being given over of God to a rep obate
mind, is not solely and singly to be ascribed to the will or decree of God from
before the fo^ndation of the world, without any other ground or cause being
assigned thereunto by the holy Spirit in the Scripture; for there we may see
that man's default in not improving what he has received, o^ may obtain, if he
be not wanting to himself, in good ea^nest to seek the grace that God does so
freely tender to the sons of men by Jesus Christ in the Gospel, is a cause of
it.



Yet this I do affirm, that what you say, that God does all these things in
time as a just and righteous judgment: So I say, all these things did God
decree that he would do, or permit to be done before all time; for there is no
new Immanent act in God, but all whatsoever he in time does, or that he does
permit others to do, those very samethings are so decreed by God to be done,
and likewise so decreed to be permitted to be done by others. Ruminate on this,
and for the rest, I may dismiss without contradiction having not much to say to
reprobation in time.

Your next objection that you make to your self is this.

Obj. But this tends to the exaltation of the creature.

Ans. That indeed is that false report that is cast upon us in these days, and
upon the truth that we profess; but I know not what g^ound they have for it,
except it be this, because we sometime use the word self in our speaking or
writing: but upon that ac^ount they may as well say that Peter was a
Free-willer, or one that exalted the creature, because he said, Acts 2.40. save
your selves from this untoward generation: and also they may as well charge the
same upon Paul, because he said, 1 Timothy 4.16. Take heed unto thy self, and to
thy doctrine: continue in them, for in so doing thou shall both save thy self
and them that hear thee: But we are so far from setting up any wisdom,
strength or power of our own, that we do a^knowledge that we, 1 Cor. 4.7. have
nothing that we have not received, neither do we glory as if we had not
received it: for John 1.16. Of his fullness have we all received, and grace for
grace; or grace to obtain grace: yea so far are we from maintaining, that we
exercise any power of our own in repenting and believing in the name of Jesus,
that we do hold and believe that we have no power at all to do either good or
evil, but what we do enjoy through the mercy of God by our Redeemer: Who is
Col. 1.17. 1 Cor. 8.6. our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by
him. Acts 17.28. for in him we live, and move, and have our being. And so
wicked men dishonor God, not with any thing they have of their own, but with
those members of the body, and faculties of the mind which are in themselves
good, as they do enjoy them from God through Jesus Christ, but are abused by
being excercised in the speaking of words, and doing of actions that are
contrary to the mind of God. See James 3.9, 10. speaking of the tongue and
saying, Therewith bless we God, even the father, and therewith curse we men,
which are made after the similitude of God; out of the same mouth proceeds
blessing and cursing: my brethren, these things ought not so to be. Now those
that we read of in Scripture that said, with our tongues we will prevail, our
lips are our own, who is Lord over us? were wicked men and p^oud boasters; but
we have learned not to glory in these things, but in this we delight to glory,
that we know Jesus Christ to be the Lord, which exercises loving kindness,
judgment and truth on the earth.



But to what you confess, that you have no power to do either good or evil but
through the mercy of God by our Redeemer: as to matter of evil who required
such a confession at your hands? and therefore by so much it is more then was
necessary, and to boot more then is truth: for who dare affirm that Jesus
Christ shed his blood to purchase power for us to do that which is evil? What
power any man or creature has as simply to an external action, he has it as
by virtue of God the Creator, and not God the Redeemer: but only as to such
actions which may have a tendency to goodness, heaven, etc. and so with you I
will confess that Ioh. 15. Without him we can do nothing. But in good sooth
Sir, this confession being so inconsistent with your other principles,
whatsoever it is that you pretend, or fair flourishes you make of denial of
your selves, and making Jesus Christ all in all, yet it is too palpable, you do
exalt the freewill of man above all that is called God, and whatsoever is done
or spoken in the advance of that, especially in that point of conversion, it is
done to the dishonor of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ: Whosoever gives
f^eewill any power at all in the choosing or acceptance of any thing that is
good, as from a principle of any innate quality it has in it self, he does in
so much dethrone Jesus Christ from his kingly power and Priestly office: Jesus
Christ died that he might purchase a freedom to the will, and Psalm. 110.3. they
shall be a willing people in the day of his power: and then Ioh. 8. If the Son
make you free, then are you free indeed.

For that which follows, I was very unwilling to trouble either my self in
transcribing of it, or the Reader, to perplex him with so much of nothing: but
by reason I have enjoined my self to that method, I cannot omit it; and thus it
begins.

[And to those Scriptures in Romans 9. which seem to be the groundwork or
foundation upon which these Arguments are built, they hold forth no such thing
as this man does endeavor to draw from them, or wrest out of them, by which he
would have his Argument seem current gold, but will be found to be but dross:
for they speak forth no such thing as that God does elect men in Jesus Christ
to eternal life, without any respect had to faith, or the use of means,
although they do exclude the works of the law wholly in that thing, as has
been already showed: neither do they speak forth any such thing, as that God
does assign the Reprobation of persons to everlasting destruction solely and
singly to his will, without assigning it to any other cause: but the contrary
is in it, as has been already made to appear in ver. 32. and in Chapter 11.20.
in which it is plain that unbelief or the not seeking of righteousness by faith
in Christ Jesus was the cause why the fleshly seeds or natural branches were
broken off from their own Olive Tree, were blinded or hardened, had the spirit
of slumber given unto them, eyes that they should not see and ears that they
should not hear, and so were Reprobated, because they sought not righteousness
by faith, and because of unbelief; and thus neither Ismael nor Esau, nor
Pharaoh were cast out of Gods presence, given over or hardened, merely, solely,
and singly by the will or decree of God without assigning any other thing in
Scripture as a cause of it: for Ismael was persecuting the son that was born by
Promise, Gal. 4.29. Esau was a profane person, and for one morsel of meat sold
his birthright, Heb. 12.16. and his posterity also, which is much concerned in
what God said to Rebecca, Genesis 25.23. For the Lord did not speak to her of two
persons, but said, that two nations were in her womb, and two manner of people
should be separated from her bowels, and the one people should be stronger then
the other people, etc. And those judgments that are to befall the Edomites, or
the posterity of Esau, are not assigned solely and singly to the will of God,
mentioning nothing beside the will of God, as a cause of it, as appears in
that Prophecy of Obadiah, ver. 10. For thy violence against thy brother Jacob
shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut off for ever: and Pharaoh
likewise we do not find to be hardened or given up of God, until he had hardened
his own heart first, if we mind and consider well his evil dealing toward God
and his people in the first place. Do but read and consider well Exodus 8.32.
and Pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also, which is a plain intimation
that he had hardened his heart several times before; and so God makes vessels
of di^honour not in the first creation, as has been imagined by some for then
he made all things good, Genesis 2.31. and God made man upright, but he has
sought out many inventions, Eccles. 7.29.]



To what you do insert by way of concession, (although they do exclude the
works of the law wholly in that thing) Sir, this is your mistake, (as I have
told you of it before) For I would have you to learn this from me, if your
pride be not too great, that where works of the law are excluded, and faith
required, that is only meant in the business of Justification, and not to be
meant about the matter of election; for in the cause of election, both faith
and use of means are as much excluded from having any casting voice at all, as
well as the works of the law: yet this to be understood excluded as
antecedently to election, but not as consequently excluded, as from being a
means, cause, or motive of the decree, but yet excluded as from being of a
consequent means for the execution of the decree; for as so, works are as
necessary to salvation as faith it self, for Heb. 12.14. without holiness no
man shall see the Lord.

Nor is there any more truth in that which follows, that we should collect from
that portion of Scripture, that the Reprobation of persons to everlasting
destruction proceeds solely and singly from the will of God; but this is that
we do affirm, that God did not elect some but past by them, and left them in
their lost condition, and this was simply and singly from the same will whereby
he elected the rest, and that for the sin whereinto they had irrecoverably cast
themselves, which would unavoydably fetter them, and make them obnoxious to all
other sort of sins, for those same sins, I say, at the last to condeme them:
and who can in this expostulate against the justice of God?

For Ismael, Esau, Pharaoh, whom the Spirit of God makes instances of
non-election or reprobation, they were by the decree of God, which is his will
or good pleasure, left in, or past by in that corrupt mass of perdition, out of
which the Lord determined not to deliver them, nor to supply them with grace
sufficient for their salvation, and this was from all eternity before they were
in existence; concerning which our dispute is, which as yet you do not meddle
withal, but only about reprobation in time, concerning which I have no cause
to contend but shall readily acknowledge that when these men came to be in
being, they in their several generations were led away by their own lusts,
which, as they did flow from that principle of their non-election, so one sin
in Gods justice might be the cause of another sin.

You make your progress thus.

[But it is found in Scripture that Gods way in making vessels of dishonor, is
in respect of what he does by men in time when they come to have a being: and
so it appears from that similitude of the potter, Ier. 18.3, 4. Then went I
down to the potters house, and behold he wrought a work on the wheels, and the
vessel that he made of clay, was marred in the hand of the potter: so he made
it again another vessel as seemed good to the potter to make it: and we do find
that God does not apply the parable or similitude to any work that he did in
the first creation, or before man had a being, but he does apply it to his
dealing with men in time, when they have a being: for says the Lord by the
Prophet ver. 5, 6. O house of Israel (note) the house of Israel was a people
then in being, and yet were not at that time made vessels of dishonor, or
given over of God to their own destruction: but God pleads from that
similitude that he had power, and also woe ld do it, if they did walk stubbornly
against him, which accordingly came to pass: for says the Lord by the Prophet,
ver. 11. Behold I frame evil against you, and devise a device against you,
return ye now every one from his evil way, and make your ways and your doings
good: and they say there is no hope, but we will walk after our own devices,
etc. ver. 12. and more for the clearing of this you may find, if you read chap.
19. and especially mind the 15. ver. the words are these, Thus says the Lord
of hosts, the God of Israel, Behold, I will bring upon this city, and upon all
her towns, all the evil that I have pronounced against it, because they
hardened their necks, that they might not hear my words.

Romans 9. must necessarily be relative to any other place, but immediately from
that inspiration of the Holy Ghost, I am assured you can bring no cogent reason
for it; It Is true the margin of the Bible gives a hint of some such parallel
places of the like import, but it does nor thence follow that the
interpretation of the one must be concluded to be the sense of the other. But
if any man in this list to be contentions to make it relative, then surely it
must rather be to that in Isa. 45.9. as I could evidently make it to appear if
it were necessary: and then all what this Gentleman has said to that of Ier.
18.3, 4. must needs fall to the ground, where I have nothing to say either to
him or it, the strength of my Argument being nothing at all concerned in it.
What is in this paragraph spoken as to vessels of dishonor, I shall by and by
meet with that in the Analyzing of this 9. to the Romans and in the mean time
proceed to attend to what you farther say.

[And this is that which is pleaded for in Romans 9. that God has power and also
it is his will to harden the hearts, and blind the eyes, or darken the
understandings of those that will not obey the truth in their day of grace,
when light is held forth unto them, as it came to pass upon the Jews, as the
just and righteous judgment of God upon them, Luke 19.44. Because they knew
not the time of their visitation. Romans 9.32. Because they sought it not by
says: and Romans 11.20. Because of unbelief.]



[But there is one text yet in the rere of all the rest that are mustered up
for the proof of this Argument, which I cannot well pass by, without speaking
something to it; lest it should be said, that there was some strength in it:
which I knew not how to remove the text is 1 Pet. 2.8. which stumble at the
word, being disobedient, whereunto also they were appointed.]



[To which I reply, first, by demanding who it is that can be disobedient in
doing what they are appointed to do by God himself? Now if those that live and
dye in unbelief were appointed of God so to do then where is their
disobedience? are they not as much obedient as those that live and dye in the
faith? for they do no more then what is appointed them of God to do* and then
do they not equally and alike do the will of the Father? and then would they
not be the brethren and sisters of Christ? Matthew. 12.50. Let those that have
understanding judge.]

Sir, I will give you for your better satisfaction, the scope of the place, and
that will a little conduce to gain the sense of the words.

The Apostle in this same verse partly confirms what he had delivered
concerning Christ, ver. 4. viz. that he was a living stone, chosen, and
precious, and partly he prevents an objection which might arise from the in
redulity of the greatest part of the Jews, and chiefly of the Scribes and
Pharisees.

This scandal he removes by the commemoration of a prophecy of David, Psalm.
118.22. whereby to signify that they ought not to be offended with the
incredulity of the Jews as a thing so strange as never to have been expected,
whereas it was foretold by David, and that by a special instinct of the Holy
Ghost. 2. And to the confirmation of the same he adjoynes another prophecy of
Isa. 8.14. And lastly, the same scandal he utterly cashiers, by a declaration
that such was the will of God that it should be so, whi h (as being most just
and holy) all the people of God are bound to acquiesce in, and this he clears,
ve. 8. when he says, that those unbelievers who are offended at the Gospel
were appointed unto this very same thing. The like expressions are found, 1
These. 5.9. God has not appointed us to wrath: and Romans 9.17. for this same
purpose have I raised thee: and ver. 22. vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction: and Jude 4. of old ordained to condemnation.

And this of the scope; now for the sense of the words.

1. We do not say they were appointed, as if we did maintain that God had
decreed to infuse o^ instill unbelief into them, for all men are by nature
unbelievers and disobedient to the truth.

Adams disobedien e had exposed them to, and left them in such a connative
state of unbelief and disobedience, that they were never able to shake off, nor
rid their hands and hearts from, until God by his immediate hand had sp^inkled
them with pure water and washed them clean; and therefore there needed no new
infusion to make them do that, to which (you say) they were appointed to do,
their own contracted original depravation wo^ld carry them on fast enough to
that without any other, or new intervenient act of God.

No Sir, Gods acts are all holy, and just, they were appointed to that unbelief
and disobedience, not that God would work it in them.

But that he had decreed and so appointed to leave them in that unbelieving and
disobedient condition whereinto man at first had freely precipitated himself,
whereby he had so captivated all his posterity, that they being deprived of the
glory of God, and God likewise having decreed to permit them to fall into gross
actual transgressions, from which he was no way obliged to preserve them; and
hence it is that here it is said they are appointed to it, because God had
decreed not to prevent it, none of this disobedience or unbelief came to pass,
either God not knowing of it, or wanting power to hinder it, but God, for the
setting forth of his own glory in the manifestation of his justice upon such
immorigerous subjects, he had decreed to permit that unbelief and disobedience,
and so it was appointed.

2. Neither do we say that there was any precept or command, whereby God did
require that unbelief or disobedience; No, the purity of his most holy nature
does most severely forbid it: but this it is that we assert, that the just God
had appointed or decreed not to give them faith, which is an undeserved grace,
Ephesians. 2.8. not to give them the spirit of obedience, for that is a disobliged
mercy, and yet without whose gift of themselves they could do nothing, Ioh.
15.2. Phil. 2.13. and that positively likewise he had decreed, that when they
were refractory and disobedient against the Gospel, in a righteous way of
judgment more grievously to blind and harden them, so punishing sin with sin;
and in the end and issue of all, to give them the wages which they had earned,
that so they might reap what they had sown, and receive the fruits of their
own labors, viz. hell and destruction; and so all of this was appointed,
because decreed to be done or permitted to be done. Therefore you do but dally
and play with the words, and make a mock of the language of the holy Ghost,
when you write; If those that dye in unbelief were appointed of God so to do,
then where is their disobedience? are they not as much obedient as those that
live and dye in the faith? Good Sir, this obedience that you dream of, that so
much perplexeth your brains, supposes a command to that unbelief, that
disobedience, which we utterly deny. It Is true this we do affirm, that there
does proceed a decree, and that, not positive, but negative, viz. a denial of
such grace as by which they might be enabled both to believe and obey the
Gospel.

And that grace being wanting to them, how shall they believe, how can they
obey? and yet all this is no other then God in his secret counsel has decreed,
appointed, to permit in the manner to come to pass.

But you have another bout with this text, and say.

[But secondly, I do therefore affirm that the disobedience o^ unbelievers is
in not doing of that which they should do by the appointment of God; and as
some of the former translations (...) read, being disobedient to that whereon
they were set: and if this man do but look on his Greek Testament, and say no
otherwise o^ this text, then in his own conscience he judges to be the clea^
sense of it, as he is freely willing to answer the same before the great and
righteous Judge, the Lord Jesus at his appearing, when he shall sit upon the
throne of his glory: Then I am persuaded that he will say no otherwise of it.]

viz. that the disobedience of unbelievers is in not doing of that which they
should do by the appointment of God; I must tell you it is very luxuriant, and
corrupts the text, and perverts the whole scope of the Holy Ghost and sense of
the words; both of which according to the mind of the Spirit, and given in
before, I need not to repeat it.

The word which the Translators here render disobedient is (...), which
properly signifies an unperswaded person, an incredulous, unbelieving and
refractory person, that will give no assent unto that which he hears. And now I
pray learn me one lesson, In what Grammatical construction can these words,
whereunto they were appointed, have any manner of relation, but only unto
their antecedent disobedient, or unbelieving, and not to any implicit command
or injunction of God, as it is by you feigned.

And then it must necessarily carry this Interpretation, being disobedient,
unperswaded or incredulous, unto which their disobedience, misperswasion, or
incredulity, they were before hand, even from all eternity, predetermined,
predestined or appointed of God.

But that which follows of yours puts me into a wonder, as it was to the Jews
concerning Christ, Ioh. 7.15. How knows this man Letters, or Learning? (as it
is in the Margin) having never learned, (...). I suppose you are not a
pretender to any Enthusiastical raptures, as if you could speak any exotic
languages, as by an immediate divine inspiration, which you never learned, as
one in London once did in my hearing, pretending a miraculous gift in his
speaking of Hebrew and Greek, he being no scholar; but let that pass, and him
too that set you on this buz, which only makes a noise, but comes to nothing.

For those former translations you mention, which render the words, being
disobedient to that whereon they were set, I have not met with any such, and
therefore leave them to their own sense. But upon your proposal and heavy
charge thereon, I have surveyed the original: the words are these, (...); for
the word (...), it properly signifies (as I said before) a person unperswaded,
not believing; and for the word (...), whereon you lay the stress of your
interpretation, if we shall follow the usual sense of the holy Ghost, in diverse
other such like places, it cannot in any other fair construction be rendered
then Appointed ordained. viz. by the decree of God, and so is the word (...)
usually taken, as Ioh. 15.16. I have chosen you and ordained you, (...), and 1
These. 5.9. God has not appointed us to wrath, (...): now why you should tread
in a path by your self, and wave the best received Interpretation, I know no
cogent reason for it, but that you have a vain affectati-of singularity. Nor
indeed much would it conduce to your purpose, had you your desire in this sense
of the word; but such men as you are when they can no ways evade the power of
the Spirit speaking in any Scripture, then they fall to their wrenches and
turnings, and doubles, as the Hate does when she is hard hunted and in danger
to be taken, and can find no other way to escape, and therefore I will leave
you to your vain subterfuges; and attend to what you further say.

[ Object. But the objection that usually is made against this, is grounded
upon Romans 9.19, 20. Thou will say unto me, why does he yet find fault, for who
has resisted his will? Nay, but O man, who art thou that reply against God?
etc. Now that which some do infer from it, is, That God does Reprobate men to
eternal destruction without assigning, or ascribing any other thing to be the
cause of it but the will of God, as this man does in his argument.

Answ. To which I answer, that there is no need at all for men to dispute with
God so as to demand of him a ground or cause of man's Reprobation, for he has
showed them the things, of himself by the things that are made, even his
eternal power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse: Romans 1.20. and
has showed sufficiently in the Scripture, that the rejecting the means of
salvation, continuing in sin and unbelief, is the cause of it, as has been
already proved, and yet I shall by the help and assistance of God endeavor to
make it more plain; for consider, that the people that Paul speaks to in these
words, Thou will say unto me, why does he yet find fault? for who has resisted
his will, etc. were the Jews, which notwithstanding all that God did publish
and declare unto them by Jesus Christ, and by his Apostles; first tendering unto
them the choice and precious mercies of himself in his Son Christ, that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all
nations, beginning at Jerusalem: and so it was declared unto them, Acts 4.10,
11, 12. that there was no other name under heaven given among men whereby they
must be saved but only by the name of Jesus of Nazareth, whom they had
crucified, whom God has raised from the dead: Which is the stone that was set
at naught by the builders the Jews: yea this truth was plainly declared by Paul
also, in Acts 13. from ver. 16. to ver. 46. and he applying his speech to the
men of Israel, and children of the seed of Abraham, in the conclusion thereof
ver. 38, 39. says these words, Be it known unto you therefore men and
brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins,
and by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which they
could not be justified by the law of Moses: Beware therefore, says he, ver.
40, 41. Lest that come upon you whsch is spoken of in the Prophets, Behold ye
despisers, and wonder, and perish, for I work a work in your days which ye
shall, (or see Hab. 1.5.) will in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto
you; and by this it may solely be concluded, that Paul was not of that mind,
that those people, or any other people whatsoever, were appointed, or designed
of God, by his purpose and decree from before the foundation of the world, that
unavoidably they must, and can do no other but despise Jesus Christ, and the
means of salvation by him; for if he had been of that mind, then certainly he
would not have bad them beware, or take heed of that which they could not help.

But notwithstanding this, ver. 45. they speak against those things which were
spoken by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming, and although through Jesus
Christ was preached unto them the forgiveness of sins, and by him all that
believe are justified from all things, from which they could not be justified
by the law of Moses, yet, as they had said before, that they were Moses
disciples, Ioh. 9.28, 29. and they knew that God spoke by Moses, but as for
this fellow, we know not whence he is; so yet they were resolved to dwell upon
the law of Moses, together with being children of the stock and seed of Abraham
according to the flesh, for justification in the sight of God: and to the very
same people Paul speaks, Romans 2.17, 18, etc. saying, Behold, thou art called
a Jew, and restest in the law, and make thy boast of God, and know his
will, and approvest the things that are more excellent, being instructed out of
the law, and art confident that thou thy self art a guide of the blind, a light
of them which are in darkness: and to those people he speaks also, Romans 9. at
the beginning, and so forward, saying, in ver. 7, 8. Neither because they are
the seed of Abraham are they all children, but in Isaac shall thy seed be
called: that is (says he) they which are the children of the flesh, these are
not the children of God: but the children of the Promise are counted for the
seed. And this he proves in showing that Ismael the son of the bondwoman,
Gal. 4.22, 23. verses, and Esau also that was born of Rebecca, which together
with Jacob was conceived in the womb of her, to wit Rebecca, by one, even by
their father Isaac, all descending from Abraham according to the flesh, and yet
Ishmael and Esau must be cast out of Abraham's house or family. And that which
he says ver. 13. Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated, was written by the
Prophet Malachy many years after they were born, brought forth and became two
nations, as it was said to Rebecca, Genesis 25.23. and the ground or reason showed
by Obadiah, ver. 10. and this is to show that God has not bound himself by any
purpose, decree, or promise, to elect, justify, or eternally to save them by
their keeping the law of Moses, and in being the seed of Abraham according to
the flesh, and therefore there could be no unrighteousness with God in casting
them out, or breaking them off from their own Olive Tree, notwithstanding all
that they could plead for themselves in these things.

But it was that vain confidence that Paul knew they had in these things before
mentioned in Chap. 2. Behold, thou art called a Jew, and restest in the law and
art confident, etc. and therefore Paul might well say, thou Jew that restest in
the law and art confident, wilt say unto me, Why does he yet find fault? for
who has resisted his will? for being so confident in these things, they would
be apt to say, Why should God find fault with us? Is it not the will of God
that the seed of Abraham, being circumcised, and keeping the law of Moses,
should be his people? and has not God himself commanded these things, and
annexed promises thereunto? who has resisted his will in all this? But Paul
having before fully proved, that God had not bound himself either by purpose,
decree, or promise, to elect, justify, or eternally to save them upon that
account, might well say, thou must not reply against God, for he having made no
such promises unto thee upon those terms, he is at liberty to break thee off as
an unfruitful branch, and to make of thee a vessel of dishonor.

For notwithstanding all the means that God had used toward them in order to
their conversion, they having all heard Romans 10.18. and God having stretched
forth his hands unto them all the day long, and yet, notwithstanding all that
God had done for them in tendering unto them such precious promises in Jesus
Christ, yet they were a disobedient and gainsaying people: and thus walking
stubbornly against God all the day of Grace, they are now in the hands of God
as the clay was in the hand of the porter, to make of them vessels of
dishonor: for the Potter did not take a piece of clay into his hand on purpose
to make such a vessel at the first as it was made by him afterward; but Ier.
18.4. the vessel which he made of clay was marred in the hand of the Potter,
and so he made it again another vessel, as it seemed good unto the Potter to
make it: and so in like manner, those people, the Jews that Paul speaks of in
the Epistle to the Romans, being stubborn in the hands of God, and disobedient
unto his righteousness, even when his hand was stretched forth unto them all
the day long, it was now just with God to make of them vessels of wrath,
fitted, or made up for destruction; and thus it is plain to any rational man,
that will but look on these things with a single eye, and with an upright mind
judge of the same, that the good will and pleasure of God is not solely and
singly the cause of Reprobation, without having any other ground or reason
assigned thereunto in Scripture; but that the rejecting the means of salvation,
to wit, the free tenders of Christ in the Gospel, continuing in sin and
unbelief, and denying the power of godliness, is assigned by the holy Spirit in
the Scripture as a cause thereof.]

And as God thus dealt with the Jews, because they sought not righteousness by
faith in Christ, so does God in like manner deal with all the world for the
like cause: He that believes not is condemned already, because he has not
believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God: and this is the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather
then light, because their deeds are evil: and 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. Because
they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, and for this
cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie,
that they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.]

ad idem, but a rambling discourse not any whit analogous to the business in
hand: Yet I have not spared to set the whole down; having proposed that to my
self to be my method at first, that so it might apppear, that I had not put a
slur upon any part of his writing, which had any appearance of substance in it.

And yet in my answer hereunto I shall not confine my self to such strict terms
as to pursue him so closely in his wildgoose chase through thick and thin, over
hills and over dales, Ultra Garamantas et Indos, and so to wait upon him in his
crooked ways, or follow him in his extravagancies: he gleans up and patcheth
together diverse impertinent places of Scripture, as Act. 4.10, etc. Act. 13.16,
etc. Ioh. 9.28, etc. Romans 2.17. Gal. 4.22. Genesis 25.23. Obad. 10. Romans 10.18.
and Ier. 18.4. and 2 These. 2.10, 11. and from these to drain out the Apostles
meaning in this place.

But my purpose is to keep me close to the words of the Apostle, who best knew
the meaning of the Spirit, and who alone is sufficient to be his own
interpreter, and from thence to infer so much as to a rational man may give a
full decision to the matter in controversy, viz. that sin and unbelief is not
the cause of Reprobation before all time, but that it proceeds solely from the
good pleasure of Gods most holy will, to reprobate or pass by whom he pleases;
though this confident I might say impudent man, says he, has already proved
the contrary: But sure then it must be in one of his former printed volumes, I
am certain it cannot be found in this pamphlet.

But before I undertake to make an entry on the words, I cannot over-slip one
of his new discoveries, whereof he desires the Reader to consider that the
people that Paul speaks to in these words, Romans 9.19. Thou will say unto me,
why does he yet find fault, for who has resisted his will? etc. were the Jews,
etc. Sir, may I be beholding to you for this your rare invention? Your skill in
Chorography it seems is not ordinary, such a dull brain as I have, did believe
that Rome stood in Italy, within the bounds of Europe, but your dextrous art
has espied it out in Judea within the climates of Asia, many hundreds of miles
distant from what I ever apprehended of it. I pray Sir, in your next inform me
whether Rome stood in Jerusalem yea or no; But what need I to wonder at thy?
for with such fopperies you gull your deluded Auditors, who swallow down worse
falsities then these, without straining at such Camels.

For truly Sir, I must tell you, that you must help me to such a faith that can
remove mountains in the twinkling of an eye, nay cities too, before I can yield
to you that Paul here speaks to the Jews: For if I may safely believe Paul
rather then you, it was directed to the Romans, Romans 1.7. for all that be in
Rome; and the Postscript written to the Romans from Corinthus. Now who can be
so ignorant as not to know that the Romans were Gentiles and not Jews? and
though in this chapter mention be made of the Jews, his sorrow for them in
respect of his near relation to them, their ancient pedigree and great
privileges, yet it is directed particularly to the Gentiles, that they might
make a holy use thereof. So that your fabric raised on so sandy a foundation,
your Babel consisting of a bare circumlocution of several texts of Scripture
forced by you to speak what was never intended by the Holy Ghost in them, it
all moulders to powder. But lest this may seem rather a tergiversation then an
answer, I will, as I intended, offer to the Readers view, the genuine Analysis
of the Apostle in this part of the chapter, that so sorting it as collateral to
your forced interpretation, the judicious Reader may thereby censure, whether
is more suitable to the mind of the Holy Ghost, yours or mine.

In the former part of this chapter, the Apostle had been treating of the
predestination of the Saints by the examples of Isaac and Jacob, and now is he
entered upon the doctrine of reprobation, by the examples of Ishmael and Esau,
under which all Reprobates may be comprehended: Of whom when he had concluded
that it was not for any of their evil deeds, but the meet good pleasure of Gods
will that so rejected them: and having proposed an objection to himself, which
carnal wisdom might allege, that if the matter were so, then there was
unrighteousness with God, to deal so unequally with persons that were in all
things in an equal condition.

He repulseth this objection as most absurd, saying, God forbid; and withal he
aggravates his protestation against such a conclusion as the charging of God
with injustice, by the testimony of God to Moses, Exodus 33.9. I will have mercy
on whom I will have mercy, etc. the reason whereof is drawn from Gods absolute
and most free power that he has over all his creatures to do with them what he
pleases.

The same absolute sovereignty is likewise ratified by the example of Pharaoh,
in whom there is such a series and concatenation of acts of the divine
providence in hardening and destroying, and that written in such large
Characters, that all the future ages of the world might know, that God is Lord
Paramount over all the works of the creation, and therefore that he may, when,
and whom, and where he pleases, raise up some to be as potsheards, that were
made of purpose that his absolute power might be shown on them; as to show
mercy on whom he will, so to harden whom he pleases.

This block being removed, and thereby the point of absolute sovereignty being
confirmed, the Apostle now meets with another objection, ver. 19. Thou will say
unto me, why does he yet find fault? for who has resisted his will? now from
what the Apostle here objects, it is palpable that in himself he concludes,
that it depends merely on the will of God that some are Reprobated, or not
elected, and thereby hardened, and being hardened do unavoidably sin and
perish. For humane reason from what was said (whom he will he hardens) might
conclude, that the Apostles doctrine leads to an absurdity; for if it must be
so, how can it be that God can justly complain of those which are hardened, and
so of those who are Reprobated, when they do sin? How may it be said can God
complain? and that for a double reason: First, because those who are hardened
or reprobated, when they sin, they do only such things as God does will to
permit by them to be done. Secondly, because those who are so reprobated and
hardened, they can do no other then thus sin, if that unto that purpose they
were so hardened and reprobated: Now both of these things are very true,
neither does the Apostle deny either of them. But that which humane reason does
infer from thence, viz. that therefore God cannot in justice find fault, or be
angry with the Reprobates when they sin, this he takes for a false conclusion,
and therefore he checks the boldness and petulancy of wanton carnal reason,
saying, Nay but O man, who art thou that reply against God? wherein the
Apostle flatly condemns the daring boldness of such men, who when God had
plainly declared in his word, that according to his free good will and
pleasure, he had elected whom he would, and therewith had mercy on whom he
would, and that he had likewise not elected or reprobated, and therewith
hardened more and more whom he world, yet they would be so adventurous as to
reply, answer again, dispute, or expostulate the case with God, thereby tacitly
accusing him of injustice, and making him either the author or approver of sin,
and so extenuating their own wickedness. In short, it tends thus far to our
purpose, that the Apostle insists not on a refutation of these reasons, but by
his silence gives consent unto them, only he rejects the sequel thence
deduced, by this express reproof, who art thou that reply against God?

Next, for a further confirmation of what he has in hand, he brings a
similitude from the Potters house: Shall the thing formed say to him that
formed it, why have thou made me thus? In which words are condemned the
desperate audaciousness of such, who fear not to contend with God their maker,
why he had not made them otherwise then he has: a like parallel place we have,
Esa. 45.9. Woe unto him that striveth with his maker, let the potsheard strive
with the potsheards of the earth; shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it,
what make thou?

Further, in these words, Has not the potter power? etc. the Apostle by an
argument a minori ad majus, clearly evinceth, that God may, without the least
tincture of unrighteousness, elect or reprobate, have mercy or harden, appoint
to salvation or damnation, whom he will.

For if the potter may enjoy that freedom without the control of any, that of
the same lump of clay he may make one vessel to honor and another to
dishonor, how much more may God, who is such a Lord that no man may say unto
him, Job. 9.12.
What do thou?

Add moreover this (to make it weigh heavier) the potter, though he be the
maker of the vessel, yet he is not the maker of the clay whereof the vessel is
made; but God he made us of nothing, at least he made the lump of clay whereof
man was made: Now the Apostle purposely made use of the word clay, to prevent a
cavil which might be made, viz. that there is a great deal of difference
betwixt us and earthen vessels: be it so; but yet what are we but as clay in
the hands of God? for thereof were we at first formed, so Ier. 18.6.

And therefore without dispute, we are more properly as clay in the hands of
God, then the clay whereof the vessel is made, in the hands of the potter. And
that the Lord has a far greater power over us, then the potter has over his
clay, because we are more properly Gods, then the clay is the potters, for the
potter made not the clay, but God made both the clay and the potter; he made
the clay of nothing, and of that clay fashioned man: Besides, the potter as he
made not the clay, so is it not in his power to unmake it, but that it will be
clay still; but God, as he formed man of nothing, so if he would please he
might reduce us to our first nothing. Moreover, we see that there is a great
difference between the potter and his pot that he makes, and yet it is but
finite, for both are creatures: But between God the creatot of all, and us his
creatures, there is an infinite disproportion, so that hence it comes to pass,
that the power and sovereignty that God has over the work of his hands, is
infinitely beyond what the potter has over his clay. If therefore the potter
has such power over his clay that is not simply his own, but holding all in
capite from God himself, how much greater power then has God over us worms and
no men to frame, fashion, and do with us what seems good in his own eyes,
without any dispute to be made with him?

From all which it is as clear as the day, that God in Reprobation or
non-election, though he had no respect to sin as to the decree, yet in respect
of the sovereignty that he has over his creatures, he may according to his
good will and pleasure, form and appoint any vessel to dishonor, without being
accountable to any, or in the least measure charged of unrighteousness.

And thus having done with my Antagonist, for his doctrinal part out of that
ninth chapter of the Romans, I must attend unto the practical uses that he
draws from them, which are these following.

[Now the use that we make of this, is first, it does hereby appear, that Gods
decree before the foundation of the world, does not hinder men from being
eternally saved, if they be not wanting to themselves in the use of that means,
and the exercise of that power that God gives unto them for the accomplishing
of their everlasting happiness.

Secondly, It may be a precious encouragement to all people to go unto God by
Jesus Christ, in the use of that means that he has appointed, for life and
salvation, forasmuch as he is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto
God by him.

Thirdly, those that have embraced Jesus Christ by that way and means, may be
sweetly comforted in the everlasting love of the Father, manifested to their
souls through the precious promises of God in Christ Jesus, which are not yea
and nay, but in him they are yea and amen; which promises of remission of sins,
the everlasting inheritance, and the holy Spirit of promise, as Ephe. 1.13, 14.
2 Cor. 1.12. a seal or earnest of the same inheritance, and those promises are
assigned, and made over so firmly to penitent believers, being baptized in the
name of the Lord Jesus, together with seeking for the same spirit by prayer,
and laying on of hands, believing the resurrection of the dead, and the eternal
judgment, and growing up, upon those principles, in holiness of life, in the
fear of God, and with a single heart in obedience to Christ, delighting to
observe all his counsel, and so going on unto perfection in the way of
righteousness, with perseverance enduring therein to the end of their lives,
that they shall undoubtedly be saved in the day of the Lord; according to
these, and such like Scriptures, Ioh. 3.15, 16. Chap. 15.16. Matthew. 18.14. It
is not the will of your father which is in heaven, that one of those little
ones should perish. (Note) It has an allusion to ve. 6. Those little ones that
believe in me, Mark 16.16. Acts 2.38. Chap. 16.31, 32, 33, 34. Matthew. 24.13.
Rev. 2.10. for God cannot fail in making good his promises to his people, they
remaining faithful; for he has confirmed it with an oath, which to men is an
end of all strife, Heb. 6.16, 17, 18. Wherein God willing the more abundantly
to show unto the heirs of promise, the immutability of his counsel, confirmed
it by an oath; that by two immutable things in which it is impossible for God
to lie, we might have strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold
on the hope set before us.

Fourthly, let the express words of Jesus Christ be accepted of as a sweet
counsel to all people, Ioh. 12.35, 36. Yet a little while is the light with you,
walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you: while you have the
light believe in the light, that ye may be the children of the light: also Heb.
3.13. exhort one another daily while it is called to day, lest any of you be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin: Hearken unto these things ye sons of
men: seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near;
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, let him
return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon.]

Isa. 66.11.
and naturally arising from the subsequent words of the Apostle, which may
conduce much (if well applied) to the business now in controversy between us.

First, here we may behold as in a glass the hatred of God against sin, and for
the sake thereof against sinners, viz. that whiles we see him by his vindictive
justice executing of wrath upon sinners, he hereby declares himself to be a God
hating sin, neither that any iniquity can dwell with him; Psalm. 5.4.
And as his anger is extended against sin, so it is only against sin; sin is
none of Gods creatures, no part of the creation, for all that he made was good:
and therefore God is not angry with, nor hates the devil intensively, and that
immediately as to his person and nature, for that is good; but as he has
contracted sin, and so that renders him hateful and abominable. How then can
God be charged with any iniquity, when he is pleased for the manifestation of
his justice, and therein of his hatred unto sin, he is pleased I say, not to
elect, but to reprobate some, and fits them, makes them up, or appoints them to
destruction, that all the world may ring of his anger and hatred against sin?

Secondly, and as God was willing to show his wrath, so was it needful there
should be such subjects, even the Reprobates, on whom he might make his power
known, that whiles we look upon God, avenging himself on his enemies, the
Reprobates, Isa. 1.24.
and therein shows us his wrath against their sin, so withal we might take
notice of his power, Psalm. 2.9.
that he may break them with a rod of Iron, and dash them in pieces like a
potters vessel, and that only because of their sin; Psa. 2.11.
and that we might hence learn to serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
trembling.

Thirdly, this may likewise serve as a watchtower, or warning-piece to the
elect, that when as they see how infinite the anger of God is against sin, and
how full of power he is to take vengeance for sin, Jude 23.
they might thence be provoked to hate the garment spotted with the flesh, and
always stand in awe and reverence of the most mighty God, Heb. 12.29.
whose wrath is like a consuming fire: And therefore it is not said, what if
God willing to be angry and to put forth his power as though that God were
delighted in anger, and in the acting of such a power, and therefore to this
end did not elect or Reprobate such a multitude of men.

But it is said, What if God willing to show his wrath, and make his power
known? viz. to all the men in the world, in all ages and generations, to the
Reprobate, that they thence may be made inexcusable.

But to the elect, that they having in their eye so many examples of Gods wrath
and power upon the reprobrates for their sins, they might thereby be stirred up
to serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear, Heb. 12.28. Phil. 2.12.
so working out their salvation with fear and trembling.

Fourthly, this will serve as a Mercuries finger to point unto the honor of
the Saints, and to set forth the high advancement that from all eternity they
have had in the bosom of God, viz. that God could be well pleased that a
greater part of the sons of men should be passed by as not known of God, Pro.
8.31.
and so left to the original hardness of their own hearts, which Adam
voluntarily drew upon himself and all his posterity, and for which to be doomed
to everlasting torments, to this end among the rest, that he might make known
the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy; Romans 9.23
contraria juxta se posita mutuo se illustrant.

But how are the riches of his glory made known to the Saints by the
reprobating of some? Why herein it is manifested, that when as there was an
equality of condition in all, all alike looked upon as in one corrupt lump and
mass of perdition, wherein it was in the free power and holy liberty of God, to
have reprobated those whom he has elected, and to have elected those whom he
has reprobated from eternity, 1 These. 5.9.
Yet he has not appointed us unto wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord
Jesus Christ: all which does proceed from the riches of his glory, and no
foreseen worth, or works, or faith in us.

And now worthy Sir, by comparing of your Enthusiasms with my Analysis and
practical uses thereupon, let the impartial Reader judge, whether has more
heartily represented the scope, sense and mind of the holy Ghost, you or I.

So that now after this tedious conflict for the defense of my second Argument,
I must attend your summons to see what you can say against my third Argument,
which follows.

[His third Argument is this; If sin and unbelief, and the rejecting of the
means of salvation, are the only causes why God reprobates any to destruction,
then there is no such mystery in the decree of reprobation, neither are Gods
ways therein so unsearchable, but that the true and undoubted cause may be
assigned: But yet they are mysterious and unsearchable. See (says he) Romans
9.14. What shall we say then, is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid,
Romans 11.33, 34. O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God!
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? for who
has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counselor?

To which I answer; first, that had I not been acquainted with the blindness of
these men, that love to be called of men, Rabbi, or Master, I should have been
taken up with admiration, that one boasting so much of schollarship, should
make a parcel of Arguments directly against the truth, and yet should appear no
better the one with the other.

In this first Argument, in answer to this Position, he gives out as if the
will of God were solely and singly the cause of reprobation, and that no other
cause can be assigned for it, either of sin, unbelief, or rejecting the means,
but the mere good pleasure of Gods most holy and righteous will, as in the
preamble to his Argument, and in the minor proposition of the Argument it self,
he says, the Scripture assigns Reprobation solely to Gods will; and yet in
this third Argument, he strongly calls in question the truth of all this, in
giving out as if the true and undoubted cause cannot be assigned, or as if that
which solely and singly was the cause of Reprobation, were not the true and
undoubted cause of it: what a piece of confused stuff is this, let them that
have understanding judge.]

Nodum in scripo querere, peeps about for contradictions in my Arguments;
whereas if a man be not blinded through prejudice he shall find a most
harmonious concord.

Sir, I willingly pass by your scandalous Ironies of blindness, Rabbi, Master,
boasting of scholarship, as unworthy of a return; but I now tell you, it is very
true that in my first Argument, and so indeed al along, I do ascribe
non-election or Reprobation solely and singly to the mere good pleasure of Gods
most holy and righteous will.

But I pray Sir, make it to appear how in this third Argument I do trip up the
heels of my former Argument, calling into question the truth of all this, as
though the true and undoubted cause could not be assigned, or that the will of
God were not solely and singly the cause of Reprobation. Curious Sir, learn
this from me, that he that does exclude all outward causes as to Reprobation,
which are transient and in time are acted in and by the creature, does not
thereby exclude all inward causes, which are immanent, immutable, and eternal,
resting in the bosom and breast of God himself, which we call his will and
good pleasure: now the first we deny, this later we affirm to be the alone
cause of Reprobation.

That which makes the decree of non-election or Reprobation to be mysterious,
and unsearchable, is not because there is no cause of it at all, for I have
affirmed the will of God to be the inward and eternal cause thereof; but this
is that for which the Apostle calls it mysterious, because that no external
cause can be assigned, but that the further that men out of curiosity, or
rather desperate boldness have attempted to find out an external cause, the
more they have entangled themselves, and the more have they intrencht upon the
holy majesty of God. And therefo e where in all the holy Scripture, the Spirit
of God has not a tongue to speak of any such external cause or causes of
eternal reprobation, there must not Gods people have an ear to hear, but in
defect of an external cause, to ascribe all to the internal, viz. the good will
and pleasure of God himself, 2 These. 1.7. 1 Cor. 13.12. Phil. 3.15.
who has no otherwise been pleased in his revealed word to give any other
account unto us of such his actings, besides his own will. But when the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed, and that we do behold him face to face, this which now
is unto us a mystery, and unsearchable by reason of humane frailty, God shall
then reveal even this unto us, and in the mean time let us lay our hands upon
our mouths, Romans 11.33.
and with admiration say, O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out! And now my good friend, let those that have understanding judge,
whether this of mine be a piece of confused stuff; or that it rather be not
simplicity in grain in you, to suppose a contradiction in that which does most
strongly confirm what is most destructive to your Position; but such crude
stuff as you have here vented, is as ordinary with you as your meat and drink.
But you proceed further;

[3. Again, why does he say, If sin and unbelief, and the rejecting of the
means, are the only causes why God reprobates any; what need he put in that
expression only, since the position does not say expressly that it is any cause
at all, but that God saw some men rejecting the means of salvation, etc. and
these he reprobated: and if that sort or kind of people that continue in sin,
and unbelief, and reject the means of salvation, be not those that God does
reprobate, then let him show us by plain Scripture Proof who, or what sort of
people they be, that so they may be known: But the truth of it is, that he can
find no expression in the position that he can except against, and therefore he
puts expressions into his Arguments which be of his own making, and them he
quarrels at, and shows what great absurdities follow, when there is no such
thing in the position.

But I have followed him a little in owning his expressions, as far as they will
stand with the truth, viz. that rejecting the means of salvation, continuing in
sin and unbelief, are in some measure the cause of Reprobation, and through the
good hand of my God upon me, have proved it by Scripture. And notwithstanding
this man has so strongly opposed it in his two first Arguments, in answer to
this position, yet one would think by what he says in this third Argument,
that he were a little inclinable to be of my mind, or otherwise why does he use
those words (the only cause) if he do not in some measure grant these things
to be a cause of Reprobation?]



And whereas you say, that the position does not say expressly that sin, and
unbelief, and the rejecting of the means are causes of Reprobation, I yield
you; for surely every one of your positions are as so many gins and snares, and
that generation of men that are of your judgment; ordinarily your positions
are so intricate and involved, so full of Amphibologies, equivocations and
mental reservations, that you only stand at the catch, to say, such a thing
was not expressed in the position: those who are acquainted not only with the
Anabaptists, but likewise with the Arminians and Socinians (of both which you
have a tange) know so much.

You say it is not expressly, which does admit that it is comprehended in it
implicitly, which is as much as I look for, if it may be deduced thence.

Howsoever, the best of it is, that I have reum confitentem, that rejecting the
means of salvation, continuing in sin and unbelief, are in some measure the
cause of Reprobation; but where you have proved these to be the causes, he that
has eyes to see let him see, I am sure I cannot find it. You conclude what you
have to say against this Argument thus;

3. To the Scripture which he quoteth out of Romans 9.14. I have spoken to it
already, and to that in Romans 11.33, 34. it speaks not at all to that
particular business of Reprobation, but of that great love and tender respect
that God yet has to Israel for their fathers sake, as does appear from ver.
25. and so forward, and of the great things which shall be done for them in the
latter days, when their deliverer shall come out of Sion, and shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob; which great work of God in respect of the manner of it,
is much mysterious, inasmuch as there is so much of the depth of the riches
both of the wisdom, and knowledge of God, that his judgments to us are
unsearchable, and his ways therein past finding out, until the fullness of time
shall come, that the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters cover the sea, Isa. 11.9. and the Lord shall set again his hand, the
second time to recover the remnant of his people which shall be left, from
Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and
from Shiner, and from Hamath, and from the Islands of the sea, etc. ver. 11. to
the end: But here I must break off from saying any more of these things at
present, for my leisure will not serve, and it is likely this man will call
this Millenarianism, as he calls the other Pelagianism.]

Romans 9.14. but at so pitiful a rate, and to so little purpose, that the Reader
will find it would have stood more with your credit, if you had holden your
peace.

And for that place of Romans 11.33, 34. howsoever it mentions not Reprobation,
yet it is a solemn conclusion of the things before delivered in the ninth,
tenth, and eleventh Chapter. For the Apostle having spoken of many difficult
points, as Election, Reprobation, rejection of the Jews, calling of the
Gentiles, recalling of the Jews; and having answered many questions, prevented
many cavils, satisfied many doubts, he now sets a period to this discourse with
a sad exclamation, O the depth, etc. whereby he signifies that he was driven
into a wonderful admiration of the wisdom and knowledge of God, in the
administration of his love to the elect, and displeasure to the Reprobate: As a
man wading into a deep river, that is not fordable, when he comes up to the
neck, and feels the water begins to heave him up, and his feet to fail him,
cries out, O the depth, etc. and goes back: so the Apostle having waded so far
as he could by the leading of the Spirit, in those unfordable mysteries, and
being almost swallowed up with admiration at Gods administrations, unable to
pass any further into that bottomless gulf, he silenceth himself, because the
Spirit cease to give him further discoveries, and resolves to enter upon no
more questions, but to admire the depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God,
whose mind (i. e.) his will and pleasure is no ways to be known of us but by
the effects and consequents. And I pray learned Sir, did I allege this place
to any other purpose, then that whereas you and other bold baiards, will
desperately undertake to assign reasons and external causes for those immanent
actings of God; we do with fear and reverence ascribe all to the good will and
pleasure of God, because by that and no way else has he discovered himself in
his word? We do plainly see by the effect of it that it was his will so to be,
else had it not been, and therefore we say it was appointed and ordained to be
so by his good will and pleasure; as for other reasons or causes we see and
know none; and surely Sir, you limit this too narrowly, straitning it to the
recalling of the Jews, which, would the scope and purpose of the Apostle bear
it, yet would it serve sufficiently for my purpose, neither should I make any
scruple thereby of your turning Millenary; for to that and a hundred more of
other unstable doctrines are such men of your temper inclined unto, being
constant only in inconstancy, persisting in nothing but change. But whereas,
you seem to put Millenarianism into the scales, as to poise against
Pelagianism, Sir, herein th^s far I shall discover my judgment upon them both,
that a man may be a Millenary (I mean, in so much as the reign of Christ upon
the earth for a thousand years) and yet (with a charitable interpretation) hold
all the Articles of the Christian faith, and so be eternally saved. I know many
learned, good, and gracious men have been of that judgment; but for
Pelagianism, their doctrine is so gross in the whole lump, yea so destructive
to and inconsistent with the fundamentals of Christian Religion, that to be a
Pelagian in all their known professed tenets, and to live and die so, I do much
doubt whether any one of them can be saved.

But what have I to do to judge another man's servant? to his own Master he
stands or falls; Romans 14.4.
I have enough to do to attend my own calling, but in the mean time to wait,
what great matters will flow from your wisdom in the rear of all, I mean, what
you have to say to my fourth and last Argument, which is as follows.

[ Arg. 4. If the foresight of sin and unbelief, and the rejecting of the means
of salvation, be the causes of Reprobation, then these absurdities will follow.

1. That no child dying in infancy can possibly be Reprobated.

2. Neither such Gentiles, or Turks, Indians, and Savages that never head of
Christ, who never enjoyed the Gospel, nor ever had the means tendered unto them;
for how can they believe in him, of whom they never heard? Romans 10. and how can
they reject that which was never tendered unto them? as many nations in the
world who are strangers from the life of God, Ephesians. 2.12.

3. If the foresight of sin should be the cause of Reprobation, then the Elect
should be equally liable to the decree of Reprobation, as the Reprobates
themselves, they all being alike in the corrupt mass and lump of Adams
Transgression; Romans 9.21, 22, 23. Ioh. 15.19. Ephesians. 2.1, 23. Children of wrath
as well as others. Romans 3.10. and ver. 20. None righteous, no not one.

4. Then Paul was mistaken, Romans 9.11. in not assigning sin to be the cause of
Reprobation.

5. The same Apostle then answered very unsoundly to those objections, Romans
9.13, 19. The first is, If God Reprobated Esau because he hated him, he was
unjust.

The second, ver. 9. Why does he yet find fault, for who has resisted his
will? for he might in one word have answered to both objections, and said, that
sin was the cause of reprobating both Esau and Pharaoh: but he says the
contrary, ver. 11. When they had done neither good no evil, Jacob have I loved,
and Esau have I hated.

6. Thereby we confine Gods infinite sovereignty over the creatures, to the
narrow scantling of our subordinate power, as though he might not do with his
own what he list, without our control, and not make a vessel either to honor
or dishonor, unless he were accountable to us for a reason of his so doing.

Answ. 1. I cannot but take notice of his evil dealing in the making of his
Arguments, that he should make no less then ten Arguments against two
Positions, and not one in all the ten that answers to either of them: now as I
have said before, I must be constrained to say yet once more, that the Position
does not say that foresight of sin and unbelief, and the rejection of the means
of salvation be the causes of Reprobation: but the Position says, God saw some
men rejecting the means of salvation, to wit, free tenders of Christ in the
Gospel, continuing in sin and unbelief, etc. which word continuing, is
forgotten, and not mentioned in all the Arguments: but I must not abate him
that expression, Continuing, lest I should be guilty of letting the truth
suffer through my negligence: for if he had put in that expression into his
Argument, and framed his Argument accordingly, to have answered the Position,
as it lies, there could not one absurdity have followed: but yet I shall
examine your absurdities particularly, to see whether they follow from the
Position, or any thing that we hold, or whether they will all prove to be
absurdities, yea or no.]



Some of our children are of such pettish and peevish dispositions, that answer
what you will to their wanton fancies, yet they are never contented.

Sir, take it not amiss, that I must rate you with one of these two, though I
have given you ten to two, the least of which might have been satisfactory to a
rational man, yet nothing will convince you, but that you are still grumbling
that my answers and Arguments hit not your positions, because I bring not every
several word of your Positions into my Arguments severally, therefore you say
they are not framed against what you do hold. Sir, before this I did not
conceive that the rules of arguing limited men to such punctilioes of words,
but if that any thing might be necessarily deduced from the Positions, besides
the bare letters and words of the Position, it might have been a warrantable
way of argumentation, let the word (continuing) be put into any, or every of
the Arguments, and you will get nothing by it, nor will it abate any of those
absurdities I have already marked out to flow from your doctrine.

If the subtilty of any of your party have drawn out and stated your Positions
so, as to lie at the catch for a starting-hole, when you feel your selves
pincht by an Argument, it will prove but a jadish trick to shift your necks out
of the collar, by saying such expressions are not in the position, or this
contains not all that is in the position.

Howsoever it is, these your concessions, and owned by you, as they are stated
by me, will convince you, that though your position be, God saw some men
rejecting the means of salvation, etc. and those he reprobates etc. yet your
reserved meaning is, that the foresight of sin and unbelief, and the rejection
of the means of salvation, be the cause of Reprobation: and indeed what can be
less collected thence? God saw some men rejecting of the means of salvation,
those he reprobates; and why did he reprobate those that did reject the means,
rather then those that did embrace the means of salvation, but only for this,
because they did reject the means? so that the rejecting of the means
(according to you) must be the cause of their Reprobation; and hence it is that
p. 33. of your Pamphlet you set down these words in a great and distinct
character, because they receive not the love of the truth, and for this cause
God shall send them strong delusions. But I will quarrel no more about words,
but see how you will shake off those absurdities laid at the door of your
position. But hereby the way let it be taken notice of, that you have not swept
the door of your former position clean from those absurdities which cleave fast
unto it, but you have skipt them all over, because in deed they were too hot
for your fingers; only you make an adventure to have a fling at the sixth
absurdity flowing from that former position, by comparing it with the first
that flows from this; concerning which thus you write.

Absurdities answered.

[And I shall compare the first absurdity, as he calls it, with that sixth or
last absurdity, which he puts to his sixth Argument, in answer to the second
position, viz. God saw some men embracing the means of salvation, those he
elected in Christ, etc. and there he gives out as if such an absurdity must
needs follow, that no children dying in infancy could be saved, saying, what
then would become of children dying in infancy, before they had the use of
faith or works, or any embracing of the means, and which never had being to
act? and to this he says, that such an absurdity as this must needs follow,
that no child dying in infancy can possibly be reprobated. Now whether two such
different things can follow these two positions, I shall leave to the judgment
of others that have understanding.]

Lyncean eyes can spy out the least inconsistency or contradiction between
those two absurdities laid to your charge, to say they clash one against
another (according to your principles) ce do quemvis arbitrum, I appeal to any
that has understanding to judge. And yet you have not so much confidence as to
make out this your supposed enterfering; you only speak to the absurdities
apart thus.

[To the first of these, he seems to make their election to eternal life very
doubtful, if at all possible, and the ground or reason is, because that
children dying in infancy have not the use of faith, or works.]



Your next work is to make an apology for your tediousness, in these words.

[I am constrained to be larger in answering these arguments, because I cannot
but a little follow him, that I may find him out in his crooked ways, that so
he may be discovered; and therefore I cannot but take notice of this
expression, before they had the use of faith; by which one would think that the
man is of that opinion that faith comes by generation, because his words do
seem to intimate as if infants had faith, but not the use of faith: but Paul
certainly was of another mind, when he said, faith comes by hearing, Rom,
10.17.



I know a regenerate person when he sleeps has the habit of faith, though at
that time he want the act and use of faith: A convert likewise under a
spiritual desertion, may have the principle and seed of faith, and yet want an
active and an operating faith: And so an elect Infant, though in respect of the
imperfection of its natural faculties, he is indisposed actually to believe,
yet in regard he is a subject capable of the inward workings of the Spirit of
God to sanctify his corrupt nature, he may passively receive the grace of
sanctification, and therewith the habit, root, seed or principle of faith, and
from thence to be denominated a believer.

Infants are reputed in the number of reasonable creatures, yea even before
they have the act or use of reason, only because they have it in semine, in
the seed or root of reason; and why not alike to have faith in the habit, or
root, and so reputed for believers, though they cannot actually exert it? Phil.
19
Sir, I must tell you, first, that faith is infused, not acquired; it is given to
believe, which passively infants are in a capacity of, as well as those that
are adult. 2. That their souls may as well be now sanctified by infused grace,
as if Adam had not fallen, they should have been holy from the womb, by
original justice propagated unto them, and inherent in them.

3. That the humanity of Christ was in this manner holy, even from the
conception, which was therein by special privilege; like unto that course
which should have been ordinary in our conceptions and births, if we had not
sinned in Adam.

4. That it cannot fairly be denied to be so in John Baptist, but that so great
a Prophet was sanctified by the holy Ghost even from the womb: which may be
confirmed by that his extraordinary motion, upon the salutation of Mary the
mother of our blessed Savior; and of Jeremy, it is not improbable by that
which God says of him, Ier. 1.5. Before I formed thee in the belly I knew
thee, and before thou came forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I
ordained thee a Prophet unto the nations.

But wonder I know to be the fecundous spawn and brood of ignorance, and
therefore I cannot wonder at the wonder.

Yet to extricate your self out of this absurdity, you undertake thus.

[But whereas he seems to make it a very doubtful thing, if not altogether
impossible, that children dying in infancy should be elected to life and
salvation, from what we hold, I must tell him, there is a great ground to hope,
if not a certainty whereby we may believe, that no child dying in infancy
before they come to have a being to act, shall ever be cast into the lake of
fire, which is the second death, because they not having the use of those
faculties, as hearing, together with the use of reason to understand what is
spoken, and being not capable of any embracing of the means, and which never
had a being to act, therefore they cannot reject the means of salvation; and
their not having of faith will never be charged upon them as sin, for where no
law is there can be no transgression, Romans 4.15. and there can be no law to
infants, as such, because they cannot know it, when they are Infants, and sin
is not imputed where there is no law, Romans 5.13. and also we find that Christ
himself said, Luke 18.16. That of such is the Kingdom of God, and has no where
said that such are reprobated to everlasting destruction; if he has, show us
where he has spoken it in Scripture, or appointed it to be spoken by any of
his Ministers. It is true, we find that we shall appear before the judgment
seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body,
according to what he has done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. but we
do not find that any shall receive any thing at the day of judgment, as a
punishment for what has been done in the body of another, although we, 1 Cor.
11.22. all dye and go to the dust in the first Adam, in that all have sinned,
or in whom all have sinned, Romans 5. ver. 12. compared with the Margin; and God
himself has declared against such iniquity of proceeding in Ezekiel. 18.20. The
soul that sins it shall die, the son shall not bear the iniquity of the
father, etc. Now that this was a dying that was more then to dye, and to go to
the dust, it is evident, for all must undergo that, whether they be righteous
or unrighteous: and we find, ver. 26. that when a righteous man turns away
from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and dies in them, he shall
dye; which does imply, that it was a death that is to be the portion of those
that dye and go to the dust in wickedness and impenitency, after that death,
when the judgment comes, which is called in Scripture the second death; and
it does appear that that death will not be the portion of any for any thing
that is acted in or by another, but for the wickedness and impenitency of every
particular soul that lives and dies therein.]

In answer to this rabble, I say, that as there is salvation for all sorts and
degrees of persons of age in covenant, but not to be extended to all of those
sorts and degrees, to reach every individual person; so in a parallel way we
may think of infants, I know no Text giving us universal assurance of their
happiness; in case there were, and that all this that you have said were truth,
I suppose there were much more cause for believers to beg of God their infants
death, then with David in prayer to seek their life: there being (as you say)
full assurance of their happiness dying, and so much fear of their
condemnation, living, to see the temptations to which in their growth they are
subject. Nay, if no child dying in infancy shall ever be cast into the lake of
fire, what should then deny but that it should be enrolled in the Chronicles as
the mercifullest act that Herod ever did in all his life, Mat. 2.16.
when he commanded that all the male children in Bethlehem from two years old
and under should be murdered? for had they live to ripe years, probably they
would have filled up the measure of their fathers, Mat. 23.32.
and contributed as much, and had their hands dipped as deep in the blood of
Christ as any other of their brethren; and therefore Herod to be as a blessed
memorable butcherous murderer, that sent so many poor souls as Martyrs to
heaven, by the sleight of hand, who had been like never to come thither, had it
not been for his merciful cruelty.

Yea, you your self might be registered as the most indulgent father, who for
the saving of the souls of your children, would expose your own to loss, by
cutting of your childrens throats as soon as they were born, and so posting of
them to heaven before their due time; whereas perhaps if they had lived so
long, as with their mothers milk to have sucked in the venom of your principles
and positions, they might have endangered both body and soul from ever coming
thither.

But what horrible things are these to think of, I am amazed to write it; and
yet consectaries that without any inforcement might very well flow from your
positions, viz. that no child dying in infancy before they come to have a being
to act, shall ever be cast into the lake of fire, which is the second death.
Whereas we do affirm, that children as well as others, being the objective
subjects of Predestination, and so considered as in the corrupt lump and mass
of perdition, with the rest of all the posterity and brood of old Adam,
according to the eternal and immutable decree, proceeding from the sole good
pleasure of Gods most holy will, 1 Samuel 25.29.
the souls of some of them are bound up in the bundle of life with the Lord
their God; and the souls of the rest, being past over, or not elected, they
shall be flung out as out of the middle of a sling.

But yet for confirmation of what you here assert, you do endeavor cum ratione
insanire, to have some reason for this your wild assertion; and next, you
basely prostitute the pure and undefiled word of God to fortify your first: I
shall undertake them both in their order, and by Gods assistance shall first
prescribe you a pill to purge this your melancholy frenzy, and next shall
rescue those Scriptures by you alleged, out of your hands, giving them to
speak in that peculiar sense they were at first intended by the holy Ghost.

And first, my learned Antagonist, had you placed the ground of your hope
distributively, viz. upon the children of believers, you might have had some
foundation for it, because the promise of the Covenant does no less appertain
to Infants, then to those of ripe years; Genesis 17.7. I will be a God to thee and
to thy seed. The promise is to you and to your children, Acts 2.39. Acts 2.39.
But whereas you take it collectively, and universally, including therein the
children of Turks, Jews, Pagans, Infidels, you have neither rule nor word, nor
promise for any such hope, that they shall be saved.

And now the first reason that you produce for your Infantissimous assertion,
that no child in infancy shall ever be cast into the lake of fire, is, Because
they not having the use of those faculties, as hearing, together with the use
of reason to understand what is spoken, and being not capable of any embracing
of the means, and which never had a being to act, therefore they cannot reject
the means of salvation.

Sir, for this time admit it so, that children cannot hear nor have not the use
of reason; Sir, neither can those that are born deaf, nor Idiots, nor madmen;
in what state or rank will you then place them?

And for the rejecting of the means of salvation, neither can they that never
enjoyed the means reject it, and in what squadron will you place them?

And therefore this assertion of yours is grounded on a false supposition, that
God cannot, or at least he will not, or does not regenerate, without the word
heard, understood, and embraced: but good Sir, I must tell you that what
expressions are used in Scripture, as necessarily requiring the hearing of the
word, and receiving of the means, it speaks of to such as are in a capacity so
to hear it and receive it, viz. those of ripe years and rationalists; and where
the Scripture is silent, viz. as to children, deaf, or fools, do not you
undertake to determine without Gods advice and counsel, but leave all the work,
as I do, to Gods secret decree of predestination, wherein he may do with his
own what his good will and pleasure is, either to save, or to damn, without the
control of any.

And though we in a charitable way may hope the best of all those children that
are born within the compass of the Covenant, viz. of believing parents, yet how
God is pleased to bring his purpose to pass, in the saving of any one of them,
is to me, and sober-minded men, as inscrutable, as is the fashioning of their
tender bodies in their mothers wombs; and it is enough to me that we may hope
well of them, because God by his promise has engaged himself (wherein he
cannot lie, 2 Timothy 2. Tit. 1.2.
nor deny himself) to be a God in covenant not with us only, but with our
children likewise: and were it not upon the account of the decree of election
(which is the foundation of all the promise) wherein God has mercy on whom he
will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens, and that, not for any thing of
good, either done or foreseen, but merely out of his own good pleasure, we
should have just cause to doubt, that all children dying in infancy should
unavoidably be damned.

Besides, my good friend, have you yet learnt, or do you understand what it is
that does regenerate? If you ascribe this work to the word heard (as it seems
you do) you are mainly mistaken; 2 Cor. 3.6
The word of it self is but a dead Letter, at best it is but a moral
instrument, and therefore it can never operate, unless it be understood, which
can never he by one that is as yet unregenerate, 1 Cor. 2.14.
for the natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they
are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned.

No Sir, it is the peculiar work of the Spirit to regenerate and convert:
Lydia's heart was opened, Acts 16. Mat. 13.3. Romans 1.16.
before she so diligently attended to Paul's words. The word of God that brought
forth fruit, did not make the ground good, but it was so before by the special
working of that Spirit: The word, which is the power of God to salvation, does
not make believers, but God first makes them so by sanctifying of their natures
and giving them to believe. Phil. 1.29.
The word of God in Regeneration has no greater force or power then the word
of the Prophets and Apostles had in raising of the dead, which had no other
operation then to be tanquam signum, as a sign of the thing done, or as a moral
instrument; for there is no lesser power requirable in the recovery of a poor
soul from a spiritual death to a spiritual life, then there is from a natural
death to a natural life: And therefore as it is Gods peculiar, to raise from
death to life natural; so it is his alone prerogative, to raise from a
spiritual death to a spiritual life, The dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God, and they that hear shall live, Ioh. 5.25.

Yea, the same power is exerted in the work of Regeneration or the new
creation, as was at first in the work of the old creation; 1 Cor. 4.6.
no less then an hand of omnipotency in them both, and therefore not
communicable to any creature.

From all of which I shall hence infer, that if it be Gods peculiar work to
regenerate, and not the word in the hearing of it, and that Regeneration is
principally necessary to give us ingress into heaven, Joh. 3.3. Mat. 5.8.
God may then as well regenerate infants by his secret power unsearchable to
us, though they neither hear nor understand, as he does those that are of riper
years, by so weak an instrument as the word and Gospel is, which has no such
inherent power in and of it self.

Secondly, this your assertion labors of another sickness, viz. a false
supposition, that nothing but actual sins expose men to the danger of being
cast into the lake of fire, whereas the truth is, That original sin or that
hereditary pravity we brought with us into the world, deriving it from our
parents, Psalm. 51.5.
who conceived us in sin, has so much of filthiness and uncleanness in it,
that God may justly cast a newborn infant into the lake of fire for it, unless
it be washed clean by the blood of Jesus, who is the alone way, the truth and
the life, Joh. 14.6.
and through whose alone merits we have an access into the Holy of Holies; into
which place are admitted only these whose names are written in the Lambs book
of life, Rev. 21.27. Luke 10.20. Rev. 20.15.
whose names are written in heaven; registered there in the eternal immutable
decree of Gods election unto life: all the rest whose names are not there
recorded, infants as well as others, are cast into the lake of fire, which is
the second death.

But enough of this at present; I shall be sure to meet you again more about
this, when you lay out your strength against original sin.

Another thing which you give out in the nature of a reason why infants cannot
be damned, is, viz. for that their not having of faith will never be charged
upon them as sin. Sir, suppose I grant so much; and so likewise what you
produce out of Romans 4.15. as a confirmation, or rather as a reason of your
reason, for where no law is there is no transgression, both may be very true,
as set disjunctively; but as you have woven them both into one sentence, they
may not be true, nor applicable to your purpose, for herein you vary your
terms; that which you write takes notice of sin, the text speaks of
transgression, wherein, I conceive, sin and transgression are not terms
convertible: for though every transgression of the law be a sin, yet every sin
is not a transgression of the law, as in the case now before us; for original
sin, though it be a sin properly and really, yet it is not a transgression of
the law as personally acted in and by the infants, but as imputatively, and as
a defect of original righteousness. So what you further say by way of
illustration, that there can be no law to infants, as such, and sin is not
imputed where there is no law, I grant you, as to infants now in existence,
which law might require the exerting, or putting out of any act or duty which
their minority is incapable to receive, or to perform: But I must withal tell
you, that as Adam, as a public person, as a root, and stock, received Grace,
righteousness and holiness for him and his, even for those in his loins; so he
received a law to him and his, even the Covenant of works, do this and live;
which law was incumbent not only on Adam himself, but likewise on all those
that were in his loins. So that infants now are born under a law, and their
want of original righteousness, and (that for the defect thereof) their being
conceived and born in sin and uncleanness, shall be a deserving cause of their
just condemnation.

What you bring forth in evidence to what you here aim at, viz. Romans 5.13. sin
is not imputed where there is no law, is so far from answering your desire,
that it cuts the throat of your assertion.

For the clearing whereof, its expedient to search into the mind of the Spirit
by the scope of the place. The Apostle in this Chapter is prosecuting that
grand point of Justification by faith in Christ, and ver. 11. lays down this,
that we have received atonement by him, whence he makes this corollary, ver.
12. that as by the first Adam sin and death entered into the world, so by Jesus
Christ righteousness and life are restored to us.

But ver. 13. he meets with an objection, that sin is not imputed where there
is no law; where he argues after this manner: If all have sinned in the loins
of Adam, then those likewise have sinned, who lived before the law was given by
Moses: but before the law was given there could be no sin, because where there
is no law there is no transgression, as Chap. 4.15. and therefore all have not
sinned in Adam. Now here the Apostle denies the assumption, or minor
proposition, affirming the contrary, that sin was before the law given by
Moses, constantly affirming, that howsoever it was not imputed, (i. e.)
reckoned, or accounted, or reputed to be sin, yet indeed and in truth, sin was
then in the world; and this being of sin in the world before the law, ver. 14.
he proves by the effect, viz. death was then in the world, and that all had
sinned, because that all in their several generations had tasted of death: and
for a more full manifestation hereof, he distinguishes mankind into infants
and those of ripe years, wherein he affirms by the effect, that not only those
that were of ripe years had died, who had sinned in their own persons, but even
infants, who had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, (i.
e.) who had committed no actual sins in their own persons, for which they
should suffer death, which is the wages of sin; even they likewise had died,
Romans 6.23.
as having brought into the world with them the guilt of Adams transgression,
and therefore it could not be denied but that sin was likewise in them.

So that you that undertake to be a Proctor for all infants, for ought you have
proved from this text, you will leave them all in a sad condition, if a more
sufficient Advocate may not be found to to plead their cause.

Another reason there is, which you would fain have to be received from the
authority of Christ himself, Luke 18.16. Of such is the kingdom of God: for the
salving whereof I must open the words, which do evidence that the Disciples had
a prejudice and a cruel one too against infants, thinking (as the Anabaptists
do) that they understood nothing of Christ nor of the kingdom of Grace; but
Christ rebukes them, and instates infants of believing parents as members of
the visible Church, Of such is the kingdom of God. Now we cannot think that
Christ's meaning is, of such, as such, is the kingdom of God, as if all infants,
whether Jew or Gentile, Turk, or Pagan, belonged as subjects to the visible
Church, for then the infants of all the heathens should be covenanted members
of the Church visible, and yet their parents are without the vi^^ble Church;
and when they should grow to age, they should without any scandal be
excommunicated, which were monstrous to affirm; much less can the invisible
kingdom of God be of such, as if all infants, because infants, were actually
saved: but all that our Savior intends is, Of such, (i. e.) of such in
covenant relation, is the kingdom of God, of such subjects, (i. e.) infants as
well as others. So that our Savior did herein hold forth the common interest
of the whole species of infants within the visible Church; their common
interest in Christ, that he is a Savior of them, as well as a Savior of the
aged: But to conclude thence of such, Therefore all such, is an unheard of non
sequitur.

We find salvation entailed upon qualifications of Graces, but not upon any age
or period of life. But that whether it be for matter of election or of
reprobation, young as well as old are looked upon, as in the corrupt lump, and
out of which some are elected, the rest are left and so not elected, which is
to be Reprobated.

You have one reason more for the defense of your assertion, that no child
dying in infancy, etc. And that, I conceive, you offer by way of anticipation
to what might be objected from Romans 5.15, 2 Cor. 5.10.
16, 17, 18, 19. concerning the imputation of Adams sin to all his posterity,
and thus you state it; that when all shall appear before the judgment seat of
Christ every one shall receive according to what he has done in his body, but
not to receive any thing as a punishment for what has been acted in the body
of another.

And I pray Sir, tell me, you that are so accurate, the reason of your
limitation, why none shall receive any thing as a punishment of that which has
been acted in the person of another, but that we may receive a reward for the
good which has been acted in the person of another? where, if the text by you
cited, 2 Cor. 5.10. be that rule you walk by, it should hold for good as well
as bad.

But perhaps you foresaw the instance that would be given in against you in
that man Christ Jesus, from the acting of whose person in his own body all
other bodies that do expect, or hope for any reward of all their labors of
love, they do participate, Joh. 1. Ezekiel. 16.14.
for of his fullness have we all received, and we all are made perfect through
his comeliness that he shall put upon us, and by his obedience shall those that
are justified be made righteous. And therefore, my good friends, this is but
gratis dictum, Romans 5.19
and you do herein grossly suborn and abuse that place of the Apostle, to serve
your base ends; this sure is no better then the devils juggle, Matthew. 4. to
mince so much of a text as will serve his turn, and to leave out the rest, so
to delude the Readers; I pray use fairer play in your next, and deal above
board.

The next thing I observe of your alike fair dealing is about that text, 1 Cor.
15.22. that all die and go to the dust in the first Adam, in that all have
sinned, or in whom all have sinned, Romans 5.12. and here sure the dust so flies
in your eyes, that all the skill and labor you can take will never wipe it away.

For first, you do confess that all Infants as well as others sinned in Adam,
and why should you not alike confess from that very place, Romans 5.18. that
therefore judgment upon all to condemnation, should pass upon infants as well
as others; but probable it is, that here your meaning is, that Adams first
transgression, whereon I shall have occasion more fully to answer, when I come
to examine and resolve your postscript of Queries; till when I shall dismiss
this paradox, and shall apply my self to enquire into the mind of God, in that
text by you cited, Ezekiel. 18.20. the soul that sins it shall die, the son
shall not bear the iniquity of the father, etc.

Upon which your comment is, by death in this place is meant eternal death,
that which is the portion of the wi^ked for their wickedness, for as for the
temporal or natural death, that is the portion as well of the righteous as
unrighteous, and therefore from this place you suppose it clear, that no soul
shall eternally be cast into the lake for the sin of another (i. e.) for Adams
sin.

But I pray Sir, what think you first of the sufferings of Christ both in his
soul and body? ^am. 1.12 Isa. 53.3.
there was no sin inherent in himself, neither of original nor actual sins, yet
was there never any sorrow or sufferings like unto his, and therefore called a
man of sorrows, which though they were not eternal in respect of duration, yet
were they eternal according to the nature and essence of them, and in respect
of the dignity of the person, being God-man, they were equivalent to any or all
of those sufferings which are eternal for time and continuance; and yet all
this was undergone not for the satisfaction of any sin in himself, but for what
sins were acted in the person of another. Next, what think you of those infants
that were drowned in the flood; Genesis 19. Number. 16.17.
or those infants which suffered in the destruction of Sodom; or those infants
in the conspiracy of Corah, where the little children are said to be swallowed
into the pit?

Now all of these infants were not born within the compass of the Covenant, and
out of that there is no salvation; and actual sin they had committed none in
their own persons, and therefore their suffering must needs be for the sins
acted by another. But to come more close to the text; The scope of that Chapter
is this: The Jews in Babylon meeting with much hardship in their captivity,
instead of being humbled for their sins, took up an unjust complaint against
God, and charged him that he dealt unjustly with them, taking up this Proverb
amongst them, that The fathers had eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth
were set on edge (i. e.) that their fathers had sinned; and they who were their
children suffered for their sin; implicitly pleading their own innocence, but
in a downright way accusing God for afflicting them for their fathers
iniquities.

Now this false charge God vindicates and clears himself from in this Chapter,
ver. 4. and so ver. 20. The soul that sins it shall dye.

By soul here is meant the person, the principal part being put for the whole,
by a Synecdoche, as Lev. 7.18, 20, 21.

By dying here, more properly is understood a metaphorical death, viz.
afflictions, wars, judgments, plague, famine, captivity, loss of comforts
formerly enjoyed. So it is taken, Exodus 10.17. 2 Cor. 1.10. and 2 Cor. 11.23.
Else by dying is meant suffering of punishment, putting to death; so the words
to dye do signify, Deuteronomy. 17.12. and 18.20. and 24.7. and 1 Samuel 14.39. and 2 Samuel 12.5. Take it of whether of these two you will, The words import thus
much, that the man which sins, what ever he be, he shall suffer, and be cut
off for his sin, himself, and not any other, shall bear the burden of it; and
beyond this to extend the words, to eternal, or second death, or to be cast
into the lake, is not with any right reason to be forced from this place: For
the words are to be understood as a direct answer unto the Jews charge and
crimination; now we do not find, that any one of them did complain, that they
suffered this second death, or that they were cast into the lake you speak of;
but only their complaint and charge was, for a bodily personal suffering here
in this life, as some of those by me formerly mentioned; the utmost was a death
of the body, by what violence soever inflicted, beyond which they had no
present experience to know, or judge; for how could they know which of their
Fathers went into that lake, or suffered the second death? And therefore if we
may (as we ought to do) suppose the answer of God to be ad idem, and not
impertinent to their cavil and charge, then the construction of these words
must necessarily be confined to temporal afflictions, as war, famine, etc. or
at worst, to death, temporal or natural: And then what becomes of all this
waste stuff of yours, by your quibling with the words, [all must dye (i. e.) go
to the dust, whether righteous or unrighteous, etc. It Is true, all the righteous
dye as well as the unrighteous, but there is a vast difference in the
circumstances of their deaths; It is to the righteous a thing desired, a bridge
whereby they pass from Egypt, to Canaan; Christ has by his death sanctified
it, and sweetened it so to them, that they desire to be dissolved and to be with
Christ. Phil. 1.23. Mat. 24.8.
But to the wicked it is the beginning of sorrows.

This might be enlarged, but to him whose eyes are not blinded through
prejudice, it is very intelligible, that the utmost of the Prophets scope can be
extended no further then this temporal death, if it be marked what the people
laid to the charge of God, and supposing God likewise to have made a direct
answer unto their charge, without any equivocation or mental reservation; And
so I leave all this that you have said in the dirt, and proceed to what you
further say.

[And again, if this man be of the same mind with some of his brethren, as he
does in some measure discover himself so to be by his words, which seem to
imply that Infant children have faith, although not the use of faith; which
conceit of theirs is usually grounded upon Matthew. 18.16. These little ones that
believe in me: from which words some of them do infer, that because Christ
called a little child unto him to set before his disciples, as a pattern of
humility to them, therefore he speaks of such little children in respect of
nonage, in ver. 6. and if that be so, then they must needs conclude that little
children, as such, cannot be reprobated, for says Christ, ver. 14. It is not
the will of your Father which is in heaven, that one of these little ones
should perish. But this I do to see how the opinions of those men will hang
together, for I do believe that the little ones he speaks of ver. 6. and ver.
14. are his disciples, which are born from above, converted, and in
conversation, in respect of innocence and humility, become as little children,
whose qualifications in respect of these things are such, as the Lord Christ
requires the best of his people to be but such.]

actu primo, but not in actu secundo, (as the Schools distinguish) they may
have it in the root, habit and seed, but not in the second acts of knowledge,
assent, and application: but of this I have enlarged my self sufficiently
before, page 127. whereto I shall refer the Reader for further satisfaction.

But, for what you write, that this opinion is grounded on Math. 18.6. and
thereupon infer a strange exposition framed by some (as you say.)

I pray Sir, find out those men that create such an interpretation as you speak
of and when you have found them indite such another learned polemical pamphlet
against their opinion, as you have here done against me; and if they can, let
them defend themselves and their private glosses, and I will promise you, that
for my part I will not interpose between you, nor have I any thoughts to
vindicate it, as conceiving it probable, that you your self have forged this
construction out of the anvile of your simple brain, and now that you endeavor
to refute it.

You make your close to this absurdiry thus.

[And thus we own the later of the two, which he calls absurdities, because
it is a truth, viz. that no child dying in infancy can possibly be reprobated,
for reprobation is the portion of such as have the means of the knowledge of
God, and his truth, which is the means of salvation, and so reject it; which
infants, as such, can never do, as has been already proved.

But for the former, viz. that children dying in infancy, before they have any
being to act, should be reprobated to everlasting destruction: he shall never
father it upon us, for it follows not from any principle that we hold,
neither will it agree with the tender mercies of our God who has no pleasure
in the death of the wicked, and therefore not of an innocent dying infant, for
mercy rejoices against judgment.]



And so I proceed to the second absurdity, which is,

[As 2. neither such Gentiles or Turks, Indians and Savages, that never heard
of Christ, who never enjoyed the Gospel, etc.

Answ. To which I answer, first by demanding why he concludes that there be
some Gentiles that never heard of Christ, etc. The Apostle Paul delivers
doctrine contrary to this, saying, have they not all heard? yes verily; their
sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the end of the world, Romans
10.18. and chap. 16.25, 26. Speaking of the mystery which was kept secret since
the world began, but now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the
Prophets according to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to
all nations for the obedience of faith; how then is it that this man says,
that there be such Gentiles, or Turks, and the like, that never heard of
Christ? if he has been among such, pretending himself to be a Minister of
Christ, he should have preached Christ unto them; But I am persuaded that he
groundeth what he says, upon a report of some History of Travelers, or the
like; and from thence there is as good ground to conclude, that they may hear
of Christ, and that there are Christians in this part of the world, which
worship that God that is the creator of al things by Jesus Christ, as there is
for us to conclude, that there is a Mahomet which the Turk does believe in, and
that there are Indians and Savages, who are strangers from the life of God, and
that worship the creature more than the Creator; for certainly they may as well
hear what we do, as we can hear what they are and what they do: and if they did
but delight to retain that God in their knowledge whom we worship, and to
entertain the Lord Jesus Christ in their hearts, in whom we believe, without
question they might know more of God and his Son Christ then they do; and this
does appear from the words of Christ, Luke 16.10, 11. He that is faithful in
that which is least, is faithful also in much; and he that is unjust in the
least is unjust also in much: if therefore you have not been faithful in the
unrighteous Mammon, who shall commit to your trust the true riches? and
therefore if they were faithful in the use of that means which they do enjoy
from God, without doubt they might know more of God then they do.

Limbo infantum, for there is no place in heaven for them, (I mean Pagan
infants) and to the Lake you say they must not go, and now you are engaged to
become an advocate for infidels; and take heed at last you turn not proctor for
the Devil, and with Origin to be so charitable as to have some hopes of his
salvation: for truly, for what yet appears by the word, he is in as great a
capacity for salvation as those infidels are: Salvation, according to
Scripture-account, is encompassed within the verge of the covenant, and does
not go beyond it. The Scripture leaves men out of covenant in a hopeless
condition.

But against what I say, that some Gentiles yet never heard of Christ, you
produce that of Romans 10.18. and 16.25, 26. that their sound, i. e. (of the
preaching of the Gospel) went into all the earth, and their words into the ends
of the world, as it was made known unto all nations. But my good friend, you
that mist before in your Chronography; I believe you are here likewise out in
your Cosmography, for here the Apostle speaks of the ministers of the Gospel,
yea and of those, not as sent to the Gentiles neither, but to the Jews, of whom
he here treats, and shows their inexcusableness for not obeying the Gospel,
whose sound went to the ends of the world: But what ends of the world? we know
that the word world is sometimes straightened to Judea only, as some are wont to
construe that of the taxing of the world by Augustus Caesar, Luke 2. only of
Judea. Now says the Apostle, the Jews cannot plead ignorance of the Gospel,
because the preachers of it have sounded it to them every where. Have they not
heard? ver. 18. did not Israel know? ver. 19. but to Israel he says, All the
day long have I stretched out my hands, ver. 21. and you that are so indulgent
over those pitiful Pagans, how is it in right reason imaginable, that when Paul
writ this Epistle to the Romans, that every mothers son under heaven should
have been a hearer of the Gospel, when as the compass of the earth is many
thousand miles about, and so many nations which have never been discovered till
of late years, yet that they then should have heard the Gospel, and that in so
short a time? sure herein your pen did run before your wit, in understanding
those words in such a sense: and therefore, my friend, if you mean to make a
right construction of those words, you must not extend them to such a latitude,
as that all the posterity of Adam had immediately upon the death of Christ the
Gospel preached to them; but you must interpret that place, by comparing it
with other such like universal expressions, as Mat. 4.23. Christ healed all
manner of sickness, and all manner of diseases: and Act. 10.38. healed all that
were oppressed with devils: and Act. 10.12. All manner of four footed beasts,
and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air, appeared by Peter
as in a great sheet: and Mar. 1.5. All Judea went out to John Baptist, and all
were baptized in the river Jordan: and John 12.19. the Pharisees say of Christ,
Behold the world goes after him: and Mat. 8.34. the whole city went out to
meet Christ: and Act. 2.5. men of every nation under heaven. For as I said
before, how can it stand with common sense and right reason, that in so small a
tract of time, those inhabitants of the utmost skirts of the world, as America,
Peru, Scythia, Tartary, Brasil, Mexico, China, and other corners of the
unknown world, should hear that joyful sound, when as neither the Acts make
mention of any preregrination to those places, nor any Ecclesiastical history
gives intelligence thereof? yea and when as to Fathers who lived four or five
hundred years after Christ, both the Indies were then unknown unto them; yea
and when they came to beat first discovered, there appeared not the least
footsteps of the knowledge of the true God. And therefore the sense can be no
otherwise then this, that whereas before the coming of Christ, the word and
promises, and oracles of God, were appendent only to the Jewish nation; now
Christ being manifested in the flesh, Acts 17.30.
he commands all men every where to repent; now none were excluded, every
nation as well as the Jews might have a share of Christ crucified, and according
to the commission received from Jesus Christ, they should preach the Gospel to
them, so far as in reason might be expected from so small a company as did
undertake that charge; and many places of the world they had then gone through.

And Sir, to what you say, [that if there be such Turks and Gentiles that never
heard of Christ; if he has been amongst such, he should have preached Christ
unto them.] I must tell you for your better information, that the Gospel of it
self is not preachable to all: had not God expressly commanded Jonas to preach
to Niniveh, he had not sinned, if he had preached to them. Sir, it is a special
mission that gives warrant unto any, when, and to whom, to preach those glad
tidings, which is not so common to all, but peculiar to such, where God has a
people to be gathered according to the purpose of election; Act. 18.10. Act.
16.7. Mat. 10.5. Act. 16.6. Romans 10.15. Jer. 23.21.
in other cases they are inhibited though they had determined to preach it: the
Apostle assayed to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit suffered them not; yea
their commission is limited, they may not go into the way of the Gentiles, and
into the city of Samaria not to enter: the Holy Ghost forbids them to preach in
Asia, and how then shall they preach except they be sent?

We see by experience in those of your gang, that there is a running and no
sending. And I pray tell me, how could any thing of God or Christ in the time
of the law, be discovered to any in a saving way, when as the purpose of God
that way, was limited to the narrow scantling of the Jewish nation? Psalm.
147.19.20. Amos. 3.4.
He showed his word unto Jacob his statutes and judgments unto Israel; he has
not dealt so with any nation, etc. You only have I known of all the families
of the earth, etc.

No Sir, such prankes of preaching the Gospel, where they have not a special
mission, would suit far better with such Itinerants as you are, to proselyte
the Indians; the only mischief would be this, Mat. 23.15.
that when you had proselyted them, they would be twofold more the children of
hell then they were before.

By what afterward you write, you seem to tread the mizmaze, viz. that we
receiving what knowledge we have of such, upon a report of some history or
travelers, and therefore that they may hear what we are and do, as well as we
hear what they are and do. Sir, if you look about you, there is not the like
reciprocal reason for the one as for the other. Those travelers you speak of,
of ours, are men of parts and ingenuity, and through long pains and
difficulties, have made new discoveries of several parts of the habitable
world; but who are the inhabitants? surely a people of a strange temper,
constitution and condition, rather like beasts, nay Devils, than men, I mean
for some of them; nay such as the Prophet speaks of, Ezekiel. 3.5. a people of a
strange speech and of a hard language, and whose words thou can not
understand, Canibals, Satyrs, who do really worship the Devil.

And tell me, how shall these reject the means, who stand in no capacity to
receive it; and surely Sir, if your will and judgment have so much of
obstinacy in them, as that they cannot take impression by an historical faith of
what is delivered from persons of an undoubted integrity: I shall much doubt
how it will be pliable to the entertayning of a justifying faith. He that is
unfaithful in the least, will be unfaithful also in much, Luke 16.10.
according to your own instance.

And to what you say, that if they did but delight to retain that God in their
knowledge whom we worship, and the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom we believe:

But I pray tell me, how is this possible for them to have this delight you
speak of, when perhaps they never heard of the true God, nor his Son Jesus
Christ? and next by whom is any such delight wrought in the hearts of any
people, but only by God himself, who has already denied it to them in his
decree?

And therefore what other means they do enjoy, which would require their
faithful improvement of them, and of their knowledge therein, I know of none;
and if you have found out any, if you please to set it down in plain English,
it will prove a greater discovery then that of America it self, unless you mean
those constant daily lecturers, the sun, moon, and stars, which in a dumb
language preach out the glory of God. But the quickest-sighted of all the
Astrologers could never read any thing of the Lord Jesus Christ in all the
firmament of heaven, 1 Cor. 1 23.
which is to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles foolishness, the
Scriptures wholly ascribing the knowledge of the mystery to the Son of God,
revealing it from the bosom of the Father, and to the Spirit of God; but
utterly denying so much as a thought of it to any of the greatest or wisest of
the world, yea unto the blessed Angels themselves. 1 Pet. 1.12.
But you further say,

[But put case it be granted, for Arguments sake, that they never heard of
Christ, why then, says the man, how shall they believe in him, of whom they
have not heard? from Romans 10. and how can they reject that which was never
tendered unto them?

Why then I say again, how have infants faith? for they never heard of Christ
as they are new born infants; and I say likewise, that if those Gentiles he
speaks of never heard of Christ, nor yet could, notwithstanding all that they
could do in the use of that means they do enjoy, then their not knowing of
Christ and believing in him as we do, will never be charged upon them as sin:
For we do not find that the Lord Jesus does require the use of a talent of
them, which never received any of him to use.]

2 Cor. 5.10.
according to what evil they have done in the body; and therefore I do affirm,
that the only breach of the covenant of Grace, is too narrow to be the
adequate cause of damnation; for many pagans who never heard of Christ, and are
under no covenant but that of works, are condemned, not for not believing in
him of whom they never heard, Romans 10.14. nor for the breach of the covenant of
Grace, but for the breach of the covenant of works; and without doubt,
uncleanness, covetousnes, sorcery, lying, Idolatry, etc. and many the like
sins, are the causes of their damnation.

They received a talent in Adam their primogenitor, and he forfeited it both to
himself and all his posterity, whereof unless redemption be made by Jesus
Christ, they are utterly lost persons. They have likewise received a general
talent bestowed on them by Jesus Christ, Ioh. 1.9. Romans 1.20
who enlighteneth all that come into the world, even enough to make them
inexcusable.

And kind Sir, if you revise your own position, it is limited to the free
tenders of Christ in the Gospel; and therefore as you put the case, your
supposition utterly clasheth with what you have in your position: But it is an
easy matter for such intoxicated unsteady brains as yours, to cross legs now
and then.

You absurdly conclude what you have to say in discharge of your self from the
second absurdity thus;

[But the Gentiles, if they cannot, notwithstanding all that they can do, hear
of Christ in the Doctrine of the Gospel in express words, that they have a
means from God by which they in their consciences may be accused or excused in
the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, Romans 2.14, 15,
16. See also chap. 1 from ver. 18. to the end: also Psalm. 19. at the beginning;
by which means there is such a discovery of God from the creation of the world,
that the invisible things of him are clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made, so that they are without excuse; but not only in the far
countries, but even here in England, where the Gospel is preached, there are
many that are strangers from the life of God, I do freely grant, the greater is
their sin: and as it is just with God to give those Gentiles over to a
reprobate mind, that did not like to retain the knowledge of God which they had
or might have had by the things that are made; so in like manner will the just
and righteous judgment of God appear toward them which have Jesus Christ
preached unto them in the Doctrine of the Gospel, and they receive him not, in
suffering the mystery of iniquity to cloud and darken their understanding, by
the coming of the man of sin. 2 These. 2.9.10, 11, 12. Whose coming is after the
working of Satan with all power and signs, and lying wonders, and with all
deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish, Because they received
not the love of the truth that they might be saved; and for this cause, God
shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie, that they all
might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness: by which mystery of iniquity their understandings are so
darkened, and their minds blinded, by which they look that all must be in a
mystery; removing mountains in a mystery, the body of Christ in a mystery, the
Ascension of Christ into heaven, and his second coming in a mystery; the
resurection out of the Grave, or dust of the earth, in a mystery to be out of
the grave of sin; and all these and many more such dark and cloudy conceits
there are, and will be more and more in men, because they receive not the love
of the truth, even the teaching of Jesus Christ in these things that are
written, Ioh. 20.31. that they might believe that Jesus is the Christ, and that
believing they might have life through his name.]

Romans 1. Psalm. 19.1. Romans 2.14.
yet that the Gentiles have so much made known unto them by the invisible
things of God, and the objective works of the creation, and the relics of the
law of nature, so far as to render them inexcusable, I shall join with you in
it, and give my vote against them.

But if you have any secret reserve (for indeed you are a pitiful soul) that
any of those herd of Goats, the Gentiles I mean, should have any possibility of
salvation, or hopes to be excused in the day of Judgment from receiving of the
just reward of all their iniquities, Joh. 15.5. Joh. 14.6.
I do then abominate any such conceit; Without Christ we can do nothing, he is
the way, the truth, and the life, and none comes to the Father but by him;
neither is there salvation in any other, nor none other name under heaven given
among men whereby they can be saved. If it should be otherwise, then farewell
the prerogative of the Jew above the Gentile, of the Christian Church above the
Pagans. If God may have his Church, his converts, his right worshippers, his
beloved and saved ones, even amidst the blindness and darkness of Gentilism,
without the knowledge of Christ, and all divine revelation of Gods will in his
word, then let us bid adieu to al Scripture, to all religion, to all profession:
but alas what are such opinions as those, but like sick men's dreams, or rather
mad men's ravings?

But I pray Sir, tell me in good earnest what your meaning is by those words
you thus write, viz. The Gentiles, if they cannot, notwithstanding all that
they can do, hear of Christ, etc. which, as the words import, imply an
abominable slander against the majesty of God, as though the Gentiles had a
desire, and thereupon did endeavor to know and learn the mind of Christ, but
being impeded by a more supreme power, were not able to compass their desires.

Sir, learn to be more modest and reverent in treating of such divine things.
Alas, so far are the heathens for a can or a will, I mean, power or desire,
that there is neither of them in professed Christians, Phil. 2.13.
but what is of Gods own working, who gives both to will and to do according
to his good pleasure. And as for the heathen, instead of doing, or any desires
thereunto, as to good, there is nothing but backwardness, indisposition,
aversness, yea an enmity against any thing that is really good, at least in a
saving way.

But alas, what persons, or cause is there in the world, that are so base and
degenerate, that cannot suborne some luxuriant tongues to plead their case,
though never so abominable?

I have now done with this, and so proceed to hear what you can speak for your
self in the defense of the position from the third absurdity, which is this;

The third absurdity.

[If the foresight of sin should be the cause of reprobation, then the elect
should be equally liable to the decree of reprobation as the reprobates
themselves, they all being alike in the corrupt mass and lump of Adams
transgression.

Answ. See how he minceth his argument, that he may bring forth absurdities
from his own expressions, and then father them upon us. In the front of his
argument he puts in unbelief, and the rejecting of the means, but leaves
out the word continuing; and now he has thrust out all, except it be this one
single term, Sin, that he may bring, reprobation to eternal destruction, to the
narrow scantling of Adams transgression: but that shall never be granted by me,
until I see a better proof for it than he has yet brought, and I can allow him
more Scriptures then he has set down to his argument, Job 14.4. and 15.14.
Psalm. 51.5. all which, together with the Scriptures he brings, do I confess,
prove that the whole lump of mankind is polluted with Sin; and I deny not, but
that this pollution or corruption, is in a measure from Adams transgression;
but that any ones being reprobated to everlasting destruction in the lake of
fire, which is the second death, is for Adams transgression, I deny; for
although all the fruits and effects of that sin in the first Adam do accompany
us, until we come to the dust from whence we were taken, which is Genesis 3.16,
17, 18, 19. Women's sorrow, being multiplied, and their conception, and bringing
forth children in sorrow, together with the curse that is upon the ground for
man's sake, so as that man must eat of it in sorrow all the days of his life,
eating bread in the sweat of his face, being accompanied with pain and
sickness, which are the companions of death, till he return to the ground; for
out of it was he taken, for (says God) dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall
return: and this was the sentence of that condemnation that God has pronounced
against the first Adam, or 1 Cor. 15.27. earthy man, and we being then in him
when the sin was committed, and the sentence pronounced, we have our part with
him in these things, as our portion in this life, for the original sin, or
first transgression: But the holy Spirit in Scripture does no where declare, as
I could ever yet find, nor as any one could ever yet show me, that man's
reprobation to the second death is for being in Adams sin, nor for sin in their
own persons, no nor yet for unbelief simply so considered but for continuing in
sin and unbelief.

For if they do repent, confess, and forsake their sins, they shall find mercy,
and be saved, as has been already proved: and if the elect should continue in
sin and unbelief, and not repent, and believe, or embrace the means of
Salvation, they should be equally liable to the decree of Reprobation, as the
reprobates themselves, and there would be no difference; but they in repenting,
believing and embracing the means of salvation, fall under the unchangeable
decree of Gods election, so as they cannot miss of salvation, as has been
already showed.]



It is the very last enemy of ours that death destroys; so that in respect of
this, Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera debet dici beatus. Now what you have
to say against our doctrine of Original sin, I find not much in this your
discourse, for this you grant;

First, that the whole lump of mankind is polluted with sin, and which
pollution, as you say, flows from Adams transgression.

And secondly, that all the fruits and effects of that sin do accompany us till
death: there is only then your bare denial that eternal death is not the
reward or wages of this sinful pollution, the contrary whereof is incumbent on
me to prove, to make my charge good against you with that third absurdity.

Now to prove that the first sin of Adam was ours, not because he is our father
by nature, (though that be a ground of the imputation also) but because he is
such a father by Covenant and law, the law and Covenant of works being laid in
pawn in his hand; we are to understand, that there be three parts in Original
sin.

1. First, a partaking of the first sin of Adam; we all sinned in him, Romans
5.12, 14, 15.

2. Secondly, the want of the Image of God, Romans 3.23. called the glory of God,
or original righteousness.

3. Thirdly, Concupiscence, or a bentness or proneness of nature unto sin, Romans
7.7, 14, 17, 23, 24.

As to the first, Adams sin is ours really and truly, not so much because it is
ours, as because it is imputed to be ours by God, who so contrived the law of
works, as that it should be made with Adam, not as a single father or person,
but with Adam as a public person representing all mankind, and having our
common nature as a father, both by nature and law, which came from the mere
free will of God: He was as the root and stock of all mankind, Romans 5.19. By
one man's disobedience many were made sinners, (i. e.) morally and legally, but
not physically and personally, the fruit and effect of which is death and
damnation; for Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death, not only temporal or
natural death, but as the Apostles Antithesis necessarily carries it, spiritual
and eternal death, in opposition to eternal life acquired by Jesus Christ the
second Adam.

Yea and the whole series and purport of the Apostles discourse, Romans 5.12. to
ver. 19. carries this clear, that every mouth may be stopped, by a comparison
of our righteousness and life received by Jesus Christ, with sin and death
contracted from Adam; that as by the disobedience of Adam we were made sinners,
viz. sinners by imputation, his sin being laid upon our account, as much as if
we our selves had eaten of the forbidden fruit: So by the obedience of Christ
we are made righteous (i. e.) righteous by imputation, God being so pleased to
accept of Christ his righteousness, as though we in our own persons had
fulfilled all righteousness, either in doing or in suffering. See for further
satisfaction, 1. Cor. 1.30. and 15.22. and 2 Cor. 5.15.

The second thing considerable in original sin, is a privation of the Image of
God, the glory of God, or original righteousness; of this see Romans 3.23.
Eccles. 7.29. Ephesians. 4.24. which uprightness had been hereditary, had man kept
his first station; but he failing, in the breach of the holy law of God, he
lost that righteousness, both to himself and all his posterity; So that, there
unavoidably succeeding a defect of conformity to the law of God, which sinless
nature did enjoy, necessarily must it draw with it the sin of that nature which
it voluntarily had contracted, viz. Original unrighteousness. Whence I reason
thus; Every transgression of the law of God takes along with it the true and
proper name and nature of sin, and to have eternal death as the reward thereof,
1 Ioh. 3.4. Romans 3.23. But every defect of conformity with the law of God is
such a transgression. Therefore, etc.

The Minor is proved from those places, 1 Cor. 2.14. and 2 Cor. 3.5. Romans 3.10.
and Romans 7.18. cum multis aliis.

The third thing considerable is a proneness, aptitude, and bentness to sin,
not by imputation, but by inclination: As the young Lion, and the young
Serpent, have not the bloody, and stinging nature of the old Lion, and the old
Serpent, by imputation, but by natural and intrinsecal inherencie: so it is
with men from the womb, they are sinners from the birth, bringing into the
world a body of sin and death. Whence I argue thus; Every evil concupiscence,
or proneness in man to sin, or rebellion to the law of God, or enmity to God,
carries with it the name and nature of sin: But original sin (Synecdochically
taken; for the habit of original unrighteousness) is that evil Concupiscence or
proneness to sin, etc. Therefore.

For the Major, I presume none dare question it; and for the Minor, that is
confirmed abundantly, and that in a special manner in the greatest part of Romans
7. where the nature of original sin is most lively represented, and the Apostle
not only for himself, but for all others, bemoanes their sad estate, in
respect of the natural inherency of that depravation of our nature.

And whereas you, Sir, were pleased to supply me with places to prove what I
intended as to original sin, I must tell you, it was not for want of stock that
I had then in store, but only because I would not then in so short an epitome
be tedious and troublesome to such dissatisfied persons, for whose alone
satisfaction I composed that breviary; but never intending it should have been
exposed to public view, it was only your pleasure to bring it into the sun
light, naked and bare as it was. And therefore that you may see that the
subject is not any ways lame or defective for want of sufficient authority to
support it, take these texts of Scripture, ex abundanti, for the confirmation
of it. Genesis 6.5. and 8.21. Job 14.5. Psalm. 57.7. Isa. 64.10. Ier. 17.9. Matthew.
15.12. Ioh. 3.6. Romans 5.12, etc. and 6.16, etc. and 8.6, 7. etc. Ephesians. 2.3. and
4.22. Col. 3.9, 11. Tit. 3.3. Heb. 12.1. Iam. 1.14, 15 etc.

For what you conclude this paragraph with, that if sinners should repent,
confess, and forsake their sins, they should find mercy; And if the elect
should continue in sin and not repent, etc. they should be equally liable to
the decree of Reprobation; I say Sir, though to affirm this does utterly
interfere with your first position, where you affirm that the elect cannot
become reprobates, neither can reprobates become elect: And yet there is some
truth in it according to the Gospel manner of expressions; but this has been
fully spoken to already. Your next encounter is, to answer a place by me
quoted, where you write thus.

[But yet lest it should be thought that there is some weight in that Scripture
which he quoteth out of Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. Children of wrath even as others, to
prove that reprobation to the second death, is for that sin in Adam, or that
infants dying in infancy, should be cast into the lake of fire for the same; I
doubt not, but by the help of my God I shall make it appear, that there is no
such thing in it: for first consider, that these words in ver. 1. you has he
quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins, cannot relate to their being in
the corrupt mass or lump of Adams transgression, for that is but one, being in
the singular number; but that which is there spoken of, is in the plural
number, or more than one, to wit, trespases and sins.

Secondly, it does appear that it does not relate to that sin they had as they
were new born infants, because it relates to their conversation, or course of
life, as they had a being in this world, ver. 2.3. wherein in time past ye
walked according to the course of this world, amongst whom we all had our
conversation in times past, etc. By which it does appear, that he does not
speak to the Ephesians of what they were as they first came into the world as
Infants; for they could not upon that account be said to walk according to the
course of this world, neither can new born Infants, as such, be said to have
their conversation in times past in the lust of the flesh, and of the mind; and
therefore they were not children of wrath upon that account: but the Apostle
there speaks of that course of life or conversation in which they lived in
time past, as they were grown persons in the lusts of the flesh and the mind,
fulfilling the desires thereof, and being by nature the children of wrath even
as others.]



But let us examine the reasons you give in, why those words were the children
of wrath even as others, cannot prove reprobation to the second death, or
expose infants to a desert of the lake of fire.

Your first reason is, because those words ver. 1. you has he quickened who
were dead in trespasses and sins, cannot relate to their being in the corrupt
lump, for that is but one in the singular number, but that spoken of here is in
the plural, more than one, viz. trespasses and sins.

A good Critic I assure you; but to this I answer. First, that though the
Scripture when it speaks of original sin, may speak of it in the singular
number, yet oftentimes it is described by words of the plural number. So Psalm.
51.5. the original carries it, Behold I was shapen in iniquities, and in sins
did my mother conceive me. and Joh. 9.34. thou wast altogether born in sins,
and Col. 2.13. you being dead in your sins; And so here.

Secondly you must know, that every particular person is the subject of that
sin, and in every member and part of that particular person is that sin
inherent; there is an infective that has spread over both body and soul, and
even all the faculties of them both, having contracted that defilement by an
hereditary propagation; and why may not the Holy Ghost, for the exaggerating of
the greatness of our natural corruption, make use of words in the plural
number, in setting forth of this sin, as usually it does, without the censure
of a Thomas Tazwel?

Thirdly, I do willingly acknowledge that ver. 1. Actual sins committed by men
when full grown, are here spoken of and meant, but not exclusively to original
sin, that is understood as well as actual, and both of these will necessarily
require a word of the plural number; Actual sins as the streams running in all
their veins, and their whole conversation in the time of their pilgrimage here;
but original sin as the fomes and fountain whence those actual sins had their
first conception, birth, and nursery, being deep rooted, and fast rivited in
the head and heart.

Fourthly, you might easily perceive what I chiefly insisted on in the quoting
of that Scripture, having set it down in words at length and not in figures, by
nature children of wrath. So that this your first reason will stand you in
little stead, as to acquit you from this third absurdity.

Neither will your second perform any greater exploits, than his fellow that
went before him; for where you beat the air, with your walking and
conversation, ver. 2, 3. I must tell you, I insist not on it, neither am I such
an innocent as to make that applicable to infants. No Sir, it is the close of
the 3. ver. which I mainly intend, and which the Holy Ghost applies singly to
the hereditary and original depravation of our sinful nature, lineally
descending from our primogenitor Adam, Genesis 5.3.
who howsoever he was created in the image of God, yet he begat children in his
own likeness after his own image, i. e. deprived of the image of God, and
sinful like himself, and by nature children of wrath: To which words you would
fain say somewhat, and so you do, but to little purpose and that which you do
say is this.

[But now the question is, how they were by nature children of wrath? say some,
because nature led them to the doing of these things, and to the living in such
a filthy conversation.

But I have better thoughts of nature, and yet I desire to think no better of
it than the Scripture speaks of it; and my judgment of it is this, that
nature is so far from leading men into sin, that the teaching of it are against
sins; which I prove by these reasons being grounded upon Scripture.



And whereas you say, you have better thoughts of Nature, Sir you need not tell
me so, I know you have; seeing by you, and those of your party, the bondwoman
is advanced equal to the freewoman; the servant set up in honor to the
disgrace and contumely of the mistress, Nature (I mean) being placed by you in
the chair of state, instead of Grace.

Joh. 7.51.
But does our law judge any man before it hear him, and know what he does? I
will therefore bring your reasons to the touchstone, whereby you endeavor to
confirm this assertion, viz. that nature is so far from leading men into sin,
that the teachings of it are against sin; and your first reason is this.

[ Because the Gentiles do by nature the things contained in the law of God,
Romans 2.14.]



Besides, I believe you have not the front to affirm that the Gentiles did by
nature worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity; or that they did
abstain from falling down before, or worshipping the creature more then the
Creator, Romans 1.25.
or that they observed a seventh day Sabbath; Nature, I am sure, never directed
them to such principles.

Search all the records of the chiefest of the heathens, even those that have
aspired to the highest pitch of all humane and natural knowledge: yet in those
their loftiest speculations concerning the nature of divine things they were
miserably blind.

Aristotle, a man of the deepest reach that Antiquity ever bred, among so many
books that he wrote, and are in part yet extant, has not left us any one
discourse by which it might appear that he bestowed any pains in searching
after the knowledge of God, except here and there, in some poor pitiful
disputes: and if it may be said thus of the most eminent of the heathens; what
then may be concluded of the whole crowd and rout of them? but as what the
Apostle ver. 12. having a consideration of them as in their pure naturals,
before their conversion by the Gospel, that they were at that time without
Christ, Ephesians. 2.12.
being aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenant
of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world; that they sat in
darkness and in the shadow of death? Mat. 4.15.
and indeed how could it be otherwise, Acts 14.16. Ps. 147.19.20.
when God favored them not, nor had any purpose to bestow grace upon them? for
in times past he suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their own ways; the word
and ordinances of his worship they had not, for he shows his word unto Jacob,
his statutes and his judgments unto Israel: he has not dealt so with every
nation, To. 10.14.
neither have they known his judgments. A preacher they have not, and how
should they believe in him of whom they have not heard? 1 Cor. 2.
and how shall they hear without a preacher? Natural ability to know the
mystery of the kingdom of God, Mat. 13.11.
they have not for the natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit; nor
is there any such power given them of God; for unto you is given to know the
secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but unto them it is not given: Joh. 15.5.
and without Christ they can do nothing. What then was become of this man's
reason thus to bragg of men in their pure naturals, which are so befogged that
they are never able to extricate themselves?

I have done with the first reason, and left it naked and bare; I shall next
proceed to your second reason, which as it is by you worded, is scarce common
sense, but such as it is, take it thus.

[2. Because those that were given over of God to a reprobate mind, being
filled with all unrighteousness, Romans 1.28. are said ver. 31. to to be without
natural affections: now if natural affections had been such an unrighteous
thing, as that it should lead them into sin, and they being filled with all
unrighteousness, could not have been without it.

To which I answer; First you mistake in your reading, it is affection in the
singular number and not affections.

Secondly the word (...) rendered by the Translators natural affection, is yet
by them in the margent rendered unsociable, and if Scapulaes Lexicon be
consulted with, such are there denoted; and so the word properly signifies in
quo non inest affectus amoris illius mutui inter parents and liberos, who are
destitute of that reciprocal love that ought to be between husband and wise,
parents and children.

And now be judge your self, what a sad reason you have brought upon the Stage
for the advancing of nature, that (as you say) it is so far from leading men to
sin, that the teachings of it are against sin; because, (for such is the
strength of your reason, or else it is nothing) such given over by God to a
reprobate mind, are without that reciprocal or mutual love that ought to be
between husband and wife, parents and children. I pray Sir, in the next look
before you leap.

And now for the third and last reason, which is of the same size the former
were, and this it is.

Because the Apostle himself directs the Saints to the teaching of nature it
self, 1 Cor. 11.14. and certainly if Paul had been of that mind, that nature
had been such an evil principle, as that it being followed, would lead men into
a wicked and filthy conversation, he would never have mentioned it as a teacher
unto them; therefore the teaching of nature does not lead men into sin, but the
contrary.]

of short hair and long hair, and ver. 14. Does not nature it self teach you
that if a man have long hair it is a shame unto him: the doubt now is, what is
meant by nature here? and first, not any principle connatural to man in the
state of innocence; for thereof there is neither precept, nor rule, nor
example, either for long hair or short hair.

But secondly, by nature is to be understood, that which by a common consent
was taken up, and brought it into a custom or fashion, and that especially
among the Greeks: for if we look upon other nations, and take the pains to
search Antiquity concerning their fashions, you shall find that it was a long
time before the Romans used any clipping of the hair, neither was it practiced
in France or Germany till of later years; nor would Lycurgus suffer it among
the Lacedaemonians; and if it were unnatural, why did Absalom were long hair? 2 Samuel 18.9. or why was the law of the Nazarites permitted? It is very apparent
therefore that the Apostles meaning is, that custom being (as it were another
nature) it was not the manner, custom and fashion of these parts, at least
among the Corinthians, to wear long hair, because it was an Argument of too
much effeminacy. And now Sir, do but revise the strength of your reason as I
have clothed it, and see what weight it may bear which any man of common
reason; and thus it lies; the teachings of nature lead not to sin, because the
Apostle directs the Saints what is fit for them to do about long hair, from
what the custom was then in use among the Grecians.

I pray Sir take more reason with you when you next offer any reason to a
reasonable man.

Your next endeavor is, to make a gloss upon this text, but it is such a one
as does corrupt the text; and thus it is.

[But as the law written in tables of stone did discover or make known sin to
the Jews, so the law of nature did discover or make known sin to the Gentiles;
and so the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and all
unrighteousness of men, as well the Gentiles as the Jews, as appears, Romans
1.18. and as the law written does work wrath to the Jews, Romans 4.15. when they
sin against it; so the law of nature does work wrath to the Gentiles, when they
do that which is contrary thereunto; and so the Ephesiaens, which Paul
directs these words unto, being Gentiles, were not lead unto sin by nature,
but nature did in its measure and degree witness against sin, and did by its
teaching declare them to be the children of wrath, when they lived in such an
evil conversation which was contrary to the teaching of it.]

we are all by nature the children of wrath, i. e. we that are converted,
whether Jews or Gentiles, all were alike children of wrath: wherein there are
two things to be opened, first, what it is to be a child of wrath, secondly,
what it is to be so by nature?

First, what it is to be a child of wrath.

First, some by this do understand one that is guilty of and obnoxious to
eternal death and condemnation because of sin; but this, though it be somewhat,
yet it is not the whole; for Adam after his sin committed, was made obnoxious
to the wrath of God, and guilty of eternal death, and yet he could not be said
to be a son, or child of wrath; for by this manner of speaking, such an one is
denoted as is born such, and by his nature is such.

For the clearing whereof, take notice of some such parallel places. It is well
known to those who are Divines indeed, that these are Hebraismes, to say, one
is a son, or child of perdition, as Ioh. 17.12. 2 These. 2.3. or that one is a
child of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. and 5.6. and Col. 3.6. and hence this manner
of speaking does a ise, because whosoever is begotten or born of a man is a
man, that which is of a horse is a horse, etc. and therefore by the name of the
Son of man is understood him, not which is simply a man as Adam was, but him
that is born of a man: Adam was a man made, not born, and therefore he is
called a man, but not the Son of man. It is observed therefore, that the
Hebrews in this their manner of speaking, when they say thou art a son or child
of disobedience, a son of perdition, etc. that they assign as it were,
disobedience and perdition, to be as the father, and that thou art born of
that; and therefore that such expressions do not barely signify that thou art
disobedient, but that thou were born disobedient; not that thou art in a
perishing condition, but that thou were born a son of perdition; not that thou
art a sinner, but that thou wast born a sinner. So likewise in those words; a
child of wrath, not that thou art obnoxious to wrath and condemnation because
of thy sins, but that thou art born a child of wrath, guilty of eternal
condemnation: so much of the first.

The second thing considerable is, how they were by nature the children of
wrath: The word nature has several acceptations; First, sometimes it is taken
for the substance and essence of a thing; but thus, acording to his essence and
substance, man is not a child of wrath, because the substance is not sin,
though it be infected with sin; Secondly, for the first principle of motion and
rest in every thing, whether that principle be in the substance, or that it be
the natural quality and propriety of the thing. And after this manner the first
nature of man was good, yea very good, for in that the Lord did imprint a power
of motion to that which was good; to know, love and worship God, and thereby to
have life everlasting: but this nature was lost by the sin of Adam, and instead
thereof there succeeded a naughty quality, whereby it comes to pass that there
is no natural motion in us, but unto that which is evil, viz. against God, and
against his son Jesus Christ, and no rest but in that which is not good.

This evil quality came by the temptation of the Devil, and it is as a
pestilence that has infected both the soul and body of man; man I say
remaining the same in his essence and substance, is infected with the venom of
this evil quality, so that he can effect or work nothing but that which is like
himself, because from this he is moved unto all actions.

Hence it is that there arise all the evil thougths in the mind, all the
perverse and distempered affections in the heart, and all wicked motions and
desires in the will.

And this corruption of the whole nature, which is otherwise called
concupiscence, the Apostle calls in this place nature, viz. the first principle
or beginning of all evil actions and motions, whether external, or internal;
and therefore whereas this is sin, it does deservedly make such the children of
wrath.

Thirdly, nature is oftentimes taken for nativity, or birth, natura a nascendo,
because that every one being conceived in sins, and born in iniquities, Psalm
51.5.
and that we are born ungodly and enemies to God, and therefore most worthy
that God should be angry with us, and inflict eternal punishments on us; and
therefore in this sense likewise are we said to be the children of wrath, i. e.
rom our first conception and nativity, and because we are descended from Adam,
and sinned in him, and all are born children of wrath, even infants likewise,
though they have not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, i. e.
actually, Romans 5.14.
yet because they are born of sinful parents, the infection becomes hereditary
to them, and they likewise children of wrath as well as others: After this
manner of speech is that of the Apostle Gal. 2. We which are Jews by nature, i.
e. Jews by birth and nativity.

And by this I hope the judicious Reader will find that I have both confuted
your reasons and confounded your gloss, so that the third absurdity will stick
as close to your proposition as the spots do to the Leopard: and now I shall
have leisure to attend your motion in the removal of your quarters to the
fourth absurdity, which is this.

Then Paul was mistaken, Romans 9.21. in not assigning sin to be the cause of
reprobation.

Answ. Paul was not mistaken, for he has assigned continuing in sin and
unbelief to be the cause of reprobation, Romans 9.32. and 11.20. and 1.2, 6, 28.



But yet this last reprobation, or that in time, is not immutable as is the
other; Jer. 6.30. Isa. 1.25. Zac. 13.9. To. 11.23.
for a man or a nation may be as reprobated silver today, and yet refined from
the dross to morrow: they may be broken off to day and grafted in again to
morrow, for God is able to graft them in again.

But for that reprobation whereabout our dispute is, as it is immanent in God
and eternal, so it is also immutable and unchangeable as is God himself.

And so I pass to the fifth absurdity which is this.

[ Absurd. 5. The same Apostle then answered very unsoundly to these
objections, Romans 9.13, 19.

The first is, If God reprobated Esau, because he hated him, he was unjust.

The second, ver. 19. why does he yet find fault, for who has resisted his
will? for he might in one word have answered to both objections and said, that
sin was the cause of reprobating both Esau and Pharaoh; but he says the
contrary, ver. 11. when they had done neither good nor evil, Jacob have I
loved, and Esau have I hated.

Answ. To the first, when I shall hear any say, that God reprobated Esau
because he hated him, without assigning any other cause, and prove it, I shall
say more to it; and in the mean time I shall desire to have this question
resolved,

Whether those that shall preach such doctrine, As that God reprobated Esau
because he hated him, and for no other cause, do not make God much like the
envious Jews, Ioh. 15.25. who hated the man Christ Jesus without cause.]

Esau before he was born, or that he had done either good or evil; that is
called hatred, comparatively, in respect of that love he showed unto Jacob; he
may be said to hate him because he loved him less than he did Jacob: Genesis 29.31.
Thus Leah was said to be hated by Jacob, comparatively with the love showed to
Rachel, because she was less beloved then Rachel: so he that serves two
masters, will hate the one, and love the other, (i. e.) will love him less then
the other: And thus God loves the reprobates less than he does the elect; but
it cannot hence be concluded, that the Lord does absolutely hate any creature
of his own making, ^en. 1.31.
for they were all good, yea very good: and Wisd. 11.24. thou love all things
that are, and abhorrest nothing that thou have made. It Is true God hates sin,
because he made it not,, and this hatred has an influx upon the sinner, as he
is a sinner, because God made him not so: But God hates not a non-elected
person, or a reprobate, as he is a reprobate, neither does he condemn him, or
decree to condemn him, for his negative reprobation, which is Gods act, Isa.
55.8.
but for his sin, which is man's act.

Secondly I say, that this hatred in God (his ways not being like our ways)
is not to be considered, as to hold proportion with the passions and affections
of men in their hatred: For this confusion, or indistinct consideration, or
comparison of divine things with humane, is that great witchcraft that puts
such a stumbling-blo^k in the way to the knowledge of things, that we cannot
discover the truth thereof with so discerning an eye as otherwise we might.

And therefore though I do attribute hatred to God, yet that hatred in God
anteceding reprobation, or which is assigned as a cause of reprobation, is
nothing else but Gods absolute will of denying that special benefit of
effectual grace, and infallible direction unto eternal life, and permitting
some men, by their own defective freewill, deservedly to fall under the misery
of eternal death. And therefore in some sort I may say that the hatred of God
is as much visible, and does as sensibly discover it self, in the denial of
effectual grace, as in the inflicting of the torments of hell.

For God the Father wounded, bruised, tormented the soul of his dear Son for
our sins, without any diminution of his love unto him: But he never denied him
effectual grace, whereby he had an immunity from sin: And therefore (say some)
It is more desirable to have the benefit of effectual grace, whereby we are
preserved safe in the love of God, than to obtain an immunity from the torments
of hell; Christ was not exempted from this last, though he was never excluded
from the former.

Thirdly, I would here distinguish of the hatred of God, as it signifies in
him, first his affection, or secondly his effection (if I may use such a word)
or otherwise the effects of his affection; (though I do confess, that these
affections, as of love, hatred, anger, etc. are not properly in God, but are
attributable to him ex anthropopathia, by similitude and resemblance.

First, for the hatred of God as it is an affection, so it does precede
Reprobation, it being the will and purpose of God to deny grace to such whom he
will not elect, which is that whith we call reprobation.

Secondly, the hatred of God, as it signifies an effect, to wit, the execution
of that hatred, anger, wrath, inflicted on sinners, and so it follows
reprobation.

To sum up all in a few words, that God bare less love to his creature Esau
then to Jacob, is manifest. That that lesser degree of love which he bare to
Esau, may comparatively, to that manifested to Jacob, be called hatred; That
God may deny some grace to one that he bestows upon another, without
injustice; that equal grace is not given to Esau as to Jacob; That those, who
from the love of God are not elected, by a necessary consequence must be
reprobated or not elected, Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6, 7. and 2.4, 5.
or loved with a lesser love. The love of God was the cause of our election,
and therefore the lesser love, or hatred, the cause of our reprobation.

And now Sir, if you peruse this what I have here said, you may easily answer
your own frivolous question.

And yet I must withal tell you, that though I do affirm, that God reprobated
Esau, or did not elect him, only because he would not, it was not the good
pleasure of his will so to do, or it was his will absolute not to do it, that he
denied that favor to him that he showed to Jacob, and so may be said to hate
him without any external cause looked upon as in Esau, why he should be
reprobated rather than Jacob, neither of them having done either good or evil:
yet there was an internal cause of the hatred or reprobation, namely, the good
pleasure of Gods most holy will, for the manifestation of his own glory, in his
power and justice. And therefore God cannot without blasphemy be compared to
the envious Jews, who howsoever they hated the man Christ Jesus without a
cause, yet God had a cause, motive or incentive, from within himself, even the
manifestation of his own glory, in showing his power and justice on those so
reprobated; which glory of his is more precious, and to be prefered before the
saving and preserving from the torments of hell, the persons of all both men
and Angels: and yet withal I say, that the vindictive punishment of God, or
positive reprobation, which is Gods appointing to torments, and hatred of God,
as it is an effect of the former, is never inflicted without a just and
meritorious cause, viz. the sin of man. And thus much to what you answer to the
first objection; to the second you write thus.

[To the second, I have already showed, that Paul directed his words to the
Jew, who rested in the law, and made his boast of God, and was confident that
he was in the way of God, and thence it was that he said, thou will say unto
me, who has resisted his will? But Paul had more than the single term, sin, to
assign as a cause of their being reprobated, blinded or broken off from their
own olive tree, to wit, a continuance in sin and unbelief, and rejecting the
means of salvation, when the hands of the Lord were stretched forth unto them
all the day long, and yet they were a disobedient and gainsaying people.]

page 115. that the words were directed to the Gentiles, to which I refer the
Reader. And whereas afterward you say, that Paul had more then that single
term to assign as a cause of their being reprobated, blinded, broken off, etc.
to wit a continuance in sin and unbelief, and rejecting the means of salvation;
Sir, this is but gratis dictum, you only say, but cannot prove it, show me any
such expression in this whole chapter, wherein this text alleged lies, yea, or
any where else in all the Scripture. It is true those words of yours of the
Lords hands stretched forth all day long were spoken to the Israelites, Romans
10.21. But to Israel he says. But in what place soever, sin, or unbelief, or
rejecting of the means, are mentioned as any cause of Reprobating, blinding,
shortning or cutting off, it is spoken only of reprobation in time, which is
but the execution of that decree which was determined before all time, and
about which immanent act of God, and not these transient, is our present
debate. And so I leave both these objections as yet unresolved by you, and
standing in as full force, for any thing that you have thereunto answered, as
when they were first endited by the Holy Ghost, penned by his holy Apostle
Paul. Give in an answer to it in the heavens if you can, for you are never able
to do it here upon earth.

And so I proceed to the sixth and last Absurdity, which is this.

[ Absurd. 6. Hereby we confine Gods infinite sovereignty over the creatures,
to that narrow scantling of our subordinate power, as though he might not do
with his own what he list, without our control, and not make a vessel either
to honor, or dishonor, unless he were accountable to us for a reason of his
so doing.

Answ. We confine not Gods infinite sovereignty over his creatures, to any
subordinate power in man whatsoever; neither does any principle that we hold,
tend to the limiting the holy One of Israel in the least, in the disposing his
creatures, any otherwise then it seems good in his good will and pleasure to
do, as has been by me already made to appear.

For as I have already granted, so I say yet again, that God might have left
his creature, man, in that lost condition that his own sin had brought him
into, and needed not to have been countable to any for a reason of his so
doing: But it was merely the good will and pleasure of our God to be moved
only from that fountain of love that was, and yet is in himself, to give forth
his Son Christ to dye for all, and taste death for every man; and that all
whatsoever was in man, or acted by man, did not merit the least drop of the
blood of Christ, but by the grace of God it came freely, and he might have
withheld that great mercy from his creature, and needed not in the least have
been countable to any for a reason of his so doing; but through that good
pleasure of God, the Lord Jesus is that lamb of God that was in the purpose and
decree of God, Rev. 13.8. slain from the foundation of the world: which purpose
and decree of God was put into execution in the fullness of time for our
everlasting good; and notwithstanding, we could not in the least have looked
for these things from God as a debt, yet it has been the pleasure of God by
grace, to send his Son into the world, and to make known the mystery of his
will in these things, and freely to give us an account, or show unto us a
reason of his so doing; which will appear plainly in the resolving those
following questions by the express words of the holy Spirit in Scripture,
without either inference or comment.

Quest. 1. Wherefore did God give his only begotten Son, or send his Son into
the world?

Answ. That whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life, Ioh. 3.16. and that the world through him might be saved, ver. 17.

Quest. 2. Wherefore did Jesus Christ come a light into the world?

Answ. That all men through him might believe, Ioh. 1.7. and that whosoever
believes in him should not abide in darkness, Ioh. 12.46.

Quest. 3. Wherefore was Jesus Christ delivered to death?

Answ. For our offenses.

Quest. 4. Wherefore was he raised again?

Answ. For our Justification.

These, and many more of this nature that might be mentioned, are laid down in
Scripture as grounds and reasons, whereby it has been the pleasure of God to
be accountable unto us wherefore he has done these great things for us, not in
order to the limitation of himself to any subordinate power in us, but in order
to the accomplishment of his own will and pleasure for our good.

And so in like manner Gods disposing of his creature, in making vessels of
honor, or dishonor, is not in respect of any confinement of his sovereignty
over his creatures to any subordinate power in us, but the confinement of
himself therein, is to his purpose, decree, and promise, which must stand and
cannot be disannulled; So that the question now is not, What God might have
done with his creature being once at liberty; but that which we are to take
notice of, is, How he has disposed, or does dispose thereof, as having freely,
and voluntarily bound and engaged himself thereunto by purpose, decree, and
promise, Isa. 14.27. for the Lord of hosts has purposed, and who shall
disannul it? his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back? So that
what God, for ought that we know, might have done with his creature, being once
at liberty, cannot now by him be done, he having bound himself as aforesaid.

Take but this one instance for the further illustration of this to be a truth:
God might, if it had been his pleasure to have kept himself at liberty, for
ought that we know, have destroyed the world with the waters of a flood, since
the flood that was in the days of Noah; but since it has been the pleasure of
God freely to enter into a Covenant with all flesh, Genesis 9.9, 10, 11. yea with
every living creature, and to make a promise that all flesh should be cut off
no more by the waters of a flood, neither should there any more be a flood to
destroy the earth, therefore now he cannot destroy the earth so any more,
because he changes not, neither can lie.]



I would rather have one solid convincing Argument, then a whole volume of such
nonsense and impertinencies as you have surfeited me withal.

And therefore in answer to what you would say, I deal thus plainly, that I do
resolve not to pursue you in this your rambling discourse; you have served us
here with a dish of cockcrowne pottage, whereupon if I should insist to frame
an answer, it would but wast my most precious time and nauseate the Reader; for
from this to the end of your Pamphlet, there is nothing of new, but a
recapitulation, and vain repetition of what has been spoken to, over and over
again, and fully answered; Only one thing about the liberty of the will, which
when I meet it in its due place, I shall then encounter it. In the mean time,
for what is comprehended in this Section, If I should yield you all, I should
receive no loss by it, not your cause any advantage, and therefore I shall
dismiss it with the appendant question; and answers, without further trouble to
my self or the Reader.

Only let me tell you, that so far as I perceive by your discourse, you have
not dived into the bottom of the absurdity contracted to your self by your
Position, which does assert, that the rejection of that means of salvation,
viz. the free tenders of Christ in the Gospel, and continuing in sin and
unbelief, are the causes of reprobation, as conceiving it inconsistent with the
justice, mercy, and wisdom of God to reprobate without these causes; whereas
our constant affirmation is, that the sole good will and pleasure of God is the
alone and single cause of non election or negative reprobation from eternity,
God having that absolute power over his creature, as that it rests solely in
his will, not to elect him, but to suffer him to sin, and so to run himself
into eternal perdition; and that therefore those who are contrary minded, that
do imagine that this absolute non election cannot well consist with the divine
attributes, as his justice, mercy, wisdom, etc. as you do in your strange
acclamation, p. 16. Then you do confine the infinite sovereignty of God that he
has over his creature, as though he might not do with his own what he list
without our control; but (as I have showed) he may either annihilate, or cast
into hell whom he pleases, as Lord Paramount. But to this you have spoken
nothing at all, as to this reprobation; all that you have said is to a Gospel
declaratory way, that no man gainsayes neither is it the subject of this our
present discourse. But you further write;

[And so it comes to pass, that those two different events which do or shall
befall the sons of men, which is salvation to all that sort or kind of people
that do embrace the means and believe in Jesus Christ; and reprobation, and
everlasting destruction to the other sort or kind of people that do continue in
sin and unbelief, rejecting the means of salvation; and these two different
events come to pass according to that purpose and decree of God which was from
before the foundation of the world: but the decree of God, which was before
time does not necessitate thse different actings of men that came forth in
their generations in time, which is the penitency, faithfulness and obedience
of those that thereby come to be under the decree of election to everlasting
life; nor the impenitency, unbelief, and disobedience of those that for that
cause fall under the decree of reprobation to everlasting destruction; no more
then the law and decree that was made by the Governors of this Nation, many
ages and generations past, concerning the protection of honest men, and the
punishment of them that do evil. But as the decree that was made as aforesaid
many ages and generations past, since it was made, is yet a tendency and
conducement, if it be considered of, to lead all men to live honestly: So the
decree of God that was before time, and published or made known to the sons of
men in time, is so far from the necessitating men to do wickedly, viz. to
continue in sin and unbelief, and the rejecting of the means of salvation, that
it is of such tendency and conducement, upon the right consideration thereof,
in respect of the great benefit on the one hand, to be the portion of penitent
and obedient persons, believing in Jesus Christ; and the great woe and misery
on the other hand, that does and will befall all those that continue in sin and
unbelief, and reject the means of salvation; that it does, I say, being
considered of, as aforesaid, tend strongly to the persuading of all ungodly
persons speedily to break of their sins by righteousness, and their iniquities
by cleaving unto Jesus Christ, in believing and walking in that truth, and
undoubtedly they shall be saved.]

that he that believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be
damned, and this is according to decree, but this is not all that is decreed,
for some particulars he has elected, others he has not elected, but
reprobated; those whom he has elected, he has likewise decreed to give them
faith, and therefore it is called the faith of Gods elect, Tit. 1.1. The rest
he has decreed not to give them, he has denied them that grace, he did not
bear so much of love unto them, as to those he did elect.

It is likewise true what you say that the decrees of God do not necessitate
the different actings of men, if you mean such a necessity, as of compulsion,
or coaction; but if we have a respect unto a necessity either of infallibility,
or immutability, and so, Quicquid fit necessario fit; in respect of these, all
things that are, are necessarily so as they are, for Gods foresight cannot be
deceived, and his decrees cannot be changed. But of this sufficiently has been
spoken before, page 95. and 96.

To what you say, that the published decrees of God are of such a tendency and
conducement to the persuading of men to forsake their sins and believe in Jesus
Christ, I deny not, but that those decrees which are so published in the
Scriptures, may be of the like import, as some other portions of Scripture are,
viz. of tendency to persuade men to forsake their sins, and believe in Jesus
Christ; But I must tell you, that they are only morally and instrumentally so,
and not physically; they work only on the outward man, they cannot change the
heart, that is Gods chamber of presence, Prove. 21.1
there is his throne alone, it is he alone that changes that, and turns it as
the rivers of water.

Phil. 1.29 2 Timothy 3.25. Ezekiel. 11.19. Romans 8.15 2 Co. 5.14. Joh. 1.12. Cant. 8.6
Were those decrees published unto men every hour, yet they can never work
faith, until that God shall give them to believe and repent, and take away
their stony hearts, and give them hearts of flesh.

Somewhat they may do, by setting forth the danger and horror of a reprobate
estate, and so to bring a man under the Spirit of bondage to fear; but surely
it is the alone love of Jesus Christ that has a constraining power to put a
man into a capacity of the spirit of Adoption, for love is strong as death.

And then I pray tell me what will all your publications, tendences and
conducements avail, where God has decreed to deny effectual grace, and faith
to believe what is so published? But there is enough of this, we shall have
more to say to what follows, which is this.

[And as God has thus bound himself, by his purpose, decree, and promise, to
the doing of the things aforesaid, that so they must come to pass in their
season, and it being also his pleasure to let the sons of men enjoy a
sufficiency of means while the day of grace lasts, to be used by them in
order to their everlasting good, so he gives them liberty in the right use
thereof, in that day of grace to choose or refuse: and it cannot be otherwise,
for a choice must needs be at liberty, and if there were not a liberty given of
God in these things, then those expressions in Scripture were in vain, as in
Deuteronomy. 30.19. I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I
have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing, therefore choose life.

Object. But to this it will be objected, that that which they might choose or
refuse was the temporal or earthly Canaan.

Answ. That there was such a thing intended in it, I deny not but that was not
all; for in those typical things that did belong to them as they were the
Children of Abraham according to the flesh, there was held forth that which did
lead them up to faith in Christ, in order to their being children of Abraham
also by faith, that so they might be heirs also of the heavenly inheritance;
and this the words immediately going before do prove, being compared with what
Paul had said Romans 10. For as it is said, Deuteronomy. 30. verse. 14. the word is nigh
thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart that thou may do it, the very same
word is said by Paul, Romans 10. verse. 8. to be the word of faith which they
preached: and we find the like of Moses, Heb. 11.24, 25. He refused to be
called the son of Phraohs daughter, Choosing rather to suffer affliction with
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season: also Luke
10.42. Mary has chosen that good part.]

viz. all men of all sorts, that they all enjoy a sufficiency of means in order
to their everlasting good, then I utterly deny it, and I have formerly proved
it contrary, that whereas he showed his word unto Jacob, his statutes and
judgments unto Israel, yet he had not dealt so with other nations; Psalm.
145.19. Matthew. 13.11. Acts 16.
for unto some it was given to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but
to others it was not given; the Spirit would not suffer the Apostle to preach
the Gospel to the Bithynians: and certainly you will never prove any such
sufficiency of Grace tendered to every person all the world over, unless you do
suborn those silent Orators, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, to plead your cause by a
discovery of what feats they have done, and how many they have converted
amongst the Indians, Americans, Antipodes, and other unknown places of the
world by their dumb preaching of the everlasting Gospel, in order to the
everlasting good of these forlorn creatures.

The next point I shall take notice of in this Section is the liberty of the
will, concerning which you spoke before but somewhat lispingly like an
Ephraimite, Judge. 12.6.
but now like a flesht Gileadite, you speak with a full mouth, and in plain
English, that it is in a man's liberty to choose or refuse things to their
everlasting good. And this indeed is that unknown Goddess to whom you sacrifice
all the strength of your other Positions, for if this liberty of will should
miscarry, all the superstructure of your other Positions must needs disshevell
and moulder to powder: I have not much to say unto it, because you have said so
little, that choice must needs be at liberty.

And though I need not hunt after fresh work, yet thus much I shall say, that
there was in Adams will (besides the liberty thereof) an habitual holy
inclination to all that was good, though with a possibility of embracing evil.

But that since the fall (besides some kind of liberty) an habitual vicious
quality in man, making him averse and froward in choosing the good, Job 15.16.
Pro. 2.14.
prone and inclinable to embrace the evil; so that man now does naturally drink
iniquity like water, and make a pastime of doing evil: and therefore as Adams
will was truly good, not only in the actions, but in the inward qualities
thereof: so our will is truly and properly corrupt, not only as to its evil
actions, but also the inward vicious disposition thereof; And until such time
as God is pleased to heal the disease, and replant in our wills their primitive
integrity, they are utterly dead in sin, captives, and bondslaves of
corruption: So that however they have some liberty in natural, civil, or
external spiritual things, yet in regard of true grace and holiness, they have
no liberty at all to choose that, but are wholly enthralled unto sin, according
to that of the Apostle Romans 6.20. When ye were the servants of sin ye were free
from righteousness: and Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity against God, for it
is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.

And therefore the man does in plain terms give the lie to the Spirit of God
speaking in the Scriptures, that dares to affirm that a man in the estate of
unregeneracy (who without doubt is, if any be, a servant of sin, and carnally
minded) is notwithstanding free unto righteousness, and may be even of his own
natural power subject to the law of God, commanding him faith, and obedience,
and that he has a liberty and power to choose grace when it is offered: strong
arguments might be brought to overturn this power upside down, but I am weary
of what is already upon my hands. For the objection that you offer, let those
vindicate it whosoever made it; for my part I do not insist upon it, but shall
answer to that place by you quoted, Deuteronomy. 39.19. after another manner.

And I do indeed conceive that this allegation is not any thing ad rem, not at
all to the business in hand. For first, Moses here speaks unto the Israelites
not as then in a state of sinful unregeneracy, but rather as in a state of
grace, for they were then the Church and people of God, and he speaks unto
them, as they were a Church, wherein, because of their holy calling, by the law
of charity he accounts of them all as in a state of grace; but if any were in a
state of unregeneracy (as doubtless there were) he counsels them to choose
life, yet he does not say, that they might have it out of their own strength
without special grace, but this exhortation implicitly teaches

First, what duty is incumbent on us, for our part to perform, and yet it does
not acknowledge strength enough in us to perform the duty.

Secondly, it shows us what is best for us, viz. to choose life rather then
death.

Thirdly, such places are as tutors to us, to inform us of our natural
infirmity, when therein we find that we are no ways able to do as we are
commanded, Luke 17.10.
but that when we have done our best we are unprofitable servants.

Fourthly, this will be as a spur to put us on to prayer, to seek that at Gods
hands which we cannot compass by our own strength; Da Domine quod jubes, et
jube quod vis. Give us, Lord, power to do what thou command, and then
command what thou will.

Fifthly, such exhortations the Spirit of God ordinarily makes use of in
converting of sinners, there accompanying the inward energetical working and
power of the Spirit of God, with the outward ministry of the word; it was the
power of Christ, Joh. 11.43. To. 1.20.
and not the bare words of, Lazarus come forth, that raised him.

Sixthly, yea such exhortations are useful to make the wicked inexcusable.

Seventhly, it is to this end, that when the wicked are punished, the justice of
God might be vindicated. Isa. 5.4.
What could have been done more?

Those two other places, Heb. 11.24.25. and Luke 10.42. where you set out the
word choosing in capital letters, as though they would have beheaded all the
arguments brought against your freewil, yet speak little to the purpose, as to
a liberty of choosing that which is good, in a person unregenerate; for that
they must speak, or else it were as good that they held their peace, as to your
cause now in hand. For as for that of Moses;

First, I look upon him, not as then an unregenerate person, but as one of the
people and household of God.

Secondly, neither are you ever able to prove that this was his first choice as
to the ways of God, but that he was better principled before this.

Thirdly, the choice which he is here said to make was but a mere civil choice,
viz when Pharaohs daughter had adopted him for her child, when he came to
years, and well understood his pedigree whence his descent was, he then
disclaimed this adoptive honor, and was not further willing to dissemble his
nation, and to act for the Egyptians against his own brethren according to the
flesh, but chose rather to profess himself an Hebrew of the Hebrews, Heb. 11.
though he suffered affliction with them: It Is true, its said he had an eye to
the recompense of the reward, but then surely that must be in his heart before
ever he could make any such choice; and then what will this place be to the
purpose as to persons unregenerate?

And for that choice of Mary's likewise, the most you can make of it, is but an
external spiritual good, to choose rather to hear a sermon, than to provide a
dinner, to prefer to hear Christ preaching, than how she might give him curious
entertainment; and this its possible for one to do and yet to go to hell after
the sermon is ended.

Mar. 6.20. Act. 12.21
Herod made choice to hear John Baptist, and the text says that he heard him
gladly; and yet what became of Herod it is an easy matter to judge without any
breach of charity.

And thus you shake hands at parting with freewill, and return to your in and
out discourse after this manner.

[And thus, when men and women come to repent, and be changed from dead works,
and embrace the means of salvation, and believe in Jesus Christ, they then come
to be such a sort or kind of people, that it was in the purpose and decree of
God which was from before the foundation of the world, to elect, justify and
in the end eternally to save; and the decree of God which was from before time,
comes to be actually put in execution upon them, in order to their being made
vessels of honor, when they come to embrace the means as aforesaid, and will
be fully accomplished when it shall be said unto them, Mat. 25.34. Come ye
blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom which was prepared for you from the
foundation of the world.]

Rev. 21.27. and 13.8. and 20.15.
whose names were found written in the Lambs book of life, and that whosoever
were not found written in that book, that they should have their portion in the
lake, which is the second death.

God did not decree to elect and justify and save individuum vagums or
qualifications, to be found no man knows where, nor when, for so it might be
that for all that election by you imagined, yet no man might be saved, if no
man would believe or repent; and indeed no man could, if God did not give them
to believe, and give them repentance to salvation. And having done with this
extravagancy, you have one fling more at the business you should look at, and
this it is.

[And this is that which God has done, not in order to any confinement of
himself to any subordinate power in us, but in order to the doing of that which
he purposed in Christ Jesus before the world began, for our good: and it has
been the good will and pleasure of God to be so far accountable unto us of
these things, for our comfort and consolation in Jesus Christ, that if any
shall say unto us, who be the vessels of mercy which God has before prepared
unto glory? that we can say, Romans 9.24. even us whom he has called, not of the
Jews only, but also of the Gentiles. Yea it has been the good will and
pleasure of our God, so to make known the mystery of his will unto us in the
Scripture, that he or they, whosoever they be, that do with delight embrace the
mean; of salvation, and retain the words of Christ, Heb. 2.1. (See the margin)
and not let them slip, or run out as leaking vessels; and 2 Timothy 2.21. purge
themselves from error, sin, and uncleanness, shall be vessels unto honor,
sanctified, and meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto every good work.
And we do find in the Scripture, that all those actings of God in a way of
mercy, in order to the everlasting good of his creature, come from him with
abundance of willingness, freeness, and delight; for he is a God that
delights in mercy, Mich. 7.18.



We with the Sctiptures do affirm, Gods absolute purpose, or the good pleasure
of his most holy will is the alone cause of non-election or Reprobation, and
not the rejecting of the means, to wit, the free tenders of Christ in the
Gospel; and the continuing in sin and unbelief are not the causes as you
assert, pretending, that if these be not assigned causes, then God would be
unjust or unmerciful to the creature; hereupon we say, that if God may not do
with his creature what seems best to him in his own eyes, without rendering a
reason of his actings, but that his attributes must be called into question,
this is to limit and confine the infinite sovereignty that God has over all
the creation, and to suffer worms and dust to control majesty.

But to this, Sir, hitherto you have said nothing.

To what you say of that place, 2 Timothy 2.21. that it is the good will and
pleasure of our God, whosoever they be that delight to embrace the means of
salvation, and purge themselves from error, sin and uncleaneness shall be
vessels unto honor, is very true, and good in that sense it was intended by
the Spirit of God, but neither true nor good in that sense it is by you applied
and made use of.

For first of all, you suppose that it is in their own power to purge
themselves from error, sin, and uncleanness, whereas this is Gods peculiar
work, to purge us from our sins, and purely to purge away our dross and to wash
us with clean water, and to turn us to himself, and then we shall be sure to be
turned; all our strength to perform such a task is else altogether
insufficient.

Your second couchant error here is, that you conceive this purging of
themselves will hereby make them vessels of honor; but I say, this their
purging was no cause at all of their being vessels of honor, but it was only
a means of the discovery of it, wherein they might have comfort and consolation.

Before, even from all eternity, by that decree of election, they were out of
that lump of perdition made vessels unto honor, or vessels of mercy which God
had before prepared unto glory; but when the times of refreshing come, Romans
9.21.23. Gal. 1.16. Heb. 9.14.
and that the Lord is pleased to reveal his son in them, and that such his
secret decree comes to be put in execution in time, by God his giving of faith
and repentance, and purging their consciences from dead dead works to serve the
living God, then they shall be vessels unto honor, unto their own comfort and
to the good example of others. Such a manner of speech there is, Ioh. 5.8.
Herein is my father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, so shall ye be my
Disciples. Now they were his Disciples before, but the meaning is, that by
bearing of fruit they should approve themselves, both to their own consciences,
and to the world besides, that they were the Disciples of Christ.

Neither is that which follows altogether so sound, where you write.

[But on the other hand, in respect of what he does in the making forth of his
justice in the punishment of his creature for sin and impenitency, he does it
not until he is provoked thereunto, even 2 Chronicles. 36.16. until there is no
remedy; for the Lord is, Psalm 19.1. and 145.8. slow to anger, and of great
mercy; and has, Ezekiel. 33.11. no pleasure in the death of the wicked. And
therefore although that the embracing of the means, repenting, and believing in
Jesus Christ, be no procuring ground or cause of any the least mercies we do
enjoy; yet the continuing in sin, and unbelief, and the rejecting of the means
of salvation, is a procuring of punishment: see Ier. 2.17. Have thou not
procured this unto thy self, in that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, when
he led thee by the way? also chapter 4.18. thy way and thy doings has procured
these things unto thee; this is thy wickedness, because it reaches unto thine
heart.]



Yet where you say, that God does not make forth his justice in punishing until
he be provoked; Sir, I cannot allow you so much, to take this universally. For,
tell me if you can, how those infants had provoked God in the general deluge,
Genesis 7.
when they were swept away with the rest of the wicked world: or those infants,
in the combustion of Sodom, Genesis 19.
how had they communicated in pride, fullness of bread, and idleness, with the
rest of the citizens: or what confederacy was there in those infants in the
rebellion of Corah, Numb. 16.
that they descended likewise with their fathers into the pit: or how had those
women been a provocation whose wombes were shut in the case of Abimelech: Genesis
20. 2 Samuel 24.17.
or those sheep, the people of Israel, what had they done when they suffered
that havoc by the pestilence, when seventy thousand men were destroyed?

No Sir, in many cases there is no visible provocation, besides the original
depravation of corrupt nature, which through the want of original righteousness
does justly deserve wrath and punishment. In some it is not for any sin either
in them or their Parents, but that the works of God should be made manifest in
them.

Joh. 9.3.
But for other cases, take the rest, and make the most of them.

And now to fill up your pamphlet, and for want of better stuff, you obtrude
upon us a leathern tale of your own observation, and this it is.

[And I can yet remember when I have been a hearer of these men which have
taken unto themselves the title of Clergy, as if they only were the heritage
of the Lord and none besides them, speak much to this purpose, that God was
abundantly more prone to show mercy than to execute wrath, and have earnestly
pressed their hearers to the use of means, calling upon them to be careful to
come to Church, as they call it, and to hear sermons, saying, thou do not
know when Gods time is, therefore give attendance to the means; If thou art
careless in coming, and wilt come but now and then, thou may be absent when
Gods time was to call thee, and then thou art undone, thou must never look for
the like time again; and such like doctrine as this, which sounds like the
truth, but contrary to their own principles, and disputed against by this man
in his arguments.]

understand little what you say, nor whereof you affirm, Psalm. 119 99. 1 Timothy
1.7. Heb. 5.12.
but had need that one teach you again which be the first principles of the
oracles of God.

And for that musty tale of yours, in answer to it I say, that I have not been
a hearer of all men, neither can justify all those whom I have heard in all
things that they have delivered, but leave them to rest upon their own bottoms,
Romans 14.4
and to stand or fall to their own masters, and so to answer for their own
errors.

But by way of retaliation say, that for those of your party, I have been often a
hearer of them, partly I confess out of curiosity and out of an itching ear,
partly to be satisfied as to their abilities, whereof I had heard great cracks,
but never came off from any of them, with any satisfaction as to what the
report was given, but I was always cheated and gulled with abundance of froth,
crude and unconcocted stuff, indeed most suitable to such apron-men as they
were from whom it came, for, similes habent labra lactucas, like lips like
lettices; do men gather grapes of thorns, Matthew. 7.16.
or figs of thistles?

But you run along in your shooting at rovers thus.

[But whatsoever they say or hold, the Scripture will sufficiently prove, Hos.
13.9. 2 Pet. 2.1. man's destruction to be of himself, and that Gods act of
reprobating of persons, blinding of their eyes, hardening of their hearts, and
breaking them off from the olive tree, Christ Jesus, is for refusing to hearken
to his counsel in time, while the day of grace lasts; for although he through
grace and mercy does give men liberty to choose life, yet it must not be in
their time, nor in their own way, but in Gods time, and in Gods way; and
therefore it is that peoples not embracing the free tenders of Christ in their
day of grace come to be under the decree of reprobation, and the execution
thereof falls upon them, for they are vessels of wrath that God Romans 9.20.
endures with much long-suffering; and they Romans 2.4, 5. despising the riches
of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, which led them to
repentance, and to treasure up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath,
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God.

And thus in abusing this much long-suffering of God, and rejecting the means
of salvation, continuing in sin and unbelief until their day of grace is at an
end, they come to be fitted for destruction, even fit objects for his wrath to
work upon, as the earth which drinks in the rain which comes often upon it,
and yet bears thorns and briars, is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing,
whose end is to be burned.]

malum culpae into malum poenae, Romans 1.23; 24.
he may punish spiritual fornication with corporal adultery.

Yea God has such an Autocratorical majesty and sovereignty over his
creatures, that he may punish without any eminent actual foregoing sin; as in
the man that was borne blind, neither has this man sinned nor his Parents;
etc. Ioh. 9.3.

But where you say, that God gives men liberty to choose life, but not in their
own time, but in Gods time; I pray Sir, make me acquainted with that mystery
(according as it is held by you) how comes it to pass, that the will of man is
at liberty to choose, at some times and not at others, and what then becomes of
that liberty of choice, when (as you say is man's time) that he cannot choose?
Is that liberty then lost? or does God over-powerfully restrain it? or is the
nature of it destroyed? surely, whatsoever you should hold forth in this, it
must needs prove destructive to your other principles.

Next, your phrase and manner of speech is altogether unsuitable to a
Scripture Phrase, when you say, that people, not embracing the free tenders of
Christ in the Gospel in their day of grace, come to be under the decree of
reprobation, and the execution thereof falls upon them, etc. Sir, herein I
would know from you, first what difference or distinction you make between the
decree it self, and the execution of the decree, or whether you do not confound
them one with another. Secondly, whether the free tenders of Christ in the
Gospel may not be made to a person this day, and then rejected, and so, (as you
say) thereby reprobated; and yet withal, that upon the like free tenders made
to morrow, viz. Christ and his excellencies published to such, may they not
then be accepted, and thereby again elected; and whether this ebbing and
flowing, this chopping and changing of decrees do not interfere with your fifth
position?

That which follows of yours is this.

[And this is according to the account that God has given us in Scripture of
the things, as will appear by resolving of these following questions, with the
express words of the same.

Quest. 1. Why were the things of the peoples peace hid from their eyes?

Answ. Because they knew not the time of their visitation, Luke 19.44.

Quest. 2. Why did God break them off from their own olive tree?

Answ. Because of unbelief. Romans 11.20.

Quest. 3. Why did they not attain to the law of righteousness?

Answ. Because they sought it not by faith, Romans 9.32.

Quest. 4. Wherefore did God give up the Gentiles to uncleanness and to vile
affections?

Answ. Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither
were thankful.

Quest. 5. Wherefore did God give them over to a reprobate mind? Romans 1.28.


Answ. Even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge.

This is that which God has been pleased to make us acquainted with, as a true
account of his dealing with, or disposing of his creature, not in order to any
limitation or confinement of his sovereignty over his creatures to any
subordinate power in us, but according to what he has been pleased to confine
himself unto by his purpose and decree; and that which he has done, and does
do in these things is in order to the execution and accomplishment of the same
purpose and decree, that so His Romans 1.17, 18. righteousness might be revealed
in the Gospel to his faithful people, to their great joy and comfort in
believing, and the revelation of the righteous judgment of God from heaven
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in
unrighteousness.]



And now you are drawing to an end you say.

[And therefore, that which we hold does not in the least confine Gods infinite
sovereignty over his creatures to any subordinate power in us, nor to the doing
of any thing in the least, more than what it has been his pleasure to confine
himself to the doing of by purpose, decree, and declaration of the same in the
Scriptures of truth, which cannot be disannulled; and therefore this man may
father this absurdity, together with the rest of them that he has endeavored
to cast upon us and the truth that we profess, upon those to whom they do
belong.]

Sir, it is too too manifest, that notwithstanding what you have here written
to guard the authority and credit of your positions, yet that this absurdity
with all the rest of its fellows, are the accursed brood of what you here in
your positions affirmed, and that they will still lie crying at your doors,
because you have exposed them to view, and own them as your own brats, and
therefore till you can better acquit your self of them then hitherto you have
done (which will never be) you must be enforced to father them whether you will
or no.

Your close of all follows thus.

[Some other positions there were written, and some of them he says may pass
with a grain of salt, and some which he does not well understand the meaning
of, wanting, as he says, an Oedipus to unriddle the meaning of using scorneful
and deriding expressions, saying, the novice leads him in a mist, and the
like: and yet he frames some arguments against them, shooting as he says, at
adventure, and yet they fall from him as if they were shot against the truth:
but at present not being very well at leisure, and also under the envious
dealing of Satan, I shall let them rest, and commend what I have here done to
consideration, if he have but the patience to read it with an impartial eye,
and with a single and upright mind, without a spirit of prejudice against it,
in respect of the homeliness of the expressions, because they are not full of,
1 Cor. 2.1, 2, 3. Excellency of speech, and the enticing words of man's wisdom,
and Theological expressions. I shall conclude all at present with these ensuing
Queries, which wait for an answer, etc.]

mine own received sense, (and I believe it was yours) I am confident you will
be never able to frame a better answer than you have already against what here
you have undertaken, which is as much as if you had said nothing. What the
obstructions were that did impede your further prosecution, I list not to
enquire into, and you have done me a courtesy to spare me further trouble: and
surely none but your very good friend would have traced you up and down so far
as I have done; and howsoever you may truly think you have exercised my
patience to read, and weigh, and answer your pamphlet, yet I will deal so
ingenuously with you, as to make this protestation, that what I have done in
answer to yours was with an impartial eye, and with a single and upright heart,
if I know mine own heart; Isa. 8.20. 1 John 4.1 1 Cor. 3.12, etc.
neither will I suffer any prejudicate opinion to lodge in me, till such time
as I have brought it to the law and to the testimony, and thereby tried the
spirits, and what I find of gold, silver, precious stones, to receive it
gladly, and to glorify God for it, and to rejoice in it; but what I find of
wood, hay, stubble, to commit it to the fire that it may be burned.

And though I am an admirer and honourer of eloquence as the workmanship of
Jehovah, who creates the fruit of the lips, Isa. 57.19 Prove. 22.11.
and for the grace whereof the King will be a man's friend, yet I dote not so
much on the thin, though fair skin and shell of learning (as Rhetorique is) but
that I would choose to give entertainment to truth and grace, though in a
course and homely dress, rather than to error and vanity, howsoever candied
over and sugared with never to many gaudy and enticing words of man's wisdom.

For your defect of Theological expressions, I cannot wonder at it, for it has
not been your trade (as you call it) you have not been conversant among
Divines, neither heard many of their words, nor seen much of their writings,
Deuteronomy. 32.2.
whose doctrine drops as the rain, their speech distills as the dew, as the
small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass; and if you
then be a stranger to their Idiome, and can make no use of their style in your
deliveries, who can be amazed at it?

And howsoever I might say as well as you, that I have been under the envious
dealings of Satan, which might have put some remora to my proceedings in this
answer, yet I list not so to Apologize, 2 Cor. 12.9.
but shall commend what I have here done to the grace of God which is
sufficient for me. And the consideration hereof to those that are judicious, to
whom God has given aptness and abilities to discern between truth and error,
light and darkness, good and evil. And the success of all, unto the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, Tit. 1.2. 2 Timothy 2.13. Rev. 3.14. Isa. 55.10.11.
who has engaged himself by his promise, wherein he cannot lie, nor deny
himself, because he is that faithful and true witness. That as the rain comes
down, and the snow from heaven, and returns not thither, but waters the
earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower,
and bread to the eater, so shall the word be that goes forth out of his mouth,
it shall not return unto him void, but it shall accomplish that which he
pleases, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto it is sent. Amen, so be it.

Thomas Tazwels QUERIES Counter-questioned.
SIR, when at first I surveyed over your bundle of Queries, I was divided in my
thoughts, whether it was fittest for me to undertake an answer to them yea or
no; It Is true, I did not conceive that they were proposed by such a one that
breathed after satisfaction, for then I had been bound in conscience (because
directed to me) to have given a direct account for the resolution of a troubled
spirit; but I was better acquainted with the temper of such Scepticks, Seekers,
Queristers, the top of whose Religion consists most what in abstruse Questions:
But that which caused this distraction in me, was, the calling to mind Solomon's
advice, Prove. 26.4, 5. Answer not a fool, according to his folly, lest thou
also be like unto him. And Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be
wise in his own conceit; So that which way soever I did address my self, I was
sure to be gored by one of the horns of that Dilemma.

Therefore I did the rather make choice of a middle way, neither directly to
answer to any of your queries, nor yet to leave any of them unresolved, but
when I apprehended them as captious Questions, more to try abilities, then to
expect satisfaction, I thought it best to follow our Saviors example, Mark
12.13. Who when the primates of the Pharisees had sent unto him certain of that
sect, with the Herodians, to catch him, and entangle him in his words, they
began first by insinuation, Master, we know that thou art true, and carest for
no man, for thou regardest not the persons of men, but teach the way of God
in truth.

Secondly, by question, Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar or not? shall we
give, or shall we not give?

But Christ, who was privy to the secret guil of their hearts, desiring a penny
to be brought him, asks them this question, Whose is this Image and
superscription? they say Caesar's; then says he, give unto Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods; so that he makes no
direct answer, but by a Question.

The like may you see Mark 11.28, 29. when the chief Priests and Scribes asked
of Christ, by what authority do thou these things? Jesus answered, I will
also ask you one question, and answer me, and I will tell you by what authority
I do these things, etc.

The like course I shall take with you; I have not positively delivered my
judgment to any of your queries, but for the resolution of them have set down
antiquestions, to which if you give a direct answer according to the Scripture,
you must then needs answer your self to all those of your own queries. So that
making Christ his practice a president to my self, I shall both follow his
example, and withal observe the wise man's direction, both to answer a fool in
his folly, and yet not to answer a fool in his folly, viz. implicitly and
consequentially to answer by a question, but positively and directly not to
answer to the words.

1. Whether it can be proved from the word of God, that the fall which we had
in the first Adam, were any further than to the dust from whence we were taken?

2. Whether it be not improper to say, that we died in the first Adam a
spiritual death, when the Scripture does say, that that was not first which was
spiritual, but that which was natural, and afterward that which is spiritual?
1 Cor. 15.

3. Whether there need to be any talk at all of any wisdom, power, or strength
of our own, when it is by all granted that we have our life and being in Jesus
Christ, and have nothing that we have not received?

4. Whether God the Father have any other end or design in giving of, or
sending his Son into the world, but only that the world through him might be
saved?

5. Whether the elect are at all in the Scripture demonstrated under any such
term as that word world?

6. Whether the Lord Jesus Christ does use or exercise any other power in
bringing of men and women to believe to the saving of their souls, but that
which may be resisted, or rejected?

7. Whether Gods decree before the foundation of the world be any other thing,
but that believers should be saved, and unbelievers should be damned?

8. Whether God can be said to judge the world in Righteousness, and yet
condemn those for unbelief which never had power to believe?

9. How can the Saints be said to judge the world righteously, if they are
carried on to believe by a power that they cannot resist; and those that are to
be judged by them cannot believe for want of the same power?

10. Whether if the salvation of some, and the condemnation of others be
necessitated by the decree of God without any respect at all to obedience or
disobedience, then to what end is it said in the Scripture of truth, that men
did, or might choose, or refuse?

11. Whether is unbelief the cause of Reprobation, or Reprobation the cause of
unbelief?

12. Whether it be not sin to say that the secret will of God is not according
to his revealed will?

13. Whether that opinion which some men hold concerning God be not damnable,
namely, to say that God declares in his word, that he would have all men to be
saved by his Son, and yet never intends that they should be saved?

14. Whether there be any Gospel to be preached to that man or woman for whom
God never intended salvation in the death of his Son; and if there be any, then
I would know what Gospel it is, and who they are that should preach it?

15. Whether condemnation to the second death or lake of fire, was ever
threatened but for personal rejection of the means afforded?

16. Whether those that perish to eternity, might not have been saved, had they
in their day improved the means afforded?

17. Whether any can believe that Christ dyed for him upon a Scripture-account,
except he believe that Christ dyed for all?

18. Whether Gods opening a door of salvation to all the Sons of men, will not
make his righteousness appear glorious in judgment?

19. Can man be said to refuse that which he never was in a possibility to
receive?

20. Does Christ's bemoaning persons in the state of unbelief plainly argue they
might believe?

Adam, as Romans 5.18, 19.

Romans 6.23. where eternal death from Adam is placed in opposition to eternal
life by Jesus Christ.

Adam immediately upon the eating of the forbidden fruit, inward terrors, and
feelings of Gods wrath, and thoughts that he was cast off and forsaken of God,
as Genesis 3.10. wherein the truth of that threatening was really accomplished,
Genesis 2.17. these being kinds of spiritual death, and a degree of eternal death;
and so Adam was spiritually dead whiles he lived, as the damned are said to
live in death.

Cor. 15. from. v. 35. to ver. 51. be not only to show, with what manner of
bodies we shall arise, viz. incorruptible, glorious, powerful, and spiritual,
but no mention at all either of natural or spiritual death.

Antithesis, that as we have our animal or natural life from the first Adam by
a natural generation, so we have our spiritual life from the second Adam, Jesus
Christ, by a spiritual regeneration; but that the order and manner thereof is
this, we have and enjoy first our natural life by propagation, but our
spiritual life afterward by infusion of the spirit.

Ephesians. 1.20. or in the raising of the body of dead Lazarus from the grave.

viz. either to a spiritual life or to a natural life, such who are so raised
are not alike passive in their resurection, contributing nothing of themselves
as to their resurrection.

Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2.13.

Ioh. 17.2. who were not every mothers son in the world, but a peculiar people,
Tit. 2.14. and to those he showed his love, being his own, Ioh. 13.1. and for
those he laid down his life, Ioh. 15.13. and unto those did he manifest his
fathers name, Ioh. 17.6. and for those he prayed, Ioh. 17.9. and for their
sakes was he stricken. Isa. 53.1. and for their sakes did he sanctify himself,
Ioh. 17.19.

world in these places following, viz. Romans 11.12. 2 Cor. 5.19. 1 Ioh. 4.14.
Ioh. 1.29. Ioh. 3.16, 17. Ioh. 4.42. Ioh. 6.33, 51.

viz. Ioh. 14.17, 22. Ioh. 15.18, 19. and 16.20, 23. and 17.9, 14, 25. 1 Cor.
11.32. 2 Pet. 2.2, 5. 1 Ioh. 3.11, 13.

Lazarus in the grave, were able to resist the omnipotent power of God, when
either Christ was quickened by the spirit, 1 Pet. 3.11. or when the word of
command was spoken, Lazarus come forth, Ioh. 11.43.

Romans 9.19. in the converting of a sinner unto God, or giving them to believe,
Phil. 1.29. and the raising of one from a natural death to a natural life. See
Ephesians. 1.19, 20. Romans 6.4, 13. and 8.11. and 11.15. 1. Pet. 1.21.





Peter, Paul, James, John, etc. are absolutely and actually justified and saved
in time, did not God decree absolutely and actually to justify and save them
before all time.

He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned,
was not a secret kept hid from the Angels themselves, (especially for the clear
manifestation of it) until that Christ was manifested in the flesh.

viz. by believing, and that it is no ways mentioned as to be the substance of
the decrees of God, though whatsoever therein comes to pass, was in reality
decreed by God.











He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned,
might it not so come to pass (there intervening no irresistible power of God,
but man left to the supposed liberty of his own will) that either no man might
be saved, or else that no man might be damned.







Adam himself, but likewise in him to all his posterity, had they continued in
obedience to the command of God.

Adam lost not that power both to himself and all his posterity, by eating of
the forbidden fruit, and therefore it is said that in him we have all sinned,
Romans 5.18, 19.

John 6.44. yet such a drawing, as that it is by the cords of a man, with bands
of love, (i. e.) by arguments suitable to our capacity, where the love of Jesus
Christ constrains them, and that of an unwilling they are made a willing
people in the day of his power, Psalm. 110.3.







viz. unto salvation, but through the sanctification of the spirit, and belief
of the truth, 2 These. 2.13.













grace into them, not to give them faith and repentance, when God is the alone
worker of it (as Phil. 1.29. Ephesians. 28. 2 Timothy 2.25.) whether I say can such
believe or repent, Matthew. 13.11. and therefore their Reprobation anteceding
their unbelief.





Abraham of sacrificing his son, Genesis 22.1. and to Pharaoh of letting the
people of Israel go, Exodus 6.7. that the hardness of his heart might be
discovered, and Gods power on him might be shown.

Romans 9.19. Who has resisted his will? and Ier. 5.29. every purpose of the
Lord shall be performed: and Romans 9.11. the purpose of non-election as well as
of election must stand: and Job 9.12. Who can hinder him?

God wills all men to be saved, are not to be interpreted thus, viz. some of
all sorts, and not all of all sorts, viz. some of Kings and those that are in
Authority as well as of any other lower sort of people.





Rev. 22.15. and Rev. 21.8, 27. not written in the lambs book, and such are
those Gentiles, who Ephesians. 2.12. being strangers from the Covenant of promise,
and without a God in the world, they were not in a capacity to reject the means
which they never enjoyed. Ps. 147.20



Ezekiel. 36.27. and taking away the stony heart.











Adam, his sin being ours by Imputation.









A POSTSCRIPT TO Thomas Tazwell.
SIR, I need not tell you what trouble you have put me to, in pursuing you in
all this your rambling discourse and frivolous Queries, for it is very visible;
and yet (against the disswasion of some friends) I have willingly gone through
with it, not so much in any hopes that I had for the recalling of a
back-slider, by a better information of him; for it is too well experienced that
men of your jump, they will sooner precipitate themselves into a hundred new
errors, then to retract one; an easy observation will clear this for a truth.
But indeed the greatest motives I had for the undertaking of this task, were,
First, the glory of the most high God, that his precious truths might not be
perverted by your lies, but that his glory might shine all the world over, as
well in the execution of justice, as manifestation of mercy, and that in both
he might be all in all, and all his works of creation might be subservient to
his good pleasure and most righteous will. The next thing I had in mine eye was
a tender love I bore to a number of poor simple souls, whom you had dipped, and
plunged into your faith, and were almost jurati in verba magistri, receiving
your crude dictates as so many Oracles; and for their sakes did I likewise draw
this burden on myself, that by unkennelling you out of your Fox-holes, I might
uncase you and turn your inside out, and so disfranchise you of all those
strong holds and subterfuges wherein formerly you trusted, 2 Timothy 3.6
and therewith deluded and led captive many silly women laden with sins (for
most of that sex were your over-credulous Auditors) that so they beholding your
nakedness, they might be ashamed for leaning on and trusting to such bruised
reeds as your rotten Positions were. And now I have done, one word of advise I
have to give you, which is this, that neither you nor any of your comrads
should be much sollicitous for any reply unto my writings; for it is already by
me resolved, that whatsoever your further undertakings shall be in this kind,
or howsoever you shall be a provocation to me, yet I will not Serram trahere,
not bandy words any more with you, nor show my self so effeminate as to strive
for the last word, for so there would be no end of making of books; Eccles.
12.12.
and if this that I have written will not do it, I conceive no less then an
Omnipotent hand will ever be able to alter your judgment. Besides, I have
wasted so much precious time on you already, that now I must endeavor to
redeem it, and that so these controversal points being laid aside, I may with
more intention bend my studies, Psalm. 9.10. 2 Timothy 4.6.
not only for the discharge of my particular calling in dispensing of the
Gospel of grace; but also, since I have almost attained the period of man's age,
and therefore (in natural account) the time of my departure being at hand, it
will be of more concernment to me, to spend the remainder of my spare time in
this my short pilgrimage, in acts of practical devotion, and to wave polemical
contests; that so setting before my eyes that great account that must be past
before that great Tribunal, I may consider before hand, how I may do it with
joy and not with grief. Heb. 13.17.


But if you or any else shall object against me that I have been too harsh in
dealing so homely and roundly with you, personating rather a ranting Quaker,
then a sober Divine; all that I have to say for my self is this, and yet I hope
this is satisfactory enough to the wise and judicious, that my plain dealing
proceeded not from any enmity I bear to your person, God he knows it, for I
shall be still ready to do you any office of love, but merely out of an
indignation that I had against your writings, which did so deeply entrench upon
the Majesty of God and his glorious Attributes.

Yet in this life I acknowledge (and therefore I rather pity then malice you)
there is not an equal discovery to all men in a like measure, but to some more,
to some less; the Talents are not distributed by God after a Geometrical
proportion, all are not teachers, there must be some hearers, for the Economy
of the Church of God. But sure my hopes are, that if you belong to God, that in
some of those whereabouts our contest has been, where you have been otherwise
minded then my self, Phil. 3.15.
that God will reveal even those things unto you.

Col. 3.4. 1 Cor. 15.54.
Elias cum venerit, solvet omnia, When Christ who is our life shall appear in
his glory, and that this corruptible has put on incorruption, and this mortal
shall have put on immortality, though now we may be of different judgments,
and jar and wrangle amongst our selves, yet then (if we appertain to Christ)
both you and I shall be made real friends, and mutually agree in the harmonious
consort of that heavenly quire, in singing the songs of the Lamb, saying, Rev.
15.3.
great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy
ways, thou king of Saints. Now unto this King eternal, 1 Timothy 1.17.
immortal, invisible, and truly wise God, be honor and glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

