Dame DOBSON: OR, The Cunning Woman. A COMEDY As it is ACTED at The Duke's
Theater.

By EDWARD RAVENSCROFT, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, Bookseller to His Royal Highness, at the
Black Bull in Cornhil, 1684.

PROLOGUE,
Spoken by Mrs. CURRER.
GAllants, I vow I am quite out of heart,
I Have not one smutty Jest in all my part.
Here Is not one Scene of tickling Rallery;
There we quite lose the Pit and Gallery,
His London Cuckolds did afford you sport.
That pleased the Town, and did divert the Court.
But 'cause some squeamish Females of renown
Made visits with design to cry it down,
He swore in's Rage he would their humors fit,
And write the next without one word of Wit.
No Line in this will tempt your minds to Evil,
It Is true, it is dull, but then it is very civil.
No double sense shall now your thoughts beguile,
Make Lady Blush, nor Ogling Gallant Smile.
But mark the Fate of this mis-judging Fool!
A Bawdy Play was never counted Dull,
Nor modest Comedy e're pleased you much,
It Is relished like good Manners amongst the Dutch.
In you, Chaste Ladies, then we hope to day,
This is the Poets Recantation Play
Come often to it that he at length may see
It Is more than a pretended Modesty
Stick by him now, for if he finds you falter,
He quickly will his way of writing alter;
And every Play shall send you blushing home,
For, tho you rail, yet then we are sure you will come,
Thus Brides are Coy and Bashful the first night,
But used to it once, are mad for their delight.
Do not the Whiggish Nature then pursue,
Lest like Whig-Writer, he desert you too.
Whig-Poet when he can no longer Thrive,
Turns Cat in Pan and writes his Narrative.
No Irish Witness sooner shall recant,
Nor oftener play the Devil or the Saint.
The Persons Names.
Mrs. Corey, Dame Dobson. The Cunning Woman. Mr. Saunders, Mr. Decoy. Her
Colleague. Mrs. Twiford, Beatrice. Her Servant, a young Wench. Mr. Baker, Mrs.
Francis. Her Old Servant. Mr. Richards, Mr. Goslin. Brother to Dame Dobson. Mr.
Kynaston, Colonel. In Love with the Countess. Mr. Ievon, Mr. Gillet. A Young
Citizen. Mr. Wilshire, Mr. Gerrard. A Gentleman Host. Mr. Monsort, Mr.
Hartwell. Mr. Bright, Mr. Farmer. Mr. Leigh, Mr. Ienkin.
La. Slingsby, Lady Noble. Mrs. Petty, Lady Rich. Mrs. Butler, Mrs. Clerimont.
Mrs. Currer, Mrs. Featly. Mrs. Percival, Mrs. Ienkin. Mrs. Leigh, Mrs.
Prudence. Mrs. Osborn, Mrs. Hellen. Mrs. Percival, Mrs. Susan.
Dame Dobson.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Dame Dobson and Decoy. Decoy. 'TWas Prudently done of you Yesterday
(when Mr. Gerrald came to know what was become of his Pistols) to send down
word you was gone into the City, by that I gained time to get 'em Painted, as
also the Table in the Closet, where they are to be found.


Dame. That Is well done.


Decoy. I have got the Picture of Mr. Vallentine that has the Pistols, who took
'em away only because he believed the other party would not fail coming to you
to know how they were lost; and the Jest is, he thinks he stole 'em-so
cunningly, that if you discover the Theft, he will think you the greatest
Sorceress in the world: and this my Care and Diligence has found out.


Dame. Well, Mr. Decoy, It shall not be out of your way.


Decoy. Nay, I spoke not as to that, it is sufficient we understand one another;
the multitudes of Fools who daily flock to you, cry you up on all sides.


Dame. There Is not one but this Mr. Gerrald that speaks against me, and he
rails at me where e're he comes.


Decoy. Though you are no Sorceress, yet you have the wit to make the World
think so, and that is the same thing as if you really were one.


Dame. I am much beholden to Beatrice for it; well, she is an admirable Wench to
draw Fools into the Net, she affects an innocent, simple carriage, which makes
'em believe twenty silly Stories.


Decoy. I always said Beatrice was a Treasure; but pray how goes the Business
of the Marriage which the jealous Lady would so sain prevent.


Dame. The misfortunes which I foretold to the Countess (who has been my Client
a great while) have disheartened her enough already; she is to come again to
know the effects of a pretended Consultation that I am to have with a Spirit
which I make her believe is my Intelligence, and acquaints me with every thing,
and in this Business I have a double advantage, for she not only pays me for
this, but the Lady Noble, who secretly loves the Colonel, fees me to hinder the
Marriage by virtue of my Art.


Decoy. You are not the only Person that takes Bribes on both sides.


Dame. Have you got those Paintings here that are for carrying on the business
of the Pistols we talked of?


Decoy. Let Mr. Gerrald come when he will, every thing is in readiness as I
told you; nor have I been wanting in my Endeavors to procure you another
Carcass, I have been with the Executioner, and he has promised me another dead
Body fresh from the Gallows, he will send it you as soon as Execution is over;
that trick once more will make you famous as long as you live.


Dame. I Will study a fit occasion to employ it to my best advantage. Be gone.

Exit Decoy.
SCENE II.
Dame Dobson and Mrs. Hellen. Dame. WHat News Mrs. Hellen?


Hell. Ah Dame Dobson, I am almost out of breath, I slipped out at our back door,
and came running to acquaint you, that the Countess is instantly coming to you.


Dame. Let her come, I am prepared what to say, being such a Credulous person
as I know she is; let her Marry him after that if she dare.


Hell. Yes, but you don't know that the Colonel whom she would be well enough
pleased with for a Husband, comes along with her in disguise of her Footman,
whom she has promised to make happy, if he can any ways convince her, that
what you do is all but a Cheat; and he has disguised himself to try if you or
any of your Devils are Cunning enough to discover him; therefore be upon your
guard.


Dame. I am glad to hear this, for it saves me a great deal of trouble, and in
the hurry of business I might not have taken the pains to have found it out.
But does not the Countess think you suspect our Correspondence?


Hell. How should she? I am always speaking against you to her; I say daily to
her, that it is by mere chance if you tell any thing true, and to convince me of
my error, she runs over all the particular remarkable things of her life, which
she pretends you have given her an account of; but little thinks she all this
while that it is from me you know 'em.


Dame. I could with long study. But because this business is in haste, and
requires all our diligence, it is the more ready way to know all by your
Intelligence, and cuts out work short.


Hell. O well thought on too, I had like to have forgot to tell you, that after
she has conversed with you barefaced, she will presently come again in a Mask;
and I am to be with her in a Mask too. I Will point at you with my finger, or
make some other sign by which you shall know us: Besure fail not, but tell the
same misfortunes as formerly.


Dame. I Will warrant you.


Enter Beatrice. Beatrice. Your Countess is come.


Hell. I Will be gone then out at the back door. I Will not fail to bring you an
exact account of everything they say when they return home.

Exit Hellen.
Dame. Beatrice bring 'em in here, and tell 'em I have been shut up in private
this good while.

Exit Dame.
Beat. Please you to walk in here. --


SCENE III.
Enter Countess, Colonel in Livery, and Beatrice. Count. WHere is Mrs. Dobson?


Beat. Your Honor must have a little Patience.


Count. Is any one with her?


Beat. No, an please your Honor; but she has locked her self up in her black
Garret, taken her great Book, and called for a glass of Water, I suppose she is
at work for your Honor.


Count. I Will expect then, Pray when she comes forth, let me be the first that
speaks with her.


Beat. I Will go and watch her coming forth for that purpose.

Ex. Beat.
Count. I vow and protest Colonel, I am very much troubled to see you in this
dress; if any one should come and know you, what would they say?


Col. There is no danger of that, I came in a Chair, I run no hazard of being
known, but you might have saved the trouble of this disguise if you would have
given less Credit to this Canting she-Fortune-teller, who invents a company of
idle stories only to get your Money.


Count. You will have it then that Fortune Tellers are Cheats.


Col. It Is their Profession, they can tell nothing, and only work upon the
Credulity of People they meet with.


Count. But examine the Case a little, what reason can this Woman have think
you, to hinder my marrying of you?


Col. I know not, unless I have some secret Rival that would supplant me* And I
cannot imagine how your Woman Mrs. Hellen, should be more quick of apprehension
than your Honor; She tells you daily you converse with an Ignorant prating
Woman, one, that if you believe, the world will censure you for your easiness.


Count. Hellen's a Fool, and has no reason to say so; for after those Truths
this Woman has told me, so often I ought to Credit her; Do not therefore
persist in persuading me to render my self unhappy by Marriage that would prove
so disastrous.


Col. The misfortune that will make us both unhappy, is, that you will believe
her.


Count. You have heard my Reasons, and you see I take all care possible
thoroughly to inform my self for your sake, and endeavor more particularly to
know what sort of Mischiefs they are that would ensue such an Engagement, and
if it be a fatality that cannot be avoided, my resolution depends on what she
shall now say; and all this I have done that you may no longer have a pretense
to say that what she does, is all but Artifice and Cheat.


Col. I doubt not but we shall presently know the truth of that to both our
satisfactions. Besure to question her about me, I am certain her Devil can
inform her nothing of my disguise. And as to Mr. Gerrald that came to you last
Night, do you think she will tell him where to find his Pistols again?


Count. Why not?


Col. He neither believes, nor hopes it himself.


Count. If she should not tell him who took 'em, I should not believe her a
Cheat, for that she is not obliged to know every thing; It suffices me that she
never tells any thing but what is true.


Col. I submit Madam, I now begin to be convinced, that she has some Witchcraft
in her; for certainly if she had not set a spell upon you, you could never be
so zealous in her Justification; for my part, I know not what can be done more
to undeceive you.


Count. Silence, she is coming down, go further off.


SCENE IV.
Dame Dobson, Countess, and Colonel. Dame. SHow those Ladies into the next
Room, I Will come to 'em anon.


Count. Well, my dear Dame Dobson, have you done what you can for me?


Dame. Your Honor forgets your Servant is here; Friend wait without.


Count. No, Pray let him stay here, though I have great Confidence in you, yet
I should dye with fear if some body I know were not by me to encourage me a
little.


Dame. Why did you not bring your Woman with you?


Count. Well, what have you to tell me now, I tremble for fear it should be ill
News.


Dame. Your Honor may choose whether you will believe me, or not; but let me
tell you, Death, Ruin and Bloodshed will attend your Nuptials, if you proceed
in this Marriage.


Count. Say you so, But cannot these things be prevented?


Dame. No, you may run the risque if you please, I have given you fair warning.


Count. But pray tell me, what sort of Misfortune will follow if we proceed?


Dame. They wholly relate to the Person you love, when he Marries he will love
his Wife so, that he will be jealous to the highest degree.


Count. He is not in the least inclined to Jealousy.


Dame. I tell thee he will be jealous, and so excessively jealous, that his
Wife shall never enjoy one minutes quiet; 'Twill be his fortune to kill a man
of considerable Quality, and an intimate Friend of his Wives, whom he will find
one Evening discoursing with her; for which he will lose his Head.


Count. Lose his Head! there is an end then, I Will not marry him. --


Dame. And this misfortune will not only happen to him infallibly in marrying
of you; but if he marry any other Woman. Now it lies in your power to prevent
all this if you have him.


Count. I Will not marry him, that is for certain; but pray tell me, can you
resolve me one thing, I would fain know what that Party is now a doing.


Dame. What shall I get by telling you a thing that you will believe is all by
ghess?


Count. Ne'rtheless, 'twill please me very well to hear, and 'twill confirm my
belief in all the rest when I shall enquire, and be assured that his actions
agree with your words.


Dame. Are you of a Spirit not to be daunted?


Count. It may be I may.


Dame. Then send away your Footman, and your own Eyes shall presently inform
you what your Lover is doing, but be not frighted, for the Apparition shall not
be very terrible.


Count. What, see the Devil! I am ready to dye at the very apprehension.


Dame. He shall be very civil, have a good heart.


Count. I thank you for that, I would not see the Devil for all the world!


Dame. I Will run up to my Chamber then, and bring you word presently what I see
in my Magic Glass.

Exit
SCENE V.
Colonel and Countess. Col. Well what will your Honor wager now, that her
Devil lets he^ see what I am doing? You wanted assurance or you might have
discovered the Cheat before she went out of the Room.


Count. You would have had me have ventured then to have seen the Devil! --


Col. Yes.


Count. But she would have put you out of the Room, and I should have been alon^
with her.


Col. Is not that an Argument of her Cheating doings; She Will only practic^
before Women whose reason is overcome by their fear, and will not admit so much as
a Footman to be by?


Count. Let me advise you to look well to your self, I shall ever have a
particular Esteem and Friendship for you: But what censure soever I undergo of
be ing too credulous, I will never be the occasion of your killing any Man on
my account; nor of your being Beheaded.


Col. Is It possible then that you believe all this?


Count. You think she is a Cheat, but what if she finds out that you are not
the person you seem, and that you are come here in disguise, what will you say
then?


Col. She Will not dream of that I warrant you, her Astrological Spectacles will
fail her there.


Count. It may be so; but if it falls out otherwise, will you then promise me
never to Marry?


Col. And if it happens as I say, will your Honor promise me to Marry me?


Count. Whist, she is coming.


SCENE VI.
Colonel, Countess, and Dame Dobson. Dame. I Have very strange News to tell
you.


Count. What pray, let me know it quickly?


Dame. I have seen your Lover.


Count. And how?


Dame. He is upon some Design, for he has put himself in the habit of a
Footman, and is in earnest Discourse with a Lady!


Count. How Is that, in the habit of a Footman talking to a Lady!


Dame. Perhaps he will deny it to you when you tax him with it, but be positive
n't, for it is so, nothing is more certain.


Count. I do believe you, you never told me any thing yet but what was
certainly true.


Dame. They stood sidelong to me as they were talking, and therefore I could
^ot see their faces, to tell you what features either of 'em have.


Count. This is sufficient, and I Will trouble you with no more Questions at
pre^ent, I am in such a wonder, that I know not what to say, I Will take my
leave; ^omorrow I Will come again to know the whole Concern.


Dame. Hereafter bring one of your Women with you, I care not for Li^ery-men.


Count. It shall be so no more.

Colonel and Countess Exeunt.
Dame Dobson and Decoy. Dame. The business is done, the Countess is gone, and
han't a word to say*


Decoy. I heard all from my stand, I am very much mistaken if the Two hun^red
pounds are not our own, now she is absolutely off from the Marriage, ^t us now
be upon our Guard, for the Colonel being enraged at her refusal to ^arry him,
will do all he can to discover our practice: And whether he comes himself, or
sends any body else upon Design; we shall have enough to do to look to our hits.

Enter Beatrice.
Beatrice. Here Is a kind of Citizen would speak with you.


Decoy. What manner of man is he?


Beat. A little Queerish upon the City Cut.


Decoy. I Will return to my hiding hole, it is for certain the Courageous Woo^be,
that I told you of this morning. If it be he, I Will com^e forth and play my
part. He Will be no lean Fool, he will bast well in the Roasting.

Decoy Exit.
Dame. Bid him come in.

Beat. Exit.
SCENE VII.
Dame Dobson and Mr. Gillet. Gillet. GOod Morrow to you Madam.


Dame. The like to you Sir.


Gillet. They say you are a Wise woman, and know every thing; if so, you must
know my Mistress, one that I am a Suitor to.


Dame. What of her?


Gillet. She is one that loved me formerly.


Dame. And you loved her a little.


Gill. Right -- I find she is a Witch --


Dame. She could not choose but return your love.


Gill. I am no very ugly person, besides, I have a Tongue well enough hung.


Dame. No doubt you have a good toward wit of your own.


Gill. Nay, I am like my Father for that, I know both when, where, how and
what, as occasion shall serve. But as to my Mistress, I would fain have married
her -- I need not tell you that neither -- But since she has been acquainted
with a certain sort of People that are come from Tangier and France, who talk
of nothing but Campaigns, Sieges and Battles, would you believe it; she is in a
manner ashamed of my Company, and they nothing but make Sport and laugh and
jeer her out of conceit with me; and -- now and then I have a devilish mind to
be at some of them; But because I have never been in the Army, nor used to
Fighting, I let 'em alone for fear I should be beaten; and for that reason I
hold my Tongue.


Dame. You have a great deal of Prudence upon my word: But why don't you pass a
Campaign in the Wars, that would teach you to be as brisk and as brave as the
best of 'em. You only want being flesht.


Gill. Yes, but --


Dame. I find you want Courage.


Gill. Pray Pardon me there, for I have as much Courage as any man can have; If
anybody angers me, I warrant you I shall not speak to 'em in half a year after.


Gillet. But it may be you may have the Discretion never to show your stoutness.


Gillet. But I have been in the Artillery Ground three or four times in Buff
and when I have come home, I have shot off my Musket in the Street that I have
made the very Houses shake again -- when -- I am naturally inclined to the Wars,
and there is scarce a Night passes but I dream of fighting and killing, and
never am alone in the dark, but am throwing my Arms about, and striking as if I
was beating of this man, and that man, and the other man --


Dame. That demonstrates your Inclination, and it is a fair Prognostic.


Gill. And the other day being alone in my Chamber, armed Cap a-pee, as I came
from Training, seeing my self in the Glass, methoughts I had such a Marshal
Air, and looked so like a Warrior, I was extremely pleased, and could not
forbear Skirmishing against the great Raw-bon'd people in the Hangings, I made
an Ass of Sampson with his Jaw Bone. And I find I could be as sharp upon real
persons, but that there is one little difficulty I cannot overcome. --


Dame. What is that?


Gill. A Musket Shot or a Cannon Bullet never minds where it goes, it kills a
stout man as soon as another, that now is very foolish.


Dame. But what would you have me do for you?


Gill. No great matter, it is only to give me a Charm to make me Sword and
Cannon proof.


Dame. You Would be invulnerable then!


Gill. Ay invulnerable, I know it is nothing to you. --


Dame. I confess I have a secret, but there are certain difficulties.


Gil. Pough, no; How many Hundreds are there in the Wars that have Charms, and
come home safe every day?


Dame. How do you know they have Charms?


Gill. Well enough, would they be such Fools else think you, to run upon Cannon
mouths, and stand with their Breasts against Muskets to be shot at? --


Dame. You see many are killed every day.


Gill. Ay, a number of poor Rogues that had not money to go to the price of
'em; or a Company of Hectoring Bullies without fear or wit, that scorn to be
beholden to any body, you may be sure they that are killed had no Charms; and
Dame pray be free with me, don't you now and then do such a Kindness?


Dame. I confess ingeniously I do; but because it is a great secret in Nature,
it will cost you dear.


Gill. For Money I can do well enough, my Father's an Alderman, he is called
Christopher Gillet, and if through your means I can bring the Name of the
Gillets into Reputation, trust you to me for your reward.


Dame. I have that, not far off, which will do your business, but be sure you
never tell any body, how, or from whom you have it, if you do, the Charm will
vanish.


Gill. Pough, Do you take me for a fool, or no; somebody shall find now I have
Courage.


Dame. Within there -- Bring me one of those Swords that hang up on the Wall,
under the Planet Mars.


Gill. O He Is the God of War --


Dame. Yes, they have Charms belong to 'em, and are enchanted, I have not above
two left, the Wars have swept 'em all away, and 'twill cost me Six Months
labor to prepare more.


Gill. And when I have one of them, need not I be afraid?


Dame. No, if any body affront you, do but draw, and they shall run away, or be
disarmed if they stay.


Gill. That Is just as I would have it; Since it is so, I Will not fear any man
that wears a head, and you shall have the Credit on it.

Enter Beatrice, gives a Sword and Retires.
Dame. The world shall talk of nothing but your Bravery; Sir there, take it;
but stay, when you have occasion to use it, put but your Thumb against the
guard, grasping the handle with your fore-fingers, and close 'em fast with your
little finger.


Gill. Is it thus I must hold it?


Dame. Hold it fast firm, close there, your thumb stiff against the guard,
right as can be; In that consists the Charm.


Gill. Ah you shall see how I Will manage it, ha, ha, ha.


Dame. Though you should chance to hit your Enemies but upon the Shins, yet
shall the point run diametrically through his Heart.

Marches along with his naked Sword.
Gill. And you will secure me I shall never be killed?


Dame. I Will assure your life as long as you follow my Directions, and hold your
Thumb as I showed you.


SCENE VIII.
Dame Dobson, Gillet, Decoy. Habited like a Bravo. Dame. WHither go you Sir?
Nobody is to come up here without giving me notice first, and having my leave.


Decoy. I come to you about Business --


Dame. But Sir, I am not at leisure. --


Decoy. I am in have, my Business is urgent, and therefore Sir, if you please,
depart the-Room.


Gill. No Sir, I don't please (methinks I am a little faint-hearted still.


Decoy. What little Prigg is this with a Sword by his side, and that City
Dough-bak't face?


Dame. Never mind what he says, take no notice of him.


Decoy. Do you know good Mr. Citt, that I shall tumble you down Stairs if you
don't rubb. --


Gill. Perhaps Sir (Courage Gillet, Courage)


Dame. Sir, I have Business with the Gentleman. --


Decoy. That Is pleasant, Business with him? --


Gill. If I had no more Wit now than you.


Decoy. What say you? --


Dame. No disturbance pray, let us go into the next Room, he will stay till we
have done. --


Decoy. No, I Am resolved to stay here, and if he does not soon remove his fools
head out of my sight, I Will throw him out at Window. --


Gill. If you anger me a little more (Now Sword, now Gillet, now, now. --


Decoy. What Is that you (...) to your self there?


Gill. What Is that to you, i^ you go to that --


Decoy. Then there is that to you.

Strikes Gillet a box on the Ear.
Gill. Gillet, to him Gillet.

Aside.
Decoy. You look as if you had a mind to draw. --


Gill. Firm, fast, Thumb stiff against the Guard.

Gillet draws.
Dame. What mean you, Sir, will you undo me? I beseech you spare him, have
mercy on him.


Gill. No, my Honor will not suffer it; therefore -- Ah Coward, dare you not
stand your ground? Take you your Sword again, you see I have disarmed you, and
can kill you if I please.

Fights, Decoy retreats, and his Sword falls.
Dame. But pray spare his life, you have the better, and that is Honor enough.


Decoy. A Pox of all ill luck, that my Sword should fly out of my hand.


Gill. Take It up again if you please, I fear no man that wears a head, I am ready
for you again.


Dame. You Will depart peaceably if I give you your Sword?


Decoy. On my Honor..... I shall meet that Spark another time.

She gives Decoy his Sword. Ex. Decoy.
Dame. Are you satisfied in my Art now, Sir?


Gill. Dear Dame, you have made me a happy Man, would you were a Queen or an
Empress; There, there is my Purse, take what you please.


Dame. You are so generous, and so much a Gentleman, that it troubles me that
you had such a Box on the Ear.


Gill. That was none of the Swords fault; and so long I care not; I am
satisfied if I had drawn it sooner, I had not had the Box on the Ear.


Dame. Ay that is certain.


Gill. Now let any of the Flanders Bullies, or Tangierines laugh at me if they
dare.


Dame. But Mr. Gillet, have a care of being too brisk, killing a Man you know
brings one into a great deal of trouble.


Gill. You say true.


Dame. Therefore you had better change your course of life, and go to the Wars;
after one Campaign or two you may come to be Colonel of a Regiment, perhaps a
General.


Gill. A General!


Dame. Yes, a General!


Gill. Shall I live to see the Name of Gillet in the Gazetts, what a joy would
that be to my old Father and Mother? I Will run and get me some other
Accoutrements presently, I long now to see my self like a Cavalier.


Dame. You Will be an absolute Hero.


Gill. But who is this comes in so briskly? Shall I turn him down Stairs?


SCENE IX.
Dame Dobson, Gillet, and Mr. Gerrald. Ger. HOw Sir! you turn me down Stairs!
--


Gill. Heah --


Ger. And heah too, what sort of Fellow's this? what a Figure he is.


Gill. A Figure Sir? -- If once my Sword begins to lay about, it runs
Diametrically through your Heart.


Dame. Go, go, would you offer to kill a man that cannot defend himself? you
know it is impossible for him to resist you: Go and fight for your Mistress, and
take her from your Rivals.


Gill. Well remembered, I Will go and kill half a dozen Rivals presently, Marry my
Mistress, beat her into better manners, and live like a Hero all the rest of my
life, Adieu.

Gillet Exit.
Ger. What foolish whimsical fellow was this?


Dame. One that has been troubling me here a good while. But what pray brings
you here, I cannot but wonder at that. --


Ger. I have a suit to you.


Dame. What Is that?


Ger. Only to be beholden to your Art to resolve me one Question.


Dame. Alas Sir, I am an ignorant Woman, and know nothing, my Art is mere
Gullery, you know it, and have said so a Thousand times.


Ger. If you tell me right as to a Theft that has been committed two days
since, I promise to change my Opinion, and never to speak against you as long
as I live.


Dame. Have you lost any thing then?


Ger. Yes, a pair of Pistols, and the best that ever were made, and for which I
would be willing to give double the price they cost.


Dame. You Would willingly have'em again, but my Art does not extend so far, I have
no Skill.


Ger. My Pistols, I beseech you my Pistols.


Dame. How should I tell you where they are? I concern my self in Matter of
another Nature, in relation to good or evil fortune.


Ger. Come lay aside your Passion, and be not angry, do what I request.


Dame. You deserve it well at my hands. But within there, Bring me a Basin of
Water. Well Sir, you your self shall see the thing distinctly, and because you
shall not think that I have any interest to deceive you, I declare beforehand I Will
have none of your Money.


Ger. I understand what is fit. --


Dame. Come Sir, here is what is requisite -- Are things in readiness.

Enter Beatrice with Wat^ Aside, to Beatrice.
Bea. Proceed with Courage, nothing is wanting.


Dame. Stand in this fashion as I do, and fix your Eyes upon the Water without
moving them off. See you nothing now?


Ger. Nothing.


Dame. Nothing at all! you don't look right then; for I see as plainly as can
be.


Ger. You may see what you please, but it is I am to see; O I begin to see now,
I see my Pistols lying upon a Table in a Closet, where to my thinking I have
been some time or other, I -- I see nothing now again, where shall I go to (...)
'em, I cannot call the place to mind?


Dame. I think I have done enough to let you see the place where the Pistols
are.


Ger. But I had rather you would have shown me the Thief that stole 'em, then
'twou'd have been no great trouble to get 'em again.


Dame. Now my hand's in, I will not do things by halfs for you: Look you in the
Glass, but without turning away your eyes, for the Figure of him that took your
Pistols will appear but a moment; what do you see?


Ger. Ha! It Is Valentine, an intimate Friend of mine. The other day I hid a
Sword of his in jest, and he to requite me, has watched his opportunity and
taken my Pistols to make me look for 'em, I Will run to his Lodgings presently.


Dame. You may go with Confidence, I never fail to tell right.


Ger. You will be no loser by this piece of Service, I am counted a man not
easily to be cozened, and 'twill be no small reputation to have Converted a man
of my Principles: At present I take my leave without farther Ceremony.

Ex.
Decoy. So he is gone, this passed cleverly.


Dame. He Is more than half won already: And if once I bring him over to my
side, away goes he to the Countess, and I doubt not but what he tells her of
the business of the Basin will induce her belief to all I shall tell her
hereafter. But now whilst we have time, let us take order that every thing may
be in readiness to deceive the rest, that I am promised to be brought here to
day.


Decoy. Ay, Aye, we shall have more Woodcocks in the Spring anon, I warrant you.

Exeunt.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Dame Dobson and Lady Noble. Dame. YOur continual Bounty so obliges me,
that my Inclinations are wholly to serve your Ladyship.


Noble. You are not to reckon the Present I make you now for any part of my
former Promise; Nor shall I think the Two hundred pound a sufficient Reward for
your trouble, if you can prevent this Marriage.


Dame. I use all the Skill I have.


Nob. I am convinced you do, I have some faithful Spies about the Colonel, and
they tell me already, the Countess has declared, That she will never Marry
him; but whilst my old Man lives, I cannot have the least pretension
imaginable; yet what from what you have often told me, I have flattered my self
all along with the hopes of his Death, for then nothing will hinder, but that I
may own my love for the Colonel.


Dame. Though your old gray Beard is not underground, yet I assure that in few
Months you shall be a Widow, and that the Colonel shall not Marry the
Countess.


Nob. But I have one scruple yet, which I had like to have forgot, and that
came in my head last Night as I was going to sleep* which if you clear, will
add much to my Satisfaction.


Dame. What is that?


Nob. You have assured me that my Husband shall dye shortly, but not that he
shall dye before me; I fear you took his life into consideration, but concerned
not your self with mine.


Dame. It Is right as you say, I did not indeed, but your Youth and Health gives
you fair assurance in that point: However my next scrutiny into the Secrets of
Fate shall be to know who shall dye first, you or your Husband; is not the
question stated to your mind now?


Nob. Yes, Pray be speedy in it --


Dame. I Will send to you in few hours.


Nob. Adieu then for the present; some one is coming to you --

Exit Noble.
Dame. Your Ladyship may rest assured of my Service. --


Beatrice. Here Is one will press in, he would take no denial.


SCENE IV.
Dame Dobson, and Susan a Country Girl. Susan. GOd give you good Den, is it
you, I pray, that is called my Dame Dobson?


Dame. Yes pretty Maiden, I am she.


Susan. I entreat you then to dispatch me quickly, for I am to return to my
Aunt who stays for me with her Husband, who is a Servant to as great a Lord as
any belongs to the Court; I told 'em I would but step and see a Cousin of mine,
who is out at Nurse-keeping at this end of the Town, and would come to 'em
presently.


Dame. Very good! and what would you with me?


Sus. What would I? --


Dame. Yes.


Sus. I am mis-inform'd I see, -- but perhaps you will not do any thing for me
because I am but a Country body.


Dame. No, no, Sweetheart. I Will do as much for thee as for any Duchess (...)
what is your Business?


Sus. Nay, but you are not that Dame Dobson that is the Cunning Woman. --


Dame. Come, come tell me your business, I am she you looked for; I am the
Cunning Woman.


Sus. Nay surely but you are not, for she that I looked for, knows every thing;
for when I have been at our Landlord's house, where I promise you great Persons
come every day, I have list'ned at the Doors, when they have been talking, and
have heard 'em say, she could tell every manner of thing in the World.


Dame. They said true, and there is none of my Name professes the A^t but my
self.


Sus. Why don't you divine then for me, I don't ask you to do it for nothing,
for you can tell well enough that I Will pay you for it, and that a certain Person
gives me Money unknown to my Mother, or any body but my own sen.


Dame. I know that very well, and also that that person has a great Kindness
for you.


Sus. Nay, since you know that, you know all.


Dame. Yes, I know all, and you wish well to that certain person too, you know
something.


Sus. Should not I love them that love me? he has told me so a hundred times,
and will sigh and be as melancholy as any thing, and says if I don't love him
again, I shall be the death of him; And he being a fine handsome Gentleman, I
would not have him dye for never so much, no indeed. --


Dame. It would be a great deal of Cruelty. --


Sus. And it would go near to break my Ladies heart, he is her only Son.


Dame. But what do you do now to hinder him from dying?


Sus. I meet him sometimes in the Barn, and let him play with me, and put his
hand down my Neck, and into my Bosom, and chuck me under the Chin, and kiss me;
and sometimes he will kiss me till he almost stifles me.


Dame. And sometimes unties your Garter. --


Sus. I see you know it without my telling; but that was never but once, when
he asked me to see my Leg. -- And then he pincht me by the thigh that it was
black and blew again.


Dame. Would he hurt you then? -- --


Sus. O, but he did not mean any harm, for all the while he lay kissing me, as
if he would have kissed the breath out of my body, and called me his Dear life
and Soul; he did so tremble, and his hand was so soft and warm me thought.


Dame. And this is all you ever did for him! -- He never asked you any more?


Sus. Only to love him. --


Dame. And that you do to be sure. --


Sus. Yes; but it is but two days since I told him so, for I had a mind to
know first if he loved me indeed and indeed; but when I told him he was so
pleased, so pleased. --


Dame. I believe it, you found him very Courteous. --


Sus. O then he hugged me, and squeezed me, and sucked my very breath out, and
said if I would do something, as that he would tell me another time, he would Marry
me. --


Dame. But when my little Maiden?


Sus. You can tell me when, and that is it I come to know of you.


Dame. Hark you Sweet heart! don't let him have his will of you till thou art
his Wife.


Sus. I am too young yet, he says; and therefore I have such a mind to -- have*


Dame. Have a care of your self, or you will be undone.


Sus. Why? what harm can it be for me more than all the great Maids in o^
Parish? why may not I have 'em as well as they?


Dame. I am at a loss again, I am more puzzled with this silly Girl, than w^ the
cunningest Customer I have.

Asta^*
Sus. How much must I give you pray now for doing it? If you will have Money
before hand, see I have brought a piece of Gold here.


Dame. I know what it is you would have, but persons that come to me for anything,
must ask me for it by Name, that I may be sure I have their full consent and
liking to what I do.


Sus. An't it all one if I tell you afterward?


Dame. No, there is a great difference in that.


Sus. I cannot abide to ask you, do something for me without -- there is my Piece
of Gold for you. I Will give it you all if you will do it for me without naming. --


Dame. Be not ashamed, out with it, nobody hears.


Sus. No, give me my Money again, I had rather never have great Bubbies as long
as I live, than ask for 'em my self. --


Dame. There it is out at last. -- The thing that you would ask of me is, that you
may have full-Breasts, that I would make 'em grow for you, that they may rise
up round and plump, like some of your Companions.


Sus. O dear, O dear, I am so ashamed --


Dame. I have such a Kindness for you, that I promise you, you shall, and for a
Charm to make 'em grow, you must stroke 'em every morning before you get up,
and say three times fasting, Grow Breasts, grow; Rise Bubbies rise; Can you
remember this? --


Sus. Grow Breasts grow, Rise Bubbies rise; Methinks they begin to swell a
little already. --


Dame. Go your ways, Pretty one, assure your self that within three or four
Months your Breasts shall rise and be as round and as hard as the very Turnips
that grow in your Garden.


Sus. O dear -- that you should know we have Turnips grow in our Garden too.


Dame. You see I know every thing.


Sus. Well, now my heart's at ease, 'twill be but a little while now before I
am Married, for Mr. Ambrose told me when my Breasts were bigger and -- Give you
good Den, and thank you forsooth.

Exit Susan.
Dame. Fare you well, poor Simplicity, this young Landlord will ruin her* But
who comes here? Ah Mr. Hartwell!


Dame Dobson, and Mr. Hartwell. Heart. I met a pretty young Country Lass going
out.


Dame. You see I have to do with all sorts. But where have you been that I have not seen you all this while?


Heart. In the Country; where betwixt Love and Jealousy, I have been almost
distracted; I have been as Unfortunate as you foretold.


Dame. What Is the Matter?


Heart. The young Widow that I told you I courted, after all her assurances of
Kindness to me, was persuaded at last to admit other Pretenders, I sighed and
^ade my Complaints, but she insulted the more. --


Dame. Why did you not come to me to know what to do?


Heart. At last I was persuaded by a Relation of hers, who stands up for my
^nt'rest to see what effects my Absence would work on her: In order to it, I
^ook a solemn leave, told her that I removed my self from her sight, that my
Complaints might no longer be troublesome to her.


Dame. That sudden Resolution startled her.


Heart. No, she was stout, and never so much as asked me to stay, I have been this
Month at Tunbridge, I came to Town but last Night, and my Friend tells me, that
several of her Acquaintance that came thence informed her I made Love to a
certain Lady there, for whom she has no kindness, at which s^e was much
surpised, and is grown jealous.


Dame. That Is a good sign.


Heart. My Friend took the hint, and persuaded her, that her unkindness and
slights, had forced me to this remedy, to put her out of my thoughts; at which
she is so piqu'd, that she has but this morning resolved to come sometime to
day to know of you how I stand affected.


Dame. Let her come, Does she know you are in Town?


Heart. No, nor shall not till I see how her inclinations are to me. It lies in
your power to do me a particular kindness, by assuring her I am the truest,
faithful'st, constant Lover.


Dame. I warrant you.


Heart. But let me tell you, she has no great opinion of Persons of your
Profession, and you will not very easily bring her to believe what you say,
unless you can do'^ by some extraordinary means.


Dame. Because I have many Businesses in hand that requires have, and lest she
should come before my Art can be prepared for her reception, I will do it by a
Trick that will very much surprise her, and be extreme pleasant.


Heart. Do so, if you are sure it will not fail.


Dame. I warrant you. Ho Beatrice, call Mrs. Francis to me presently.


Enter Beatrice and Mrs. Francis. Beat. Here she is, we were talking together
at the Stairs head.


Dame. Come near, Mrs. Francis, I have a word to whisper in your ear.

Dame whispers with her.
Franc. I Will about it presently. --


Dame. Hark you once more --

Whisper: again.
Franc. I Will be sure to take care.


Dame. Do every thing just as before, and let Decoy be in readiness near hand.
Beatrice let it be your care to see 'em enter in due order.


Beat. Yes.

Beat. Franc. Exeunt.
Heart. Now that you may not take any body else for my pretty Widow, I Will show
you her Picture in a Minature, Take good notice of it, it is very like her.


Dame. You have reason to love her, she is a great Beauty, a delicate Brown.


Heart. Hear me Dame, If you would have her credit you, I fear she will require
good proofs of your Skill, for her Kinsman tells me, that she comes at the
persuasion of a Countess, where she was a Visiting not an hour since, who has
assured her, that she can ask you nothing, that you cannot satisfy her in.


Dame. She absolutely believes you are not in Town.


Heart. She sent a Lady of her Acquaintance a Letter at Tunbridge an
inquisitive* Letter about new Amors, and but yesterday received an Answer; I
happened to be of that parties particular Acquaintance, unknown to her, and
prevailed with her at parting to write her word of my continuance there, that
she might not know any thing of my coming away; So that she does not in the
least*suspect I am so near.


Dame. Since it is so, I Will prompt her curiosity to see you. There Is a
Looking-glass I prepared for another Business, it shall now serve for this;
when your Mistress is here, and you hear me make a sort of Invocation, steal
softly forth behind her, as she is looking in the Glass, and be kissing her
Picture, and this she will take for a great proof of your Love and Constancy.


Heart. I understand you.


Dame. After a Minute retreat, and if I demand any thing else (which you will
guess by my words) come forth and perform it.


Heart. She has no belief of Spirits at all, and has a great presence of Mind;
therefore have a care how you proceed.


Dame. Rely upon me. I Will not be mistaken I Will warrant you.


Bea. There Is a very pretty Lady --

Enter Beatrice. Desires to speak with you.


Heart. If it should be her now.


Dame. Of what Complexion is she?


Beat. A lovely Brown.


Dame. Get you gone quickly, and be sure to listen to our Discourse, and
remember about the Looking-glass. -- Now bring her in, and be you near me, I Will
give you the sign when you shall send Mrs. Francis in. That is a piece of
management to amuze both the Lady and the Gallant that is absconded, that he
may not think all I do is Legerdemain. This must be his Widow, she is so very
like the Picture. Now let me see if this incredulous Lady cannot be wrought
upon by my Practice. You are welcome, Lady.

Hartwell Exit.
SCENE VI.
Dame and Lady Rich. Rich. I Am come to you at last, you are in Vogue, and it is
now grown a fashion to visit you on all occasions; and I cannot but follow the
Mode as others do.


Dame. My Knowledge is so very scant Madam, that perhaps you will think your
coming not worth the trouble.


Rich. Even in deceiving your knowledge is much; Because you know how to
deceive persons of good discretion and parts.


Dame. To do that, would cost me more trouble than to tell the truth.


Rich. See what you can tell me, here is my hand.


Dame. There Is not a Line but denotes you a very fortunate Lady, born under a
Planet of Benign influence, and good luck will attend you.


Rich. Pass by what is so general.


Dame. You are a Widow. The grief for the Death of your first Husband is almost
worn from your Heart, by the hopes of a Second; You have many Pretenders: But
there is one loves you above the rest in a high degree, and he is very jealous,
impatient if you but look upon another man, and quarrelsom with you, if access
of Passion may be called so.

Dame makes a sign to Beatrice, that they should come in order.
Rich. There is something in that --


Dame. He has been absent some time, and you have treated him so ill, that now
he is from you, you are apprehensive lest you should lose him.


Rich. It may be so.


Dame. But fear nothing, he has an Inclination to no person but your self, and
if you Marry him you will be the happiest Woman in a Husband of all your Sex.


Rich. This is no very ill beginning; but let me freely tell you, that I am one
of small faith, and if you would have me believe you to be a Woman of such
Knowledge as you pretend to, you must tell me something more remarkable than
you do to others.


Enter Beatrice. Beat. There Is a Gentlewoman without brought to you in a Chair.
She says she is come a great way to speak with you.


Dame. Cannot you tell who she is? run and desire her to come again an hour
hence, I am not at leisure to speak with any body now.


Beat. If you did but see her, you would have Compassion for her, she is in such a
sad Condition, and so full of Pain that I have not the heart to send her away.
Be pleased to see her Dame, I never saw the like in all my life.

Mrs. Francis shrieks without.
Rich. She may need your speedy help. Hark yonder how she shrieks; I Will have
patience awhile.


Dame. I am very sorry I should make you wait. Call her in.


SCENE VII.
Dame Dobson, Lady Rich, Mrs. Francis, Beatrice, Mrs. Francis Dressed lik^ a
Country Gentlewoman, very extraordinary big and swelled upon the Belly and
Stomach. Franc. MAdam, your Reputation is so great, and your Doings so
wonderful, that I am come to desire you --

Speaks to the Lady Rich.
Rich. You're under a mistake, Madam. I am not the Person you mean.


Franc. Pardon my Error, I am in such pain, and so afflicted with what I
undergo, that --


Dame. You are vastly swelled indeed, your Tympany is very extraordinary.


Franc. Eh, hi, hi, oh --


Rich. Alas, good Gentlewoman.


Franc. Pray do what you can for me, I am informed that you not only can tell
by Astrology things past, present, and to come; but that also you have Charms
to cure all Diseases, not cureable by the Physicians, and Countercharms for
Witchcrafts and the like.


Dame. I am acquainted with some such Secrets, but yours is a very strange
Distemper.


Franc. I don't ask you to make an absolute cure at present, but only to
assuage the pain, and give me a little ease.


Rich. You ought not to refuse her that Kindness.


Dame. Tell me true, Do you not think it above my Skill.


Rich. I Will believe you an able Woman indeed, if you can do this.


Dame. It is Charity to ease the afflicted, and it concerns my reputation to
comply with you.


Rich. Then you will Cure this Tympany.


Dame. In your presence, your Ladyship shall see it done, before the
Gentlewoman goes hence, she shall not have the least pain, swelling, or
appearance of any such thing.


Rich. You promise largely.


Franc. Good Madam. --


Dame. Dame if you please Call me Dame.


Franc. Good Dame then, don't promise any thing you are not sure to perform; I
have been thus above these three years, and I shall be content to be cured in
three months. The Doctors, Apothecaries, and Chyrurgeons have tried their Skill
to no purpose. Some say it is Witchcraft, and that I am under an ill Tongue.


Dame. I Will let you see that I know more than all of 'em. But you must find out
somebody so Charitable as to be willing to take your swelling on them, for as
it came by Witchcraft, so I cannot transmit it from your Body but to another,
be it Man or Woman, as you please, that matters not.


Rich. I see your Evasion, because no body will be willing to be tortured, you
hope to come off and save your Credit.


Franc. It Is apparent enough you don't know how to cure me, therefore never go
about to keep me in suspense.


Dame. I intend no such thing, do but you find out a Person, and I Will cure your
^ympany.


Franc. Where should I find out one, if your Servant there would be willing
(...) do me that Kindness, I Would reward her well for it.


Beat. I Madam, I would not have it for all you are worth; what would the World
say of a young Woman as I am? If I should be seen with such a great ^elly, they
would not believe I came by it in that manner.


Rich. Your Servant is well versed in your Business, she has her lesson, and
would bring your Skill into Reputation by seeming afraid of your Charm, and by
that would make us believe you can do it.


Dame. You mistake Madam; No body here has any such designs.


Rich. I would gladly see this Experiment. -- Can you think of nobody that will
do you such a courtesy? there are enough to be found for Money.


Franc. I will endeavor, but that requires time. Now I think on it, a Tenant's
Man of mine is below, that I got to come up to Town with me, perhaps he will do
so much for me.


Rich. Quickly call him up.


Beat. Yes, Madam. --

Beatrice Exit.
Dame. If the Fellow be willing, I ask but a half quarter of an hour, the
Gentlewoman shall be eased of the Tympany.


Rich. I Will believe it Dame, when I see it.


Dame. Upon that point rest my Credit with you.


SCENE VIII.
Dame Dobson, Lady Rich, Mr. Francis, Beatrice, Decoy. Franc. HArk you honest
William --

Decoy dressed like a Country Fellow.
Decoy. I thank you with all my heart Londlody, for your good will to me, the
Gentlewoman here has told me the Business. I have no mind to have a Tympany.
There Is a Belly with all my heart; why all the folk would call me Bursengut; no
I thank you.


Franc. But hear what I say, if you will do it for me I Will give thee Twenty
Pieces, and be bound to maintain you all your life, without doing any manner of
work, and here is Ten of 'em in hand.


Rich. Hark you friend, don't be such a Fool to refuse 'em. Are you so simple
to think this Woman can remove the Tympany from her to you, it is impossible.


Decoy. So I think to tell you true forsooth; Well, well, give 'em me, I Will
venture.


Dame. It shall depart from her, but scarce be perceivable in you; Come sit you
down here. --

She makes 'em both sit down in two Chairs.
Franc. I begin to tremble.


Rich. This goes on, and I begin not to know what to think on it.

Dame strokes 'em both with her h^ upon the Belly and Stomach, and speaks some
Gibberish.
Dame. Let no body speak a word.


Fran. Ah, ah.


Decoy. Ah, ah.


Franc. Eh, good Dame Eh.


Decoy. Ah, ah, ah, What a rumbling and grumbling I feel in my Gu^* Oh it is
coming, it is coming.


Franc. Ah, ah, ah, the Tympany is going, it is going, Eh, eh, eh, I feel it, I
feel it. It Is going, going, going; Ah ah.


Decoy. Ah, it Comes, it Comes, it Comes; ah, it Comes, it Comes, it Comes --


Franc. Ah my swelling, ah my swelling, Eh, eh, eh.


Decoy. Oh I burst, I burst, oh I burst; O-la, O-la, la, la, la, Ah, ah, ah,
it is enough, enough, enough. -- Eh, I am half as big again as my Landlady was;
Oh, oh my Belly is as big as a Tun.


Franc. Ah, how much at ease I am now!

Francis rising up. Ah you are a most rare Woman --


Dame. Well, what say you now Madam?


Rich. My wonder is above expression.


Franc. Methinks I am not the same person, may I credit my senses, I feel not
the least pain, I am well and lightsom, I am overjoyed. Ah good Dame here are
Thirty Guinneys, but that is not sufficient, let me present you with this Ring,
and hope yet a better reward than all this. Adieu Madam, your most humble
Servant, I am impatient till I go and show my self to my Friends and
Acquaintance, I fancy none of 'em will know me, William come follow me, good
William.


Decoy. Nay, marry I am in no such have, you are lighter than you were, and I
am so much the heavier, I shall be finely laughed at for my pains, here is a Cure
with a Poxt to it. Wounds, I can hardly see my way for my Belly.


Beat. How you waddle along, you are as slow paced as a Snail.


Decoy. Marry none but such a Calf as I would have been blown up thus like a
Scotch Bagpipe.


Beat. Farewell Friend.

Francis, Decoy Exeunt.
SCENE IX.
Dame Dobson, and Lady Bich. Rich. SUre I have a mist before my Eyes.


Dame. Your Ladyship has seen a small Essay of my Skill.


Rich. I am quite astonished; since you can do such, feats as these, don't seen
me away barely with words; but let me see something in relation to my Lover.


Dame. Explain your self, have you a Curiosity to see what he is a doing at
this instant?


Rich. Ay, that if you please.


Dame. Would you see him by your self, if you will I Will pronounce but two
word^, and retire, and his likeness shall appear to you in his posture, and
doing the same actions that he is employed about at this instant, where e're he
is.


Rich. And shall I see nobody but him?


Dame. That is according as he is alone, or in Company.


Rich. Let me see him then, but be you here, not that I am afraid; perhaps
(...) very well pleased where he is, and troubles not his thoughts about me.


Dame. You Spirits that are Subject to my Charms, Obey, Obey, Obey, And let
there to this Ladies eyes appear the form of him she loves. Beatrice, draw that
Curtain, he will stay but a moment.


Rich. It Is he, my Lover himself!

Lady Rich sees Mr. Hartwel appear in the Glass. What is he a doing?


Dame. His eyes are fixed upon a Picture.


Rich. It Is my Picture, I know it by the Ribbond.


Dame. I hope you are well pleased now, he kisses it with a great deal of
Devotion.


Rich. I am surpised, but now he is gone; my Satisfaction of seeing him was but
very short.


Dame. There Is not a more faithful Lover in the World, nor one that has so
great a Passion for your Ladyship.


Rich. Having seen what I did, I need no longer doubt it; now I wish with all
my heart he were in Town.


Dame. I could do your Ladyship such a Kindness if you would but write to him.


Rich. Nay, I believe he would come with Writing, but I cannot send my Letter till
to Morrow; And 'twill be two or three days before he can be here.


Dame. But I have a nimbler Post of my own, write but to him to come away
presently, and I Will send an Express with it that shall bring you an Answer in
half a quarter of an hour, and he shall be here himself to Night.


Rich. Bless me sweet Heaven! what do you mean?


Dame. Nay, I say it, if your Ladyship be so minded. --


Rich. How! Shall I have an Answer of my Letter presently.


Dame. As soon as it can be writ.


Rich. It Is thirty Miles to Tunbridge, where he is.


Dame. If it were a hundred, my Messenger would be there and back again n a
moment.


Rich. This is more than I ever heard of you yet. -- The like sure was ^ever
done.


Dame. Step to the Table, there is Pen, Ink, and Paper; Now please to write what
I dictate:

Sir, I can no longer endure your absence; Send me word by the Bearer if you
resolve to put an end to my Trouble, by letting me see you in Town to Night?
That Is enough, Subscribe as you please -- Now give it me to S^l, a little
Ceremony is required which you cannot see without being extremely frighted;
I Will wait on you again in a minute. -- --

Dame Exit.
Rich. I have been Courageous hitherto, but now I begin to have an ugly
apprehension.


Beat. Madam, you need not fear any thing.


Rich. How do you do to live with her, and not be frighted.


Beat. O Madam, I am used to it.


Rich. But was not you horribly scared at first?


Beat. Alas, Madam, my Dame took me in Fatherless and Motherless; I was left
quite friendless, and was glad to be any where. But now I am used to it, it is
nothing to me.


Rich. Whither is she gone now?


Beat. To her Familiar.


Rich. What is it like?


Beat. It Is a sort of Hobgoblin which she has above, it is hellishly ugly; but
never does any mischief.


Rich. I protest I am confounded at all she does.


Beat. She is a Prodigious Woman, and if you should but know all.

Re-enter Dame Dobson.
Dame. Your Letter is there by this time.


Rich. What already?


Dame. Go to the Glass and see --

Lady Rich goes and looks in the Glass. Spirit by all the Power I have over
thee, Obey, obey, obey; And let the same Person again be visible.

Hartwell appears as before.
Rich. He comes again, he is Reading my Letter, he seems transported with Joy.


Dame. It Is a great Confirmation of his Passion.


Rich. Now he takes a Pen in his Hand.


Dame. He Is going to write to you* and that very minute he gives the Messenger
the Answer, he will quit that Fantastical Body he appeared in, and bring it here
to you.


Rich. To me, let him not come near me, I entreat you.


Dame. Be in good cheer, it shall fly to your feet without being seen who
brings it, or whence it comes.


Rich. Now they bring him a Candle. -- He Is going to seal it, I am all over in
a cold sweat.


Dame. Methinks every thing is done very gently. See now he is gone to deliver
it to my Messenger, I took particular care you should not be frighted.


Rich. It Is true, though I am not naturally timorous, yet I have seen so many
things, that I did not believe possible to be done; that I confess to you I am
scarce in my right Senses.


Dame. But pray oblige me to say nothing of all this. But see my Messenger has
made have, here is an Answer come --

A Letter drops from the Ceiling at their feet. Here Madam, take it, be not
afraid.


Rich. How, touch a thing that came by the Devil!


Dame. Read it, the force of my Conjuration is spent, and my Spirit's
Commission is now at an end, you need not fear any further effects.


Rich Reads. It Is his Handwriting, who could have believed this possible?

Dear Charming Creature -- I shall take Post immediately, and doubt much
whether you will see me, or the Messenger first. A Lover when summoned by the
Person he adores, rides commonly the forehorse, Yours.

I must take my leave without Ceremony. -- I am in a manner struck Dumb with
^dmiration, I Will see you again very suddenly, though I make you no
acknowledgment for the present trouble, your favors shall not go unrewarded.


Dame. As you please, I only require your secrecy; Beatrice wait on her ^wn,
and shut the door.

Lady Rich and Beatrice Exeunt. ^ome forth, Sir.

Hartwell appears. Well Sir, how is it with you? Have I done you good Service?


Heart. I am so obliged to you, I shall never be able to come out of your Debt.


Dame. This Slight showed as well as if I had showed the deepest mystery in my
Art, That would have taken up time, and your occasions required expedition.


Heart. This was as well -- Here are Ten Pieces, let that excuse me till a
further opportunity to express my Gratitude.


Dame. Get on your Boots and Riding garb, to appear in to her at Night, I have
performed my part, the rest depends on your management.


Heart. I Will go and prepare for it. Adieu.

Exeunt.
SCENE X.
Dame Dobson, Gillet in the habit of a Gentleman going to the Campaign. Gillet.
DAme Dobson -- Ha my Dear Devil of a Dame, Do you know me again Dame!


Dame. Who are you: What Mr. Gillet?


Gill. How do you like me Dame? Am not I Heroically equip't? don't I look like
a Bully of the Field?


Dame. You are one already for certain.


Gill. View me round, have I not the right air and mien of a Warrior?


Dame. As if you had been in twenty Champaigns, and fifty Assaults, besides
Attaques and Sieges.


Gill. Would I were amongst 'em. Mortblue the Habit makes the Soldier, it puts
life and courage into me; methinks I am inspired with valor, I could beat the
Devil now; I Will Pawn my Soul to Old Nick but I Will be the Death of a Hundred men
e're long.


Dame. You must not be too fierce on the sudden.


Gill. I cannot forbear, if I should be hanged, I went e'n now to show my self
to my Mistress, where I met three or four of my Rivals, the young Officers I
gave you an account of; and they at their old rate began to jeer, and told me I
was a Coxcomb, for putting my self into such a Garb; I presently whipped out
Poaker, placed my Thumb as you gave me directions, firm, Close said I, They
star'd upon me, and ^eigning to laugh, retreated, and but one of 'em du^st so
(...) as draw his Sword.


Dame. I believe it, they found themselves mistaken in you.


Gill. It Is a rare Sword Dame, with this and my Thumb thus, I defy a whole
Squadron.


Dame. You have it right, but let me advise you to moderate your Courage, and
never to use it: But upon just provocation, and in your own defense.


Gill. I shall have much ado to govern my self, let them look to it that (...)
voke me, -- Ha, Stand off -- ha.

Draws his Sword, and (...) about as if he were angry, (...) fighting with
somebody.
Dame. Hold, put up, Somebody is coming.


Gill. At their Peril be it if they anger me. --


SCENE XI.
Dame Dobson, Gillet, and Mr. Hartwell. Hartw. TWo words with you Dame, about a
thing I had forgot to speak to you of.

Hartwell whispers with her.
Dame. I Will take care.


Heart. If I should come to be known, it would spoil all.


Dame. It would prejudice my reputation as much as your interest; therefore
look you be secret your self.


Heart. Nay, it shall never be known for me.


Dame. Then you need say no more.


Heart. But if any of your Servants? --


Gill. Why are you importunate, when she tells you, You need say no more.


Heart. What Is that to you Sir, Do you think I don't know my own business?


Gill. And do you think my Dame Dobson don't know a little better than you? She
tells you, you need say no more, and it is an affront to her Art not to believe
her; and I Will not see my Dame affronted.

Gillet draws.
Dame. Eh, Mr. Gillet.


Gill. No, No quarter, I Will Hamstring him.


Har. Ha! Is the fool so brisk? have at you then.


Gill. Whoh, you push too hard -- Hold a little; Pish, the Devil's in you; See
there now my Sword's down.

They fight, Gillet's Sword falls out of his hand, and Hartwell takes it up.
Heart. He that can defend his life no better, should not be so insolent and
impertinent.


Gill. Pough Dame, never be dismayed, this was some mistake in my Thumb -- it
was not put right.


Dame. Sir, Pray use your Conquests with moderation.


Heart. It Is well for him that he is in your House, had he been any where else,
I Would have used the fool as he deserved; but I Will not occasion any disturbance
here. There Is his Sword.

Hartwell Exit.
Dame. Your discretion obliges me. -- You don't understand your self, Mr.
Gillet, I gave you warning before.


Gill. Dame, you must teach me once more how to place my Thumb right, I was
mistaken -- but for the future.


Dame. No, that is not the Business -- your Thumb was right enough.


Gill. What then?


Dame. Did you not see me make signs to you to retreat? 'twas nothing for him
to get the better of you.


Gill. Why so?


Dame. Because he had a Sword of me with a Charm too, he has had i^ this (...)
Months, and the eldest Charm still Conquers the other.


Gill. Oh! I wondered indeed where the fault lay, The Devil on it how he (...)
his Along, and clatter'd his Sword about mine, his is a damnable strong ^m.


Dame. You see you are not to fight with every one at a venture.


Gill. Well, now you have given me warning, I Will be sure to ask that first.


Dame. You Will do well; for if your Enemy has an Enchanted Sword too, yours will
signify nothing unless it be elder.


Gill. I Will go now and fight the rest of my Rivals from my Mistress, and if she
will not Marry me then, I Will be gone for Tangier, where I Will kill my Fifty Moors
aday for my diversion till they are all destroyed, and then I Will return the
great Hero of Great Britain, and be made a General. Adieu Dame.

Gillet Exit.
Dame. The man will go mad for certain. At last I am got clear of Visiters, I
must make use of this opportunity for other Affairs. --

Exeunt.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Dame Dobson and Mrs. Prudence. Dame. What News bring you, Mrs. Prudence? How
does your Lady?


Prud. She Is below, she made me light out of the Coach at Door to come and know
if you were alone, and at leisure to be spoke with.


Dame. Beatrice, run down and tell the Lady that is below in the Coach, I am
alone, and if she pleases, may come in.


Prud. You see how impatient she is to know your Answer to her Question.


Dame. She has reason for it, but you know it required time to deceive her
Artificially: It was necessary to our purpose to make her put away her former
Woman, and to take you in her place, and to continue it without letting her
know that you were of our Acquaintance; It was requisite also to let her be
^ccustomed to you, that she might put Confidence in you. All this is brought
about, and we are now upon the point to Compass our design without danger of
ever having our Confederacy discovered.


Prud. It shall never be known for me.


Dame. I am assured of your Secrecy upon account of your Cozen, whose intrest
is not a little concerned in mine, Decoy has done me an excellent piece of
Service by engaging you to our party; I am glad he had a Kinswoman so discreet
and capable to serve us in this affair, it shall be to your Satisfaction.


Prud. I Will play my part so exactly, that my Lady shall believe all the Devils
in Hell had a hand in it.

Enter to them Lady Noble and Beatrice,
Nob. Well, and how Dame, have you been mindful of me?


Dame. You desired by some supernatural means to be convinced of the thin^ you
had a mind to know.


Nob. Yes, because I would have no doubt for the future.


Dame. You would know whether your Husband will dye before you? Now mind what I
say, In the Alcove of your Chamber stands a high Cabinet, upon which is a great
deal of Purcellein and China. The great Jarr or Urn that stands in the middle,
shall fall down of it self at some time of the Night, if it breaks your Husband
shall dye first; if it does not break, you will go before him. -- Now I tell you,
it will be his turn to dye first, and you will live long after him; But I do this
to satisfy you fully in the point, is not this as supernatural a thing as can
be? and by this you will see that I am not a person of words, and outward show
only; for this shall happen at home at your own House, where I nor nobody for
me can be to use any means or device to throw it down; But what, you look a
little blank upon the matter.


Nob. It Is true, I begin to apprehend that I have engaged my self too far, and
my heart fails me.


Prud. For my part, Madam, I shall certainly be afraid; and if your Ladyship
please, you may dispense with my not lying there.


Nob. No, never talk on it, that must not be.

That silly Wench is afraid of every thing, but I am resolved to know my
Fortune in this point, and if that happens which you say, be assured I will
largely consider your extraordinary pains.

Exit.
Dame. I never doubted your Ladyships bounty, if your Ladyship pleases to
follow me, I Will give you a little Viol to drink three Spoonfuls of, which when
you go to Bed will make you slumber, and prevent your fear.

Noble, Prudence, Dame, Exeunt.
SCENE III.
Colonel and Lady Noble. Nob. MRs. Beatrice, tell your Dame she shall hear
from me to Morrow morning, I Will come and acquaint her what passes.


Col. What is your Ladyship here?


Nob. You see how my Impatience to oblige you, has made me lay aside all
scruples. I had ever an aversion to the whole Tribe of Fortune Tellers,
Astrologers, and Cunning People, I always believed it their Business to get
Money; but you desired me to see this Dame Dobson.


Coll. You have obliged me in it.


Nob. But who imagined to meet you here, she took me in to show me her Closet,
otherwise I had been gone and mist seeing you.


Coll. What thinks your Ladyship of our Cunning Woman.


Nob. I Recant my former opinion, I resolved to assist you in convincing the
World that she was but a Cheat: But after what she has told me ought to be si^*
she has revealed such things, that it is impossible but she must deal with the
Devil.


Coll. There it is now, she is too cunning for all you Women, in that consists
her greatest Skill.


Nob. Colonel, your Countess is a person highly deserving, and I shou*d be
very glad to see her Married to a Man of so much Worth and Bravery, and you
know I have hither to blamed her for desisting upon account of any thing this
Woman had foretold. But now I find the Countess was much in the right for I am
absolutely persuaded the Match will be very unfortunate.


Coll. Such Predictions should not hinder if the Countess would but consent to
Marry me.


Nob. But is there no other Woman in the World you could be content with for a
Wife? --


Coll. I have too strong a Passion ever to leave her.


Nob. But you must dispense with things when there are such strong Reasons
against you, endeavor to please your fancy in some other Beauty.


Coll. What will it avail me to love any other? for in her opinion the Change
of the Person does not in the least alter the fate of my Marriage.


Nob. I Confess she has much puzzled me too, she told me I should very suddenly
be a Widow, but that is no wonderful thing, for my Husband is very old and
sickly; and though his Death would be a great grief to me, yet there is some
reason for it: For according to the course of Nature, I should outlive him. But
that which I don't understand is this, she assures me I will Marry again, now I
don't find in my self the least inclination to a second Husband --


Coll. By that, you see there is no Credit to be given to what she says; for if
you never marry again, what becomes of her Prediction.


Nob. Yes, but she maintains that I will, and that what she tells me will
certainly happen. She assures me moreover, that I shall make him I marry the
happiest man living.


Coll. I verily believe it Madam, for a man cannot but be happy with a Lady of
such Beauty and Perfections. But for all this, Dame Dobson may be no great
Conjurer; for I Will tell your Ladyship, Suppose you had inclination enough to
marry me, I should have all the happiness imaginable with you, because that it
is the effect and influence of your Stars, and yet the Consequences of my
Planet is, for me to be jealous, vexatious, and tormenting of my Wife, to kill
a man in her presence, and to dye for it. How can these things hang together?


Nob. But it is not certain that I shall marry you.


Coll. I only say, suppose it, Madam.


Nob. You know I never declared my mind in that point.


Coll. True Madam, nor do I now press you to it. But what I was saying is this,
That that which we know never will happen, yet might have happened.


Nob. Eh.


Col. And in this case after what this Dame of ours has told to me and the
other, she must in necessity be in the wrong either to you or me.


Nob. But the fatality which she found threatened you, was perhaps to (...) but
a certain time, and not pointing to your whole life: It may be she did (...)
look so far, and if it were so, you may live a year or two unmarried, and after
that marry whom you please without danger.


Col. I assure your Ladyship, I apprehend no danger at all, she is a very lying
silly prating Woman.


Noble. Your Servant Colonel, There Is a Lady that would not be known, and I am
as unwilling to be seen as she. For the World knowing that I have an old
Husband, and one that is Sick too, will be apt to report I came to inquire after
his Death.


Coll. The World is very malicious. It Is therefore good to avoid Censure. Your
Ladyships most humble Servant.

Lady Noble pulling her Hoods over her face:
SCENE IV.
Colonel, and the Countess. Count. I Have made you expect a little too long.


Coll. Our Dame has some Persons above with her, and we cannot speak to her
yet, therefore you are come soon enough. But I beseech your Honor to tell me
what said the Lady to you that came in as you were Dressing? I perceived by her
she had some extraordinary News to tell you; and therefore I took my leave and
came before.


Count. She told me the same thing as somebody had acquainted you with before,
concerning the Adventure of a Looking-glass, and the Gentlewoman Cured of the
Tympany, I heard what a strict Charge you gave 'em, not to let me know anything
of those Matters.


Coll. It will call any bodies reason in question to believe it, every body you
see tells you great Miracles of this Woman, and I meet not with one but she has
fooled and cozned.


Count. You are her Enemy, and will believe nothing; for my part I know her by
Experience, and believe all she has foretold relating to my self, to be as true
as if it were already happened.


Coll. But permit I may reason the case a little, That that she foretells shall
happen to me, will not happen; but by the malign Influence of the Planets that
ruled at the time of my Nativity; now a thousand and a thousand others were
born at the same instant, and under the same Planet; and I shall all these if
they Marry be Unfortunate, Jealous, and Kill a^ Man* A^surd, absurd.


Count. You take it in a wrong sense, there is a fatality of good and evil
fortune affixed to each particular person. And this fatality does not depend
upon the moments of their Birth. A Thousand people perish together in a Ship^;
a Thousand others are killed in a Fight, they are all born at different times,
and (...) several Planets. Yet that does not hinder, but that the same
Misfortune (...) fall every one of them.


(...). I see you will never want Arguments to defend your Incomparable (...).
If you loved me. --


Count. My Compliance to come hither again with you, is a sufficient testimony
of my Kindness. -- But now I will put on my Mask, and speak my North-Country
t^ne, lest Dame Dobson should come on a sudden, and surprise me, If we deceive
her in this, I will yield my self in the wrong, accept your Love, comply with
your desires of Marriage. But I am too well assured she will discover the Cheat.


Coll. I doubt it very much; at least she will not remember to have seen me in
the disguise of a Footman.


Count. She hardly then so much as cast her Eye toward you, and this Habit,
and that Perriwigg gives you quite another air, you are in a manner another
person.


SCENE V.
Colonel, Countess, Dame Dobson, and Beatrice. (...). Here Is a Person of worth
has waited with a great deal of Patience.


Coll. Have a care she does not get a glimpse of your Face. We are come to you
with an absolute belief and confidence in your Knowledge; for we have heard
such wonders of --


Dame. Let that pass, and to your own affairs; What is it that you desire of me?


Coll. I am a Gentleman of a good Family, though of a mean Estate, the person
you see here is a considerable* Heiress in the North, I have stolen her away,
and married her without her Friends consent, her Father is averse, and we use
all the interest we can to pacify him, by the persuasion of Friends, but he will
hearken to no terms. Now our request is a little difficult, but you have done
many stranger things, we desire you to make a perfect reconciliation; for which
you shall have Two hundred Pound for your pains.


Dame. It requires much trouble to effect.


Count. Ne marry, it is no such great fault. Lou^ I tro every day does the (...)
of that, and you shall no gang without a ge^d reward, if you can do us that
(...) (...) turn, and a thousand Benisons on you tol boot.


Dame. What you desire is not impossible.


Coll. Here are 20 Guinneys for you in hand, take 'em and use the best of your
Skill.


Count. Eh, Weladay, Ise given you ten times as mough, set me but to rights
with my Father, I pray.


Coll. I know the least Secret of your Art will be sufficient to do our (...)
siness.


Dame. Well, I Will try what may be done; he lives in the North you say (...)


Coll. Yes, but he is hastening up to Town to look after us.


Dame. He shall be reconciled to you, but 'twill require some time.


Count. Ene Geud betide you now in troath Dame.


Dame. I Will tell you now what you shall write to him.


Count. Nea, Nea, the Deal of ill luck of that Woman, but he burns all I write
to him, and won not read 'em not so much as ean Letter; no he in troath Dame.


Dame. When I have used a certain Ceremony to the Paper, and said some mystical
words over it, then write upon it, and provided, that he does but touch the
Letter, he shall have no Power to refuse, and then you shall see the
Consequence.


Count. Ise warrant you he shall touch it, or it shall gang very hard.


Dame. That will be sufficient.


Coll. How glad am I at this, now you will be undeceived?

Colonel aside to the Countess.
Count. Geud, Geud blessing on thy heart for it. -- Ise pray for thee tol my
dying day. -- Ene give me the Paper quickly, Dame I am with barn till I gripe
it in my hand.


Dame. I Will bring it to you in a Moment.


Coll. A word I beseech you before you go, we two married for Love; some are of
opinion that such matches are seldom fortunate, pray tell me what will be the
event of ours.


Dame. You will be very happy, your Dame looking wishly in the Colonels face.
Physiogmony at least seems to express so much, and I frame a Judgment more from
the Visage and Cimetry of features in the Face, than from Lines in the Hand.
But I Will be more positive in my asseveration, if the Lady pleases to show her
Face.


Count. Nea, nea, Pray you tol excuse me there away, Ise ha money very* goad
reasons why I mun no show my face tol any ene in London; therefore pray you to
hold you content for this eance.


Coll. Cannot you at the same time you set a spell upon the Paper, make also a
Discovery of what I ask to know beside.


Dame. It shall be done, I Will be with you again presently.

Exit Dame.
Coll. Now Madam, I hope you will be as good as your word, Dame Dobson is no
longer the Person you took her for, where is her Skill and Cunning now? she
believes we are married, and I am no longer under the malicious influence of
any Star to lose my Head.


Count. We shall hear what she will say when she comes again.


Coll. She Will tell us we shall be very fortunate, and will bring you the Paper
with a Charm in it, or Charmed Paper; was ever any thing more ridiculous?


Count. I believe it would have the effect we desired, if what we ask t^ had
been real; but let us not rejoice too soon, when she has consulted her Spirits,
I am afraid she will find out the Cheat.


Coll. But suppose she should bring you the Charmed Paper, without any
Advertisement from her Familiar of our Contrivance?


Count. Then I promise you to show my face, and canvince her of her Igno^, and
to Marry you without further scruple.


Coll. Then I am a happy man, Dame Dobson is no more a Witch. I think I (...)
her coming.


Re-enter Dame Dobson. Coll. Now for the Paper, Dame.


Dame. What mean you here? This Lady has no Father, you have not stolen her
away, nor are you Married to her; and what is more, you never will be Married to
her.


Count. Hear you that, I pray you geud Sir, were you told before that nea
Witch in the World had mear Skill.


Coll. I confess I have not stole this Lady, nor am not yet Married to her. But
say you that I shall never Marry her?


Dame. Never.


Coll. Your reason?


Dame. My Art tells me so; therefore --


Coll. But why, what shall hinder?


Dame. I stayed not to look into the reason, but it is an easy thing to let
you know why, if you are willing I shall call my Spirit, he shall tell you
himself.


Coll. Call him.


Count. Eh wa is me, Call her Spirit.


Dame. That you may not be frighted at the Apparition, you shall see nothing
but the Head of a Dead person, which he shall animate, and a while give motion
to, as if it were living, and had all its senses. But do not show the least
sign of fear, for he is disturbed when he sees any body afraid of him, and when
he has cause to be angry, I have no longer Power to control him.


Count. Nea, but I mun be afraid of the Deil, I shall be soar afraid in gued
faith Woman, therefore Ise see no Deil.


Coll. Why Madam? I Will be near you.


Dame. This is an ill time for you to act the Hero, you may be afraid as well
as the Lady, as stout as you think your self, the appearance of my Spirit will
daunt you.


Coll. I Will venture that.


Count. Nea, nea, Sir; Ise naught to do with Spirit, nea with Head, Ise know
ean enough already.


Coll. I Will wait upon this Lady home, and come to you again Dame, in the int'rim
prepare your blackish Spells, and your most dreadful Apparitions, you shall see
I am a man that fears nothing.

Colonel and Countess Exeunt.
Dame. I shall expect you. It concerns me now to play my part well. He Is a man
upon the fret, he is disgusted with Art, and will never give over till I can
absolutely convince him that I deal with the Devil. -- Mrs. Hellen you may
enter now if you please.

Goes to the side of the Stage.
SCENE VI.
Dame Dobson, and Mrs. Hellen. Hell. WHat say you now Dame, was not my coming
very seasonable?


Dame. How come they to play us this trick? I did not observe the Colonel
enough in his Footman's habit to know him again.


Hell. It was a sudden resolution, and must happen by the importunity of this
indefatigable Colonel. When I came home and heard she had changed her Clothes,
and that she was gone abroad in his Coach without any Attendants to meet him
somewhere it gave me a Suspicion, and I concluded their Rendezvous must be
here. -- Judge now of my diligence.


Dame. It makes well for our Business that it fell out so.


Hell. I look upon the Marriage now to be quite broken off, the Countess after
this will never receive any more of his Visits. -- Adieu, I Will go out at the
back door, and slip home before they miss me; and for the future, I Will take
care you shall not be surpised.


Dame. Do, for your diligence will be useful. Fare you well.

Hellen Exit.
SCENE VII.
Dame Dobson and Decoy. Decoy. YOu are an able Practitioner, I am as well
pleased at this act, as at the Cure of the Tympany, in which I performed my
part.


Dame. But our most necessary business at present is this Colonel. He is gone
hence with the Countess much confounded in his understanding; He is resolved to
come again, and will always be troubling us unless by some Stratagem we can
bring him to an absolute belief, that I am a Woman of profound Science.


Decoy. That Is no hard thing, play him the same Prank that so affrighted the
young huffing Volontier that is gone for Tangier. He that braved it out, and
thought himself a man of such undaunted Courage.


Dame. I believe 'twill shock the Colonel as much, I see Beatrice is
Conducting us some new Customer, go in and get all things in readiness for that
design, for the Colonel will not long be absent.

Decoy Exit.
SCENE VIII.
Dame Dobson, Mrs. Clerimant. Cler. IS this She?


Beat. That is Dame Dobson.


Cler. Though your Person is a Stranger to me, your Reputation is not;
therefore I hope you will excuse one that --


Dame. My Name is sufficiently known, therefore no Apologies, but to the
Business; what is your pleasure?


Cler. I am informed you not only concern your self in telling Fortunes, but
that you have wonderful Secrets to preserve Beauty, as also to give it where it
is wanting; Don't look upon me I beseech you: This Discourse has brought a
color into my Face as red as Scarlet.


Dame. How! Come to know your Fortune, and debar me from looking in your face?


Cler. Nay, if you must -- but -- I vow to you I am so ashamed.


Dame. How ashamed and have such a pretty Face as that, a most lovely delicate
Face! --


Cler. Nay, I am sensible I am not a perfect Beauty, but my comfort is, that as
I am not absolutely handsome, I am not very ugly; I know I have something in me
taking enough, a lively air, not altogether ungentile, indifferently well
shaped, no ill mien, and some share of wit too; and with all this, I can make
no very ill figure in the World.


Dame. Your appearance is very extraordinary.


Cler. In truth I am content to be as I am, and I would not change with a great
many that are thought very considerable Beauties.


Dame. Change, -- It must be for the worse, I know never a Lady in Town but
would be proud to be like you.


Cler. I do not come to you to be made more Beautiful than I am, but to have
something that may preserve what is already agreeable in me, and to keep me a
great while in my prime.


Dame. But what if I should give you some additional Beauty?


Cler. But can you? --


Dame. I have experienced the Secret a hundred times, it is but to change your
Skin for you. --


Cler. Change my Skin!


Dame. Yes Madam, change your Skin.


Cler. Change my Skin? good Gods, change my Skin, I shrink at the very thoughts
on it, and I begin to fancy already that you are fleaing me alive. --


Dame. That would be a Cruelty indeed; but in short Lady, if you would have a
fine delicate soft supple Skin like an Infant, you must do as I tell you.


Cler. It Is enough for them that are ugly to suffer all that. But as for me
that have only a few Pock-holes to endure so much --


Dame. But who says it will be any pain to you?


Cler. Why, dear Dame, is it possible to make me handsomer, and not endure pain?


Dame. The only inconvenience is, that you must keep your Chamber fifteen days,
and not be seen, you will not be the only person, I have four or five Patients at
this time that keep within for this very reason.


Cler. Fifteen days is no such long time.


Dame. I Will give you a Pomatum that shall insensibly take off the first Skin of
your Face, without giving you the least trouble, or any wish imaginable.


Cler. O let me have it quickly, I Will give you any rate.


Dame. My Pomatum is not yet quite ready, three or four days hence I (...) be
able to pleasure you.


Cler. And will not this Pomatum lessen the Mouth, and take it off a little at
the corners? for methinks a little Mouth is the becoming'st thing, the Mouth
can never be too little, too little.


Dame. I have a contracting Water that does that. But my Pomatum will make the
under Lip a little more pouting and ruddy, Oval the Eyes, and give a just
proportion to the Nose.


Cler. You are a most delicious ravishing Woman for this: Now if I might ask
you one little thing more.


Dame. I Will do any thing for you that lies in my Power.


Cler. You know Dame that the handsomer any person is, the more ambitious and
desirous to be entirely perfect; I pretend a little to Singing, I have all the
New Airs in Town, and can sing all the Songs that are now in Season, I would
desire you to mellow my Voice, and take away a little harshness, that I may
have it more at command, and bring it within compass. There are certain little
Softnesses and Rowlings in the Voice, which are extreme pretty and sweet, which
I have not yet to my fancy.


Dame. If you will go to the Charge on it Madam, I Will make you sing like a
Cherubin; I make an admirable Syrrup for that purpose, the Composition is a
little dear, you shall not use it above three Months, but --


Cler. Make, make it, I Will not spare for Cost.


Dame. It shall be ready with the Pomatum, I Will only take Measure of your
Voice. --


Cler. Take measure of my Voice, how is that?


Dame. That is, you must let me hear you sing a little, that according to the
Strength and Sweetness of your Voice, I may add or diminish in the Composition
of the Syrrup.


Cler. I have a little hoarsness at present.


Dame. No matter, when once I have heard you, I shall guess how it is.


Mrs. Clerimant Sings. Cler. This was not altogether well Sung, but --


Dame. You have already a very good manner of Singing, but the Syrrup I will
make for you.


Cler. I entreat the favor of you to let me partake of all your Secrets, I
have reason to endeavor for the greatest Accomplishments and Perfections that
I can, since my dependence is chiefly on them; -- For though I make this show
as you see in the World, yet I have but a mean Fortune; -- It Is true, I live
well at Court, and have good Relations and Friends that wish me well for my
Families sake; But all that will not do my Business; I must look for further
Advancement.


Dame. A Lady of your Perfections cannot but Command her Fortunes at Court, you
have so many Charms, and there are hearts so disposed to love. --


Cler. Do you think then I shall be successful in those Affairs?


Dame. If you overcome one Difficulty you will be a very happy Woman.


Cler. O fie, O fie, Dame now I am no longer able to look you in the face.


Dame. O Madam, I only said so to let you see I have some little Skill, Come
tell me, what Circumstances you are in, and how affairs stand as to that point?


Cler. O you have spoke a word that has confounded me, and I see I had need
tell you nothing, you know it already!


Dame. What is general I know at first sight; but if I would specify
particulars, I must have recourse to my Art, those things are not learnt but
with pains and difficulty, and time spent in study; -- wherefore if you expect
any help from me, tell me your grievance, that I may the sooner give you a
further proof of my Abilities.


Cler. I can no more have Confidence to tell you then --


Dame. You should no more conceal any thing from me than from your Physician;
believe me Madam, I am an Excellent Midwife, and can give you a quick
Deliverance from most misfortune.


Cler. O, O, O, what shall I do? what shall I do! never was the like of this!


Dame. What ails you Madam?


Cler. O Don't come near me, don't look at me, I shall dye with shame, well if
it is so plain to be discovered already, I Will go and hide my self from all the
World.


Dame. I suspect some thing, I Will follow the hint.

Dame speaks aside, and pauses a while.
Cler. I see it is in vain for me to conceal any thing from you, but pray tell
me Dame, do you perceive it with your eye, or is this knowledge the effect of
your Skill! Methinks I don't look big at all.


Dame. It Is so, She has swallowed the forbidden Morsel.

No, no, fear nothing, I confess ingeniously to you, I knew it by my Art only,
and that pierces through Stone Walls, and Mountains. Now give me a short
account of your Condition, and tell me what you would have me to do for you.


Cler. This is an Age of a great freedom, but the Court you know is a place
that more particularly allows of a frank free Conversation, -- An eminent
Person made Courtship to me, at first I thought it but raillery, and that he
did it out of Gallantry only, but the Continuance in time made me sensible he
was in earnest. His person at first was not displeasing to me; but his
Protestations, Vows and Sighs, and his continual Observances begot a Passion in
my heart, and at last he won me to a kind Compliance, I scarce knew I loved
before I was undone.


Dame. He Will never Marry you.


Cler. O never! I see you have studied my Case thoroughly, you know every
particular. No, he is now upon his Marriage with a Lady of great Quality, all
things are agreed, they are to be married suddenly.


Dame. Come, you must make the best on it.


Cler. O my shame is growing upon me; I shall be scorned by my Relations, my
Reputation gone, I am ruined: -- Therefore dear Dame Dobson help me in time, if
you know any thing that will cause an Abortion*


Dame. No, no, my Art meddles not with Life or Death, that were Murder.


Cler. Then I must abandon all Society. -- Ple never stay where I am known* let
me see, I will go beyond Sea, and stay there till I am brought to Bed.


Dame. Perchance we may save you that trouble.


Cler. And my honor be safe?


Dame. If I undertake it --

Let me consider a little, I Will consult my Art, and resolve you further.


Enter Beatrice. Whispers to Dame. Beat. Dame, here is the young City Hector,
he is come to you in a great heat, I could scarce keep him out till I came in to
acquaint you he was there.


Dame. There Is some mischief in this, he has been beaten again, and comes to
upbraid me,

Carry this Lady into some far Room, that she may not hear our Discourse.
Madam, please to retire a little, my Servant shall wait on you; I must use a
Ceremony in order to your affair, that will require my being alone a moment or
two.


Cler. I Would gladly expect as many hours.


Beat. This way, Madam.

Cler. and Beat. Exeunt.
Dame. Mr. Gillet where are you?


SCENE IX.
Dame Dobson, and Mr. Gillet. Gillet. O I thought the time long, I could scarce
have Patience, O Dame, I have been served a damnable trick.


Dame. As how my little Hero?


Gill. I went to visit my Mistress, resolving to sight away all my Rivals, and
to take her out, and be Married before I left her, and when I came, there was
the Devil to do, they were Singing, Dancing, and Feasting, as if they were all
mad.


Dame. What was the meaning of that?


Gill. The Jade had jilted me, and his Morning was married to a little damned
flattering young Officer, I had always a good mind to have Cut his Throat, and
if they had not prevented me. --


Dame. What would you have done?


Gill. I Would have spoll'd their Jollity. -- I bolted into the Room amongst them,
swore two or three bloody Oaths; but e're I could draw, three of them clapped
^old of me, took away my enchanted Sword, and tumbled me down Stairs.


Dame. If your Sword had been drawn they could not have don't.


Gill. Ay, there was my sillyness, I swore before I drew; But Dame, what (...)
I do for my Sword? I was fain to come away without it, for there were
Constables sent for, and such an Uproar of People at the Door.


Dame. You did well to come away.


Gill. But my Sword.


Dame. If they don't send it you, you must have another; I have just one left.


Gill. But cannot you Conjure for it.


Dame. That will be the same Charge to you, and this that I have has something
a stronger Charm.


Gill. Let the other go and be Hanged, then I Will have this. Here, here is Money
for it, let me have it quickly.


Dame. Within there, fetch me down the Sword that hangs above. But why in such
have Son Gillet?


Gill. Son!


Dame. Excuse the familiar Expression. But I call you Son, because I take a
particular Affection to you, and adopt you my Favorite, and will show the
utmost of my Skill to oblige you.


Gill. Well then, Mother I thank you, I called for the Sword in have, because I
have but a short time to order my affairs; for I intend to leave England in
three or four days, and go for Tangier; where when my Name is famous, and I
have been a terror to the Heathen Pagans and Infidels, I will return the
Champion of Christendom, and then Mother, I will make you a brave Woman indeed.


Dame. But Son, if you design all this, you omit a material Circumstance; since
you resolve to set up for a Champion, you must have a Mistress, in honor of
whom you must fight and wear her Colors, and ingrave her Name upon your Sword
with some remarkable Motto.


Gill. You are in the right, I have read some such thing in Pyramus, and the
Seven Champions, and Valentine and Orson. But how shall I do, I have never a
Mistress now.


Dame. You must choose another before you go.


Gill. I love never a Woman in the World, but she that is Married this Morning.


Dame. No, it must be a single Woman; Let me see your hand, I Will tell you how
long 'twill be before you will be in love.


Gill. Stay, let me clean it a little, it is something dirty with my fall down
Stairs. There now --

Gillet spits in his hand and rubs it upon his breast.
Dame. Hum, Um, Mount Venus -- Um -- Um -- Not in love Sir.


Gill. No!


Dame. No!


Gill. No I vow to Gad.


Dame. Why, you are just upon your Marriage as it 'twere.


Gill. Gad then it is as 'twere not; for I know nothing often.


Dame. Pull off your Hat, let me see your Forehead; I was sure I was not
mistaken.


Gill. It may be you see something that relates to what is past betwixt me and
my Mistress that is Married; for I thought it as good as a Match, only her
Friends fell off, because I was but a Citizen, and not of a Family good enough
for her.


Dame. No Son, Nothing of all this, both in your hand and forehead I see the
infallible signs of a Marriage; and if you are not Married to a handsome young
Lady of a vast Fortune within Eight and forty hours, I Will never pre^d more to
Astrology.


Gill. In Eight and forty hours!


Dame. Ay.


Gill. And to a great Fortune!


Dame. An Heiress, and of a great Family. -- There Is something of honor too
joined with this Marriage -- You Will be a Knight or a Lord very suddenly.


Gill. And all this by a Wife, where or how shall I see this Woman?


Dame. I could Conjure for her, and let you see her likeness. But what need you
care for that, since 'twill infallibly be so, though I have not examined yet by
what chance it will come about?


Gill. O dear Dame, Sweet Mother, Do but Conjure for her, and let me know all;
Do, and I Will hugg you, as the saying is, as the Devil hugged the Witch.


Dame. My adopted Child, I have promised to deny thee nothing; Go into the next
Room, lay by your Hat and Sword, when my Invocation is over, and the Spirit
that assumes her likeness ready, I will blow this little Whistle. Then come
forth, pass by, kiss your hand, and bow in token of good Will and Amity; for
you must reverence the Spirit just as you would do the Party her self, were she
there.


Gill. I must not speak then.


Dame. Not a word, all dumb signs -- and no more than I tell you, when you are
passed then go into that Room there, and stay till I call you.


Gill. I Will observe your Orders to a hair.


Dame. Go then and prepare.

Gill. Exit. Hem Beatrice! Now Fortune assist me, and this will be a gainful
business.


Re-enter Mrs. Clerimant and Beatrice. Dame. Come Madam, I have good News for
you, I find by my Art that it will be for your turn to marry suddenly, your
Husband will be Rich, a little Capricious, but one that will love you, and with
whom you may live very happily, if you can excuse the want of Noble Parentage.


Cler. If he be rich, and can maintain me handsomely.


Dame. So far I proceeded, and since your Condition may excuse all other
defects, I left off the enquiry of unnecessary particulars, and went forward to
give you a view of the Person that is to be your Husband.


Cler. As how!


Dame. To show you his likeness, it is true, it is done by my Invocation of a
Spirit; but you will see nothing but the likeness of a Man pass by you.


Cler. O Lord, I fancy I feel the ground open under me.


Daine. No, the rising of him is a little terrible; therefore not to ^right a
Woman in your Condition, I have ordered it that you shall be in the next Room
^ere, and when you hear a Whistle, enter, and at the same time the likeness of
your Husband shall enter at that Door, and if it bows to you, return his
Civility, and go out there, and stay till I call you.


Cler. But shall I be safe?


Dame. In the next Room hangs a little gilt Helmet, put that on, and take (...)
Spear that belongs to it in your hand; they have Power of Protection from (...)
evil Spirits. But you need not fear, go.


Cler. My desire to see the Person, encourages me very much; I long to see what
manner of man it is I shall Marry.

Exit Clerimant.
Dame. Go your ways -- So, now shall I have the diversion to see two Fools
afraid of one another. He by his folly, and she by her fondness will be enduc'd
to an absolute belief of my Conjuration; thus does my Art at once afford me
Profit and Pleasure. Mr. Gillet be ready. Madam be ready -- when --

Dame runs to each side of the Stage calls to 'em, and then whistles.
Enter Mr. Gillet, Mrs. Clerimant from each side, look at each other, he Bows,
she Curtsies passing by, and so go out. Gillet looks a little behind him as
soon as he is pas^'d her. Dame. Ha, ha, ha, Beatrice go after and keep her
there till I Call; Son Gillet, Son, Son.


Gillet peeping. Ha!


Dame. Come, come in, the Apparition's gone.


Gill. I was a little afraid.


Dame. That was because you had not the Sword on: But the stoutest Men in the
World may be allowed to be afraid of a Spirit. Courage extends no farther than
not being afraid of living Creatures. But how did you like the Lady?


Gillet. O Dear Mother, a lovely Creature. But is she such a Fortune -- an
Heiress?


Dame. I told you before as to that.


Gill. But where shall I see her now again in proper Person?


Dame. Go home immediately, and be standing most part of the day in your
Father's Shop, a Lady will come there in a Coach to buy some Jewels, amongst
the rest show her this Ring, desire her to put it o^ her Finger, if she does
not offer it her self when she is looking upon it; -- and if once this comes
upon her Finger, she falls immediately desperately in love with the man out of
whose hands it came last.


Gill. O dear!


Dame. The Lady is not in love with you, or ever has seen you, but will
accidentally come as I tell you; Therefore I give you this Sympathy Ring, the
very touch whereof will beget in her such a strong passion, that she will not
be able to refuse you any thing that you will ask of her, nor endure to let you
be out of her sight, as long as the love Fit lasts.


Gill. And how long will it last?


Dame. But two days. --


Gill. What if I should ask her to lie with her to be sure of her, for fear we
should not get to be Married in that time, and she afterward fall off?


Dame. I told you you would infallibly be Married to her in Eight and forty
hours; therefore, I know nothing can fall out to the contrary; Besides to a^
her, that would do no good, this is no Charm against virtue and honor,
therefore you must ask nothing but what is lawful.


Gill. O ho, I understand you.


Dame. Go, get you home quickly, when she is come and has bought, proffer to
wait on her home for the Money, take with you a Wedding Ring to have in
readiness, and by the way make your Courtship, she will presently yield, then bid
the Coach drive to Marry La Boon, and by virtue of that Ring hoop her fast to
you.


Gill. Well, dear Mother, there is my Purse I leave in Pawn for this Ring,
there is a hundred Guinneys in it, and as soon as the Marriage is over, I Will come
and give you a hundred more to buy you a pair of Wedding Gloves. Adieu.

Gillet Exit.
Dame. There Is one Dispatch now for the Lady Bride. Here Beatrice, desire the
Lady to walk in.


Re-enter Mrs. Clerimant and Beatrice. Dame. Go you down and guard the Door.

Madam, I have examined my Spirit, and I am informed that you will have a fancy
some time to day to go into the City to a great Jewellers to buy two or three
hundred pounds worth of Jewels, and from thence your Marriage will happen.


Cler. How should I have such a fancy in my Head, I have not a quarter of the
Money by me to pay for 'em. And yet I have seen a man that your figure exactly
resembles, often standing in a Goldsmith's Shop as I have passed by in a Coach,
and have taken great notice of him.


Dame. Do you know the Shop.


Cler. Exactly.


Dame. Go then, enquire the Peoples Names, and who this man is, and of what
substance and ability as to Riches; though I know by my Art he is or will
suddenly be a vast rich man. And when you are satisfied go in, pretend to buy
a Diamond Ring, bid him go home with you, and say you ll pay him the Money;
though I know if you take Five hundred pounds worth of Jewels he will present 'em
you all, he is so in love with you. And by the suddenness of your Marriage, I
ghess he will offer to marry you before you get half way home, and then he is paid
of Course; and the things are your own.


Cler. I Will try the Frolic; If it be one as I suspect, I Will not make two words
about the Business.


Dame. Go, and when you have done, come and inform me what passes.


Cler. But first Dame --


Dame. Nay, don't put your hand in your Pocket, I Will have no Reward till you
are satisfied I have deserved it, when the business is over. -- That you are
Married, and find your Husband as I tell you, if then you will present me with a
Jewel of One hundred pounds value, Ple esteem it for your sake, and such a
thing you may take up where you are a going.


Cler. Well Dame, you are very generous, and so will I be in my Reward -- Till
then my thanks -- if this succeed, I shall be a happy Woman.

Exit.
Dame. And I shall have the Credit of making a good Match for a Court Lady that
has more Beauty than Honesty, is a fit Wife for a Citizen that has more Money
than Wit.

Dame Exit.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Dame Dobson, and Mr. Gerrald. Dame. MR. Gerrard, I see you are come to
visit me again.


Gerr. I am your Convert; finding my Pistols by your means, has given me an
absolute belief in every thing you say or do: Was there not a North-Country
Lady with you?


Dame. Yes, a pretended Heiress. They thought to deceive me with a Story of her
being stolen away and Married.


Gerr. What could be more strange than the Discovery of that? 'Twas the
Countess -- to whom the Colonel lays such a close Siege! She is absolutely
resolved never to have any farther Correspondence with him: And for proof often.
I am to call on her some time to Day to wait on her hither.


Dame. What to do?


Gerr. To desire a Charm of you to make her forget the Colonel.


Dame. I am at her Service.


Gerr. But good Dame Dobson, now you have done me the favor so absolutely to
convince me of your profound Knowledge. I have one more favor to beg of you.


Dame. What is that?


Gerr. I am a man that love my Pleasure; I hate delays and laying Siege to
Women: who sometimes wanting a little Inclination to betray 'em within, will
hold out longer than fortified Towns. Now I am for a brisk assault, Taking,
Sacking and Plundering them all in a Minute: wherefore I would purchase a
Secret of you, that might make all Women that I have a mind to, to fall in love
with me at first sight.


Dame. I understand you --


Gerr. I am by Nature very inconstant, but do not think the worse of me for it,
it is the only way to be happy; for if we consider the thing right, what can be
more miserable than a constant Lover.


Dame. Most men are of your mind.


Gerr. Fully to enjoy the sweets of love, we must love all that are Fair and
Beautiful: The tall, the short, the lean, the plump, the fair, the black, the
brisk, airy, wild and the sober phlegmatic demure Lady: They have all some
different Charm, and something peculiarly pleasant and diverting in their way
of loving, which others have not; and therefore a Lover cannot be completely
happy that confines himself to any one, or indeed to less than all.


Dame. You are one of an extraordinary Gusto.


Gerr. I am experienced, and know Women: There is a sort of 'em that are proud,
haughty, and imperious, who think it a scorn that any man in the World should
say he has had the advantage of 'em. There are others of a cold Constitution by
Nature, and insensible: Some that nothing can change, when once they have
placed their Affections. And as this sort are very pleasant and delightful to a
man, whilst his appetite serves; so are they a most troublesome sort of
Cattle, when a Lover begins to retreat: They are Killing, Stabbing, and
Poisoning: Others there are that have a natural Aversion both to Love and to
Mankind.


Dame. Those sure are Monsters in Nature!


Gerr. They are dough-bak'd Women; there wanted heat at their Generation: And
there is as great a difference betwixt them and other Women, as in the Chickens
that are hatched by the heat of an Oven, and those under a Hen!


Dame. There is a great difference indeed: But now as to your Business! I will not
say it is above my Power; but as I cannot absolutely effect it without the
utmost severity of Art, and the most rigorous of my Conjurations, to assemble
the Spirits that are most stubborn and difficult to obey; so it cannot be done
in a day; and you will not in less than six Months perceive that I have
compassed for you what you desire.


Gerr. But will you assure me that in Six Months or such a time, I shall have
power over all Women that please my fancy?


Dame. There is one little difficulty which incapacitates me absolutely to
promise; but if that obstacle were removed --


Gerr. What is it?


Dame. I shall need a Composition of Gold, which is a Sovereign Metal, and is
essentially necessary to my performance of this Affair.


Gerr. I understand you: There are 40 Guinneys for the present, I was just
going to offer it you.


Dame. Nay, -- I ask not any for my self; I Will freely bestow my pains, but this
is for an Ingredient; my Spirits shall go to work upon these, and have time
enough to talk before the six Months are expired.


Gerr. I shall live in a great expectation of the good hour.


Dame. I would willingly have contrived to have done you the Kindness without
putting you to the Expense, but that it was impossible to be done without an
Extract of Gold; which truly prepared and rightly administered, will have a
strange Dominion over the Spirits of Women. You see what Miracles it works in
its simple Native state, with its gross Elements about it; what then will it do
when my Spirits have ref^'d it, by the help of my Art?


Gerr. And how is it to be used?


Dame. I convert it into Powder; which put into a Gold Case, with some
Ceremonies used to it, and mystic Characters engraven upon it; and wor^ about
your Neck, will have a secret power to produce a Sympathy in the Breasts of all
Ladies, for whom your Heart feels any Inclination: And as your desires increase
or abate, so will their loves to you. --


Gerr. You are an admirable Woman if you effect this.


Dame. Nothing can hinder't but your want of Faith.


^err. Which shall be strong, that your Charms may prove so too.


Enter Beatrice, whispers to Dame Dobson. Dame. I Will go to her, stay you here;
and when he is gone, give us notice.

Exit Beat. Sir, I must leave you, some urgent* Occasions require me within;
but rest confident and assured that from my Art you shall become a Bean Gorson
amongst the Ladies.

Exit Dame.
Gerr. Having made it my Business so long to decry this Woman, and called every
body Fool that had any thing to do with her; am I my self after all become her
Bubble? her demand of Gold for an Ingredient, looks like a Wheedle: And besides
the present Sum* she has laid her Train to draw more from me for the future:
But yet her revealing to me my Pistols, and her discovery of the Cheat of the
pretended North Country Heiress, are things that persuade me to a Confidence
that she can do strange matters: But if she should Cheat me after all -- I Will
have the wit to hold my tongue, and not let it be known; so I shall not be laughed
at, at least --

Ex:
Re-enter Beatrice. Beat. Dame, Mr. Gerrard is gone.


SCENE II.
Enter Dame Dobson, and Prudence. Dame. MRs. Prudence, walk in here then.


Beatrice, stand you Sentinel, and give me timely notice who comes.

Ex. Beat. Come now to our China Vessel; what became of the Jarr.


Prud. I came on purpose to give you an account, when we went up to Bed, we
locked the Door on the inside, she laid the Key under her Bolster. The question
then was, whether we should put out the Candle or not? at last we considered,
that if we should see the Spirit, the sight would fright us out of our wits.
And that it would be enough to hear it fall! That done, I had the string ready
which I had prepared with a running knot, and as I came to Bed in the dark from
the Chimney, where I put out the light, I stepped and put it over the Neck of the
Jarr; and unwound the bottom all along, as I crept to the Bed side. -- I was no
sooner laid, but my Lady crept close to me, and clasped her Arm round my
waste, and every now and then fancying a Noise, she would say -- Oh we are undone!
we are undone! but with a soft low voice, for she was afraid to cry out, lest
the Spirit should know we were there.


Dame. How could you forbear laughing?


Prud. With much ado, at last I gave the Cord a twitch, down comes (...) Urn,
the noise made her shreik out. -- I seconded her with ah, I am dead, (...)
dead: She slunk down over head and ears in the Bed -- I did the same; (...)
half an hours Palpitation of the heart, not daring to stir or speak all that
(...) till she was almost smothered. She bid me get up and see in what
condition (...) Jarr was.


Dame. Broken all in pieces, I warrant you!


Prud. No, the Jarr it self was whole, it happened to fall upon the Quilt of
the Couch, and from thence rolled down upon the Tapestry Carpet that was spread
upon the floor of the Alcove; but the Cover fell so, as it broke in the middle.


Dame. What said she then?


Prud. She past away the rest of the Night in a great deal of disquiet, lest
her old man should not die; she will come to you -- sometime to day, to know what
Comfortable News you will give her; at present she is much disheartened.


Dame. I Will satisfy her when she comes, I warrant you.


Prud. Now I have told you all, I Will begone: I stole out to come hither. And if
I am mist must make some excuse.


Dame. Yes, for she must not know you have bin here.


Enter Beatrice. Beat. Dame -- here is Mr. Heartall come to speak with you.


Prud. He knows me to belong to my Lady, I Will put my Hoods over my face, and
steal by him.


Dame. No, go out that way, Beatrice will show you. Ex. Prud. and Beat. Enter
Sir, enter.

Enter Heartall. Well Sir, -- How goes our Business?


Heart. Nothing better. After I left you yesterday -- I went two or three miles
out of Town in a Hackney-Coach, the Glasses drawn up that nobody might see me.
Toward Evening I took Post, and came to Town, and light from my Horse at my
Widows Door, by good luck she was just then looking out of the Window,
expecting me; she received me with joy. We entered into a serious discourse of
Love, and after a thousand Protestations of Kindness, she assured me that
within three days I shall be entirely happy.


Dame. She Will Marry you then.


Heart. We then made a Contract before witness. That Circumstance of kissing
her Picture in my Retirement, wrought much upon her: She thinks she cannot
enough reward my fidelity.


Dame. I am glad I contributed so much to your Fortune.


Heart. I Will ever acknowledge your Favors; but let me tell you, That what you
have done for me, redounds much to your advantage, and has extremely advanced
your Reputation: She has told somebody what past yesterday betwixt you, it is
in every bodies mouth. -- I have already met four or five of my Friends (...)
have inquired of me if it was true, that I was yesterday Thirty miles off.


Dame. Do not undeceive 'em by no means.


Heart. Never. I protested to 'em all, that I was at Tunbridge; and that (...)
(...) Post and came to Town upon account of a Letter I received at Twelve (...)
(...).


Enter Beatrice. Beat. The Colonel is come.


Heart. I find you are full of Practice still: I Will come again in the Evening,
and bring my thanks with me for all your Kindness.


Dame. You need not concern your self about that: I think my self indebted to
you, that you have given the World this Confirmation of my Skill, so much to my
advantage. And I will rest extremely well satisfied -- if you will but stay and
discourse the Colonel a little: He Is an unbelieving Enemy of mine, and I would
do all I can to bring him over to my side, and in this you may serve me.


Heart. It Is ten to one but he will be enquiring, the truth of this Business; and
a Confirmation from my mouth may prevail much.


Dame. I Will retire, and give you opportunity. Take no notice that you have
spoke with me yet; but say you are told I am very busy upon some great Design.


Heart. I Will observe Orders.


Dame. Go Beatrice, bring in the Colonel.

Exit Dame.
Enter Colonel. Coll. How, Mr. Heartwell in Town!


Heart. A Letter which I received yesterday at Noon from the Party you know of,
brought me so soon to Town; She was at last so kind to Command my return.


Coll. She was here yesterday to consult Dame Dobson in matters relating to
you; and as she herself affirms, Dame Dobson showed her you in a Glass kissing
her Picture.


Heart. It Is true, that I often paid my Devotions to her Picture when I was
absent.


Coll. And that she writ to you to Tunbridge at the same time, to come with all
speed to Town, and a Spirit conveyed her Letter, and brought back an Answer
from you in less than a quarter of an hour.


Herrt. What is it you tell me? Yet now I think on it, her Express must have bin
the Devil, otherwise he could not have bin here before me.


Coll. Then you believe it was the Devil.


Heart. Perhaps you only tell me this to laugh at me, or try my Confidence in
this Woman, because you find me here: But it is very true that in my Solitude I
was musing on my Window, and kissing her Picture just when the Messenger (...)
me the Letter.


Coll. You did kiss it then, and she writ to you, and you answered the Letter
immediately? I know not what to think.


Heart. I am as much surpised as you, but I wondered I could not overtake the
Messenger; for I mounted immediately, and had a Horse under me so fleet, I
durst venture to run him with most New Market Racers; yet he was (...) (...)
fore me, and had delivered my Letter long e're I came.


Coll. The Circumstances of your confirmation render it yet more (...) Did you
not stop by the way?


Heart. No, -- I rid as if it had bin upon Life and Death.


Coll. I confess now I know not what to think of this Cunning Woman.


Heart. I do not know whether it may be proper for me to enquire any thin^ of
her now or not, concerning this matter * I came to be resolved in some doubts
relating to my Mistress, but she having bin here before, I Will let it alone:
Besides I am told here, that old Dame Dobson is extremely busy. -- I have
outstay'd my time already, and I cannot conveniently tarry any longer --
beside, Colonel, I owe that respect to you.


Coll. I hope I am not the Occasion of your going away, my business is but
Curiosity, -- I am in no great haste.


Heart. I have altered my mind, since you have told me she has bin here, and
and in two or three days I shall be resolved in my scruples, if the Widow keeps
her word: And I think I need not doubt it after those assurances which she has
given me since my coming to Town.


Coll. I am glad to hear you are so far advanced toward your Happiness.


Heart. It Is so. -- Colonel, Your most humble Servant.

Exit Heartwell.
Enter Dame Dobson. Dame. Well Sir, your North Country Lady. Where?


Coll. She Is afraid to come, but that is pardonable in a Woman; I confess you
surpised me, I did not think you could have found out that we came to put a
trick upon you. And I more wonder at that, than I should at your Familiar or
Devil, you talked of showing us. --


Dame. O it is a hard thing to deceive me. I hold intelligence with those
Spirits that inform me of every thing.


Coll. Come, leave talking of Spirits, those are Stories to be told to Women
and Fools; let me understand the reality of the thing.


Enter Beatrice. Beat. O Dame!


Dame. What Is the matter, Beatrice?


Beat. Here Is the rich Country Gentleman come to Town again, he that told you
(...) many Thousand Pounds he got by Farming the Chimney Money of his County.


Dame. What he that we fobb'd out of his Money with our Counterfeit Widow!


Beat. The same!


Dame. Tell him I am not at Home.


Beat. I have; but he swears and stares. And says, he will search every Rome in
the House.


Dame. Say -- I am not at leisure; and that there is a Person of Quality with me.


Beat. I told him that too, when he said so; but he swore busy or not busy,
(...) speak to you. And would come in, though all the Devils of Hell were (...)
^ou.


^ame. His coming at this time will ruin me.


Beat. All I could prevail with him in, was but to have patience, till I came
in, (...) ^old you he was at the Door.


Dame. I must not speak with him till the Collonel's gone; if he sees me (...)
open his Throat, and out with all before him. And then there'l be no come off
for me.


Coll. I perceive, Dame, you are disturbed; what is the matter?


Dame. There is without a Rustic sort of a Country Gentleman, that will not be
denied Admittance; one that comes to be angry with me upon a mistake, at
another time I should have good sport with him: But now his presence would be
troublesome, and divert me from pleasuring you in what you have a mind to know
or see.


Coll. Let him come in -- I Will give him his answer. I am here first.


Dame. Doubtless -- he will have respect to your Garb and Quality. Let him come
any other time, and I Will satisfy him in all he can demand.


Coll. Call him in.


Dame. I Will retire in the mean time to dispatch another small Affair in order
to my Business with you. Call him in Beatrice, I Will be at my listening hole,
when he goes out follow him cl^se at heels, and bolt the Street Door after him.
--

Exit Dame and Beat. se^erally.
Enter Mr. Farmer. ^arm. Ha, Noble Colonel!


Coll. Who, Mr. Farmer!


Farm. Lord, Colonel, who'd have thought to have seen you here?


Coll. Why do you wonder at that? You come here. Every body comes here. And I
amongst the rest.


Farm. I am too much your humble Servant, not to inform you of what I know; you
come to a Woman here that is the greatest Cheat this day upon the Earth: if I
should tell you what a Trick she has played me. --


Coll. How! And every body tells such wonders of her?


Farm. Ay, a Company of Fools like my self. I have bin her Milch Cow, till of
late; but my eyes are open: if you will have patience to hear it. I Will give you a
Relation of the Jigg she has played me.


Coll. What, she has conjured for you then!


Farm. Oh finely, under pretense of helping me to a rich VVidow, has cheated me
out of 600l. but that is past, such an Owl as a Country Clodpate was; a fine
Bird for her to pluck.


Coll. She has had good store of your Guinneys then!


Farm. She is a Cutpurse, a Cutthroat; be you judge of the fine Doings of my
Dame Dobson, who has conspired with that Cockatrice to Cheat me of such a Sum;
but I Will have her apprehended, and Burnt for a VVitch, or Hanged for a Cheat at
least.


Coll. Be not in haste, she may come off by saying that what you reproac^ her
with, is but a story of your own Invention; I came here to have some proofs of
her Conjuring, I shall catch her in her Roguery, and that joy^'d with your
Charge against her, will make well for your purpose and mine too.


Farm. Now I am convinced, that all her Supernatural Informations and
Conjurings are mere Artifice and Cunning; yet she has showed me strange things
that have frighted me to the very heart -- And I know not, but you --


Coll. I am faithless of all that, and fearless. I Will put her to her Trumps; go
you to the next Tavern, and stay my coming, when I have done here I Will come to
you, there I Will hear your Story at large, we'll lay our heads together how to
regain your 600l. and be revenged on her, for the Injuries she has done me.


Farm. I will be counseled by you; And I hope 'twill prove to the Advantage of
us both. Colonel, I Will expect you at the Rose.

Exit Farmer.
Coll. So -- Now to manage this Business to the best advantage.


Enter Dame Dobson. Dame. What is he gone? why did not this Wench call me?
where are you Beatrice? you are so negligent in your Duty. I am sorry I did not
know it sooner.


Coll. He is but just gone.


Dame. You had much ado to persuade him then? --


Coll. He used many Arguments to stay, and pretended earnest business with you.


Dame. It Is a wonder he did not tell it you.


Coll. No!


Dame. 'Twill be a fortunate Chuff; though at present he is in a peck of Troubles
about 600l. which he thinks he is Cheated of: But is in the hands of a rich
young Widow, to whom he will certainly be Married in a very short time.


Coll. Say you so? -- he is no very handsome Man.


Dame. But she loves him desperately; she came to me to know what kind of
Husband he will prove: I certify'd her from the infallible Rules of my Art: But
she for all that to try his Temper, persuaded me into a Plot against him, to
see how he will bear the loss of so much Money, and whether he will be more
troubled for the loss of her Person, or such a Sum.


Coll. Then he will have the Money again by marrying the Widow.


Dame. She has ordered some Friends to pay him the Money a Month hence here in
Town, when she has heard what humor he is of.


Coll. Then 'twas her he threatened, he called somebody Cheating Baggage
several times, and threatened; how will she like that? This may go nigh to
break off the Match!


Dame. No: it is his Fate to Marry her. The Stars have so decreed it, and my Art
has foretold it; therefore it must be, but let us talk no more on it now another
time I Will tell you a pleasant Story how we have managed him in this Affair.


Coll. This is a Cunning Devil: how she has confounded me again?


Dame. You were going on in a Discourse before we were interrupted. In which
you seemed to desire something of me, do you remember what you were going to
ask? --


Coll. I was pressing you to let me understand the mystery of your Practice, ^d
the reality* of your Art; for I know it is all but Subtlety, and Delusion: (...)
may tell me; I am not one that will hinder your advantage; every one must live
in the World, and I am a well-wisher to Ingenuity: I know that all persons from
the highest to the lowest act for their advantage, and Profit is the thing they
aim at.


Dame. How! Profit! who do you take me for? There is no deceit-Sir in what I
perform: I am as good as my word to every Body; nay, I would not be worse than
my word to the Devil -- So far I am from what you say! --


Coll. I believe you. -- -- We ought to be as good as our word to every one:
But yet hold a little, Dame Dobson confess to me that the greatest of your
Skill is to know how to deceive Cunningly; and I Will esteem you the more for it:
I will commend your Ingenuity, and if you will show me how you manage your
Affairs, I will be more beneficial to you, than are the silly Fools you fright
into such admira^ion.


Dame. Your false Presumption makes you insult too much; have a care you come
to no harm. I have not the least intention of ill to you; but here are those
that will take my part. And though you see nothing, they hear what you say in
derogation to my Honor, and their Power. And it is not safe for you to talk so
any longer.


Coll. You speak this to a man that is insensible of fear. I laugh at all your
Devils and Familiars, and your Spirits of Intelligence: I defy 'em: Let 'em
come: Let -- 'em appear quickly. I Will play the Devil among'st 'em. What silly
Business is this! I can do as much when I please, my self; but I thought I
heard something fall down.

Dame Dobson walks about with precipitation, looks upward and downward, mutters
to her self. After that Thunder and Lightning is seen to flash down the Chimny.
Dame. Look nearer, and see what is there?


Coll. See: yes, without the least apprehension of fear.


Dame. It may be as stout Men as your self have bin afraid. Whence comes your
silence? what you are amazed?

The other parts of the Body fall down the Chimny.
Coll. I did not expect this Sight of horror; a Humane Body torn Limb from
Limb. Do you Murder folks here?


Dame. If you will take my advice, go your way.


Coll. I go away!


Dame. Never strive to hide it: I see fear has seized you.


Coll. I acknowledge I have some concern on me; But it proceeds only from the
misfortune of this poor mangled Wretch.


Dame. Since you are so troubled at that, I Will bring him to life again. You go
back, and hang down your head; you are ashamed now to let me see that you are
afraid; but I Will forget you have insulted, and release you from this fright.

She waves her wand in the Air, the Thunder and Lightning redoubles, during
which the Parts of the Body approach and join together. The Body rises and
walks to the middle of the Stage. Go! return from whence thou came, and be as
thou were before the Power of my Commands forced thee to appear. --

The Body vanishes.
Coll. Where is the thing I saw? I perceived a Man to move toward me; where
is it? I would fain have spoken to it.


Dame. Your Voice is faint and trembling; you told me you were one that feared
nothing.


Coll. The Sight was so extraordinary, that I may well be allowed a little
surprise; but as for being afraid, you do mean injury if you think so.


Dame. You changed Countenance more than once; what would you have done if I
had showed you what you have so long in vain endeavored to see.


Coll. Ay the Devil. I Will give you a Hundred Guinnies to show me that Sight.


Dame. You d'be scared out o'your Wits.


Coll. I will be as good as my word if you can show me the Devil. And I Will then
say you are what you pretend to be, without that I am an Insidel still --


Dame. Since it is so -- I will. Fortify your self with Courage, and come again
in the Evening.


Coll. You are in earnest?


Dame. In very good earnest: I Will see how courageously you will stand the brunt
of such an amazing Object. You Will be sure to come?


Coll. Yes; but you will engage I shall return in safety.


Dame. Safe from every thing but your own fear: If fear kill you, I cannot help
that.


Coll. May I not bring a Friend along with me?


Dame. No, you must come alone.


Coll. Adieu then Dame. I Will be sure to come.

Exit Colonel.
Dame. You Will consider better on it; but come not, or come; your valor is but a
Bravado: I know the strength of your Constitution now. And since this Sight
made your Courage retreat so, the next shall rout it quite. And give it such an
overthrow, it shall never rally hereafter to my prejudice. And this Imports me
more than ever, now you are joined in Confederacy against me. --

Exit Dame.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Dobson, and Mr. Goslin. Dame. MR. Decoy!


Decoy. Where are you?


SCENE II.
Enter Decoy. Decoy. HEre, Mr. Goslin's come, and now you have a Devil in
readiness for the Colonel. I think I had best run and fetch the Lady; She
stays only for my coming to tell her you are at leisure.


Dame. Do so, tell her I am alone, if any one comes in the mean time, you may
carry her into the next Room awhile; all things are prepared for her coming.
Beatrice has her* Instructions, and all will go well.


Decoy. She'il be very liberal, and she is a Woman frighted at the least thing
^imaginable, and will look upon any slight trick as miraculous. --


Dame. Go thou, bring her quickly that we may dispatch her, and have a
clear-house before the Colonel comes; as much frighted as he was at the Body
torn Piecemeal, yet perhaps he may venture to come again.


Decoy. You have a Devil ready harness't to entertain him. But I Will lose no
more time. -- I Will send you in a Customer -- I have without, who whil's* I step
for the Lady* will afford you diversion enough.

Ex. Decoy.
Dame. This Decoy is a diligent fellow, I have thriven well e're since he has
bin my Confederate: Oh, here comes the Sheep I am to flecce.

Enter Jinkin. Who would you speak with Sir?


Iink. Was a great pig Gentleman of Wales look you. And her was come to look a
Gentlewoman, was call her Name Dobson.


Dame. I am She!


Iink. Then look you Dame Dobsons, Got he knows, her was come to you, with very
heavy hearts look you. --


Dame. I afford present help for most Misfortunes. --


Iink. Was hear indeed that her was full of Conjurations. And that her keep
tame Devils, and Spirits and Familiars about you: Now her has bin Wedded, and
Married, and put together in Matrimonies one whole years, two days, and three
weeks, look you, without Portions with her Wife; because she was very good
Gentlewomans born, look you: But now her is grown full of Boldnesses, and was
tell her to her face, her did not Marry Iinkin for love; but her Diversions I
pray you: Then her was ride Huntings, and leapings over Hedges and Ditches, and
blowing Horns, with the best Hunters in Whales, look you.


Dame. There Is no great harm in that, if she do not make you blow the Horn too!


Iink. Was know not that; but at last, look you, her leapt Hedges and Ditches
so long till her leapt away with 400 Pieces of good Red old Golds; But her so
Cunning, that her sent Scouts after her. And her was feen upon her Gallops to
London in Man's Apparels; so her come after, and as soon as her come to Town,
her spied her in the Streets with Hats and Feathers, and Swords by her sides
like Gentleman's, look you: So her presently threw her Cloaks over her Noses,
look you, that her Wife might not know her, for her had meanings to follow her,
to watch her and to dog her, and just then comes 200 Coaches and Carts and
stops poor Iinkin. So her lost her Wifes, and could never see her since.


Dame. Would you have stopped her, if the Coaches had not hindered?


Iink. No: Got he knows; for her would have drawn her Swords and Weapons, and
killed her Husbands like a Man.


Dame. That is to say, you were afraid to be beaten.


Iink. Not asraid; but was not willing to be provokt to wroths and
indignations, look you: For Got he knows, when a Welchman's Blood is up, all
the Devils in her, was not lay it again; But pray you, look you, can you Conjure
hers to this place, and give her Love-Powders, and great deal of Charms to make
her have Kindnesses and good Wills toward Iinkin, her Husband; but I doubt you
cannot do that, because I know the Devil is in her already, look you, because
she plays such pranks* I pray you.


Dame. I could bring her hither, tho she were on the very Top of Penman Moor;
But it requires much Labor and Ceremony to new mould a Woman's Heart, and
alter her Affections: besides it will take up long time.


Iink. Iinkin can have patience, if Dame can put love into her.


Dame. Give me then 9 Pieces of Gold for an offering to the Spirits which I
must make use of to Conduct you^ Wife hither to put'em in good humor.


Iink. Nine Pieces? An able Lawyer has but five: Zownch -- And why should the
Devil have more Fees than the Lawyer?


Dame. Know you not that 9 is a mysterious Number? and very significant?


Iink. Why! was her Devil deal with Mystery in Numbers?


Dame. The greatest mystery in Nature is in Numbers; and especially in this
Number 9. find me the like again in all Arithmetic, 3 times 1 make 3. And 3
times 3 make 9.


Iink* Got he knows it was very pretty.


Dame. If you observe, 9 is composed all of odd Numbers; each including the
other proportionably; for as 3 is the result of 3 Unites; So Nine is the result
of 3 Threes.


Iink. And was it much better I pray you for being odds?


Dame. Numero-Deus impare gaudet, Spirits are pleased with odd Numbers, says
Virgil the great Astrologer.


Iink. Zounce, you was out Dame Conjurers! Got he knows Virgil was very good
Poets -- but her was no good Astrologers!


Dame. One of the greatest that ever was. Do not you see he has bewitched all
the World with his Verses ever since? And has put so strong a Charm in them
'twill last so till Doomesday; Nobody that reads 'em can refuse liking 'em.


Iink. That was very truths look you, indeed was have no great Acquaintance
with Virgil in Whales, and yet Virgil was her Cozen afar off, and a very good
Bard; but mark you, was her know he writes Verses in Whales, better than her
Cozen Virgil does: look you Dame, here was 9 pieces of red Gold for your
Spirits, your Devils and your Hobgoblins: And of all loves, I pray you get
Iinkin his Wife again.


Dame. Doubt not.

Call Beatrice.
Iink. I pray you, look you if her have one Welsh Devil in all her Flock, and
commend her lovingly to her, and tell her Iinkins was her own Flesh and Bloods,
and her own Cozen Germans.


Dame. I Will enquire their Countries and Pedigrees: Now to show that you freely
consent to the Charm; blow 3 times upon it as hard as you can --

Jinkin blows three times on her hand. Harder yet: So -- come again to me four
days hence; and then I Will give you an ^ount how your affairs stand. And when
the Devil will fetch your Wife!


Iink. How the Devil fetch her Wifes! -- Zownce -- no.


Dame. Fetch her to you only: and then I Will prepare a Philtre or Love Potion,
shall make her dote on you hereafter.


Iink. Look you, pray you! make her very strong Glisters of Love that may keep
in her Bodies, and work up to her hearts, And that will do it, look you.


Dame. I know what is fit to be done.


Enter Beatrice. Iink. Got be with you Dame Dobsons, and all your Devils.

Ex. Jink.
Beat. I have listened to this Welsh Customer with a great deal of Pleasure.


Dame. Against he comes next, I le invent some Story shall make him deposite a
greater Sum. What a number of Fools will make me more cunning in spite of my
Teeth? Every one increases History: And rather than it shall not seem
Miraculous, tells lies to make it appear so.


Jinkin Reenters. Beat. Your Welshman returns.


Dame. Look out, and see what is the matter?

Beat Exit.
Iink. Dame Dobsons, Dame Dobsons.


Dame. What Is the matter!


Iink. Her come to tell you Woman's, you have wonderful Skill in Conjurings; as
her was on the Stair Case, and hearing Pratlings below, was look down and saw
her own Wife talking with your Maids, look you.


Dame. Are you sure you saw your Wife?


Iink. Zownce her knows her own Wifes and her own Spouses, or the Devil was got
into her likenesses, with her Hats and her Feathers.


Dame. No, it was your Wife: I did it to let you see your Money was not thrown
away; your present to the Spirits of 9 pieces has obliged 'em mightily: And
made 'em as willing to serve you, as if you were a Lord. And now you see what
virtue is in number 9.


Iink. Her will put all her Silver into 9 Pences for this, and all her Golds
into 9 Pounds; But look you Dame Dobson, will not your Devil wait on her Wifes
up here? Zownce her would fain see her.


Dame. You must not be seen by your Wife yet: 'Twill hinder the Operation of my
Spell.


Iink. Then Iinkin was glad her own dear Wifes did not see her own Husband^


Dame. Next time you come bring 20 l. with you for the Love-Powder: It Is made
of all the dear things that can be. And will cost you so much if you have of
the best.


Iink. Her would have of her best, look you; because her Wifes has very little
affections for poor Iinkins -- And her would have her love her very much. --


Dame. You shall -- Within there.

Enter Beatrice. Conduct him out at the back Door. --

Ex. Beat. and Jinkin Chance is often very kind to me; if Fortune favors me
thus but a little longer* I shall have no more need of Spies and Intelligencers.


Enter Mrs. Jinkin habited like a Gentleman. Mrs. Iink. According to the
description given me, you should be Dame Dobson.


Dame. You are not mistaken.


Mrs. Iink. I have Business with you of great Concernment.


Dame. Who could refuse any Courtesy to so pretty a Gentleman?


Mrs. Iink. You are pleased to rally me; but to my Business -- I am so happy to
have something in me that is not unpleasing to a great many Persons. --


Dame. And I doubt not but you make the best use on it. --


Mrs. Iink. I do my endeavor; but every thing falls not out to my mind. There
is one little Obstacle that hinders; and I come to desire you to remove it.


Dame. Come, to particulars! --


Mrs. Iink. It Is this, -- I see every day a great many fair Ladies, things very
agreeable to my Age and Constitution; of four or five that I am acquainted
with, and not altogether hated by, there is one that is Mrs. of her self and
rich: It Is said she is worth 10000 l.


Dame. You Would have a Charm to make this Lady marry you?


Mrs. Iink. Perhaps she desires it as much as I: She Is handsome, young and
spritely: And we seem as it were created for one another. But --


Dame. But what, little Cavalier?


Mrs. Iink. The Devil on it is -- you can Divine what it is I want. What I would
have you do for me, I believe is not Impossible. -- See, there is my hand --


Dame. The Judgments we frame from the hand are too uncertain, it gives but an
Imperfect knowledge. -- I am no great Friend to Chyromancy. -- I shall be able
to inform you more by Casting your Nativity. -- 'Tell me in what day of the
Month you were born?

Dame Dobson makes figures* in her Table Book*
Mrs. Iink. The 16th of November.


Dame. The first Letter of your Name?


Mrs. Iink. It begins with C.


Dame. Of your Surname?


Mrs. Iink. J.


Dame. My pretty little Gentleman, what fair Lady soever you are in love with
-- Come to me. And what favors you would have her grant, through my means --
you shall obtain.


Mrs. Iink. By what Secret must it be done?


Dame. The 10000 pounds are not for you; you are a Female your self.


Mrs. Iink. I love you for that: what because I ha'nt a Beard yet, you think
(...) Woman! Have I the Air of a Woman, think you? See this Hat* this (...),
this adroitness to draw my Sword.


Dame. You have a manly Grace in all you do; but still you are a Woman.


Mrs. Iink. You have mistaken something, you have not cast my Nativity (...)!


Dame. I Will tell you presently, You have bin Married a year and odd Months.
Your Husband is very Rustical. You have little Kindness for him, though he took
you without a Portion. You absent your self from him. -- He knows not what is
become of you: And what little Gold you have, you took from him without his
knowledge. --

Dame Dobson traces figures in her Book.
Mrs. Iink. Augh -- It must be the Devil that told you all this; for without
Exception, not one living Soul knows any thing of my concerns, nor of my coming
hither. I lodge at an old Ladies, and pass for her Nephew. -- I in^rusted
nobody else with the secret of my being a Woman -- but she knows nothing of all
the rest.


Dame. Are you satisfied now as to your But --


Mrs. Iink. I am dropped out of the Clouds: I wonder no longer People cry you up
so: I am of their mind now; and shall speak in your Commendation as much as any
body.


Dame. My Reputation is of too great Concern to me to forfeit in trifling
things; what I undertake, shall deserve admiration from the wisest and most
penetrating Judgments. --


Mrs. Iink. I believe your Ability to be such, that you can do every thing. --
Dame, do so much as change my Sex for me, and make me a Man!


Dame. Make you a Man?


Mrs. Iink. I know you can if you will. -- I Will consider you well for it: I Will
be bountiful --


Dame. You have a strong fancy for the 10000 l.


Mrs. Iink. I nauseate my beastly, ill-bred, rustical Husband; were I a man,
I Would be unmarry'd from him; And then I should have rare Game amongst the
Ladies. -- I could then proceed bravely in my Designs: It Is this habit that
inspires me with boldness to talk to 'em; they hearken to me so willingly* and
seem so pleased with the least Courtship I make, that I am almost mad to see my
self in so fair a way to make a short business, to want the principal Verb to
make me happy. Well -- of all Conditions, that of a Woman is most miserable! --
I have a Hat and a Sword toward Manhood: Come -- supply the deficiency of
Nature -- Suit my Body to my Soul. And make me a Man complete in all points:
for I am resolved never to quit the habit. --


Dame. I hear you for mirth sake: But you have too much discretion to be
serious in it. --


Mrs. Iink. I am very serious and in good earnest: I swear I would be a man
(...) my heart! --


Dame. I doubt it not: And so would a great many besides your self -- such a
secret as that to transform a Man to a Woman or a Woman to a Man, would make me
a rich Woman indeed.


Mrs. Iink. Since you could tell me all that you have told me: And what nobody
knew but myself. -- I am convinced nothing is Impossible to you. -- I am
extremely delighted with your Knowledge.


Dame. Whenever you have a mind to make use of my Art to reconcile yo^ to your
Husband, and bring matters about there. --


Mrs. Iink. Pish -- He Is more concerned at the loss of his Money, than his Wif^*


Dame. Observe me: The best course you can take, is to appease him* would you
always play the Libertine thus? And have no regard to your Honor? -- If you will
be a better Wife to him hereafter than hitherto you have bin -- I have a Powder
shall make him love you better than ever.


Mrs. Iink I ^on't want Money yet; when that time comes -- we'll talk more
on it: Till then I Will take all the Diversion this habit can afford me -- I live
now the pleasuntest life in the World. And I Will not quit it till I am formed
to it: Adieu -- Dame, I give you nothing now -- Because I intend to see you again
very suddenly.


Dame. Fare you well, little Bully -- have a care how you d^aw amongst the
Ladies; 'twill be ill incountring there for you. --


Mrs. Iink. I warrant you -- I am Soldier Skilful enough to know how far to
advance -- and to make a safe retreat. --

Exit Mrs. Jinkin.
Dame. This was as lucky, and as pleasant an accident as ever yet happened to
me since I first professed the Art of Divination, the Husband and Wife to come at
the same instant. --


Enter Decoy, and Madam Featly. Decoy. Enter Madam, enter.


Feat. No, no, -- I will not go in, -- I repent I am come so far as I am. -- ah --
ah. --


Decoy. What Is the matter, Madam?


Feat. I thought I saw a Spirit behind me, a huge tall black hairy thing.


Decoy. 'Twas nothing but the shadow of the Gentleman that went down Stairs --
recollect your self -- See there is Dame Dobson.


Feat. Ah -- ah -- ah- Sir, I beseech you do not let her come so near me!


Decoy. I Will stand betwixt you and her. -- What are you afraid of Madam?


Feat. Her very looks fright me: O she is most terrible.


Decoy. It Is a mere fancy -- she is made like other Women.


Dame. Madam -- Please to tell me, what you desire: Be not bash^ul, I know the
secrets of a great many. --


Feat. O la -- a -- I -- a -- I am in love; a --


Dame. O very well -- And who is it that is not in love? if you knew as well as
I, what a world of People are infected with that Distemper, -- you will say 'twas
more Catching than the Plague, though but few dye on it in our Age. --


Decoy. I am glad for this Ladies sake it is not Mortal.


Feat. Is love a Distemper then, say you?


Dame* Oh a great one, it distempers People so sometimes, that they cannot
scarce eat or drink -- or rest quiet in their Beds. -- Nay, some are
distempered even to Madness -- especially when Jealousy is joined with it --


Feat. My Condition just -- she is a very learned Woman.

Aside to Decoy.
Decoy. Tell her, tell her -- what you would have.


Dame. Come Madam, -- Let me understand your Condition; descend to ^ticulars.


Feat. Be pleased to know then Dame -- That I* am but a Citizen's Wife; --
(...)* say truth, my Father was a Citizen; but my Husband is an Alderman.


Dame. Very good. --


Feat. He was a little elderly when I married him: And because he was very
rich, my Parents would have it a Match.


Dame. So. --


Feat. I never much loved him to say Truth; -- yet -- He Is a very kind man to
me -- Lets me have what I will -- do what I will -- and go where I will.


Dame. A very good sort of a Husband. --


Feat. Yes, -- he is kind to me in all this; but he takes very little notice of
me as I am a Woman -- unless it be a Sunday Nights that we go to Bed betimes.
And then I swear it goes against the grain with me -- he does so grunt -- and
-- oh I don't like him as a man at all. --


Dame. You may have good reason* -- There are many such in the City that
maintain their Wives well -- They are generally good Husbands, but ill Lovers:
A woman is seldom very unhappy in a Husband, unless he debars her of Liberty in
such a Case, and is stingy or jealous.


Decoy. Madam, please to go on and tell her your self. --


Feat. I have a Kindness for a certain person -- a Gentleman, and one that I
have found great satisfaction in; a man so different from my Husband, that
were*I but assured of his Constancy -- I should believe my self the happiest
Woman living. --


Dame. What reason have you to doubt it?


Feat. Within this Month I have had a great Suspicion my interest is sacrificed
to a Rival -- he takes all the Caution imaginable to hinder me from knowing it.
And to persuade me that he loves no body but me.


Decoy. You must let her know all -- She maintains him answerable to his
Quality -- So that by her means, he makes as good an Appearance as any
Gentleman need* --


Dame. All this shows a very generous Disposition: He is then Madam your
Pensioner.


Feat. Yes, I keep him; but I would not willingly he should oblige another a^my
Expense: And if I knew that he was disloyal, I would retrench my Civilities as
to all that. --


Dame. And with very good reason. --


Decoy. B^t on the otherside, The Lady would be very loath to quarrel with ^im
if it be so, that he loves no body but her.


Dame. It Is a nice point; and you do well to search into it; for otherwise you
would but expose your ^elf to the laughter of your Rival: or lose your Gal^ by
q^elling with him to no purpose.


Feat. You say all in a word.


Decoy. Auh -- She Is a profound Woman.


Dame. I Will -- let you know the truth of this Business presently.

Exit^.
Feat. By what means? -- Ah I am undone -- She Is going to send some of her
Spirits to me, I Will begone --


Decoy. Look to your self: some of 'em will be upon your back at the Door* if
you offer to stir.


Dame. What Is the matter with you, Madam?

D. turns (...)*
Feat. I find my self very ill -- on the sudden. -- I Will come again another time!


Dame. Let me loosen your Stays, perhaps you are too strait laced?


Feat. Eh, no -- ah --

Feat. makes signs that Dobson should not come near her.
Decoy. Don't come near her: She Is so very tender, you cannot touch her without
hurting her.


Dame. I find it now, the Lady's afraid; but let her not be frighted, instead
of my ordinary Apparitions and visionary Intelligences, I Will only by my Art
raise the Head of the Idol Abelanecus, which spoke so wonderfully in former
Ages, and which shall give her a just account of what she pleases to know --


Feat. The head of Abelanecus! a Head!


Dame. When you have heard what that will say, you need no longer be in doubt.
--


Feat. Will it speak!


Dame. It shall speak.


Feat. And shall I hear it? --


Dame. You shall hear it.


Feat. No, no, I Will not hear't, that is for certain; for I Will begone this very
Minute. Now I have neither Love nor Curiosity. -- And I Will reward you to your
wish for curing me of two such evils. --


Dame. Eh Madam, -- when you are once entered here, there is no going out as you
Imagine!


Decoy. What do you mean Madam? You Will undo your self; here are swarms of
invisible Spirits all round you: And if you affront their whole Society so
grossly, as to go away before you have heard the Answer of Abelanecus his Idol:
They Will come upon you with their Talons, and tear you to pieces. -- *


Feat. What! would you have me stay and talk with the Devil?


Dame. Thousands would be glad to have a sight of him, that never could obtain
the favor.


Feat. They need only come to you!


Dame. They may often come to no purpose: He will not speak to every one, and he
must love you very well -- if --


Feat. How! love me! The Devil love me! I Will say my Prayers. He shall not love me,
I defy him. And --


Decoy. Hold, hold, hold -- for Heavens sake do not provoke him: Don't speak so
loud, Madam. Every body cannot have his Friendship: if you should anger him
where are you then?


Dame. What say you, Madam!


Decoy. That she is very much obliged to the Devil for his Civilities.


Dame. Believe it Madam -- He Is at your service -- I Will go my self for the
Head, that is to be your Oracle; for she will suffer no body but me to come near
her: I give you notice before hand -- That you must not show any sign of fear;
-- I will not answer for your safety if you do.

Exit Dame.
Feat. Whither have you brought me here! what shall I do, not to seem afraid --
I cannot hold a Joint still for trembling!


Decoy. Think what a Satisfaction 'twill be to know the truth, that you may
(...) longer be fooled by a Man; when you have heard what the Head says, you will
know what to resolve for the future.


Feat. But the question is how I shall do, to hear it speak, and not show any
^ar? -- I shall never be able to go through't. -- eh he, eh --


Re-enter Dame Dobson, a Table brought in with the Head on it. Beat. appears
upon the Table with her ^ead dressed antickly, and her naked Neck and Shoulders
-- Eyebrows blackt, great Pendants in her Ears as big as Pigeons Eggs. Decoy.
Oh Madam! don't hide your Face, look up! the Devil is not so horrible a Sight
as you Imagine. --


Dame. Come near, Lady -- The Head is in readiness to speak to you.


Feat. Let it begin -- I can hear it hither.


Dame. If you would make much on it, she would speak the freelier to you; Go and
salute it. --


Feat. Salute Her! Mercy upon me, not for all the world.


Decoy. I Will go and salute her for you! -- How pleased she is -- See Madam*

Head turns it self from right to left.
Feat. I dare not, -- ah, ah -- But why am I in such a fear? It may be it is but
a Vision! a mist cast before my Eyes?


Dame. A Vision Lady? It may be you think I put tricks upon you. You shall soon
be satisfied of that --

Dame mut^ers.
Head. Touch me.


Feat. Or. save me, save me!


Dame. Now go and see if it be a Vision.


Head. Touch me.


Feat. Save me! what will become of me?


Decoy. Madam, why would you offer to say --


Feat. Oh I shall dye -- I shall dye.


Dame. Go presently and touch her; if she calls a Third time you are a lost
woman: She Will fly upon you.


Decoy. Come Madam, come boldly.


Head* Touch me.


Decoy. Ah quickly, -- quickly.

Feat. goes forward two or three steps, and then stops and speaks.
Feat. Well then, since there is no remedy, I need not go any nearer. -- I see
plainly, it is a Head, a real Head.


Dame. That Is not enough -- you must touch it with your bare hand.


Decoy. Forward -- forward.

Featly going near the Table, Head rowles its Eyes* She squeaks and starts
back. Decoy holds her.
Feat. Eh, eh, eh. The motion of its Eyes have frighted me horribly.


Decoy. So -- the other step.

Mrs. Feat. puts out her hand, and draws it (...) once or twice, at last
touches it, and retreats.
Dame. Now lay your hand upon her, you shall have no hurt: So, now ^o farther
off if you please, you have touched it. Now ask her what Questions you will.


Feat. Need I use Ceremony?


Dame. No, -- no.


Decoy. Make have Madam, that we may be gone.


Feat. Stay, -- let me recollect my self a little: Tell me Madam Head, does the
party I love, love me?


Head. Yes.


Feat. Does he love any Woman but me?


Head. No.


Feat. Does he not often go and visit Mrs. Bridget?


Head. Sometimes.


Feat. For what I beseech you, Madam Head?


Head. To serve his Friend.


Feat. Shall it never redound to my prejudice?


Head. Not in the least.


Feat. I Will know no more Dame. Here, here is Money; Take Purse and all, Adieu,
-- I am almost out of my Wits. Sir, I beseech you not to leave me, till you
have seen me safe at home again.


Decoy. I Will wait on you, Madam --

Ex. Feat. and Decoy.
Dame. Here is a good Lump. -- The Purse weighs heavy -- her fear was such,
that she would give it me all, rather than stay to count our part.


Beat. I may venture to come out now, to fright 'em soundly is a sure way to
get good store of Money; for I have observed all along, that the most fearful
are the most liberal.


Dame. Away! Clear the Room! Some body comes.


Enter Mrs. Hellen. Hell. Dame! where are you, Dame?


Dame. Mrs. Hellen what now?


Hell. Ah -- I had much ado to get to you: The Colonel has a design to
surprise you -- he and others have prevailed with the Countess to come with him
once more, he has placed her and others in readiness to come in at a sign
givenwhich is shooting off a Pistol.


Dame. Say you so?


Hell. He has got a Constable, and a Warrant, that if the other way ^il* he may
have you before a Justice. I Will put on a Mask and slip by him to give you
notice.


Dame. Well enough. How! the Lady Noble here!


Hell. I Will begone before she enters.

Ex. Hell.
Dame. Beatrice! Run up into my Chamber, put up all the loose Plate to the rest
in the great Trunk, where my Money is. There Is the Keys. And all my (...) light
Furniture into other Trunks. And let 'em be carried down into the (...) quickly.


^at. Yes. --

Ex. ^eat.
Enter Lady Noble. Dame. Your Ladiship's come in a most unlucky hour. -- I am
very busy.


Nob. Ay Dame, I am afraid all hours will be unlucky to me.


Dame. Why so, since I saw you I have found by looking in my Magic Glass, that
your old Knight is as good as a dead man --


Nob. Upon that condition I Would give 500 l.


Dame. I have said, and it cannot be otherwise.


Nob. O but the Urn, the Urn!


Dame. Ay, ay, -- broke, broke, that is assurance enough --


Nob. No, no, -- it is not broken!


Dame. Not broken, what! will your Husband receive a Bruise on the Head by a
strange accident, of which he will dye in a Months time, and your Urn not broke!
your Ladyship does not do well to tell me such Stories.


Nob. The Urn it self is whole: But the Cover indeed broke in two.


Dame. Oh the Cover, and is it not sufficient! is not the Cover a part of the
Urn, and signifies the Head? is not this Demonstration now, your Ladiship's a
strange Woman?


Nob. Dame Dobson, be not angry; your Interpretation has satisfied me, and to
show it has, here is the reward in Gold which I promised you. --


Dame. I Will take it, because I will not give your Ladyship the trouble to carry it
back again: Therefore I Will lay it up for you: I Will not make use often, nor count
it mine till a Month hence, that your Husband is Dead and Buried. --


Nob. And will it be in a Month?


Dame. Yes, in a Month. --

A Dreadful noise without.
Nob. For certain!


Dame. I Will Pawn my Reputation. Hark, -- whilst you and I have been talking
here, my great Devil is broke loose!


Nob. Broke loose! what will become of me! what will become of me!


Dame. Begone as fast as you can. -- I Will begin my Charm and stop him.

She begins to mutter strange words.
Nob. Ah the Devil, the Devil. -- eh, eh. --

Noble runs out squea^ing.
Enter Mrs. Frances. Franc. The Colonel, and Mr. Gerrald are below.


Dame. In company together!


(...). Yes.


(...). The meaning of that, Gerrald is revolted: Tell the Colonel I am (...)
up in my Closet, preparing my Charms for his Business. That I shall ^ave
finished them presently. But expect to find him alone, and when you have
delivered the Message, come and get Porters, and go with my Trunks to a
Friend's house, where I Will send 'em for Security, lest things should happen
amiss.


Franc. Yes.


Dame. As you come, bid my Brother Gos^lin be sure not to appear till he hears
me whistle, and call him by his Devil's Name.

Dame Exit*
Enter Colonel, and Mr. Gerrald. Coll. Where is Dame Dobson?


Franc. Shut up in her Closet to perfect her Charms in order to the Business
you come about. -- She ordered me to call her when you were here; but told me
that you were to come alone.


Coll. I met this Gentleman coming hither; but understanding mine is an
appointed Business, -- he is pleased to do me the favor to defer his till
another time.


Ger. I had only a question to ask which I forgot when I was here before.


Coll. I Will but speak two words with him, and he will begone.


Franc. I Will acquaint my Dame then --

Ex. Franc.
Ger. Now let me hear how you intend to make this Discovery: And lay Dame
Dobson open to the World for so great a Cheat as you say.


Coll. I have run her up to a Project, which I think cannot fail; a while since
she gave me the Diversion of seeing a Man's Body torn Limb from Limb.


Ger. Diversion do you called?


Coll. I seemed amazed to encourage her to show me more. And feigning my self
afraid to look upon the Body: I observed all the motion; The Limbs joined
themselves together. The Body erected it self, and walked about: The Device was
very neat, and cleverly performed; but how 'twas done, I don't apprehend.


Ger. There are many Slights to deceive the Senses.


Coll. The surprise and fear I expressed, drew her on to promise me, that she
would raise the Devil for me to day. I Will Counterfeit a fear still, that she
may not go back from her word: if I can but once get hold of her Devil, I Will
make him Dance. And this is it for which I sent for you, and other Friends to
be in readiness; in whose presence I mean to uncase her Devil, that you may be
Witnesses of the Cheat, and help to divulge it, that the Town may no longer be
imposed on.


Ger. I Will retire to your Friends, and expect the Event.


Coll. Bid 'em be sure to detain all persons that are either coming in or going
out. -- -- And when they hear the Pistol go off, that is the Sign.


Ger. I know it imports you very much to make a discovery; but I fear she will be
too Cunning for you.


Coll. If I fail -- I know the Countess will upbraid my obstinacy, and the
world laugh at me -- but I willingly run the hazard of all that; since if I
succeed* the Countess yet is mine.


Ger. I confess the venture is small in regard of such a Purchase; so proceed
and be successful.

Ex. Ger.
Enter Dame Dobson. Dame. Colonel, I find you a man of Courage that you dare
come again.


Coll. I assure they had need to have Courage that come to you; but I depend on
your word: you assured me I should receive no harm.


Dame. Yes, but for all this you are still faint-hearted: Therefore bethink
your self whilst you have time.


Coll. I Will deal ingenuously with you, that what you showed me last staggered
me: you found it out; and being ashamed of my former weakness -- ^ take this
Occasion to repair my Honor in your Opinion.


Dame. Perhaps you will be less able to stand the shock now, then you were before;
he sight of the Devil is far more terrible than to see a humane Body in any
Posture or Condition.


Coll. I promised you 50 Guinnics if you would let me see him, I have brought you
the Sum; if I am a little moved I shall have the satisfaction at least to see
that which Thousands of people are of opinion, ^obody has power to show.


Dame. If you don't believe me, keep your Money; you shall see I am no^
selfinterested.


Coll. You do this because you cannot be as good as your word.


Dame. Cannot! not as good as my word. Give me the Money, I Will not raise the
Devil for nothing. --


Coll. That is but reasonable. Take it.


Dame. You shall see one of the most formidable Devils of Hell; as you regard
your life, let him not see the least sign of fear upon you; not the trembling
of a joint, nor change of Countenance; if you do, you will be mangled as the Body
I showed you. You have heard already he is an unruly Devil.


Coll. My heart is fortified, and I stand with resolution.


Dame. Prepare then at the third Invocation of his Name.


Coll. Proceed, I burn with Expectation.


Dame. Ho Madian! Madian -- Say, do you not tremble yet? does not your heart
begin to fail you? --


Coll. I rather believe your Art fails you: no sign of Devil yet. --


Dame. Upbraid me! Let all things then turn to Confusion -- justle ye Elements,
and flash your dreadful Lightnings forth to Usher in this direful Fiend of Fire
and Darkness.


Thunder and Lightning. Coll. Your Mock-hell and puny flashes of Brimstone,
fright not me, I see I stand unmoved.


Dame. Yet are you daring? Ho Madian -- that lie fast bound by my Charms,
still be obedient to their Power, and stir not forth till I revoke the Spells
of your Confinement.


Coll. How! not see him appear?


Dame. No Sir.


Coll. Not unkennel your Devil, what is the meaning of this! why do you fool me
thus?


Dame. In regard to your Safety.


Coll. Evasion, -- all Evasion.


Dame. Answer me, and upon your Honor answer me, -- for by my Art I know it is
true. (And therefore do it to avoid your Destruction, which would certainly
follow) for my Spirits will revenge me.


Coll. What do you mean? what is it you know?


Dame. Nay, I know it already; and to let you see I do, I tell you from my
spirit of Divination, that you have bent your intentions to my Destruction, and
in order to it, are come with a resolution to surprise me; joined in Confederacy
with others.


Coll. Ha!


Dame. It Is true, if by Conjurations I raise the Devil, you will accuse me to a
Magistrate for a Sorceress; if it prove no Devil, you will set the world in
clamor against me, Endite me for a Cheat. Say, -- is not this true; does not
this my Knowledge convince you I can do wonders?


Coll. I do confess it; but your Knowledge is not so wonderful as you make it,
that Fellow that came running in such have, I perceive is your Intelligencer,
It was he waited upon the frighted Lady to her Coach. He Is one of your Spies
that has found it out, and given you notice; and you would have it pass for a piece
of Skill?


Dame. I know your Malice will upbraid me in every thing, and were it not that I
would not be guilty of your death, I Would convince you yet, and proceed in what I
was about; but your Intentions which are known to my Spirits, have filled 'em
so with Revenge and Malice, that they would tear you in pieces should I loose
them from their Dens.


Coll. Do -- This is all Excuse, do -- I desie you and your Devils, and to
encourage you, I swear upon my Honor, Word, as I am a Man, show me but a
Devil, you and your Reputation shall be safe.


Dame. I tell you your life is concerned; you cannot secure that against my
Spirits, nor me from Justice to answer for your Death; Therefore it cannot be
done.


Coll. You will not then?


Dame. It would ruin us both.


Coll. You will not do it then?


Dame. No.


Coll. You are resolved you wont?


Dame. I am.


Coll. Then I am resolved too, either to see your Spirits, or to let you see
mine.


Dame. What mean you by that Pistol, to kill me!


Coll. No; but in this is a spell. And when this speaks, it conjures up my
Devils. There --

Shoots off the Pistol.
Dame. What Is the meaning of this?


Coll. You Will see presently. --


Dame. If I let loose my Devils. --


Coll. Do, and turn 'em to mine -- Let 'em fight helter-skelter; look you, mine
are entered the lists first; now where are yours?


Enter Mr. Farmer, Mr. Gerald, Countess, Lady Noble, Constabl^ and Officers.
Farm. Mr. Constable come. Come in Officers.


Ger. Come Madam.


Nob. O la, oh.


Ger. I warrant you, Madam.


Coll. Your Ladyship may venture in: Here Is no danger I assure you.


Farm. Well Sir, has she showed you the Devil?


Coll. No, nor cannot.


Count. How! cannot.


Coll. By her excuses she has confessed she cannot. --


Dame. There are not many in this Company -- I have a mind to satisfy beside
this Honorable Lady. -- Your Honor may please to know I have confessed (...)
such thing; and whether I can or cannot, is not convenient to acknowledge
before Company. I have given the Colonel Reasons why I don't comply with his
desires at this time, and he ought to be satisfied. --


Count. O, nay, then* -- Indeed Colonel you are unreasonable.


Dame. You know his temper, Madam.


Count. You are much to blame Sir.


Coll. 'Twas ever my misfortune, that you would take her part: but without this we
have proofs sufficient to make it out, at least to spoil her Trading.


Farm. I Will take Care of that. Come Conjurer, where is my rich Country Widow, I
think she and you own some few Hundreds of Guinnies.


Dame. I know nothing of any Widow, nor of your Guinnies.


Farm. But time of Payment is come; what, because I have bin hunting after her,
in the Country where she talked of her Estate, lay; you thought I had given 'em
over for lost. And would not come to you for 'em -- o, o, o.


Dame. Allegations without proof!


Coll. We shall find proofs enough both for that and other Cheats, that will
bring your Grannamship to the Whipping*post and Pillory.


Farm. Come, come, Mr. Constable, take her into Custody.


Ger. Who are these?


Enter Mr. Gillet and Mrs. Clerimont. Dame. Gillet here! This advantage is not
to be lost. Mr. Constable, permit me to speak a word with that Gentleman.


Gill. Ho Dame, Give me joy, Dame.


Dame. Whist!


Gill. What Is the Matter? what do all these people here?


Dame. I Will tell that anon; are you Married?


Gillet. The Parson has done his part, and we'll do ours anon; but take no
notice to my Wife you knew any thing of the matter; I brought her to see you,
pretending to know what good event we should have of our Marriage.


Dame. Enough, you remember your Promise. Have you the Money?


Gill. That was one reason of my coming!


Dame. Let nobody see you give it me; so, now let me speak two*words to your
Lady -- The Business is done I hear; you are Married?


Cler. Yes, dear Dame, thanks to you.


Dame. Have you e're a Jewel for me?


Cler. I have Jewels in abundance. I Will give you this Locket upon my Arm, and
(...) to him I lost it.


Dame. Enough.


Coll. Is not that my Cousin Clerim ont?


Count. Yes sure.


Nob. But who is that with her?


Ger: It Is one Gillet, the rich Jeweller's Son in the City.


Coll. Cousin Clerimont, what has brought you here?


Cler. That which brings you and every one, Curiosity.


Coll. A word with you Cozen, what does he do with you?


Cler. A word with you in private.


Gill. What Dame, is this my Wife's Cozen!


Dame. Yes, -- yes, -- You hear he is.


Enter Mrs. Jinkin running, Mr. Jinkin following. Mrs. Iink. Dame Dobson! Dame
Dobson!


Dame. Hist! hist. What Is the matter!


Ger. What young Spark is this?


Mrs. Iink. O Dame! my Husband spied me in the Street, and followed me* -- I
came in here to escape him.


Dame. See -- he follows you in.


Mrs. Iink. Good Dame cast a mist before his Eyes, that he may not see me.


Dame. I ha'nt time, mix your self with that Company, till I speak with him.


Iink. O Dame Dobsons.


Dame. Speak low, speak low.


Iink. O Dame! you are a rare Conjuring Woman's. Since I feed you and your
Devils -- I go no where, but I meet my Wifes -- her run from Iinkin, but now
her is come here I pray you give her some of your Love*Powders, for her has no
good wills to go for Whales without her own dear Wifes, look you.


Dame. I could do it, were not for these People here; but they are of her new
Acquaintance here in Town, and will have heraway from you.


Iink. Codsplutter-her-nails! take her Wife's away, look you --


Dame. Hist -- speak low. Mr. Gillet come hither. Observe me, here are two of
you in the same Condition; you have both of you Wives here; your Wifes Kinsman
came to me to know where you were, and brought a Constable with him to take her
from you, and intends to annul the Marriage.


Gill. How!


Dame. You have not bedded her. Look to it, you must not let him carry her off.


Gill. Not as long as I have my charmed Sword.


Dame. Look you, this Gentleman is almost in your Condition. He has a Wife
amongst'em too; now if you can overcome this difficulty, and get'em away
from'em, you and your Wives will be happy as long as you live.


Iink. Zounce if her had her black Bill out of Whales, her would fight 'em with
that, her would put her Enemies from her, and p^ll'em to her, and hit off their
Ears, and their Noses, look you.


Dame. No matter; your Swords will do. You two must join together, and I Will
raise a Spirit to take your parts, shall fright'em out of their wits; a Spirit
that was famous in King Kadwalledar's days, and near of Kin to him.


Iink. Her and her Cousen Devil, look you, will beat'em all. Cotsnownes her
will have her Wifes.


Gill. And I mine.


Dame. Stand you two together, and when I whistle for my Spirit to appear, Draw
your Sword, and fall on those that stand next to me. They Will run from you, only
strike at'em; don't offer to kill'em.


Farm. Come have you done, we'll stay no longer waiting on you.


Coll. Mr. Constable, we are ready; do your office as soon as you please


Dame. Give me leave a little Gallants, because my Reputation is so highly
^ncern'd, and you all doubt my art, to vindicate my self from your Censures,
and to satisfy your Curiosities, I will before you all gratify the Colonel
with the sight of what he so much desired, and believes not in my power to
perform!


Count. How!


Nob. No, no, ah.


Ger. Fear nothing.


Coll. This is but her Bravado.


Dame. O Madian, appear -- where?

She Whistles. Thunders and Lightnings, stamps with her foot and sinks down.
Gillet, Jinkin sall on the Constable, Ger. and Farm. interpose, the Women run
about and squeak.
Count. Nob. Ah, eh, eh, eh.


Gill. Now Charm.


Iink. Cots Nownce! her will have her Wifes look you.


Ger. Hah, what is the meaning of this!


Count. Nob. Ah, eh, eh.


Enter Goslin like a Devil. Coll. Devil, have at the Devil.


Enter Mr. Hartwell. Heart. Ha -- what is to do here?

Fight, Ger. disarms Gillet, and Jink. gets astride upon Farm. spits in his
Fist, and Cuffs him. Weomen run and squeak. Hartwel and Constable pars em.
Coll. Ha, Mr. Devil, have I caught ou?


Count. Noble. Murder, Murder!


Heart. Be not frighted Ladies, Ple part em.


Iink. Zownce! let her alone! Her fights for her Wifes, and the Honor of
^hales, look you. Her will give her the bloody Noses.


Coll. Come! Devil speak, who are you?


Iink. Let her Cousin Devil alone, look you.


Coll. Speak, or this minute I Will run my Sword into you. --


Ghost. Quarter^ Quarter -- I am no Devil.


Coll. Oh, are you no Devil at last: here you that Madam!


Count. How! no Devil!


(...). No Devil!


Coll. Here Is the He-Devil* but where is the Cheating old She-Devil?


Farm. I saw where she went down; but she shall not escape so with my Guinnies.
I Will after her, and ferret her out of her holes.


Coll. While you search the Cellars, I Will unc^se this Devil.


Farm. Come Constable, come you all along with me.

Ex. Farm. Constable. Officers.
Heart. Alas poor Dame, here is a foul surprise.


Ger. Come Devil, who are you?


Ghost. Alas -- I am no Devil -- I am but a poor Town Clerk. --


Coll. A poor Town Clerk -- ha, ha, ha. Here Is a frightful Devil for you*
^dies. Come, confess all: --


Ghost. And please your Worship -- I came to Town about a Suit of Law* ^d
hearing my Sister practiced the ungodly black Art; she recounted to me fi^e
Stories of her Cunning, and showed me how all was done without any Conjuring or
Knowledge in the Stars; as plainly by her Practice is appeared to me: and at
last being in need of a Devil, she entreated the favor of me to serve her; and
so if'^ please you -- in hopes of a better livelihood.


Coll. You left your Clerkship for a Devil-ship?


Ghost. Yes, an't please your Worship.


Coll. Now I think there needs no other Confirmation: what thinks your Honor
now of Dame Dobson!


Count. I confess I am ashamed and confounded, I know not what to say.


Coll. I hope you will not want a Charm of Oblivion now -- to forget me.


Count. You have all the right in the world to insult.


Nob. This is such a surprise.


Coll. I hope your Ladyship too is convinced now, That there is no necessity now
to have a second Husband against your Inclinations?


Nob. I find she is a Cheat, too much to my sorrow.


Ger. Here Is a wonderful Discovery.


Nob. My Husband lives, the Colonel is lost, my hopes are defeated; I Will
retire and grieve in private for my Misfortunes.


Count. Your Ladyship seems troubled.


Nob. I am so Sick with the fright, that I must beg your Pardon^ for my abrupt
departure. Your Servant.

Exit Lady Noble.
Coll. Now Gentlemen, let us know, what made you take her part, and fall upon us?


Iink. Cot in Heaven bless her life and limbs, and her shall not take her wives
from her: Her will have her nown Wifes, look you.


Mrs. Iink. But good Mr. Iinkin, her is resolved not to go down into Whales,
look you; And if her will have her Wifes, Her shall run for her VVive^, look
you. --


Iink. Zownce and her will run so long as her has legs to carry her, look you.

Mrs. Jinkin runs out, Jinkin follows her.
Gill. And now Colonel -- I challenge my Wife; though Dame Dobsons Charm do not
hold good, as to my Sword: The Parson's Charm will not fail me as to your
Kinswoman. We are Married, Colonel.


Coll. My Cousen has satisfied me in that particular; She is yours Mr. Gillet,
and I rejoice she has got so good a Husband.


Count. W^, I see q^ainly, Dame Dobson i^ ab Witch; yet truly merits the (...)
(...) Cl^ning (...).


Enter Far^t, Dame Dobson, Constable and Officers. ^arm. Bring her in Mr.
Constable; we caught her escaping at the great* Cellar. (...) Neighbors inform
us she had sent away her Trunks and bos^ Goods a little before; but we have
sent Scouts after to see where they lodg'd'em.


(...). O Dame I did you think to outwit the Colonel?


(...). In six Months Dame, you and I shall have a small affair to unravel.


(...). Stay till that time comes then.


^arm. But you and I must account sooner; you must refund 600 Guinnies.


Coll. And to me 50* for notshewing me a better* Devil than this poor Town
Clerk here: Now we have you again, I Will let him go.


Ghost. I thank your Worship; -- If ever they catch me a Devil-Acting again* --
I Will give'em leave to make a Devil of me indeed. --

Exit Gosli^.
Gill. I must have 40; returning you my Sword with no Charm.


Dame. To call in all your Sums at once, is enough to break a good Banke^; but
I Will clear Accounts with you all, give me but time.


Farm. Time!


Dame. Yes, time to speak: For your 50 Colonel, though I showed you no Devil;
yet I deserve'em for the good I have done your Family in helping this your
Kinswoman to a good Husband; saving her Reputation, and you the charge of
Nurse-keeping: And let her tell you if the Service I have done her, don't
deserve'em, and 50 more.


Cler. Cousen, Grudge her not that small Sum, on my account.


Dame. For your Sum, Gillet, I Will be judged by the Company, if I don't
deserve'em for helping you to so fine a Lady for your Wife, and a Gentlewoman,
and of a Family above the expectation of a Citizen.


Heart. Yes, yes, that Score is cleared. --


Gill. Considering my Wife's a Fortune, I Will be more a Gentleman than to stand
upon a small thing.


Dame. Now for your 500 l. Sir; because I have never done you any Service --
I Will refun'd -- provided you will leave me in peace and quietness.


Farm. For my part make restitution of my Money, I have no more to say. --


Ger. I Will pass mine in silence, for yet the world knows not any thing; and
therefore cannot laugh at me.


Heart. For the good Service* Dame Dobson has done me, I am obliged to be (...)
Intercessor: And my re^est is, (...) all Pardon her what is past, and not
prejudice her Reputation by Discourses in Public, since'tis her livelihood,
and ingenuity ought not to be discouraged.


Dame. Nay, let them tell all; if the World upbraid me, it will laugh at them; In
this Business it is more Credit to ^ceive than be deceived: I can practice yet
in remote Cities* or live upon what I have already gained; so I have no more to
say, but ^at I am ready Sir to count out your 600 Pounds. Coll. (...) (...) has
so much Skill to Divine, when I shall be absolutely happy in (...) Countesses
favor, she shall have her freedom.


Count. She is deceitful; But Colonel, if you have any Skill in Palmestry,
read it -- There Is my Hand.


Coll. Hence then I can foretell a Marriage near, and years of Happiness that
shall ensue, in spite of Planets, or their Malicious influence.

Lovers that can like me with Patience wait,
Will tire their Evil Stars, and conquer Fate.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE,
Spoken by Mr. IEVORN.
THo I am no great Conjurer you see,
Nor deal in Devil or Astrology,
Yet from your Physnomies I shrewdly guess*
The Poet stole the French Divineress.
But let not that, pray, put you in a passion,
Kidnapping has of late been much in fashion:
If Alderman did Spirit men away,
Why may not Poets then Kidnap a Play?
Poets are Planters, Stage is their Plantation;
But tho they are for Trade and Propagation,
Yet don't like Thievish Whiggs Rob their own Nation.
But, Fellow Citizens, beware Entrapping,
For, whilst you are busy sending Folks to Wapping,
'Ygad your Wives e'ne go abroad Kidnapping.
Tending to this, of late I heard such stories,
That I*for safety Married amongst the Tories.
And see from City Prigg I am become
A Beau Garcon, a man of the Sword: rare Thumb!
Jerne I am all Tory now, par ma foy
I hate a Whigg: I Am l'Officiere du Roy.
And now I bid defiance to the City,
Nor Whigg, nor Critic shall from me have pity.
And as in Valor, I in Wit am grown,
Then to'em Gillet; let them know their own.
You Whiggs, but Critics are amongst the Cits.
And Critics are mere Whiggs amongst the Wits.
Through your cross Nature you l no mercy show,
But would the Monarchy of Wit o're-throw;
And Critics here with the same spirit stickle
(...), as Whiggs in Conventicle.
(...) Sheriffs and Poets equally you ^ul
(...) in a Playhouse, they ^ Guild Hall.
(...) Noise, you see, and Faction often fails,
(...) is our Shield against your Prot'stant Flails.
Law and large Fines may send you all to Iails.
And if you Critics here are troublesome
I Will Diametrically upon you come,
And (...) you with my Charm, Firm, Close* Standfast Thumb!
Then there is your Wheadling Critic, seems a Friend,
Commends by halves; and with a But in the* end,
Has sly reserves which still to Faction tend.
They praise a Play, and on the Poet fleer,
But, his back turned, loll out their tongue and Ieer.
Thus amongst Wits, as Whiggs too, these are Trimmers,
They Are like a sort of Half Crowns we call Swimmers.
Broad to the Eye, but though the Stamp seems fair
Weigh 'em they are light, and damned mixed Metal are.
These blame the City, but uphold their Charter,
They Rail at Treason, but give Traitors Quarter,
And when a Rebel's hanged, they style him Martyr.
For Perjured Villains they would have Reprieve,
And to False Witnesses can Pensions give,
Yet will not allow a Mayor may choose his Sheriff.
They cry, to Magistrates we'll give all Honor:
But let us have Law: -- Then Holloo -- take him Coroner.
But, Friends, don't think that you shall longer Sham us,
Or that we'll Bugbear'd be by your Mandamus;
(...) see Dame Dobsons Devil long was famous,
failed at last: so will your Ignoramus.

