John Rawlet B. D. Died Septembr: 28th* 1686. Aetat. 44.



Poetic Miscellanies OF Mr JOHN RAWLET, B. D. And late Lecturer of S. Nicholas
Church IN THE TOWN and COUNTY OF New Castle upon Tine.

Et prodesse valent and delectare Poetae. A verse may find him, who a Sermon
flies:
And turn delight into a Sacrifice.
Herbert. LICENSED.

November. 22. 1686. Rob. Midgley.



LONDON, Printed for Samuel Tidmarsh, at the King's-Head in Cornhill, near the
Royal Exchange. 1687.

An Epitaph on the Reverend and truly pious Mr. John Rawlet, B. D. made by his
sorrowful Friend I. M.
RAwlet's Remains lodge in this humble Cave;
As he was free from pride, so is his Grave.
But Virtue needs no Pyramids: Its worth
Bribes not the Heralds pains to blaze it forth.
As Diamonds shine by their own native Rays,
And Phoebus his own glittering beams displays;
So great deserts are their own Monument:
No Tomb, no Epitaph's so eloquent.
Whilst others therefore their proud Marbles boast;
He rests with greater honor, but less cost.
On his Divine Poems.
REader, expect not here, the filth of the Stage,
Poems that please, but more debauch the Age.
His chaster Muse such heavenly strains does sing,
As Angels chant to their Immortal King.
By such pure harmony he tuned his heart
In the Celestial Choir to bear a part.
THE CONTENTS.
AN Epitaph on the Reverend and truly Pious Mr. John Rawlet. Page (i) On his
Divine Poems. (ii) An Invitation to the Holy Communion, with directions, etc.
Page 1 On the Holy Communion. 4 Another Poem of the same. 6 Directions for
receiving the Holy Communion. 8 For early rising on a Lord's Day Morning. 11
Morning Thoughts. 13 Directions for the Evening. 16 On Whitsunday. 18 On
Ascension. 23 On Divine Love. 25 On Death. 30 Midnight Meditations. 46 A
description of True Prayer. 51 How to get and keep a quiet mind in all
Conditions. 53 A Preservative against Temptations. 57 On Solitude. 59 The sum
of our Duty. 68 Whilst I was hearing Music. 70 On a great Thunder and storm,
June 1. 1671 72 Calmness in a Storm, etc. 74 On the Rain that fell in June
1681. 77 On a Cross with a Crown upon it in Burton. 83 On the sight of Furness
Fells. 86 On the parting of ways in a Iourny. 88 An account of my life in the
North. 90
Paraphrases.
Of Palm 19. 57. Thou art my Portion, O Lord. 94 Of Psalm 39. 6, 7. 96 Luke 11.
14, etc. 101 Of Seneca' s Thyestes, Act. II. 103 A Plain Paraphrase. 104 His
first Epistle to Lucilius. 105 His 70 Epistle. 109 Of Horace's Ode 22. 128
Martial's Epigram. lib. 1. 6. 132
Inscriptions and Epitaphs.
For M. M. upon her recovery at Antwerp. 133 Written on Dr. Patrick's Devout
Christian, given to a Friend. 135 An Epitaph designed for William Banks,
Esquire. 136 On A. M. a tender Infant. 138 On Bishop Wilkins's Picture. 139
True Beauty. 141 On my own Picture. 142
AN INVITATION TO THE Holy Communion. WITH DIRECTIONS FOR THE Due Receiving it.
HArk, we are called; O friends, Away, away,
All things are ready, make no more delay.
Are all things ready, and shall only we,
For whom they are prepared, unready be?
We that forbidden Fruit did long to taste,
Shall Not we, when called, to our Lord's table haste?
When food provided is which will restore
The blessedness our eating lost before?
Let us then hasten, and this Call obey;
It Is with the Prince that we must dine to day,
Whose Sacred presence calls us to prepare
And fit our selves; Have must not banish care.
Hither approach all fair and clean within
From the defiling love of every sin,
All bathed in purest streams of hallowed tears,
Which help to wash our stains and drown our fears.
The Souls first dipped in this preparation flood,
Are fit for farther cleansing by Christ's blood.
Repentance is a second innocence,
Joined with resolves for new obedience:
Draw nigh with faith and holy love adorned,
And deep humility, which, though it is scorned
By blinder mortals, is, in Gods own Eye,
The Souls true beauty, richest gallantry:
With ardent longings come, enflamed to taste
The deepest sweets of this divine repast,
The grace and comfort here diffused abroad,
And on the well-prepared Soul bestowed.
Beg him to fit you thus who did invite
You hither; for both meat and appetite
Do come from him: and by the hand that spread
Our Table, must our Souls be furnished.
And when in the Wedding garment we are dressed,
With humble boldness to this Sacred feast
Let us approach, this wondrous banquet, where
The Master of the Feast becomes our cheer.
ON THE Holy Communion.
THE Son of God made Man, his life laid down
To save our Life; to purchase us a Crown,
He bore the Cross; and that we might retain
The memory hereof, he did ordain
His Sacred Supper as his Churches Feast,
When he bestows upon each humble Guest
Those greater blessings which he represents
By Bread and Wine, the outward Elements;
He does himself in this familiar way
With Pardon, Grace, and Glory too convey
To such, who, whilst by faith they these receive,
To him themselves entirely back do give.
Thus is a Marriage union finished, and
Christ and the Soul linkt in a mutual band:
Thus at one Feast we mingle griefs and joys,
Christ's death and our own Nuptials solemnize.
And if indeed our Faith and Love herein
Are with Repentance joined, if we for sin
Sincerely grieve, sincerely plight our Troth,
In Heaven we shall enjoy the fruits of Both.
ON THE Holy Communion.
OUR blessed Lord, who loved us, and gave
Himself for us, us by his death to save;
That this his love and death might never be
Forgotten, has ordained a feast, when we
With grateful hearts should still record his love,
And to blessed purposes his death improve.
Often let us remember then, and praise our Lord
At's Holy Table, where he does afford
To worthy Guests Peace, Pardon, Grace, and Joy,
Pleasures that satisfy but never cloy.
And let us still set Jesus in our sight,
In all our actions by this Copy write;
That our dear Lord beholding us, may find
His Sacred Image in our Life and Mind.
Thus let us with great Zeal and Holy strife
Christ's death remember, imitate his Life.
So shall we grow in grace, till from this state
Our Lord to Glory shall his friends translate:
Then shall we be where blessed Jesus is,
And feast with him in perfect endless bliss.
DIRECTIONS FOR RECEIVING THE Holy Communion.
CHrist calls us to his Table, but who is fit
In such an High and Holy place to sit?
Only the Souls that are adorned with Grace,
May here in presence of their Lord take place.
Such whom the knowledge of his wondrous love
To deepest sorrow for their sins does move;
Who place on him their Love and Confidence,
And render a sincere Obedience
To all his Laws: who make God's Love their Treasure,
Preferring it above Wealth, Honor, Pleasure.
Who do in Charity with all Men live,
And those who wrong them from their Heart forgive:
Who pure and sober are in all their ways,
And in God's Service vow to spend their days.
Art thou but such a one, thou art the Guest
Whom Christ bids welcome to this Heavenly Feast.
With Love and Joy his Death Commemorate,
Whilst here thou feed'st; and hereby Consecrate
Thy self entirely to him; and he will
His promises and thy desires fulfill.
He Will own thee for his Servant, and bestow
Such Blessings as thou need here below:
Even here he seals to thee Pardon and Peace
And all thy Graces shall receive Increase:
Until at length he raise thee far above,
To taste the fullest Fruits of his dear love;
Where we no more shall need our Bread and Wine,
Ravished with glorious Sights and Joys Divine:
Wherefore, who in those Heavenly Joys would share,
To sup with Christ on Earth let them prepare.
FOR EARLY RISING ON A Lords day Morning.
THis day our blessed Lord did early rise,
Let all his pious Servants do likewise;
His good Disciples rose before the light,
That his dead Body they with spices might
And tears embalm: then let devotion raise
Us up to give our God and Savior praise.
Thus let our Songs of praise shorten the night,
Till we shall come into that heavenly light,
When we shall hear no more of nights and days,
No more shall cease to love, rejoice and praise.
O blessed employments, these Saints truly blessed,
Who thus emploi'd enjoy eternal rest!
This holy Rest let me this day begin;
Resting to God from business, care and Sin.
And let me in thy day and service find,
Such pleasure and such profit to my mind,
As may excite me all the following Week,
And my whole Life my dearest Lord to seek.
Not in a Garden, or a Cave of Stone;
But in the Heavens, where on his glorious Throne,
He does exalted sit at God's right Hand;
Thousands of Angels round about him stand.
There free from sin and sorrow, sloth and sleep,
There let me an eternal Sabbath keep.
Morning Thoughts.
BOth God and Satan by my Bedside stand;
My Morning-thoughts are craved on either hand:
He that gets these, is like to have the day.
What, then, shall God be empty sent away?
No, Lord, but let the whole made holy be,
By these First Fruits I offer up to thee.
I praise thee for this last Nights quiet rest,
The Peace and Safety wherewith I am blessed.
I praise thee, my good God, that to my sight
Once more thou have restored the Morning-light:
My Strength and Time, which thou do thus renew,
I Consecrate to thee, they are thy due.
Be with me this whole day: Save me herein
From danger, if thou please, chiefly from sin.
All the day long, Lord, keep me in thy fear;
And make me ever sensible how near
Thou art: In private, or in company,
Let me remember thy all-seeing Eye
Upon me placed, that I my self may frame
To do thy Will, to glorify thy Name.
In sin with others let me not comply,
But speak, act, think, as knowing thou art by.
Good Lord, preserve me from that heinous Crime,
Mis-spence of short, uncertain, precious Time.
O let me not my golden hours wast,
But live this day as if it were my last:
That I may mind the work I have to do:
Set Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell in view.
Let me from Christ my Head, fresh strength derive,
That I by Faith in thy dear Son may live.
Let me do others good, my self at least;
Let sin this day be weakened, grace increast.
Help me to spend it so, that I at Night
May, looking back upon it, take delight;
And in Eternity thy Name may praise,
For this, and all my well-improved Days.
DIRECTIONS FOR THE EVENING.
REview at Night the Actions of the day;
What time was well spent, what was thrown away:
Bless God for Mercies, and confess the sin
Thou know thou have been guilty of therein.
To God, through Christ, for Pardon humbly pray;
Resolve against it for the following day.
Dare not to close thy eyes before thou make
All Reckoning clear: Perhaps thou may awake
Before God's Judgment Seat: How dare thou look
Him in the Face, should he present a Book
Of sins unpardoned? But if thou have made
Thy Peace through Christ, thou need'st not be afraid;
Both Soul and Body are secured from harms,
Thou lodged in such a gracious Fathers Arms:
Who all his Children will in safety keep,
And so thou boldly may go die, or sleep.
ON WHITSUNDAY.
ALL hail great day! Day of our new Creation,
And of Redemption the sure confirmation.
Almighty Love, that did us first create
In holiness and bliss, when from that state
By our Apostasy, our selves we threw
Into that state, does us again renew;
This did the blessed Jesus undertake,
And by his Spirit wrought, which for his sake
On us was shed; and which does fully show,
Christ is God's Son, by making Christians so.
He being now advanced on Gods right hand,
Does exercise his regal Power, and
By all the Miracles of this great day,
Not only does his present power display;
But also shows his future purposes,
And does effect them by such signs as these,
A rushing Wind do his Disciples hear,
And cloven fiery Tongues on them appear.
God both in Wind, and Fire, and Voice is here:
Through all the World this wind commotion makes,
Which both the Heathenish State, and Jewish shakes.
For not the Idol-temples fall alone,
But also that of the great Solomon;
This fire soon grew into a mighty flame,
And as if that strong wind had driven the same,
Through the whole World it did with brightness shine,
And did the World enlighten and refine.
Those Cloven Tongues, the Apostles mouths did fill,
And did convey to them such wondrous skill,
In all the Languages the World had known,
That they exactly spoke them as their own:
And whilst in these they do the Gospel preach,
Their hearers they do both surprise and teach.
These were to them Letters of Credence given,
To show their Embassy derived from Heaven.
What God inflicted once for punishment,
Now as a blessing on the World is sent.
Variety of Tongues that did disperse
All Nations, now unites the Universe.
The Babel-builders it did then confound;
But now the Christian Church even from the ground,
To such a vast firm structure does it raise,
As may engage Spectators to his praise,
Whose wisdom can make all things serve his ends,
The same thing hurts his Foes, and helps his Friends.
What to the Apostles he did then direct,
Has on each single Christian some effect.
O Sacred Spirit, within my Soul repeat
These blessings, which once made this day so great;
Breath thou upon me with that heavenly Wind,
Which may refresh and purify my Mind;
Kindle within me and preserve that fire,
Which may with holy love my Breast inspire,
And with an Active zeal my mind inflame,
To do thy will, to glorify thy name.
Furnish me richly both with gifts and Grace
To fit me for the duties of my place:
So open thou my Lips, my Heart so raise,
That both my Heart and Mouth may give thee praise,
As in thy Temple; keep there residence
Within my Soul, and never part from thence,
Till I am framed and fitted by thy hand,
A Pillar in God's House above to stand.
ON Ascension Day.
ART thou ascended blessed Lord on high?
And do I on this earth still grovelling lie,
In muddy, sensual, fading pleasures, drowned,
Where pain and grief, horrors and Hell are found?
O pity, dearest Lord, some pity take
On a poor fainting Soul for thy names sake:
Help Lord, Lord help, to thee I lift mine Eyes,
Stretch forth thy helping hand, and make me rise,
O raise my sinking Soul above the Mud,
And dirt of low delights, which Flesh and Blood
Relish and crave: Let my exalted mind
It Is pleasures in thy Love and Service find;
But never let that seem pleasant to my taste,
Which grieves thy Spirit, and does my Conscience waste;
Keep my Soul mindful of its heavenly birth,
That it may Heavenward tend, weaned from this Earth.
By all my falls upon this slippery Ground,
Grant that I nearer may to Heaven rebound,
And let all streams of comfort here below,
Up to the Fountain lead me whence they flow.
Let Faith, and Love, and Longings raise my Heart
Up to the blissful place where Lord thou art;
Let my chief joy spring from this Faith, and Love,
Till I ascend to thee, and joys above.
Divine Love.
WHose Soul is once betrothed, can ever he
From that engagement disobliged be?
The hearts, which love unites in loyal bands,
Are chained as fast, as by their tongues and hands.
Even thus am I in heart engaged, my mind
Is firmly fixed, but on no Female-kind:
The blessed Jesus is my Lord, my Love;
He is my choice, from him I Will never move.
Away, then, all you objects that divert,
And seek to draw from my dear Lord my heart:
Go, Riches, Honors, Beauty, Bravery, go,
Tempt these mean Souls who nothing better know*
That uncreated Beauty, which has gained
My ravished Heart, has all your glory stained;
His loveliness my Soul has prepossest,
And left no room for any other guest:
Cease then with knockings to assault my Door,
Disturb not my repose, attempt no more
These gates which to the King of Glory be
Made to fly open, and to none but he.
For him I sigh, I wishly look, and long
To be released from this ensnaring throng
Of poor bewildred Mortals, from whose sight
My Soul does meditate a nobler slight
Into the Regions of eternal Joy,
Where nothing shall her blessful peace annoy;
There Is her own home, her Country's there above,
That blessed Land of Life, of Light and Love;
There my dear Friends fled hence, with God are blessed;
Thither are swiftly hasting all the rest;
There lives my Lord, and there I long to live,
He gave these longings, and himself will give.
Have then, pale Death, accomplish my design;
Thou that break'st others wedlocks, finish mine.
This naked breast strike with thy sharpest Dart,
The sweetest Cordial to a fainting Heart.
Release my pained Soul from this dull clod
Of prisoning Earth, and take her to her God,
That there she may her Nuptials solemnize,
Where neither Sin nor Death shall spoil her Joys.
Lord, hear these groanings, and some pity take
On a poor gasping Soul, which for thy sake,
From earthly home, Friends, Joys, and all would part,
To be with thee for ever where thou art.
O make me meet for this Translation, and
Then on this happy message death command.
In the mean time, Lord, show thy self to me,
Till thou shall please to take me up to thee.
So to mine Eyes thy glory still display,
That they may never look another way.
So let me taste the sweetness of thy Love,
That no allurements may my mind once move.
Quicken my longings, and increase that flame,
Which Heaven-wards lifts the Soul from whence it came
Let flames of holy Love all others burn,
And opposition into fuel turn.
Let thy Sunbeams on a dark heart shine clear,
All our earth kindled fires will disappear.
In thee now let me find so much of Rest,
As may with more impatience fill my breast;
Till filled with thee, the pains of love increase,
Till they shall in a full fruition cease.
So seize on me, that we never more may part;
Till thou shall take my Soul, Lord, keep my heart,
And dwell in me, till I with thee shall dwell.
This Earth with thee is Heaven; without thee, Hell.
ON DEATH.
I.
TEll me, some kind Spirit, tell,
How comes death so terrible?
Thou, who art already fled in triumph, say,
Why the embodied Soul is so in love with Clay?
By what strange Magnetisms wooed,
She so adheres to Flesh and Blood?
That fate must force her from that dull abode,
Or she would grovelling lie,
The eternal Tenant of Mortality.
The wretch whom a malignant Fever fires,
And at each pore in liquid flame expires,
Cold death's refreshing hands to shun,
Does to the unkinder Doctor run,
For Juleps, Blistrings, and Phlebotomy,
And other medicinal Artillery:
The Fever's vanquished, and the Man is free;
But all this stir and torment only gains
The privilege of being racked again by these,
Or the severer pains
Of sorne more merciless Disease.
Had not the Patient better fled to' a Tomb,
The Asylum which distempers give, but where they never come?
II.
Old age it self, which, one would guess,
Should with a kind of lust
Lie down and sleep in Dust,
Does yet the grand fatigue of life caress,
And gapes for its last dregs with unextinguishable Thirst:
When the dull eyes spirituous fire is lost,
Like cooling Metals, fixed by Winters Frost,
When the bald Head depopulate and bare
Looks white like some smooth Globe of Ice,
And of its once fair flourishing spring the Hair
All that remains will not suffice
The mighty sum to count,
To which the numerous Years that have gone or't amount;
Yet even this feeble piece of Hums and Has,
That Is but the Monument of what he was,
Does with his Cordials and Elixirs treat,
To make his wearied Pulses beat
With momentary heat;
Still he abhors the dismal thoughts of Death,
Still on his guard he stands,
And fain he would defend his breath
Against the great Conquerour's stroke, though but with Crutches in his hands.
III.
Strange Riddle of mysterious desire,
That Man should hope his vital fire
Should Vestal prove, and never expire:
That he should wish the Eclipsed beams,
Like Arethusa, under ground might stray
In a decrepit Body's dark, inglorious way*
And never disembogue their shining streams
Into the glorious Ocean of inexhausted day.
Is this the Reason which we so much boast,
That sure unerring Guide,
No less our safety than our pride,
And would this have us in a tempest ride,
And endlesly be tossed?
When one kind Shipwreck would convey us to our native Coast,
A coast where we might pleasure taste,
High with the gust of all peril past.
Where a perpetual spring of bliss
Blooming in all the rich Luxuriancies
Of never withering Ecstasis,
Satiates but does not cloy
The ravished mind,
And no Tears fall, but those of joy
Which, Nilus like, while they orewhelm are kind.
IV.
But though with all this pomp of words we prate,
And paint the happy glories
Which grace the triumphs of a future State;
Yet sure we think 'em senseless stories,
The pageantry of some distempered Head,
Which fancies Pencil did delineate,
The broken visions of the living when they dreamed 'oth' dead.
That we are so loath to die,
Proceeds from infidelity;
For whatsoever the mighty Men of Sense,
Those skulls of Axiom and Philosophy,
By reasons Telescope pretend to evince,
Beyond this World we can no other see,
And not to be
Worse than life's greatest storm appears,
Than all its Hurricanes of hopes and fears;
So some baulkt Gamester who has but one poor Stake
Left of his Stock, and knows not when he may
Get more to keep in play,
Does his last chance with trembling take,
And fain he would the fatal throw delay,
The Box once lost to him for ever's past away.
V.
Or if we are fully satisfied,
The Soul is to Divinity allied,
That its impenetrable hypostasis
Is of a lasting and substantial make,
Which Death's arrest can never shake;
But from our scattered Ashes shall arise,
Bekindled with exhalted energies:
If this her fixed persuasion be,
Doubtless it is guilt that makes us pale, and groan,
When fate sends out the black Decree
Of dissolution.
As a debauched Gallant
That Is just embarquing for a foreign Land,
'Midst throngs of Creditors does worried stand,
Who for quick payment with wild fury rant:
So Conscience rallies up,
Of crimes the worst, of Debts ten thousand Bills,
Embitters with new poisons Death's ungrateful Cup,
And the departing Soul with shame and horror fills.
So that Mankind does lie
Under a sad necessity
Of strong desire to live, and wretched fear to die:
Which way so ere their faith they turn,
A forcible Dilemma's Horn
Wounds them in each Hypothesis:
The Atheist would for ever live in this,
'Cause there is no other World; the Theist, 'cause there is.
By Mr. Walrond of All Souls.

An addition by another hand.
VI.
But the true Christian whose firm Faith does sway
His Heart and Life, who humbly does obey
That Gospel he believes, and in good earnest makes
Heaven his end, and Holiness the way
Wherein he constantly does walk,
Whilst he through this low World his journey takes,
And leaves great things which others use to talk.
This gallant Man can Death outbrave,
Which if a Monarch fear, that Monarch is a Slave.
Mean Slave is he who fears to die,
He lives, yea dies in daily fear;
Death though far off he thinks and makes it near,
Afraid of every Man that passes by,
Of every Beast and Bird, and every Fly,
Of every Bit and every Draught,
Which is ever poisoned by his own dire thought.
Fain the poor Wretch would longer live,
And yet he fears what longer Life must give.
He dare not Eat, he dare not Sleep,
Though thousand armed Guards strict watch do keep:
Over him the mighty Prisoner Day and Night
They watch as if 'twere to prevent his flight.
These awed with threats and hired with great rewards,
To keep him safe, yet cannot save his breast
From fears which still disturb his rest:
Alas the Tyrant fears those very armed Guards.
VII.
But the true Christian free
From this ignoble painful slavery,
Over fear of Death has got the Victory,
And over the love of Life and all that is here
Which this low Life to Mortals does endear,
His Soul by Grace refined from drossie Earth,
From sordid Lusts and love of Sin,
Made mindful of its own high Birth;
It will not be confined within
These narrow bounds of Matter and of Time,
But up into Eternity will clime,
With wings of Faith and fervent Love does soar
To the Ethereal Regions there to share
Those Glories which our Lord is gone before
For all his faithful Followers to prepare:
Our Lord who drove away dark shades of Night,
Brought Life and Immortality to light,
And with that darkness banished fear,
And by that Light our minds did cheer;
The Christian he does teach to wait,
And long for Death that shall translate
His Soul to its most blissful State;
And makes him patient to endure
The cares of Life, or miseries of old Age,
Even when the torturing Stone, the Gout or Colic rage,
He bears with courage what he cannot cure.
VIII.
Not love of Life but hope of Heaven does give
This courage, and makes him content to live
In midst of Racks and cruel Pain,
Who in the midst of joys counts Death his gain.
Strong and untir'd, he acts the allotted part,
Undauntedly he bears the inflicted smart,
Not that he fondly cares still to repeat
Life's tedious Circle, still to eat,
To Drink, to Talk, to Work and Sleep,
Still to roll the Stone up Hill,
The Stone which tumbles downward still;
Only he knows he must his Station keep
Until the General bids sound a Retreat,
And when he hears that joyful sound,
Gladly he does himself prepare
To march away; and does himself his breast make
bare:
When Death draws nigh to give the healing wound,
He dare not on his Life commit a Rape,
Heaven is not taken by that Violence,
But he dare meet Death in the horrid'st shape;
He nothing fears from that kind Providence,
Which wisely orders all,
Axes, and Halters, Flames and Swords,
Whatever else we dreadful call,
What are they all but Bugbear words
To fright weak Childish minds, but cannot fright
That Man of Wisdom and of Might,
The valiant Christian not afaid to die;
For Death is all those great words signify.
IX.
If Death be all, what does the good Man care,
Whether an Halter or a Quinsie choke,
And stop that breath which he does freely yield;
Whether an Ax or Apoplexy give the Stroke,
The gentle Stroke of Death:
The good Man generously dare
In a good cause die in the open Field,
As well as in his Bed give up his breath:
Nor does he fear the stormy Ocean's Wave,
In a Sea Monsters Paunch dare make his Grave,
Is unconcerned whether he expire
In some Malignant Fevers fire,
Or in the nobler flames of Martyrdom,
Elias-like, he be conducted home.
Over all he is a Conqueror,
And somewhat more;
'Ith' midst of all he can in triump sing,
O Death where is thy Sting?
Of that long since thou was bereft,
For in our dying Lord that sting was left,
In stead whereof Death now has got a Wing,
Which helps to waft the Heaven-born Soul on High,
When once released from this dull earthly Clod,
There the free Soul to her own home does fly,
For ever there to make her blessed abode;
Where she no more does fear to sin, to smart, or die,
But there she clearly does behold her God,
Her God she there loves and enjoys eternally.
Midnight Meditations.
LOOK here, my Soul, how sparkling and how bright
These Stars do shine in this cold frosty Night;
From the Sun's absence they advantage take,
Their native luster visible to make;
Their beams set in array adorn the Sky
As if they did Nights black approach defy;
This cold which freezeth us, it does but clear
The Air, and make their brightness more appear:
Let these fair Stars be patterns unto thee
And teachers too showing what thou should be,
When sacred Providence the Heavenly Law,
Made up of Love and Wisdom, shall withdraw
That pleasing Sunshine of prosperity,
Which from thy Cradle has attended thee,
And by its Revolutions shall this state
Into afflictions dark cold night translate;
Or if thy body sickness should confine
To a dark room to languish there and pine
In pain, or malice should attempt thy fame,
And with black Slanders strive to cloud thy name;
Or what is thought worse than either, should thou be
Stark naked stripped and pincht by Poverty;
Or should thou be for some great merit sent
To a dark Prison or a Banishment:
Then muster all thy powers up, O my Soul,
Whose shining may these Clouds of Night control:
Let all these oppositions serve to raise
But greater Trophies to thy virtue's Praise;
Virtue like valor is a thing never known,
If in encountering dangers never shown*
Now let a bright unspotted innocence
In sweet Contentment, Courage, Patience,
Shed its mild beams, let Hope and Joy display
Lustres which turn night into lightsome day.
So shall the Darkness as a foil be friend
Thy Beauty, and a greator glory lend:
So thy Eclipse shall but attract more Eyes;
So from oppression thou shall greater rise;
So by our treading thrives the Chamomil,
As if our feet did but manure the Soil;
Nor is affliction's night the only case
Wherein thy brightness should the dark shades chase,
But when my Soul temptations unto Sin,
Like foggy darkning mists, shall from within,
Or from without arise, striving to stain
And fully thee with guilt; then ler disdain
Break forth in virtuous Sparklings, and dispel
Those noisome Vapors which arise from Hell:
Yea when at last that King of terrors, Death,
Shall summon thee to yield thy utmost Breath,
And with its dismal shape strive to affright
Thee with the horror of eternal night;
With an undaunted mind his Message hear,
With cheerful smiling looks his presence hear,
Dread not his aspect, turn not from his Dart,
But with resolvedness present thy Heart;
Thy Heart now burning most with Heavenly fire
Which Heavenwards wafts thee, there thou shall
expire,
True Phoenix in the flames of Love and Joy:
Death shall not hurt thee, thou shall it destroy,
And though to Mortal Eyes thou disappear,
Thou shall shine brighter in an higher Sphere,
Even like these Stars thou n'ere shall find a Night,
But shall be swallowed up in greater Light.
A Description of True Prayer, whether with a Form, or without.
GOD is a Spirit, and in Spirit will
By us be Worshipped: But this Holy skill
Of Worshipping aright is not an Art
Of Words from Brain or Book, but in the Heart
It Is placed. An Heart that with the Lips does move,
Venting the breathings of its inward Love.
An Heart that is awed with greatest Reverence,
Which may consist with filial Confidence:
An Heart whose ardent longings do aspire
After those Blessings which our Tongues desire,
And puts upon endeavors to attain
The grace we crave, which else we crave in vain*
This Heart prays right, such Cordial Prayers as these
Profit our selves, and do our Maker please.
Thus let us pray, and when we end our days,
Prayer shall be changed for everlasting Praise.
How to get and keep a quiet Mind in all Conditions.
Would thou enjoy an easy quiet mind,
Let thy own will to God's will be resigned:
Follow his conduct, serve him with delight,
With Pious awe live still as in his sight:
Banish fond Dreams of earthly happiness,
With Prudence use the Goods thou do possess.
To Proud and Sickly Fancy give no place,
But follow Nature overruled by Grace.
Nature craves little, Grace sometimes takes less;
Pride, Avarice and Lust demand excess.
Examine well all earthly things, and see
Thy love but to their worth proportioned be.
Let not excess of Joy corrupt thy mind,
Pleasures too luscious leave a sting behind:
Regarding this World as a Travelers Stage,
Seek the delight but of a Pilgrimage;
Converse with thy own mind, get so much leisure
As often to entertain thy self with pleasure,
Whom Crowds of Men and business still employ,
Such not themselves, nor Friends, nor God enjoy.
In all enjoyments most God's goodness taste,
In all designs make him the first and last.
Let Joys and Pains both quicken holy Love,
And earnest longings after God above.
Never depend on things without thy power,
Things which chance may, time quickly will devour.
Calmly forethink what evils may betide,
Not to torment thy self but to provide
Courage and Comfort which attend the Wise,
Whilst common changes are no great surprise.
To rule the outward World never design,
This is God's work, to rule thy Passions thine.
Doing thy part leave all to him who knows
How all events most wisely to dispose.
All thy desires make known to God in Prayer,
And then alone on God cast all thy care.
Mind not the World's opinion much, nor grow
Unhappy merely 'cause Men think thee so:
Their thoughts or words can leave no mark behind;
Thy self do make the impression on thy mind.
If thou feel real smart, make it not more:
Anger and Grief do but increase the Sore.
Know that the greatest hurts are from within,
And misery proceeds only from Sin.
Sin above all things flee, and never cease,
Till thou with God through Christ have made thy Peace:
And all thy Life pursue that innocence,
And usefulness which inward joys dispense.
Grow in all Grace, chiefly in Holy Love
To God and Man, which fits for Heaven above:
In hope whereof rejoice, and so partake
The first fruits of those joys which Heaven do make;
Yea now the Soul that with his God does dwell,
By Faith and Love, finds Heaven within a Cell.
Then wholly live on God, make him thy all,
With Faith and Patience waiting for Death's call.
Thy Soul thus fixed, nothing can much annoy,
Till God shall fix thee in eternal joy.
A PRESERVATIVE AGAINST Temptations to Sin.
REmember when Temptations do begin,
Satan would have, God would not have thee sin.
Satan and God about thee do contend:
Which do thou think thy Foe, and which thy Friend?
Thy Flesh, be sure, with Satan soon will join:
Will thou with both against thy God combine?
O horrid and unheard of Treachery! to close
Against our dearest Friend with Mortal Foes;
Against our Friend, who came to give us aid,
Lest we to those our Foes should be betrayed.
Shall Satan, by thy help, obtain the day
Whilst God as grieved and conquered, goes away?
Shall Satan be embraced, whilst God shall be
Resisted, so that he will fly from thee?
What, shall the Spirit's movings on our Hearts
Be quenched, and not the Devils fiery Darts?
Remember then the best and worst of sin,
Thy Flesh and Satan take delight therein;
Both thy sore Enemies: But then believe
It wounds thy Soul, and does God's Spirit grieve.
Satan and Sin their Servants do destroy,
God to his Servants gives eternal joy.
Wherefore, O Lord, I yield my self to thee,
Let not sin have dominion over me.
Thy easy Yoke I Will wear, when that is laid down,
Let thy Free grace vouchsafe a glorious Crown.
ON SOLITUDE.
I.
WElcome sweet Solitude, who loves not thee,
Loves not himself: for only he
Who from the busy throng is quit,
He to retire into himself is free,
He with himself may sit.
II.
Than our Dear self is any thing more Dear?
Shall we then seem to hate or fear
What most we love? yet so do they
Who rather had be rambling here, and there,
Than with themselves to stay.
III.
Some hideous frightful thing there is within,
Even a consciousness of Sin:
That if alone does them affright;
Which to torment them when it does begin,
Straightway they take their flight.
IV.
Even from themselves poor Men they strive to fly;
Thrust into vicious Company,
There hoping for a little Peace
From Noise, from Sport, from Riot, and thereby
Their Torments they increase.
V.
Who weary of himself, himself still flies,
And Vice for a diversion tries;
Hence greater weariness shall feel:
The Plaster which his folly does devise,
Wounds worse than did the Steel.
VI.
Thus the Slave laden with his Guilt and Chain,
From Prison breaks, but not from pain;
His Irons gall him in the road,
Until at last he is hurried back again
To feel a double Load.
VII.
Thus in the numerous herd, the wounded Heart
Would shroud himself, but still the Dart
Sticks in his Flesh, widens his Wound;
He cannot in the Crowd shake off his smart,
Nor escape the following Hound.
VIII.
Then welcome, Solitude, abhorred by none,
But Fools and vicious Men alone;
Whilst courted by the Wise and Good,
Who by Fruition have its blessings known,
Its pleasure's understood.
IX.
Whilst they hither, from the World remove,
In all that is Good they do improve,
And here where nothing can annoy,
Rendering themselves worthy of their own love,
Themselves they do enjoy.
X.
Wearied with Noise and Hurry here, we have
The Rest and Silence of a Grave;
The Mind too freed from stir and noise,
Begins to feel what pious minds most crave,
Foretasts of Heavenly joys.
XI.
The Moon from view retired, receives most light
From Heaven, and Heavenward shines most bright:
But what time we her Full do call,
When she comes forth exposed to common sight,
It Is then Eclipses fall.
XII.
Here Virtue's fixed, which justling Crowds did shake,
Here it does Sanctuary take,
When Lusts and Passions it pursue;
Here gathering strength, does brave resistance make,
And all her Foes subdue.
XIII.
The mind exhausted by the multitude,
Here has its strength renewed;
Like Fields oppressed by constant Plough,
It does when Fallow laid in Solitude,
More Rich and Fertile grow.
XIV.
They who from others seem the most recluse;
For others Good most Fruit produce;
Who labor under Ground, there find
The Gold which after serves for common use,
And does enrich Mankind.
XV.
Rich Streams of Blessings from the Hermits cell
Overflow the World, which none can tell
From whence they flow, but like some Fountain,
Unknown as the head of Nile, he often does dwell
In the obscurer Mountain.
XVI.
The learned tribe whose works the World do bless,
Finish those works in some recess;
Both the Philosopher and Divine,
And Poets most who still make their address
In private to the Nine.
XVII.
Thus on the Banks of Thames great Cowley chose
His private Chertsey for repose;
Cowley whose Verse like those rich streams,
So deep, as clear, in various numbers slows,
And long shall last as Thames.
THE Sum of our Duty.
LOve God with all thy Heart and Soul, and Mind;
To Friend and Foe be just, be true and kind.
Obey they Parents, and thy Rulers Laws;
Never rebel, but suffer in God's Cause.
Be Meek and Patient, Humble, Sober; Chaste,
In these good ways be constant to the last.
And when thou have done all, then humbly cry,
An useless, sinful Servant, Lord, am I.
My strength and grace is from thy Holy Spirit;
My hope is in thy Mercies, and Christ's Merit.
Whilst here I live, let not thy Spirit leave me;
And when I die, O Blessed Lord, Receive me.
Whilst I was hearing Music* Feb. 1. 1671.
LOrd, take my Soul, and tune it to thy will,
It wants tuning, but thou want no skill.
O let thy Grace my mind bring into frame,
So shall I love and praise thy glorious name.
In thy great goodness shall my heart rejoice,
Thy goodness I will praise with cheerful voice:
Also my Life I Will study so to frame,
That all my works may glorify thy name.
Thus shall my Feet, my Tongue and Heart agree,
This harmony thou love, this pleases me;
Thus will I spend my time on Earth, thus I
Will serve thee whilst I live, and when I die,
I in a nobler sort thy name will praise,
Let Grace raise me, so I Will thy Glory raise.
On a great Thunder and Storm, June 1. 1671.
THY power, O Great Jehovah, I adore,
Whose voice in Thunder through the Clouds does roar;
This voice I Will entertain with awful fear,
With greater aw I will thy threatenings hear;
Thy lightning which does pierce where it is not felt,
It spares my Body, but my heart shall melt:
Much more thy Spirit shall, whose flames divine
Consume our lusts, but do our Souls refine.
Showrs which gush forth, when the Clouds broken be;
Purge Me and the Air, soften the Earth and Me.
Afflictions, Storms and Showrs of Love and Peace,
This Purity and Softness shall increase:
Thus Ear, and Eye, and Mind, Reason and Sense,
Each has its Object, learns its Lesson thence.
Which way so ere I turn my eye or thought,
I something find, whence Piety is taught.
Lord teach me ever duly to improve
The tokens of thy Wisdom, Power and Love.
CALMNESS IN A STORM: Made in a Stormy Journey, September. 1672.
IN rough foul Ways, my Mind is smooth and clear;
When the Winds roar, then do I loudest Sing:
When the Sky low'rs, Smiles in my Looks appear:
Clouds weeping Rain, no Tear from me can wring.
What is it can disturb that inward Peace,
Which from disturbances receives increase?
This Wisdom, and this Courage, sometimes I
Can in my little Stormy Journies use:
In the Storms of Life, there is much more reason why
The same brave Resolution I should choose.
Life is a Journey full of Troubles; these,
Wisdom may turn into Advantages.
Do I grow poor? I Will more enrich my Mind,
Am I defamed? I Will make my Virtue shine
More brightly through those Mists; are Friends unkind?
God shall be dearer. Does my Health decline?
My Soul to Heaven shall thrive; when Death shall give
The mortal Wound, then shall I truly live.
Thus the great Hercules, from Juno's spite
Favors received, this made his fame increase;
First Toils and Dangers gave him first Delight
And Glory; thus the martial Man is Peace;
Not to bare chance, and quiet times, would owe,
But to the Valor which subdues his Foe.
O daring conquering Virtue it is, we prize,
As this claims Glory as its just desert:
Shelves, Sands, and Tempests are the Exercise
And Honor of the skilful Pilots Art.
Who boasts a Virtue that was never tried,
Is a stout Seaman by a Fireside.
Great Praise we to our wise Creator owe,
Who tho he has not (which he easily could)
Made all things sweet and smooth; to make them so,
Gives us the power; all Earth he made not Gold;
But gives the Elixir which can do as much,
Turning course Stones to pure Gold, by its touch.
On the Rain that fell in June -- 81. after a long Drought, from the beginning
of April; begun in my Journey.
WHilst, gracious Lord, thy Creatures all around,
Give thee what praise they can, shall Man be found
The only senseless, dull and silent Thing?
Shall he be mute, whilst even the Fields do sing?
Their pleasedness is in their Color seen;
How soon the parched Earth looks fresh and green
The thankful Corn its head does humbly bend,
Flowers and Herbs, sweet Odors heavenward send.
The cheerful Birds, which in all Weathers sing,
And thereby chide and shame Man's murmuring,
Now use their utmost Art, and strain their Throats,
To warble forth their sweet melodious Notes.
The duller Beasts hear this, and straightway they,
As dancing to this Music, Frisk and Play.
A noble gratitude they teach, whilst for these showrs,
They thankful are, whose benefit is ours.
And what, shall we, who more receive than they,
And more can render, shall not we repay
Those thanks to which the lower Creatures all,
As well as our Creator, do us call?
And both we disobey, and both we wrong,
If we with all the rest join not our Song.
Since they by us, their Praises send to Hea'vn;
By us, who know all good Things thence are given.
And who with Speech and Reason were indu'd;
First to conceive, then show our Gratitude.
Wherefore I do adore that Providence,
Which these enriching Showers does dispense.
That to the languishing and parched Earth,
And dying, Grain and Herbs gives life and birth.
The thirsty Fields which could no moisture get
From Springs or Rivers, are refresht with wet,
In such a way, as would mirac'lous seem,
Did not the commonness abate esteem.
What makes the Vapors to ascend on high,
And there condense to Clouds, that fill the Sky?
What makes those hollow Clouds strong to contain
Within their Wombs vast Treasuries of Rain?
And what supports them, when thus weighty grown,
To keep them from a sudden tumbling down?
Justly we may applaud, justly admire
The Chemistry of that Celestial Fire,
Which from salt Seas fresh Vapors does extract;
Like thanks and wonder does that Art exact,
Which makes the Clouds to hover as they fall,
And breaks, and parcels them in drops so small;
Which on the Earth, whilst gently they distill,
Revive those Fruits, which Floods and Spouts would kill.
Thus, Lord, thy Works thy Glory do proclaim;
Both Heaven and Earth conspire to praise thy Name.
Even every pile of Grass, and every Shower
Which makes that Grass to grow, does show thy Power.
No less they show thy Bounty to us all,
On whom thy Sun does shine, thy Rain does fall.
How wondrous is that Bounty which renews
Daily those Gifts, which daily we abuse?
Mercy is thy delight: O, teach us more
To imitate that Mercy we adore.
And whilst the Earth improves the Sun and Rain,
Let us not still receive thy Gifts in vain.
Let warmth and softness in our Hearts be wrought,
And holy Fruits unto perfection brought:
Such Fruits as may our Benefactor please,
Who sends these Gifts, and greater Gifts than these.
He gave his Son, his Son did shed his Blood;
By goodness, God designs to make us good:
And this design his Goodness does pursue,
Whilst he affords the rich and heavenly Dew,
Of's Word and Grace, to quicken and renew
Our thirsty Souls. O God, thou art all Love;
On this alone we live here, and above.
This does preserve that Life, which first it gave;
From this the comforts of our Life we have.
This now gives Grace, and Glory has prepared;
By this we Work, from this have our reward.
And since this Love, with blessings fills our days,
Lord give us Hearts as full of Love and Praise.
Such Hearts as may direct our Hands and Tongues
To pious Actions, and to grateful Songs.
And as each Moment brings from God above
Mercy through which we live, and breathe, and move;
So, Lord, let every pulse, and every Breath,
And every action praise Thee until Death,
Which stops that Breath, our Souls shall thither raise,
Where love's our Life, and all our Work is praise.
And, what Crowns all, where Death shall not destroy
This blessed Life of Love and Praise, and Joy.
On a Cross with a Crown upon it, in Burton, betwixt Lancashire and Kendale;
Sept. 18. -- 80.
THis day in Riding through a Town,
Upon the Cross I saw a Crown;
Which straightway brought unto my mind
What we in Holy Writ do find;
That Christ did first his Cross sustain,
Before he was advanced to reign;
And this is every Christians case,
Who wins the prize, must run the race.
Our selves we first must well behave,
E're modestly Rewards we crave;
Bearing the burden of the day,
E're we receive the evening-pay;
And Conquer in our Christian fight,
Before we have to Triumph right:
And many sorrows undergo
Before the Joys of Heaven we know.
Lord, to thy Orders I submit,
Confessing they are just and sit:
Reason does teach us, and thy Word,
The Servant's not above his Lord;
By Patience and Obedience, he
To Glory went, and so must we:
But since thy Grace alone does send
Help in the way, bliss in the end,
Such measures of this Grace impart,
As may both give strength and desert;
Lord furnish me with power and skill,
To do and suffer all thy Will;
Make me but willing to obey,
And what commands thou please lay.
Make me but able to abide,
And how thou will let me be tried.
Lord help me so thy yoke to wear,
Help me my burdens so to bear,
That when they shall be both laid down,
I may receive a glorious Crown.
On the sight of Furness Fells, June 19. -- 71.
OFTEN have I seen a barren Mountain shroud
Its lofty head within a liquid Cloud,
There at its will (thus height still makes things proud)
Quaffing up Vapors, which had else been Rain,
Drinking all up, yet sending naught again,
But still a barren Mountain does remain;
Whilst humble Valleys which do lie below,
Waiting till Heaven its kindly Dews bestow,
In Corn and Wine, in Milk and Honey slow.
Thus greedy, proud, impatient minds that crave
Still more and more, from Heaven or nothing have,
Or yield no Fruit of whatsoere it gave.
Whilst humble Souls, by silent patience,
Which strongly wooes, soon get great blessings thence,
And thither still return their recompense.
On the Parting of Ways in a Journey.
I Often as I Travel, find
Divided ways divide my mind;
Perplexed I stand, and don't well know
Whether I here or there should go:
At length I forward must advance,
Guided by guesses or by chance;
And when I have some paces gone,
I find they both do meet in one.
This gives my mind some recompense
For the former trouble and suspense.
Thus in Religions nicer ways,
One here, and there another strays,
Each fiercely cries that he is in the right;
And both my tender mind affright:
Then to the Sacred Rule I go,
To see if this my way does show;
This humble Souls in great things guides,
But subtle trisles never decides.
When nothing thence is understood,
The footsteps of the wise and good,
With care I trace, and on I hold,
Till my maturer thoughts grow bold
To slight this trifling difference,
As seeming of mean consequence;
Since in all things of weight they both agree,
And I in them, with both, this quiets me.
An account of my Life in the North. Been qui latuit been vixit.
SInce you, dear friend, wonder how here I live,
This homely Verse a brief account shall give;
I live, if not in pleasure, yet at case,
Not in loud laughters, but in silent peace;
And tho I rarely meet with merriment,
I more a stranger am to discontent:
Here Is no excess, nor are things needful scant;
I seldom feast, but yet I never want.
No dainties here to luxury invite,
Our food serves well the sober appetite,
Which need not be with poignant Sawces dressed,
Our healthful Hunger of all Sauce is best.
Doctors we have none, nor much need them here;
The Doctors we more than Diseases fear:
For Country-folks think they sell death to dear.
Although I lie not on a rich Down-bed,
Yet do sweet sleeps refresh my weary head.
No Walks or Gardens here, but yet the Field
And fragrant Meadows equal pleasures yield:
No Lutes or Viols entertain my ear,
But more melodious Birds I daily hear.
Riches I have not, nor do riches need,
Whilst here at easy rates we clothe and feed.
I have no Servants whom I may command,
Nor have I work that needs a Servants hand.
I am not high enough to envied be,
Nor do I one whom I should envy, see;
Here Is no applause to make me proud or vain,
Nor do I meet with censures or disdain;
My people, if they are not wise and great,
Are not untractable through self-conceit;
No factious, giddy heads that make a Schism
For fear of Popery or Arminianism:
No sawey, arrogant controllers, such
That cry, This is too little, this too much:
No such vile wretches who their Preacher hate
'Cause he reproves sin at too smart a rate:
Wherefore I envy not flocks of more wealth,
Which give more trouble whilst they have less health.
If of Companions I have no great store,
With my own mind I may converse the more;
And from my old Friends tho I am confined,
Letters may keep us in each others mind:
Or if, whilst buried here, I lose their love,
I Will fix my mind on surer things above.
But need I Friends, need I Companions crave,
Whilst I as many Friends as Neighbors have?
Or if I want the joy of bosom Friends,
I 'scape the pain which still that joy attends:
For whilst they live our hearts often ache with fear;
But break and bleed when of their death we hear.
And if I want the comfort of a Wife,
I have the pleasures of a single life;
If I no Gallants here, nor Beauties see,
From slavish Love and Courtship I am free:
What fine things else you in the South can name,
Our North can show as good, if not the same:
Even as in Winter you have shorter Nights,
But Summer us with longer Days requites.
Thus if my want of joy makes life less sweet,
Death then will seem less bitter when we meet.
But what is this Worlds Joy? It Is Innocence
And Virtue that do truest joys dispense:
If Innocence and Virtue with me dwell,
They Will make a Paradise of an Hermits Cell.
On Psalm. 19. 57. Thou art my portion, O Lord.
Distempered men, whose Souls are all on fire
For earthly toys, do heighten their desire
By what they reach to; and the more they have,
The less content, the more they still do crave:
Wealth, Honors, Pleasures, all do but inflame
Corrupted Appetites, not fill the same.
As Oil, when thrown upon a raging fire
Quenches it not, but makes the flame rise high'r;
So they in burning Fevers, whilst they think
To cool their heat, increase it with cold drink.
The best of creatures never were designed
By their Creator to content the mind,
But are bestowed to lead us unto him;
We up these Streams should to the Fountain swim:
Only those blessed Souls who place their love
On God himself, and on the Joys above;
That solid satisfaction do attain,
Which others hunt the World for, all in vain.
God is our center and our place of Rest;
He fills alone the most enlarged breast.
He who enjoys him always, of excess
Will never complain; nor be of emptiness
Who does enjoy him fully: Once but taste
His sweetest goodness, and thou never wilt wast
Thy time, or love thy serious thought or pains
Of things that merit not the name of gains:
Him thou will make thy Portion and thy Lot;
Nor spend thy Coin for that which profits not:
In him are heighths and depths of good, to move
And satisfy his peoples boundless love.
On Psalm 39. 6, 7.
IN a retired Hermitage I dwell,
Where no disturbance can approach my Cell;
Where scarce with any noise my ears are struck,
But the gentle murmurs of a purling Brook,
Or the soft whispers of the Winds that move
The trembling Leaves of an adjoining Grove;
Or the sweet music of the winged Quire,
Unto whose mirth and freedom I aspire.
Here with a calm and easy mind I sit,
From throngs, from business, and from passions quit:
And hence, as from an higher Region, I
The ways of mortals on this Earth descry,
Their toilsom follies, and their fruitless pains,
Heavy their toils, alas, but small their gains;
Shadows they follow, dote on painted toys,
Strangers to manly, solid, lasting joys.
Here see the Earthworm laboring in a Mine
For heaps of Clay, which tho he does refine,
It Is still but glittering Clay; yet the poor slave
Here digs, till unawares he finds his Grave;
Where down he lies, but leaves behind his Gold;
(For which his Liberty, his Ease, his Soul he sold)
His Gold he leaves often to an unknown Heir,
Who wildly wastes the fruits of all his care.
Strange madness this, which Misers has possessed,
Who starve themselves to make their Heirs a feast.
Here see the proud Man hunting after Fame,
And yet by vice and business blots his name;
Adores himself, and would have all adore,
And therefore is by all despised the more;
Scorns to submit to any Man, and yet
To his own Passions vilely does submit.
He lavishes much labor, skill, and time,
Up into some high dignity to climb;
On which his vain designs, if Fortune smile,
Tottering and trembling there he stands a while;
Till thence by some slight push he headlong fall,
Whither he up by tedious steps did crawl.
Unweildy greatness, and his dangerous height,
Make him to fall with greater shame, more weight.
The Man of pleasure thinks himself more wise;
Gilt Earth and pop'lar air he does despise;
Delights he craves more fit for flesh and blood;
Give him his grosser and more savoury mud,
The pleasures of his Throat and Lust, wherein
Wallowing, he drowns himself and sense of Sin;
And yet his course his own designs does thwart,
Rendering the Life he is fond of, dull and short.
The pleasures that he takes, his health destroy,
Health, without which no pleasures we enjoy:
His pleasures leave far greater pain behind;
They please his senses, but torment his mind.
O brutish senseless wretch! who when he might
With Angels taste of pure and high delight,
Will rather choose on poisonous dirt to dine,
Will choose in filth to lodge with Dogs and Swine.
Well, let them take their choice; But how shall I
This short swift moment spend before I dye?
What shall I seek? What shall I wait for here?
Oh! need'st thou ask what should to thee be dear,
My Soul? What is it, when this World is gone,
Will then thy portion be? Seek Him alone,
Even the Eternal God, the only rest
Of Holy Souls, who in his Love are blessed:
His Love shall Honor be, his Grace my Treasure,
His Service and his Smiles, my highest Pleasure.
May I but feel I love, and know I please
My God, I Will ask no greater things than these
No greater on this Earth. But here I Will wait
That happy hour, wherein he shall translate
My weary wandering Soul unto her rest,
When she of Joys Divine shall be possessed;
Joys flowing from the blessed God, and make
Blessed the Souls who do of them partake:
My hope, my trust, my love on him I Will place,
Waiting till I in joy behold his face,
On Luke 11. 14, etc.
WHen Satan from a Sinners heart
Ejected is by Grace,
Restless through malice, still he strives
To gain his ancient place.
He who does readmit this Guest,
His state becomes much worse,
His wickedness more heinous is,
Greater shall be his Curse.
Then watch and pray; the very first
Motions to sin suppress;
Constantly use the means of Grace,
Promoting Holiness.
Lord cleanse our Hearts, and then of us
A firm possession take;
Engage us to thy self, that we
May never thee forsake.
Seneca Thyestes, Act. 2.
STet quicunque volet potens
Au^ae culmine lubrico;
Me dulcis saturet quies:
Obscuro positus loco
Leni perfruar otio.
Nullis nota Quiritibus
Aetas per tacitum fluat.
Sic cum transierint mei
Nullo cum strepitu dies,
Plebeius moriar senex.
Mors illi gravis incubat,
Qui notus nimis omnibus
Ignotus moritur sibi.
A Plain Paraphrase.
LET who will climb to heights of Honor, where
What they with labor get, they hold with fear.
On lower ground give me an humble nest,
In private shades with peace and safety blessed;
Here I Will in silence pass my sliding years,
Strange to great men, strange to their cares and fears
In this obscure, quiet recess shall I
An honest Country Parson live and die.
But dreadful terrors do his death attend,
Who all his time in crowds and noise does spend;
Knows not himself, nor thinks of his last end.
A Translation of the first Epistle of Seneca to Lucilius.
HOld on, brave friend, in those good purposes
Thy last did mention; by such means as these
Live to thy self; the time that heretofore
So many ways was lost, now lose no more.
Our time, some's stolen (believe me what I say)
Some fairlier seems withdrawn, some slips away.
But of all ways none is a worse mispence,
Than losing it by sloth and negligence.
View with attentive eyes the most of men,
With whom thou do converse, and tell me then,
Is not their life, much of it, loosely spent,
Idly yet more, all on impertinent
And trifling things is lost? Where can thou name
A man that prizes time? that sets the same
Value on Hours as Gold, who every day
Perceives he is dying, whilst days wear away?
It Is a mistake to think death yet to come
As all at once, which always works, and some
Of it is already past: for all the breath
We have, expired is in the hands of death.
Act as thou speak, then with all thy power
Lay hold on and improve each present hour.
So on to morrow needst thou not depend,
If thou to day have wisdom well to spend.
All things without us cannot be called our own,
But Time is truly ours, and Time alone.
This fleeting slippery thing does nature give,
As riches, to possess whilst here we live.
Yet of this precious treasure easily may
Who ever will, vast portions steal away
Strange folly this! that things of little cost
Or worth, things easily repaired when lost,
Should be so prized, that men bestowed with such
Mean things as these, themselves they reckon much
Obliged to the Donor, but we hear
No thanks for this rare jewel Time; so rare,
That Gratitude it self no way can find
Whereby it may this gift repay in kind.
But you may ask how I from day to day
My time do spend? whether I my self obey
My self herein? I am, I must confess,
Like one who joins care with his lavishness;
Who though's expenses do his bounds surmount,
Yet of 's expenses still he keeps account.
I dare not say I lose no time, yet I
So careful am, that I can tell you why,
And how, and what I lose: so the same Fate
I Am in with him who to a poor estate
Not through his own fault is reduced, to whom
Pardon from all, succor from none does come.
Thus I can tell how I come poor: but what?
Is that man poor who has enough? Sure not.
Yet you, my friend, I rather would advise
With care to keep your time, betimes be wise
To use it well, you the old Proverb know,
Thrift comes too late when the Purse is grown too low.
And rather haste, since Old Age Time behind
Not only least, but worst, we use to find.
Seneca Epist. 70.
IF we will be friends, it seems I must relate
My each days actions; see at what a rate
Of freedom I converse with thee, and will
Keep nothing from thee, so to keep thee still.
I visit now the Schools, and lately there
Did the Philosophers disputing hear.
What at these years? why not? what should I scorn
To learn at length, 'cause I have long forborne?
I justly happy should my self esteem,
Was this the only act did misbeseem
My years. This School all ages does admit;
Let us whilst young, when old let us visit it.
I to the Theater am carried, age
Is held no plea to keep me from the Stage.
Seldom a bloody fencing-match is made
'Twixt Gladiators, but I see it played.
Are Sports before Philosophy preferred?
Must those be seen, and may not this be heard?
Perfection only may dismission give
From Learning; whilst thou liv'st, learn how to live.
Receive this necessary truth from me,
Who'm old my self, old men should learners be.
But Oh the madness of our age! when I
(As in my way, you know, to the Schools) pass by
The Italian Theater, what crowding's there
(So men about the Crier flock) to hear
The Grecian Music, here Oh toyish pride;
Who tunes his Pipes best Auditors decide.
Mean while those places where good men should be,
We only full of empty Seats do see.
Yea and their few frequenters most deride
As dronish fools, men lazily employed.
Welcome such jeers, with smiles encounter them;
A fools contempt, a wise man will contemn.
On, on Lucilius, now thy Studies ply,
Lest growing old, thou Scholar turn, as I
Am glad to do: Now hasten, or undone,
Thy age will leave the work thy youth begun.
Why, why what progress should I make? Do ask?
What yet have done? what think? Believe't a task
Wisdom to get; high titles may, I know,
And unsought Honors be conferred; so
Men may be wealthy by inheritance;
But where is the man whose virtue came by chance?
This, this with pains is got, 'twill cost no less
The man that would in one all goods possess.
What Is honest, only's good; those things that please
The fancies of the vulgar, nor in these
Is certainty or truth; I Will tell you why
I think thus: for I did not justify
You say, in the letter that I sent before,
This my assertion, but did praise it more
Than prove it; In a word then, each thing's known
Good, by what is first and properly its own,
Thus we commend the cluster-laded Vines,
The industrious servant, and good tasted Wines.
Why is the Carriers horse made strong in the back?
But 'cause he is appointed for the pack.
Amongst a variety of dogs, in those
That hunt the Game by the sent, we praise the nose.
Swiftness in them that take their prey by flight;
Fierceness in those which with wild beasts do fight.
In every creature what is most genuine
And self-peculiar, answering the design
'Twas made for, that it is best is judged; then
Reason's the best accomplishment of men.
Reason does man farthest from brutes remove,
Exalts him nearest to the Gods above.
It Is this alone is man's propriety;
In other things beasts share as well as he.
Is he indu'd with strength? so Lions are.
With beauty? why, the Peacock may compare
With him. Or is he swift? so is an Horse.
I need not say Man in all these is the worse.
Excluding accidents, what can he claim
For his? He has a body; true, the same
Have Trees. Or voluntary motion, so
Have worms: A voice; but Dogs we know
Have shriller mouths: A Bull can louder roar
Than he can hollow: Nightingales have more
Melodious throats. Reason is therefore his,
His happiness depends alone on this.
If Beings have a proper good, and then
Begin to be accounted happy, when
The good they were designed for, they possess;
Reason consummate, is man's happiness.
It Is this we call Virtue or Honesty,
Synonimous both these expressions be.
We now enquire not what in general
Is good, but what we may a man's Good call.
Virtue, thou say, is easily understood,
That it is a, but not the only good.
Yet it appears so, since in all you love
Virtue by it self: in all, Vice disapprove.
Suppose a man blessed with o'reflowing wealth,
Honors, Retinue, Friends all great, good health;
Yet can these outside bravenesses scarce fee
You to approve him, if he vicious be.
On the other hand, imagine one in wants,
Friendless, never waited on by Supplicants;
Claiming no honor as his birthright, no
Continued line of Ancestors can show;
Yet his known goodness will thy love procure
Maugre those disadvantages: Then sure
We must allow, that the only Good of man,
Which in the absence of all other can
Get that esteem; naught else can, wanting this.
The like in other things apparent is.
A painted fineness, Gold or Silver beak,
Rich lading, Ivory Ceilings, do not speak.
Ships therefore good, but a close-jointed building
Well rigged into a firmness, neither yielding
To waves or storms; a sitness to obey
The Pilots hand that does direct its way.
The Sword it self we praise not for the gilt
Belt that it hangs in; for a Silver Hilt,
Or Scabbard set with Pearls; but when it is made
Of well-wrought steel, an Armour-piercing Blade.
So in his Rule, the skilful Architect
Does straightness, not fine workmanship respect.
Each thing claims praise for the innate properties
That serve its end, not bare appendices.
It skills not what men have then, how they fill
Their Chests with Us'ry, how much Land they till;
How many crouching Honourers they have,
What costly Glass they drink in, or how brave
Rich Beds they lie on, what fine Clothes they wear,
How high they live: No, but how good they are.
And then they are good, when in their actions they,
Reason conformed to Nature's Laws, obey.
This Virtue is, which does its owners make
Blessed; and works as they of this partake,
Goodness derive; since naught but what does flow
From this is good, sure it alone is so.
If you will grant all humane goods consigned
To what is most properly the man, his Mind,
Virtue alone will be admitted, which
Confirms, enlarges to the noblest pitch,
Exalts the soul; Whatever else incites,
And seems to gratify or appetites,
Enfeebles, and corrupts them in the end:
Such objects whilst they speciously pretend
To heighten our conditions, they but raise
An empty swelling pride, and so debase
Our minds, and with the pageantry of Shows
And pompous Nothings, they our hopes abuse.
In all our actions reference must be had
For guidance of our lives, to Good and Bad.
From those impartially consulted, we
Learn what performed, what must omitted be.
Let the resolved good man his duty know,
He will thereto through hardships, losses, go,
And threatening dangers; but no proffered price,
No honor, safety, ease, can him entice
To what dishonest seems; no hopes invite
Him to what is ill; from good no fears affright.
Virtue and Vice seem only good and ill,
Since a respect to these should rule our will,
And give us Law's whereby our lives to frame.
An even Virtue which all times the same
Tenor retains, is of all goods the best,
Because who own it once, are dispossessed
Thereof by no attempts of force or art:
This Wisdom never to folly can revert.
We meet with frequent instances of those,
Whose inconsulted rashness does expose
Them to those hardships common spirits fear,
Who trample on what others hold most dear.
Thus have some Voluntaries dared to hold
Their hands like firebrarnds in the flames; whose bold
Resolved laughter not the torturing rack
Disturbed, but they could smile whilst sinews crack.
Men of such hardened tempers often have been,
Whose tearless eyes their Children dead have seen;
Who have encountered Death in fearless sort.
Thus Love, Ambition, Rage dare dangers court.
And should judicious Constancy do less
Than but a sit of furious senslesness?
Nor good nor ill those things are, which the wise
Always, and which sometimes the rash despise.
It Is virtue only has deserved the name
Of good, which 'midst all Fortune's still the same,
Walks with a noble and regardless state;
Rendered by none dejected, nor elate.
That ought is good beside what is honest, this
Conceit destructive of all Virtue is.
Hence men will think they may, and strive to find
Somewhat that is good, not seated in the mind.
But this Opinion is false, this course
Repugnant is to Reason, Virtues source.
He the good man, you will confess, appears
Who most religiously the Gods reveres,
Who, what misfortunes ever him befall,
Does with a cheerful patience bear them all;
As ord'red by an higher Providence
Which to each one his portion does dispense.
Then with an argument this strengthens us,
Since pious Honesty does dictate thus,
To be submissive to the Gods, and not
Fret at mischances, nor bewail our lot,
Nor quarrel at their Orders, but resign
Our selves to them, and do what they enjoin.
If any thing but Honesty may go
For good, what inward vexings hence will flow?
An anxious wish a long life to attain,
Followed with carking restlesness to gain
Life's Utensils, which is an endless care,
Roving, and vain, which no wise man can bear.
But Honesty, that certain good is found,
Which our affections, and pursuits can bound.
If pomp, wealth, pleasures, make us happy, then
We may the Gods less happy judge than men.
If Souls exist from bodies separate,
We justly hope a more exalted state,
Than what they now arrive at whilst immerst
In duller matter: but it will be worst,
If these enjoyments which she does partake
By the bodies mediation, for its sake
Are real goods; But how absurd is this
To think the Souls release can worst its bliss?
Shall the wide World-expatiating free mind
Fall short of what it was when earth-confind?
If ought external's good, we must confess,
Beasts share herein, and so in blessedness.
But Honesty the only good we call,
For which wise men dare do and suffer all.
But raise thy thoughts a while, and then if clear
This notion does not to thy self appear,
I Will make thy self the judge: Imagine then
Thy death might hugely serve thy Countrymen,
Would thou not it with patience (now confess)
Suffer, yea, and embraced with willingness.
See what a price on Honesty you set,
Whilst even for it, you all things else forget*
You for the common good dare dye, although
You dye as soon as of your death you know.
Else in a small time intervening, they
Who nobly dye, rewarding pleasures may
Conceive: Tho slaughtered Heroes in their Grave,
Of Earths affairs no farther knowledge have;
Tho their brave actions here performed, create
No satisfaction in a future state;
Yet whilst they in premeditation view
The fair advantages which will ensue
Their deaths (which like themselves had noble ends)
Their Countries good, or safety of their Friends,
They suffer not, but rather death enjoy,
Whilst in a pleasing ecstasy they dye.
But yet even they whose more surprising fate
Deprives them of the last great pleasure, that
Their forethoughts might afford, without delay
Dare fearless meet their hasty death, whilst they
All other interests wave, content alone
A well-deserving action to have done.
Offer disswasives to their enterprise,
Tell them their more deserving memories
Will not survive them long, their Country too
Unkind, will undervalue what they do.
To all they will answer, These are by-respects;
This work not for self-relative effects,
But for its Honesty, we undertake,
Which nothing can persuade us to forsake.
This is the apparent good which not alone
The perfect, but all generous minds do own.
All other things men study to attain,
Are poor enjoyments, mutable and vain;
Empty of ought but trouble: For they are
Got and possessed with equal anxious care.
And tho indulgent fortune may amass
And heap them on her favorites, alas!
They are but burdens which the bearers press,
Sometimes o'rewhelm them with their weightiness*
The Purpled Nobles, Silken Gallants, those
Men gaze at so, if searched into, disclose
Themselves but owners of an happiness.
The Stage Play Actor borrows from his dress,
Which richly glorious, with a stately port
Like the great one he personates, extort
To's assumed self some few hours reverence from
Wanton spectators, who returning home,
Are soon of those opinions dispossessed,
He into's former meanness is undrest.
They are not great whom raised we behold
To Honors heights, or Mountain tops of Gold:
Their advantageous standing puts a chea:
On common eyes, which misconceive them great,
And fail to take their altitude aright,
Measuring the Ground they stand on for their height.
A Dwarf's a Dwarf, tho placed upon an Hill;
A Giant in a Vail's Gaint still.
But we for th'man mistake his ornaments,
For what is his own but borrowed accidents;
Divest him of his Riches, Honors, those
Bounties of flattering Fortune, which impose
On ignorant admirers, whose short view
Reaches but outsides; wave his Body too:
Then make a judgment of him whether he
Great from himself, or from externals be.
Can he with lively looks, heart undistrest
Behold the glittering Blade set to his breast,
As careless whether's Soul by's mouth, or by
His wider wound forth from his body fly?
Can he with an unmoved patience bear
The great'st misfortunes? And when he shall hear
Threatenings of Tortures, Prison, Banishment,
Or all that witty Tyrannies invent,
As their own pleasures, and the Coward's fears,
Can boldly say, No danger now appears
To me? I long since have forethought them all;
Learned to prepare for whatsoever may fall?
Preexpectation does alleviate ill,
Which blinder confidents of fortune will
As not foreseen, and sudden, strange esteem,
And this surprisal makes it greater seem:
For what intolerable did appear
At the first sight, by use men learn to bear.
What sufferings, Fools, that Providence the Wise
Does teach, who thereby does familiarize
Ills to himself: whilst daunted those cry, We
Thought: not such fortunes did await us, he
Did to the worst himself obnoxious know;
Come what will come, he knew it might be so.
A Paraphrase on the 22d. Ode of Horace. Integer vitae, etc.
THE upright man whose heart and life is pure
From guile and vice, needs neither Sword nor Spear,
His Virtue ever makes him so secure,
He needs no Bow; nor pois'ned Arrows wear;
Cowards, or wrathful men, themselves thus arm,
The good man neither does, nor fears he harm.
He that has tamed the Tiger in his Breast,
Wild Lusts and Passions, safe may take his road
Through Woods and Deserts, never-fearing-Beast,
All will adore him, as a petty-God,
All will approach him with deep reverence,
Paying the homage due to innocence.
As I the other day did careless rove,
Having no weapon but a well-string'd Lute,
I spied an huge fierce Wolf within the Grove,
Who by my music charmed, did there stand mute,
And wondering seemed to listen, whilst my Verse
Did the praises of eternal love rehearse.
Strange sire of heavenly love which reconciles
The Savage Beasts, and angry Elements,
Turns rage and fury into friendly smiles,
And mischief either conquers or prevents;
To him who does the great Creator love,
The World of creatures all will harmless prove.
This Armour's strong, tho light: a Coat of Mail
Not to be pierced by Bullet or by Steel;
It gives a strength over which naught can prevail;
May I its force within my breast but feel,
Fearless I Will follovv vvhither Fate shall call;
Smiling I Will bear whatever shall befall.
Place me on Northern Hills of frozen Snow,
On which the Pole Star does directly stand,
There will I give the love and praise I owe
To him whose love makes that a pleasant Land.
Against frosts and Snows Love is the only charm,
These flames melt Snows, these flames my breast shall warm.
Or throw me on the parched Lybian Sands,
Where flaming Sunbeams do the Trav'ler burn;
Love all Divine, those scorching heats withstands,
Gods Love will Deserts to a Garden turn;
His Smiles, his Words are Fountains, Shades and Breeze.
Each place is Paradise, when I have these.
No Winter frosts, this holy Love shall chill,
No prosperous Summer's heat shall it abate;
But higher it shall flame, and higher still,
Till it to Heaven my Soul in Flames translate:
God's Love is all I crave in Heaven above:
On Earth below, I only craves Gods Love.
Lib. 1. Martial Epigram 6tum.
AN Eagle once a Child aloft did bear,
The Child secure, the Eagle most in fear.
Thus Caesar's Lions sport them with their Prey,
The Hare in their wide Mouth does safely play.
Which then the greater Wonder shall be thought?
A mighty Power each to pass has brought,
Jove did the first, the latter Caesar wrought.
For M. M. upon her Recovery, when at Antwerp.
OH, praise the Lord, my Soul, humbly adore
The riches of his Grace, which more and more
To me his Handmaid has been still expressed;
Let Love and Praise be equally encreast.
'Twas God, who first did Life and Reason give;
By him I am preserved, in him I live:
His Mercy, and his Power did lately save
My Soul from Death, my Body from the Grave.
It Is just, I to my God should wholly live,
Who has renewed the Life he first did give.
Thou that did make me put my mind in frame;
Make me thy Servant, who thy Creature am.
As thou have lately made my Body whole,
So do much more for my more precious Soul.
What thou have wrought without, now work within;
My pain is gone, Lord cleanse me from my Sin:
Thy healthful Spirit upon me bestow,
That I in Grace may daily stronger grow.
So strengthen me, that I may walk in ways
Of Holiness and Peace through all my days,
Till thou shall take me hence to live above,
In endless Joys with thee, the God of Love.
Written on Dr. Patrick's Devout Christian, given to a Friend.
IN Prayer, the Tongue has but the lesser part;
Devotion's chiefly seated in the Heart:
This with our Lips we humbly must express,
And in our Lives by serious Holiness.
They who on Earth, with Heart, Lips, Life, adore
Their God, in Heaven shall praise him evermore:
Whilst then our Prayers begin, and end the Day,
Let Us daily live as strictly as we pray.
Au Epitaph designed for that most excellently accomplished and Publick-spirited
Gentleman, William Banks Esquire, of Winstantly in Lancashire; who died at
Chastleton in Oxfordshire, July 6. -- 76.
UNder this Monument the Relics lie
Of a Great Man, all that of him could die;
Who whilst he lived, lived to the noblest ends,
To serve his God, his Country, and his Friends.
Wherefore his God, his Friends, his Country give
Freedom from Death, and make him still to live:
His Soul with God in Regions lives above,
In Regions like his Soul, all Peace and Love:
With dearest Friends his precious Memory
Lives fresh and fragrant; nor with them shall die.
His grateful Country does preserve his name,
Just Praises, and true Tears, Embalm the same:
His lovely Picture still has Life and Breath,
In hopeful Children; so small Power has Death
Over good Men, who when they seem to yield,
Then, like their dying Lord, they win the Field;
Only the Grave in peace retains their Dust,
Until the Resurrection of the Just.
Multis ille bonis flebilis occidit;
Nulli flebilior quam mihi.
On A. M. a tender Infant.
HEre Sweetness lies, and Innocence, whose Breath
Was stopped by early, not unfriendly Death:
She Is gone to rest, just as she did begin
Sorrow to know, before she knew to sin:
Death that does Sin and Sorrow thus prevent,
Is the next Blessing to a Life well spent.
ON Bishop WILKINS'S Picture. December. 30. -- 82.
THis is his Shadow, who was once the Glory
And Pillar of our British Church; whose Story
Ages to come shall wondering read, this Age
Shall mourn his death, tremble at its presage:
He was all that which makes men great and good;
But's loss will make his Worth best understood.
His just Description I no more can give,
Than the Painter can make this his Picture live;
His truer Picture lives within my mind,
And in the pious Works he left behind;
In both, my sorrows some relief shall find:
Till his great Soul ere long I meet above,
Amongst blessed Spirits in Heavenly Joy and Love.
True Beauty.
LET blind Admirers, handsome Faces praise,
And graceful Features to great Honor raise;
The Glories of the red and white express;
I know no beauty but in Holiness:
If God of beauty be the uncreate
Perfect Idea, in this lower State
The greatest beauties of an human mold,
Who most resemble Him, we justly hold;
Whom we resemble, not in flesh and blood,
But being pure and holy, just and good.
May such a Beauty fall but to my share,
For Curious Shape, or Face, I never shall care.
On my Picture.
SEE here the Shadow of another Shade,
Which, like its Picture, soon away will fade;
To Worms and Moths a Portion soon will fall,
Both short-lived Copy and Original.
And yet rejoice, my Friends, since the unseen mind
Lives when dead Shades and Corpse are lest behind;
And shall we be concerned what will become
Of fading Faces, rotten Bones and Tomb,
Whilst the unseen Mind, whose form no art can draw,
Exempted is from Deaths severer Law?
Virtue does Life and lasting Beauty give;
Virtue and virtuous minds for ever live;
With God they live in joys together, where,
Of losing God, Joys, Friends, is no more fear.
Rejoice then Friends, this Glory make your choice,
Always do good, always in God rejoice.
FINIS.
Books Written by Mr. John Rawlet, B. D. and sold by Samuel Tidmarsh, in
Cornhil.
A Treatise of Sacramental Covenanting with Christ, showing the ungodly their
contempt of Christ, in their contempt of the Sacramental Covenant: With a
Preface chiefly designed for the satisfaction of Dissenters, and to exhort all
men to Peace and Unity.

An Explication of the Creed, the Ten Commandments, and the Lords Prayer, with
the addition of some Forms of Prayer.

A Dialogue betwixt two Prorestants, (in answer to a Popish Catechize called, a
short Catechism against all Sectaries), plainly showing, That the Members of
the Church of England are no Sectaries, but true Catholics, and that our
Church is a sound part of Christ's holy Catholic Church, in whose Communion
therefore the People of this Nation are most strictly bound in Conscience to
remain.

The Christian Monitor, containing an earnest Exhortation to an Holy Life, with
some directions in order thereto; written in a plain and easy Style, for all
sorts of people.

Poetic Miscellanies.


