TOM ESSENCE: OR, The Modish Wife. A Comedy. As it is Acted at the Duke's
Theater.

Licensed,

November. the 4th. 1676. Roger L'Estrange.



LONDON, Printed by T. M. for W. Cademan, at the Pope's Head in the Lower Walk
of the New-Exchange in the Strand, 1677.

PROLOGUE.
WHat! will no warning do? -- you are hardened grown,
So often Iilted, yet will be Cully'd on?
It Is strange -- but your good Natures, Sirs, will sway
Powerful Variety you must obey:
I thought your last bad Treatment was enough,
As you are of Sermons t'ave made ye too Play-proof;
Yet -- mauger all, you will assist the Cheat,
Tho ye see danger, you will pursue the feat.
Like brisk young Fopp that is heated with desire,
When knowing Miss does subtly fan his fire,
Tho sure of Clap -- yet will he not retire.
Then take your Chance, the first time 'twill not be,
If it prove bad, that we have Consend ye;
Yet we applaud your Curiosity.
For Gallants, should ye fatally engage
To keep from hence till Wit returns to the Stage,
I fear but few of ye will see that Age.
Then, since the fault's your own, been't too severe
On us -- your poor and willing Servants here
For Faith -- we treat,
With all the little Wit that you can spare.
The Persons Names.
Mr. Percival, Old Monylove. A Credulous old Fool, who has a young Wife. Mr.
Crosby, Courtly. A sober Gentleman, Servant to Theodocia. Mr. Norris, Loveall.
A wild Debaucht Blade. Mr. Gillow, Stanly. Gallant to the Old Man's Wife. Mr.
Lee, Tom Essence. A Jealous Coxcomb of his Wife. Mr. Richards, Laurence.
Loveall's Man. Mrs. Hughes, Mrs. Monylove The Old man's Wife, and Mother-in-Law
to Theodocia. Mrs. Barry, Theodocia, Daughter to Old Monylove. Mrs. Osburn,
Luce, A Widow disguised, and passes for Theodocia's Maid. Mrs. Gibbs, Mrs.
Essence, Tom Essence's Wife very Impertinent and Jealous of her Husband. Mrs*
Napper, Betty, Mrs. Monyloves Maid. Servants, Attendants, Bailiffs, etc.
The Scene, LONDON. Tom Essence: OR, The Modish Wife.
ACT the First.
Scene the First.
Scene, Covent Garden. Luce alone. FOrtune -- thou have proved kind in placeing
me
So near my Rival Theodocia;
And now false Loveall suddenly shall find
A Woman's Honor, nor his Perjuries
Shall rest long unrevenged --
When by his soothing Language, cunning Arts,
With Protestations to be none but mine,
I was betrayed to his unruly flame:
But thus disguised, as Theodocia's Maid,
I Have subtly won her Love -- so that when e're he comes
I easily shall frustrate his design. --
To her Theodocia. Theo. Ah my dear Luce --
Were It not for thee, my laboring heart would break:
Thy Friendship eases my disturbed mind,
And I shall never forget that happy hour
In which thy Cousin brought thee -- since thou do prove
Not only of Servants, but the best of Friends.

Luce. Madam, whatever hitherto I Have done,
Or shall hereafter do, will prove at last
To be my Duty -- but Madam, your sad looks
And frequent sighs betray an inward grief;
Let me Conjure you, by that Name of Friend,
Which you have been pleased to think me worthy of,
Reveal the cause of this unusual Sadness.

Theo. Ah Luce -- a Father's Rigor does disturb my mind
So much, he is blinded with the love of Wealth,
He Would have me Cancel all my former Vows
Which I by his command did make to Courtly,
And place 'em on Loveall, whom I never saw,
But by his Picture, -- so that either way
I must prove perjured or disobedient.

Luce. But Madam -- if Courtly's false, your Vows will then
Be canceled, his silence may cause suspicion;
For it is at least a month since he left the Town:
And were he constant, as his love seemed true,
He could not have forborne so long a time
From sending kind expressions of his heart,
TO oblige a pleasing answer -- but
Mrs. Essence ready above. A constant Lover in this Age is rare;
It Is gallantry to break the Vows of Love,
And he is the bravest man, who has been most
Perfidious to his Mistress --

Theo. Forbear dear Luce such fatal suppositions:
Here I Am inclined to think all that is false*
Pulls out a Picture. Dwells in this man -- each feature, all the air
Proclaims a guilt of all things that are ill --
Oh, take that hated object from my sight

(Gives Luce the Picture. Luce. Ha! Lovel's Picture! --
( Theo. pulls out another Picture. My Soul's transported with this gift,
So highly I esteem what she rejects,
That I have been but one continued thought
How to obtain the original.
This present may an happy omen prove,
To my desires -- to enjoy the man I love.

Theo. But look on this -- then check thy rash opinion:
Can thou see here e're an inconstant line --
Ah what a pleasing air dwells on this Face!
These eyes display at once --
A charming sweetness, and a noble pride;
Nay, all the Lineaments bespeak him one
So truly brave and noble, that 'twere a crime
Unpardonable but to think him false.

Luce. This piece indeed denotes a noble soul:
Yet Madam, pleasing looks have often proved
The cloud and varnish of a Treacherous mind:
Yet since your Love's so great, I cannot blame
Your just resentments of a Father's rigor.

Theo. By all that is good I love him -- yet I must -- oh --


(She faints and lets fall the Picture. Luce. Help, help -- some help for
Charity.


To them Tom. Essence. T. Ess. How now Mrs. Luce, what is the matter!


Luce. My Lady is not well --


T. Ess. Is that all? your cry was so loud, I thought of nothing less than a
Rape -- poor soul, she is very silent -- that my damned tatling Wife would take
example of this divine silent Creature --


Luce. Pray Mrs. Essence hold her till I call more help to carry her in

Exit Luce,
Mrs. Essence discovered at a VVindow. T. Essence. She Is cold -- I Will try if
she has life -- (kisses her) Amber, Musk, and Civit! -- I protest I know not
whether she breaths or no -- (kisses her again) she is Essence of Violets from
head to foot -- what a ravishing lip is here! --


Mrs. Essence. What is it I see, my Husband with a Woman in's Arms -- it is so
-- he kissing her -- Oh precious Rogue! must I suffer this! I Will be sooner with
you than you desire y' faith.

Exit Mrs. Essence.
To him Luce and a Maid. T. Essence. Come, come away, it is pity such a pretty
plump (and I believe sound) thing, should slip into the other World at an Age,
in which she is capable to do good in this.

Exeunt] Enter Mrs. Essence alone. Gone! how soon they have quitted the place, as
if the Plague were here -- I have often wondered at his late coldness to me;
but now I find he denied me those refreshing Comforts to bestow them on his new
Miss; this is the crying sin of the Nation, grown common among the Block-headed
Husbands, as well as with the single Libertines, who think every man's Dish
ought to be at their command to carve where they like best; and it is grown so
modish, that the accomplished Gallants, as they call themselves, will not Marry
unless they may have the freedom of keeping a Love-toy, as they name those lewd
Creatures; for a bare Wise will not down with 'em -- when Heaven knows they need
not ramble, did they perform their duties at home; but the Wife must starve and
languish whilst they are at their Varieties -- but in Troth it shall not be so
with my peirt Block-head; I Will hold him so strictly to it hereafter, -- that
I Will spoil his gadding I Will warrant him --

(Spies the Picture. Ha! what is here? if this duskey light deceives me not --
it is a rich case --
By're leave, I must see your inside --

(Opens the Picture, starts. To her Tom Essence. T. Ess. Heaven's be praised,
'twas but a swound -- it is a lovely soul, and on my Conscience not of my old
Neighbors Begetting -- Her skin's as white and smooth as Pomatom -- but mum --
here is my Mortifier --


Mrs. Essence. Venus bless me, it is a lovely Picture --


(aside T. Essence. What Is that she is so devout at? -- ha! -- Stars shine out
--

(Looks over her Shoulder. Gad take me -- gad forgive me, it is the Picture of a
smooth-fac't Fellow.


Mrs. Essence. What a Surprising look is here! Oh these bewitching Eyes and
tempting Lips!

(Kisses the Picture. Methinks they melt with such a sweetness! I could for
ever dwell upon 'em --


(aside. T. Ess. S'life, she will Fornicate with the Picture!


Mrs. Essen. Ah Mrs. Essence, what would become of thee, had thou the
addresses made thee by such a comely Person; that Woman were a Beast that could
deny the kindness he should sue for -- Oh my cursed Fortune! to make one of the
Vulgar my Yoak-fellow, 'twere better to be a Miss to such a one as this, than
to be Coupled as I am -- pretty thing -- but such a Picture of Ill-luck is my
Logger-head, that a Bear to me is the more beautiful Beast of the two, and
would be more pleasing --


(aside. T. Ess. A Goat would to satisfy your Appetite --

(Snatches the Picture. How now Madam Flippant, have I caught you traducing the
Honor of your Lawful Sovereign, your Husband -- What, what defect have I that
should be corrected and amended; this shape and mein in times of Yore were not
contemptible when Knights Daughters with their Thousands did prostrate
themselves to me; and Maids of Honor, when I carried Gloves and Ribbons to
Court to 'em, have sued for Kindnesses which you have reapt; and I pray, what
are you, but an Oyl-firkin, whose sole composition is Lamp-oyl and Anchovis.


Mrs. Ess. Yes, yes, I know well enough that --


T. Ess. Do you so Iesabel -- and after my rejecting my aforesaid creams of
beauty to the fletton-milk of thy Countenance, am I thus rewarded? You grow so
Rampant, that the plain wholesome dish of a Husband will not down with you,
without the Ragous of a Gallant.


Mrs. Ess. Go to, my special Property, and Cover-lid of Iniquity -- inslame
not my resentments -- but restore my Picture -- and that instantly --


T. Ess Then this is my kind Journey-man, is it? -- hum, a pretty Rogue to rob,
an honest Citizen of his good name, -- but did I know him, by Finsbury I Would
maul him.


Mrs. Ess. Leave off your idle fantastic fancies, and restore my Picture with
those submissions that become a Husband; and beg pardon for prying into my
Secrets, or I swear I Will act what you may repent you e're provokt me to.


T. Ess. Make my Submissions? break thy Neck thou Traitor to my Honor; Slife
stop that Clack of thine, or upon Rep, I Will quarter thee, and set 'em upon the
Citty-Gates for a terror to all Extravagant Domineering Wives.


Mrs. Ess. And what shall be done to Whoreing disloyal Husbands?


T. Ess. Yet again! -- Stand forth, and make up your mouth as demurely as on
the day of my Tribulation and Bondage, which was my Wedding Day with thee -- so
now, against thy brazen-fac't Lady-ship, thus I draw my Accusation: -- Dorothy
Essence, hold up thy hand, -- hold up I say -- so -- I will show you, to your
cost, what I learnt last Sessions, when I was on the Jury. --

Whereas thou Dorothy Essence, Wife of Thomas Essence, Milliner.


Mrs. Ess. Whereas thou Thomas Essence, Husband of Dorothy Essence Gentlewoman
--


T. Ess. Gentlewoman with a Pox -- a Citizens Daughter and a Gentlewoman --

Not having Grace or Obedience before your eyes --


Mrs. Ess. Not having Grace or Obedience before your eyes.


T. Ess. But being moved by the Diabolical discourses of lewd wild Gallants.


Mrs. Ess. But being moved by the Diabolical glances of lewd wanton Creatures.


T. Ess. By Amber-greese and Pomander leave off -- or -- Have Feloniously
stolen from the body of thy said Husband --


Mrs. Ess. Have Feloniously stolen from the body of thy said Wife.


T. Ess. The inestimable commodity of his Life and Calling, his Reputation.


Mrs. Ess. The inestimable commodity of her Life and Calling, her Reputation.


T. Ess. To his damage, and against the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King,
and so forth.


Mrs. Ess. To her damage --


T. Ess. Cudslid Silence. -- How say thou Dorothy, Guilty or not Guilty?


Mrs. Ess. Hou say thou Thomas, Guilty or not Guilty --


T. Ess. As gad-sa'me, leave off your tricks and plead, or Sentence shall pass
upon you to be Pressed to death.


Mrs. Ess. Not Guilty my Lord --


T. Ess. Say you so? -- How will thou be tried then?


Mrs. Ess. By this --

(Snatches the Picture and runs out. Exit.
T. Ess. Good -- She Is run away with the King's Witness that shall hang her;
how-ever, I Will after her, for fear by tampering she spoil my Evidence.

Exit.
SCENE, A Garden to Old Monylove's House.
Mrs. Monylove and Betty. Mrs. Mon. It Is dark -- Art sure you gave Stanly right
directions?


Betty. Madam I did -- but it is not yet the hour; besides, should he come,
he would go directly to your Chamber-window, according to your appointment, and the
Ladder is let down.


Mrs. M. On better thoughts I came hither to prevent his coming to my Chamber,
therefore prithee step up and see if he be there; if not, here I will expect
him.

(Exit Betty That Stanly loves me, is questionless, otherwise so brisk a
Town-gallant as he could never have proved so constant to his Amor,
considering the frequent repulses I have given him; I must reward his
Constancy, but not with yielding to his desires; for tho (by my old Master Sir
Timothy Thrivewell's contrivance, who having been busy with me, and fearing I
should prove fruitful to his disgrace) I am Married to a Superannuated Fool;
yet in despite of all temptations and opportunities, if it be possible that
flesh and blood can hold out, I Will keep those Vows I made to my old Dotard, in
hopes that Heaven, to reward my Loyalty to him, will take compassion on my
Youth, and by his death, make me capable of making a younger Brothers fortune.
-- not yet come? -- I Will take another turn.

Exit.
Enter Loveall, Laurence. Lau. Sir, Sir, are you mad? should we be discovered,
what can we expect less than a seizure for suspicion of Felony, Burglary, or
what not, and so be worshipfully hanged for a frollick.


Lov. Thou dull insipid Ass, he is no true Lover, who will not run some danger
for the sight of's Mistress; and I swear, e're I sleep, if possible, I Will
either see or discourse with her; that when I am in bed, I may dream my self
into a passion which may enable me more vigorously to express my Love to
morrow: for, if she proves as witty as her Picture describes her fair, I shall
be beyond expression happy --


Lau. No question Sir, but you will be monstrous vigorous to morrow, should you
do as you say -- Dream your self into a passion. -- But Sir, in my opinion your
Dream would prove more pleasant, if you would home to Bed, and fancy her one of
those fine Ladys you have Courted and enjoyed; that is the true Elysium slumber!
Hang these Night-spirits, the damned suspicion of their being either Old or
Ugly, would sooner put me into a Fright, than create Amorous thoughts.


Lov. Sarrah, not a word more, and stir not from this place till I come again;
nor breath for your life, lest any one should over-hear you --

Exit Loveall.
Lau. I am a Slave Sir -- So, now is he as hot after fresh game, as a new cured
Gallant that runs a Tilt against the next Perticoat he meets, to try his
Doctors skill -- It Is not above two months since he swore a Rich Widow into
belief of his Counterfeit Love; for she (good natured soul!) thinking him real,
yielded; but so soon as he had done the feat, he (like the rest of his Brother
strikers) turned tail and sneakt away without taking leave -- ha -- I hear
somebody comeing -- now honest Laurence, to save thy Carcass, what would thou
give for Daphne's faculty of being turned into a Tree?


Noise. Enter Theo. Luce. Theo. Come my dear Friend --
Let Us recreate our selves in these cool shades,
And for a while divert my troubled mind
From wracking thoughts --
For his tormenting silence prompts me to think
That your suspition's just -- Ah! were he here,
A Fathers rigorous power should not prevail.

Luce. I wonder Madam that he is not yet come,
Since I writ word of what consequence
His presence would be here -- and used, I thought,
Sufficient motives to have hastened him.

Theo. Pray Heaven he is well --

Lau. She Is very passionate poor Creature! --

Lau. Stumbles and makes a noise. Theo. Ha! who is there? --


Lau. Cudslid I Am discovered, but fie come off. -- I am a Friend and Servant
of your happy Lovers, Madam -- who ^^fortunately arrived to ease your griefs:

This must be Mrs. Theodocia --


(aside. Theo. Is fortune then so kind? -- Say Friend, to whom it is you do
belong? --


Lau. Belong Madam? to whom should I belong, but to him who admires, doats, and
thinks of nothing in the world, but of your fair self? My knowledge of the
entreigue of the Picture will convince you who I serve: -- Say Madam, is it not
an excellent Picture, and describes the Original deserving? --


Theo. My doubts are cleared, it must be Courtly's man.

Ah tell me if thy Master be in Town --
If he is, fly to him and bring him hither;
Tell him with what impatience here I wait
His coming, to confirm our plighted Loves.

Lau. That you may quickly do Madam, for he is in this Garden; and since you are
so impatient, I Will venture a broaken Nose to find him out -- Oh Love what power
have thou, that with a picture can create a flame!

Exit Lau.
Theo. Come Luce, let us have to meet the man I Love --


Exeunt Theo, Luce. Enter Mrs. Mon. Betty, Loveall at a distance. Betty. He Is
not yet come Madam --


Mrs. M. Art sure the Garden door is open -- see --


Exit Betty. Lov. This must be She; for by the sudden glimps of a light from
the Houses, I saw her shape and mein; and both seemed pleasing --


(aside. Mrs. M. Ha! there is some body; it must be he -- hist, hist.


Lov. Who Is there? -- Now Love assist me --


(aside Mrs. M. Speak softly Friend, for should the old man's spys
(As questionless such Agents he may have
To pry into my Actions) over hear,
Or discover you, I too soon should lose
The good opinion which with care I 've gained
With my old Dotard, and be incapable
To prosecute my intended kindness,
Which for requital of your constant Love
I have designed --
For know, the Assignation which I Have made,
Is to propose what may advantageous prove
To you for ever* if you approve of it.

aside. Lov. Ha! blessed mistake! this is the old man's Wife
My Uncles once convenient Utensil:
Now for some Love-intreigue; Horns on my life
Are making for the old Fools empty Noddle.

Mrs. M. In short it is this --
By my contrivance, I have won my Husband
To force his Daughter Theodocia
To break those Vows which formerly she made
To Courtly -- and I, assisted by my old Gallant
(Who made this cursed match for me, and thinks
Me loyal to his Intreigue) have, much ado,
Persuaded my old man to give consent
That Sir Timothy's debaucht wild Nephew, Loveall,
Shall marry Theodocia --

Lov. Good -- meaning me, kind Devil! --

(aside. Mrs. M. But I Have a plot runs counter to both theirs --
For I Have resolved Theodocia shall be yours.

Lov. So, -- now must I to exercise with rusty Bilboe;
For since I Have Rivals, I may conclude she is handsome;
Which if she proves, I Will do what I before did not design:
I Will marry her -- before my intentions were
Only to have Wheadled her good Nature up to Love,
Then given her strong sufficient proofs of mine;
That done gentilely, have left her in the fashion.

Mrs. M. Why stand you mute? do not six thousand pounds
And a fair Virtuous Lady deserve thanks? -- ha -- Betty? --

Enter Betty. Betty. Madam, Mr. Stanly is now entered the Garden --

Mrs. M. How, Stanly said you! he is here already, wench --

Betty. It Is impossible, I parted with him but now at the Garden gate.

Lov. Now brain assist me to get off -- I have it.
Madam, I must confess I Am not the man
Whose bliss you labor; yet be he whom he will,
I love that Lady with as pure a flame as he;
Yet I confess I find he has the odds
Of me, in having two most powerful Advocates,
Fortune and your Self to plead his cause.

Mrs. M. It Is Courtly sure; but I Will not seem to know him.
(aside. Sir, who e're you are, that thus rudely 've entered
This place at so unseasonable a time,
'Twill be the safest way to quit it soon;
But if you obstinately stay, I shall conclude
What now I but suspect: That your design
Is not for Love, but to rob the House.

Lov. Of a fair Ladys heart, by Heaven I would:
Could I but seize on Theodocia's Love,
I would submit to the severest sentence
A Fathers rigor could pronounce.

Mrs. M. Oh Betty, this can be none but Courtly,
My Daughters Lover, and my design is ruined;
For questionless he will tell my Husband of it -- then, --

Betty. Fear nothing Madam, if he proves so base
I Will take it upon my self, as if I did
Personate you; and I thank my Stars,
I have a Confidence can match the boldest blade.

Mrs. M. Let Us have then to my Chamber, lest the Servants
Should discover Stanly there.

Mrs. M. Betty. Exeunt. Lov. They are gone -- good --
What have I got now by my Curiosity?
Only the knowledge that I have a Rival,
And consequently blood must ensue.
(Call Luce. Well, happen what will, I am resolved to morrow
I Will see her; and if possible, find out
Who this Rival is.

Enter Laurence. Lau. Hist, -- Sir, Sir, it grows damnable dark.


Lov. Who Is there, Laurence?


Lau. The same Sir, honest Laurence; and in despite of the Proverb, no Lazy
Laurence, for I Have been active; both Brain and Limb I Have ventured to do you
Service, and so successful I have proved, that with the Emperor I may say,
Veni, I came up to her; Vidi, I had a glimps of her Phisnomy; but Vici, I came
over her: y' faith the Town's your own, impatient ^he is now in quest of you;
in the Garden to find you out, my Nose and Tree have had several encounters;
but that I am honest probatum est, my Nose stands right, and smells your
Mistress near.


Lov. My precious Rogue, where is she?


Lau. Not far, I Will engage. Poor Soul, I no sooner named the Picture, but she
was on tip toe of desire to speak with you: But she comes -- to her Sir, fear
no colors, for I have broke the Ice.


(Noise of a Door shutting. Lov. Sarrah, I hear a Door shut; see if it be the
Gardens, and bring me word.


Lau. I Will endeavor to find it out Sir, and if I escape this N^ght whole, I Will
be hanged e're I Will venture on such another Romantic project.

Exit. Lau.
Enter to Loveall, Luce. Luce. Her Love has guided her so fast, I Have lost her;
But I Will take the other turn to find her out. Ha!

(Offers to go. Lov. takes hold of her. Lov. My Life, my Soul: I want words to
express
My joys, for this blessed opportunity
Of making known to you my restless Love.

Luce. How Is this? it is Loveall's Voice, my forsworn Servant.
Too sure it is he, for my rebellious heart
Leapt in my breast when he began to speak.

Aside. Lov. Your beauty by your Picture is displayed;
And if with beauty you have mercy too,
My joys will be complete; for by those Stars
Which borrow luster from your Eyes, I swear
I am so Fettered with Loves pleasing toils,
That I can sooner dye than cease to love.

Luce. Too true, it is he; the very words he used
When he betrayed my Honor, Perjured man!

Aside. Lov. How! dumb, my fair? this shall unlock your lips.

(Offers to kiss her. Luce. Keep off Sir, and who e're you are, you are rude;
What business have you here? and pray with whom?

Lov. I am Loveall, who cannot, will not rest
Till I have heard my Doom.
I know not by what art the Painter drew
That Picture which was sent me by my Uncle:
But sure your beauty 'twas that did inspire him;
For with his Pensil h' has so powerfully drawn
Such killing sweetness, and attractive Charms
That I no sooner saw,
But lost my liberty, and became a Lover.
-- Not speak, my fair?
Torment me not with this your killing silence,
But kindly answer me, and bid me live.

Luce. It shall be so.
Sir, your love by your impatience you have shown;
But should I yield ere I have tried or seen
The man that sues for love, what could I expect,
But a just censure of a forward longing
For a Husband; or at least
My discretion might be called in question.
Then Sir, desist at present: fear; yet hope,
For till I Have approved your person, tried your flame,
I shall forbear further discoursing with you:
If your Love's true, comply with my desires,
And quit this place; for should we be discovered
By any of the Servants, my Honor would suffer;
Therefore good night, but take this with you Sir --
I long for the approaching day as much as you.

(Exit Luce. Lov. She Is gone; happy, happy Loveall;
Her wit, by her discretion, she has shown:
I Am so transported with my happiness,
I know not what to do.
Where is this Rascal now? that I might home,
And in a dream I Will Antedate my bliss.
Exit.
Enter Stanly; after him Laurence. Stan. What should this fellow be? perhaps
it is one ordered to expect my comeing, and with more safety to conduct me to
her.


(aside. Lau. Is she not a charming Creature? what a Devil should make you quit
the encounter so soon? the Garden door goes with a spring-lock, no fear of
being impounded for this Trespass: Well, had I been half as much in Love as you
pretend to be, I should have given her further proofs of it e're we had parted.
Oh it is the fondest Ti^, and talks so prettily of Love! Y're strangely altered
on the sudden; you were not so cold and backward when you attempted and
enjoyed the Frollick-widdow at Stamford.


Stan. How Is this? Some Villain (on my life) designing force on Theodocia's
Virtue, knowing she uses to walk late at Nights in this Garden; but I Will spoil
his Plot. Sir, discover who that Devil your Master is, or I Will cut your Throat.


(lays hold on Lau. Lau. Ha! Pox on it, what a damned mistake was this: now some
trick to get off;
I Will Huff: How Sir, will you cut my Throat Sir?

Stan. Yes Sir, if you defer your answer; therefore be speedy.


Lau. So I will y' says; murder, murder.

(Lau. slips out of Stanly's hand, and runs out crying Murder. Stan. The Rogue
is gone, and will Alarm the House; what shall I do?


Enter Loveall. Lov. That was my Rascals voice: Hist Laurence: Sirrah, Dog, how
you yelp.


Stan. Another Villain? Defend your life, who e're you are.


(draws. Lov. My Rival I hope: Now Luck, if it be thy will, direct my Sword.


(they fight. Enter Lau. Lau. What shall I do, there is a whole Regiment coming:
Ha! a Ladder; b' your leave, this shall be my way.


Gropes about, and finds the Ladder; goes up the wrong-side. Lov. Company
coming? then it is time to Retreat.
Exit.
Enter Servants with Lights. Serve. From this place the noise came; come along,
come along.


Stan. Now Wit assist me.


Stanly slips off his Habit; discovers a Devils Habit; puts on a Masque, goes
and meets them; they run out crying, the Devil -- Lau. How? the Devil! Heaven
have mercy on my soul, what will become of me now?


Stan. Thanks good contrivance, this has done me Service, and all is hushed
again: My fighting Blade gone too. Now for the soft caresses of my Love, her
yielding kindness will countervail past dangers: I wish all doting Fools had
such obliging Wives as my Miss proves; what a gentile world it would be then?
The Candle's brought.

(A Candle set in the Window. Thus to my Heaven I mount.

As Stanly goes up the right way, Lau. descends the wrong way of the Ladder.
Lau. Fortune I thank thee for this discovery and deliverance: Old man, snore
hard.


When old Fools Wed, they must with Horns dispense:
Horns are the just rewards for impotence.
The end of the First Act.
ACT the Second:
Scene the First.
Scene, Mrs. Monyloves Chamber. Mrs. Monylove and Stanly. Stan. YOur reasons
Madam have prevailed, and I Am become your Convert; henceforth I Will curb my
loose desires: But which way shall we effect your kind Contrivance, which you
for my advantage have designed? for Theodocia will not quit her Vows she made
to Courtly, and your old man intends she shall be Loveall's Bride.

Mrs. M. Were you once introduced into the Family, my Daughter-in-Law should be
yours; for I Would so work upon the Old man's temper, that he should believe all I
should say was true: I Would add some Ciphers to your small Estate, to make it
swell above your Rivals; his Covetousness would then be assistant to the Cheat,
and make him embrace you for his Son-in-Law.


Stan. What e're we intend to do, must speedily be put in execution; for
without question, the person I encountered in the Garden, was Loveall, her
new-arriv'd Servant.


Enter Betty. Betty. Oh Madam, my Master's coming up Stairs.


Mrs. M. What shall we do, he is as fond as an old Baboon; the Nights I Articled
with him upon Marriage, to lie alone, I designed for the enjoyment of my self;
but he is so soon stirring in the morning, that I am as much plagued, as if I
had lay'n with him all the Night; but his fondness would soon turn to Jealousy
should he see you here; therefore good Sir, hide your self under the Bed, or
any where.


Stan. Madam, fear nothing: Betty, prithee help me on with my Coat: So, so, now
I am prepared to receive him, and both of ye be sure to second what e're I say.


(Old M. coughs within. Enter Old Monylove. Old M. Joy, where art? as I say, my
Chick, I Have hardly rested for want of thy sweet Company to Night: Ha! what do I
see? a man in my Wifes Chamber so early? Bless me! in the name of goodness,
what art thou?


Stan. Be not surprised good Sir, I am your Friend and Neighbor.


Old M. My Neighbor Sir! as I say, you may be my Neighbor, but not my Friend;
I Will stand to it.


Betty. It Is Dr. Bleedwell Sir, he lives within three doors of us; my Lady,
last night, finding her self not well, sent me for him.


Stan. But I unfortunately was then abroad; so soon as I returned, my man
informed me that your Maid was to enquire for me; I then immediately came to
your House, and finding the Garden-door open, innocently entered; but such
dismal shreiks I heard, and horrid Apparitions came up toward me, that I let
the place with great Confusion.


Old M. Apparitions said you Sir? bless us!


Stan. Many Sir; one Devil among the rest, was five foot higher than the
Dutchman that is showed about Town, with a great Beard, flaming Eyes, meager
Looks, and a large pair of Horns on his head; a Citty-Devil on my life, by his
Crest.


Old M. Sir, your Servant, I Will stand to it, the very Devil by his description,
that Roger told me he saw.


Stan. When I was got home, and had recollected my self, I resolved to visit
your Lady early this morning, to know her pleasure; -- And let me tell you Sir
--


Old M. What, what, will he tell me that he has Cuckold me? as I say, I know
not what to think, he seems a strongchined Knave.


(aside. Stan. Your Lady's in a desperate condition.


Old M. Condition Sir! what condition? ha!


Stan. Sownd, Sownd, Madam, (to Mrs. Mon.) See, see, now the Fits upon her;
this is a Disease incident to young Married women, obstructions which often
produce Madness, if not timely remedied.


Mrs. M. Oh sick, sick, where is my Master? were it not for his sake, I would
resolve to dye rather than undergo this torment long.


Old M. Oh kill me not dear Cock with such fatal words; if all I am worth can
purchase thy health, thou shall not want it, I Will stand to it. Good kind Sir,
have so^e compassion on a wretched man, find out some speedy way to save my
Chickins life; and as I say, here is your (...) which shall be trebled when the
Cure is perfected; I Will stand to it.


Sta. There is a way; -- again the Fit's returned.


Mrs. ^on. Sownds. In short Sir, Tunbridge-waters are her only remedy.

Old M. They are sold in Town, I Will send for some immediately.


Stan. In Town? Save your money Sir; those Waters sold in Town, are mear
Cheats, they put a little Salt-Peeter, Brimstone, Rusty ^on to our
Conduit-waters to nauciate the taste, which with the Ignorant, pass current: but
were they right, they lose their Virtue, once removed from the Spring; besides,
the Air as well as Waters is assisting to the Cure.


Old M. To Tunbridge Wells you say Sir; Betty, put up your Mistresses things,
and bid the Fellow get the Coach ready, for we will go part of the way to Night.


Stan. Would you go, said you? not for the world Sir.


Old M. Why Sir, why may not I go?


Stan. I find Sir, you have no insight into our Learning; therefore your
Ignorance is excusable.


Old M. What if I had Sir, what then?


Stan. You would not then have offered to have gone your self; for as the
memorable Italiano, in his Treatise de Elementis observes; some waters are of
strange natures, and different effects in operation: Particularly he mentions a
Spaw near Room, whose water was excellent for the Cure of Barrenness, if Women
went without their Husbands: And he tells a Story, that some suspicious
Husbands accompanying their Wives to those waters, instead of Curing, they
proved absolute Poison to the women, so that no less than six and forty
Marryed-women lost their lives in one day: but says he, had the Jealous
Coxcombs stayed at home, they had saved their Wives lives, and their Cures had
been effected.


Old M. Goodness defend me! but Sir, are Tunbridge-waters of that nature?


Stan. Of a far stranger; for should any of your Servants go with her, it may
endanger her Life.


Old M. Some body must, for fear of further sickness.


Stan. Any of her own Relation or Acquaintance may, without danger.


Old M. Let me see -- my Daughter cannot, she is to be Married; were that don,
The. and her Husband should have borne her Company -- Oh I have it: my Dear,
prithee send to my Cousin Pride, the Mercer's Wife, she is acquainted with the
place, and found benefit by the Waters; and that very Summer she drank them,
soon after she had a chopping Boy.


Mrs. M. What you please Master, but my Maid says, some of her Relations live
near the Wells.


Old M. But Duck, our Neighbor Dr. says, none of the Family must go.


Stan. Yes, yes Sir, her own Maid may with security, but none that belongs to
you.


Old M. Let it be so then, and Heaven bless the Remedy, and may the Waters pass.


Mrs. M. Have Betty, and put up my Clothes whilst the old man is in the humor:
Oh sick; good Dr. some speedy Remedy, and commiserate my sad condition.


Old M. 'Lass poor fool, it grieves my soul, and see, it melts to tears.


weeps. Enter Boy. Boy. Sir Timothy Thrivewell, Sir, and a Gentleman, are in
the Dining Room, and desires to see you.


Old M. My good Friend, and his long expected Nephew I warrant: Wife, I Will see
you again e're you go: Sarrah, bid my Daughter come to me in the Dining Room.


Boy. She Is there already Sir.


Old M. That Is well: Sir, I hope you will excuse my abrupt departure.


Stan. Your Servant Sir: I Will write (e're I go) a Dyary for your Lady, in what
method she must drink the Waters; and if they operate as I expect, think of
getting a Boy Mr. Monylove.


Old M. Ha, ha, he, kind Sir, your Servant; how, I get a Boy, you jest, you
jest, I Will stand to it.

Old M. Exit.
Stan. Indeed Miracles are ceast: What a credulous Ass is an old Dotard. Now
Madam I have thought on a way to perfect your design, and to make me happy with
fair Theodocia.


Mrs. M. I have, an Intreigue which certainly must take for introducing you
into the Family; but at your Lodging we will discourse further of it, therefore
have thither and expect me.


Stan. I fly Madam, and shall think the hours, Ages, till I see you there.


Exeunt severally. SCENE the Second. Monyloves House.
Luce Sola. False man! he is now repeating what to me he said,
To Theodocia, and should she prove as credulous as I,
My hopes would be blasted: may Heaven direct her,
And make her hate him, which she sure would do,
Were she informed of his Ingratitude.
What shall I do? Although his injuries
To me, have been beyond expression great,
Yet my Rebellious heart pleads for him still,
And will not let entertain a thought
That might persuade to Jealousy.
Enter Laurence? Lau. Now Mrs. Repository of thy Lady's Secrets, since my
Master, like the bold Knight, is encountering your Lady, according to Romantic
method, I, the Squire of his body, should caress thee, the Squiress of her
body; and thus I accost my Damsel, and display affection.


(Offers to kiss her. Luce. Away, you are too Saucy.


Lau. Baulk not a young Lover in his first Address, for by all those fine
things my Hero is saying to thy Lady, thy beauty has so smitten me, that I
languish all night, and sigh all the day, and so forth.


(he sings. Luce. And never saw me before?


Lau. Yes, but I have -- thy likeness, but let that pass.


Luce. My likeness Sir?


Lau. Yes, thine, little wild Cat: Let me see, where was it? -- oh, in my
Dream last night; me-thoughts thou were the kindest, comingst thing -- but a
Pox on these backward Interpretations of Dreams, for I find, That fancy did,
what Phillis will not do.


(sings. Luce. I hope this Fellow knows me not, I Will try him further, and will
seemingly comply; he may perhaps discover Loveall's intentions to me. Well Sir,
I Vow ^blush to find my self so forward; for I must confess the first sight of
you bred an alteration in me, but your gay frollick humor so extremely pleases
me, that if you prove as sincere a passionate Lover as your Master seems to be
to my Mistress, and they make it a match -- here is my hand upon it, I will not
be backward.


Lau. If you are, I Will soon man you -- why so, this makes the Proverb good,
Happy is that Wooing which is not long a doing. Hang all Love-speeches, they
serve only to screw a man up to such unreasonable protestations, that of
necessity he must break'em; or keeping them, proclaim himself an easy Fool:
But my Master (Heaven be praised) knows better thing good man -- ha, ha, he --
his Vows will never trouble him.


Luce. Is not your Master real in his Love to my Mistress?


Lau. Oh yes, he is as really Passionate as Tarquin in his Addresses to a Woman
he likes; his design is only to stretch a Commandment, or so, with her good
Gentleman.

(aside. Enter Boy. How now Scoundrel, what come you for?

Boy. Here are some Letters for my Master.

Luce. Ha! Letters for him?

(aside. Lau. Give 'em me Sirrah, I Will deliver 'em.

Luce. My fancy questionless must take. (aside. I Will ease you of that trouble
Sir, if you please, and carry them in.


(to Lau. Lau. Will thou? with all my heart; for to say truth, I long to be
carousing with my Companions in the Cellar: I should have spoke with my Master,
but the business requires no have, another time will serve -- do hear oh
Damsel fair, when I am full fraught, expect a broadside from me; for Wine
elevates my soul, adds confidence, and will make me boldly express the violent
outgoings I have for thy sweet self.

(Exit Lau.
Luce. I luckily have thought upon a way
Which of necessity must take.
Fortune Revenge, I both your aids implore,
To cure my Honor, and my Love restore;
And both your powers for ever I Will adore.
Exit:
SCENE the Third. Tom Essence with the Picture. Scene, Covent Garden.
T. Ess. So, so, I have recovered it at last: I rose early this morning, and
picked her Pocket of it while she was in bed: now I Will take a view of my
precious Padder for hearts.


Enter Courtly. Court. My soul's alarmed with that fatal news
Which Theodocia sent in her Letter:
Thou fair example of true Love and Constancy,
I fly to rescue thy unsullied Virtue,
And will redeem it from a Father's power.
(goes toward T. Essence. Oh Heavens! I either dream, or sure that Fellow
Has my Picture which I gave to Theodocia
When I went out of Town -- I Will go nearer.

(looks over T. Ess. his Shoulder. T. Ess. I know him not at present --
certainly he was never my Customer:

Wretched Mr. Essence, to what a destiny art thou born, that such a
smooth-faced Rascal should tumble thy Wife, and rifle her of thy reputation.


Court. By Heaven, the pledge of my eternal love;
Strange thoughts and jealousies throng in and fill
My troubled breast,
And fatal sears would urge me to suspect
That Theodocia is unconstant grown.

(looks again, etc. T. Ess. What, what would this Fellow have? -- honest Tom.
must thou never go abroad again, but must expect to be pointed at for a
Hen-peckt Fribble; in troth I pity thee.


Court. Hell and Confusion, it is too true the same.


(aside. T. Ess. This Fellow's as prying as an Informer: Sir, what are you, who
would you speak with, what is your business, or are you a Counter-Vermin you
stick so close? if you are, you are mistaken in your man: I owe nothing, my Wifes
Portion paid my Debts, therefore march off before my Indignation flies about
your ears.


Court. You must resolve me one question first Sir.


T. Ess. Must Sir?


Court. Yes, must Sir, and that quickly too.


T. Ess. Before you ask it Sir? The strangest Fellow I e're met with in my life.


Court. Leave off Fooling, and tell me how you came by that Picture?


T. Ess. How I came by this Picture?


Court. The truth you Rogue, or I Will send thy soul to another world.


T. Ess. Rogue? very fine! in short my answer is, what is that to you, how I
came by it.


Court. Sirrah trifle not, but tell me, or by Heaven --


T. Ess. Yes, do kill me, and I Will have thee hanged, if all I am worth can
purchase a Halter. If he be a man of Honor, sure he will not kill me, because I
have no weapons. Looks on Court. then on the Picture. (aside. How? how? how is
this? Slise, this is the Villain that does my drudgery as they say; have I
found you in faith: now Thomas take courage and Huff him briskly -- ha, ha, Sir,
have I found you? this blustering will not do; what, no one but my Wife to satisfy
you Goatish appetite: Cudslid avaunt, or I Will swinge you.


Court. Oh intolerable impertinence! Rascal, explain thy self, or I Will beat
thy brains out.


T. Ess. If you can Sir, thanks to your Worship, my Noddle's hardened and too
well guarded with your present you have bestowed upon me -- you conceive me.


Court. Still more misterious; Sirrah, leave off your riddling.


T. Ess. This is one of the impudent'st Whore-masters I ever knew: he is not
content to Cuckold me, but would force me to confess and declare my self one.
Had I courage enough, I would chastise him till he were impotent.


Court. I Am on a wrack -- By all that is good, tell me how you came by that
Picture


(offers to draw. T. Ess. Well I must tell him; there is no remedy: How I came
by it Sir? why I took it from my Wife; you might have saved me this labor, for
you knew it well enough Sir; but I Will, I Will -- but I say no more.


Court. Damnation! is the your Wife, from whom you had this Picture, said you?


T. Ess. She my Wife Sir? what now? yes Sir, I suppose she is, for I believe I
am married to her; but I Will swear I have layen with her, and so have you to, a
pox on your picture for it.


Court. Thou her Husband! you lie you Dog, it cannot, must not, shall not be.


T. Ess. I wish it could not, then it should not have been: but may that Parson
that Married us, be for ever choused of his Tyths, his Wife Cuckold him as mine
does me; may the Children be like the Fathers that got 'em, and his House
become the Nursery of Whetstone-Whores, and Speering-Bullies; But for your
part, since you are so brisk Sir, the Court of Arches shall tame both yours and
my Wifes courage; for to shame ye both, the world shall know how you have
abused an honest Tradesman, and one that has borne all Offices in his Parish:
Bu^ first I Will to her Relations, and let them know her Virtue; then I Will sue
out a Divorse, turn her out of doors, and after be fashionable, and keep a Miss
cum privilegio.

Exit.
Manet Courtly. Court. He Is gone; i^ this thing then her Husband?
Is this the effect of your repeated Love,
When before Heaven you Vowed a Constancy:
Ungrateful Fair! believing I, thought Heaven
Might sooner err than thee.
Cursed be the time I ever saw thy Charms,
And may thy quiet with thy Beauty fade.
What shall I do, and whether shall I go
To ease the tortures of my troubled soul?
-- Ah Theodocia; if thy faithless Tongue
Had never sworn to keep those sacred Vows,
Which (to thy shame) are in Heaven Recorded;
Yet such an abject thing worthy your scorn,
Might have preserved
My Interest and thy Vows entire:
But I too late thy Sexes frailty find
In thee; Your Virtues like your Beauties fade,
And though all Heaven does in your forms appear,
Yet Falsehood, Treachery, and all that is ill,
Dwell in your souls and hearts: Oh --

Enter Mrs. Essence. Mrs. Essence. This peremptory Fellow has played me a
slippery trick, but if I catch him, I Will make him an example for domineering
Husbands: Ha! bless me! the Gentleman I think will swound, he looks so pale.


Courtly seems not well. Court. At length my griefs have gained the Victory,
My spirits yield to the resistless force
Of Injuries undeserved.

Mrs. Ess. Sweet Sir, how do you, you seem not well? (a comely person) pray be
pleased to repose your self in my poor House, both it and Owner are at your
Devoire, I swear.


Court. I Will accept her kindness till I recover.
(aside. Madam, I embrace your Charity,
I must confess I Am indisposed at present;
Something I Will do to right my Injuries.
(aside. Madam, you will excuse my boldness.

(to Mrs. Ess. Mrs. Ess. You honor me with your boldness Sir; and I assure you
Sir, you cannot be more bold than welcome to your Servant Sir. Pray give me
your hand Sir: Poor heart, it is a fit o'th'Spleen without question, it is so
violent! and he presses my hand so hard.


(Exeunt. SCENE the Fourth. Scene, Monylove's House.
Enter Theodocia and Mrs. Monylove. Theo. Since Madam, my Father has resigned
his power to you, I question not your goodness will command what I shall
readily obey.


Mrs. M. Daughter, I cannot blame your hard construction of a Fathers rigor;
and now, to be just to him, I should urge what he already has; (Oh, I faint)
but since your aversion to young Loveal's such, I will not only propound, but
effect a match which may prove beneficial to you, if wisely you comply.


Theo. Ha, what means she?


aside. Mrs. M. You know the power I have over your Father.


Theo. Thanks to his Dotage.


(aside. Mrs. M. Wisely then embrace the man I offer, it is my Brother, to day
he will be here; and did not my indisposition force me out of Town, I should
have rejoiced to have seen him: However, in my absence I Would have you treat him,
not as a Stranger, but as one who is to be your Husband: consider, and let me
know what you resolve.


Theo. Fortune! thou have made me now completely wretched; if I reject the man my
Father offers, the world will censure me for being disobedient: and if I refuse
the man that she propounds, her interest with my Father, is so great, what is it
she will not do to blast my fame, and to my Father aggravate my fault? and if
with either I comply, my Bliss and Love in Courtly, I must lose: what shall I
do? I Will seemingly consent to what she has proposed, and by that means gain
time to frustrate what they both design. It shall be so; Madam, your kindness
has prevailed; and tho I never saw the person you have named; yet hitherto, so
obliging you have been, that readily I yield to your desires.


Mrs. M. It Is well resolved; and Theo. rest satisfied, he has the
accomplishments of a Gentleman, his humors gay, but that will be a good
mixture with your Gravity. Daughter, farewell, perform your promise and be
happy.

Mrs. M. Kisses Theo. then Exit.
Theo. Madam, may your intended Journey prove prosperous, and procure your
health. Yes, I will keep my promise, but it shall be to Courtly; when I prove
false to Love, may all things prosper that may make me wretched.

Not Fathers Threats, nor Mothers subtlest Art,
Shall change my Love, or disengage my heart.
Exit.
The end of the Second Act.
ACT the Third:
Scene the First.
Scene, Covent Garden. Tom Essence, Solus. I Have been with her Cousin, and to
give the Devil his due, his advice was none of the worst; it is possible I may
be in the wrong, and my Wife honest, notwithstanding what has past; and tho
this Picture may startle me, yet it does not convince me: why then Thomas Mum,
least thy Neighbors should conclude what thou do but suspect, let me see
where am I to go? to my Pulls out a Table Book. Lady -- Hum in Pall Mall; to
Madam Hum, one of the Maids of Honor; to Madam -- Hum -- in Covent Garden. --
Agad it is a plaguey troublesome thing to be handsome and gentile, for the Women
are ready to pull a Man a pieces that is well accomplished. I was forct to
Marry, to be rid of these fond souls; but a pox on it 'twont do, they have the
spawn of the Serpent in 'em, and will be tempting frailties which hitherto I
have resisted: But if my Wife proves a down right Wife, I Will be mercyful to my
languishing fits; -- ha -- who comes here? Enter Courtly Mrs. Essence. Bless
me! the very Rogue, whose Picture I have, Courting my Wife -- suspicion avaunt
-- honest Tom, that thou art a Cuckold is too evident.

Mrs. Ess. If you will go, Sir oblige me; pray do, by accepting this Bottle of
water of my own Distilling, Sir; that if your distemper should return, the cure
may be perfected by my means.


Court. Oh the Impertinence of Women-kind! Madam, your obligations are beyond
expression great.


T. Ess. Ha! She presents him too; now the pox upon him, for the Devil has
pleased her.


Mrs. Ess. But should it relaps indeed --


Court. No danger of that I assure you -- Madam, your Servant.


(offers to go. Mrs. Ess. I was yours before Sir; but Sir, you remember how to
take the Cordial.


Court. Oh yes Madam, as you applied it to me; your Servant.


(offers to go. T. Ess. A pox of her Application; I fear you have applied
something too --


Mrs. Ess. Very right Sir; adieu good Sir, may Heaven restore and preserve your
health -- but, a word Sir, when your Bottle is out, pray let me see you Sir,
and it shall be repleated with the same: my name is Dorothy Essence, it is true,
my Husband is somewhat whimsical, but you will find a civil person of me Sir.


Court. Oh Mrs. Essence, your Servant -- it is the conceitest Creature I e're
met with.


(aside) Mrs. Ess. Exit. T. Ess. So, so, they are parted -- he comes this way;
I Will look big upon him, perhaps that may terrify him.


T. Ess. goes by Courtly, and looks big on him. Court. Ha! that cursed Fellow
here again? how my heart rises at the sight of him -- what a hard Law is Duty to
old Age; he could not sure be of Theodocia's choice; but she was forced to obey
her Fathers power.

(aside. Oh too, too happy man, to have a Wife so fair and beautiful!


(to T. Ess. (As he goes out, Enters 'Theo. He looks frowning on her.) Exit T.
Ess. Hye day, what means he?


Theo. It is he; but why this strangeness, and his returned conceild from me.
Ah Courtly, my excessive Love would promp me to embrace a Jealousy of what I
would not willingly believe, that thou art false.


T. Ess Oh too, too happy man, to have a Wife so fair and beautiful! what
should he mean by this -- oh too soon I understand the Rogue; now he has
Cuckold me, he basely tryumphs.


Theo. Perhaps I may learn something of this Fellow, for I hear he is excellent
for intelligence of Love-intriegues, and has brought as many Couples together,
as any Parson about Town, but not so lawfully. -- Mr. Essence, are you
acquainted with the person that but now lest you?


T. Ess. Ah Mrs. Theodocia, I always had a respect for you, and have often
commended you to the high-flown rich Blades with Coaches, that are my
Customers, how good a Wife you would make; and is this my reward, do you flout me
in misery?


Theo. Not I; but tell me the cause of your affliction?


T. Ess. Oh the greatest under Heaven, next to bad Trade, but my Wifes
Occupation is good, a pox on her Customers, for Mrs. Tho. here stands the model
of a complete wretched Husband -- that Fellow who went from hence but now.


Theo. What of him Sir?


T. Ess. What of him Sir? he has Robbed me.


Theo. How? that Gentleman?


T. Ess. That Rogue; he has Feloniously stolen the precious Jewel of my life;
my Rep, in fine, he has Cuckold me; now it is out, my heart is somewhat eased.


Theo. It is impossible; can Courtly be so base?


T. Ess. Oh it is too true, these eyes, but now, were witnesses of his and my
Wifes familiarity: to conclude, he lies with my Wife; now you have the
sorrowful truth of my Woe.


Theo. All my prophetic fears were but too true,
And Courtley's treacheries too evident:
Me-thoughts his looks, as he past by, betrayed
An inward guilt.
If thou art False, where shall I find one Just?
For, with such seeming Honesty, he swore,
And wisht-such Imprecations on himself,
If in the least he Violated Love,
Or broke his Vows; those Vows he made to me,
I durst to have sworn, he really designed
That Constancy he Vowed:
But b'inded by my Love, I find too late,
He Is like the rest of the perfidious Race,
And made these Vows t'entrap my Innocence.

T. Ess. Sweet Mrs. Theo. thou Queen of Diamonds, moderate thy passion: Your
Charity to me is too great, and since so cordially you espouse my afflictions,
I Am grieved that you are not a man; if you were, I should have entreated the
favor of you, that you would have cudgeld him for my sake; but seeing that
cannot be, I Will drown my self in Tears, and lay my death to his charge; oh, oh,
oh.


(cries. Theo. Oh that I were a man, I Would soon redress
My wrongs:
His Life should pay the forfeit of his Vows,
And he should fall a Victim to my rage.

T. Ess. Good Saint!


Theo. But oh I rave;
For Courtley's generous soul could never admit
A thought so base to harbor in his breast,
Much less would execute so vile an act;
Heaven's! it is impossible! Courtly false? it cannot be.

T. Ess. O yes, Madam; yes, too true he is false; but how shall we curb his
Leachery?


Theo. Ah Traitor! double-hearted faithless man!


T. Ess. Blessed Angel!


Theo. Sure Hell it self has not a torment equal to thy Crime.


T. Ess. Sweet soul!


Theo. To wrong a person never injured thee --


T. Ess. Never I, I Will take my death on it, not so much as in the sale of a pair
of Jessamy-Gloves, a twelve-penny glass of Essence, or six-penny pot of
Jessamy-butter.


Theo. But my complaints are vain;
I Will tear this Viper from my breast, and then
Study a just Revenge to scourge his soul,
For Violations done to sacred Love!
(Exit.
T. Ess. She Is gone! Heavens bless her! how cordially she took my part, pretty
Creature! and what she intends to do, Heaven knows, for she talked of Revenge --
Fie Thomas, why so slow to correct this Fellows lewdness toward thee? for
shame do something, let not a Woman outstrip thee in prowess, in thy own cause
too? -- well -- for Whetstone to thy Valor, thou shall to th'Tavern, one pint
of Sack, used to make thee as huffing as a blustering Bully, half Drunk in an
Ordinary, or as Valiant and quarrelsome as a Constable heroically Drunk,
surrounded with his rusty Bilboe.

Exit.
SCENE the Second, Luce Sola. Mon. House.
This Letter which I have contrived, I hope
Will set a period to base Lovealls Treachery:
If not, I Will let fair Theodocia know
My wrong, and the important secret of my shame
Declare; then some way we will contrive
To right my Injuries, and redress her own.
Enter Theodocia. Theo. Ah Luce, at last I Have overcome my Love,
For Courtly is become the worst of men;
Imagine all that is base, the foulest acts,
The thoughts of wicked men could e're invent,
In Courtly they are all comprised;
Such things I Have seen would breed astonishment:
That false delewding man is now in Town;
And stead of keeping his past Vows to me,
Rejects and slights'em, wantonly sins
In the embraces of a Treacherous Wife.

Luce. You amaze me Madam! Courtly false?


Theo. As Hell -- but for Revenge,
I Will to my Father's power resign my self;
And tho I hate the man he has proposed,
Yet I Will comply, and Lovealls flame admit.

aside. Luce. Heaven's, but that must not be --
Oh do not rashly give your self away;
For Madam, Marriage is the great concern
Of our whole lives; according as we choose,
We are either blessed or wretched in this World.

Theo. But I Am resolved, since Courtly's false,
And tho I look on both with equal hate,
Yet him I will reject whose Love was counterfeit;
But Lovealls passion for me may be true.

Luce. Loveall? the giltiest of all mankind;
Those crimes you would lay on Courtly, are his due,
And I me no stranger to his Perjuries.

Theo. Is he false too? Ah unhappy Maid!
Fortune has destined thee not one true Lover.
Say what thou know, then we will consult some way
How to preserve my Honor and Obedience.

Luce. Madam, here comes your Father*


Theo Oh torment of my soul!


Enter Old Mon. Stanly, Mrs. Mon. and Betty in Men's Clothes. Old M. Look you
Sir, there is my Daughter -- The. receive your Uncle with respect.


(they salute Theo. Mrs. M. As gad sa'me, you are the extravagantst English
Beauty I e're met with, the notoriousest pretty Devil! ha! what charming
features! bon mein! surprising graces, and divine harmony of Limbs are here! By
my hands, Old man, thou were inspired when you Begot her, she is a very Cherubin!


Old M. Ha, ha, he; as I say, it is the pleasantest Wag, and I Will stand to it,
his Sisters humor right, when she is pleased.


Theo. Luce, observe that face, it is extremely like my Mothers, the voice too
not unlike.


Luce. Upon my life, it is her self Madam; I Will take the little Attendant aside
and sift him.


Mrs. M. And how, and how like you my Garnitire, is it not Jauntee Madam, ha?
(Luce and Betty Exeunt. I am come reaking hot out of the Academy of Dresses;
this Suit was made by the King of France's own Tailor; let me fee e're a
Garlick-eating mangy-fisted English Rascal, make the like: Ah with what an
extravagant pleasure and delight does this triming sit! ah how notoriously
excellent is the shape displayed -- this Ribbon -- a rare dye! French yellow,
emblem of Jealousy, and denotes excessive love and passion; the only color I
value my self on; for Females understand by that my mind and flame; and dye
with desire of my acquaintance; but for variety, I have a Suit of Sky for
Constancy; sometimes Pink for Modesty, to wear in such Company as I shall visit
that day; for by my hands, little Devil, a Suit of Ribbon well suited with the
address we men make to your Sex, is half our Courtship, which is a secret of my
own discovery.


Theo. It Is fit you keep it so Sir, for the rarity -- what a strange thing is a
Traveled Fop?


(aside. Mrs. M. How now soul! ala mort! come, come, lay aside this
reservedness; pox on the English breeding; by my hands it makes all the Females
Fools: Ah, how fort obliegeant the Madamoisels are a Paris; there, a Married
Woman in her Husbands presence, will clip, embrace, and kiss a man she fancies,
the first time she sees him.


Theo. And lie with him behind her Husbands back.


Mrs. M. Mortblecu, a damned English censure; by my hands, I believe, that to
one extravagantly honest here, there are twenty at Paris; our London Devils are
all Hypocrites; for at that moment they seem most coy, they privately are
contriving how to enjoy the person they seem to slight -- Brother Tim. if ever
you will have your Daughter respected and celebrated for a modish person, let
her frequent Masquerades, visit Play Houses in cognito, receive Treats,
converse with the refined traveled Wits; make Balls speak French, and be
obliging to the modish Gallants.


Old M. Yes, and have her made a Miss, got with Child, and be turned on my
hands; no, good Brother, you must excuse me for that absurd, absurd, I Will stand
to it.


Mrs. M. Iernee rank English still -- a man cannot make address on Gallantrie,
nor a Woman be Complesant, but Impotence will censure -- But little soul, my
Sisters Character of thee has overcome me, and the blind god at last has got
the Conquest -- By my hands I love you, and the rather, because I find it is not
for want of wit, but breeding; that makes you defective, when address is made
to you; therefore dear Devil, say, shall I sink or swim?


Theo. According to your skill Sir -- but sure so gay, so brisk, refined a
Traveled Wit as you, can never be at leisure to Love, nor so serious as to
make Addresses.


Mrs. M. Then you expect I should have Courted you in a Romantic style; and
whine, as if Sentence of damnation had past upon me; hang that dull,
commonplace way of making Love -- but if Swearing will confirm you; by those
Twinkling Eyes, Cherry Lips, Alablaster Neck, Painting Fountains of delight;
and by all the clouded Beauties of your person, which by Imagination I am
convinct are excellent, I swear I never Loved before, but now am desperate; yet
if you slight it, I Will never Love again -- (Sing) Let Fortune and Phillis frown
if they please, I Will no more on their Deities call, and so forth -- Is not this
better than your whining: Oh Love, if e're thou't ease a heart which owns thy
power Divine -- Damn such effiminacy -- then pretty Rogue, be wise, and meet
my Love; by this kiss thou shall -- (offers to kiss her -- she shoves Mrs. M.
away) oh insupportable English incivility.

She sings Sweet Philida, be not so Coy,
I love not to ravish a Kiss:
Your peevishness will but destroy
The hopes of enjoying true Bliss.
If the Lover you like, does offer
To give you the proofs of his slame,
And you fondly reject his kind prosser,
Too late your own folly you will blame.
Then yield to what e're he desires,
And slight not his Critical Love;
With your vigorous Lover r^tire,
You Will quickly the pleasure approve.

Old M. It Is a merry Grigg; but Sir, is this his constan^ humor?


to Stan. Stan. Ever Sir; this Gayeity has left many bleeding hearts in France;
he never encountered with a Female yet, but he came off Victorious.


Old M. Say you so Sir? a notable Wagg, I Will stand to it.


Stan. But your Daughter only, as her Beauties due, has gained the Victory; for
ever since he received your Ladys Letter, he has been Charmed, so that his
Nights have been but one continued Dream of her.


Old M. I am sorry I must cross his dream, for my Daughter was promised to
another, before my Wife acquainted me of her Brother's Fortune, by his Uncles
death.


Stan. How Sir, is she engaged to another?


Old M. As I say, she is Sir, to a man of a fair Estate, engenious, and
handsome enough for a Husband.


Stan. By all means break it off Sir, or you must expect some fatal
consequence, for he is so truly Valiant, he will never permit a Rival to enjoy the
Beauty he admires.


Old M. I cannot help it Sir, it is now too late, for I Will stand to it; the
Writings of Agreement for settlement of Jointure are drawn up, and tomorrow
they and my Daughter are to be Signed, Sealed, and delivered, and so forth.


Mrs. M. I Will soon remove that scruple little Rogue. [to The. Do hear old
Oedipus, Father and Brother together, she questions my Virtue and Modesty; this
comes, old Priam, of bringing up your Daughter in dull Security and Ignorance.


Old M. But Sir, you are Virtuous?


Mrs. M. And had my Pusillage as they phrase it?


Old M. Yes little one.


Mrs. M. A Traveller, and bring home his Maidenhead! damned Absurdity? why
'twas the only Commodity my Father sent me over to Trade with; had I not
bartard it away, 'twou'd have grown musty on my hands: no, no, (thank Heaven)
this is a more knowing trading Age, than to keep such druggs on our hands; I
exchanged that thing with the Air: My Callis. Host's Niece had that Foolery,
she was pretty and deserved it: I Will beget no Fool; I, there are too many in
the world already.


Old M. But if you are as you say, you may beget Sooterkins or scab'd-Cookcoes,
I Will stand to it.


Mrs. M. By my hands, sound as a Bell, both in Purse and Person: See, see, I
have Commendams of both -- [Gives ^ne Paper to Old M. and another to Theo. Now
Fortune be propitious -- Stanly, What think you of my design? --


Stan. Well, hitherto; if you are not discovered, as yet I find no signs they
know you.


Old M. Hum -- What Is here? (he Reads) A particular of Sir Humfry Hordwell's
Estate, late Deceased, and now Descended to his Nephew Christopher Careless,
Esquire -- the Sum total 4000 l. per annum -- As I say, a fair Estate, but he is
wild, and I have past my word already, otherwise my Daughter should have had
him.


[aside. Theo. How Is this? A particular of all the Claps Squire Careless has
had since the Age of fifteen, and the several places he got them, with the
Catalogue of the Drs. names that Cured him; as likewise an account of all he
has layen with to this present time? This is the newest and impudentest way of
Courtship I ever knew or heard of yet.


[She Laughs Mrs. M. What Laugh you at, little Devil? that shows my
Constitution true Steel -- by my hands it does.


Theo. Without question Sir, and 'twou'd be a rudeness unpardonable, should I
suspect you otherwise, when a whole College of Physicians have certified your
health; yet I should be loath to venture on so desperate a Lover as you pretend
to have been, for fear he should not make the Song good of a Healthful young
vigorous Lover, and so forth.


Mrs. M. By my hands, I Will confirm what they have writ --


(Mrs. Mon. Sings, Dances, and pulls Theo. about.) Old M. I Will stand to it,
Brother, you are the merryest man -- But come Brother, as I say, you and your
Friend here shall take a hard Lodging with me; I have one Bed to spare; ye are
used to lie together I hope?


Mrs. M. Now this Old Fool will force me to Cuckold him, merely out of
Covetousness, that he will not foul a pair of Sheets extraordinary, -- Yes,
yes, Brother, Travelers always snore together.


Old M. Please you to walk in to Supper -- and then I Will show you your Chamber
--


Stan. What an old Dotard's this; now will he be Pimp to his own Wife, for I Will
make good use of my time, and will not be repulsed as before (aside): Madam
your humble Servant.


Mrs. M. Little one, give me thy hand; as gad sa'me good flesh, and of a
lushious Constitution: I find I shall be desperately in Love; Adieu, my Soul,
Adieu: But do hear, be more complesant and agreeable the next time we meet.


Sings, Sweet Philida, be not so coy, I love not to ravish a Kiss. Old M. Theo.
follow us.


Old M. Mrs. M. Stan. Exeunt. Manet Theodocia. Theo. What cursed Ascendant had
I at my Birth,
That thus I Am teas'd by th'dross of all Mankind:
Not one that is generous designed for me;
Heaven! take my Life, or rid me of these Plagues.
Luce, Prithee what news?

Enter Luce with a Letter. Luce. Fear nothing Madam, for I have discovered
enough to break off this proposal; for it is, as I suspected, your
Mother-in-Law is the brisk traveled Blade; but what she designs, as yet I
cannot learn; but Betty promises a discovery. Madam, here is a Letter in a
Woman's hand, which I found in the Packet that was left here for Mr. Loveall,
perhaps this may confirm what I have formerly told you of that false man.


Theo. Let me see it -- I Will read it.


(Opens, and reads. My Dearest,
Your absence, my indisposition, together with the ill news of your design of
Marrying in London, have reduced me to such weakness, I cannot long expect to
live, nor indeed do I wish for life, if mauger all your Protestations before
Heaven, and those fatal pledges of our Loves, our Children, you at last prove
false, yet Heaven one day may revenge my wrongs: I am sure some Friends, who
(did they know the affront) would soon redress me, but I hope there will be no
need of such exstremity; and that your generosity will prompt you to be just to
her, who is in sight of Heaven,

Your Lawful Wife, Stamford. Eliz. Manly, otherwise Loveall.


Theo. Base Villain.


Enter Loveall and Lau. Lu. He comes Madam, now let him know your just
resentment of his wickedness.


Lov. Madam, such strange attractive influences you are Mistress of, I cannot
live one moment from your sight; oh wrack me not with torturing delay, but
kindly say you will comply with Love, and then my happiness will be complete.


Theo. Your strain's too Courtly Sir, to gain belief; therefore your pardon, if
I suspend Credit of them for a time -- but Sir, your Man left Letters for you
with my Maid, and I concluding so deserving a Person as your self, must in your
Life, have some Intreigues of Love, opened one Letter writ in a Woman's hand;
you will pardon Sir the rudeness which was the effect of Jealousy.


Lov. That Jealousy was kind, since it often proves the effect of Love; and I
am so free from base unworthy acts; that what you term a Rudeness, I esteem an
Honor, since I Am assured you will find nothing there which can prove
prejudicial to my Love, or gain your disesteem.


Theo. Your Generosity Sir is questionless, and this has so confirmed what in
your praise I Have heard, that when you have read it, you soon will understand
what I intend.


Lov. What can she mean by this! let me see.


[Reads to himself. Lau. to Lu. Well Mrs. Sweet lips, what comfort do you give
a passionate Lover?


Lu. The same as formerly, I Will stand to my Agreement; if your Master and my
Mistress make it a Match, I am yours; if not, your Servant.


Lau. But suppose a man should be too far gone for ever recovering, what then?
I hope if thou will not commit Matrimony, thou wilt show good natured, and be
civil upon occasion?


Lu. Yes, with a Cudgel to cool courage, or with a Halter to end your pain.


Lau. Pretty Courtship, it is by my troth, and you are wondrous civil.


The. Now Sir, you guess what I design, false and perfididious as you are.

Enter old Mon. and stands behind Theo. What wickedness there is in man!
To break those Sacred Vows you made to Heaven,
And to betray poor Innocence to misery.
But now thy Treacheries I know, never expect
I shall comply, and so partake the guilt;
No, you shall never see me more.

Old M. How, how is this? never see you more: that is fine in faith! absurd,
absurd, I Will stand to it; but Minks, he shall both see and feel you too e're I
have done; are you again relapst into your former disobedience? I say comply, or
--


Lov. I must confess, were th'accusation true, and I of what this Lady charges
me, were guilty, her anger then were just, and death my desert: Read Sir the
horrid'st Villainy that ever was invented, and inconsistent Sir with one that is
tender of his Honor.


Luce. Now Squire, what becomes of your Knight Errant, and your hopes?


Lau. Why pretty Kins, I Will not break my heart for thee; but if I lose thee,
it is but once singing Fortune my Foe, and twice being drunk will set thee a
float out of my heart, and then farewell to your Ladyship.


Old M. Reads -- former protestations -- hum, fatal pledges of our Loves -- (a
pretty phrase for Bastards) crimes -- hum -- affront -- hum -- but your
generosity -- hum -- Eliz. Manly, otherwise Loveall -- absurd, absurd, I Will
stand to it, should this be true: I Will try him.


Lov. Now Sir, is it possible that a man of Honor can be guilty of so vile an
Act?


Old M. Lay aside your Honor Sir, and give me leave, as I say; as you hope to
be saved, do not you know this Eliz. Manly? Ha! Answer to that, Answer to that.


Lov. Not I, by Heaven Sir.


Old M. But that is not the question; as you hope to be Saved, have you no
Bastards? Answer to me that Sir.


Lov. Not any Sir, upon my Honor -- that you shall know of; for my Widow, for
ought I know, may be forward with my effects of kindness by this time. [aside.
This Sir, is some Rivals plot to undermine my Bliss with this fair Lady: Ah
Madam, let not such trivial Acts debar me of that happiness I prize above my
Life; but if your breast has entertained another Love (pardon the suspicion
grounded on your concern for a thing as false as Heaven is true) I will resign
my Life rather than be the Author of your discontent.


Old M. Away, away Sir, with these Complements, and prepare to take her for
your Wife -- Theo. rest satisfied that I am convinced it is false; some trick on
my life of your old Lovers; but I Will mar his design: Come, ask his Pardon for
that foul suspicion you had of him.


Theo. How Sir?


Old M. I say, provoke me not, but beg his pardon without more delay.


Lov. By no means Sir, her suspicion was kind, and warranted by this, -- and I
am satisfied.


Old M. But by your favor Sir, I am not, and I Will have it so -- acknowledge
your fault Baggage, or I Will stand to it: I Will --


Theo. I must comply -- Sir, in Obedience to a Father's power, I acknowledge my
unjust suspicion -- (that you were Virtuous) and I shall be careful hereafter
how I credit Reports that may be prejudicial to your Honor -- (to which thou
art a Stranger) -- your Servant Sir, and expect an entertainment suitable (to
your perjuries) -- for here I Vow, henceforth to study a Revenge on the
Promoters (of your Love to me) --


Theo. and Luce, Exeunt* Old M. So, so, now it is as it should be; be sure Sir
to get the Writings ready against morning; in the interim I Will endeavor to
keep her in this humor she is now in, lest the Weathercock of her
Female-noddle rear to a colder point.

(Exit.
Lov. It Is in the coldest point already, full North to my desires.


Lau. Say you so, then I Will after my little Pyrate, and try to win her on our
side.

(aside.) Exit.
Lov. That Letter startled me, when I saw 'twas Dated from Stamford; I
suspected my kind Widow had found out my Amor, and had sent this to forbid
the Banes -- I was a Rogue to serve her so, when she out of Charity entertained
and Clothed me when I was stripped and robbed, to top a false contract and name
upon her; but my Love, for variety, must excuse that fault; and I thank Heaven
I have weathered all storms, and doubt not but to attain my ends; for I Love
Theodocia to that excess, enjoy her I must, Married, or Unmarryed.


If fairly with my Love she not complyes,
By stratagem her Virtue I Will surprise.
Exit. The end of the Third Act.
ACT the Fourth.
Scene, the first, Theo. Chamber.
Theo. and Luce. Theo. YOur injuries (kind Friend) shall be redressed; my
Father shall not force me to embrace a man that values not his Vows nor Honor.


Luce. But Madam, your happiness depends upon Obedience; you for your safety
must comply with a Father's power; yet I could wish (so well I love him) that
it could be some way hindered.


Theo. What shall we do? this is the fatal day, and every minute I expect my
Father.


Old M. Within -- Rise Daughter, rise.


Enter Old M. after him Betty. Theo. And I already hear his fatal voice.


Old M. It Is well, make have; I Will stand to it, the Bridegroom will be here
before you are ready -- Ha Youngster, with whom would you speak so early, Ha?


(spies Betty. Betty. Now Wit assist me -- (aside. (Feels in her Pocket, pulls
out a Song. My Master Sir, has sent me to know how Madam Theo. does this
morning, and presents her with the effects of his Love, in a Song which he writ
last Night before he went to Bed.


Old M. He is very quick: I must Marry her off, or this Travell'd-Brother of
mine will show me an Outlandish trick, and Marry her before I have enquir^d of
his Estate. (aside. Let me see his Scribbling -- this is such a buzzing crambo
Age, that the young Fops account it accomplishment to be thought beggarly
rhymeing Fools, I Will stand to it.


(aside. Luce to Theo. What an unluckly accident was this, without question
Betty comes with Intelligence.


Old M. Hum, pretty Childish silly stuff; -- can you sing it Little one?


Betty. Yes Sir, my Master made it to one of the new Tunes he heard in an Opera
at Paris.


Betty Sings. Ah Sacred Boy desist, for I
Comply with your resistless Art;
Your Arrows with such vigor fly,
Already they have enflamed my heart.
I will no more despise your power,
But thus submissively obey;
Yes by your favor, 'twas not your,
But Celia's Victory to day.
For had she Valid that charming face,
And you your keenest Dart had shot;
Yours had been the just disgrace,
And I Would obtained the Victors Lot.
Then not your Power, but Chance admire,
In having such a Friend as she,
Who lent you rays t'encrease my fire,
And thus made you a Deity.
Old M. Verry pretty; and as I say, your Master can be serious for all his
jollity, Young man.


Betty. My Master earnestly desires to speak with you Sir.


Old M. I am going to him, for I have received a Letter for him from my Wife --
Daughter make have and put on your Trinkets, for I expect your Bridegroom
every minute.

(Exit.
Betty. Thanks to my invention Madam, I have shifted him -- this Song was
presented me by our Butler, who procured it made by a mercenary Scribler of the
Town, for a fit of Drunkenness, gratis.


Luce. Betty, have you found out your Mistresses design yet?


Betty. I have, -- and Madam, by what I have learnt, I understand your
Maidenhead is short-lived, but I having compassion for your Virtue, and
finding my Mistress, your Moter-in-Law none of the Honestest, am resolved, if
possible, to rescue you from ruin -- for the Blade that came with her is the
person whom she designs to be yours; but not only yours I Will assure you, for my
Virtuous Lady lay with him to Night.


Theo. Unheard Of wickedness! -- But which way shall we frustrate their design?


Betty. Troth Madam, show 'em a fair pair of heels, for she knows you care not
for Loveall, so that they conclude it easy to win the old Man to their side,
and force you to accept of her Love, as she personates her own Brother; and if
so far she prospers, her Gallant is to be shuffled into your hand when the
Marriage is designed, and by that means chouse both my old Master and your self.


Luce. Cunningly contrived -- yet, for all this, I doubt not but to counterplot
both her and Loveall too -- but for better security, we must be gone from this
place.


Betty. Make have then and avoid the Net; and that you may have time for your
escape, I Will in, and hold my Mistress in discourse; and let me know where you
intend to be, and I Will send word what passes at home.


Luce. We Will be at Essence's, I have some interest with his Wife, till we have
an opportunity to perfect your happiness.


Theo. Thou best example of true Friendship.


[Ex. severally. Malsey's Chamber. SCENE the Second: Scene a Chamber in Old M.
House.
Stanly dressing himself. Mrs. Mon. dressing her self at a Table, have
Night-cloaths on her head, in her half Shirt, and her Breeches on. A Letter for
Mrs. Monylove. Mrs. M. Your Raptures are too violent to last -- and know Sir, I
had not yielded now, had not my Old Man warranted, or rather justified my
proceedure; for his Penuriousness I could no other way requite, and he was
instrumental to his being a Cuckold, for laying two so full of Love together.


Stan. It Is Theodocia, whom I confess next to your self I love, but chiefly for
her money; for Madam, you are the sole Commandress of my heart; and that I may
hereafter be serviceable to both, so warily I will proceed with her, that she
shall only raise an Appetire, which vigorously I Will lay with you.


Mrs. M. Soft Sir, you will find your stock little enough for her; and for my
part, if I cannot hold out, my Dotards Angels shall turn Prourers at my
Command; for I must confess the truth of the Song you gave me, which says --


Mrs. M. Sings. Who complys with gay Youth, does prudently choose;
She that yields to old Age, does her passion abuse:
She may languish and sigh, but in vain it will prove;
Age, dulls the brisk flames, and slackens hot Love:
He may kindle a fire, but cannot supply;
So, for want of Loves fuel, her passion must dye.
But Youth that is full fraught with Love and desire,
Creates a true flame, and supplys the blessed fire:
He Will rally, renew it, and with vigor maintain
What dotage endeavors to do, but in vain*
Then give me a Gallant; when I Am yoak^ to old Age,
What the gray-head does raise, his Youth shall assuage.
Enter Betty. Mrs. M. Betty, what news have you learnt this morning?


Betty, Madam, my Master is resolved on the Match between Mrs. Theo. and Mr.
Loveall, notwithstanding the Letter Luce discovered yesterday, for he has sent
for Mr. Loveall this morning; but Luce has been beforehand, and sent Mr.
Loveall word that Mrs. Theo. will meet him at Essence the Milliners, on purpose
to prevent his meeting with my Master's message, and so hinder his coming
hither.


Mrs. M. That was well done -- but upon what account is Luce so Zealous in
breaking off this Match?


Stan. I cannot apprehend the meaning; however, if by her means I gain
Theodocia, she shall not want reward.


Enter Old Mon. Old M. I must hold this Youngster in talk till my Daughter is
Married to Loveall; or I Will stand to it, this young Snipper-snapper will, I
fear, forbid the banes. Ha -- what do I see? my Wife dressing her self -- it is
too true -- absurd, I Will stand to it.


Mrs. M. Cuds'lid, my Husband! what shall we do? all our designs are ruined if
he discovers me --


Stan. Let me alone, I Will bring you off, never fear it.


Old M. Curse on my Dotage; too late I find my folly in Marrying a young Wife,
I could expect no less in reason, than to be a Cuckold --

Wife! what subtle damned Devil was it put you on this design, to make me the
promoter of my own shame? -- but Sir, for your part, I Will stand to it, I Will
swinge you.


(to Stan. Stan. (Laughs). But Sir, do you in earnest conclude my Bedfellow to
be your Wife?


Old M. A rat on you -- Are my Eyes my own Sir?


Stan. No Sir; if you suspect my Friend for a Woman, if he were not, all thy
Wealth should not purchase her from my Embraces -- here is a Face indeed, as
charming as the notedst Female Beauty; but Nature mistook in moulding every
part, forgetting she had made a Venus-face, placed it on an Adam's Body.


Old M. As I say, if this be true, it is wonderful! and indeed, I have often
heard my Wife say, that she and her Brother were so alike, (being Twins,) that
one could hardly be known from the other.


(aside. Mrs. M. Brother, I thought I should surprise you; by my hands, thou
art the most credulous man I ever met with -- but to convince thee of thy Error
-- Jack, prithee tell him what sport we have had at Paris in Masquerade.


Stan. Yes Faith, my Friend and I have lived at least three months upon the
Pistols he has had clapped in his hand at Carnival-time, when he went disguised
in Woman's Clothes, as Earnest, for ensuing pleasure.


Mrs. M. But say old Trojan, am I so like my Sister?


Old M. Like quotha? I durst to have sworn you had been she.


Mrs. M. To convince you, search me; do, do: but if thou do not, thy
Daughter shall, for I am desperately in Love with her.


Old M. Absurd, I Will stand to it, that I should take him for my Wife -- (aside)
But soft good Brother, my business of this early Visit, was partly to deliver a
Letter directed to you from my Wife; and partly to desire you to forbear any
further amorous discourses with my Daughter, sic volo, sic jubio, you
understand me* I have promised her to another, and this I resolve shall be her
Wedding day.


(Gives a Letter. Stan. How! this day is she to be Married? and will you slight
Squire Careless? take heed Sir what you do.


Old M. Why Sir, I hope you wont Hector me? will you?


Stan. I have a greater respect for the young Lady then --


Old M. You, a respect for the young Lady? what are you Sir, that dare pretend
to have a respect for my Daughter, Ha?


Stan. It Is no harm Sir, to be Civil to a handsome Lady; it is a Devotion we owe
to Beauty.


Old M. But as I say Sir, it is harm Sir, and I Will none of it, therefore show
you civility some where else.


Mrs. M. Jack, no more -- Brother, rest content, I Will have none of your
Daughter; by my hands not I -- for my reasons, see there --

[She gives Old M. the Letter; he Reads to himself. Stanly, have courage, the
Girl's thine own,
Since this last rub we have so smoothly past,
All little Oppositions I despise.

Stan. See, see, the Letter works rarely.


Mrs. M. It must take, especially as now I have designed to proceed.


Old M. I Will stand to it, the kindest Wife man ever had.


(aside Mrs. M. Now should you kneel and prostrate, Damsel, at my feet, I would
deny her; by my hands, not once caress her.


Stan. How Sir, can you so easily quit a Lady you so entirely Love?


Old M. What Is that to you Sir: Good Brother rid my House of this Friend of
yours, for I fear he will prove no Friend of min^, should he stay; I like not his
Countenance, he has the looks of a slye Rogue.


Stan. Rogue! you are merry Sir --

Old M. You Lie, you are a --

Stan. What, what Sir?

Old M. What Sir? you are a Quodammodo, I Will stand to it.

Stan. A Quodammodo?

Old M. Yes, a Quodammodo Sir -- bring your Action, I care not.


Stan. Such another word, Old man, will make me very Angry and Extravagant.


Old M. Extravagant! I believe it; but march off civilly, or as I say, I shall
civilly make you Sir.


Mrs. M. Jack, withdraw, and let me alone; I have a Plot which of necessity
must be prosperous.


Stan. Sir, on my Friends request I Will leave your House, but look to it -- a
Quodammodo said you!

(Exit.
Old M. Adieu, Huffing Sir -- as gad sa'me he has put me into a filthy pet.


Mrs. M. Brother, I have a rare fancy sprung, which if you approve of, must
procure your desire.


Old M. In what good Brother?


Mrs. M. To make your Daughter comply, and marry this Loveall, whom my Sister
mentions in her Letter; for since (as she writes) you have promised Theodocia
to another, I am resolved to fulfill my Sisters request in assisting you in your
intentions -- in pursuance of which, I have thought on a way, -- it is this, --
you say I am very like my Sister?


Old M. Right -- what then?


Mrs. M. How if I, putting on one of my Sisters Gowns, should personate her,
and fairly at first use persuasions to Theodocia; but if they fail, to use a
Mothers Author^ty, and Lock her up till the business is done.


Old. M. How? you personate my Wife! and Lock her up! -- well thought on --
I Will none of that good Brother; soft and fair, I smell a Rat; I understand you,
and so you will debauch her, if not marry her your self.


Mrs. M. Who, I? by my hands, all my Courtship was but Rallery a-la-mode.


Old M. But I Will stand to it, you may so a-la mode her, as you called, that may
make her unfit for a Husband.


Mrs. M. The insupportable censure of impotence! I tell thee old Blade, I Would
sooner marry an Orange Wench then thy dull Virtuous Daughter; by my hands I
would.


Old M. A fitter Wife for such wild Gallants, than an honester Woman, I Will stand
to it.


Mrs. M. Is not my Reputation at stake? a Sisters Conjuration? by my hands you
wrong me, to suspect my Honor.


Old M. But (pardon me Sir) should it come to that extremity of Locking her up,
will you neither say, nor do any thing tending to Debauchery, as you hope to be
saved? gad forgive me.


Mrs. M. I Will do neither by Heaven.


Old M. Good; now if you should, I Will Indict you for Perjury, and I Will stand
to it; you are a witty Blade, the design must take, for thou art so like my Wife,
that I am almost persuaded to kiss thee for her, but that it is so unseemly for
one man to kiss another.


Mrs. M. Then it is a Plot.


Old M. It is, and we will about it instantly, the Wench shall furnish you with a
Gown -- yet methinks I would be by, tho unseen to her, when you persuade her.


Mrs. M. To show you how unjust your suspicion is, you shall.


Old M. (Laughs). I cannot but Laugh to think how the young Baggage will be
cousened; you, her Mother?


Mrs. M. The deceit will be pleasant, what an innocent Cheat it will be? (to
both) -- but let us about it.

Exe.
Scene the Third. Tom Essence's Shop.
Tom Essence Solus. Well, I find thy soil Tom, will never produce the fruit of
Valor, therefore I have taken up the safer Cudgells of the two; I have
entered an Action of Battery against Courtly for violently assaulting the body
of Dorothy Essence, my Wife; and my Lawyer tells me, I shall have swinging
damages for every bout I can prove he has assaulted her; and to have damage
enough, so soon as I have dispatched my Customers, I Will to the Temple-walks, and
hire two or three Knights of the Post, who shall Swear to at least three
thousand pounds worth of Trespass, with which I Will buy an Estate, and turn
Country Gentleman.

Enter Men and two Women to his Shop. Fair Ladys, what lack ye? delicate Roman,
Italiansscented Gloves, good Essences, Tiberos, Orange Jessamine, Essence
d'Espagne, Fanns, Ribbons in every point francois -- Boy* -- Boy, bring some
Essences. (Boy Enters with Essence-bottles) Ha my little Rogues, here are
Perfumes -- ravishing enough to revive the dead.

[He bobs the Women's nose with his Finger and Bottle. 1. Wom. You are the
pleasantest Creature Mr. Essence, I cannot live unless I see you once a week at
least; you are the divertingst person in the Town I swear.


T. Ess. Alas Madam, I, I my pretty hearts; you are the Diamond Queen of the
Nation; say no more, say no more, I have a rich Blade in store for thee;
another time, another time. --

Ha! my pretty Cherubins! --


(Pats their Breasts with Essences. (Men buzze about the Women. 2. W. What a
conceited impudent Rascal's this! (aside. Mr. Essence, a word with you --


T. Ess. I wait on you Madam -- Jack, bring those Spirits came in last from the
Jews in the City; Rogue, you never mind, never mind Sirrah.


(Enter Boy with more Bottles. 1. W. Let me see'em Mr. Essence --


(T. Ess. gives 'em about -- the Boy imitates his Master. T. Ess. There are
Scents Ladys -- upon Rep -- oh incomparable! I can Dine as heartily on a good
Roman or Italian Scent, as you can on a dish of Meat -- oh lushious! excellent!
rare!


2. W. What do you ask for these Gloves?


T. Ess. Try'em on, try 'em on Queen of hearts -- upon Rep, these Gloves are as
well worth two Guynnies as the common Jessamine half a Crown; but you pretty
Beauty shall give me but an Angel; I be-friend you I assure you; say no more.


2. W. Are you Married Mr. Essence?


[He tryes on the Gloves, pats, strokes, kisses her arms, and ^oys all the
while he talks. T. Ess. Yes Madam; yes, I thank my Stars, I am married; I was
forced to it, for what with Maids of Honor, and Country Ladys, I was almost
teas'd out of my Life -- see there, -- a Country Knights Daughter; she has for
these two years past, all the time she has been in Town, been as constant every
day at my Shop, as a Bully at the Ordinaries; and she makes Love so
passionately, that I was forced to take the opportunity of her being out of
Town when I married, and so choust her (poor soul) yet she cannot forbear
coming still.


2. Wom. You Are very hard-hearted, that could refuse so pretty a Lady; how
chanced you did not marry her? had she no fortune?


T. Ess. Yes, Madam, yes, pretty well, some hundreds; but alas, a Country
Damsel is not fit for us Traders in this lewd Town, they would soon find out the
fashionable Trade, to our costs -- Faelix quem faciunt Madam, I am as to that
point wise, at my Neighbors expense; wag your Honor, wag your Arm a little --

But I fear my Town-Soul has played me a prank; but Tom. that secret's for thy
self alone.

(aside. -- Ha Madam; how Ceraphically it sits, and for Scent, smell; smell it
little Ceraphim.


2. Woe. What means the Fellow -- You Are Saucy --


(Bobbs her Nose. T. Ess. How? Saucy in commending my Commodities, pretty,
pretty -- prithee smell again --

This, ay this is it in faith -- -- Cudslid you Whore --


Bobs her, she gives him a Box on the Ear, and goes away with the Gloves. Enter
Lov. who prevents T. Ess. striking again. Enter Loveall. Lov. How now Tom,
quarrelling with your Customers?


T. Ess. Customers with a pox, -- I have exposed to Air, at least a dozen
papers of my best Roman and Italian Gloves; smell Mr. Loveall -- and the
Baggage laid out nothing but a box o'th'Ear; but I had repartee'd it, had not
you staid my hand -- but Mr. Loveall, I am heartily glad to see you in Town
again, the Ladys have so wanted you at my Shop.


Lov. Sirrah, will you never leave your Lying to one that knows you? you were a
pure Rogue to put a common Whore upon me when I was last in Town, for a person
of Quality; but look to it Rascal, for I Will trappan thee into Matrimony for it,
and then Cuckold thee.


T. Ess. Say you so, then hang care, I find it is impossible to be a Married man
and no Cuckold, for the Misses who are kept, are more true to their words than
the Wives now a days are to their Oaths they make in the Church -- (aside. But
Mr. Loveall, as I hope to be Alderman, and ride in Scarlet, and have the
Blew-coat Boys sing Iordans Poetry before me to the Spittle, I was credibly
informed she was a Person of Honor.


Lov. Yes, of VVhetstones Park, Moseleys Damsels were Nuns to her, and she was
so Pockey, that she embraced the offer of a French Vallet to go over into
France to get Cure.


T. Ess. A person of Honor may get a Clap, or so, who can help it -- but is
she gone to Paris? that I had known it sooner.


Lov. What would that have advantaged you?


T. Ess. Much, much Sir; for I would have sent a Venture by her for Gloves,
Ribbons, and Essences: Those kind obliging souls buy three to one Cheaper than
your Coy Virtuous Women, I know it by experience; the little Goddesses of Love
have the prettiest Wheadlingst ways, that what I have lost by Selling to them,
I have choust the Honest Women of -- look you -- there goes a Rogue who has at
least three times given me the go-by for several pair of Gloves -- She has
called in a Coach to see some, fitted her self, fallen into a Laugh, pretended
business, and made the Coachman drive away hastily, sans paying a-gad: But
hanged, I always got up my loss by the next Virtuous Customers have come, which
is the cause of the Report that I sell dear -- but Mr. Loveall, I must live;
should I be reasonable to the Honest, I should lose abominably.


Lov. A precious Rascal, to make the sober Ladys of the Town maintain the
Misses: On my Life, this was some thrifty Gallants invention, to mitigate his
expense of Keeping.


T. Ess. Upon Rep Sir, my own Invention, to make the Rich Charitable to the
Indigent members of Venus-encounters -- See, I have a swinging Catalogue of
'em, here, all Debtors, who are to pay trebble for the Commodities they have
taken up, when they come to the Preferment of being kept by Lords or Country
Cullyes; so that in my own defense, I Am forced now and then to top 'em on some
shallow* brained Lord or Knight, to hedge in my Debts.


T. Ess. retires to his Shop. Lov. Laurence, are the Writings finished?


Enter Laurence. Lau. Yes Sir, they are done, but I having had no warrant to
pay the Fees, the Lawyers would not trust.


Lov. What Is a Clock?


Lau. Almost Twelve Sir -- you must make have, or the Canonical hour will be
past; and if the old Man should be in a pet, he may chance to stop your
Marriage till to morrow.


Lov. Fear it not -- for I will not sleep, till it be in Theodocia's Arms; let
us have to the Temple for the Writings, from thence I Will fly to take
possession of the two great blessings of the World, Wealth and Beauty.


Whose mighty Charms the World could never withstand,
For their joint powers both Age and Youth command.
Exeunt. The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT the Fifth.
Scene, the first. The Street before Tom Ess. House.
Courtly Solus. MY restless soul stung with Theodocia's Falsehood, hurries me
headlong to a wild despair, yet mighty Love controlls my faint Resolves -- but
spite of Love, and all his mistick trifling, no longer I Will sustain my
Injuries -- but stay --

(Studys To him Mrs. Essence. Mrs. Ess. This Husband of mine is possessed, that is
certain, and should I be so too, he would soon be fashionable, which I am resolved
to make him, if he continues longer in his Whimsies.

(Spies Courtly. -- Ha! here is the fine Gallant again, as pat as may be; well
Thomas, look to thy Head, for if this Blade proves kind, something to your cost
may follow. --


(aside. Cou. Married! and broak her Vows! and still enjoys an undisturbed
mind! -- she shall not long, -- for like her ill-genius, I Will hant her every
where with repetitions of her faithless Acts -- since thou fair faithless
Creature have robbed me of a constant Love as thou'st made me, thou shall be
wretched too.


Mrs. Ess. Hem -- hem, sweet Sir your Servant --


Mrs. Ess. sets her self in order by her Pocket-glass. Cou. Oh the disquiets of
an Injured soul!


Mrs. Ess. How do you do Sir? -- goodness Searches her Pockets, and pulls out
an Essence-bottle. defend him, I fear he is ill again -- let me see -- oh, here
it is, -- this Spirit they say is excellent good to dispel Vapours' -- I Will try
the experiment on him --


[take some on her Finger and bobs his Nose. Cou. What mean you Woman? --

It shall be so, I will revenge my self on all the Sex; first force this Tyrant
from my soul, then practicing dissembled Love, like her, I Will win 'em to my
cursed end, and then expose 'em to eternal shame.


Mrs. Ess. Upon my life some Ill-natured Creature has denied his request, which
makes him out of humor; but I Will make amends for the rudeness, and will comply
if he has the goodness to ask, let it be what it will, for I find I shall not
be able to refuse him any thing -- Sir, as I was saying -- pray how do you.


To them Tom Essence. T. Ess. Fire and Gunpowder! my Wife and Courtly together
again! where be these Catch-pole Rogues now, they might kill him with Authority,
should he resist -- how-ever I Will in, and fetch a Weapon, and by knocking him
down, secure him till they come to Arrest him.

(Exit.
Mrs. Ess. One word for pity Sir -- my heart beats heavily, and I am so
concerned for you, that I Vow I am strangely indisposed -- Oh I am sick --


She falls into his Arms, and lets fall the Bottle. Cou. Ha! the Woman faints
--


Mrs. Ess. The Spirit, the Spirit Sir, quick, quick -- rub my Temples Sir, pray
do -- what not one kiss -- (aside. the Spirit again, and bob my Nose with it Sir
--


Cou. Damn her, it is Counterfeit -- and the whole Sex is a Cheat -- thus
Theodocia seemed, when I took leave of her and left the Town -- but I no sooner
gone, but she resigned my Interest to another --


(aside. Mrs. Ess. Hold me a little harder Sir -- squeze me harder yet Sir;
fear not, you cannot hurt me Sir -- the Duce take him, he understands me not
sure!


(aside. Re-enter Tom Essence with a Paring-shovel. T. Ess. Blood must ensue --
were he at his Prayers, I Would knock him o'th'head -- Cuckold me quotha? a good
jest y'saith -- but I Will maule his Mazzard, were he as stout as Hector or
Goliath -- hum -- hum, -- Valor assist me; Tom, stand to it, and cool his
courage in the midst of Courtship -- now Sir, after my hearty Commendations --


Cou. Curse on my Eyes, what do I see? that hated Fop --


T. Ess. offers to strike. Cou. turns. T. Ess. bows and cringes T. Ess. Pox on
him, his looks make me tremble like an Aspin-leaf: Friend Thomas, thy disgrace
will be insupportable; what, Cuckold and Coward too, thy Father was as pretty a
spark as e're played Trial of Skill at the Bear-Garden.


Cou. Sirrah, retire from my sight instantly, or by Heaven I shall grow wild.


T. Ess. This is the Kings Highway Sir -- winks and beckons to his Wife. and
-- the Baggage wont stir, ah Gypsy.


Cou. Do you dispute Sirrah? --


T. Ess. I Am gone, I Am gone Sir -- it is a hard case, a man must be forced to
leave his Wife with her Gallant -- but I Will be near to hear and see what you do
--


(Retires. Cou. Wherein can I be Serviceable Madam --


Mrs. Ess. Cannot you guess Sir? I am young, have an Ill-natured Husband, and I
Vow you are Sir -- but you will think me a Wagg, should I tell you my mind --


Cou. No, no, no, speak, what am I? --


Mrs. Ess. You are Sir -- Lord I blush so -- pray turn your back Sir -- you are
-- pray Sir do --


Cou. Torment! -- now Madam speak, you are obeyed --


[turns his back. Mrs. Ess. Upon my Credit Sir, you are the most desirable man
I ever saw, and could wish --


Cou. Could wish I would do -- what?


Mrs. Ess. Revenge my quarrel on a necessary, but ill natured Fool, called a
Husband --


Cou. To Cuckold him or so? --


Mrs. Ess. I Vow you are an Ingenious person, and guess admirably well Sir. --


(hides her Face. Cou. Oh Theodocia, too late I find the falseness of thy Sex.


Re-enter Tom Essence. T. Ess. Nay Friend of mine, thou can not want a
greater Whetstone for thy Valor than her Impudence.


[Offers to strike: Court. turns; he starts back fearful. Cou. Rogue, are you
here again --


T. Ess. For no harm, no harm I Vow to gad Sir -- I only come to pare away the
dirt my Neighbors have cast at my Door -- Sure my Father begot me in an
Alarm, for I have fear enough to put a whole Town into Confusion.


[aside. Mrs. Ess. My Husband just in the nick -- what ill Luck was this.


[aside. To them Theodocia. Theo. That Perjured Villain here? how I loath the
sight of him.


(aside Mrs. Essence, do you tamely stand, and let that Fellow rob you of your
Honor?


T. Ess. Troth Mrs. Theo. I cannot help it, for to say truth, I am a very Giant
in thought, but a Dwarf in action; I understand the Theory of fighting, but
the thoughts of blood and wounds have kept me from the practick part, or by
this time I had peppered him.


Theo. So poorly-spirited! you deserve no better Fate -- To. T. Ess. False and
Inconstant man, are these the effects of horrid protestations, enough, if broak,
to damn thy soul.


[to Cou. Mrs. Ess. What means she?


Cou. Madam, in vain you Counterfeit a Passion, a second time I will not be
deceived; you are faithless grown, and have betrayed thy Honor to Eternal
Infamy -- Oh Theodocia, Reproach me not with Vows, which you, as I thought with
as spotless Zeal did echo to -- but now -- thy choice, thy abject choice
declares thy Honor lost, thy former Love Hypocrisy.


Theo. Good Heaven! he thinks to palliate his wrongs with a pretended Crime I
should be guilty of -- art thou grown so hardened in thy sin, to prosecute it in
the face of Heaven and all the world, and basely to justify your injuries to
plighted Love, would brand my Honor with Inconstancy.


Cou. to Mrs. Essence. Madam, your Charms do so surprise my soul, that without
the blessed enjoyment of your Love, I shall be the wretchedst breathing -- as now
by Heaven I am --


(aside. Mrs. Ess. Lard Sir, your Complements are strangely obliging --


T. Ess. Are they so? Very fine in faith! --


(aside. Mrs. Ess. That my Block-head were out of the way now; well I must, I
Vow, that is the short and long on it.


(aside. Theo. Courtship before my Face I cannot bear -- desist, or thy speedy
death shall justify my Passion, and thou shall fall a Victim to my tormented
soul --


T. Ess. Good kind heart, how Zealous she is in my Cause still; well -- she is
an excellent Friend, and a pretty Creature; and had I been as high-spirited as
she, the man had been knocked o'th'head by this --


Cou. Do, take my Life, and glory in the act, and by one fatal blow, cancel
those Vows you made, and which are lodged here in my heart Theodocia, then you
may uncontrolled, possess your worthy choice.


Mrs. Ess. What a Medly is this? it madds me that I am so disappointed --


Mrs. Theo. Don't think that this pretended Anger, for I know not what shall
excuse the affront you have done me; no, no, a Woman's a Woman, and has a
Spleen as well as man, understands points of Honor too; you conceive me -- my
Husband should be my own -- but this lewd Age -- yet I Will say no more --


Theo. I understand her not -- (aside.) -- yet too true I know that thou art
false --


(to Cou. Cou. Witness Heaven, if I am false, you showed me the way -- but to
convince you, here take my Life -- and by my death I will declare my Innocence.


Theo. Innocence!


T. Ess. Innocence! a good jest in faith -- when you become the blot of my
Scutcheon, and exalt my Horn above my Neighbors; this is Innocence, is it --
but Cudslid I Will not endure it -- oh good Sir, I forgive Offers to strike Cou.
Courtly turns, he cringes. you, upon Rep I meant no harm; be pleased to buy any
good Gloves or Ribbons, Essences for your Periwig -- pray walk in Sir -- Pox on
him --

(aside. Enter Bailiffs. Oh are you come, that is well; there is your man, do
your Office --


Bailiffs Seize on Courtly. Cour. Arrested! what means this Riddle?


T. Ess. Riddle Sir? you are like to unfold it as you have my Wifes Riddle, Pox
on your Learning for your pains --


Mrs. Ess. What does my Sot design by this? I Will observe, he is such an
impertinent Ass, that I am ashamed to own him, for fear this Gallant should
have the worse opinion of me for his sake, and disappoint my Expectations --


(aside. Cou. Rascals, at whose Suit am I Arrested? and for what?


T. Ess. Come, come Sir, I can handle and talk to you too, now you are in the
hands of Justice, as they say; you are Arrested at my Suit Sir --


Cou. At yours Villain, Slave, yours?


T. Ess. Even so Sir, at mine and my Wifes injuries, great injuries you have
done me, Rep must be satisfied.


Cou. What wrongs have I done thee? had thou affronted me, thou art a thing
would more deserve my pity than revenge -- and for thy Wife --


Theo. Dishonouring her, is I suppose a trivial thing, but now you will find the
due reward for Treachery.


T. Ess. Ay, ay, he shall find to his cost, for I can prove three thousand
pounds worth of Assault and Battery Sir, you have committed on my Wife.


Cou. I injure her! Villain, thou Lie --


Mrs. Ess. I swear, and so he does, for he has not done me reason yet, as they
say; but if he had, it would have been no Trespass, for I Vow he should have
had free ingress, egress, and regress to do what he pleased -- had you not come
as you did --


(aside.) Cou. Cruel Fair, wherein have I done any thing might merit this ill
Usage.

( to Theo. I injure thee! by all that is good, it is as false as thou art to
thy former Vows, -- oh Theodocia --


T. Ess. Hy day, I talk of my Wife, and he addresses himself to Mrs. Theo --


Cou. Were not thy perjuries sufficient --


T. Ess. Leave fiddle faddle Sir, and answer to the point -- did you never lie
with my Wife, ha? how say you, ha?


Cou. I never had so foul a thought toward Theodocia --


T. Ess. Look you there again now -- tell not me of what you thought of Mr.
Theo. but of my Wife.


Cou. Of Theodocia your Wife, I was talking of.


T. Ess. Theodocia my Wife? ha, ha, he; sure the man is madd.


Cou. Is not this Lady your Wife?


T. Ess. A Lady might have been my Wife, if I had been kind, but that time is
past.


Cou. I am amazed! then the Picture I saw in your hand, you had from this Woman?


T. Ess. Even so Sir -- this Whirly-gigg is my Spouse.


Mrs. Ess. He tells you true Sir, and it is as true that I am that Fellow's
Wife, a base Rascal as he is to suspect my Virtue.


T. Ess. Virtue! Au Lord! and have been Courted by a Batchellour-spark of the
Town! that is the common pretense of all the Whores, tho they have layen with
half the Town --


Mrs. Ess. Sirrah, you think by accusing me, to excuse your own base actions;
but I Will not bear it, marry will not I; I brought a good Portion, and will be
respected and humored, marry will I.


T. Ess. Yes, you shall be respected, but -- with a Cudgel -- if you go on
Cuckolding me, I Will tell you but so.


Theo. What an unexpected change is here?


Cou. How have I been wandering in a Labyrinth of Errors since I came to Town,
and Theodocia's injured Virtue strikes such a terror through my heart, that I
am all Confusion -- Madam, can you pardon one who basely has suspected Virtue
and Innocence -- some small excuse I have, though not enough to justify my
wrongs to your fair self; for meeting this Fellow with my Picture which I had
given you at my going out of Town, and he affirming he had it from his Wife,
and it being reported in the Country that you were Married, made me conclude
this was your Husband, which made me act deeds I am now ashamed of --


Theo. Blessed mistake! since it has tried and proved your generous Constancy,
and I should rather ask your pardon for having been the Original of your past
troubles, tho not wilfully; for Fainting last night at the door, and having
your Picture in my hand, I dropped it; but when I came to my self, in vain I
looked, for I could not find it.


Mrs. Ess. At that very time I saw you in my Husbands Arms; and suspecting him
for Lewdness, I came with a design to surprise ye together, but ye were too
quick, and there I found the Picture.


T. Ess. Au Lord, what will become of me now? the burden of all will light on
my Shoulders.

[aside. Yes, yes Sir, it is too true what the Woman says -- and here is the
Picture.


Mrs. Ess. Woman, you Clownish What-de-lack? no Woman of your making --


T. Ess. Say you so, then it would have been no news if you had Cornuted me --
and I fear the mistake has gone too far for my Rep, pray Sir speak comfort to a
Jealous mind; did you not revenge the affront I offered you, upon my Wife? --
the truth good Sir, and I heartily forgive you, for I was justly served for
being such a Coxcomb to conclude what I had not thoroughly examined.


Cou. Friend, rest satisfied, I have neither injured you or your Wife, but your
Jealousy was enough to have made her extravagant; therefore have a care how
you provoke a Woman hereafter.


Mrs. Ess. Ay Tommy, as this Gentleman says, take heed how you stir up my
Granam Eves curiosity in me any more -- if you do, I shall be for Forbidden
fruit -- but I forgive you this time, as you should me, and cease to be
Jealous, or I shall be sollicitous for you know what -- Madam, I hope you will
pardon my late miscarriage, I Swear I meant no harm, not I, I Vow.


T. Ess. Sir, upon Rep I am obliged to you, and now -- my dear, let us embrace
and sign peace -- me thinks this looks like our Wedding Day -- if hereafter I
break this League of Amity, I give thee free liberty of Conscience.


Mrs. Ess. Which I shall take, but till then Tommy, give me no cause, and I
will be yours, and only yours, till death, Dorothy Essence.


T. Ess. Well said Chuck -- Enter a Boy, whispers T. Ess, Sir your Servant;
Mrs. Theo. your Slave: Customers are come whom I must wait on -- Mrs. Theo. use
my Shop, and pray do you too Sir; upon Rep, I Will sell cheaper to you two, than
to any I know, for being the instruments of Reconciliation between my Dolly and
I.

(Exit.
Enter Luce. Theo. Dear Friend, what news have thou learnt in my absence? does
my Father cruelly persist in his design to make me Loveall's Bride.


Luce. Madam he does -- but what is the meaning of this? Mr. Courtly here? and
reconciled? by what strange accident were ye made Friends.


Cou. Our Stars only tried our passions by some unlucky influences -- but
Madam, if you please, we may frustrate your Father's power if you will
vouchsafe to make me happy with your fair self.


Luc. The Proposal's good, embrace it Madam, and put it instantly in execution;
for should either your Father or Mother find you, you would be in a desperate
condition.


Mrs. Ess. Mrs. Theo. if I can serve you, command me, and Sir, you too may add
yours to hers, and you shall see how cheerfully I will obey.


Theo. I am obliged to you Mrs. Essence, -- and Friend, your proposal
corresponds with my wishes, -- yet a Father's anger, which will be enflamed too
by a disappointed Stepmother, may produce a fatal consequence to all my hopes.


Luc. Indeed your Mother is impatient for your coming home, and I have promised
to bring you; but to prevent all danger, I have contrived a way to disappoint
your Mother, and Mrs. Essence may be Serviceable.


Mrs. Ess. Which I willingly would be, if it be an Intreigue; for I love
Intreigues with my heart, and if you please to walk into my house, we will
discourse further of it -- pray walk in Madam -- Sir, I beseech you --


Cou. Ah Madam, this happy hour will make full satisfaction for our past
misfortunes.


(Exeunt. SCENE the Second. Strees before Mon. door.
Love all, Laurence. Lov. Now for the rifling of Loves charming spoils --
Laurence, have you the License ready?


Lau. Yes, yes Sir, here is the warrant of Condemnation -- and the Writings
from your Lawyer; he Swears he has tied you neck and heels -- look you Sir --
dear Parchment, to the tune of Twenty Guynnies.


Enter Mrs. Monylove. Mrs. M. Mr. Loveall, your Servant; my Master is in great
expectation of you Sir, pray make have to him, for he is so humoursome, that
should you be absent any longer, it may endanger you the losing of my Daughter,
and me the Honor of having so worthy a person for my Son-in-Law -- which I Will
prevent, if possible --


(aside. Lov. I am obliged to you Madam, and am glad to see your health so soon
restored.


Mrs. M. Indeed Sir for the present I was Ill, but having taken the Air, and
lying out one Night from this close Town --


Lov. In the Arms of your kind Friend Stanly. --


(aside. Mrs. M. My health returned, and I was loath to put my Master to
charges, which made me put off my intended Journey -- pray walk in Sir --


Lov. your Servant Madam --


Love and Lau. goes into the House. Enter Luce with Mrs. Essence Maskt, with
Theo. Clothes on. Mrs. M. Here' s Luce with Theodocia, 'twas well I shifted him
off before they came --


Luce, thy diligence shall be rewarded; Daughter, no words, but along with me
--

Now Stanly, I Will perform my promise --


(aside) [Exit, with Mrs. Ess. Luce. So, this was a luckey Conveyance -- now to
prepare for my own affairs --

Loveall, at last I Have caught thee in my Net,
In vain you will strive, for you're past retreat.
(Exit*
SCENE the Third. Old Mon, House,
Old Mon. after him Loveall, Laurence. Old M. Mr. Loveall! in good time Sir,
I Will stand to it, I have a quarrel with you; what, stay till the Canonical hour
be past? Absurd, absurd, I begin to suspect you have no Love for my Daughter;
if you had, you would have made more have --


Lov. Not I Love fair Theodocia?


Old M. As I say, not Love her, or you would have been here sooner; but now Sir
I am resolved she shall not be Married till to morrow; for my opinion is, that
all Marriages after the Canonical hour are Unlawful; and consequently the Women
are but a kind of Licensed Whores, which my Daughter shall not be, if I may have
my will; I will not bate an Ace of the Canonical hour Sir, I am a Church of
England man Sir, I Will stand to it I am.


Lov. But under favor Sir, our Church respects not time, but administration;
if it be by One in Orders, and according to the Ceremony of the Church, let it
be at any time, it is good -- but Sir, for fear some scrupulous man should
refuse, what think you of taking a Coach to Pancras-Church, there it will be
done effectually, for that is a place of Privilege and Liberty to Marry
without Lincenses, and at any time --


Old M. A place of Privilege and Liberty? a place of Debauchery, I^le stand
to it -- what an age is this! that our Mother Church should have Loop-holes as
well as the Laws! for those places of Liberty, as you style 'em, serve only to
Debauch our Children from their obedience; for when they have no mind to Marry
the person of their Parents approbation, they run away with some indigent
smooth-tongu'd Fellow to your place of Liberty (as you call it) and Marry him
for Love forsooth, and commonly take their first taste of man in one of the
Bawdy-houses, near that Church, and I Will stand to it; I believe the Beds infect
'em, and make 'em turn Whores, and Cuckold their Husbands, as most do --


Lov. Must then my happiness be deferred till to morrow Sir?


Old M. Ay, indeed must it Sir, the rather too, because I have not perused the
Deeds of settlement yet.


Lov. Here they are Sir, and the License too.


Old M. Very good, very good, let me see 'em.


( Lov. gives Old M. the Writings, he peruses 'em. Enter Mrs. Mon. Betty. Mrs.
M. I have performed my promise, your Daughter is within.


Old M. Oh Brother -- I am oblig^d to you -- now Mr. Loveall, you have nothing
to do, but to prepare to be Married to morrow -- pray know this Gentleman, it is
my Wifes Brother, a notable Wagg, I Will stand to 't -- and he disguised himself
on purpose in Petty-coats, to put a trick upon my Daughter, and cosen her into
obedience -- come, come, I know you are surprised, and think it is my Wife, he
is so like her -- embrace I say, embrace him, I Will stand to 't, you shall --


Lov. By Heaven his very Wife* for I know no Brothe^ that she has -- however,
since she has brought Theodocia home, I Will favor her design, but I cannot
imagine what will be the end of it -- Sir, I must acknowledge the Obligation
you have done me, in bringing fair Theodocia to be my Bride --


(Embraces Mr. Mon. Mrs. M. But now I have her in my power Old Sir, I am
resolved not to surrender her till I am assured of her Portion.


Old M. Thou art the notablest Lad I e're met with, but to satisfy you, I
engage before ye all, to pay down on my Daughters Wedding day the Sum of Six
Thousand Pounds; besides, it may be, a settlement of my whole Estate upon her
and her Heirs for ever.


Mrs. M. Done like a Father of so deserving a Daughter.


Lov. And I hope you will say I do deserve your Daughter, when you shall see with
what obliging kindness I shall use her -- and my Uncle too has made a
Settlement of his whole Estate upon me.


Mrs. M. And you are resolved to give this Portion?


Old M. As I say, I Will stand to it --


Mrs. M. Stanly, bring forth your Bride --


Enter Stanly, Mrs. Essence Maskt. See Sir, as to my own particular, I have
kept my word; but my Friend here, has both won and Married your Daughter, and
now I hope the Portion will be ready --

Old M. How! my Daughter Married to that Hector? Brother --


Mrs. M. Mistake not Sir, now my business is done, I resign that Title, and
reassume that of a dutiful Wife; and to say true, I never had a Brother.


Old M. Ha, is this true? -- was it you then that wore the Breeches, and made
me a Cuckold in my own House? you are a Harlot, I Will stand to it, and I Will take a
course with you, for I Will be Divorst if money and Law can do it; but first I Will
cancel the Settlement I made on thee, of my Estate for Life, but it was with
power of Revocation; and next, I Will turn that graceless wretch out of doors --
it is well you have the modesty to hide that shameless Face --


(to Mrs. Ess. Lov. Theodocia Married!


Lau. What will become of thee Laurence? for since thy Master has mist of the
Mistress, thou art in danger of losing the Maid --


(aside. Mrs. M. Fret on Sir, yet 'twill not do, for your promise is good, the
Portion must be paid, and Divorse when you will, the Prerogative-Court will
give me Alimony, and the Chancery Separation money, enough to maintain a
Gallant.


Old M. An absurd impudent Strumpet, I Will stand to it -- but I am well enough
served for Marrying when I was past the use of Woman --


Lov. Was this the Assignation you made your Gallant, Madam? --


Mrs. M. The very same Sir --


Stan. Even so will; for when I came, her kindness turned to this, and forced
this Lady into my Arms to Marry, which you may be assured I did very
unwillingly; but as you say -- Persecution is come abroad, and we must suffer
patiently --


Lov. Villain, thou never shall enjoy her; thus I Will force a passage to thy
soul, and cancel all those Vows you have newly made to this Lady --


(draws) Stan. Now I have possession Sir, I shall not easily resign my Interest.


(Draws, they fight. Mrs. Ess. Hold, hold, good Gentlemen, Murder not one
another for me --


(She Unmasks All. Mrs. Essence!


Lau. Nay, then take heart of grace good Laurence, for there is hope again; what
Mrs. Essence!


Mrs. M. The Milliner's Wife in Theodocia's Clothes -- then I must rest
content, since I am outwitted


(aside. Stan. Cursed Stars, am I Cousen'd then?


Old M. Huswife, what have ye done with my Daughter? you have her Clothes --


Mrs. Ess. Be not angry Mr. Monylove, she is gone about a certain Intreigue, and
to carry it on, she desired my assistance: Now I, loving harmless witty
Intreigues from my heart, readily complied, and I was thus disguised, and
brought by Mrs. Luce to be Married to a person in Mrs. Thodocia's name; and I
Vow, methinks it is a very pleasant Intriegue.


Stan. A Devil on your pleasant Intreigue, I am like to lose a fair Fortune by
it; nothing Vexes me now, but that I did not perfect the Marriage, that in
revenge, when the Cheat should be discovered, I might have Hanged thee for
having two Husbands --


Mrs. Ess. I Vow Sir, I admired at your forbearance, and am glad you did not
urge it on me, for I fear I should have yielded, you Embraced me so
passionately, and Kissed me so pleasantly!


Lov. There Is some hopes left, since she has mist of her design --


(pointing to Mrs. Mon. Joy, joy to you Stanly, you are the happy man to have a
Fortune forced into your arms --

(to Stan. Enter Cou. Theo. Luce, Betty, Tom Ess. after'em. T. Ess. Well, I am
Jealous again, what a Devil should my Wife do with Courtly now? something more
is in it than I can at present apprehend -- and what their business is here,
for my blood I cannot guess --


(aside, Old M. What, what do I see, Mr. Courtly and my Daughter together?


Cou. Who desire your Blessing, which is only wanting to complete and crown our
Joys --


Lov. Then she is beyond all hopes, e're to be retrieved --


(aside. Old M. Baggage, out of my sight --


T. Ess. Call my Wife names? that must not be -- Neighbor forbear
Ill-language, or look you, de'fee, the Law shall gagg you -- what tho she be
somewhat faulty, yet my Wife's my own Sir, and no one shall Correct her but my
self -- Ha, Mrs. Theo. in my Dolls Pettycoats? --


Old M. What ails the Fellow? shall not I Correct my own Daughter? if you want
your Wife Sir, there she is, Married to one of the Town-Hectors, I Will stand
to it --


T. Ess. Married! Married! oh insatiable! what, two Husbands! is this true?
confess and be hanged, for so thou shall, if it be proved --


Old M. In vain are all excuses; go, go, I Will never own you more, and your
disobedience will justify my intention, to give my Estate to Mr. Loveall in
satisfaction for the affront you have done him.


Lu. First hear what I can say in Vindication of her actions -- she could not
otherwise have done in Honor, her Vows by your command, being given to her now
Husband Mr. Courtly -- but grant she had been free, yet Loveall could not have
Married without the forfeit of his Honor; to prove the truth of which, read
there the Accusation of his intended Perjury --


(delivers a paper to Old M. Lov. Ha! this is the Widow -- too true, it is she,
curse on her ill-timed presence -- had I been sure of Theodocia, I Would have
out-fac'd, nay, and out-ly'd the Devil before I Would have resigned that beauteous
Treasure -- but now it is too late --


(aside. Lu. Do you not know me Sir? view me well -- not yet know me? -- to
convince you, I am the person you have endeavored basely to abuse -- see here
-- that Ladys Picture enclosed Shows a Picture and a Letter to Lov. in your
Uncles Letter, which by Providence you left hehind you at my house -- now did I
basely seek Revenge, thy Life is forfeited -- but Love in me's more powerful --
therefore to salve my Honor, you must -- Marry me -- if not --


Lov. I am past evading it, nor indeed would I, since I have lost Theodocia, --
She Is Rich and Handsome -- Faith Madam I must plead guilty, I have been a very
Villain, -- but then consider Widow, 'twas Love, all powerful Love of your
sweet Self made me act so extravagantly; but if now thou prov'st kind-hearted
and forgiv'st me, I Will proclaim thy mercy to the world, and Seal it in the next
Church we come to --


Old M. What Is here? a Contract of Marriage between William Lovett and
Theodocia Landwell, of Stamford, Widow; what is this to Mr. Loveall, Luce?


Lov. Sir, I confess it my hand, and intended for my name, but that my Uncle
had provided your Daughter for my Wife -- but since that does not succeed, I am
resolved to execute what I then designed only as a Cheat on this Ladys Virtue;
Widow, your pardon; Widow, your pardon.


Old M. How! is Luce a Widow?


Lov. Yes Sir, this is the Widow who formerly I told you relieve'd me and my
Man, when we were Robbed and Stripped.


Old M. What a turn is this! a Rich Widow my The's Maid? a good jest I Will
stand to it.


Luce. Thus disguised, I gained admittance into this Lady's Service, to prevent
my Disgrace, and her Ruin, as it might have proved; for, by my contrivance,
both yours and your Daughters Honor is unsullied, seeing she has performed her
Vows to Mr. Courtly --


Lau. The Widow! what Ill-luck was it that I did not get into my Masters
Saddle.


(aside. Old M. You Are a Witty pretty, Pretty witty Widow, I Will stand to it --
Mr. Loveall -- 'twas absurd, absurd in you to do so ill an action -- however
I Will stand your Friend to your Uncle, and as I say, Marry her, and I Will
justify it --

Mr. Courtly, take my Daughter, and bless ye together, and I hope you will pardon
my intention of Cousening you; I am Old Sir, 'twas for money, a greater Estate,
a greater Estate; and you know we Old men are as amorous on money as you young
Gallants on fair Maids; I Will stand to it, I am Sir, as I say I am.


Cou. My Obedience Sir, for the future, shall show my Forgiveness of your
intended wrong, since I have full possession of my Theodocia.


T. Essence to Stan. Pshaw, pshaw Sir, your reasoning is vain, do not I know
the tricks of the Fashionable Wives, they make nothing of marrying their
Gallants now a days, but I Will not allow it; you have m^rry'd her Sir, and shall
keep her Sir, for I Will have nothing more to say to her; a fair riddance of her
say I, and if she goes on marrying at this rate, the Town will be but one great
forked head of her own making, upon Rep.


Cou. Essence, you must pardon your Wife, for what she did was at our request,
and innocently done.


T. Ess. Pardon her? not I, therefore take her to you Sir, or I Will have her
hanged Sir, and then I Will have the Five hundred pound Lass, whom I was informed
had but three.


Theo. What she did, was at my desire Mr. Essence --


Cou. To gain time for our marriage, and to prevent Mrs. Monyloves discovering
us before our Joys were complete.


Stan. A Pox upon it, it was too true; you may take your Jessamine butter-pot
home, for any use I have made of her.


Old M. I Will stand to it Neighbor Essence, she is a witty discreet Woman, and it
will be absurd if you do not pardon her.


Mrs. M. 'Twas only a harmless Intreigue, such as my Neighbor Tattle and I
used when we went Maskt to the Galleries at the Play Houses, to hear the fine
Gentlemen talk None-sence, and Swear, to be thought Wits -- and this
Gentleman (if I am not deceived) used to be one of 'em.


T. Ess. Say you so? then I Am satisfied, since Rep is whole again -- but Doll,
provoke me no more to Jealousy; and do hear, by way of prevention, go no
more to the Play Houses maskt; for there is a scurvey Proverb, and you may be
caught at last -- Your Pitcher may be cracked with often use -- yet I will not
bar you of your pleasure, but be contented to go the seldomer, and I Will set you
in a Box, as well as our Neighbors Wives; for the Pit and Galleries are become
downright Conventicles of Bawdery; one cannot hear a Play in 'em, for the
Chattering of the fluttering Blades to a Company of Pockey-fac'd Creatures in
Vizards, upon Rep -- but Doll --


Use freedom with discretion, and you will see
Tom Essence understands Civility.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 4. 3. Line 20. for Adams Body, read Adonis Body.

EPILOGUE, Spoke by Mrs. Essence.
NOw I had rather, Sirs, be hanged, than come
To know your Courtesies about our Doom:
You Have been applied to, all the several ways
Man's Wit could think of to procure your Praise,
Yet never has any yet successful been,
To gain your Favors, or Applauses win;
When monstrous Fools ye have been made o'th'Stage,
Such provocation justified your Rage.
We Have only now an Essence shown -- poor Man,
Whose Jealousy was Author of his pain,
But yet the Fop recovered Rep again.
-- But now me thinks a Cloak-Cabal I see,
Whose Prick-ears glow, whilst they their Jealousy
In Essence find -- but Citty-Sirs, I fear,
Most of You have more cause to be severe:
We yield you are the truest Character.
But Tommy Swears by Rep -- your Whoring lives
Are but too bad examples to your Wives.
If each man to his Dolly would be true,
Then like my self, yours would be honest too:
But, Sirs, I Vow it was with much ado.

