AN EXPLICATION OF THE CREED THE Ten Commandments, AND THE LORDS PRAYER WITH
The Addition of some Forms of Prayer.

By John Rawlet, Minister of t^^ Gospel at Wiggin in Lancashire

London, Printed for John Sims, at the Ki^^^ Head at Sweeting's Alley End in
Cornhill, next house to the Royal Exchange, 1672.

TO THE READER.
IT might justly appear ridiculous to make a large Preface to this little
paper. The design of it is easily known at the first sight, to render the chief
Heads of our Religion plain and easy to the young and ignorant. And this I
hope, is an attempt of that nature as needs no great Apology, except on this
account, that it comes after there has been so much done to the same purpose
already, and that so sufficiently, as might seem to render all future
undertakings of this nature wholly needless. But to this let it suffice to
answer, that what I have here drawn up was intended for my own private use, for
which I could not find any of those Expositions I light on, (though otherwise
in their kinds very excellent, and to some of which I have been much beholden)
in all circumstances so suited as I desired.

And they moreover for whose sake this was chiefly designed, had not those
other helps of this nature at hand, nor could I so easily procure the same for
them as I can this.

What is here done is in subserviency to that Catechism which our Church
recommends to the younger sort: that by a plain and fuller explication of the
principles contained in it, the use thereof might be rendered more profitable to
the learners. And for this I had the judgment and authority of the Right
Reverend my Diocesan encouraging me hereto, that none may accuse me of boldness
in this undertaking.

Some perhaps may wonder that I observe no more proportion in explicating the
Articles of the Creed, whilst I am so large on some, and on others very brief.
But for this I thought I had sufficient reason, when I considered, that about
some of them (as particularly that of Believing in Jesus Christ) there have
been many hot disputes, and some dangerous mistakes, of which there are still
some popular Books and Sermons too full, notwithstanding all the endeavors of
many excellent Divines for their removal. That which I have herein sincerely
aimed at, is only to represent the Gospel in its native plainness and
simplicity, that the Text might not be spoiled by a dark Comment, as too often it
is, whilst easy and obvious truths are obscured with hard words, and with such
subtle notions and distinctions, that if the Salvation of Common people lay
upon the understanding of them, their case were hard.

In the explication of some other Articles, (as especially that of the
Catholic Church) I have consulted the particular necessity and danger of that
people, amongst whom at present the providence of God has cast my lot. And to
this I was the rather inclined, as finding not long since in some of their
hands an exposition of the Creed by a Popish Author, wherein he endeavors,
though with miserable success, to shelter some of the prime novelties and
falsehoods of Popery under the Articles of the common Christian Faith. And under
that head of the Catholic Church would fain persuade us, that the Roman Church
and the Catholic are of equal signification and extent. In order whereto, with
their usual cunning, he jumbles I cannot tell how many things together, and asks
his Scholar how he can prove that St. Peter was Head of the Church, and the
Bishops of Rome his Successors in this power and dignity. And the Proof is only
from those two Texts, which they so commonly press to this purpose. Joh. the
last, 15, 16, 17. Mat. 16. 18. The insufficiency of which Allegations for that
end they produce them, has an hundred times over been shown them; whilst from
Christ's command, in the former place, to St. Peter to feed his flock, that is,
to be diligent in preaching to them the Gospel, they would infer his power over
the whole Church, because forsooth thereis mention made both of Lambs and
Sheep. And the title given him in the latter place (supposing it to be spoke
rather of his person than consession) is no more than what we find bestowed on
the other Apostles, Ephesians. 2. 20. Rev. 21. 14. But all this while, here is not a
syllable of his establishment in the Bishopric of Rome, nor of any power over
the universal Church to be derived from him to his successors in that Sex; nor
yet will they ever be able to show, why this power (if any such there had been)
should not rather be conferred upon the Sex of Antioch, whereof they grant him
to have been Bishop, before he was at Rome. On such mere uncertainties do
depend the great Articles of the Romish faith. But these things it is needless
here to repeat; only I shall desire any man that is impartial to let his own
conscience judge, whether the definition I have afterward given of atrue
Catholic Christian, That he is one who sincerely believes the doctrines, and
obeys the precepts of Jesus Christ, be not far more agreeable to Scripture and
reason, than that which Popish Authors give, whilst they would have it
essential to a Christian to be subctej to the Bishop of Rome. And Ineed not
suggest to the judicious, how considerably the Popish Cause is weakened by this
single conclusion, That a man may be a true Catholic Christian, (as I have
before defined him) and so be saved, without being subject to the Pope. For if
this once be granted (as needs it must, if Scripture and Reason may be of any
force in the dispute) then it plainly appears, that all their loud talk about
the Infallibility of the Church, the Authority of the Church, no salvation is
to be had out of the Church, etc. is nothing else but empty noise: And a
company of Quakers or any other Sectaries, if they were got but good store of
them together, might talk just at the same rate, and with muchwhat the same
reason; whilst they arrogate all those things to their own party, which are
spoke of the Universal Church of Christ, if not more than we find ascribed even
to this. Yea, and grant that the Church of Rome were a sound part of this
universal Church, yet still'tis but a part, and therefore could not, with any
pretense of reason, lay claim to those promises and privileges which pertain
to the whole Church, any more than any other part equally sound might do. But
this is not a place to discourse these matters at large.

One thing more I cannot but mention, which I observed in the forenamed Popish
Treatise, viz. the Authors endeavor to prove the lawfuless of praying to
Saints, and that from Genesis 48. 16. Where Jacob blessing Joseph's children,
says, Let my name be named on them, and the name of my Fathers Abraham and
Isaac. Here for named he renders it invocated (which makes nothing for his
advantage, since even thus it is not invocated by but on them) and thence would
fain persuade his Readers, that Jacob here exhorts his Sons to pray to him when
dead, and to their forefathers. Though I can hardly think this Author himself
was so persuaded, but offerred as much violence to his conscience as to the
Text, when he alleged it as a proof of that, to which it has not the least
reference: being spoke only of his taking Ephraim and Manasseh into the number
of his Sons, according to ver. 5. of that Chap. and so they were afterward
reckoned with the rest, as Heads of their respective Tribes. (Is it any wonder,
by the way, if this sort of men have such a low esteem of Scripture, when they
can have no more service from it at their greatest needs?) Upon this occasion
it was, that before the Exposition of the Lords Prayer, I have in an Answer or
two shown, to whom it is we ought to direct our prayers, viz. to God only
through Jesus Christ, of which I have there, I hope, given sufficient evidence.
So plain and justifiable is the doctrine and practice of our Church, in this
and all other matters of moment in controversy betwixt us and the Church of
Rome, they themselves not daring to disapprove of what we do, whilst we justly
reject and sufficiently disprove their additions to Christianity, wherewith
they have loaded and corrupted it.

Throughout the explication of the Creed (there being seldom any need under
the other Heads) I have been careful to annex Scripture-Proofs to all those
points, which might in the least seem to need them, and were capable of that
way of Proof.

In the end I have added two Forms of prayer, useful for families that have no
better helps: two also for the younger sort; together with two graces to be
used before and after meat. In the drawing up of which I have been so careful,
that I hope there lies no considerable objection against the matter of them:
And then, as for those who think a Form it self unlawful, I shall not stand to
concern my self with their objections or censure. May but these weak endeavors
conduce any thing to the promoting of the knowledge and practice of that
Doctrine which is according to Godliness, that is, of our Christian Religion,
all whose doctrines and Precepts, are every way sitted to make men godly here,
and blessed hereafter, I shall then have my end, and let God have the praise.

AN EXPLICATION OF THE CREED.
Q. SInce by your Baptism you have taken upon you the profession of
Christianity, what is required of you to make good this profession?

A. I must believe all that God by Jesus Christ has revealed, and do all that
he has commanded.

Q. What brief Summary have you of the Christian Faith?

A. The Creed commonly called the Apostles.

Q. Rehearse the Articles of your Creed.

A. I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth* and in
Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born
of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and
buried, he descended into hell, the third day he rose again from the dead, he
ascended into heaven, sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty:
from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the
Holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints, the Forgiveness
of Sins, the Resurrection of the Body, and the life everlasting. Amen.

Q. What mean you by saying you believe in God, etc?

A. I believe there is one first and Psalm. 90. 2. Rev. 4. 11. 1 Timothy 1. 17
Psalm. 62. 11. 1 Ioh. 4. 8. Ioh. 11. 7.
most glorious Being, without beginning or end; the Maker of all things, who is
infinite in wisdom, power, goodness, and all perfections.

Q. What reason have you to believe there is such a Being, since you cannot see
him?

A. Because I see those things which can come from no other cause.

Q. What be those?

A. This great world, and all the Romans 1. 20.
Creatures in it, which are made and governed in so wonderful a manner.

Q. How was the world made?

A. Out of nothing, by the word Genesis 1.
of God, in the space of six days.

Q. Are there more Gods than one?

A. No, there is but one. Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Gal. 3. 20.


Q. Why do you call God Father?

A. Principally as he is the Father Mat. 28. 19. Ioh. 5. 23.
of our Lord Jesus Christ, in a peculiar and unspeakable manner.

Q. Have you any other reason?

A. Yes, as also he is the Father of Col. 1. 3. Heb. 12. 9. Act. 17. 29. 2 Cor.
6. 18. Ephesians. 5. 1.
Spirits, both Angels and men, and especially of those who love and serve him
as dear children.

Q. What mean you by saying God is Almighty?

A. I thereby mean that God has Ier. 32. 17. 19. Job 9. 12. 1 Samuel 3. 18.
power to do all things that contradict not his wisdom and goodness; and has
right and authority to dispose of all things as he pleases.

Q. How is Jesus Christ the Son of God?

A. As he was begotten by the Father Ioh. 1. 1, 2. 14.
before all worlds, in a manner peculiar to himself alone, and by us not Col.
1. 15, 16, 17. Isa. 53. 8.
to be declared or understood.

Q. What do you apprehend of Christ by this eternal generation.

A. That he is true God, one with 1 Ioh. 5. 7. 20. Ioh. 10. 30. Isa. 9. 6.
the Father, being the Second person of the blessed Trinity.

Q. But is he not man as well as God?

A. Yes, he is both God and man Romans 9. 5. 1 Timothy 3. 16. Phil. 2. 6, 7. Ioh. 3.
13.
in one person, the humane nature being united to his Divine person.

Q. How did the Son of God become man?

A. He was conceived by the Holy Luke 1. 35.
Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin Mary, and in this respect also he is styled
the Son of God.

Q. Wherefore was this wonderful conception?

A. One reason was, that he might Heb. 7. 26.
be pure from all sin, wherewith the nature of others is polluted.

Q. Why should so glorious a person stoop solow as to become man?

A. That he might be fit to obtain Heb. 2. 14, 15, 16, 17.
Redemption and salvation for mankind.

Q. What is signified by his names Jesus and Christ?

A. Jesus signifies Savior, and Christ Anointed, to let us understand that he
is anointed or set apart to be our Savior and Redeemer.

Q. How came man to stand in need of a Redeemer?

A. By reason of that sinful and miserable Romans 5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Ioh. 3. 5. 8. Rom
5. 12.
estate into which he fell.

Q. How came sin and misery first into the world?

A. By the disobedience of our first Parents Adam and Eve.

Q. In what estate were they created?

A. In an holy and happy estate. Genesis 1. 26. 27, 31.


Q. What was the particular Sin by which they fell?

A. Their eating of the fruit of a Genesis 3.
certain tree in the Garden of Eden, of which God had commanded them not to
eat, called the Tree of knowledge of good and evil.

Q. What mischief did this their sin Romans 3. 23. Romans 5. 17, 18, 19.
and fall bring upon us?

A. By one man's disobedience many were made sinners, and the Fountain being
unclean, so are the streams. Job. 14. 4. Psalm. 51. 5.


Q. And what is our danger by reason of this our sinful condition?

A. We are liable to the wrath of Romans 5. 15, 16. 2 Cor. 5. 14. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3.
God and to whatever miseries it shall please him to inflict, either here or
for ever hereafter.

Q. What then did Christ intend in becoming the Redeemer of mankind.

A. To deliver men from under the Mat. 1. 21. Act. 3. 26. Col. 1. 21. 22.
guilt and power of sin, and to save them from misery, and restore them to the
love and favor of God.

Q. How did he bring to pass this great work?

A. Becoming man, he lived a most Luke 9. 58. Ioh. 8. 46. 1 Pet. 2. 21, 22, 23,
24. 1 Pet. 3. 18. Romans 5. 1, 2. Heb. 9. 14.
holy and afflicted life, by his doctrine and example showing to men their
duty; and died a shameful, painful death upon the Cross, that he might purchase
for us pardon of sin, with grace to heal our natures and sit us for glory*

Q. By whom was Christ put to death?

A. Through the malice and procurement Mark. 15. 15. Mat. 22. 20. 21.
of the Jews, he was condemned to be crucified by Pontius Pilate a Roman
Governor, the Jews being then in subjection to the Romans.

Q. But why did God spare man who had sinned, and lay such sufferings on his
innocent and beloved Son?

A. Because by this means he discovered Ioh. 3. 16. 1 Ioh. 4. 10. Romans 3. 25,
26. Mat. 20. 28. Romans 5. 11. 1 Cor. 6. 20.
his infinite mercy to mankind, and yet in a way that gave great honor to his
justice, an atonement being made for sin, and a ransom paid that the sinner
might be redeemed.

Q. How is it for the honor of God not to pardon sin without an Atonement?

A. When God had made a law and threatened misery to the transgressors, if he
had given no testimony of his displeasure upon the transgression of it, the
world would have been apt to call his wisdom and holiness in question, to
slight his authority, and be more bold to sin against him.

Q. How then do the sufferings of Christ vindicate the holiness and justice of
God?

A. In that they do fully discover Romans 3. 25. Heb. 9. 22, 23. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
the horrid evil of sin, and the holiness and justice of God in his hatred of
it, who would grant no pardon without the death of so glorious a person.

Q. What is the proper effect of this Consideration?

A. To make men sensible of their danger, and humbled for their sins, and
thereupon to hate and forsake them.

Q. How does the death of Christ engage us to Repentance and Obedience?

A. The infinite love of God and the 2 Cor. 5. 15. Romans 2. 4. 1 Ioh. 4. 19.
Redeemer herein revealed is apt to make men love so good a God, and to be
careful to please him.

Q. What farther motive does it afford hereto?

A. The consideration of what Christ Luke 23. 31. Heb. 10. 29.
himself suffered, for our sakes only, may assure us that dreadful vengeance
will fall upon all those who reject this Savior, and must in their own persons
suffer for their sins; which consideration may well work upon all that love
themselves to forsake their sins.

Q. For whom did Christ die? 1 Timothy 2. 6. 1 Timothy 4. 10. Heb. 2. 9. 1 Ioh. 2. 2.
2 Pet. 2. 1. Romans 14. 7, 8, 9. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.


A. Christ died for all men, that they might be saved upon condition of their
believing in him: and so he is Lord of all, as having bought them with his
blood, and has full power of ruling, judging and disposing of them.

Q. But who shall be actually saved by Christ?

A. Only they, who upon hearing Ioh. 3. Mar. 1^, 16.
the Gospel, perform the condition therein required, of Believing in him.

Q. What plainly is meant by this Believing in Christ, which is of so great
necessity to our salvation?

A. Hereby is meant that we must Ioh. 1. 12. Ioh. 7. 37, 38. Ioh. 20. 31.
so effectually believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and Savior of the
world, as to become heartily willing to be saved by him, in the way appointed
in his Gospel.

Q. What way has he appointed in the Gospel for our obtaining of salvation?

A. That we should unfeignedly repent Act. 2. 38. Mat. 16. 24. Ioh. 14, 15. 1
Ioh. 2. 2. 3* 4. 5, 6. Romans 3. 24, 25.
us of all our sins, obey his commands, imitate his example, and for his sake
alone hope for mercy and salvation from the free grace of God.

Q. Is it not enough then for our salvation, to believe that our sins shall be
pardoned, and to rely upon Christ for this pardon?

A. No, for unless we forsake our 1 Ioh. 1. 6, 7. Mat. 7. 21. Heb. 5. 9.
sins, all our confidence and reliance upon Christ is but sond presumption*
since he is the Author of eternal salvation only to those that obey him.

Q. What then are Obedience and Holiness as necessary as Faith?

A. Yes, they are absolutely necessary, Heb. 12. 14. Gal. 5, 6. Act. 15. 9.
Act. 26. 18.
since without holiness we shall never see God, nor can we be put into a state
of justification, but by that faith, which, if life be continued, will
certainly produce obedience.

Q. When may a man be said to be in a state of justification?

A. When he is so far brought into Romans 5. 1.
the favor of God, that, according to the rule and tenor of the Gospel, if he
should die in that estate, he should not be condemned for his sins.

Q. And is there any thing beside a reliance on Christ's merits necessary to put
us at first into this state of justification?

A. Yes, there is also required of Act. 3. 19. 2 Cor. 8. 5. 1 Pet. 1, 2.
us Repentance for sin, with a sincere resolution to lead an holy life, which
is as necessarily included in a right reliance on Christ, as a resolution to
follow the directions of a Physician is included in our relying on him for our
recovery.

Q. Are we then to account obedience the meritorious cause of our justification?

A. No, by no means, nor Faith Heb. 1. 4. Heb. 9. 12. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10. Iam. 2.
14. 17, 18, 19, 20. etc.
neither; for that is to be ascribed purely to the sufferings of Christ; only
our dependence upon him and resolution to obey him (both which do ever follow
upon a true faith) are required as the condition of this our justification.

Q. What more is required of us to continue us in this state, and that we may
be justified and saved at the day of judgment? Col. 1. 23. Mat. 24. 13. Mat.
25. 34, 35. etc. 2 Ioh. 9. Rev. 22. 14.


A. Even the actual performance of these resolutions, in living an holy life,
and persevering therein to the end, is the necessary condition of our
continuance in Gods favor, and of our complete justification and salvation at
the last day.

Q. What mean you by that Phrase that Christ descended into Hell?

A. I thereby understand his remaining Act. 2. 24. 26, 27. 31.
under the power of death, his soul being all this while in an invisible state,
as the souls of dead men are.

Q. How long did he thus remain under the power of death?

A. Till the third day, on which he ^uk. 24. ^6. 1 Cor. 15. 4.
rose again from the dead.

Q. How long did he remain on earth after his Resurrection?

A. Forty days only, to give assurance Act. 13. 9.
of his Resurrection, and to instruct his Disciples; after which, he ascended
into the highest heavens.

Q. What mean you by his sitting at the right hand of God?

A. His being exal ed as Mediator Mat. 28. 18. Heb. 1. 3. Phil. 2. 9. 10, 11.
to divine dominion and glory, all things being delivered into his hands by the
Father.

Q. When will he fully manifest and declare his power?

A. When at the last day he shall Mat. 24. 30. 2 Timothy 4. 1.
come in power and glory to judge the world.

Q. Who are the quick and the dead?

A. All that shall then be found alive, and all that had been dead before.

Q. For what are they to be judged? Eccles. 12. 14. Romans 2. 16. 2 Cor. 5. 10.


A. For all actions done in the body, whether good or bad, open or secret.

Q. For what end must there be this future judgment?

A. That God, the righteous governor 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8. 9. 10. Jude 15.
of the world, may be glorified in his condemning and punishing the wicked, in
his justifying and rewarding the righteous.

Q. Who is the Holy ghost?

A. The third person of the sacred Ioh. 15. 26. 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. 2 Cor. 13, 14
1 Ioh. 5. 7.
Trinity, proceeding from the Father and the Son, being one God with the Father
and the Son.

Q. Why is the Divine Spirit called Holy?

A. Not only as he is holy in himself, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Tit. 3. 5.
but also as it is his peculiar office to make men holy.

Q. What has he done, or still continues to do toward the making men holy?

A. He has revealed the will of 2 Pet. 1. 21. Ioh. 16. 13. Romans 8. 13. Gal. 5.
22.
God in the holy Scriptures, and carries on the interest and design of Christ
in the world, by turning men's hearts from the world to God, from sin to
holiness.

Q. For what reasons do you believe that the holy Scripture was wrote by men
inspired by the Holy ghost?

A. Because the Doctrines of it are so worthy of God, and have the confirmation
of such miracles.

Q. Is the will of God perfectly revealed in Scripture?

A. God has so perfectly revealed Mat. 28 20. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. Rev. 22.
18, 19.
his will and our duty therein, that nothing ought to be required of us, either
to be believed or practiced, as necessary to salvation, which is not plainly
contained in this his holy word.

Q. Are there not some Traditions as needful as the Scripture, and of equal
value with it?

A. We need no Traditions beside Mat. 15. 9.
the Scripture: but the Tradition or delivery of Christian Religion, and the
Holy Scriptures, from one generation to another, ever since the time of Christ
and his Apostles, gives us great assurance of their truth, and helps us to
judge what books belong to the Canon of Scripture, and what do not.

Q. How does the Holy Ghost carry on the work of Christ upon the souls of men?

A. By enlightening their minds to 1 Cor. 2. 12. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Romans 5. 5. 1 Cor.
12. 3.
discern the vanity of the world and the evil of sin, and thereby enclining
them to come to Christ, that through him, they may be reconciled to God, and
made happy in his love.

Q. How does the Spirit work these ^ffects upon the Soul?

A. By opening our hearts to attend Act. 16. 14. 1 Thessalonians. 2 13. Ioh. 17. 17.
Ier. 31. 33. Ioh. 3. 8.
to the word, wherein our duty with the motives to it is revealed, and by
keeping the truths thereof upon our minds till they become effectual to our
conversion; though the way of its working cannot be distinctly told.

Q. Can a man be saved without the help of the Spirit?

A. No, for if any man have not the Ioh. 3. 5. Romans 8, 9.
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

Q. To what end is the spirit so necessary?

A. Both to implant grace in our 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23, 24. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16, 17. Ephesians.
6. 10. Romans 8. 26.
hearts, and to confirm and increase the same; to comfort and guide us, to
strengthen us against temptations, and to help us in the performance of all
duties.

Q. To whom do we owe the praise of any good thing wrought in us or performed
by us?

A. To the Spirit of God, who works Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. 10. Phil. 2. 13.
in us both to will and to do.

Q. But where lies the fault, if men live all their days in sin, and are never
converted and brought home to God?

A. Wholly on themselves and not Hos. 13. 9. Isa. 5. 4. Ioh. 3. 19.
on God in the least.

Q. But how can that be? since his Spirit alone can sanctify them, can they
help it if they are not sanctified?

A. Yes, for by their sloth and wilfulness Ioh. 5. 40. Act. 7. 51. Mat. 13. 12.
they grieve the good Spirit of God and hinder his workings; and by their not
improving that grace they have already received, are themselves the cause why
they receive no more.

Q. Is there then any thing to be done by us, in order to our own conversion
and salvation?

A. Yes, for God commands us to Phil. 2. 12.
work out our own salvation.

Q. What is it that we are to do? Prove. 14. 20. 21. 1 Timothy 4. 13. 15. Ioh. 5
39. 1 Cor. 13. 5. Ephesians. 6. 18. Luke 11. 13. Iam. 1. 5. Ephesians. 4. 4. 15. Col. 1. 18.


A. We must hear and read the word of God, and consider of it; examine our
hearts and keep continual watch over our ways, and earnestly beg of God his
holy Spirit, to enable us to do what he requires of us.

Q. What do you mean when you say you believe the Holy Catholic Church?

A. I do hereby profess to believe, that Jesus Christ has a Church upon earth,
made up of all his true and living members, 1 Cor. 12. 12.
which may be called that Body whereof he is the Head.

Q. Is there not some one Person here in earth, appointed to be visible head
over this Universal Church, who is to be held Christ's Vicar on Earth?

A. We read of no such thing in Isa. 49. 23. Romans 13. 1. Act. 20. 28. Heb. 13.
17. Ephesians. 2. 20. 21.
Scripture, and therefore have no reason to believe it; but under Christ,
Princes and Pastors are the Heads and Governors in their respective dominions
and Churches.

Q. Why is this Church called holy?

A. Because the members thereof are Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7. Romans 6. 4. 1
Pet. 1. 15.
separated from the rest of the world, dedicated to God, and engaged to
holiness in heart and life.

Q. Who are they that belong to this Church?

A. As to outward appearance, all Mat. 28. 19. Ephesians. 4. 4, 5. Act. 8. 37. Romans
10. 9, 10.
such who are baptized into the name of Christ, and do credibly profess their
belief of the Gospel and their resolution to obey it.

Q. Who are the true and living members of this Church?

A. Such whose belief and life is agreeable Romans 2. 29. Ioh. 15. 5. 8. 14.
to their profession.

Q. Why is it called the Catholic or Universal Church?

A. To show that it is not confined Romans 2. 10, 11. Col. 3. 11.
to any particular place or nation, as the Church of the Jews was, but is
spread abroad over the face of the earth.

Q. Is it proper then to give the name of Catholic only to those who are of
this or that particular Church or Sect?

A. No, not at all, but very unreasonable. 1 Cor. 1. 13.


Q. How is it then that some say, that the Church of Rome is the Catholic
Church?

A. There is neither sense nor charity in it, since it is as much as to say,
that one part (and a bad one too) is the whole; and that no man can be a true
Christian, except he be of the Church of Rome.

Q. Are not all Christians in the world bound to be subject to the Church of
Rome?

A. No, not though it should be 1 Cor. 1. 12. The Cephas here named was St.
Peter (see Ioh. 1. 42.) who therefore could not be Head of the whole church
much less the Popes his pretended Successors.
Reformed, any more than they are bound to be subject to the Church of England
or Scotland, which are but parts of the Universal Church; And many good
Christians there were in the world, before there was a Church at Rome, and many
have been since, who perhaps never heard of any such place.

Q. Is it not all one then to be Papists and Catholics?

A. Upon no account, since Papists (how many so ever they be) are but a
particular Sect of Christians, as Anabaptists or Quakers are, and a Sect that
has done a world of mischief to the Church of God, by their dangerous
innovations, both in opinion and practice.

Q. Who then is properly and truly a Catholic Christian?

A. He that heartily believes all Mar. 16 16. Act. 10. 34, 35. Gal. 6. 15. 16.
Romans 14. 17, 18.
that Jesus Christ has revealed, and sincerely endeavors to do all that he
has commanded, is the true Catholic, of what Church or nation soever he be.

Q. What is one of the best signs of such a true Catholic?

A. To have a great deal of charity Ioh. 13. 35. Romans 14. 3, 4.
for all his fellow Christians, though they are not in all things of the same
opinion with himself.

Q. And does that sign agree to that Sect who absurdly call themselvos Roman
Catholics?

A. Less than to any other Sect whatever, for they are bound by the definitions
of Popes and Councils (which if they contradict, they cannot be Papists) to
judge all men damned that are not of their Sect, thereby condemning many
millions of Christians far better than themselves; which horrid
uncharitableness, is enough to keep wise men from amongst them.

Q. Are the Churches which be reformed from Popish innovations parts of the
Catholic Church of Christ?

A. Yes, and the best and soundest parts thereof, agreeing in all matters of
substance, with the Church of Christ in all ages and nations of the world.

Q. How prove you that?

A. In that these reformed Churches (as particularly our Church of England) do
profess to hold nothing as necessary to salvation, which is not contained in
the holy Scriptures; which same Scriptures are received and believed by all
other Christian Churches, who do thereby approve of all that we hold as
necessary.

Q. But why did these reformed Churches at first depart from Communion with the
Church of Rome? Romans 16, 17, 18.


A. Because the Romish Church imposed such new fangled doctrines and practices,
as were plainly contrary to the word of God; and therefore it was in those
things to be departed from, by all those who would conform themselves to the
ancient Church, as it was settled by Christ and his Apostles.

Q. What mean you by Communion of Saints?

A. That Communion which Saints 1 Ioh. 1. 3. 1 Cor. 12, 13. Act. 2. 4. 2. Heb.
10. 25.
have with God, and Christ their Head, by partaking of his Holy Spirit; and
with one another in their mutual likeness and love, and in their assembling
together for the worship of God.

Q. What mean you by saying you believe the Forgiveness of Sins?

A. I hereby profess to believe, that 1 Ioh. 1. 7. 9.
they who repent of their sins, trust in Ephesians. 4. 32. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
and obey the Lord Jesus, shall, for his sake, find God so gracious to them, as
to free them from that condemnation and punishment to which their sins made
them liable.

Q. What mean you by Resurrection of the Body?

A. I hereby profess to believe, that 1 Cor. 15. 51. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14. 15, 16.
Ioh. 5. 28, 29.
at the last day, God will raise up all that were dead, and change those that
are then alive, and that they shall appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ.

Q. What mean you by Life everlasting?

A. I do hereby profess my belief 2 Timothy 1. 10. Mat. 25. 26. Romans 2. 6, 7, 8,
9, 10.
of a future state after this life, wherein the Righteous shall enjoy
everlasting happiness, and the wicked shall be sentenced into everlasting
torments.

Q. But does it not seem very harsh to think, that God should punish any the
worst of sinners with everlasting torments?

A. No, not when we consider Deuteronomy. 30. 15. etc. Ioh. 3. 16, 17.
what graciou terms were proposed to them, for their obtaining of glory, and
escaping of this misery; and how they Prove. 8. 36. Ioh. 5. 40. Act. 13. 46.
themselves did wilfully refuse the offers of grace, when they knew this misery
would follow upon that refusal.

Q. What then is safest for us all to do in this case?

A. So to believe and fear these terrible Mar. 9. 43, 44. etc. Ezekiel. 18. 29,
30. Ier. 5. 12, 13, 14.
threatenings of Christ, as to take the only sure way to escape them, by obeying
his commands; rather than to quarrel with them, or presume they will prove
false.

So much for the Articles of your Belief.

HAve you also a brief Summary of the whole duty of man in reference to is
practice?

A. Yes, the ten commandments.

Q. Rehearse the first.

A. I am the Lord thy God, which Exodus 20. 1, 2, 3. etc.
brought the out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shall
have no other Gods before me.

Q. What learn you from the first commandment and the Preface set before it?

A. I hence learn, that we are bound to acknowledge that God, who is our Maker,
Owner, and the giver of all our mercies, to be the only true and living God,
and to behave our selves toward him accordingly.

Q. How does it beseem us creatures to behave our selves toward this our God?

A. We are bound to love him with Mark. 12. 30. 1 Timothy 6. 17. Heb. 12. 28.
Psalm. 86. 9. Phil. 4. 4. 6. Deuteronomy. 28. 14, 15. Psalm. 119. 127, 128. 1 Cor. 10.
10. 1 Pet. 5, 6.
our highest love, to put our whole confidence in him; to reverence, admire and
rejoice in him; to pray to him and praise him; to obey all his commands without
grudging, and to submit to all his providence without murmuring or repining.

Q. Which is the second Commandment?

A. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, or any likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in
the water under the earth: thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve
them, for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation of them that
hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my
commandments.

Q. What are we taught in the second Commandment?

A. The second Commandment teaches us to worship God according to his own
appointment, and to take special heed that we make not any image or picture of
him; nor give religious worship to an Image, upon any pretense whatsoever.

Q. What reason do you find given for the engaging our obedience to this
Command?

A. The reason here given is, that God is a jealous God, who therefore will not
suffer himself to be dishonored, by men's making and worshipping any thing as
an Image of him, but will severely punish such idolaters and their posterity;
whilst the true lovers and worshippers of him shall be plenteously rewarded,
even to many generations.

Q. What other reason do you find given in the repetition of the Law? Deuteronomy. 4.
12, 15, 16. etc.

A. We there find this farther added, that when God spoke to the children of
Israel, they only heard a voice, but saw no similitude, (or bodily shape) and
therefore it is unreasonable to make any image or resemblance of him.

Q. How ought we then to conceive of God when we worship him?

A. We ought not to conceive of him Isa. 40. 18. Ioh. 4. 24. 1 Timothy 1. 17.
Psalm. 116. 5. Ier. 23, 23, 24. Job 11. 7.
under any bodily shape, but as a spiritual Being, infinitely wise and
powerful, holy, just and good; who fills both heaven and earth with his
presence, and in his essence is unsearchable.

Q. What is the third commandment?

A. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

Q. What are we taught in the third Commandment?

A. The third Commandment enjoins us to have so great reverence for God, as not
to take his name in vain.

Q. Who are they that take Gods name in vain?

A. Chiefly they who dare swear Lev. 19. 12. Prove. 30. 9. Mat. 5. 33, 34, 35,
36.
falsely by the name of God, and they also who in their passion or ordinary
discourse, break forth into swearing.

Q. What Rule has Christ given for our ordinary communication, that we may
avoid swearing?

A. That we should barely affirm Mat. 5. 37. Iam. 5. 12.
or deny a thing, using yes or no, or the like expressions, without oaths or
imprecations.

Q. Is it enough to justify these common oaths, that some men will not (as is
pretended) believe others, except they swear.

A. No, this is but a vain excuse, since sober and good men are easily believed
on their bare word, and common swearers are seldom thought to make conscience
even of what they swear.

Q. Is it not enough to justify these oaths, that what is sworn is truth?

A. No, for an oath must be taken Heb. 6. 16.
only when we are lawfully called thereto, in some weighty case which cannot
otherwise be well determined.

Q. Who else may be said to take the name of God in vain?

A. They who are careless and irreverent in the worship of God, and they who
upon every light occasion cry out, oh God, or oh Lord, when they have no sense
nor thought of that glorious Majesty, whose sacred name they rashly mention.

Q. What reason is urged to keep us from this sin?

A. The consideration of that vengeance, which, sooner or later, God will
certainly execute upon those who are guilty of this profaneness and contempt of
his Majesty.

Q. What is the fourth Commandment?

A. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy; six days shall thou labor, and
do all thy work, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; in it
thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy Son, nor thy daughter, thy
manservant nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor the stranger that is
within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the Sea, and
all that in them is, and rested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath day, and hallowed it.

Q. What are you taught in the fourth Commandment?

A. The fourth Commandment teaches us that it is our duty to set apart one day
in seven, for the solemn worship and service of God.

Q. What reason is here mentioned for the enforcing this Command?

A. Gods allowance of six days in the week for our worldly employments, and his
own example in resting on the seventh, when he had made the world in six days
before.

Q. Which day in the seven did the Jews keep their Sabbath?

A. They kept the seventh day, which we now call Saturday.

Q. Why do we Christians keep the first day of the week?

A. In remembrance of our redemption Mar. 16. 9.
wrought by the Lord Jesus, especially of his Resurrection, which was upon the
first day of the week.

Q. What warrant have we for so doing?

A. The example of the Apostles Ioh. 20. 19. 26. Act. 2. 1. 1 Cor. 16. 2. Rev.
1. 10. 1 Cor. 11. 16. Heb. 13. 17.
and primitive Christians recorded in Scripture, where this day is styled the
Lords day; the practice of the Church of God in all ages since; as also the
custom of our own Church, and the commands of our Rulers both in Church and
State.

Q. How ought we to spend the Lords day?

A. In the worship and Service of God, both public and private; especially in
meditating on and praising him for his works of Creation and Redemption.

Q. Are there no works lawful on this day?

A. Yes, works of necessity and Luke 13. 15, 16.
mercy, whether to man or beast, but we ought to abstain from such employments
and recreations, as either prevent the duties of this day, or else hinder our
due profiting by them.

Q. What is to be done in private, that we may best profit by the public
service of this day?

A. We ought by prayer and serious consideration to prepare our selves
beforehand for the public worship of God; and when we come home, to meditate
on what we have heard; and Masters of Families ought to pray with and instruct
those that are under their charge.

Q. Who are they then that do not remember this day to keep it holy, but
profane it?

A. They, who, without any necessity, take journeys, or follow their
employments on this day, or else spend the same in idleness and pleasure;
neglecting the service of God in public, or in their Family, accounting it a
burden to spend a day in works of Piety and devotion.

Thus much of the Commandments of the first Table, which enjoin the duties we
owe more immediately to God. Now follow those of the second Table, which
respect our duty to man.

What is the fifth Commandment?

A. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long upon the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Q. What are we taught in the fifth Commandment?

A. The fifth Commandment teaches Mark. 7. 10, 11, 12, 13.
us to honor our Parents, obeying all their lawful commands, succouring and
maintaining them, if they stand in need of our help.

Q. Are there none beside our natural Parents to whom we owe obedience?

A. Yes, we are also bound to reverence Romans 13. 1. Heb. 13. 17. Col. 3. 22.
Romans 13. 7.
and obey all those, who, by their place and power, may well be called our
Parents, to wit, the civil Magistrate and our Spiritual Pastors and Teachers.
Servants must be subject to their Masters, showing all diligence and
faithfulness, and we must give due honor and respect to all those who are in
any regard our Superiors.

Q. What promise is made to those who keep this Commandment?

A. A promise of long life and prosperity, so far as God shall see it for their
good.

Q. What reason may be given why this promise was made peculiarly to the
keeping of this Command?

A. Because obedience and Subjection, both in families and kingdoms, Mat. 5. 5.
ordinarily produce that peace and quietness, which tends very much to our
happiness even in this world.

Q. What is the sixth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not kill.

Q. What is forbidden in this Commandment?

A. The murdering of our selves, or any other person.

Q. Is it sufficient, if we abstain only from murder?

A. No, but we moreover ought to Mat. 5. 22. Ephesians. 4. 31. Gal. 5 20. Col. 3. 12.
13.
abstain from all rash anger, inward malice and revenge, from railing and
provoking language, from quarrelling and fighting.

Q. But what if others shall injure us in word or deed, may we not return the
like to them?

A. No, but we must bless them who curse us, do good to them that 1 Pet. 3. 9.
Mat. 5. 44. Romans 12. 19, 20, 21.
hate us, forgive and love our very enemies, that so we may overcome evil with
good.

Q. Is there then no way of seeking our own right when we are injured and
abused?

A. Yes, by just and lawful means 1 Cor. 6* 4, 5.
we may seek our right, but without any malice or revenge in our hearts.

Q. Is there any case wherein the taking away of a man's life may be allowed?

A. Yes, in execution of public Romans 13. 4.
justice upon malefactors; in a lawful war, or when we are constrained to it
in the just defense of our own lives.

Q. Who may be said to break this Command by taking away their own lives?

A. Not only they who lay violent hands on themselves, but all those who by
immoderate eating and drinking, or any such wicked and wilful course, destroy
their health, and so shorten their days.

Q. What is the seventh Commandment?

A. Thou shall not commit adultery.

Q. What is forbidden in the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment forbids adultery and fornication, with all the
occasions and beginnings of these sins.

Q. From what particularly ought we to abstain in obedience to this Commandment?

A. We ought carefully to abstain Mat. 5. 28. Ephesians. 5. 4. 1. Tim. 2. 9. Romans 13.
13.
from all immodest looks, unchaste thoughts and discourses, from wanton songs,
books and pictures; from lascivious dalliance, light carriage and attire, from
idleness and intemperance, the usual occasions of farther wickedness.

Q. What is the eighth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not steal,

Q. What is forbidden in the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment forbids, 1 Cor. 6. 8, 9, 10. Romans 13. 8. Iam. 5.
4.
our doing any thing unjustly to the lessening of our neighbors estate,
whether by stealing from him, or by cozenage and cheating in our bargains; by
wilful neglect to pay our debts; or by oppression and extortion.

Q. Is this all that is required of us, not to rob others of their wealth?

A. No, But we must moreover be ready Mat. 5. 42. Gal. 6, 10.
to lend or give to those that need, according to our ability.

Q. What especially is to be done by us that we may avoid the breach of this
Commandment?

A. We ought diligently to follow Ephesians. 4. 28. Tit. 3. 14. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. 11,
12.
our several honest callings and employments; and to live in such a sober and
thrifty manner, suitable to our estates and conditions, that we may be able to
pay our debts, and relieve the poor; and so shall not be put upon stealing,
gaming, cheating, or any wicked course for our livelihood.

Q. What is the ninth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Q. What are we especially enjoined in this ninth Commandment?

A. That when in any case we are called to be witnesses, we speak nothing but
the truth.

Q. What farther ought we to abstain from?

A. We ought to abstain from raising, Romans 1. 29, 30. Tit. 3. 2. Iam. 4. 11.
Mat. 7. 1.
receiving or spreading false reports of our neighbor, and from doing any
thing to lessen his just esteem; from rash and uncharitable censures; from
tale-bearing and tatling of other Lev. 19. 16. 1 Timothy 5. 13. Col. 3. 9.
men's matters; and from all lying in our communication one with another.

Q. What is the tenth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his man servant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his
ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors.

Q. What are we enjoined in this Commandment?

A. The tenth Commandment enjoyneth Heb. 13. 5. Gal. 5. 21. 26. Iam. 5. 9.
us to be so thoroughly well content with our own condition, that we should not
envy or repine at any thing our neighbor enjoys, nor covetously desire it from
him.

Q. What are those general rules in the Gospel which include the whole of our
duty to one another?

A. That we should love our neighbor Romans 13. ^. Mat. 7. 12.
as our selves, and deal with all others, as we our selves desire to be dealt
with, were we in their case.

Q. Give me some particular instances of this last Rule.

A. Masters ought to deal with their Servants, as they themselves were they
servants, would in reason desire to be dealt with; we must not give that ill
language to others, nor raise or entertain such stories of them, as we our
selves cannot bear, when we are so used; The Seller must deal as honestly and
justly, as he desires to be dealt with, when he comes to buy, etc.

Q. Can you by your own power perform these duties required of you?

A. No, but we need the assistance 2 Cor. 3. 5. Iam. 1. 5.
of Gods grace, which we are to seek for by prayer.

Q. To whom ought our prayers to be made?

A. To God only, in the name of Psalm. 65. 2. Col. 3. 17.
Jesus Christ.

Q. May we not then pray to Angels and Saints?

A. No, for we have no warrant Col. 2. 18.
for it from Scripture, (which, in so weighty a matter of religion, is
necessary) but very much against it.

Q. Name to me some one Text of Scripture, where we are commanded to worship
God only.

A. Mat. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve.

Q. Where are we expressly forbidden the worship of Angels?

A. In Rev. 22. 9. when St. John being about to worship the Angel, he said to
him, see thou do it not, for I am thy sellow-servant, worship God.

Q. But may we not pray to Saints and Angels, as our Mediators, that they
would pray to God for us; as when we put up a petition to the King, we make use
of some Courtier to present it for us?

A No, for there is no likeness in Psalm. 34. 15. Ier. 23. 23.
the case, God himself being most gracious and always near to us; and moreover
it tends to the great dishonor of the Lord Jesus, who is our only Mediator,
by whom we are to offer up our prayers to God.

Q. Name me some one Text to prove that Christ is our only Mediator.

A. 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is one God, and one Mediator betwixt God and Men, the
Man Christ Jesus.

Q. What farther reason can you allege against praying to Saints and Angels?

A. It is in vain to pray to them, because Job. 14. 21. Isa. 63. 16. Ier. 23,
24.
we have no reason to believe that they can hear the prayers that are made to
them from several parts of the world; it being proper to God only to be in all
places at once.

Q. Is it lawful before hand to know the words we intend to use in prayer, that
is, to use a form of our own or others making?

A. Yes, it is lawful, since it is no where forbidden in Scripture, and the
directions there given concerning prayer may be practiced either with or
without a form.

Q. But we are taught in Scripture Jude 20. Ephesians. 6. 18.
to pray with or in the Script; and does not that forbid the use of a Form?

A. No, not at all, since we may pray with the Spirit, even then when we use a
Form.

Q. When therefore may a man be said to pray with the Spirit?

A. When in his prayers he is hearty and serious, his soul being filled with
those holy desire and affections, which are wrought in him by the Spirit of God.

Q. Is there in the Gospel any Form given us for our direction in prayer?

A. Yes, that which Christ taught his Disciples, and therefore called the Lords
prayer.

Q. Let me hear you repeat it.

A. Our Father which art in heaven, Mat 6. 9. etc.
Hallowed be thy name, Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done in earth as it is in
heaven, Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive those that trespass against us, and Lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil, for thine is the Kingdom, the power, and the glory, for
ever and ever. Amen.

Q. Into what parts may this prayer fitly be divided?

A. The Preface, six petitions, and the Conclusion.

Q. What learn you from the Preface, Our Father which art in heaven?

A. That in all our addresses to God we ought to come before him with humility
and reverence, and yet with a firm confidence in his fatherly mercy and
goodness.

Q. What do you pray for in the first Petition, Hallowed be thy name?

A. That God may be known, honored and worshipped aright both by us, and the
whole world.

Q. What do you pray for in the second Petition, Thy kingdom come?

A. That God may rule in the hearts and lives of men by his Spirit and laws;
that the Church may be enlarged by the conversion of Heathens and Infidels, and
that the coming of Christ in glory may be hastened.

Q. What do you pray for in the third Petition, which is, Thy will be done in
earth as it is in heaven.

A. We herein pray that God would so conform all our hearts to his will, that
we may (in our measure) serve and honor him as faithfully, cheerfully and
unweariedly, as the blessed Spirits in heaven do.

Q. What pray you for in the sourth, Give us this day our daily bread?

A. We herein pray that God would of his mercy afford to our Bodies such a
measure of things needful and convenient, as our daily necessities call for.

Q What pray you for in the fifth petition, Forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us?

A. We herein pray that God would be merciful unto us, and not inflict on us
those punishments which we for our sins have deserved.

Q. What means that expression, as we forgive them that trespass against us?

A. We hereby profess both that it Mat. 6. 14, 15.
is our duty and our practice, to forgive such as trespass against us; and are
thence encouraged to hope for mercy from God, this forgiveness of others being
one condition of his forgiving us.

Q. When may we be said to forgive him that trespassed against us?

A. When we bear no more grudg nor ill will to him than to any other; nor would
revenge our selves, by doing him any injury, if it lay in our power; nor do
rejoice in any hurt that does befall him, but are ready to do him good, if he
stand in need of our help.

Q. What then is their case, who, though they know this rule in the Gospel, and
daily say this prayer, yet will not forgive men their trespasses?

A. They are guilty of lying to God in their prayers, and do moreover, in
effect, desire God not to forgive their sins, but to punish them with
everlasting damnation.

Q. What is the best motive to the performance of this so needful and difficult
duty of forgiving Offenders?

A. Gods readiness to pardon us, Mat. 18. 32, 33, 34, 35.
who have yet done infinitely more against him, than any of our
fellow creatures can possibly do against us; the serious consideration whereof,
will be apt to make us such toward others, as we desire God should be toward
us.

Q. What do we pray for in the sixth petition, Lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil.

A. We herein pray, that God would not leave us to our selves, to run into
temptation and sin, but that he would make us ever so watchful and diligent,
that we may either avoid the occasions of sin, or, through the help of his
grace, may overcome the temptations we meet with.

Q. To what use serve those words in the conclusion, For thine is the kingdom,
the power, and the glory, for ever and ever?

A. These words serve as our encouragement, to ask all these things from God,
to whom alone belongs all power and dominion; and they direct us to render all
praise and glory to his eternal and ever-blessed Majesty.

Q. Wherefore do we say Amen, at the end of this and other prayers.

A. This word Amen (which signifies as much as verily, or so be it) is used, to
express the earnest desire and great hopes we have, that our prayers will be
heard and answered.

To those especially for whose use the following Forms of Prayer were intended.
Beloved Friends.
YOu might with some reason be displeased with me, should I question your
belief of the being of a God, and of your relation to him, as he is your
Creator, Ruler and Benefactor: but you can have no reason to be displeased with
me for exhorting you to the performance of that duty, which this belief does
strongly engage you to, that is, to testify your acknowledgment of God and
dependence upon him, by your daily offering up a sacrifice of prayer and praise
to his Divine Majesty* For if you dare live at such a distance from God, as not
to come before him, and worship him, its much to be feared, you do not heartily
believe that he is, or that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him.
And this while, alas! how little do you differ from Heathens, though you may
carry the name of Christians? And if wrath shall be poured out on the Heathen
kingdoms and families, that know not God, nor call upon his name, (Ier. 10.
25.) do you think it shall sare any better with the Families of those who are
called Christians, if, whilst they profess to know God, they do not worship and
glorify him as God? Nay rather shall they not have a greater condemnation?

But I need not, I hope, stand arguing with you, to show either the necessity,
the reasonableness or benefit of this duty of prayer in general, or of praying
with your families. If there should be any so perverse and quarrelsome, as to
call for arguments; instead thereof, to such let me only say, If indeed you
think, that neither you nor yours are any way related to God, nor owe him any
service, you may at your pleasure (and also at your peril) forbear to render
him any. If you think you stand in no need of daily protection, or of any mercy
either for soul or body, or think that God cannot supply you therewith, then
choose whether you will pray to him or no. And if you are not every day beholden
to God for some good thing or other, then you may neglect to give him thanks
for his goodness. And if on a Sickbed, or at a dying hour, you think there will
be no need of prayer, you may then omit it in the time of life and health.

But for all those, who wouldnot be thought guilty of such Atheism and
profaneness, I would beseech them to make conscience of this duty.

To this end let me advise you, every day, morning, and evening, to take the
most convenient time, when your whole family can come together, and then to
join all in humble, solemn prayer and praise to that great and glorious God,
who is the maker and preserver of us all. And for your more orderly performance
of this duty, if you have no better helps at hand, you may, if you see good,
make use of the Forms ensuing, composed for that purpose.

Here fall not, I beseech you, to devising of excuses to shift off this work
any more than you would do, if you and your Family were invited to a feast, or
to share in some great Dole.

For shame pretend not you are so poor, or so hard wrought, that you cannot
spare time for this service of God, as if this was only for rich men, who have
nothing else to do. I know, indeed, there is more required of them than of you
that are poorer: but yet you have souls to save as well as they; and therefore,
if you have any love for your selves, you will be as willing to take what pains
you can to save them. You would not leave it to rich men only, to eat, and
drink, and sleep; nor should you any more leave it to them only, to pray to
God, and to read and hear his word: since these works of religion are for your
own interest, even for the health and happiness of your souls, as those common
actions are for the preserving of your bodily life.

Moreover I am fully persuaded, that if you cast up your accounts right, you
shall never find your selves one penny the poorer at the years end, for having
spent every day one quarter or half an hour, in prayer to God, in reading and
meditating on his holy word, or in any other such good employment. And yet more
for your encouragement, I dare assure you, that at your lives end, you shall
never repent of the time thus spent, no not though it had been twice as much,
if in all other parts of religion you shall have been equally careful.

Much more might be said; but I shall only add, to you that cry out, how little
time you have, and therefore grudge to allow any of it for holy duties, I very
much suspect, that you can every day spend much more than these would take up,
in idleness and vanity, nay perhaps in the Alehouse, to the great hurt of body,
soul and estate. Bethink you then soberly, when all your time comes to be
reckoned for, which way of spending it will be most to your comfort, and now do
accordingly. Or if you say you have no time to throw away thus idly, yet what a
great matter would it be, to rise one quarter of an hour sooner than usual, and
to spend that time in prayer? you could do more than this for your own
pleasure, or for a small profit; and shall not the love of God and your duty to
him prevail as much with you?

Nor yet think it will be enough for your excuse, to pretend, that your
employment is of that nature, that your Family cannot come together for prayer,
especially not in the morning, (which is like to be the plea of the Husbandman
rather than the Tradesman) This I say, will not excuse your neglect, since I
question not, but that by appointing your time of prayer a little earlier, or
by a prudent contrivance of your affairs, you may ordinarily avoid this
difficulty.

This I speak upon good grounds, since there are many, whose business in the
world is as great as yours, and their callings the very same, who can yet well
enough keep up Family prayer, without any such inconvenience as you would
pretend. And what, pray, should hinder, but you may do the same, if you have
but the same love to God and zeal for his worship that they have.

But however, when some of the Family are necessarily absent, let as many come
together as can, and lay a charge upon your children or servants, when at any
time they cannot join with you in the Family, that they be sure to take some
time to pray to God by themselves in private; for which purpose I have added
two shorter Forms for those of the younger sort.

And indeed I would advise all, beside their performance of Family Duties, to
set apart some little time (once in a day at least) for their more secret
prayer to God, which seems plainly enjoined by our Savior himself, Mat. 6. 6.
When thou prayest, enter into thy Closet; and when thou have shut thy door,
pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret
shall reward thee openly. Nor can I well see, how that man is ever like to hold
on in a religious course of life, who is not wont thus privately to betake
himself to God, there to make his particular confessions, petitions, and
returns of praise, and to ease himself of whatever burden lies on his mind,
which before others he cannot so freely do. And in these private prayers, there
is not commonly so much need of a Form: all our work now being to express the
desires of our own souls to God only, even to such a God as looks at the
sincerity of the heart, and not at the nimbleness or eloquence of our tongues.
Nor indeed is it likely any Form should fully reach to every man's particular
case. But your best help will be, to get well acquainted with the state of your
own souls; to know well your sins, your temptations, your necessities and
dangers; and to get deeply affected with the sense of your spiritual and
eternal concernments: and then do but with uprightness and humility represent
the very inward sense of your souls to God, in the name of his Son Jesus, and
you shall never fail of acceptance, through any weakness of expression: Yea,
remember, it is this inward sincerity of heart that must at all times accompany
your prayers, if ever you hope for acceptance.

And therefore, before I conclude, let me make it my earnest request to you,
that you take special heed to the frame of your hearts, whenever you come
before God in prayer, as in all other holy duties you ought. Think it not
enough to speak a few good words upon your knees, evening and morning, with a
seeming reverence, whilst in the mean time, your hearts are never moved or
affected with what you are doing. This is such a lipservice as neither will be
acceptable to God, nor will do any good to your selves. Leave it to poor
ignorant and deluded Papists, to number their prayers by their beads, and to
think they have served God very well, when they have patter'd over so many
Creeds, Pater-nosters and Ave-maries; a devotion which a Parrot might go near
to learn, and sufficiently shows that Ignorance is the Mother of it. but you
who, through the mercy of God, do live in a Church, where you have been better
taught, do you show forth the fruit of your teaching and knowledge; and that,
by offering up to God those services which beseem reasonable creatures: and
which are suited to the nature of him whom you serve, who is a spirit, and will
be worshipped in spirit and truth; who is a living God, and will not be put off
with a dead carkase, with the bare moving of lips, the noise of words, or
posture of the body, but will have all the powers and faculties of our souls
employed in the duties we perform to him. This is part of that reasonable
service, which he now especially requires from us, instead of the sacrifice of
beasts, and the burden of lifeless ceremonies, which were used in the Jewish
Church before Christ's coming, Romans 12. 1.

See, then, I beseech you, that your very hearts and souls go along with your
tongues in prayer; and let your affections be suited to the several parts
thereof. This is the true praying in the Spirit, whether with or without a
Form. Let your confession of sin be attended with a deep sorrow and humiliation
for it, with a bitter hatred of, and strong resolutions against it. Think what
a frame you should be in, and what earnestness you should use, if begging for
your life of a Prince or Judge; and labor to be like affected, whilst you are
begging from God forgiveness of sins and eternal life. Whilst you are blessing
God for his goodness, let your hearts be drawn sorth to the exercise of holy
love and delight in him. Inwardly thirst after that grace you pray for,
resolving with diligence to labor for it, etc.

And by what I have now said, you may plainly perceive, that the sincerity of
your hearts in prayer is to be known, not so much by your present servour and
affection, as by your behavior afterward, and by the constant tenor of your
lives. He, and he only is the true worshipper of God, and prays to him aright,
who, by his daily actions and endeavors, does manifest the same inward settled
apprehensions and desires, which his words express whilst he is praying.

For instance, you beg of God, to take off your hearts from the world, and all
things here below, and to increase in you a love to himself, to his Son Jesus,
and to the glory which is above. Now to manifest that you are sincere in this
request, you must do your part toward the obtaining of what you beg, that is,
you must set your selves to the serious consideration of the vanity, the
shortness and emptiness of present things; you must consider the nature of your
own souls, and the allsufficiency of God; you must reflect upon the goodness he
has already shown, the love of Christ in dying for us, and the great and
precious promises of the Gospel: and by this means you shall find the Spirit of
God working in you those graces which you pray for. So when you pray against
this or that sin, to which you are most inclined, and in danger of, you must
both use particular considerations against it, and must keep out of the
temptations, avoid the place and company where you are like to be drawn to it,
etc. Otherwise what do you but solemnly mock God? As if one man should come to
another, and with a great deal of ado beg his help in any labor, and then run
away and never set's own hand to it. Or as if a man should pray to have his
house kept from burning, and then straight way go and put fire to it. In
prayers for temporal mercies you do not do thus: for beside praying for your
daily bread, you take pains to get it, in your several trades and employments.
And do you think you are not bound to do as much for your souls as for your
bodies? Or have you promises of grace, any more than of daily bread, without
endeavoring for it in the way God has set you? Nay, rather, whereas you are
often restrained from too much care about the world, you are again and again
enjoined to labor for the meat which endures to everlasting life, Ioh. 6. 27.

For the Lords sake, then beware of cheating your souls with that common
mistake, which is the ruin of thousands, both of this party and that, whilst
they foolishly imagine, that their much praying and hearing will serve turn for
their salvation, instead of an holy heart and life; and so they are but devout
in the Church or Closet, it matters not what liberty they take in the market,
in the shop, or at the Alehouse; and when they have but said a good prayer in
the morning, they may do what they list all the day after, or at least, they
can make all whole by praying devoutly at night.

How grossly do such men abuse themselves and their services, who would by these
excuse themselves from holiness, when as one great reason of them is to help
and strengthen us for strict and holy living.

And therefore have I endeavored so to contrive the ensuing Forms, that they
who use them might even thereby find themselves instructed and engaged to be
holy in all manner of Conversation. For which there seems sufficient warrant in
our Blessed Saviors own example, in that most absolute Form which he has
given us, whilst, with the petition for that great and comprehensive mercy of
the Gospel, Forgiveness of sins, he has interwoven an engagement to that great
duty (which will prove us to be Christians indeed) the forgiving of all those
who who have trespast against us.

Let this then be firmly believed, and deeply fixed in your minds; that as you
would be loath to take up with a parcel of good words from your servants every
day, instead of the work you set them; so no more will God be put off with
prayers, Sermons, or any thing, instead of a sincere and hearty endeavor to
render a constant, universal obedience to his pure and righteous commands.
Christ himself has plainly enough told us, what is like to become of all those,
who only cry Lord, Lord, and yet do not obey the will of God, Mat. 7. 21. We
must wash our hands in innocence, and so compass Gods Altar, if we would have
our offerings accepted of him, Psalm. 26. 6.

And beside our endeavors to glorify God by offering up of praise, we must
order our conversation aright, if ever we would see the salvation of God, Psalm.
50. 23. Of almost all men I know, I pray God deliver my soul from the state of
those, who can pray devoutly, (be it with book or without) and yet go on in sin
securely.

But it is time for me to conclude, though I have much ado to confine my self on
so needful a Subject. To shut up all then: who-ever thou art that read this,
Let thy soul (to use the Psalmists phrase, Psalm. 63. 8.) follow hard after God,
in earnest prayer, both in the Church, thy Closet, and thy Family: and beside
this, do thou follow after peace and holiness, (Heb. 12. 14.) in thy life and
conversation; so shall thou certainly see and enjoy God in that glory, where
prayers shall be turned into everlasting praises. Amen.

MORNING PRAYER for a Family.
MOst Holy and ever-blessed Majesty, Thou renewest thy mercies upon us every
Morning; and every Morning we desire to renew our thanksgivings. And here we
are now come before thee, humbly to offer up thanks and praise for our safety
and refreshment this last night, to thee the God of love, who give us daily
cause to admire thy bounty, and to speak good of thy name. We acknowledge thee,
oh God, to be our Maker and Preserver; thou did at first give us life and
reason; and from thee it is we have received all the comforts of life, from the
very day of our birth to this present morning. Through thy goodness it is we
have enjoyed any measure of health and strength, and have been furnished with
things needful and convenient for this present state. Thy good hand of
providence has still been over us, either in keeping us out of dangers and
troubles, or else in supporting and helping us under them, or in delivering us
out of the same. For these and all other thy mercies, at any time bestowed on
us or ours, or any of the Sons of men, we desire to render humble and hearty
praise to thy divine Majesty. Yea, blessed, and for ever praised be thy name oh
God, that thou have not only shown much mercy to our bodies, but have also made
abundant provision for the everlasting welfare and happiness of our precious
souls. Most fully have thou declared to the world, both in thy word and by thy
works, that thou have no delight in the death of sinners, but had rather that
they would turn and live: For even then when we were fallen from thee, and from
that blessed estate wherein our first Parents were created, and so stood liable
to thy wrath and to everlasting damnation; then wast thou pleased to take pity
on us, when none else in heaven or earth did pity or could relieve us; Even
then did thou give thine own Son Jesus Christ from heaven to be our Savior
and Redeemer, to teach us thy will, to give us thy Spirit, and to die for our
sins, that as many as believe on him and obey him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life. Oh, what manner of love is this, which thou the Father have
shown, and which thy Son Jesus has shown to us worthless creatures, to us vile
sinners! The sense of our own unworthiness may justly increase our admiration
of thy kindness: and when we consider all this thy goodness, great cause we
have to humble our souls before thee, in the remembrance of our own sinful and
most unsuitable carriage toward thee the God of love. We did indeed bring along
into the world with us sinful natures and inclinations; for in sin we were
conceived, and brought forth in iniquity. And alas! how many sins have we
committed since we came to the use of our Reason! Though thou have always been
doing us good, yet, like foolish and unthankful wretches we have returned evil
for good. We have been far from loving thee and trusting in thee as beseems thy
creatures: but rather have we wasted our love upon the vain and fading
enjoyments of this present world; in them have we delighted, and in them have
we placed our confidence. Though we have called thee our Maker and Owner, yet
have we not quietly and patiently submitted to thy will, as we are therefore
bound, because we are thy own: But very ready we have been, both to murmur and
repine at thy providence, when they have gone cross to our carnal desires; and
to find fault with thy laws, as if they were too strict and severe, because
they are contrary to our foolish sensual inclinations. Oftentimes have we
neglected the duties of thy worship, misspent and profaned thy Holy day, and
have looked on prayers, Sermons and Sacraments as burdensome and needless
things. And very trifling and careless have we been in those duties we have
performed; not duly considering what an holy and glorious God thou art, with
whom we have to do. Thou indeed have commanded us to love our neighbors as our
selves; but we, through the sinful and excessive love of our selves and our own
concernments, have been very much wanting in the duties of justice and charity
to others. Much of our precious time we have wasted in idleness and vanity, in
unprofitable and sinful company; and too frequently we have abused thy good
creatures, for the satisfaction of our own base lusts. Often have we given way
to our own unruly passions and sinful inclinations, breaking thy laws, and
grieving thy Spirit, merely for the tasting those pleasures of sin that are but
for a season. And these deeds of darkness, these sins of ours we have committed
in the open light of thy Gospel, contrary to the plain commands of thy word,
which we have often read and heard, yea contrary to the motions of thy Spirit,
and the checks of our own consciences, which we have felt within us. Most
justly therefore might thou pour out the hottest of thy fury upon us, as
having been of those disobedient servants, who have known thy will, and yet
have not done the same. Nor can we expect any other than to be made infinitely
and eternally miserable, if thou should deal with us after our deservings.
But there is yet, through thy grace, a door of hope open for us; thou thy self
have provided a refuge, to which poor sinners, in this lifetime, may fly for
safety and comfort. For thou, oh most merciful Father, have promised, that thou will, for thy Son Jesus sake, have mercy on all those, who are truly grieved
for their sins, humbly confessing and speedily for saking the same. Now we must
needs acknowledge those thy conditions of mercy are exceeding equal and
gracious; and most just it is we should perish for ever, if we refuse the same.
For we cannot, oh God, in reason expect, that our sins should be pardoned, if
we wilfully continue in them; Nor can we ever hope that Christ should be our
Savior, if we do not own and obey him as our Lord; Nor can we look for the
joys of heaven, whilst we walk in those ways of wickedness, which lead to Hell
and damnation. Oh will thou then make us sincerely willing to do what we our
selves own to be so just and reasonable: that we may not dare in an hardened and
impenitent manner, to go on in those ungodly courses, which we are convinced
are so dangerous and mischievous. Let not our own vile lusts, nor the
temptations of Satan, our malicious enemy, prevail with us to reject our
blessed Savior, and that eternal life which he purchased by his death, and now
offers to us in the Gospel. How shall we then escape, if we neglect so great
salvation? Or what shall we plead for our selves, at the last great day, if we
that are called Christians should be found depisers of Christ? How justly may
he then destroy us, not only as enemies, but as Mockers; and may give us our
portion in the hottest place of the burning Lake, with Hypocrites and
unbelievers. Wherefore we do now most humbly and earnestly beseech thee, oh
thou Father of mercies, and God of all grace, give us not up to such a
reprobate mind and feared conscience: but together with enlightened minds, give
us such soft and tender hearts* that we may look back on the sins we have
committed, with shame and sorrow; and may cast away from us even our most
pleasant sins, with bitter loathing and hatred, never more to be reconciled to
them. And for thy Son Jesus sake, be thou merciful to us, own us as thy
Redeemed ones, and make us partakers of those great mercies and blessings,
which he has purchased for all his faithful servants. For his sake alone we beg
from thee the forgiveness of our sins, a freedom from thy wrath, and from
everlasting damnation. And we do also beseech thee, by him to deliver us from
the evil of this present world, even from the snares of the Devil, and from the
power of our own corruptions, that no sin may reign in our mortal bodies, so
that we should yield obedience thereunto. Oh cleanse thou us from all secret
sins, and let not presumptuous sins have dominion over us: But let thy holy
Spirit ever rule in our hearts, and so guide us in all our thoughts, words and
actions, that we may ever render a sincere and cheerful obedience to all thy
commands. Fill us with such a sense of thine infinite goodness, that we may
love thee our God with all our heart and soul. And help us to show this our
love to thee, by our unfeigned love to thy people, and to all men. And make us
still careful to deal with others so justly and charitably as we our selves
desire to be dealt with. Keep us ever depending upon thy grace for strength and
assistance, without which we can do nothing. Oh do not thou leave us to our
selves; for then we perish. Forsake us not, oh God, at any time through our
whole lives, nor suffer us to depart from thee; but keep us ever steadfast and
unwearied in well doing. Wean our hearts from this world and all the comforts
thereof; make us always sensible that we are hasting away hence into eternity;
and prepare us for that time when we must e're long be called away thither.
Help us now to live in such frequent serious thoughts of death, that it may not
be terrible nor hurtful when it comes. Now make us wise to set our affections
on things above, and to lay up for our selves a treasure in the heavens, that
when all things here below shall fail* we may then be received into those
everlasting habitations, which thou have provided for them that love thee. With
us show mercy to the whole world. Let the Gospel of thy Son run and be
glorified throughout all the earth: make it known to heathens and Infidels, and
let it be obeyed by all that are called Christians. Let all Popish darkness,
ignorance and Idolatry, with all other errors and heresies, be driven away by
the light and truth of thy pure Gospel; and let the coming of Christ in glory
be hastened. Be merciful to these nations wherein we live, and grant we may be
so humbled and reformed, that we may be pardoned and spared. Be gracious to our
dread Sovereign, and all his Royal Relations; enrich them with the graces of
thy holy Spirit: and make all our Magistrates faithful and zealous in punishing
and suppressing wickedness, and in promoting virtue and godliness. Let thy
blessing be upon the faithful Preachers of thy Gospel, increase daily their
number, and let their labors be blessed and succeeded. Let all our differences
be so composed, that we may live in peace and love, and with one heart and one
mouth may glorify thee our God. Bless our Friends and Relations, and make them
thy faithful servants. Visit in mercy all the children of affliction; whatever
their particular necessities and burdens are, whether of soul or body, do thou
seasonably and suitably comfort and relieve them. And now, oh God, since
through thy good providence, thou have brought us to the beginning of another
day, afford us we beseech thee thy gracious presence throughout the same. Let
thy blessing be upon us in our lawful Callings and endeavors. Preserve us and
all ours, if it be thy will, from all bodily dangers; especially we beg that we
may be kept from sin, the worst of evils. Wherever we are, or whatever we are
doing, keep us sensible of thy eye that is ever upon us; that in all companies
and employments, we may approve our selves to thee in well doing; and make us
ever watchful against all sin and the temptations that lead to it. As we now
have prayed to thee in the Morning, so let us remain in thy fear and service
all the day long: And do thou so guide us, this day and all our days here on
earth, by thy counsel, that we may at last be received to thy Glory. And all we
humbly beg, for the Lord Jesus our dear Saviors sake; with whose words we
conclude these our imperfect prayers, saying, as he himself has taught us, Our
Father which art etc.

EVENING PRAYER for a Family.
OH Eternal and ever-blessed God, thou art the maker and Lord of all things,
who do uphold the world by thy power, and govern it with infinite wisdom and
justice: and we are the workmanship of thy hands, who depend upon thy
providence, and in thee live, move, and have our beings. From thy bounty we are
daly supplied with mercies for our bodies; and through thy patience it is we
have yet leave to wait on thee, and to seek from thee grace and glory for our
immortal souls. Oh what are we vile sinners, that thou should have such
regard to us, and so earnestly invite us to thy service, who deserve not so
much as to live on thy earth, or once to appear in thy presence. And it is only
through thy forbearance of us, that we have not long since met with the just
wages of our sins, in those eternal torments from which there is no recovery.
For we confess our selves to be by nature children of wrath, even as others
being stained with that foul Leprosy and pollution of sin, which was derived
from our first Parents. But so little sense have we had of the evil and danger
of this our estate, that we have even taken the direct course to make our
selves more miserable, by adding daily our own actual sins to this corruption
of our natures. Oh how justly may we blush, and be confounded in our selves,
when we look back upon our carriage in the world, from our childhood and youth
up even until now. How much of this our time have we spent in sin and vanity,
but how little in thy service? In every place and condition of life that we
have been, we may easily remember the many sins we have been guilty of; but how
little have we made it our business to obey thy laws, and honor thy name,
either by doing good to others, or getting good to our own souls. We had soon
learnt in words to acknowledge, that we were made to serve thee our God; but in
works we have denied and disobeyed thee. We have been very forgetful of thee,
and of thy authority over us; and have lived as if we owed thee no service, as
if we thought thou had no regard to our actions now, nor would ever call us
to a reckoning for them hereafter. Though in our infancy we were baptized into
thy name, and thereby bound to serve thee all our days in newness of life, yet
we have often broke this Covenant, which we then entered into. Instead of
performing our vows to renounce this world, and its pomps and vanities, with
the flesh and the lusts thereof, we have been most eager lovers and followers
of the world, and have made provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof. Oh how often has the temptation of some worldly profit, or carnal
sensual pleasure drawn us to cross thy will, and wound our own consciences, and
to endanger the damning of our precious souls. And this whilst we have taken on
us the name of Christians, and have professed to believe all that is revealed in
the Gospel. Whilst we our selves have spoken much against sin, and of the
mischief and danger of it, yet have we securely allowed our selves in it; and
have neglected those very duties, which we have confessed to be just and
reasonable, and for our own greatest good. Whilst we have seemed to contemn
this world as vanity, our chief business has been to seek after it; and whilst
we have spoke much of the joys of heaven, and with our tongues have extolled
them, yet we have taken little pains to make sure of them, by walking in those
ways of holiness, which can only bring us to the enjoyment of them. Yea, these
and such like confessions as these have we often made before thee, and yet
still have continued in the very same temper of mind and course of life, which
we acknowledge to be so exceeding sinful and dangerous; as if we thought it
enough for us, to condemn our ways without reforming them, to confess our sins
without forsaking them. The very sins of our prayers themselves, the hypocrisy
we have therein been guilty of, is enough for our condemnation. Often have we
prayed that thou would vouchsafe to keep us without sin, and yet presently we
our selves have carelessly and wilfully run into it* and when we have been
begging that the rest of our lives might be pure and holy, we have strait-way
gone and polluted our selves with impure and ungodly actions. And after we have
gone from the hearing and reading of thy holy word, we have quickly forgotten
and disobeyed it. What then shall we say unto the most righteous God, or
wherewith shall we excuse our selves? For alas! our transgressions are
multiplied before thee, and our sins they do testify against us. And if thou
should now be extreme to mark what we have done amiss, and to deal with us
accordingly, how then shall we appear in thy presence, or whether shall we flee
from thy wrath? But oh thou that art the Preserver of men, ever ready to show
mercy to the humble and penitent, look on us poor sinners with an eye of pity
and tender compassion: And do thou now work in our souls that unfeigned sorrow
for the sins we stand guilty of, that we may be fitted for mercy and pardon,
that so iniquity may not be our ruin. We come to thee, oh God, in the most
blessed and prevailing name of thy Son Jesus, through him our Prince and our
Savior, begging both repentance and remission of sins. For his sake turn from
us thy wrath, and receive us into thy favor: Let his precious blood, which he
shed for sinners, cleanse us from all unrighteousness. And oh that this love
which he has shown in dying for us may prevail with us to trust our souls with
him; to love him and obey him, that so he may become to us the Author of
eternal salvation. Oh Lord, grant we may never be so wickedly disingenuous and
perverse, as to encourage our selves in sin, because Christ died for sinners;
as if we might therefore hate him because he has loved us: but make us ever so
duly sensible of the ends of his death, that we may entirely give up our selves
to him, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify us to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. Do thou
graciously enable us, by our holy and unblameable walking, to adorn the
doctrine of God our Savior in all things; and let this grace of thine which
has appeared to the world, bringing salvation, teach us to deny ungodliness
and all worldly lusts, and to lead righteous, sober and godly lives, whilst we
are in this present evil world. To this end, we beseech thee, oh God, through
thy Son Jesus, to shed abroad thy holy Spirit into our hearts, and thereby to
cleanse us from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, that we may perfect
holiness in thy fear. Sanctify us throughout both in body and soul, that we
may be holy in heart and life, even in all manner of conversation. Take off our
affections from all things here below, and six them on thy blessed self and the
glory that is above; that we may never be so foolish, as to expect happiness
from riches, pleasures, friends, or any worldly comforts, which are daily
decaying and dying away: but let us ever trust in and depend upon thee the
living God, who give us all the good things we enjoy, and who alone can
make us perfectly happy, in the enjoyment of thy self for ever. Whilst we are
here, in our travail through the world, we only beg of thee such a measure of
outward comforts as thou see most convenient for us and ours. Let us have thy
blessing with whatever we enjoy; and give us patient and contented minds under
all thy dealings with us. Make us faithful in obeying thy Command, first to
seek the Kingdom of Heaven and the righteousness thereof, and then we know thy
promise shall be fulfilled, that all other things shall be added to us, so as
thou see will be best for us. To thy will, oh God, we desire humbly to resign
up our selves and all our affairs: only do thou keep us continually in thy fear
and favor, and then deal with us as seems good in thy sight. Increase in us a
sincere love to all men, that we may carefully perform our duty to them, doing
good to all, to the utmost of our power; but never doing any kind of hurt or
wrong to any, either in thought, word, or deed. Lord preserve us from envying
the richest, or despising the poorest, and keep us ever free from hatred,
malice, uncharitableness, and from all desire of revenge. Let thy grace so curb
our passion, and change our corrupt natures, that we may not render evil for
evil, but may always study to overcome evil with good. Whenever we receive
injury from others, do thou enable us from the heart so to forgive them, as we
for Christ's sake hope to be forgiven by thee. Let us all in this Family live in
peace and love, and in the fear of thy great name, faithfully performing our
duties one to another, in our several Relations. Help us, oh heavenly Father,
to pass the time of our sojourning here in fear, as Pilgrims and strangers,
abstaining from those fleshly lusts which war against our souls; that laying
aside every weight and hindrance, we may with patience run the holy Race that
is set before us. Keep us always mindful of that everlasting state toward which
we are daily tending, that we may spend this short life as beseems those who
know that Death is hasting upon us, and that after death comes judgment, when
thou the righteous God wilt call us to an account for all our deeds done in the
body, and wilt accordingly dispose of us, either to happiness or misery for
ever. Oh Lord make us in good earnest in these our prayers; and help us to live
as those that believe the great truths of thy Gospel; that we may ever have
such a sense of them upon our minds, that we may not dare at any time, upon any
account, to allow our selves in any one sin, or in the neglect of any known
duty: but by patient continuance in well doing, may seek after, and make sure
of that glory and immortality, which thou have promised, through Jesus Christ,
to them that love and serve thee. With us, show mercy to the whole world. Let
the Gospel of thy Son run and be glorified throughout all the earth; let it be
made known to Heathens and Infidels; let it be obeyed by all that are called
Christians. Let all popish darkness, ignorance, and Idolatry, with all other
errors and heresies be driven away by the light and truth of thy pure Gospel;
and let the coming of Christ in glory be hastened. Be merciful to these nations
wherein we live; and grant we may be so humbled and reformed, that we may be
pardoned and spared. Be gracious to our dread Sovereign, with all his royal
Relations, and enrich them with the graces of thy holy Spirit. Make all our
Magistrates faithful and zealous in punishing and suppressing wickedness, and
in promoting virtue and godliness: and make us and all other Subjects loyal and
obedient to our King, and to all in power under him. Let thy blessing be upon
the faithful Preachers of thy Gospel, increase daily their number, and let
their labors be blessed and succeeded. Let all our differences be so composed,
that we may live in peace and love, and with one heart and one mouth may
glorify thee our God. Bless ad our friends and relations, and make them thy
faithful and obedient servants. Visit in mercy all the children of affliction,
whatever their particular necessities and burdens are, whether of soul or
body, do thou seasonably and suitably comfort and relieve them. We humbly bless
thy name for the mercies of this day, that thou have safely brought us to the
end thereof; and earnestly we beg thy pardon of whatever sins we have been
guilty, whether of omission or commission, in thought, word or deed. Take us we
beseech thee, and all that is ours, into thy care this night, and keep us, if
it be thy will, from all evil of body, especially of soul: And so refresh us
with rest and sleep, that we may be fitted for thy service and our lawful
employments in the following day: And all we humbly beg for Christ Jesus our
Saviors sake, with whose words we conclude our imperfect prayers, saying, as
he himself has taught us, Our Father which art in heaven etc.

Two Forms of Prayer especially intended for the Younger sort.
MORNING PRAYER.
GReat and Glorious Lord God, Thou have commanded us to remember thee our
Creator in the days of our youth: and here am I thy unworthy servant, desirous
to manifest my remembrance of thee, I praying to thee, according to thine own
appointment. My only hope of acceptance is in thy goodness and mercy, who art a
loving and tender Father to us thy poor creatures, and art ready to accept of
the weak services and prayers of those, who do heartily desire to please thee
and obtain thy favor. Wherefore I now most humbly beseech thee, to be gracious
and favorable to me, a worthless, sinful creature. I have indeed been a
transgressour from the womb, and have shown my evil and wicked nature, by my
great forwardness to run into any kind of wickedness that I have been capable
of. When I could do little else, I had soon learnt to sin against thee; very
early I began to be stubborn, and self-willed, proud and slothful, quarrelsome
and revengeful. And to this very day have I continued in my sins, which have
increased together with my years; and have been given up to the pleasing of my
self, and satisfying my own vain and childish inclinations, but have taken
little thought for the pleasing and serving of thee my Maker and Preserver.
Though I have had so much reason, that I could love my Parents and Friends,
those that did me good, and have been afraid of displeasing them, and of being
corrected by them, yet have I had little love for thee my God, who art the
giver of all good; nor have I been afraid of thy wrath, who can destroy both
body and soul in Hell. This, oh Lord, has been my great folly, and a very
great cause of all my other sins, that I have lived most of all by sight, and
have little minded any thing but what is now before me. Therefore have I
forgotten thee, and lived as if there was no God, because I could not see thee
with bodily eyes; and have preferred any foolish pleasure now in hand before
the everlasting joys of heaven, which are yet to come; and because I could not
see Hell Torments, nor hear the roarings and outcries of those who are damned
for their sins, therefore have I made so light of sinning against thee. But of
this my folly, and all my wickedness the fruit of it, I desire to to be ashamed
before thee; confessing that I have herein behaved my self more like a bruit
Beast than a reasonable creature, whilst I have been led by my senses more than
by my reason, or by the belief of thy holy word: And most justly might thou
deal with me accordingly, and might shut me out of those joys, which I have
so little loved and sought after; and might make me for ever feel those
torments, of which I have not been afraid. But I humbly beseech thee, oh
merciful Father, for thy Son Jesus sake, take pity on me, and freely forgive me
all my sins, and save me from those miseries, which for my sins I have
deserved. And I beseech thee to give me thy holy Spirit, that I may thereby
have my mind enlightened, my heart softened, and my nature so thoroughly renewed
and changed, that I may be taken off from the love of all sin, and may take
such pleasure in thy service here, that I may live with thee in happiness for
ever hereafter. Since, through thy great mercy, I have been baptized in my
infancy, and thereby given up to thee my God, and engaged to be thy servant, do
thou help me rightly to understand and carefully to perform the duties to which
by my Baptism I am bound: that I may in heart and life renounce the Devil and
all his works, the lusts of the flesh, and the pomps and vanities of this
world, and may remain Christ's faithful servant unto my lives end. Let thy grace
preserve me from all those snares and temptations, which in these my younger
years I am most in danger of. Oh keep me that I may never fall into rioting and
drunkenness, whoredom, or any kind of wantonness and uncleanness. Do thou help
me at all times to watch over my ways, that I may not wilfully run into any
temptations and occasions of sin; that I may not be given up to idleness,
gaming, nor the excessive love of any sports or pleasures; nor may venture
amongst such wicked companions as would entice me to ungodly courses; neither
let their jeers and scorns ever make me ashamed of a strict and holy life. Make
me ever careful to hearken to the reproofs and instructions of godly friends,
and to keep my self employed in honest and lawful labors, or in the duties of
religion. And whilst I shall continue in this dangerous world, be thou oh God
my upholder and my guide. I desire heartily to give up my self to thee, to be
disposed of as seems good in thy sight, begging only, that in every condition,
through my whole life, I may be kept faithful to thee, and diligent in thy
service, that so at length I may be brought safe through all difficulties and
dangers, into that everlasting rest which remains for thy people. Be merciful
to the whole world; fill the same with the knowledge of thy Gospel; and let the
coming of Christ in glory be hastened. Be gracious to these nations, to our
King, with all his royal Relations, and all Magistrates under him. Bless the
Ministers of thy holy word, with all thy people, and my kindred and friends.
Show mercy to all them that are in affliction; and let thy blessing be upon
this Family to which I belong. I praise thy name for the mercies of this last
night; and beg thy presence with me this day, that I may not do any thing which
is displeasing to thee, but may ever so live in thy fear, that I may be sure of
thy favor, both here and to all eternity. And all I humbly beg for thy dear
Son Jesus sake, who has taught us to pray, saying, Our Father which art in
heaven, Hallowed etc.

EVENING PRAYER.
MOst great and glorious Lord God, Thou dwell in the highest heavens, and
yet thou regardest the meanest of thy creatures here on this earth, and art
ever ready to show mercy to such as do humbly and earnestly seek to thee for
the same. Wherefore I do now most humbly beseech thee to take pity on me, a
weak and worthless creature, and to deal with me, not after my deserts, but
according to the multitude of thy tender compassions. I cannot, alas! plead any
deserts of my own: for though I am thy creature, yet am I a vile sinner, one
that deserves not the least of all thy mercies. I was born into this world with
a sinful and corrupt nature, which is prone to wickedness, and very backward
and listless to any thing that is good: And I have already shown forth the
sinfulness of my nature, in those sins which I have committed against thee.
Though my years have been but few, yet my sins have been many and very
grievous. Of that little time which I have lived in the world I have wasted
much in folly and idleness, in sports and pleasures, seldom thinking what I was
sent into the world for, or how I might do to make my self happy for ever. I
have indeed been often taught, that I was made on purpose to serve thee, oh
God, in obeying thy commandments, that so I might live with thee for ever in
heaven; yet have I grievously neglected thy service, and have not made it my
business to get acquainted with thy holy laws; and those plain commands, which
I have known, I have often wilfully broken. Little delight have I had in
praying to thee, in reading or hearing thy holy word: but have greatly
neglected these duties, and have often spent the Lords day in idleness and
playing. Yea, with shame I must confess, I have taken pleasure in reading any
foolish book rather than in the holy Bible: And though I could well enough
remember idle stories, vain and wanton songs, yet have I soon forgotten thy
blessed word, after I have read or heard the same. Many times have I been
disobedient to my Parents, and to those who have had rule over me; and when I
have committed faults, I have been presently ready to tell lies for the
excusing my self, though I knew I did ill therein. Very easily have I been
drawn into ill company, and to join with them in doing evil: and though I have
seen many of my companions, as young as I, die before me, yet have I seldom
thought with my self how I should do to get fitted for death, or what would
become of me after death in another world. Now, oh Lord, I beseech thee to open
my eyes, and soften my heart, and work in me a true sorrow and repentance for
these, and all other the sins which I have at any time committed against thee,
that so I may find mercy and forgiveness from thee. Have mercy upon me, oh thou
God of mercy, and for the Lord Jesus sake be at peace with me. Let his precious
blood wash me from all my sins, and procure thy favor, that I may escape those
eternal torments which I have most justly deserved. Through the Lord Jesus do
thou become my gracious, loving Father, owning me as thy dutiful child: And
help me to show that I am so, by living in a careful obedience to all thy holy
laws. Oh that the time past of my life may suffice to have spent so vainly and
carelessly; Lord make me for the time to come diligent and careful in serving
thee, and in working out my own salvation. Make me so wise for my own good,
that I may put off the amending of my ways, and leading a godly life till
hereafter; Let me not think it too soon to set about that work for which all my
life was given me, and is all little enough. Justly then may thou shorten my
days, if I should wilfully defer my repentance and reformation. Yea justly
may thou refuse to accept of me in old age, if now I spend my youth, and the
best of my days in serving the Devil, and satisfying my own lusts. Wherefore oh
Lord, I beseech thee, now betimes to incline my heart to thy fear and service,
that when I am old, I may never depart from thee. Make me always sensible of
the shortness and uncertainty of my life, that numbering my days, I may apply my
heart to wisdom; and through my whole life may make this my great study and
care, to get an everlasting happiness in the world to come. Oh never suffer me,
good God, to become so foolish, as for any pleasures of sin, to part with the
hopes of eternal glory, and to sell my soul into the hands of Satan, to be
tormented with him for ever. But do thou, oh Lord, strengthen me by thy grace,
against all his temptations, and against the allurements of the world and the
flesh, that they may not prevail over me. Help me to flee all youthful lusts,
and to follow after sobriety, chastity, and all manner of purity, virtue and
godliness. Whenever I am ready to run into sin, oh then fill my mind with the
thoughts of that Hell, to which sin leads; and let the hopes of heaven make me
ever cheerful and constant in thy service. Let thy word be my chief study and
delight, and thy people my constant companions; and let thy holy Spirit ever
guide and assist me in the ways of Holiness, till at length I shall be advanced
to that happiness which shall never end. Be merciful to the whole world, fill
the same with the knowledge of thy Gospel, and let the coming of Christ in
glory be hastened. Be gracious to these nations, to our King and all his Royal
Relations, and to all Magistrates under him. Bless the Ministers of thy holy
word, with all thy people, and my kindred and friends. Show mercy to all them
that are in affliction; and let thy blessing be upon this family to which I
belong. I praise thy name for the mercies of this day, and humbly beg pardon
for the sins I have herein been guilty of, whether in thought, word or deed.
Take me into thy care* I beseech thee, this night, and preserve both soul and
body from evil, and so refresh me with quiet rest and sleep, that I may be
better fitted for thy service in the following day. And all I humbly beg of thy
divine Majesty, for the Lord Christ Jesus sake, who has taught us to pray,
saying, Our Father etc.

Grace before Meat.
GIve thy blessing, oh God, we beseech thee, to thy good creatures now provided
for us, that by a sober and moderate use of them, our bodies may be strengthened
and fitted for thy service, for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

Grace after Meat.
WE bless thee oh God, for the refreshments at this time afforded to us, and
for all other the comforts we enjoy, whether for soul or body; Help us we pray
thee to show our thankfulness for thy mercies, by living to thy praise, in a
sincere obedience to all thy commandments, for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

FINIS.

