The Mind of the Front.
WIth Flowers Crowned here Flora fits as Queen,
Near Her as Maids of Honor, stands
The Painful Ceres, and Pomona's seen
Begging a blessing at her hands:
To Crown her Crops, and Deck her Trees again
With Flowers, the hope of Fruit, Corn, Wine and Grain.
The Gracious Queen soon grants Their desire,
And sweetly smiling, casts a ray
From her bright Eyes, which like Sol's chearing Fire,
Dries up cold dewes, and drives away
The Frosts, which had long locked up from our Eyes,
Beauties in Beds, which with the Sun now rise.
Behold each Ear with Jewels hung does shine,
And every sprig Flowers does adorn:
The pleased Pomona views the spreading Vine,
In hope as high as Ceres Corn:
Then both agree, of both to bring their best,
To entertain you at the Florists Feast.
Mean while the Queen calls for her Cabinet,
And all her Jewels does expose,
Shows what they are, and by what Artist set,
Then kindly bids you pick and choose;
Come boldly on, and your Collection make,
It Is a free Gift, pray wear them for her sake.
FLORA CERES and POMONA by JOHN REA gent: London printed for Richard Marriott
and are to be sold at his shopp in fleetstreet under ye kings head
Tavern.1665.

^^OS speculum vihemodo vernat et interitama. FLORIS imago fugax rapidi nos
admonet aeui. FLORI par amienis, tener est crescentibus annis FLOREM si
ostendei feret ipso tempore fractum OFLOS sic vernaris ^^emli aetate, pudorem
and FLORE accipias, et honest viuere discas.

D: Loggan sculp:


FLORA: SEU, De Florum Cultura.

OR, A Complete Florilege, FURNISHED With all Requisites belonging to A FLORIST.

In III. Books.

BY JOHN REA, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Richard Marriott, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Fleet Street, under the King's Head Tavern, over against the Inner Temple
gate, 1665.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber.


TO The Right Honorable CHARLES LORD GERARD, Baron of Gerards Bromley in the
County of Stafford.
My Lord,
SInce your Honor was pleased to approve the Design I drew for your then
intended Garden at Bromley, and fearing to be prevented through Age and other
infirmities of further serving your Lordship therein, I thought it my duty to
give you some account, with what Plants, Fruits, and Flowers it ought to be
furnished, when you shall please to accomplish that noble intendment; and
having now finished this Florilege, in all humility I present it to your
honor; if it prove so fortunate to be thought worthy your perusal, you will
find it aiming at the advancement of an Art, as laudable as delightful, and
able to acquaint you with all the glories of our best Gardens, as also how to
instruct your own Gardeners, not only in the names, but likewise in the
natures, kinds, and qualities, of every Plant, Fruit, and Flower, fit to be
collected by the best Florists; together with the order to be used in their
Cultivation, Planting, Propagation, and Improvement: a knowledge rarely found
among those of that profession, and never until now (in so plain a method)
made public; which, had it not been for the occasion of expressing my duty and
affection to your Honor, certainly had perished in the first conception, and
never appeared in Print: so from you chiefly results the profit or pleasure all
others shall partake by this community of forty years Experience, which
possibly may be as many as desire to have good Gardens, and bear any affection
to that honest and innocent recreation of Planting.

And although our Country cannot boast the benignity of that beautiful Planet,
which meliorates their Fruit in Italy, France and Spain; yet by reflection from
good walls, well-gravelled walks, the choice of fit kinds, and positions proper
to each particular, we may plentifully partake the pleasure, and yearly enjoy
the benefit, of many delicious fruits; as also the admiration and delight in
the infinite varieties of elegant forms, various colors, and numerous kinds of
noble Plants, and beautiful Flowers, some whereof have been heretofore handled
by a renouned person of your Name, but, since his time, Nature has discovered
many new Varieties, not known to former ages, as I hope shortly will appear in
your own Collections, gloriously adorning your spacious Garden, which I wish
may correspond, both in Fashion, and Furniture, with that noble Structure to
which it appertains.

My Lord, when I consider the Nobility of your Extraction and dearest
Relations, Ample Fortune, and Opulent Expectations, the Excellence of your
Natural Inclinations, and the beautiful qualities you have acquired by a happy
Education, refined by Foreign Travels to sublime Perfection, I conclude this
book as fortunate in the Dedication, as my hopes assure me of your Protection.
Your noble Name as an Amulet is alone able to preserve it from the poisonous
breath of malicious Ignorance, and no Sciolist dare presume to Censure what you
shall please to Patronize.

Accept then my Honored Lord, this humble offering, which possibly may live to
do you service, when I am dust and ashes, and, according to my highest
ambition, remain as a testimony of my sincerest gratitude for the many favors
I have received from your Honor, your most accomplished Lady, and that noble
Family from whence she is descended. I should here add my prayers for your
Honors preservation, did I not reserve them for my morning Sacrifice, daily to
be presented to the immortal Deities by him that is

Your most humble and most devoted Servant, John Rea.

TO The truly Noble, and perfect Lover of Ingenuity, Sir Thomas Hanmer, Baronet.
Honored Sir,
THese Papers which have long lain by neglected, are at last made Public, and
now come to present you a rude Draught of a Rustic Garden, Planted with such
Flowers and Fruits as will prosper in our cold Country; a Subject (I confess)
worthy a better Author, and sufficiently celebrated in only saying, it is
agreeable with your Noble Inclination: and although my remote Residence, and
mean Abilities, could not furnish so many new varieties as are to be found in
your own incomparable Collection, nor cloth those inserted in a Dress
proportionable to their Native Glories; yet possibly many Lovers, less knowing
in this delight, may from the perusal in many particulars not formerly
published, receive some Satisfaction, and so stand obliged to you for the
Benefit, since it was your Goodness that first occasioned the Undertaking: for
had not your happy Acquaintance reanimated my drooping endeavors in this
delight, and your own free Bounty furnished me with many noble and new
Varieties, I had certainly long since grown out of love with my Garden, and
consequently spared you the Trouble of this Intrusion, as my self the Pains in
penning these proportionable effects of idle hours. Sir, I know your Judgment
in things of this nature to be Transcendent, as your Generosity, and Courtesy
is Superlative, which makes me hope, you will heartily Accept, and mildly
Censure, the confessed Infirmities of him that is

The humblest of your Faithful Servants, John Rea.

TO The Most Accomplished, THE Lady GERRARD of Gerrards Bromley.
It Is Flora calls, bright Beauty come
Walk forth and view Elysium,
Where happy Lovers, crowned with Flowr's,
Do sit and sing, in still-green Bowers;
And many smiling Virgins stand,
Humbly expecting your Command.
Here Coy Adonis from his Bed
Will rise, and raise his drooping Head,
Warmed and Inspired by you, grow Wise,
And fall no more Love's Sacrifice;
Yield to Your Beauties greater power,
For you may pluck his Virgin Flower.
Self-lov'd Narcissus if he look
On your fair Eyes, will leave the Brook,
And Undeceived, soon will rue
He ever any Loved but You.
If to the Hyacinth you turn,
He Smiles, and quite forgets to Mourn.
The enamored Heliotrope will run
To your bright Stars, and leave the Sun.
Our Lillies here do make no show,
They Whiter on your Bosom grow,
And Violets appear but Stains,
Compared with your blewer Veins:
Yet to Invoke you, when they bow,
Propitious Heaven perfumes their Vow.
The Cowslip Cups, by Heba filled
With Nectar, from the Gods distilled,
Presented is unto your Taste,
That Beauties prime may ever last.
New-blown Buds, all Scents excelling,
As you pass by, invite your Smelling.
The crafty Flowers well knowing this
The only slight to steal a Kiss.
Mark how the glorious Tulips rise
In Various dress, to take your Eyes,
And how the fairest and all the rest
Strive, which shall triumph on your Breast.
But hark, methinks near yonder Well,
I hear the voice of Philomel,
Seeming to challenge a dispute,
'Twixt her shrill Voice and your sweet Lute:
Alas poor Bird thou want Art,
One touch of Yours will break her Heart,
And as she falls, Sing but one strain,
'Twill piece her broken Heart again.
Thus your rich Beauty and rare Parts
Excel all Flowers, exceed all Arts.
Live then sweet Lady, to inherit
Your Fathers Fortune, and his Spirit,
Your Mothers Face, and Virtuous Mind,
Then dye a Saint, and be Enshrined.
J. R.

TO The Fair and Virtuous Lady, Mris TREVER HANMER, Now Wife to Sr JOHN WARNER,
Knight.
VIrtue, and Beauty, with kind Nature joined,
To frame a Body, and adorn a Mind:
Virtue took all the Graces for her guide,
And Beauty, Love, with all the Flowers beside.
Long Nature studied, in what mould to cast
This masterpiece, concluded at the last,
It must a Hanmer be, from whence or none,
She might expect such rare Perfection:
And having brought this noble Work to view
Of mortal Eyes, we all conclude it is You;
For Those bright Heroes would fair Virtue find,
Need search no farther than your beauteous Mind:
And if for Beauty curious eyes do seek,
They Will find it flourish in your lovely Cheek;
And now those Flowers, from whence at first it grew,
Return again, with love to wait on you.
Deign then, sweet Lady, but one cheerful ray
From your Fair Eyes, 'twill drive those damps away,
Which stupid Ignorance on them would cast,
And, at one breath, their Sweets and Glories blast.
Bless with your sweeter breath the Myrtle Bowers,
And be the Genius of these Plants and Flowers.
To the same Lady.
T To search the Indies for their Balm and Spice,
R Rifle the treasure of old Paradise,
E Enter all Breasts where Innocence does dwell,
V Visit the Pulpit, or the Friars Cell,
O Or search the Sea, and pierce the richest Mines,
R Run ore the Legend of the Saints, and Shrines;
H How needless then would all this labor be
A At our return, when we amazed should see
N Nature and Virtue had each several grace
M Made to inhabit in one Breast and Face?
E End then our strife, and in her Beauteous Name,
R Read all Perfection, and from whence it came.
Madam,
Though you have altered now your Name,
Your Virtues speak you still the same
As when the Acrostick first was writ,
Therefore it were sin to alter it.
TO THE READER.
Forty years are now completed, since first I began to be a Planter, and to
dedicate more time than I could well have spared for diversion, to that lovely
recreation; and having by the help of a long continued diligence, collected all
the rarest Plants, Fruits, and Flowers, that by any means I could procure,
either in this Nation, France, or Flanders, at last by long acquaintance I
learned their Qualities, and so by slow degrees attained to a considerable
stock, both of Plants and Experience; and although I have little cause to
commend the Ingenuity of my Neighbors, or the rural Desert where it was my
unhappiness to Plant them; yet with an unfainting perseverance, I have
continued my affection to this honest recreation, without Companion or
Encouragement; and now in my Old age (wearied and weaned from other delights)
find my self more happy in this retired solitude, than in all the bustles and
busy employments of my passed days.

Some years since, seriously considering Mr. Parkinsons Garden of pleasant
Flowers, and comparing my own Collections with what I there found, easily
perceived his Book to want the addition of many noble things of newer
discovery, and that a multitude of those there set out, were by Time grown
stale, and for Unworthiness turned out of every good Garden; the love of the
Subject (more than any opinion I had of my own Abilities) soon persuaded me to
endeavor the supply of what was therein wanting, and by taking away the Worse,
to make room for Better; but after considering the whole Series and business of
the Book, I concluded with experienced Builders, that it were better to make
use of some of the best materials, in the erecting of a New piece, than to
repair and accommodate the Old; fitter to be fashioned into the form of a
Florilege, furnished with all requisites belonging to a Florist, than continued
in the old method of an Herbal, and instead of old names, uncertain places, and
little or no virtues, to insert some other things much more considerable.

And now ingenious Reader, having told the occasion, and by what steps I
attained to this humble degree of knowledge, I shall proceed to acquaint you
with what may be expected, either in Method, or Matter, from my performance.

Been docet, qui been distinguit. In three Books therefore, as in so many Beds,
have I lodged Earths Beauties, each Book having a peculiar Title, and each Bed
a Tutelar Deity.

The first Book, under the Title of Flora, the Flowery Goddess, gives you
several forms, and apt directions, how to make, plant, preserve, and keep both
Fruit and Flower-Gardens, furnished with the choicest Plants, Flowers, and
Fruits, that will endure the extremity of our long Winters; describing all such
as are not vulgarly known, with certain and assured directions how to set, make
grow, increase, and preserve each particular; as also for the raising of new
Varieties; not taken out of simple Books (the Publishers and Retainers of many
Untruths) but learned from my own Practical experience.

The second Book carries the Title of Ceres, the Goddess of Seeds and Tillage,
and she presents you with her Harvest-Garland, made up with such Plants and
Flowers as are yearly, or every other year, raised from Seeds, with directions
for the Sowing, transplanting, and disposing each of them.

The Third and last Book, entitled Pomona, invites you to a Banquet of the
best Garden-Fruits our cold Northern Country will afford; acquaints you with
their Names and Qualities, and how to Plant, Propagate and Improve them; as
also what Vines are fittest for our Climate; which are the best Berries; and
brings you at last, to rest in a Grove of ever-green Trees and flowering
Shrubs, informing how to Plant, Order, and Dispose them.

As for the cutting the Figures of every Plant, especially in Wood, as Mr.
Parkinson has done, I hold to be altogether needless; such Artless things,
being good for nothing, unless to raise the Price of the Book, serving neither
for Ornament or Information, but rather to puzzle and affright the Spectators
into an Aversion, than direct or invite their Affections; for did his Flowers
appear no fairer on their stalks in the Garden, than they do on the leaves of
his Book, few Ladies would be in love with them, much more than they are with
his lovely Picture. I have therefore spared my self and others such unnecessary
Charge, and only added some draughts for Flower-Gardens.

I shall not attempt to celebrate so sublime a subject as this in hand, since
all the Flowers that are to be found in Rhetoric, hold no comparison with
those of the Garden; neither will I throw away a word to stop the Mouth of
malicious Ignorance, the Censures of such commonly proving Praises; the
Judicious better Approving what they shall hear Condemned by so unworthy Judges.

Certainly there are many, besides my self, that are taken with the alluring
Charms of this lovely Recreation; to whom this Book may be Beneficial, and I
wish as advantageous, as I now find such a Work would have been to me, when
first I began my Plantation; and if these my humble Endeavors have the good
fortune to find a friendly Acceptance, I shall think my time and travel well
bestowed; since to gratify the Lovers of this delight, and to increase their
Number, is the highest ambition of

Your industrious servant J. R.

FLORA TO THE LADIES.
YOu Gentle Ladies that would know
What in Adonis Gardens grow,
Walk forth with me, and I will bring
You to the Beauties of the Spring.
First we will view the Myrtle Grove,
And there salute the Queen of Love,
With Daphne, fair as when alive,
Closed in a Verdant Vegetive.
Then to the Enamel'd-banks we will go,
And as the dainty Flowers blo',
We there will pick out all the fair,
To make fresh Chaplets for your hair.
See where the Primroses appear,
With other Red and blush Primroses.
Infants of the year,
Blushing with shame for to be shown
Now the rare Daffodills are blown:
Mark in what Order they do stand,
Bowing their Heads to kiss your Hand,
And then with yellow Jealousy,
Rivaled by richer Beauties, dye.
For see the Auricula ursi Bears-Ears.
Auriculaes come forth,
Adorned with Dies of much more worth,
And fair Eyes twinkling on each stem,
The Heavenly Bear shines not like them.
But then the rare Anemonies
Appear and challenge all the prize,
In various colors richly dressed,
And might be chosen for the best,
Did not now Phoebus call to rise
The Tulips, to delight you Eyes
With glorious Garments rich and new,
Excelling all in Eden grew;
Like the Rich Glutton some are dight
In Tyrian-Purple and fine White;
And in bright Crimson others shine,
Impaled with White and Graydeline:
The meanest here you can behold,
Is Clothed in Scarlet, laced with Gold.
But then the Agot Hanmer a rich Tulip.
Queen of all delight
Wears Graydeline Scarlet and White:
So interwoven and so placed,
That all the other are disgraced
When she appears, and does impart
Her Native Beauties shaming Art.
Once did that famous Pater Z^g^rs, a Jesuit in Antwerp, famous for painting
Flowers.
Jesuit try
To Copy out her Majesty,
But falling short of his desire,
He left his Pencil to admire.
Near to this Queen on either hand,
As lovely Maids of Honor, stand
The Names of fine Tulips.
Orient Virgin in despair,
And Archduke Imperial.
Leopaldus Mistress fair,
Viewing Grand-purpur, in array
So Rich, may challenge all the day;
And many more, which to express
The manner of their curious dress,
Would Pens and Pencils set at strife;
Yet neither render half the life.
But see they fade and seem to dye,
The Dews to weep their Obsequy,
And all their luster vanish quite,
That lately were so fair, so bright:
Yet Gentle Ladies do not fear,
They Will spring again another year:
For, though they seem, they are not Dead,
Only disrobed to go to Bed,
And there secured from all harms,
Rest in their tender Mothers Arms.
Beauties walk on, why droop ye thus?
Look where the brave Ranunculus
With Scarlet Robes appear in State,
And double Ruffs ingeminate:
Monster, Puvoine, Variegated
From Foreign soils hither translated,
Thrive by the Florists skill and care,
In this lean Earth and Northern Air.
And now behold as you pass by
The White, the Purple, and Blush Paeony,
With some fair Lillies that invite,
The double Red, and double White:
Who now their Beauties do disclose,
To entertain the lovely Rose,
The White, and Red, together meet,
To match their mixture by your Cheek;
And now I find my thoughts prove true,
From thence the Rosa-mundi grew.
See how your presence makes to shine,
The Names of several five Roses.
Damask and the Crystalline,
Marbled with varied colors spread,
The gallant Belgic, Blush and Red.
That Thornless Bryer there does twine,
With the sweet double Eglantine,
Brings forth fine Flowers that do excel
As well in Beauty, as in Smell;
And in this clear, and sweeter Air,
The Double Yellow looks most fair;
The Damask Province, and the Red,
Do now appear no better spread;
Their folded Buds upon each stem
Expect your Breath to open them,
That so perfumed they may disclose,
And each appear a Fragrant Rose:
The various Flower of Iri^ Ch^cidonica.
Chalcedon,
Bulb'd Iris, and the Martagon,
With all else blown, you may suppose
Are servants to attend the Rose.
But June is past, the Rosy Bowers
Give place unto the Gilliflowers,
Whose comely Forms, and Colors fair;
With odorous Breath, perfuming Air,
And Merry looks, invite your Eyes
To veiw their choice varieties.
How big with Flower their Largest Gilliflowers aprest to break the pods.
Bellies seem?
Lucina aid them now they Teem;
Help Ladies for to hold the Back,
Lest that their tender Wombs should crack.
So, now it is well, doubtless next morn
You Will see a dainty Beauty born,
With so many lovely Graces,
Matching the Tincture of your Faces;
All will conclude, but first admire,
That young Adonis was the Sire,
And Venus must the Mother be
Of those Fair Infants which you see:
For Children of an Unchaste Mother
Are seldom like to one another;
And mark them well, you will find each one
Of different complexion,
Var'ing in Stature, Form, or Air,
And none of them of Vulcan's Hair.
It Is a sad truth, and their own case,
Most of them are of Seedlings.
Spurious Race;
For the Legitimate are gone,
And there remains scarce any one
Descended from the Nobler kind,
Fortune to such has long been blind.
Ladies methinks you are not Merry,
Sure this long Walk has made you Weary,
But if you like this harmless play,
I Will meet you here another day;
When to their Quarters we will go,
Where they themselves shall let you kno',
Which in each kind does most excel,
With all their Names, and where they dwell:
And then you will hear them beg, and sue,
That they may come to wait on you.
Ladies before you bid adieu,
Hear what the Author wishes you.
May all the several Ornaments You wear
Be like these Flowers, renewed every Year:
And You, like them, such splendid Graces win,
You know the Lillies neither Sow nor Spin.
Silent as Flowers may You in Virtues grow,
Till ripening Time shall make you sit to blow,
Then Flourish long, and Seeding leave behind
A numerous offspring of your Dainty kind:
And when Fate calls, have nothing to Repent,
But Dye like Flowers, Virtuous and Innocent.
Then all your fellow Flowers, both Fair and Sweet,
Will come with Tears, to deck your Winding Sheet;
Hang down their pensive Heads so dew'd, and crave
To be transplanted to your perfumed Grave.
J. R.

To the most adorned with Virtue, Beauty, and Noble Qualities, The Lady HANMER,
The worthily-beloved Wife of Sir Thomas Hanmer, Baronet.
MADAM,
THese Paper Plants and speaking Flowers
Are sent to him that is All yours:
So by that Title now alone
This Book is yours, you Two b'ing One.
The Flowers inscribed you soon will know;
They all in your own Garden grow:
And those to others seem most new,
Are old and obsolete with you.
You are a Florist born and bred,
And to a Florist married;
Whose skill united can revive
Each tender drooping Vegetive;
Call every Flower by its name,
And tell from whence to us they came.
At first no Laurels we do send;
But when Desert has crowned the End
A Pyramid we raise to Fame:
Such glory has your honored Name,
It can preserve this Paper Tomb
Until the end of all things come:
For to the account of Beauties chaste
You have a Nil plus ultra placed.
So radiant is your Virtues fame,
It kindles in each Breast a flame;
To erring Ladies lights the way,
By your Example not to stray:
For (like Penelope) you stay
At home, and sweetly spend the day.
In Spring, when Flowers your Gardens grace,
With Needle or Pencil you can trace
Each curious Form, and various Dye
So represent unto the Eye,
Nobly proportion every part,
That Nature blushes at your art.
In Somer you walk forth to fill
Baskets with Roses for the Still:
And when Autumnal Fruits are come,
You then preserve the Pear and Plum.
Winter, that most to London sends,
Keeps you at home to feast your Friends.
The half-starv'd Statues at your door
Revive, and are no longer poor.
Long may you live, daily to vex
The vicious Wantons of your sex.
Instruct the Virtuous by your ways
To win (like you) immortal praise.
Last, having run a course so eaven,
Your Better part may pass to Heaven,
And there conclude your happy story,
Crowned with eternal wreaths of Glory.
So wishes, Your Ladyships Sincerely-devoted Servant, J. R.

(...) FLORA. THE FIRST BOOK. Of the making and planting of Fruit and
Flower-gardens, with a Nurcery for Fruits and Flowers to furnish both.
FAir Houses are more frequent than fine Gardens; the first effected by
Artificers only, the later requiring more skill in the Owner: few Gardens
being found well furnished out of the hands of an affectionate Florist. The
love of such a Master will keep each tender Plant alive, his care and skill
has collected: for never was any Art or Excellence liked or loved by the
Ignorant; it is Knowledge that begets Affection, and Affection increases
Knowledge. Love was the Inventer, and is still the Maintainer, of every noble
Science. It is chiefly that which has made my Flowers and Trees to flourish,
though planted in a barren Desert, and has brought me to the knowledge I now
have in Plants and Planting: for indeed it is impossible for any man to have
any considerable Collection of noble Plants to prosper, unless he love them:
for neither the goodness of the Soil, nor the advantage of the Situation, will
do it, without the Masters affection: it is that which animates, and renders
them strong and vigorous; without which they will languish and decay through
neglect, and soon cease to do him service.

I have seen many Gardens of the new model, in the hands of unskilful persons,
with good Walls, Walks and Grass-plots; but in the most essential adornments so
deficient, that a green Meadow is a more delightful object: there Nature alone,
without the aid of Art, spreads her verdant Carpets, spontaneously imbroydered
with many pretty Plants and pleasing Flowers, far more inviting than such an
immured Nothing. And as noble Fountains, Grottoes, Statues, etc. are excellent
ornaments and marks of Magnificence; so all such dead works in Gardens, ill
done, are little better than blocks in the way to interrupt the sight, but not
at all to satisfy the understanding. A choice Collection of living Beauties,
rare Plants, Flowers and Fruits, are indeed the wealth, glory and delight of a
Garden, and the most absolute indications of the Owners ingenuity; whose skill
and care is chiefly required in their Choice, Culture, and Position.

I have known many Persons of Fortune pretend much affection to Flowers, but
very unwilling to part with any thing to purchase them; yet if obtained by
begging, or perhaps by stealing, contented to give them entertainment: An
Unworthiness more unpardonable in the Rich, than punishable in such Poor as
steal through want. And perhaps to some he may seem no wiser, that parts with
forty or fifty pounds for an Horse or Hawk, which must be daily fed and
attended, than he that gives so many shillings for a noble Plant or beautiful
Flower, that needs little of either. But our faces are not more variable than
our affections; and, I fear, that to Flowers is too innocent for this Age
(guilty of so much wickedness) to take delight in. Yet since our long Winter is
so well over, and our illustrious late-obscured Luminaries have now regained
their former splendor, I shall adventure to bring forth my Plants and Flowers
into the open air: but before I unveil their beauties, or discover their
qualities, it will be necessary to prepare their lodgings, places to plant
them. Thus much by the way as we pass to the Garden.

I shall now proceed to inform all such as desire to be Florists, how they may
do as I have done, make their own Gardens themselves, assisted only by
ordinary Laborers: in which undertaking it is not my intention to intrude upon
the Gardeners trade, nor to amuse the Readers with Romantic Inventions; but
(as a Florist) to acquaint the unskilful with such Rules and apt Forms, as may
be fit for the planting and disposing of the best Flowers; and in so plain and
easy a method, that every person of any capacity may be enabled thereby to be
his own Gardener, observing that which follows.

To the Habitation of every Gentleman, or Person of considerable Fortune and
Ingenuity, there should belong two several Gardens joined together, and only
divided with a Wall, so as there may be a passage out of the one into the
other; and both of these for delight, recreation, and entertainment. As for the
Kitchen-garden, a place more remote will be requisite, serving only for the
public use of the Family: but these two Gardens of delight would be seated on
the South side of the House, in respect of prospect from the Windows, and the
benefit of Sun, and Shelter, which many tender Plants, Fruits and Flowers do
necessarily require. Some to abate the rigor of the North and East winds,
plant Pear Trees, Elms, or Sicamores, in default of Buildings, at convenient
distance without the walls; which may be considered upon sight of the place;
for Situations are so various, that no positive Rules can possibly serve to fit
all: besides, every one abounds with his own reason, and may add or alter as
the place and his purpose shall require.

The most graceful grounds for these Gardens, is an entire level; and the best
Soil, is that, which is neither Clay nor Sand, but partaking of both: and if
either, it may be much helped by Compost. Hanging grounds, incapable to be cast
into a Level, seldom make handsome Gardens: such must be divided into parts,
with Descents, as the convenience of the place will afford; in the designing
and ordering whereof, I shall advise all such as are unexpert in such
operations, to be guided by some honest, and skilful Gardener, or other
experienced person, upon whose judgment they may rely, and not trust to the
dilates of a green fancy, lest they employ their pains to purchase repentance,
as I know many have done.

The first of these Gardens of Delight, we will call the Fruit-garden, the
other the Flower-garden, which would be lesser, and placed immediately under
the walls of the house; the other on the East or West side thereof, according
to the quality of the place. I shall not advise any, to make either of these
Gardens too big, for such are commonly ill furnished, and worse kept. Fourscore
yards square for the Fruit, and Thirty for the Flower-garden will be enough for
a Nobleman: but for a private Gentleman, Forty for the one, and Twenty for the
other will be sufficient; and so bigger or lesser, according to the draught you
make choice of, or the fortune and fancy of the owner.

If you are to enclose a new ground for a Garden, be careful in placing the
Walls, that the size, situation and form, may all be answerable to your
intended plot: the ground exactly measured, and tried, that the Walls may be
neither out of square or level, which will much advantage the work which is to
follow. For the Foundation and a foot higher, Stone may serve, but after Brick
is best; raising them nine foot high at the least, on the inside the Garden,
and scued only on the outside; and for dividing the Fruit from the
Flower-garden, a thin wall of five or six foot high may serve; or else half
Pales, cut with handsome heads, and put into a Brick color, with equal portions
of red Lead and Ochre, ground on a Painters stone with Linseed Oil, serving
fitly for the planting of fine Roses, on either side. The walls being finished,
the ground is to be prepared for planting: and first we will begin with the
Fruit-garden.

In the first place you are to divide the Walls for Trees: allowing about
twelve foot in large Gardens betwixt them, and half the measure at the corners:
in lesser Gardens ten foot or thereabouts, more or less, according to the
spreading of the trees you intend to plant. Mark the places where they are to
be set, then trench the Borders round about the walls a yard wide, and about
two foot deep; but about the places marked for trees, two yards square, that
their roots may have room to spread, casting therein good store of old,
well-rotted Neats dung, which will last much longer than that of Horses; and
let it be all over about a foot thick, well mingled with good Earth, and trodden
down: then lay thereon another course of Earth mixed with Dung, and therewith
raise the Borders to the height desired: then mark and stake out the form of
the whole Garden, according to the design or draught you shall fancy; so that
you may know the places where the Beds and Borders will be; the which must be
trenched, and dunged as the former: but before you begin to set out any part of
the Garden, the whole must be well dug, and cast into a level, from side to
side.

The ground thus prepared, and having provided sawed Rails, five inches broad,
and an inch and quarter thick, that have been laid straight, and seasoned a
year at the least, let them be lined on the upper edge, gaged to a thickness,
smoothed with a Plain, on that edge, and outer side, fitted to lengths, and
pieced according to the Timber, and order of the work: you may put them into a
Stone-colour, with white Lead, common Ceruse, or London white, some Charcoal,
and Linseed oil ground together on a Painters stone: but the Rails, and the
Stone-colour will last much longer, if they be first well primed with red Lead
and Umber ground as the former: then after the Colors are dry, and the Rails
fitted to their places, nail on the insides thereof, pieces of hard wood that
will last, about half a yard long, placing them an inch under the upper edge:
if you set them too thin, the Rails will be apt to warp, and turn with the Sun:
which done with discretion, make holes to let these feet into the ground, and
so place them by a line, and a long level, that the upper edges may all be of
one entire level, throughout the whole work, beginning with the Borders about
the walls, and so place all the rest in order, accordingly as the draught shall
direct you: let the feet be well ramm'd, and the rails kept straight and level,
raised up, that they may be four inches on the outer side above the ground,
after the Allies are gravelled and made: then fill every Bed and Border with
good screened or sifted earth, and leave them like a ridge, higher than the
Rails in the middle.

The next work, is to prepare the places intended for Grass, and to provide
Turfs for them. First, level the ground, and consider the thickness of the
Turfs, which when laid, must be three inches lower than the upper edge of the
Rails, and the Allies four inches, so the Grass will be an inch higher,
remembering still from the Rails to fetch your measures, and level, to keep the
whole work in order; and if the ground under the Turfs be not barren of it
self, it should be covered some thickness with hungry Sand to make it so, that
the grass grow not too rank. The best Turfs for this purpose are had in the
most hungry Common, and where the grass is thick and short, prick down a line
eight or ten foot long, and with a Spade cut the Turfs thereby, then shift the
line a foot or fifteen inches further, and so proceed until you have cut so
far as you desire, then cross the line to the same breadth, that the Turfs may
be square, and cut them thereby: then with a straight bitted Spade, or
Turving-Iron (which many for that purpose provide) and a short cord tied to it
near the Bit, and the other end to the middle of a strong staff, whereby one
thrusting the Spade forward under the Turfs, and another by the staff pulling
backward, they will easily be flaied and taken up, but not too many at a time
for drying, but as they are laid; which must be done by a line, and a long
level, placing them close together, and beating them down with a Mallet: having
covered the quarter, or place intended, let it be well watered, and beaten all
over with a heavy broad Beater: Lastly, cut away by a line what is superfluous,
that the sides may be straight and eaven, or in what work you shall please to
fancy.

The Grass-plots being finished, you may proceed to gravel the Walks and
Allies. There are several kinds of Gravel, the Cat-brained binding gravel is
the best, and the loose Sandy gravel the worst; lay it something thick, and
beat down every course, the worser in the bottom, and fine screened gravel on
the top, and in finishing, leave the Walks a little round in the middle; for
the level, the Rails on either side will direct you that you cannot err,
remembering to lay the Walks and Allies four inches under the edge of the rails:
these Walks and Grass-plots must be often rolled with a weighty stone roller to
keep them smooth and in good order. And now this Garden is ready to be planted
with Trees, Shrubs and Flowers, each thing in its proper season.

The best time for planting Trees and Shrubs is in October, and then either of
your own provision, or out of the Nurceries about London, you may furnish the
walls with Pears, Plums, Cherries, Apricocks, Peaches, Nectorins and Vines,
making choice out of Pomona's store of such you desire; where you will find
what Fruits are fittest for Walls, and what for Standards; which may be
disposed and set in the Garden at proportionable distances: betwixt which may
be placed Roses, Currants, Goosberries, Cypress-trees, Miszerions, or what other
Shrubs or Greens you like. The Borders about the walls and the rest of the Beds
may be furnished with the more ordinary sorts of Flowers, as Lilies, Martagons,
Pionies, Daffodils, Tulips, and so of all other sorts, such of each kind as are
least worthy to be received into the Flower-garden, where I would have all
things rare. As for the placing, planting and ordering of all the Plants,
Fruits and Flowers, wherewith this or the Flower-garden is to be furnished, it
is needless to be here expressed, for that at the end of every Chapter, where
each particular is treated of, you will find ample direction for the doing
thereof.

In default of Timber to make Rails of the thickness forementioned, Inch-boards
slit to the breadth may serve; and some make use of Tiles or Bricks molded on
purpose, but both these are apt to break with the Frosts, and to be out of
order. Some are at the charge to set their Gardens with Freestone, hewed for
the purpose, which standing in the ground (unless it be very good) will moulder
away, and cleave with the Winter-frosts. Next to the forementioned Rails, Box
well set is the best to border large Beds in a Fruit-garden, and suits very
well with Grass, and may fitly serve for all but the Borders to the Walls,
which would be kept up with Rails.

Pallisado's (or, as we usually call them, Pole-hedges) are much in fashion in
France, and there set with dwarf Fruit Trees; such are troublesome to keep in
order, and subject to strong Winds, fit only for spacious Gardens: but the
best hedges for our Country are those set with Pyracantha and Phyllirea; and
for lower in lesser Gardens, Celastrus and Alaternus; these will be alternately
green, and correspond exceeding well with Box and Grass: these Hedges must be
kept narrow, and supported with stakes, rods or laths on either side, and as
they grow, cut straight by a line on the top, and even on the sides. How to
raise these Plants, and when to set them, you may find directed in the places
where they are described.

And now having done with the Fruit-garden, and made it a fit repository for
Fruits, Plants and Flowers of the more common kinds; we will proceed to the
Flower-garden, and fashion it in the form of a Cabinet, with several boxes fit
to receive, and securely to keep, Natures choicest jewels.

Having made choice of a Plot that for measure may fit the place, and stand
provided of Rails four inches broad, and an inch and quarter thick, that have
been well piled, kept straight, and seasoned, you must make use of some
understanding Joyner to work them; first he must be made acquainted with the
Draught, whereby he may know the length of every Piece from each corner and
angle, (allowing for the joining them together) and also the number of Pieces
in every length; which being cut out, must be lined, gaged and plained, as
before is directed in the Fruit-garden; these only differing, in that they are
to be molded with an half Round on the outer edge. The Rails thus prepared, in
the great Allies, near the place where they are to stand, may be joined and
fast nailed together at every corner and angle, and as the several Pieces are
finished, set on the ground (which must first be levelled) in their proper
places; and when all is finished, set them exactly by a line, a long level, and
a standing measure, for the breadth of the inner Alleys, which must be as broad
as the Beds. Every Piece, if they be of equal and true measure, perfectly
square at each corner and angle, will answer to the Line every way. When they
are thus placed, and having prepared many pieces of hard wood, of half a yard
long, and of a considerable bigness, that they may last the longer, let them
into the ground on the inside the Rails, an inch under the upper edge, and
there nail and fasten them; the more of these feet you make use of, the faster
and better the work will stand, and not warp or turn with the heat of the Sun.
Before the holes be filled, prime the Rails with Linseed-oyl, Red-lead and
Umber, well ground on a Painters stone, and after put them into a Stone-colour,
with any of the forementioned Whites, Charcoal and Oil: as soon as the Colors
are dry, place the Rails exactly, and try them every way with the line and
level, filling and ramming the feet hard, that they may not stir out of their
places. The Borders about the Walls are to be of the same breadth and level
with the Beds, and railed about on all sides after the same manner. All which
diligently performed, take the Earth out of every Bed and Border by degrees as
you work them, about two foot deep, and lay the same in the Alleys, not
stirring the Feet; then cover the bottoms all over with good old Neats dung,
that it may be six inches thick, after it is hard trodden: next skreen the
Earth, or sift it through a Wier-riddel, and do the like by old Dung rotted to
Earth, spread thin on the ground to dry, that it may the better pass through
the Skreen or Riddel, and fill the Beds and Borders therewith, putting in
almost as much of the one as the other, more or less as the Earth is in
goodness, which stir up and mingle well together, and so proceed until all be
finished. Lastly, make the Alleys, those within the Fret, raised with good
binding Sand, laid smooth, and hard beaten, so that they may all lie level
three inches under the upper edge of the Rails. For this Garden I design one of
the Draughts of twenty three divisions, and each to be two foot six inches
broad, then the Fret will be nineteen yards six inches square; next thereunto
an Alley of the same breadth round about, then a Border of the same breadth
railed about as the Beds, broken about a yard and half wide for goings in, in
the middle of every side, then close up to the outer Rail, on the inside put
Posts into the ground at each corner and end, with others betwixt them equally
divided; these Posts must be of good sawed Timber, of about five inches square,
and four foot high above the Rails; let them be well ramm'd, and of equal
height, fastening on the heads thereof Rails of the same breadth, unto which,
and that at the foot, nail good well-prepared Laths sloping, six inches
asunder, both ways chequer-wise, as every Joyner knows how: this Lattice-frame
being well made, may be first primed white, and after colored green in oil,
with Pink and Verdigreefe, or Ortment and Indico. The Rail next to the Fret
must be answerable thereunto, and the Border filled according to the rest. All
which performed, gravel the great Alley, and coat it with the same Sand, that
it may be of the color of the rest.

This inner Alley and Border will take up three yards and one foot, the Borders
to the Walls one yard and two foot, the great Alleys five yards, two foot and
six inches; to which nineteen yards and six inches (the measure of the Fret)
being added, the whole Garden from wall to wall will be just thirty yards
square.

And because diverse have Gardens already enclosed, that the measure of the
forementioned Fret will not fit, I have therefore designed Draughts of several
sizes, that every one may take that which best agrees with his ground, and is
most proper for his purpose: the same Rules (before expressed) serving for all,
only altering the Measures for the breadth of the Beds and Alleys, observing
the true division, of which every Fret may be, what will best agree with the
place from two foot to a yard. And those that want Timber to make Rail's after
the manner before directed, may set the Beds and Borders with French Box, and
instead of the forementioned Lattice make a thin Pole-hedge with Celastrus,
Alaturnus, Pyracantha and Phyllirea, or what of these he can get, which being
ever green will agree very well with the Box: but the Borders to the Walls
nevertheless must be supported with Rails, to keep them and the Walks divided
and in good order.

I know a Garden so set with Box will show very well, and (if carefully kept)
will last many years; but it will be three years before the Box be grown to
perfection; besides, the Roots, if not cut away on the inside with a keen Spade
every other year, will run into the Beds, and draw from the Flowers much of
their nourishment: also it must be kept cut, and sheared three times every year
at least; whereas a Garden set with Rails is free from all these
inconveniences, presently in perfection, and kept with little labor, only
rolling the great Alleys, smoothing the rest, and weeding the Beds; which,
though often stirred and turned over in taking up Roots, mending the Soil with
sifted Dung, or planting again, you need not fear to lose the Level, the Rails
will still direct you: and as the Ground sinks, the same must be raised again
with good Earth mingled with Lime and Dung, which has lay en on an heap to rot
the best part of a year, that it may be sifted and employed to that purpose.
And as I told you in the former Garden, when you earth up these Beds, lay them
not flat, but something round toward the middle, especially if the Ground be
apt to hold wet. The greatest care, skill and curiosity is required in the
ordering, disposing, planting and preserving each rare Plant and tender Flower,
wherewith this Garden is to be furnished, and, although you may find ample
direction at the end of each Chapter (where the particulars are inserted) for
the doing thereof, yet a word or two in this place will be necessary, for the
placing some Plants and Flowers in this Garden, which we design to be of thirty
yards square, with a railed Fret of twenty three divisions, and a latticed
Border; and first we will begin with the Walls; those on that side open to the
South, or South-east, I would have planted with the best Peaches and
Nectorines, set twelve foot asunder, and an Indian Gesmine and double Clematis
in the middle betwixt those Trees that stand next to the corners, and a
double-flowered Pomgranate betwixt each of the other; the East and West sides
with the best Plums and Cherries; and the North side (if the Walls be high)
with the best Pears grafted in Quince-stocks, and betwixt every two of these
Trees a tall standard Rose-tree, ordered in such manner as in the Chapter of
Roses is directed, that each may bear several colored Roses on one stock. The
Borders to the Walls are best to plant Auricula, red Primroses, Hepaticaes,
double Rose-champion, double Nonsuch, double Dames-violet, the best
Wall-flowers, double Stock-gilliflowers, and many other things you will find
directed to be planted under Walls. The inner side of the Lattice is to be set
round about with several sorts of fine Roses, cut near the ground, that the new
Shoots may be wound into the Lattice all over, and no place left bare, the
which must be seasonably cut on the top eaven with the Rail, and also on the
sides, so in two or three years you will have a noble Hedge of Roses, which
will be an excellent ornament to the Garden. The Border next this Rose-hedge is
chiefly intended to place Pots upon, on all sides, with the best Gilliflowers,
Auricula's, Myrtles, Oleanders, and all other potted Plants, only the edge
next the Rail is to be set with all the several sorts of Crocus, mingling and
placing together such as are of a season.

Now for planting the Beds in the Fret, you must consider every piece, and
place the Roots so as those of a kind set in several Beds may answer one
another; as in the corners of each Bed the best Crown-Imperials, Lilies,
Martagons, and such tall Flowers; in the middles of the five Squares great
Tufts of the best Pionies, and round about them several sorts of Cyclamen; the
rest with Daffodils, Hyacinths, and such like: the straight Beds are fit for
the best Tulips, where account may be kept of them: Ranunculus and Anemonies
also require particular Beds; the rest may be set all over with the more
ordinary sorts of Tulips, Frittillaries, bulbed Iris, and all other kinds of
good Roots, in such sort as you will find directed where they are described.
And every year, as your stock increases, you may dispose them according to
your own fancy, or alter the places of any Roots that lose their Fibers, at
your pleasure; but such Flowers, whose Roots retain them, are considerately to
be placed at first, where they may stand diverse years without removing.

It will be requisite to have in the middle of one side of this Flower-garden a
handsome Octangular Somer-house, roofed every way, and finely painted with
Landskips, and other conceits, furnished with Seats about, and a Table in the
middle, which serves not only for delight and entertainment, to fit in and
behold the beauties of the Flowers, but for many other necessary purposes; as
to put the Roots of Tulips and other Flowers in, as they are taken up, upon
Papers, with the names upon them, until they be dried, that they may be
wrapped up and put in Boxes; for writing the names, both in planting and taking
up, of all Flowers, in order as you dispose them: for shelter in case of a
sudden shower of rain, and diverse other purposes you will find this House to be
fit for, which is indeed a thing so necessary, that it cannot (with any
convenience) be wanting, and therefore ought to be considered in the setting up
of the Walls, wherein it is to be placed, so that it come not further into the
Garden than the just breadth of the Border, for putting of it out of square.

These Gardens will not be maintained and kept well furnished, without a
Nurcery, as well of Stocks for Fruits, as of Flowers and Seedlings, where many
pretty Conclusions may be practiced for the raising of new varieties of diverse
kinds, which is indeed the principal part of a Florist: and here you may yearly
make your Hot Bed, for the raising of choice Annuals. In the side of this
Nurcery you should also have a convenient House to put in such necessary Tools
as are to be used about the Gardens, as a Skreen, a fine Wier-riddle, two
Spades, a bigger and a lesser, likewise Shovels, and Howes of several sizes, a
Pruining-hook, Grafting-knives, a Saw, a Chissel and Mallet, as also a small
Penknife for Inoculating, and laying of Gilliflowers, a Line and Rule, Trowels
of several sizes, a handsome Hammer, with two pair of Garden-shears, and two
Iron Rakes, a bigger and longer in the head, and a shorter with the Teeth
thicker set, with several Baskets of Twigs, and Besoms, to sweep and carry away
the clensings of the Gardens; as also for the keeping of Roots after they are
taken up, Seeds, and such like things; but chiefly for the housing your Greens
and other tender Plants in Winter; for which purpose it ought to have a Stove,
or raised Hearths in several places, that with a small Fire you may gently
attemper the Air in time of hard Frosts. Also in this Nurcery there should be
always kept a provision of Dung of several sorts, as that of Neats, Hogs,
Horses and Sheep, Pigeons and Poultrey, each of these laid severally on heaps,
the four first mixed with Lime, and all of them covered with Earth, to putrify
and rot, that they may be ready to sift, and supply the Flower-garden on all
occasions: for if your Ground be hot and sandy, Neats dung with Lime is the
best; if cold and inclining to clay, that of Horses, Pigeons or Poultry is good
to help it; for Fruit Trees Hogs dung well rotted is good, especially in hot
Grounds; for Gilliflowers Sheeps dung, for Auricula Neats dung sifted, with
little Earth in it; old Wood-pile earth and Willow earth are both good for
tender Plants that will not endure Dung. These several Composts being had in
readiness, and applied with discretion, all the noble Plants and Flowers, whose
Descriptions hereafter follow, by the Rules there set down may be increased,
preserved, and kept in their best perfection.

The convenience of Water to these Gardens is very considerable, and if it be
to be drawn or pumped out of a Well, a Ciftern is necessary, which filled, and
let stand in the Sun two or three days, will be fit to water any young or
tender Plant whatsoever: for which purpose you should have three Watering-pots,
one of the ordinary fashion of Tin or white Iron, with a Head full of small
holes; another with a Pipe only to let out the water; a third of Earth, with a
small neck, and many small holes in the bottom: the first is to water Plants in
Somer; the second to water Pots with rank water, wherein the dung of Sheep,
Pigeons or Poultrey has been imbibed, that it may be put to the Roots of
Gilliflowers, and other housed Plants, without wetting or staining the Leaves
or Branches; the third being put into water will fill from the bottom, which
will stay in so long as you stop out the air with your Thumb at the top; this
fitly serves to water young and tender Seedlings of Auricula, and such like,
without washing the Earth from them; for by the motion of your Thumb you may
cause the water to fall gently upon them, more or less, as you shall desire. It
is also necessary to have a small Pump, either of Wood or white Iron, about a
yard long, with a Sucker and Sweep like ordinary Pumps, only the lower end,
and also the hole in the end of the Pipe from whence the water issues, if made
of Wood, are to be covered with Plates full of holes: with this Pump, being put
into a Pail or Cowl of water, you may soon water a whole Garden; but the
chiefest use of it is, to eject water up into Wall-trees to wash away
Mill-dews, Caterpillars, and other noisome vermin, as also to cause the Fruits
in hot and dry seasons to be fairer, and to ripen much the better.

And now, because laying of Branches, planting by Cuttings, Budding, and the
Hot Bed, are often mentioned in the following Directions, it will be necessary,
for the avoiding of Repetition, in this place to inform such as are to learn
how these several Operations are to be performed.

And first for the laying of Gilliflowers, make choice of such Slips as are
strongest and fittest to lay, prune the sides and ends of the topleaves, and
under the middlemost joint cut the stalk half through, and slit the same
upwards to the next joint; make a hole in the Earth something wide, and gently
bend it down thereinto with a small hooked stick to keep it from rising, then
turn up the head of the Slip that the slit may open, in which posture hold it
with one hand and earth it up with the other, pressing it down to keep the Slip
upright; lastly water it. Now there are some good Slips that grow so far from
the ground that they cannot be laid therein; in this case we make use of small
Pots with a slit in the one side, through which we draw the prepared Slip into
the Pot, holding it down, and covering the slit with a thin plate of Lead
provided for the purpose, bending the upper end over the edge of the Pot to
stay it, turning up the Slip, and filling the Pot with fine rich Earth pressed
down to keep it from rising. These Slips, Pots, and all other Slips laid, must
be often watered, which will cause them to get roots the sooner. The best time
for laying of Gilliflowers is from the middle of June to the same time in July;
the sooner the better, provided the Slips be well grown; hard enough to endure
cutting and bending down. In the beginning of September you may take them off
with Earth about them, and set them in Beds or Pots filled with good Earth
before prepared; place these Pots in the shade, and sometimes gently water
them, but take heed of too much wet, lest it rot the small fibers, and so
destroy the young Plants; which, for prevention of great Rains, ought to be
sheltered with a shelf of thin Boards provided for the purpose, which place not
too near them, that they may not want air.

Now for the laying of Roses, Gasmines, Jreens, and other woody Plants, after
directed to be raised by Layers, make choice of such a Lance or Branch as may
easily be bended to the ground; those Shoots of the same year are best, and
root soonest; cut it half through on the under-side at a knot or joint if it
have any, then slit the same upward two or three inches long, and prick the
Bark thorough with a blunt-pointed Awl, in diverse places about the slit; take
off the tops of all laid Plants except Greens, then make a wide hole to hook it
down, and proceed as in Gilliflowers. In such Plants as are unapt to root, bind
the upper end of the slit very hard with a Packthred or Wier, which will stop
the sap, and hasten the effect desired; and fail not to put some rank Earth
about the place laid. The best time to lay Greens, or indeed any other Plants,
is about the middle of August, that they may prepare for rooting at the Spring:
these Layers having passed a year in the ground, will be ready to be taken off;
and if you find them well rooted, it will be seasonable to remove them;
otherwise they may stay a year longer. All Layers must be frequently watered,
which will cause them to root the better.

Cuttings are to be taken as soon as the Sap begins to rise, and cut sloping
from a knot or joint, at the lower end, like a Deers foot, and left about a
foot long; make a deep Trench and lay them therein a little sloping, fill the
Trench with good Earth pressed down something hard, within two fingers of the
smaller ends. All Plants that will grow of Cutting, will root sooner being
laid, but Cuttings (of such Plants as we have not our selves) may be had of
others, and in that case chiefly to be used. These Cuttings must be often
watered, as the former.

As for Budding or Inoculating of Roses, it is performed after the same manner
as that of Fruits, where among the several ways of Grafting you will find ample
direction for the doing thereof.

When you are to make a Hot Bed, cast all your Horse-dung and wet Litter on a
heap, in a corner of the Stable, that is of a fortnights gathering, more or
less, according to your store; then in the place where you intend to make it,
knock in four Stakes, which must be left a yard at least above ground, place
them at the corners, so that the Bed may be four foot broad, and of what length
you please, then lay the Horse-dung with the wet Litter betwixt the Stakes
suitably, not more short dung in one place than another, until you have raised
it two foot high, which tread down hard all over, and let not one place be
softer than another; then in the same manner raise it two foot higher, which
tread down as the former, and so proceed until you have raised the Bed a full
yard high after it is hard trodden; which done, knock in more Stakes about it,
beat up the sides close, and wrap it about with large ropes of Hay, or long
Litter, two wreaths above the dung, then take some of the Earth of an old hot
Bed, or of the best in your Kitchin-garden, and sift it, which lay on your Bed
four inches thick; arch it over with small Poles, and cover it with Mats,
Hair-cloth, or Canvas, which will cause it to heat in four or five days, then
give it air, and when the violent heat is over sow your Seeds, and cover the
Bed again; the next day, if you find the Bed over hot, give it more air; if too
cold, cast some Straw on the covering until the heat return, which by
thrusting your finger into the Earth you may find whether too hot or cold; and
by this means by airing and covering you may keep the Bed in a constant temper,
which should be warm rather than hot. When the Seeds come up, give them air to
dry the moisture raised by the heat of the Bed; and for your choicest Seeds,
cover them from the Sun with Glasses raised to give them air, and some part of
the day take them off, to acquaint the young Seedlings with the Sun by degrees,
which grown strong, take up and plant in rich Earth in your Garden, but keep
them from the midday Sun until they are well settled in their new lodging.

We shall now give you some Draughts for Gardens, and then proceed to acquaint
you with our Plants and Flowers.

CHAP. I.
Laurus.
THE Bay Tree among the Greens for many special properties may challenge
Priority; and therefore we will begin with some noble kinds thereof, omitting
that common Bay wherewith all are so well acquainted, and fix that ever fresh
and flourishing Fruit-bearer in the front of our Florilege, called

Laurocerasus.
THe Bay-cherry is a stately ever green Tree, growing in some places ten or
twelve foot high, but most commonly in a thick Bush full of boughs and
branches, covered in the old with a gray, and in the young, green bark;
plentifully adorned with thick, bright-shining green leaves, and many long
stalks set with whitish flowers, which are succeeded by small Cherries, black
when ripe, with stones like to the common Cherries. The aptness of this to be
increased has made it common, and therefore seldom admitted into curious
Flower-gardens; yet it may be a fit ornament for Court-walls, and those on the
North side of the Fruit-garden.

Laurus Tinus.
THe Wild Bay being spread upon a Wall will be five or six foot high, and full
of branches, bearing at every joint two leaves, which are smooth, something
long, and of a dark green color: at the tops of the branches come forth great
tufts of small white flowers, with blush edges, sometimes succeeded by small
blew berries, wherein the seed is contained. There is another of this kind
called Laurus Tinus folio glabro, that differs only in that the leaves are
larger, and of a brighter green color.

Laurus Tinus Lusitanica.
THe Wild Bay of Portugal differs from the last, in that the leaves are
harder, fuller of veins, and of a browner green color, and the flowers a
little inclining to purple; the berries like those of the former, but smaller.

Laurus Rosea, sive Oleander.
THe Rose Bay Tree is of two sorts, the one bearing red flowers, and the other
white, in no other respect differing: the stem grows to the bigness of a
Man's Thumb, divided into three branches, bearing at every joint, long, hard,
thick, dark, green leaves; at the ends of the branches come forth the flowers,
which are of a deep blush color in the one, and white in the other, consisting
of four long narrow round-pointed leaves, which with us fall away without
bringing seeds.

Laurus Indica.
THe Indian Bay with us thrives slowly, and is seldom found above four foot
high: it grows in a thick bush, the branches covered with a yellowish green
bark, thick set with leaves, which are betwixt those of the Cherry-Bay and the
common kind, something resembling those of the Cytron-tree: the flowers grow in
a long spike of a greenish white color, succeeded by berries like small
Olives. This fine Plant is a stranger in England, and (though an Indian, yet)
if defended from Frosts in Winter, will last many years, and may be increased
by Layers.

Having now set down so many Bays as we think fit for this place, we will
conclude with two other Greens, which in their beautiful still-green leaves
much resemble them; for should we follow the method of an Herbal, and place
every kind in a particular Chapter, we should not so well inform such as desire
to be Florists, either in the choice of, and manner how, to order, plant and
dispose every particular, which is a knowledge chiefly to be inquired and
learned by all ingenious lovers of these delights.

Mala Arantia.
THe Orenge-tree considered as it grows with us, may more fitly be placed
among the Greens than with the Fruits; for that all the benefit it affords
us, consists in the beauty of the ever-green leaves and sweet smelling
flowers, the fruit in our cold Country never coming to maturity. Orenge-trees
in Spain and other hot Countries grow to tall and fair trees, but with us seem
no other than shrubs. The bark of the elder boughs is brown, and the younger
green, with some thorns; the leaves are large, and of a fresh shining green
color, twining a little like those of Ivy, with many small holes in them, of
a strong sweet sent, and never falling until new thrust them off; the flowers
are of a whitish color, and very sweet, succeeded by small round green fruit,
which in time grows to be something large, and of a yellowish red color, as
every one knows; for although the Tree be rare and strange to many, the Fruit
is common and well known unto all.

Arbutus.
THe Strawberry-tree grows slowly, seldom rising to more than two yards high
in Ireland its proper Country, but with us not so tall; the body has a rough,
and the branches a smooth, bark: the leaves are alternately green like the
Bays, finely purled about the edges, long and round pointed; the flowers grow
on the ends of the branches with long stalks, which are small little white
bottles, like those of the Lily of the valley, succeeded by red berries when
ripe, like to Strawberries, of a harsh taste, containing many small seeds.

The Cherry-Bay flowereth in May, and the fruit is ripe in September. The Wild
Bay flowereth in Winter, but in March and April is in its greatest beauty. The
Rose Bay and the Indian seldom flower before July. The two Wild Bays are hardy
and easily rised, either from Suckers or Layers: the two other; Rose Bays and
Orenges, are more tender, and must be planted in strong Cases to be housed in
Winter: the Rose Bay is apt to yield Suckers, by which it is increased, as the
Indian Bay by laying down the branches.

The Orenge-tree is in its greatest beauty in the Spring, in respect of the
sweet flowers, younger and elder fruits, with gallant green leaves, wherewith
this busy Plant is at one time (and at all times, in an agreeable Climate)
plentifully furnished. Young Plants may be raised by setting the Kernels in
March in rich Earth in Cases, to be housed in Winter, for they will not endure
one nights frost; they may be grafted in the bud, or by approach with some more
generous kind.

The Strawberry-tree is in its greatest glory in October and November, when the
berries are ripe, which mixing with the fine green leaves are a delightful
object. Young Plants are commonly raised from Seeds, and some by Layers, but it
will be long before they root, and when removed the Earth must be taken with
them, and carefully planted, for they are nice in their nonage, but elder
Plants very hardy, and will prosper under any warm Wall, and last many years.

CHAP. II.
Myrtus.
THE Myrtle-tree, by the care of the Curious that delight in things that are
so, may be preserved in our cold Country, although it be tender and impatient
of our long frosty Winters. In hot Countries there are many more diversities of
this Plant than we shall mention, or trouble our selves withal; for indeed
such tender things put us to more pains in their preservation, than they afford
us pleasure in the enjoyment, being rather a vexation than a delight: we will
therefore make choice of such, that by solemn invitation, diligent attendance,
and courteous entertainment, will vouchsafe to live with us, and leave the rest
to the Poets to grace the Elyzian Groves, or build green Bowers to shade the
Paphian Queen: and first of that best known,

Myrtus Latifolia.
THe Broad-leafed Myrtle grows in a thick bush, sometimes four or five foot
high, full of branches set with fine bright-shining, sweet, and ever-green
leaves, somewhat broad and long; at the joints of the branches come forth the
flowers, composed of fine small white leaves, with some white threads in the
middle, and very sweet; the roots consisting of many strings and fibers, as all
Trees, Shrubs, and Wood-plants do.

Myrtus minore folio.
THe Lesser-leafed Myrtle grows like the former, but not so high; the leaves
are thicker on the branches, and smaller pointed at the ends, like them, but of
a deeper green color, in other respects little differing.

Myrtus rotundiore folio.
THe Box-leafed Myrtle differs only from the last described, in that the
leaves of this are round-pointed, like unto the leaves of Box, in all other
parts agreeing. There is another narrow-leafed Myrtle, with small sharp-pointed
leaves and branches erect, for which it is called the upright Myrtle, and we
have another with narrow leaves, thick set with close-compacted branches,
whence called the Birds-nest Myrtle.

Myrtus latifolia flore pleno.
THe double-flowered Myrtle in the manner of growing and green leaves is like
unto the first described, only as it is more tender, it grows neither so
large nor tall; the chiefest difference is in the flowers, which in this are
white like those of the other, but very thick and double, and of a delicate
sweet sent.

Myrtus Boetica latifolia.
THe great Spanish or Laurel-leafed Myrtle is bigger in all the parts than any
of the former; it rises to the height of a Man, and the leaves are like those
of the Bay, but of a whiter green color, set in a double row on both sides the
branches, sweet in sent, and in flowers and fruit little differing from the
first described.

These are the varieties of Myrtles preserved in Cases by our best Florists,
and diligently housed in Winter, yet the last is more hardy, and with any care
will endure (planted at large) the violence of Winter. We shall now subjoyn two
other fine Greens, and so conclude this Chapter.

Gelsiminum Indicum flavum odoratissimum.
THe sweet yellow Indian Jasmine is a beautiful Green, and rises with us about
two foot high, dividing into branches, covered with a purplish colored Bark,
adorned with many fair shining, dark, ever-green leaves, in fashion like those
of the Pomegranate, but longer and broader; the flowers are like in form to
those of the common white Jasmine, but bigger, of a fair yellow color and
sweet sent; in their natural Country succeeded by fruits like small Olives,
which with us flowering late never arrive to any perfection.

Phyllirea Variegata.
THe Variegated or striped Phyllirea is the most beautiful of all the kinds,
and therefore in this place to be described as deserving a Case, and to stand
among the fairest Greens: for the other sorts (fit only to form ever-green
Hedges) you will find in the end of this Volume among Greens more vulgar. This
fine Plant rises (if suffered) to the height of a Man, thick set with small
branches, and those with small ever-green leaves constantly edged and striped
with white, and may by the Shears be fashioned into what form you affect.

The Myrtles blossom about the middle of August, and continue flowering
commonly until the middle of December: the Indian yellow Jasmine flowers about
the same time; and the striped Phyllirea, whose glory consists in the
variegated ever-green leaves, is at all times a choice object of delight, and
hardy enough to be planted at large, where a little defended from Snows and
Frosts, it will endure the Winter as well as the more ordinary kinds.

All these Plants are commonly set in Cases, and with Orenges and tender Plants
housed in Winter, and increased by Layers after the manner before directed. The
best time to transplant the more hardy kinds of Greens is about the Tenth of
March, and for the more tender to be set in Cases toward the end of April: the
Earth you set them in must be fresh, and such that has long lain on an heap
well mixed with good old Neats dung, often turned and well mixed until
thoroughly rotted; but before this Earth be put into the Cases, it must be
skreened or sifted, and a good quantity of short sticks of Oler, Withy, or any
other soft wood, else broken bricks, pebblestones, and such like rubbish, laid
in the bottom of the Cases to draw away superfluous moisture and prevent
clogging, which would rot the smaller fibers, and spoil the Plants, if not
destroy them. Small sticks also cut short must in some quantity be mingled with
the Earth, wherewith fill the Cases within three inches of the top; these
sticks will keep the Mould hollow and from clinging; which done, raze or cut
the bottoms of your Roots, and artificially set your Greens and other tender
Plants therein, but not too deep by any means, rather choosing to leave some
part of the Roots uncovered, than to place them too much under ground; as soon
as they are set water them, and keep them sheltered from Wind and Sun until
they have taken root; after a fortnight you may by degrees acquaint them with
the Air, and when you find they have gotten strength, set them abroad. The same
order is to be used with such Layers as you shall take off to plant in Cases in
August.

Commit your Cases with Orenges, Myrtles, and other tender Plants, betimes,
before the first Frosts, to their Winter Quarters the Conservatory, but shut
them not up in the daytime especially, unless constrained by Fogs or Frosts,
which lasting long, you must on fairer days acquaint them again with the Sun
and Air by degrees; during extreme Frosts, and when Water will freeze in your
Conservatory, in default of Stoves or raised Hearths, you must attemper the Air
with Pans of Charcole, especially at night, let the Coals be half burnt out
before the Pans be placed, and then not set too near the Plants. In March, when
the great Frosts are past, open the doors, and give them Sun and Air by
degrees, a little at first, which increase with the Spring; about the end of
April set them forth, and wash them clean (especially the Greens) with a
Watering-pot from dust and cobwebs; and you must not forget while they are in
the house to water them gently, especially in November, and after long Frosts,
but let not the water touch the Leaves of any of the Greens, and choose rather
to give housed Plants too little water than too much. As soon as the Heats
begin, cover the Earth in the Cases some considerable thickness with Moss, it
will keep the Earth moist and from clinging, and water them as you find cause.
Every Spring and Autumn, that is, a little before you set forth your Plants,
and before you house them, you must take some of the Earth out of the Cases,
and open the rest with a Fork or other fit tool, not hurting the roots of the
Plants, and fill them up again with rank Earth, two parts Dung, well rotted and
preserved for that and such like purposes.

These are the Rules observed by Mr. John Rose, the ingenious Keeper of the
Garden at Essex-house in the Strand, where is now to be seen under his regiment
a most noble Collection of the choicest Greens and rarest Shrubs that are
planted in Cases, in a most healthy and flourishing condition.

CHAP. III.
Florentium Arbuscularum.
OF Flower-bearing Trees and Shrubs, which fall their leaves in Winter, and
renew them again every Spring, there are many kinds; in this place we will
mention the rarest, and such only as are fittest to furnish our Flower-garden,
and leave the rest to beautify the end of our Book. And first of the biggest
and best known,

Cerasus flore pleno.
THe double-flowered Cherry is in all parts thereof like unto the common
English Cherry-tree, the only difference is in the flowers, which of this are
large, thick and double, of a pure white color, and many growing together,
which fall away without bearing fruit, recompencing that defect by the
multitude of fair double flowers wherewith it is yearly adorned. There is
another double-blossom'd Cherry of the kind of the common small black Cherry,
which the French call Merisziere, that bears large double flowers as big as
the lesser double white Rose; this is common in France, and doubtless a little
time will make it so in England.

Arbor Persica flore multiplici.
THe double flowered Peach-tree differs in nothing from the ordinary, but
only in the flowers, those of this being double, consisting of three or more
rows of leaves, of a reddish blush color, seldom succeeded by any fruit, the
beauty of the flowers recompencing that defect.

Balaustium, sive Malus Punica silvestris.
THe double-blossom'd wild Pomegranate-tree is the rarest of all the flowering
Trees and Shrubs, if pruned up it will grow seven foot high, otherwise, in a
thick bush full of small branches, with some thorns thereon, and many small
shining green leaves, which fall away in Winter, and are renewed late in the
Spring; at the sides and ends of the branches come forth many hard, hollow,
reddish, or Coral-coloured cups, and out of them most beautiful flowers, as big
and double as the largest and thickest Province-rose, and of an excellent
bright crimson color. There is another of this kind with double flowers, that
is lesser in all the parts thereof, the leaves of a sadder green, and the
flowers more inclining to the color of an Orange: we also hear of another,
with double striped flowers, which is yet a stranger in England.

Syringa, sive Gelsiminum Arabicum.
THe double white Pipe-tree or Jasmine of Arabia is a rare and tender Shrub,
much desired by all Florists: it has diverse long, slender, stiff, woody
branches, whereon grow many fair large leaves, something resembling those of
the common white Syringa, but smoother, larger, eaven at the edges, and of a
fresh green color, two standing at every joint one against the other, and at
each joint contrary to other; at the ends of the branches come forth diverse
flowers, standing on several footstalk, each in a hose, like those of the
common white Jasmine, containing fair double flowers, consisting of two, and
sometimes three, rows of round-pointed white leaves, each row containing five
or six leaves: the middle of the flower is hollow and something yellow, of a
strong sweet sent, like unto that of Orange flowers.

Syringa laciniatis foliis, sive Gelsiminum Persicum.
THe blue Syringa with cut leaves, or Persian Jasmine, comes up with many
small woody branches, finely decked with dainty green leaves, which are small,
long, cut in, and divided almost to the middle rib, some into three small
leaves on a side, and a larger at the point, others into two, and some have but
one on each side, and that bigger at the end. All these varieties are commonly
to be seen in the leaves of this fine Plant; at the end of the branches come
forth the flowers many together, in fashion like unto those of the ordinary
blue Syringa or Lylac, but smaller, and of a finer purplish blue color, and
better sent.

Oleaster exoticus.
THe strange wild Olive, or Tree of Paradise, is a sweet and beautiful Plant,
and, though a great stranger, is contented with our homely entertainment: it
rises up with woody shoots, of a dark yellowish color, set with long narrow
whitish green leaves, bearing along the branches diverse small flowers, of a
greenish yellow color, which (in its natural Country, but seldom with us) are
succeeded by green berries like unto small Olives, which when they are ripe
will be of a reddish color; the whole Plant, as well leaves as flowers, is of
a sweet and pleasant sent. This out of Ferrarius.

Cytisus Maranthe.
Horned Tree Trifoile rises four or five foot high, the body seldom bigger
than a Man's Thumb, covered with a whitish bark, and the branches more white;
the leaves stand three together, lesser, rounder and whiter, than those of the
ordinary Laburnum; the flowers are like those of Broom, of a gold yellow
color, which in May come forth three or four together at the ends of the
branches, succeeded by crooked flat thin Cods, like Horns or Half-moons, from
whence called by the additions of Corniculatus and Lunatus; it is a tender
Plant, usually set in Cases, and housed with Greens in Winter, not to be
increased by Seeds or Layers, but by taking off some new Slips in June, setting
them in the shade, and keeping the Earth moist by frequent but gentle waterings.

Althaea fruticosa.
SHrub Mallow has woody branches covered with a whitish bark, set with soft
woolly whitish green leaves, in fashion like those of the Ribes or Curran-tree;
the flowers are large and like those of a single Holly-hock, in some of a deep
reddish or violet-purple, in others paler or lighter, with the bottom of a
deeper purple, running into the leaves in small veins; and there is another
that has fresher green leaves and white flowers, with a large purple-spot in
the bottom. Of this sort there is another that has the flowers striped with
faint purple or blush lines.

Amomum Plinii.
TRee Nightshade rises about a yard high, with a woody stemm, and many green
branches set with small long green leaves, something uneaven at the edges,
which fall away in Winter; at the joints of the branches it puts forth two
or three flowers together of a star-like form, turning back the leaves, which
are white with a yellow pointill in the middle, like unto those of the ordinary
Nightshade, which falling away are succeeded by small green berries, that in
December will be of a fine red color, like unto little red Cherries, wherein
is contained small flat white seeds.

Solanum fruticosa.
THe Shrub Nightshade has a woody stock and branches about a yard high, of a
dark brown color, with sad green leaves; the flowers are like those of the
common Nightshade, in one white, and in another of a blue color. There is one
of this kind that has the green leaves variegated with white.

Spiraea frutex.
THe Shrub Spiraea rises up with diverse woody stalks about a yard high, set
with leaves like those of Sally, but lesser and nicked on the edges, at the
tops of the stalks come forth diverse small pale Peach-coloured flowers, thick
set together in a long spike, lessening by degrees like a pyramid; the root is
woody and lasting, flowers in August, endures the Winter, and is increased by
Layers.

Hypericum frutex.
WOody St. John's wort has two, three, or more woody stalks, which rise about a
yard high, beset at certain distances with tufts of small green leaves, and
among them many small flowers, white, and a little purple in the middle; this
pretty Plant flowereth in the end of April, endures the Winter, and is
increased (as the former) by Layers.

Mezerion.
DWarf Bay grows in a thick bush full of branches, in some old Plants rising
three or four foot high, covered with a tough bark, and set with small whitish
round-pointed green leaves, which fall away in Autumn; the flowers are small,
consisting of four leaves, growing thick and close together on the sides of the
new Shoots, wherewith they are on all sides covered, which in one (the most
common) are of a pale blush color, in another white, and in a third of a deep
Peach-colour almost red; these flowers are sweet, and may be smelled at
distance; which being past, in their places come forth many small berries,
which when they are ripe are of a red color.

The double-flowered Cherry is in blossom in April, and the double-flowered
Peach in March; the Cherry may be grafted in any other Cherry-stock, but the
best way is to make choice of a stock that is big enough to hold two grafts,
which may be grafted near the ground, the one graft of this, and the other of
the Flanders Cluster-cherry, which growing up together, planted against a wall,
the branches intermixed and nailed one within the other, so that after the
double flowers of the one are past, the double fruits of the other may succeed,
will be a wonder to those that do not understand by what means it is brought to
pass, conceiving both to proceed from one kind. The double Peach will thrive
best, and bring forth fairer flowers, being spread upon a wall, having been
inoculated on an Apricock-stock.

The Balaustium brings forth its beautiful flowers toward the end of August;
it is a tender Plant, and must be either set in Boxes that it may be housed in
Winter, or else under a South wall where it may have the benefit of the Sun in
Somer, and the roots about it covered with Pease-straw or Litter to keep them
warm from freezing in the Winter, and the branches also must be thatched with
Broom, or some other provision, to defend them from nipping frosty air, which
otherwise will cause them to die even to the ground, and many times never to
spring again: but those that are desirous to preserve this and other tender
Plants, and have a convenient house to remove them into in Winter, then this
may be so handled, and not trusted abroad in the open air, for that the trouble
of housing and preserving of a few, will be almost as great as that of many;
and new Plants may be raised either from Suckers, which it is apt to yield, or
by laying down the branches.

The double white Syringa, or Arabian Jasmine, brings forth its fair odorous
flowers from the beginning of May until the end of September; it is a great
stranger in England, and very apt to leave us upon the least dislike; therefore
those that desire to entertain so curious and nice a guest, must aford it warm
lodging in the Winter, and diligent attendance in the Spring, when first it
comes abroad, and then perhaps it may be complemented to an acceptance of our
courser country fare.

The blue Syringa with a cut leaves, or Persian Jasmine, flowereth in April,
and is as courteous as the other is curious, it will live abroad in the open
air planted under a wall, and yield us increase by laying down the branches, or
by cuttings, being apt to root and thrive if a little defended from Frosts in
Winter.

The Oleaster flowereth in May, and is planted and increased in the same manner
as the last mentioned, and endures the Winter as well. I intend that described
by Ferrarius, and not that kind common with us, which wants the properties
said to belong to this noble Plant.

The Shrub-Mallows show their flowers commonly in August, sometimes later; they
are tender, and must be planted under a wall, and defended in Winter: the usual
way to raise them is by laying down the branches in the Earth, and sometimes
from the seeds gained out of hotter Countries, for ours seldom bring any to
perfection: they may be grafted the Aproach-way one upon another, so that from
one root you may have all the forementioned varieties.

Tree Nightshade is a Plant well known, and chiefly respected for the beauty
of the red berries, which will abide on the branches in Winter, at which time
standing among Myrtles and other Greens, it makes a fine show: it is raised by
sowing the seeds in March, which are apt to come up and grow, especially if
they be sowed in a Pot of good Earth, and housed in the Winter.

The Shrub Nightshade is in flower toward the end of May, and increased by
Layers.

The blossoms of the Mizerions begin to appear in the end of January, and
usually continue flowering until the beginning of April; they are hardy, and
will grow any where; the way to raise them is by sowing the berries as soon as
they are ripe, which will be about the middle of July; they will lie long in
the ground before they come up, therefore are usually sowed in some large Box
filled with good Earth, and set in some place out of the way, where it will
need no other attendance than only weeding; the second Spring after the
sowing, and not before, they will come up: they which have nigh stood a year or
two, may be removed according to the pleasure of the owner.

CHAP. IV.
Rosa.
THE Rose-tree is of diverse excellent kinds, not known to former Ages,
wherewith our English Gardens are now graced, and here in this place to be
handled, together with our old store, which for many respects are not to be
neglected; and first we will begin with the red Rose of England, the most
common and best known of all others, and in order proceed to the rest.

Rosa rubra Anglica.
THe English red Rose, wherewith all persons are so well acquainted, that it
needs no description; we have observed some variety therein, the flowers of
some to be of a far deeper Red than those of others, and others to be much
doubler and thicker of leaves than the common kind, whereof I have one that is
of a deep red color, and as thick and double as any Rose whatsoever: and of
late we have found another of this kind, with striped beautiful flowers, thence
called

Rosa mundi.
THe Rose of the world in all the parts differs not from this ordinary red
Rose, but only in the color of the flowers, which in this are for the most
part of a pale blush color, diversely spotted, marked and striped, throughout
every leaf of the double flower, with the same red color which is in the
ordinary red Rose, so that it is the most beautiful to behold of all the
striped or variegated Roses we yet have seen; the scent, as the form of the
flowers, is like unto that of the common red Rose.

Rosa Hungaria.
THe Hungarian Rose, for the manner of growing, is like the common red Rose,
only the Shoots are green; the flowers differ in that they are of a paler red
color, with many faint spots spread over the leaves of the double flower,
which in shape and scent is like unto the ordinary red Rose; this is of small
beauty, and only received by Florists for a variety.

Rosa Provincialis flore rubro.
THe red Province Rose has branches and leaves much like unto those of the
common red Rose, but bigger and greener; the flowers are large, thick and
double, spreading very broad, and laid open, of a paler red color and sweeter
scent than the ordinary red Rose; of this kind I have one whose flowers are
constantly spotted and marbled with deeper and paler red.

Rosa Belgica, sive vitrea, flore rubro.
THe red Belgic Rose is in branches and leaves very like unto the common red
Rose, but much taller; the flowers are exceeding thick and double, full of
small leaves in the middle, and bigger on the outsides of the flowers, which
when it is full-blown will turn toward the stalk; the whole flower is of a
fine deep red color, and inferior to no Rose of one color whatsoever; the
sent is like to that of the common red Rose: this by some is called the Duke of
Rowans Rose, as growing plentifully in his Garden. By our unlearned Florists
and Nurcery-men, the Vitriol Rose, the African Rose, the Marigold Rose, are all
one thing.

Rosa rubra humilis.
THe dwarf red Rose, by some called the Gilliflower Rose, grows low, and
never rises so high as the ordinary red Rose; like unto it, but with fewer
thorns: the flowers are but small, yet thick and double, which in the bud
before they open stand round and eaven, as if they had been clipped off with, a
pair of Cisers, but when they are fully blown, are fine round double Roses, of
a pleasant Carnation color, and of the sent of the ordinary red Rose.

Rosa holoserica multiplex.
THe double Velvet Rose has the young Shoots of a sad reddish green color,
with few or no thorns thereon; the leaves are like those of the common red
Rose, but of somewhat a sadder green; the flowers contain two or three rows of
leaves, which are of a dark red Velvet color, with some marks of a lighter red
in them, and many yellow threads in the middle: this seldom bears any store of
Roses, neither has it any better sent than the ordinary red Rose.

Rosa marmorea.
THe marbled Rose in the manner of growing does much resemble the Velvet Rose,
the greatest difference is in the flowers, for those of this are larger, very
double, and of a light red color, marbled, veined, and marked with a deeper
and lighter bluish gray-deline, very variably, some more than others, and some
sadder and more inclining to purple, so that many times all these diversities
on one bush are to be seen blown together; for it is a plentiful bearer, and,
besides the beauty of the Roses, the sent is very good, like, but better than
that of the red Province Rose.

Rosa sine spinis.
THe Rose without thorns, or the Virgin Rose, is in shoots and leaves like unto
the marbled Rose, but greener and smoother, without any thorns at all; the
flowers are not so thick and double, spreading their leaves and standing
forward from each other, of a pale red color, with part of them on the faces
of a pale blush, and the backsides of every leaf wholly of whitish pale color,
so that the Roses when they come well (for sometimes they will seem as blasted)
are fair and very sweet.

Rosa Francofurtensis.
THe Francford Rose has strong reddish shoots full of thorns, with large thick
whitish green leaves, the button under the Rose being bigger than that of any
other; the flowers are thick and double, many times breaking in the bud, and
seldom opening fair or spreading their leaves smooth, but curled and crumpled,
of a bluish red color and sweet sent, like (but stronger) to that of the red
Rose.

Rosa Cinnamomia.
THe Cinnamon Rose, as every one knows, (it being as common as the first
ordinary red Rose) rises up with tall red shoots, bearing in May many small
double Roses, of a pale red color and faint sent, a little like unto that of
Cinnamon, from whence it took the name.

These are all the kinds of red Roses that hitherto have come to our knowledge,
and now we shall proceed to the varieties of Damask or paler-coloured Roses,
proper to be handled in the next place.

Rosa Damascena vulgaris.
THe common Damask Rose, although it be not so ancient an inhabitant of England
as the common red Rose, yet it is as well known, and all the parts thereof, so
that it needs no further description.

Rosa Damascena versicolor.
THe party-colored Damask Rose, or (as it was commonly called) York and
Lancaster, differs only from the ordinary Damask Rose, in that the flowers
are parted and marked, sometimes half the flower, and sometimes in some of the
leaves, with a pale blush almost white upon the Damask Rose color, from which
in no other thing it differs.

Rosa Crystallina.
THe Crystal Rose is in all parts thereof like unto the last, the only
difference is in the marking of the flowers, which in this are much fairer and
better than in those of the other, being usually striped, spotted, and marked
with pale white upon the Damask Rose color, throughout every leaf thereof, not
differing in sent or other respects from the two former.

Rosa Damscena variegata elegantior.
THe elegant variegated Damask Rose is something like the last described, only
the shoots are shorter and redder, and the leaves smaller, the flowers
something doubler, and often better marked than either of the former: this is
by some called Mrs. Hearts Rose.

Rosa Damascena Provincialis.
THe Damask Province Rose has longer shoots and leaves than any of the former,
and of a reddish green color; the Roses are somewhat of a deeper blush color
than those of the ordinary Damask, but three times as large, thick, and double,
as all know that have any acquaintance with flowers, being now too common; but
were it as scarce and hard to be obtained as some others are, it would be of as
much esteem as any whatsoever, the Roses being very fair, and the sent good.

Rosa mensalis.
THe monthly Rose is in all the parts thereof very like unto the Damask Rose;
it is said that in Italy it bears seven months in the year, but I could
never find or hear of any truth that it ever bore flowers in England above
three, that was, in June, about the middle of August, and toward the end of
September; the Roses are very like the Damask, but something more double, and
not all things so sweet.

Rosa Belgica, sive vitrea, flore rubicante.
THe blush Belgic Rose has bigger branches and fuller of thorns than any of
the former, the green leaves thicker, stiffer, and of a whitish green color,
the flowers grow many together on the ends of the branches, which are about the
bigness of the ordinary Damask Rose, but very thick and double, and of a fine
pleasant pale blush color and sweet sent: this is the greatest bearer of all
the Roses, and the distilled water thereof is almost as good as that of the
Damask: some call it the white Province Rose, and some the Batavick Rose.

And these are the diversities of the Damask or paler-coloured Roses; we shall
now proceed unto the yellow Roses, and set down such diversities of them as are
come to our knowledge.

Rosa lutea simplex.
THe single yellow Rose grows as high as the Damask, the young shoots are
full of small hairy prickles, and of a dark reddish color; the leaves are
small and the flowers single, containing but five leaves, of a pale yellow
color: it is but a wild Rose, and only entertained in Gardens for variety.

Rosa Austriaca flore phoenicio.
THe scarlet Rose of Austria is in all the parts thereof like unto the last
described, the chiefest difference is in the color of the flowers, which in
this on the inside of the leaves is of a fine scarlet, and on the outside of a
pale brimstone color; and although this Rose be but single like the former,
yet in respect of the color so different from all other Roses, it is esteemed
by all lovers of flowers.

Rosa lutea flore pleno.
THe double yellow Rose in the manner of growing does something resemble the
single kind; the shoots are small and not so red, the leaves are rather
smaller, and of a pale yellowish green color; the flowers, when they come
fair, (as they seldom do) are very thick and double, containing a multitude of
small pale yellow leaves, often with a great thrum in the middle, but when it
comes well it has no thrum at all, but the leaves are folded in the middle
like unto those of the Damask Province Rose: the sent is not considerable, its
glory consisting in the form and color only.

These are all the varieties of yellow Roses that as yet are come to our
knowledge, and now in the next place we will take a view of the diversities of
white Roses, beginning with the most common.

Rosa alba vulgaris.
THe common white Rose is so well known unto all persons, that it needs no
description; there are two sorts of ordinary white Roses, the one much doubler
and fairer than the other, the best kind bears fine double pure white Roses,
and sets off others very well, so that although it be common, yet we may
afford room for one bush among the rest to increase the number of varieties.

Rosa incarnata.
THe blush Rose differs in nothing from the ordinary white Rose, but only in
the color of the flowers, for those of this are at the first opening of a fine
pleasant blush color, which after grow something whiter, in all other respects
agreeing with the former.

Rosa moschata flore pleno.
THe double Musk Rose rises very high with many green branches, and dark green
shining leaves, armed with great sharp thorns, the flowers come forth on long
footstalk at the ends of the branches, many together in a tuft, most of them
flowering together, being small whitish or Cream-coloured Roses, not very
double, the first row of leaves being much bigger than the rest, which are
small, and stand loosly, not forming so fair a double flower as the ordinary
white Rose. There is another of this kind that bears single Roses, of much
lesser esteem than this; the flowers of both are chiefly valued for their
scent, which is sweet like unto Musk, from whence they took the name: commonly
they flower in August, after all others are past, but their usual time is in
September.

Rosa Moschata alter.
THe other Musk Rose of some called the Damask Musk Rose, and of others the
white Cinnamon Rose, is in the leaves and branches like the other, but grows
not so high, the leaves larger, and of a whiter green color, the flowers
bigger, whiter, and more double than those of the former, but not altogether so
sweet; this flowereth before the other in the end of other Roses, or presently
after them.

Rosa Canina flore pleno.
THe double Dog Rose in leaves and branches is like the lesser white Rose, or
wild kind hereof; the flowers are double, for which it is esteemed, of a faint
whitish blush color, and weak.

Rosa semper virens.
THe ever-green Rose grows like the wild Eglentine, the leaves fall not away
in Winter as those of other Roses, which property has imposed the name, but
stay on until they are thrust off at the Spring by new; the flowers stand four
or five together at the ends of the branches, which are single, containing but
five leaves, which are of a pure white color, and something in scent
resembling the Musk Rose.

Rosa Hispanica Moschata.
THe Spanish Musk Rose rises as high as the last, with great green branches,
and bigger green leaves; the flowers are single, containing five large white
leaves, with an eye of blush in them, like in scent to the last described.

Rosa Pomifera major.
THe great Apple Rose has a great stock and many reddish branches, with green
sharp thorns; the leaves are like those of the common white Rose, the flowers
small and single, standing on prickly buttons, bearded like other Roses, which
after the flowers are fallen, grow great, red, and of the fashion of a Pear,
which red berries or apples are the chiefest ornament of this kind.

Rosa Eglenteria flore duplici.
THe double Eglentine only differs from the common single wild kind, in
that the flowers of this are double, composed of two, and sometimes three rows
of leaves, of a pretty reddish color, the scent both of the green leaves and
flowers is the same with the wild kind.

All these several sorts of Roses do bring forth their fair, sweet, pleasant,
and profitable flowers in June, and continue flowering all that month, and
most part of July, except such only whose time is expressed in their
Descriptions.

The best and most esteemed are, first, of the red Roses that called Rosa
mundi, the Rose of the world; Vitriensis, the red Belgic Rose; the marbled
Rose, the Rose without thorns, and the red Province Rose: of the Damask Roses,
the crystal Rose, Mrs. Hearts Rose, the blush Belgic Rose, the monthly Rose,
and the Damask Province Rose: of the yellow Roses, the scarlet Austrian Rose,
and the double yellow Rose: of white Roses, the blush Rose, and the Damask Musk
Rose. These are all excellent Roses, and none of them would be wanting in any
good Florists Garden.

Roses are increased either by inoculating the buds of them in other stocks, or
by laying down the branches in the earth: the best stocks to be inoculated upon
are the Damask, the White, the Francford, and the wild Eglentine; the best
time about Midsomer, or as soon as good buds can begotten.

All stocks of budded Roses must be carefully kept from Suckers, and if the
Buds be placed near the ground, after one years growth the budded lance may be
laid in the earth to root, whereby it will become a natural Tree, one of which
is more worth than three that are budded, for that every Sucker that comes from
them will be of the same kind, whereby they may be increased; but all Roses are
not apt to yield Suckers, and therefore the speediest and most certain way is,
to lay down the branches, putting some old well rotted Dung about the place
where they are laid, which will make them root the sooner.

All Roses are hardy enough, and will endure the Frosts in Winter, and the
better the soil is you set them in, the better they will thrive, and the fairer
will be the flowers; they are usually disposed up and down the Garden in
bushes, and under walls, and set in rows or hedges, supported and kept in on
either side; the several-coloured Roses intermixed and well placed, blowing
together, will make a most gallant and glorious prospect. After they have done
bearing, they must be cut with the Garden-shears something near, and toward the
Spring each branch cut again with a knife close to a leaf-bud, and what is dead
or superfluous taken away. Now there are some Roses that are not fit to be
planted in a hedge; as the Musk Roses, which will not bear at all unless they
grow to some high wall or house-side, where they may have liberty to grow to
their full height, which will be commonly eight or nine foot high; also the
double yellow, which is the most unapt of all others to bear kindly and fair
flowers, unless it be ordered and looked unto in an especial manner; for
whereas all other Roses are best natural, this is best inoculated upon another
stock; others thrive and bear best in the Sun, this in the shade; therefore the
best way that I know to cause this Rose to bring forth fair and kindly flowers,
is performed after this manner; First, in the stock of a Francford Rose near
the ground put in a Bud of the single yellow Rose, which will quickly shoot to
a good length, then half a yard higher than the place where the same was
budded, put into it a Bud of the double yellow Rose, which growing, the Suckers
must be kept from the Root, and all the Buds rubbed off except those of the
kind desired, which being grown big enough to bear, (which will be in two
years) it must in Winter be pruned very near, cutting off all the small Shoots,
and only leaving the biggest, cutting off the tops of them also as far as they
are small; then in the Spring, when the Buds for leaves come forth, rub off the
smallest of them, leaving only some few of the biggest, which by reason of the
strength of the stock affording more nourishment than any other, and the
agreeable nature of the single yellow Rose from whence it is immediately
nourished, the Shoots will be strong and able to bear out the flowers, if they
be not too many, which may be prevented by nipping off the smallest Buds for
flowers, leaving only such a number of the fairest as the Tree may be able to
bring to perfection, which Tree would stand something shadowed, and not too
much in the heat of the Sun, and in a standard by it self rather than under a
wall. These Rules being observed, we may expect to enjoy the full delight of
these beautiful Roses, as I my self have often done by my own practice in
diverse Trees so handled, which have yearly born store of fair flowers, when
those that were natural, notwithstanding all the helps I could use, have not
brought forth one that was kindly, but all of them either broken, or as it were
blasted.

Tell me what flower kind Nature does disclose,
May be compared to the lovely Rose;
Whose Beauty, Virtue, Scent, and Colors are
In Life, in Death, in Bud and Blossom, rare.
And if one kind these graces all comprise,
What then in thirty choice varieties?
Friend, muse no more, nor reckon what else rare,
Since all conclude the Rose without compare;
But wing thy thoughts to mount three stories higher,
Up to his Throne that thus adorned the Briar.
And now after this long walk it will be time to retire, where we may sit in
some shady Bower, and behold the several flower-bearing and climbing woody
Plants, wherewith the same is covered and adorned, which with others of like
nature, but more rarity, shall be the subjects of our next discourse.

CHAP. V.
HAving done with so many of the flower-bearing Trees and Shrubs as we intended
for this place, we will treat of some other woody flower-bearing Plants, that
(being Climbers) serve conveniently to cover Somer-bowers: and first we will
begin with the Jasmines, whereof there are diverse excellent varieties, most of
them peculiar to such Countries, where the benignity of the Air and fertility
of the Soil is agreeable with such delicate and tender Constitutions: and
although we cannot expect such rare Plants to prosper in our cold Country, yet
there are some of this kind contented to live with us; with which and some
others more tender, together with Wood-binds and Virgins-bower, this Chapter
will acquaint you, and first with the most common.

Jasminum album.
THe white Jasmine has diverse green flexible branches, that come forth of the
bigger boughs, which proceed from the root, set with winged leaves of a dark
green color, standing two together at the joints, made of many small-pointed
leaves set on each side of a middle rib, usually three on a side, and one
bigger and more pointed at the end: at the tops of the young branches diverse
flowers come forth together in a tuft, each on a long foot-stalk, which are
small, long and hollow, opening into fine white-pointed leaves, and of a strong
sweet scent, which with us fall away without bringing seed.

Jasminum Catalonicum.
THe Catalonian or Spanish Jasmine rises not half so high as the former, the
branches and green leaves are like, but larger and shorter, the flowers are of
the same fashion, but much bigger, and before they are open of a blush color,
and after white with blush edges, more sweet than those of the former.

Jasminum Hispanicum multiplex.
THe double Spanish Jasmine is in the manner of growing like unto the last, the
greatest difference is in the flowers, which of this are white like the first,
but bigger and double, consisting of two rows of leaves, with some smaller
coming forth of the middle, or hollow bosoms of the flowers, which are as sweet
as those of the former.

Jasminum luteum.
THe yellow Jasmine has many long slender woody branches, rising from the
root, set at distances with three small dark green leaves together, the middle
or end-leaf being the biggest: at the joints where the leaves come forth stand
long stalks, bearing small long hollow flowers, ending in five, and sometimes
six, yellow leaves: after the flowers are past, round black-shining berries
succeed them; the roots are tough and white, creeping in the ground, and coming
up in diverse places much increasing.

Jasminum Indicum flore phoeniceo.
THe Indian scarlet Jasmine, from a large spread root, consisting of many great
fibers and smaller strings, comes up one, two, or more flexible branches, not
able to sustain themselves without the help of something to support them,
putting forth at every joint some small short tendrils, whereby it will
strongly fasten unto any woody substance: at the joints come forth two winged
leaves, which are as large almost as Rose leaves, full of veins, and finely
nicked on the sides, which most usually stand three on a side and one at the
end, which are reddish at the first, but afterward of a fair yellowish green
color; the flowers come forth at the ends of the branches many together, which
are long like a Fox-glove, opening at the ends into five fair broad leaves,
like unto that of the Gentianella, with a style and small threads in the middle,
of a yellow or Saffron color; in some Plants the flowers have small red lines
on the insides thereof, others of a deep dark scarlet color, veined with small
yellow lines.

These are the varieties of Jasmines growing in our English Gardens, unto which
we will insert some other woody climbing flower-bearing Plants, which seem
conveniently to cover and beautify some Bowers, as

Periclimenum perfoliatum.
THe double Honisuckle, which is so common that it needs no description, it
is very fit to cover an Arbor in respect of the much spreading thereof, and
the multitude of sweet flowers grow in five or six stories one above another,
with round green leaves circling the stalk betwixt every roundle of flowers,
which are of the form of the wild Honisuckle, but fairer, yellower, and much
sweeter.

Periclimenum Italicum flore rubro.
THe red Italian Honisuckle grows something like the wild kind, with such
green leaves, but redder branches, spreading very much, so that two Plants (one
of the former and another of this) are sufficient to cover a large Arbor: the
flowers of this are very many, coming forth together in great tufts from the
ends and sides of the red branches, which are longer and better formed than
those of the other, which at first, before they are fully blown, are wholly of
a fine red color, but afterward more yellow about the ends, or upon part of
the flowers, which make a gallant show, and are of a sweet scent, but not so
strong as the former.

Clematis peregrina flore rubro.
REd Virgins-bower has many limber woody weak branches, covered with a brown
thin outer bark, and green underneath, winding about any thing it can take hold
of; the leaves stand at the joints, consisting of three parts, whereof some are
notched on one side, and some on both; the flowers come from the joints upon
long footstalk, which are made of four leaves standing like a cross, of a
sullen dark-red or liver-colour: the roots are a bundle of browh strong
strings, fastened to a head running deep in the ground.

Clematis peregrina flore purpureo.
PUrple Virgins-bower differs nothing at all from the former, but only in
the color of the flowers, those of this being of a sad heavy bluish purple.

Clematis peregrina flore pleno purpureo.
THe double purple Virgins-bower in all the parts thereof is like unto the
former, but bigger and stronger; the flowers are of the same color with those
of the last described, and exceeding thick and double, the outward leaves being
broad like the former, and the inner narrow and folded close together, like a
large button in the middle of the flower, which open by degrees, but so slowly;
that the outward leaves commonly fall away, before the other open or show
themselves, which is a great defect in this flower. I have heard of two others
of this kind, which are said to grow in the Florists Gardens about Rome,
bearing double flowers, the one of a bluish Peach-colour, and the other white.

Maracoc, sive Clematis Virginiana.
THe Virginian Climber rises out of the ground in May, with many long round
winding stalks, more or less according to the age and liking of the Plant,
which will grow with us to be five, six, or more foot high; from the joints
come forth the leaves, at each one, and from the middle to the top a small
clasper, like that of the Vine, and a flower also; the leaves are broad at the
bottom, and about the middle divided into three parts, nicked about the edges;
the bud of the flower before it opens is like unto the seed-vessel of the
common single Nigilla, but longer, having at the top five crooked horns, which
opening, this bud or head divides it self into ten parts, susteining the
leaves of the flower, which are very many, long, sharp-pointed, narrow, and
orderly spread open one by another, some lying straight, others crooked; these
leaves are of a whitish color, thick-spotted with a Peach color, having
toward the bottom a ring of a perfect Peach-colour, and above and beneath it a
white circle, which adds much to the beauty of the flower, in the midst
whereof rises an Umbrane, which parts it self into four or five crooked
spotted horns; from the midst of these rises another roundish head, which
carries three nails or horns, biggest above and smallest at the lower end:
never with us is this flower succeeded by any fruit, but in the West Indies
(its natural Country) it bears a fruit like unto a Pomegranate, from whence
called there Granadilla, containing a whitish pulp, and many cornered rough
black seeds, of the bigness of Pear-kernels: the roots are long, somewhat
thicker than those of Sarsa Parilla, which run far in the earth, and put up
heads in several places.

The Jasmines bring forth their flowers from July until the middle of August;
the first white, and the common yellow are hardy, and will endure our cold
Winters, and increase fast enough by Suckers, but the Indian yellow is tender,
and not so easily raised; this and the Spanish, both sorts must be planted in
Pots, Tubs, or Boxes, that they may be housed in Winter: with us they are
usually increased (especially the Spanish kinds) by grafting them late in the
Spring the Approch-way, upon the stock of the common white Jasmine; the other
Indian Jasmine flowereth about August, and will endure the Winter if it be
defended in its nonage, but older Plants are hardy enough, and may be increased
by Layers; those which I have I raised from seeds which came from Virginia.

The double Wood-bind flowereth in May, and the red in the end of June: there
is nothing more easily increased, for every branch of either of them will take
root if it but touch the ground, much more if it be laid artificially therein:
the chief use of these and the common white Jasmine, is to cover Arbours, or
adorn the walls of houses.

Clematis or Virgins-bower, the several kinds thereof will be in flower most
part of July and August, they grow well with us, and endure long, easily
increased by laying the branches: these are commonly used to cover Arbours, for
which purpose they fitly serve; but many of the young and small branches are
apt to die in Winter, which must be pruned in March, and the nearer they are
cut, the fairer the flowers will be in Somer following.

The Maracoc brings forth his beautiful flowers in August, and is more tender
than the other; the stalks die to the ground every Winter, and spring again
from the roots in May, which must be covered and defended from extreme hard
frosts in Winter; the roots run far, and come up in diverse places, whereby it
may be much increased: we usually plant them in large Pots, in the richest
Earth we can get, which will stop the running of the roots, be conveniently
removed into a house in Winter, and into the Sun in Somer; for unless it stand
in some hot place, and the Somer be according, it will not bear at all;
therefore to help it forward, many with good success set the Pot with this
Plant up to the top in a Hot bed, where Melons or choice Annuals have been
sowed, as soon as they are taken off or removed.

CHAP. VI.
HAving passed through those greater woody flower-bearing Trees, Shrubs, and
Plants, we will proceed to some lesser, whose stalks like the last die to the
ground in Winter, and rise again from the roots at the Spring; and then
conclude with some small woody Plants, that for the beauty of their flowers are
preserved in our choicest Gardens.

Fraxinella flore rubente.
BAstard Dittany with a reddish flower rises up with diverse round hard woody
brownish stalks, about two foot high, the lower parts whereof are furnished
with many winged leaves, resembling those of Liquorish, or of a young Ash,
consisting of seven, nine, or eleven set together, somewhat large and long,
finely purled about the edges, of a sad green color, and strong resinous
scent; the upper part of the stalks are furnished with many flowers, growing in
a spike at distances one above another, each containing five long leaves,
whereof four stand on the two sides bending upwards, the fifth hanging down,
turning up again the end, of a faint or pale red color, striped through every
leaf with a deeper red, having a tassel in the middle made of five or six long
purplish threads, that bow down with the lower leaf, and turn up the ends again,
with a little freeze or thrum at the ends of each of them: the flowers are
succeeded by hard stiff clammy husks, horned or pointed at the ends, something
like those of the Columbine, but bigger, rougher, and harder, wherein is
contained round shining black seeds: the root is white, very large and
spreading under ground; the whole Plant throughout all the parts thereof has
that strong resinous scent, not so pleasant to the Nose, as the flowers are
delightful to the Eye.

Fraxinella flore rubro.
BAstard Dittany with a red flower differs from the former, in that it is
bigger in all the parts thereof, the leaves of a darker green color, the
flowers grow in a longer spike, and of a deeper red color; of this kind there
is another raised from the seeds of this, whose flowers grow thicker on the
stalk than any other kind, and are of a deep bloody red color.

Flaxinella flore albo.
BAstard Dittany with a white flower has the leaves and stalks of a fresher
green color than any of the former, and the flowers white, and not altogether
so big, in no other thing differing from the former.

Fraxinella flore albo caeruleo.
BAstard Dittany with an Ash-colored flower differs only from the last in
the color of the flowers, those of this being of a pale blue or Ash color:
there is also another variety of this, raised from the seeds of this kind,
which is lesser in all the parts thereof than any of the other, and the flowers
are of a bleak blue color, striped with a deeper blue or violet color.

Having now done with the varieties of the stately, though strong-scented
Fraxinella, we will conclude with a kind or two of sweet smelling Cistus,
leaving the many other diversities to their natural habitations, being Plants
so tender, that the trouble in keeping them would be more than the pleasure of
having them.

Cistus mas.
THe male Cistus is a small shrubby Plant, growing with us about three or four
foot high, having many slender brittle woody branches, covered with a whitish
bark, whereon are set many long and something narrow whitish green leaves,
crumpled and something hard in handling, two standing at every joint; the
flowers come forth at the ends of the branches, three or four together upon
slender footstalk, each consisting of five small round leaves, like unto a
small single Rose, of a fine reddish purple color, with many yellow threads in
the middle, which soon fall away, and are succeeded by round hard hairy heads,
containing small brown seeds.

Cistus Ledon.
THe Gum Cistus rises higher and spreads more than the former, with many
blackish woody branches, whereon are set diverse long narrow dark green leaves,
but whiter on the backsides, standing two together at every joint; the stalk
and leaves being bedewed with a clammy sweet moisture, but much more in hot
Countries than in ours, which being artificially taken off, is that black sweet
Gum called Ladanum: at the tops of the branches stand single white flowers,
larger than those of the former, like single Roses with five leaves, each
having at the bottom a dark purplish spot, broad below and pointed upwards,
with some yellow threads in the middle; after the flowers are past, cornered
heads succeed, wherein is contained small brownish seeds, like those of the
former.

The Fraxinella's are in flower about the end of June, and continue most of
July; the seed is ready to gather about the end of August, which will (by the
springing of the Pods) be all lost, unless care be taken to prevent it. This is
a hardy Plant, and will endure many years without removing, and yield many new
Plants; which in the beginning of March may be taken from the old root: they
are also raised from seeds sowed in rich earth as soon as the frosts are past
in February, from whence varieties may be raised, especially from those of the
deep red, the white, and the Ash color.

The Cistus is raised from seeds, and the Plants housed in Winter, for they
will not endure the cold air.

CHAP. VII.
HAving now done with all such Greens, Flower-bearing Trees, Shrubs, and woody
Plants, that are of most beauty and esteem, we will proceed to Flowers,
beginning with those vulgarly called French Flowers, which are such as have
either Scaly, Bulbous, Grumous, or Tuberous roots, from whence the Leaves,
Stalks, and Flowers do yearly spring, most of them dying even to the very roots
shortly after their flowering: and first of Lilies and their kinds, whereof
there are many diversities, the Martagons being of the same family, out of all
which I shall cull the best, and purposely omit the rest as Vulgars, not worthy
entertainment: the Crown Imperial is also a kind of Lily, which although it be
common and of small regard, yet to follow the example of diverse good Florists,
and to make way for some newer and nobler kinds thereof than were formerly
known, we will begin this Chapter of Lilies and Martagons therewith, and so
pass to the rest in order.

Corona Imperialis.
THe Crown Imperial has a great round Fox-scented root, from whence springs
up a tall and strong stalk, garnished from the ground unto the middle thereof,
with many long shining green leaves, from whence it is naked upwards, bearing
at the top a tuft of small green leaves, and under them eight or ten flowers,
according to the age of the Plant, hanging down round about the stalk, in
fashion like unto a Lily, consisting of six leaves, of an Orange color, with
many veins of a deeper color on the backsides of the flowers; next the stalks
every leaf thereof has a bunch or eminence of a sadder Orange color than the
rest of the flowers, and on the inside those bunches are filled with
sweet-tasted clear drops of water, like unto Pearls, each flower having in the
middle a style compassed with six white chives tipped with yellow pendents.

Corona Imperialis flore multiplici.
THe double Crown Imperial is of later discovery and more esteem than the
former, and chiefly differs from it in the flowers, which in this are
constantly double, each flower containing fifteen or sixteen leaves, whereas
those of the other common kind have but six; the leaves of these double flowers
are narrower, with a drop or Pearl at the head of each of them, of the same
color with those of the common kind, and as many flowers on one stalk. The
plant at first coming up is redder, and contineth longer so than the ordinary:
The green leaves of darker color, and the tuft on the top above the flowers,
bigger, and consisting commonly of more leaves. This is a gallant plant,
deserving esteem, although the other is now little regarded.

Corona Imperialis flore luteo.
THe yellow Crown Imperial differs only from the first common kind, in that
the flowers are of a fair yellow color, and now more rare than that with
double flowers.

Corona Imperialis angustifolia flore rubente.
THe narrow-leaved Crown Imperial, with a reddish flower, differs from the
other single kinds, in that the leaves are much narrower, the flowers smaller
and of a light red or pale Rose-colour.

Lilium Persicum.
THe Persian Lily has a root like unto that of the Crown Imperial, but longer,
smaller, and whiter, from whence springs up a round whitish green stalk,
beset from the bottom to the middle thereof with many long and narrow whitish
green leaves; from whence to the top stand many small flowers, hanging down
their heads, each containing six leaves, of a dead or over-worn purple color,
with a pointill and chives in the middle, tipped with yellow pendents.

The Crown Imperial flowereth in the end of March, or beginning of April, and
the Persian Lily, almost a month after it, they are both increased by assets
that come from the old roots, which lose their fibers every year, and therefore
they may be taken up after the stalks are dry, which will be in June, and kept
out of the ground until August; they may be set in borders, or corners of
large knots, among ordinary Tulips, and other flowers that lose their fibers,
that they may be taken up together; the Crown Imperial, especially that with
double flowers, is an excellent ornament in the middle of a large Flower-pot,
among Daffodills, Tulips, Anemonies, Hyacinthes, and other flowers of that
season; the Persian Lily is a flower of small beauty, and only received for
variety, the dull and heavy color serving to set off, and cause others to seem
the more glorious.

Lilium Rubrum.
THe red Lily is a vulgar flower, and many sorts thereof common in every
Country-womans Garden, the which are seldom accepted by any Florists. There are
three other kinds which are of some regard, in respect they bear fairer flowers
than any of the other common sorts; we will insert those only, and pass over
the rest as regardless plebeans not worth mentioning.

Lilium Cruentum bulbiferum.
THe fiery red bulbed Lily rises up from a great white scaly root (as all the
Lilies have) with a strong tall stalk, set with many long dark-green leaves,
and at the top adorned with many fair large flowers, each composed of six broad
thick leaves, of a fiery red color at the tops, and toward the bottoms of an
Orenge-colour, with small black specks, bearing among the flowers, and along
the stalk, diverse bulbes like little roots, which being set, in time will bring
forth flowers like unto those of the original.

Lilium Rubrum flore pleno.
THe double red Lily, is like unto the former, in root, stalk and leaves, but
without bulbes, not so big nor of so dark a green color; it commonly bears
many Orenge-coloured single flowers on one stalk, with many small brown specks
on the insides thereof, and some times but one fair double flower, as if the
leaves of many flowers were united in one, which although it be but accidental,
yet it happens in this kind more frequently than in any other red Lily; for if
you have many roots of this sort, you will always have some double flowers, and
many more in some years than in others.

Lilium Luteum.
THe yellow Lily is like the last double Lily, but taller and bigger, the
flowers are many on one stalk, and wholly of a fine Gold-yellow color; this is
more esteemed than any of the former.

Lilium Album.
THe white Lily affords three diversities, two besides the common kind,
which are of more estimation than any of the red Lilies, and for the beauty of
the one, and rarity of the other, deserve to be regarded.

Lilium Album vulgar.
THe common white Lily is so well known, that it needs no description; it
has a scaly root, bigger and yellower than those of the red Lily; the stalk is
tall, the leaves broad and long, of a fresh green color; the flowers are six
or eight on one stalk, in an old plant, but fewer in the younger; which in
fashion are like those of the former, but turning back the points of the
leaves, which are of an excellent pure white color, with a pointell and white
chives in the middle, tipped with yellow pendents.

Lilium Album Byzantinum.
THe white Lily of Constantinople differs from the common white Lily in that
it is smaller in all the parts thereof, and bears more flowers, usually
twenty, or thirty on one stalk, which many times will come flat and broad, with
a hundred or more flowers thereon, like unto those of the common kind, but
smaller.

Lilium Album flore pleno.
THe double white Lily is in all things like unto the common kind, the flowers
only excepted, which in this are usually five or six on one stalk, and all of
them constantly double, consisting of many small long white leaves, which grow
on the footstalk one above another, forming a long double flower, the leaves
of them are long green, before they open or turn white, and unless the season
be very fair, they never open at all; this is esteemed for the rarity of the
double flowers, more than for any beauty that is in them.

Martagon.
THe mountain Lily or Martagon is next to be described, whereof there is some
diversity; they are divided into two primary kinds, that is those that bear
broad green leaves in rundles about the stalks at distances, the which are
called mountain Lilies; and others that bear narrow long green leaves,
sparsedly set on the stalks, in some bigger, and in others smaller, out of
which we will collect the best, and describe them in order.

Martagon Imperiale, sive Lilium montanum majus.
THe Martagon Imperial has, as all the Martagons have, a scaly pale yellow
root; the stalk rises a yard high, of a brownish color, beset at certain
distances with Caudles of broad green leaves, and naked betwixt; at the top of
the stalk come forth, in an old plant, fourscore or a hundred flowers, thick
set together, each on a several foot-stalk, hanging down their heads and
turning the leaves back again, as all Martagons do, which are thick and fleshy,
of a pale purple color, with brown spots on the inside, a style in the middle,
with six yellow chives tipped with Vermillion pendents.

Martagon flore Albo.
THe white Martagon differs from the former, in that the stalk is greener,
the flowers fewer, and not so thick set on the stalk, and are in this, of a
white color with yellow pendents.

Martagon flore albo maculato.
THe white spotted Martagon is very like the last in manner of growing, only
the stalk is brown, and the flowers inclining to a blush color, with many red
spots on the insides thereof, in no other respect differing from the former.

There are some other varieties of the Martagons or mountain Lilies kept in
vulgar Gardens, which are not worth the mentioning, these three sorts being the
most acceptable.

Martagon Canadense maculatum.
THe spotted Martagon of Canada may serve to bring up the rear, and follow the
mountain Lilies, for that the green leaves grow on the stalk in rundles; the
root of this stranger is smaller, and the stalk lower than any of the former,
bearing four or five flowers on long footstalk, in form like a red Lily,
hanging down their heads, of a fair yellow color, with many black spots on the
inside, a pointell and six chives tipped with red pendents.

Martagon Constantinopolitanum.
THe Martagon of Constantinople has a great yellowish scaly root, from whence
springs up a brownish stalk, beset confusedly with many something large round
pointed green leaves; on the top of the stalk come forth three, four, or more
flowers, on long footstalks, hanging down their heads, and turning the leaves
back again, which are of a fair Orenge-colour, deeper in some than in others,
with a pointell and six chives tipped with yellow pendents; this is common in
every ordinary Garden, and had not been here inserted, but to make way for a
better kind thereof.

Martagon Constantinopolitanum maculatum.
THe red spotted Martagon of Constantinople differs from the other, in that
the flowers are larger, more on a stalk, of a deeper Orange, or Scarlet color,
and thick specled on the inside, with many small black spots, which adds very
much to the beauty of the flower.

Martagon Panonicum.
THe Martagon of Hungary is like the last in root, leaves, and form of flowers,
only the leaves are larger, and thinner set on the stalks, the flowers much
bigger, and of a bright pale Orenge-colour; this as it is the rarest of all the
Martagons, so is it the hardest to come by.

Martagon Virginianum.
THe Virginian Martagon has a close compacted, round, scaly, pale, yellow
root, from the sides whereof, more frequently than the top, come forth the
stalks about three foot high, sparsedly set with whittish green leaves, bearing
at the head three, four, or more something large flowers, turning back like
that of Constantinople, of a Gold yellow color, with many brown spots about
the bottoms of the flowers, with the points or ends of the leaves that turn up,
of a red or Scarlet color, and without spots; this is a tender Plant and must
be defended from Frost in Winter; there is another of this kind that bears
more flowers on one stalk; differing from the former, in that these are of pale
colors but spotted as the other.

Martagon Pomponium.
THe Martagon of Pompony has a great yellowish, brown, scaly root, from whence
springs up a green stalk, two or three foot high, promiscuously thick set
with many small, long, green leaves almost to the top, where stand many
flowers, in number according to the age of the Plant; for in some that have
stood long unremoved, I have had fourscore or an hundred flowers on one stalk,
which are of a yellowish Orenge-colour, with small black specks on the inside
thereof, in fashion like to the red Martagon of Constantinople, but smaller;
there is some variety in this Plant, for some of them have broader and shorter
green leaves than others; and there are others that flower a fortnight after
the most common, and best known of this kind.

Martagon Luteum punctatum.
THe yellow spotted Martagon has a great scaly root like that of the last, but
bigger; the stalk rises up in the same manner with broader green leaves, the
flowers also are of the same size and fashion, but of a pale, greenish, yellow
color, with many black specks on the inside thereof, and not so many on one
stalk as the former.

Martagon luteum non punctatum.
THe yellow Martagon without spots differs only from the other, in that the
flowers of this are all of that pale, greenish, yellow color, without any
specks or marks; these yellow Martagons for variety may be admitted, and were
they as pleasing to the scent, as they are to the sight, would be of more
esteem than now they are; there is one other variety of this yellow Martagon,
which differs only in the time of the flowering, which is not until July,
and in that the flowers are of a fairer and deeper yellow color.

All these Lilies, and most of the Martagons, flower in June; that of Pompony
is the earliest, which flowereth toward the end of May; those of
Constantinople are later, as about the end of June or beginning of July; and
that of Virginia the last of them all, whose time of flowering is in August.

They are all increased by the roots too fast, being strong and hardy Plants,
except that of Canada and that of Virginia, both which are very tender and
unapt to thrive or live at all in our Country; the roots of all the other hold
their Fibers, and therefore do not affect to be often removed, which when there
is occasion to do, the best time is as soon as the stalks are fully dry, for
then they will have fewest Fibers; these scaly roots must be set reasonable
deep, four or five inches over the head in the earth, which every other year
should be opened down to the bottoms of them, not hurting or stirring any of
the Fibers, and all the off-sets and young roots taken away, the mother root
only left, unto which some richer earth may be then conveniently put before it
be covered, by this means the flowers of the old root will be fairer, and many
more on one stalk, the ground not pestered, and new Plants gained.

As for these tender Martagons of Canada and Virginia, they will not endure to
stand abroad, but must be planted in the richest and hotest earth can be
gotten, in Boxes or large Pots, and set in some Seller in the Winter where they
may not Freez.

CHAP. VIII.
Fritillaria.
THe Fritillary, and the varieties thereof are next to be described, the which
may be divided into two distinct kinds; the first those with small roots,
sharp-pointed green leaves and large flowers; and the other with bigger roots,
round pointed whiter green leaves, and different fashioned smaller flowers; of
each kind there are several sorts and diversities; we will begin with the
first, and first of that best known.

Fritillaria vulgaris.
THe common checquered Fritillary has a small round white root, made of two
pieces, as if it were cleft in the midst, out of which cleft the stalk
springs a foot high, or more, with some few leaves thereon dispersed; at the
top thereof out of a tuft of four or five hollow long green sharp-pointed
leaves comes the flower, hanging down the head like to that of the ordinary
Crown Imperial, consisting of six leaves of a sullen reddish purple color,
checquered with a deeper purple; the inside of the flower is of a brighter
color than the outside, with a style and six chives tipped with yellow pendents:
after the flower is fallen, the style (which is the seed-vessel) stands
upright, and contains flat gristly seeds; like unto that of a Tulip, but
lesser. The old roots of this sort will bring two and three flowers on one
stalk, and the seeds diversities, some paler and some brighter than others, and
some flowering in March, a month before others.

Fritillaria flore duplici albicante.
THe double blush Fritillary is in all the parts thereof like the former, only
the flower is double, consisting of twelve leaves or more, of a pale purple or
blush color, spotted as the other; this is not accidental but natural, and is
constantly double.

Fritillaria alba.
THe white Fritillary differs chiefly from the first, in that the leaves and
stalk are greener, and the flower white; the seeds of this being sowed brings
varieties, some flowering a month before others, some bearing larger flowers,
and some two on one stalk.

Fritillaria flore luteo.
THe yellow Fritillary is in all things like the last, only the flower of this
on the outside as well as inside is of a perfect yellow color.

Fritillaria flore atro rubente.
THe dark red Fritillary has green leaves, whiter, broader, and shorter than
the former; the flower is larger, of a dusky red color on the outside, and
bloud-red on the inside, which falls away sooner than those of the other sorts;
and this is that the Walloons have lately brought over, which they call the
black Fritillary; a flower of small beauty, and less continuance.

Fritillaria maxima rubra.
THe great red Fritillary is in all the parts thereof like unto the last
described, but bigger; the flowers also are larger, of a dark red color,
usually two or three upon one stalk; a much better flower than the last, but
almost as soon decaying. These are the varieties of the first kind of
Fritillaries, and now we will proceed to describe those of the other sort.

Fritillaria flore luteo major.
THe greater yellow Fritillary has a bigger and broader root than any of the
former; the leaves are broader, shorter, and round-pointed, the stalk about two
foot high, and of a whiter green color than those of the former; the flower is
long, small, and of a faint yellow color.

Fritillaria flore luteo punctato.
THe spotted yellow Fritillary has round-pointed whitish green leaves, like
the last; the flower is bigger and longer than any of the former, of a pale
yellow color, diversely spotted and checquered, which adds much to the beauty
thereof.

Fritillaria lutea maxima Italica.
THe great yellow Italian Fritillary has darker green leaves than the former,
the flower longer, and of a dark yellowish purple color, spotted with small
red checquers; this is that which has been lately brought unto us out of
Flanders, by the name of the Isabella-coloured Fritillary.

Fritillaria Italica flore luteo viridi.
THe small Italian yellowish green Fritillary is like the last, but smaller;
the flowers are small and long, two or three on one stalk, and turn up the
brims of the leaves, which are of a yellowish green color, spotted with
purple, little respected for that the smell thereof is very offensive.

Fritillaria angustifolia exotica viridi albicante multiplex.
THe exotic narrow-leaved Fritillary with a whitish green double flower is of
more rarity than the former; it has a tall stalk, narrow green leaves, and a
large short double flower, of a fullen whitish green color.

Fritillaria lutea juncifolia Lusitanica.
THe small yellow Fritillary of Portugal has smaller and shorter round-pointed
leaves than any of the former; the flower is also small, of a yellow color,
more spotted and checquered than any of the yellow Fritillaries.

Fritillaria Pyrenaea.
THe black Fritillary is in all things like the yellowish green, but that the
stalk and flowers are shorter than those of the last, and of a dark sullen
blackish green color.

Fritillaria Hispanica umbellifera.
The Spanish black Fritillary only differs from the last, in that it is
bigger, and bears four or five flowers hanging round about the stalk, like
those of the Crown Imperial.

The early kinds of Fritillaries do flower about the end of March or beginning
of April, the other after those are past, for the space of a month one after
another; the great yellow is the last, whose time of flowering is in the end of
May.

The roots lose their fibers as soon as the stalks are dry, and may then, or
any time before the middle of August, be taken up and kept dry for some time,
but if taken up too soon, or kept too long out of ground, will either perish or
be much weakened thereby; therefore take them not up before the middle of July,
nor keep them out of the ground after the beginning of August; they may be set
among ordinary Tulips, and other roots that lose their fibers, in the beds of a
Knot or Fret, where the nakedness of the stalks (especially of those of the
first kind) may be covered with the leaves of others.

Doubtless many more diversities of these Fritillaries may be raised from the
seeds of the best kinds, being sowed, preserved, and ordered in the same manner
as those of Tulips, few particulars needing exception either in this, or in any
other bulbous-rooted Plant that loses the fibers; wherefore those that desire
to practice the sowing of such seeds, I refer to the general directions in the
end of the Chapter of Tulips, where they will meet with ample satisfaction
therein.

CHAP. IX.
Tulipa.
THe Tulip is a flower well known, especially the more common kinds thereof,
but there are many noble varieties, whose faces, as few are acquainted with, as
with their excellent qualities; these are those lovely Lilies, whose bravery
excelled Solomon in his greatest luster, Flora's choicest Jewels, and the most
glorious ornaments of the best Gardens, transferable favors from one Florist
to another, aptly conveyable (the season considered) many miles distant.

And as these stately Flowers are esteemed, so are they valued, one root being
usually sold with us at all prices, from a penny (I may say with modesty) to
five pounds; but in other Countries where Flowers are more affected, at far
higher rates. Such is their rarity and excellence, and so numerous are the
varieties, that it is not possible any one person in the world should be able
to express, or comprehend the half of them, every Spring discovering many new
diversities, never before observed, either arising from the Seeds of some
choice kinds, the altering of off-sets, or by the busy and secret working of
Nature upon several self-colours, in different soils and situations, together
with the help of Art: Of all which plentifully in the end of this Chapter.

The division of Tulips according to Gerard, Parkinson, Clusius, and Ferrarius,
is into three sorts, Praecoces, Medias, and Seretinas, early, middle, and late
flowering Tulips, whereas indeed there are but two primary distinct kinds,
Praecoces, and Serotinas; these having other notable differences, besides their
time of flowering, which from the first to the last, is as distant in the
Praecoces, as that of those called Medias to the Serotinas; so according to
their rule, we might as well divide the early as the later, and so make four
sorts out of two; yet not to be thought singular, I shall not alter the old
method, but set down a plentiful variety of each, under such names as they are
generally received and known by, written after the English fashion, that
persons unexpert in the Orthography of Foreign Languages, may be able to write
and pronounce them; beginning with the best known and more ordinary sorts, and
so proceed to better.

The greatest difference of Tulips is in the flowers, as the diversity of
color, manner of marking, bottoms, chives or Tamis, bigness, fashion, and
manner of growing; the which after one general description of the whole Plant,
shall be particularly expressed, whereby each flower by name and face may be
known and distinguished.

Tulipa praecox, media, and serotina.
THe early, middle, and later flowering Tulip, springs out of the ground,
with leaves folded one within another, which opening by degrees become broad,
thick, long and hollow, turning up the edges, and holding water falling
thereon; they are commonly three in number, but sometimes in old-rooted Plants
four or five, of a whitish green color, with whiter edges, especially in those
of the Praecoces, whereby they may be known from the other sorts, whose leaves
are of a fresher green; the stalk with the flower comes up in the middle of
the leaves, which do rise therewith, and compass it at certain unequal
distances; many of the Praecoces bending to the ground, but before they flower,
drawn by the Sun, stand upright as all the rest do; the stalks of the Praecoces
are commonly not above a foot high, and many of them much lower, but those of
the Medias and Serotinas far higher: they all bear usually but one flower on a
stalk, which stands upright, in fashion like unto a Lily, composed of six
leaves, green at the first and closed, which warmed by the Sun, open and change
into diverse several glorious colors, variously mixed, edged, striped,
feathered, guarded, agotted, marbled, flaked, or specled, even to admiration;
the leaves of some of them being round pointed, of others sharp, and in some
three of one fashion and three of the other: The color of the bottoms and
Tamis, especially in the Mediums and Serotinas, does also notably differ from
each other; for in some they will be white, yellow, or straw-colour; and in
others blew, black, or purple, deeper or lighter; some of these flowers are
sweeter than others, and many of them have little or no scent at all: in the
middle of the flower stands a long green head, commonly three square (which
is the Seed-vessel) compassed about with six chives, tipped with pendents (which
are those after the French we call Tamis) in color usually answerable to that
of the bottom, which often changes; for when a red, or purple flower, with a
blew, or other dark-colored bottom and Tamis marketh well with white, the
bottom will be white also, the bottom running up into the leaves, which is a
prime cause of the well marking thereof, but the Tamis remain without
alteration, whereby the flower may be known through all the various mutations
thereof, the rule holding certain in most of the best flowers. After the leaves
of the flower are fallen, the head or Seed-vessel grows biger, rounder, and
longer, containing usually six rows of flat, thin, brown, gristly Seed. The
roots are some rounder and bigger than others, sharp at the upper end; and in
those roots that will bear flowers, either forked, or showing two points to put
forth two leaves, but in such as will not bear, but one: the bottom is big and
round, with a little woolly eminence on the one side thereof, from whence the
Fibers come forth; on the other side in such roots as have born flowers, there
is a hollow chanel where the stalk grew, which yearly shifteth from side to
side, arising immediately from that eminence which is in the bottom of every
root, but more in some than others. These roots are composed of several thick
skins, folded within each other, and covered with a thin brown Coat, which is
every year renewed, and the old cast off.

And now having done with the general, we will proceed to a more particular
description; and first of the Praecoces, or early flowering Tulips, the
varieties whereof are chiefly of two sorts or manners; those of the first or
more common rank, are called Edgers, and are either Red, Carnation, Crimson, or
Scarlet, deeper or lighter, with yellow, straw-colour, or white edges, or else
sadder or paler violet, graydeline, or murey-purple, with greater or lesser
white edges; of these there are a multitude of diversities, but most of them
now little esteemed; we will therefore set down some few of the best, and then
give you a more plentiful variety of those of the other and better sort, which
although they are of the same, or like colors with the former, yet notably
differ in manner of marking, these being either striped, feathered, guarded, or
variably marbled, with two or more colors in each flower, as by the following
descriptions is expressed; but first of the Edgers.

Praecoces, early flowering Tulips.
THe Winter Duke, so called, in respect it flowereth commonly in Winter, that
is before the tenth of March, at which time the Spring begins; it has a
very low stalk, and bears a short leaved-flower, of a deep red color, with
large yellow edges, a round yellow bottom, and brown Tamis.

General Duke flowereth later, and is a fairer and better flower, of a bright
red or Cherry-colour, with large and well divided yellow edges, the bottom and
Tamis like the former; there are diverse sorts of Dukes, some deeper, others
paler, but all of them are red, with yellow edges, whereof these two are
esteemed the best.

General Brancion is a strong upright flower, of a bright Scarlet-colour, with
even and well-parted butter-colour edges, which before the leaves fall turn
white; the bottom of the color of the edges, and the Tamis purple.

Pretty Betty is also a good Edger, the flower is of a bright Crimson, with
pale butter-coloured edges, which soon turn white; it has a star-pointed
bottom, of the color of the edges, and blew Tamis.

Duchess Brancion is a fair large flower, with long round-pointed leaves, of a
deep shining Scarlet-colour, with deep butter-colour edges; the bottom large,
round, and pale yellow, with Tamis of the same color.

Lac Verine is an early flower, and ranked with the best Edgers, of a fine
blewish-red color, with large and well-parted pure white edges, the bottom and
Tamis pale yellow.

Violet Ratgans is a reasonable tall flower, with a woolly-stalk, and
sharp-pointed leaves, of a violet-purple color, with large Snow-white edges,
the bottom and Tamis both yellow.

Violet de Remow, or purpur lisse, grows taller than the last, with a smooth
stalk and fair large flower, of a rich violet-purple color, with large and
well-divided Snow-white edges, a white bottom and black Tamis.

Palto van Leyden is fittest to be the first of the feathered and varigated
kinds, in respect of antiquity and colors, which are red and yellow; in the
younger roots well-placed, feathered, and striped, but commonly the flowers of
the old roots are more yellow than red, and often all yellow, as the bottom and
Tamis are.

Florisante is a low flower, most of a pale hors-flesh color, finely varigated
and marked, with some crimson, and at first pale yellow, which after turns
white; it is a little apt to run, that is, in one or two hot days the colors
to slubber, and run one into the other, which takes away the beauty of the
flower; the bottom and Tamis are both blew.

Religious is a strong healthy flower, of a dark-red color, with many small
stripes of white, but commonly the red has the mastery, and if the season be
hot, will soon run over the white; the bottom is pale yellow, with dusty brown
Tamis.

Blindenburg is a middle sized flower, the tops of the leaves of the color of
a Pease-blossom, and the sides from the middle to the bottom white, with yellow
Tamis.

Non such petits late is of the size and fashion of the last, the flower is of
a pale-blush almost white, pretily marked with many small stripes and specks,
of Orenge-tawny; the bottom and Tamis pale yellow.

The Corn heart is a small low flower, carnation, striped, and marked with
white, but seldom enough white; the bottom and Tamis pale yellow, as in most of
the early Tulips.

Admiral Crinki is in all things like the Corn heart, but more constantly well
marked with white.

General Molswick is of the same family with the two last, of the same colors,
but much better marked than either of the former.

Cleremont, in the manner of growing, is like the Religious, the stalk strong,
and the flower large, sometimes pretily marked with deep carnation and white;
the bottom and Tamis both yellow.

Paragon Cleremont in the manner of growing is like the last, but much a better
flower, more constantly marked with white, upon a bright bluish carnation;
this is more esteemed than the former, by all that have both kinds, for though
the first be in many hands, this is not truly so, for it is a trick much used
by those that sell flowers about London, to add Paragon to the name of any
common flower when it comes well marked, and then impose a treble price.

Admiral Encusen has a weak stalk, and small flower, with sharp-pointed
leaves, tipped with crimson, and feathered with white; the bottom white, with
pale yellow nails and Tamis.

Morillion Cramosine is an excellent flower, much more esteemed than any of the
former; it is of fine bright crimson and pure white, finely striped, spotted
and well parted, the bottom and Tamis pale yellow.

The Noble has the flowers much better marked with crimson and white, in
bearing of Sets and young roots than in the old, whose flowers (though larger)
are little marked with white, scarce appearing to be the parents to so
beautiful children; the bottom and Tamis are both pale yellow.

Aurora, or Grenseg, is another good flower, of a rich carnation color, well
striped and marked with white, the bottom and Tamis pale yellow.

The early perfect grows something taller, the flower fine crimson and white.

Perishot is a strong flower, of a fair shining, blewish-red color; sometimes
well marked with greater and lesser stripes of white throughout every leaf, but
if the red have the mastery, it will quickly run all over the flower; the
bottom is white, and the Tamis pale yellow.

Princess, or la bella Princess is something like the last, but of a more
blewish-red color, sometimes well striped and feathered with white, the bottom
and Tamis pale yellow.

Fair Ann is an upright flower, in shape like the Cleremont, with round-pointed
leaves, marked with great flakes of white, and Claret Wine color, the bottom
white, with pale yellow Tamis.

The Omen, or Nuino, as some call it, is the last flower of any of the
Praecoces, it has a strong upright stalk, the flower fair, large, and well
formed, of a pale Rose-colour, with many veins and marks of crimson, circling,
and garding, great stripes of white; the bottom and Tamis both blew, which is
seldom found in a Precox.

The Marquis is a flower of small beauty, respected only for the strangeness
of the colors, which in this are sad horseflesh, dark yellow, and some small
veins of red, confusedly placed; the bottom and Tamis both yellow.

Viceroy is an old Flower, of a violet purple color, edged, feathered, and
striped with white, the bottom and Tamis of a greenish yellow color; to the
name of this flower Paragon is often added, as if it were a distinct kind, when
it is but the same better marked than usual.

Galatea is a fine flower, of a bright gredeline, stripped with white, the
bottom and Tamis pale yellow.

Maria is also a pretty flower, of a pale gredeline, well striped and marked
with white, the bottom and Tamis pale yellow.

The Superintendent is now the most esteemed of all the early Tulips, it rises
higher than ordinarily others do; the flower is fair and large, excellently
marked with violet purple and good white, the bottom and Tamis pale yellow.

Medias, or Middle flowering Tulips.
THe Swish of Portugal is a tall, large, long-leaved flower, of a rich Crimson
color, with some marks about the edges of the leaves of a deep red, striped
with great gards and lists of straw-colour through every leaf thereof, with a
large round yellow bottom, and straw-coloured Tamis. There are several sorts of
Swishes, but this is the best, the other are lesser flowers, the colors not so
good, nor so well placed.

Munera is a flower of a middle size, the leaves sharp-pointed, of a bright
crimson color, finely spotted, and marked with small stripes and drops of pale
yellow; the bottom and Tamis straw-colour.

Semper Augustus, heretofore of much esteem, has a flower not very large, but
well veined and striped with deep crimson and pale yellow; the bottom and Tamis
dark-violet purple.

The Prince of Orange is of a good Orenge-colour, striped with yellow, of which
color the bottom and Tamis are.

General Essex is of the same colors of the former, but the Orange deeper, the
yellow paler, and more constantly well-marked; the bottom and Tamis
dark-purple, almost black.

Pluto is a dark sullen Flower, of a sutty Orenge-colour, variably marked with
darker, and lighter yellow; a sad-greenish bottom and bluish Tamis.

Pass Oudinard is an old Flower, of a sad reddish-colour, sometimes well marked
with brighter red and straw-colour; it is common and unconstant, and so little
esteemed; the bottom and Tamis both blew.

Paragon Oudinard Vam Bole is in all things like the last, only the colors
are brighter, more constantly well placed, and in some years will come so well
marked, that few rich Flowers excel it; the bottom and Tamis both blew.

Agot Morine, when it comes well is a pretty Flower, of a dark reddish-colour,
variably marked with sad Isabella and straw-colour; the bottom and Tamis
dark-purple.

Agot Robine is a long leaved old Flower, of a sullen reddish-colour, with some
flakes and marks of an over-worn Dove-colour, with a whitish bottom and black
Tamis.

Agot Robine paragon, or Robinet, is like the last, but much better, of the
same sad-red color, often well marked with Dove-colour, crimson and white; the
bottom and Tamis like the last.

The white Agot is like the last, but a lesser Flower, Dove-colour, well marked
with deep red, inclining to murrey and white, the bottom and Tamis blew.

Tudart, or Toundurt, is like the Agot Robine, of a heavy dull-reddish color,
the leaves edged with a smoaky Dove-colour, and sometimes a little marked with
white, the bottom and Tamis black.

Jaspar Tudart, is a larger Flower, of a brighter red than the last, some
Dove-colour and much white; bottom and Tamis black.

Royal Tudart, or the Lady Wottons Tudart, is better than either of the two
former; the Flower is of a sad red color, whipped about the edges with crimson,
and stripped with pale yellow, the bottom and Tamis black.

Harvy is a large variable Flower, but sometimes it will be of a dark-purplish
red color, with great flames of deep shining crimson, and small stripes of
white; the bottom and Tamis dark purple.

Admiral Vander Pool is of a dark red, inclining to liver-colour, feathered and
marked with pale yellow, which one hot day turns white, the bottom and Tamis
white; this is a pretty Flower, but runs a little at last.

Morillion nacarat is an old Flower, of a light Scarlet-colour and milk-white,
sometimes well marked, but the leaves are hollow, and at last runs; the bottom
blew with black Tamis.

Cardinal Flambiant is of a pale Scaret-colour, well marked with white; the
Flower is short and handsome, bottom and Tamis blew.

Prince Cardinal is a large long-leaved Flower, well marked with flesh-colors,
crimson and white; the bottom and Tamis blew.

Morillion de Anvers, is an ordinary low Flower, pale scarlet, marked with pale
yellow, and runs at last.

Orient Virgin is a good Flower, pale scarlet, and pure white, well divided in
small marks and stripes; the bottom and tamis both blew.

General Gowda is a large Flower, of a bright crimson color, sometimes well
marked with white, but commonly the red has the mastery; besides the bottom
and Tamis are both pale yellow.

Triumphans is a smaller Flower than the last, the stalk weak, the colors good
crimson and white, but very unconstant; the bottom and Tamis blew.

Envy is a good Flower, of an excellent crimson color, well marked with good
white, especially on the inside the leaves; the bottom and Tamis both blew.

Bew Turnier has a Flower in fashion like the last, the colors are gredeline,
crimson and white, but very unconstant, and often little or no white.

Bell la Bar is an old Flower, like the last, of the same colors, but more
constantly marked with white.

Bell Breire has a weak stalk and small Flower, of a good crimson color,
guarded and striped with pale yellow, which one hot day turns white; the bottom
and Tamis pale yellow.

Bell Brune is a fair Flower, of a dark-brown crimson color, well marked,
feathered and striped with white, the bottom pale yellow, with large
dusty-brown Tamis.

The Cardinal is a low Flower, of a deep-dark red color, sometimes feathered
with white, and often all red; some of them are rectified, and come much better
marked; the bottom and Tamis blew.

Vesta has a Flower round and handsome, of a deep-shining crimson color,
variably spread with white, but if the red have the mastery, it soon runs
over the white; the bottom and Tamis blew.

Royal Vesta, or Nonparel, is a better and more constant flower than the last;
the colors are carnation, crimson and white: when the flower marks well, the
bottom is white and the Tamis blew.

Mazarine has long, narrow, sharp-pointed leaves, of a pale crimson color,
marked with deeper red and white, but unconstant; the bottom blew and the Tamis
black.

Sattine, General Richard, or Emperor, is all one old flower, with a tall
upright stalk and short leaves, of a pale carnation color, flaked and marked
with white, a little apt to run; the bottom and Tamis yellow.

Morillion de Argiers is an ordinary Flower, of a blewish-red color, marked
something like the last with white; the bottom and Tamis pale yellow.

The Pearl is an old Flower, of a bright carnation color, marked and striped
with more and less white; the leaves of the Flower twine and stand different
from others; the bottom and Tamis pale yellow.

Bien Venu is like the last in the fashion of the Flower, but much better, it
is of a pale carnation color, striped and variably marked with white, the tops
of the leaves pale flesh-colors; bottom and Tamis blew.

Admiral Cataline is an old Flower, of a bright carnation, some crimson, and
constantly well marked with white; the bottom white, and Tamis pale yellow.

Susanna is a delightful Flower, of a comely form, the colors bright
carnation, and Snow-white, from the first opening, well parted and divided, the
bottom white with pale greenish Tamis. Those of this kind which rectify and
have most white, are called Astreas, others the Virgin of Amsterdam.

The Pelican, when it comes right, is a pretty Flower, of a good carnation
color, marked thick with smaller and bigger stripes of white; the bottom and
Tamis of a greenish dark blew color.

Belline is a small weak stalked Flower, of a bluish carnation color, a
little marked with white; the bottom and Tamis blew.

Pass Belline chiefly differs from the last in the colors of the Flower,
those of this being carnation, some gredeline and much white, well placed and
parted; the bottom and Tamis both blew.

General Zweman is a fair Flower, bright carnation gredeline and white,
variably placed, and paned on the tops of the leaves; the bottom white and
Tamis blew.

Camusetta is a fair large Flower, apt to be known by the green leaves, which
are large and full of whitish spots; the Flower has large broad leaves, well
veined striped and marked, especially on the insides, with carnation, some
gredeline, and much white; the bottom, by the well marking of the Flower is
commonly white, and the Tamis blew.

Faragon Francoise is a handsome flower, of a good deep carnation-colour, well
marked with long stripes of white; the bottom and Tamis blew.

Admiral of France is like the last, in color and manner of marking, but the
leaves of this twine, and do not stand round as those of other Flowers; the
bottom and Tamis blew.

Benedictine is a pretty flower of a bright carnation color, well marked with
white; the bottom and Tamis dark-purple.

Paragon Blackburn has a tall stalk, and fair Flower with broad leaves, yet
sharp-pointed, of light carnation-colour, with some marks of deeper red, flamed
and striped with white; the bottom and Tamis blew. This was raised by Mr.
Humphry Blackburn, late keeper of the Garden at York-house in the Strand, from
the seeds of the Pass Oudinard, as he told me when he gave me the root.

Paragon de Gildon is a good Flower, of a fine carnation-colour, deep crimson
and pure white, well placed and broken; the bottom and Tamis blew.

Dantile de Flure is of a pale Rose-colour, prettily laced, marked and spotted
with white; the bottom and Tamis pale yellow; this is a pleasant Flower, but
runs a little at last.

Pass Rosy is a fine round Flower, variably marked upon pale Rose-colour, with
crimson and some veins of straw-colour, resembling a well watered Tabby; the
bottom and Tamis pale yellow.

Rosillionte is a large Flower, Rose-colour, variably spotted and striped with
white, which commonly has the mastery; the bottom and Tamis blew.

Holofernes, or Golia, is a very tall Flower, marked all over with shaddows of
Rose-colour and pale yellow; the bottom and Tamis yellow; now of little esteem.

Turban is a large round hollow-leaved Flower, often with eight or more leaves,
of a reddish Peach-colour, flamed up the middle and sides with crimson; the
bottom blew with dark brown Tamis.

The Chimney-Sweeper is a low short-leaved round flower, of a blackish dark red
color, with a large round whitish bottom, and pale yellow Tamis; some of these
will happen to be striped with more or less white, and then called the striped
Chimney-Sweeper, and as they mark so valued.

Admiral Heart is a handsome flower, of a good carnation color, deep crimson,
and good white; the bottom blew with black Tamis.

Zeablom is of diverse sorts, the most ordinary is of a sad bluish red color,
sometimes a little marked with white, very unconstant and apt to run, as most
of the Zeabloms are; the bottom and Tamis sad purple.

Royal Zeablom, or Coning, is at first opening a fine flower, striped and
veined through every leaf thereof with bluish carnation, gredeline and white,
but if the season be hot, it will run and be slubbered all over; the bottom and
Tamis both blew.

Cedanella is of near affinity with the last, but much a better flower, of a
good bluish carnation-colour, well marked and variegated with crimson, some
gredeline, and good white; of this there are two or three sorts, but the best
has more white, and is not apt to run as the other are; the bottom and Tamis
blew, and called Cedanella de Bard.

Lanscot Bole is a fine flower, of a bright carnation-colour, finely agoted and
striped with gredeline and white; the bottom and Tamis blew.

Altes Royal is sometimes a pretty flower, of a deep bluish red color, marked
with some light crimson and white, but when the red has the mastery, it will
quickly run over the other colors; the bottom and Tamis are dark blew.

Zweman John Garet, or Chamolet, is an old flower, of a deep Peach-colour,
chamleted, and striped with red and white; the bottom blew and the Tamis purple.

Paragon Lifgin is an ordinary flower, a little marbled and striped about the
edges with Isabella-colour, and pale yellow, and sometimes over all the flower;
it has a greenish dark bottom and sad blew Tamis.

The Parot is of several sorts, some all green, unless a little whitish toward
the sides of the leaves, others have the leaves half folded, green in the
middle, and the sides almost white; but there is one noble kind hereof, which
for its excellency is called

The Rich Parot, this grows tall and strong, the green leaves rent in the
sides, the flower large, and formed something like the last, only it has
spurs on the sides of the leaves, which are of dark brown color, and lighter
by degrees to the middle, which is of a whittish green color, very strange in
fashion and colors from all others; the bottom and Tamis of all the Parots are
of a pale greenish yellow color.

Agot Rampard is a fine flower, of a heavy sad Isabella-colour, with some marks
of rich crimson, and great stripes of yellow; a dark bottom, with large black
Tamis.

Agot Gekeire is a low flower, with long narrow sharp-pointed leaves, of a
color betwixt horseflesh and Isabella, a little striped with white; the
bottom blew, with large purple Tamis.

Star de Man's is a small flower, with long and very narrow sharp-pointed
leaves, at first opening twisted at the ends, which after open and spread flat
like a star, with six points, of a reddish Isabella-colour, striped toward the
bottom with white; the bottom and Tamis both pale yellow.

Marvelia de Quacle is of a pale Isabella-colour, with many red spots standing
together on the inside of the leaves, like unto a sprig of Barberies, and
sometimes a little striped with white; the bottom and Tamis dark blew.

The President is a round Globe-formed flower, marked with purplish red,
lighter and sadder yellow; the bottom and Tamis violet.

Nofte, or the Royal-Shuttle-maker, is worthy esteem, the leaves of the flower
are sharp-pointed and a little twine, finely marked with bright flesh-colors,
deep scarlet and pale yellow; the bottom and Tamis black; this usually puts
forth a bulb or young root betwixt the stalk and lower leaf, whereby it is
aptly increased.

La perfeit, or Turdif rectified, is a pretty low flower, of a pleasant
carnation, well marked with white; the bottom and Tamis dark blew.

Pompeza is a fair large flower, constantly well marked with fine light
carnation and pure white; the bottom and Tamis blew.

Eminentissime is at first a fine flower, with long sharp-pointed leaves, well
striped with Peach-colour, carnation and white; the bottom and Tamis dark
purple.

The Eagle is a fair flower, Peach-colour, pale gredeline, some deep crimson
and pure white; bottom and Tamis purple.

Rickets fine Agot is a beautiful flower, striped, agotted, and variously
marked with Rose-colour, deep crimson and fine white; the bottom and Tamis
purple.

Agot Oriental is a good flower, finely marked with Rose-colour, gredeline,
some crimson and white; the bottom and Tamis purple.

Paragon Florison is a good flower, the leaves sharp-pointed, variably veined,
striped and marked with Isabella, Peach-colour, and milk white; the bottom blew
and Tamis dark violet purple.

Morillion Curtis is a large strong thriving flower, most of a
carnation-colour, a little crimson about the Edges, and well feathered with
white; the bottom and Tamis pale yellow.

Admiral de Man's is an old flower, of a deep red, striped with white, but
slubbered and not well parted, besides it is apt to run, and the bottom and
Tamis yellow.

Jacobea rectified is in colors like the last, but much a better flower,
commonly marked up the middle of the leaves, with a great feathered stripe of
deep red, the rest white; the bottom and Tamis yellow.

Paragon de Costa is like the last, but a better flower, well striped and
marked with the same deep red color and good white; the bottom and Tamis
yellow.

General of Holland is an old flower, of a deep bluish red color, with great
marks and small stripes of white; the bottom and Tamis blew.

La Towers is a weak-stalked flower, which when it comes well has one or two
large broaken stripes, of a bluish red color, through the middle of every
leaf, the rest white; the bottom blew and the Tamis black.

Bell Pallas of Paris is a better flower than the ordinary Pallas, it is
commonly well marked, and striped upon a bluish red, with some crimson and
more white; the bottom and Tamis blew.

Pass bell Tew, or numero une, is an old flower, agotted and marbled with
gredeline and white, but unconstant; the bottom and Tamis of a dark blew,
dusted with yellow.

Marbre Jasper is like the last, but a fairer and more constant flower, of a
brighter gredeline, agotted and marbled upon white; the bottom blew, with brown
dusty Tamis.

Agot Poit vin, or Pass Cittadell, is an old flower, with narrow sharp-pointed
leaves, of a pale gredeline and murrey purple, sometimes agatted, veined and
marked with white; the bottom and Tamis blew.

White pass Citadel is in all things like the last, but that the white has
the mastery, and therefore more esteemed than the former.

Dorile is a hansome flower, of a bluish bright carnation, varied and striped
with good white; the bottom blew, and the Tamis purple.

Carthago is something like the last, but much a better flower, of the same
bright bluish carnation color, and more constantly well striped, and marked
with white; the bottom and Tamis blew.

Diana is of several sorts, the best we call La bella Diana, which is a good
flower, of a bright bluish carnation, varied, striped, and well marked with
deep red and pure white, throughout every leaf thereof, with a blew bottom and
purple Tamis.

Dipute Doria is a kind of Diana, the flower is like the Dorile, but commonly
better marked and striped with small lines of deep red and snow white; the
bottom and Tamis like those of the Diana.

Dianea is a flower of my own raising from the seeds of the Diana, from which
it differs in that the leaves are edged and finely whipped about, with a deep
brown purple, and feathered in the middle with the same color upon snow white;
the Tamis dark blew.

General Doctor Boleson vam Bole is a fine flower, of a bluish bright
carnation, purled about the edges, well striped and marked with crimson and
pure white, which commonly has the mastery; the bottom blew, with small black
Tamis.

Otter, or Otho de Man's, is a tall large old flower, often containing eight or
more leaves, of a dull heavy purple color, listed up the sides, and sometimes
feathered through the leaves with white; the bottom and Tamis yellow.

Brown purpur Cataline is like the last in the fashion of the flower, but of a
better brown purple color, feathered and striped up the sides and middle of
the leaves with large lists of white; the bottom and Tamis purple.

Pass Heron, or Grand purpur de Book, is an old flower, with three leaves
standing up like a Herns top, and three turning down, of a sullen, yet shining
purple color, with many small lines of milk white; the bottom and Tamis pale
yellow.

Violetta is one of the first blown of the Medias, it is of a violet purple
color, sometimes well marked with white; the bottom and Tamis pale yellow.

The Flanders Widow is a common flower, of a sad purple color, and marked
toward the bottom with a sadder purple and some white; the bottom of this and
all the other Widows is small and of a greenish blew color, with purple Tamis.

The good Widow is in all things like the last, but more and better marked with
white.

The Fair Widow differs from the last, in that the flower is shorter, more
and better striped and marked with two sad purples and white.

Princess Royal came from the Flanders Widow, and differs only from it, in
that the leaves of the sad purple flower are listed about the sides with white.

The white Widow is of the same fashion and color with the other Widows, but
commonly striped and marked with more white.

Deesse, or (as we call it) the Prince of Wales, is of the family of the
Widows, and formerly esteemed; of this we have two sorts, the best is of a good
deep purple, well striped and feathered through every leaf thereof with white;
the other is a lesser flower, the leaves narrow and sharp-pointed, not so well
marked as the other; the bottoms and Tamis of both like those of the Widows.

Princess Turgiana is the best of all the generation of Widows, the flower has
thin leaves, well marked with two purples, and much white, which commonly has
the mastery; the bottom and Tamis like those of the Widows.

Ariana is of my own raising from the seeds of the Sturgiana, from which it
differs, in that the leaves are thicker, purer white from the first opening,
and very well marked with bigger and lesser broken stripes, and drops of bright
crimson; the Tamis purple.

Rundelo, Angellica, or Paragon Bembrig, is a large long-leaved flower, of a
deep reddish purple color, flaked and marked with white; the bottom and Tamis
of a dark purple color.

Brown Anvers is a fair well-formed flower, of a sad reddish brown purple
color, striped and marked with some lighter purple, and more or less white;
the bottom blew with dark purple Tamis.

Bew Anuers is like the last, only the colors are brighter, and the flower
commonly better marked; in bottom and Tamis like the former.

General Anvers, or Brown Duke of Brabant, is like the last, but better marked
with a brown and lighter purple, and often well striped with white; the bottom
and Tamis as in those of the two other.

General Bole is a good flower, of near affinity with the Brown Anvers; the
Flower is agoted, striped and variably marked with a darker and lighter reddish
purple and white, with a blew bottom and purple Tamis; it is a tender Flower,
and the root apt to perish in a hot of over-dunged soil; of this there are two
or three sorts, but the best is that called General Bol Talbon.

Paragon Jeron, or Jeronimus Royal, is a good Flower, striped and marked with
shades of purple and good white; the bottom and Tamis dark blew.

Adoratea de Holland, or as it is vulgarly called the Dorothy of Holland, is a
good Flower, of a deep brown purple color, finely whipped about the edges, and
well striped and marked with a redder and lighter purple and pure white, the
bottom and Tamis purple; of this there are two sorts, but the best is called
the North Dorothea.

Carolus is an excellent Flower, elegantly marked and striped with shades of
murrey, purple, and pure white, through every leaf thereof; the bottom blew,
and the Tamis purple.

Pass Zeablom of Paris is the best of all the Zeabloms, the Flower is fair, of
a deep purple-colour very well marked with white; the bottom blew with dark
purple Tamis.

Veluerte, Ulurte, or the Velvit Tulip, is a good flower, of a deep dark velvet
purple-colour, marked with some lighter purple and white stripes, especially in
the tops of the leaves; the bottom and Tamis black.

Brown Purpur de Murrey, as it is commonly called, is an excellent fair Flower,
of a rich shining brown purple-colour and pure white, marked with great stripes
up the middle of the leaves; the bottom blew with purple Tamis.

Agot Hanmer is a beautiful Flower, of three good colors, pale gredeline, deep
scarlet, and pure white, commonly well parted, striped, agoted, and excellently
placed, abiding constant to the last, with the bottom and Tamis blew. This
gallant Tulip has its name from that ingenious lover of these rarities, Sir
Thomas Hanmer, who first brought it into England, from whose free community, my
self and others partake the delight of this noble Flower.

Agot san Dence, or Argus, is of the same colors with the last, and like it in
the manner of marking; the chiefest difference is, that the leaves of this are
sharper-pointed, plainer, and not so broad and hollow as those of Agot-Hanmer,
the gredeline more purple, and the scarlet paler; the bottom and Tamis of this
are blew like the former.

Brabason is of several sorts, and all of them fine Flowers, of several purple
colors; the most common is the petit Brabason, the Flower being small but well
marked with two purples and white, the rest being all very good Flowers, and
known by several names, as Brabason pore, Brabason Hugon, Brabrason Adrian,
Brabason Puke, and Brabason Swallins; all of them of several purples and white,
notably differing from each other in colors and manner of marking.

There are other good Flowers, whose colors are of several purples and white,
as Hispaniolet, Agot de Gorier, Archduke Imperial, Le Arch de Auckre,
Amphitrio, Arminante, Consiergi, and Althea; these more notably differ from
each other in the work or fashion of marking than the Brabasons, as well as in
lighter and deeper, redder, or blewer purples, they are all fine Flowers, and
some of them very rare.

There are also some other good Flowers that are crimson and white, as Atlas,
Sigismond, and Paragon Alette, others carnation and white, as Unick la Croy,
Jacobine, and Finette; all excellent Flowers, with many more, which to
enumerate would fill a considerable volum.

Besides these, there are many pretty new flowers which arise from good
self-colours, which the French call Bizars, and we French Modes; of these I
will give you the knowledge of a dozen fine sorts, and so conclude the
middle-Flowering Tulips.

Tremontane is flesh-colors, pale yellow, and Isabella; bottom and Tamis pale
yellow.

Proteus is a pretty small Flower, well marked with deeper and lighter crimson
and pale yellow; a dark bottom and violet purple Tamis.

Amidore is a fine Mode, pale yellow, well marked with dark cinnamon-colour;
the Tamis purple.

Brown George is a large round Flower, thick striped and powdered with sadder
and brighter cinnamon-colour, upon pale yellow, with black Tamis.

Agot picot is a large Flower, well marked with pale Rose-colour, some crimson
and white; the bottom and Tamis blew.

Aurora is of the color so called, and pale yellow, with brown Tamis.

Clytus is a fine Flower, of a dark yellow color, finely marked with small
lines of hair-colour and dark crimson, with violet purple Tamis.

Agot Bizar is deep Orange, light flesh-colors, and pale yellow, with a
greenish bottom and black Tamis.

Rich Portugal is but a small Flower, but finely marked with small lines of
cinnamon-colour, and pale straw-colour, with a dark bottom and black Tamis.

Memorables has a long-leaved Flower of the color of pale tanned leather,
prettily marked with sad purple, and bright yellow, with purple Tamis.

Proserpine has the tops of the leaves of the color of the last, yellow
toward the sides, marked and whipped about with very brown dark purple; the
bottom yellowish, and the Tamis purple.

The Curle differs from all others in the form of the Flower, for this has the
leaves thick and curiously plaited, and curled about the edges; the color is
dark yellow, finely marked all over with small lines of sad red or
liver-colour; the bottom and Tamis violet purple.

Tulipa Serotina, The late flowering Tulip.
PAto Madam, the yellow Crown, or as some call it the Crown of France, is now a
common Flower, of a good full red color, marked and crowned on the tops of the
leaves, with gold yellow; of this there is an inferior kind, whose Flower is
more yellow than red, and therefore many ignorantly call it the fools Coat; the
bottom and Tamis of both these are yellow.

Prince de la More is a fine Flower, as rare as the other is common, well
marked with a deeper and lighter cinnamon-colour and pale yellow, with a blew
bottom and black Tamis.

The Serotine Zeablom is a weak-stalked low Flower, of a deep red color,
feathered and marked with some gredeline, and at first pale yellow, which after
turns white; the bottom and Tamis dark blew.

Gresound is a low small Flower, of a dark red color, striped and feathered
with pale-yellow; the bottom of a dark greenish color, and the Tamis almost
black.

Star of Venus has a larger Flower, of a good carnation-colour, marked and
veined with pale yellow at first, which after turns white; the bottom and Tamis
both blew.

Paragon Mullen is bright carnation, and sometimes well striped with white; the
bottom and Tamis blew.

Agot Roman is an old flower, most pale Rose-colour, sometimes well marked
about the edges with crimson, and striped with white; the bottom and Tamis blew.

Marbre Harlus is an ordinary flower, most flesh-colors, marked with Isabella,
and sometimes a little white; the bottom and Tamis dark blew.

Tenebris is a large strong flower, of a dark deep red color, like that called
de Roy, with small veins of Peach-colour, a small pale yellow bottom, and dark
brown Tamis.

All these Tulips, and many others may be had of Mr. Rickets of Hogesden near
London.

These beautiful flowers (warmed by the Rays of the returning Sun) disclose
their bravery, to salute the first approaches of the welcome Spring; the
Praecoces flowering from the beginning of March, until a good part of April be
spent, at which time the Medias begin to display their noble colors, and about
the end of that month, or the beginning of May, are in the height of glory,
and when past, the Serotinas succeed, and commonly continue the greatest part
of that month.

The roots of all Tulips lose their Fibers every year, and are to be taken up
as soon as the stalks are dry, which is commonly about Midsomer, and kept dry
out of the ground until the time of setting them, which in cold grounds is
about the end of September, and in hot and more fertile grounds October.

The more common and ordinary kinds may be set in borders, or spaces in knots,
according to the fancy of the owner; but for the richer and more noble sorts,
they will deserve to be lodged in particular beds by themselves, provided for
that purpose, after the manner hereafter directed.

When the roots are ready to be taken up, make choice of a fair calm day, and
in stiff or hard grounds, a long hollow Trowel will be fit for the purpose; but
in the best light ground, it may be done with the hands only.

As the several flowers are taken up, lay them on papers, whereon the names are
written, and place them open upon some boarded flore, where they must so remain
to dry about twenty days; then take away the dead Fibers and loose outer skins,
and such off-sets or young roots as will easily part from the old; which done,
it will be necessary to wrap up your best roots especially, in fresh well dried
papers, and on the out sides to write the name of each flower, which may be
kept with their off-sets with them, until the middle of August, at which time
the off-sets must be Set in a good bed prepared for that purpose; the old
bearing roots left in the papers until the time forementioned for planting
them.

After your roots are secured in Boxes, it will be very necessary often to look
them over, lest any should be moldy, as it often happens, which must be gently
wiped off with a woollen cloth; the root dried before the fire, and so put up
again into a fresh paper.

The roots thus carefully disposed, it will be time to prepare a place to plant
them, which for the best bearing roots is a bed or beds, according to your
store, a yard broad, and in length according to your ground, bordered with
rails, and filled two foot deep, with the lightest, freshest, and finest sifted
earth that can be gotten. These beds will contain six roots in every row cross
the bed, which with a line may be exactly divided, and the roots placed
accordingly, but before they are set, the number of roots in each sort must be
considered, and the position of each particular designed in a paper, according
to this example, North Dorothea. Paragon Florison. Agot Hanmer. Emmentissime.
Proteus. La Bella Diana. Brabason Swalins. Grand purpur de Murrey. General
Bole. Agot Picot. Pass Zeablom de Paris. Pompeza. Agot San Deny. Carolus.
Amidore. General Bolson. Paragon Jeron. Agot Oriental. Rich Parrot. Proserpine.
Ariana. Brabason Hugon. Veluerte. Astrea. Agot Bizar. Princess Turgiana. The
Eagle. Carthago. President. Clitus. whereby reckoning the numbers, the flowers
may be set, and after known before and after their time of bearing, and so by
the same paper taken up and disposed as before is expressed. In placing these
roots, some set the saddest colors toward the sides, and the lightest in the
middle; but a hansome mixture is best, not setting too many dark or light
colors together, though different from each other, nor to mingle the Praecoces
with the Medias, but placing each sort in a particular bed; when these noble
Tulips begin to rise up to flower, it is very necessary to cover the bed with a
Canvas tilt (supported with a frame, and raised like a Hearse that it touch not
the flowers) especially in the night to prevent Frosts, which often curdle the
buds, and quite spoil the beauty of the flowers, besides it defends them from
hail and great rains, as also from the scortching heat of the Sun, and so cause
them to continue long in flower. This tilt or canvas covering may be taken off
before the time of flowering in fair days, and to refresh them with some gentle
showers, but kept covered in the night; and when fully blown, give them not
above an hours Sun in the morning and as much in the evening, if the season be
hot, otherwise they will endure more.

As for the more ordinary sorts of Tulips that are set in borders, or spaces in
knots, and no account kept of them, such, if the ground be good when they are
set, may stand two years without taking up, but not longer, in respect the
off-sets that rise from them, will cause the flowers to be small and weak, and
all the nourishment proper to this Plant exhausted, so that before they are set
again in the same place, the earth must be changed for that which is fresh.

After the flowers are fallen, break off the head or seed-vessel from the stalk
of every flower, unless of such you reserve for seed, which will cause them to
dry down the sooner, and also fortify the roots.

Although the roots of Tulips are for the most part hardy, and of long
continuance, yet sometimes some of the best kinds will be infected with
diseases, notwithstanding our greatest diligence and care in their
preservation, which happens to the roots of some, whilst out of ground, and to
others after they are set. For the first, in observing the root of any good
flower, if it appear rivelled or crumpled on the outside, and feel soft and
spungy, it is a manifest sign of a consumption, which to prevent, wrap it up in
Wool dipped in Sallet Oil, and place it where it may receive some little
warmth from the fire; and abouts the end of August set it in the ground,
putting some soot made by a wood-fire, mixed with sand, about it, covering the
place with a pot, the bottom turned upward, to keep it from wet, until the
fibers are come forth, which will be by the end of September or not at all.
With such roots thus handled it often happens, that though some of the outer
folds rot and consume, yet the middle and heart will remain sound, and in two
or three years bear a flower again.

Now for such defects as happen to these roots after they are set, and put
forth green leaves; if any of them begin to fade and wither, open the earth to
the bottom of the root to find the cause, and if the root be moist, and feel
soft, it is past help; but if any thing hard, it may be recovered by putting
soot and dry sand to the root, and covering it, as in the former, leaving the
place something open that it may dry down the sooner: In hot days take off the
pot, and take up the root as soon as the fibers are gone, and keep it in Wool
wet in Oil near the fire; last set it again after the manner of the former, by
this means many good flowers have been saved, which neglected had been
undoubtedly lost.

And as we industriously endeavor to recover such sickly roots of choice
flowers, so purposely we infect others more vulgar with sickness, by taking up
the roots a little before they come to flower, and laying them in the Sun, to
abate their luxury, and cause them to come better marked the year following;
this I have often done with strong and lusty roots of the Pass Oudinard, Pass
Citadel, Pass Heron, Agot Robine, Turloone, Widows, and such like ordinary
flowers, and commonly found the success answer my expectation in many, and some
of them to come so well marked, that they might be taken for much better
flowers than they are, especially if a new name be put upon them, as some
flower-merchants about London use to do.

The next thing to be considered, is the manner of raising new varieties, a
practice fit for the best Florists; and this is effected chiefly, by sowing the
seeds of some choice flowers, as also by the changing of off-sets, and the
secret working of nature upon diverse self-colours.

For seeds, you must be sure to make choice of such flowers as have strong
stalks, and the seed-vessel three square, of such kinds as are most constantly
well marked, and such as have the bottoms and Tamis, either blew or purple,
which is rarely to be found in the Praecoces, whose bottoms are commonly white
or yellow; yet there is one excellent kind before described by the name of the
Omen, that aptly marketh with three colors, and has the bottom and Tamis both
blew, from the seeds whereof doubtless many fine varieties may be raised; next
unto this the Florizante, Morillion Cramosine, Perishot, Admiral Encusen, and
the rest of the well-marked Praecoces are not without hope; but from the
Viceroy, and the varieties of Edgers, few better than the originals are to be
expected.

The Medias, or middle flowering Tulips, afford many more excellent varieties
fit for this purpose, as the Adoratea of Holland, Carthago, Paragon Jeron,
Doctor Bolson, Paragon Florison, Royal Tudart, Orient Virgin, Diana, Angellica,
Cedanella, Princess Turgiana, all the Brabasons, bew Anvers, and diverse others:
All these named being well-marked flowers, of different colors, with blew or
purple bottoms and Tamis, not apt to run, but abiding constant to the last; and
therefore all flowers of hope, and such as few lovers and collectors of flowers
are without.

Commonly we make choice of such we intend for seed, when they are in flower,
but in so doing we often fail of our purpose, for that the roots lose their
fibers, and the stalks dry before the seeds come to be half ripe; to prevent
which, make choice of the strongest roots you have, of such flowers you desire
to seed, and set them in that part of your Garden most exposed to the Sun, six
or seven inches in the ground; by which means you may gain good ripe seeds,
from almost any flower, as I have found by experience.

About the middle of July, sooner or later, as the Summer is hotter or colder,
the seeds will be ready to gather, which may be known by the dryness of the
stalks, and the opening of the seed-vessels, which gather, and take up the
roots, letting the seeds remain in the pods until the end of September, and
then take them out, which being cleansed from chaff, may be sowed in beds of
fine sifted earth, especially the more ordinary sorts; but those of the
choicest flowers, must be sowed in Boxes filled with the finest earth that can
be gotten, in respect the young roots are apt to run down deep in the earth, so
that in beds many of them will be lost: Sow not these seeds too thick, nor
cover them more than a finger thick; in March following they will come up with
small leaves like grass, and in April weed, and gently water them, as often as
you shall find occasion. About Midsummer, two years after the sowing, you may
take them up, cleanse the small roots, and set them again in rows at a wider
distance, and so every other year until they come to bear flowers, still
altering the ground with fresh earth and sifted compost before you set them
again; it will be six or seven years before the Praecoces will bear flowers,
but the Medias a year or two sooner; when you see the flowers, mark out the
best, and give them new names, casting away the common reds, yellows, and
purples, and reserving such self-colours chiefly as are light, with blew,
purple, or black bottoms and Tamis, for such often change into fairer flowers,
and better marked, than many that show their best at first flowering.

And although probably many fine flowers may be raised from the seeds of those
well-marked flowers before mentioned, yet such as have a good collection of
Modes or self-colours, observing what colors are aptest to change, and by the
bottoms running up into the leaves become well marked with several colors;
doubtless by sowing the seeds of such, the product maybe as answerable to
expectation; and though they come at first wholly of one color, yet if that be
either Orange, Brimston, Hair, Dove, Gredeline, Isabella, Shamway, or any other
light or strange color, they are to be esteemed, for in a year or two, many
such have changed into good marked flowers, and so with all their increase
continued.

To hasten which effect, let such of your colors as are strong and luxuriant,
be set in lean and hungry, but fresh ground, and the next year after in that
which is fat and well manured; and so yearly removed to contrary soils, until
you obtain the end desired; and such flowers may be set in your Garden, and the
rest continued. The like course is held with off-sets, to cause them to alter
from the original, as many have done, for the General Bole came from the brown
Anvers, the Cedanella from the Zeablom, and many fine flowers from the
Brabason, Turloon, and Widows.

As for the planting of the best Tulips, a provision of manured, fresh, light
sandy earth is necessary, yearly to make new beds for them, or by taking away
that wherein they grew to supply the place; for if Tulips (as many good
Florists conclude) be set twice in the same earth, they will languish and decay
for want of agreeable nourishment; yet if you have store of Neats dung mixed
with sand, that has lain on a heap two or three years, the same sifted, and in
August well mingled with the earth of your bed in any good air will be
sufficient; many about London complain of the earth, when indeed the fault is
in the air. I have set my best Tulips twenty years successively in one bed,
where by the means prescribed, they have prospered to my wish, and often beyond
my expectation.

CHAP. X.
Narcissus.
THe Daffodill, next the Tulips, deserves mention, in respect of the great
variety and excellence thereof; we will begin with those called true Daffodils,
and so proceed to the bastard kinds, of both which, there are single and
double, some with broad, some with narrow green leaves, some bearing one, and
others many flowers on one stalk; but in respect many of them are now common
and of small esteem, we will insert the best in every kind, and such only as
are fittest to be collected and entertained by all that delight in flowers;
beginning first with that best known, called

Narcissus Nonparel.
THe incomparable Daffodill has a great and something round root, covered with
brownish skins, as the roots of all Daffodills are, from whence rises up three
or four long broad leaves, of a grayish green color, with a stalk more than
two foot high, at the top whereof out of a thin skinny husk (as all others do)
comes forth one large single flower, hanging down the head and looking one
way, as all Daffodills do, consisting of six pale yellow large leaves, almost
round pointed, with a large and wide chalice or cup in the middle, of a deeper
yellow, cut and indented about the edges; this sometimes has a flower with
twelve or more leaves, and a large cup, which is occasioned by the sport of
Nature, joining two flowers together.

Narcissus Nonparel flore, sive chalice pleno.
THe incomparable Daffodill with a double flower or cup, is in all the parts
thereof like unto the former, the flower only excepted, which in this has the
cup in the middle, very large, thick, and double, consisting of longer pale
yellow leaves, and diverse broken parts of the deeper yellow cup, mingled
together one within another, which besides the border of large leaves, forms a
reasonable fair double flower, this is called Narcissus pas Citroniella by the
Walloones that brought it lately out of Flanders by that name; I have had it
many years, and have now great store thereof by the increase of one root which
I received from Paris by the name of the double nonparel Daffodill, as in truth
it is.

Narcissus Gallicus major flore pleno.
THe great double French Daffodill has narrower and shorter green leaves than
the former, the stalk rises about a foot high, bearing one fair double flower,
composed of many sharp-pointed leaves, confusedly thrust together without
order, of a pale yellow color almost white; the leaves of this flower are thin
and apt to stick together, and never open at all if the season be wet, yet in
some years it will come very fair and well opened.

Narcissus Gallicus minor flore pleno.
THe lesser double French Daffodill is in all the parts thereof lesser than the
other, it bears upon a weak stalk one fine double flower, made of many
sharp-pointed leaves lying one over the other, and shorter by degrees to the
middle thereof, like a star with six points; this is of something a yellower
color than the former, and opens well.

Narcissus albus flore pleno Virginianus.
THe double white Daffodill of Virginia comes up with two small green leaves,
and betwixt them the stalk about six inches high, bearing one fair double white
flower, in form like the last described, but only in the middle thereof comes
forth a small long white fork or horn, which adds much to the beauty of the
flower; this is tender and will scarcely endure our Winters, yet more hardy
than that little single upright Virginian Daffodill, called Atto Musco, which
is not worth the care which is required in the keeping of it.

Narcissus Albus multiplex.
THe double white Daffodill is so common and well known unto all that have any
judgment in flowers, that it needs no description, yet for the beauty of the
flower, and the sweet scent, may be admitted; every other year in June or July
it must be taken up, the small roots and off-sets cast away, the biggest only
retained, which may be kept dry until the middle of September, and then set,
will in due season bring forth fair double flowers.

These are the best of the true Daffodills that bear one flower on a stalk; I
shall now give you the time of their flowering, and then proceed to the next
division, which is of those true Daffodills that bear many flowers on one
stalk, leaving all other observations concerning the planting and ordering of
them to the end of the Chapter, where one general direction may serve for all.

The Non-parell single and double, flower in the end of March or beginning of
April; the double French Daffodills sooner, about the middle of March; the
white of Virginia in the end of April, and the common white about the same
time, or a little after it.

Narcissus Africanus aureus major.
THe great yellow Daffodill of Africa is the most stately of all the single
Daffodills that bear many flowers on one stalk, whereof there are four or five
sorts, but none of them comparable to this, so that those that are furnished
with this, will care but little for any of the other; the leaves of this noble
Daffodill are long and broad, of a greener color then others, among which
comes forth a strong stalk, not so long as the leaves, bearing at the top
thereof in an old and well-grown Plant, ten or twelve large flowers, of a fair
shining yellow color, with round large boles or cups, of a deeper yellow than
the six outer leaves, of an excessive sweet scent; the root is great, and in
fashion like that of other Daffodills; it is usually called Narcissus d'
Algiers, and Africanus Polyanthos.

Narcissus Sulphureus major.
THe great Brimston-coloured Daffodill has narrower and greener leaves than
the last, yet full as long; it has commonly four or five flowers on one stalk,
which at first opening are of a bright Lemon-colour, with a large round
Saffron-coloured cup, after it has been blown some time, the leaves turn to a
more sullen Brimston-colour, and the cup also waxes paler; this is sweet like
the former and worthy of esteem.

Narcissus Narbonensis sive medio luteus.
THe French Daffodill with the yellow cup has long and something broad leaves,
but not so long as the two former, it bears sometimes eight or ten flowers on
one stalk, made of six small white leaves, and a little round yellow cup in the
middle, of a soft sweet scent; of this kind there are five or six several
sorts, some flowering earlier, some bigger, and some bearing more flowers than
others.

Narcissus totus albus Polianthos.
THe all-white Daffodill with many flowers is like the French Daffodill last
described, only the flowers are all white, as well the cup as the outer
leaves: of this there is a lesser and a greater, but the greater is much the
better.

Narcissus Cyprius flore pleno Polianthos.
THe double yellow Daffodill of Cyprus with many flowers has leaves almost as
broad and long as the former, and a stalk above a foot high, which bears four
or five small double pale yellow flowers, of a strong heady scent; it is tender
and must be defended from frosts in the winter.

Narcissus medio luteus Corona duplici
THe Turkey Daffodill with a double Crown comes up with three or four long
broad leaves, with a large tall stalk, bearing four or five small milk-white
flowers, with a double yellow cup in the middle, composed of many small short
yellow leaves, or parts of several cups, one within another; this is exceeding
sweet, and not so tender as the last.

Narcissus Chalcidonicus flore pleno Polianthos.
THe double Daffodill of Constantinople with many flowers is like the last
described, the leaves come up before other Daffodils, and the stalk bears
four or five small double white flowers, the leaves standing without order, and
many pieces of a yellow cup among them: there is another of this kind that
bears fewer and lesser flowers; the pieces of the yellow cup, that is mixed
with the white leaves, are edged with purple; they are both very sweet and fine
flowers, but the first is much the better, and is more tender than the other.

The great African Daffodill flowreth about the middle of March, the
Brimstone-colour in the beginning of April, the French Daffodils, and the all
white, betimes in March, the double yellow of Cyprus flowreth about the end of
April, and the other of Constantinople, about the end of March, but after some
mild winter much sooner.

The next division of true Daffodills is of Juncifolias, those with round
rush-like leaves, whereof there is some diversity, the best of which are these
that follow.

Narcissus Juncifolius albus.
THe white Junquilia, or Rush Daffodill, has a small round blackish root, from
whence spring up three or four small long Rush-like green leaves, with a stalk
more than a foot high, bearing three or four little flowers, each containing
six white leaves, and a round cup in the middle, of the same color. There is
another of this kind that bears white flowers, with larger cups, in nothing
else differing.

Narcissus Juncifolius flore albo reflexo.
THe white turning Junquilia, or Rush Daffodill, has green leaves like the
former, but somewhat shorter, rounder, and greener, the leaves of the flowers
are larger, the cups much bigger, and both of a white coleur: the six leaves
turning back even to the foot stalks.

Narcissus Juncifolius flore luteo reflexo.
THe yellow turning Junquilia differs chiefly from the last in the color of
the flowers, which in this are wholly of a gold yellow color.

Narcissus Juncifolius chalice albo reflexis foliis luteis.
THe yellow turning Junquilia with a white cup differs from the rest, in that
the outer leaves of the flowers are pale yellow, and the cups milk white.

Narcissus Juncifolius chalice luteo reflexis foliis albidis.
THe white turding Junquilia with a yellow cup, is only different from the
other, in that the flowers are contrary to them, the turning leaves in this,
being white, and the cup yellow.

Narcissus Juncifolius luteus magno chalice.
THe Junquilia, or Rush Daffodil with a great cup, is bigger in all the parts
thereof than any of the former, the flowers are seldom more than three on one
stalk, which are larger than in any other Rush Daffodil, the outer leaves are
yellow, and do not turn toward the stalk, but rather toward the cup, which is
big proportionally to the outer leaves, and of a deeper yellow color.

Narcissus Juncifolius luteus flore pleno.
THe double Junquilia, or Rush Daffodill, in all the parts thereof, is like the
common Junquilia, only the flowers of this are thick and double, consisting of
several rows of leaves, with the cups, or pieces thereof, betwixt every row of
bigger leaves, and wholly of a fair yellow color: there is another of this
kind that bears double flowers, but lesser and much inferior to this.

All these Junquilias, or Rush Daffodils, do flower in April, some sooner than
others, and most of those that turn back their leaves, are commonly in flower
together.

Narcissus Marinus sive tertius Mathioli.
THe great Sea Daffodill, or Mathiolus his third Daffodil, has a root far
bigger than any other the forementioned Daffodills, the leaves are commonly six
in number, of a whitish green color, twice as thick and broad as any of the
former, but not so long as many of them, from the middle and sides whereof
springs up one, two, and sometimes three great stalks, more than a foot high,
bearing at the tops thereof, ten, twelve, or more flowers on each stalk,
consisting of six white leaves spread or laid open, with a white short cup or
crown in the middle, lying flat upon the leaves, cut or divided into six
corners, from whence stands forth long white threads, turning up the ends,
and some other white threads in the middle also, tipped with yellow pendents.

This springs late out of the ground, seldom before the beginning of April,
and flowreth in the end of May, and sometimes not until the beginning of June.

Narcissus Indicus autumnalis latifolius rubellus instar Lilii polianthos.
THe Indian broad-leaved Autumn Daffodill, with many Lily-like reddish flowers
on one stalk.

Narcissus Indicus autumnalis rubello albicante color polianthos.
THe Indian Autumn Daffodill, with many blush flowers on one stalk.

Narcissus Indicus latifolia squamosa radice flore phoeniceo.
THe Indian broad-leaved Daffodill, with a scaly root, and scarlet flower.

Narcissus latifolius flore Phoeniceo instar Jacobei polianthos.
THe broad leaved Daffodil, with scarlet flowers, many on one stalk, vulgarly
called Jacobea, this is the red Daffodil described by Mr. Parkinson, the plant
is tender, unapt to live with us, and the flower of small beauty.

Narcissus Virginianus latifolius flore purpurascente.
THe broad leaved Virginian Daffodil with a purplish flower. This Daffodil
bears many flowers on one stalk, like small Lillies, of a sullen purplish
color, never opening, and seldom showing the inner sides of the leaves, in
its natural country, and I doubt will hardly live in ours. Of this generation
is the Narcissus of Japan or Garnsey Lilly, which there prospers and bears in
October Peach-coloured flowers.

These Indian Daffodills flower late, most of them not before September, and
some after; they are all strangers in England, except that of Garnsey: many of
them are described by Ferrarius, and I find them all mentioned in the
Catalogue of the Paris Garden, but of what beauty they are, or how they prosper
there, I confess I am yet to learn, and I doubt Indian Plants like little
better in France than with us; besides they being of the nature of the great
Sea- Daffodill, if the fibers be either broken in taking up those large roots,
or spoiled by so long a journey, the roots will undoubtedly perish, and never
comprehend in the ground or spring at all. And thus much for the true
Daffodils; and now we shall pass to the bastard kind, and set down some or the
best of them, beginning with the biggest and best known, called

Pseudonarcissus aureus Hispanicus maximus.
THe great yellow Spanish bastard Daffodill, from a great root set deep in the
ground, which it affects, comes up many thick stiff leaves, of a grayish
green color, with a stalk three foot high, bearing at the top thereof one fair
large yellow flower, not hanging down the head, but standing forth, consisting
of six short, and something broad leaves, and a great Trunk in the middle, a
little crumpled, and wide open at the mouth, turning up the brims.

Pseudonarcissus Hispanicus flore albo major.
THe great white Spanish bastard Daffodill is not so large as the former yellow
in any of the parts thereof: it bears one milk-white flower, hanging down the
head, which is of the fashion, and almost as big as the former; there are two
other sorts of white Spanish bastard Daffodills, which are lesser, and wholly
of a Snow-white color.

Pseudonarcissus maximus flore pleno.
THe greatest double bastard Daffodill, or Tradescants double Daffodill, of all
other is the most stately, and bears the biggest, doublest, and gallantest
flower of all the double Daffodills; it has a great round root covered with a
brownish skin, from whence springs four or five somewhat large leaves, but
not very long, of a whitish green color, the stalk rises about a foot high,
bearing at the top thereof one fair great flower, very much spread open like a
full-blown Province- Rose, consisting of a great number of small pale yellow
leaves, and almost as many larger, of a deeper yellow color, standing in rows
one under another, shorter and shorter by degrees, even to the middle of the
flower.

Pseudonarcissus major flore pleno.
TUggies great double bastard Daffodill, in all the parts thereof is like the
last described, but only in the fashion of the flower, which of this, is of
the same yellow color, large and double, but not so well spread open, nor the
broken parts of the cup so well parted, being like to the next in fashion, but
far more thick and double, and a much better flower.

Pseudonarcissus minor flore pleno.
THe lesser double bastard Daffodill, or Willmors double Daffodill, has as
large roots, and something longer leaves than the former; it bears one double
yellow large flower, but not so fair and double as either of the former, yet
the leaves of this are larger, though not so many; sometimes it will be a fair
double flower with the cup much broken, and mixed with the paler outer leaves,
and sometimes with the six paler outer leaves, and a great double Trunck, in
some close and unbroken, and in others half broken, and divided into many parts.

Pseudonarcissus flore pleno minimus.
THe least double bastard Daffodill, or Parkinsons double Daffodill, is like
the last in all the parts thereof, but lesser; the flower is double, consisting
of some rows of pale yellow outer leaves, and some pieces of a broken, deeper,
greenish yellow Trunck, forming a long greenish yellow double flower; not so
big as the last.

Pseudonarcissus Anglicus flore pleno.
THe double English bastard Daffodill, or Gerards double Daffodill, differs
only from the common English bastard Daffodill, in that the flower of this is
double, consisting of the pale yellow outer leaves, and parts of the deeper
yellow trunck, divided in several rows one within another, and sometimes the
trunck is only double, and some parts or sides of the flower of a greenish
yellow.

Pseudonarcissus angustifolius aureus multiplex.
THe golden double narrow-leaved Daffodill has narrow leaves, of a whitish
green color, about four or five inches long, with a stalk almost a foot high,
bearing one double flower, consisting of six yellow outward leaves, and many
that are smaller and of a deeper yellow, thick set together in the middle, with
some of the paler leaves among them; the middle of the flower pointing forth,
different from all the double Daffodills; this is as rare as any of the former.

They do all flower from the middle of March, to the middle of April, most of
them being commonly in flower together.

Pseudonarcissus Juncifolius albus.
THe white bastard Junquilia, or Rush Daffodill, has two or three large green
leaves, not altogether so round or Rush-like, as those of the forementioned
kinds; the stalk is about half a foot high, bearing at the top one small white
flower with six small and short leaves, standing about the middle of the
trunck, which is long and very wide open at the brims, the small outer leaves
are a little greenish, and the great trunck is milk-white.

Pseudonarcissus Juncifolius luteus major.
THe great yellow bastard Junquilia has bigger, longer, and broader green
leaves than the former, the stalk is higher, and the flower larger and more
open at the mouth than the white, and wholly of a yellow color: Of this there
is another sort that no way differs from it, but in that it is lesser in all
the parts thereof; there is likewise a third, that is like the great yellow,
but fairer, and flowereth a month after it, in all other parts agreeing.

All these bastard Junquilias flower in March, except the last, which is a
month later; the lesser yellow is the most common, and is sold by the Walloons,
by the name of Junquillia Mutone.

The greatest number of the Daffodills are hardy, and increase exceedingly in
almost any soil, and some of them are very tender, and must be planted in good
earth, a warm place, and defended from Frosts in Winter, such are the double
white Daffodills of Virginia, the double yellow of Cyprus, and those of
Constantinople, and indeed all those that bear many flowers on one stalk, are
more tender than the other sorts, therefore it will be convenient to place them
all together under some South wall, where they may stand unremoved many years,
in respect they are not very apt to off-set; neither do they yearly, unless
they be taken up, lose all their fibers, so that by long standing in a place
the roots will grow great, and the flowers will be many and fair; all the other
sorts that bear but one flower, may be taken up in the beginning of June, and
kept dry until September, the Sea Daffodill, and those of India excepted,
which hold their fibers, and must not be removed but upon necessity, and then
planted again as soon as may be.

The Sea Daffodill is far more hardy than those of India, which require to be
planted in boxes, and housed in winter, but the other may be set under a south
wall where it may stand twenty years without removing. If any desire to sow the
seeds of Daffodills, in hope to raise some new varieties, those of the
Nonparel, the great Spanish yellow, the Spanish whites, the great Junquilia,
and the bastard kind, are the aptest to bring good seeds, and the likeliest to
yield diversities; they may be sowed in September, and not removed of three
years, and then in June taken up, and presently set again in good ground at
wider distances, where they may stand until you may see what flowers they will
bear, and then disposed as they shall deserve.

The seeds of the Sea Daffodill must be sowed very thin by it self, and not
removed for the space of ten years, about which time it will bear flowers, and
when you take it up, the Fibers, which it still holds, must be kept whole,
and the root presently set again, where it may stand without removing: all the
Indian Daffodils are of the same nature, but much more tender. If the seeds
were obtained, perhaps they might be the products to plants more durable, being
naturalized and bred up in our own Country, but so long expectation requires
much patience, though little pains in planting, only sowing them in boxes,
letting them not freez in Winter, nor want water in Somer.

Having now done with the Daffodils, we will conclude this Chapter with some
diversities of Lucoium Bulbosum, the Bulbous Violet, which is of the nature of
the Daffodills, and then proceed to the Hyacinths.

Lucoium Bulbosum praecox majus.
THe greater early Bulbous Violet, from a small round root, like unto that of a
Daffodil, puts forth three or four very green broad flat and short leaves,
with a naked green stalk, at the top whereof out of a thin skin comes forth
one, and sometimes two small white flowers, hanging down the heads, consisting
of six short leaves, standing round together, with small sharp points, of a
pale greenish color.

Lucoium bulbosum praecox minus.
THe lesser early Bulbous Violet comes up with two narrow grayish green
leaves, with a small stalk betwixt them, bearing one small pendulous flower,
with three small pointed white leaves, on the out side, with three shorter
within them, standing round like a cup, edged with green: this is that common
kind vulgarly called the Snow-flower.

Lucoium majus bulbosum serotinum.
THe great late-flowring bulbous Violet, is in all the parts thereof very like
unto the first, but much bigger, it bears upon a reasonable tall stalk,
bigger in the middle than at either end, three or four flowers, like in form
and color unto the first: we have had two other varieties which came from
Portugal, but both of them so tender that they would not abide in our cold
Country,

The first flowreth about the end of February, the second or lesser a fortnight
before it, and the great late flowring kind, not until May.

They all increase by the root like Daffodills, being very apt to off-set; they
lose their fibers, and therefore may be taken up and kept dry until Autumn,
and then choice being made of the biggest roots to set, the rest may be cast
away, for a few of these will be sufficient to furnish a garden, especially of
the lesser and common kind.

CHAP. XI.
Hyacinthus sive Jacinthus.
THe Hyacinth, or Jacinth, is of diverse sorts, and many of them of small
esteem, we will make choice of the best, and set them down in order, beginning
with that so much desired by all Florists.

Hyacinthus Indicus tuberosa radice.
THe great Indian tuberous-rooted Hyacinth has a thick tuberous knobbed root,
formed into several heads, with many thick fibers at the bottoms of them, from
those heads rise up several strong and tall stalks, set with diverse fair, long,
and broad green leaves, joined at the bottom close unto the stalk, where they
are biggest, growing smaller and smaller even to the top thereof, where stand
many fair large flowers, each composed of six white leaves, spread open like
those of a white Daffodill, with some short threads in the middle, and of a
strong sweet scent: there is another of this kind that differs only from
this, in that it is lesser in all the parts thereof.

Hyacinthus Botroides major sive Muscari flore flavo.
THe great yellow Musk Grape flower, or yellow Muscari, from a long round root,
with many thick fat fibers underneath (which do not perish as those of many of
the other Jacinths do) spring up five or six leaves, which at first are
reddish, and after of a whitish green color, hollow, or guttered on the upper
side; sometimes from an old root that has stood long unremoved, comes up
three or four weak stalks, commonly lying on the leaves, laden toward the top
with many flowers, like little bottles, of a fair yellow color, and of a Musk
sweet scent.

Muscari flore cineritio.
THe Ash-colored Muscari, is in roots, leaves, stalks and flowers like unto
the last, but something lesser, the leaves a little paler, and the flowers of a
bleak Ash Color, as sweet, or rather sweeter than the former.

Muscari flore rubro.
THe red Muscari, differs chiefly from the last, in that the flowers of this
are of a yellowish red color, and of a softer sweet scent.

Muscari flore albo.
THe white Muscari is like the last, only the flowers of this are of a pale
bleak white color, and of a strong Musky scent.

Hyacinthus comosus ramosus purpureus.
THe fair-haired branched Jacinth has broader leaves than any of the former,
not lying on the ground, but standing more upright, but hollow like the other,
the stalk rises up half a yard high, branched out on every side, with many
tuffs or knaps at the ends of them, of a dark murrey purple color: the roots
are great, and hold their fibers like those of the Muscari.

Hyacinthus comosus ramosus elegantior.
THe fair curled haired Jacinth is in all the parts thereof like the former,
the only difference being in the flowers, which of this is a bush, or tuft of
many branches, sub-divided into diverse long curled threads or hairs, of a fine
bright murry purple color, as well the top of the stalk as the flower: this is
a beautiful, and strange fashioned flower, and has been of great esteem, but
now grown something common.

Hyacinthus Stellatus major Peruanus.
THe great starry Jacinth of Peru, from a great root, like unto that of the
Muscari, come up before winter, many broad, long, sharp-pointed green leaves,
which lie on the ground round about the head thereof, from whence rises up a
thick short stalk, bearing from the middle to the top thereof, upon long
footstalk, very many blew star-like flowers, with some blew threads, tipped with
yellow pendents, standing about a middle head, which is of a deeper blew
color, than that of the six outer leaves.

Hyacinthus Stellatus major Peruanus flore albo.
THe great white starry Jacinth of Peru, has leaves of a lighter green color
and lesser than those of the former, the flowers are not so many on the stalk,
and white, with a little show of blush toward the bottom, in all other parts
agreeing with the other.

Hyacinthus Stellatus major Peruanus flore carneo.
THe great blush starry Jacinth of Peru is in all things like the first, the
only difference is in the color of the flowers, which in this, are of a fine
purplish blush-colour.

Hyacinthus stellatus Lilifolio, and radice caeruleo.
THe blew Lilly-leaved starry Jacinth has a root composed of pale yellow
scales, like unto that of the white Lilly, but smaller and longer, from whence
spring up many broad green leaves, like unto those of a Lilly, but shorter; the
stalk rises about a foot high, bearing many star-like flowers at the top
thereof, which are of a light blew color, with six short leaves in the middle,
standing round like a cup.

Of this kind there are two other sorts, differing only in the color of the
flowers, which in the one is white, and in the other blush, in all other
respects agreeing with the former.

The Indian Hyacinth does not flower in our Country until August; the
Muscaries, and the fair-haired Jacinths flower in April; the starry Jacinths of
Peru, and those with Lilly leaves, bring forth their flowers in May.

The roots of all these Jacinths do hold their fibers, therefore not to be kept
long out of ground, nor the fibers broken when removed; they are to be
transplanted in August, except the Indian Jacinths, which are yearly to be
taken up in April, the roots carefully parted without breaking the great
fibers, and thus re-planted; put some rich earth in the bottom of a pot, and
place the root so that it may be covered on all sides, with some natural fresh
earth; which done, fill up the pot with the same rank earth, to give the fibers
nourishment; make a hole in a hot bed something cooled, and put the pot
therein, where let it remain without watering until the roots spring, then
take it out and place it under a South wall; in dry weather let it not want
water, and about the middle of September house it, for this plant will not
endure either wet or cold, and if planted with rank earth next the root, more
apt to off-set than to bear flowers. All the Muscaries except the Ash Color,
must be planted in a warm place and defended in Winter, the rest are hardy and
require no attendance. We have some other sorts of Hyacinths which yearly lose
their fibers; the chiefest of which are these that follow.

Hyacinthus Botroides caeraleus amoenus.
THe sky-colored Grape-flower comes up with three or four small guttered
green leaves, from a round white root, with a stalk about six inches high,
bearing at the top thereof many flowers close set together like unto a small
bunch of Grapes, in form like those of the Muscari, but lesser, of a fine pale
blew or sky color, and of a soft sweet scent.

Hyacinthus Botroides flore albo.
THe white Grape-flower is in all things like the former, but that the leaves
are green, and the flowers white, growing somewhat thicker on the stalk.

Hyacinthus Botroides flore rubente.
THe blush Grape-flower is like unto the last, but bigger in all the parts
thereof, and the flowers of a pale bleak blush-colour.

Hyacinthus Botroides ramosus.
THe branched Grape-flower differs from all the former, in that the flowers
grow along the stalk in branches, being of a blew color, and bigger than any
of the other, as the roots, leaves, and stalks also are.

Hyacinthus Orientalis major dictus Zumbul Indi.
THe great Oriental Jacinth, or Zumbul Indi, is that great Jacinth that comes
up with a specled stalk, and great broad long green leaves, bearing on a strong
stalk many fair long bluish purple flowers, opening into six small leaves,
which turn back again (as all the Oriental Jacinths do) the root is big and
round, covered with a reddish purple coat; of this kind there is one that
bears fair double flowers, and there are many sorts besides those whose
descriptions follow, the which differ chiefly in the color of the flowers; in
some they are of a pale, and some of a deeper blew color, with stripes down
the backs of the leaves of the flowers, some are wholly white, and others of a
fine blush-colour; they are all sweet, and their roots may be taken up and kept
dry, as well as those of Tulips, which causes them to be the more respected.

Hyacinthus Coelestis.
THe Celestial Hyacinth is bigger in all the parts thereof than the Zumbull
Indi; it commonly comes up with two stalks, each bearing many large flowers,
like those of the last, but bigger, and of a fine pale blew or sky color; of
this kind there are two or three others, that bear large flowers on big tall
stalks, some of a deeper, and others of a lighter blew color, some white,
others blush, and perhaps all these raised from the seeds of the Zumbull Indi,
as others may be from the seeds of them.

Hyacinthus Orientalis Brumalis, sive praecox flore albo.
THe early white Oriental Jacinth, from a short round big root (sometimes
before Winter) rise up long green leaves like those of the last, as the flowers
are also, but lesser, and of a pure white color; this is commonly in flower in
the end of January; there is another of this kind that bears purple flowers,
that come as early, for which property they are chiefly respected.

Hyacinthus Orientalis flore pleno caeruleo.
THe fair double blew Oriental Jacinth, is in all respects like the other blew
Jacinths, the chiefest difference is in the flowers, those of this kind being
fair and double, of a good blew color, and consisting of two or three rows of
leaves spread open; there is another of this kind that bears double blew
flowers, but not so fair, and more apt to come deformed.

Hyacinthus Orientalis candidus flore pleno.
THe pure white double oriental Jacinth differs from the single white, in
that the flowers of this are thick and double, of a pure snow-white color, and
opening much better than the best kind of the double blew, for which it is much
esteemed.

Hyacinthus stellaris flore cinereo.
THe Ash-colored starry Jacinth has a round white root, and green leaves,
spreading on the ground like those of the common Harebell, or English Hyacinth,
the stalk bears very many small starlike flowers in a thick bush, bigger
below than above, of a pale blew or Ash Color, and very sweet.

Hyacinthus stellatus vulgaris.
THe common blew starry Jacinth, rises out of the ground with two or three
brown leaves, which be long and hollow, of a whitish green on the upper side,
brown underneath, and half round, the stalk bears at the top thereof five or
six small star-like flowers, consisting of six leaves, of a fair blew color.

Hyacinthus stellatus flore albo.
THe white starry Jacinth has leaves like the former, but of a fresher green
color, the flowers are of the same fashion and white, a little inclining to
blush; there is one of this kind with snow-white flowers, and there is another
that bears blush flowers.

Hyacinthus Stellatus praecox.
THe early Starry Jacinth has broader and fresher green leaves than the
former, with blew flowers; the flowers of this are bigger, and of a brighter
blew color; there is one of this kind likewise that bears white flowers,
and another more rare than any of the former of this kind, the flowers whereof
being as large as those of the first blew, and of a fine blush color.

The Grape-flowers are in flower in April, the great Oriental Jacinth betimes
in March, the white and purple early Winter Jacinths in January or in the
beginning of February, the other Oriental Jacinths, both single and double,
flower in the end of March and beginning of April; the Ash-colored starry
Jacinth flowreth in April, and the other Starry Jacinths in February and
beginning of March.

They all lose their fibers, and may be yearly removed in June or July, but
none of them (except the Oriental) would be kept long out of ground; they are
hardy, and require small attendance; most of them bear seeds, which being sowed
and preserved as that of Tulips, produce new diversities. There are some others
which I have purposely omitted, as the Woolly Jacinth, which I have had many
years, but never could see one flower of it, it is common in Spain, but will
not flower in England; and of these described the best are the fair double
blew, and the double white Oriental Jacinths, the Celestial, the white, and the
blush Starry Jacinths: the other are pretty flowers, but of less beauty and
esteem.

CHAP. XII.
Ornithogalum.
THe Star of Bethlehem, and the varieties thereof, are next to be handled, some
of them are fine flowers, and others not worth the naming, the which we will
pass over, and describe the best only.

Ornithogalum Arabicum.
THe Star-flower of Arabia has many long green leaves, like unto those of the
Oriental Jacinth, from whence rises up a round green stalk, about two foot
high, bearing at the top thereof upon long foot stalks, diverse large flowers,
with small short green-pointed leaves at the bottom of each of them, consisting
of six pure white leaves, with six white threads about it, tipped with yellow
pendents: the root is great and white, with a flat bottom, the fibers being
gone, which it yearly loses: this is very impatient of frost, and will not
abide with us, unless it be carefully preserved and defended in Winter.

Ornithogalum maximum album.
THe greatest white Star of Bethlehem has many fair broad long fresh green
leaves, which spring early out of the ground, and continue from the beginning
of February to the end of May, at which time they begin to fade, and the stalk
with the head of flowers begins to rise, and before they are blown the
leaves will be all gone: the stalk when in flower, is a yard high, green,
smooth and round, bearing at the top a great bush, or spike of flowers, upon
long footstalk, which grow shorter and shorter to the top of the stalk: the
flowers open by degrees, first below and so upwards, consisting of six white
leaves, spread open like a Star, with a white umbone in the middle, beset with
many threads tipped with yellow; the root is great, and has a flat bottom like
the former, but more hardy to endure, and apter to increase, whereby it is now
grown common.

Ornithogalum Neapolitanum.
THe Star-flower of Naples rises out of the ground early, with four or five
long hollow pointed whitish green leaves, standing round together; the stalk
rises two foot high, bearing many flowers, each containing six long narrow
leaves, of a shining white color on the inside, and of a whitish green on the
outside, turning back toward the stalks, with six other small leaves in the
middle, standing round together like a cup, with a white pointell, and six
threads tipped with yellow: the root is white, and increases too much, and
therefore requires to be yearly taken up and freed from off-sets, wherewith it
is apt to be pestered.

Ornithogalum Luteum.
THe yellow Star of Bethlehem comes up at the first with one long round
greenish leaf, which opening a little above the ground, yields another small
leaf shorter than the first, from whence rises a stalk four or five inches
high, bearing at the top four or five small green leaves, and among them the
like number of small yellow star-like flowers, with a small greenish line down
the backs of the leaves, and some small reddish threads in the middle; the root
is small, round, white and clear, and although it yearly loses the fibers, it
will not endure to be kept but very little time out of the ground.

Ornithogalum Aethiopicum.
THe Star-flower of Ethiopia has green leaves a foot long, and an inch broad,
wooly when broken, and a stalk a cubit high, bearing from the middle to the top
many large white star-like flowers, wi^h some yellowness in the bottoms of
them, with a three-square head compassed with white threads, tipped with yellow;
the root is thick, round and white, almost as tender as that of the first.

There are some other varieties, as the great white spiked Star of Bethlehem,
which is like the former great white, but lesser, and not so good, the flowers
grow in a larger spike, but much thinner set on the stalk; there are some
others that bear small white flowers, not worth retaining.

The Arabian flowreth in May, the second in June, that of Naples and the yellow
in April, but the Ethiopian not until August.

They lose their fibers, and the roots may be taken up as soon as the stalks
are dry, and kept out of the ground until the end of September, except those
of the yellow, which will not endure out of the earth but a little time: that
of Arabia, and that of Ethiopia, are both tender and will not endure the
extremity of our long frosty winters, therefore they must be planted in boxes,
in rich hot sandy earth, and housed in winter; the yellow may be set among
other tender roots that require to be covered and defended from frosts in
winter, the other are hardy, and may be set in any place among other roots that
lose their fibers.

CHAP. XIII.
Moly.
WIld garlic yields some diversities worthy of entertainment, the which are
next to be described, and first we will begin with that so much celebrated by
the ancient Poets.

Moly Homericum.
THe great Moly of Homer rises up with two or three great, thick, long hollow
leaves, of a whitish green color, like that of the Tulip, with some small
bulbs growing sometimes on the ends of the leaves, but commonly betwixt them,
and on the stalk near the ground, which being set will produce a plant of the
same kind; the stalk rises up a yard high, naked, round and smooth, bearing a
great umbel or tuft, of small star-like purplish flowers, upon equal
footstalk, which continue long before they decay. The root is very great,
white, and of the smell of Garlic.

Moly Indicum, sive Caucafon.
THe Indian Moly has leaves like the former, but shorter and broader, the
stalk rises up not so high as the leaves, without any flowers, but only
bearing a cluster of reddish scaly bulbs, each as big as an Acorn, standing on
footstalk, which being set, will bring a Plant of the same kind; the root is
great and white, covered with a dark-colored coat, and increases but little
under ground.

Moly montanum Pannonicum.
THe Moly of Hungary is of two sorts, the first has three or four broad long
green leaves, which are carried up with the stalk a foot high one above
another, having at the top some sad reddish bulbs, and between them long
footstalk, with flowers of the fashion of those of Homers Moly, and of a pale
purple-colour, the root is small but very apt to increase; the second Moly of
Hungary is like the first, but that the green leaves are smaller, and the stalk
bears a greater cluster of dark green bulbs; the flowers are like those of
the first in fashion, color, and manner of growing, and the root is covered
with a dark purple coat.

Moly Serpentinum.
SErpents Moly is like the former, but of much more beauty and regard, for that
the bulbs on the head of the stalk are redder, the stalk lower, and the small
green leaves twine and crawl, from whence it took the name; the flowers that
grow among the bulbs, are more beautiful than those of either of the two
former, and the scent not so strong, the root is small and round, increasing
into many small round roots, no bigger than a small Pease.

Moly montanum flore luteo.
THe yellow Moly has two long broad leaves, when it will flower, otherwise but
one, of the color and near of the bigness of those of the Tulip, between which
comes up a slender stalk, bearing at the top a tuft of yellow star-like
flowers, greenish on the back, and with yellow threads in the middle; the root
is whitish, apt to increase, and smells strong of Garlic, as the flowers and
leaves do also.

Moly montanum latifolium Hispanicum.
THe Spanish purple Moly has two long broad leaves, like the last described,
betwixt which the stalk rises up two foot high, bearing at the top many
star-like flowers, of a fine delayed purple color, with threads of the same
color tipped with yellow; near the ground it yields bulbs, by which it may be
easily increased; this has no scent of Garlic in any part.

Moly pyxidatum argenteum Hispanicum.
THe Spanish silver-cupped Moly has two or three long rush-like leaves, which
pass away when the stalk is risen up to his height, which will be three foot or
more, bearing a great head of flowers, which after some time spread much open;
the flowers grow on long footstalk of a silver-colour, with lines on both
sides the leaves, in fashion small and hollow like a cup; the root is white and
clear, and not very apt to increase, and without any ill scent in any part
thereof.

Moly Dioscorideum.
DIoscorides his Moly has a small transparent root, covered with a thick
yellowish skin, from whence springs up three or four narrow Grassy leaves,
with a stalk a foot and half high, bearing at the top a tuft of milk-white
flowers, like unto those of Ramsons, with little or no scent of Garlic. There
is another of this sort that is lesser, and the leaves of the flowers rounder
pointed; these and the yellow are the most common of all the kinds of Moly.

Moly Muscatum Monspeliense.
THe sweet Moly of Montpelier has four or five small leaves, no bigger than
bents, with a stalk about a foot high, bearing many small star-like white
flowers, which if the end of Somer be hot and dry, smell like Musk or Civet,
the root is small, very tender, and must be carefully defended from Frosts in
Winter.

Homers Moly flowereth in May, and continues until July; the Indian Moly
bears the head of bulbs in June and July, and all the rest flower about the
same time, except the last, whose time is late in September.

These lose their fibers, and may be taken up after the stalks are dry, and the
biggest roots preserved to set again, casting away the small off-sets,
wherewith many of them are very apt to be pestred, especially if they stand
long unremoved; they are all hardy and will thrive in any soil, except those
whose tenderness is expressed in the description; the flowers of most of them
are neither fair nor sweet, and only preserved by those that affect varieties;
their best use is to adorn flower-pots, where they will continue if the water
be renewed, a long time, and set off other flowers of the same season, being
placed among them. There are some others of this family not worth mentioning,
for those described are enough, if not too many, unless they were of a more
worthy generation.

CHAP. XIV.
Asphodelus.
THe Asphodill, for that it bears star-like flowers, is next to be described;
there are some few diversities of them, of which we will take the best only,
and leave the rest as neither worth collecting nor retaining.

Asphodelus major albus ramosus.
THe great white branched Asphodill has many crawling hollow three-square
leaves, sharp-pointed, lying on the ground about the root; the stalk from the
midst of them rises round, smooth and naked, divided at the top into many
branches more or less, according to the age of the Plant, bearing many
star-like flowers, consisting of six leaves, whitish on the inside, with some
yellow threads in the middle, and stripped with a pale purple line down the
back of every leaf; the root is composed of many thick cloggs, biggest in the
middle, and smaller at both ends, fastened together at the head, of a grayish
dark color on the outside, and yellow within.

Asphodelus albus non ramosus.
THe white unbranched Asphodill is like the former, but that the stalk is
without branches, and the flowers whiter, without any line or stripe on the
back sides of the leaves, the cloggs of the roots are smaller and fewer than
those of the other.

Asphodelus major flore carneo.
THe blush-coloured Asphodill differs from the last, in that the leaves are a
little spotted, and the flowers of a blush-colour, which causes it to be more
esteemed.

Asphodelus major flore albo striato.
THe great white striped Asphodill has many long and broad green leaves, which
for the most part lie on the ground; the stalk rises up smooth, like the white
unbranched Asphodill, with many such like flowers, of a whitish silver color,
striped down the back of every leaf with a purple line; they grow on the stalk
in a long spike, first flowering below, and so upwards by degrees; the root is
a great bulbe, whereunto are fastened diverse cloggs, like those of the former.

Asphodelus minimus albus.
THe least white Asphodill has four or five narrow long green leaves, almost
three-square, with a small stalk about a foot high, without branches, having at
the top some white flowers, like those of the former, and striped on both
sides, every leaf with a purple line; the roots are many cloggs, smaller than
any of the other.

Asphodelus minor albus sive fistulosus.
THe little hollow white Asphodill has many long hollow green leaves, growing
thick together, from among which come up many round stalks, bearing from the
middle to the top diverse white star-like flowers, with purple lines on the back
of them, like those of the white branched Asphodill; the roots are not in
cloggs like the former, but small white strings fastened together at the head;
this is a tender Plant, and apt to perish if it be not carefully preserved from
Frost and wet in Winter.

Asphodelus luteus minor, sive Hastula Regia.
THe small yellow Asphodill, or Kings spear, has many long narrow-edged green
leaves, trailing on the ground; the stalk rises a yard high, set with small
long leaves to the middle, where the flowers begin, being many yellow and
star-like; the roots are many long yellow strings which run in the ground and
increase very much; this is the most common, and least esteemed of all the
Asphodills.

They do all flower in May and June, except the two last; the first of them
flowereth in August and September, and the other in July.

They may be taken up, and the roots parted, when the stalks are dry, and
presently set again, for they would not be kept long out of ground, and except
the last white whose tenderness is expressed in the description, they are all
hardy and will thrive in any place; most of them bring seeds, which is not
worth the sowing, for that it will be many years before they bear flowers, and
no variety is to be expected from them, and for gaining new Plants, the old
increase fast enough.

There is another kind of Plant, called the Lilly Asphodill, whereof that Sedg,
which bears soon-fading dark yellowish Lilly-like flowers, commonly called
the Day-Lilly, or the flower for a day, common in every Country-Garden, is a
kind. There are three other sorts worthy to be inserted, two of them being very
rare and of much esteem.

Lilia Asphodelus luteus.
THe yellow Lilly Asphodill rises up with many long thin Sedgy leaves, out of
the middle of them comes up a naked stalk, bearing at the top thereof four or
five small Lilly-like yellow flowers, blowing one after another like the day
Lilly, but continuing many days before they fade: the leaves dye to the ground
before Winter, and the roots are many long yellow strings very much increasing.

Lilia Asphodelus flore albo.
THe Lilly Asphodill with a white flower is in all the parts thereof like the
former, the leaves are of a fresher green color, and the flowers snow-white,
like unto the Savoy Spiderwort, but that the stalk is higher, and the flowers
bigger.

Lilia Asphodelus flore carneo.
THe Lilly Asphodill with a blush, or flesh-coloured-flower, is very like the
white, the greatest difference is in the flowers, which in this are of a fine
bright blush or flesh-colors; this and the white are very rare in England and
France, but frequently found in many Gardens in Germany.

Phalangium.
THe Spider-wort is next in order to be treated of, there are some diversities
of them, but we will set out the best only, and first begin with that so like
the white Lilly Asphodill, that the one may easily be mistaken for the other.

Phalangium Alobrogicum.
THe Savoy Spider-wort rises up with four or five green leaves, like unto
those of the Lilly Asphodill, but shorter, and of a whiter green color, out of
the middle of them rises up a stiff round stalk, about a foot high, bearing at
the top one above another, seven or eight flowers, like in form to those of the
Lilly Asphodill, but lesser, and of a pure white color, with some threads in
the middle tipped with yellow, and a small forked pointel; the roots are long
white thick strings, joined together at the head, increasing reasonable well.

Phalangium majus Italicum album.
THe great Italian white Spider-wort has many long narrow leaves, spread on
the ground, with a reasonable tall stalk, bearing at the top many star-like
white flowers, like, but bigger than those of the common kind next described;
the roots are many white strings running under ground, and increasing as well
as the former.

Phalangium non ramosum vulgar.
THe common unbranched Spider-wort has small leaves like grass, but of a
whitish green color, from among which rises one, two or more stalks almost
two foot high, bearing at the top many small white star-like flowers; the roots
are many long white strings, like those of the last described, but smaller.

Phalangium Virginianum.
THe Virginian Spider-wort has a stringy root, and broad grass-like leaves,
the stalk rises up in joints, with some short leaves at the top thereof; out
of a tuft of those green leaves, come forth the flowers, which are many,
hanging down their heads at the first, and turning up as they come to blow,
each flower containing three leaves, laid flat, of a blew color, with red
threads in the middle, tipped with yellow pendents: they open commonly one after
another, and may be called a flower for a day, for that they shut at night, and
never open again. It is a great increaser, and thereby grown common in almost
every garden; this was first brought unto us out of Virginia, since we have
received thence several other varieties, differing chiefly in the color of the
flowers, for besides the blew described, we have another that bears bigger
and fairer blew flowers, two that have red flowers, a bigger and lesser, and
one with snow-white flowers; in some years the flowers of the greater red will
come double.

The Lilly Asphodills flower in the end of May, or beginning of June, and the
Spider-wort about the same time, the common unbranched kind is the first, and
the branched the last, the two best Spider-worts, that of Savoy, and the
Italian, flower together about the end of May, the Virginians a month later.

These plants are all hardy, and will live and thrive in almost any soil, but
best in that which is moist; the time to take them up and transplant them, is
in August, the roots may be parted as they grow in several heads, and set
again, where they may stand two or three years unremoved: they bear seeds, from
whence plants of the best kind may be raised, that is of the white and blush
Lilly Asphodills, Savoy, and Italian Spider-worts; it will be four or five
years from the sowing, before they come to bear flowers, yet it is worth the
labor and attendance, for that seeds of the two Lilly Asphodills, may be
obtained from places far distant better than plants. Having done with these
flower-bearing plants, before we pass to the rest of the Bulbous roots, the
varieties of Paeonies are to be handled, which shall be the subject of our next
discourse.

CHAP. XV.
Paeonia.
THe Peonie is of two sorts, Male and Female: The Male is to be known from all
the rest, in that the leaves are constantly whole without any division, and the
roots are long and round; of this there is but one sort, and that preserved
more for its Physical properties, than for the beauty of the flowers: the
Female is of many sorts, some bearing single, and others double flowers; the
leaves of them all are cut in and divided on the edges more or less, and the
roots are more tuberous, growing in clogs, like those of the Asphodill, with
many round pieces fastened to the head, with smaller strings. There are four
sorts that bear single flowers, which are the Male kind with purplish red
single flowers, the common Female with smaller and darker purplish single red
flowers, the blush with large blush flowers, and the single Piony of
Constantinople, whose flowers are larger than those of the Male kind, and of a
deeper red color, without any show of purple; these are of small esteem, yet
the two last for variety may be admitted; those that bear double flowers are
best worthy to be regarded, the which we will particularly describe, and first
begin with that best known.

Paeonia foemina vulgaris flore pleno rubro.
THe double red Peonie has many stalks, and store of leaves divided or cut in
at the edges, of a dark green color, the flowers grow on the tops of the
stalks, which are very large, thick, and double, of a full deep red color, and
seldom continuing above eight days before they shed their leaves; the roots
are many long clogs fastened to the head or main root, with smaller strings;
this is so common and well known, that it needs no description.

Poeonia foemina flore pleno purpureo.
THe double purple Peony differs from the last in that it is smaller in all
the parts thereof, and the leaves of a whiter green color; the flowers are
double, consisting of some broad, and many narrow leaves, of a fine bright
shining purple color, which fall away like those of the former.

Paeonia foemina flore pleno rubescente.
THe double Carnation Peony has lower and stiffer stalks than the former, with
smaller leaves, divided or cut-in in some places on the edges, as all the
Female kinds are; the flowers are neither so big, nor so double by much, as
those of the common red, of a bright shining carnation color at the first
opening, but daily declining and waxing paler, until it come to be almost
white, never shedding the leaves, but abiding long, and at last wither on the
stalk; the roots are like the former, but smaller, and of a brighter brown
color on the outside. I have one of this kind that bears large, thick, and
double flowers, consisting of many long round pointed leaves, the ends and
sides thereof turn white in one hot day, and continue so with a red stripe in
the middle many days, then wither on the stalks.

Paeonia foemina flore pleno albicante.
THe double blush, or white Peonie, is in the manner of growing like unto the
last described, but taller, the green leaves something larger, more veined and
ribbed than those of any the other sorts; the flowers are much bigger than
those of the last, and more thick and double, which at the first opening are of
a fine light blush color, but by standing blown, in a few days will turn to be
of a pale white, and so continue a long time before they decay, the leaves not
falling off, but withering on the stalk, like those of the last, and this is
accounted the best of all the double Peonies which have hitherto come to our
knowledge; I have often heard of a double Peonie that has snow white flowers
from the first opening thereof, and so abiding constant to the last, but have
not seen any such, and therefore doubt the verity of the report.

Paeonia faemina flore pleno variegata.
THe double striped Peonie in the manner of growing is like the last, but
something smaller in all the parts thereof; the flowers are double, of a fine
red color, striped and variegated with white, abiding long in flower, and at
last the leaves wither but fall not off.

They all flower in May, sooner or later, as they stand more or less in the Sun.

All the Peonies are hardy, and being set in good ground, will continue and
abide many years without removing; they are commonly set in great tufts in the
middle or corners of knots, or on borders, and may be taken up, parted, and
planted again, from September unto the end of October; those roots that have
sprouts or buds at the ends of them, are best to be planted; for those clogs or
roots that are without them, will ly in the ground and never spring at all,
except those of the double purple, every piece whereof will grow, being aptest
to increase of all other; in some years the double kinds do bring some seeds to
perfection, which being set or sowed very thin, in September or October, where
they may stand unremoved until they flower, which will be about seven years
from the sowing, herhaps some new varieties may be produced, especially from
the seeds of the Carnation, Blush, Purple, and variegated kinds.

And now we will return to the rest of the blubous and tuberous-rooted plants,
remaining to be described, and set them down in order according to their
similitude and several relations to each other, and first of that whick
flowreth first, though vulgarly accounted last.

CHAP. XVI.
Colchicum.
THe Meadow-Saffron, whereof there are many sorts, some of them for the beauty
of their flowers, deserving place in this Collection, the which shall be
described, the rest bearing single flowers wholly of one color, and neither
eminently striped, nor checkered, we will pass over as not worth the trouble.

Colchicum versicolor.
THe party-colored Meadow-Saffron, and all the rest, except those of the
Spring bring forth their flowers in Autum before the green leaves appear, which
being kept back by Winter, come not up until February; the flowers of this
come out of the ground late in the year, three, four or more from one root,
standing on very short footstalk, composed of six leaves, whereof some are
white, others of a pale purple, and some of them half white and the rest
purple, with some threads or chives in the middle like unto the Crocus or
Safforn-flowers of the Spring; after the flowers are past, the green leaves do
not presently come forth, little of them appearing above ground before the end
of February, which at first are of a dark brown color, but with the Spring
grow to be large long and green, three or four standing upon a short round weak
green foot-stalk; in the middle of the leaves the seed-vessel appears,
containing round brown seeds; the root is something like unto that of the
Tulip, but commonly bigger, and having that eminence at the bottom, standing
out very long, from whence many fibers shoot into the ground.

Colchicum variegatum.
THe varigated Meadow-Saffron differs from the last, in that the Flowers rise
higher, and are striped with a deeper purple, upon a pale blush ground,
throughout every leaf thereof, which are longer than those of the former, and
not so round-pointed; in the roots and leaves there is no material difference.

Colchicum atropurpureum variegatum.
THe dark purple striped Meadow-Saffron differs from the other, in that the
Flowers at their first appearing are of a pale blush-colour, with small and
sharped-pointed leaves, which after a little time become striped and guarded
with a dark sad purple.

Colchicum variegatum dictum Agrippina.
THe variegated Meadow-Saffron, commonly called Agripina, is of later discovery
and more rarity than any of the former, the difference chiefly consisting in
the color and marking of the Flowers, which in this are white and red penached
like a Tulip.

Colchicum fritillaricum Ne apolitanum.
THe checkered Meadow-Saffron of Naples has larger and deeper purplish red
Flowers, and more eminently checkered like Fritillary than any other of that
sort (except the next) whereof there is some diversity, but this is the best;
the root and green leaves differ very little from those of the former.

Colchicum fritillaricum Chiense.
THe checkered Meadow-Saffron of Chio brings forth (late in Autum) small but
beautiful Flowers, of a pale purple color, thick spotted and checkered with
bluish purple; the green leaves come up in the Spring, which are much smaller
than any of the other, commonly three in number, of a fresh green color, lying
on the ground, twining and folding the edges; the root is like those of the
other, but smaller and more tender.

Colchicum flore pleno.
THe double Meadow-Saffron is like the common English kind, that grows
plentifully in diverse moist Meadows, only the Flowers of this are double,
containing many leaves, of the same pale purplish color, with some chives tipped
with yellow pendents among them.

Colchicum flore pleno purpureo.
THe double purple Meadow-Saffron differs from the former, in that the
Flowers are smaller, the leaves of them sharper pointed, and of deeper purplish
red color.

Colchicum variegatum flore pleno.
THe double varigated Meadow-Saffron is like the first double kind, only some
of the leaves of the double Flower will be striped, and guarded with white, upon
the pale blush ground.

Colchicum maximum flore pleno.
THe greatest double Meadow-Saffron has Flowers much bigger, and doubler than
any of the former, containing very many round-pointed leaves, of pale purplish
blush-colour, spreading open, and forming a gallant double Flower, far
transcending any of the former double kinds.

The roots of the Colchicums, being set about the end of August, or beginning
of September, will suddenly put forth fibers, and shortly after Flowers, being
the first blown from the time of the setting of the dry roots of all others,
although vulgarly accounted the last, which are indeed the first that flower,
some of them in September, others in October, the first parti-colored, and
that of Chio being commonly the last.

They are easily planted, the roots losing their fibers, which may be taken up
as soon as the green leaves are dried down, and kept out of the ground until
the forementioned time for their planting; they affect a moist ground, but
being hardy will thrive and increase in almost any soil, only that of Chio is
tender, and will not prosper unless it be planted in a warm place, where it may
have the comfort of the Sun and the benefit of shelter from Frosts, wet, and
cold in Winter, whereof it is very impatient. I doubt not but other fine
varieties may be raised by the sowing of the seeds of the best kinds; the
manner of handling them is the same with that of Tulips, and other bulbous
roots that lose their fibers.

CHAP. XVII.
Crocus.
SAffron is of diverse sorts, some flowering in the Spring, and others in Autum,
whereof the true Saffron is a kind, all the rest are only entertained for the
beauty of their Flowers, which are of three principal colors, white, purple,
and yellow, deeper and lighter, bigger and smaller, and some striped,
feathered, or flamed, as in the following descriptions is expressed, and first
of the white and the varieties thereof.

Crocus albus major.
THe great white Crocus rises up with narrow long green leaves, with a white
line in the midst of them, and as soon as these leaves appear out of the
ground, there comes up in the middle of them, covered with a thin white skin,
small low white Flowers, composed of six leaves, with some chives, and a long
Saffron pointell in the middle, which never open but when the Sun shines warm
upon them; after the Flowers are past, the green leaves grow longer, and the
seeds succeed, which is small and round, contained in a low three-square husk
of a yellowish red color; the root is small, round and flat, covered with a
russet coat; there is a lesser of this kind that bears very small white
Flowers of little esteem.

Crocus Maesiacus.
THe white Crocus of Masia is like the last great white, but bigger, and
bearing more Flowers from one root, but not of so pure a white color, but
rather inclining to yellow; there is one of this kind, with the bottom of the
Flower and part of the stalk of a bright blew color, and there is another of a
pure white color, with the bottom and stalk blew, of the seeds whereof the
next was raised.

Crocus plumatus pallidus.
THe pale feathered Crocus, is something like the last white, but larger, and
not so round pointed; the stalk and bottom of the flower is blew, like unto it;
the three outward leaves on the backs or outsides are all white or
silver-colour, and on the insides finely striped with bigger and smaller
stripes of pale bluish purple; the three inner leaves are striped with the
same color, but smaller on both the sides thereof; this is not so common as
many of the other are, and is indeed one of the best we have.

Crocus Episcopalis.
THe Bishops Crocus has bigger roots and leaves than any of the former; the
flowers are longer and sharper-pointed than those of the last, and variable in
their colors, sometimes they will be white finely striped with blew, sometimes
the three outer leaves will be blew, and the other three silver-colour striped
with blew, and sometimes it will have three leaves white, and the other three
pale blew, and all these diversities arising from one root, and the increase
thereof.

Crocus Imperialis.
THe Imperial Crocus has many flowers rising from one root, which are of a
silver color, striped on the backs of the leaves with purple, which when they
are open are seen through on the other side; this increases so fast that it is
grown very common; of this kind there are two others, the one bigger, and the
other lesser, of the same color and fashion of marking.

Crocus Regalis.
THe Royal Crocus is like the Imperial, but bigger, and better striped with
deep purple, especially on the backs of the three outer leaves; from the seed
of this some varieties have been raised, differing from the original, some
being bigger, others lesser, and striped with deeper, or paler purple, but in
all these flowers the white has the mastery, and therefore are joined next
unto those of that color.

Crocus purpureus minor.
THe small purple Crocus has narrow green leaves, and small low purple
flowers, round-pointed, and dark bottoms, almost black.

Crocus purpureus major.
THe greater purple Crocus has bigger leaves and roots than the former, the
flowers rise higher, and are large, long, and sharp-pointed, of the fame purple
color, with a deep purple bottom.

Crocus purpureus maximus.
THe greatest purple Crocus is like the last in leaves and roots, but bigger,
the flowers are the largest of all the kinds of Crocus, of a more bleak purple
than the former, and round-pointed; there is one of this kind that has the
leaves listed about with white, like the Tulip called a Prince.

Crocus Neapolitanus caeruleus.
THe blew Neapolitan Crocus only differs from the greater purple, in that the
flowers of this are of a deep-sky color, with a dark bottom.

Crocus plumatus purpureus.
THe purple feathered Crocus is like the greater purple, but a little bigger
and rounder pointed, the three outer leaves of the flower are of the same
purple color, and feathered with white on both sides thereof, the three inner
leaves are thick striped with white upon a paler purple on both sides likewise,
and this is accounted the best of all the sorts have hitherto come to our
knowledge.

Crocus purpureus striatus.
THe purple striped Crocus is in fashion like the common yellow, the flowers
are of the same size and season, of a reddish purple color, veined and striped
throughout every leaf on both sides with a deeper purple, much resembling the
flowers of the true Autumn Saffron, but of a deeper and redder color.

Crocus purpureus striatus major.
THe great purple striped Crocus is like the greater purple, the flowers are of
a pale purple color, with three great stripes down the backs of the three
outer leaves, of a deeper purple, and of something a lighter purple on the
inside, as the three inner leaves are also, and a little striped on the backs
near the bottom.

Crocus purpureus flammeus major.
THe greater purple flamed Crocus has fresher green leaves than the other
purples, the flowers are of a middle sise, of a whitish pale purple on the
outside, and deeper on the inside, striped and flamed throughout every leaf
thereof; there is another of this kind that is lesser in all the parts thereof,
the flowers of a deeper purple, flamed with fair broad stripes on the inside
the leaves, from the middle to the edges; these give good seeds, which being
sowed yield varieties.

Crocus luteus sive Maesiacus.
THe yellow Crocus is so common and well known that it needs no description,
it bears many reasonable large round-pointed flowers springing from one root,
in some of a deep yellow color like a cole of fire, and in others more pale,
and there is one whose flowers are of a Brimston color; the roots of these are
bigger than any of the former, and increase too fast; this is the true Crocus
of Mesia, and the white so called borrows that name from it, in respect of the
resemblance it has thereunto.

Crocus luteus maximus.
THe greatest yellow Crocus is like the former, being a variety raised from the
seeds thereof; the flowers are of a deep yellow color, but as large as the
greatest purple, for which it is esteemed.

Crocus flavus striatus.
THe yellow striped Crocus has small bleak yellow flowers, with three stripes
of dull purple on the backs of the three outer leaves, the green leaves are
narrower and longer than any of the former.

Crocus luteus versicolor.
THe Cloth of gold Crocus has short whitish green leaves; the flowers are of a
fair yellow color with three purple stripes on the backs of the outer leaves,
all the rest of the flowers are wholly yellow; which are not so plentiful as
the former yellow, bearing but two or three flowers from one root; the roots
may be known from any others, being covered with a hard netted peeling, or
shell; of this sort there is another, whose outer leaves are on the backs
wholly of a dark purple, except the edges which are yellow, and is therefore
called the Duke Crocus, from the Duke Tulip; and there is one other sort with
netted roots that has pale yellow flowers inclining to white; with bluish
purple stripes up the backs of the outer leaves, and part of the stalk next the
flower, of the same color.

These are the best varieties of Spring Crocus that hitherto have come to our
knowledge, there are some others inferior to these, which I have purposely
omitted, and I doubt not but many other varieties may be raised from the seeds
of these, being sowed and nursed up by industrious lovers of this delight; and
as in the Colchicum, there are some that bring forth their flowers in the
Spring, so there are some Crocuses that flower in Autumn, which are next to be
inserted.

Crocus verus.
THe true Saffron springs up with many long narrow leaves, and after them the
flowers, in form like the former, of a reddish purple color; in the middle of
the flowers there are some small yellow chives standing upright, which are
unprofitable, as those of all the other kinds, but besides these each flower
has two, three, or four greater and longer chives hanging down upon or between
the leaves, which are of a fiery red color, and the true blades of Saffron,
the which only being picked from the flowers, pressed between two papers, and
after dried upon a Kiln, or otherwise, is that Saffron commonly sold in shops:
the roots are bigger than those of any other sort of Crocus, and covered with a
hairy skin, easily distinguished from all others.

Crocus Byzantinus argenteus.
THe silver-coloured Autumn Crocus comes up in October, like the Crocus of the
Spring; first the green leaves appear, and then the flower, commonly one, and
seldom two; the three outer leaves are pale blew, or silver-colour, and the
other three more white and lesser, with some yellow chives in the middle, and a
long pointell feathered at the top; the root is round and covered with a russet
coat.

Crocus Pyrenaeus purpureus.
THe purple mountain Crocus rises up like a Colchicum before the leaves;
commonly with one flower, and sometimes two one after another, standing on long
footstalk, of a violet purple color, and almost as large as the biggest
purple of the Spring, with some yellow chives in the middle, and a long
feathered topt pointell; the green leaves succeed the flowers, sometimes
appearing before Winter, but most usually not until the Spring; the root is
small and white like that of the lesser purple.

Crocus montanus Autumnalis.
THe Autum mountain Crocus springs later than any of the former, about the
end of October, with three or four short green leaves, and after them the
flowers, which are of a pale bleak blew color, standing on short footstalk,
scarcely appearing above ground at the first, but afterward grow a little
higher; the root is great, with a flat bottom, covered with a dark-gray coat,
and increasing very little.

These are all the Autumn kinds hitherto discovered; those of the Spring are in
flower one after another, and many of the best together, from the middle of
February unto the middle of March; the Duke Crocus, and those with netted roots
being commonly the first, and the greatest purple the last; those of Autumn
flower from the beginning of September to the end of October, one after
another, in order as they stand described.

All these several sorts of Crocus, both of the Spring and Autumn, lose their
fibers with their leaves, and may then be taken up and kept dry; those of
Autumn until August, and of the Spring until October; they are hardy and will
prosper in any place; the Vernal increase exceedingly, if they stand any time
unremoved, as the true Saffron does, which is taken up every third year, the
other Autumnal increase very little; the best place to plant Spring Crocus, is
close up to a wall or pale, or on the edges of boarded borders round about the
Garden, mingling the colors of those of a season together, as the whites with
the purples, the best Cloth of Gold with the Royal, the deep purple feathered
with the lighter, and so of the rest; by observation most of them may be
distinguished by the roots, and so placed according to the fancy of the
Planter, but the forementioned places are the best, for that few other flowers
appear until they are past; for should they be set among Tulips (as some use
to do) the Grassy leaves after the flowers are gone, would more trouble and
disgrace the place, than the flowers did delight and adorn it; many more
varieties than are yet discovered, may be raised from the seeds of the best of
these, being sowed in September, and every other year in July removed and set
wider, until they bear flowers, make ng the ground light and rich, into which
they are transplanted, which will be a great addition unto them.

CHAP. XVIII.
Iris bulbosa.
THe bulbous Flower-de-luce is of two sorts, the one bigger, and the other
lesser in all the parts thereof, the first is called Iris bulbosa latifolia,
the broad-leaved bulbous Iris, or Flower-de-luce, whereof there are many fine
varieties; the other is called Iris bulbosa tenuifolia, the narrow-leaved
bulbous Flower-de-luce, of which there are more diversities than in the former,
but most of them of less esteem. Before we proceed to the descriptions of
these, there are two other sorts of Flower-de-luces deserve to be mentioned,
and first that called

Iris bulbosa prima Clusii latifolia.
THe first great bulbous Flower-de-luce of Clusins, before the long, broad,
flaggy, thin green leaves rise up to half their height or length, puts forth
two or three flowers from the middle of them, standing on short weak
footstalk, each flower consisting of nine leaves, as all Flower-de-luces do,
whereof those three that stand upright are short and closed together, the three
that fall down turn up the ends, and the three arched leaves, which in other
Flower-de-luces cover the bottoms of them stand up, parted into two ends, in
some white, but in most of a sky-colour, with a long stripe in each of the
three falling leaves; and all these diversities have been found in this flower,
although there be but one kind thereof, altering in color according to the
nourishment it receives, as it happens in diverse other Plants. After the
flowers are past, the green leaves grow longer; the root is something big,
round, and white, covered with brown skins, having two or three long thick
roots growing under it, from whence many small fibers shoot into the ground.

Iris Persica.
THe Persian Iris, or Flower-de-luce, comes up with one, two, or three
flowers, according to the age of the Plant, as soon as the green leaves begin
to appear above the ground, which after the flowers are past grow broad, long,
and flaggy, like those of the former; the flowers stand on weak short
footstalk, composed of nine leaves, the three that turn down are of a pale
sky-colour, with a large spot of brown purple, almost black, on the ends
thereof, with another spot of deep yellow above it, streaming along the middle
of these leaves under the arches, with many small spots of the same dark
purple-colour on both the sides thereof; the three arched leaves that cover the
lower part of the falling leaves, are of the same pale sky-colour with the
ridge, but a little blewer, and the ends parted in two pieces and turned up;
the three other leaves which in other Flower-de-luces stand up, and are called
the top leaves, in this are very small and turn down toward the stalk, of the
same pale sky-colour that is in the arched leaves; the root is like that of the
former.

The first is said to flower in its natural Country in January and February,
but with us not until April, and most usually in May, the other flowereth with
us in the end of February, or beginning of March.

The first is a tender Plant, and must be planted in a warm place, and defended
from Frosts in Winter, the other is more hardy, and will grow and bear flowers
plentifully in any good soil; after the leaves are dried down, and about the
time that Tulips are taken up, the roots of these may be removed, but in the
taking of them up, care must be had that the long roots that grow under the
bulb be not broken; they may be kept dry until September, and then parted and
planted again in good rich earth, and in a warm place, where they may stand
three years unremoved, but if you take them up every other year, they will bear
the better.

Iris bulbosa major, sive Anglica caerulea.
THe English blew bulbous Flower-de-luce rises up with five or six big thick
long leaves, crested on the back, and hollow on the other side, blunt at the
ends, and of a whitish green color, out of the middle whereof the stalk rises
about two foot high, bearing at the top out of a thin skinny hose, one, and
sometimes two flowers, composed of nine leaves, three turned downwards, longer
and broader than any of the other, each having a yellow spot about the middle
of the broadest part of the leaf, as in all others of this kind that follow; it
has three other small and arched leaves, covering the lower parts of the
falling leaves, turning up the ends, which are divided into two parts; and the
other three leaves standing upright, very small at the bottom, and of the
breadth of a six pence at the top; the whole flower in this, except the yellow
spot, is of a bleak heavy blew color; the seed is round and of a yellowish
brown color, contained in three-square husks, wherein if it be stirred when it
is ripe it will rattle; the root is big and long, covered with a brown stringy
coat, this is the most common and the worst of all others, the rest that follow
are fine flowers, and some of them very rare.

Iris bulbosa major flore caeruleo elegantior.
THe great bulbous Iris with a rich blew flower, is in all things like the
former, except the color of the flower, which in this is a rich shining blew
color, far excelling the other, and having that spot which is in the lower
leaves of all these Flower-de-luces, of a deep yellow inclining to an Orange.

Iris bulbosa major flore caeruleo variegata sive chamoletta.
THe blew striped Flower-de-luce is like the first, the flowers of the same
blew color, but diversely marked and striped throughout every leaf thereof,
with a dark violet purple color, resembling watered Chamolet.

Iris bulbosa major purpurea.
THe great purple bulbous Flower-de-luce has larger flowers than the first
common kind, the whole flower except the yellow spot, is of a reddish murry
purple color.

Iris bulbosa major flore purpureo versicolor.
THe great purple variable bulbous Flower-de-luce has the flowers somewhat
lesser than the former, and of a rich murrey purple color, with a small yellow
spot in the falling leaves, marked with deeper brown purple, almost black, upon
a lighter purple, like watered Chamolet, and therefore by some called brown
purpur Chamolet, and the former the blew Chamolet, by which names the Walloons
brought them over out of Flanders.

Iris bulbosa major flore cinereo.
THe great Ash-colored bulbous Flower-de-luce has one or two flowers on a
stalk, as big as the first blew, which are of an Ash or Lavender color with a
yellow spot in the three falling leaves.

Iris bulbosa major flore cinereo striata.
THe great Ash-colored striped bulbous Iris is like the last, only the flowers
of this being of the same color are striped and veined all over with small
lines of purple.

Iris bulbosa major versicolor.
THe great variable colored bulbous Flower-de-luce has the three falling
leaves of the flower of a pale silver-colour, with a circle of ash color about
the yellow spot, the arches are of the same silver-colour, ridged with
ash color, and the top leaves also striped and veined with blew.

Iris bulbosa major flore rubente.
THe great pale red or Peach-coloured bulbous Flower-de-luce is more rare than
any of the former; the flowers are in fashion like those of the purple, and of
a pale red color like unto the blossom of a Peach, with a small yellow spot
in each of the three falling leaves.

Iris bulbosa major flore albo.
THe great white bulbous Flower-de-luce is something bigger than the first
common blew; the flowers when they are full-blown are of a pure snow-white
color, with a small yellow spot in the middle of the three falling leaves.

Iris bulbosa major flore albo maximo.
THe great white bulbous Iris with the biggest flower is like the last, but
something bigger; the flowers are longer and larger, of the same snow-white
color, and sometimes the three top-leaves will be a little striped and spotted
with a faint purple color. I have diverse blews, murrey, and violet purples,
some deeper, and others lighter, all large flowers, which I raised from the
seeds of this great white, and one deep blew with small stripes of white
through every leaf of the flower, and of more than an hundred, I had but two
whites, the one more, the other less striped than the original.

Iris bulbosa major alba variegata.
THe great white striped bulbous Flower-de-luce has a smaller flower than the
first white, of the same pure white color, and finely striped and marked with
veins, stripes, and drops of a shining watchet or blew color throughout every
leaf thereof; this is by many called the Purcelan Iris, from the colors and
manner of marking, resembling that of a China dish.

Iris bulbosa major flore albo and purpureo variegata.
THe great white bulbous Iris striped with purple next to the peach color is
the rarest of all the great bulbous Flower-de luce; the flowers are almost as
large as the first white, of the same pure white color, and excellently
striped and marked through every leaf thereof with purple of the seeds of this
I have raised several varieties, whereof two are most considerable, one of them
has a snow-white flower, marked in the falls with dops of purple, and the
top-leaves with small stripes, the other is of a deep velvet dark violet purple
color, with small spots and stripes of ash color, both in the three falling
leaves, and those that stand upright.

Iris bulbosa major flore luteo.
THe great yellow bulbous Flower-de-luce differs only from the first white,
in that the flowers of this are of a fine bright gold-colour, with the spot in
the three falling leaves of a deeper yellow, almost orange.

These are the diversities of the greater bulbous Flower-de-luces, as far forth
as hitherto have come to our knowledge; I doubt not but that there are many
more in other Countries, and more may be raised in our own, by sowing the seeds
of those we have, which in ordering is the same with Tulips; they bring forth
their flowers in June, some sooner than others, the blews being first in
flower, then the whites, and the purples last.

The roots lose their fibers every year, and must be taken up as soon as they
are dry down, or a little before, for if they stay longer in the ground, within
a fortnight after flowring, they will put forth new fibers, and then it is too
late to stir them; the roots being taken up in a fit season, may be kept dry
until the beginning of August, and then it will be time to set them, for it is
not good to keep them too long out of ground; if the earth wherein they are set
be over rank and hot, it will rot and consume them all; therefore a bed must be
made for them of good fresh sifted earth, and not too poor neither, for then
they will not thrive; nor placed too much in the Sun, for that will scorch and
spoil them; but the best place is on the East side the Garden, for neither the
South nor the West sides will agree with them, as I have often found by
experience.

Iris bulbosa minor.
THe lesser bulbous Flower-de-luce is next in order to be described, whereof
there are many more varieties than are to be found in the greater kinds, but
many of them very common, and of small esteem, we will therefore make choice of
some few, and choose the best and most worthy to be collected and entertained.

Iris bulbosa minor flore albo.
THe lesser white bulbous Flower-de-luce springs out of the ground before
Winter, with small narrow leaves, which at the Spring grow bigger and longer,
with a hollow chanel on the insides; the stalk is longer and smaller than that
of the former kind, bearing at the top out of a thin skinny husk, one or two
flowers, of a snow-white color, smaller, shorter and rounder than those of the
greater kind, with nine leaves standing in the same fashion, the three falling
leaves having a yellow spot in each of them; the arched leaves are divided and
turn up the ends, and the other three top-leaves are longer than those of the
greater kind, and stand upright; the seeds are like those of the former but
lesser, and the roots are yellower, shorter, and not so hairy, very apt to
off-set, whereby they are soon increased. This description may serve for the
rest of this kind that follow, therefore we will only add the several names by
which some of the best are received, and the difference of the colors that are
in the flowers of others that want names.

There is another white, that is bigger in all the parts thereof than the
former, the stalk taller, and the flowers larger, but not of so pure a white
color as the other, and having that yellow spot in the three falling leaves as
in all others.

There is another like the first in size and fashion, whose falling leaves have
a little show of yellowness in them, and so have the middle ridges of the
arched leaves, but the upright or top-leaves are white.

We have another with a small flower as white as the second, the lower leaves
are so small, that the yellow spot covers almost all the ends thereof,
standing outright; the arched leaves are also small and long, and the
top-leaves bend in the middle and meet at the ends.

There is another kind called the Spanish yellow, that rises not so high as
usually the rest do, the flower is like the first, but of an excellent deep
Gold-yellow color throughout the whole flower.

And another that rises as high as the second, with pale yellow flowers, with
a deep yellow spot; of this there are diversities, some bigger and some lesser,
some with paler and some with deeper yellow flowers, and one with the falling
leaves white, except the yellow spot which is common to all the bulbous
Flower-de-luces.

We have one called the party-colored Spanish, whose falling leaves are white,
the arched leaves silver color, and the top-leaves of a bluish purple; of
this sort there is another that has the falling leaves cirled with blew, the
arched leaves pale blew, and the top-leaves purple.

There is another called the early Portugal, that is smaller in all the parts
thereof than the former, the flowers stand round and neat, in fashion like the
Spanish yellow, but wholly of a fair bluish purple color, except the yellow
spot which is in the three falling leaves.

We have another purple with a higher stalk, and larger flower than the last,
but near of the same color.

There is another like the last, whose flowers are of a reddish purple-colour,
and flowereth very late.

And another that has yellow falling leaves, sky-colored arches, and
top-leaves of a murrey purple.

And there is another whose falling leaves are yellow, the arches and
top-leaves of a fair hair-colour, and another of a sadder and duller brown
color.

And we have another that is taller and larger than any of the rest, with
falling leaves of a dusky yellow color, with veins and borders about the edges
of a dun color, the arches of a dull purplish yellow, and the top-leaves of a
sullen bluish purple.

There are many other varieties, but most of them inferior to those mentioned;
we will conclude with three other sorts that are more rare than any of the
former.

Iris angustifolia Hispanica bulbosa non scripta.
THe Spanish narrow-leaved Flower-de-luce, not written of, is something like
the Spanish-yellow, but smaller and shorter; the flower is of a pleasant bright
yellow color, with a deeper spot in the three falling leaves, and instead of
the top or upright leaves, it has three very small short sharp-pointed leaves,
if they may be called leaves in respect of their smallness.

Iris angustifolia bulbosa elegantissima percico flore.
THe most elegant narrow-leaved bulbous Iris, with a Peach-coloured flower,
rises up with a stalk and leaves like those of the middle size; the flower
has large and long falling leaves, with a yellow spot in the midst of the
ends of them; the arched leaves are also large, and the divided ends long and
turned up; the top-leaves are likewise large and long, and the whole flower,
except the yellow spot, of a fine reddish Peach-colour, deeper than that of the
greater kind before mentioned; this is the rarest of all other, and as hard to
be found.

Iris bulbosa angustifolia serpentaria caul.
THe narrow-leaved bulbous Iris, with a spotted stalk, is in the manner of
growing something like the Portugal, but a little taller and bigger; the
flower is of that fashion, and wholly of a reddish murrey purple color, except
the spot which is in the falling leaves thereof, which in this is of a deep
yellow color, round at the head, and with a small list running under the
arched leaves; this may be known before Winter, after the green leaves are come
up, for that the bottoms of them for an inch above the ground, are of a reddish
color full of dark purple spots; this is that which the Walloons have lately
brought over out of Flanders by the name of Iris d' Abbey. Some of them flower
sooner, and others later, commonly after most of the greater kinds are past, in
June, and stay until July; the purple Portugal and the Spanish yellow are
first, the hair-colours and murrey-purples last; the flowers will be soon
spoiled by wet, unless it be shaken off shortly after it has fallen upon them.

The roots lose their fibers, as those of the greater kind, and are to be
handled after the same manner; the seeds of the best kinds also produce
varieties, and the roots of the common or ordinary sorts increase too fast; the
two last are the rarest and most tender, they must be planted in good fresh
earth that is not hot with dung, and where they may have the comfort of the
morning Sun only.

CHAP. XIX.
Jris Tuberosa.
THe Tuberous, or flag-leaved Flower-de-luce, is of diverse sorts, and those
commonly divided into two kinds, the Tall and the Dwarf, the which may be
subdivided into two other sorts, broad leaves and narrow leaves, the Tall are
called Iris major, or Latifolia, the Dwarf Iris minor, or Chamaeiris, of each
of these there are many diversities, out of which we will select those that
bear the fairest flowers, and pass by the rest as not worth the mentioning; the
best of all the kinds is called

Iris Chalcedonica major.
THe great Chalcedonian Iris, or Turkey Flower-de-luce, rises up before Winter,
with diverse broad yellowish green leaves, folded one within another at the
bottom, and opening toward the tops; out of the middle of those leaves rises
a round stiff stalk two foot high, bearing at the top thereof one gallant great
flower, consisting of nine leaves as all the rest do; the three lower leaves
being very large and broad, are of a sad purple color almost black, diversely
spotted, straked and marked with a grayish white color, with a great black
freez or fringe in the middle of each of them; the three arched leaves that
cover the smaller part of these lower leaves, are of the same color, and
marked in the same manner, but a little paler, especially toward the sides and
ends; the three upper leaves are also very large, and marked like the other,
but of a brighter and more lively color by much; the roots are tuberous, thick
and long, like those of other flag Flower-de-luces, but of yellower brown
color, with many great long flat fibers.

Iris Chalcedonica minor.
THe lesser Chalcedonian Iris, or Turkey Flower-de-luce, differs from the
former, in that it is lesser in all the parts thereof, the leaves of a yellower
green color, the flower darker, and not so eminently marked.

They flower in May, sooner or later as the Spring is forward or backward.

These are the best kinds of flag Flower-de-luces; after the flowers are past,
sometimes the roots will lose their fibers, and then the green leaves will dye
to the ground; such as do, must be taken up and kept out of the ground until
the middle of October; the best time to transplant them is in the end of August
or beginning of September, the best place under a South-wall, and the best soil
that which is fresh and mixed with well-rotted and fine sifted wood-pile earth,
and if they be covered and defended from hard Frosts in Winter, they will
prosper and bear flowers much the better; some use to take up the roots in the
end of June, and keep them dry until October, which makes them the apter to
bear flowers.

Iris Dalmatica major.
THe great Flower-de-luce of Dalmatia has great broad Sedg-like green leaves,
a tall stalk, bearing three or four large flowers on several branches that come
from the top and sides thereof, which are in fashion like the flowers of the
common great flag Flower-de-luce, of a pale blew or watchet color, and sweet
scent; the root is great and tuberous, proportionable to the rest of the parts.

Iris Asiatica caerulea.
THe blew Flower-de-luce of Asia is like the last, but something lesser in all
the parts, the stalk more branched, and bearing more flowers, which are of a
deeper blew color than those of the former.

Iris Lusitanica biflora.
THe twice flowring Portugal Flower-de-luce is in all things like the common
great purple flag Iris, but a little lesser, and flowreth in the Spring, and
again commonly the same year in Autumn; the flowers of this are sweeter than
any of the former.

Iris Camerarii purpurea versicolor.
THe variable purple Flower-de-luce of Camerarius has green leaves almost as
big as those of the last, but shorter; the flower is of the same fashion, but
lesser; the three lower leaves are of a reddish purple, the arched leaves of a
bleak yellow, shaddowed with purple, and the three top-leaves of a dull smoky
yellowish purple color; we have another that is taken for the true Iris
Camerarii, in respect it agrees with the description of Clusius, a man of
excellent judgment, this has great thick knobby roots, broad flaggy leaves, a
reasonable-tall smooth stalk, and flowers of a blew color, welted down the
middle of the leaves with yellowish white, and the falling leaves fringed about
with a thick plaited fringe of the same yellowish white color; there is
another that passes under that name that has flowers of a pale blew or
sky-colour, fringed about the leaves like the former, but with a deeper blew
color than is in the rest of the flower.

Iris caerulea versicolor.
THe blew party-colored Flower-de-luce has green leaves something lesser than
the former; the flowers are variable in their colors, for some have the falls
blew at the edges and the rest white, the arched leaves of a whitish yellow,
and the top-leaues of a pale sky-colour with yellowish edges; in some the blew
is deeper with dark spots, in some very pale; and there is one whose upright
leaves are of a bright watchet, with yellowish edges, and the falling leaves
party-colored, half blew, and the other ash color, with yellowish edges.

Iris alba versicolor.
THe white variable Flower-de-luce in roots and green leaves is like that of
Camerarius; the stalk rises almost a yard high, bearing four or five flowers
one above another, which are of a silver color, with a list of bluish purple
down the backs of the top-leaves, and the lower leaves are whipped about the
edges with blew, the arched leaves of a pale sky-colour, and more blew toward
the ridge; this is a pretty flower, but does not deserve that nickname Iris
gloriosa as some have put upon it.

Iris aurea angustifolia Tripolitana.
THe yellow Flower-de-luce of Tripoly has green leaves a yard long and almost
an inch broad, the stalk four foot high, not big, but stiff and round, bearing
at the top thereof, two or three long narrow-leaved gold yellow flowers, in
fashion like those of the bulbous Flower-de-luce.

Iris angustifolia major caerulea.
THe great blew narrow-leaved Flower-de-luce has dark green leaves like the
last, but neither so long nor so broad; the stalk rises a little above the
leaves, bearing many flowers, which blow one after another, of a bright blew
color, and in fashion like those of the last.

Iris angustifolia versicolor Clusii.
THe narrow-leaved variable Flower-de-luce of Clusius has a thick tuft of
narrow long green leaves, from whence (if the plant be old and have stood long)
come up many round stalks, higher than the leaves, bearing four or five small
flowers one above another, the lower leaves whereof are variably marked with
white and blew, but the arched and top-leaves are wholly of a light blew
color; the root consists of many long strings whereby it fasteneth strongly
in the ground and much increases; there is another of this kind that bears
white flowers.

Iris angustifolia major flore duplici.
THe greater double narrow-leaved Flower-de-luce has long narrow green leaves,
but broader and shorter than those of the last, and not so thick set together;
the flowers seem like many thrust together, coming confusedly out of one husk,
not having the distinct parts of a Flower-de-luce, and sometimes it comes with
two or three small flowers, of distinct form, rising out of one husk; the
flowers are of a fair blew color, with many veins of white running through the
leaves; the roots are like those of the last, but bigger, and not so apt to
increase.

Chamaeiris latifolia alba major.
THe great white dwarf Flower-de luce has something broad but short green
leaves, a stalk about half a foot high, bearing commonly but one flower, which
in some is snow-white, and in others straw-colour; the roots are tuberous like
the common flag Flower-de-luce, but lesser and shorter.

Chamaeiris latifolia major purpurea.
THe great purple dwarf Flower-de-luce is like the former, the only difference
is in the color of the flower, which is in this of a dark violet purple, in
some deeper, and in others lighter.

Chamaeiris latifolia alba minor.
THe lesser white dwarf Flower-de-luce is smaller in all the parts thereof than
the former, the flowers scarce rise above the leaves, which are like the other
but lesser, and of a whitish color in one, and in another straw-colour; there
are of this kind that bear violet purple flowers, in some deeper, in others
lighter; and one of a pale sky-colour; there is another that has the falling
and top-leaves of a yellowish color, with lines of purple, and another that
has the top-leaves of a bluish yellow, spotted with purple, the falling
leaves spread over with pale purple lines, and the arched leaves silver-colour.

Chamaeiris latifolia flore rubente.
THe blush-coloured dwarf Flower-de-luce has leaves and roots like the former,
the chiefest difference is in the color of the flower, this having the falling
leaves of a reddish Peach-colour, with blew thrums, the arched and top-leaves
of a fine pale red or blush-colour.

Some of these Flower-de-luces do bring forth their flowers in April, others in
May, and some not until June.

They are hardy plants, and will grow and increase in any place, but the better
the soil is, the more they will flourish; those that have large Gardens may
afford them room, but most of them are fitter for the borders of a
Fruit-garden, than that of flowers, in respect they take up much ground which
might serve to plant better things; the best time to remove and plant them is
in the beginning of September, parting the roots and setting them neither too
thick nor too deep. There are two other plants which Mr. Gerard has placed in
the end of the Chapter of flag Flower-de-luces, the one is that small
Flower-de-luce with the three-footed root, and greenish flower with black
falls, called the velvet Flower-de-luce, heretofore common in most Country
Gardens, now rarely found; the other is the Sisyrnichium or Spanish-nut, which
has a round netted root like that of the Cloth of Cold Crocus, and bears in
its natural place (which is the Sea coasts of Spain and Portugal) small
soon-fading flowers, having the parts of a Flower-de-luce, which to us can be
of no use, for it will not thrive transplanted, or grow at all in England.

CHAP. XX.
Gladiolus.
COrn-Flag, and the varieties thereof are of no great esteem, yet because they
come in a season when there are not many other flowers, the three following
kinds may be admitted into the Flower-garden.

Gladiolus Byzantinus.
THe Corn-flag of Constantinople rises up with three or four broad long and
stiff green leaves, full of ribs, one coming out by the side of the other, and
joined at the bottom; the stalk rises from among the leaves, bearing many
flowers one above another, standing all one way like those of Fox-gloves, which
in this kind are larger than in any of the other sorts, and of a deep red
color, with two white spots within the mouth of every flower; the root is
round flat and netted over, apt to give many off-sets if it stand long
unremoved.

Gladiolus flore suave rubente.
THe Corn-flag with a bright red flower, has green leaves almost as broad and
long as the former, but of a blewer green color, the flowers differ only in
the color, which in this are of an excellent fine bright red or carnation
color, and almost as large as those of the Byzantine.

Gladiolus flore albo.
THe Corn flag with white flowers is lesser in all the parts thereof than the
last described, the leaves are of a fresher green color, the roots whiter, and
the flowers snow-white.

There are three other more common varieties, which are called French
Corn-flags, two that bear red flowers, the one a little bigger than the other,
and one that is Ash Color; and we have another called the Italian Corn-flag,
that bears flowers like the common red French Corn-flag, but that they are of
a sadder red color, and grow on both sides the stalk.

They flower in June and beginning of July; the Byzantine is the latest, and
the common kinds are the first.

The roots yearly lose their fibers, and as soon as the stalks are dry, may be
taken up and kept out of ground, until the time of setting Tulips; they are
apt to give many off-sets, and therefore require to be taken up and every year
freed from them, and the old roots set again five or six together, that they
may make the better show when they are in flower; the first is a little tender,
and would be defended from Frosts in Winter, the other are more hardy, and the
common kinds will prosper in any place and increase too much.

CHAP. XXI.
Orchis sive Satyrium.
THe Fly-Orchis, or Bee-flower Satyrions, for variety may be inserted, although
they grow wild in many places, they are received into Gardens for the beauty of
the flowers, especially those called

Mellitia sive apifera.
THe Bee-flower grows not above six inches high, with three or four something
narrow green leaves; the stalk bears three or four flowers one above another,
each containing four leaves; three of them are small and sharp-pointed, of a
blush-colour, and turn up toward the top of the stalk; the fourth is round,
and in form and color so like unto a Be, that any one unacquainted therewith
may take it for a living Be sucking of a flower; the roots are round, two
joined together, and after it has born flowers, one of them perishes, and the
other remains hard and sound.

Orchis Spegodes.
GNats Satyrion has leaves somewhat larger than the last, and the stalk
higher; the flowers grow in the same manner, but differ in that the lower leaf
is in this like a Gnat, or great long Fly, the roots like those of the
Bee-flower.

Orchis Myodes.
FLy Orchis is in all things like the last, except the flowers, which of this
are smaller than either of the former, and the lower leaf like a Fly with
legs, a list of Ash Color crossing the back, and the lower part black. There
are many other varieties of Orchis and Satyrions, some bearing pretty flowers,
as the male and female handed Satyrions, the Butter-fly Orchis, the snow-white,
the all-red, the yellow, and diverse that are spotted, all which are found wild
in diverse places of the South and West parts of England.

The time of their flowering is commonly about the middle of May.

They are usually diged up where they are found, with a turf about them, which
may be set in some shady barren place of the Garden, for they will not live at
all in a hot good soil; but the best way to Plant them, is, first to make
choice of a place in the Garden fit for them, then digg up a broad thick turf
in some Meadow, or other place where they naturally grow, then open a hole and
set the turf therein, with the grass upwards, wherein with a knife cut round
holes, taking out the pieces so rounded, and put the roots in the places, and
and fill them up with some of the same earth; this may be done in June or July,
and at the Spring when the grass and flowers grow up together, with a pair of
Scisers cut the grass low, and leave the flowers, which by this means will
prosper and bear as well as in their natural habitations, as I have experienced.

Dens Caninus.
DOggs-tooth, or Dogs-tooth Violet, is a kind of Satyrion, as the spotted
leaves and roots do manifest, but of greater beauty and rarity than any of the
former that grow wild with us, as these do also in diverse places of Italy,
Germany, and France, and for the beauty of their flowers deserve to be planted
in the best Gardens.

Dens Caninus flore albo.
DOggs-tooth with a white flower comes up in the Spring with two leaves when it
will flower, otherwise but one, which come out of the ground closed together
with the flower between them, which opening lay themselves flat on the ground,
the stalk and flower standing up between them; the leaves are of whitish green
color, long and narrow, but broadest in the middle, spotted and striped with
white lines and spots; the stalk is about half a foot high, bearing at the top
one flower, hanging down the head, containing six narrow long white leaves,
which turn up again to the stalk like to the flowers of Cyclamen; in the middle
of the flower there is a white three-forked style compassed about with six
chives tipped with sad purple pendents; the root is long and white like a
Doggs-tooth, from whence it is so called; with a small piece joined to the
bottom thereof.

Dens Caninus flore purpurascente.
DOggs-tooth with a pale purple flower is lesser in all the parts thereof than
the former, the leaves are broader, but shorter, spotted and marked with darker
lines and spots; the flower is like that of the other, but smaller and of a
pale purple color.

Dens Caninus flore rubro.
DOggs-tooth with a red flower has leaves of yellowish green mealy-colour,
spotted with red; the flower is of a deep reddish purple color, and the chives
more purple than those of the last.

Dens Caninus flore luteo.
DOggs-tooth with a yellow flower differs from the first, in that the leaves
of this are sadder and browner, and the flower of a fine pale yellow color, in
other things agreeing.

These pretty flowers come forth in the end of March, or beginning of April;
they do not affect a dunged soil, but must be planted in good fresh earth about
the middle of August, before they put forth new fibers; for although they lose
the old every year, yet they quickly recover new, and therefore must not be
kept long out of ground, and when they are set, it will be convenient to cover
the place with some pot or tub, to defend them from wet, until they have put
forth fibers and begin to get strength, which will be within a fortnight if
they be set at the forementioned time, and then all danger is past, for too
much rain falling upon them presently after they are set, will be apt to rot
and spoil them; these roots do seldom increase with us, but many of them are
yearly brought over out of France and Flanders, by such that make a Trade of
selling flowers, whereof there are many now about London, but commonly they
come over so late that not one in ten of them will grow.

CHAP. XXII.
Cyclamen.
SOw-bread, in the spotting and marking of the green leaves, and turning back
of the flowers, somewhat resembling the Doogs-tooth, is next to be handled:
There are many varieties thereof, and most of them worthy to be received into
the Gardens of the best Florists, adorning them with diversities of gallant
variaged green leaves, as well as fine sweet smelling flowers, some of them
appearing in the Spring, some in Somer, but most in Autumn, of all which in
order.

Cyclamen Vernum flore purpureo.
THe purple Cyclamen of the Spring has a smaller root than many of those that
follow, round and flat like a Turnip, and almost black on the outside, from
whence springs up diverse round-cornered and sharp-pointed green leaves,
spotted and circled with white round about the middle on the upper side, and
red underneath; the flowers come up folded in the leaves, every one upon a
small long stalk, hanging down their heads and turning up the leaves again,
composed of five narrow long leaves, which in this are of a bright shining
reddish purple color, and sweet scent; after the flowers are past, the head or
seed-vessel shrinketh down, winding the stalk in a scrowl about it, and rests
on the ground hid under the leaves, where it grows great and round,
containing some small seeds. There is one of this kind that flowereth about
Christmas, if not hindered by hard Frosts.

Cyclamen Vernum flore albo.
THe white Cyclamen of the Spring differs from the former, in that the leaves
of this are rounder, and not so much indented, and the flowers snow-white; in
scent far sweeter than the former, in all other things agreeing.

Cyclamen Vernum Creticum flore albo.
THe white Candy Cyclamen of the Spring differs from the last, in that the
green leaves are larger, longer, more indented, and eminently marked, the
flowers longer, and the leaves of them broader, in all other parts agreeing
with the former.

Cyclamen Antiochenum flore amplo albo duplici Vernale.
THe double white Spring Cyclamen of Antioch has large long spotted leaves,
and tall stalks, with large double white flowers, consisting of twelve leaves
or more.

Cyclamen Vernum flore purpurascente.
THe pale purple Cyclamen of the Spring is very like that of Candy, but that
the green leaves are broader and better marked, the flowers larger, and of a
fine pale purple toward the points of the leaves, the rest deeper; in all
other things agreeing with the white of Candy, and is a diversity raised from
the seeds thereof.

Cyclamen Aestivum.
THe Summer Cyclamen has round green leaves, somewhat cornered, and marked
with white on the upper side, and dark red underneath; the flowers are small,
purple, and sweet like unto the first purple of the Spring.

Cyclamen Romanum.
THe Roman Cyclamen has rounder leaves than the last, sometimes indented at
the edges, and eminently marked about the middle with white spots; the flowers
spring up before the leaves, commonly about July, which are short and of a fair
reddish purple color; the root is bigger than any of the former, and the seeds
being sowed, bring forth varieties, differing in the marking of the green
leaves, and in the size and color of the flowers, some being bigger than
others, and of a deeper or lighter reddish purple color.

Cyclamen Hederae folio autumnale.
THe Ivy-leaved Cyclamen of Autumn brings forth the flowers before the
leaves, like those of the last, but that they are longer and of a paler
purplish color, the green leaves are longer also, pointed at the ends, with
one or two corners at the sides, and commonly very much spotted, and marked on
the upper side; the seeds of this bring varieties like that of the Roman.

Cyclamen Hederae folio flore albo.
THe white Ivie-leaved Cyclamen differs from the last, in that the leaves are
rounder, and the flower white.

Cyclamen autumnale angustifolium.
THe narrow-leaved Cyclamen differs from all the rest, in that the leaves are
long and narrow, set on the stalk at the bottom with two points like an arrow
head, as in that of Arum; the flowers are like the former, in one purple, and
in another white.

Cyclamen Antiochenum flore duplici.
THe double-flowred Cyclamen of Antioch has round leaves, something like that
of Somer, with four corners, and more spotted with white, the flowers are much
bigger than those of any of the former, having each of them ten or twelve
leaves of the same reddish purple color that is in the first purple of the
Spring, or a little paler toward the points of the leaves, and deeper at the
bottom, flowring in Autumn: there is another Cyclamen of Antioch that brings
forth double snow-white flowers, and many others that bear single flowers, both
of the Spring, and also of Autumn, which are called of Antioch, but rare to be
found in our English Gardens, especially those with double flowers.

Those that are mentioned to be of the Spring, bring forth their flowers with
the green leaves in April, or the beginning of May, that of Somer in June, or
the beginning of July, those of Autumn come forth before the leaves, some in
the end of August, many in September, and the rest in the beginning of October.

The roots of Cyclamen do not lose their fibers, and therefore are seldom to
be removed; the best time to transplant them is in June or July, except that of
Somer, and the Roman, which must be sooner, before they begin to put forth buds
for flowers; they rarely increase by the root, but are commonly raised out of
seeds, which must be sown as soon as they are ripe, in some tubs or square
boxes, in good light earth, and at first covered a finger thick, afterward
when they are come up, and the small green leaves dried down, some more of the
same earth may be put upon them; the first Winter after the sowing they must be
housed, or covered, to defend them from frost, especially those of the Spring,
afterward they will be strong enough to defend themselves; two years after the
sowing they may be transplanted and set about nine inches distant from each
other, where if the soil be good, they will quickly come to bear flowers, and
perhaps some new varieties, differing in size, color, or marking of the green
leaves, from all those before observed.

CHAP. XXIII.
Anemone.
THe Wind-flower, or Anemone, by which name it is generally received and known,
for the delicacy of form, richness of color, and excellency of variety, next
to the Tulips, deserves to be esteemed; there are chiefly two kinds thereof,
both bringing forth many diversities of delicate flowers, as well double as
single; the first by us is called Anemone latifolia, the Anemone with broad
leaves; the other Anemone tenuifolia, the Anemone with narrow leaves, and by
the Walloones about London (that bring them over out of France and Flanders to
sell) Hard leaf, and Soft leaf. There are some wild kinds that have been ranked
with these, as the Pulsatillaes, the wood Anemones, and some others not worth
the mentioning, all which for their unworthiness are excluded out of this
collection, having so many varieties of the two nobler kinds to acquaint you
with all, we will therefore begin with the latifolias, those with broad leaves,
and so proceed to the tenuifolias, those of the other kind with narrow leaves,
and having given you a plentiful variety of double flowers, we shall say
something of those with single flowers, from whose seeds many fine varieties
are raised, some with double, though more with single flowers.

Anemone latifolia vulgaris maxima versicolor.
THe common great double variable broad-leaved Anemone comes up before Winter,
with many something broad leaves, cut in on the sides and folding the edges,
seldom lying smooth and plain, of a fresher green color than many of those
that follow, and a little hard in handling, as all this kind are, and therefore
by some called Hard-leaf; from among these leaves rises up one two or more
stalks for flowers, according to the age and bigness of the roots, having about
the middle of them some jaged leaves, as all the Anemones have; at the top of
the stalks the flowers come forth, which are large and double, consisting of
many narrow long sharp-pointed leaves, the out-most whereof are broadest and
green, with some stripes of Orenge-tawny, the inner leaves are smaller, less
striped with green, and the middle leaves being wholly Orenge-tawny, turning
inward, cover the head or button which is usual in the middle of the flowers of
most of this kind; the root is tuberous, large and thick; of a blackish color
on the outside, and yellowish within: this common Anemone is by many
Gentlewomen, and others as ignorant, called Robin Hood, Scarlet and John, and
the Spanish Marigold; there are two kinds thereof, the flowers of the one being
more double and less green than the other.

Anemone latifolia dictus Pavo major.
THe common broad-leaved double scarlet Anemone is in all things like the last,
except the flower, that of this having but two or three rows of large
round-pointed leaves, which are wholly of a light scarlet or Orenge-tawny
color, with a whitish circle at the bottom, and a blackish hairy head or
button in the middle; this and the former are the most common and best known of
all the sorts of double broad-leaved Anemones.

Anemone latifolia flore pleno coccineo.
THe broad-leaved Anemone with a double scarlet flower has the leaves as
green, but smaller than those of the former; the flower is thick and double,
consisting of many round-pointed narrow long leaves, which are wholly of a rich
scarlet color; there is another that bears double scarlet flowers, the
leaves whereof are narrow, sharp-pointed, and of a lighter scarlet color; this
is that sort which is commonly called super-rich, and there is another that
bears double flowers almost as large as the first, which are of the color of
red-lead.

Anemone latifolia flore pleno coccineo variegata.
THe broad-leaved double scarlet variegated Anemone has small and something
brown green leaves, a tall stalk, bearing a gallant large double flower, of a
rich scarlet color, and every leaf thereof finely striped and varigated with
white: this far surpasses any of the former, and was brought out of Flanders
unto us, by the name of bell de Paris.

Anemone latifolia flore pleno rubro.
THe double broad-leaved red Anemone has dark green leaves, and a small double
bloud-red Flower, consisting of many narrow leaves; of this kind there is
another like unto it, only the leaves of the flowers are tipped, and a little
edged with white.

Anemone latifolia flore pleno purpureo.
THe broad-leaved double purple Anemone has broader leaves than those of the
last, and of a brownish green color; the flower is something larger, and the
leaves thereof not so many, but broader, of a murrey purple color. There are
diverse sorts that are like unto this, which only differ in the color of the
flowers, some being deeper, and others lighter, and some of so pale a purple,
that by long standing before they fall, seem almost white.

Anemone latifolia flore pleno purpureo variegata.
THe double broad leaved purple varigated Anemone chiefly differs from the
former in the bravery of the flower, which is very large, thick, and double, of
an excellent reddish purple color, and every leaf thereof listed about with
white.

There are diverse other varieties of double broad-leaved Anemonies, that are
yearly raised from the seeds of some single flowers, whereof there are many
diversities, differing chiefly from the double kinds, in that the green leaves
are smaller, and the flowers single, few of them esteemed, but such as bring
the best seeds; which are sowed in hope of raising new varieties of double
flowers.

Anemone latifolia flore simplici.
BRoad-leaved Anemonies with single flowers are of diverse sorts and colors,
some bigger, others lesser, taller, or lower; the flowers are all single,
consisting of one Pale or row of leaves, with a hairy-head in the middle, of a
color differing from that of the leaves; these flowers are of diverse reds,
purple, scarlets, deeper or paler, even to Pinck or Peach-colour, white, silver
or Ash Color; some of the best sorts are kept by Florists, for that they bear
seeds from whence diversities are raised, and some double flowers as well as
many single, and of differing colors, both plain and striped. In all these
single flowers, and some of those less double than the last sorts of the double
kinds, the head in the middle, after the flowers are fallen, grows bigger and
full of down, in which the seeds are wrapped, which must be carefully gathered
as soon as it is ripe, else it will be all blown away with the wind; they are
to be sowed and ordered after the same manner as those with narrow leaves.

Anemone tenuifolia vulgaris flore pleno rubro.
THe common double narrow-leaved red Anemone has many winged green leaves,
divided into many several branches, each leaf being cut and parted into many
divisions, smaller and more divided than those of Parsley, and some of them like
those of a Carret, among which rises up, one, two or more stalks, according to
the bigness of the root, with some small green leaves about the middle of each
of them, and bearing at the top one great double flower, consisting of six or
seven, and sometimes more broad outer leaves, of a deep red color, having in
the middle a large thrum of small leaves, of a lighter and much paler red
color, out of the middle whereof comes many larger and broader leaves, of a
lighter red than the outer leaves; and deeper than those of the thrum, which
warmed by the Sun spread themselves over it; the roots are thick and tuberous,
something resembling small razes of Ginger, of a yellowish brown color, and
neither so big nor black as those of the other kind with broad leaves.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno versicolor.
THe double narrow-leaved variable Anemone is in all things like the former,
but only the color of the flowers, which in this will sometimes be of a pale
blush-colour, the tops of the leaves almost white, and the bottom Peach-colour,
and sometimes the flowers will be red like the former, but striped and
varigated with pale blush, almost white, and sometimes without any marking at
all; I have often seen all these diversities in this one kind, all proceeding
from the increase of one root; and this is that which is called the
Aple-blossom, or Packingtons Anemone.

Anemone tenuifolia elegantior flore pleno rubro.
THe more elegant double narrow-leaved Anemone with a red flower has narrower
and more divided green leaves than those of the former, the stalk longer, and
the outer leaves of the flower more in number, and sharper pointed, of a good
crimson color; the thrum in the middle thereof is of a pale red, and the tuft
of small long leaves that comes out of the middle of the thrum, is very large,
and spreads almost quite over the flower, of a lighter crimson than that of
the outer leaves, and deeper than that of the thrum; many times two flowers
will be joined together on one stalk, which happens more frequently in this
kind than in any other; the root is not so big and thick as that of the common
red, but flatter and more spreading than it; all the rest that are to follow,
do either resemble that or this, and the chiefest difference being in the
flowers, these two general descriptions may serve for all to spare unnecessary
repetition.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno coccineo.
THe double narrow-leaved Scarlet Anemone, is like the last, but that the
stalks grow not so high, and the flowers something smaller, which are thick and
double, and of an excellent rich Scarlet-colour, and therefore usually called
Incarnadine de Spain.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno coccineo variegata.
THe double Scarlet variegated narrow-leaved Anemone is in all things like the
last, but only in the color of the flower, which in this is of the same
Scarlet color with the former, finely striped and marked with white, the thrum
seeming to be almost all white, and sometimes some broader leaves will come out
of the middle thereof, of a bright Scarlet striped with white, like unto the
outer leaves.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno coma scarlata.
THe double narrow-leaved Anemone with a Scarlet thrum differs from the last,
in that the outer leaves are white, and the thrum Scarlet.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno dicta Nacara.
THe double narrow-leaved Anemone called Nacara is like unto the Scarlet, only
the flower is of a deeper and yellower Scarlet color, resembling that of the
lesser French-Marigold, but not so deep, and the thrum inclining to an
Orenge-colour.

Anemone flore pleno Sulphureo.
THe double Brimston-coloured narrow-leaved Anemone differs from the last, in
that the outer leaves of the flower are of a pale greenish yellow color, like
unto Brimston, and the thrum more green.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno viridante.
THe narrow-leaved double green Anemone is like the last, but that the outer
leaves are of a greenish Orenge-tawny-colour, and the middle thrum of a
yellowish green.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno albo major.
THe greater white narrow-leaved double Anemone little differs either in the
green leaves, or fashion of the flower, from the former, being as large and
double as any of them, and of a milk-white color. There is another that
bears a small double snow-white flower, having six outer leaves, and a thrum
in the middle, made of small-hairy leaves, standing even at the top, as if they
had been clipped with a pair of Scisers.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno maxima albo.
THe greatest double narrow-leaved white Anemone, called the white of Bordeaux,
is in fashion like the first, but much larger and fairer, and of a pure white
color.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno Colombina.
THe narrow-leaved double blush Anemone, called Colombina, has a larger flower
than any of the former, the outer leaves being long and broad; the thrum
composed of short narrow leaves, putting forth a great tuft of longer and
broader leaves, which spread over the flowers, almost to the points of the
outer leaves; the whole flower is of a blush, or flesh-colors, like unto the
color which is usually found in the flowers of the Colombine, from whence it
is so called.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno Roseo.
THe double narrow-leaved Rose-coloured Anemone has smaller flowers than the
last, but very thick and double, of a more lively color, like that of a new
blown Damask Rose.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno Roseo variegata.
THe narrow-leaved double variegated Rose-coloured Anemone only differs from
the last, in that the flower of this is striped and varied with white,
especially the outer leaves.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno rubicante maculato.
THe narrow-leaved double spotted blush Anemone rises up with a tall stalk,
bearing a large flower, the outer leaves whereof are almost white, marked with
small reddish spots and marks, especially on the outer side; the thrum is large
and thick, composed of many narrow long sharp-pointed leaves, of a reddish or
Peach-colour, powdered with small specks of a deeper red color; this is called
by those that brought it out of Flanders, the perfect Curtizan. There is
another little differing from this, either in colors or manner of growing,
called pass Albertine.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno purpureo.
THe narrow-leaved double purple Anemone comes up with green leaves commonly
before Winter, and many times with flowers, and therefore for the prevention of
such forwardness, we keep the roots out of ground and not set them until
November, which causes them to bear the fairer flowers at the Spring
following, which are very large, thick and double, of a dark sullen violet
purple color.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno Lavendulae color.
THe narrow-leaved double Lavender-coloured Anemone is in all things like the
last, the flower is lesser, and of a pale heavy blew color, like unto the
flowers of Lavender; there is another of this sort that is striped with white,
especially the outer leaves of the flower.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno caeruleo.
THe narrow-leaved double blew Anemone is in fashion like the last, only
differing in the color of the flower, which in this is of a fine bright blew
color, more pleasant to behold than any of the purples.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno coma purpureo.
THe narrow-leaved Anemone with the purple thrum, commonly called perfect in
beauty, differs chiefly from the other purples in the color of the flower,
the outer leaves of this being white, and the thrum or plush, as some call it,
purple.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno coma Amarantina.
THe narrow-leaved double Anemone with the dark purple thrum, called Amarant,
has as broad green leaves as the first common red, and the flower is of the
same fashion, the outer leaves of such a red color, and the middle thrum of a
dark-murrey purple color, like the flowers of the lesser Amaranthus purpureus,
and therefore called the Amarant Anemone; sometimes there will come a tuft of
bright red leaves out of the middle of the purple thrum, and then some have
called such flowers Amaranthus tricolor, as if it were a distinct kind, which
in some years happens in most flowers, and in others few or none.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno coma Amarantina variegata.
THe double narrow-leaved variegated Amarant Anemone is in all things like the
last, only the outer leaves, and those that come out of the middle of the
purple thrum, are variegated with white, much fairer in some years than in
others. There are two sorts of this flower, one said to be of Paris, and the
other of Flanders, but that of Paris is the better, being more constantly
marked, and more distinctly than the other.

Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno quinque coloris.
THe double narrow-leaved Anemone of five colors is like the Amarant, but that
the stalk is taller, and the flower larger, the outer leaves thereof are red,
the thrum of a deeper murrey-purple, out of the middle whereof comes one or
two rows of leaves, of a light crimson color from the ends half way, the rest
pale yellow; in the middle of these leaves there is a small tuft of shorter
leaves, which are of a pale silver color, so the five colors are, red, being
that of the outer leaves, purple that of the thrum, crimson the tops of the
leaves that come out of it, yellow the other part of them, and the small tuft
in the middle silver color; this is an uncertain flower, and seldom comes
well.

Anemone tenuifolia dicta Bel-Lizwaire.
THis noble double Anemone has fair large flowers, of a dark purplish color,
finely striped with white; the roots are tender, and apt to perish, unless the
soil be very agreeable, as all the other narrow-leaved striped Anemones are;
there is another like unto this called Rigat Polemburg.

Anemone tennifolia dicta Bell Rigat.
THis is a fair large and double flower, of an excellent crimson color, and
well striped and marked with white.

There are diverse other sorts of double narrow-leaved Anemones, as Orlata vera,
Cagetan, il Diavolo, il Diavolesso, and several others that are variegated, but
most of those variegated kinds are so nice and tender that few can keep them
from perishing.

There are also diverse sorts of rare Italian Anemones, as The Duchess, which
has a large flower, finely striped with pale Rose-colour upon white.

Mellidore is Gold yellow within the leaves, and red without.

Mariana is Pink color, and graydeline striped.

Larviana is flesh-colors near Isabella.

St. Mark is Brick-colour, or brown red, striped with sad white.

The Extravagant, Cateana, Gallatea, and at least fifty other sorts all rare
flowers.

Anemone tenuifolia flore simplici.
THe single narrow-leaved Anemones are of a greater variety, rarity and esteem,
than the Latifoliaes: formerly we had very few of these flowers, and those of
little worth, but now of late years we are become owners of many diversities,
of diverse colors, both plain, edged, striped or marked with white, so that a
bed set something thick with the several varieties of these Flowers, makes a
gallant show, for their stalks are tall, and bear plentifully fair large
Flowers, commonly consisting of one row or pale of broad leaves, with a hairy
head, or button in the middle, which after the Flowers are past grows big and
long, yielding store of small Flat brown seeds, wraped in down; the green
leaves are larger, grow ranker, and are more in number than those of the double
kinds; the roots much bigger, and apter to increase; and besides the great
varieties of reds, scarlets, purples, whites, Peach, and Rose-colours, both
plain and marked with white, there are some others raised from the seeds of
these that bear gallant double flowers of several colors, as red, scarlet and
purple; these either plain or striped sorts I have seen more resembling the
flowers of the double latifolias, than those with narrow leaves, for these
consist of many something broad leaves, having no plush or thrum of leaves, but
a small head or button in the middle, some having but two rows of leaves,
others three, and some so thick and double, that the head in the middle is not
to be seen, until the Flowers fall; and yet these kinds (especially the
thinner sorts) perfect their seeds, from which many fine Flowers may be
produced; these are called Hermaphrodites, for that they partake of both kinds,
as having the roots and leaves of the narrow, and the flowers of the double
broad-leaved Anemones.

All these Anemones, both double and single, bring forth their beautiful
Flowers commonly in March, April and May, sooner or later, according to the
State of the Spring, and time of setting their roots.

In the handling and ordering of the rarer sorts of these excellent Flowers,
some more than common care is to be taken; for if the soil, situation, time and
manner of planting and taking up, be not exactly observed, the Flowers will
neither be fair, nor will the roots prosper and increase, but on the contrary
rot, and consume, especially all the best double kinds with narrow leaves; the
ordinary, and those with single Flowers are more hardy.

The first thing therefore to be considered, is the soil wherein they are to be
planted, which must be fat and rich, the earth not too light, a rich sandy lome
earth is the best, wherein some Neats and Sheeps dung with a little lime has
been tempered, and layen long on a heap, often turned over, so that the dung be
fully rotted, and well mixed with the earth, which being first sifted through a
Wire Sive, make a bed thereof half a yard deep at the least, in some place that
is not too hot in the Sun, but something shadowed; then about the end of
September, place the roots of those Anemones with broad leaves therein, six or
eight inches asunder, and three fingers deep in the ground, setting that side
upward where you perceive small eminences to put forth leaves; those with
narrow leaves are to be handled in the same manner, only differing in the time
of their setting, for these must be kept out of the ground in some dry place
until the end of October, and the purples a month longer, and then set in the
same manner as the others; those with broad leaves will come up before Winter,
and those with narrow leaves about the end of February, or sooner if the Winter
be mild, in March and April, if the season be dry, they must be watered, which
will cause them to thrive much the better, and to bear the fairer flowers.

If you find they like their entertainment, grow strong, bear fair flowers on
tall stalks, and prosper well, you may forbear to take up their roots until
the end of June or July; but on the contrary, if the green leaves are few, the
flowers small, and stalks short, it is a manifest sign of their dislike, and
that the soil is either too cold and poor, or else too hot and rank, which is
far more dangerous; in this case they must be taken up as soon as the green
leaves turn yellow, the roots put into sand, and so kept in some dry place for
a month at the least, and then taken out, and kept in papers in some cool dry
place, until the time of planting, for should the roots remain in the ground
any time after they have lost their fibers, the earth being over-hot, they
would all, or most of them rot and consume away, especially if any store of
rain fall upon them; in the taking up of their roots, care must be had that
they be not broken, especially those with broad leaves, which must not be
divided nor broken, until they part of themselves, those of the other kind with
narrow leaves may be broken or parted with less prejudice, but the wholer they
are kept, the better they will thrive; and although the times before mentioned
be best for the planting and setting the roots of both kinds of these rare
flowers, yet the more ordinary kinds may be kept out of the ground until the
end of February, which some use to do to cause them to flower late after others
are gone; in this practice it will be necessary to steep the roots four and
twenty hours before you set them in warm water, and to plant them with some
Willow earth under and over them, and in a more shady place than ordinary, else
the heat of the Sun in the time of their flowring, will much diminish their
beauty; so if you have two beds stored with choice varieties of Anemonies, that
set last more shaded than the first, and the forementioned rules observed, you
will be sure to enjoy the delight of their delicate flowers part of March, all
April, and the greatest part of May, unless your Garden stand in some smoky
place, where neither art nor industry will cause them to prosper, unless set in
a hot bed in January, as some about London use to do.

Now for the raising of new varieties of Anemones from seeds, choice must be
made of the Flowers, as in Tulips; some of the double latifolias bring seeds,
the richest scarlets, palest purples, pink, white, and sky-colours are the
best: but in the single Tenuifolias there is more choice, as red, and scarlets
with deep white edges, all that are variegated or striped with white, and in
these the deepest velvet purples are the best; but above all others those that
have two or three rows of leaves, and that excellent velvet single blew,
described and commended by Ferarius, are chiefly to be preferred.

The seeds of these flowers will be ready to gather in May, which must be done
as the down rises, else they will be blown away; and having gathered all your
seeds, stay not as some direct to sow them until August, but let it be done by
the middle of July at the furthest, and be sure the earth in which you sow them
be good, and finely sifted, be it in beds or boxes, which your best seeds will
deserve.

To separate the seeds that hang in the down, you must take earth that is very
dry and fine, in quantity according to the seeds you intend to sow, put it in a
Bowl, Trey, or Basin, and mingle the seeds therewith, then stir and divide them
with your fingers until none of the white down appear; sow them not too thin,
for some will fail to come up; lastly, cover them half a fingers thickness with
fine rich earth, and so let them remain until about a month after their
springing, then strew over them a fingers thickness more of like earth, and so
leave them until Winter begins, at which time they must be covered with
pease-straw, laid upon sticks, that it touch not the earth, to prevent the
frosts and cold nipping air; but from the time of sowing to the second covering
with earth, you must not neglect often gently to water them.

The next year after their sowing, in August, they may be taken up, and set
again in rows at convenient distance, where they may remain until you see what
flowers they will bear, and then dispose them as they shall deserve: some
report they have had Anemones bear flowers the next, others the second year
from the sowing, but I can expect few or none that are good before the third,
and many will not bear until the fourth year; but the agreeable goodness of
the earth and air for bringing them forward is most considerable, therefore be
sure to make it as rich and good as you can, but take heed of too much dung.

If the earth of your bed, wherein you would set your best Anemones, be either
too stiff clay, or too light sand, it must be compounded; Clay with brook sand,
and pearl sand, with good fresh fat earth taken next under the Turf of some
good pasture, well mixed together with some lime, and old Neats dung rotted to
earth; which composition must be finely sifted before used; with this earth so
prepared make a bed half a yard deep, and therein set your roots, which will
prosper and bear the better; if at any season of setting them, you put a little
Willow earth under and over the roots, it will cause them soon to put forth
fibers, and thereby able to abide the Winter; yet in frost and hard weather, it
will be good to cover them that are come up with mats or pease-straw, which
take off for two or three hours, every other day, (if fair) to give the bed
air, and prevent mouldiness, which has been the destruction of many a fine
plant.

CHAP. XXIV.
Ranunculus.
THe Crow-foot is of diverse kinds, and many of them not fit for our purpose, we
will therefore make choice of such only as bear the fairest flowers; and first
begin with such as have grumous or kernelly roots, which may be taken up and
kept dry, as well as those of Anemones, and then conclude with some others of
another nature.

Ranunculus Creticus albus.
THe double white Ranunculus, or Crow-foot of Candy, comes up with leaves
something broad, and indented about the edges, some of them more cut and
divided than others, of a pale green color full of white spots; the stalk
rises about a foot high, with some smaller, and more divided leaves thereon,
parted at the top into two or three branches, each bearing a fair white flower;
the root is grumous or kernelly, having many grains bigger than those of Wheat
fastened to one head, of a sad brown color on the outer side; of this kind
there are three other sorts that bear single flowers, one all white, another
with purple, and a third, with bright red edges.

Ranunculus Creticus flore argenteo.
THe Cloth of silver Crow-foot of Candy has smaller leaves than the last, the
stalk bigger, and branched, bearing at the ends thereof single flowers, lesser
than those of the former, containing seven or eight round-pointed leaves, of a
pale yellowish blush color on the insides, a little striped, but more on the
outside with crimson; the root is grumous like that of the former.

Ranunculus Asiaticus flore pleno luteo.
THe double yellow Ranunculus of Asia comes up with many green leaves, cut and
divided like those of a Carret, from whence rise many small upright stalks,
each bearing at the top one small double flower, of a shinning yellow color;
the root composed of many thick fat grains, fastened to a head of a white
color. There is another of this kind that has bigger green leaves, and larger
double flowers, of a more pale yellow color, and we have a third only
differing in that the flowers are single.

Ranunculus Asiaticus flore pleno rubro.
THe double red Ranunculus of Asia has the lower leaves plain and not cut, a
little indented at the edges, the rest of the leaves are parted into three or
five divisions, and notched about the edges; the stalk rises almost a foot
high, bearing at the top thereof one fair and something large double flower,
containing many round-pointed leaves, set in six or more rows one within
another, and of fair yellowish red or Scarlet color; in some strong Plants,
when the flower is almost past, another small double flower will rise out of
the middle thereof; the root is grumous like those of Candy, but lesser, and
the grains longer.

There are now several other nobler sorts of Ranunculus of Asia, with gallant
double flowers, much excelling this old kind described, the which we will
insert under those names they are received, distinguished and known by, placing
them in order according to their affinity with each other, beginning with that
fine variety of our old acquaintance, the former called

Bozvell or Plumashe, this is in all things like the first old kind, only every
leaf of the double flower is finely striped with pale yellow, of which there
are two sorts, one said to be of Paris, the other and better of Flanders.

Pianisco chiefly differs from the last, in that the flower is a little double,
and of a bloody red color.

Sang de Beuf differs from the last, in that the flower is more thick and
double, and at first seems to have small lines of yellow in every leaf
thereof, but when full blown, it is of the color of Bulls blood.

The Monster, or Giant Ranunculus, has thicker, rougher, and browner green
leaves than any of the former, the stalks bigger and branched, each bearing a
fair double Scarlet flower, but that on the chiefest stalk, is as big, and more
double, than the fairest Marigold, which in shape it much resembles, only the
small leaves of this are sharp-pointed; there is one of this sort whose flowers
are lesser, and a little striped with yellow.

The great Monster of Rome is bigger in all the parts than either of the last,
the flowers are larger, the leaves broader, very thick and double, forming a
most gallant rich Scarlet-flower.

Puvoine of Rome has the broad and thick pale green leaves maculated with
white, the flowers large, thick and double, with broad round-pointed leaves,
which stand out in the middle, different from the Monsters, and of a deep
Scarlet-colour; of this kind there is another more rare, which only differs,
in that every leaf of the brave double flower is listed about with yellow.

Marvelia has such like green leaves as the last, the flowers differ, in that
those of this are not so double, the leaves long and narrower, varied and
marbled with a deeper and lighter Scarlet.

Ranunculus Asiaticus flore simplici diversorum colorum.
RAnunculus of Asia with single flowers are of diverse sorts and colors, which
chiefly differ from the first double red in the flowers, which commonly are
composed of five something broad leaves, with a thrummy head in the middle,
much resembling a single Anemonie; In some the flowers are red, some yellow,
deeper or lighter; and others spotted and striped about the edges with red,
with several other pretty varieties, both of plain and mixed colors; and we
have one of the Giants race which bears on a branched stalk three or four
single flowers, consisting of seven broad round-pointed leaves, of a greenish
pale yellow at first, after milk-white, the leaves spotted and tipped with
reddish purple, and another more rare, called the Archducal Ranunculus, which
has the single flower finely marked with three good colors.

These several sorts of Ranunculus are pretty flowers, and many of them worthy
of esteem, especially the double kinds; they bring forth their beautiful
flowers in April and May, which continue a long time before they fall.

The roots of those of Candy may be taken up, and kept out of ground in Sand
for some time, but require to be planted in September. The yellow of Asia is
hardy, and will prosper well without being taken up; all the other are nice and
tender, and require to be planted in rich sandy and ranker earth than that
directed for Anemones; the roots are every year to be taken up about Midsommer,
well dried and kept in Papers or Boxes, as Anemones, until such time they are
to be set, for if they be left in the ground, or set too soon, they will come
up before the great Frosts, which (unless carefully covered) will destroy them.
I use to set them toward the end of December, and in warm and early grounds
January is soon enough; the roots may be parted and set severally six inches
asunder, in rows, three fingers deep, where if the soil be agreeable, they will
come up in March, and about the beginning of May bring forth gallant flowers,
and much increase by roots; and although Ranunculus require a ranker and more
sandy earth than Anemones, yet it may be over rank; if you suspect it to be so,
when you set your roots, take off some of the earth, and in the place thereof,
cover the bed about an inch thick all over with good fresh earth, taken next
under the turf of some good Pasture, finely sifted, and if two stiff, mingle it
with fine brook sand; place the roots thereon, then cover them with a little of
the same earth, and lastly finish your covering with that earth you took off
your bed, so that the roots may be three inches under ground; some set their
Anemones and Ranunculus in the end of September, and as soon as they come up,
shelter them with supported Mats, which must (for an hour every fair day) be
taken off to air the bed, and prevent mouldiness, for if they be not carefully
defended from hard Frosts and Snows, it will soon kill them all, therefore to
avoid such trouble and danger of loss, I prefer late setting, as needing no
attendance, or ever failing to answer my expectation.

In March and April, when they are come up, and begin to rise to flower, they
must be often well watered, for then they require moisture, too much of which
in the Winter destroys them; some years some of their roots will lie in the
ground, and not spring at all, which take up and dry with the rest, and they
will bear flowers nevertheless the year following.

Unto these nobler kinds of Ranunculus, or Crow-foot, some others of our old
acquaintance may be joined; they are now common I must confess, yet bear fair
flowers, and were they as strange and nice as some of the former, they would be
more esteemed, these being too familiar to be much affected, and kept with so
little care, that few care for them, and therefore it will suffice only to
name them, and so conclude this Chapter.

Ranunculus Anglicus.
THe English Crow-foot with a grumous root, commonly called Chelidonium minus,
or the lesser Pile-wort, differs not at all from that common weed which grows
in every hedge, with single shinning yellow flowers, but only that the flowers
of this are thick and double; this Plant I found wild many years since, and
setting it in my Garden, it much increased, so that I gave many roots thereof
to diverse about London and other places, and am confident that most of the
Plants that are in England, came from that one root which I found, for I could
never hear of any other that found it wild in any place.

Ranunculus albus flore pleno.
THe double white Crow-foot has large leaves cut into fine divisions, and
notched about the edges, of a fresh green color on the upper side, and pale
underneath, full of ribs and veins; the stalk about half a yard high, divided
into several branches, bearing many small but very double fine white flowers;
the root is composed of many thick, long whitish strings, fastened to a
something big head.

Caltha Palustris flore pleno.
THe double Marsh-Marigold is no other than that we commonly call the
Water-Boot, so plentiful in wet grounds, only the flowers of this are thick
and double, of an excellent Gold yellow color; the roots are stringy, and
prosper well in Gardens; there are three other sorts of double yellow
Crow-foot, common in our Country, as that with the round root, called the
Batchelors button; the common running Crow-foot with double flowers, and the
small double flowered Grass Crow-foot.

The Pile-wort flowereth in March, and will grow any where, and increase too
fast; the double white Crow-foot, and Marsh-Marigold, flower in April, and set
in good ground will continue many years unremoved, and yield increase from the
roots, which are to be planted in Autumn in a moist place, and something out of
the scorching Sun.

CHAP. XXV.
Aconitum.
WOlfe-bane is of diverse kinds, yet there is but one fit for our purpose, which
with the Radix Cava, or Hollow root, give me leave to place in one Chapter, and
first of of the Aconite.

Aconitum Hyemale.
THe Winter Wolf-bane rises out of ground commonly in January, with round cut
green leaves, standing on short footstalk, and with them the flowers which
are small and yellow, made of five leaves, like a single Crow-foot, with yellow
threads in the middle; the root is thick and tuberous, like unto that of the
common red narrow-leaved Anemone, but rounder, and loses its fibers every year
as the Anemones do.

Aconitum Hyemale flore pallido.
THe pale Winter Wolf-bane is in all things like the former, only the flowers
of this are of a pale yellow color, and in some plants almost white.

These two sorts of Aconite do bring forth their flowers with the green leaves
commonly in January, for which they are only esteemed; the roots may be set in
any of the Summer months, and in any place, for they are hardy and will thrive
more than better things.

Radix Cava.
HOllow-root is a Plant as low in growth as reputation, the common and ordinary
are cast out of every good Garden, and these following chiefly retained.

Radix Cava major flore albo.
THe white Hollow-root comes out of the ground about the end of March, with
green leaves like those of the Colombine, from among which, rise up two or
three short stalks, naked from the bottom to the middle, where the flowers come
forth one above another, every flower having a short green leaf at the foot
thereof, which are long and hollow, with a heel behind, like uhto the flowers
of the common Larks spur, with bigger bellies, and the mouths not so open,
being wholly of a pure white color; the root is big and round, of a yellowish
brown color on the outside, but more yellow within, and hollow underneath.

Radix Cava major flore carneo.
THe blush-coloured Hollow-root is in all things like the former, but that the
flowers of this are of a light red, or deep blush-colour, and sometimes the
flowers of some Plants of this kind will be of a deep reddish purple color.

These kinds of Hollow-root come up in the end of March, flower in April, and
are underground again in May; the roots lose the fibers, and may be kept out
of the ground two or three months; they are apt to increase, and will like in
any soil, but best in that which is inclining to sand, so as they stand not too
hot in the Sun.

CHAP. XXVI.
Hepatica Nobilis.
NOble Liver-wort is of two sorts, the one bearing single, and the other double
flowers; the first are now little esteemed, and few of them entertained by the
curious, but the double kinds more respected, and some of them accounted very
rare, we will begin with that best known.

Hepatica Nobilis flore pleno purpureo.
THe double purple Hepatica comes up before the leaves, with many small, and
something long naked stalks, each of them bearing at the top thereof one small
double flower, of a violet purple color, at which time the leaves spring up
foulded at the first, but after opening themselves, are divided at the edges in
three parts, standing on several long footstalk, as high as the flowers,
which leaves will continue until new come again; so that commonly the flowers
rise up among the old leaves; the root is composed of many long black strings,
fastened to a head, from whence the leaves and flowers spring.

Hepatica nobilis flore pleno caeruleo.
THe double blew Hepatica is in all things like the former, but the color of
the flowers, which in this are of light watchet blew color.

Hepatica nobilis flore pleno albo.
THe double white Hepatica has smaller and fresher green leaves than either of
the former, the flowers snow-white, and as thick and double, more rare to be
found, and therefore much more esteemed.

Hepatica nobilis flore pleno rubro.
THe double red Hepatica is in all things like the last, but only the color
of the flowers, which are as thick and double as any of the former, and of a
fine pleasant pale red, inclining to Peach-colour.

These are the most valuable diversities that hitherto have come to our
knowledge; there are others that bear single flowers of the same colors of the
double ones, but little esteemed by any good Florists; yet by some are
preserved, chiefly for that they bear seeds from whence varieties are expected,
but I have not heard or seen any that have been so raised that are
considerable. It is reported that the double white, and the double red have
been raised from the seeds of the single kinds; I confess I have not seen
either of them, and therefore can give no further assurance than the credit of
a good Florist the reporter.

The double kinds flower about the middle of March, and the single ones a
fortnight sooner; they must be planted like the Auricula, in rich well-dunged
ground, where they will thrive and bear plentifully, and may be increased by
parting the roots after they are grown into several heads.

Geranium.
CRanes bill is of diverse sorts, but few of them of any esteem, the chiefest of
them are, the knobbed Cranes-bill, that has a root like a small Cyclamen,
bearing many single pale purple flowers; the blew Cranes-bill and the white
differ only in the color of the flowers; the blew and white striped
Cranes-bill is like the two last, only the flowers are variably spotted,
striped, and parted with white and blew; the purple Crow-foot Cranes-bill has
a great head of flowers, which open by degrees, and die at night; the variable
Cranes-bill is common, it has small flowers, varied with small reddish veins
upon white; the sweet Cranes-bill has flowers of a dark blackish purple
color; the red Rose Cranes-bill has flowers like a red Rose Campion; these
simple flowers are all exactly described by Mr. Parkinson, they flower in
April, May and June, and increase too fast: but we have now an other more rare
called

Geranium nocte olens.
FOr that it smells sweet only in the night, it has a great root like a
Paeony, with large jagged leaves, the flowers come forth in July, with small
and round pointed leaves of a purple color listed about with yellow, so as the
purple seems but as a spot in the middle of every leaf; these flowers stand
on smooth stalks eight or ten on a head, which in the night are as sweet, as
beautiful in the day; the plant is tender, and therefore set in a pot, and
governed in Winter as the Cardinals flower; or housed and kept dry in Winter,
for any moisture rots the root.

CHAP. XXVII.
Helleborus.
HEllebor is of two sorts or kinds, that is, black and white; and there are
some lesser sorts, called Helleborine, that for the beauty of their flowers
deserve mention; we will begin with the black Hellebor, vulgarly called the
Christmas Rose, but more properly

Helleborus niger verus.
THe true black Hellebor, from a root composed of diverse long brown strings,
running deep into the ground, and fastened to a big head, springs up many
green leaves, standing on big stiff footstalk, divided into eight or nine
parts, and nicked about the edges; the flowers come forth in Winter, upon such
short fat footstalk, in form like unto single white Roses, at first white,
but by long standing turn to be of a blush-colour, with a pale yellow thrum,
and a green head in the middle; chiefly respected for the early flowring, which
is commonly about Christmas, and therefore by many called the Winter or
Christmas Rose; there are some other sorts of black Hellebor, but none of any
beauty or esteem, but this only.

Helleborus albus.
THe white Hellebor comes up with a great round head, of a whitish green
color, opening it self into many beautiful large green leaves, eminently
plaited throughout, and compassing each other at the bottom: out of them the
stalk rises a yard high, or more, with small leaves to the middle thereof,
from whence it is divided into many branches, bearing a multitude of small
star-like flowers of a yellowish green color: the root is thick and big at the
head, with diverse great white strings, which run down deep into the ground,
there strongly fastened, and abiding many years unremoved.

Helleborus albus flore atro rubente.
THe white Hellebor with a dark red flower differs from the last, in that it
comes up a month before it, with larger leaves, smaller and finer plaited:
the flowers are lesser than those of the former, and of a dark red, or sad
liver-colour. This is a stately plant, and will deserve its place in the best
Florists garden. There are some lesser sorts of Hellebor which we call
Helleborine, whereof two or three are worth our acquaintance, and therefore fit
to be inserted.

Helleborine major sive Calceolus Mariae.
OUr Ladies slipper comes up with diverse stalks about half a yard high,
compassed at the bottom with broad green leaves, like those of white Hellebor,
but smaller, and not plained; at the tops of the stalks come forth one, two,
and sometimes three flowers, one above another, upon small short footstalk,
with a small leaf at the foot of each: the flowers in form are Oval, the upper
part hollow, and the lowerround and swelling; at the hollow part are two small
slippets, wherewith at the first the hollowness is covered, but after open and
stand apart from each other; these flowers are in some of a pale yellow, and in
others more rare of a brown color, tending to purple; the roots are composed
of many dark brown strings, interlaced one within the other, lying under the
upper crust of the earth, and not deeper, as those of the former kinds.

Helleborine minor flore albo.
THe small white Hellebor rises up like the last, but not so high, neither are
the leaves so large, and of a whiter green color: the stalk bears in a spike
many small white flowers, consisting of five leaves and a small close hood in
the middle: the roots are many small strings, running in the upper part of the
earth.

Helleborine minor flore purpurante.
THe small purplish Hellebor is like the last described, but that the leaves
are narrower, the flowers smaller, and of purplish blush-colour.

The true black Hellebor flowreth about Christmas, the two white Hellebors in
June, the Ladies Slipper, and the white Helleborine in the end of April or
beginning of May, and that with the purplish flower about the beginning of June.

The roots of the black and white Hellebor are hardy, and abide long unremoved,
therefore fit to be at first set in good ground and where they may stand: the
Helleborines are found wild in some parts of York and Lancashire, and therefore
do not require too rich a soil. I received all the varieties before mentioned
from that honest Gentleman, my never to be forgotten friend, Mr. Roger
Brodshaw, who found them in the shady woods near his house in Lancashire; there
is another small Plant which may properly be mentioned in this place, of which
a word or two before we conclude this Chapter.

Lilium Convallium flore albo.
THe white Convall Lily, May Lily, or the Lily of the valley, for by all these
names it is called, has a small stringy root, which runs in the ground, and
comes up in diverse places, with three or four long and broad leaves, something
resembling those of the lesser Helleborine, from whence rises up a small naked
stalk, bearing at the top one above another, hanging all on one side, many
little white flowers, like little Bottles with open mouths, which are of a
comfortable sweet scent.

Lilium Convallium flore rubente.
THe Conval Lily with a reddish flower differs only from the former, in that
the flowers are of a fine pale red color, and therefore more esteemed than the
other which is found growing wild in diverse places in the North.

They both flower in May, and will increase too fast, but bear best in the
shade, and in a mean soil; I never read or heard of any other plant called the
Lily of the valley, and if this be that mentioned in the Canticles, I am the
Rose of Sharon and the Lily of the valley, perhaps it was by the Rose to typify
lovely Majesty, and by this small low flower, virtuous Humility, it having an
especial property to help weak memories, raise Apoplectick persons, cheer the
heart, and ease the pains of the Gout.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Gentiana.
GEntian is of several sorts, some greater, and some smaller, we will make
choice of one of each, and leave the rest, as fitter for a general history,
than this collection of flowers, and first of that rare medicinable plant called

Gentiana major flore flavo.
THe great Gentian with a yellow flower, from a great thick yellow bitter root,
rises up, with a long round and pointed head of leaves, closing each other,
which opening lie upon the ground, and are long, broad and plaited, like unto
those of the white Hellebor, but softer and more pliable, from among which the
stalk comes up, which is stiff, round, full of joints, and above a yard high,
with two small leaves at every joint compassing the stalk, which from the
middle to the top thereof is adorned with many rundles, or Coronets of flowers
standing at every joint with two green leaves under them, which are laid open
like Stars, of a yellow color, with some threads in the middle, which are
succeeded by round heads containing seeds like unto those of the Fritillaria.

Gentianella verna.
GEntian of the Spring, or Gentianella, as it is commonly called, has diverse
small hard green leaves growing in tufts close to the ground, ribbed and veined
like to other Gentians, from among which rises up a small short stalk, bearing
at the top one fair, large, hollow, bell-fashioned flower, with open brims,
ending in five corners, of an excellent deep blew color, with some white spots
in the bottom on the inside: the roots are small pale yellow long strings
which run in the ground, and put forth leaves in diverse places, whereby it
increases so fast, that it is now grown common in every ordinary Garden.

The great Gentian flowereth from June to July, and the Gentianella from April
to May; the first increases slowly by the root, and it is hardly raised from
seeds, in respect those plants that grow in England seldom bring any to
perfection, and if any plants be gotten up from seeds, it will be many years
before they come to bear flowers: the root must be planted in September, in
rich ground, under a South wall, and carefully defended from frosts in the
Winter; the other will prosper in almost any soil, so it be in an open air.

CHAP. XXIX.
Campanula.
BEll-flowers are of several sorts, as well double as single, and some of them
worthy acceptance, wherewith this Chapter will acquaint you.

Campanula Percifolio.
PEach-leaved Bell-flowers have many small leaves, like those of the
Peach-tree, lying on the ground, from whence many stalks rise up two foot high,
bearing from the middle to the head diverse flowers, which are short, round at
the head, and wider at the brims, parted into five points, in one pure white,
and in another pale blew: the roots are many small strings creeping under the
upper crust of the earth, and increase very much: these are common in every
Garden, but I have often heard of others of both these kinds, which are
reported to bear double flowers.

Campanula Pyramidalis.
STeeple Bell-flower rises with many tall stalks higher than those of the
former, garnished with bigger, and smoother dark green leaves, resembling those
of Beets, bearing a multitude of flowers in a Pyramidical form, which are of
the fashion of the former but lesser, in some blew, in others white; the plant
is full of milky juice, the roots large, stringy, and yielding milk like the
branches.

Trachelium majus.
THe great Canterbury Bells have large rough leaves like those of a Nettle, but
bigger; the stalks are square, divided into branches, whereon stand diverse long
hollow flowers like Bells, wide at the brims, and parted into five points, in
some white, and in others of a deeper, or paler violet purple: the roots are
hard and stringy, increasing and abiding many years, although the leaves and
stalks die to the ground every Winter.

Trachelium majus flore duplici.
DOuble Canterbury Bells differ in nothing from the last, but in that the
flowers are double, consisting of two or three rows of leaves, which as in the
former, are in some of these white, and in others blew or purple.

Trachelium Giganteum.
Giants Throat-wort has long leaves of an over-worn green color, rough and
hollow in the middle, a little indented about the edges; the stalk rises two
cubits high, set with leaves, from among which the flowers come forth, which
are Bell-fashioned, divided at the brims into five points, which turn back, and
are of whitish purple color; the root is like those of the former, and as long
lasting.

Trachelium Americanum sive planta Cardinalis.
THe Cardinals-flower has many leaves like those of Canterbury bells, but
lesser, and of a yellowish green color, from among which rise tall
hollow-stalks, beset with leaves smaller by degrees to the top, from the bosoms
whereof the flowers come forth, consisting of five long narrow leaves, three of
them standing close together and hanging down right, the other two are turned
up, with an umbone betwixt them, of somewhat a paler color than the leaves,
which are of an excellent rich crimson-colour; the root is composed of very
many white strings, and if it be well looked unto abides many years. There is
another of this kind (which lately came from Virginia) with blew flowers.

They flower from the end of May, commonly until August, those with
Peach-leaves first, and the Cardinals-flower last.

All these Bell-flowers are easily increased, by parting the roots in
September, and thrive well in almost any soil, so they stand not too hot in the
Sun; Cardinals-flower is more tender, and must be planted in good light earth,
in a pot, that it may be housed in Winter, for it will not endure Frost. The
most worthy of these are the two sorts of Campanula with double flowers (if
there be any such) the two double sorts of Canterbury Bells, and the
Cardinals-flower; the rest are of small esteem, yet many for want of better
things afford them room in their Gardens.

The Cardinals-flower must be set in a pot, in good rich light earth; and when
Winter begins to grow sharp, set the pot in the ground, under a South-wall
three inches deeper than the top, and cloth it about and on the pot with dry
Moss, covered with a glass, which in warm days and gentle showers take off to
refresh the Plant; this course is more fit for this Plant than housing, and
with some others to this rule referred, which must be observed until April,
and then you may take out the pots and safely expose them.

CHAP. XXX.
Jucca Indica and Periploca Virginiana.
THe Indian Jucca, or that we call so, is a Plant of some reputation with
Florists, and Periploca of Virginia, which Mr. Parkinson calls Virginian Silk,
is kept in some good Gardens, both which, though of different kinds, faces and
qualities, we will comprehend in this Chapter, as also some other Indian Plants
that are contented to live with us, and first of that called, but not truly,

Jucca Indica.
THe Indian Jucca has a great thick tuberous root with large fibers, from
whence springs up a great round tuft of hard long hollow green leaves, with
points as sharp as thorns, which always remain and fall not away, except it be
some of those that stand outward, which are recompensed by others that spring
from the middle, from whence sometimes in an old and well kept plant, springs
up a strong round stalk, divided into several branches, which bear diverse
flowers, something resembling those of the common Fretillaria, but narrower at
the bottom, containing six leaves, the three outer veined on the backs from the
bottom to the middle with a reddish blush upon white; these flowers come forth
in July, and soon fall away without bringing any seeds in our Country. This
Plant must be set in a large square Box, wide and deep, filled with good rich
earth, where being housed in Winter and defended from Frosts, it may remain
many years; it never increases with us, yet there are now many Plants thereof
in England, which have been brought from our Plantations in the West Indies.

Periploca Virginiana.
VIrginian Silk is a Plant more respected for being a stranger, than for the
beauty of the flowers; it rises up with one or more round stalks almost four
foot high, set at several joints with two long broad-veined round-pointed green
leaves, at the top of the stalk, out of a skinny-hose, comes forth a great
tuft of flowers, to the number of thirty or forty, hanging down on long
footstalk, each flower consisting of five small hollow-leaves, of a pale
purplish color, neither fair nor pleasant; after they are past, come long
crooked codds, standing upright, containing flat brown seeds, wrapped within a
great deal of fine soft whitish brown silk; the root is big, long and white,
running far under ground, and spring up in many places; it flowereth in July,
and sometimes, but not every year, brings seeds and silk in August; it
grows abundantly in Virginia, and has been raised often by seeds that have
come from thence; and although the stalks die to the ground every Winter, the
root is of long continuance, and will send forth new at the Spring, especially
if the place where it stands be covered with horse-dung in Winter, to defend
it from the Frosts.

Canna Indica.
THe Indian flowering Reed rises up with fair large green leaves, coming from
the joints of the stalk, at first folded, after spread open; the stalk is above
a yard high, bearing at the top one above another diverse flowers, like in
fashion to the Gladiolus or Corn-flag, of a bright crimson color; after the
flowers the seeds are contained in three-square heads, which are round and
black, of the bigness of a Pease; it has a great white tuberous root full of
knobs, whereby it aptly increases. There is of this kind another differing,
only in the color of the flowers, which in this are yellow with reddish
spots. These Plants must be set in large Boxes, in good earth, often watered,
and housed in Winter, for one nights Frost will destroy them.

Ficus Indica minor.
THe Indian Fig with us consists of leaves only, one springing out of
another, proceeding from one leaf put half into the earth, which takes root
and puts out others; these leaves are a finger thick, flat and round-pointed,
of a pale green color, with a show at the first of brown prickles on the
upper-side; at the tops of the leaves, in June break out the flowers, which are
composed of two rows of pale yellow leaves, with a yellow thrum tipped with red
in the middle; after the flowers are past, the head they stood on grows bigger,
in form of a Fig, but never comes to any perfection with us. There is another
of this kind that has bigger and much larger leaves, but will not endure our
cold Winters, for the lesser kind is planted in Pots or Tubs, and housed in
Winter, or else the Frosts will rot and destroy it.

CHAP. XXXI.
Auricula Ursi.
BEars Ears are nobler kinds of Cowslips, and now much esteemed, in respect of
the many excellent varieties thereof of late years discovered, differing in the
size, fashion, and color of the green leaves, as well as flowers, the which we
will list under these colors, namely purple, red or scarlet, yellow or
Buff-colour, snow or milk-white, and acquaint you with so many fine diversities
in each of them, as may be sufficient to stock a Florists Garden, who from
their seeds, handled according to the following directions, may raise many new
varieties.

Auricula flore purpureo.
THe purple Auricula is of diverse sorts, some deeper and some lighter, we will
begin with that best known, commonly called the fair Downham, from whose seeds
many good flowers have been raised; this has many green leaves, somewhat long
and mealy, narrow from the bottom to the middle, and broader by degrees almost
to the ends, which are something round and striped about the edges; out of the
middle of the leaves, and from the sides of them, the stalks spring up five or
six inches high, bearing at the top many flowers of a fine bright murrey or
reddish purple color, each flower consisting of five small leaves, parted at
the ends, with a white circle or eye in the middle, standing in small cups,
wherein (after the flowers are fallen) appear small round heads with a prick in
the middle, containing small brown seeds; the root has many long white
strings, like unto those of the Primrose or Cowslip. This description may serve
for all the rest, with such additions as may distinguish the difference, or
need exceptions. This was one of the first good flowers of this kind that we
had, and takes the name from the first owner, my very good friend Mr. John
Downham, a reverent Divine, and an industrious Florist, from whom many years
since I had this and diverse other fine flowers.

Mr. Good's purple Auricula is a strong Plant, with large leaves, a big tall
stalk, bearing a great Truss of many fair, fine, rich purple flowers, with
snow-white eyes, that will not wash yellow with rain, as some do, but abide
white to the last; this noble kind was raised by Mr. Austen in Oxford, and
given to Mr. John Good of Balioll College, whose now it is there called.

Mistress Buggs her fine purple was raised by her in Battersey near London, it
is like the former in all the parts, but that the great head of flowers stands
more erect, of a deeper purple and broader white eyes.

Mr. Whitmores purple is also a very good flower, fair and large, many on one
stalk, of a lighter purple than any of the former, with fair white eyes; this
was raised by my worthy friend William Whitmore of Balmes near Hodgsden
Esquire, who was pleased the last Spring to give me a Plant thereof.

Purple Fransway is another good flower, it bears a great truss of rich
shining purple flowers, with very large white eyes.

The black Imperial may be reckoned with the purples, it has small leaves and
a short stalk, but bears many fair flowers close set together, of so dark a
purple color, that without much error it may be called black, with fair
snow-white eyes; this was raised in Oxford.

Rickets sable Auricula is like the last, only a little bigger in all the
parts, but of as black a color, with fair white eyes; this was lately raised
by Mr. Rickets of Hogsden often remembered, the best and most faithful Florist
now abouts London.

The purple striped Auricula is small in all the parts, has a weak low stalk,
bearing four or five purple flowers, striped with white.

The purpled and Lemon-coloured striped Auricula is a much bigger and stronger
Plant than the last, the stalk is stiff, but not tall, bearing often eight or
ten flowers, which are Lemon-colour, striped with reddish purple; this was also
raised by Mistress Buggs before mentioned, and is a flower of good esteem.

There are diverse other good purples which have been raised from seeds by my
self and others, and every year produces new varieties, not to be confined
within any limits.

Auricula flore rubro sive coccineo.
THe Red or scarlet-colour Auricula is of diverse sorts, one of the best I know,
is called Mistress Austins scarlet, it has large leaves, a strong upright
stalk, bearing a great truss of fine scarlet flowers, with snow-white eyes;
diverse other excellent flowers have been raised in Oxford by Mr. Jacob Bobert
keeper of the public Garden.

There are diverse sorts of reds, inclining to scarlet, some redder and some
yellower than others, some with large flowers, and many on one stalk, with
white, or pale yellow eyes, upon many of which, several fantastical names (by
those that raised them) have been imposed, as the Fair Virgin, the Matron, the
Alderman, Mercury, and the other Planets, the Cow, the Red Bull, etc.

There are some raised from seeds that are crimson, others carnation, and one
by my self that bears a great truss of large blood-red flowers, with fair
white eyes.

Besides these there are raised from seeds infinite other varieties of
Rose-colours, Blushes, Cinnamon and other fine colors; those whose flowers are
of new and strange colors with white eyes that will not wash, are chiefly to
be marked out and preserved.

Auricula flore luteo.
THe yellow Auricula is of small esteem, those that bear the largest flowers,
the biggest truss, of the deepest yellow color, and white eyes, are most
regarded; but the more ordinary sorts are commonly cast away, as I have done
above forty in one year that came of seeds; but of this generation there are
some, whose flowers are of a Buff color, some yellower, and some dunner than
others; these have been in good esteem, and every Florist had his Leather-Coat,
many of which yet remain and retain the names of those that raised them, as
Tradescans Leather-Coat, Lances, Tuggies, Turners, Collins, Lookers, Humphries,
Meracows, Mows, Mullars, Randolls, and Rickets Beazar, all several good kinds
of Leather-Coats, and I have raised a Leather-Coat my self from seeds, that is
not inferior to the best of those mentioned; and there is one that on a short
stalk bears four or five double flowers, with three rows of leaves in each
flower.

Auriculo flore albo.
TThe white Auricula is of small variety and esteem, the best is that called
the Virgins milk; this has large mealy leaves, a tall strong stalk, with a
great truss of milk-white flowers, with snow-white eyes, which placed among the
purples, sets off, and adds to their glory; there are some that are perfectly
white, and many milk-whites, but few of them of any better esteem than the
yellows.

We will now (as others have done) conclude this Chapter of Auricula, with two
other Plants that bear flowers something resembling them, but neither are of
that family, or have any other relation thereunto, yet fittest for this place,
as not deserving particular Chapters.

Auricula flore caeruleo folio Boraginis.
THe Burage-leaved blew Auricula has rough hairy leaves, spread on the ground
like those of Burage, but much lesser, and rent in the sides in some places,
among which rises up one, two, or more brown hairy-stalks, five or six inches
high, each bearing at the top, three, or four flowers, consisting of five
leaves, which are large, sharp-pointed, and of a fair rich blew color, with
some small yellow threads in the middle; the root is long and brownish, with
many small fibers annexed thereunto. This Plant as it is rare, so is it tender,
and impatient of our cold Winters, and therefore requires to be planted in a
pot, that it may be handled as the flos Cardinalis.

Cortusa Mathioli.
BEars-ears Sanicle, as some call it, springs up with the leaves foulded,
which opening are fair and broad, cut in divisions and nicked about the edges,
a little hairy, and of a dark green color on the uperside, but whiter on the
other; from among the leaves rises up one or two naked stalks, five or six
inches high, bearing at the tops diverse small flowers, like in form to an
Auricula, but hanging down their heads, and of a dark purple color, with a
small white eye and some threads in the middle; after the flowers are past, the
seeds succeed, like that of the Auricula; the root is composed of a thick tuft
of small whitish strings fastened to a head, which abides in the ground all
the Winter, the leaves perishing and renewing at the Spring. This Plant is
commonly raised from seeds, set in a pot and ordered as in the last in Winter;
both this and the former flower with the Auricula or a little after them.

All the several sorts of Auricula do flower in April or the beginning of May,
and sometimes they will flower again in the end of August, or beginning of
September, but those flowers that come then, are neither so fair, nor so many
on one stalk, as those of the Spring.

The Bears-ears must be planted in some place that is a little shaded from the
scorching heat of the Sun, the soil made very rich, if stiff with sand and
store of well rotted Neats-dung, and therein the roots set a foot asunder, for
they spread wide, and will not thrive if they want room; the best way to set
them, is to open a wide hole, leaving or raising a little hill in the midst
thereof, then set the root thereupon, and spread the fibers round about it,
lastly cover and water them. After the middle of August every other year take
them up, and then mend the soil where they grew, with sifted Neats-dung, and
having slipped and parted the roots, and cut off those fibers that are too
long, set them in the same place again; by this means you shall not fail to
have them thrive and bear store of flowers, but if you let them stand too long
unremoved, or in poor, or stiff ground, you must expect the contrary.

The best sorts of Auricula are set in pots, which they will well deserve; fill
the pots almost half full with sifted Neats-dung, the rest with good sandy
earth well mixed with such sifted dung, and about the end of August set the
Plants therein, but not too deep, for the roots will be apt enough to draw
downwards; place these pots in the Sun all the Winter, and with Glasses defend
them from over much wet, but do not house them, for they will do better in the
open Air. At the Spring when they rise to flower remove them into a place more
shaded, and after the flowers are past (except those you leave to seed) you may
dispose in some shady place out of the way, to make room for pots with
Gilliflowers.

The raising varieties of them from seeds is a secret wherewith few are well
acquainted, and it is to be performed with something more than common
diligence, according to the rules following; After the flowers are past, and
the stalks begin to grow yellow, you may observe in the top of that little
round seed-vessel, a small hole, and then you may be assured the seed is almost
ripe, and if you do not carefully look to it, will be all shed before you are
aware; therefore as soon as you perceive it to be ready, cut down the stalks,
keeping the tops upright, for if you turn them downwards, all the best seeds
will fall out; then bind them in bundles, and place them upright to the Glass
of some South Window, where (by some benefit they will receive from the Sun)
they will harden, and be much the better; toward the end of August or
beginning of September, prepare some square box or boxes according to your
store of seeds, that are nine or ten inches deep, and of what breadth you
please, with some holes in the bottom to let out water, which fill three parts
full with fine sandy sifted earth, one half thereof being well rotted Neats
dung, which mingled well together, and laid smooth with your Trowel, lay
thereon a fingers thickness of fine sifted Willow earth, or for want thereof
dried Cow Dung beaten small, mingled with a little good earth and sifted, and
sow your seeds thereon, mingled with Wood-ashes, which by their color will
direct you to sow them the more suitably; they must not be sowed too thin, for
all will not come up, if they do they may easily be removed to another place;
after the seeds are thus sowed, cover them half a finger thick, with the same
you put next under them, which press down lightly, and let them remain in the
Sun and Air until they begin to come up, which will be about April, and then
they must be removed into the shade, and often gently watered; as soon as they
are grown to any considerable bigness take some of them up, where they are too
thick, and set them presently in some bed prepared for that purpose, six or
eight inches asunder, where they may remain until they come to bear flowers;
and those you leave in the box may be transplanted in the end of August after
the same manner, and so the box will be ready again to sow more seeds; some of
them will bear the Spring following, others about August the year after they
were sowed, and the rest the Spring then next following, provided the ground
you set them in be rich and good, otherwise you will lose all the delight of
your labors. Some are of opinion that the beginning of October, others the end
of February, is the best time to sow them, but having tried all those times, I
find that before mentioned to be the best; for the seeds are so small that if
they be kept any time out of the ground, they will be all dead. Now above all
things you must be sure to get the seeds of good flowers, for from thence
springs all your hope; when you see their flowers, those you dislike, cast
away, or else if you have convenience send them to the flower-market, the
common Emtory of trash and refuse, and reserve the rest for your own delight.

CHAP. XXXII.
Primula Veris, and Paralysis.
PRimroses and Cowslips are English flowers, and well known to every Milk-maid,
being the common ornaments of Meadows and Pastures, yet there are some
varieties of them entertained in Gardens, out of which we will cull the best,
and leave the rest to those that delight in such common toys. We have now other
kinds of Primroses and Cowslips, that bear diversities of red flowers, more
esteemed than those of our own Country; but first we will begin with some of
our old acquaintance, and then proceed to those of later discovery.

Primula Veris flore pleno vulgaris.
THe common double Garden Primrose is so well known, that it is sufficient
only to name it, but were it not so common in every Country-womans Garden, it
would be more respected, for indeed it is a sweet and dainty double flower, and
the chiefest of all our English kinds.

Paralysis flore geminato.
THe Cowslip hose in hose differs from that of the field, in respect the
flowers are ingeminated, one standing within the other, many on one stalk, the
same in color and fashion with those of the common kind.

Paralysis flore pleno.
THe double Cowslip differs from the common kind, in that it is bigger, and
bears many fair thick and double flowers on one stalk, of the same Gold
yellow color with the former.

Paralysis flore pleno viridante.
THe double green Cowslip differs from the last, in that the flowers of this
are of yellowish green color, but as thick and double; and this is the rarest
and most esteemed of all our English kinds.

There are diverse other sorts both of Primroses and Cowslips planted in some
Gardens, as the double green Primrose, and another that has the outer row of
leaves green, with a small pale yellow flower in the midst, the single green
Cowslip, the tufted Cowslip, the fantastic Cowslip, or Jackanapes on horse
back, the Cowslip with the jagged hose, and another with a large hose divided
in five points, and purled about the edges with a small single yellow flower
standing therein; all which I leave to those that delight in them, and pass to
others of more esteem.

Primula Veris flore rubro.
THe red Primrose is of a newer date, more beauty, and greater variety than the
former; in roots leaves and fashion it differs not from the common single
field Primrose, only the tops of the roots, and bottomes of the stalks, are of
a reddish color, but the greatest difference is in the colors of the flowers,
there being almost twenty diversities of reds, some deeper and others lighter,
from blood red to pale Pink color; some are of a bluish Rose-colour, sader
and paler, some brick-colour, some Dove-colour, others of the color of an old
Buff-coat, and some hair-colour; all which varieties have been raised from
seeds, and likewise these more excellent kinds following.

The fair red Primrose is a pleasant flower, of a most beautiful rich shining
velvet red-colour, with a yellow Star in the bottom, as is in all the rest.

The Scarlet Primrose is of esteem, the flower is of a bright Scarlet color,
more rare than any of the former.

Red Primrose hose in hose has upon every stalk (for many stalks bearing
flowers rise from one root, in all these kinds) two flowers ingeminated, one
standing within the other, in some bigger and of a deeper red color, in others
lesser and paler; of this kind I have raised six several diversities differing
from each other, either in size, fashion or color.

The double red Primrose is the rarest of all the kinds, the flower is reported
to be almost as large, thick and double, as the common pale yellow kind, and of
a fair red color: this if any such be it is that so much seed has been sowed
in hope to obtain.

The red Cowslip, or Oxlip, is also of several sorts, all of them bearing many
flowers on one stalk, in fashion like those of the field, but of several red
colors, some deeper, others lighter, some bigger like Oxlips, others smaller
like Cowslips.

The variable Scarlet, or Orenge-coloured Cowslip, has many small flowers on
one stalk, which toward the bottom on the upper side in some, are of a fine
Orenge-colour, and the leaves listed about the edges with Cinnamon-colour, and
something redder on the outside; some are of a fine Scarlet color deeper or
lighter in great variety, all proceeding from the seeds of the deepest colored
flowers.

The red Cowslip hose in hose has many flowers on one stalk, like those of the
ingeminated red Primrose before described, but lesser; of these I have five
distinct diversities, some bigger, some lesser, and of deeper or lighter red
colors.

Of some of these sorts a multitude have been and are yearly raised from seeds,
still sowed in hope of gaining new varieties, casting those away that do not
answer expectation, which by many about London, with such like refuse; are sent
into the flower-market, and there sold for little, for had they not that way to
purge their Gardens, they would certainly, as I and others do, destroy them. I
have lately heard several ignorant pretenders to the knowledge of flowers say,
that they could buy in that market the best Tulips in England for five
shillings the hundred, the best red Primroses and Bears-ears for six pence the
dozen, and all other flowers whatsoever, one with another, for two pence a
piece; and I believe they and many others are confident that there are no
better to be found in the world, than those there sold at that rate, for my
part I shall not endeavor to undeceive them, but wish them good markets that
are so poorly pleased, and return to the subject in hand.

The common double Primrose flowereth in April, and the Cowslips in May, the
red kinds in March, and many of them will begin in September, and continue
bearing flowers all the Winter, unless checked by hard weather.

The English kinds are hardy and prosper in any place that is not too hot in
the sun; the red kinds are planted, sowed, and ordered in the same manner as we
do the Bears-ears; yet if sowed in a bed of good earth toward the end of
September, they will come up at the Spring, and soon come to bear flowers; we
shall only add some few varieties of another kind of small Cowslips, and then
proceed to other things.

Paralysis minor flore rubro.
REd Birds eyes continue all the Winter with the leaves closed together, which
at the Spring do open and spread upon the ground, with small long and narrow
leaves, snipt about the edges, of a pale green on the upper side, and of a
mealy whitish color on the other; from among the leaves rise up one or two
small hairy stalks, half a foot high, bearing at the top many small flowers,
like in fashion unto a small Bears-ear, of a fine reddish Peach-colour, with
yellow eyes in the bottoms of the flowers, it has a small stringy root, and
sometimes bears small seeds.

There is another of this kind that is a little bigger in all the parts
thereof, and bears white flowers.

And a third that is like the last, but that the white flowers are poudered
over with the same red color that is in the first.

These pretty plants bring forth their flowers in April, and are preserved in
some Florists Gardens, they prosper best in a shady barren place, for they grow
naturally in moist barren ground in the Northern parts. I received the several
varieties before mentioned from that worthy honest Gentleman my very good
friend Mr. Roger Brodshaw of the Hay in Lancashire before remembered.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Lychnis.
CHampions are of several sorts, and many Plants are called Lychnis, with some
other word of distinction added thereunto, we will make choice of some few, and
such only as are fittest to adorn a Flower-Garden, and leave the rest as
vulgars not worth the mentioning.

Lychnis Coronaria rubra multiplex.
THe double red Rose Champion is in all the parts thereof like unto the single,
so well known that it were superfluous further to describe it, only the flowers
of this are thick and double, of the same delicate velvet red color, which is
in the common single kind.

Lychnis Coronaria alba multiplex.
THe double white Rose Champion is in all things like the former, but only that
the flowers of this are white, but as thick and double and far more rare than
the red.

Lychnis Chalcidonica flore simplici.
SIngle Non-such, Flower of Constantinople, or as it is most commonly called,
Flower of Bristol, is a Plant as well known as the former common Champion, and
therefore needs no further description, neither indeed had I admitted a thing
so common, but that there are some fine diversities thereof, worthy of room in
the best Gardens, and the varieties standing together, setting off each other,
make a fine show. I therefore begin with the common kind that bears a great
head of many single Scarlet flowers, which may serve to point out all the rest.

We have another of this kind, no way differing from the former, but in the
color of the flowers, which in this are at the first of a reddish
blush-colour, after growing paler by degrees; so that in one head of flowers
there will be several shadows of blushes, one paler than another.

There is a third that bears single flowers, like in all parts to the former,
only the flowers of this are of a snow-white color.

Lychnis Chalcidonica flore pleno miniato.
THe rich Scarlet Non-such, or Flower of Bristol, differs from the first, in
that the stalks are bigger and stronger, bearing many flowers (as the rest do)
at the tops thereof, which in this are thick and double, and of the same rich
Scarlet color that is in the first, or a little deeper.

The Champions do begin to flower toward the end of June, and will continue
bearing flowers until September, the several sorts of Non-such; bring forth
their flowers in July.

The Champions must be planted of slips taken from the old root, in the end of
August, or beginning of September, that they may take root before Winter; those
set in the Spring run up to flower and die at Winter, as the old Plants are apt
to do, therefore set slips every year, lest you lose the kind. The Non-such are
hardy Plants, and will continue long, they are increased by taking young Plants
from the old roots, which will come up with many heads, and every head taken
off with some little of the root will grow, and soon come to bear flowers; the
best time for the doing thereof, is in the end of March, when the new shoots
are risen to some height out of the ground; perhaps if trial were made of
sowing the seeds of the single kinds, some new varieties might be gained; the
seeds are small and must be sowed and ordered as we do Auricula: but these
Plants are not dainty of their nourishment, for they will grow and bear well
almost in any soil, but worst in that which is over hot and too rank.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Keiri five Lucoium luteum.
WAll-flowers, or Winter Gilliflowers, have diverse sorts worthy of
entertainment, and although there are some kinds common in every Country
Garden, yet these that follow will deserve a place in this collection, and room
in a Florists Garden.

Keiri flore simplex majus.
THe great single Wall-flower is in all the parts thereof like the common kind
well known unto all, but that it is much larger, the leaves of a darker shining
green color, the flowers many, growing on a long spike, of a deep gold yellow
color, and some of them as broad as half a crown.

Keiri majus flore pleno
THe great double Wall-flower is in all things like the last, excepting the
flowers, which of this are of the same gold yellow color, and although not so
broad as those of the single kind, yet very large, thick and double.

Keiri simplex flore albo.
THe single white Wall-flower has leaves as green, or greener than the former
single yellow, and as large; the flowers are single, consisting of four
leaves, of a fair white color.

Keiri flore pleno albo.
THe double white Wall-flower is in all the parts thereof like unto the single,
only differing in the flowers, those of this being of the same white color,
not very large, but thick and double: we have a sort of double white
stock-Gilliflowers, that is raised from seeds, which in respect of the green
leaves is by many called the white Wall-flower, but any that are acquainted
with the different scents of the Wall, and Stock-Gilliflower, may thereby soon
distinguish the one from the other.

Keiri majus flore pleno ferrugineo.
THe double red Wall-flower has something large green leaves, and bears a
long spike of double yellow flowers, that stand thinner on the stalk than those
of the great double yellow, having the outer leaves dashed over with a dark red
color, which whilst the flowers are in the bud, and not quite open, is much
more to be seen than afterward when they are fully blown.

Keiri flore luteo pallido.
THe pale yellow Wall-flower, although it be in all the parts thereof like unto
the common double Wall-flower, yet is it more esteemed, for that the flowers of
this are thicker and doubler, stand closer together, and are of a fine pale
yellow color.

They flourish in March, April, and part of May, affording store of fair sweet
flowers for almost three months.

They are easily raised, being apt to grow up on slips, set in March after the
manner directed for Stock-Gilliflowers; the best place to plant them, is close
to some South-wall, unto which they may be fastened, and defended in Winter
from Frosts and hard weather, for some of them are tender, especially the
double white, and the great single and double yellow.

CHAP. XXXV.
Lucoium.
THe stock-Gilliflower is of more esteem than the Wall-flower, as well for the
elegance of form, as delicacy of colors; there are many sorts that bear double
flowers as well as single, but the double only are admitted into the Gardens
of the curious, the single remaining in some nurcery to bear seeds, from which
the double are raised; we will therefore set down the varieties of those
chiefly that bear double flowers, and only tell you, that each of them has a
single of the same color, from the seeds whereof many double ones are gained.

Lucoium flore pleno diversorum colorum.
DOuble stock-Gilliflowers of diverse colors are in all parts so like the
single, and they so well known unto all, that they need no description; the
chiefest difference consists in the flowers, which of these are large, thick,
and double, bearing many upon one branch, and one stalk many branches of
flowers, which are either of a sadder or lighter purple color, or of a paler
or deeper reddish murrey; and there is one has greener leaves than any of the
rest, that bears pure white flowers, each of these having single flowers of
the same color and kind, from whose seeds the double are produced.

Lucoium flore pleno variegatum.
THe double striped stock-Gilliflower is in all things like the former, and
has the same diversities of colors, only differing in that the flowers of
these are all striped or marked more or less with white, which adds very much
to their beauty and esteem; there are some with striped single flowers, from
whose seeds the double are raised, as in the former.

Lucoium alterum flore pleno.
THe other double stock-Gilliflower has no single of the kind, and is lesser
in all parts thereof than those raised from seeds, the flowers are also
smaller, but thick and double, of the same or like colors of the other, both
for single colors and mixed, many of them much more, and better striped with
white than those of the former kind.

Lucoium luteum flore pleno.
THe yellow stock-Gilliflower is as rare to find, as a white Wall-flower, yet
there are of both sorts, as well double as single, the double of this yellow
kind, being raised from the seeds of the single; it has hairy green leaves,
and a woody stalk like the rest; the flowers are of a pale yellow color; in
the one double, and in the other single.

They begin to flower in April, are in the greatest glory in May, and many
continue flowering all the Summer, and until they are checked by Frosts.

The first, that have single ones of the same kinds, are raised from the seeds
thereof, the double never bearing any, neither do the seeds of every single
kind produce any double, but if you have good seeds and of a right kind, you
may from them raise many double flowers, which having obtained, sow them at the
full of the Moon in April in your Flower-nurcery, not too thick by any means,
and after they are grown four or five inches high, in some rainy season, pull
them up, then turn the bed over where they grew, and set them again in rows at
convenient distance; after they have stood some time, and begin to grow high,
take them up again as before, so set them the second time, by this means they
will become more hardy, grow low, and spread in branches, have strength to
endure the Winter, and at the Spring be far better Plants to remove, than those
that run up with long stalks, which seldom escape the Frosts in Winter; and you
will have many with double flowers among them, which may be perceived in the
buds, which will be rounder and bigger than those of the single, and those you
may remove into your Garden, taking them up carefully, not breaking the roots,
and with some earth about them, which being a while shaded and watered, will
grow and bear flowers, as well as if they had not been at all removed; those
with single flowers must stand to bring you seeds, which must be yearly sowed
to preserve the kinds, for after they have born flowers, commonly both the
double and single dye.

The other sorts of double stock-Gilliflowers, do neither bear seeds, nor have
any single of the kind, so that they are increased by slips only, those of
this kind being more apt to grow, and longer continue than the former that are
raised from seeds; but as in Gilliflowers so it is in these, the first being
more easily obtained, has caused the later to be neglected and almost quite
lost, notwithstanding one Plant of this nobler kind is worth five raised from
seeds.

Many are of opinion, that double stocks raised from seeds, longer than the
first year of their bearing flowers, are not to be preserved, or kept by any
way or means, but I know by experience they are mistaken, for I have often
raised many Plants from the slips or cuttings of this kind as well as the
other; it is true that commonly the old Plant being all run up to flower, dies
the next Winter, but the cuttings will grow and bear the next Spring following,
almost as well as those immediately raised from the seeds. All the art is in
setting them, which is to be performed in manner following; First make choice
of such branches as do not bear flowers, the which cut off some distance from
the stock, so that they be not too long, then slit down the bark at the end of
the slip about half an inch, in three or four places equally distant from each
other, according to the bigness thereof, which peell as far as it is slit and
turn up, then cut off the naked woody part close to the rind that is turned up,
make a wide hole and set the slip therein three fingers deep, with the bark
spread open round about the end thereof, then cover it, which being shaded for
some time and watered, if the ground be any thing good, will grow and prosper
very well; and certainly this is the best and most absolute way to raise double
stocks of any kind that has been practiced by any; and in the like manner you
may cut and set slips of the best Wall-flowers, Gilliflowers, or of any other
woody Plant that will grow of slips, a pretty practice for Ladies and
Gentlewomen, for whose sakes chiefly it is here inserted; they may also be
increased by laying the slips after the manner of Gilliflowers.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Hesperis sive Viola Matronalis.
DAmes Violet, or Queens Gilliflower, is a common Plant, growing plentifully in
every Countrywomans Garden, and by them called Close Siences, of which they
have two sorts, one bearing pale blush, and the other white flowers, both
single, consisting of four leaves only; but we have three nobler varieties of
this flower, worthy to be received into the choicest Gardens, the first of them
and most known is called,

Hesperis flore pleno albo.
THe double white Queens Gilliflower is in all parts so like the common single
kind (except the flowers) that I need to set down only their differences;
those of this are very many on one branch, and one stalk often times has many
branches of flowers, which stand close and thick together, commonly in a long
spike, each flower being thick and double, of a pure white color, and delicate
sweet scent, especially in the evening, for which property it is called
Hesperis.

Hesperis flore pleno purpurascente.
THe double purplish Queens Gilliflower differs in nothing from the former,
but in the color of the flowers, those of this being as many on one stalk or
branch, as thick and double, and of the same scent, but of a fine pleasant
light reddish purple-colour, deeper than that of the common single kind, and of
newer date than the double white.

Hesperis flore pleno variegata.
THe double striped Queens Gilliflower is in all parts like the last, but that
the flowers, which are of the same purplish color, are finely striped with
white, and therefore more esteemed than either of the other of this sort; we
have one that bears single striped flowers, respected for the seeds sake,
which sowed may produce varieties.

They flower from May to the end of July, and are easily raised, for almost any
slip or branch thereof, set in the ground, shaded and watered, will grow, only
the nipping of the buds for flowers from such new set Plants as soon as they
appear, would not be neglected; the single kinds will seed, from which the
double sorts have been raised.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Ptarmica flore pleno and aliis
DOuble Pellitory and others, for in this Chapter I shall give you several
Plants that bear double white flowers, and although they be of several
families, I have joined them together, for that each of them would scarce
deserve a particular Chapter, and all of them bear pretty flowers, and are
entertained for variety in most Florists Gardens; the double wild Pellitory
has tall slender stalks, set with long narrow green leaves, snipt about the
edges, like unto the single that grow wild in the fields, bearing at the top of
the stalk many small double white flowers; the roots are composed of many long
white strings, which run in the ground, and spring up in diverse places, whereby
it is very apt to be increased.

Parthenium flore pleno.
DOuble Featherfew is in all things like unto the common single kind well known
unto all, the only difference is in the flowers, which of this are very thick
and double, being white and something yellow in the middle; this is increased
by setting the slips that run not up to flower in the end of August.

Chamaemelum flore pleno.
DOuble Camomill is like the ordinary, but that the green leaves are of a
fresher green color and larger, the flowers of this also are larger and very
double, being white, with some yellowness in the middle; this is more tender
than the common kind, and must yearly be renewed, by setting young slips thereof
in the Spring.

Cotula flore pleno.
DOuble Dogy-fenel has many small deep dark green leaves, bearing at the tops
of the branches diverse broad spread double white flowers without scent; the
root is composed of many small strings, and increased by setting the slips in
the end of August, nipping of the buds for flowers, as soon as any appear.

Cardamine flore pleno.
DOuble Lady Smocks has many winged leaves lying on the ground, like those of
the wild kind, from whence many small stalks come forth, bearing many double
white flowers; the small stringy roots creep in the ground and come up in
diverse places.

Bellis flore pleno.
DOuble Daisies are of diverse sorts, and some of them for variety, entertained
in good Gardens; the chiefest are the greater white, the all-red, the great red
and white, the childing Daysie, the abortive naked double green Daysie, and
diverse other varieties there are scarce worthy naming; they all flower in
April, and may be easily increased by parting the roots in the Spring, or
Autumn; if they stand too much in the Sun, unless often watered, it will soon
scorch and destroy them.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Caryophilbus hortensis.
GIlliflowers are the pride of Somer, as Tulips are the glories of the Spring;
all those now in esteem are such as in Holland and Flanders have been raised
from seeds, which is the cause they are so frail, and apt to perish after they
have born flowers; we had heretofore many good kinds that were not seedlings,
but few of them now to be found in any of our Gardens.

Of these Dutch flowers I have known more than a hundred distinct varieties, by
several names, all of them fair, large, thick, and double flowers, well
striped, flaked, marbled, or powdered with white or blush, either upon darker
or lighter red, crimson or carnation, sadder or brighter purple, deeper or
paler Scarlet, and white; so that all the best varieties now in being, may be
comprehended under these three sorts, that is, red and white, purple and white,
and scarlet and white, in all which colors there are many fine varieties, the
which we will insert under those names by which they are generally received and
known, beginning with a dozen of the best in every sort, the rest being all
very good flowers; but indeed there is no end of these seedflowers, every year
producing new varieties, and perhaps within two or three years, few of those
now in esteem left, for commonly the Plants after they have born flowers die in
Winter, a property common to most seedlings.

To describe every particular flower, would be tedious, and to small purpose,
in respect of their frailty; therefore I conceive the naming the best in every
sort, will be sufficient to inform those that desire to collect them, which
done, we shall further enlarge touching their propagation, culture, planting,
and preservation.

Gilliflowers red and white.
GHarles the second Queen Katherine Emperatoria Emperor of Russia Emperors
Court Queen of Persia Virgin of England Virgin of Cullen Coridon King of
Bohemia Bohemia Crown Emperor Rodolphus Great Tamberlane Queen Esther Floradine
Royal-Oak Grand Duke-Royal Lacerbeck Super-eminent Lord de Camp New bonaventura
Victoria Marvel de mond Countess of Flanders Bel-blome Prince de Parma Court of
Castile Samaritan Bell Infanta General of Holland Count Florus Bell Rose Brown
favorite Grand Boor Kings sconce Daris Princes Court New painted Lady.
Purple and White.
King David King Solomon King of Assyria Queen of France Oylman Pantalees Don
John General of the Indies Triumph of Spain Eagle royal Dorilisant Prince
Robert Queen of Sweden Bell de mondi King of Portugal Bell triumphant Admiral of
Spain House of Commons Covenant of England St. Lewis Marble stone Prince
Henrick Royal Match General Wigons Blew Crystal Tapisere Grave florus.
Scarlet and White.
Empire of Germany Bride of Holland Carthusa Alexander Young Prince Lord Belle
Yonton Oriental King of Ethiopia The Jewel Great Boor Morning star Bell believer
Bonaventura Prince of Orange Paragon Brewer Virgin of Orleance Van Velson
Incarnadine d'Bezond Dorothea of Holland The Cock Hovaniere Augustus Fair
Frances Count Mansfield Salamander
All these Gilliflowers and some others of lesser note I observed the last
season in flower, in the Garden of Mr. Rickets of Hogsden before mentioned.

These are the varieties of the best Gilliflowers now in being: they flower
chiefly from the middle of July to the same time in August, and in hot Summers
some of them will seed, which must be carefully looked unto, and gathered as
soon as ripe, lest rains in Autumn destroy it.

These seeds are to be sowed very thin, upon a bed of good fresh earth, after
rain, in the beginning of April, the Plants well grown, taken up in some rainy
season, and set again in rows a foot asunder, where the year following they
will bear flowers, some double, but more single, which may be pulled up and
cast away as soon as discovered, leaving only those with double flowers. Plant
your best Gilliflowers in pots, which must be placed to bear flowers, where
they may have the morning Sun only, for the afternoon Sun does the plants much
harm: water them in their necessity gently, to moisten the earth by degrees,
for too much wet rots the small fibers, therefore take heed your pots be not
over wet at the bottom, neither would these flowers be long wet on the leaves.

Every year some of them will die: set not another in the same earth, but take
it out, and fill the pot again with that which is fresh, for earth in pots will
spend it self more than that in Beds, and requires to be yearly renewed: from
such stocks as escape the Winter, after bearing, take as much of the earth as
you can out of the pot, without hurting the roots, and fill it up again with
that which is fresh; in Winter, and to the middle of April (that the weather
grows hot) water in the morning, after in the evening, putting water to the
roots, not wetting the branches.

When your flowers are spindled, bind them to sticks, and nip off all
superfluous buds, that the flowers of such you leave may be the fairer; stick
hollow Kix, and the Cleies of Beasts upon the ends of sticks about your pots,
into which Earwigs and black Insects in the night will creep, which may be
taken in the morning and destroyed; when the flowers begin to appear, open the
points of the pods to give them liberty, and those pods which break, bind with
a narrow list, of the thin film of a Gold-beaters old mould, which wet, will
stick together, keep the flower round, and scarcely be perceived; but those
that are not provided with this, may cut some of the bark from a withy stick,
fit it to the place, and thrust it into the pod, to hold up the drooping side
of the flower: when they have done bearing, cut away the stalks, and in rainy
seasons (which often happen in Autumn) lay the pots down on the sides, to
prevent the taking of too much wet.

The greatest care required in the preservation of these Plants is in Winter,
in which season they are to be defended from great rains, snows, and long
frosts, as also from the North and East winds; therefore if you have a
convenient house, with large doors, that they may not want air, place them
therein, as soon as admonished by the first frosts, giving them at all times
(unless in the night, and in time of frost) as much air as the house will
afford, and if you find them dry, in open weather gently water them with water
qualified with a little Sheeps dung (not wetting the leaves) especially after a
long frost, which will settle the earth to the roots: let not your pots be too
wet by any means, and if too dry, frost does them the more harm. In February
and March, in fair days often set them forth, and sometimes let them receive a
gentle shower, but take them in at night; in April cut away the dead leaves,
fill the pots that want, with good earth, and place them where they are to
stand to bear flowers.

Those that want a convenient house to winter these tender Plants, may place
the pots close to a South or West wall, where with thin boards supported over
them, they may be defended from the forementioned prejudices, and by taking off
the boards, aired at pleasure; this way is by most Florists preferred before
housing, and practiced with better success; for Gilliflowers so much affect an
open and free air, that if they want it, they will soon ascertain the owner by
his loss, the verity of this period.

As for Clove Gilliflowers and others of the more ordinary kind, such may be
set on banks or beds, and increased as the former; the chiefest care required
about them, is to shake off the snow, and to defend them from excessive wet in
Winter; you may preserve them from long hard frosts, by putting pease-straw
rotted to dust, two fingers thick about their roots.

For various colors Tulips most excel,
And some Anemonies do please (...) well,
Ranunculus in richest Scarlets shine,
And Bears-ears may with these in beauty join:
But yet if ask and have were in my power,
Next to the Rose give me the Gilliflower.
Caryophilli Sylvestres.
PInks are of many sorts, and little esteem, they only serve to set the sides
of borders in spacious Gardens, and some of them for posies, mixed with the
buds of Damask Roses; most of them are single, and there are some that bear
double flowers, the best those which are called the feathered Pinks; they have
broad leaves, deeply cut in, and jagged at the edges, whereof there is white,
light red, and bright purple, and some with a deeper or paler purple spot in
the middle; the best of these are, the feathered Pink of Austria, and that with
the large deep purple spot in the bottom, the common single Pinks are not worth
mentioning; for those with double flowers, whereof some are white, others pale
red, or purple, are common things not regarded; the Granado Pink is a small
Gilliflower of that kind, and belongs not to these, neither do any of those
that rise from the seeds of Gilliflowers, with single flowers.

The Pinks flower with Roses in June, and every ordinary Gardener knows how to
plant and dispose them, as also that vulgar Plant called Thrift, whereof there
is a bigger kind that bears many flowers on a head like the common one, but
flowering by degrees, so that it is of small beauty, besides it is a tender
Plant, affecting the vicinity of the Sea, and not long abiding in our Gardens.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Armerius.
SWeet John's, and Sweet Williams, are of diverse sorts, but few of them worthy
the acceptance of a Florist; we will therefore pass by the common and ordinary
kinds, and describe the best only.

Armerius angustifolius.
SWeet John's differ from Sweet Williams, in that the green leaves are narrower
and the stalks shorter; the flowers like the Williams are many on a head, but
deeper jagged. In some Plants the flowers are red in the middle, and paler
toward the edges, in others white; and there are of both these sorts that bear
double flowers, consisting of two or three rows of leaves, and these are
esteemed only.

Armerius latifolius.
SWeet Williams have broader and darker green leaves than the John's, higher
stalks, and bearing more flowers, some red, and others white; and there is one
called London pride, with variable flowers, some red, others white specled with
red more or less; and there is another that bears double red flowers; with
all which, except the white, every Country-woman is well acquainted; but we
have another more rare than any of these, called the Velvet Armerius, or Sweet
William, which differs chiefly from the other single kinds in the color of
the flowers, which in this are of a deep rich murrey velvet color, with a
paler circle toward the bottoms of the leaves, and this is the best of all the
Williams.

They flower usually in June before the Pinks; the sowing their seeds is now
much used, and some pretty varieties are raised; every slip of them set in the
Spring will grow and abide the Winter; the double John's, and the Velvet
Williams, are worthy the acquaintance of the fairest Lady that is a lover of
flowers, and those that have room may practice the sowing their seeds, and
possibly may raise some fine diversities with double flowers.

CHAP. XL.
HAving now set down all the best flower bearing Plants that are permanent, we
will conclude this Book with some sweet Herbs, and such only as are worthily
received by the Collectors of flowers, which done, refer you to Ceres, who will
acquaint you in the next book with her best seedlings.

Marum.
HErb Mastick rises about a foot high, with stiff hard stalks divided into
many branches, thinly set with small green leaves, two at every joint; at the
tops of the stalks, and branches, come forth small white flowers among a tuft
of white downy threads; the whole Plant is of sweet and pleasant scent.

Maram Syriacum.
ASsyrian Mastick grows not so tall as the former, the leaves smaller,
whiter, and thicker set on the branches, like those of Myrtle; at the tops of
the stalks stand many green knaps or heads, like those of sweet-Margeroum, but
bigger and greener, the root is woody, and the whole Plant of a delicate sweet
scent, very tender and impatient of cold, and therefore must be set in a pot,
and not housed in Winter, but ordered as is directed for flos Cardinalis, and
carefully defended from Cats, that else will eat and destroy it.

Salvia.
SAge is of many sorts, but those fittest for this place are the variegated
great Sages, the one marked with white, the other with yellow, and the small
sweet Sage; the variegated are common, but the small more rare. There are
several sorts of small Sage, but that here intended is a small tender Plant of
a musky sweet scent, far excelling all the other.

Majorana.
MArgerom is likewise of diverse sorts, but that called Winter sweet-Margerom is
most esteemed, there are of this two sorts, but the best has smaller and
browner green leaves than the other, and as sweet as that yearly raised of
seeds.

Pulegium.
PEny-Royal is a common Plant in every Kitchen Garden, especially the ordinary
sorts, but there is one more rare that has the leaves thick set on the stalks
like tufted Margerom, but closer set together.

Lavendula.
LAvender is of four several sorts, one bigger, another lesser, both bearing
bleak blew flowers; a third that has large broad green leaves, growing thick
on the stalks, never bearing any flowers with us, but that which is most
esteemed is like the first, but that the flowers are white and of a stronger
sweet scent.

Serpillum.
TIme is of diverse sorts, out of which three are chiefly to be chosen, Musk-
Time, double or tufted- Time, and gilded- Time; the two first are well known,
the third has something broad green leaves, finely marked and gilded with
yellow; all fit to be placed in Posies among sweet flowers, and therefore
deserve a little room in a flower-garden.

All these Plants and Herbs are raised by setting the slips or branches, in the
beginning of April, being all apt to root and thrive, except the Assyrian
Mastick; and the perfumed Sage, the first being as hard to be found as kept,
the later more common, and something curious in its conservation.

There is another fine Herby-Plant, preserved by the best Florists, called
Abrotanum viridi flore amplo, this is a kind of Sowtherwood; it grows low, with
a thick tuft of very small, long, whitish green leaves, of an Oily scent, and
in July bears fine yellow flowers, on small naked stalks; it is tender, and
therefore planted in pots to be housed in Winter, and may be increased by
setting the slips in March, which will prosper if set in the shade in Summer,
and kept from cold in Winter.

And now as we begun with Bays, we will end with Rosemary, the several kinds
inserted shall end this Book.

Rosmarinum.
ROsemary is of several fine sorts, besides the common kind, with which all are
acquainted, we will only name them and so conclude this Book.

Rosmarinum latifolium.
BRoad leaved Rosemary, in the fashion and manner of growing, is like the
common kind, but bigger in all the parts thereof, the leaves broader, thicker
set on the branches, and of a fresher green color.

Rosmarinum Aureum.
GIlded Rosemary differs from the common kind, in that the leaves are
variously striped with yellow, as if they were gilded with Leaf-Gold.

Rosmarinum Argenteum.
SIlver Rosemary has smaller leaves than the last, finely marked and striped
with white or silver color, therefore so called; this is more rare than the
former, and of more delight and beauty.

Rosmarinum flore duplici.
DOuble-flowered Rosemary has stiffer stalks, bigger and greener leaves than
the common kind, with many pale blew double flowers, like Lark-Spurs, but
lesser.

The Gilded and Silvered Rosemaries, are in the Summer months in greatest
beauty, and the more they are exposed to the Sun, the better they will be
marked; they all flower in May, and are increased by setting the slips in March
or the end of August.

In the Van at first, the Bays appear,
Rosemary at last brings up the Rear;
The one victorious Brows adorn,
The others at joyful Hymen's worn.
Ladies to you the first is due,
Since none do conquer more than you,
Nor greater joy can him betide
Has such a Beauty to his Bride.
So Flora bids you now adieu,
Leaves first, and last, and all to you.
CERES THE SECOND BOOK.
HAving given you a full account of all the fairest flowers which Flora has
afforded our cold Country, and with the pleasure of their beautiful aspects
passed over the Spring; We are now arrived at Summer, which that it may present
you with something besides Corn and Hay, Ceres presents her Harvest Garland,
made up of all such pretty Plants and fine Flowers as are yearly, or every
other year raised from seeds.

In this Book I shall endeavor to set down the best in every kind, and
purposely omit such simple seedlings as are not worth the sowing; and although
you will find some that are of longer lasting than the rest of the same tribe
or kindred, yet properly befitting their places, as deserving no other.

We will begin with those that last longest, and so proceed to the rest that
are annual, and to be raised by seeds from year to year; and as in the former,
so in these you will find directions for the sowing, transplanting, and
preserving each particular; and first of the largest and longest laster.

CHAP. I.
Malva Hortensis.
GArden Mallows are of many sorts, but most of them fitter for a Physic than a
Flower-Garden, there being but one kind that bears beautiful flowers, which
is that called Malva Hortensis Rosea multiplex, which in English we call double
Hocks, or double Hollihocks, these bearing many gallant double flowers, and of
diverse glorious colors, whereof there are of each color that bear single
flowers, but those by few esteemed or entertained, unless in want of the double
kinds.

The double Hollihocks have great long white roots, from whence spring up many
round cornered leaves, like those of common Mallows, from among which the
stalks spring up five or six foot high, set with green leaves, more cut in and
divided, and from the middle to the top, adorned with smaller green leaves and
fair large flowers, some very thick and double like the Province Rose, some
that have the outter leaves broad, and a thick double flower composed of
shorter leaves in the middle; and there are some that the double flower has
many heads, as if many small double flowers were thrust together into one. The
colors of these flowers in several Plants, are either white, Silver-colour,
Cream-colour, blush, Rose-colour, Carnation, Scarlet, Orenge-colour,
Brimston-colour, bright red, dark blackish red, or purple; of all which several
colors I have Plants now growing in my own Garden. After the flowers are past,
the seeds are contained in round flat heads, for the double kinds seed as well
as the single, which are flat, and of a whitish brown color.

They commonly flower late in August and September, so that the first flowers
must be preserved for seeds; for although the Plants are of some continuance,
yet they are chiefly increased and raised from seeds, which are to be sowed in
the beginning of April, where the second year they will bear flowers, out of
which the best may be chosen, and those removed into the Garden in October
after they have done bearing.

CHAP. II.
Aquilegia.
COlombines are Plants well known, and commonly raised from seeds, although
their roots are of some continuance, they are of many sorts, differing in form,
as well as in the colors of the flowers; we will in these, as in all the rest
that are to follow, give you a brief account of the best varieties of each,
with directions how to continue the kinds from year to year.

The double Colombines, for the single are not regarded, are distinguished by
the flowers, which chiefly are of four colors, namely white, blew, murrey
purple, and red, some deeper, and others lighter; but these self-colours are
not valued, those that are variegated, striped, spotted, or powdered, are only
entertained, whereof there are many diversities, differing in colors, or
manner of marking, from each other; some will be half white, and half of
another color, as light blew, violet-purple, murrey, or light red; others
striped, spotted, and variously marked with these colors upon white, in some
more and in others less.

The double Inverted Colombines, that is with the heels turned inwards, are of
several sorts, as double and well-marked as those of the former, and with the
same colors, but not so plentiful in varieties.

The double Rose-Colombines are those that have no heels, but stand on the
stalks like little double Roses, but that the leaves are narrow and
sharp-pointed; of these there are some diversities, of the forementioned
colors, diversely striped and mixed, some bigger and less double, and others
lesser but more double.

The Degenerate Colombine is like the last, but that the outermost row of
leaves is much larger than the rest that are inward; the whole flower is
commonly of a greenish purple color.

The Virginian Colombine has small single flowers with long heels, of a
yellowish color, shadowed with red, having deeper red spots in the hollow
parts of the flower; this came to us in Plants from Virginia, and from the
seeds thereof, many have been raised, but few like the original, most of them
degenerating into simple single ill-coloured flowers.

They flower in the end of May after the Tulips are past, and therefore the
more acceptable, that season affording few other flowers.

All the double Colombines do bring seeds as well a the single, which must be
sowed in April in the Nurcery, where the second year they will bear flowers,
out of which the best may be chosen and removed into the Garden, there to
continue three or four years, but if they be kept too long, they will turn
single, or less double, and few of them will come well marked; so that against
the fourth year a new stock would be provided, and the old cast away; almost
every root that bears mixed-coloured flowers, will have some that will be of
one color, the which, in such Plants of every color and kind as you reserve
to seed, must be nipped off, and the best marked flowers only left to seed,
and so you may be sure of many fine varieties from the seeds of such
well-chosen flowers.

CHAP. III.
Antirrhinum.
SNap-Dragon has some pretty diversities, the Plant is common and well known,
and needs no description, the chiefest difference is in the colors of the
flowers, and the thing most necessary to inform, is how to gain the best kinds,
and to keep and preserve them; the first and most common is that called

Antirrhinum album.
THe white Snap-Dragon is so common, that I need say no more of it, but we have
another kind thereof that is more rare, and this is called

Antirrhinum album variegatum.
THe white variegated Snap-Dragon is in all things like the common white, but
only that the upper broad leaf, that is divided in the middle, and turned up
at the edges, has on the inside many small long feathered lines, of a fine
purplish color, which adds much to the beauty of the flower.

Antirrhinum rubrum.
THe red Snap-Dragon is of two or three sorts, the best has flowers like the
former, but that they are of the color of a deep red Rose, the other are red,
but paler than each other; and there is another that bears smaller red
flowers than the former, having a yellow spot in the Nose of the flower, as all
the rest have, but in this circled as it were almost about with white.

Antirrhinum lutcum.
THe yellow Snap-Dragon is in all things like the common white, and only
differing in that the flowers are of a fair yellow color.

They flower from May to July, and the seeds are ripe in August.

All these kinds of Snap-Dragons are raised from seeds, and bear flowers the
second year from the sowing, and then commonly the old roots having perfected
their seeds perish; yet the slips of them being taken off and set in the manner
directed for double stock-Gilliflowers, will grow and bear flowers the year
following; the best slips for this purpose are those that do not rise up to
flower, and the best time to set them, the end of May or beginning of June; I
have now several Plants of the variegated white and best red, raised from
slips, and have thereby preserved the kinds many years, without sowing their
seeds.

CHAP. IV.
Linaria.
WIld, and Tode-flax, have some varieties planted in Gardens, the which we will
only name, and so pass them over, being Plants of small esteem; and first of
the Wild flax.

Wild flax with a white flower has many slender stalks a foot high, set thick
with broader leaves than the common Flax, bearing at the top many white
flowers, made of five something large leaves, with small lines of purple; the
seed is like that of the manured kind, but the root will abide many years after
the sowing, and although the branches dye to the ground in Winter, new will
come up at the Spring.

Wild flax with a yellow flower has many reddish stalks, set with leaves like
those of St. John's Wort, bearing at the top many flowers like the former, but
of a yellow color; the seeds are black, but not shining, and the roots abide
in the ground like those of the white.

Purple Tode-flax has fat narrow long leaves, of a whitish green color, shipped
about the edges, the stalks bearing in a spike diverse small flowers, made in
the fashion of the common Wild Tode-flax, but lesser, and without heels behind,
which are either of a sadder purple, or paler violet, with a yellow spot in the
gaping place of every flower; the seed is small and flat, of a grayish color,
and the root dies soon after the seed is ripe.

Sweet purple Tode-flax has leaves lying on the ground like those of a Daisie,
but bigger, with smaller up the stalk, which is branched at the top, and
plentifully furnished with many small (and if the season be hot) sweet flowers,
something like those of the last, but of a lighter purple; the seeds are also
alike, but of a reddish color, and the root perishes in the like manner.

Toad-flax of Valentia has more and bigger stalks than the former, with leaves
like unto those of small Centory; at the tops of the stalks come forth the
flowers, like in fashion to the common wild kind, but lesser, of a fair yellow
color, the gaping mouth down, and the heel behind of a purplish color.

Broom Tode-flax is only commendable for the thick standing of many small fair
green leaves in a bush, it rises up with a straight upright stalk, about a
yard high, divided into many branches, and those thick set with fair green
leaves, long and narrow, like those of the common Flax; at the joints come
forth small reddish flowers, not worth regarding, which are succeeded by small
blackish seeds, and the whole Plant dies at the first approach of Winter.

They flower in July and August, and the seed is ripe soon after; those whose
roots abide the Winter, are fit to be set together, the rest sowed with other
annuals or seedlings, in some place open to the Sun; the best of them is, they
are apt to come up, and need but small attendance.

CHAP. V.
Digitalis.
FOx-gloves are of three several sorts, that is, a greater, a middle kind, and
a lesser, and these are of three principal colors, which are purple, white,
and yellow; the best that are received into Gardens, are those following.

Digitalis major ferruginea.
THe Dun-coloured Fox-glove has long nicked grayish green leaves, a stalk five
or six foot high, bearing a multitude of small and short flowers, of a
yellowish dun-colour, with a long lip at the lower side of each of them; the
flowers are succeeded by cods, containing small dusty seeds; the roots commonly
perish after seeding, but if they stand warm, and are defended from Frosts in
Winter, the Plants will continue two or three years.

Digitalis media flore luteo rubente.
THe Orenge-tawny Fox-glove is of a middle size, having leaves a little bigger
than those of the lesser yellow; the flowers are long and narrow, of a fair
yellowish brown color, inclining to an Orenge-tawney; the seeds are like the
former, and the roots commonly perish after the seeds are ripe.

Digitalis alba major and minor.
THe great white Fox-glove differs from the common red of the field, in that
the leaves and stalks are of a yellowish green color, and the flowers wholly
white; there is a lesser kind that is more rare, it has the leaves and stalks
shorter, the flowers lesser, of a pure white color, and thicker set on the
stalk.

Digitalis major lutea.
THe great yellow Fox-glove has leaves like, but lesser than those of the wild
kind; the stalk rises three or four foot high, bearing many long hollow
pendulous flowers, shorter than those of the common kind, and wider open at
the brims; the seeds are like those of the former, and the root more woody and
of long continuance.

Digitalis minor lutea pallida.
THe small pale yellow Fox-glove has something broad smooth dark green leaves,
finely snipt about the edges, a stalk two foot high, bearing a multitude of
long, hollow, small, pale yellow flowers, which are succeeded by seeds, like
those of the rest, but smaller; the root is composed of diverse hard strings,
and longer lasting than any of the former.

They flower in June and July, and that with dun flowers, seldom before August.

All these kinds of Fox-gloves are raised from seeds, and none of them bear
flowers until the second year; the seeds are sowed in good rich earth in April
in the Flower-Nurcery, and in September after removed into the Garden.

CHAP. VI.
Carduus.
THistles, as noisome Weeds, are more usually cast out, than as delightful
flowers received into Gardens, yet there are some sorts that may be accepted,
and the chiefest among these seedlings inserted.

Carduus Globosus major.
THe greater Globe-Thistle has many large leaves lying on the ground, cut in
and gashed to the middle ribb, full of sharp prickles; the stalk rises above a
yard high, divided into branches, bearing great round hard heads, thick set
with sharp-bearded husks, of a bluish green color; out of the husks come
forth pale blew flowers, spreading over the whole head; a braver thistle never
beautified a Scots Bonet; after the flowers are past, the seeds are contained
in the husks, which must be preserved, for the old Plant dies in Winter.

Carduus Globosus minor.
THe lesser Globe-Thistle has leaves like the former, but lesser and whiter,
the stalk and head of flowers not so bigg, the root more durable, commonly
lasting three or four years, bearing flowers.

These flower usually in August, and sometimes later; being sowed of seeds,
they will come to bear flowers the second year. There are some other sorts of
Thistles, which in general collections are received into Gardens, but none of
them fit for our purpose.

CHAP. VII.
Scabiosa.
SCabious is a Plant well known, especially those sorts thereof which carry
blew flowers, and grow wild in the fields, but there are other kinds of
Scabious, which as well for the beauty of their flowers, as being Foreiners,
find friendly entertainment from all that delight in seedlings, but first take
one of our own Country to usher in the other strangers.

Scabiosa flore albo.
WHite flowered Scabious has many jagged green leaves, like that of the field,
but lesser, bearing stalks and flowers of the same fashion, only differing in
color, the flowers of this being white; this has been found wild in the
fields, and thence for the rarity brought into Gardens.

Scabiosa rubra Austriaca.
REd Scabious of Austria, in leaves resembles the Devils bit, but shorter, and
only snipt about the edges; the flowers are of the fashion of those of other
kinds, in one of a deep red color, and in another of a fine bright purplish
red; the seeds are a little long and round, set with hairs at the ends.

Scabiosa rubra Indica.
REd Indian Scabious has many jagged green leaves lying on the ground, from
whence rise up diverse stalks, divided into several branches, bearing flowers
like those of the former, but of various colors, some being deep crimson,
others murrey purple, in both, some deeper, and others paler; and some will
have the outer leaves of a deeper or lighter murrey, and the middle of the
flower almost white; we have some that bear their flowers like the Childling
Daysie, many smaller coming out on long footstalk of the sides of one larger
flower; and many other diversities are observed to proceed from the seeds of
this kind which are yearly sowed, for the Plant commonly dies after it has
given seeds, yet if it stand in a warm place, and the Winters prove mild, some
Plants will last and bear flowers two or three years.

The two first flower about July, the other, if they bear the first year they
are sowed, it will be late in September, so that then from such Plants little
good seed can be expected, but the best way to be sure of good seeds, is about
the beginning of June to remove the young Plants, to keep them back from
running up to flower the first year, which will cause them to bring their
flowers sooner the next, and so have time to ripen the seeds, from which being
sowed in April, many more varieties may be raised than are before described,
especially from the flowers that are of the lightest and most mixed colors,
the which are chiefly to be reserved for that purpose.

CHAP. VIII.
Cyanus.
COrn-flower, or Blew-bottles, are common in every corn-field, especially those
with blew flowers, of which kind many diversities are raised from seeds,
differing in color, for some of them will be blew, like that of the field,
other white, blush, sadder or lighter, purple, brighter or darker, red, or else
of these colors mixed, as edges white, the rest blew or purple, or the flower
white, edged with blew or purple, in some striped, spotted, or divided, half
the flower of one color, and the other of another, and often the middle of the
flower of a sadder and deeper color than the rest. After the flowers are past,
the scaly heads contain (wrapped in downy matter) small hard white shining
seeds, which must be preserved and sowed at the Spring, for the roots yearly
perish.

There is another sort more rare than any of the former, called the Sultans
flower, the seeds are smaller and blacker than those of the former, the plants
bigger in all the parts thereof, the flowers are larger, and of a purplish
blush-colour in one, and in another Snow-white, more beautiful than any of the
former; the roots yearly perish, and the seeds not very apt to come up, or the
Plant to prosper, but requires to be often watered, and to be nursed up in a
hot bed.

We have another called the Spanish Corn-flower, which rambles and takes up
more ground than can well be spared for so poor a Plant; the flowers are of a
pale purplish blush-colour, but not so fair nor beautiful as the last; this
seeds, and yearly dies as the rest do.

The first kind flower in June and July, the two last not until August; the
Sultans flower is of some esteem, but the rest are little valued, yet by such
as want better things entertained.

We have another Plant which Mr. Parkinson in his florilege sets forth by the
name of Jacea marina Baetica, Spanish sea Knabweed, then rare with him, but now
common in almost every Garden, and is no other than that rambling lasting
Plant, vulgarly called the great Cyanus, or Blew-bottle.

Carthamus Sativus, bastard Saffron, is an annual, yearly raised from seeds, it
has broad green leaves, a round hard stalk, branched at the top, and each
branch bearing one great scaly head, out of which comes a tuft of shining
gold-coloured threads, which keep that color (though gathered) a long time; the
seed is round and long, white and hard, but seldom ripens with us, and the
root yearly dies; the seeds come to us from Spain, where much is planted, for
the use of the dyers of silk.

CHAP. IX.
Amaranthus.
FLower Gentle is chiefly of two sorts, the greater, and the lesser; of the
first there are some diversities, but many more and better of the latter, of
which there has lately been observed twenty five varieties, all in flower
together, but first of that best known.

Amaranthus purpureus major.
THe great Floramour has a thick and tall crested stalk, with many reddish,
large green leaves, the stalk divided into many branches, bearing long spikes
of round hairy tufts, of a reddish purple color, which are divided into
several parts, wherein (when full ripe) great store of small white seeds is
contained; this is an old flower and common, called by some Country women, Love
lies a bleeding; we have now of this kind some other varieties, that differ
chiefly in the tufts or flowers, some bigger, others lesser, some purple mixed
with green, others wholly of a whitish green color; they are hardy, sowed in
April, will flower in the end of July, and perish with the first frosts.

Amaranthuus purpureus minor.
THe lesser purple Flower Gentle comes up with yellowish green leaves, a
little reddish, something broad at the stalk, and sharp pointed; the stalk set
with these leaves, rises about two foot high, branched at the top, and bearing
flowers, which are long, soft, and gentle tufts of hairs, many standing close
together in form of a Pyramid, of an excellent rich deep shining murrey purple
color, which it will retain (after it is gathered) many months: the seeds of
this (as of all the rest) are small black and shining, and the roots perish as
those of the former.

Amaranthus diversorum colorum.
FLower Gentles of diverse colors do little differ from the last, either in
leaves, stalks, or seeds, only as their flowers are of deeper or lighter
colors, so are the leaves paler green, and lesser red than other, the chiefest
difference is in the flowers, which are not only of many several colors, but
notably differing in form of growing, some with one spike, others with many,
some round, and others more flat and divided into diverse parts, the colors
most common to these flowers are purple, scarlet, and gold-colour, in some
deeper, in others lighter or paler, in very great variety, and in all exceeding
bright and shining; fine flowers to be set in pots to supply the place of
Gilliflowers, these coming to flower as soon as they are past, and with the
great African Marigold make a gallant show in a Garden.

Amaranthus tricolor.
FLower Gentle of three colors differs from the former, in that the leaves
are in some hot years parted into three colors, namely, green, red, and
yellow; the flowers small, and of no esteem; the whole beauty of the plant
being in the marking of the leaves; the seeds like those of the former, and the
root as soon perishing.

They flower usually in August, but some years not until late in September;
therefore that they may flower betimes, and perfect their seeds, sow the seeds
in a hot bed about the middle of March; after the plants are come up, and have
gotten some strength, make a new hot bed, and after the violent heat is past,
take them up with earth about them, and set them therein; about the beginning
of May, transplant them where they may stand to bear flowers; the place must be
open to the Sun, and the foil light and rank, and often watered. Thus by
removing them from one hot bed to another, it will cause them to thrive, and
not only afford you many gallant flowers, but store of good seeds, which will
continue good three or four years, so to prevent wanting, you may reserve a
quantity from year to year, for indeed, no good Garden would be unfurnished
with these beautiful flowers, the chiefest, and most deserving esteem of all
the annuals or seed-flowers.

Helichrysum sive Amaranthus luteus.
THe golden Flower Gentle, or Goldy locks, is a stranger in our Country, it
will neither be raised from seeds, or live if the Plants should be procured out
of the hotter Countries; yet I have seen two sorts thereof in flower in London,
many years since; they came up with small stalks, thinly set with narrow long
whitish green leaves, bearing at the ends of the stalks, many small, double,
gold-yellow flowers, in the one round, and in the other bigger, and flat at the
top, both keeping their color, and not shedding their leaves, many months
after they are gathered, as I have seen in diverse dry Plants; these and the
Cats-foot, or Cotton weeds, grow wild in some parts of Italy, Candy, and other
hot Countries, but will not live with us.

CHAP. x.
Delphinium.
LArks-heels are ofseveral sorts, as well double as single, yet there is but
one kind worth the preserving, which is that called

Delphinium elatius flora pleno.
DOuble upright Larks-heels have small jagged leaves, tall upright stalks,
branched at the top, and bearing many fine double flowers, in form like to the
Rose-Colombine, in several Plants of sundry entire colors, as purple, blew,
Ash Color, Rose-colour, pale blush, or white; these are the most usual
colors, yet sometimes some roots will bring flowers that are striped and
variegated with blew end white, and often with some leaves blew, and others
purple; after the flowers are past, the seeds are contained in small horned
pods, which are black and round, the which being sowed will bring some Plants
with single, but most with double flowers; the roots perish in Winter.

They flower according to the time of sowing them, sooner or later, in July or
August, but I have often had Plants that have come up from seeds fallen out of
the pods before Winter, which have continued and born fair double flowers in
June following, and furnished me with much good seed.

The usual time to sow these seeds is the beginning of April, but to get good
seeds, which is a chief consideration in these Plants, I usually sow some as
soon as they are ripe, in some place where they may be defended from long
frosts in Winter, and one of these Winter plants is worth ten of those raised
in the Spring, and will yield more good seed; yet in some kindly Summers, those
of the Spring will seed reasonable well. Next unto these two other Plants are
ranked, in respect their flowers resemble the single Larks-heels, the first is
called

Nasturtium Indicum.
INdian Cresses, or yellow Larks-heels, spread into many long trayling
branches, four or five foot long, which, unless supported, lie on the ground,
and take up much room; the leaves are smooth and round, the flowers of a fair
yellow color, in fashion something like a single Larks-heel, but the leaves
stand plainer, and some of them are streaked with red; the flower is so well
known, that I need not to be curious in describing it, for few Gardens of any
note are without it; the seeds are rough, and uneaven, falling of themselves,
and gathered off the ground and preserved, for the root dies in Winter.

The flowers come forth in July, and the Plant continues flowring until it be
checked by frosts; the seeds are sowed in April, and if they be ripe and good,
are apt enough to come up; and the trayling branches as they grow, may be led
upon a pack-thred fastened unto sticks, into what form you please, or they may
be bound to rods stuck in the earth, that they may not ly on the ground. The
other Plant wherewith we will conclude this Chapter is called

Balsamina foemina.
THe female Balsam-Apple has a thick reddish stalk like Purslane, bunched, and
set with leaves like those of the Peach-tree; about the stalk from the middle
upwards, come the flowers, on short footstalk; which are of two or three
shadows of purples, with spurs behind like single Larks-heels; but bended
downwards; these flowers are succeeded by round rough heads pointed at the end,
wherein is contained small round blackish seeds; the root dies at the first
approach of Winter.

The flowers come forth in July and August, and rarely yield any good seeds in
our Country; the Plant is tender, and must be sowed in a hot bed, and removed
into good ground, and carefully attended with watering in the heat of Somer,
else it will quickly perish.

CHAP. XI
Blattaria.
MUllen, or Moth Mullen, has some diversities that are commonly raised from
seeds, whose roots perish in Winter, but there are others that will continue
many years, and yield increase from the root, the first of which is that called

Blattaria flore purpureo.
THe purple Moth Mullen has dark green broad leaves lying on the ground, from
among which rises up a stalk a yard high, bearing from the middle to the top
many fair purple flowers, consisting of five leaves, with some threads in the
middle; the root is long and brown, abiding many years, and increasing; of this
kind there is another that bears flowers of a Violet blew color, in other
respects not differing.

Blattaria lutea odorata.
SWeet yellow Moth Mullen has leaves of a grayer green color than those of
the former; the stalk rises about a yard high, divided into branches, bearing
pale yellow flowers of the fashion of the other, but smaller, and of an
excellent sweet scent; the root abiding as well as the former.

Blattaria flore luteomajor.
THe great yellow Moth Mullen has larger and greener leaves than any of the
former, the stalk four foot high, bearing many fair yellow flowers, broader and
larger than those of the purple, which are succeeded by round buttons,
containing seeds; the root perishes in Winter, after it has born flowers and
seeds. Like unto this kind there is a newer variety, differing only in that the
flowers are betwixt red and yellow, but more red than yellow, and abiding the
Winter.

Blattaria flore albo.
WHite Moth Mullen differs from the great yellow, in that the flowers are not
all thing so broad, and of a fair white color, with purple threads in the
middle; the root perishing in the same manner.

The two first flower in the beginning of May, the rest in June.

These are plants of little reputation; those whose roots continue are the
best; they may be increased by parting the roots, or raised from seeds, and
will bear flowers the second year. The great yellow and the white are raised of
seeds only, the root not lasting like those of the three other sorts.

CHAP. XII.
Papaver Multiplex.
DOuble Poppies are become the common ornaments of the Kitchen-Garden, and are
so well known that they need no description; the colors of the flowers are
red, purple, Scarlet, Lead-colour, white, or blush, and of these many
varieties, some deeper, and others lighter; there is one that bears small,
but very double flowers, every leaf whereof is half white, and half red, and
another of a fine Scarlet color striped with white; besides these, the small
double rich Scarlet, which differs only from the single field Popy in the
doubleness of the flowers, is of some esteem; but the rarest of all the rest,
is one lately discovered, differing only from the last, in that the flowers
are of a fine Gold yellow color.

They flower in June, and yield store of seeds, which falling of themselves, or
gathered, and sowed in the Spring, will come up and prosper in any place; the
party-colored red, the striped Scarlet, the small double Scarlet, and
especially the yellow, are those most esteemed.

CHAP. XIII.
Nigella.
THe Fennel-flower has some few varieties, whose seeds are preserved, and
yearly sowed in Gardens; the Plant is so common and well known, that it needs
little description, the first is that single kind called

Nigella Hispanica.
SPanish Nigella has leaves like Fennel, the flowers are single, consisting of
five larger leaves than those of the other sorts, commonly of a bleak blew
color, with a green head in the middle, compased about with little gaping
hollow leaves and a yellow line; after the flowers are past, the head grows
bigger, with a crown on the top spread like a Star; the seeds are round and of
a yellowish green color.

Nigella flore duplici.
THe double Nigella has leaves like the former, the flowers consisting of
three or four rows of smaller leaves, one lying under another, of a pale blew
color in one, and white in another; the seeds are black, contained in round
heads.

They flower in the end of June or beginning of July, and are yearly raised
from seeds, which sowed in the Spring are apt to come up, and require small
attendance.

CHAP. XIV.
Crysanthemum.
COrn-Marigold is an annual scarce worth the sowing, some retain two sorts,
that is, Crysanthimum Creticum, the Corn-Marigold of Candy, which is a simple
single pale yellow flower, and Crysanthimum Peruvianum, the Corn-Marigold of
Peru, which is that great Monster we call the Flower of the Sun, of which there
are two sorts, the one bearing round, and the other Oval yellow flowers,
heretofore admired, but now grown common, not at all respected.

Calendula flore plena.
DOuble Garden-Marigolds are yearly sowed of seeds in Kitchen-Gardens; there is
one kind thereof that bears fair large double flowers, far excelling the
other common kinds.

After Atticus flore luteo.
YEllow Star-wort has rough leaves of a dark green color, the stalk divided
into branches, bearing at the ends five or six green leaves, standing round
like a Star, with a flower in the middle, consisting of narrow long pale yellow
leaves, compassing a yellowish brown thrum; these flowers appear in June, and
as soon as the seeds are ripe, the root dies; we have another which we call
After Atticus Italorum, the Italian Star-flower, commonly called the blew
Marigold, which will continue many years, and yield increase from the root; it
flowereth late, seldom before September, and the flowers like those of a single
Marigold, but of a purplish blew color, with a yellowish brown thrum in the
middle.

Flos Africanus.
THe African, or French Marigold, and the varieties thereof, are well known to
most persons that delight in flowers; there are three principal kinds, and of
them some that bear single, others double flowers, some deeper, and others
paler, but the best of them is that called

Flos Africanus maximus multiplex.
THe greatest double African, or French Marigold, has many winged leaves like
those of the Ash, finely purled about the edges, and of a dark green color;
the stalk rises commonly a yard high, toward the top divided into branches,
set with green leaves, and each branch bearing one large double flower,
consisting of a multitude of leaves, of a fair gold-yellow color on the upper
side, and paler underneath; and sometimes there will come diversities from the
seeds of one flower, some being paler than others; these fair great double
flowers rise out of a large pod, wherein after they are past, long narrow black
seeds are contained, from which the several varieties are raised, and some of
them will bring large single flowers with a thrum in the middle, although taken
from double flowers.

Flos Africanus fistuloso flore multiplex.
THe hollow-leafed African, or French Marigold, is like the last, but smaller;
the flowers are thick and double, composed of many hollow leaves, opening at
the ends, in some of a deep, in others of a paller yellow color, and as the
former, so the seeds of this will sometimes bring single flowers.

Flos Africanus minor flore pleno.
THe lesser double French, or African Marigold, has lesser leaves than any of
the former, the stalks not so strong and upright, but leaning and turning
diverse ways; the flowers are thick and double, but much smaller than those of
the other kinds, sometimes wholly of a gold-yellow color, and sometimes the
outer leaves being bigger than those within, are of a deeper and sad color;
the seeds of this do likewise bring some single flowers as well as double, and
diversities of both, as bigger, and lesser, deeper, and paler, but none of them
much esteemed in respect of their evil smell.

The two first kinds flower about the beginning of September, and the last
common sort sooner; the roots perish with the first Frosts, and are yearly
renewed by seeds, for which purpose the first flowers are to be preserved, and
the seeds sowed in the beginning of April in a hot bed, especially those of the
two first kinds, and after they are come up and of some strength, removed into
a good rich soil that stands in the Sun, where being watered they will
prosper, and bear store of gallant double flowers, the seed whereof are only
to be preserved.

CHAP. XV
Convolvulus Caeruleus.
BLew Bind weed is of two sorts, a bigger and a lesser, the first rises up
with many long winding branches, set with large and something round leaves,
pointed at the ends; the flowers come forth at the joints upon long
footstalk, which being blown open, are like bells, with broad open mouths,
ending in five corners, of a fair blew color, tending to purple; these flowers
open in the night, and are to be seen in the morning before the Sun, for as
soon as it shines upon them, they are all gone and never appear again; after
the flowers are past, the husks contain round black seeds; the roots perish in
Winter.

There is of this kind another that has cornered leaves like Ivy, the flowers
of a deeper blew, more reddish in the five plaits and bottom, in all other
things like the former.

The lesser Bind-weed has smaller and longer leaves than the first, and a weak
stalk, rising about two foot high; the flowers come forth at the joints where
the leaves stand, like the other in fashion, but lesser, and far more
beautiful, being of a fair blew color with a white Star in the bottom; the
seeds are like the former, but smaller, and the root dies with the first
approach of Winter.

The greater kinds flower late in September, the lesser in June and July; they
are yearly raised from seeds, the first requiring a hot bed, but the other is
hardy and will come up and thrive without that trouble; as for the red flowered
Bind weed of America, we must not expect to see it bear in England, and the
Lavender leafed Bind-weed, is a weed indeed common in many fields in diverse
English Countries. We have another sort of Bell-flowers raised from seeds,
called

Viola Mariana.
MArians Violet, or Canterbury Bells, the first year after the seeds are sown,
comes up with many hairy leaves, something broad and long, spread on the
ground; the year after the stalk rises a yard high, divided into many branches
set with smaller leaves, and a multitude of flowers standing in green husks,
which are large, round, hollow Bells, swelling in the middle, with narrow
necks, and ending in five corners, in some of a white or silver color, and in
others of a pale or deep purple; the seed is small, contained in square husks,
and the whole Plant dies as soon as the seeds are ripe, so that the kinds are
continued, by sowing the seeds in April, with other annuals, and after removed
where the Plants may stand to bear flowers.

CHAP. XVI.
Stramonium.
THorn-Aple is of two sorts, a greater and a lesser, the first rises up with a
strong round stalk four or five foot high, spreading at the joints into many
branches, set with large dark green cornered leaves, cut and jagged about the
edges; at the joints come forth large Bell-fashioned white flowers, which are
succeeded by great round and something prickly Thorny green heads, which being
ripe, open into three or four parts, and discover a great quantity of blackish
flat seeds within them; the root dies in Winter, and new Plants often come up
of its own sowing.

There is another, little differing from this, but that the flowers are of a
light purple color.

The lesser Thorn-Aple differs from the former, in that it is lower and much
lesser in all the parts thereof; the leaves are smooth and rent at the edges,
and the stalks without branches; the flowers come forth at the joints like the
other, not so big, but more beautiful, white in color, and like a Bell in
fashion; the Aples or heads that contain the seeds are lesser, rounder and
harder than those of the greater kind; the root dies at the first appearance of
Winter.

We talk much of two other varieties of this lesser kind, the one bearing
flowers ingeminated, or hose in hose, one coming out of the other; and another
that is double, consisting of two or more rows of leaves rising equally
together; I have seen the figures of both these well cut in Brass, in two or
three Books of Flowers Printed in Foreign Countries, and it is like that such
there are in those parts, but I am confident they were never seen in England,
otherwise than in picture.

For that with single flowers will hardly flower with us, and if it do, it is
so late that it seldom yields any good seeds; the greater kind is common and
will grow any where, the fittest place is in an Orchard or Kitchen-Garden, for
it takes more room than the Plant deserves.

CHAP. XVII.
Mirabilia Peruviana.
THe Mervail of Peru has a big stalk, bunched at the joints, of a fair green
color, in those that will bear white and red flowers, red in those with red
flowers, dark green in those with yellow flowers, and brown in those with red
and yellow flowers; these stalks spread into many branches, set at the joints
with fair green leaves, betwixt which and the stalk the flowers come forth on
short footstalk, in fashion like those of the lesser blew Bind-weed, narrow
at the bottom, and wide open at the brims, which in several Plants are of the
forementioned colors, as white, red, or yellow, but the rarest are those with
variegated flowers, either red and white, or red and yellow: these flowers
(like those of the Bind-weeds) open in the night, and as soon as the Sun shine
upon them, the brims shrink inward and wither away, so that they are to be seen
late in evenings, or early in mornings, and therefore have been called the
flowers of the night; after the flowers are past, each of them is succeeded by
one seed, of the bigness of a small Pease, with a short neck like a little
bottle; the roots are long like a Raddish, blackish on the outside, and
commonly perishing in Winter.

They flower from the end of July, until Winter check their luxury; the seeds
are set in the beginning of April in a hot bed, and thence removed into some
place where they may have the benefit of the Sun; such roots as flower not the
first year, being covered in Winter with Horse-litter, will bear sooner the
year following and yield good seeds, and the roots of such as have born, being
taken up in the beginning of Winter, laid for a time to dry, and then wrapped
severally in Woollen rags, and so kept all the Winter, being set in the ground
in the beginning of March, will prosper and bear flowers in due season;
heretofore this flower has been much esteemed, and yet is by many much desired.

CHAP. XVIII.
Pomum Amoris.
APles of love are of three sorts, the most common has long trailing branches,
set at the joints with winged rough leaves and yellow flowers, which are
succeeded by Aples, as we call them, of the bigness of an ordinary Crab, not
round but bunched on the sides, of a pale Orenge-colour, full of a waterish
slimy pulp, wherein small seeds are contained; the root dies in Winter. Of
this kind there is another sort, that differs only in that the Aples are of
a pale yellow color; and we have a third that is of a lesser kind, smaller in
all the parts thereof, and bearing many fine round Berries of a bright
Orenge-colour, containing a slimy pulp and small seeds, as the rest do.

These Plants are received only for the beauty of the Aples or Berries, as
they are commonly called, the flowers being not considerable; the seeds are
yearly sowed in the beginning of April, and must be often watered to bring them
forward, else Winter will take them before the fruit be ripe, which seldom
comes to perfection before the middle of September.

CHAP. XIX.
Thlaspi Creticum.
CAndy tufts are small Plants rising about a foot high, with stalks set with
long, narrow, notched, whitish-green leaves; at the tops stand many small
single flowers close set together, which in some Plants are all white, others
have a purplish spot in the middle, and some are all of a pale purple color;
the seeds are small and reddish, and the roots yearly perish.

They flower in the beginning of July, and will thrive in almost any ground,
being sowed in April with other annuals.

CHAP. XX.
Lupinus Sativus.
GArden Lupins are chiefly of four sorts, the first and most common is that
with yellow flowers, of which kind there is another in all things like unto it,
but that the flowers are white; the two other sorts are called blew Lupins,
whereof there is a bigger and a lesser, but the bigger is much the better; they
bear Pease-like blossoms, of a blew color, with some mixture of purple and
white in the middle; they are yearly sowed of the Pease-like spotted seeds in
April, with other annuals. Unto these may be added the Scarlet Kidney Bean, now
common and well known unto all that delight in flowers; this grows taller,
and rampeth more than any of the other, twining about what is near it; the
beauty of this Plant consists in the flowers, which in fashion are like those
of the field Bean, but of an excellent bright Scarlet color; after the flowers
are past, the Beans are contained in long codds, which may be eaten green, as
other Kidney Beans are, which when they are ripe, are of delicate reddish
marbled color, and some of them black; these must be set before April, and
where they may have room, and the benefit of the Sun.

CHAP. XXI.
Lathyrus latifolius.
PEase everlasting, although it be a Plant of long continuance, yet it is
raised from the seeds, which being like small Pease and sowed, will be two or
three years before the Plants grow big enough to bear flowers, and after the
roots will continue long, the branches dying to the ground in Winter, and
rising again at the Spring; it bears many large Pease-like blossoms, of a
purplish red color, standing on long footstalk; this is commonly planted
under Walls, where it may be supported, for if the Plant be old, the branches
will grow to a great length, and twine with claspers about what is next it.

Orobus Venetus.
BLew everlasting Pease differs from the former, in that the Plant is much
smaller, and the flowers of a Violet purple color, not so common, yet as long
lasting, and raised from seeds like the former.

CHAP. XXII.
Medica.
SNails, or Button, are of diverse sorts, raised yearly from Pease-like seeds,
only regarded for the vessels, which in some are like a Snails house, smooth
rouled up, others prickly, some like small Buttons, and others rough and hairy,
and of all these sorts varieties; pretty toys for such as delight in simple
seedlings; like unto these there are others called

Scorpioides.
Caterpillars, like the last, are only esteemed for the seed vessels, which are
like green Worms, or Caterpillars, some bigger, and others lesser; the Plants
trail on the ground, and must be supported; the seeds yearly sowed in April,
the common time for most seedlings.

Hedysarum clypiatum.
THe red Satin flower, vulgarly called, French Hony-suckle, is common in most
Gardens, it has many stalks, set with winged green leaves, and at the joints
come forth smaller stalks, set with many flowers, of a shining red color, and
in some white, but more rare or seldom found than the red, which is ordinary:
after the flowers are past, the seeds are contained in flat round husks, three
or four standing one above another; they flower in June and July, the second
year after the sowing, seed, and die at Winter following.

Planta Mimosa.
THe Sensible Plant, and the Humble Plant, from seeds yearly gained out of
America, and sowed upon a hot bed, covered with glasses, and carefully
preserved, will rise with woody stalks set with small winged leaves about a
foot high; respected only for that by touching the leaves of the Sensible you
may perceive them to shrink from you, and the Humble to, fall of their own
accord, as sensible of injury, and disdaining to be handled, the one out of
Pride, the other Humility; they are curiosities scarce able to requite the care
of attendance, perishing with the first Frosts, and good seeds hardly obtained.

Ocimum
BAssil is a sweet smelling Herb well known unto all, especially the ordinary
and common kind, but there are two other sorts more rare, one called
Bush-Bassil, the other Indian Bassil; the first of these has smaller leaves,
thicker set on the stalks, and sweeter than the common kind; the other has
larger leaves, and deeply cut in on the edges; they all perish at the first
appearance of Winter, and are yearly renewed from seeds which are black, and a
little long; the last biggest, and the middlemost the least.

Majorana odorata.
SWeet Marjerom is also an annual, as well known as the common Bassil; of this
we have a smaller kind, called Marjerom Gentle, the leaves whereof are lesser,
more hoary, and sweeter than those of the common kind; these are yearly raised
from seeds, sowed in April with Bassil.

Botrys.
Oak of Jerusalem rises up half a yard high, divided in many branches, set
with leaves deeply cut in on the sides, resembling an Oke-leaf; the seedy
flowers grow clustering about the branches, like the blossoms of the Vine; the
whole Plant is sweet, and dies as soon as the small seeds are ripe.

Ambrosia.
Oak of Cappadocia rises higher than the last, with many crooked weak
branches, bearing many tops of mossie yellowish flowers; the leaves are
something like those of Mugwort, dusted as it were with meal all over the
Plant, which is of a pleasant sweet scent, and good taste; the seeds are round
and black, the root threddy, and dies in Winter; this is the Poets so much
celebrated Ambrosia, which in respect of its fragrant scent, and pleasant tuft,
they feign to be the food of the Gods.

And now the Swains sing Harvest home,
It Is time for CERES to be gone:
Her Flowers are past, it is Seeding-time,
Autumnal Fruits are in their prime.
That you may taste, and know the best,
POMONA bids you to her Feast.
POMONA.

The third Book.

BY JOHN REA, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Richard Marriott, and are to be Sold at his Shop
in Fleet Street, under the King's Head Tavern, 1665.

POMONA. THE THIRD BOOK.
ACquaints you with the finest Garden-fruits, Vines and Berries, our English
Nurceries do afford; as also with some Flower-bearing Trees, Shrubs, and
Greens, more familliar than those you find in the first book; with the order
that is to be used in their Propagation, Planting and Improvement.

Good Gardens are to be furnished with rare Fruits, as well as fine Flowers;
and although most persons of ability at the first, plant their walls with Trees
bought out of the Nurceries about London, yet it will be necessary for such (as
well as others) to have a Quarter in the Nurcery, set with choice Stocks of
every kind, for the raising of young Trees, that if any of the first provision
either die, or fail to bear such Fruits as are desired, their places, out of
their own store, may be supplied with better; besides, it is no small
satisfaction to a Planter, to be assured what Fruits his Trees will bear:
therefore before I proceed to the particulars, to prevent repetition, the
following Rules necessarily require to be inserted, and first,

For the raising of Stocks for Garden-Fruits, the which are to be of four
different kinds, as Apples, Quinces, Plums, and Cherries; for Apples that you
may have dwarf-trees fit for Walls, the stocks you must provide are those of
the Paradise Apple, either raised from the Kernels, or from Layers, the
branches being as apt to root as those of Codlings, in which you may graft what
other good Apples you desire; but in respect these stocks (of their own nature)
grow slowly, I have found out another expedient to help them forward, that is,
by grafting the Cyen of the Paradise Apple in a Crab, or other Apple-stock,
close to the ground, with one graft, and when that is grown to the bigness of a
finger, graft thereon about eight inches higher, the fruit desired, which will
stop the luxurious growth of the tree, almost as well as if it had been
immediately grafted on the forementioned Layers, and will cause the Trees to
bear sooner, more, and better fruits.

Quince-stocks are easily raised, either by Cuttings, or Suckers, of which you
may have great store from one old Tree, by cutting it down in March, within two
inches of the ground, which will cause a multitude of Suckers to rise from the
root; when they are grown half a yard high, cover them at the bottom a foot
thick, with good earth, which in dry times must be watered, and as soon as they
have put forth roots, in Winter remove them into your Nurcery, where, in a year
or two, they will be ready to graft with Pears for your walls. These Stocks (as
those of the Paradise Apple) will cause the Trees to dwarf, and not to rise so
high, but that they may be conveniently spread upon walls, which grafted on
Pear-stocks, would grow too big and sturdy; besides the Quince-stocks cause the
Pears grafted thereon, to be fairer, much better colored, and the trees to
bear sooner and more store of fruits. There are several sorts of Quinces, but
the best and fittest for this purpose is that of Portugal.

Plum-stocks are raised from Suckers and Stones, choice being made of the
kinds; those of the white Pear-plum are esteemed the best, but indeed, those of
any other great white, or red Plum, that has large leaves, and shoots, are as
good, either to graft other choice Plums upon, or for the budding of Apricocks
and Peaches.

Cherry-stocks are also raised from Suckers and Stones; those of the ordinary
wild black Cherry are most commonly used to this purpose, but Stocks of a
better and more agreeable nature may be raised from the stones of the black
Heart-Cherry, Duke, Luke ward, Amber, and Morello Cherries: the Stocks of our
common English red Cherries are most used for the grafting of May or early
Cherries; the Morello, and indeed any other sort will form trees more fit for
walls of eight or nine foot high, than the black Cherry stocks, which cause the
trees to grow much taller,

The Stones of Apricocks and Peaches are not worth the setting for stocks to
inoculate with other good kinds, in respect their roots are spongy, and will
neither last nor endure to be transplanted: therefore the Stones of Plums and
Cherries are chiefly for that purpose to be regarded and disposed after the
ways following.

Having provided a good collection of the Stones of Plums and Cherries, in
October prick them down in rows, the sharp end upwards, about three fingers
deep, in a bed of good earth, well turned up and raked; then cover the same all
over with new long dung, to prevent the frosts, which in April you may take
off, and in May they will come up, and being kept from weeds, in two years will
be ready to remove into your Nurcery, in rich and well manured ground before
prepared for that purpose: before you set them, cut off such roots as run down,
as also the tops and side branches, placing them in rows, at four foot
distance, each kind apart, where in a year or two most of them will be ready to
graft in the bud, the Plums, with the best of their own kind, and also with
Apricocks and Peaches; the Cherries are only fit to be budded with other good
sorts of Cherries; as for Suckers, they must be set in the Nurcery after the
same manner, and after they are grown to an inch Diameter, may conveniently be
grafted in the cleft.

Gather your Grafts of Plums, Cherries, and Pears, from the middle of January,
to the same time in February, those of Apples may stay until March: choose
such as are of two saps, that the old wood to the knot may be placed in the
stock; those of one years shoot will serve in default of the other, but such
will be longer before they come to bear.

Make choice of such Grafts as are strongest, and take them from such branches
as are aptest to bear, and then fullest of Fruit-buds; such Trees as are ill
bearers, or not come to bear fruit, are to be rejected, the Grafts always
partaking the quality of the Tree from whence they are taken: Bind your Grafts
in bundles, each sort by it self, and put them half way to the tops in earth,
until you use them, keeping an exact account of the kinds, that you be not
mistaken in your fruits; as for the several ways of grafting them, it is to be
performed with much exactness, in manner following.

Grafting (as we are taught by common experience) is the artificial placing the
Cyen, or Graft of one kind, upon the stock of another, so as the sap of the
Stock may without impediment come to nourish the Graft; it is therefore
expedient in this operation (the Saps passing betwixt the bark and the wood)
that they be exactly joined, which is effected four several ways.

The first and most known is grafting in the Cleft, Plums and Cherries about
the new Moon in February, Pears in the beginning of March, and Apples a
fortnight or three weeks after: First, saw off the head of the stock, in a
smooth place, for Wall-trees, within four fingers of the ground, in Standards
much higher, according to the growth of the stock; pare away with your knife
the roughness the saw has left, then cleave the head a little besides the
pith, and put therein a long wedge of hard wood to keep the cleft open, which
cut smooth with the point of your knife, that the sides may be eaven, then cut
the Graft on both sides from a knot or bud, in form of a wedge, in length
proportionable to the cleft, with shoulderings, which place therein, so as the
Saps may exactly join. Lastly, cover the Head with clay well tempered with
Horse-dung, and leave not the Grafts too long.

The second way is called Shoulder, or Whip-grafting, fit only for small
stocks, and to be performed something later than the former; first cut off the
Head of the stock, and smooth it as in Cleft grafting, then cut the Graft from
a knot or bud on one side sloping, about an inch and half long, with a
Shouldering, that it may rest on the Head of the stock; the Graft must be cut
from the Shouldering smooth and eaven, sloping by degrees, that the lower end
may be left thin; place the Shouldering of the Graft upon the Head of the
stock, and with your knife cut away so much of the bark, as the cut side of the
Graft did cover, place both together, that their Saps may exactly join, then
bind them together with rushes, flags, or baste, and clay the Head as in the
former.

The third way is called grafting by Approach, by some Ablactation; and this is
done in April, sooner or later, according to the state of the Spring; the
manner differs from the last, in that the Cyen remains on its own stock, and
the Head also on the stock you would graft, therefore both must be planted
together, or in Cases, that they may be so posited; the Branches of both (being
near of one size) must be brought together, that they may touch each other the
length of three inches, then cut the joining sides of both until you approach
near the pith, and fit them so together, that the Saps may exactly meet, in
which position bind them, and cover the place with such tempered clay as is
used in Heading of Grafts: as soon as you perceive the Cyen and stock to be
well cimented and incorporated, cut off the Head of the stock four inches above
the binding, and in March following the stub you left above, as also the Cyen
underneath, close to the grafted place, that it may subsist by the Stock only:
some use to cut off the Head of the Stock at first, then join the Cyen
thereunto, after the manner of Shoulder-grafting, differing only in not
severing the Cyen from its own Stock; both ways are good, but I have found the
first the more succesful. This manner of Grafting is chiefly used, in such nice
and tender Plants, as are not apt to take any other way, as Orenges, Limons,
Pomgranats, Vines, Gessamins, Althea frutex, and such like.

The fourth and most considerable way of Grafting of all other, is called
Inoculating or Budding, the which is effected by taking off the Eye or small
bud which grows betwixt the leaf and the new shoot or Lance, and so placing it
on a fit stock, that it may from thence receive nutrition agreeable: and this
may seasonably be done, from Midsomer, to the middle of July, at such time as
the Sap is most in the stock, and the bark easiest to be raised: the Buds must
not be too young or tender, but taken from strong well-grown Shoots of the same
year, which being cut from the Tree, take away the top and leaves, leaving half
their stalks, by which you may hold the Buds when you put them into the stocks;
then having made choice of stocks, according to the nature of your Buds, in a
smooth place make a cross cut thorough the bark of the stock, then from the
middle thereof, gently slit the bark thorough, (not wounding the stock) almost
an inch long, then nimbly prepare the Bud, by cutting the bark on both sides
the length of the slit, as much above as below, forming a Shield or Escocheon,
with the lower end a little sharp; next take off the Bark on the other side,
and with a quill, cut in the fashion of a scoop an inch long, take off the Bark
and bud dexterously, that you leave not the root behind, for if you see a hole
under the bud on the inside, cast it away and prepare another; the Shield being
thus made ready, hold it in your mouth by the end of the stalk, until with the
flat end of your knife you have raised the Bark of the stock on either side the
slit, sufficient to receive the Shield, which put in with care between the Bark
and wood; thrusting it down until the top join to the cross cut, then bind it
close with Bast taken out of a Russia Mat, or Woollen yarn, so that the bud may
sit close to the stock; there is another way more ready than this, which I have
long used with success, it differs only from the former, in that from the
cross cut, the Bark is slit upwards, and the Shield formed, and put in
accordingly, leaving the end below the bud, longer then may serve, and after it
is thrust up as high as is necessary, cut off what is superfluous, at the cross
cut, with which the end must join, than bind it as the former. There are other
ways of Inoculating, but these two are the best, and the later the more
expedite and easy to be performed.

The best time to Inoculate is in the evening of a fair day, in a dry season,
for rain falling on the buds before they have taken, will destroy most of them;
after three weeks you may cut away the binding, and in March following the head
of the stock, three fingers above the bud, which being well grown, cut close,
that the stock may cover.

In placing of grafts or buds in stocks, you must consider what Trees you
intend them for, either standards, or for walls, and so graft or bud them high
or low accordingly; as also to lodge them on that side of the stock which is
most exposed to the strongest winds, to prevent their being blown out or
loosened.

When your Grafts are grown half a yard high, those you find inclined to shoot
up in one lance, pinch off their tender tops, which will prevent their
mounting, and cause them to put forth side-branches; in March following, prune
away those are small, and what you find superfluous, cutting the long lances
close behind a bud, a thing always to be observed in pruning.

If the ground of your Nurcery be good, and kept from Weeds by often turning,
most of these Grafts (especially the stone-fruits) will be ready to transplant
within a year or two, but Pears and Apples grafted on the forementioned stocks,
to form Dwarf, or wall-Trees, growing slowly, require more time, and not to be
removed until the stocks are covered.

The best time to transplant and set Trees, is about the middle of October,
which must be carefully taken up, that the roots be not cut or broken, but
before they are set, you must cut off such roots as run down, and the ends of
those you find too long, as also most of the small threads where they grow too
thick. Which done, the ground and place where they are to be planted being
prepared, and wide holes opened, raise a small hill in the center thereof,
whereon set your tree, opening and spreading the roots round about it; then
cover them with the best earth, and shake the tree that the roots lie not
hollow, treading it down to fasten them.

Standards all know are to be set upright, but if naturally they lean any way,
let it be toward South-West, from whence the strongest winds commonly proceed;
these must be supported with strong stakes, that they be not tossed, but kept
upright: wall-trees are to be placed at such distance, as they may be leaned to
the wall, and most conveniently spread and nailed thereunto.

The best time to plash, prune, and nail trees, is in February, after the great
Frosts are past, except Peaches and Nectorins, which being cut before the
rising of the sap, are apt to dye after the knife, and so stump and deform the
Tree, therefore such must be left until they begin to put forth buds and
blossoms. Spread the boughs and branches upon the wall, like the ribbs of a
Screen fan, or the fingers of your hand displayed, and let not one cross the
other, leaving no place bare; such as will not come handsomely to the wall,
must be cut off close to the stock, and the ends of the small branches, close
behind a leaf bud; and in Summer when they put forth new wood, rub off such
buds, as growing may deform the Tree; after Midsomer you must give your Trees a
second pruning, by cutting away the new lances, to give Sun and Air to the
fruits, to cause them to ripen, and be well colouted. The pruning of Trees
depends much on the discretion of the Operator, who is to consider the growth
of every Tree, and what may most conveniently be taken away, without leaving
the walls too bare. The well and seasonable pruning of Trees in Summer, will
cause them to set thick with Fruit-buds, and bear plentifully; and if too many,
cut off the smallest, leaving so many as the Tree may be well able to nourish
and bring to perfection.

There are many other observations about fruit Trees, but these inserted are
the most essential, which together with what you will find at the end of every
Chapter, where each particular is described, may be sufficient to inform all
such as desire to be Planters, besides their own practice will every year
inform them, Experience being the best Tutor.

I confess I might have spared part of this pains, by referring the Readers
unto two little Books, long since written in French, and now lately translated
into English, and some others good in their kinds; yet in respect of us, and
our Climate, very deficient (as all I have seen are) which defects I have
endeavored to supply, and to make this work as absolute as I was able, in
directing the choice of particulars, as well as the order of their propagation.

The French Gardener gives us the names of a multitude of Pears and other
fruits about Paris, but nothing to direct our choice, so that if any should be
desirous to obtain some of the best from thence, he might easily be mistaken,
having no better a Guide than a bare name to direct him; indeed, for good fruit
we need search no further than the Nurceries about London, which are now
abundantly furnished with many excellent varieties in every kind, which may be
had with little labor and small charge; and in respect every one that desires
to Plant, has not experience, or perhaps the knowledge which sorts of every
kind are fittest to be collected, either in relation to their goodness, the
soil, and situation of the Gardens where they are to be planted, I shall
therefore endeavor by the following papers, to give the best directions I am
able, and acquaint you with what I have learned in forty years practice, and
first begin with Apples.

CHAP. I. Pomum.
APples are fruits fitter for Orchards than Gardens, yet some choice kinds may
conveniently be planted in large Fruit-Gardens, either in Bushes, or on
North-walls, which ought not to be left naked; these Apples well ordered, will
not only cover the walls with fair green leaves, but also bear store of good
fruits; the fittest for this purpose are those that follow.

The Juniting is a small, yellow, red-sided Apple, upon a wall ripe in the end
of June.

The King Apple is as early ripe as the last, bigger and much better tasted.

The Margaret, or Magdalen Apple, is a fair and beautiful fruit, yellow, and
thick striped with red, early ripe, of a delicate taste, sweet scent, and best
eaten off the Tree, and therefore most fit for a wall.

The Famagusta is a fair, large, early Apple, good in taste, and apt to bear.

The Giant Apple, although it have large shoots and leaves, yet is not apt to
grow to a great Tree, and therefore fit for a wall; the fruit is great, and
long, yellow, and well tasted, and, either to coddle, or bake in Tarts, the
most excellent of any Somer Apple.

The good Housewife is the largest of all the Apples I have seen, of a greenish
yellow color, and good for the purposes last mentioned.

Pome de Rambures is a fair large French Apple, and makes a noble show upon a
wall.

The Winter Queening is a fair red-striped Apple, beautiful on the Tree, and
excellent in its season, it succeeds incomparably on the Paradise Apple, as the
Colviele, and all other sorts of Queenings do.

The Quince-Apple is a fair smooth yellow Apple, something like a Quince, of a
very good taste, and, on the Paradise Apple, bears more and fairer fruits than
on a Tree stock.

The red Russet is an excellent Apple, of a middle size, and long lasting.

The round Russet Harvy is a fair brown-coloured, good tasted Apple, and bears
well.

The Carlisle Pippin is an excellent good tasted Winter Apple.

The Bridgewater Pippin is also a very good Apple, beautiful to the eye, and
pleasant to the palate.

The Lincoln Rennet is reputed to be the best of all the Rennets, whereof there
are many sorts.

The Non such is a middle sized, round, red-striped Apple, of a delicate taste,
and long lasting.

The Royal Pearmain is a much bigger, and better tasted Apple than the common
kind.

The Kirton Pippin is a russetish yellow, very good Winter Apple.

Go no further is something like a Pearmain, but better and longer lasting.

The Darling is a large Gold yellow Apple, of an excellent quick, something
sharp taste, and bears well.

The Angels Bit is a delicate tasted Apple, and much esteemed in Worcestershire.

These twenty several sorts of Apples are all choice fruits, and grafted on the
Paradise Apple according to the precedent directions, may be fit for Walls, or
Dwarf hedge-Trees in large Fruit-Gardens. There are many other good Apples,
proper to be planted at large in Orchards, which are out of my Province.

CHAP. II. Pirus.
PEars in France are preferred for Walls, before all other fruits, and would be
so in England, had we the best and fittest kinds, and also their diligence in
planting and dressing them; nor are we so deficient in this fruit, but that our
Nurceries about London afford us many excellent kinds, fit for this purpose, as

The Somer bon Christien, which is a fair large yellow Pear, red on one side,
well tasted, ripens and bears plentifully upon a wall.

The great Burgomot, or Hamdens Burgomot, is the best, biggest, and soonest
ripe, of all the Somer Burgomots, an excellent fruit, and bears well on a wall.

The Orange Burgomot is a round, short-stalked, deep yellow Pear, and very fit
for a wall.

Bezi d' Heri is an excellent French Pear, in shape like a Burgomot, and of a
delicate perfumed taste.

Boeure de Roy is another good French Pear, of a dark brown color, long form,
and very good taste.

The green Boeure Pear is bigger than the last, of a yellowish green color, a
great bearer, and a very good moist fruit.

The Violet Pear is a fair large well tasted fruit, and bears very well on a
wall.

The Binfield Pear, now called the Dove-Pear, is a fair large, good Pear, and
bears well.

The Greenfield Pear is also a very good fruit, and much fairer on a wall than
in a standard.

The great Musk Pear is an excellent fruit, large, yellow, and of a Musky noble
taste.

The great Russet of Remes is a very great brown Pear, and thrives well in a
Quince stock.

Amado^te is a good French Pear, of a middle size, yellow, dry, and well tasted.

The bloody Pear is small, brown on the outside, and blood red within, a
curiosity not to be wanting.

The Rousellet is a very good tasted middle sised Somer Pear, as all the former
are.

The winter Bon Chrestien is a fair large Pear, and, when in perfection, of a
deep yellow color, and red on the side next the Sun; of this there are several
sorts, but the best is that called Bon Chrestien Door; it requires to be
Grafted in a Quince stock, and Planted on a South wall, which it will deserve,
for it is an excellent Fruit, well tasted, and long lasting.

The Portail is also a very large greenish Winter Pear, and requires a South
wall.

The Dead Man's Pear is of a middle size, and good taste, it bears well, and
lasts until Christmas.

The Non-such is an excellent large moist Pear, and lasts as well as the former.

The Winter Musk is a large, round, red-sided yellow Pear, good in taste, and
long lasting.

Dionier is also a large Russet Winter Pear, and fit to be Planted on a Wall.

The Double flowered Pear, so called, for that the flowers consist of two rows
of leaves, the Fruit is of a middle size, of a good taste in its season, which
is from the beginning of March, to the middle of May.

There are several good sorts of Wardens, and baking Pears, proper for Walls,
as the red Roman Warden, the Spanish, and the Green Warden, the Baking
Greenfield, and the great Surrein, with many others; all these named I know to
be very good fruits, and worthy to be Planted on Walls, and Trees of them may
be had out of the Nurceries about London, especially those of Mr. Daniel
Stepping, and Mr. Leonard Girl, who will faithfully furnish such as desire
these, or any other kinds of rare Fruit Trees, of whose Fidelity in the
delivery of right kinds, I have had long experience in diverse particulars; a
virtue not common to men of that profession.

CHAP. III. Cydonia.
THe Quince is of some variety, differing chiefly from each other in the
fruits, the most common is

The English Apple-Quince-tree, this is full of Burs and Bunches, the Fruit
unequal, covered with a white Cotton before it be ripe, but then yellow, of a
harsh taste, and often stony.

The Portugal Apple Quince is a large fruit, yellow, and apt to be full of
chops, so tender that it may be eaten raw.

The Portugal Pear-Quince is fair, large, Pear fashioned, and yellow, excellent
either to bake or preserve.

The Barberry Quince is as good as the Portugal, but lesser, both in the tree
and fruit.

The Lions Quince is fair, large, and of a deep yellow color, the sides
ribbed, with a deep hollow crown.

The Brunswick Quince is a good fruit, large, round, and whiter than any of the
former.

These Quinces are easily raised by Suckers, Layers, or Cuttings, as has been
said for the raising of stocks: they prosper best in a moist soil, and bear
much better and fairer fruits, if planted on a wall: you may graft one kind
upon another, and such grafted trees will soon come to bear abundantly.

CHAP. IV. Cerasus.
THe Cherry Tree is of diverse kinds, differing both in leaves and fruits; some
have small leaves and shorter-stalked fruits, others large, long leaves, and
long-stalked Cherries; the first of those with smaller leaves we call

The May Cherry, which differs from the common kind, in that the Cherries will
be ripe in May.

The early Flanders Cherry is bigger and sweeter than the common English
Cherry, and earlier ripe.

The later Flanders Cherry differs from the last, in that the Cherries are
bigger, of a sharper taste, and later ripe.

The Flanders cluster-Cherry differs from both the former, in that the Cherries
grow on the stalks in clusters, two, three, and sometimes more joined together,
and some stalks will have but one.

The great bearing, or preserving Cherry, is like in the Tree to the later
Flanders; the Cherries are large, of a blackish red on the outer side when
ripe, and blood red within, of a sharp taste, and late ripe, but bears
abundantly.

The Morello Cherry is like the last, but bigger, better tasted, and no very
good bearer.

The Archdukes Cherry is a very good early ripe Cherry, well tasted, and on a
wall bears well.

The Carnation Cherry is as big as the last, of a bright shining red color,
and good taste.

The Lukeward Cherry has larger and longer leaves than any of the former, the
fruit fairer, with long stalks, early ripe, and well tasted.

The black Heart-Cherry is a fair, large, blackish red Cherry, in taste sweet
and good.

The black Cherry of Orleance is a very fair, large and good fruit.

The black Spanish Cherry is of the same dark red color with the two former,
rounder, not so big, but very well tasted.

The Bleeding Heart is a large bloody dark red Cherry, and tastes well.

Prince Royal is a large late-ripe Cherry, good to preserve.

Portugal Cherry is a good fruit, and very apt to bear.

The Kings Cherry is a fair, large, and very good Cherry.

The Corone Cherry has large leaves, bears few Cherries, but those good and
great; of a deep red color on the outside, and paler red within.

The Biquar Cherry is as ill a bearer as the last, the Cherries are fair, of a
pale red color, and spotted with white.

The white Spanish Cherry has great long leaves and large Cherries, white, and
a little red on that side next the Sun.

The Amber Cherry has very large leaves, and fair Amber-coloured Cherries,
sweet and good.

The red Heart-Cherry is not esteemed for that it grows too much in wood, and
bears but little fruit.

The Hungarian Cherry of Zwerts, so much commended by Mr. Parkinson, does in no
respect answer his description; for it is an ordinary ill-bearing Cherry, and
now not at all esteemed: but Mr. Girl before mentioned, has a new Cherry,
(which perhaps is that intended by Mr. Parkinson) the which he received by the
strange name of

Ciliegi Birrieloni: the Tree in leaves, buds and shoots, much resembles the
Dukes Cherry, and the fruit is reported to be every Cherry as big as an
ordinary Apple; the verity whereof a little time will manifest.

The Dwarf Cherry is of two sorts, one having the small branches hanging down,
those of the other more erect; the first bears a small round red Cherry, the
fruit of the other is a little bigger and pointed.

These are the varieties of Cherries our Nurceries afford; the best of which
for Standards are the Early and Later Flanders Cherries, the Great Bearer, and
some that want walls so handle the Duke and Carnation Cherries: those with
large long leaves are not at all fit for Standards, but must be spread on
walls: the Dwarf Cherries are commonly grafted on ordinary Cherry stocks, and
kept low in bushes.

CHAP. V. Prunus.
THe Plum-tree is of diverse sorts, differing in the shoots and leaves from each
other, whereby many of them may be distinguished, but chiefly by the fruits,
which are of several colors, forms, and tastes; some early ripe, others later,
and all commonly known by particular names, whereby they may be easily
collected; we will begin with the firstripe.

The red primordian Plum is of a middle size, fashioned like a Pear, with a
round head, and smaller toward the stalk, of a red color, good taste, and
early ripe.

The blue primordian Plum is in shape like the last, something lesser, of a
Violet-blue color, good taste, early ripe, and a plentiful bearer.

The Amber primordian Plum is a round yellow waterish Plum, not worth the
planting.

The Morocco Plum is a large, round, early-ripe black Plum, and very apt to
bear.

The Barberry-plum is a large early black Plum, of the fashion of an Egg, and
the Tree apt to bear.

The black Damosine is an early-ripe good-tasted Plum, bigger than a Damson,
and bears well in a Standard.

The Violet-plum is so like the last, that it is only to be distinguished by
the taste, that of this being of a more quick and pleasant relish.

The green Damosine-plum, as our Nurcery-men call it, is a fine small, round,
and ever-green Plum, with a small stone, and of a good taste, not so early ripe
as any of the former.

The Prunella is a small white Plum, of a tart (but not unpleasant) taste: an
excellent fruit either to dry or preserve.

The black Prunella is not so sharp in taste as the white, and serves fitly to
the same purposes.

The green Osterly-plum is round, green, of a middle size, and reasonable good
taste.

The Muscle-plum is a fair and something long black Plum, well-tasted, and a
good bearer.

The red Muscle-plum is like the last, but lesser, flatter, and of a dark red
color.

The Catalonia-plum is like the black Muscle-plum, but bluer, rounder, and of a
quicker taste.

The Bole-plum is of a middle size, black, flat on the one side, and well
tasted.

The Cheston-plum is long and large, of a dark red color, and very good taste.

The Kings Plum is a fine middle-sized good-tasted red Plum, and bears well on
a Wall, but not on a Standard.

The Queen Mother Plum is a fine-tasted round red Plum, and a good bearer.

The Diaper'd Plum is pale yellow, marbled, and a fair firm well-tasted Plum.

The Marbled Plum is in shape like the Cheston-plum, yellow, marbled with red,
and when full ripe all red; a firm good fruit.

The Damasco-plum is an excellent long middle-sized reddish Plum.

Foderingham-plum is in fashion and color something like the last, and a very
good fruit.

The blue Perdrigon is like a small Damson, but sooner ripe, and much better
tasted.

The green Perdrigon is bigger and rounder than the last, green on the outside,
and well tasted.

The white Pedrigon is something bigger than the last, but not so good a fruit.

The Matchless is a middle-sized white Plum, of an excellent good taste, and
much esteem.

The Verdoch is a large shining green Plum, and only fit to preserve, for
which purpose it is very good.

The Peach-plum is a long whitish, something late, good-tasted Plum.

The Imperial Plum is of two sorts, one long, the other round, both large red
waterish Plums, but the round is the better.

The Gaunt Plum is a great Pear-fashioned, moist, sweet tasted red Plum.

The Dennie Plum is something like the Marbled-plum, but lesser, and later
ripe, yet a good fruit.

The Turkey Plum is a great, long, black, late ripe, but a good tasted dry Plum.

The Peascod Plum is of three sorts, one red, another white, and the third
green, all long, late-ripe, waterish Plums, the red is the best, and the green
the biggest.

The white Date is a great whitish green Plum, of a harsh waterish taste, and
late ripe.

The yellow Date is a long yellow Plum, and much better tasted than the white.

The red Date is a fair, large, long Plum, of a fine red color, and better
tasted than the yellow.

The white Pear-Plum is little respected for the fruit, which is sour, and
seldom comes to be ripe, but esteemed only for Stocks to graft other good
fruits upon.

The red Pear-Plum is of no better esteem than the common white.

The black Pear-plum is the best of the three, something late ripe, but a good
tasted dry Plum.

The earlier white Pear-plum is much better than the common kind, and will be
ripe and reasonable good in the end of August.

Bonum magnum, or the Dutch Plum, is a very great oval-formed yellowish Plum,
and, according to the name, is good as well as great.

The Apricock Plum is a great waterish ill-tasted whitish yellow Plum.

The Nutmeg Plum is of two sorts, the most common, a small dark red late Plum,
the other fashioned like a Nutmeg, and white, late ripe, but reasonable good.

The Pruine Damson is bigger and better than the common kind, a good fruit to
dry or preserve.

The Mirabilon is of two sorts, one red, the other white; the Trees apt to grow
in wood, but seldom bear any fruit, and therefore not esteemed.

The best and biggest of these Plums are Planted on East, or West walls, and in
Pallisade hedges, the other will bear well in Standards; the Fruit buds from
Christmas to April, are often picked off by Birds, which if not carefully
prevented, will soon frustrate your expectation.

CHAP. VI. Mala Armeniaca sive praecocia.
THe Apricock, especially the common sort, is known unto all, but we have
several better kinds wherewith it concerns every ingenious Planter to be
acquainted, and therefore to be described: we will pass by the common sort, and
begin with the first ripe.

The Algier Apricock is lesser in all the parts than the common kind; the fruit
is small, round and yellow, ripe a month or more before the other kinds; the
tree is tender, and impatient of long frosts, from which (in the more Northerly
situation) it requires with Mats to be defended.

The Masculine Apricock has thinner and smoother leaves than those of the
common kind, the fruit larger, better, and sooner ripe, but if the Tree be not
well ordered, unapt to bear.

The long Apricock differs chiefly from the last, in that the fruit is
longer, and of a paler yellow color.

The white Apricock has the leaves folded, seldom opening; the fruit is
lesser, whiter, and better than that of the common kind.

The Orange Apricock is something like the ordinary sort, only the fruit is
fairer, rounder and better, of a deep yellow color, and good taste.

The Great Roman Apricock is bigger in all the parts than any of the former,
the fruit also bigger than that of any other kind, and excellent to preserve.

Apricocks are easily raised, being apt to take, inoculated on a Plum stock;
those that have the largest Shoots, leaves, and Fruits, are fittest for this
purpose, as also for budding of Peaches, and for grafting other good sorts of
Plums; Apricocks require to be planted on a South wall, and to be often pruned,
being apt to grow in wood, and therefore the Midsomer Pruning, as well as the
Winters, is not to be neglected.

CHAP. VII. Mala Persica.
THe Peach Tree is as well known as the Apricock, and needs no description;
the Peaches are of diverse sorts, some early ripe, others late; the Early most
esteemed, the other with us seldom coming to perfection: some are soft and
tender, coming clean from the stone, others hard and fleshy, obstinately
cleaving thereunto. I shall endeavor to give you an account of all the best
our Nurceries now afford, which are many more, and much better than formerly
were known, beginning with the Early kinds.

The Nutmeg Peach grows not to so large a Tree as most of those which follow;
it is of two sorts, the first ripe, is small and white, the other a little
bigger, and red on the side next the Sun, both good tasted fine Fruits.

The Troy Peach grows to a fairer Tree, the fruit much larger, red on one
side, well tasted, and almost as early ripe as the last of the former.

The Savoy Peach is the next ripe, the fruit is fair, of a reddish yellow
color, and good taste.

Modena is an excellent Peach, of a yellowish color, and comes clean from the
stone.

Orleance red Peach is a fine fruit, and leaves the stone.

Morello Peach is a fair red-sided fruit, and parts from the stone.

Navar Peach is of a whitish color, and comes clean from the stone.

The Magdalene Peach little differs from the last.

Alberges is a fair yellow Peach, and leaves the stone.

Violet Musk Peach is red on the outside, and the flesh yellow.

The Persian Peach is a fair yellow Peach, but cleaves to the stone.

The white Monsieur is a fine early ripe Peach.

Bloody Monsieur is red within and without, a beautiful Peach.

Bordeaux is a large Peach, dark yellow, and red at the stone.

Verona is a very good red Peach.

Smyrna is a very good yellow Peach.

Rambovillet is a good dark yellow Peach.

Peach de Pavie is a good yellow Peach.

Slane Peach is a good yellow large Peach.

Friars Peach is an excellent fruit.

Crown Peach is a fair fruit, and ripe with the Newington.

Billi^e Peach is something like the Newington.

The Newington is an old Peach well known, the fruit is fair, of a greenish
white color, and red on the side next the Sun.

The Queens Peach is as well known as the last, it is large and good, of a
reddish yellow color on the outside.

Isabella Peach is of a fair reddish yellow color, and good taste.

Violet Muscat is a fine Violet-coloured good Peach.

Colerane Peach is a good red Peach.

Roman Peach is a fair yellow Peach.

Man Peach is a good mellow well tasted fruit.

Musk Peach is a large good-tasted beautiful fruit.

Quince Peach is something of that fashion, yellow and good.

Portugal Peach is an old good reddish yellow Peach.

Lavar Peach is the same with the Navar Peach.

Peach despot is yellow spotted with red.

Royal Peach is large like the Queens Peach, red at the stone, and ripe with
the Newington.

These are all good Peaches, but the most rare are, the white Nutmeg, the
Orleance, Modena, Savoy, M^ello, Violet Musk, Bordeaux, Billice, Isabella, and
the Royal Peach.

CHAP. VIII. Nucipersica.
THe Nectorine is so like unto the Peach in the Tree, that it cannot be
distinguished but by the Fruit, all Peaches being Downy on the outside, and
most of them bigger than Nectorines, which are smooth and round, and, before
they begin to ripen, much like unto a green Wallnut, but after of several
colors, some of them of a more delicate taste, and all of a firmer substance
than the Peaches, the most common is

The green Nectorine, of which there is a bigger and a lesser, the later not
worth the Planting, the other is bigger, always green on the outside, of a firm
and something hard substance, and raw taste, unless fully ripe.

The yellow Nectorine is also of two sorts, one small and comes clean from the
stone, the other bigger but not so good, both on the outside are of a Gold
yellow color.

The white Nectorine is as big as the greater yellow, white on the outside, and
a little red toward the Sun, no better tasted than the yellow.

The Paper-white Nectorine is something lesser than the former, but more
beautiful, and better tasted.

The painted Nectorine is as big as the first white, full of red spots, and of
a good taste.

The red Roman Nectorine has the fruit fairer and better tasted than most of
the former, of a fine red color on the outside, and near the stone, of a Musky
sweet scent, and delicate taste.

The red Nectorine that comes clean from the stone, is an excellent fruit, like
the former, but, for that it leaves the stone, more esteemed.

The Murrey Nectorine is bigger and rounder than the last, of a yellowish
color, shadowed over with dark murry purple, firm, and something hard, not so
good as the Roman.

The Tawny Nectorine is as red as the last on the outside, firm, and yellow
within, an excellent fruit.

The Russet Nectorine is a good fruit, of a brown or russet-colour on the
outside, and red at the stone.

The Orbine Nectorine is something like the last, but redder on the outer side,
and well tasted.

The best of these Nectorines are the red Roman, the Murry, and the Tawny
Nectorines.

The best sorts of Peaches, Nectorines, and other fine Fruits, Flowering
Shrubs, and Winter Greens, may be had of Mr. George Rickets of Hogsden before
remembered.

Peaches and Nectorines are raised by Inoculating the Buds in good Plum-stocks,
set in rich ground, that they may abound in Sap; for if the Stocks be weak and
dry, the Buds will not hold. The best Nectorines are to be Inoculated into an
Apricock, and so are the best Peaches, especially the Early kinds, for which
purpose you must provide Apricocks of the common kind, budded as low as you
can, that after one year they may be Inoculated again a foot higher with the
best Peaches, and especially Nectorines. These fruits are also raised from
Stones set in October, but many kinds are apt to degenerate; besides, the Trees
are not only impatient of removal, but of less continuance, and worse bearers
than those budded on the forementioned Stocks.

Peaches and Nectorines are more tender than Apricocks, and the fruits require
more Sun to ripen them, therefore they must be Planted on the hottest wall, and
that which has the Sun longest upon it: they must not be pruned in Winter, the
wood being apt then to die after the knife; the best time is when they begin to
flower, and then cut away what is dead, and such Lances as are too long, behind
a Leaf-bud, and nail them close to the wall.

If you let the middle stem grow upright, the side-branches will not prosper,
but decay for want of nourishment, the top drawing away the Sap; to prevent
which, whilst the Tree is young, bow down the head toward the Sun, and so nail
it to the wall, which will stop the Sap, and cause the Tree to put forth
side-branches, and to bear plentifully. Such Trees as are old and decaying, cut
them down in March as low as you can with convenience, leaving some branches to
draw the Sap, and cover the wound with Clay: the Stock will put forth new
Lances, and in a year or two come to bear fruit again.

CHAP. IX. Amigdala.
ALmonds may properly be placed next unto the Peaches and Nectorines, the Trees
much resembling them, but bigger, and growing upright, not needing the help of
a Wall; the Leaves and Flowers are like those of the Peach, the fruit is Downy
on the outside, but not fit to be eaten, having a thick smooth stone, wherein
is contained the Kernel, or Almond, in some sweet, and in others a little
bitter: they seldom come to any good perfection with us, and the Tree is
chiefly received for the beauty of the Flowers, which being many, Early, and of
a fair pale reddish color, make a fine show in a Garden. Of this there is a
Dwarf kind, small in all the parts, and seldom rises above four foot high; it
is tender, and therefore Planted in cases, and housed in Winter.

The Almond Tree is raised by setting the Stones or shells with the Almond in
it, in the places where they are to stand, being unapt to grow if removed.

CHAP. X. Nux Avellana.
THe Filbeard is a Tree well known, yet there are some kinds of Nuts that few
have seen, we will therefore acquaint you with them, and begin first with the
most common.

The white Filbeard differs from the common Hasel nut, in that the Husks are
longer, the Nuts thinner shelled, and the Kernels of a better taste.

The red Filbeard differs from the white in the Husks and Nuts, which are
browner, and the Kernels covered all over with a red skin, of a more delicate
taste than the former.

The Filbeard of Constantinople has the Bark whiter, the Leaves bigger, and
the Husks more jagged and rent than the former, the Nuts are like those of the
white Filbeard, but rounder and bigger.

The great round Nut has shorter Husks than the Filbeards, the Nuts bigger
than any two of them, short and round, with great heads, the crowns in some
being as broad as a Groat, the Shell is thick and hard, and the Kernels much
bigger than other Nuts are, shells and all.

The great long Soft-shelled Nut differs from the last, in that the Nuts are
long, larger, and something flat, the Shells as soft as any of the Filbeards,
the Kernel as big as an Almond, and very well tasted.

I confess these Nuts are more proper for an Orchard than a Garden, but in
respect they fitly serve to be Planted and spread upon the North wall of the
Fruit-Gardens, I have set them down in this place.

They are all aptly raised from Suckers, or by Grafting, as I have found by
experience, having many goodly Trees of the Filbeard of Constantinople, and the
great Nut, which I grafted upon ordinary Hazle stocks; these Nuts spread upon a
North wall, do not only cover it with fair green leaves, but will bear Nuts
abundantly; they must not be set too thick, because the branches will spread
far and wide, which must be bowed down, nailed to the wall, and often sheared
in Somer, which will cause the Trees to thicken, and bear more and bigger Nuts,
than if they grew at large.

CHAP. XI. Vitis.
THe Vine is a Plant well known, the several kinds chiefly differ in the
Grapes, and some in the Leaves, as bigger, or lesser, and more or less cut in
on the sides; and although the varieties are infinite, yet few of them will
prosper and bring their fruits to perfection with us, therefore we will mention
such only, as are fittest for our Climate, and begin with the first ripe.

The small black Grape, or as some call it the Cluster Grape, is first ripe
with us, the Grapes small, black when ripe, set thick on the bunches, and well
tasted.

The white Muscadine Grape bears large bunches, and great Grapes, sweet and
good, ripening well most years.

The Canada Grape, or Parsley Vine, has the leaves more cut in and divided,
than those of any other; the Grapes white, ripe with the last, but thinly set
on the bunches.

The red Muscadine Grape is as large as the White, but not so apt to ripen with
us, requiring more Sun.

The Raisin of the Sun Grape is large, red and good, and in the Southern parts
ripens reasonable well.

The Bursarobe is an excellent large, sweet, white Grape, of much esteem in
France, and in some years will be ripe with us.

The Frontiniack is a white Musky sweet Grape, but seldom comes to perfection.

The Muscat Grapes are most esteemed in France, as the Chasseluts, Bicane, and
Rochel; the Grapes are sweet and good, great bearers, and doubtless in a
skilful hand, and good place, will do well with us.

The Burlet is the largest Grape we have, and though the Grapes be sour, as not
ripening with us, yet the great bunches, and large white Grapes, make a gallant
show on a Wall, and will make very good Vinegar.

There are more than a hundred several sorts of Grapes, but these mentioned are
fittest for our Climate; the most agreeable are the three first. All Vines are
aptly increased by Layers or Cuttings, and if the earth be good, will quickly
strike roots.

They are to be Planted on South walls, and confined by cutting; the closer
they are pruned, the better they will bear, and the fairer will be the Grapes:
make the ground you set them in, with rich light sandy earth, and every Winter
open the Roots, and mend the soil with old dung; cut them at a knot in January
to prevent bleeding, and about Midsomer take away the superfluous branches, and
stop the Lances before the Flowers, and when the Grapes begin to swell, take
the leaves from about them, that they may have the full benefit of the Sun.

CHAP. XII. Ficus.
THe Fig Tree is of several sorts, and some of them will live and bear fruits
with us; the most agreeable is

The greater blue Fig, which spread upon a Wall, will rise six or more foot
high, and in breadth proportionable; the wood has a great pith, and the leaves
are large, divided commonly into five Sections, of a dark green color: the
fruit breaks out of the branches without blossom, which when ripe, is long
and round, like a Katherine Pear, of a dark bluish brown color on the outside,
but more red within, and full of small white grains, soft, mellow, and sweet.

Tho Dwarf blue Fig grows not to so big a Tree as the former, the fruit
smaller, better tasted, and sooner ripe: it must be defended in Winter, else it
will yearly die to the ground.

There are several other sorts of Figs, as the Flowering Fig, Figs of
Lanquedoc, Figs of Marseilles, the white dwarf Fig, and others; but the greater
blue Fig is fittest for our Climate.

These Figs are to be planted upon a Wall, that they may have the benefit of
the Sun to ripen the fruits: they are increased by Layers or Cuttings; besides,
they are apt to yield Suckers.

CHAP. XIII. Sorbus.
THe common Service-tree grows wild in many places, but there is a kind thereof
more rare, and like the Horse-Chesnut esteemed; this nobler kind of Service by
long standing grows to a fair Tree, with many branches set with winged leaves
like those of the Ash, but smaller, and indented about the edges; the Flowers
grow in clusters, succeeded by Fruits, in some round, in others Pear-fashion,
much bigger and better tasted than those of the common kind.

This Tree is rarely found in England, though common in France; it may be
raised of Seeds or Kernels, or grafted on the Stock of the common kind.

CHAP. XIV. Mespilus.
THe Medlar is of four several sorts, as the common ordinary kind with Thorns,
which is vulgarly known.

The greater Medlar has larger shoots and longer leaves than the former,
without Thorns, and the fruit much bigger and better: this succeeds very well
grafted on a Pear-stock, and if spread on a Wall much better than on a Standard.

There is another curious sort of Medlar, that differs chiefly from the last,
in that the fruit is without stones.

The Neapolitan Medlar or Azarollier grows to a reasonable fair Tree, with
many branches and some thorns; the leaves are like those of Hawthorn, but
bigger; the fruit is like that of the former, but rounder, much less, and
better tasted: this is commonly grafted on a Hawthorn, but with no good
success, for the Grafts seldom take, and those that do, rarely bear; both which
defects may be supplied by a Pear-stock and a good Wall.

CHAP. XV.
Lotus.
THe Lote or Nettle-tree grows with us to a small Tree, with leaves like a
Nettle, the fruit like a small Cherry, green at first, after red, and black
when ripe, of a sharp (but not unpleasant) taste.

Pishamin.
THe Virginian Plum grows to a fair Tree, with broad-veined green leaves, and
bears a fruit like a Date, set in a husk of four green leaves, of a blackish
color, firm like a Date, and something sweet, with great flat thick Kernels,
from whence the Trees are raised.

Cornus.
THe Cornell-tree, or (as many call it) the Cornelian Cherry-tree, in the
manner of growing resembles a Dog-tree, the leaves smooth and veined, the
flowers small, early, and yellow, the fruit late ripe, and formed like a small
Olive, of a shining red color in one, yellow with red sides in another, and
almost white in a third, for all these varieties I have seen: the fruits (when
green) are good to pickle as Olives, and (when ripe) to preserve.

These three last-mentioned Trees are raised from the Stones or Kernels, the
two first preserved for their rarity, and the last for the fruit, and for that
it may be fashioned into any form, yet bear never the worse.

CHAP. XVI. Morus.
THe Mulberry-tree is of some diversity, the Berries are of three colors, as
black, white, and red; we will begin with the first because best known.

The black Mulberry grows to a large scrambling Tree, spreading wide, but not
very tall, apt to be bowed into any form; the leaves are round, thick and
pointed, nicked about the edges; the flowers are downy Catlins, which turn into
Berries, at first green, after red, and lastly black, like unto Hedge
Black-berries, but bigger and longer, something sweet in taste.

There is another sort of black Mulberry, more rare; it chiefly differs in the
Berries, which are much bigger and better tasted than those of the former
common kind.

The white Mulberry grows lesser spread than the black, the leaves paler,
softer, and thinner set on the branches, the Berries smaller, the grains
thicker set, white and sweet in taste.

The Virginian Mulberry soon grows with us to a fair Tree, with larger leaves
than the last; the Berries are longer and redder than any of the former, and of
a pleasant taste.

These Trees are easily raised either by Suckers, Layers or Cuttings; and the
great black Mulberry may be grafted on the common kind.

CHAP. XVII.
Grossularia.
GOosberries are of diverse sorts and colors, as red, blue, yellow, white, and
green; some of them round, others long; some smooth, and others prickly.

Of red Goosberries there are three sorts, one small and round, seldom bearing;
another bigger and a little flat, but no very good bearer; the third is called
the Damson Goosberry, this is a good bearer, the Berries large, round, and red,
and (when full ripe) with a blue tincture over them like a Damson.

The blue Goosberry has the Berries thinly set on the branches, which are
small, a little long, and of a dark red color, tinctured over with blue.

Yellow Goosberries are of several sorts, one large, round, and smooth; others
lesser; some long and prickly, of which there are two sorts chiefly esteemed;
the first round, smooth, large and good, of a bright yellow color, and called
the Amber Goosberry; the other is large, long, and prickly, of a deep yellow
color and good taste, and is called the great Hedgehog Goosberry.

The white Holland Goosberry is the fairest, biggest, and best bearer of all
others; the Berries are large, round, smooth, white, transparent, and
well-tasted.

The green Goosberry is of two sorts, one bigger and longer than the other,
both very green and good, but the bigger is most esteemed.

Goosberries are propagated by Suckers, Layers or Cuttings. I have a
Goosberry-bush that from one stem bears four several-coloured Berries,
effected by Budding, the Amber, Damson, and Green, upon several branches of the
White. Those that desire the like curiosity, must in Winter prune and prepare
the Stock, leaving thereon three branches only, and at the Spring rub off all
buds that come forth in other places; about Midsomer put in the Buds taken from
the biggest Lances, which after they are grown to some bigness, one Bud of the
natural Stock may be suffered to grow to make four sorts; the Stock must be
kept from Suckers, the Lances in Somer stopped, and pruned in Winter, that one
draw not more Sap than another.

CHAP. XVIII. Ribes.
COrinthes, or Currants, as they are vulgarly called, are Plants well known unto
all; of these there are five several sorts, which differ chiefly (as the
Goosberries) in the Berries.

The small black Curran is not worth the Planting.

The small red Curran is of no better esteem.

The great red Curran is a plentiful bearer, the Berries twice as big as those
of the former, of a bright shining red color, and good (though something
sharp) taste.

The greatest dark red Dutch Curran differs from the last, in that the Berries
are bigger, of a more blackish color, and sweeter taste.

The white Curran is like the great red, only the Berries are something
lesser, white, transparent, and well-tasted.

They are as easily increased as Goosberries by Suckers, parting the roots or
laying the branches; these may be budded one upon another, and so several sorts
grow from one Stock, as is said of the Goosberries.

CHAP. XIX. Oxyacantha.
THe Barberry is common with all that have Orchards or Gardens, especially the
common kind; but there are two other sorts more rare, the first has many
branches of Berries that are without stones, and some on the same Bush with
stones, like the common kind.

The other Barberry chiefly differs from the common kind, in that the Berries
are twice as big, and more excellent to preserve; and, if the roots be purged
from Suckers, and the branches spread upon a Wall, the Berries will be fairer,
better colored, and indeed excellent for diverse uses.

These Plants are too apt to abound with Suckers, and to multiply too much.

CHAP. XX.
HAving now given you an account of all the best Garden-Fruits, Vines, and
Berries that hitherto have come to our knowledge, we shall proceed to the rest
of the Flower-bearing Trees, Shrubs, and Greens, omitted in the first Book, as
being fitter for a Fruit, than Flower-Garden, and that I may perform what was
promised in the Epistle and Proem, (with submission) insert them in the end of
this Book.

Castanea Equina.
THe Horse Chestnut was raised from the Nuts that came from Turkey, which grow
well with us, and in time to a fair large Tree, full of Boughs and Branches,
set with gallant great green Leaves, divided into six, seven, or nine parts,
or several leaves standing together, nicked about the edges, much resembling
those of Palma Christi; at the ends of the Branches in May many Flowers come
forth, each having four white leaves, with thrids in the middle, which in their
natural Country, turn into Chestnuts, but rarely with us. It is respected for
the beauty of the fair green Leaves and Flowers, and with us increased (in
default of Nuts) by Suckers. The name was imposed from the property of the
Nuts, which in Turkey are given to Horses in their Provender, to cure such as
have coughs, or are broken winded.

Arbor Judae.
Judas Tree seldom grows with us above six foot high, the young Shoots have
a reddish bark, and the Leaves round, the Flowers break through the bark in the
Spring, before the Leaves, three or four standing together, on a small short
stalk, in fashion like Pease-blossoms, of a fine purplish bright red color,
which are suceeded by long flat cods, containing small flat black seeds; there
is another of this kind, whose bark, leaves, and cods, are greener, and the
flowers white; they are apt to put forth many Suckers, by which, as also by
Layers, they may be increased.

Laburnum.
BEan Trefoile is of two sorts, a greater, and a lesser, the first rises to a
reasonable tall Tree, with a whitish green bark, full of Boughs and Branches,
set with Leaves, three always standing together; at the joints of the branches
in May, many yellow Flowers come forth, like those of Broom, but lesser, and of
a paler yellow color, growing on long branched stalks, succeeded by flat thin
cods, with small black seeds: the other lesser kind, chiefly differs in that it
is smaller in all parts, the branches weak, and the whole Plant scarce able to
support it self without help; these are now both common, for that every Cutting
will grow, and those of the greater kind soon rise to large Trees.

Cytisus secundus Clusii.
THis kind of Trefoile is much smaller in all the parts than the former, the
leaves of a fresher green, and almost round, three growing together close to
the stalks, the middlemost biggest; the Flowers are like those of the former,
of the same season, and the Cods small and hairy at the ends; both these Plants
are aptly increased either by Seeds or Suckers.

Colutea vesicaria.
THe great bastard Sena with bladders, has a stock sometimes as big as a man's
Arm, divided into many branches set with winged leaves, like those of Lycoris:
the Flowers come forth in May, like those of Broom, but of a paler yellow
color, after which appear clear thin transparent bladders, containing black
seeds.

Colutea Scorpioides major.
THe greater Scorpion poded bastard Sena is lower, and lesser in all the parts
than the former, and chiefly differs, in that the bladders which succeed the
Flowers, are distinguished into many divisions, like unto a Scorpions tail,
containing small seeds: this and the former are raised from Seeds, Suckers,
Layers, or Cuttings.

Spartum Hispanicum.
SPanish Broom has a woody stalk, divided into many small long green twigs,
with small long green leaves, which soon fall away, and leave the twigs naked:
the Flowers come forth in May, toward the top of the branches, like those of
common Broom, but larger, the Cods are long and small, containing brown flat
seeds, by which this Plant may be increased, as also by Suckers.

Nux vesicaria.
THe bladder Nut, if pruned up, and kept from Suckers, will grow to be six foot
high; the bark is whitish, and the leaves like unto those of Elder, the Flowers
white and sweet, many hanging down on a long stalk, after them greenish
bladders, each containing one smooth small Nut with a green Kernel; it is too
apt to send forth Suckers, and thereby to be increased.

Sambucus Rosea.
THe Gilder Sose rises six or more foot high, spreading into many branches,
with broad leaves divided into three Sections; at the tops of the young
branches comes forth a round ball of many single white Flowers, close set
together; it flowers in May with the Pionies, which placed together in Chimneys
or Windows, make a fine show: the Plant is hardy, and of long lasting,
increased by Suckers, which will soon bear Flowers.

Syringa flore albo.
THe white Syringa, or Pipe Tree, never rises tall, but grows in a bush,
with many small branches, and diverse Suckers from the root; the leaves stand
two at a joint, which are ragged, crumpled, a little pointed, and dented about
the edges; the Flowers in May come forth at the ends of the Branches, many
together, consisting of four white leaves, with yellow thrids in the middle; it
is easily increased, being too apt to put forth Suckers.

Lylac sive Syringa flore caeruleo.
THe blue Syringa, or Pipe-Tree, is so common, that it needs no description,
especially the ordinary kind with blue Flowers, but there are three other sorts
more rare, which chiefly differ in the color of the Flowers, those of the one
being Snow white, another Silver color, that is white, with a light wash of
blew; the third has larger Shoots, grows more upright, and bears more, and
much fairer Flowers on one branch than any of the former, and of a fair purple
color; they all flower in April, and must yearly be discharged of Suckers,
else they will choke the tree, and cause it to die, or not bring forth Flowers;
this said, I need not tell you how this Plant is increased; they are all hardy
Plants except the white, which is more tender, and would be Planted on a Wall.

Paliurus.
Christ's Thorn rises in some places five or six foot high, with many slender
branches, set with broad and round leaves, veined, and a little pointed, also
thick set with small Thorns; the Flowers are small and yellow, many together on
a long stalk, which in Palestine its natural place, but not with us, are
succeeded by round, flat, shelly fruit, covered with a fleshy skin, including
two or three small hard brown and flat seeds: this Thorn is much esteemed for
its rarity, but especially for the name, being that (as is supposed) wherewith
our Savior was crowned, and is increased by laying the Branches.

Rhus Mrytifolia.
THe Myrtle-leaved Sumach rises yearly from the Root, with many small
branches, sometimes four or five foot high, set with winged leaves, like those
of the broader-leaved Myrtle, on each side a middle rib; at the tops of the
Branches come forth diverse Flowers, consisting of many purple thrids, which
turn into small black Berries, containing small Seeds, whereby, as also by
parting the Roots, new Plants are raised.

Rhus Virginiana.
THe Virginian Sumach, or Bucks-horn tree, grows in some places six foot
high, the young branches are of a reddish brown color, handling like Velvet,
resembling the Velvet head of a Buck, yielding milk if cut or broken; the
Leaves are many, set on each side of a middle rib, snipt about the edges; at
the ends of the Branches come forth long and thick brown tufts, made of many
soft and woolly thrums, among which appear many small Flowers, much redder than
the tufts, which yield small Seeds; the Root puts forth many Suckers,
whereby it is increased.

Hedera Virginiana.
THe Virginian Ivy rises up with diverse small stems, divided into many long
weak branches, which set against a Wall, will fasten thereunto, with small
claws like a Birds foot, and climb to the top of a tall Chimney; the Leaves at
first are red, and crumpled, but after fair and green, divided into five, six,
or more leaves, standing together upon a small foot-stalk, set without order;
the Flowers with us only appear in bud, but never open; the Roots run on the
top of the ground, and by cutting some of them from the stock, and turning up
the ends, new Plants may be raised.

Tamarix.
THe Tamarisk Tree is well known to most persons; in some places by long
standing it grows tall and great, though commonly with small and weak
branches; the red Shoots set with small short hairy soft green leaves, which
fall away in Winter: this is of little beauty or esteem, but there is another
of this kind more rare, in respect the leaves are wholly white, and abide so
constantly, from year to year; this as the other, is increased by Suckers or
Layers.

Larix.
THe Lanch-tree, with us, grows slowly, and to be found in few places; it
has a rugged bark, and boughs that branch in good order, with diverse small
yellowish bunched eminences, set thereon at several distances, from whence
tufts of many small, long, and narrow smooth leaves do yearly come forth; it
bears among the green leaves many beautiful flowers, which are of a fine
crimson color, and in its natural place succeeded by small Cones like
Cypress-nuts, whereby new Plants are raised, being hardly increased any other
way.

Of all these flower-bearing and beautiful Trees, I have placed this Larch-tree
the last, in respect it is the rarest, and (although it falls the leaves in
Winter) nearest in nature to those ever-green Trees that are next to follow,
and so may serve as a Bridge to pass from the one unto the other.

CHAP. XXI.
Abies.
THe Firre-tree is of too tall a growth to be planted in Gardens, and so is the
Pine; they are both raised from the Nuts or Kernels, and grow slowly with us,
and fit only to be planted in spacious Orchards, or on each side broad Walks;
but there are several other Greens, that are proper to be placed in Gardens,
the which require to be more fully described; the first and biggest of those
usually planted in Gardens is called

Arbor vitae.
THe Tree of Life by long standing grows as big as a Man's leg, with many
branches hanging downwards, and set with winged leaves, something like those of
Savin, but flatter, and platted like a Lace, of a fair green color in Somer,
but dark and brown in Winter, of a strong resinous scent, to some not
unpleasant; in May, on the tops of the branches are many small downy yellowish
flowers, standing in small scaly heads, wherein lie small long brownish seeds,
which in some places ripen with us, and being sowed spring and prosper
reasonably well, but the Plant is so apt to root in Layers, that the Seeds are
seldom sown.

Cupressus.
THe Cypress-tree, that is now common in every Garden of any note, grows in
time to a tall Tree, not spreading, but standing upright in a Pyramidical form,
broadest below, and narrower to the top; the Leaves (if they may be so called)
being ever green, small, long, and flat, wholly cover the stalks: some old
Plants will bear Nuts (as they are called) of a russet or brown color,
containing many small brown Seeds, which sowed (especially those that we have
from hotter Countries) will come up, and thrive very well; they must be sowed
in October, and defended from Frosts in Winter whiles the Plants are young and
tender.

Vermicularis frutex major.
THe greater Tree Stone-crop rises up like a small Tree, upright, full of
twigs and branches, thick set on all sides with small round sharp-pointed
leaves, something like those of Prick-madam, but lesser and shorter, and of a
dark green color, abiding all the Winter without falling: the flowers come
forth in August, of a yellowish green color: this Plant is preserved in some
good Gardens for its beauty and rarity, and is increased by Layers or Cuttings
set in the beginning of March, shaded and watered in dry seasons.

Ilex Arbor.
THe ever-green Oak grows slowly, and with us in few places seen, other than
as a small Tree, spreading in branches set with small hard green leaves,
indented about the edges, and a little prickly, which abide all the Winter: in
the Spring it bears small yellowish mossy flowers, and in some places small
blackish Acorns, from which young Plants may be raised, but most usually by
laying down the branches.

Agrifolium.
HOlly is a common Hedge-tree, yet there is an elegant kind thereof,
entertained in Gardens, for that the ever-green shining leaves are variously
marked with Gold-yellow, and so continuing constantly from year to year; it is
aptly increased by Layers, and capable of any form.

Buxus.
BOx is of four sorts, the first is our common English kind, well known unto
all, of which there is another elegant variety, that has every leaf thereof
edged and compassed about with yellow; this is called Buxus Auratus, or Gilded
Box: the third is a low and dwarf kind, whose leaves are much smaller than the
former; and of this there is also a Gilded kind, much more beautiful than the
other; the ordinary serves fitly to border large open Frets for flowers, as
the common English kind those of a spacious Fruit-garden, as also for Hedges.
All these kinds of Box are easily raised, for every Slip thereof set in March
will take root the first year, and spring the next.

Pyracantha.
THe ever-green Hawthorn, if suffered to grow at large, rises up six or more
foot high, full of branches, set with ever-green leaves snipt about the edges,
and long sharp thorns: the flowers come forth in the Spring, many clustering
together like those of Hawthorn, as the Berries are which succeed, but more in
number on one branch, of the color of Coral, and abiding (if kept from Birds)
the greatest part of Winter: the Plant is increased by Suckers, Layers, or by
sowing the Berries, which (like those of common Hawthorn) will lie in the
ground a whole year before they come up: this Green serves with others to make
an ever-green Hedge.

Celastrus.
THe Staf-tree (as Mr. Parkinson calls it) by long standing in an open place
grows to a reasonable tall Tree, but commonly in a Hedge-bush: the Leaves,
which fall not away in Winter, are something like those of Laurus tinus, but of
a fairer (though sad) green color; it bears on a small stalk four or five
yellowish green Flowers, which turn into small Berries, like black Cherries,
containing a stone with a kernel: this Plant is chiefly increased by Layers,
and the best use that can be made of it is to mix with Pyracantha, for the
making of an ever-green Hedge.

Alaternus.
THe ever-green Privet, or (as it is commonly called) Alaternus, never rises
high, but grows low in a thick Bush, full of branches, set with small hard
ever-green leaves, round, and indented about the edges; the Flowers come forth
at the joints, many together, which are small and white, succeeded by small
black Berries, containing many Seeds, by which, as also by laying the Branches,
this fine Plant may easily be increased. Those that affect Hedges in their
Gardens, cannot make choice of any fitter for the purpose than this, and the
next that follows, in respect of their aptness to be formed and confined by
Laths or Rods to any proportion, abiding to be sheared, and all the year
retaining their incomparable verdure.

Phyllirea.
Mock-Privet is of several sorts, but that here intended is the first of
Clusius, and from his description set out by Mr. Johnson: In France this fine
Green is much used in Palisade, tall, ever-green Hedges, and to adorn the Walls
of Courts; it grows well with us, and much higher than Alaternus; the Leaves
longer, more cut in on the edges, and of a fresher green color; the Flowers
are small, many together, and of a greenish yellow color, succeeded by small
black Berries, wherein the Seed is contained, which sowed in October, and
defended from long hard Frosts in Winter, will come up at the Spring, and soon
furnish Plants to make an ever-green Hedge, for which purpose this and the last
are the chiefest, except that excellent kind called Phyllirea folio leviter
serrato, which has deep ever-green leaves, lightly cut in on the edges, and
thicker set on the branches; vigorously enduring the Winter, and aptly
reducible into any form; but very hard to be increased either by Seeds or
Layers, as Mr. Bobert (the ingenious Keeper of the public Garden in Oxford)
has experimented by many trials.

Laurus.
THe Bay Tree, especially this common kind, is so well known, that it were
superfluous to describe it; yet being the best of the Greens common in our
Country, and serving for several uses, it is not to be neglected in the
furniture of the Fruit-garden. I have seen a sort of this ordinary Bay, that in
respect of the smooth shining green leaves, and those thicker set on the
branches, carried the face of a noble Plant, and certainly was a choice variety
raised from Seeds. These Bays are not to be set too much in the Sun, nor open
to the North or East winds; their Roots must be defended from long hard Frosts,
by covering them with store of long Dung, which at the Spring may be removed:
they are commonly increased by Suckers, and some sow the Berries, which will
come up and prosper reasonably well, if defended in Winter. And as I begun the
first Book with a forward Bay bearing Cherries, I will now conclude this last
with our domestic Bay bearing Berries.

From foreign Bays I first set forth,
Then traveled from South to North,
And in my journey more than guest
What Flowers grew 'twixt East and West,
And which were like to thrive and stand
In this our cold and steril Land:
Arrived at home, I anchor may
Cast under this our Country Bay.
And now, kind Readers, to complete your pleasure,
I have exposed all my stock of Treasure;
The naked Nature's brought unto your view,
As well of ancient Beauties, as of new;
Fine Flowers and Fruits presented to the Glad,
Garlands of Greens and Cypress to the Sad;
The flowering Shrubs and blossom-bearing Trees
To Diligence, that is, unto the Bees.
And for my guerdon this is all I crave,
Some gentle hand with Flowers may strew my Grave,
And with one sprig of Bays my Hearse be friend,
When as my Life, as now my Book, does
END.
Laus Deo.
THE TABLE.
A
AConite. Page. 140 Almonds. Page. 224 Anemones, and the kinds. Page. 125-135
Apples. Page. 209, 210 Thorn-apples. Page. 194 Apples of Love. Page. 196
Apricocks. Page. 219 Asphodils. Page. 93, 94, 95
B
Balsam-apple. Page. 188 Barberry-tree. Page. 231 Basil. Page. 198 Bay-trees.
Page. 15, 16, 17, 24, 25 Bay common. Page. 239 Bears-ears. Page. 151-154
Bee-flower. Page. 120 Bell-flowers. Page. 147 Canterbury-bells. Page. 147, 193
Bind-weed. Page. 193 Bladder-nut. Page. 233 Blue-bottles. Page. 184 Spanish
Broom. Page. 233 Box. Page. 237 Buttons. Page. 198
C
Camomil double. Page. 166 Campions. Page. 159, 160 Cardinals-flower. Page. 148
Canterbury-bells. Page. 147, 193 Caterpillars. Page. 198 Cherries. Page. 214,
215 Cherries double-flowered. Page. 21, 24 Horse-Chesnut. Page. 232 Christmas
flower. Page. 123 Christmas-rose. Page. 143 Christ's thorn. Page. 234 Cistus.
Page. 39, 40 Colombines. Page. 177, 178 Corn-flag. Page. 119 Corn-flowers.
Page. 184 Cornel-tree. Page. 229 Cowslips. Page. 156, 157, 158, 159
Cranes-bill. Page. 142, 143 Indian Cresses. Page. 187 Crown Imperials. Page.
40, 41 Crow-foot. Page. 136, 139 Currants. Page. 231 Cypress-tree. Page. 236
D
Daffodils. Page. 73-82 Double Daisies. Page. 167 Dittany. Page. 38, 39, 40
Dogs-tooth. Page. 121, 122
E
Ellebore. Page. 143, 144, 145
F
Featherfew double. Page. 166 Dog-Fennel double. ibid. Fennel-flower. Page. 190
Fig Tree. Page. 227 Indian Fig. Page. 150 Filbeards. Page. 224, 225 Firre-tree.
Page. 236 Corn-Flag. Page. 119 Toad-Flax. Page. 179, 180 Flower-de-luces. Page.
107-158 Flower of Bristol. Page. 159, 160 Sulcans Flower. Page. 184 Flower
Gentle. Page. 185, 186 Flower of the Sun. Page. 191 Flower of the night. Page.
195 Christmas Flower. Page. 123 Fox-gloves. Page. 180, 181 Fritillaries. Page.
46, 47, 48, 49
G
Gentian. Page. 146 Stock-Gilliflowers. Page. 162, 163, 164 Queens
Gilliflowers. Page. 165 Gilliflowers. Page. 167, 168, 169, 170 Candy
Goldy-locks. Page. 186 Goosberries. Page. 230 Grapes. Page. 225, 226
H
Hauthorn ever-green. Page. 237 Holly variegated. ibid. Hollihocks. Page. 176
Hollow-root. Page. 141 Honisuckles. Page. 35, 37 French Honisuckle. Page. 198
Horse-Chesnut. Page. 132 Humble Plant. Page. 198 Hyacinths. Page. 83-88
I
Jacinths. Page. 83-88 Jasmines. Page. 19, 22, 25, 34, 35, 37 Sweet John's.
Page. 171 Jucca. Page. 149 Judas tree. Page. 232 Virginian Ivy. Page. 235
K
Kings-spear. Page. 94
L
Ladies-slipper. Page. 144 Ladies-smocks double. Page. 166 Larch-tree. Page.
235 Larks-heels. Page. 187 Lavender. Page. 173 Tree of Life. Page. 236 Persian
Lily. Page. 47 Lilies. Page. 42, 43, 46 Day-Lily. Page. 94 Con^all-Lily. Page.
145 Noble Liverwort. Page. 141, 142 Lovelies a bleeding. Page. 185 Garden
Lupines. Page. 197
M
Shrub Mallow. Page. 23, 25 Marjerom. Page. 172 Sweet Marjerom. Page. 199
Marjerom Gentle. ibid. Marigolds. Page. 191 African or French Marigolds. Page.
191, 192 Ma^tagons. Page. 43, 44, 45, 46 Mastick. Page. 172 Mervail of Peru.
Page. 195 Medlars. Page. 228 Moly. Page. 90, 91, 92 Moth-Mullein. Page. 188,
189 Mulberries. Page. 229 Myrtles. Page. 17, 18, 19, 20
N
Nectorines. Page. 222, 223 Nettle-tree. Page. 228, 229 Tree Nightshade. Page.
23, 25 Shrub Nightshade. ibid. Non-such. Page. 159, 160 Bladder Nut. Page. 233
O
Oak of Jerusalem. Page. 199 Oak of Cappadocia. ibid. Oak ever-green. Page. 237
Olive wild. Page. 22, 25 Orenge-tree. Page. 16, 17, 19, 20 Oxslip. Page. 157
P
Peach-tree double-flowered. Page. 22, 24 Peaches. Page. 220, 221, 222, 223
Pears. Page. 211, 212 Pease everlasting. Page. 197 Pellitory double. Page. 166
Peniroyal. Page. 173 Peonies. Page. 97, 98 Phyllirea. Page. 19 Pinks. Page. 170
Pipe-tree. Page. 22, 25, 234 Pishamin. Page. 228, 229 Plums. Page. 216, 217,
218 Pomgranate double-flowered. Page. 21, 24 Poppies double. Page. 188, 189
Primroses. Page. 156, 157, 158, 159 Privet ever-green. Page. 238 Mock Privet.
ibid.
Q
Quinces. Page. 213
R
Indian Reed. Page. 150 Rose-trees. Page. 26, 27, 28-33 Rosemary. Page. 173
Guelder Rose. Page. 234 Christmas Rose. Page. 143
S
Saffron flowers. Page. 102-106 Meadow-Saffron. Page. 99, 100, 101
Bastard-Saffron. Page. 184 Sage. Page. 172 Woody Saint John's wort. Page. 24
Sanicle. Page. 154 Satin flower. Page. 198 Satyrion. Page. 120 Scabions. Page.
182, 183 Sena-tree. Page. 233 Sensible Plant. Page. 198 Service-tree. Page.
227, 228 Virginian Silk. Page. 149 Ladies-slipper. Page. 144 Ladies-smocks.
Page. 166 Snails. Page. 198 Snap-dragons. Page. 178, 179 Sow-bread. Page. 122,
123, 124 Spanish Broom. Page. 233 Spider-wort. Page. 95, 96 Shrub Spiraea.
Page. 23 Staff-tree. Page. 238 Star-flowers. Page. 88, 89, 90 Star-wort. Page.
191 Tree Stone-crop. Page. 237 Strawberry-tree. Page. 16, 17 Sultans flower.
Page. 184 Sumach. Page. 235 Sun-flower. Page. 191
T
Tamarisk-tree. Page. 235 Globe-Thistle. Page. 182 Christ's Thorn. Page. 234
Throat-wort. Page. 148 Time. Page. 173 Tree Trefoil. Page. 22 Bean Trefoil.
Page. 232 Tree of Life. Page. 236 Candy Tufts. Page. 196 Tulips. Page. 50,
51-72
V
Vines. Page. 225, 226 Bulbous Violets. Page. 82, 83 Dames Violet. Page. 165
Dogs-tooth Violet. Page. 121 Marians Violet. Page. 193 Virgins-bower. Page. 36,
37 Virginian Climber. ibid. Virginian Ivy. Page. 235 Virginian silk. Page. 149
W
Wall-flowers. Page. 161, 162 Sweet-Williams. Page. 171 Wind-flowers. Page.
125-135 Woodbinds. Page. 35, 37 Winter Wolf-bane. Page. 140
FINIS.
The Printer prays the Reader lend
His helping hand these faults to mend.
ERRATA.
IN the Latin Verses at the foot of the Front, line 4. read fructum. In the
Verses to the Lady Gerard, l. 28. r. Hebe. In Flora p. 1. l. last r. intercept.
p. 11. l. 4. r. mell. l. 40 r. Jasmines, Greens. p. 31 l. 15. r. weak scent. p
35. l. 27. r. somer. p 41. l. 32. r. off-sets. p. 43. l. 36. r. Rundles. p. 54.
l. 38. r. ruin. p 57. l 4. r. scarlet. p. 64. l. 25. r. Turgians. p. 68. l.
12. r. most of these Tulips. p. 79. l. 14. r. some of. p. 99. l. ^. r. perhaps.
p. 137. l. 22. r. a little more double. p. 139. l. 33. r. cut into five. p.
166. l. 28. r. Dogs fennel. In Ceres, p. 180. l. 10. r. downy. p. 191. l. 10.
r. twenty fine. p. 193. l. 26. r. counties. p. 197. l. 18. r. must not be set.
p. 199. l. 25. r. pleasant taste. In Pomena, p 214 l. 8. r. Riguar. p. 239. l.
15. r. foreign.

Where Flowers are set or sowed of seeds,
We must expect some noxious weeds.
garden plots

garden plots

garden plots

garden plots

garden plots

garden plots

garden plots

garden plots


