Serious Advice TO THE ARMY.

LAMBETH-HOUSE: March 20th. 1692/3;.
This Serious and Seasonable Advice to the English Soldiers of His Majesty's
Army, sent to me by a Reverend Divine in the Country, I do not only allow to
be Printed, but do also earnestly recommend it to those for whose sake it was
composed, as that which I hope may, by the blessing of God, be of great use to
them.

JO. CANT.

Serious and Seasonable ADVICE TO THE ENGLISH SOLDIERS OF His Majesty's Army.

LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill, and Will.
Rogers at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. M DC XC III.

Serious and Seasonable ADVICE TO THE English Soldiers, etc.
Gentlemen,
A Military Employment, when it is undertaken with a good intention, begun and
carried on for honest ends and purposes, has been generally thought not only
lawful and barely innocent, but highly useful and commendable likewise. And
since the common Safety of Europe, as well as the necessary Defense and
Preservation of that Church and Nation to which you belong, is the Cause for
which you are now engaged; you will not so much want a Casuist to state the
Lawfulness of your Profession, as you seem to stand in need of some Christian
Monitor to put you in mind how you ought to behave your selves in it.

The Calling of a Soldier is doubtless very well consistent with that of a
Christian; and although the Armor which the Gospel recommends, is of a Spiritual
nature, and such as we are all required to put on and employ in our Defense
against our Spiritual Enemies; yet we no where find, that either our Blessed
Savior, or any of his Apostles, did ever condemn the use of Secular Arms and
Carnal Weapons as absolutely unlawful. Nor indeed can it be reasonably
imagined, but that Christians as well as other men may be innocently allowed to
provide the best they can both for their Personal and for the Public Safety.

The truth is, that which has brought so ill an opinion upon a Military
Profession, is the looseness of Manners, and Unchristian Conversation of too
many of those who are employed in it: And it is the scandalous Example of some
amongst you, which has brought so ill a report upon the Character of a Soldier
in the general. For the undiscerning part of mankind (which is generally the
greatest part of it) is too apt to judge of a Profession, according to the
Lives and Conversations of its Professors. And because they observe so much
Impiety and Injustice, so much Profaneness and Irreligion in the Behavior of
some Soldiers, they are from thence unhappily prejudiced with an ill opinion of
All.

Now the best and only way to vindicate the Credit and Reputation of a Military
Life, from all Prejudices of this kind, is to remove that unhappy occasion from
whence they proceed; and if instead of distinguishing your selves from the rest
of mankind by your Vices, you would be more careful to behave your selves as
becomes Christians; if instead of Blaspheming God with so many horrid Oaths
and Curses, you would learn to Reverence and Adore him, and ascribe him the
honor due unto his Name; if instead of that Riot and Intemperance, that
Injustice and Uncharitableness which so much abounds amongst you, you would be
more mindful of those pressing Obligations which your Religion teaches you, of
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, and of living soberly, righteously, and
godly in this present world; your Profession would then be entertained with
much more Respect in the world: The Character of a Soldier would then appear in
its true Luster, and be as highly honored amongst men, as it is indeed most
deservedly Honorable in it self.

The Character which St. Luke gives of Cornelius, (Acts 10.) is a Pattern very
worthy your imitation upon this account; and this out of a sincere intention
for the Good of your Souls, for the Honor of your Profession, and for the
happy Success of your Arms, I heartily recommend to be transcribed by you.

He was a Roman Soldier; and although by Birth and Education a Heathen Idolater,
yet being happily posted amongst the Jews at Caesarea, he there attained to the
knowledge of the True God, and afterward became a most eminent Convert to the
Christian Faith: From whence it is easy to imagine how profitably he employed
his vacant hours, and what great advantage he made of the Place and the Persons
amongst whom he conversed: for although we have no particular account given us
of his behavior, till the time of his Conversion; yet it is highly probable,
that he never spent his time idly and unprofitably, or (what is much worse),
profanely and irreligiously; but that he was always meditating upon, and
considering his latter end; and carefully projecting with himself, how he might
secure an Interest in the Favor and Protection of that God, in whom are the
Issues of Life and Death, and before whose dreadful Tribunal he was to give a
solemn and severe Account. He wisely considered how hazardous and uncertain the
Life of a Soldier is, above all other men; and this Consideration naturally led
his thoughts to a nearer Prospect of a Future State. He well knew, That it was
appointed for all men once to dye; and that to dare to dye with a more than
ordinary Courage and Resolution, was what became the Bravery of a Good Soldier;
but because after this life ended, there was a Judgment to come, when every one
that has done good, shall go into life everlasting, and every one that has
done evil, into everlasting Fire; he thought the consideration hereof a matter
of the highest importance to him imaginable; and was easily convinced how much
he was obliged not only in point of Duty, but in point of Wisdom and Interest
likewise, to make the best provision he could for a happy Portion in this his
Immortal and Eternal State.

How discreetly he behaved himself, and what prudent care he took of his life
and conversation in order hereunto, is evident from the account which the
Evangelist gives of him, who says, that he was a devout man, one that feared
God, and prayed unto him continually. He did not, it seems, suppose, that his
Military Employment for the service of his Prince, could give him any the least
dispensation from his Duty to his God. He did not think, that to Curse, and
Swear, and Blaspheme, and bluster out his profane and daring Impieties against
the Supreme Judge of Heaven and Earth, was one necessary Qualification of his
Profession: No; it is plain that he believed the Character of a Religious and
Devout man, was very well reconcilable with that of a Good Soldier: And he has
left these as Maxims of Eternal Truth, to be transcribed from his Example, That
the best Courage does always proceed from the best Conscience: And that no man
is so well qualified to appear Fearless and Undaunted before the face of an
Enemy, as he who walks in the Fear of the Lord, and reposeth his strength and
confidence in the God of his Salvation.

Fear indeed at first hearing, may seem a very odd ingredient in the Character
of a good Soldier; but such a Fear as this of Cornelius's was, is so far from
carrying in it any the least imputation of Cowardice, or Meanness of Spirit,
that it is very well consistent with the Principles of true Courage; nay, and
the most powerful Incitement that can be, to all Gallant and Valourous Actions.
For to live in the Fear of God, to fear him so as to tremble at the thoughts of
offending him, and to pay a Reverential Regard to the Majesty of his Power, and
the Authority of his Laws, is the sure and certain means of engaging him on
your side: And when you are once happily secure of that, you need not fear what
man can do unto you: Nor need you be then afraid though never so many thousands
of your Enemies set themselves against you round about.

Gentlemen, Your known Bravery and Resolution in the day of Battle has
eminently appeared in the late Actions in which you have been engaged. And your
very Enemies have confessed to your glory, that they felt to their own shame,
that you have been far enough from fearing those who can kill the body only.
But God forbid, that you should esteem as any part of your glory, not to fear
him, who can destroy both body and soul in hell. No, such a Religious Fear as
this is one of the principal Accomplishments of the true Christian Hero. And if
you will believe the Experience of one of the greatest Generals France ever
bred, he will inform you, That no man can be truly brave without it.

The next thing proposed to your imitation from the Example of Cornelius, is
the Constancy of his Piety and Devotion. For it is said of him, That he was a
devout man, and one that prayed to God continually. And to convince you of the
reasonableness and wisdom of this Practice, I need only suggest to you those
particular and extraordinary Obligations, which men of your Profession seem to
lie under, of imploring the assistance of the Divine Protection: For you are
much more conversant in Dangers and Necessities, and oftener exposed to
Hardships, and Distresses, than any other sort of men: And so perilous are the
Circumstances, so great and manifold are the Difficulties wherewith you are
sometimes encompassed, that in many Cases you seem to stand in need of a
Miracle on purpose for your preservation; and have no other means left for you
to escape, but the immediate interposition of that God, whose Will no Human
Policy can control, and whose Almighty Power no Creature is able to resist.

Now what can be thought more reasonable, than for men in such hazardous
Circumstances and apparent Dangers as these, to be continually addressing their
Supplications to him, who is both willing and able to save them to the
uttermost? and so to engage the favor of his Divine Aid and Assistance by
Prayer and Devotion, that He may be always ready to save and defend them, and
be their present help in the needful time of trouble?

This was looked upon as a very necessary preparation against the dangerous
Accidents and Events of War amongst the Jews; and this the Christian Emperor
Constantine the Great thought so requisite in order to the happy success of his
Arms and Armies; that, besides his own private Devotions in his Tent, he taught
every particular Soldier in his Army an excellent Form of Prayer, and required
them to say it for themselves: Which Pious Precedent the Religious Theodosius
is said to have followed with so good success, that his Historian says, he
obtained a great Victory over his Enemies by the prevailing efficacy of his
Devotion, rather than by the strength of his Army, or the Power of his Sword.

It Is not indeed expected that so much time can be spent in Devotion in a Camp,
as in a Cell, or a Cloister; nor will there be so much exacted in this Case of
a Soldier, as of a Monk. But yet it must be still remembered, that God Almighty
requires the Worship and Service of both according to their respective Talents
and Abilities. And although those external Avocations which do necessarily
attend the business of your Profession, will not perhaps allow you to be so
often upon your knees, as those who have more leisure, and more convenient
retreats for the exercise of their Devotion; it will nevertheless behove you to
be as fervent and frequent in Prayer as you can; and as often as your
Circumstances will permit.

Whilst you are in your respective Quarters, you will have greater Advantages
of this kind than most other men. And if you do not gladly comply with those
happy Opportunities which are then afforded you, of praying daily to God, both
privately, and in the public Congregations where you are, it cannot be then
said in your excuse of this neglect, that you were otherwise engaged, and that
you were not at liberty to do it: No, the World will be then apt to conclude,
that it is because you do not think the Duties of Religion any part of your
business: And that with those wicked and profane Wretches in the Psalmist, You
care not for God, neither is God in all your thoughts.

But I hope, Gentlemen, this severe reproach will not lie upon the Character of
many of you: And I cannot but observe it to the great Honor and Reputation of
some amongst you, and those not a few, that you have constantly frequented our
solemn Assemblies, where you came, and expressed therein a very decent and
orderly Devotion.

Now although such happy opportunities as these cannot be so well and so often
enjoyed, whilst you are in the Field, and actually engaged in Military Service;
yet even then your Minds and Meditations may be devoutly disposed: And the
greatest Hurry and Confusion of a Camp can never hinder, but that you may be
still calling upon God in short Ejaculations, and pious Motions of the Soul. A
Lord have mercy upon me; a God help me; or a Lord save and defend me; may be
easily intermixed with any of your most busy Engagements: And yet some such
short Ejaculatory Forms of Devotion as these, when they are addressed unto God
servently and affectionately, may in some cases be as useful as they are easy
and natural. It Is certain, they will spend no more breath, nor require any more
words to express them, than a Profane Oath or a Curse: And how much more it
becomes a Christian Soldier to habituate himself to the one rather than to the
other, I leave to the serious consideration of every one of you, who has a
Soul, and believes it to be Immortal; and whoever believes so, must needs
conclude, That a Sword or a Bullet in a man's Heart, and a God dammee in his
Mouth at the same time, is the most deplorable and desperate state of a dying
man that can be imagined: For he who defies God with his last breath, as he
leaves himself no space for Repentance, so neither does he leave to others, how
charitable soever they may be, the least room to hope for any Mercy from God
for him.

This, Gentlemen, is a Consideration of the greatest moment to you in the
world: And a little of your own reflection upon it will, without the assistance
of any other Arguments, easily convince you, how highly it imports you to be
wise to consider your latter end; and in order hereunto, to follow the Example
of that Religious and Devout Soldier Cornelius, which is here proposed to your
imitation.

And if you could but be once happily persuaded to this, what glorious
Achievements might not be then expected from you? How might one then chase a
thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight? And how would all the boasted
Force and Policy of your Enemies be confounded and brought to naught, were you
but as mindful of your Duty to God, as you are courageously stout and resolute
in the service of your King and Country? or were you but as careful of the
Interest of your Souls, as you are well known to be bravely prodigal of your
Lives, and wholly unconcerned at the approach of any bodily danger?

This would infallibly engage the Lord of Hosts himself to be on your side,
even the Lord strong and mighty in Battle. And that being once happily secured,
you may be then always confident of the Success of your Arms; and need not
fear, but that your Enemies, and those that imagine mischief against you,
should be turned backward, and flee before you.

Whereas on the contrary, let your Cause be never so just, and your own
personal Bravery never so great; yet so long as your Iniquities continue to
separate between you and your God, and your sins hide his face from you; you
cannot then trust in the Arm of Flesh; nor is it your Sword that can then help
you.

Joshua was a great General, had a very just Cause, and a good Army to support
it. And yet it is very remarkable in his Story, That he was smitten before the
Canaanites for a Sin amongst his Soldiers. And this I mention to put you in
mind of the fatal Consequence of your sins; which whilst you continue in
without Repentance, you harbor a Foe within your own Tents, that will do you
and your Cause more mischief than all the Arts and Assaults of your Enemies
could be otherwise able to do.

If therefore you have any serious regard for your own Interest and Advantage,
with reference to the Life that now is, or that which is to come; if the
glorious Success of that Cause in which you are engaged, if the Honor and
Safety of your King, the Good of your Country, the Defense and Preservation of
your most Holy Religion, and the Common Welfare and Prosperity of that whole
Church and Nation to which you belong, can make any tolerable Impression upon
you; you must then think your selves obliged upon the account of all these most
powerful and prevailing Motives to make it your great Care to live and dye as
it becomes Christians; to fear God, and to pray unto him continually; and so
to order your Conversation aright, that Iniquity may not be your Rain, neither
in this World, nor in that which is to come.

This, Gentlemen, is the hearty desire of him who daily remembers you in his
Prayers to God for you; and who earnestly entreats and exhorts you to pray
daily for your selves likewise, That God would prosper your Cause you have in
hand; that He would plead your Cause with them that strive with you, and fight
against them that fight against you; That by his heavenly Wisdom and Power from
above he would Direct the Councils, and Influence the Conduct, and Defend the
Person of your Royal General; and so continue both Him and You under the
merciful Care and Protection of his Good Providence, that you may be still safe
from the power of your Enemies; and that the ungodly and those that hate you,
may not be able to triumph over you: But that you may do valiantly, and conquer
gloriously, and rejoice greatly in the God of your Salvation, saying, Blessed
be the Lord God, our Savior and mighty Deliverer, who has done great things
for us: and praised be the Lord for evermore, who has pleasure in the
Prosperity of his Servants.

Forms of Prayer and Devotion for the use of the Army.
IT was purposely designed that the Prayers which are here recommended to your
use, should be short and few: and that no more should be imposed upon you in
this Case than the most busy Circumstances of your Employment may be well
supposed to admit. But forasmuch as every one, who calls himself Christian, and
thinks it his Duty to pray at all, cannot but allow it to be highly useful and
expedient, to implore the daily Protection, and to show forth the loving
kindness of that God, who alone makes him both to sleep, and wake, and dwell
in safety: I hope you will all account it but a very reasonable Service (for
Men in your circumstances more especially) to begin and end the Day with these
short Forms following.

A Prayer for the Morning.
O Almighty and most merciful Lord God, I return thee my most humble and hearty
thanks for renewing thy mercies toward me every morning; and for the
particular care and watchfulness of thy good Providence over me this night past.

O continue forth thy goodness and loving kindness toward me! and be thou
still my Savior and mighty Deliverer in all my dangers and necessities: in the
time of Battle, in the hour of Death, and in the Day of Judgment.

Take me into thy Divine Favor and Protection this day more especially, I most
humbly beseech thee: and keep me from all things that may be hurtful both to my
Soul and Body.

Grant, O Lord, that I may give no occasion of Offense to any of those amongst
whom I converse; that I may not be guilty of any cruelty or unjust violence,
any unchristian hatred, malice, or revenge, or any other uncharitableness
toward my Neighbor: but that in all my conversation I may live paceably and
unblameably; so as neither to do any wrong, nor to suffer any.

Assist me with thy Grace and holy Spirit to keep my Body in Temperance,
Soberness, and Chastity: that I may keep my Soul innocent and undefiled
thereby, and my Body the better strengthened and prepared for that vigorous and
active ^^vice in the which I am employed.

Set a watch over my lips, O Lord, that I offend not with my tongue: that no
evil-speaking, lying, or slandering, no wicked blasphemy or profaneness, nor
any other evil communication may proceed out of my mouth.

Teach me in every thing to do the thing that pleases thee, O Lord my God; and
direct and enable me to continue in thy fear all the day long, that I may be
always fitted and prepared to dye in thy favor; even so Lord, whenever it
seems good in thy sight.

Together with my self, I recommend to thy Divine Grace and Favor, the King,
and all my fellow Soldiers: most humbly beseeching thee to bless and prosper
and defend him against the face of his Enemies; and to inspire us with such
Courage and Resolution, that we may manfully fight his Battles, and valiantly
and faithfully discharge our respective Duties in that state of life to which
thy Divine Providence has called us.

O Lord, hear my Prayers, forgive me all my sins, pardon my failings, and do
more abundantly for me than I am able to ask or think, through the merits of
Jesus my Savior; in whose most holy name and words I sum up all my wants,
saying, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

A Prayer for the Evening.
O God the Creator and Preserver of all Mankind, in whom we live and move and
have our being, and to whose only mercy it is to be ascribed that we are not
consumed: I most humbly beseech thee to accept of this my Evening Sacrifice of
Praise and Thanksgiving for thy preservation of me this day past, and for all
the many gracious effects of thy Goodness toward me throughout the whole
course of my Life.

My sins testify against me, that I have justly deserved thy utmost
displeasure: and if thou should enter into Judgment with me, O Lord, I have
nothing to plead, but my own misery, and thy great goodness, to make me an
object of thy infinite Pity and Compassion. Unto that therefore I appeal, and
fly for succor; beseeching thee for thy mercies sake, and for the sake of
Jesus my Savior, to turn away thy face from my sins, and to blot out all my
misdeeds.

Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember thou mine iniquity for ever.

Pardon whatever thou have seen amiss in me this day more especially; and
graciously accept of my hearty sorrow and repentance for all those sins, to
which, through the frailty of my nature, or the wiles of Satan, or the wicked
example of other men, I have too much accustomed my self, [Here it will be
proper to mention those sins which your Conscience accuses you of:] And for
the time to come grant me such a measure of thy Grace and holy Spirit, that I
may be thereby enabled to resist the temptations of the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil; and in every thing to keep a Conscience void of offense, both
toward thee, my God, and toward Men.

My life, O Lord, is in thy hand; and it is thou only who have hitherto
preserved it from all those perils and dangers wherewith it has been so often
encompassed. O let it be thy good pleasure to continue it under thy merciful
Care and Protection this night. And whenever thou in thy infinite Wisdom, shall
think fit to dispose of it for the service of my King and Country, grant me thy
Grace that I may resign it cheerfully; and happily exchange it for a better, to
live and reign with thee in life everlasting.

Grant this, O merciful Father, for Jesus Christ's sake, who died for me; and
in whose most prevailing Name and Words I continue my Supplications for my
self, and for all my Fellow Soldiers, saying, Our Father which art in Heaven,
Hallowed be thy Name, etc.

Besides this practice of saying your Prayers every Morning and Evening, it is
farther advisable, that you should sometimes humble your selves before
Almighty God in a more solemn manner; to deprecate his Wrath and Indignation
against you, and to implore his Mercy for the pardon and forgiveness of your
sins. For which purpose I recommend to your use that most excellent Form of
Devotion which is appointed by our Church in the Commination Office: where the
51st Psalm, and the Prayers which follow it, are so admirably contrived to
exercise the Devotion of every hearty and sincere Penitent, that you will not
want any other help, nor can you indeed be well supplied with a better: for
which reason it is put at the end of this Advice.

And because it is highly requisite that Men in your Circumstances should be
continually lifting up your hearts to God; and at all times, and in all places,
and upon all occasions addressing your Souls to him, from whom comes your
strength and salvation, it will be very proper for you to habituate your selves
to these Ejaculations, or short Prayers following.

Ejaculations to be used upon the following Occasions.
At going out or returning into your Tent or Quarters.
O Lord bless my going out and my coming in from this time forth and for ever
more.

At your being drawn out to Battle.
Thou, O Lord God of Hosts, art our refuge and strength in the day of Battle: O
be thou now and evermore our Defender against the face of our Enemies.

In thee, O Lord, is our trust: be it therefore according to thy word, and
suffer not our Foes to triumph over us.

Through thee shall we prevail: and in thy Name shall we tread them under that
rise up against us.

Upon your preservation after the Fight.
Glory be to thee, O Lord, for saving my life from destruction, and for
delivering it from the peril of the sword!

O grant that I may from henceforth dedicate it wholly to thy service: and make
it an instrument of thy glory, O Lord God of my salvation.

After any Victory obtained.
We have heard with our ears, O God, our Fathers have told us: and as we have
heard, so have we seen likewise that salvation is of the Lord. For we got not
this victory through our own sword, neither was it our Arm that helped us: but
thy right Hand, and thine Arm, and the light of thy Countenance, because thou
had a favor unto us.

Of thee therefore will we make our boast all the day long: and praise thy Name
for ever and ever.

Upon any desperate wound received, or in the time of sickness.
I acknowledge, O Lord, holy and true, that I am justly wounded for my sins and
transgressions: and that thou of very faithfulness have caused me to be thus
afflicted. But be thou still my Savior and Defense. Leave me not, neither
forsake me O Lord God of my salvation.

When there appears small hopes of your Recovery.
Father, if it be possible, remove this affliction from me: nevertheless not my
will, but thine be done.

Father into thy Hands I commend my spirit: for thou have redeemed me O Lord
thou God of Truth.

May God of his gracious goodness bless and sanctify these Instructions to his
Glory, and to your spiritual and eternal Benefit! And we who sit quietly under
our own Vines, and under our own Fig-tiees, whilst you, Gentlemen, are so
generously hazarding your lives abroad for our defense and preservation, shall
not cease to make mention of you in our Prayers, saying, The Lord prosper you:
we wish you good success in the name of the Lord.

Out of the Commination in the Liturgy.
First read and consider seriously the Following Exhortation, Now seeing that
all they are accursed, etc.

NOW seeing that all they are accursed (as the Prophet David bears witness)
who do err and go astray from the Commandments of God, let us (remembering the
dreadful Judgment hanging over our heads, and always ready to fall upon us)
return unto our Lord God with all contrition and meekness of heart, bewailing
and lamenting our sinful life, acknowledging and confessing our Offenses, and
seeking to bring forth worthy Fruits of Penance. For now is the Ax put unto the
Root of the Trees, so that every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit, is
hewn down, and cast into the fire. It is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God: He shall pour down rain upon the sinners, snares, fire
and brimstone, storm and tempest; this shall be their portion to drink. Forlo,
the Lord is come out of his place to visit the wickedness of such as dwell upon
the Earth. But who may abide the day of his coming? who who shall be able to
endure when he appears: His Pan is in his Hand, and he will purge his floor,
and gather his Wheat into the Barn, but he will burn the Chaff with
unquenchable fire. The Day of the Lord comes as a Thief in the Night: and when
Men shall say Peace, and all things are safe, then shall sudden destruction
come upon them, as sorrow comes upon a Woman traveling with Child, and they
shall not escape. Then shall appear the Wrath of God in the Day of Vengeance,
which obstinate sinners, through the stubborness of their heart, have heaped
unto themselves, which despised the goodness, patience, and long-sufferance of
God, when he called them continually to Repentance. Then shall they call upon
me (says the Lord) but I will not hear, they shall seek me early but they
shall not find me; and that because they hated knowledge, and received not the
fear of the Lord, but abhorred my counsel, and despised my correction. Then
shall it be too late to knock when the door shall be shut; and too late to cry
for Mercy when it is the time of Justice. O terrible voice of most just
Judgment which shall be pronounced upon them, when it shall be said unto them,
Go ye cursed into the fire everlasting, which is prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. Therefore Brethren, take we heed betime, while the day of salvation
lasts; for the night comes when none can work: but let us, while we have the
light, believe in the light, and walk as Children of the light, that we be not
cast into utter darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth. Let us not
abuse the goodness of God, who calls us mercifully to amendment, and of his
endless pity promises us forgiveness of that which is past, if with a perfect
and true heart we return unto him. For though our sins be as red as scarlet,
they shall be made white as snow: and though they be like purple, yet they
shall be made white as wool. Turn ye (says the Lord) from all your
wickedness, and your sin shall not be your destruction. Cast away from you all
your ungodliness that ye have done, make you new hearts, and a new spirit:
Wherefore will ye die, O house of Israel, seeing that I have no pleasure in the
death of him that dies, says the Lord God? Turn ye then, and ye shall live.
Although we have sinned, yet have we an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. For he was wounded for
our offenses, and smitten for our wickedness. Let us therefore return unto him,
who is the merciful receiver of all true penitent sinners; assuring our selves
that he is ready to receive us, and most willing to pardon us, if we come unto
him by faithful repentance; if we will submit our selves unto him, and from
henceforth walk in his ways; if we will take his easy yoke, and light burden
upon us, to follow him in lowliness, patience, and charity, and be ordered by
the governance of his holy Spirit: seeking always his glory, and serving him
duly in our vocation with thanksgiving. This if we do, Christ will deliver us
from the curse of the Law, and from the extreme malediction which shall light
upon them that shall be set on the left hand; and he will set us on his right
hand, and give us the gracious benediction of his Father, commanding us to take
possession of his glorious Kingdom: unto which he vouchsafe to bring us all,
for his infinite mercy. Amen.

Then upon your knees repeat the 51 Psalm to the end.

Miserere mihi Deus. Psalm. 51.
HAve mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness: according to the
multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses.

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness: and cleanse me from my sin.

For I acknowledge my faults: and my sin is ever before me.

Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou
might be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou are judged.

Behold, I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me.

But lo, thou requirest truth in the inward parts: and shall make me to
understand wisdom secretly.

Thou shall purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: thou shall wash me, and
I shall be whiter then snow.

Thou shall make me hear of joy and gladness: that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice.

Turn thy face from my sins: and put out all my misdeeds.

Make me a clean heart, O God: and renew a right spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence: and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

O give me the comfort of thy help again: and stablish me with thy free Spirit.

Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked: and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, thou that art the God of my health:
and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.

Thou shall open my lips, O Lord: and my mouth shall show thy praise.

For thou desire no sacrifices, else would I give it thee: but thou
delightest not in burnt-offerings.

The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O
God, shall thou not despise.

O be favorable and gracious unto Sion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of righteousness, with the
burnt-offerings and oblations: then shall they offer young bullocks upon thine
altar.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Then say the Lords Prayer, Our Father, etc.

OUr Father, which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation: But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Then, O Lord, we beseech Thee, etc. and the following, Prayer. Then, Turn thou
us, O Good Lord, etc.

O Lord, we beseech thee mercifully hear our prayers, and spare all those who
confess their sins unto thee, that they whose consciences by sin are accused,
by thy merciful pardon may be absolved, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Most mighty God and merciful Father, who have compassion upon all men, and
hate nothing that thou have made, who would not the death of a sinner, but
that he should rather turn from his sin, and be saved; Mercifully forgive us
our trespasses, receive and comfort us, who are grieved and wearied with the
burden of our sins. Thy property is always to have mercy; to thee only it
appertains to forgive sins. Spare us therefore, good Lord spare thy people,
whom thou have redeemed; enter not into judgment with thy servants, who are
vile earth, and miserable sinners; but so turn thine anger from us, who meekly
acknowledge our vileness, and truly repent us of our faults; and so make haste
to help us in this world, that we may ever live with thee in the world to come,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

TUrn thou us, O good Lord, and so shall we turned. Be favorable, O Lord, be
favorable to thy people, who turn to thee in weeping, fasting, and praying.
For thou art a merciful God, full of compassion, long-suffering, and of great
pity. Thou sparest when we deserve punishment, And in thy wrath think upon
mercy. Spare thy people good Lord spare them, And let not thy heritage be
brought to confusion. Hear us, O Lord, for thy mercy is great, And after the
multitude of thy mercies look upon us, Through the merits and mediation of thy
blessed Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS
A Persuasive to Frequent Communion in the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
By His Grace John Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, 8 vo. Price 3 d.


