Certain things, as they were revealed before they Came to past, are now in
Love published, with some Addition concerning the present Times.
AS one oppressed, so do I write these lines,
Of God's great Day, and of these latter times;
In which Gog shall with Magog so combine,
That to Armageddon they may incline.
Oh Valley of Jehosaphat prepare,
In thee the Nations now shall have their share.
Who shall contend against God's innocent,
God will that Nation and that People rent.
With judgments great he will Men's faults correct,
That set at naught and scorn his poor Elect.
God will his truth and People's cause defend,
Against all such as will not yet amend.
The Lord Almighty he will show his Power,
His Vengeance on the wicked he will shower:
He will cut off the Scoffer and the Proud,
The Drunkard, Swearer and the wicked crowd.
Strange Plagues and Deaths amongst men shall arise,
That hate God's servants and his truth despise;
Great signs and wonders God from heaven will show,
The heavens, earth, seas with marvels great shall flow:
The whole Creation shall with wonders then,
Preach forth Repentance unto wicked men.
The Earth shall Q^ake, the Sun in Light decay;
The Moon seem blood, the Stars shall fall away.
Men's hearts shall fail at that which they shall see:
For from God's wrath no place shall then be free.
For God will smite Professors and Profane,
And all that do talk of his name in vain.
The high, the low, the rich and poor shall bend,
At thole sad woes which God on them will send.
What shall I say! the like has never been;
God will be known, his Power shall be seen:
For Widows cry, the Fatherless make moan,
The Husbands weep, and Wives with sorrow groan;
Poor Children, for their Parents, do lament
Their Prison-state, and more their banishment:
Husbands from Wives, Parents from Children small,
To be undone by sending into thral.
Ah woeful Nation, where these things shall be,
Good Men oppressed, but wickedness is free.
A Meeting now to worship God in fear,
Is that at which Men mock, deride and jeer;
And to confess we meet to worship God,
Is that for which we feel the Scorner's Rod:
To worship God, to preach, to meet and pray,
Is not to be permitted in this day;
And those that meet with a true good intent,
Are for that cause exposed to banishment.
Religious worship we may not maintain:
From serving God some Men would us restrain.
God's ways and truth are now made burdensome,
Who walks therein must into Prison come;
And if God's truth he will not then forsake,
NO more but, Goa^er him to Prison take,
We Will make him bow, he is not fit to live,
He will not swear, no honor he will give.
To fear an Oath, and not to swear at all,
To speak the truth, when Judges do us call;
Our yea, our nay, as Christ did us command,
For this they will transport us from our Land.
Because (O Christ) thy Law we dare not break,
Our Country, and our Friends we must forsake.
My Native Country, over thee I mourn;
Thy case is sad: for thou will be forlorn.
If thou go on, as thou have now begun,
There is no way but thou will be undone,
For like as Sodom and Gomorrha who,
Vexed righteous Lot, and would those Angels know,
Whom God had sent to lead him safe away,
Felt their destruction came without delay.
Even so, O Nation, if the righteous shall
Forsake thy borders, then shall be thy fall.
Thy safety, peace, prosperity and rest,
Is for our sakes, whom God has loved and blessed.
Yea for our sakes, against whom thou art bent;
To drive us from thee into Banishment.
The Lord does love us, and when e're we go,
His wrathful vengeance he will on the show:
When ye begun your rage on us to vent,
Then God this sweeping Plague amongst you sent.
Oh let none say, the Plague shall have an end,
If that ye would away the Quakers send,
And rid the Land of them and all their ways,
Then shall be peace, with good and happy days;
No, no, Oh people! if ye mind it well,
These woes were seen, and some thereof did tell,
The cause of all is your ungodly state,
God's truth ye mock, his goodness ye do hate;
Hard measure ye unto his Servants give,
For ye will not at quiet let us live;
But with your Courts, your Prisons and your Laws
Ye pinch and rent us, as with Dragons claws.
But that is not all, of all we are bereft,
And in a state of Banishment are left
Unto the rage and cruelty of those,
Who know not God, and do remain our foes.
For these and such like, acted in this kind,
God sent this Plague, and first it did you find
Near to that place, from whence that good man went,
Whom first ye fore'd away in Banishment.
And as that work ye since have driven on,
The Plague does still increase your Coasts upon.
An if ye will not persecuting cease,
God's Plagues shall more and more on you increase;
Your Souls accursed from his Presence shall
Be, and by Plagues your Carcasses must fall:
Your Name shall rot, your honor shall decay,
God from the Earth will take you all away.
With fear and dread God will beset you found,
His Plague's great terror shall your wits confound
He will deprive you of your reason so,
Before it is near you, ye away would go;
But what to do, or where a place to hide,
No place ye'l find where ye may safe abide;
But like poor outcasts, that no home do know,
Shall from your Houses wander to and fro;
No peace within, nor rest without shall find,
But like to those left comfortless and blind;
Each man shall of his fellow be afraid,
And greatly fear that he shall be betrayed
Into the hand of some devouring wretch,
Who waits death's stroke away his life to fetch.
O Plague, like death, none can resist thy will,
For thou art sent, and it is thy work to kill,
Off them that shall resist God's mighty power;
Both high and low, this Judgment shall devour.
God will chastise, and with his Beesome sweep
Away all those, that hate his Law to keep.
The stuborn-hearted and the strong shall reel.
For those sad woes and Plagues which they shall feel.
The scoffing tongue and lying lips shall close,
For truth no longer now they shall oppose.
The Lord in fury to this Land does call,
What mercy could not do, his Judgments shall,
Break People hearts, bow down the haughty mind,
Bring tenderness, the Prison-bands unbind,
That so the Gospel of glad-tydings may
Sound forth God's power in this latter day,
To turn all Souls from darkness unto light,
That they may fear, and do God's will aright.
Awake Oh people, who have tenderness,
Trust in the Lord, and do not fear distress;
Obey Christ's light, and it will show the way
How ye must live, that Christ may be your stay.
Be strong all ye that do the living know,
Let none faint when e're does come the woe;
But let all wait in the true patient mind,
For here true peace and comfort we shall find.
Come now dear Friends, who know the living voice,
Gird up your minds, and let us all rejoice;
The Gospel of the Kingdom now shall ring,
Great flocks to Christ the sound thereof shall bring;
With open hearts much people shall embrace
the Lord's dear Truth, and love his saving Grace.
And some, who did not know God's truth, shall now
Believe Christ's light, and to God's power bow;
For now it shall be as it was of old,
The blood of Martyrs shall increase Christ's fold:
The peace of God shall cruelty bow down,
Oppression cease, and truth shall have the Crown.
O happy they who hold out to the end,
In their distress the Lord will comfort send.
So blessed are they who for the truth are spent,
Either at home or else by Banishment:
Yea happy they who in the Lord shall die;
Whether in bonds or else at liberty.
J. R.

Printed the 29. of the 5th. Month 1665.


