SCARAMOUCH A Philosopher, HARLEQUIN A Schoolboy, Bravo, Merchant, and
Magician. A Comedy After the ITALIAN manner. Acted at the Theater Royal.

Written by Mr. EDWARD RAVENSCROFT.

Spe Incerta certum mihi laborem sustuli.

Terent. in Hecyram. Printed for Robert Sollers at the Flying Horse in St.
Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXVII.

Prologue.
VEry unfortunate this Play has bin;
A slippery trick was played as by Scapin.
Whilst here our Actors made along delay,
When some were idle, others ran away,
The City House comes out with half our Play.
We fear, that having heard of this so long,
Your expectation now will do it wrong.
The Poet does a dangerous trial make,
And all the common Roads of Plays forsake.
Upon the Actors it depends too much,
And who can hope ever to see two such
As the Famed Harlequin and Scaramouch.
This well he knew. --
Yet rather chose in new attempts to fail,
Than in the old indifferently prevail.
Great Wits refrain this writing, 'cause it is low,
They oftener write to please themselves than you.
Like but the Play, let others have the name,
Let both French and Italians share the fame,
But if it be bad, let them too bear the blame.
The Persons Names.
Scaramouch, a Philosopher. Mr. Griffin. Pancrace, a talkative Doctor. Mr.
Powell. Octavio, Son to Scaramouch. Mr. Clark. Cynthio, Son to Pancrace. Mr.
Wiltshire. Spitzaferro, a Coward ignorant and bold. Mr. Cartwright. Plautino, a
man of intrigue. Mr. Goodman. Harlequin. Mr. Haynes. A Fencing Master. A
Dancing Master. A Singing Master. An Officer.
Aurelia, beloved by Octavio. Mrs. Vincent. Livia, under the name of
Zerbinetta, a supposed Gypsye. A School-Mistris. Mrs. Covey.


SCARAMOUCH.
ACT I. SCENE I. A Brick-house.
Enter Octavio. Octavio. AH too Cruel News for a Poor Lover; the Person I adore
must this day by the Commands of her Parents resign her self to the embraces of
one she loathes and hates: this Letter she sent to me for Releif -- What Is to be
done?


Enter a Fencing, a Dancing, and Singing Master. All three, Good Morrow, good
Morrow Signior, Oct. Gentlemen, I have earnest business calls me abroad this
morning, I cannot stay to learn my Exercises now, but let me see you at this
Hour to morrow: your Servant gentlemen.


Exit. All three, Servitore, Signior, Servitore. Enter Harlequin. Omnes* Ha
Harlequin.


Harl. Signior Dancero.

Sings and dances and makes legs. Signior Singero.

Sings out and then singsa piece of a Tune. Signior Fencero, Euh.

Makes Thrusts at him As if he were fencing. Euh, Euh, Servitore, Servitore.


Fenc. Good morrow, good morrow to you.


Sing. You are very Merry.


Harl. You have been teaching Signior Octavio his exercises. Signior Chantero
i will sing you a rejoicing Air, pourpassa -- tempio un^ Alegare^zza, una
Ca^sona, Bella, Bella,


Harl. sings a ridiculous Song. Sing. O Rarely well sung Signior Harlequin.


Harl. Singing and Dancing I understand well enough. But Signior Alonge, I
don't Comprehend the Mystery of your Vocation, what need is there of killing a
Man by Rule?


Fence. The art of Fencing consists in two things, to give and not to receive
that is, to ofsend, and defend.


Harl. That is to run a Man through, and not be run through, which is to kill
and not be killed, ha-


Fenc. Right, and it is impossible you should receive, if you know how to turn
the Sword of your Enemy from the line of your Body. And this depends only on
the Motion of the wrist, As -- -- in thus, and out -- thus.


Harl. A man then whether he be valiant or not, If he has but this art, is sure
to kill a Man and not be hanged for it.


Fenc. And not be killed.


Harl. O not be killed, but if he be hanged it is as bad.


Fenc. This which I tell you is demonstration.


Harl. Oh, Oh, but I can give you better demonstration, how a man may not be
killed*


Fenc. As how?


Herl. Fences and Iumps forwards and backward with his Wooden Sword against the
Fencer, His foil, and at last runs away. Harl. For example There --


Fenc. There is no guard indeed like a good pair of Heels, But if you run away
how will you do to kill your Enemies?


Harl. Come behind him and Shoot him, or kill him pissing against a Wall,
Demonstration, a sure way to kill and not be killed,


Fenc. But a Gentleman ought to have Honor and Gallantry.


Harl. I was not born a Gentleman.


Fenc. There Is nothing so commendable as the knowledge of Arms. This Imports
more than all other Sciences. Singing and dancing are things unprofitable in
respect of this.


Dance. Very good, my Master of Defense, pray don't so much undervalue dancing.


Sing. Nor speak so slightly of Music.


Fence. You will not I hope compare Hopping and Squealing to the Noble Science of
Defense?


Dance. There Is a Man of Confidence.


Sing. A very pleasant Fellow.


Fence. Why my Nimble Sir, such another word, and I shall lead you a new dance,
and make you my little Canary Bird change your Note.


Danc. If you are at that good Mr. Fencer, I shall teach you your business a
little better.


Harl. Eh, are you mad to quarrel with a Man that understands to Fight in
Teirce and in Quart? and knows how to kill a Man by Demonstration?


Danc. I care not for his demonstration, for his Tierce *nor his Quart.


Harl. Eh, Eh.


Fenc. How you Grasshopper, you Skip Jack, you Hop-myThum.


Harl. Eh, Mr. of Defense.


Dan. You cold Iron Carrier, you spit-frog, you Scarecrow, Bravo.


Harl. Eh, Mr. Dancer.


Fen. If once I fall upon your bones --


Harl. Eh, No.


Dan. And if I take you to task --


Harl. Eh Fie.


Fen. I Will make you dance to a new Tune.


Harl. Eh, Pray.


Dan. And I Will learn you to mind your hits.


Harl. Eh, Fie No!


Sing. Stand aside, we will give him Demonstration.


Herl. Eh, No, No, Pray, Auh!

Enter Scaramouch. Hola, Signior Scaramouch, you come very luckyly With your
Learning and Wisdom to persuade 'em to Peace and quietness.


Scar. What Is the matter?


Harl. They are quarrelling about their Professions, and going to fight it out,
Which is best?


Scar. Wherefore are you thus transported with rage? Have you not learned Moral
Philosophy? which teaches the Government of our Passions. Have you never read
the Learned Treatise Seneca composed of Choler. Ought not reason to be Masters
of our Passions?


Danc. But Signior Scaramouch, he had the impudence t'affront us, and speak
contemptously of our Professions, and undervalue singing and dancing.


Scar. A wise man is above injuries, and the best return to affronts is
Moderation and Patience.


Fence. They had both of 'em the Impudence to compare their two Professions of
singing and dancing to the Noble Science of defense.


Scar. And ought you to be concerned at this? is this sufficient to cause such
irregular emotions, it is vain Glory to make comparisons, Wisdom and Virtue
only give distinction.


Sing. There is nothing so profitable to the Public as Music.


Danc. Nor nothing so necessary to Mankind as dancing


Sing. All the disorders, all the Wars which have been in the World have
happened, for not having learned Music.


Danc. All the misfortunes of Mankind, all the lamentable Stories which we read
of in History, the disapointments of Councils, the failuers of great Generals,
and defeats of Armies have bin through want of Dancing.


Fenc. Ha, Ha, Ha.


Scar. How so?


Sing. Does not War proceed from the want of Union among men?


Scar. True.


Sing. And if all men would learn Music, would not they accord better with one
another? And would not there be an universal peace and quietness in the World?
Peace is when all men agree in a Harmonious Concurrence, Peace and Concord are
the same thing.


Scar. Oh! --


Danc. When a man fails in his conduct, whether it be in respect to the affairs
of his -- Family, or the Government of the Kingdom, or in the Command of an
Army, is it not always said of such a man he did not go well about his
business; he did not take the right time? And so, --


Scar. Oh! -- *


Danc. And how should a man go well, or do any thing in time, that cannot Dance?


Fenc. Ha, Ha, Ha.


Danc. Here now you see the profitableness of Dancing, and Music, Dancing is
therefore a Science absolutely necessary to mankind.


Sing. And Music is a Science without which the World cannot subsist.


Fenc. And how will you Govern without the Sword? And where are your Generals
and Armies without men that understand their Weapons? Therefore I maintain
against them both, that the Science of Desence is the noblest and most
necessary of all Sciences whatever.


Scar. And what think you all of Philosophy? You are all three very impertinent
to give the name of Science to your professions. A Fencer, a Musician, A
Dancer. A Hector, a Fiddler, and a Jack Pudding.


Fenc. Out you lousy Philosopher.


Sing. You Pitiful Pedant.


Danc. You formal Blockhead.


Scar. How you Rascals?


He falls on them with his sists, and they buffet him. Harl. Eh, Signior
Philosopher.


Scar. Slaves, Rogues, Rascals.


Harl. Signior Philosopher.


Fenc. Dunce, Blockhead.


Harl. Gentlemen!


Scar. Impudent Rogues.


Harl. Signior Philosopher.


Scar. Ignorant Sots*


Harl. Signior Philosopher, Gentlemen.


Scar. Rascals.


Harl. Signior Phisosopher.


Sing. Impertinent Philosopher.


Harl. Gentlemen.


Scar. Curs, Dogs, Sots, Rogues, Rascals, Villains.


Exeunt Fighting. Harl. Signior Philosopher, Gentlemen.

Signior Philosopher, Gentlemen, Signior Philosopher; e'ne fight Dog, sight
Bear, and the Devil part 'em, l've done all I can.


Exit. Re-enter Scaramouch composing himself, and Harlequin Counterfeiting a
Rage. Harl. Ha! Impertinent Rogues, Rascals, Ignorant Sots, Illiterate Beasts,
Curs, Dogs, Whelps, Knaves. Villains. --


Scar. Moderate this Passion, anger is offensive to the Eyes of a Philosopher.


Harl. No body must be angry but himself, Rogues, Affront a learned Philosopher!


Scar. It imports not, a Philosopher can bear injuries as he ought, I will go
write a Book against Music, dancing, and Fencing, and undo all the Professors
of it by Argument.


Vaulting here. Exit. Harl. That I was but a Philosopher to have this Command
and Government over my Passions.


Exit. Enter Octavio. Oct. O my cross fortunes, O my Aurelia, I Will call her
forth, to know if she at last resolves by her obedience to make me wretched,
and her self unhappy -- St -- St -- Signiora Aurelia.


Enter Aurelia. Aur. Who Is there, Signior Octavio?


Oct. Ah Aurelia, is that true, which this Letter Imports? are you to be
married so soon?


Aur. Such is the appointment of my Father.


Oct. What has occasioned this sudden Resolution?


Aur. He finds his Sickness to increase, and the Phisicians grow doubtful of
his Recovery, wherefore he has presixt the time of my Marriage, that he may see
me well disposed of as he thinks, before he dies -- *but what Change is this I
see in you? Why in your Countenance do you wear these marks of Sorrow? Do you
doubt my Fidelity? Or are you not assured of the love I have for you?


Oct. Yes Aurelia, I am assured you love me, but have no Assurance you will
ever love me. I have heard say, that the love of your Sex is not so lasting as
that of ours, and that passions in Women's breasts are like Flames rising from
light perishable Substance, which decay even as soon as they are born.


Aur. My Heart then is not like those of other Women, I perceive well enough,
that the Fervency of my love cannot be abated but by death.


Oct. I believe that you really think what you speak. But I dread a power that
in your heart will combat against those tender Sentiments it has sor me, your
Dependence is on a Fathers will, that already is determined to dispose of you.


Aur. No Octavio, it is not in a Fathers Power to force me to break my Vows to
you, I Am resolved to abandon my Family, nay my Life, rather then quit you.


Oct. O blessed Assurance!


Aur. After this you are no longer to doubt me, but endeavor my Relief, if it
should come to the extremity, think therefore how to dispose of me, if I am
forced to fly from this Marriage?


Oct. I will instantly go and advise with some faithful Friend.


Aur. Heaven will be favorable to our Vows.


Oct. Heaven cannot be cross to me, if you are constant.


Aur. Most assuredly I will, Adieu.


Ex. Oct. I shall then be happy.


Enter Cynthio and Harlequin. Cynt. My Father arrived?


Harl. Signior Si.


Cynt. And this morning?


Harl. This morning.


Cynt. And returned say thou with a Resolution to have me marry?


Harl. Signior Si.


Cynt. The Daughter of Signior Scaramouch?


Harl. Of Signior Scaramouch.


Cynt. And that Signior Octavio is to marry my Sister, and make it a cross
match?


Harl. A cross match.


Cynt. Cross indeed to us both. My Fathers Voyage then to Lauretto, was not out
of Devotion as he pretended, but to fetch them from the Monastry.


Harl. From the Monastry.


Cynt. And you met my Father just as he came ashore?


Harl. Signior Si.


Cynt. And he told you this?


Harl. Signior Si.


Cynt. And he knows all my concerns thou say?


Harl. All.


Cynt. And that in his absence I have made a contract?


Harl. A Contract.


Cynt. Prithee speak to me, and don't in this manner catch my last words.


Harl. you forget not the least circumstance.


Oct. How Is that Signior Cynthio, your Father arrived, and knows you are
Contracted?


Harl. Signior si.


Cynt. O Octavio! Counsel me what is to be done in this juncture?


Oct. I Am at as great a plunge, and want a Counselor my self.


Cynt. As soon as my Father see's me, a Tempest of outrage will pour upon me --
his Reproaches will be most violent.


Harl. Methinks I already see his Brow bent with fury against you, and his Cane
lifted above his head, to give you a thousand dry drubs for the folly you have
committed.


Cynt. How shall I avoid the storm?


Oct. How shall I secure my Love?


Enter Plautino. Plaut. Who Is here! Signior Octavio? Signior Cynthio, how is it,
what is the matter? why look you both so melancholy?


Cynt. Signior Plautino I Am undone.


Oct. And I the most unfortunate man in the World.


Plaut. How? In what?


Cynt. My Father is arrived with a resolution to have me marry.


Oct. And Aurelia to morrow is to be married to Spittzaferro.


Plaut. And what harm is there in all this to you two?


Cynt. You know not our concerns.


Plaut. No, but it is in your power to tell me, and I am a man of great
Consolation, one that Negotiates in the affairs of young Gentlemen.


Cynt. O Plautino, if you could find any invention to draw me out of this
trouble that I am just falling into, I should think I owed even my life to you.


Oct. And if you could prevent or but delay this Marriage --


Plaut. To tell you the truth, nothing almost is impossible to me, Heaven has
blessed me with a genious fit for all manner of witty Contrivances, and pretty
Inventions, therefore tell me your grievances.


Cynt. You know it is a month since my Father took a Voyage to Lawretto. --


Plaut. I know it Sir.


Cynt. A few days after his departure, Signior Octavio and I in our rambles,
met with a Troop of them that call themselves Egyptians.


Plaut. Fortune Tellers.


Harl. Signior Si, Gypsies.


Cynt. They had in their company a young Girl, of beautiful Features, that Sung
and Danced to a Miracle, who had in all she did such acharming Air.


Plaut. That you could not choose but fall in love.


Harl. Signior Si, at the same time she stole Signior Cynthio's heart and my
money.


Cynt. I know not if it were the agreeableness of these good qualities of
Singing and Dancing --


Harl. and picking of Pockets.


Cynt. First raised in me an unconquerable Passion.


Plaut. So.


Cynt. After two or three Visits, the Company would Permit me to make no
addresses to her without a Contract of Marriage, which after much struggling
with my Passion, I consented to.


Plaut. You are then Contracted to her?


Cynt. Yes, and have not the least regret for what I have done, but languish
for the happy hour to consummate the Marriage.


Plaut. What stop?


Cynt. Before I take her from them I am to lay down two hundred Pistols for the
expense of her Education, and to recompense the loss the whole Company will
suffer by her departure.


Plaul. I understand* Deposit the sum.


Cynt. It Is that I want.


Plaut. Borrow't.


Cynt. I forged a plausible story to a Friend of my Fathers, that I wanted so
much for his use in his absence, who had promised it me within two days; But
now my Father's arrived, that design's ruined, and I am too cruelly
disappointed.


Plaut. And this is your grievance?


Cynt. It is.


Plaut. Now Signior Octavio, let me know your resentments.


Oct. I have long bin in love with the fair Aurelia whose passion corresponds
with mine, but her Father is averse to it, and proposes Signior Spittzaferro
for her Husband, and he is too wealthy a Rival to be Supplanted.


Plaut. But are you sure Aurelia loves you?


Oct. Yes, and hates Spitzaferro.


Plaut. Then fear nothing.


Oct. Yes I have much to fear. To secure her mind I drew her to a Contract.


Plaut. Better and better.


Oct. Her Father who has long languished under a great fit of sickness,
apprehending his death is near, with all speed presses her Marriage, and has
appointed that to morrow shall make her a Bride to my Rival.


Plaut. It cannot be, it must not, it shall not.


Oct. These are words of comfort.


Plaut. And all that troubles you is your want of money to purchase your dear,
pretty little Creature, and the fear you have to see your father, after his
having heard of your engagement.


Cynt. Yes.


Oct. And my care is for Money to provide for the Person I love, if being
Pres't to this Marriage she be forced to sly from her Fathers importunity and
Anger.


Plaut. Good Heavens, that you should call me to counsel for this, had you not
one pretty invention, one little Stratagem, where is thy wit Harlequin, are thy
Brains Addle?


Harl. O Signior Plautino, I am better at Execution then Invention.


Plaut. Well, we will try what performance you have.


Cynt. Do you believe --


Plaut. Euh no more, but think how to receive your fathers onset, without being
daunted.


Cynt. I tremble to think of his coming, and have a natural timerousness in me,
that I cannot ore come, were it any but a Father --


Plaut. You must in the first encounter show your self a man, least finding you
give ground, he proceeds to treat you like a Child; go and practice how to
behave your self; take courage and Resolution; be possitive in all your answers
and obstinate.


Cynt. I Will endeavor.


Plaut. Accustom your self a little by Practice, come let us see how you will
behave your self. Your Posture bold, your head upright, your looks assured.


Cynt. So.


Plaut. Good, now imagine I am your Father arrived, and answer me as you would
do him, Hau! Villain, disobedient Villain, ungratious Varlet, the grief of thy
Parents, and shame to thy Family, the dishonor and burden of my old Age,
unworthy as thou art to bear the name of my Son; how dare you appear before me,
that have in my absence, given me so much cause of displeasure, and done as
thou have done? Is this the reward of my care to give thee breeding? Is this
the best return you make me, this the respect due to a Father? Is this your
duty and obedience? Go ungratious wretch as thou art, had thou the boldness,
the impudence, to engage your self without my consent and approbation, to marry
without my leave or knowledge, answer me, answer me, you that sneak so, what
have you to say for your self? What are you struck dumb?


Cynt. I cant but imagine it is my Father himself that rants thus at me.


Harl. He swaggers like one of threescore, cuds-so h'has made me tremble.


Plaut. You must not therefore behave your self like a Boy that is afraid of a
Rod; come he is not your Schoolmaster, but your Father.


Cynt. I Will go in and fortify my self with resolutions, I Am resolved not to be
danted.


Plaut. Not so much as in looks.


Cynt. No.


Plaut. Nor hang you head.


Cynt. No.


Plaut. Nor be not Mealy Mouthed.


Cynt. No, I Will give him two words for one.


Harl. Cudso, an excellent Tutor and an apt Scholar.


Plaut. Don't bate him an Ace.


Cynt. Not a tittle, you have whetted me, and I am sharp.


Plaut. See your Father is coming.


Euh. Plaut. Signior Octavio retire, and leave us the Field to our selves.


Oct. Exit. Harl. Signior Si, let us stand aside, and see the Battle, whiz the
Bullets will fly Anon.


Cynt. O my heart fails me.


Plaut. No, no, stay you, Sir stay.


Harl. Euh, Eo poura, Signior, Eo poura.


Plaut. Come bear up.


Cynt. I cannot stand the Brunt, I Will e'ne get out of his sight


Exit. Plaut. Signior Cynthio, stay Signior Cynthio, see He Is gone, what ill
tempered mettle is this Blade made of? That his edg is turned already; well I Will
speak to him, do you second me, and be sure to back my discourse.


Enter Pancrace. Panc. Was ever the like Action in a Son?


Plaut. He has heard the business already, and cannot forbear talking on it to
himself.


Panc. so villainous a piece of Insolence.


Plaut. Let Us harken a little nearer.


Panc. I Would fain know what he can say for himself.


Plaut. We have our Story ready.


Panc. Does he think to deny his Marriage?


Plaut. No, that is the least of our thoughts.


Panc. Or hopes he to excuse it?


Plaut. As well as we can.


Panc. Or will he tell me some fine Story?


Plant. It may be we may.


Panc. It shall be to no purpose.


Plaut. We Will try that.


Panc. I Will harken to nothing.


Plaut. Reason or not Reason.


Penc. I Will lay him up in Lavender.


Plaut. His fears make him require sweeting. Sir I am glad to see you safe
returned.


Panc. Good morrow Plautino, I Will go find him out.


Plaut. I believe Sir your voyage agreed with you very well, you are grown fat
upon it, and look mighty well.


Panc. I am very well, -- marry without my knowledge?


Plaut. Had you not a very pleasent Voyage?


Panc. A very pleasant one, pray let me alone to be angry.


Plaut. How Sir, would you be angry?


Panc. Yes Sir, I have reason to be angry I think.


Plaut. With whom?


Pance. With my Son.


Plaut. For what I beseech you?


Penc. You have not heard what has been done in my absense.


Plaut. I heard of some small matter.


Panc. How! an action of this nature, a small matter?


Plaut. It Is true you have some reason to.


Panc. It Was such a Prank.


Plaut. Yes truly but --


Panc. A Son to marry without the consent of his Father.


Plaut. Something may be said as to that indeed, but I know you are a man of
that Wisdom not to be too much concerned at what cannot be helped.


Panc. Not to be concerned, yes I will be concerned, don't you think, that I
have all reason immaginable to be angry?


Plant. Yes truly you have so, I was angry my self when I first heard on it, I
was so much concerned for your sake, that I schooled your Son soundly, ask him
there what a Lecture I read him for his want of respect to a Father, to whose
least commands he ought to show obedience, no man could have said more, not
your self. But I have since considered things according to Reason, and find
(now my Passion is gone) that they are not so bad as may be imagined,


Panc. How? What can be worse, then for a Son to run headlong, and Marry no
body knows who?


Plaut. Oh, I grant it was not well done, but what? our Actions depend not
altogether on us, the Stars have a powerful influence. In sine, it was his Fate.


Panc. That Is a fine Reason indeed, by that means a man may Cheat, Rob, Murder,
and say for excuse, 'Twas his Fate so to do.


Plaut. But Sir, you take my words in too strict a Philosophical a sense, yet
Fate is hard to be resisted, and the influence of the Stars, concur much to the
Operations of our Minds.


Panc. But does not wisdom control the Stars, and the Fate you: talk of?
Sapiens Dominabitur Astris --


Plaut. It Is true, Wisdom corrects but cannot quite alter the course of the
Stars -- But what, you don't expect to see your Son at these years as wise as
your self?


Harl. As for example, young Mr. Octavio, notwithstanding all my good Counsels,
daily Advice, Remonstrances, Cautions and Caveats, has yet played a more
foolish trick then Signior Cynthio.


Plaut. I would fain know if you were not young once your self, and had not
your Devices and Vigaries like others? I have heard say that you were
heretofore very brisk upon the Ladies, a great Gallant, and kept Company with
all the Ladies of the times.


Panc. It Is confessed, but I had still a regard to my self, I never did what he
has done.


Plaut. And what has he done? He saw a young Lady whom he loved, he had that
from you to have a kindness for all pretty Women. He found her very charming,
made her visits, looked languishingly on her, sighed and talked passionately,
and declared his love in all the gallantries of Courtship. She makes a return,
he is weak, the temptation strong, his Stars conspire, Fate helps, Opportunity
presents, he makes use of the Critical minute, the Parents surprise him, force
him to marry her, he gives her his Hand, and makes the best of a bad Market,
and yet you will be angry.


Harl. Ha, Ha, Ha, Rogue!


Plaut. What would you have had him been killed? it is yet better to be Married
then Murdered.


Panc. I never heard that matters went so far.


Plaut. Ask him, see if he don't say the same thing?


Panc. Was he forced to marry?


Harl. Oh Signior si, with a great Battoon.


Plaut. Nay I Would not lie for the matter.


Panc. Then he shall presently go to a Notary, and Depose upon Oath, that he
was forced to it.


Plaut. But that is a thing he will never do.


Panc. I Will have it done to annul the Marriage.


Plaut. To annual the Marriage?


Panc. Yes.


Plaut. Ah, you will not annul it Signior Pancrace.


Panc. Will Not I annul it?


Plaut. No.


Panc. Why have not I the Authority of a Father? Is it not Reason and Justice
for the violence offered my Son --


Plaut. He will never agree to it.


Panc. Not agree to it?


Plaut. No.


Panc. Not my Son?


Plaut. No, not your Son, would you have him declare himself a Coward? and say
that he did it for fear? Oh, he never will, that were to disgrace himself and
his Family, and make him unworthy to be the Son of such a Father as you?


Panc. I care not for that.


Plaut. He must for his own reputation and your honor, say that his Marriage
was his own choice.


Panc. But I Will have him for my Honor and his own Reputation, say just the
contrary.


Plaut. I Am sure he never will.


Panc. I Will make him.


Plaut. Indeed he will not*


Panc. He shall, or I Will disinherit him.


Plaut. You?


Panc. I.


Plaut. Good!


Panc. I Will do it.


Plaut. No, you will not disinherit him.


Panc. Will Not I disinherit him?


Plaut. No.


Panc. But I will.


Plaut. No.


Panc. No?


Plaut. No.


Panc. That Is fine, I will not disinherit my Son!


Plaut. Signior, No.


Panc. Who shall hinder me?


Plaut. Your self.


Panc. My self, good!


Plaut. Yes, you cannot have the heart.


Panc. But you will find I shall.


Plaut. Nature and the compassion of a Father will take his part.


Panc. They Will signify nothing.


Plaut. Yes, Yes.


Panc. No.


Plaut. I know you are naturally of a good disposition.


Panc. No, I am not, I can be angry if I please, but let us end this discourse
which provokes me. I Will go and find out Signior Scaramouch, and acquaint him
with the fine Actions of my Son.


Plaut. Signior Pancrace, if I can be serviceable to you in any thing, you need
but Command.


Panc. I thank you Signior Plautino, O that I had but my Son alive that is
dead, to make him my Heir.


Exit. Harl. You are an able man, our business is now in a good Posture, but
Money, Money, Signior Plautino, Eh, it is a Pretty Gypsy.


Plaut. I engage -- The design is hatched, I am only thinking where to find a
man that we may trust to act a part that I have designed stay, stand you at a
little distance, give your Hat, the Cock of an angry Bully, sway your body upon
one leg, set one hand by your side, swell, look fierce and killing, now take an
angry march round, now turn short Cock before and behind at once, now quickly
draw, ha, advance with a countenance full of fury, as if you had found the man
you were to sacrifice. So -- it is well, I shall put fit words into your mouth,
and instruct you to disguise your visage, and alter your voice.


Harl. Eh, Signior Plautino, don't put me to swim out of my depth, I have no
good heart for a Lion.


Plaut. O a Lamb in a Lions skin is as dreadful to the eye as a Lions whelp.


Harl. And lot the fear of the Galleys be before your eyes.


Plaut. We Will share the danger betwixt us, three years more or less in the
Galleys is not sufficient to restrain a noble heart from a brave understanding.


Exeunt. The End of the first Act.
Act. II. Scene I.
Enter Plautino and Spittzaferro. SPitt. Ah Signior Plautino, I meet you very
luckily, I was just coming to find you.


Plaut. For what Signior Spittzaferro?


Spitt. To ask your advice about a business I have in hand.


Plaut. I Am very glad I meet you, here we may discourse with freedom.


Spitt. Be covered I beseech you, it is concerning a matter of great importance,
but it is not good to proceed in matters of this nature without the counsel and
advice of Friends.


Plaut. I take it as a particular honor, Signior Spittzaferro, that you make
choice of me. Well Sir, acquaint me with the business.


Spitt. But first I desire you not to flatter me, but really and truly to tell
me your thoughts.


Plaut. Well, since you desire it, I will.


Spitt. There Is nothing I should sooner find fault with, than a friend that
will not freely tell me his mind.


Plaut. You are in the right.


Spitt. In this Age it is very hard to find a sincere friend.


Plaut. Very true.


Spitt. Wherefore Signior Plautino give me your advice, with all the freedom
imaginable.


Plaut. There Is my Hand upon it.


Spitt. Swear to me.


Plaut. By our friendship, as I hope to live. Now tell me what is it?


Spitt. I would know whether you think it convenient for me to marry or not?


Plaut. For you to marry?


Spitt. Yes, I my self in Person, what would you counsel me?


Plaut. I tell you plainly, that 'twill be very indiscreetly done of you to
marry, for marriage is a thing that even young people ought to consider of
before they do it, and if marriage at the best be counted the greatest of
follies, what can be worse than to be guilty of this folly, at an Age when we
should be more discreet. In short Sir, I tell you my opinion, I would not
counsel you to marry, and you will be thought the indiscreetest man in the world,
having lived free to these years, if you should now thrust your neck into the
yoke.


Spitt. And I tell you Signior Plautino, that I Am resolved to marry, come what
will, and that no body will count me a fool for marrying the Gentlewoman I
pretend to, when once they see what manner of person she is.


Plaut. O! that alters the Case, you did not tell me that.


Spitt. She Is one that is very pretty, and one that I love very well.


Plaut. You love her very well?


Spitt. With all my heart, and I have her Fathers consent.


Plaut. Oh, you have her Fathers consent too?


Spitt. Yes, and I have promised to be married to morrow.


Plaut. O Marry, Marry, I have no more to say.


Spitt. I was formerly against marrying, but now I consider if I continue as I
am, the race of the Spittzaferro's will be at an end, and in marrying I shall
live after I am dead, in my issue.


Plaut. Therefore you will do very well to marry.


Spitt. Yes, what a pleasure I shall take to see a Company of little Creatures,
to whom I gave life and motion, and are so many small Figures of my self, there
shall I see my self drawn to the life in little. O how these little images will
be hopping and jumping about me, and calling me Pa pa, talking and prattling,
and telling me a company of pretty little foolish tales, O the dear pretty
little Poppets, what can be more delightful.


Plaut. Nothing in the world, therefore marry the first thing you do.


Spitt. Very good, you give me that Counsel.


Plaut. I counsel you, you cannot do better.


Spitt. Truly I am very well pleased to find you counsel me so like a friend.


Plaut. But who is this Person you are to marry?


Spitt. One Mistress Aurelia.


Plaut. What the pretty young Mistress Aurelia?


Spitt. Yes.


Plaut. She that is so modish and waggish?


Spitt. Yes.


Plaut. Daughter to Signior Ieronimo?


Spitt. The same.


Plaut. And Sister to young Alberto that has a command in the Castle?


Spitt. It Is she, but him I never saw yet, he is in the Country.


Plaut. Mercy upon me?


Spitt. What say you Signior?


Plaut. A very fit person for you, marry with all speed.


Spitt. Have I not made a good choice?


Plaut. A rare one, ah, what a fine Wife will you have, Marry, Marry, Marry
Signior Spittzaferro.


Spitt. Your approbation pleases me extremely, I give you many thanks for your
good counsel, and invite you to my Wedding to morrow.


Plaut. I Will not fail to come. The young Aurelia Daughter to Signior Ieronimo,
married to Signior Spittzaferro, that is not above 53 years of Age; oh what a
match, what a fine match is this?


Exit. Spitt. This match must needs be very happy, for every body is much
pleased that hears on it, I have not told it to one but smiled at my choice as
soon as I speak, I shall to morrow be the happiest man in the world. O here
comes my Mistress.

Enter Aurelia. Ah! how pretty, what an Air, how delicately shaped, and what a
Stature! Can any man see her and not have a mind to her? whether art thou going
my little Poppet, my dear Wife that is to be, of thy Husband that must be?


Aur. I Am going about a little business.


Spitt. Euh -- good, my little Mopsie, the hour is coming that we two must make
one another happy, I can do with you what e're I please, without any Body's
saying why do you so? or is it well done? you will be mine all over from head
to foot, I shall then be your right owner, and Master of you all over, of your
pretty waggish Eyes, of that pretty little Roguish Nose, of those Cherry-Cherry
lips, of those little, little, fritter Ears, of those pretty blub-cheeks, -- of
that dimpl'd, dimpl'd Chin, of those round, hard, panting Bubbies, of your
soft, white Skin, of your -- Euh -- oh! -- In fine, every part and particle of
you will be solely and wholly at my disposal; and I shall be the like to you,
to be stroak'd and kissed, and do what e're you please with, Are you not glad
of this Marriage, my little Wanton?


Aur. Most extremely glad, I Will assure you: For to say truth, my Father's
severity has kept me in a most intolerable subjection, I have been almost mad
for a little more liberty, and especially e're since he was sick. He has kept
me so mewed up in his warm Chamber, that I have wanted room to breath in. Were
it not for you, that I must go abroad to buy things for our Wedding, I should
never have stirred from him: Ah! the fresh Air is so comfortable to me.


Spitt. -- And the sight of me, --


Aur. Above all, -- I have wished a thousand times that he would marry me to
somebody, that I might get out of his Jurisdiction, and be a little more at my
own disposal; and you, I thank you, are come most luckily to do me that good
turn.


Spitt. I Will take you into my tuition.


Aur. Aye -- Signior Spittzaferro, and now I Will be preparing to lead a
pleasanter life, to take my full swing of pleasure, to make amends for what I
have lost.


Spitt. Eumh!


Aur. Now, Sir, you being a very brave person, well bred and one that
understands what it is to live, I believe that we shall do well together; and
that you will not be one of those troublesome Husbands that would have their
Wives live sneaking and mewed up; it is a thing that does not at all agree with
me, I should never away with it in a Husband; I cannot endure a dull solitary
life, it is directly against my humor; I Am all Air and Mirth; I like to go
where I please, and do what I list.


Spitt. Eumh!


Aur. I love Visiting. Plays, Balls, Masquerades, and good Company: I Am for
good Clothes, -- a sine Coach, and handsome Liveries, and appearing amongst the
best, as well dressed, and as rich as any of them.


Spitt. Eumh! yes, yes.


Aur. In fine, I Am resolved to make my life as pleasant as I can; and I know
you will think your self happy to have a Wife of my humor.


Spitt. Eumh; -- Yes, yes.


Aur. We Will never be meddling, nor thwarting one another; I Will not concern my self
at what you do: As I hope, on the other side, you will not be contradicting, or
telling me what I shall do.


Spitt. Eumh; no, no.


Aur. As for my part, I think there ought to be a mutual compliance, and that
people ought not to marry to be troublesome to one another. In fine, when we
are married we will live like two that understand one another humor; no jealousy
nor suspicious shall trouble your head, but it shall be sufficient that you
have an assurance of my fidelity; as I shall have a good opinion of yours. But
what troubles you, I perceive your countenance much changed on the sudden?


Spitt. Some splenatick vapors that rise and dizzy my brain.


Aur. It Is a distemper that abundance are troubled with. But our Marriage will
take away all that. Adieu, Signior Spittzaferro, my dear Husband, -- That must
be, of your Wife that is to be. I am in a little have at present, because I
have not Clothes and things about me as I would have; I Am just going to buy me
what things I want, you shall see how sine I Will be to morrow -- Adieu Signior
Spittzaferro.


Ex. Enter Plautino. Plaut. Signior Spittzaferro, I Am glad to find you still
here: I met just now a Jeweller who had the finest Diamond-Ring that I have
ever seen; and thinking you might want one to present to your Mrs. I earnestly
entreated him to come to you, and let you see it. He will be here presently.


Spitt. No have, no have, Sir.


Plaut. How! what mean you, Signior Spittzaferro, you were very hot upon it even
now?


Spitt. Since that I have some scruples come into my head concerning my
Marriage: I will very well consider on it before I proceed any farther; I would
sain have somebody interpret to me a Dream which I had last night; and but just
now call to mind. You know that Dreams are as they were Glasses, that represent
to us things that shall happen. I dreamt that I was in a Ship, and the Sea very
tempestuous; and that --


Plaut. Signior Spittzaferro, I have a little urgent business at present that
will not let me stay to hear you out; I have no skill in dreams, besides, I
give no credit to them. But as for consultation about your Marriage, hear a
couple of very learned Philosophers, your Neighbors, Signior Scaramouch, and
Signior Doctor Pancracio, one a bold Aristotelian, and the other a modest
Academick; with them you may debate about every particular of your Marriage,
they being of different Sects, you may hear their several opinions, and from
both judge what is best for you to do; for my part, I Am satisfied with what I
said to you before: And so your Servant.


Exit. Spitt. He Is in the right; I ought in this case to consult these learned
Men.


Exit. Enter Pancracio and Scaramouth. Panc. This unadvised Marriage of my Son
extremely alters the measures we had taken. --


Scar. Strange folly of youth!


Panc. But no matter, Signior Scaramouch.


Scar. Let me tell you that --


Panc. I Will suddenly remove all obstacles.


Scar. That the education of children --


Panc. Is not altogether sufficient to prevent them from running into
extravagancies, because nature is subject to frailty, and we are sometimes
deceived by ill under the species of good.


Scar. Signior, no, that --


Panc. That it is better to bestow it upon a Son than an Estate, because Wealth
respects only the body, and may be taken from us; but we cannot be deprived of
our virtues, which are the riches of the mind, because more permanent, and of
greater importance.


Scar. No, that --


Panc. That it cannot be taught in old age, because the habits that are grown
up with us are too deeply fixed in nature, to be rooted out.


Scar. No, that --


Panc. That unless it be given to youth, they will miscarry all their life
long, because they want the Bridle that should curb and restrain them in their
full carreer.


Scar. No, that --


Panc. That nothing can be more beneficial, because without it we are things
unpolished, and rather Bruits than Men.


Scar. No, that --


Panc. That, what? what, Signior Scaramouch?


Scar. Euh! Signior Doctore!


Panc. Oh, Bono! --


Scar. Oh, Patientia! --


Panc. Signiorsi.


Scar. That the education of children --


Panc. Is a task --


Scar. Signior, no.


Panc. Is of that consequence.


Scar. Signior, no.


Panc. Is of such a value --


Scar. Signior, no.


Panc. Is a thing t --


Scar. Signior, no, no, no, Signior no.


Panc. Why, what is it then, Signior Scaramouch?


Scar. You have done?


Panc. Signiorsi.


Scar. You have no more to say?


Panc. Signior, no.


Scar. You are satisfied.


Panc. Signiorsi.


Scar. You Will hear me now?


Panc. Signiorsi.


Scar. And not interrupt me?


Panc. Signior, no.


Scar. You promise?


Panc. Yes.


Scar. Upon your word?


Panc. Yes.


Scar. We Will talk some other time then.


Panc. O! que Diavolo!


Walks gravely away. Scar. Hola! Signior Scaramouch, let us discourse a little.


Panc. goes after him, and takes him by the sleeve. Scaramouch returns. Scar. I
say then, the Education of children.


Panc. Aye, the Education of children


Scar. Is a thing not to be expected from every Father; for no one is fit to
give Education to youth --

This is spoke at the same time that Pancrace speaks. Enter Harlequin. Sees them
both gabling together, comes and stands betwixt them, laughs, looks in their
faces, and runs out. -- But such as are of great Reason and Judgment. Hence it
proceeds that so many Sons miscarry, because their Parents foolishly presuming
on their own abilities, will be giving directions when they want it themselves:
And how is it possible that any should be well instructed, when he that will
teach, needs to be taught. No, no, they who cannot give some eminent proof of
their Abilities, ought rather to commit their Pupils to the care of those who
are of known sufficiency, acd thoroughly experienced in the Principles and
Rudiments of --


Enter Harl. with a Drum, stands betwixt them, and beats louder and louder; they
turn from each other, and hold their ears. He goes out laughing. Panc. Concurs
so much to their This is spoke at the same time as that above. future being,
that it is a duty incumbent on all Parents, to see them well brought up, and
endoctrinated; for without Education our life is offensive to others, and a
burden to our selves; and Education consists principally in three points,
First, in the Authority of him that instructs: Secondly, in his Care; and
Thirdly, in his Ability: He must have Authority, or he is not regarded; for
Youth is headstrong; he must have Care, because they are heedless; he must have
Abilities, because many are indocile, and hard to be taught; and nothing but
the soundness of his Reason can expel their Ignorance; which being innate and
--


Exit. Panc. Oh! so; Signior Scaramouch.


Looks about, sees nobody, and turns to Scaramouch. Scar. Signior.


Pancracio stands in a posture leaning his ear, as listening to what Scar. will
say; Scar does the same to him. -- Panc. Speak.


Scar. Si.


As they stand listening, Harl enters, stands betwixt 'em, looks in their faces;
bursting into a little laughter, retreats, sings, and laughs. Harl. Ha! he! he!
he! hi!


Ex. Panc. Signior Scaramoueh.


Scar. Ap -- pouh.


Panc. Speak.


Scar. Ap -- pouh


Harl. Ah -- he -- he -- hi!


Harl. hits each a pat with his Sword on the Buttocks; as they each turn round,
-- he passes betwixt them, and goes out: they, in in turning, face each other.
Panc. Signior Scaramouch, what have you to say?


Scarl. Nothing.


Panc. Nothing?


Scarl. Nothing, Signior Pancrace, but that if your Son had had a discreet
Father for his Instructor, he would have known better things e're this, than
making of Contracts and Marriages.


Panc. But what if the Son of Signior Scaramouch, that has learnt the fine
Accomplishments of Music, Dancing, Fencing and Riding, and that has had such a
wise Father to govern him, has done the like?


Scarl. How, Signior Pancrace?


Panc. Even so.


Scarl. I understand not the Riddle.


Panc. Harlequin can explain it. -- Adieu.


Scarl. Done the like! O here he comes.


Enter Octavio. Octav. Good Morrow to you Sir.


Scarl. Octavio!


Oct. Your Blessing.


Scarl. No matter for Ceremony.


Oct. Are you unwilling to receive the tenders of my duty?


Scarl. I have other business with you.


Oct. What, Sir?


Scarl. Stand before me, look me full in the face; fix your eyes upon my
forhead.


Oct. No Sir.


Scarl. I read guilt in your looks.


Oct. What do you mean Sir?


Scarl. What horrid thing have you done?


Oct. Nothing, Sir, to offend you


Scarl. Nothing?


Oct. No, Sir.


Scarl. You Will not confess, -- Harlequin says true.


Oct. Harlequin!


Scarl. O, do you blush at that?


Oct. Has he told you any thing of me?


Scarl. I Am in have, look to it; if thou have dishonored me, I Will renounce
thee: And come not in my sight.


Ex. Enter Cynthio, Harlequin. Oct. O! Are you there, Sir? I Am glad to find
your Worship.


Harl. Eh! your Servant, Sir; your Humble Servant, Signior Octavie. -- I am
your most Humble Servant.


Oct. You are very Ceremonious, but I shall spoil your Compliment, and let you
understand,


Harl. Ah! Signior Octavio!


Octavio draws. Harl. falls on's knees. Cynt. O! hold.


Oct. Pray don't hinder me.


Harl. Eh! Signior!


Cynt. Signior Octavio.


Oct. Pray don't interpose.


Cynt. O! pray don't offer to --


Harl. Eh! -- How have I offended, in what?


Oct. You are ignorant, are you? -- I Will give you instructions, I will.


Cynt. Pray be pacified.


Oct. Ho; I Will make the Rogue instantly confess his treachery; yes Sirrah, I
will: you thought it should never have been discovered, but I Will have an open
confession from thy own mouth, or run my Sword down your throat as deep as ever
it was in the scabbard.


Harl. Ah! poor Harlequin, can you have the heart to --


Oct. Confess then.


Harl. Signior, I confess I have offended you.


Oct. O, have you so!


Harl. Truly I have done you wrong, I confess it, Signior; but I don't know in
what.


Oct. I Will refresh your memory.


Cynt. No, no, Signior Octavio.


Harl. Well, Sir, since I must, I confess that my Companions and I drank up
three of those six Flasks of Florence-Winae you sent to your Friend for a
Present; when I told you that a Tile fell from the top of a House which was
mending, and dropped just into my Basket, and broke 'em.


Oct. O! did you drink it, Raseal, did you?


Harl. Yes Sir, and ask your pardon.


Oct. I Am glad I know it. But this is not the thing I now question you about.


Harl. This not the thing?


Oct. No, it is a business that more nearly concerns me.


Harl. I have done nothing else.


Oct. Have you not, Sir, have you not?


Harl. Eh!


Cynt. Hold! hold!


Harl. Eh! Signior, yes, yes: About a fortnight since, when you sent me one
night to your Mistress, to Present her with the Gold-Watch, and I returned
covered over with dirt, and my face bloody, and told you that I was set upon by
Rogues in the dark, as I went cross the square, who knocked me down, and robbed
me both of that and my Money --


Oct. So. --


Harl. It was all but invention, I went and sold it.


Oct. You sold it, you did. --


Harl. Yes, but cannot imagine how you should come to know it.


Oct. A very good confession.


Harl. Signior, I wanted a small sum of Money.


Oct. But this is not the thing neither I was resolved to know.


Harl. No? oh! I am very sick, Signior.


Oct. No, Villain, this is not it; but I Will make you out with it, or --


offers to strike. Cynt. Hold.


Harl. Eh! -- Well, Signior, you remember one night, as you came home from your
Mistresses, that a Rogue came behind you, and knocked you down into the kennel
with a great Club, and all spoiled your new Clothes. --


Oct. Yes.


Harl. 'Twas I, Signior, laid you sprawling, and then fell all along my self,
as if I had been knocked down too, and cried out Thieves! Thieves!


Oct. It was your Roguery, yes.


Harl. Only, Signior, to make you keep better hours, and cause you to come home
sooner a nights from your Mistresses, where you used to sit up late, and let me
stand waiting for you without in the cold, to the great prejudice of my health.


Oct. A precious servant, when time and place are more convenient, we will talk
more at large of these particulars; but at present I am only concerned to know
what thou have lately done to me, yet worse than all this.


Harl. Not this neither.


Oct. No, Sirrah!


Harl. This is all.


Oct. This all?


Harl. Signiorsi.


Oct. No, Sirrah, this is not all, and I Will not leave thee till thou have
confessed the very thing.


Aarl. But will you leave me then?


Oct. But confess.


Offers to strike. Harl. Eh! Signior, tell me what it is, and I Will confess with
all! my heart.


Oct. Quick, Sirrah, quick; I Am in have.


Harl. Let it alone till another time, and I Will think on it against I see you
next.


Oct. Sirrah, one minutes delay, and thou art dead.


Harl. Eh! Signior Octavio; Mercy, Signior, I have told you all.


Oct. This all?


Harl. Signiorsi.


Oct. You Will not confess then what you told my Father?


Harl. Your Father! yes --


Oct. What?


Harl. Nothing.


Oct. Nothing?


Harl. Signior, no.


Oct. No?


Harl. 'Signior, no.


Oct. Look to it, I had it from his own mouth.


Harl. Signior, with your permission, Heaven will not bless him, if he tells lies.


Oct. If I find you did, I Will cut your throat as sure --


Enter Plautino. Plaut. Sir, I bring you ill news.


Cynt. What, Plautino?


Harl. Cut my throat! Signior, no; Signior Octavio, Servitore.


Ex. running. Plaut. The Egyptians are upon going away with your Zerbinetta,
and she, with tears in her eyes, charged me to come with all speed* to acquaint
you, that if you don't come and bring the Money (within two hours) which the
Company demand for her, you will lose her for ever; for they intend for Germany.


Cynt. Within two hours!


Plaut. At farthest.


Cynt. Without thy aid, Plautino, I am wretched. If thou have no invention to
procure the Sum, I Am undone for ever.


Plaut. How much is it?


Cynt. Five hundred Ducats.


Oct. And I am ruined too, if thou can not procure me 200 Pistols.


Plaut. I have a Mint in my Brain, and I Will coin so much for you both presently.


Cynt. But time presses the performance.


Plaut. I Will make both your Fathers Purses bleed for it. As for your business,
the Engine is already fitted. Well, let us about our design: Where Is Harlequin?
he must make one.


Cynt. Your threats have made him desert us.


Plaut. He Will be a necessary Impliment.


Oct. I Will endeavor to regain him before he is got quite out of our reach.


Cynt. His fear will make him avoid you.


Plaut. I Will hunt him out.


Exeunt. Enter Harlequin. Harl. I Will have no more to do with young men; I Will
apply my self to the old, that are grave and serious. I Will go and consult with
Signior Pancrace, the learned Doctor, to know how I shall be a wise man. Hola!
Signior Doctore!


Enter Pancraccia. Panc. Who Is there?


Harl. Your Servant, Signior Doctore.


Panc. O ho! Harlequin, what news?


Harl. Signior Pancrace, I have a mind to be a Philosopher.


Panc. Good.


Harl. I am vexed that my Father and Mother did not breed me up to be a Scholar
when I was young.


Panc. A very rational reflections; Nam sine Doctrina vita est quasi mortis
Imago; You know what that is, you understand Latin?


Harl. Yes, but in a manner as it were that I did not. Tell me the meaning
often* I pray.


Panc. That is to say; Without learning, life is but the Image of death.


Harl. I find this Latin has much of truth in it. Pray give me your
instructions. for I have a mind to be one of your Sect.


Panc. You have the Foundation of Knowledge already, the Principles and
Rudiments of Learning.


Harl. Eh; yes, yes, I can write and read.


Panc. What is it you have most mind to learn? Logic?


Harl. Logic! what is Logic?


Panc. Logic is that which directs the three operations of the understanding.


Harl. The three operations of the understanding! what be they?


Panc. The first, the second, and the third; the first is, to apprehend well by
the means of the Universals. The second is* to judge well by means of the
Categories. The third is, to draw a consequence well by means of the Figures,
Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferio, Baralipton, etc.


Harl. He Is Conjuring.


starts back. Panc. Come near.


Harl. What are these, the names of Spirits, or of Heathen Philosophers?


Panc. The names of Figures, the chief things in Logic?


Harl. Logic then I find is full of cramp-words; teach me something that is
not so crabbid, something that I may learn with pleasure.


Panc. Have you a mind to learn Morals?


Harl. Morals! what is the meaning of Morals?


Panc. Moral Philosophy treats of Happiness, teaches men to moderate their
Passions, and --


Harl. Eh; Signior, no; I cannot moderate my passions; when I am vexed, I am as
angry as the Devil in Hell, and hearken to no manner of reason, therefore
Morals will be in vain.


Panc. Would you then learn Physics, or Natural Philosophy?


Harl. What is that about?


Panc. It explicates the Principles of natural things, and the Proprieties of
bodies: It discourses of the nature of the Elements, Metals, Minerals, Stones,
Plants, and Animals: and teaches the cause of Meteors, of the Rainbow, of
Comets, Lightnings, Thunder, of Rain, Snow, Hail, of Winds, Tempests, and
Earthquakes.


Harl. There Is too much hurry in this, it makes too great a din^in a man's
ears, and giddies his brain.


Panc. Meta-Physicks then?


Harl. Meta-Physicks, Signior! Meta-Physicks?


Panc. Treats of Heaven, and Angels, of Spirits and --


Harl. No, I Will have nothing to do with Spirits.


Panc. What would you learn then?


Harl. Teach me to spell well, that I may write so, as people may know what it
means.


Panc. Oh, Orthography!


Harl. Yes, Orthography.


Panc. O, very well; have you e're a Primmer?


Harl. I learn the Primmer!


Panc, Yes, it is very requisite for a man that will be a Philosopher, to
understand the Primmer well.


Harl. I was a Philosopher twenty years ago then. Teach me something that is
mighty fine to know, something that is very curious, that I may pass for one
deeply learned. Teach me to understand the Almanac.


Panc. The Almanac?


Harl. Yes, that I may know how many days are in a week, how many weeks in a
month, how many months in a year.


Panc. Good.


Harl. How to know when Quarter-day comes, and how often in a year: that I may
be sure never to lose any of my wages.


Panc. Good! so.


Harl. That I may know when the Wind blows, or does not blow; when it rains, or
not rains; or when the Moon shines, or does not shine.


Panc. Things very material, and necessary to be learnt: sollow me, and I Will
carry you to a fine old Gentlewoman that lives hard-by, who shall instruct you.


Harl. Is she a Philosopher, Signiore?


Panc. A profound one, and deeply skilled in the Primmer, and the Almanac.
Come, I Will recommend you to her, and she shall take pains with you.


Harl. Your Servant, Signiore Pancrace.


Exeunt. The End of the second Act.
Act III. Scene I. A School-Room.
The Scene draws, and discovers Harlequin amongst a company of little children
at School, all gabling together in a Schooltone; the Mistress sitting in the
middle in a great Chair, with a great Rod and a Ferrula sticking upright at
either corner of the back of the Chair. Harl. snatches a piece of Bread and
Butter out of one of the childrens hands; the child falls a crying. 3d Sch.
EUnh! Eunh! Eunh!


Mistr. How now? who is that makes a noife: there?


1st Sch. The new Scholar.


2d Sch. The new Scholar.


Mist. Child, come hither; what makes you cry, tell me?


3d Sch. H'has got my Bread and Butter.


Mist. Cuds-lidikins, he; which is that he?


3d Sch. He there.


Mist. My new Scholar! does he play such tricks already?


Harl. I was very hungry, Signiora Philosopher.


Mist. I shall teach you better manners.


Harl. I asked for a piece, and the cross Chit would give me none.


Mist. And therefore you were so rude to snatch it?


Harl. I had not eat my Breakfast to day.


Mist. Look you do so no more.


Harl. May Not a Philosopher eat Bread and Butter?


Mist. Come, which of all you Dunces that stay behind here, can say your
Lessons, that you may go home after your fellows?


All Sch. I, I, I, I, I, I.


Mist. Look to it, they that tell me they can, if they cannot, shall be whipped;
therefore sit you down, and mind your Books till I come again, that you may be
perfect.


Harlequin goes and sits in the Mistresses Chair, takes the Rod and plays with
it; pulls out an Apple, and eats and sings with his mouth full. 1st, 2d, 3d.
Sch. O brave! O brave!


1st Sch. I Will tell my Mistress.


2d Sch. I Will tell my Mistress.


1st, 2d, 3d Sch. Ha! ha! ha!


Harl. You, little boy, come hither, and say your Lesson.


1st Sch. Pray, who are you?


Harl. I Am a Philosopher.


1st Sch. Ha! ha! ha! A Philosopher! Pray, Mr. Philosopher, come out of my
Mistresses Chair.


They throw Books at him, and pull him to come out. All Sch. Ay, come out of
the Chair, come out.


Harl. I Am a Philosopher! I Am a Philosopher! I Am a Philosopher!


Enter Mistress. They all run to their places. Harl. sees the Mistress, and
runs to her. Mist. So, what is to do here?


Harl. O que Diavolo!


Mist. This is fine! my back's no sooner turned, but you are all at your
Gambols: Come, for this trick, he that has not his Lesson perfect, shall be
sent home with a good whipping: and first, let us see what you can do, you, Mr.
Philosopher.


Harl. Signiora!


Mist. Come, and stand by my Chair; so, stand upright. How chance you have not
washed your hands to day?


Harl. O! no matter.


Mist. No matter, said you?


Harl. I forgot it.


Mist. Forget to wash 'em another morning, and I Will scour 'em for you with a
good Rod.


Harl. Ha! ha! he!


Mist. Out, you great sloven; come to School with dirtyhands!


Harl. Euh, Signiora! well enough, well enough.


Mist. Well enough! but let me sind it so again, and it shall be ill enough with
you.


Harl. May Not a Philosopher have dirty-hands?


Mist. Look I see it no more so.


Harl. What does Mrs. Philosopher concern her self so with my hands, for?


Mist. Come, let me hear you say your Lesson now. Shut your Book, say over the
Alphabet, begin.


Harl. A, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, k, l, m, n, p.


Mist. N, p! what is the next letter to N?


Harl. P.


Mist. P, again? there is the second fault; hold out your hand.


Harl. My hand?


Mist. Hold it out to receive instruction, thus; so, now look on the top of the
house, and see what letter sticks on the Seeling.


He holds out his hand, she hits him with a Ferrula. Harl. O!


Mist. O then is the next letter, l, m, n, o. This, I see, will make you a
Scholar.


Harl. I find it is as Mr. Doctore said, she is a profound Philosopher.


Mist. N, O, P; then go on.


Harl. N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, W, X, Y, Z.


Mist. How, open your Book, and read.


Harl. A, b, ab, e, b, eb, i, b, ib, o, b, ob, u, b, ub. B, a, ab.


Mist. How Is that? b, a, spell ab?


Harl. Yes.


Mist. A, b, spells ab; B, a, spells -- what? what says the Sheep?


Harl. What says a Sheep? Ha! ha! ha! he!


Mist. What says the Sheep?


Harl. The Sheep says -- Ha! ha! he! nothing can a Sheep speak.


Mist. Did you never hear a Sheep cry Ba?


Harl. Ba? yes.


Mist. Well then, B, a, spells Ba; this is the third fault* Come, a sound
whipping will quicken your apprehension.


Harl. Ha, ha, he.


Mist. I am glad to see you so cheerful; come, put your head through the back
of this Chair.


Harl. What means Mrs. Phisosopher?


Mist. Come down, down, I say --


Hits his hand with a Rod* Harl. Eh, -- Eh, -- Mrs. Philosopher.


Mist. How long must I stand waiting on you? Down, down, I say.


Hits him again. Harl. Eh, -- Eh, -- Mrs. Philosopher. --


Mist. Down with your head. --


Hits him again. Harl. Eh, Eh.


Mist. So, children, one of you untruss his Points quickly.


Harl. Ha, whipped! whip a Philosopher? Eh, -- Eh, -- Mrs. Philosopher, Mrs.
Philosopher.


Mist. Untruss, untruss, does he resist; here, every one of you take a Rod, and
help me.


Whips his hand. Harl. puts his head through the back of the Chair, lifts it up,
runs about the Room with it hanging on his neck; all the children take Rods,
and, with the Mistress, run about the Stage whipping him. He runs out, the
Scene shuts. Harl. Eh, -- Eh, -- Eh, Signiora Mrs. Philosopher, Signiora* Mrs.
Philosopher. Eh, Eh, Eh. --


Exeunt. Enter Harlequin. Harl. Whipped! a Pox of Mrs. Philosopher. Whipped! Devil
take Mrs. Philosopher. O! here comes Signior Scaramouch; I Will go and consult
with him. Signior Scaramouch!


Enter Scaramouch. Scar. Harlequin!


Harl. Signior Scaramouch, I am disgusted with the affairs of the World, and
resolve to apply my self to other things. I have a desire to be a Philosopher.


Scar. A Philosopher?


Harl. Signior si.


Scar. Hola! -- within there! Prepare* the habit of a Novitiate; go, go, into
the Hall, and they will put you on the habit of a Novitiate.


Harl. A Novitiate! no, no, of a Philosopher.


Scar. Of a Philosopher of the first Class.


Harl. First Class! what is that?


Scar. Of a Novice.


Harl. O ho! of the Sect of the Novice Philosopher.


Goes into the house, and reenters. Scar. Go, it is ready for you. So, now you
have assumed the Robes of a Philosopher, it is requisite your mind should be
invested too with the habits of a Philosopher.


Enter Harl. in a great Gown of Mat, with Hanging-sleeves of the same, and a
broad Straw-hat, with one half of the brim pulled under his chin, parting from
the head. Harl. Signior si.


Scar. The habits then requisite for the mind are these.


Harl. By the way, one word, I pray, Signior Scaramouch; are the habits of the
mind for a Philosopher, made of the same stuff as the habits of his body?
Methinks this should be a little too coarse for the inside.


Scar. A habit is a certain* facility added to our power, and helping it to
act. -- As for example, -- a --


Harl. A certain facility!


Scar. As for example.


Harl. A certain ^a, --


Scar. Eh! As for example, a Rope-dancer, who by often practicing to dance upon
a Rope, grows at last expert, and does it with ease.


Harl. So I, by often wearing my new Shoes --


Scar. What?


Harl. Wore 'em out.


Scar. Euh, -- Peuh. --


Harl. Signior Scaramouch, hear me now: A habit is a certain facility added to
our power, and helping it to act. As for example, a Rope-dancer, who by often
dancing upon the Rope, at last breaks his neck with case*


Scar. O stupidity! the principal virtues requisite in a Philosopher, are
Patience, Temperance, Sobriety and Chastity; the first is Patience, he must not
be provoked to anger.


Harl. If I am struck by any one, may I not strike again?


Scar. No.


Harl. No! If a Mule kick me, may I not kick again?


Scar. No.


Harl. No! I Will be no Philosopher.


Throws off his Gown. Scar. Not unless you can kick harder than him.


Harl. O ho! then if any one strike me* I may strike again, if I think I can
beat him. Cud-so! I find there is reason in Philosophy.


Scar. The next is Temperance; a Philosopher must be temperate, he must not eat
much.


Harl. Not eat much?


Scar. No, eating dulls the brain.


Harl. Not eat much!


Scar. No.


Harl. No! I Will be no Philosopher.


Scar. Not much Mutton, or Beef, nor such gross meat, but good Capons, --
Partridg, -- and Pheasant. --


Harl. O ho! Pray go on.


Scar. The next is Sobriety; a Philosopher must not be drunk, nor given to
drink.


Harl. May Not a Philosopher drink?


Scar. Not much.


Harl. No, I Will be no Philosopher.


Scar. Unless.


Harl. No, no, unless I may drink as much as I please, I Will be no Philosopher.


Scar. No Philosopher!


Harl. No, I love good Wine.


Scar. You must not drink sour, naughty, crude Wines, but the best you can get;
as Monti-Pulchino, Montifiasco, and Florence Wines.


Harl. O ho!


Scar* Be sure the Wine you drink, be good.


Harl. O, I Am of your opinion, Signior; I find I shall soon be a Philosopher,
because I come of the kind; my Mother was a Philosopher; for the knew what was
good for her; she always kept the best for her self.


Scar. The last is, Chastity; you must not run after Women.


Harl. Nor may not they come to me?


Scar. No.


Harl. I Will be no Philosopher.


Scar. Hold.


Harl. May Not I lie with them neither?


Scar. No.


Harl. I Will be no Philosopher.


Scar. Not unless you are married*


Harl. Not unless I am married!


Scar. And then too with great moderation.


Harl. I Will be no Philosopher.


Scar. Hold.


Harl. May Not I now and then, when I Have got Money, go to a Wench?


Scar. No.


Harl. Not if I Am sure she be sound?


Scar. Upon no account.


Harl. No; I Will be no Philosopher, I Will be no Philosopher.


Scar. Hold, hold, hold.


Harl. No, no; I Will be no Philosopher, no Philosopher; I Will be no Philosopher.


Ex. Scar. Euh! Que Bestia, Bruto, Animale.


Ex. Enter Harlequin, Plautino, Cynthio, Octav. Harl. Philosopher; a Pox take
Philosophers; I Will be no more a Philosopher: Not to go to a Wench! Eh, he, he.


Plaut. He Is here.


Harl. Eh, Signior Octavio, here!


Cynt. Nay, you cannot avoid us now.


Harl. Euh, Signior, I demand pardon.


Falls on's knees. Plaut. Harlequin, you must along with me, now is the time
for you to show your Parts.


Harl. Euh, Signior Octavio; I demand pardon.


Plaut. Come, think of my instructions, and let us see how well you can perform,
after the pains I have taken with you.


Oct. My dear Harlequin, listen to his discourse.


Harl. Ah ha! now, dear Harlequin, now you have need of me.


Starts up, and walks huffing about. Oct. Go, I pardon all thou have confessed,
and worse yet, if thou have don't.


Harl. No, Signior, no; don't pardon me, run me through, kill me; I shall take it
for an Honor to dye by so noble a hand.


Oct. No, Merit rewards by being assistant to my love.


Harl. No, Signior, kill me; Signior, kill me.


Oct. I Will forget thou ever did offend me.


Harl. Kill me, Signior, kill me.


Oct. I Will never be angry with thee hereafter, do what thou will.


Harl. Kill me, Signior, kill me.


Oct. No, I have too great a love for thee, my poor dear Harlequin; come, be
good natured.


Harl. To surprise me, and so to affront me.


Cynt. Come, come, forget and forgive.


Harl. To call me so many Rogues and Villains.


Oct. It was my passion.


Harl. To offer to run your Sword down my throat.


Plaut. Eh, Harlequin.


Harl. To make me bring to light the secrets that had long lain buried under
the Tombstone of my heart. --


Oct. I am sorry for it.


Harl. To make me discover what I had sworn never to reveal. --


Oct. I ask thee pardon, my dear Harlequin be pacified, take pity of a poor
Lover,


Cynt. This ought to mollify.


Harl. Well, you will never take me to Confession again? --


Oct. No.


Harl. Nor kill me?


Oct. No.


Harl. Nor run me through?


Oct. No.


Harl. Nor thrust your Sword down my throat?


Oct. No.


Harl. Well then, I pardon you.


Plaut. Go then, prepare to come forth with all speed; all things are in
readiness, be gone.


Harl. Allagre, Signior Octavio, Allagre.


Ex. Plaut. O, here comes Signior Pancrace chewing the cud; be gone, and leave
me to proceed in my Enterprise. Take care of my reserve, and hasten him into
the field.


Exeunt. Enter Pancrace. Panc. TO have so little conduct and consideration, to
throw himself into such a snare as this! -- O! the unadvisedness of youth!


Plaut. Sir, your Servant.


Panc. How do you, Plautino?


Plaut. You are thinking of your Son.


Panc. It gives me no small trouble.


Plaut. Life is full of changes; it is good always to be prepared for the worst.


Panc. I could have born any thing but this.


Plaut, Every one can bear the evils which might have happened; but it is the part
of a Philosopher to master his Temper, and command his Passions in the evils
which do happen.


Panc. I Will tell you, Mr. Plautino, nothing but this could have moved me: --
This is a thing; -- Well, I Am just going to Counsel about it, to know how to
remedy it.


Plaut. Pray hearken to me, Signior Pancrace; try some other way to adjust the
business, you are not ignorant that Law requires much sauce, and you will hang
your self upon dangerous Tenters.


Panc. You are in the right; but pray what is that other way?


Plaut. I went and found out the Brother of this young Woman your Son has
married; he is by profession a Bravo, one that lives by cutting of throats; he
never speaks without an Oath in's mouth, and makes no more scruple to kill a
man, than to blow out the snuff of a Candle. I discoursed him upon the
Marriage, and found him reasonably inclined to accommodate the business for a
certain Sum of Money; and provided he may have it, he is contented to suffer a
Divorce.


Panc. What is it he demands?


Plaut. Oh! it is very considerable.


Panc. But what?


Plaut. Extravagant things.


Panc. Well, let me hear?


Plaut. Nothing under 5 or 600 Pistols.


Panc. Five or 600 l evors and Quartan-Agues seize him! he does it to jeer us.


Plaut. So I told him I would not give ear to such a Proposition, and said that
you was not a man of that easy temper to be whistled out of your Money: After a
long debate, the result was this; -- I am, says he, in a short time, to go to
the Army in Flanders; I must be well accoutred, and have need of Money, which
makes me consent to what otherwise I should not hearken to: I want a good
serviceable Horse for the Wars, which will not cost less than threescore
Pistols.


Panc. Well, threescore Pistols shall break no squares.


Plaut. I shall want too, says he, a Sword, Pistols, Scarf and Feather; which
will cost at least thirty Pistols more.


Panc. Thirty and threescore, make fourscore and ten.


Plaut. Just.


Panc. It Is a great Sum, but for once I Will be content, because you advise me.


Plaut. I shall want too, says he, a Horse for my Man, which will cost thirty
Pistols.


Panc. A Horse for his Man?


Plaut. Yes.


Panc. Let him walk a-foot, and be hanged! a Horse for his Man! Pox on him, he
shall have none.


Plaut. But, Sir?


Panc. No, he is an impertinent Rascal! A Horse for his Man!


Plaut. Auh, fie, Sir! what, would you have the Servant (...) a Cavalier go
a-foot?


Panc. E'ne let him go as he please, and the Master too. A Horse for his Man!


Plaut. Come, Sir, never stick out for so small a matter; don't go to entangle
your self in Law: give it, give it, to save the trouble of going to Law.


Panc. Ha, well; -- Since you will have it so, I will. But he is a Rogue! a
great Rogue! a Horse for his Man! a Pox on him; they shall neither of 'em have
one for me.


Plaut. Signior Pancrace; a Philosopher, and recall his words!


Panc. Well then, Signior Plautino, because I said it, I Will stand to it.


Plaut. I must have too, says he, a Sumpter-Horse to carry --


Panc. O! let him go to the Devil with his Sumpter-Horse, I Will to Law.


Plaut* Ah! consider, Sir!


Panc. No, no Sumpter-Horse.


Plaut. What, not a little Mule?


Panc. No, I Will to Law.


Plaut. Consider, Signior Pancrace.


Panc. No, no, I Will to Law.


Plaut. Ah! not a little paltry Mule?


Panc. I Will to Law, I Will to Law.


Plaut. Of some 8 or 10 Pistols price.


Panc. No, no, 3 or 4 Crowns it may be, to buy him a little Ass.


Plaut. What, Sir; an Ass to carry his Luggage to the Wars?


Panc. Then I Will to Law.


Plaut. No, pray don't talk of going to Law: there will be Money for
Declarations, Pleas, Answers, Rejoynders, Sub-Rejoynders, Demurs, Motions,
Non-Suits, and Removing from one Court to another: Then your Appeals. Eh! -- if
once you entangle your self, you will sooner see the end of your Estate, than of
your Suit of Law.


Panc. And what, I pray, will this Sumpter-Beast cost?


Plaut. For his Horse, his Man's, and the Sumpter-Horse; and for the Pistols,
Sword, Scarf and Feather, with Bridles, Saddles, and other Furniture, and to
pay some dribling Debts which he owes to his Landlady, Laundress, and so forth;
he demands in all, 200 Pistols.


Panc. Two hundred Pistols?


Plaut. Yes.


Panc. Two hundred Pistols. I Will to Law, to Law.


Plaut. Bethink your self.


Panc. I Will to Law.


Plaut. Don't embroil your self.


Panc. I say I Will to Law.


Plaut. You must spend a world of Money in Law; you must give the Clerks
Expedition-Money, pay for Writing, Drawing, Engrossing, Copying, Sealing,
Endorsing, and all several Charges. Then for Fees in Court, Judges Fees, King's
Duties. Then, Sir, what is most requisite of all, Bribing of Judges: your
Adversary too does the like. So that after all, it is but Cross and Pile who
gets the better. O! Signior Pancrace, Law-expences are numberless; give this
Fellow his Money, and there is an end; it is easier to satisfy one Rogue than a
thousand.


Panc. Give him 200 Pistols!


Plaut. Yes, and be a gainer by it. I Have cast up what a Suit of Law amounts to;
and I find, that giving him 200 Pistols, will save you five; not reckoning your
trouble, pains, vexations, going, waiting, sending, fetching and carrying, and
following a company of busy Coxcombs, who will but laugh at you when you have
done. I would rather give 500 Pistols than go to Law, tho I were sure to get
the better.


Panc. Laugh at the learned, I defy 'em.


Plaut. Signior Pancrace, you may do as you please; but were it to me, I Would give
200 Pistols, and laugh at them.


Panc. No, I Will to Law, I Will to Law.


Plaut. Here comes the Gentleman himself.


Enter Harlequin in the habit of a Bravo, with a huge Sword, and a Girdle stuck
round with Pistols and Daggers, which are discovered by* his Cloak falling off;
-- and Rosy-Cheeks, with great Whiskers. Harl. Signior Plautino, carry me to
this Dog of a Dr. to this damned Heathen Philosopher, this old Rogue, the
Father of Cynthio.


Plaut. For what, Signiot Cavalier?


Harl. I hear he is for going to Law, and for getting a Divorce against my
Sister! I Will divorce him! I Will divorce his Soul from his Body!


Plaut. I know not whether he intends any such thing.


Harl. I hear he does, carry me to him; I Will make a Woodcock of the Philosopher.
Pick a hole in his Skull, and sup up his Brains for my Breakfast.


Plaut. He Would make no more to do it, than to sup off a RawEgg. I heard indeed he
will not consent to give you 200 Pistols, he says it is too much.


To Pancrace behind him. Harl. Death, and Heart! if I find him, I Will dissect
him; tho I Am broken alive upon the Wheel as soon as it is done.


Plaut. Signior Pancrace is a man of Resolution, and perhaps does not fear you,
nor any man that wears a head.


Harl. He, -- he not fear me! Death, and Heart! if I find him, with this Sword
I Will rip him from the Belly up to the Chin. Who'! is he there?


Plaut. O Signior! that is none of him, that is none of him.


Harl. Nor no Friend of his?


Plrut. On the contrary, the greatest enemy he has.


Harl. I am glad o'that of my Soul: Signior, are you an enemy to that Logical,
Moral, Phisical, Meta-phisical Philosopher? that Syllogistical Dunder* noll
Doctor? Ounds! are you his enemy? ha!


Plaut. Yes, Signior; I Will assure you he is.


Harl. Give me thy hand then, old Trojan; I swear to thee by my Reputation, by
ten thousand Devils, and all their Dams, before two days are at an end, I Will
whet my Sword upon the bones of him. Therefore fet your heart at rest, and let
me alone to revenge all; I Will send his Soul to the Devil, throw his Carcass to
the Dogs, and bring you his Brains in a Mustard pot; Damnation! I will Boy! --
Eh! --


Plaut. Such things are not suffered here.


Harl. Ounds! I Am a Souldierly Philosopher, and carry all my wealth about me;
my Sword is my Plough, and another Country will serve for Tillage as well as
this. -- For the death of him I will be, tho his Soul, by transmigration, goes
presently into a wild Bull, and he bears me away upon his Horns.


Plaut. He has heard of your threatening, and will be upon his guard; he has
many Friends, Acquaintance, and Servants, that will desend him.


Harl. Let 'em come, let 'em come, a thousand of 'em; it is what I desire.
God's Death! -- Heart! -- and Ounds! -- Oh! that he were but here now, in the midst
of twenty friends and all their Swords in their hands; Eh, -- you Rogues, you
Dogs, come on! Allone! Morblieu! Sa, sa; Kill, kill; no quarter; Slash, -- cut,
thrust, -- kill, -- stand fast; -- Eh! you cowardly Rogues, you Dogs, you Sons
of Whores! Have at you, -- at you, -- at you, -- at you, -- at you! Do you give
ground? Stand fast, you Dogs; fast! Ha! -- Eh! --


Pushes on all sides with his Sword. Plaut. Eh! -- Eh! -- Eh! -- We are none of
'em, Sir.


Harl. Ha! do you rally again? are there more of you? Have amongst you!

Shoots. There Is for you! Thus would I have served 100 of 'em.


Ex. Plaut. You see how many throats he would cut for 200 Pistols. I wish you were
well out of this business.


Panc. Plautino.


Plaut. Signior.


Panc. He shall have 200 Pistols.


Plaut. I am glad on it, for your sake.


Panc. Call him, I have so much about me.


Plaut. Give 'em me, 'twill not be for your Honor to see him, now you have
past for another; and I fear, if he should get you in his power, he would stand
upon greater matters.


Panc. Hold your hand, but take care my business be done fore you part from my
Money.


Plaut. I warrant you.


Panc. I Will go home and expect your coming; be sure you see it done.


Ex. Plaut. Trouble not your self, I Will bring you a good account how I part
from't. -- So, here is one Bird caught in chaff.


Enter Cynthio. Cynt. Have you done any thing to the comfort of a poor Lover?


Plaut. See, there are 200 drops of your Father's heartsblood.


Cynt. Witty Plautino, what comfort thou giv'st me! Come, let us haste to
purchase what I value more than life. Now! my loved Zerbinetta! thou art mine!


Exeunt. Enter Scaramouch and Harlequin. Scar. Octavio comes not yet near me;
it is so, -- he has done something; -- I Will go find him out, and make him confess
the business.


Harl. O, Signior Philosopher! O, Signior Scaramouch!


Scar. What, what?


Harl. Your Son.


Scar. Well, my Son.


Harl. Has the greatest misfortune befallen him; alas poor Mr. Octavio.


Scar. What? ha!


Harl. I sound him in a very melancholy mood, for something you had said to
him; and to divert his thoughts, we took a walk to the Seaside; where, amongst
other things, I saw a Fisherman going out; we went a-board for pastime, to see
some sport. When we were a league off at Sea, a small Vessel made up to us; we
suspected nothing, but when they came they boarded us; took us all out of the
Fisherman, and clapped us under Hatches.


Scar. Octavio too?


Harl. Signior si, they were Pirates, Runagado-Rogues; they have sent me a-shoar
in a Longboat, to tell you that if you don't immediately send 'em 500 Dollers,
they will carry your Son away to Algiers.


Scar. Five hundred Dollers?


Harl. Yes, and have allowed me but two hours for my return.


Scar. What a murrain made him go a fishing?


Harl. Eh, -- Signior Scaramouch; a Philosopher can bear injuries as he ought.


Scar. They demand, you say --


Harl. Five hundred Dollers.


Scar. Think they that is a Sum one would be content to part from?


Harl. They are great fools.


Scar. And that I have nothing to do with my Money but to send it to them?


Harl. Pirates, Signior, are a sort of folks that don't understand Philosophy.


Scar. Four hundred Dollars, say you?


Harl. Five hundred, Signior.


Scar. Five hundred?


Harl. Yes Sir, but make have. Hold your hand. Go and ransom my Son.


He holds the Purse, and talks, which he does not let go, and carries his arm
from one side to the other. Harl. does the like. Harl. Yes Sir.


Scar. But tell these Pirates that they are Rascals.


Harl. Yes.


Scar. Rogues.


Harl. Yes.


Scar. Great Rogues, Thieves, Cutthroats.


Harl. Let me alone.


Scar. They get these 500 Dollers from me against my will.


Harl. Yes.


Scar. And which I would not have given them to save their lives.


Harl. Very good.


Scar. And that if ever it lies in my power, I Will be revenged.


Harl. Yes.


Scar. Go make have, and bring my Son a-shoar.


Puts the Purse in's pocket, and is going away. Harl. But, Signior.


Scar. What?


Harl. Where Is the Money?


Scar. Han't you't.


Harl. Not I, you put it up again in your pocket.


Scar. I know not what I do, I Am so vexed.


Harl. It Would vex a man --


Scar. What a murrain made him go a fishing?


Ex. Harl. Ha! ha! he! Signior Philosopher!


Enter Octavio. Oct. Harlequin.


Harl. Signior Philosopher; Ha! ha! he!


Oct. I find thou have good news, thou art so merry?


Harl. Signior, no.


Oct. Can thou do nothing for me?


Harl. Signior, no.


Oct. Must I then despair?


Harl. I have done all I can.


Oct. Do thou give me comfort?


Harl. Signior, no; the Stars are unlucky.


Oct. I will then find out a place for my retreat; lie down, and sigh away my
life.


Harl. Stay, Signior Octavio, here is luck in a bag for you.


Oct. Thou show me life, health, and all.


Harl. How, call me names, and run your Sword down my throat!


Oct. No more of that, I have forgot it.


Oct. I part with this Money, on condition that you give me leave to be
revenged on Signior Scaramouch, for what he said of me.


Oct. Do as thou will.


Harl. There then is your Sum.


Oct. I Will have to tell Aurelia this good news.


Ex. Harl. And I to be revenged on Signior Philosopher.


Ex. Enter Pancrace and Spittzaferro. Spitt. So affected with Gallantry! such a
Lover of Balls, Masks, and other Divertisements! I have been all this while
mistaken in her humor, I Will not concern my self at what she does, or where she
goes! can this be wholesome to a Husband's Reputation! Well, I will hear what
the learned will say on this point. And first, I Will consult with Signior
Pancracio.


Panc. Go, go friend, you are very impertinent, and ought to be banished the
Republic of Letters.


Spitt. Oh! here he cames to my purpose.


Panc. Yes, and not without very good reason: I say you are a Dunce, a
Blockhead, an Ignorant; an Ignorantior, an Ignorantissimus, an
Ignorantissimetissimus, an Ignoramus per omnes Casus, Moods and Tenses.


Spitt. He has been wrangling with somebody in a Disputation* Signior.


Panc. You will be arguing, and know not so much as the very Rudiments of
Learning.


Spitt. Passion blinds him so, he sees me not, Signior.


Panc. It Is a Proposition condemned, confuted, rejected by all Philosophers
both Ancient and Modern.


Spitt. Somebody has much incensed him, -- I --


Panc. Toto Coelo, Toto via aberras.


Spitt. I kiss your hands, Signior Pancrace.


Panc. Servant, Servant.


Spitt. Can I --


Panc. Do you know what you have done! A Syllogism in Bocardo.


Spitt. I desire --


Panc. The Major's absurd, the Minor's impertinent, and the Conclusion
ridiculous.


Spitt. I desi --


Panc. I Would sooner dye than grant what you say, and I Will defend my opinion to the
last drop of my Ink.


Spitt. Can I --


Panc. Yes, I Will defend this Proposition; ^gunis and calcibus, unguibus and
rostro.


Spitt. Signior Aristotle, pray what has so incensed you?


Panc. I have all the reason in the World.


Spitt. Pray what was it?


Panc. An illiterate Blockhead, would maintain an erroneous Proposition; a
false, damnable, destructive, execrable Proposition.


Spitt. May I beg leave to know what 'twas?


Panc. Ah! Signior Spittzaferro, nature is this day reverst, and the World is
falling to a general decay, a most shameful License reigns every where, and the
Magistrates who are established to take care of the Public, ought to blush for
shame, in suffering such a horrible and intolerable Scandal as this.


Spitt. What, pray?


Panc. Is it not a most horrible thing, a thing that cries to Heaven for
vengeance, that it should be suffered, for a man publicly to cry the form of a
Hat?


Spitt. How Is that?


Panc. I maintain that a man ought to say the figure of a Hat, and not the
form; yes, not forma, but figura; for there is this difference betwixt form and
figure, that the form is the external disposition of animate Bodies; the figure
is the external dispositions of Bodies inanimate: It ought to be said, the
figure of a Hat, and not the form. Go-to, Dunce as thou art, this is the truth
of the thing, these are the express terms of Aristotle, in his Chapter of
Quality.


Spitt. Marry, I thought we had been all undone! Come, Signior Pancrace, think
no more of this; I have a business to impart to you. I desire --


Panc. O, impertinent Blockhead!


Spitt. Pray forget it. I desi --


Panc. Dunce.


Spitt. I beseech you, Sir, -- I -- de --


Panc. To defend against me such a Proposition as this.


Spitt. He was in the wrong, -- I --


Panc. A Proposition condemned by Aristotle.


Spitt. That Is true, -- I --


Panc. In express terms --


Spitt. You Are in the right; yes, -- you are a Fool, a Dunce, an Ouff, a Sot, a
Blockhead, to dispute against a Learned Doctor that can both write and read, --
So now the business is over, I desire you would give me your attention; I come to
consult with you about a business which very much puzzles me, I have thoughts
of Marrying, to have a Companion in the business of the World; the person is
handsome, and I like her very well: she thinks her self a happy Woman to have
me for a Husband; her Father and I are agreed: But I Am a little startled at a
thing that you may guess -- of a blow that a man never feels when it is given
him. And I desire you, as being a Philosopher, to tell me your opinion. How,
what do you advise me too?


Panc. Sooner than I would accord to say the form of a Hat, I would be brought
to affirm, that datur vacuum in rerum natura; and that I am not a Man, but a
Vegetable, a Plant, or a four footed Beast.


Spitt. Doubtless he is possessed; Mr. Doctor, pray hear me a little; I have been
speaking to you this half hour, and you don't mind what I say.


Panc. I beg your pardon, I am so incensed when I hear the truth oppugn'd.


Spitt. Well, Sir, forget it, and give me your attention.


Panc. Very good; -- what would you with me, good Signior Spittzaferro?


Spitt. I would speak to you concerning a business.


Panc. In what, Idiom?


Spitt. Idiom!


Panc. In what Language would you discourse; in French?


Spitt. No.


Panc. Spanish?


Spitt. No.


Panc. Dutch?


Spitt. No.


Panc. English?


Spitt. No.


Panc. Latin?


Spitt. No.


Panc. Greek?


Spitt. No.


Panc. Hebrew?


Spitt. No.


Panc. Syriack?


Spitt. No.


Panc. Arabic?


Spitt. No.


Panc. Chaldea?


Spitt. No.


Panc. Turkish?


Spitt. No, no, no; in Italian, in Italian.


Panc. Oh! in Italian?


Spitt. Yes.


Panc. Go then on the other side, for this ear is destined only to Scientifical
Languages; and this for my Mother Tongue.


Spitt. What a deal of Ceremony there is with these Learned Men.


Panc. Well, now tell me what you would have?


Spitt. I would have your opinion concerning a difficulty.


Panc. A Philosophical difficulty, without doubt.


Spitt. Excuse me, -- I --


Panc. Perhaps you would know if Substance and Accident be terms synonimus, or
equivocal, in respect of being.


Spitt. Not at all, Signior.


Panc. If Logic be an Art or a Science? --


Spitt. Not that neither I --


Panc. If it has for its objects the three operations of the understanding, or
only the third?


Spitt. No, -- I --


Pauc. If there be ten Categories, or only one?


Spitt. Not I -- I --


Panc. If the Conclusion be of the Essence of eight Syllogisms.


Spitt. No, no, -- I.


Aanc. If the essence of good consists in the Appetibility, that is in being
desirable, or in being convenient?


Spitt. No, that I --


Panc. If good be reciprocal with the end?


Spitt. Peu! Ho! I --


Panc. If the end can move us by its real being, or by the intentional, that
is, by the being it has in our apprehensions?


Spitt. No, no, no, a Pox of the Devil; none of all this.


Panc. Explain your self then, for I cannot guess what it is.


Spitt. Aye, Aye, Signior, I would explain my self; but you must hear me then:
The business that I would discourse with you about, is this: That I have some
thoughts of Marrying a Gentlewoman, that is young and handsome, and one who has
a kindness for me; and I have asked her Fathers consent. But now I apprehend --


They speak together. Panc. Speech is given to a man At the same time. to
explain his thoughts; and just as thoughts are the representations of things,
so are our words the representations of our thoughts. But those representations
are distinguished from others, in-as-much as other representations are
altogether distinguished from their originals; and words include in themselves
their originals, they being nothing else but the thoughts explicated by
external signs; from whence it comes, that those who think well, do also speak
well. Now therefore explain your thoughts to me by your words, which are, of
all signs, the most intelligible.


Spittz. pushes the Doctor into his house, and returns. Spittz. The Devil take
all such folks as will not hear a man speak: I Will go find out the other
Philosopher; he perhaps may be more reasonable, and less talkative.


Panc. comes out again, and Spittz. pushes him in. Panc. Now, Aristotle says
there is this difference --


Spitt. Are you there again with your Aristotle? Go, your Master Aristotle's a
Fool, and you are an Ass.


Exeunt. The End of the third Act.
Act IV. Scene I.
Enter Aurelia, Zerbinetta, and Plautino. Plaut. YES, it was the desire of your
Lovers, that you should be acquainted; besides our design requires it.


Aur. I find nothing in their desires, but what is very agreeable; and it is not
without a great deal of joy that I receive so fair an acquaintance: Nothing
shall be wanting in me to perfect a friendship, that shall render us dear to
each other.


Zerb. To me the Proposition is most pleasing. But, Signior Negotiator, pray
give us an account by what stratagem you drew the Money from the covetous old
Fathers of our Lovers?


Aur. Yes, and how your wits are employed for a supply. Signior Octavio had the
hard fortune to be Arrested just then.


Zerb. Do, I love roguery at my heart; -- and you shall find by my countenance,
that you don't tell it to one insensible of ingenuity.


Plaut. O! here comes Signior Octavio in have; we have no leisure now.


Enter Octavio. Oct. The enemy's at hand.


Plaut. We Will leave you the Field to deal with him I have instructed; Madam
Aurelia, come; whilst they play their Game, I Will entertain you with the relation
of what you have a desire to hear; which, I Am sure, will be diversion enough
for so short a time.


Ex. Plaut. and Zerb. Enter Spittzaferro. Spitt. This Philosopher was very
impertinent and talkative: -- I Will now consult. -- Ha! -- who is this discoursing
with Aurelia?


Oct. How, Fair Aurelia! do you speak this in earnest?


Aur. In very good earnest.


Oct. Will you Marry, then?


Aur. Yes.


Oct. And to morrow?


Aur. Yes, to morrow.


Oct. And can you (Fair, cruel One) abandon me and my vows; and forget all the
obliging protestations you have made to me?


Aur. I marry, one not for Love, but Money, a thing which I want, and you have
not; and you know well enough how the World goes with them that want Money,
that must be had whatever it cost. And I take this opportunity to set my heart
at ease; my Husband is a man that cannot live very long, I warrant you I shall
be a Rich Widow in a year or two, and then I shall be able to make you amends
for the injury.


Oct. Is this the Gentleman?


Aur. Yes, this is the Gentleman that is to be my Husband?


Oct. Signior, I wish you much joy of your Marriage, and dedicate my noblest
Services to you; I assure you, you wed a Lady of great Beauty, and eminent
Perfections: And to you also, Madam, I wish all happiness imaginable; you have
made an excellent Choice; He has the mein of a worthy Person, and the looks of
one in all things adapted for a good Husband. Signior, I desire your
friendship, we will keep a good correspondence, we will visit, and see one another
daily.


Aur. You do us both so great an honor, we shall always be glad of your good
company.


Oct. And I shall be extreme glad to see you and your noble Bridegroom at
Court, where I have interest, and can be able to serve you.


Aur. I will be often there when I am Married.


Oct. Madam, your Creature and Slave. And Signior, your Vassal and Humble
Servant.


Exit. Aur. Signior Spittzaferro, this young Gentleman is a Courtier, he will
do you any service there for my sake: But we will talk more on it another time. I Am
still busy about my affairs. Your Servant, Signior. -- To morrow, -- to morrow.


Ex. Spitt. To morrow, to morrow; the sound has something in it that is doleful;
my mind gives no good prognostics of this Marriage; I Will hear the opinion of
Signior Scaramouch. Hola! Signior Scaramouch?


Knocks. Enter Scaramouch. Scar. What is your pleasure with me, Signior
Spittzaferro?


Spitt. Signior Scaramouch, I want your advice in a small concern, and I am
come on purpose to be resolved in my doubts: -- O! this is well; here is one
will hearken to a man.


Scar. Signior Spittzaferro; pray alter your positive manner of speaking. Our
Philosophy teaches us not to speak any decisive Proposition, but to discourse
of every thing with uncertainty, to suspend always one judgment. And for this
reason you ought not to say, I am come, but -- I think I am come; -- or, -- it
seems to me I am come.


Spitt. Seems to me, or, I think?


Scar. Yes.


Spitt. Seems to me, it may well seem to me, that I am come, when I am here.


Scar. That is no good consequence; for that may seem, or appear to a man,
which in reality is not.


Spitt. Why, am not I come hither when I am here?


Scar. That Is uncertain, we can be sure of nothing, and therefore ought to
doubt of every thing.


Spitt. What, am not I here, and are not you talking to me?


Scar. It seems to me that you are here, and I think that I am talking to you;
but yet I am not certain that it is so.


Spitt. Euh! what a Devil, don't I know it, and don't you know it well enough,
that it not only seems so, or appears so, but that it is certainly so?


Scar. Nego, nego, we are sure of nothing; and to convince you that we can have
no certain knowledge, let me tell you, -- there is nothing in the intellect but
what was first in the senses, and by them conveyed to the understanding. Now,
our senses being fallible, the knowledge which depend upon them, cannot be
infallible, and so not certain: Ergo, Signior, you don't know for certain that
you are here.


Spitt. Pray don't stand upon these niceties, but let us talk of our business.
I come to acquaint you that I have thoughts of Marrying.


Scar. That Is more than I know.


Spitt. I tell you, I have.


Scar. It may be you do.


Spitt. The Gentlewoman is very pretty, and very young.


Scar. Very likely.


Spitt. Will it be discreetly done of me to Marry, or not?


Scar. It may, and it may not.


Spitt. Eh! what canting is this! I ask you, Signior, if I shall do well to
marry the Lady I speak of?


Scar. As it happens.


Spitt. Will it be ill done of me?


Scar. Peradventure I, peradventure no.


Spitt. For Heaven-sake, Signior, answer me as you should.


Scar. It Is my endeavor.


Spitt. I have a very great kindness for the Gentlewoman.


Scar. That may be.


Spitt. Her Father and I are agreed.


Scar. Perhaps you may.


Spitt. But I am only afraid, that if I marry, I shall be a Cuckold.


Scar. It Is not impossible.


Spitt. What think you?


Scar. Not unlikely.


Spitt. Shall I, think you?


Scar. Such things have been.


Spitt. What would you do, were you in my place?


Scar. I cannot tell.


Spitt. What would you advise me to?


Scar. What you think best.


Spitt. But what do you think best?


Scar. What pleases you.


Spitt. Peu! a Pox! -- and is that all?


Scar. I Will have no hand in it.


Spitt. -- --


Scar. Let it be as 'twill.


Spitt. Euh! the Devil! I Will make you change your note, with a Pox to you! you
Philosophical Blockhead.


Beats Scaramouch. Scar. Ah! ah! ah!


Spitt. I am quit with you for your canting, and I Am satisfied.


Scar. Whence this insolence! how dare you have the audacity to strike a
Philosopher!


Spitt. O, pray correct this manner of speaking; you ought to doubt of every
thing; you ought not to say I did strike you, but that you think I did strike
you; or it seemed, or appeared so.


Scar. I Will complain to Justice.


Spitt. I Will have no hand in it.


Scar. I Will have satisfaction for the injury.


Spitt. Peradventure I, peradventure no.


Scar. I have the marks of your blows on my flesh to show.


Spitt. That may be.


Scar. You have made me all over black and blue.


Spitt. Not unlikely.


Scar. Justice will award me good damage.


Spitt. That Is more than I know.


Scar. It shall be a dear striking.


Spitt. Let it be as 'twill.


Scar. You shall hear of me.


Spitt. Such things have been; Adieu.


Exit. Enter Pancrace. Panc. Signior Scaramouch, the business is done, a
Divorce agreed on, the Parties consenting, my Son disengaged; and now we may
proceed to our designs.


Scar. But I see not Octavio yet: What a murrain made him go a fishing?


Enter Harlequin. Harl. O, poor wretch! O, unfortunate! ah! ah! Poveretto!


Scar. Who Is here?


Harl. Servitore! Signior Reverendissime, Signior Scientissime, Signior
Excellentissime, Signior Illustrissime.


Panc. What Is your business?


Harl. Signior, I was an unfortunate Inhabitant of Ligorn, had many losses at
Sea; all my effects were seized on by my Creditors; I fled away with this
little, to secure something for a future subsistence.


Panc. You would sell it?


Harl. Signiorsi; I fled hither for refuge, my Creditors have notice of it, and
are come after me to lay me in Prison. I would turn it into Money, and go
presently a Shipboard, and try my fortune at Sea.


Panc. What, will you take an ounce?


Harl. Half a Ducat.


Scar. Half a Ducat?


Harl. Signior si.


Scar. Half a Ducat?


Harl. Signior si.


Scar. Ap -- pouh! here is a Fool.


Aside. Panc. How many ounces is there in all?


Harl. Eight hundred.


Panc. And you will sell't for 800 Ducats and a half.


Harl. Signior si.


Panc. He Is an Ignorant.


Scar. Ap -- pouh! a Sot.

Aside. This is my house, I Will go in and weigh't.


Ex. Harl. Ap, -- ap, -- ap, -- a.


Panc. He Is going to weigh't.


Harl. Oh! Servitore!


Panc. What is your name, Signior?


Harl. Trivoline, Merchant of Ligorn.


Panc. Did you buy all this Plate your self?


Harl. Signior, no; it was my Father's, old Signior Trivoline's.


Panc. I Will buy it of you for your Father's sake.


Harl. For the sake of old Signior Trivoline, that was Merchant of Ligorn?


Panc. For the sake of old Signior Trivoline, Merchant of Ligorn.


Harl. I thank you, Signior Pancrace.


Panc. Hau!


Harl. What Is the matter, Signior Pancrace?


Panc. Hau! how did you know my name?


Harl. O Diavolo! because you were my Father's Friend.


Panc. You never saw me before.


Harl. Signior, no; but I have often heard my Father, old Signior Trivoline,
Merchant of Ligorn, say, that he had but one friend in the World, and that was
one, Signior Doctore Pancrace.


Panc. What does he mean? I never heard of any -- Signior Trivoline. --

Aside. But I Will buy the Plate, and out of the gains re-imburse my self of the
Sum I paid for the Divorce. I Will step into the House, and fetch you the Money.


Ex. Harl. He! he! he! Oh! here comes Signior Scaramouch.


Enter Scaramouch, with the Plate and Money. Scar. It weighs so much: Heaven
sends me this good fortune for redeeming my Son. -- Here, take your Money.


Harl. How much?


Scar. Four hundred Ducats.


Harl. Signior, no.


Scar. No?


Harl. Signior, no.


Scar. How much then?


Harl. Eight hundred Ducats and a half.


Scar. Signior si, here is 400 whole Ducats.


Harl. Signior, no; I Will have 800 half Ducats


Scar. Ap -- pouch!


Harl. Causa Signior?


Enter Pancrace with Money. Scar. Bono! here is 800 half Ducats for you.


Panc. Signior Trivoline, here.


Draws him aside, offering Money. Harl. Signior si.


Scar. Here.


Draws him aside. Harl. Signior si*


Panc. Here.


Again. Harl. Signior si.


Scar. Here.


Again. Harl. Signior si.


Panc. I knew old Signior Trivoline; he was my good Friend.


Again. Harl. Signior si.


Scar. Take your Money.


Again. Panc. Eh! Signior Scaramouch.


Again more eagerly. Scar. Eh! Signior Pancace.


Again. Panc. I have bought it, Signior Scaramouch.


Again. Harl. Signior si.


Scar. I have bought it, Signior Pancrace.


Again Harl. Signior si.


Panc. You have sold it to me.


Again. Harl. Signior si.


Scar. No, to me.


Again. Harl. Signior si.


Panc. How Is that?


Harl. You Will give me 800 half Ducats?


To Panc. Panc. Signior si.


Harl. And you will give me 800 half Ducats?


To Scar. Scar. Signior si.


Harl. It Is a bargain.


Scar. Here Is 800 half Ducats in Gold.


Harl. Signior si, for your part?


Scar. For the Plate.


Harl. Signior, no.


Scar. What then?


Harl. You Will not give 800 more?


Scar. Signior, no.


Harl. Not for Signior Pancrace?


Scar. Signior, no.


Harl. Nor will not you give eight hundred more, Signior Pancrace.


Harl. goes toward the door, and turns his face. Panc. Signior, no.


Harl. How would you both buy it then?


Panc. Ah! go to the Devil!


Harl. Servitore!


Goes farther. Panc. Signior Scaramouch, he is a Fool; I Will buy it all as for my
self, and you shall be one half in the purchase.


Scar. Signior si.


Harl. Signior Pancrace, you will not give 800 more?


Turns. Panc. No, no.


Harl. Ah! Bono; you will not give it for the sake of old Signior Trivoline?


Goes nearer the door, and turns. Panc. No.


Harl. Ah! Adieu; -- you will not give it?


Goes to the door, and turns. Panc. No.


Harl. You Will give no more?


Stands sidelong, one half out of the door. Panc. No, no, no, Signior, no.


Harl. Nor you?


To Scaramouch. Scar. Signior, no.


Harl. Basta, Signior Pancrace, give me your Money then.


Panc. There it is in Gold.


Harl. Eight hundred Ducats and a half, just?


Panc. Signior si.


Harl. For the sake of old Signior Trivoline.


Panc. Signior si.


Harl. Servitore! Signior Pancrace, Adieu.


Scar. Ap-pouh! a Fool.


Panc. Ah! so, Signior Scaramouch; now let us see our good bargain.


Scar. Signior si, ap pouh!


Panc. Then we will go in, and divide it equally by weight.


Scar. Si, ap pouh!


Panc. takes the Sack by the end to tumble the Plate out, and nothing but
Earthen-ware appears; Scar. takes up a piece, makes faces, and let us it fall.
Panc. Oh! Signior Scaramouch, what is here?


Scar. Signior?


Panc. Oh! Signior Scaramouch; O! Maleditto; O! Cullio-N^rio; O! Diavolo.


Ex. in a rage. Scar. Oh! que cosa -- cou -- etc.


Ex. gabbring Italian. Enter Spittzaserro. Spitt. Eh! What was the meaning of
this Blockheadly Philosopher, I could not get a positive word from him. -- Oh!
-- here are Enter Aurelia, Zerbinetta, like Gypsies, singing and dancing. some
Gypsies, I Will see what they will say to the business; they are very merry: Hark you
there, can you tell my Fortune?


Zerb. Yes, yes; my fine Sir; here are two can tell you your Fortune.


Aur. Come, cross our hands with a piece of Silver, we will tell you something
shall be for your good.


Spitt. Look you; -- here are both hands crossed.


Zerb. You have a very good Phisiogmony, my fine Sir; a very good Phisiogmony.


Aur. Yes, a lucky Phisiogmony; the Phisiogmony of one that shall be something
one of these days.


Zerb. You shall be married e're long, my fine Sir; you shall be married e're
long.


Aur. You shall marry a fine Wife, a fine Wife.


Zerb. Yes, a Wife that every body shall love, and make much of.


Aur. A Wise that shall get you a great many friends, my fine Sir; that shall
get you a great many friends.


Zerb. A Wife that shall make you known and noted at Court.


Aur. A Wife that shall bring a great many Gallants to your House.


Zerb. A Wife, for whose sake you shall be visited every day.


Aur. A Wife that shall get you a great Reputation.


Zerb. You shall be esteemed for her sake, my fine Sir; you shall be esteemed
for her sake.


Spitt. Oh! very good: But, pray tell me, shall I be in danger to be made a
Cuckold?


Zerb. A Cuckold?


Spitt. Yes.


Aur. A Cuckold?


Spitt. Yes, shall I be in danger to be made a Cuckold?


Zerb. Aur. -- La! la! la! la! --


Both sing and dance, and Ex. Spitt. Why the Devil don't you answer me? I would
know if I shall be a Cuckold.


Zerb. You a Cuckold?


Spitt. Yes, I ask if I shall be a Cuckold?


Zerb. Aur. -- La! la! la! la! --


Both sing and dance, and Ex. Enter Plautino. Plaut. Signior Spittzaferro, what
comfort do they give you?


Spitt. A pox of the Carrions, they will have left me unresolved too.


Plaut. I have heard of a Cunning-man hard by, that is famous for his Art of
Astrology and Magic; who, by representations, can show you whatever you have
a mind to see.


Spitt. Signior Plautino, let us go find him out, for I Am resolved to know my
doom.


Exeunt. Enter Scaramouch and Harl. with a great Sack, which he places betwixt
the Scenes. Harl. Oh! I have traced this right; now for my revenge.


Scar. Harlequin, where is Octavio?


Harl. Your Money was very acceptable; Mr. Pyrat presents his Humble Service to
you.


Scar. But where is Octavio?


Harl. Oh! he is safe, but you are not.


Scar. Eh! why? what?


Harl. There are people hunting all about for you, to kill you.


Scar. Me?


Harl. Signior si.


Scar. Ah! Who?


Harl. The Gentlewomans Brother that Signior Cynthio has married, believes that
the design which you have to make a Match between him and your Daughter, is the
main reason why the breaking off of the Marriage is so much endeavored; and
he is resolved to kill you, to be revenged. All his acquaintance of Indigent
Officers and Bravoes are enquiring after you, to be the death of you; at least
half a score have inquired of me for you already.


Scar. To kill me?


Harl. They swore they would be the death of you; but I told 'em you did not care
for that.


Scar. Not care.


Harl. No; for, said I, Signior Scaramouch is a Philosopher, and is not afraid
of death. He cares no more for his Body, than I do for my old Shoes.


Scar. No.


Harl. You may bruise his flesh, and break his bones; but you cannot reach his
mind: A Philosopher's mind is invulnerable. Did not I say right, Scaramouch?


Scar. O, Harlequin! what must I do, Harlequin?


Harl. Oh! Signior Scaramouch; to see a Philosopher! Fear puts me in a fright
too, I cannot hold a joint still: stay, I Will look about.

Looks out, and starts. Oh! O!


Scar. Oh! Harlequin! Harlequin!


Harl. No, no, 'twas nothing.


Scar. Can think of no way to help me?


Harl. Signior, no; hark, -- let me look again: -- What Is here, -- a Sack? Ah!
Signior Scaramouch, Fortune is your friend: Put your self into this, and I Will --
ha --


Scar. Oh! a!


Harl. No, -- there is nobody; so put your self in, and I Will take you upon my
back like a burden, and carry you home.


Scar. Si, si.


Harl. Have, have; I hear somebody come.


Scar. goes into the Sack. Scar. So, -- so, Harlequin.


Harl. Keep close, stir not, whatever happens.


Scar. No, Harlequin, no.


Harl. Hide, hide, Signior Scaramouch; yonder comes one, keep close.


Harl. Acts a Bravo. Feigned. Dam this Signior Scaramouch, this Musty
Philosopher; if I find him, I Will cut his throat.

-- Signior Scaramouch is not one that desires to have his throat cut; he is a
very civil Person, a Scholar, and a Philosopher.


F. A Philosopher! a Fool, a Dog, a Rogue, a Rascal, a Son of a Whore.

-- He Is wa orthy Philosopher. -- Keep close.


F. Is he a friend of yours?

-- Signior si.


F. I am glad I have met with a Friend of his, by whom I may present my most
profound Respects to him; which I will do in this most hearty manner.

Runs crying round the Sack, and beats him. -- Hold, hold, hold.


F. I Will dodg you Sirrah; do you dodg? I shall meet with you*

-- Ah! ah! ah! Hold, hold, hold; ah! ah!


F. My service to him, my love and service. Adieu, my good Friend, to Signior
Scaramouch.

-- Oh! Signior Scaramouch!


Opens the Sack. Scar. I can endure no longer.


Harl. O! I am bruised. I am beaten.


Scar. How Is that? I was beaten.


Harl. Signior, no.


Scar. Signior si.


Harl. O yes, yes, Signior; as I ran round the Sack to save my self, the blows
sometimes light upon you.


Scar. You should a run somewhere else.


Harl. I Will look and see if the Coast be clear. -- Oh! have a care, -- have a
care; I see one with a great pair of Whiskers, and a Cap lined with Fur. --
Close, -- close.


He acts a Dutchman. F. Gooden morgen Lans-man, gooden morgen; were sal ick
vind'n, Myn-heir, vander Scaramouch.

-- Vander Scaramouch?


F. Yaw, Myn-heir, yaw, yaw.

-- Yaw, Myn-heir, yaw, yaw.


F. Were sal ick vind'n hem

-- Find him.


F. Ken uwe no Duytch spreken? will ghy neit spreken?

-- Spreken, -- spreken, -- spreken. --


F. Ghy Sacraments a Hounts-foot, ick sal uwe lustick slagen.

-- Ah! ah! ah!


F. Ten hundred Duysant Devils, -- mock uwe zeil Haulen Hountsfoot.

-- Ah! ah! ah!


F. Ghy Sacraments a -- ick sal vind'n Myn*heir vander Scaramouch; -- ick sal
hem slagen, -- Ghy Sacraments, a -- ten hundred (...) (...) Devils

-- Oh! the Devil wander him, and slopen him; and ten hundred thousand Devils
go with him.


Harl. O, my ribs!


Scar. O, my shoulders!


Harl. O! Signior Scaramouch, I was not near you.


Scar. I felt every blow as perfectly as before.


Harl. Signior, no.


Scar. Signior si.


Harl. You did but hear 'em.


Scar. I felt 'em.


Harl. Signior, no, fear made you think so.


Scar. I feel 'em still.


Harl. Signior si, by sympathy, sympathy.


Scar. Sympathy; O, Diavolo! sympathy!


Harl. O, Signior; here are some roaring Boys come singing along, and every one
a Bottle of Wine ins hand. Lie still till they are passed.


He acts three men, in speaking and singing in three several Voices. 1. Well,
now let us go find out Scaramouch.


2. And drink and sing all the way.


3. Let Us sing 'tother catch, and make an end of our Bottle first.


1. I Will begin.

Chi non beve, vita breve, gaudera.

sings a Treble. I Will bon Vino, che' divino, viver fa.

Confusion to Signior Scaramouch. -- So.


2. Chi non beve, etc.

sings a Tenor. Confusion to Scaramouch.


3. Chi non beve, etc.


a Base. 1. Come, here is one shall drink and sing too.

Eh! Signior; I am in have.


as Harlequin. 2. Sing, sirrah.

I cannot sing.


as Harl. 3. Sing after me. -- Chi non beve.

Chi non beve.


as Harl, 1. Fie, fie; sing after me, and observe how I beat time upon the
Sack. -- Chi non beve.

Chi non beve.


as Harl. 2. Again, -- again; -- Chi non beve, etc.

Chi non beve.


as Harl. 3. He Is a Blockhead, let us leave him, and go find out Scaramouch.


2. Let Us take this Rogue with us to show us the way.


3. Ay, ay; -- let us take him with us.

I do'nt know him.


as Harl. 1. You lie, you dog! -- along, show us the way.

Signior, no; I have business.


as Harl. 2. You will not go then?

No.


as Harl. 3. Let Us beat him till he will.


Sear. peeps out of the Sack. 1. Knock his brains out.


2. Lay him on soundly.


1. Aye, soundly.

as all 3. Soundly, soundly, soundly.


As Harl. acts this, Scaramouch lets fall the Sack, comes softly out, and
stands just behind him, with his Girdle ready to beat him, as he turns. --
Harl. turns to beat the Sack, sees Scaramouch, runs off; who follows* beating
him. Scar. Aye, soundly, soundly, soundly.


The End of the fourth Act.
Act V. Scene I.
Enter Spittzaferro and Plautino. Plaut. I AM not acquainted with him; but I
have heard great commendation of his skill: It Is somewhere hereabout he lives:
Look you where he comes forth.


Enter Harlequin like a Magician, with a great pair of Spectacles on his Nose,
a long Prospective-glass, looking at Spittzaferro at a distance. Harl. A man of
a bold Aspect, fortunate Phisiognomy, sanguine Complexion, strong Constitution,
great Appetite, and good Digestion; but by nature timorous and diffident;
therefore sleeps not sound.


Plaut. Exactly you.


Harl. Aged 53 years, 2 Months, 9 days, 37 hours, three hundred threescore and
three minutes and a half.


Spitt. What says he?


Plaut. He Is telling you how old you are, a new way of counting these learned
Men have got. See, he is coming toward you.


Spitt. Signior, I Am your Servant.


Harl. You are not, I pay you no Wages.


Spitt. I give you a good morrow.


Harl. You give me nothing.


Spitt. There is some Gold.


Harl. A good gift is a good morrow.


Spitt. I come, Signior, to kiss your hands.


Harl. There.


Hits him in the Chops first with one hand* and then with the other. Spitt.
Euh! what is the meaning?


Harl. And there. -- How you have done what you come for?


Plaut. I perceive he is not a Man of Ceremony.


Harl. You are a Man of great vulgarity, Signior; you ought to make your
Approaches in a more peculiar manner, and not to disgorge such vulgar Phrases
in the face of the Learned.


'Plaut. Pray ben't so critical; we are not used to treat with persons of your
profound Science.


Spitt. In short* Signior, my Name is --


Harl. Spittzaferro.


Spitt. I am come to tell you that I am about --


Harl. To Marry.


Spitt. Signior si, and desire to know of you --


Harl. If you may do it with safety.


Spitt. Signior si, and if I shall not be --


Harl. A Cuckold.


Plaut. He knows all before you tell it him.


Harl. O, impertinence! *tell a Magician what you come for! Whiz! -- whose Art
is knowledge it self. Buz! who reads what is written in the Stars. Fitz! who
holds intelligence with Spirits. Ptru -- ru -- ru! -- to whose eyes the Book of
Fate lies open. -- Bro, -- through, -- to, -- to, -- rou!


Plaut. Most learned Sir; you have sufficiently informed his understanding, as
to his conversation; now be pleased to satisfy his curiosity, which brought him
hither: and by your Magic representations show him something that may be to
his advantage.


Harl. Basta, basta, Signior, basta. Follow me in.


Ex. Enter again in a Room. Harl. with a dark Lanthorn. Tricola, tracola, whiz!
Tricola, tracola, Buz!
Tricola, tracola, Fitz!
Tricola, tracola, Ptru-ru-ru!
Tricola, tracola, Bro-thro-rou!
Tricola, tracola. Goes about prancing, sings this ridiculously; at last stops.
Tricola, tracola.
Tricola, tracola.
Doodle doodle-doo.
My Conjurations are Pacifick; A vision of horns appears in shadows, increase
to a vast bigness, and vanish.
Your Fortune see in Hierogliphick.
Plaut. See, Signior Spittzaferro.


Spitt. This vision's no good omen.


A vision of horns appears, increases and decreases in bigness several times,
at last vanish upward. Harl. Tricola, tracola; tricola, tracola; tricola,
tracola, etc. Toodle-doodle-doo, etc.


Goes about prancing* as before* Plaut. Mind, Sir, mind.


Bird. Cucko.


A Cucko appears in shadow, cries 3 times, and each time grows bigger, at last,
flies up out o*sight. Plaut. Hark.


Bird. Cucko.


Spitt. Say you so?


Bird. Cucko.


Flies away. Spitt. This Bird gives no good Augury of my Marriage.


Plaut. I Am afraid 'twill be something unfortunate.


Harl. Tricola, tracola; tricola, tracola; tricola, tracola, etc.
Toodle-doodle-doodle-doodle-doo.


Prances about. Men appear in shadows with horns on their heads, grow bigger
and less several times, several times appear and disappear, at last dance with
a great pair of horns in each hand; they offer as it were to Spittzaferro,
shaking 'em at him with each hand, shaking their heads, then jump up out
o'sight one after another. Spitt. Signior Plautino, these were Cuckolds, they
shook their heads at me; that is no good sign.


'Plaut. We Will know what it signifies. Signior, what is the meaning of all this?


To Harl. Harl. Tricola, tracola; tricola, tracola; tri --


Plaut. What are you going to do now?


Harl. To Conjure up the Devil himself in person, who shall tell you the
meaning on it. Tricola, tracola; tricola, tracola, etc.


Spitt. The Devil himself. Euh! Servitore, Signior, tricola, Servitore.


Ex. Spittz. and Plaut. Harl. Euh! Euh! Signior.


Plaut. No, no, Servitore.

Eh! eh! he! tricola, tracola, etc.


Exit. Enter Spittzaferro and Plautino in the Street. Plaut. Signior
Spittzaferro, what think you How?


Spitt. Signior Plautino, I think it is better to be a Man than a Beast; and
since Heaven has created me one, I Will take care not to be metamorphis'd by a
Woman.


Enter Cynthio. Plaut. Signior Spittzaferro, here is Signior Alberto your
Brother-in-Law; Signior Alberto, this is the worthy person that is to marry
your Sister.


Cynt. Signior I am just now luckily arrived; my Father has told me the good
news* I Am glad Aurelia has the good fortune to have a man of your Character for
her Husband. I shall be proud of such a Brother-in-Law.


Spitt. Signior I kiss your hands.


Cynt. Time will not allow farther Ceremony; my Father sent me to tell you, that
they want your company. Come Sir, I Will wait on you.


Spitt. Excuse me Signior Alberto.


Cynt. No Ceremony, I pray.


Spitt. No haste, no haste.


Cynth. The Scrivener is there, the Writings are ready, they want you to set
your Hand and Seal to the Jointure you make my Sister.


Spitt. No question.


Cynt. Come Sir, let us go.


Spitt. I have a word to say to you first.


Cynt. To me?


Spitt. Signior si.


Cynt. What I pray?


Plaut. I Will go before, and tell 'em you are coming.


Ex. Spitt. Signior Alberto, it is true, I asked your Fathers consent to marry
Aurelia; he was very inclinable; but upon more deliberate consideration I find,
I am a little too far in years for her, and I am convinced I shall not be a fit
Husband for her.


Cynt. Excuse me, my Sister thinks very well of you, and I doubt not but she will
be happy in you.


Spitt. No, she will not; I have sometimes strange melancholy Fits, and whilst
they last, I am very extravagant; and I Am sure 'twill be too much for her to
bear with me in those humors.


Cynt. My Sister is of a very good disposition, and as merry, she will sing and
laugh, and play a thousand tricks to divert you; she will be the fittest Wife
alive for you.


Spitt. Then Signior I have some infirmities of Body too, which will disgust
her.


Cynt. That Is nothing Signior, a virtuous Wife is never disgusted with her
Husband.


Spitt. In short Signior, give me leave to tell you, I would not have your
Father by any means to let me marry her.


Cynt. O Signior, my Father was always a punctual man, and do you think upon
his deathbed he will be worse than his word!


Spitt. Tell him Signior, I dispense with his promise, and I --


Cynt. For never so much, he has said it, and you shall have her, let what will
be the matter.


Spitt. Ah! what ado's here!


Cynt. See then Signior Spittzaferro, what a particular esteem and liking my
Father has for you; he told the company that the thoughts of this day revived
him, and said, if a Duke should now demand my Sister, he should go without her
for your sake.


Spitt. Signior Alberto, I Am extremely obliged to your Father, for the honor
he does me, but I assure you, I am resolved not to marry.


Cynt. Your reason?


Spitt. The reason is, because marriage is inconvenient for me; I Will imitate my
Father and all my Ancestors, who could never be persuaded to marry.


Cynt. Nay, nay Signior, you have your liberty, no body as I know will force
you against your inclinations. But since it is so, pray go and acquaint my Father
with it your self; I have done my message, and am engaged to go another way. Do
ye hear Signior, you need not doubt your release; he is one will not impose her on
you. Adieu.


Is going off, and returns. Exit. Spitt. Well, I Will go and put an end to this
business, that my mind may be free from fears and my (...) continue sound.


Ex. Enter Scaramouch and Pancrace. Scar. Signior Pancrace, we are abused,
disgraced.


Panc. Couzened and cheated.


Scar. That Rogue Harlequin.


Panc. That Rascal Plautino.


Scar. That Villain Harlequin.


Panc. That cursed Plautino, and Knave Harlequin, his wicked Accomplice.


Scar. They shall account for their Rogueries.


Panc. They shall be made Examples, Signior Scaramouch. Let Us join in our
Revenge.


Scar. We Will have recourse to Justice.


Panc. Get Officers and search 'em out.


Scar. We Will have 'em strapado'd*


Panc. And sent to the Galleys.


Scar. Cherto, Seguro.


Panc. Then we will take a course in order to my Son, whom I will yet have to
marry your Daughter Andramo.


Scar. Patientia Signior Pancracio, I have received Letters.


Panc. What from Lauretto, which inform you that your Daughter and mine resolve
to be Nuns.


Scar. Yes.


Panc. I have Letters to that effect too, but I Will not consent to it.


Scar. Your Son being engaged I am content.


Panc. Signior Scaramouch, I will yet recover all.


Scar. Matters are gone too far, he loves another.


Panc. I Will make him love again.


Scar. Affection cannot be forced.


Panc. He shall marry her.


Scar. My Daughter shall continue there.

Suspend your Resolutions till we know more of the concern, we will search 'em
out, and have them face to face.


Scar. My Son.


Panc. And mine.


Scar. And Harlequin.


Panc. And Plautino.


Scar. And that Gypsy Baggage shall have no cause to laugh.


Panc. Let Us about it.


Scar. Instantly.


Panc. I now presently, along! Signior Scaramouch.


Enter Spitzaferro. Spitz. I found Signior Beronimo more reasonable than I
expected; but I believe he thought my refusal an affront, and might slight it
out of Pride, but I took him at his word; and now, stand disengaged Signior,
Ieronimo Servitore, Signiora Aurelia, I kiss your hands, -- so it is well.


Enter Octavio. Oct. Signior Spitzaferro, I Am your humble Servant.


Spit. Signior I am yours.


Oct. My Friend Signior Alberto tells me, you are not a man o'your word.


Spit. It Is confessed; but it is not without much regret, and --


Oct. O Signior, no harm at all.


Spit. I am very much troubled, and wish with all my heart, --


Oct. No harm done.


Spit. I should have been very glad that --


Oct. It matters not Signior, rest contented. Signior be pleased to make choice
of one of these two Swords, and take which you like best.


Spit. One o'these Swords.


Oct. Yes, which you please.


Spit. To what intent?


Oct. After your refusing to marry a Lady, to which you had given your word, I
doubt not but you will take in good part the Complement I come to make you.


Spit. What Is that?


Oct. There Is a little Billet which Signior Alberto desired the favor of me to
deliver into your hands.


( Spit. reads) Signior Spitzaferro, I consider that your refusal to marry my
Sister, is an affront to our Family, I demand the satisfaction of a Gentleman;
make choice of your Weapon, and appoint the place and time.

Your Friend and Servant, Alberto.

Spit. Friend and Servant! What a Complement is there to such a Message?


Oct. Other men would make a noise and a buslle, and grow enraged against you;
but Signior Alberto is a civil person, and one that does things very
obligingly, he sends courteously to you, to tell you, that if you please you
two will civilly cut one another throats.


Spit. A fine Complement, a very civil person indeed.


Oct. Come Signior, choose your Sword I pray.


Spit. I kiss your hands Signior, I have never a throat to cut; What a
Civility's there?


Oct. It must be so if you please.


Spit. Signior no matter for Complements among Friends, Servitore.


Is going off, Octavio pulls him back. Oct. Signior, if you please you must not
depart yet; come take which you like best, I Am a little in haste, or I Would allow
you more time to make your choice.


Spit. I have nothing to say to the business.


Oct. You are not pleased then to fight him.


Spit. No, not at all.


Oct. You don't think good to kill one another.


Spit. Signior no.


Oct. It Is against your inclination?


Spit. Signior si.


Oct. You have made a resolution to the contrary.


Spit. And please you.


Oct. At least Signior Spitzaferro you will have no reason to complain, you see I
observe method, and do things in order; you go from your word, the party
injured sends you a Challenge, I bring it, you refuse to fight, I beat you for
not accepting the message, that follows of consequence, all this is in course,
and I know you are too worthy a person not to approve of proceedings which are
so orderly and exact.


Spit. What a sort of man's this?


Oct. Come Signior, choose your weapon without more ado.


Spit. Yet again!


Oct. Signior, I force no body, but you must take it; nor does Signior Alberto
compel you to any thing, but you must sight him, if you please.


Spit. I shall do neither.


Oct. No?


Spit. Signior, no.


Oct. With your permission then.


Beats him. Spit. Ah, ah, ah, ah.


Oct. Signior, I have all the reluctance imaginable to treat you so contrary to
all my inclinations; but with your good liking, if you please, I cannot forbear
till you do me the favor to grant what I request of you.


Spit. I kiss your hands Signior, give me which you please.


Oct. No Signior, which you please, So, is it not best to do things thus freely
and courteously. I Am very glad to find you so inclinable, for you are a very
civil person, and one for whom I have a particular respect; I was extreme sorry
to see you would force me against my Nature. Well Signior, I Will go and acquaint
Signior Alberto, that you will please to do him the obligation to meet him at
six to morrow morning upon the Mole, with your Sword in your hand, like a
gallant person* So Signior Spitzaferro I kiss your hands; Your most humble
Servant.


Spitt. takes a Sword. Ex. Spitt. Eh! What a sort of Ceremony, what kind of
Complements are these? What an obliging, disobliging person was this? Euh --
Malleditto.


Exit. Enter Cynthio, Aurelia, Zerbinetta, Officers. Aur. Take courage, you see
me in the same ill circumstances, and exposed to the like misfortunes.


Zerb. You know your birth, and who you are; you have Relations that will
reconcile all. But I Am in a condition that that will not appease the anger of a
Father, to whom Merit signifies little, and who regards nothing but Wealth.


Enter Pancrace and Scaramouch. Panc. O are you caught at last, are your
intrigues discovered? Will you now at last consent to quit your fine choice.


Cynt. O Signior, I humbly beg of you, no more to think of separating me from
this fair person; I Am hers by a thousand Vows, and by holy Contract she is mine.


Aur. She Is a person of such virtue and merit, that when you know her better,
you will have the greatest esteem for her imaginable.


Panc. Esteem one that has seduced my Son from his obedience.


Enter Plautino. Plaut. In the hands of Justice!


Panc. No, I have no esteem for a Vagabond, one of a Race unknown.


Plaut. Signior Pancracio. regret not that your Son loves a person unknown, one
without a portion, and whose quality you are ignorant of; the person from whom
he purchased her declared, passing through a little Village not far from this
City, called Pitrola, in a time when several Houses were on fire, they found
her brought forth into the street, then but an Infant, lying in a Cradle, and
left unattended, in the time of this distraction they stole her away.


Scar. What said you?


Plaut. They believed it not the Daughter of a Peasant, but a Nurse-Child,
having several rich Medals about her Neck, of which they left this one as the
most remarkable.


Shows a Gold Medal. Scar. Let me see it.


Plaut. By publishing this Story, she may come to the knowledge of her Parents;
and this may serve for a circumstance to consirm 'em she is their Daughter.


Scar. O, fortunate discovery! happy confirmation!


Plaut. What say you* Signior Scaramouch?


Scar. It Is my Daughter whom I lost in the same manner as you speak of.


Panc. Your Daughter, Signior Scaramouch?


Scar. Yes* I own her.


Zerb. O happy Zerbinetta!


Scar. No, no, your name is Olivia.

My Sister! unexpected joy.


Scar. Signior Pancracio, you have now no longer reason to repent your Son's
actions.


Plaut. Nor you, Signior Scaramouch, have no reason to be angry with your Son,
for his love to the fair Aurelia.


Scar. My Son love one that is contracted to another.


Plaut. Signior Spittzaferro, by the consent of parties, has quitted his
pretensions, and I have acquainted Signior Ieronimo with Signior Octavio's love
to his Daughter, and he now approves well of it, and resolves nothing shall be
wanting in him to gain your approbation of the match.


Scar. Signior Plautino, I am content.


Aur. Blessed agreement!


Oct. Lucky hour!


Cynt. Fortunate Plautino!


Zerb. Happy conclusion!


Plaut. This good news, I hope makes my Peace with all.


Panc. Servitore, Signior Plautino.


Scar. I forgive all but Harlequin; that is a Rogue shall not escape punishment.


Plaut. I Will step into Signior Ieronimo, and tell him the good news.


Exit. Enter Spittzaferro. Spitt. O! Signior, Servitore; I received your
invitation, and take it for a very great favor, that you think me worthy of
the honor of your Sword.


Panc. How Is this?


Spitt. But, Signior Alberto, let me tell you, that at present I am not in a
condition to fight; I will satisfy you in whatever else shall be requisite.


Panc. Aberto! what means he?


Spitt. Imagine then that you see me in the Field with my Sword in my hand,
sighting against you. Imagine likewise that you have laid me on the ground;
publish it throughout the City, I Will acknowledge it; for the present I do consess
my self overcome. And without any sighting at all, I ask my life of you.


Cynt. You have it.


Spitt. Not that I am afraid to fight, but that it will not be discretion in
me at this time.


Cynt. As you please.


Spitt. And that wisdom tells, it is better to do it now, than to submit to your
mercy after you have killed me.


bynt. Very true.


Spitt. Yet, upon condition that you will hereafter demand your life of me,
when it shall be inconvenient for you to fight, and I shall send you the like
courteous invitation.


Scarr. What means this?


Panc. Signior Spittzaferro, who do you talk to?


Spitt. To Signior Alberto.


Panc. To Cynthio.


Spitt. Brother to Signiora Aurelia.


Panc. My Son.


Oct. It Is true, Signior Spittzaferro; this Gentleman is not Signior Alberto,
but Signior Cynthio; not her Brother, but my Friend, to serve me in my Amor. I
was your Rival, and your true Enemy; But now you have quitted your pretensions,
and matters are concluded, I Am your Friend hence*forward.


Spitt. Then it will not concern me hereafter to require him to demand his life
of me.


Oct. You may sleep in peace.


Spitt. Ah! Bono, Servitore.


Enter Plautino. Plaut. Signior Scaramouch, Signior Ieronimo is extremely
rejoiced at the happy conclusion.


Enter an Officer bringing in Harlequin in his Magicians habit. Offic. Come
along, come.


Panc. Oh! is he caught? he shall have the Strapada.


Harl. Signior si, I deserve it for counterfeiting a Bravo, and cheating you of
206 Pistols.


Panc. Ah! Furbo! Villain!


Harl. And for not being a Philosopher of your Sect, Signior; for not learning
Logic, Morals, Physic and Metaphysics, Signior si.


Scar. He shall be sent to the Galleys for seven years.


Harl. Signior si, for not being a Novice, and learning Patience. Temperance,
Sobriety, and not going to a Wench.


Scar. Signior Pancrace, his sentence shall be for his whole life.


Harl. Signior si, for telling you your Son went a fishing, and for getting 500
Dollers of you against your will.


Panc. Signior Scaramouch, he shall be hanged out right.


Harl. Signior si, for being a Merchant of Ligorn, and cosening Signior
Pancrace and Signior Scaramouch of 800 half Ducats, and for being the Son of
old Signior Trivoline.


Scar. He shall be broken alive upon the Wheel.


Harl. Signior si, for having the insolence to put a learned Philosopher into a
Sack.


Scar. Bestia!


Harl. For laying him on with a great Cudgel.


Scar. Bruto!


Harl. And beating him till he was all over black and blue.


Scar. O che Diavolo! Impertinente!


Panc. Away with him to a Magistrate, he shall have his reward for all.


Harl. Signior Officer, I have dropped a Purse of Gold where I stand; take the
light and look for it, it belongs to Signior Scaramouch, and Signior Pancrace.


Scar. Ah! Bono.


Panc. Look for it, Signior Scaramouch, you and I will hold him in the mean time.


The Officer holds the Torch to Harlequin's feet to look for it, he treads it
out. Scar. Eh! Bestia!


Harl. Excusa, Signior, 'twas by chance.


Panc. Go, light it again, and look for the Money; we will hold him.


Scar. Signior si.


Ex. Officer Panc. Eh.


Harlequin slips out of the Gown as they hold him by the Arms, goes behind
them, and hits each two or three times over the head, -- they strike at him,
and buffet one another. Scar. Eh.


Panc. Bruto!


Scar. Bestia!


Panc. Bruto!


Scar. Bestia.


Harl. Ha! ha! he!


Ex. Enter Officer with a light; looks, and sees them holding the Gown and Cap
upon it, and nobody in it. Panc. Oh! Signior Scaramouch, here is nobody.


Scar. No*body?


Panc. The Villain's escaped.


Scar. O che Furbo.


Aur. Zerb. Gone!


Oct. Cynt. Hah che Cullione!


Panc. Signior Scaramouch, rest content at present. Now let us go in, have the
Music, eat a good Supper, and make a night on it.


Scar. Signior si* signior si.


Ex. Panc. and Scar. Plaut. You must all join to make a reconciliation for
Harlequin. He must for all this come in for the leg of a good Capon.


Enter Harlequin. From listening. Harl. Signior si, Signior si.


Oct. Cynt. Come, come, Harlequin's come.


Aur. Zerb. Aye, come, poor Harlequin.


making legs to every one* Harl. Servitore, Signior Octavio; Signior Cynthio,
Servitore; Signiora Aurelia, Servitore; Servitore Signiora, and Servitore Tutti
quanti.


Exeunt. FINIS.
Epilogue.
THose that were Judges forty years ago,
Would nothing but strict Comedy allow,
And humors drawn exactly to the life.
The Poet here, with nature is at strife.
We showed to day only what is strange and new,
Where tho the Picture was not drawn so true,
Yet th'oddness of the piece may pleasure give,
As that alone makes the Dutch painting thrive.
We in this age, which is so much for change,
Have leapt the Hedge, and now with freedom range.
What Is naturally witty will not do,
Unless there is something yet more strange than you.
If like your selves an airy Fop we show,
You cry, Dam-me Jack, that was stole from you.
No humor on the Stage will pass for Wit,
Cause every day you act your selves in the Pit.
In Coffee-House but half the Fool y'expose,
With talk impertinent, and silly Oaths,
The Mall the Fop at full proportion shows.
To have you here then were dull Repetition,
'Twould be at least the fourth and worst Edition.
Nor can we now any new humor meet,
In all Cheap Side, Cornhill, and Lumbard-street,
Upon the change, they are formal, dull, precise,
Of Dutch and French most gravely telling Lies;
Foretelling the success of Foreign War,
What may portend the Whale and Blazing-Star.
Since they are so gravely dull, and you so light,
Our Play we hope may've done you both some right.
Even in this Play will be some natural touches,
Whilst you're such Harlequins, they Scaramouches.

