THE Canterbury Guests; OR, A BARGAIN BROKEN. A COMEDY. ACTED AT The
THEATER ROYAL.

WRITTEN BY Mr. EDWARD RAVENSCROFT,

LONDON, Printed for Daniel Brown at the Bible without Temple-Barr; and John
Walthoe, at his Shop in Vine-Court, Middle Temple, 1695.

PROLOGUE, By a FRIEND.
In The latter Age, ere Critics dared to Damn,
Or Censure rashly, what deserved a Name;
When Bully Ben lugg'd out in Cat'line's Cause,
And huff'd his duller Audience to Applause,
Then if the Poet swore 'twas good, each Guest
Believed the Author, and approved the Feast:
But now in humble Prologue, the poor Muse
Implores your favor, and for mercy sues.
To day the ty'rd Satyr takes his rest,
And has at last himself a Fool confessed:
In vain is all his Malice, or his Art,
He jerks, you grin, and damn him when you smart.
This Ag's Crimes are past good Satyrs Cure,
He scarce can lash you more than you will endure.
The busy Statesman, can in a well-writ Scene
See Treason punished, and yet Plots again:
Young Gaming Heirs, who see poor Cully trickt,
Laugh at the Jest, and the same Night are nickt.
The London Cuckold sees his Brother Horned,
Yet is not by the Stage-Example warned.
The high kept Miss can see poor Jiltals fate,
Yet Cuckolds her kind Keeper for a Treat:
Since Headlong Folly then uncheck'd will reign,
Successful Satyr but Rebels in vain*
Our harmless Author therefore bid me say,
That even Fopp'ry goes untouched to day;
There Is scarce a knotted Fringe in all his Play.
The stately Side-Box Beau may cock his Nose,
And Mob'd up Phillis take a Morning Dose
Of fifty Dishes at the Choc'late-House.
And when the Consort's done, the Ladies may
There entertain the Beaux till break of day,
And still pretend they for their Coaches stay.
Men of no business to the Court may come,
And Essenc'd Wigs Perfume the Drawing Room;
Where, on the Window, Fops, their Wit to prove,
Write Petty-Treason to the God of Love.
In short, whatever Crimes o'r run the Town,
Here Is none to day that are with Malice shown:
We Have Plot and Humor too, but as for Wit,
Let that be judged by the discerning Pit.
THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO Rowland Air Esquire.
SIR,
IT has long been a Custom with Authors to trouble their best Friends; for, who
but friends will excuse so many Impertinencies as are generally found in
Dedications, and have their Names set as a Skreen betwixt our faults and the
censures of the Critics, who in this Age are so unmerciful, that they never
spare the Poet for sake of the Patron, be he never so eminent or well qualified?

A second pretense, is a grateful acknowledment of favors received; but there
Self-Interest advances under the Mask of Gratitude and good Manners, for our
thanks seem rather invitations to new Benefits. To say truth, Poets choose
Patrons for their Plays, with the same design that crafty Parents do able
Godfathers for their Children.

The Reasons, Sir, why I shelter this under your Name, are, because your
Affability, and singular good Disposition to all Mankind, enclines you not only
to pardon Errors, but to confer Obligations, which you perform with that
cheerfulness and courtesy, that whom you oblige you charm. Next, Sir, from the
long acquaintance and vicinity of our Families and Relations, who ever held a
fair and happy Correspondence till the vicissitudes of time gave Interruption.
Then let this tender of my respects and service to you, with this small trifle,
receive and establish me in your Memory and Friendship, which is the aim and
ambition of, Sir,

Your sincere Friend, and most humble Servant, Edward Ravenscroft

Dramatis Personae.
Men. Alderman Furr. A Citizen of London. Mr. Trafuse. Sir Barnaby Buffler. A
Country Knight that affects to speak Proverbs. Mr. Underhill. Justice Greedy. A
Glutton. Mr. Bowin. Mr. Lovell. A sober Gentlemen. Mr. Verbrugen. Mr. Careless.
A gay brisk Airy Gentleman. Mr. Geo. Powel. Durzo. A blunt Sea-Captain. Mr.
Bright. Dash. A Country Clark and Scrivener. Mr. Dogget. First Innkeeper. Mr.
Mich. Lee. Second Innkeeper, and Jack Sauce a Cook. Mr. Pinkerman Toby. A
Serving-Man. Tho. Kent. Women. Jacinta. Daughter to Alderman Furr. Mrs. Rogers.
Hillaria. His Niece. Mrs. Verbrugen Arabella. Sister to Lovell. Mrs. Knight.
Mrs. Dazie. Two Wenches. Mrs. Lawson. Mrs. Breeder. Mrs. Kent. Beatrice. A
waiting Woman. Mrs. Perrin.

Three Children, Wayters, Fiddlers, Singers, and Dancers.

The SCENE, CANTERBVRY.

THE Canterbury Guests; OR, A Bargain Broken.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Alderman, Fur, and Justice Greedy. Fur. MR. Justice, this was kindly
done of you, to come and meet us.


Gree. Since I knew of your coming into the Country, I could not do less than
ride out a Mile or two, and now, Mr. Alderman, you are welcome to Canterbury.


Fur. Sir, I thank you.


Gree. What! are not your Daughter and Neice light out of the Coach yet?


Fur. I bid 'em stay till we had determined which Inn to lodge at, where is the
best entertainment?


Gree. Let me see, there is the Three Kings, and there the Old Kings Head. I
protest this Riding out has got me a Stomach; I Will see which House has the best
provisions, and we'll take up there.


Fur. Do so; in the mean time I Will step to the Coachman and pay him.


Gree. And order my Man to have my Horse home. Fur. Exit.


Enter two Innkeepers, opposite. 1 Inn. Speak in the Star there, Tapster.


2 Inn. Chamberlain, show up into the Rose, quickly.


1 Inn. Mr. Justice.


2 Inn. Mr. Greedy.


1 Inn. I see, Sir, you have a Coach full of Friends come to Town, please to
let 'em be my guests, they shall have civil entertainment.


2 Inn. Sir, here they may have excellent accommodation.


1 Inn. Mr. Justice. They pull him by the Sleue.


2 Inn. Sir.


Greed. Look you Neighbors, all favor and affection set aside, what have you
to Eat and Drink, what curiosity have you for Supper, there is the point?


1 Inn. For Wine, Sir, I have such a Pipe of Canary pierced but this Morning --


Gree. Right Racy Canary.


1 Inn. Three Years old, as full of Nits as the Sun is of Motes, sparkling, as
it were the extract of Diamonds.


Gree. Say thou.


1 Inn. 'Twill make a Cat speak, a Judge deaf and dumb, an old Man get
Children, or bring a Dead Man to life again. It Is a ^lower Mr. Justice.


2 Inn. I have such a Butt of Malago, Rich Old Malago.


Gree. Old Malago!


2 Inn. And such a Butt of Sherry!


Gree. Sherry too, and Old Malago! there is a double blessing; let me taste --


1 Inn. Then if you are for Claret, Sir -- All this Scene they turn the Justice
by the Arm from one to the other, with greater violence every time.


2 Inn. Or for White -- Sir.


Inn. I have such --


2 Inn. Not the like in England.


Gree. Hold, hold Friends, all this is very well, what have you not that is
Eatable.


1 Inn. You may have Mutton --


2 Inn. Or Lamb --


1 Inn. Or Rabbits --


2 Inn. Or Chickens --


1 Inn. Or Pigeons --


2 Inn. Some young Turkeys, Sir, some young Turkeys.


1 Inn. Or a Pig, a Pig, a delicate fat white Sow Pig.


Greed* Pig -- Pig -- delicious meat.


2 Inn. Sir, I have three brace of the plumpest young Patridge.


Gree. Young Patridge!


1 Inn. And I a brace of the rarest Pheasants.


2 Inn. Mr. Justice, I have such a rarity, such a morsel of Meat.


Gree. What Is that, what is that?


2 Inn. I had a whole live Calf sent me from Flanders, and within you may see
such a Chine of Gaunt Veal --


Gree. Gaunt Veal! O blessing sent from Heaven! let me go --


1 Inn. Mr. Justice. Holds the Justice.


Gree. Let me go, or I Will lay you by the Heels.


2 Inn. 'Twere Treason to let you go, without acquainting your worship.


Gree. Bear witness, he assaults me in the Highway.


1 Inn. That I have half a dozen of the finest largest Bruges Capons, that were
ever sent a present into England.


Gree. Bruges Capons!


2 Inn. They were fed with Marrow, Amber Greece, and blanched Almonds.


Gree. Let me down on my knees and give thanks, -- I am in the Land of Canaan.
-- O Bounty, -- bounty, -- bounty. --


1 and 2. Get up Sir.


Gree. Which way shall I turn me.


1 Inn. This way Sir.


2 Inn. Here Sir.


1 Inn. This way Sir.


2 Inn. Here Sir.


1 Inn. Here Is the Gaunt Veal.


2 Inn. Here the Bruges Capons.


Gree. Stand off, let me go, let me go, O Gaunt Veal, Runs one way: veal, veal
-- O Bruges Capons, capon, capon, Runs the other way. O Veal -- O Capon, Capon, O
Veal. Runs too and fro, several times.


Re-enter Alderman Furr. Fur. What Is the matter, what is come to you?


Gree. They have undone me, -- I starve in the middle of plenty. I know not
which to choose; A pox on you, join both your Houses together, O Capon! O Veal!
-- O Veal! -- O Capon!


1 Inn. Sir, I have this day come down by the London Coach, a basket of your
little round Marrow puddings.


Gree. What, your white puddings, made of Marrow and Almonds?


1 Inn. They Will melt in your Mouth Sir --


Gree. London Marrow puddings, -- the scales are turned; and now Mr. Alderman,
let us in and feast like Epicures, Gaunt Veal -- and Marrow puddings.


Fur. Come let us have Supper in good time.


2 Inn. You shall Sir. Ex. Fur. Greed. and 2 Innkeepers.


2 Inn. A pox of those Marrow puddings, I have lost my Guests, but it pleases
me to think how the hungry Justice will scold when he finds none of those
danties, for we both lied abominably. Exit.


SCENE II.
Enter Toby, and speaks to the Alderman as he returns from the door. Tob. Sir,
I suppose you may be Mr. Alderman Furr.


Fur. Furr is my name, your business friend.


Toby. My Master, Sir Barnaby Buffler greets you; he sent me before to wait
your coming, and to let you know, he will in few hours hence be in Town. -- the
farther particulars of his mind you will understand from this -- Gives him a
Letter.


Fur. I am glad he will be here to night.


Toby. Sir, my Master's mightily pleased with the thoughts of Marrying your
Daughter; he talks of nothing but her all day; she will be very happy if she can
but away with some small faults.


Fur. I have taught her Obedience, and she that is so to a Father, will be the
same to a Husband. -- He Is Rich.


Tob. Right Sir, now I have delivered you your Letter, I Will observe my Orders,
and give this to your Daughter.


Fur. I Will send her to you, whilst I read my Letter. Jacinta. Ex. Fur.


Tob. Strange humor in Parents, to enslave their Children for wealth. -- The
estate and not the Man is now regarded.


SCENE III.
Enter Jacinta, Hilaria. Jac. Pray thee, cosen, leave me not in this extremity.


Hill. No, no, come, where is the Esquire to this Knight Errant.


Tob. By me, Sir Barnaby Buffler commends this to the fair hands of Madam
Jacinta. Jacinta takes the Letter.


Jac. Are you his Servant.


Tob. I am faithful Servant to your humble Servant, and the Person designed for
your Husband, he desires all things may be in readiness to night, that the
Marriage may be solemnized to Morrow morning.


Jac. His message seems to imply a command.


Tob. He Is a Person not to be thwarted nor instructed, for when he has once
said the word -- hum. -- To Jacinta.


Hill. This Buffler's but a foolish kind of a name, come friend, be frank with
us, and let us know a little more of his humor, To Toby. -- but first what
manner of person is he?


Tob. Auh, a Spark of the times; a brisk blade of a about Fifty five Years of
Age, who to cool the intemperance of his Youth, -- resolves forthwith to take
the Sovereign Remedy, a Wife.


Hill. Make have and let us see the Letter, for if he be a lover of that Age,
his style must be very amourous and pleasant; for nothing's more ridiculous
than an old Bachelor in Love, or to set up for a Beau.


Tob. You Will find it a very extraordinary Letter.


Jac. Did he read it to you.


Tob. With a very cheerful countenance.


Hill. Since he is his Confident, read it out.


Jacinta reads the Letter. Jac. MY Child, I have an Estate in two Counties, I
am Lord of three Manners, I have One Thousand Five Hundred Thirty Six Pounds
Thirteen Shillings and Four pence Half penny Rent, besides Pepper Corns; and
Esquire Careless, my half and only Brother, is my next Heir, if I Die without
Issue. I am told that in Marrying you, I may get as many Children as I think
good; prepare therefore against to morrow, in order to the first; as for the
rest, we'll think of them at leisure. Consider you lodge at an Inn, therefore
be not seen but in a Masque, that it may not be said you appeared in pub^ick
places amongst strangers, for methinks already I begin to be concerned for your
Honor, and that you ought not to be seen without my leave.



Jac. This Knight must be some strange Monster.


Hill. This fellow's of a Complexion to tell all. Well friend, -- you say your
Master is elderly, but as to his Person.


Tob. Why, pretty bulky -- but lusty and Heartwhole.


Hill. The caution in his Letter, shows him of a Jealous humor.


Tob. If he be jealous of his Wife, as he is of his Money, the Devil shall not get
her out of his clutches.


Hill. And obstinate.


Tob As a Bitch that has Puppies, When you bid her come off her litter, he will
have his humor, tho the Devil stood at the door.


Jac. And how must a Wife deal with all these good qualities.


Tob. To tell you my mind, in short, I even pity you, that so handsome a young
Lady should be Married to a gruf Curmudgeonly old fellow, with whom you can
never enjoy a minutes happiness; in hopes to be left a rich Widow.


Hill You speak honestly.


Jac. How miserable shall I be made.


SCENE IV.
Enter Alderman Furr. Fur. Well, have you done your Message according to order?


Tob. I have said my say, and now I Will go acquaint my Master.


Fur. The Bells ring to Prayers -- Put your selves in order, and go to the
Cathedral. By that time -- your intended Husband, Sir Barnaby, will be here, at
present he is busy with the Toby Exit. Attorney, to get the Writings drawn
according to our agreement, that all things may be in readiness against to
morrow Morning, the time prefixed for the Marriage.


Jac. Sure, Sir, if you loved me, you would not be so hasty to part with me.


Fur. It Is the great care and love I have for you, makes me solicitous to see
you well disposed of: There ends a Father's care, for when he gives a Daughter
in marriage, it is supposed he gives her to more than a Father; for such is a
Husband. Husband and Wife are one.


Hill. That Rule, Uncle, will not hold in Arithmetic, for according to the first
Principle, one and one, make two.


Fur. Mad-Cap Niece, meddle with your own matters -- Let me see --


Hill. Nay, Uncle, never put on your Considering-Cap for an Answer; what I say is
true, and I Will give you a farther demonstration that Man and Wife are not one:
For in this Age they are seldom or never together, the Man's in one place and
the Wife in another; as far asunder as ever they can get: And you know it is
impossible for one and the same thing, to be at the same time in several places.


Fur. She has a very unhappy Wit; I am glad, Daughter, that you are going from
her, for she is enough to spoil all the young Women she meets with* But I hope
she will have a Husband will meet with her.


Hill. Never of your choosing, Uncle.


Fur. Likely so, for you're hair-brained enough to do things of your own head.


Hill. Do you think, Uncle, I have not as much Wit to choose a Husband as you?


Fur. Well, well, follow your own course; but I hope you will get a Husband one
day will Cudgel your bones for you.


Hill. But, Uncle, it is not now as it was in your young days; Women, then, were
poor sneaking Sheepish Creatures, but in this Age we know our own strength, and
have Wit enough to make use of our Talents: If I meet with a Husband makes my
Heart ache, I Will make his Head ache.


Fur. I am apt enough to believe, one House will be too hot to hold you long: I
doubt not but your Husband (whoever shall have the ill fortune to be so) will
in a short time be as weary of you as I am.


Hill. Should he prove but half so ill natured as you are (which certainly no
young man can) I Would swear my self a Virgin, and consequently sue out a Divorce
against him for impotency.


Fur. Come, Niece, leave your unluckiness, and now I have brought you down for
company, don't employ your Wit to teach my Daughter disobedience.


Hill. These old Fornicators keep such ado with Obedience --


Fur. Go, get you gone to Church --


Hill. To Church, or any where, to be rid of an old man.


Fur. Go, go, I have other business than to mind your tittle tattle.


Hill. Farewell, Nuncle -- Teach my Grannam to -- Spin.


Jac. Thou art a mad Wench to talk so. Fur Exit.


Hill. Pish -- I Would have Women say, and do what they list; Have not we rational
Souls as well as men? What made Women mopes in former Ages, but being ruled by
a company of old Men and Women? Dotage then was counted Wisdom, and Formality
called Gravity and good Behavior.


Jac. What would you advise me to in this extremity? I shall never love this
Knight.


Hill. Let him know your mind, and if he will not believe you he is an unmannerly
Fool; And there is an end. Come Wench -- Exeunt.


SCENE V.
Enter Lovell and Toby, meeting. Tob. O here is my Master: Sir, they are come, I
have delivered the Letters.


Lov. My Sister and I then will give them a visit presently; whilst she holds
the Old man in discourse, I Will upbraid Jacinta.


Tob. It Is sore against her will -- But you will have a better opportunity -- for
in my hearing the Alderman bid them go hear Prayers at the great Church, 'twill
not be long ere they come this way.


Lov. Haste then to our Inn, acquaint my Sister they are come, and tell her the
occasion of my stay. -- Toby Exit. Here Is one not in Love -- he is so merry.


SCENE VI.
Enter Careless, humming a Tune. Carel. Ha! Is not that my old Friend -- Franck
Lovell?


Lov. Careless! -- who thought to have met you at Canterbury after eight years
absence. How fares my friend?


Carel. Well in health and mind: In Purse too, I hope.


Lov. Where have you been all this while? What Country has held you?


Carel. All Countries, and sometimes no Country; for I have been most of the
time at Sea.


Lov. At Sea!


Carel. I Will tell thee in short -- Coming, at the Death of my Father, to a
Mortgaged Estate, and I too extravagant to recover it, went a Voluntier to Sea,
aboard one of the King's Frigates; when our Fleet returned I went aboard the
French, then the Dutch, and so from one Fleet to another, till I touched upon
most of the known Coasts the Christian World Trafficks to. By this time I hope
my Estate is disincumber'd, and I am free in the World.


Lov. Prudently done, and now you are grown a stanch sober man.


Carel. I have not parted with one grain of my old humor, I am as wild as
ever, only I have learned to Sin at cheaper Rates. But what is more material,
let me know what is become of thy elder Brother -- Is he Dead yet, and you in
possession of the whole Estate?


Lov. No, he lives; and what is worse, now in his Old Age is going to marry.


Carel. Bring me to him, I Will Drink him Dead.


Lov. If the Drink were Poison, 'twou'd scarce have time to work. To morrow is
the prefixed day, unless prevented by Stratagem: My Sister and I, by his
G^acious Letters, are invited down to his Wedding.


Carel. Lives the Lady here in Canterbury?


Lov. At London -- But he durst not venture thither for fear of Expenses -- and
that after Marriage -- his Wife should be buying fine Coaches, Beds, and
Furniture.


Carel. Prudently considered.


Lov. This therefore was the appointed place to meet at; her Father and he have
treated by Letters this Twelvemonth, but a Nights Courtship must serve the
Lady: He marries her in the morning, and the next day removes to his Country
House.


Carel. Which must be her Monument -- for there she will be buried alive! -- Is
she likely to have Children?


Lov. Young and handsome.


Carel. That Is bad --


Lov. But what is worse, she is the only Woman I ever did, or can love. But my
discourse is unseasonable -- Let me know your Inn, I Will visit you at Night, and
tell you all.


Carel. Whither are you now going?


Lov. The party I have been speaking of, is going to Church, and I take this
opportunity to discourse her.


Carel. It Is gone too far -- Let thy dull Elder Brother take her, you shall
along with me -- I Will show you a Companion worth forty Mistresses.


Lov. What is he?


Carel. An honest Tarpaulin -- The Son of an English Renegade: He was born a
Shipboard, and never was ashore beyond a Sea Port Town -- except up in the
Countries amongst Indians and Spaniards, to Ravage, Burn, and Plunder, for he
has been a Buccanier from his Infancy.


Lov. His Employment disgraces not his Parentage.


Carel. Stout he is and brave -- and that temper has inclined him to leave that
hellish Crew, and employ his Valor in the Service of his Father's Native
Country: He brings with him sixty thousand Crowns, and doubtless will have good
Employment -- for from Captains of Ships, and Governors of Plantations, the
King has heard much of his Valor -- Come, you shall drink a Bottle, or a Bowl
of Punch, with me and the Captain.


Lov. Were I going to any one but a Mistress.


Carel. Pox o'thy Mistress; if thou were going to a Wench I might excuse you --
but I should think my self cursed, should I consent thou should solicit any
Woman in the way of Matrimony.


Lov. Will you never leave this lewd wild humor?


Carel. Not upon the score of Matrimony. Why, Franck, I Will tell thee, I am now
like a Calf in the Fens, that straggles every where, and feeds where I like
best; but should I marry, I should be tether'd to one spot of Ground; at best,
be confined to an Enclosure.


Lov. The Horse that is loose often falls into a foul Ditch, or is put in the
Pound for straying in his Neighbors Ground: Marriage is honorable and safe.


Carel. It would be so if all Wives were honest: I Will undertake a Mistress
shall love thee twice as long as any Wife thou can find. Nothing choaks Love
like the Surety of Possession: Love is an excellent Meat, but Marriage an ill
Sauce. Were I going to Tyburn, I would cry, drive on Carman, and choose to Sing
a Penitential Psalm at the Gallows, rather than return to say, For Better for
Worse.


Lov. Atheists in Love, like Zealots in Religion, are not to be reclaimed by
Argument, yet now and then are converted by some lucky accident, you may one
day see a beauty, that like a burning glass shall draw all thy loose flames
within a narrow compass.


Carl. Beauty is more brittle than the glass you talk of, and Man's estimation
of it less durable. I may perchance Love only one at once; but not that one
always; and whilst I am in my right wits, I will not leave delightful variety,
for the unsavory insipid bitts of Constancy.


Lov. Well, Jacinta has a Kinswoman for her Companion, so beautiful, her Eyes
would fix your wandering thoughts, and make you abandon all Women for her sake.


Carl. So thinks the devout young Novice, newly entered into his Cloisture; he
has no sooner forsaken the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, but imagines he is
able to make the greatest Debauchee, in Love with Mortification.


Lov. My mind at present is not composed enough, to return an answer to every
thing you urge; but venture your self with me into her company, and if ever you
return the same Man --


Carl. I know my self so well grounded in Sin, and have tasted so much the
sweets of wickedness, that I dare venture my self into any temptation to the
contrary; and to see this miracle, will suffer my self to be seduced into civil
company, and if they do debauch me --


Lov. Come then.


Enter Toby Tob. Sir, Madam, Jacinta and her Cosen went out the back way, but
I believe Prayers were almost done, -- for they return already. -- See yonder,
they come with their Masks on. I know their Petticoats.


Lov. Retire -- whilst I discourse one, do you detain the other, to give me
opportunity; these are they --


SCENE VII.
Enter Jacinta, Hilaria. Carl. Accost thy own natural, and leave me to manage
the other impertinent.


Lov. My Heart's my guide, -- stay Jacinta, take off your mask, and let me see
if your Face is as much altered as your Heart. Do you fly me, -- but I Will
pursue you, as Jac. Lov. Exeunt. a Ghost does the guilty Murderer.


Carl. If you have lost your Tongue too, ye are a blessed pair, -- so were it
not for your Tongues, you Women would all be Angels*


Hill. Da-da -- da -- Hill. strives to run out by him.


Carl. Nay, nay, you are not to pass so, I am resolved both to hear and see you
first.


Hill. Well, what would the Man be at?


Carl. The Man's at what he would be, he is at you.


Hill. What do you mean?


Carl. Faith I cannot resolve you till I see your Face; pull off your Mask, and
then I Will tell you what I mean.


Hill. Suppose I will not.


Carl, Than I shall suppose you very ugly, -- for I never knew a Woman that had
a handsome Face, could endure to hide it.


Hill. Yes, if she likes not her Company.


Carl. Yet she would have her company like her; I trust more to a Woman's pride,
than her Love or good Nature; for tho they are ugly, they think themselves
handsome, and would be thought so by others.


Hill. Why then do they maintain the humor of Vizard Masks?


Carl. Because under them they Sin concealed. I Will avouch, Vizard Masks ruin
more Women's Virtues, than all the Bawds in the Nation.


Hill. Your Reason for that, good Mr. Voucher.


Carl. Under the vizard, the Wife goes to the Play, Ball, or Masquerade,
undiscovered to her Husband; the Maid unknown to her Mistress; the Daughter or
Neice, unperceived by her Relations; the Mask draws the Gallants, and tho at
first you come but out of curiosity, to hear what Men will say, our quick
Repartees, our gentle Bawdry, and brisk raillery, tickles your Ears; your
bodies are Buxome, your Bloods grow wanton, your fancy strikes firmly on some
Man or other, the Gallant grows importunate, and you are Conquered.


Hill. Do you find them so frail?


Carl. A Woman's Ear is the Outwork to her Chastity, lodge your self but there,
and the Fort is more than half taken; when once a Woman hearkens to what you
say, she will soon do what you would have her.


Hill. Then you take a Parley for a Surrender.


Carl. No, but after a Parley they soon yield.


Hill. Now I have a mind to stay and talk with you, but must be forced to leave
you, to avoid your ill Opinion.


Carl. Nay, if you have a mind to it, you will do it, let me think what I will; and
if you will not pull off your Mask, I Will even begone and leave you -- fare you well.


Hill. And fare you well. Turn from each other, and look back over their
Shoulders.


Carl. Nay, if you look over the Shoulder at me, I Will turn again, for you have
no mind I should begone, I Am sure.


Hill. Why did you look back at me?


Carl. To see --


Hill. If I would look at you, and so we even caught one another; and what can
you say to me, that I cannot retort on you again.


Carl. But I Will be judged by your self, if I have not more Reason to think you
desire my stay, than I yours; you have a full sight of me, see what I am, and
know whither you like me or not; you are all Vizard, Scarf, and Petticoat; for
ought I know, you may want a Nose, set of Teeth, be Squint-eyed, or blobber
Lip'd.


Hill. You Will make me as ugly as the Devil, am I not cloven footed, think you?


Carl. I Will tell you that presently. Offers to look at her legs.


Hill. Nay, --


Carl. A handsome Leg and Foot, I Will be sworn; and here is a well shaped Hand
and Arm, and what Breasts are here, how round and plump.


Hill. Hands off, your enquiry begins to grow troublesome.


Carl. If you have a Face and Features, answerable to your Limbs, you are a prime
piece of Woman's flesh.


Hill. Do you think I have?


Carl. Gad do I.


Hill. Than to keep your good Opinion, I Will be gone, and you shall not see it. Nay,
nay, no attempts -- hands off. Offers to pull of her Mask.


Carl. I have sworn to see it.


Hill. And I have sworn you shall, but stand at greater distance, farther,
farther yet, see -- Hill. gets her back close to the door, pulls of her Mask,
and runs off.


Carl. Excellent Creature!


Hill. Fare you well.


Carl. Ha, are you so cunning; she is gone. by her wit I did not think she had
had so good a Face; for wit and beauty seldom go together, in a Woman, she has
a large stock of both, and I could wish my self in Bed with her; but the
thoughts of her are momentary.


SCENE VIII.
Re-enter Lovel. Lov. False, faithless Woman.


Carl. Prithee think no more of her, come now go with me and be merry, we'll
have Women in abundance.


Lov. Hang 'em Jilts.


Carl. No, such Women as your Mistress is, are more like Jilts, those I mean
are good Conscionable Girls, that will not let you spend your Money for
nothing, with the others you wast your Gold and time, and at last like young
Heifers, when they come to be milk'd, spurn at you in defiance, and away they
frisk.


Lov. Ah Jacinta; can a Father's word outweigh a Lover's vows.


Carl. Damn this pining, whining, puling, peaking, sneaking, sniveling Love;
I Will carry you where you shall see, merry, gay, jocond, sprightly Love; thou
shall have it in Armfuls, and dilate thy self in pleasure.


Lov. I shall be no company, my Soul is out of tune.


Carl. We'll have Music, Wine, and Women, to divert you: yet in spite of all
the Sex,

I Will keep my Soul free, as the Bird that flies in the Air,
And never Love one, till I of all the rest despair.

ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Hilaria, Jacinta, and Careless on the other side the stage. Hill. IT IS a
fine Evening, Cosen, and I love to look about me.


Carl. Ha! these are they.


Jac. Here comes Mr. Lovel's Friend.


Hill. We'll stand him bare faced.


Carl. Now, which is she that I am in Love with?


Jac. He Is at a stand.


Hill. He Would fain know me again; but prithee take up a brisk humor, and let us
try to puzle him.


Jac. No, prithee let us go in.


Carl. What are you upon the Wing, or do you come out a grazing like Rabbits,
just at the Burrow's mouth; that as soon as any body comes, you may pop into
your holes again.


Hill. We had need be watchful, when such pochers as you are abroad.


Carl. Your Watchfulness signifies little; I come now like a Ferret to creep
into your holes, and scare you out of your Burrows.


Jac. But if instead of a Burrow, you should run into a Warrenner's trap.


Hill. And that you may easily do, for we are no out-lying Conies, we keep
within heart of the Warren.


Carl. Ay, but I know your Musees, your inlets and outlets, and wherever the
Rabbits pass, the Ferret or Weesel may venture. You see I come just to the same
place; 'twas here you popt in from me before; But now I am got between you and
the hedge.


Jac. But how do you know, that we are the same pair?


Hill. And which of us is it, that was too nimble for you?


Jac. You had best have a care on which you venture, for in such cases, you
ought not to spoil your friend's game.


Carl. It Is one of you.


Hill. I see you are no good hound; you cannot follow the scent well.


Carl. Many a good nosed Dog is at a loss, when the scent is crossed; but if I
catch one, and my friend the other; if we are mistaken, let him say which is
his, and we will make a change.


Jac. But which of us two do you think would fall to your share?


Carl. Y'Gad I don't know.


Hill. Don't you know a Woman's Face, when you see it a second time?


Carl. She showed it with such a Legerde-main -- her Mask was no sooner of,
then on again, and she was gone.


Jac. Observe us well.


Carl. Let me see -- Faith not I, -- if you had your Masks on, I should know
her from a Thousand, at the very sight of her Vizard, my Heart would go pit --
a -- pat.


Hill. If you are so in Love with the complexion of Velvet, you should have a
Negro for your Mistress.


Carl. There is beauty in black, why else do Ladies put on patches, and some
love black Hair better than light, and why not black Faces as well.


Jac. But you would be for a white one at this time, if you knew which was under
the Vizard you like so well.


Hill, I am glad he does not, for than he would pretend Love to one of us.


Carl. Gad but I would not to you, nor ever a Woman in the World.


Jac. I dare swear you would.


Carl. Perhaps I might make you believe I was in Love with you.


Jac. No, that you could never do.


Carl. Why, don't you think your selves handsome enough to be loved.


Jac. Yes; but we think you have more Wit.


Carl. What, than to Love one of you?


Hill. Yes, or any body else, that is never like to Love again.


Carl. Are you an Enemy to me, or to Love?


Hill. To Love; I think it a very foolish thing.


Carl. But it is Marriage makes it so, give me Love as nature made it, free and
unconfined -- observe but Mistress and Gallant, how brisk, how gay, how fierce
they are in their Amors! whilst Marriage-Love comes like a Slave, laden with
Fetters, dull and out of humor.


Hill. For my part, I am rather for a Gallant, than a Husband.


Jac. So am I clearly --


Carl. It Is well dissembled on one side; one of you I am sure speaks against
her Conscience; but if you are as you say, you are Girls for me.


Jac. What both --


Carl. Both, I gad both.


Hill. Hold, one's enough, and if you will be a Gallant to one of us, we expect
you should be constant.


Carl. That circumstance makes it too like Marriage.


Hill. The constancy is while you pretend; not but that either Mistresses or
Gallant may choose elsewhere, but they must love but one at once


Jac. But which of us will you choose?


Carl. Faith I Will be for her I talked to in the Mask.


Hill. Well Sir, when you find which of us two is she; claim her for your
Mistress.


Carl. Adieu.


Hill. Come Hilaria. Ex. Jac. Hill


Carl. Ha Hilaria! I faith that is she, but they are gone in; Jacinta I remember
is the name of Lovel's Mistress; till now I fancied the other was she, because
more brisk and airy. Well I Will find out Lovel, and we'll give 'em a visit.


Exit. SCENE II.
Enter Justice Greedy, and First Innkeeper. Greedy, with a Cane striking.
Greed. Sirrah; Dog.


1 Inn. Sir, I beseech you.


Greed. Rogue, I Will break your bones.


1 Inn. Mr. Justice, Sir, and please your worship, -- do but hear me.


Greed. I cannot hear of Mercy, Hunger cries louder against thee for Vengeance.


2 Inn. Have moderation Sir, in your Anger, -- Justice has a scale for Mercy,
as well as Rigor.


Greed. Do thou see villainous Host, I am so weak and faint for want of
Eating, I can hardly follow thee.


1 Inn. Sir, on my word you shall have an excellent Supper.


Greed. But disappointment Sirrah, -- did not thou prate to me of Bruges
Capons, Marrow puddings, and --


1 Inn. That was only and please your Worship to out-lie my Neighbor, he had
no Gaunt Veal, and please your Worship -- nor --


Greed. O I shall go into a Consumption, Sirrah! my fancy has mounted
Constellation height, -- I supped Jelly from the Stars in conceit, and now must
I be content with dry Mutton and Rabbit? --


1 Inn. I Will make amends to Morrow, Sir, at the Wedding Dinner, I Will send Man
and Horse round the Country to pick up dainties.


Greed. But I have longings, Sirrah, I have longings more dangerous than a
Woman's with Child. O! I have wamblings in my Stomach.


1 Inn. What thinks your Worship of a glass of Canary, -- I have a Flower.


Gree. Do, do, bring't, or I shall faint.


1 Inn. And to enable you till Supper, a slice of potted Venison.


Greed. Ay, ay, for I am like a Mud Wall falling to decay; I want patching up.
1 Inn. Exit


SCENE III.
Enter Alderman Furr. Fur. Mr. Justice, whilst I have leisure, let me desire
the favor of you, to take the care of providing and ordering a handsome
entertainment against to morrow. Spare for no cost.


Greed. That Is well, that is well.


Fur. Let every thing be in the best manner, I leave it wholly and solely to you.


Greed. Both as to quantity, -- quality, -- manner, ordering, dressing, and
every thing?


Fur. Every thing! --


Greed. Without Molestation, -- Contradiction, -- or control?


Fur. Absolutely and entirely.


Greed. I love to understand the extent of my Commission, now am I Lord over
the Boiled, -- Baked, and Roast.


Re-enter Innkeeper. With a Bottle and a Plate. 1 Inn. Mr. Justice, please you
to taste?


Greed. Mr. Alderman, my service to you; special Drinks and Eats. Canary, ha!
this Venison has a good smack with it. Ay, this is a fit relish to recover a
balk'd Stomach.


Enter Jane. Jane. Sir, here is some Gentlemen and a Lady enquire for you.


Fur. Oh our Friends are come! Show 'em in, and call down my Daughter. Ex. Jane.


SCENE IV.
Enter to them, Sir Barnaby Buffler, Mr. Lovel, and Dashwel, with a black Box,
and a Roll of Parchment under his Arm, with Pen and Ink, hanging at his Girdle,
and Arabella after. -- Sir Barnaby, you are welcome.

Sir Bar. I thank you Mr. Alderman, A good welcome is the best Dish at a Feast.
This is my half Brother, and this our Sister.


Fur. Sir your Servant -- Madam give me leave -- All salute each other.


Greed. Your Servant Sir, Sir your Servant, Madam your humble Servant. (Greed.
speaks with his Mouth'full, and wipes it with the back of his Hand to salute
Arabella.)


Fur. Here Is my Daughter, Sir Barnaby bids you welcome.


Sir Bar. He comes well that comes to a good end, -- Lady, your humble Servant,
and faithful Husband, till death us part.


Jac. Your Servant Sir.


Sir. Bar. And now Father-in-Law -- tho I never saw you before, yet we
understand one another by letters, -- therefore let us fall to the matter, and
spare complements.


Fur. Ay, Sir Barnaby, no matter for ceremony amongst Friends.


Sir Bar. No, for Ceremony, is the Wiseman's scorn, the Fools delight, and the
Idleman's business.


Fur. Ay, Sir Barnaby, I am for down right dealing --


Sir. Bar. That Is best, -- for Full of Curtisy, full of Craft -- and fair words
will not fill a Bushel. Here then is the mark I shoot at, I come to Marry your
Daughter.


Fur. Right --


Sir Bar. You and I understand one the other, and Marriage Articles are agreed
on betwixt us.


Fur. Right -- I writ you my mind to every particular.


Sir Bar. Now Sir, knowing that Forecast is as good as Work, I have brought the
Marriage writings ready drawn, and my Attorney to see 'em signed and sealed,
come hither Dash --


Dash. Here and please your Worship's are the Deeds that concern your Estate,
and here the Marriage, Settlement, and Joynters, and so forth.


Fur. Very well Sir Barnaby.


Sir Bar. This I did to prevent expenses, for it is chargeable lying at Inns --
A penny saved, is a penny got. And I have brought my Brother and Sister, that
being altogether, we may be so much the cheaper.


Fur. They are welcome Guests, -- spare for nothing that the place affords.


Sir Bar. I Love to Be merry and wise. Enough's as good as a Feast. And now
Sir, whilst you peruse the Writings, I Will open my mind to your Daughter; we
shall soon have done -- Few words are best amongst Friends.


Fur. We'll withdraw into a another Room, and leave you to your selves. Come
Gentlemen.


Greed. Look you after Joynters and Settlements -- I Will into my Kingdom, and
take possession of my new Office. I come ye Woodcocks, Pheasants, Patridges,
and Quales: O ye darlings of Nature, ye tempters of the Appetite, I am coming
amongst you, to hug kiss and embrace your beautiful limbs.


Sir Bar. Who does he mean?


Greed. I could even jump out of my Skin for joy; now will I Eat often, and
give thanks when my Belly's full: For I could never remember to say Grace
before Meat, in my Life.


Sir Bar. What say you Sir --


Greed. Say -- why I say Sir, Store is no Sore; and that is a better say, than
Your enough's as good as a Feast. Chew upon that Sir Barnaby, till I come
again. -- Greed. Ex.


SCENE V.
Enter Sir Barnaby, and Mrs. Jacinta. Sir Bar. This is some prodigal Glutton, I
wonder Mr. Alderman will keep him company -- One scabby Sheep is enough to
infect a whole Flock. But not to stand thruming of Caps, my Wife that is to be
-- I am now to tell you, that since your Father and I are agreed, there only
remains, that I open my breast to you in these particulars. First, as to my
Person, you see it well enough, there is nothing to be disliked; nature has been
sufficiently bountiful to me, I am As strait as an Arrow; as plump as a
Patridge; -- and as sound as a Roach. But it may be said, I am of a full Age;
-- the better for you. Better be an Old Man's darling, than a Young Man's
warling. And he that Marries ever he be wise, shall Die ever he thrive. Now I
found in my self an inclination to like you, the first and only time I saw you
-- which was last Year, when you were with your Uncle in our Country, at the
Sheriffs Feast. I don't say you took notice of me.


Jac. No indeed Sir --


Sir Bar. Hold, I don't ask you questions -- because I would not give you the
trouble of answering. Now as I had a liking to you at first sight -- So I know
you must have some inclination in nature, to think well of me for a Husband.
For I observe your Eye has been upon me ever since I came -- Looking breeds
liking; and Where the Eye fixes, the Heart soon follows. So there is an end of
that. Secondly, I am none of those that mind Fashions -- Wisemen invent
Fashions, and Fools follow 'em. I am rather for saving than spending, ever
keeping in mind, that, To save is Healthful, to get is Comfortable, but to
spend is Intolerable. Now my taking you for a Wife, shows what good Opinion I
have of you, and that I believe you to be prudent enough, to imitate so
reasonable a Husband; for without that and your Father's Three Thousand Pound,
(which I would have with you) I should never have Married you -- nor can I
doubt you hereafter, since A good Jack makes a good Jill. And from the moment I
Marry you, I Will make you Mistress of all I am worth, (upon condition) you lay
not any of it out, upon any occasion whatsoever.


Jac. How Sir, not --


Sir Bar. Hold again -- Marriage brings the Key that unlocks a Virgin's Mouth.
Maids must be seen, not heard. Lastly, to discover my whole Heart to you,
because Children are certain Cares, but uncertain Comforts; and because they
will cost a great deal bringing up, and moreover for that I love you so
tenderly, we will get but one or two at most, and than I will forbear making
you afraid, lest you should Die in Childbed, For the Pitcher goes not so often
to the Well, but it comes home broken at last. Thus having told you all that is
necessary, and finding you so reasonable, and we both so well agreed. I Will
instantly acquaint your Father, -- put all things in readiness to Night, be
Married in the Morning according to the Old Rule, -- Happy is the Wooing, that
is not long a doing. Adieu Wife.


Sir Bar. Ex. Jac. Two words to a bargain, the Proverb says; but he will not
allow me one.


SCENE VI.
Enter Hilaria. Hill. Cozen, I heard all your Courtship; you have a most
Sententious Lover. You Will be married to the whole Book of Proverbs.


Jac. He would not let me speak a word, but is gone away with all the
presumption imaginable that I love him.


Hill. It Is a strange Devil.


Jac. Which way shall I divert this ridiculous marriage? My Father will hearken
to nothing I can say.


SCENE VII.
Enter to them Lovell and Careless. Hill. Here Is Mr. Lovell, he is the fittest
person for you to consult with -- O Gallant! who sent for you? To Careless.


Carel. I hope, Madam, you will allow a man to look after his heart when it is
gone astray.


Hill. You could not find it when you saw us last.


Carel. You conspired to juggle me out on it; but I know well enough which of
you had it.


Hill. You are beholden to Mr. Lovell for your knowledge.


Lov. No, upon my word, Madam: But he has told me his last Adventure.


Carel. Well, Madam, I hope you will stand to your Bargain.


Jac. We are no Flinchers; we'll not be worse than our words.


Carel. Then I challenge you for my Mistress; you were the Lady I talked to in
the Mask. Careless takes Jacinta by the hand.


Jac. I am not her I assure you.


Carel. I am well assured it could be none but you; I knew it when I was here
before, though I did not then own it.


Jac. Take my word, Sir.


Carel. Lord, that you should think to deceive me! Why, all the while I was
last in your company, my heart beat all on that side you stood, and my cheek
next you burnt and glowed --


Hill. Ha, ha; 'slise, he has not found it out yet --


Carel. Ha --


Lov. No, I Will be sworn Careless have not you.


Carel. I Will be sworn, Madam, Hilaria was the person. --


Hill. Ha, ha, ha -- but that is my Cozen Jacinta.


Carel. No, no, no; did not you call her Hilaria as you went in?


Hill. and Jac. Ha, ha, ha.


Hill. I thought how well you knew, and therefore called her by my own Name on
purpose to try you.


Carel. Ba! --


Lov. Now Careless you are caught --


Carel. I must be impudent -- Well, Madam, to let you see that I did, go both
of you out of the Room, and come in Masked; and if I don't choose the right,
I Will be content to resign the hopes of a Mistress.


Jac. There is but right and wrong.


Carel. To give you a greater proof on it, I Will make my choice blindfold.


Hill. 'Twill still be an even Wager that you hit on the right.


Lov. Careless, you are outwitted in faith.


Hill. Servant, our Covenant is void for Nonperformance of the conditions.


Carel. But calling me Servant, after the condition is broken, it is a
confirmation -- and will make it stand good in Law.


Lov. No, Careless, that Quirk will not do.


Carel. But, Madam, I hope you will give a man leave to retract when he finds his
Error; your self occasioned the mistake, 'twas an error of my Hand, not of my
Heart, for at the same time I told you Hilaria was she, and you are Hilaria;
therefore 'twas you I meant.


Hill. Yes, yes, 'twas me you meant, when your Cheek glowed, and your Heart beat
on the left side.


Hill. and Jac. Ha, ha, ha -- Cozen, you are too great a Tyrant.


(...). You pursue your Victory too severely; it is Generous to give the
vanquished Quarter.


Hill. I do more, I give him liberty to make his Retreat.


SCENE VIII.
Enter Alderman Furr. Fur. Mr. Lovell, they want your company within -- to
witness the Writings. Daughter, you must go too.


Lov. I Will wait on you again presently. Exeunt Lovell and Jacinta.


Fur. Sir, as you are Mr. Lovell's friend -- please to Sup with us, you shall
be welcome.


Carel. Sir, I know not whither you will tell me so when you know my business.


Fur. Pray, what may it be?


Carel. It was my fortune this Evening to have a sight of your Niece, as she
went abroad.


Hill. What Is he going to say?


Carel. To whom, Sir, I took so great a liking, that I could not rest satisfied
till I had found who she was; which I had no sooner done by Mr. Lovell, but
engaged him to bring me here to ask your consent to make my addresses to this
fair Lady.


Hill. O, I thought he would a been a second Sir Barnaby, and asked no bodies
leave but his.


Fur. Pray, who are you, Sir?


Lov. Did you not know Colonel Careless?


Fur. Very well -- he died some ten years since.


Carel. He was my Father.


Fur. Indeed! He left, I think, some twelve hundred a year; but encumbered.


Carel. He did so.


Fur. And have you that Estate still?


Carel. Every Acre, Sir -- and the Mortgage paid off.


Fur. I heard you were very wild.


Carel. I have had my Frolicks, but keep my Estate out of the Devil's Clutches.


Fur. Nay, if you were as wild as wild could be, you would meet with your Match
there; My Niece is as wild as you can be, she is vain, idle, careless and
talkative.


Hill. Uncle, you should do in driving a Bargain for marriage, as in selling of
Horses; tell their good qualities, and leave it to them to find the ill.


Fur. These are faults will be discovered in you at first sight.


Hill. Sir, I hope you will like me never the worse for what he says.


Fur. Instead of his getting you for a wife, you intend to get him for a
Husband.


Hill. It is more to the humor of the Age; if you will not commend me, I Will
commend my self: And if I thought but half so well of him, as I do of my self,
we'd soon shake hands, to Have and to Hold, without your leave.


Fur. You see her humor, Sir; if after this you dare venture on her, I shall
not Counsel her against you, provided you make out that Estate, for I wish her
well married.


Hill. Stay, Uncle: Now I think on it, you may take him with you, marriage is
quite out of fashion, and I hate to be out on it as much as you do to be in it;
if he had ten or twelve thousand a year, would keep me a Coach and Six, and all
things suitable to that Grandeur, I might admit him as a Gallant; and all that.


Fur. I Will leave you to her; for at this mad rate she talks all the year round.


Hill. Now the jest would be, if you should play such a simple trick to fall in
Love with me indeed, and indeed. Exit Fur.


Carel. Make your own words true, and accept me for a Gallant, I know not what
may follow --.


Hill. I Will push on the frolic at a venture, to see how far 'twill go; there is
my hand to kiss, and I confer on you the Title of Servant.


Carel. So, here is one hopeful young man in a fair way to be ruined.


SCENE IX.
Enter Jacinta, Arabella, together; Lovell and Durzo after. Jac. To morrow I
shall be unhappy.


Arab. I pity your circumstances.


Lov. Look you Captain -- there is your friend.


Carel. Come, Captain -- how is it*


Durz. Why, these Towns are such places, that a man cannot tell where he is,
though both his Eyes are open. I can walk so all about my Frigate, Fore and Aft,
in my sleep, between Decks, or above Deck, and return into my Cabin without
waking, but here I am forced to have a Pilot to steer me broad awake.


Lov. They want one Witness more, and desire you --


Carel. Captain, I leave you in good company; I Will be with you presently.


Arab. Who is this?


Lov. A brave Sea-Captain -- Stout and Blunt -- he was Born in a Ship, and
scarce knows any thing of Land Affairs.


Hill. He looks as ruff as a Storm.


Arab. I like him well; he looks as if fighting was his business.


Jac. He Is not very curious in his Dress.


Lov. Captain, how do you like these Ladies?


Capt. Three very snug Frigates, well Rigged; 'twere pity too but they were as
well Manned.


Lov. Ever you come Aboard one of these -- you must be new Rigged your self; I
must carry you to a Wardrobe.


Capt. What place is that, do they fight or Drink there?


Lov. It Is a Storehouse for the Body, you must lay by this Sea habit for a Land
Dress, the Ladies will not like the smell of Pitch and Tar.


Capt. Not like it! Which of them will not like it?


Hill. He Will beat us anon.


Jac. I begin to be afraid.


Durz. But what do you with these Ladies here?


Lov. Court them, Gallant them.


Durz. What Is that?


Lov. We make love to them: You must have a Mistress now you are come ashore.


Durz. Must I? Which of them?


Lov. Her you like best, Captain


Durz. I like them all; I am for a whole Tier of them.


Lov. Every man must have his share -- make choice of her you think handsomest.


Durz. But how must a man know a handsome Woman?


Lov. Here Is a Pattern to choose by -- observe: Shows Arabella to the Captain.
A Forehead high and fair -- Eyes black and sparkling -- Cheeks plump, not by
Art, but Nature painted -- A Mouth little, red Lips and white Teeth; a Pearly
Portcullis to a Ruby Gate.


Durz. That Is fine.


Lov. A Chin dimpl'd; in that little Pit a thousand Hearts lie Buried.


Durz. They are thrown in then, as fast as we heave Dead men overboard in a
Sea Fight.


Hill. Well said, Captain.


Lov. A Neck smooth, fat, white, and soft as the down on Swans.


Durz. Ay, that --


Lov. Breasts hard and round, their motions pant beholders Hearts into an
ecstasy; they rise and fall like Waves blown up by gentle Winds. -- Do but lay
your hand here, Captain. Durzo touches Arabella 's Breasts.


Durz. O, O, feel here! Durzo pulls Lovell 's hand to his breast.


Lov. Ah! your heart beats high, we shall have boisterous weather anon -- I
perceive it coming.


Jac. How. is it Captain?


Durz. My heart begins to leap and play like a Porpice before a Storm.


Lov. Look you here, Captain -- an Arm and Hand small, white and plump, the
vaulting Blood blushing through the fair skin like a Lawn. Veil* spread o'r a
Bed of Roses. Touch her Captain. Lovell puts Arabella 's Arm into Durzo 's hand.


Durz. Oh, how fine it is to stroke such Limbs.


Hill. Beauty, I see, will soften and polish him.


Arab. Now tell me Captain, what do you think of me?


Durz. As of a Woman.


Lov. Is that all?


Durz. Why, a Woman's the finest thing I ever saw, except a Cannon Mounted, and
a Ship under Sail.


Lov. Now Captain, if you like her, claim her for your Mistress: Love her,
Court her, Gallant her, and do your best. -- Win her and wear her; that is fair
play.


Durz. Will you give her me?


Lov. If you can get her.


Durz. Why, I can take her up in my Arms and run away with her.


Arab. And whither would you carry me?


Durz. Aboard -- and he that dares come to take you from me there, had as good
leap into a Blazing Fireship, or kiss Thundr.


Arab. But I am no Lawful Prize, if you take me by force: By the Laws of Love
you must Court me, and win me fairly.


Lov. You must get her good Will, Captain.


Durz. I thought I had her Will when I had her -- but now I think on it I have
been told, That a Woman's Will shifts more Points than the Wind. But if she Sail
any Point of the Compass, I Will hale her in I warrant you.


Lov. Well said Captain.


Arab. I Will hold you Chase I warrant you --


Jac. Have a care of Storms.


Hill. And look you don't slip your Anchor, Captain.


Enter Justice Greedy. Gree. Come, come, here you stand Chit chat, and forget
the main business of Life; Supper's on the Table and half cold. Walk in and
line your Christmas Coffers, come.


Hill. Well advised, Mr. Justice, they that will not follow set them in the Stocks.
-- This is the Jolliest old Blade for Eating! His Mouth's like a Mill, always
grinding -- Come Servant, Usher me in handsomely.


Carel. I Will Eat and Drink to enable my self in your Service.


Arab. Captain, you shall be my Guest; you are not arrived to that degree yet
to live by Love.


Durz. I Will take in a little Ballast, that I may Sail the Stiffer.


Exeunt. ACT III.
SCENE I.
Scene draws, and discovers Alderman Furr, Sir Barnaby Buffler, Justice Greedy,
Mr. Lovell, Mr. Careless, Captain, Jacinta, Hilaria, Arabella; Dash entering,
should in by Toby -- at a distance Beatrice, Waiting. Fur. GEntlemen, you are
all welcome: Sir Barnaby, my service to you. O, Mr. Dash, where are you? --
Come, take a Chair and sit down.


Dash. O Lord, Sir, I dare not presume -- Retreats.


Fur. Come, come, sit down -- sit down.


Dash. At your Worship's Table! I have more Breeding; an't please you, I Will Sup
with the Gentlewoman, by her leave, when you have done.


Fur. Sir Barnaby, pray speak to him to sit down.


Sir Bar. Sit down -- Better be unmannerly than troublesome.


Dash. No offense, I hope. Dash sitting down speaks to Lovell.


Lov. No, no, sit down. He sits at a distance from the Table.


Fur. Reach him his Hat there.


Dash. Let it lie, Friend.


Fur. Reach it him, I say.


Dash. I beseech your Worship*


Fur. Put it on.


Dash. By no means.


Fur. Put it on his head.


Dash. I beseech your Worship hold me excused: I am a poor Scribe.


Sir. Bar. Be it better, or be it worse, be ruled by him that bears the Purse.


Dash. Your Worships are wiser than I am. Dash puts on his Hat, and sits at a
distance from the Table.


Hill. A pure fellow this, he sits as if he were afraid of the Table.


Arab. Friend, you cannot reach.


Fur. Draw your Chair nearer.


Dash. I thank your Worship.


Fur. Shove it nearer the Table for him. Toby behind shoves the Chair nearer,
and he thrusts it back as often with his foot.


Dash. Very well, I thank you friend.


Fur. Nearer yet.


Dash. So, very well, very well; so, so, very well, very well. And sits with
his Napkin cross his left Arm.


Hill. Friend, My Service to you.


Dash. O Lord -- And please your Ladyship, Drink to me! Dash starts from the
Table, and falls down on his knees, wiping his Mouth with his Sleeve.


Fur. Keep -- keep your Seat friend.


Dash. Madam, your poor Scribe thanks you. --


Arab. Drink to me Mr. Dash, I Will pledge you.


Dash. Your Ladyship must excuse me; I dare not be so bold. Mistress, my
Service to you. Turns round and Drinks to Beatrice behind standing up; she
makes a Curtesy and smiles.


Beatr. Thank you Sir.


Carel. Look you, Madam, he is a very well-bred man.


Greed. Give me a Glass of Wine -- here is ado about nothing -- I am -- almost
choked with all this Ceremony.


Fur. Now fall to, Friend.


Dash. Thank your Worship, I don't spare*


Hill. Unfold your Napkin Mr. Dash.


Dash. It Is very well, I heartily thank your Ladyship.


Arab. Spread it before you, you will grease your Clothes.


Dash. I thank you kindly -- I have a Handkerchief for that. Dash speaks with
his Mouth full, and spreads his Handkerchief on his knee.


Greed. Sir Barnaby, your Ladies health to you.


Sir Barn. I thank you, Sir.


Greed. You don't Eat heartily Sir Barnaby.


Sir Barn. I am no great Supper-man.


Greed. Don't you eat Suppers?


Sir Barn. Seldom: One Meal a day makes a Man healthy and wealthy.


Greed. On one Meal a day we may live, on two we may thrive, but three must
make us fat. And I say, Sir Barnaby -- Eat and be Rich, Fast and dye in a
Ditch. Come, come, Hunger breeds Knaves: A full Belly thinks least harm.


Sir Barn. I am for what is wholesome: Light Suppers make clean Sheets.


Greed. But my Grannam taught me better -- When the Belly's full the Bones are
at rest: Eat nothing and Dream of the Devil.


Sir Barn. Several Men several Minds; I sleep best without. Custom is a second
Nature.


Greed. Sir Barnaby, Ill Customs are better broken than kept: If I went
Supperless to Bed, my Guts would croak all Night like Frogs in a Fishpond.


Sir Barn. Nature is bent to its own Ruin: Gluttony destroys more than the
Sword.


Greed. Monstrum Horrendum; that men can hold Arguments against their Bellies.


Fur. How now Mr. Dash. Dash rises from Table with his Napkin and Plate, and
makes a low Leg.


Dash. I have Supped I thank you -- and now I Will wait upon your Worship.


Fur. No, no -- take his Plate and Napkin there -- Beatrice offers to take it
and he will not let her, but carry it himself to the side board.


Beatr. Let me set it by.


Dash. Excuse me there, forsooth, I understand better.


Enter Toby. Tob. Here are two Women enquire for Mr. Justice Greedy.


Greed. For me? I Will not stir from Table for no body: Cannot a man eat in quiet?
I Will throw up my Commission.


Lov. O Sir, let them come in. Exit Waiter.


Hill. If it be Justice business we may have some sport.


Greed. Call them in -- Come forward, what is your business?


SCENE II.
Enter Mrs. Breeder, and Mrs. Dazie, and Children. Breed. We are come and
please you, to make Oath against a person that is fled to this Town to be
married, and disowns both us and his Children.


Greed. Who is it?


Dazie. One Sir Barnaby Buffler.


Greed. Here he is, speak to his face.


Dazie. O Sir Barnaby, have we found you!


Breed. Were you so cunning, to go so far from home to steal a marriage, that
we might not hear on it? -- But we are here to forbid the Banes.


Sir Barn. What mean you Woman?


Breed. Ah Gentlemen, wonder not at us, for this wicked Sir Barnaby, five years
ago, tempted my honesty, and with solemn promises of marriage prevailed over my
weakness, and got me with Child.


Greed. What! and eat no Suppers.


Fur. How Is this!


Breed. And to increase my sorrow, -- I had two at a birth.


Greed. What, and he Eat no Suppers.


Hill. O rare Sir Barnaby.


Fur. Hold you your Clack Gossip. To Hilaria.


Sir Bar. An impudent Queen -- I never saw her -- I should not know her if I
had met her in my Dish.


Breed. If I had never known you, I had never Breed weeps. known sorrow.


Jac. Alas poor Woman.


Sir Bar. Mind her not, she is a queen; It Is no more pity to see her Weep, than
to see a Goose go barefoot.


Dazie. You Will say you don't know me too, I warrant you.


Greed. What has Sir Barnaby been Tennant to your Copyhold too.


Dazie. Even so to my sorrow.


Fur. What, both!


Sir Bar. A Couple of Carryons -- Never a Barrel better Herring.


Greed. Come, come, here is matter for me, Greed. turns his Chair from the
Table. give me my Chair.


Sir Bar. Ay Mr. Justice, take 'em Coram nobis.


Grerd. I Will examine these matters according to Authority.


Breed. Tho he will not know us, let us see if he don't know these, come here
Children, kneel Johnny, -- kneel down little Sarah, ask Father blessing, and
let us see if he can be so unnatural to disown his own Flesh and Blood.


Dazie. And do thou kneel Tommy, ask blessing -- The Children all kneel down.
it is Nown Daddy.


3 Chil. Pray Father -- pray Daddy -- pray Father, pray Daddy.


Sir Bar. Pray Father, pray Daddy. Sir Bar. sits down on his Hams, and mocks
the Children.
Pray Father, pray Daddy.
You Jackdaw's you, hold your gaping.

Greed. Come before Justice -- here you that han't told your story yet. -- But
first, what is your name.


Breed. Elizabeth Breeder.


Greed. And Yours.


Dazie. Sarah Dazie, and please you --


Greed. And what come you for? what is your complaint?


Dazie. And please your Worship Mr. Justice.


Greed. Speak out --


Dazie. And please you this Sir Barnaby --


Greed. Well, -- but first what are you --


Dazie. I am a very honest Farmer's Daughter --


Greed. I believe it would a been better for you, that you had been a Farmer's
honest Daughter.


Dazie. I had been so and please you, -- had it not been for Sir Barnaby.


Greed. Why, what did he do?


Dazie. He knows well enough, what was done in the great barn.


Greed. What he thrash'd you there did he?


Dazie. Here is the fruit of his labor, hold up thy Head Tommy; look you
Gentlewoman, is he not as like, as if he was spit out of his Mouth?


Hill. He has his very Eyes, and the make of his Face.


Breed. And see here a pair of pretty Twins, so like the Father.


Jac. These have his Nose, his Forehead, and Chin exactly.


Fur. It cannot be denied, but they are pretty Children.


Sir Bar. Ye all Dream, they are neither like, nor pretty -- nor nothing. These
are impudent queans.


Arab. This is an abuse to my Brother, designed to hinder his Marriage.


Lov. It Is combination, Mr. Justice, take care of these baggages: Let 'em kiss
the Whipping-post.


Greed. Let me alone. (Justice goes step by step.) Well, and you Mrs. Breeder,
you say these two Children were begotten on your natural body, by Sir Barnaby,
and born out of lawful Wedlock.


Breed. Yes Sir, but not without a Contract.


Greed. Well, stand you by -- but hold, hold, -- one question or two more. What
were you when this was done.


Breed. A Chambermaid.


Greed. And this was your Chamber practice, what, he did not Ravish you, did he?


Breed. Not against my Will.


Om. Ha, ha, ha.


Sir Bar. They both Lie faster, than a Dog can trot.


Greed. Trouble not your self Sir Barnaby, they have both confessed that these
are bastard Children, consequently themselves to be Whores, I Will send 'em to
the house of Correction.


Breed. No, I lay claim to him for my Husband.


Dazie. And so do I.


Greed. And the Whipping post lays claim to you both. Come, give me Pen, Ink,
and Paper, I Will make their Mittimus.


Dash. Here and please your Worship, I have both. Dash pulls out Pen and Ink.


Carl. Now Baggages, present, present --


Breed. A word and please your Worship -- Carl. speaks to Breed. and Daz.


Greed. Well! --


Breed. Here is a Collar of Brawn, which my Father sends you as a token of his
respect, for your prudent moderation in this affair.


Greed. Humph -- Brawn -- Brawn! -- I say you are a notorious Baggage. Rare
Brawn, rare Brawn! Aloud.


Breed. It Is ready sou^'d for your Worships Eating.


Greed. Speak softly -- abuse so worthy a Person as Sir Barnaby! rare Brawn,
there will be no living without Justice; delicate Brawn. -- I Will make you an
example. -- Set it behind my Chair, rare Brawn, rare Brawn!


Carl. He swallows the bribe.


Lov. The Jades act it well.


Dazie. Mr. Justice.


Greed. What, now you will Sing the second part to the some Tune, will ye.


Dazie. My Mother has sent your Worship, this couple of fat Capons, for a
present.


Greed. Dainty Birds, speak for you! hang you. --


Dazie. She was dairy Maid to your Worship's Mother. --


Greed. No, no, Not I -- you are a most impudent strumpet -- dainty birds,
dainty birds.


Dazie. They are of her own Cramming.


Greed. Softly -- abuse such a Person as Sir Barnaby; dainty birds indeed! I Will
swinge you both, -- dainty birds. I am enraged, I shall never be able to do
Justice with moderation. I Will -- I Will -- I Will -- Ah -- dainty birds.


Carl. Mr. Justice, being these Women are come a great way, and have small
Children to provide for, were it not better to lend 'em home again, than to
keep 'em here, and put the Town to charge.


Hill. Od's life, old Sir, discharge 'em; or let me be their bail.


Greedy. Truly Sir, my Heart is mollified, I think with you 'twere best to send
them back to their own Country, and Sir Barnaby may do well to give 'em a small
Sum to bear their charges back.


Sir Bar. Hang 'em -- Not a Cross to bless themselves with -- even let 'em go
Byard on Ten-toes for me.


Fur. Well, here is Angels a piece upon condition, they trouble us no more with
this clammer.


Breed. Dazie. We thank your Worship.


Greed. Dainty birds -- dainty birds.


Fur. And hereafter, if we find good ground for what you say, I Will prevail with
Sir Barnaby, to allow some thing yearly for maintainnance of your Children.


Greed. Dainty Birds --


Breed. Dazie. Thank you Sir, -- thank you.


Greed. Go, go, get you gone -- you are beholden to these Friends.


Breed. Go Johnny -- go Sarah, you may never see your Father more, therefore
ask him blessing.


Dazie. Ay, do Tommy, ask Father blessing too.


3 Chil. Pray Father -- pray Father.


Sir Bar. Bastards, Whores-birds! the Devil take ye all.


3 Chil. Pray Father -- pray Daddy, etc. Sir Barnaby runs off.


Breed. Dazie. Follow him Children, follow him.


3 Child. Pray Father, -- pray Daddy, -- The three Children run after him. pray
Father, -- pray Daddy, -- pray Father.


Hill. Ha, ha, ha, -- Sir Barnaby and Children. Exeunt.


Arab. Poor Infants.


Carl. Hark you, hark you, Frailties; the boul of Punch is ready, the Captain
and I will come and be merry with you for an hour --


Dazie. We'll expect you.


Breed. Your Servant Sir. Carless whispers Breed. and Dazie, Hilaria, hearkens
behind his back.


Hill. Madam, my Spark and your Captain, I suspect by that whisper are wickedly
bent -- I over heard a paw word.


Greed. Come Gentlemen, let us deliver Sir Barnaby from the Philistines, and
bring him back.


Carl. Ay, we'll all help, we'll drive away the Whores, I warra^^ you.


Hill. Will you so, we'll watch your motions -- come Madam.


Arab. It Is even as you say -- Carl. Durzo. Greed. Lovel. Dash. Arabel beat
Toby -- Exeunt.


Greed. Rare Brawn -- delicate Brawn -- dainty Birds -- dainty Birds --


Hill. Mr. Justice -- rare Brawn, delicate Brawn -- rare Birds, dainty Birds --


Greed. You are a wag, you are a wag, Mr. Dash, bring the Collar after me.


SCENE III.
Alderman Furr, and Jacinta. Jac. You see Sir, what a Person you are going to
Marry me to.


Fur This is nothing, at best, but a trick of Youth, many a Woman would be glad
to see so good proofs of a Man, that is to be her Husband, mind you his Estate.


Jac. What is a Wife better for an Estate, when he is so Covetous.


Fur. Thrift will increase it -- 'twill be all your Children's.


Jac. He Is Jealous too.


Fur. You call that Jealousy which is prudence.


Jac. And obstinate.


Fur. Humor him --


Jac. And Conceited.


Fur. Say as he says.


Jac. And slovenly.


Fur. Great Wits are generally so. Do you not observe, that every word he
speaks is a sentence.


Jac. His is old fashioned -- Grandmother Wit -- he is a mere bundle of
Proverbs, -- I shall have him -- nick name'd -- and called my Solomon.


Fur. You are a Fool to argue so against your own good*


Jac. Besides, Sir, he is Old.


Fur. He Will Die the sooner, go -- there is a salve for that sore* Here he comes,
compose your self. --


SCENE IV.
Enter Sir Barnaby, Justice Greedy, and Dash to them. Bar. These Carrions have
put me Quite out of my Bias, I can Get into my right geers again, on the
sudden.


Greed. Hang 'em -- think no more on 'em.


Sir Bar. Now Father-in-law, to draw to a conclusion in our affair.


Fur. The sooner the better.


Sir Bar. And to end all in a word, for A word to the Wise is sufficient.


Fur. Very good.


Sir Bar. The Marriage writings being signed and sealed betwixt us --


Fur. They are so --


Sir Bar. And I being to Marry your Daughter to Morrow, For delay are
dangerous.


Fur. True.


Sir Bar. Than I may now account her as my Wife.


Fur. You may so --


Sir Bar. Than there is but one thing more remains necessary to be done to
night.


Fur. What Is that?


Sir Bar. Considering that she is as my Wife, -- and that we are lodged here in
a public Inn -- where there are some passengers already, and may yet be many
more -- and that Inns are subject to disturbances at any hour, it will be more
for her safety and my honor, that she be this night put under my guard and
protection. She shall be lodged in the Chamber, betwixt mine and my Brothers,
where we can both of us, hear and be ready if occasion should require. For many
things fall out, betwixt the Cup and the Lip, and That may happen in a Minute,
that does not otherwise fall out in an Age, and It is better to prevent a
mischief, than to remedy it.


Fur. It is so. Be it as you please Sir Barnaby.


Sir Bar. I do than require, that you now deliver your Daughter to me, with
your own proper hand -- with all your right, title, claim, and interest that
you have in Fur gives his Daughters hand to Sir Barnaby. and to her.


Fur. Here Sir --


Sir Bar. Observe Gentlemen -- say after me, -- I deliver to you, my Daughter
-- etc.


Fur. I deliver to you my Daughter, Fur. gives his Daugters hand to Sir Bar.
with all my right, title, claim and interest, that I have in and to her, to be
made your lawful wedded Wife.


Sir Bar. So, I love to do all things with discretion, and to make all things
sure, Fast bind, fast find.


Jacin. A fine Bargain indeed.


Greed. You act very prudently, Sir.


Sir Bar. A thing -- once well done, is twice done. And now Sir, you shall see
how punctual I will be to you* Dash give me the little Paper I gave you.


Dash. Here and please you.


Sir Bar. Reach me the Pen and Ink -- Sir Barnaby writes his name, and Greed,
and Dash, do the same. He gives it taking of the Seal. So Mr Justice, pray
observe; here I subscribe my name.


Greed. Hum -- m -- m -- hum -- m -- m -- ah --


Sir Bar. See Gentlemen, I take off the Seal; here Sir, I deliver you this --
before Witness.


Fur. What is it? --


Sir Bar. Read it I pray, I think it is right.


Fur. Reads. I Do acknowledge to have had and received of and from Mr. Benjamin
Furr, Alderman and Citizen of London, his sole and only Daughter, called and
known by the Christian name of Jacinta, with all her Conditions and Qualities,
be they good or bad, with all absolute promise, full intent and purpose, on my
part, to make her my true and lawful Wedded Wife, by Ten of the Clock to
Morrow-morning, being the third of May, and the Day following the Date of this
present writing -- In Testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal.

Barnaby Buffler.



Sir Bar. So, now do you two Witness it.


Fur. Reads. Witness. Cormorant Greedy. Zachariah Dash.



Jac. Was ever the like extravagance.


Fur. What can be the meaning of this Receipt, does he think I lend or sell him
my Daughter?


Greed. No matter -- it is his fancy, -- it does you no hurt.


Sir Bar. Now Sir, I Will see my Wife safe up to her Chamber, and bid you all
good Night.


Greed. For Bed already Sir Barnaby?


Sir Bar. Ay, Early to Bed, and early to Rise,
Will make a Man Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise.

Fur. Heaven send my Daughter to do well, -- this Receipt will not out of my mind.
But come, she is Married to a good Estate, and that covers a multitude of faults.


Greed. Ay, ay, well enough -- dainty Birds -- dainty Birds. --


Exeunt. SCENE V.
Enter Mrs. Breeder, Dazie, and Boy. Breed. Come, where is this bowl of Punch?


Boy. There Madam -- Boy Exit.


Breed. Sings. Tell me Mother, pray now do, etc.


Dazie. Sings. She got Money by it, she got Money by it, etc.


Enter Careless, and Captain. Carl. Merry Girls Captain.


Capt. Cheary my Mates, cheary.


Breed. Courage Captain -- give me your hand, I love a Tarpaling at my heart.


Capt. Come, let us drink about, my service to you.


Breed, My service to you! there is a sneaking compliment, you would have said as
much to an honest Woman.


Capt. I cannot talk at your rate, but if you are for Ship shape language,
downright drinking, or will come to grapling, I am for you.


Carl. Bid the Music come in Ladies, the Captain has brought his Boats crew to
entertain you with a Song and a Dance.


After the Song and Dance, Enter Greedy; Hillaria, Arabella, in Men's Habits.
Greed. By your leave Gallants, I am come to be merry with you, and have brought
a couple of young Friends with me, they are going to Travel, to Morrow they are
for Dover.


Dazie. They are welcome into our Cabin, I wish we had better entertainment.


Greed. What, are not honest Gentlemen, handsome Girls, a bowl of Punch, and
good Music entertainment!


Arab. I fear we shall be uncivil --!


Carl; That you can hardly be in our Company.


Breed. Lord, these are the two prettiest Youths!


Dazie. I long for a kiss of 'em.


Carl. You may Sing, Drink, Swear, Roar, and Ruffle, and do as you please.


Greed. They came of a good kind, Greed* shoves 'em to the Women, they salute.
they only want entering. To them Boys, to 'em -- Hollow.


Hill. By your leave Ladies.


Capt. Come, now ^owze it away.


Carl. Every one his Dish. Ladies your Healths.


Hill. Your Healths Ladies.


Arab. Your Healths Ladies.


Greed. Ay, ay, about with it.

Sings. I have a thirsty Soul,
Than give me a full Boul,
And let me drink, without Control.
In spite of the Vicar, and his dull teaching.
We'll take of our Liquor, and never mind his preaching;
Let him Damn us to the Pit hole.

Capt. There Is something in that.


Hill. Come, let us have the other dish, Sir, to you.


Arab. And to you Captain.


Capt. Come, about Ship, all hands aloft.


Hill. Now, Sir, pledge me on this Ladies Lips, three go downs upon reputation.


Arab. And Captain, pledge me the like here.


Carl. Two brisk little Devils. They kiss and ruffle the Women, and whisper to
'em.


Greed- I told you they were no Mongrels.


Breed- Where will you meet us. Whilst the Dance continues, Greedy nods his
Head to the Tune, Drinks, and now and then Sings, I have a thirsty Soul.


Hill. Steal to the Inn over the way.


Arab. Bid the Chamberlain show you into Justices Chamber.


Dazie. You Will not fail to follow. Hill. Arab. Breed. and Dazie. whisper all the
while.


Carl. What, whispering! It spoils company.


Breed. Mum.


Dazie. Enough.


Hill. I beg your pardon.


Enter Boy with a Letter. Boy. Sir, a Messenger has brought you this Letter,
and stays for an Answer.


Breed. We'll take this opportunity. Ex. Breed. and Dazie


Greed. Away, away, you luscious Jades to my Chamber, mind your Q. hum --
Captain, my service to you -- I have a thirsty Soul, etc.

Breed. Clop. Exeunt.
Carl. What Is here, a Billet doux. Reads. GAllant, I know not what is the cause,
but I am very Melancholy, pray come and spend an hour or two with me, ever I go
to Bed, for I find I have an inclination to your company, perhaps the sight of
you may cure me. Bring the Captain along with you, to divert his Lady, for she
is in the dumps too.

Hillaria.


This it is to have the company of honest Women, they presently grow troublesome.


Hill. Why Sir?


Carl. If they be of the dull sober sort, a Man can hardly get acquaintance
with them, but they fall flat in love; if of a spritely gay humor, they
presently grow impertinent, and will ever be sending such notes as these to a
Man, or running after him.


Hill. But is she handsome, that gives you this invitation?


Carl. Yes, hang her, she is well enough.


Hill. Than you should take it for a kindness.


Carl. But I wonder Women han't the Wit to know when a Man cares for their
Love, or their company; for to be sure, when he has a mind to either, he will be
coming or sending to them.


Durz. Will Not you make sail toward them?


Carl. Do you think I Will leave good sociable company, for a dull honest Wench.


Arab. She Will take it ill.


Carl. I have a better Opinion of her Wit, than to think she would desir't, if she
knew how the case stands -- boy bid the Messenger tell her he cannot find me;
I Will make such visits, when I have no better company -- but where are our Women.


Boy. They went out just as you began to read the Letter.


Greed. Hum -- come let us mind our Punch. -- I have a thirsty Soul --


Carl. Was this your whispering; young Squire, you don't play me fair play, you
ought not to take up another Man's Dice. -- And Captain, where is your Lady.


Capt. What has she set her sails too, and stole away like a Cowardly Enemy in
a dark night.


Carl. Go down Boy, we'll pay below. Boy exit. Gentlemen you make too bold with
us; To take one Woman from us, 'twas ill manners, to rob us of both, Malice
and ill nature.


Hill. I do it by way of reprisal, you took one from me, and we have got two
from you.


Carl. I take one from you.


Hill. Yes, I have had a long Intreague with a Lady named Hillaria, I have
followed her from London, and here I find you are become her Servant.


Carl. I was ignorant of any such pretensions.


Hill. I shall spoil your Markets theretoo; and tell her that she is impertinent
to send after you -- and all that -- and when you can find no better company,
you will come to her -- and all that.


Carl. Nay, than I Will take another course with you. Come Sir. Draws.


Capt. Ay, now there is some work toward, I have lost my Pinace too, which is
he that I am to give a broad side to?


Arab. I have a Sword to entertain you, as fierce as you look.


Capt. God -- a mercy little Piccaroon, huzza -- away with it.


Greed. Keep the peace in the King's name. -- I Will steal after the Women, I am
enflamed with Punch, and they shall lay the fumes. Greed. Ex.


Hill. Surely Sir, you will not be so Mad to fight for one you don't Love.


Carl. Look you Sir, tho I scorn to tell her so, or any of her Sex, yet I do
Love her, will Love her, must Love her, and no body else shall Love her.


Hill. But I do, will, and shall Love her better than you.


Carl. Come, give me a proof on it then.


Hill. Yes, Sir, I will give you a proof on it -- Hill. Arab. throw of their
Periwig. lie there Periwig.


Arab. And mine there.


Hill. What do you think of me, now my Manhood's off.


Arab. And Captain, how do you like a Woman in Breeches?


Capt. Hey, how wind you now!


Hill. Alas poor Gallant! observe how you are cheated of your Mistresses, -- ha,
ha, -- farewell Gallant.


Arab. And Captain stick to your bowl of Punch.


Carl. Hark you, stay --


Hill. No, Women are so impertinent, Men will come after them, when they Love
'em; Adieu. Hill. Arab. Exeunt.


Carl. Gad, they are too unconsciable to deprive us of our Women, and than to
run away themselves. And now she knows I love her, she will insult over me, what
shall's do Captain?


Capt. I Will observe what course you steer, I Will sail in your Wake.


Carl. And those two Jades, to serve us such a trick! I thought they had some
honor in 'em, but --

I find that Women are by Nature guilty,
For be they Whores, or not Whores, they will gilt ye.

ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Lovel, and Careless. Lov. THE truth is, she played the Tyrant with you,
but you deserved that, and more.


Carl. Were not the use and conversation of Women absolutely necessary for
Mankind, I would forswear the whole Sex.


Lov. I know by the Constitution of your body, you would not be able to keep that
Oath long. Yet I advise you to forswear all but one.


Carl. That is, you would have me Marry.


Lov. Yes, you would find more comfort in a Wife, than in ten Mistresses.


Carl. If what you say be true; why do most Husbands in this Age, (which I take
to be wiser than any that is past,) turn away their Wives, and keep Wenches? at
least, those that are so civil to live with a Wise, maintain a Mistress beside.


Lov. And if it be not true, why do the great Debauchees at last, forsake all
their Mistresses for a Wife? we find most of 'em Marry at the long run; nay
generally they prove the best Husbands. The Reason is, they have experimented
the folly of that lewd course of Life.


Carl. I had never so good an Opinion of Marriage as now, for this Dog trick;
these two jilting Jades showed me, in leaving us so in the lurch, has lessened
'em in my esteem, to the degree of honest Women, and now the scales are even,
the first of either party that obliges me, draws it down on that side.


Lov. Than Hillaria I hope, will turn the balance.


Carel. If the Devil is minded to loose a Gamster, let him venture to make her
and me Friends.


Lov. And he will, for here she comes to work your Conversion for which end,
i will leave you together. Ex. Lovel


SCENE II.
Enter Hillaria to Careless. Hill. How now Gallant? Careless Sings and walks
about, as not much minding her.


Carel O Madam! --


Hill. You are very merry Gallant.


Carel. I have no Reason to be otherwise. Sings and walks about 2 or three
times, and jostle one another. Why do you jostle me? --


Hill. And why do you jostle me?


Carel. You walk in my way.


Hill. It Is you walk in mine.


Carel. Get farther off.


Hill. Go you farther off.


Carel. I was here first.


Hill. Than you may begone first.


Carel. I have business here.


Hill. What, to see me?


Carel. No, with Mr. Lovell.


Hill. Yes in my Conscience, you was coming to see me.


Sings and walks about Carelessly. Carel. Now I think on it, so I was on
purpose, to let you know that I am alive; for I believe you thought, I had
either Hanged my self for the trick you put on me, or had broke my Heart, with
sighing for your absence, with whom I am so desperate in Love* but believe me,
I have not yet broke so much as a button, and may I break my Neck when I do,
either for Love of you, or any Woman living.


Hill. Yet Spark you love me.


Carel. It Is true, I love you well enough; because you are unlucky; and was not
honesty in the case, I should love you better, but as it is, you are in a
desperate condition.


Hill. Must I than despair?


Carel. You are for Matrimony, and that I hate, I can no more endure a Wife,
than a standing Dish of Meat.


Hill. You think than I am in Love with you.


Carel. Think it! ha, ha, -- as tho I did not know that, by your following me,
up and down, what came you for after me? and for what come you to talk with me
now, if you an't in Love with me? and what made you seduce the Woman from me,
but that you might have me all to your self.


Hill. I vow now you put me in mind on it, I may be in Love with you; but you say
my case is desperate, then desperate must be the Cure, and I must even resolve
to be your Mistress, Wench, or what you will called.


Carel. That Is your only Remedy -- I am a Bird of Prey, and fly at all.


Hill. Nay than I am a Dead Woman still, for you will soon take a flight from me
to another.


Carel. But when I have caught my prey, I take my Belly full of it; I never
leave it till I am gorged.


Hill. And will your Stomach come again.


Carel. Yes, sometimes, but generally some ravenous Fowl or another, picks up
my leavings, and flies away with it.


Hill. But would you have no more care of me.


Carel. My care would signify but little; for a Man seldom finds either Money
or a Woman, in the same place he left 'em


Hill. But is it not a point of Honor amongst you Men, not to leave the Women
you debauch, but if they prove Constant, to provide for 'em.


Carel. Provide for 'em! is it not enough we teach 'em a Trade, by which they
may get their livings. But you will not want providing for, you have a good
Portion, but if I would, you your self in a short time would be for change.


Hill. Well Careless, we'll do nothing rashly, I Will to Bed and consult with my
Pillow, and to morrow tell you more of my mind.


Carel. But let me give you this caution, be not deceived with the vain
considerations of Virtue, Modesty, Chastity, Honor, Reputaion, and the like,
these are Bugg-words, that awed Women in former Ages, and still fool a great
many in this. And if once these idle notions get into your thoughts, I shall
give you over for a lost Woman.


Hill. The common practice of my Sex, may prevail much; evil example makes
twenty Sinners to the black Gentleman's one. Adieu.


Exit Hillaria SCENE III.
Enter Captain. Carel. So much for her, Captain, how is it with you, you look as
if you were not well.


Capt. I am not, I have a wild Fire in my Veins, my blood is a circulating
flame, it spouts against the upper Region of my brain, like a tempestuous
Hurricane.


Carel. By your description this should be Love; that is the disease torments
you; Love plays mad wreaks, when first it enters a breast and finds resistance.


Capt. Love!


Carel. Yes, Love like the small Pox, as any seldom escape it, so the more
dangerous it is, when it comes late.


Capt. I don't know, but I have had strange turmoyls and combustions in my
fancy ever since your friend gave me that description, and showed me the Lady;
I have been looking for her.


Carel. See she is under sail, she will be up with you presently.


SCENE IV.
Enter Arabella. Arab. Captain, -- what execution have my Eyes done -- are you
in Love yet?


Capt. You have fired your upper Teer, you have peppered me with small shot.


Carl. Yes, Madam, he is furiously infected with Love, but can you tell him how
to cure his Disease.


Arab. To cure Love, he must look for Love again.


Carel. There Is encouragement for you -- bear up close, speak to her Captain.


Capt. I could speak better to the great Guns of an Armada, whose Oratory is
nothing but Fire and noise.


Carel. Board her to rights, briskly.


Capt. If I was but once master of her Forecastle.


Carel. That Is easy, she is leaky Captain, -- she is leaky.


Capt. Than she will founder anon.


Carel. Madam, afford him your hand; so now I have brought you to grapling,
I Will vere off, and give you Sea room, get clear of one another as you can. Ex.
Carel.


SCENE V.
Enter Captain and Arabella. Capt. Can you Love?


Arab. Yes Captain.


Capt. Me; by the North Star, say but that word, and this Sword, if you
command, shall Unpeole half the World, Draws his Sword. to give us and our
Progeny Elbow-room. Discharge but that word from your Mouth, and Command me to
still Tempests, to split Rocks in a sunder. Lady, do but feel the weight on it;
see is it not an excellent blade?


Arab. I have no great skill.


Capt. Feel, has it not a brave edge, and what a point is here!


Arab. It Is dangerous meddling with edge Tools, pray put it up.


Capt. Have you any Enemies? if you have --


Arab. No Captain, put it up.


Capt. Will you Love me then?


Arab. I Love not danger; any thing but killing.


Capt. Did you never see one killed?


Arab. No.


Capt. No! had you but been with me in our last Engagement, you might have seen
a sight, that would have made a Coward in love with Death. There you would have
seen our Enemies bear up in a half Moon, exposing to our view, the terror of
their wooden Castles, the Mouths of their great Guns, which were made to
swallow Iron Morsels, that might lie heavy upon their Stomachs, till they were
disgorg'd in our Faces.


Arab. Fau -- fau --


Capt. We, with Topsails out, Flags and Streamers flourishing in the Wind, and
Trumpets sounding, unite our force; than like Thunder fall in amongst them;
there like the Sons of Terror, we are seen in Clouds of Fire and Smoke, The
Slaughter now begins --


Arab. Hold good Captain.


Capt. We play at Tennis with Iron balls, and Death comes whisting by our Ears,
Heads take Fire in their Brain pans, and burst in sunder like Grenades,
scattering the wild Fire of their Brains in their fellow Soldiers Faces.


Arab. You fright me horribly.


Capt. Other Heads, fly from one Ship with the Bullets that saluted them, to
visit their friends in another. Limbs like Langrel-Shot, mount, scattering in
the Air, and hands that could not reach their Enemies before, now fly into
distant Vessels, to give their Foes a box of the Ear; other hands grasping their
Swords, clear a whole Deck in their flight.


Arab. What shall I do!


Capt. We are now in a confusion, the Fireships flame, and their half Moon is
divided -- into blazing Stars.


Arab. O quarter, Captain, quarter!


Arab. Some burn, the Men leap over board, and drown themselves to save their
lives; other Ships real drunk, with the Sea brine, and at last sink to the
bottom, to follow these brave Men, who fought in 'em, with as much Courage, as
they drank.


Arab. Have you yet done?


Capt. The Flags and Pendants.


Arab. Yet more --


Capt. That hung wantonly playing in the Air, now on the Decks lie stian'd in
blood, and their tant Masts are brought by the Board, and lie on their Hull 's
as in Coffins. -- how like you it, is it not brave?


Arab. I am almost Dead with fear.


Capt. I thought you valiant; did not I see you draw your Sword.


Arab. In Land matters I am Courageous, but in Sea affairs a mere Coward; their
very terms are Bullets to me, I would not hear such another relation --


Capt. Not hear! can you fear when I stand by? my voice is gentle, but I have
something that can speak louder to your Enemies, see --


Arab. What Is that, a Pistol? Captain shows a Pistol.


Capt. It Is the spawn of a Cannon, a little spit-Fire Devil.


Arab. Pray Conjure him down again.


Capt. Frighted at my voice! you shall hear what a brave Language this speaks.
Captain cocks it, and shiots it off as he goes out, and just as Sir Bar. enters.


SCENE VI.
Enter Sir Barnaby, in an extravagant Night dress. Sir Barnaby looking in,
Arab. runs off squeaking. Captain shoots off the Pistol just by Sir Barnaby,
who falls down. Sir Bar. What noise is this?


Arab. Ah!


Capt. Gone -- I Will after her, and give her the other salute.


Sir Bar. Murder -- murder, help.


Enter Dash. Dash. Oh! Sir, what is the matter?


Sir Bar. I am shot, I am shot.


Dash. Shot Sir!


Sir Bar. I am shot, as sure as a Gun, I am shot.


Dash. I don't see you bleed.


Sir Bar. It may be the Bullet stops the hole, and will not let the blood come out.


Dash. Shall I run for a Surgeon --


Sir Bar. But where, All is not in hand, that helps. Look honest Dash, and see
what I ail.


Dash. Please your Worship to stand up --


Sir Bar. What! before I know whether I am killed or not.


Dash. I see no signs on it -- do you feel any hurt, do you think you are killed?


Sir Bar. Dash. I think I don't feel any, but Thoughts are deceitful; look,
look, The Stander by sees more than a Gamester.


Dash. It has missed you, Sir.


Sir Bar. Then a Blot's no Blot till it he hit. I durst have sworn I had been
killed, for he shot me down as flat as a Flounder: But all is not lost that is
in Danger. And give a Man Luck and throw him into the Sea.


Dash. Did your Worship see no Body?


Sir Bar. Who ever it was, they thought One pair of heel's worth two pair of
Hands; they ran for it, As if the Devil drove 'em.


Dash. Will not your Worship follow 'em.


Sir Bar. Let 'em go, Make a golden Bridge for a flying Enemy. It Is Wisdom to
keep out of harms way. Take the Candle, let us see if all be safe here, and that
the noise has not wakened Jacinta, then we'll to Bed again. -- Ha -- her Door
is open -- what can the meaning be at this time of Night -- Dash, look in and
see, if any body be there, whilst I compose my self -- hum -- hum -- I had like
to have Paid for my peeping.


Dash. No Sir -- there is no body. Dash. with the Candle goes in


Sir Bar. It Is good to be sure, let us us go in then, Seeing is believing.


Sir Barnaby, Dash, go in. SCENE VII.
Enter Justice Greedy, in Night-geer, Mrs. Breeder, Mrs. Dazie, half undrest,
he peeping in first, as from his Chamber Greed. Surely I heard talking -- but
all is whist -- Here, here, you may venture out.


Breed. Is any body stirring.


Greed. Not a Mouse --


Dazie. I heard a noise ever since we went to Bed.


Breed. So did I.


Greed. It may be the Cook is stirring -- I charged him to call me before day,
for I am Overseer general of the Kitchen, besides my Stomachs up, and I can lie
a Bed no longer.


Breed. I swear, Mr. Justice, I shall have a better Opinion of a Man that has a
good Stomach, as long as I live, for your sake.


Greed. Ay, ay, Good at Meat, good at Work.


Dazie. You are a brisk old blade, to venture on two at once.


Greed. I begin to grow Old, but the time was, when I could have been
froliksome with two and two, my Girls -- but hark, the House is up -- I hear
the chopping Knives at work upon the Dressers -- they will be coming to call me
-- slip down stairs and get into some by Room, and make your selves ready there.


Dazie. I see light at the bottom of the stairs, we cannot go down yet without
being seen.


Breed. Than we'll in here again.


Greed. No, no, here, I feel a door open -- this is some room that no body lies
in.


Dazie. Where --


Greed. Here -- here -- In -- in -- so -- now I Will into my Chamber, make my
self ready, Greedy put them two into Sir Barnaby's room, in the dark. and Eat a
good Breakfast, a quart or two of good Egg Caudle, will be a necessary recruit
after this nights undertaking -- Ah Whores, brisk dainty Whores. Greed. Exit.


SCENE VIII.
Reoenter Sir Barnaby and Dash. Sir Bar. Ah Madam Jacinta! is it so, out of
your Bed at this time of Night.


Dash. O Lord, Sir, there is another random shot. A Gun goes off without, and a
loud squeak.


Sir Bar. We'll retire into our Castle then -- They both retire into Jacint.
Chamber. and keep out of harms way. Forewarned, Fore-arm'd.


SCENE IX.
Enter Arabella running, followed by the Captain, holding a Pistol in his Hand,
which he puts in his Coat-pocket. Careless, Lovell, Hilaria, Jacinta. Arab. Ah
--


Capt. Sure she will love me anon.


Carel. I told you Madam, you should see sport.


Jac. How you tremble Madam!


Arab. O the Captain's in his hot* fit, and I am in my cold?


Hill. What has he done to you?


Arab. Frighted me horribly; he has not spoke a word, but was as terrible, as
the roaring of Cannon.


Jac. The Captain would be a rare Physician to cure Ladies of the Ague -- if
fighting 'em can do it.


Lov. What was you doing Captain.


Carel. Only saluting his Mistress.


Capt. Right, I gave her a Gun, that is Sea Courtship.


Lov. Your complement was very loud -- you should first have given her a fair
summons to surrender, and seen if she would have yielded upon Parley. Did you think
to take her Heart by storm, as Man do Towns?


Capt. It was more like a Soldier.


Carel. But not like a Lover, Love is a gentle passion -- but Madam, admit him
again into your service -- he will forget he is a Soldier, and turn Courtier
for your sake.


Arab. No, let him still retain his valor, but not express his Love, in such
terrible Rhetoric.


Capt. I know not how to Court you in a Silken phrase, but if down right
reallity will do it, I Will be your friend both board and larboard.


Arab. Than Captain, out with all your Sails, top and top-gallant, you shall be
my Lover.


Hill. Well performed, Madam.


Arab. Whilst I my Heart under your conduct steer,
No Coasting Pyrate, Lovers I, nor Rovers fear.

Hill. Well, now Lovers I think it is time for you all to be at rest, but my
Cousen here, I pity at my Heart, to morrow is her execution day, and I dare
swear, she had rather 'twere for Hanging, than Marrying.


Jac. O Hillaria! that word has damped all my mirth, I had else gone to Bed
again, with some pleasure, for the Captains courtship had quite put to morrow
out of my thoughts. But it is late -- I Will bury my cares in my Pillow -- and
trust all to providence.


Hill. I Will bear you company this Night as a friend does an acquaintance, that is
to be trust up the next morning; and all the time we cannot sleep, we'll Sing no
other Letany, than -- From an old overgrown Looby, and from Sir Barnaby Booby
-- goodness deliver thee. Good night Servant --


Carel. Good night, unluckiness. Exeunt Jacinta, and Hilaria, into their
Chambers. Exeunt Lovell, Arabella, at another Door.


Lov. Arabella, I Will see you to your Chamher.


Arab. Good night Gentlemen.


Capt. Bonos noches, bonos noches. I think it is now time for us to turn in too.
As soon as Jacinta and Hilaria went off, they return back squeaking, as
frighted.


Carel. But now I think on it, what is become of our two Whores, must we give 'em
over so.


SCENE X.
Enter Sir Barnaby, with a Man's Suit of Clothes in his Hand, and Dash. Jac.
Hill. Ah -- ah --


Sir Bar. Your Whores Gentlemen! here are your Whores.


Jac. How Sir Barnaby!


Sir Bar. Ha, Madam Jacinta -- I find you are a Canarybird -- out of your Nest,
at this time of Night.


Hill. Whores, said the Beast.


Sir Bar. No better nor no worse, are these trappings fit for a Ladies Chamber?
there has bren Rantum scantum doings within, the Bed's turned Topsy Turvy,
Men's Clothes and Women's, thrown Higeldy Pigeldy; whilst some are at it,
Helter skelter, arsy versy, hand over head, and the Devil and all.


Capt. What a Pox is all this -- I am a shark, if I understand one syllable of
what he says.


Carel. Sir Barnaby, is this fit language for you to give Ladies, in Gentlemen's
Company?


Capt. What does he affront the Ladies -- have at his main-top -- I Will shatter
his Tackling. Captain draws.


SCENE XI.
Enter Justice Greedy. Carel. Hold Captain --


Greed. What Is here? Civil Wars, and homebred Combustions -- keep the Peace.


Carel. Put up Captain.


Duz. Affront the Ladies -- I Will rake him from stem to stern.


Greed. Keep the Peace in the King's name.


Carel. Forbear --


Greed. Sir Barnaby, what is the matter?


Sir Bar. The matter is, that Old Birds will not be caught with Chaff. Mr.
Alderman, I thank you for your fine Daughter; but you shall not find, Sir Barnaby,
the Man you take him for, Some wiser than some. Yet: And you Mrs. Jacinta, that
looked As harmless as a Devil of two Years old; and As demure, as if Butter
would not melt in your Mouth, were you to be Married in the Morning, and could
not forbear playing at leap frog over Night. Your servant, your servant --


Greed. Hold, Sir Barnaby, a word with you, Sir Barnaby. Dash. Ex.


Carel. If this should fall out so luckily now to Greed. runs after Sir
Barnaby. break of the match.


Hill. With a little good management it may.


Carel. We'll all help it forward.


Greed. O -- O --


SCENE XII.
Enter Sir Barnaby, Mrs. Breeder, and Dazie. Sir Barnaby goes off as to his
Chamber, and turns back hastily, and o'erthrows the Justice that was running in
after him. Sir Bar. Whose there -- whose there --


Breed. Sir Barnaby, Sir Barnaby.


Dazie. Sir Barnaby, Sir Barnaby.


Carel. What Is here, new discoveries.


Dazie. Sir Barnaby, what makes you fly from us.


Breed. What made you Sir Barnaby rise so early, and leave us in Bed by our
selves?


Greed. Rare Whores -- strike that nail home. Greed. aside to the Whores.


Sir Bar. Whores -- Jades -- Carrions --


Hill. In my Conscience, Sir Barnaby has picked up your two Mistresses.


Dazie. Gentlemen, You beat the bush, and he caught the birds.


Breed. Ladies, you see old Love cannot be soon forgot.


Sir Bar. Queans -- Gypses -- Baggages --


Dazie. Sir Barnaby, Madam, -- had not disowned us last night, but that it was
upon his Marriage, and before you.


Sir Bar. Ye Harlots -- ye -- Strumpets -- I Will have you whipped and flead.


Greed. O that is too much Sir Barnaby, -- you have given 'em Correction already.


Carel. What, Sir Barnaby, in Bed with two at once -- Higledy Pigledy.


Jac. No better, -- nor no worse --


Capt. Was this his rantum scantum.


Hill. To be Married in the Morning -- Sir Barnaby and play at leap frog over
night.


Omn. Ha, ha, ha.


Sir Bar. Rest you merry, Let them laugh that win. Hey Chamberlain, Chamberlain
-- Dash, call to the Hostler, bid him saddle my Horse, and let the Boot-catcher
bring up my Boots, I Will begone at peep of Day.


Dash. Yes, and please your Worship. Sir Barnaby Exit.


Greed. Hold Sir Barnaby, be not in such have.


Carel. Let him go -- let him go.


Greed. No, that must not be -- his going may spoil a good Dinner, at least,
I Will persuade him not to go till he has Dined.

Well, you luscious Jades you -- I Will remember your Christmas boxes for saving
my credit so handsomely -- get you down into the Larder, I Will give you a rare
Breakfast. Ex. Greed.


Breed. We'll meet you there -- your Servant Ladies.


Dazie. Your Servant Gentlemen Breed. and Dazie. Exeunt.


Carel. Look you Madam -- who would not Love such honest wenches -- how ready
they were to do a Man a good turn.


Hill. Servant! I Will allow they have a great deal of good nature -- for they are
for doing every Man's turn as well as yours.


Carel. That Is Malice, and ill nature in you --


Hill. I Will grant you any thing at this time, because we'll not loose the
opportunity of doing my Cousen a piece of service.


Carel. We'll find out Lovell -- tell him the whole business, and concert with
him, how matters shall be managed.


Jac. In the mean time, we'll retire into our Chamber.


Hill. Let that be the place of Rendezvouse.


Carel. Come Captain. Careless, Captain, Exeunt together. Jacinta, Hilaria,
another way Exeunt


ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Sir Barnaby, Mr. Alderman Furr. Sir Bar. THen you heard nothing of all
these fine doings last Night*


Fur. No, Sir.


Sir Bar. Nor you did not hear the Pistol go off?


Ald. No.


Sir Bar. Lady, you slept like a Dormouse, and I wonder that you being so sound
a sleeper -- your Daughter should be so wakeful to leave her Bed at midnight.


Fur. But Sir Barnaby, are you not mistaken in what you told me.


Sir Bar. Look you Sir, Truth may be blamed, but never shamed. I could give you
farther proof if occasion served. But Truth is not to spoken at all times.


Ald. Yet it concerns you to speak, and to prove what you speak, this is no
jesting matter.


Sir Bar. Well than, Over shoes, over boots. And In for a Penny, in for a
Pound. Whee -- ho -- Toby. Sir Bar. whistles for Toby.


Enter Toby, and Greedy after. Toby. Here, Sir.


Greed. I Will resign my Office, I Will resign my Office.


Fur. What now!


Greed. I Will resign my Office, if I been't better obeyed.


Fur. What, are you frantic?


Greed. 'Twould make me frantic, and stark mad, were not I a Justice of Peace,
and Coram too, which this rebellious Cook cares not a straw for; there are a
dozen of Woodcocks.


Fur. Pray put your self into the number, and make 'em a Baker's dozen.


Greed. I am contented, so they may be dressed to my mind; he has found out a new
device for sauce, and will not dress them with Toasts and Butter. I had rather
loose my Commission, than suffer't.


Fur. Let 'em be dressed as you will, go in and trouble us no farther.


Greed. Well, I Will go, Woodcocks without Toasts and Butter, by the Lord Harry,
I Will never suffer't. Greed. Ex.


Sir Bar. Now Toby, speak neither for favor nor affection, But tell truth, and
shame the Devil, what did you tell me you saw last Night?


Toby. Having occasion to rise in the Night, to go down (and please your
Worship,) as I came in again, I perceived two young brisk Sparks Dance up
stairs before me, they parted in the Gallery, and one of 'em went tap, tap, at
Mrs. Jacinta's door, which presently opened, and in he went. Thought I, this is
some guest that has mistaken his Room -- I crept softly, and peeped in -- whip
went of his Hat -- and whip went off his Coat -- thus half undressed threw
himself within the Curtains, and cried, my Dear -- Dear Jacinta; and there they
hugged and kissed, and hugged -- till the Bed shook like an old barn, in a windy
day.


Sir Bar. Hum!


Tob. At length says Mrs. Jacinta (whose voice I knew,) come, come, to Bed my
Dear, and don't get Cold; so I will replied the other, we will so kiss and hug all
this Night, my Dear, Dear, for you are to be Married to Morrow.


Sir Bar. And -- and what followed?


Tob. Then the door was locked on the inside. I sat me down, resolved to watch
till Morning -- but before day light, out they came, and surprising me there,
took me for a Spy, and a listner, and discharged a Pistol at me, just as my
Master opened his door it mist me, down stairs I scattered, they after me --
but I ran into the Orchard, and hid my self in the Pear Tree.


Sir Bar. Hang him that has never a shift.


Fur. And you both heard and saw a Man in my Daughter's Chamber.


Tob. As I told you, upon my Corporal Oath.


Fur. But --


Re-enter Greedy. Greed. Well, never was the like of such a fellow.


Fur. Are you interrupting us again!


Greed. Mr. Alderman, what do you think?


Fur. I think, you will do very well to be gone.


Greed. Nay, but pray hear me --


Fur. I will hear nothing.


Greed. Well then -- I take your silence for consent, I Will even commit this
saucy Cook. I Will sign a Warrant for him forthwith.


Fur. Let me tell you Mr. Justice you do very ill to trouble us, when we are
upon serious business?


Greed. Why, Mr. Alderman, there is as lovely a Codds-head, as ever Eyes beheld,
and how do you think this Rogue of a Cook is going to dress it.


Fur. As he should do your Head, cleave it, and take out the brains.


Greed. What Is the matter Mr. Alderman, you are even as Chollerick as the Cook?
what say you Sir Barnaby -- will it do well -- a Cods-head without Shrimps.


Sir Bar. Sir, We have other Fish to fry at this time. You had as good go from
whence you came, for here you will be but Out of the Drying Pan, into the Fire.


Greed. Well, I Will try the other bout with the Cook, and if I cannot fadge, I Will
discreetly sit me down and cry for vexation, for my passion must have vent -- a
Cods head without Shrimps, O monstrous!


Fur. Friend, what manner of Man was this person, you saw in my Daughter's
Chamber. Greedy Exit.


Tob. I did not see his Face -- for his back was to the Door all the while --
but a brisk youngster i'saith.


Sir Bar. Now I have given you sufficient proof, restore my acquittance, and
take back your Daughter -- Even Reckoning, makes long Friends. And so Merry
meet, merry part.


Fur. I Will give one Proverb for your two, One tales good, till another is told.
Therefore I Will not close my account with you, till I have spoken with my
Daughter.


Sir Bar. You have paid me in my own Coin. Reason is Reason, all the World
over. For he that Judges, must hear both parties. But pray dispatch, for I
stand upon Thorns.


Fur. It will be necessary, that you, who are her accusers, should go with me
to her.


Sir Bar. A guilty Conscience needs no accuser, however we'll go, tho we Shall
be as welcome, as Water into a Ship, for I know she will look at us, As the Devil
looks over Lincoln. Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Enter Greedy, and Cook. Greed. No Shrimps! a Cods-head without Shrimps!


Cook. Yes, Sir, a Cods head without Shrimps, is as good as a Justices head,
without Brains.


Greed. I tell you Cook, you are saucy.


Cook. I tell you Mr. Justice, you are Jack in an Office.


Greed. I shall lay you by the Heels.


Cook. Than, I Jack Sauce, the Cook, will bast your Worship, as I bast my Meat.


Greed. To strike a Justice of Peace, is Petty Treason, Edwardi quinto. But for
spoiling of Dinner, I Would send you away presently, and commit you without Bail or
Mainprize.


Cook. For all that -- keep out of the Kitchen, which is my Dominion, or I will
scall'd you without measure, and without mercy. Why sure Mr. Justice, I can
dress Dinner without you, hau --


Greed. The Rogues as Chollerick as a rosting Lobster -- I must give him good
words, or All the fat will be in the Fire. Well honest Jack Sauce, do as thou will -- why should old Friends fall out -- give me thy hand.


Cook. I Love your Worship with all my Heart.


Greed. Do thou? prithee than let there be Shrimps to the Cods head -- dear
Sauce, honest dear Sauce.


Cook. Why* so there is Sir --


Greed. Is there -- what made you and I quarrel then?


Cook. You would not have patience till it came to the Table.


Greed. Thou said true -- come prithee let us go see how matters are in the
Kitchen.


Cook. Kitchen me no Kitchen, if you can be quiet, things will be done well
enough.


Greed. Give me thy hand once more -- thou art an honest Fellow, -- thou say
there shall be Shrimps than, ha, shall there?


Cook. If you speak Sir, one word more --


Greed. I -- a -- done -- I Will bring thee a bottle of Sack into the Kitchen.


Cook. And I Will relish't with a plate of pickled Mushrooms.


Greed. Honest Cook! honest Jack Sauce, no Shrimps! in my Conscience, 'twould
have broke my Heart. Exeunt.


SCENE III.
Enter Lovell; Captain, a little after. Lov. So far all goes well, my Brother
resolves to quit the Field -- but now to work the Alderman -- that he may not
suspect a Contrivance, that is the difficulty -- let me see --


Capt. Mr. Lovell! yes, it is he -- soho -- whose within?


Lov. Are you here Captain! Lov. stands as in a study, Captain enters.


Capt. That Is a Lovers question right -- even let your Goes up to him and
knocks at his Breast as at a Door. Eyes answer you -- but I thought you had not
been at home. Your body looked, as if had been forsaken by your Soul.
Whirlwinds take this Love, it has -- made a fool of me too; when I am spoken
too, I am thinking of Ladies; my wits and senses are gone a rambling, like
Seamen gotten a shore, in their longboat.


Lov. Your friend gave you fair warning not to fall in love.


Capt. There Is the Devil on it, I know not how it comes about -- well, believe
me, tho Women look like Angels -- there is witchcraft about 'em; for if a Woman
does but fetch the long heave, with lifting up her Head, and bending in her
Back, two little -- round -- white -- plump -- pouting Devils pop up before,
which put such a glowing heat into my veins, that my blood in a moment grows
too hot for it is Channels* and I could o'errun a score of 'em.


Lov. You are transported at the very thoughts of Women.


Capt. I am now in one of my fits -- that I had but half a dozen Ladies in my
great Cabin! how I Would rummage them together, I Would make 'em smoke again.


Lov. If you are so hot, take a walk in the open Air to cool you.


Capt. That will not do -- if we were going to engage, perhaps the loss of a Leg
or an Arm, might abate my Fever.


Lov, Your distemper is so rooted in you, that you must loose a Leg or an Arm
for every handsome Woman you see, or you will not be thoroughly cured.


Capt. Say you so, than I Will endure it still, and try what time and chance will
do.


Lov. But how go squares 'twixt you and your Mistress?


Capt. Well remembered, she sent me this Letter even now by her Maid; I wanted
somebody to read it to me.


Lov. Cannot you Read?


Capt. No, I am a Sea-Captain, the Sea breeds Soldiers, but not Scholars: it is
out of my Element.


Lov. You shall hear it then.

Reads the Letter. MY Roaring Boy, I can Love no longer at your fierce rate, my
Heart is bound under another Convoy, give Chase to a fresh Mistress; I am
sailing after a new Rigged Gallant, and now bid you defiance. So a boon Voyage
to you Captain, and farewell.

Arabella.



Capt. What, turned Renegate?


Lov. Short warning this!


SCENE IV.
Enter Arabella Hillaria. Capt. See, she is not out of my Hemisphere. I Will give
her Chase.


Lov. They tack about to us.


Arab How dejected my Lover looks now I have taken away his Commission.


Hill. Captain, what think you of love?


Capt. As of folly.


Arab. Is It not a fine pastime?


Capt. Yes for Fools.


Arab. What think you of Women?


Capt. As of light Sailors.


Hill. Arab. Ha, ha, ha.


Lov. That shot Captain, hit 'twixt wind and water.


Capt. Or, as of Ships that are crank for want of Ballast, tossed about with
every wave, and cannot be steered in any true course?


Arab. Hill. Ha, ha, ha.


Capt. Do you play with my Anger; Am I so tame to be laughed at? sure I have
seemed more terrible, when with this Sword, I have lop'd off Limbs, strow'd
Decks with Carcases, turned Fleets to floating Hospitals, sent Navies to their
Ports to cut down Masts, and hew the Timber of their scattered Vessels into
wooden Legs and Crutches, to under-prop the Cripples they brought home. Love,
have thou disarmed my looks of Manhood? -- phew -- with that gale begone.


Hill. Arab. Ha, ha, ha.


Hill. Captain, Love is still in Port, he went not out with that strong puff.


Lov. No, Love has not yet weighed Anchor.


Arab. Captain -- you have a qualm yet in your Stomach, you are either
Sea-sick, or Lovesick still.


Hill. But Captain -- if you have really done with Love and Women -- Let us know
your thoughts of both in good earnest, what is Love?


Capt. A Sea, a dangerous Sea, where Wind and Tide are still contrary: Men are
the Barks that venture out, whose ruins still its Waves conspire.


Arab. And what are Women in this Ocean?


Capt. Pirates, that rob us of our hearts, Laplanders that give us a fair wind
to leave safe Harbors, and when we are out at Sea, make it swell to a Tempest
to drown us. I have out-rid the Storm, thanks to my lusty Vessel, and now being
gotten safe in Harbor, can look back and say -- Yonder I had like to have been
wrecked.


Lov. Well said, now you have given them a whole Broadside.


Arab. For all that, I see he is but a fresh water Lover yet: Now you think your
self past danger, you are in greatest peril to be Cast away -- what think you
if that Letter which raised this Tempest, was but a Plot to -- see how my Lover
could bear the loss of his Mistress?


Lov. What wind do you call this? -- By what Point of the Compass will you
steer now?


Capt. I think I had best make what haste I can to come up with stern of her.


Arab. That it was so, here is my hand on it. Arab. and Durzo takes hands.


Hill. It Is very true, this Plot was but to try your humor.


Capt. Why then, we'll put out to Sea once again, and my heart shall run the
risque with yours in all Adventures.


Arab. Captain, I strike sail to you.
You now with Triumph in Love's Ocean steer,
Calm is the Sea, and from all Pirates clear.

Lov. The Conference is broke up, here comes Careless and my Brother: Get you
two in -- Now Captain, for our management.


Capt. Let him come. Arabella and Hilaria Exeunt*


SCENE V.
Enter Sir Barnaby, Careless and Furr. Sir Barn. You see your Daughter is so
confounded at one Evidence, she scarcely had confidence to deny't; for a guilty
Conscience needs no Accuser.


Fur. I am sorry you had the trouble to come so far for so little purpose; but
excuse me -- I cannot forbear grieving at a Child's misfortune.


Sir Barn. Children are certain Cares, but uncertain Comforts. Now, Sir,
remember that Giff Gaff is an honest man; You have your Daughter, give me my
Acquittance. So the man has his Mare again and no hurt done.


Fur. It Is Locked up in my Chamber, but I Will fetch it you: To commit such
extravagance the very Night before her marriage, what madness possessed her!


Exit Fur. Carel. Sir Barnaby, you intend then to begone.


Sir Barn. As soon as I can get my Boots on.


Carel. Without marrying Mrs. Jacinta.


Sir Barn. She has spun a fine thread; even let her brew as she baked.


Carel. Who do you think shall marry her, now you have defamed her?


Sir Barn He that was with her last Night, if he please: Evening Orts are good
Morning fother: but for my part, I am not so hungry to lick another man's dish.


Carel. But Sir Barnaby, you are the man must make her reparation, you have
traduced me and defamed her -- the scandal brings an aspersion on the whole
Family that I seek to contract alliance with, for her Cozen Hilaria is the
person I pretend marriage to; for all offenses therefore against her -- her
Family and my self -- from you I challenge satisfaction.


Sir Barn. What do you mean by satisfaction?


Carel. Here before your Brother and the Captain, I require that you first deny
all you have said against the Lady's Honor. Secondly, that you make it your
request to marry her.


Sir Barn. Bate me an Ace of that, quoth Bolton.


Carel. You must, Sir.


Sir Barn. I have brought an old House upon my head; Eat my words and marry
her. Two words to that bargain.


Lov. No, Sir, the last I deny; tho I believe nothing in prejudice of Jacinta's
Honor, how ever unhappy circumstances make him think so, yet till he is
convinced to the contrary, he cannot in Honor, nor must not Marry her.


Capt. Must not! -- he must, and shall or --


Sir Bar. Must is for the King.


Capt. I say must -- unless I spring a Leak, and sink forty Fathom deep under
the Earth.


Sir Bar. Who so bold, as a blind Byard.


Carel. Captain, forbear.


Sir Bar. I have brought my Hogs to a fine Market, this will be The Devil upon
Dun.


Carel. I am glad you are so far a favourer of our cause, to believe Jacinta
innocent.


Lov. I do.


Carel. But since her Honor and the Family's cannot be held without this
Marriage; I press him to that point, tho at the same time, I direct my Sword
against the Brother of my Friend, and even against my Friends own breast, for I
am sure the Captain will not stand idle.


Capt. Tho I am not so skilled in Love, I hope I shall do my part at this sport.


Sir Bar. This mends like sower Ale in Summer.


Carel. I think we are all ready.


Lov. Draw Brother.


Sir Bar. Hum -- humh --


Carel. Come let us not loose time.


Lov. Draw Brother, draw.


Sir Bar. Umh, What Is worse than ill luck.


Lov. What Is the matter.


Sir Bar. My Sword with riding, is grown rusty in the Scabbard. Sir Bar. offers
to draw his Sword.


Carel. Let me see it Sir Barnaby -- I Will warrant you.


Sir Bar. Fair and softly. Trust my Sword in an Enemies hand! Whose's the fool
than.


Carel. Cry you mercy. Pulls to get the Sword out.


Sir Bar. Ay, Cry you mercy, killed the Cat. -- umh humh.


Lov. Let me see it -- Gentlemen with your patience, I Will speak two words aside
to my Brother.


Capt. Dispatch, dispatch -- the winds fair.


Sir Bar. What a pox -- No such have, to hang true Folk


Lov. Let us not engage in an ill cause, if we can help it.


Sir Bar. I am content to let it alone, tell 'em It Is good to have Wit i^ ones
Anger.


Lov. But you must repair the Ladies Honor.


Sir Bar. But I Will not take a Lease of her for life, to be bound to repairs,
when all the damage has been done by the Tenant at will.


Lov. Upon my Life and Conscience, I think her very innocent and virtuous* Be
not abused by fond suspicions.


Sir Bar. One may see light at a little hole.


Lov. I am confident -- she will make a good Wife.


Sir Bar. A Vessel will smell of the first Liquor. Once a Whore, and ever a
Whore.


Lov. I have done -- we must even fight it out, Lovel draws the Sword. there is
your Sword. You tremble.


Sir Bar. It Is a little Cold this morning methinks.


Lov. Cold!


Sir Bar. May come it early, come it late, it will make the Cow to quake.


Lov. Since you are afraid, rather than your Honor shall be exposed -- I Will
make one Proposal -- and let you see, I persuade you to nothing, that I would
not do my self -- Gentlemen, my Brother cannot Marry the Lady, because his
Opinion it not reconciled to her Honor; but I have other thoughts of the fair
Jacinta, and believe all in her prejudice to be mistakes; therefore if she will
accept me for a Husband; I am ready to do her Justice.


Carel. I confess you being both of a Family, and Sir Barnaby's Brother, your
Marriage gives sufficient Satisfaction.


Sir Bar. Ay, Any Tooth good Barber, as the case stands with her.


Carel. But your Estate is not half Sir Barnaby's.


Sir Bar. There Is a spoak put into the Wheel again.


Lov. The whole comes to me, if he die without Issue.


Sir Bar. There, He has hit the right nail on the head.


Carel. He may Marry, and have Children.


Sir Bar. That Puts his Nose out of joint again.


Carel. Yet I Will undertake, let but Sir Barnaby, add to your Six Hundred a
Year, four more out of his Estate, during life. And Mr. Alderman shall accept
the Change.


Lov. Come Gentlemen, then let us decide the matter thus: I know my Brother
will not be forced to any thing.


Sir Bar. No, All things for Love, nothing by force.


Carel. What say you Sir Barnaby?


Sir Bar. I say Sir, I will not be forced by any body -- nor to any thing -- I Will
sooner loose a thousand Lives.


Capt. Well said, old boy; come bowze it away.


Carel. Come then, Sir, you and I --


Sir Bar. Nay, Sir, be as angry as you will -- I Will speak what I have to say
first, and I tell it you to your Teeth, I will not be forced, and yet out of
Love and natural affection, to my Brother -- and because he likes the
Gentlewoman, his fancy shall not be balked. Therefore I will give four Hundred
a Year upon that Condition, whether any here will or nill, and let me see
who will say me nay. I can be as chuff as any of you.


Carel. I beg your pardon, Sir Barnaby; then friendly we embrace, and here let
all resentments vanish.


Capt. What then, do we strike our Flag --


Lov. Dear Brother, this honorable act surprises me.


Capt. No Fighting amongst us, Zou^s, aboard a Ship, we had had as many Bullets
ever this, as here has been words.


Sir Bar. Captain, You need not be so Crusty, you are not so hard baked.


Capt. That Is a Land term, now, that I don't understand.


SCENE IV.
Enter Furr, Hillaria, following him. Hill. Uncle -- Uncle, have you any work
for a Tinker. The Parson has staid this hour, and has nothing to do -- must he
be gone, or will you have him stay to say Grace at Dinner?


Fur. Let him take pains with you, you want Grace.


Hill. Right, I am not come to it; Uncle, and you are past it, else you would not be
so easily seduced to believe Sir Barnaby Beelzebub there.


Fur. Sir Barnaby, here is your Acquittance -- I wish the next Lady you Court,
may have better luck.


Carel. Mr. Alderman, Sir Barnaby still retains so great a respect for your
Daughter, that if you will accept Mr. Lovell for her Husband, he offers to settle
on him, four Hundred a Year, additional Estate, out of his own, during Life;
and you have a prospect for it all hereafter.


Fur. Will he!


Sir Bar. Yes, -- no offense I hope -- I will -- What Is freer then gift.


Hill. Now do I hope my Uncle will refuse the offer -- and give me all his Money
when he Dies, to vex his Daughter.


Fur. Rather then you shall see a Groat on it, I Will give it to Hospitals, which
is the worst use a Man can put his Money too; for the Poor are always cheated
on it. Mr. Lovell, I have all I can desire, which is to see my Daughter well
disposed off; for your sake I Will add some Hundreds to her Portion -- for my
Heart is now so much lighter then it was.


Lov. Sir, I Will study to deserve your kindness. And Brother yours --


Hill. Lord, Uncle, that you should do all this to spite me.


Sir Bar. What you do, do with a Jerk, For I*ll pack up my Aulls and begone.


Carel. You Will stay and Dine with us, Sir Barnaby.


Sir Bar. Ay, ay, Prayer and Provender, never hinder a Journey. While you order
your matters, Dash. shall draw a short Article for Memorandum.


Lov. Then I Will go offer my self at Jacinta's Feet, and ask her consent.


Carel. Sir, now I have done you a piece of service Sir Bar. and Lov. Ex.
severally. please to do me a small kindness in requital.


Fur. Sir, I must acknowledge your friendship; what is it?


Carel. To use your Authority with your Neice, and keep her up; for I can be no
where, either about my business, or taking my recreation, but she presently
comes and disturbs me, she was the occasion of all last Nights bustle.


Fur. Nay if there is any mischief toward, she is at the end on it I warrant you


Hill. Ay, but hold Sir, I was at the beginning of that, as you will hear
hereafter.


Carel. You see how it is Sir -- If you don't take some speedy course with her,
I must be forced to leave this Town, to avoid her Company.


Fur. Pray take her along with you, and you will free me of a great trouble, for
she has been my vexation some Years.


Hill. It Is true, that Gentleman and I have been a little troublesome to one
another; you know he came to solicit (...) in the way of Matrimony, which I
don't much approve of; for it makes Folk's fall out. The first Day of Marriage
is the last Day of Love. (...) liked him well enough for a Gallant, and if he
would have accepted of me for a Mistress, or so; we might have fadg'd a while,
but he had a foolish scruple of Conscience, nothing would serve him but
Marriage, and so away came I, this is all Uncle.


Capt. I shall never learn to know at Land, whether they are in earnest, either
in talking or fighting.


Fur. If you will have my Opinion in the case, you were cut out, one for the
other; and it is pity two Houses should part you. Therefore if she will agree to
your desire, or you conform to here is, it is all one to me, you have my consent
to either. All I ask is, that you will make an end quickly, that I may be clear
of her Company.


Hill. Then, Sir, you may either go to London, or stay in the Country, if you
please, without danger of being troubled with me; for I absolutely declare
against Marriage; and if nothing else will serve your turn, you may go when you
will, where you will, and do what you please; I Will have nothing to say to such
an unreasonable Man as you are.


Carel. To convince you Mr. Alderman, that what she says is not true, but that
on the contrary, I am for having her for a Mistress, and she is for being my
Wife: Mr. Lovell, and the Captain, and all that know me, can witness, I have
continually railed against Marrying.


Fur. Well, I Will leave you to decide the matter betwixt your selves. Fur. Ex.


Capt. Yes, yes, I have heard you forswear Marrying, and drinking too* yet I
catch you dabling in the Punch bowl next day.


Carel. Now Lady, if you are not for what I proposed, you may even live a Maid.
and Die a Fool, or live a Fool, and Die a Maid; your Epitaph shall be the same.


Hill. I except against your Sex for Witnesses, as byast. But rather then such a
lyiny Man as you shall have it, my Maidenhead and I will Live and Die together,
be buried both in a Grave, that you may be chief Mourner at my Funeral. So
farewell you Matrimonial Fop.


Carel. Pray --


Hill. No, there is a Wedding going forward within, and I would not loose the
diversion of that silly sight, to hear all you can say. Hill. Exit.


Carel. Come Captain, we'll go see how scurvily it looks in others, that it may
be a warning for us, to avoid it too. But this I Will say,

If for a Wife my liberty I loose,
This is the Girl must catch me in the noose. Cap. Carel. Ex.

SCENE VII.
Enter Mr. Justice Greedy. Greed. Send away Dinner -- send away Dinner, there a
pox upon them all for loytering Rogues, why don't you send Dinner away, I must
even sit me down, for I am almost spent with running and bawling after one and
another.


Enter 1 Innkeeper. 1 Inn. Lord, Sir, you have no patience, here is a noise, as
if the great Bell rung out for the Towns being on Fire, and your Tongue was the
Clapper.


Greed. It must Ring out, when my Belly Rings Noon; the baked Meats run out,
the Pottages boil over, and the Roast'd will be dried to Powder.


1 Inn. Who can help it -- Sir Barnaby himself gave order for Dinner to be
ready by Eleven of the Clock, the Clock has made all have possible. They within
are at better for worse -- the words are not quite out of their Mouths yet:
why, your Worship is a Man of no moderation?


Greed. Well, well, they have done by this time, -- good host, see it be sent
to Table, my Spirits are almost spent.


1 Inn. It shall, Sir, it shall.


Greed. Bid my Clark be ready to attend me. Innkeeper Exit.


1 Inn. Yes, Sir.


Enter Dash. Greed. Oh, Mr. Dash. -- has the Parson done the jobb.


Dash. Yes, Sir.


Greed. What a sudden change of affairs is here, this good Dinner was provided
for Sir Barnaby's Wedding Dinner -- and is now served up for Mr. Lovell's
Bride, and all falls to his share.


Dash. Much good do him with her, that has her; I am glad Sir Barnaby mist her.


Greed. But what do I prating here, when Dinners going up.


Dash. Gemminy Sir, how you are garnished out, as if you were to be served up
for a standing Dish -- more for ornament, than use -- let me help you off with
your Cloak. Some body has pined a dish clout to your back.


Greed. Whose Roguery was this, the Cooks or the Boys; I Will have 'em all to the
whipping post, for abusing a public Magistrate.


Dash. Look you Sir, they have pined a dish clout to your back, and the Cape is
stuck with staring Feathers -- like a French hen.


Greed. Help me -- they will have dined else before I come.


Dash. Sir. Mr. Alderman sent me to acquaint you, that a Lord, and a Coach full
of Ladies -- of his acquaintance, Just now are come into bait, whom he could
not but invite to dine with him -- therefore makes bold with you as his special
good friend, the Table being but little to have a a Cloth laid in another Room.


Greed. How, not dine within, after all my care!


Dash. Sir, he desires you to see Dinner sent up in good order, and me to
attend at Table. Your Worship may for once dispense with your Magistracy, and
sit with me and the waiting Gentlewoman; I don't like Dineing amongst great
Gentry, it is not mannerly to fill one's belly before 'em.


Greed. Well, there shall not a Dish escape me -- and now I think on it, I can
there take my own time; and gorge at leisure.


Dash. So Sir, you may now put on your Cloak -- only take a view of your Hat,
that Cock's Tail in it makes you look like a City Train-band Captain.


Greed. Would I knew whose Roguery it was.


Dash. Look you Sir, here is the first Dish come from the Table already.


Enter 1 Boy with a Dish. Greed. Prithee go and call my Clerk to me. Dash Exit.
Hold, hold, you Sir -- whether go you with that?


1 Boy. To the Kitchen, Sir.


Greed. No, no, set it down here -- So -- Enter 2 d Boy with a Dish, and sets
it down. Ay, ay, and you there -- here, here -- set it down here --


2 Boy. The Dogs will come to it there.


Greed. Go Knave, go, what serve I for?


2 Boy. Indeed, Sir, they will.


Greed. No, no.


1 Boy. A Greyhound, as I came a long, chopped a great Mary-bone out of my Dish,
and ran away with it.


Greed. Send him to me then: I Will lay the Dog by the heels. Sets the Dish down.


2 Boy. Come Tom. Boys Exeunt.


Greed. Let me see; what is here -- O -- the Toasts and Marybones: Marrow's a
delicate food; the very Quintescence of the Ox -- it Oils the Chops rarely --
and makes Dinner go glibly down.


Enter Dash and John with two Dishes. Greed. You Sir, come here -- John, set
your Dish down too -- we'll not trust any thing into the Kitchen till we have
Dined, the Rogues there will be Liquorish and light Fingered.


Dash. Your Worship speaks discreetly. Exit.


Greed. I know the tricks of Servants -- John, where is the Cloak-Bag?


Exit John, and enter again with the Cloak-Bag. John. Just here Sir.


Greed. Let me see -- that is a Pottage -- this a Dish of Scotch Collops -- this
a Frigacy of Chickens -- well relished on my word; this fellow, Sauce, were an
excellent Cook was he not so cross and choleric. Hold the Bag, John, is there
a clean Napkin in it?


John. Yes Sir.


Greed. 'Twill stand us in use now: Let me see, suppose we put in two or three
Marybones -- Ay, they are full -- remove the Dishes into the next Room there,
and as I send the rest into you, put in some of the best of every thing, but
not so as to unfurnish quite the Dishes.


Enter Dash with a large Dish. Dash. Sir, here is the Venison Pasty scarce
touched.


Greed. Let me see it -- O rare -- carry't in there. Dash Exit, into the
By-room. O rare, fat Venison; ay, there is a substantial Dish, the Glory of
England -- Mr. Dash! Re-enter Dash. Have they almost Dined?


Dash. Yes Sir. Dash Exit.


Greed. John, John, put in a good deal of the Pasty, cut off a lusty corner;
take the fattest of the Venison; and do you hear me, a swinging deal of Pudding
Crust. Enter 1 st Boy and 2 d with Dishes.


1 st Boy. Sir, must we set these down here too? The Boy snatches out of the
Dish a Lobster, and runs; Greedy after him; in the mean time the 2 d steals a
Pheasant, Greedy after him, and tumbles down top of one the other; the Boy gets
away with.


Greed. Ay, ay, John, John, take in these things here -- Ha! are you at your
Legerdemain? -- Stop Thief, stop Thief.


1 st Boy. A Pox of your Clutches.


Greed. Hey, another Felon -- Sirrah, Sirrah, come here -- Come here Sirrah*


2 d Boy. O murder! murder!


Greed. Sirrah let go, it is Felony, thou wilt be hanged else: Call in the
servants, make fresh pursuit -- send Hue and Cry after the Rogue.


Enter John. John. What Is the matter Sir?


Greed. O that Villainous Boy has murdered me, he is run away with a Pheasant.
John, and this Leg is all that is left of the Lobster. O never will my Belly
forgive my hands, that could not hold it. -- Here, put this Leg of the Lobster
into the Cloak-Bag -- bring it forth, and let me see how thou have stored it.
-- Oh these unlucky Bastards, I am almost swelter'd -- John brings in the Cloak
bag. Let me see what is this.


John. Some of the Pasty.


Greed. Ay, well -- but what have thou done here? Puts his finger into the bag,
and licks twice or thrice. What Is this Pottage -- Pottage --


John. Yes Sir -- there is a good deal of it in --


Greed. Oh Rogue! Villain! put Pottage into my Cloak-bag!


John. It Is very good, 'twill do no hurt I warrant you.


Greed. O Nonsensical Ass -- thou have spoiled all: O what do I suffer, the
Lobster broken, the Pheasant gone; how many afflictions befall me in one day.
Here, lead me into the next Room; I Will sit me down and sigh till my heart
breaks, for surely I can never survive all this.


John. Pray, Sir, have patience.


Greed. No, no, my stomach's gone with vexing. I am a dead man, I shall never
eat again. -- There, there -- bring in the Cloak-bag, and my Cloak with it. Oh.
-- Exeunt. John carries off the Cloak and Cloak-bag.


SCENE VIII.
Enter Mr. Alderman Fur, Sir Barnaby, Lovell, Captain Careless, Jacinta,
Hilaria, Arabella, Mrs. Breeder, and Mrs. Dazie. Fur. I am glad our Guests are
gone. -- Now, Mr. Lovell, I wish you much joy with my Daughter -- may you live
happy together.


Sir Barn. So do I, but marry in haste and repent at leisure.


Lov. The marriage seldom knows repentance where both parties are pleased.


Sir Barn. All Is well that ends well; I say, the proof of the Pudding is in the
Eating. So rest you merry.


Carel. Sir Barnaby, two words ere you go; it is not convenient you should
depart under the scandal of a Licentious Bastard-getter, therefore that you may
go with as clear a reputation as you came, I declare these two here were set on
by some that I know, to bring you in disrepute with Mr. Alderman and his
Daughter. -- Farther they confess, that the old Justice shifted them out of his
Room into yours this morning by accident. So you are cleared from two scandals,
and three Children, at once.


Dazie and Breed. All this we own.


Sir Barn. Well said: When the Frier's beaten then comes Jack.


Hill. Look you Sir, these are the Clothes you found in my Cozens Chamber, which
we borrowed of those two young Youths that came down with us yesterday in the
other Stage-Coach, and are going into France with their Governor to Travel;
these we put on out of a frolic. I undressed in her Chamber; and I was that
little Fornicator that so kissed and caressed her in her bed. This Uncle, I
hope, will ease your mind, and reconcile Sir Barnaby to the Bride's reputation.


Sir Barn. T^ttle Tattle, give the Go^se more Hay.


C^^el. Nay, Sir, the Captain and I are Witnesses to this matter.


(...) Barn. Ask my fellow if I am a Thief.


Fur. It Is like enough, my Niece is seldom without an unlucky frolic.


Sir Barn. Then she is like Goodyears Pig, always doing mischief.


Hill. We -- we -- we --


Omn. Ha, ha, ha --


Sir Barn. I shall meet some of you either at Hedge or Style -- and so let them
laugh that win -- Exit Sir Barn.


Omn. Ha, ha, ha.


Hill. Sir Barnaby, Sir Barnaby, remember Waltoms Calfe -- Farewell Frost --


Lov. I Will see him mounted for his last kindness. Exeunt Lovell and Arabella.


Arab. I must bid him farewell too.


Fur. I am glad he missed my Daughter; I like neither his person nor humor.
Come, now I Will lead you the way in -- we'll have the Music and be merry.


Hill. Hold, hold, Uncle; you are for rising from Table before Dinner's done --
here is another Course yet to come up: The Parson must say Grace once more.


Carel. Lead on, Sir; pray lead on -- here is a Plot upon me.


Hill. Come, come, Careless, never halt before a Cripple.


Carel. O Madam, you are a dangerous Person, I dare not trust my self with you
alone.


Fur. Niece, what say you to me?


Hill. It comes just now in my mind that I have lost my Bedfellow, and now my
Cozen is married I know not what to do, for I vow I dare not lie alone.


Carel. O no, it is dangerous; for after seeing marriages, and a new married
Couple put to Bed together, as strange dreams and fancies will be apt to run in
your mind, as after seeing Executions and dead People; and who knows what a
taking you may be in in the Night, and what strange fits you may have.


Hill. O Sir, do you begin to come about; would you beat off others that you may
be my Bedfellow your self? I perceive now that you are for having a Wife.


Carel. I for a Wife?


Re enter Lovell and Arabella. Hill. Madam, you come just in the nick of time,
to see a poor distressed Damesel throw her self away -- Well Sir, give me your
hand, rather than lie alone to Night I Will do any thing.


Carel. I knew 'twou'd come to this.


Hill. I will be you Wife; and since I cant't have a Gallant before marriage,
I Will do like other Wives, and have one after. And now I think on it too, a
Husband's very necessary to keep off a scandal; and besides, what Children the
Gallant gets, the Husband must keep.


Fur. You are like to have a hopeful Wife.


Carel. I can be even with her there. -- Look you Madam, you can bring me none
to keep but what are my own; and if you expect I should be a Father to all your
Children, I expect you should be a Nurse to all mine, and I may have 'em
brought home to me on all sides; for I intent to be a great getter, and the
Father of many. Is it a bargain?


Hill. It is: Here, lewd Fellow, here is my hand on it, Heaven send thee good
luck, for I shall be a plague to thee as long as I live.


Lov. This is fair play on both sides.


Hill. This it is for folks to meet that understand themselves. Captain, what
think you of this?


Lov. He Is in a deep Contemplation of Love too.


Durz. Yes, and this is the very thing I love.


Arab. Let not such idle thoughts trouble your head, I am almost weary on it my
self.


Durz. Say you so?


Arab. Yes, you and I will be friends for all that, such a trifle as love shall
break no squares. So Captain, tack about to the next.


Durz. But by your leave, it is more honorable to stand into rights than to make
a tack, and say and sing the Devil's head off. I will judge of Love by the
Rules of Honor; therefore sink or swim, I Will bear up close with you.


Carel. Well said old Buccanier.


Arab. I like a man of resolution well; then here is my hand, my trusty
Tarpaulin, you shall find me no flincher neither. And now Captain, we are
sailing out of the Haven of Love into the Tempestuous Sea of Matrimony.


Durz. So, at last I have gotten the Weather-gage of her, and now I Will lay her
thwart the Harser and Board her to rights.


Hill. Now Uncle, pray Con over our Agreement, for you are to be Summoned for a
Witness upon occasion.


Fur. It is like to be a fine marriage.


Lov. Yes, if it go on as you begun.


Carel. You shall see our marriage (which you think clapped up out of a frolic)
go on more cheerfully than yours made out of stark Love and desperate
Affection; we, like two Birds, though we Roost together at Night, will have our
freedom all day, and fly chirping about, whilst you, like two Domestic
Animals, coupled too close together, shall still be sharling and biting one at
another.


Hill. And we have the trouble every now and then to part you. Mark the end on it.


Carel. Mrs. Breeder and Mrs. Dazie, your good service shall be rewarded; let
none of your Function think they have lost me because I am married, I am
entered into matrimony but not into bondage.


Hill. He has, as it were, but one Mistress the more. -- Lead away Uncle.

Whilst other Wives and Husbands Scold and Rant,
We two will live like Mistress and Gallant. Exeunt.

EPILOGUE.
FRom Elbow Chair in the Pantry I am come,
To see what you are doing here; make room.
So heartily I slept after my Labor,
My Nose did louder Music make than Pipe and Tabor.
My Dreams presented me a Bill of Fare,
Of sumptuous Meat and Dainties that were rare:
I waked with joy, and to my comfort find,
Three Couple here in Bonds of Wedlock joined.
Three days we'll Feast, a day for every Pair,
And each days Management shall be my care:
We'll have our swinge of Mirth, let nothing cross it,
For every Bride I Will provide a good Sack-Posset,
With grated Naples-Bisket made, and yolks
Of new-laid Eggs, Salacious Food for married Folks:
It shall be rich with Ambergreese and Pounded Pearls,
Which shall provoke a Race of lusty Boys and Girls:
A Bridal Cake for each one too to Munch on,
And every Guest shall have a lusty Lunchon.
All that are here for Guests I do invite;
We'l^ treat the first, the second, and third Night;
With all the choicest Dainties I will feed ye:
^

