A COLLECTION OF English PROVERBS Digested into a convenient Method for the
speedy finding any one upon occasion; WITH Short ANNOTATIONS.

Whereunto are added Local Proverbs with their Explications, Old Proverbial
Rhythmes, Less known or Exotic Proverbial Sentences, and Scottish Proverbs.

The Second Edition Enlarged by the Addition of many hundred English, and an
Appendix of Hebrew Proverbs, with Annotations and Parallels.

By J. Ray, M.A. and Fellow of the Royal Society.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the University, for W. Morden.
1678.

The PREFACE.
THe former Edition of this Collection of English Proverbs falling into the
hands of diverse ingenious persons, my worthy friends, in several parts of this
Kingdom, had (as I hoped it would) this good effect, to excite them, as well to
examine their own memories and try what they could call to mind themselves that
were therein wanting, as also more carefully to heed what occurred in reading,
or dropped from the mouths of others in discourse. Whereupon having noted many
such, they were pleased for the perfecting of the work frankly to communicate
them to me. All which, amounting to some hundreds, besides not a few of my own
observation, I present the Reader with in this second Edition: I dare not yet
pretend it to be a complete and perfect Catalogue of all English Proverbs: but
I think I may without arrogance affirm it to be more full and comprehensive
then any Collection hitherto published. And I believe that not very many of the
Proverbs generally used all England over, or far diffused over any considerable
part of it whether the East, West, North or midland countries, have escaped it;
I having had communications from observant and inquisitive persons in all those
parts, viz. from Francis Jessop Esquire of Broom-hall in Sheffield parish
Yorkshire, Mr George Antrobus Master of the free School at Tamworth in
Warwickshire, Mr Walter Ashmore of the same place. Michael Biddulph Gent. of
Polesworth in Warwickshire, deceased; Mr Newton of Leicester, Mr Sherringham of
Caius College in Cambridge; Sr Philip Skippon of Wrentham in Suffolk Knight, Mr
Andrew Paschall of Chedsey in Somersetshire, and Mr Francis Brokesby of Rowley
in the East Riding of Yorkshire. As for local Proverbs of lesser extent,
proper to some Towns or Villages, as they are very numerous, so are they hard
to be procured, and few of them, could they be had, very quaint or significant.

If any one shall find fault, that I have inserted many English Phrases that
are not properly Proverbs, though that word be taken in its greatest latitude
and according to my own definition of a Proverb, and object that I might as
well have admitted all the idioms of the English tongue; I answer, that, to say
the truth, I cannot warrant all those Phrases to be genuine Proverbs to which I
have allowed room in this collection; for indeed I did not satisfy my self in
many: but because they were sent me for such by learned and intelligent
persons, and who I ought to presume understand the nature of a Proverb better
then my self, and because I find the like in Collections of foreign Proverbs
both French and Italian, I chose rather to submit them to the censure of the
Reader, then my self pass sentence of rejection on them.

As for the method I have used, in the Preface to the former Edition I have
given my reasons why I made choice of it, which to me do still appear to be
sufficient. The method of common places, if any man think it useful, may easily
be supplied by an Index of Common places, wherein to each head the Proverbs
appertaining or reducible shall be referred by the apposition of the numeral
characters of page and line.

Some Proverbs the Reader may possibly find repeated, but I dare say not many.
I know this might have been avoided by running over the whole book, and
searching for the Proverbs one by one in all the places where our method would
admit them entry. But sloth and impatience of so tedious a work enticed me
rather to presume upon memory; especially considering it was not worth while to
be very solicitous about a matter of so small importance. In such papers as I
received after the Copy was out of my hands, when I was doubtful of any Proverb
I chose to let it stand, resolving that it was better to repeat some then to
omit any.

Now whereas I understand that some Proverbs admitted in the former Edition
have given offense to sober and pious persons, as savouring too much of
obscenity, being apt to suggest impure fancies to corrupt minds, I have in this
omitted all I could suspect for such save only one, for the letting of which
stand I have given my reason in the Note upon it; and yet now upon better
consideration I could wish that it also were obliterated. For I would by no
means be guilty of administering fuel to lust, which I am sensible needs no
incentives, burning too eagerly of it self.

But though I do condemn the mention of any thing obscene, yet I cannot think
all use of slovenly and dirty words to be such a violation of modesty, as to
exact the discarding all Proverbs of which they are ingredients. The useful
notions which many ill-worded Proverbs do import, may I think compensate for
their homely terms; though I could wish the contrivers of them had put their
sense into more decent and cleanly language. For if we consider what the
reasons are why the naming some excrements of the body or the egestion of them,
or the parts employed therein is condemned, we shall find them to be, either 1.
because such excrements being offensive to our senses, and usually begetting a
loathing in our stomachs, the words that signify them are apt to do so too;
and for their relation to them, such also as denote those actions and parts of
the body by which they are expelled, and therefore the mention of them is
uncivil and contrary to good manners; or 2. because such excrements reflect
some dishonor upon our bodies, it being reputed disgraceful to lie under a
necessity of such evacuations, and to have such sinks about us: and therefore
modesty requires that we decline the naming of them, left we seem to glory in
our shame. Now these reasons to me seem not so weighty and cogent as to
necessitate the omission of so many of the most witty and significant of our
English Proverbs: Yet further to avoid all occasion of offense, I have by that
usual expedient of putting only the initial letters for the uncleanly words so
veiled them, that I hope they will not turn the stomach of the most nauseous.
For it is the naming such things by their plain and proper appellatives that is
odious and offensive, when they come lapped up (as we say) in clean linen,
that is expressed in oblique, figurative or metaphorical terms, or only
intimated and pointed at, the most modest can brook them well enough. The
Appendix of Hebrew Proverbs was collected and communicated by my worthy friend
Mr Richard Kidder Rector of Rayn in Essex.

So I have dispatched what I thought needful to premise either for my own
excuse or the Readers satisfaction, to whose favorable acceptance I recommend
the work.

Sentences and Phrases found in the former Collections of Proverbs, the most of
them not now in common use for such, so far as I know, but borrowed of other
Language.
A.
BEtter to go about then to fall into the ditch. Hispan. The absent Party is
still faulty. In vain he craves advice that will not follow it. When a thing is
done advice comes too late. Though old and wise yet still advise. It Is an ill
air where nothing is to be gained. No Alchymy to saving. Good Ale is meat,
drink and cloth. Anger dies quickly with a good man. He that is Angry is
seldom at ease. For that thou can do thy self rely not on another. The
wholesomest meat is at another man's cost. None knows the weight of another
burden. When you are an Anvil hold you still; When you are a hammer strike your
fill. The Ape so long clippeth her young that at last she kills them. An Ape
is an Ape, a varlet's a varlet, Though they be clad in silk or scarlet. A
broken Apothecary a new Doctor. Apothecaries would not give pills in sugar
unless they were bitter. Better ride on an Ass that carries me, then an Ass
that throws me.
B
BE not a baker if your head be of butter. Hispan. The balance distinguishes
not between gold and lead. There Is no great banquet but some fare ill. One
Barber shaves not so close but another finds work. On a good bargain think
twice. Ital. Barefooted men need not tread on thorns. Bashfulness is an enemy
to poverty. Better to be beaten then be in bad company. Beauty is a blossom.
Beauty draws more then oxen. Beauty is no inheritance. The beggar is never out
of his way. The beggar may sing before the thief. No more then the English of
that old Latin verse. Cantabit vacuus coram latrone viator.

Better to die a beggar then live a beggar. Such a beginning such an end. He
that makes his bed ill lies there. If the bed could tell all it knows it would
put many to the blush. He who lies long in bed his estate feels it. Who looks
not before finds himself behind. Bells call others to the Church, but enter not
in themselves. Be not too hasty to outbid another. Who has bitter in his mouth
spits not all sweet. The blind man's wife needs no painting. Hispan. He is blind
enough who sees not through the holes of a sieve. Hispan. That which does
blossom in the Spring will bring forth fruit in the Autumn. He that blows in
the dust fills his eyes. The body is the socket of the soul. It Is easy to bowl
down hill. Brabbling currs never want fore ears. The brain that sowes not corn
plants thistles. The Ass that brayes most ears least. Would you have better
bread then is made of wheat? Ital. Bread with eyes, and cheese without eyes.
Hisp. Ita. To beg breeches of a bare ars't man. As I brew so I must drink.
There is no deceit in a brimmer. Building is a sweet impoverishing. It is
called the Spanish plague: Therefore as Cato well says, Optimum est aliena
insania frui.

Building and marrying of children are great wasters Gall. The greatest burdens
are not the gainfullest. To buy dear is not bounty. Buy at a market, but sell
at home, Hispan.
C.
THere is no cake but there is the like of the same make. In a calm sea every
man is a pilot. A good candle-holder proves a good gamester. If thou have not a
capon feed on an onyon Gall. The Cat is hungry when a crust contents her. The
liquorish Cat gets many a rap. It Is a bad cause that none dare speak in. He
that chastises one amendeth many. Though the Fox runs, the chicken has wings.
The chicken is the Countries, but the city eats it. Woe to the house where there
is no chiding. The child says nothing but what he heard at the fire. To a
child all weather is cold. When children stand quiet they have done some harm.
What children hear at home does soon fly abroad. Children are poor men's riches,
are certain cares, but uncertain comforts, when they are little make parents
fools, when great, mad. A light Christmas a heavy sheaf. The choleric drinks,
the melancholic eats, the Phlegmatic sleeps. Who never climbed never fell.
After clouds comes clear weather. Give a clown your finger and he will take
your whole hand. Cobblers and tinkers are the best ale drinkers. The Cock
crows, but the hen goes. When you ride a young colt see your saddle be well
girt. The comforters head never aches. Ital. He commands enough that obeys a
wise man. Ital. It Is good to have company in trouble. Solamen m^seris socios
habuisse doloris.

Keep good men company, and you shall be of the number. Confession of a fault
makes half amends for it. He that contemplates has a day without a night. He
may well be contented who needs neither borrow nor flatter. He that converseth
not with men knows nothing. Corn in good years is hay, in ill years straw is
corn. Corn is cleansed with the wind, and the soul with chastning. He covers me
with his wings, and bites me with his bill. A covetous man is like a dog in a
wheel that roasteth meat for others. A dry cough is the trumpeter of death.
Keep counsel thy self first. Counsels in wine seldom prosper. He that will not
be counseled cannot be helped. Courtesy on one side does never last long.
Courts have no Almanacks. Craft brings nothing home. To a crazy ship all
winds are contrary. Credit lost is like a Venice glass broke. He that has lost
his credit is dead to the world. No man ever lost his credit but he who had it
not. Crooked logs make straight fires. Crosses are ladders that do lead to
heaven. Carrion crows bewail the dead sheep, and then eat them. Ital. Cruelty
is a tyrant that is always attended with fear. Who is a cuckold and conceals it
carries coals in his bosom. Hisp. Let every cuckold wear his own horns. In rain
and Sunshine cuckolds go to heaven. A cutpurse is a sure trade, for he has
ready money when his work is done.
D.
YOu dance in a net, and think no body sees you. When all is gone and nothing
left, What avails the Dagger with the Dudgeon heft? The danger past and God
forgotten. No day passes without some grief. It is never a bad day that has a
good night. Deaf men go away with the injury. It Is a wicked thing to make a
dearth on's garner. Death keeps no Calendar. Men fear death as children to go
in the dark. Better to go to bed supperless then to rise in debt. Hispan. Deeds
are fruits, words are but leaves. Deeds are males, and words are females. I
fatti sono maschi, le parole femine. Ital.

Desires are nourished by delays. He loses his thanks who promises and
delayeth. Gratia ab officio, quod mora tardat, abest.

A man may loose his goods for want of demanding them. Optima nomina non
appellando fiunt mala.

First deserve and then desire. Desert and reward seldom keep company. Discreet
women have neither eyes nor ears. La femme de bien n'a ny yeux ny oreilles.
Gall.

Sweet discourse makes short days and nights. Diseases are the interests of
pleasures. All her dishes are chafing dishes. The Devil is not always at one
door. It Is an ill battle where the Devil carries the colors. Diversity of
humors breeds tumors. A man may cause his own dog to bite him. The Dog who
hunts foulest hits at most faults. When a Dog is drowning every one offers him
water. Dogs wag their tails not so much in love to you as to your bread.
Hispan. Dogs gnaw bones because they cannot swallow them. Ital. Do what thou
ought, and come what can. Gall. A noble housekeeper needs no doors. Do as
the Friar says, not as he does. Hispan. A great dowry is a bed full of
brabbles. Hispan. Fine dressing is a foul house swept before the windows. He
was hanged that left his drink behind. Who loses his due gets no thanks.
E
WIde ears and a short tongue. Think of ease, but work on. That which is easily
done is soon believed. Who eats his dinner alone must saddle his horse alone.
Hispan. You cannot hide an Eel in a sack. Good to begin well, better to end
well. In the end things will mend. He that endures is not overcome. No man
better knows what good is then he who has endured evil. Envy never enriched
any man. Of evil grain no good seed can come. Bear with evil and expect good.
Evil gotten evil spent. Male parta male dilabuntur.

That which is evil is soon learned. Evil that comes out of thy mouth flies
into thy bosom.
F.
WHo has a fair wife needs more then two eyes. Fair is not fair, but that
which pleases. This is an Italian Prove. Non e bello quel'ch' e bello ma e
bello quel'che piace. A fair woman and a slash't gown find always some nail in
the way. One may sooner fall then rise. Fall not out with a friend for a
trifle. It 's a poor family which has neither a whore nor a thief in it. A fat
housekeeper makes lean executors. Every one basteth the fat hog, while the
lean one burns. Teach your father to get children. Such a father such a son.
The faulty stands on his guard. Every ones faults are not written in their
foreheads. Better pass a danger once then be always in fear. It. Reckon right
and February has thirty one days. He that has a fellow-ruler has an
over-ruler. Fiddlers fare, meat, drink and money. Take heed you find not that
you do not seek. Ital. Well may he smell of fire whose gown burns. The first
dish pleases all. I Will not make fish of one, and flesh of another. The fish
follow the bait. In the deepest water is the best fishing. He that is suffered
to do more then is fitting will do more then is lawful. No man can flay a
stone. One flower makes no garland. None is a fool always, every one sometimes.
A fool is fulsome. A fool demands much, but he is a greater fool that gives it.
Fools tie knots and wise men loose them. If fools went not to market bad ware
would not be sold. Hispan. One fool makes an hundred. If you play with a fool
at home he will play with you in the market. Better a bare foot then no foot at
all. Forgive any sooner then thy self. Gall. Ital. The foremost dog catches
the hare. The persuasion of the fortunate swayes the doubtful. When Fortune
smiles on thee take the advantage. He who has no ill fortune is cloyed with
good. He that will deceive the Fox must rise betimes. Foxes when sleeping have
nothing fall into their mouths. This is a French Prove. A Regnard endormi rien
ne cheut en la gueule. Foxes when they cannot reach the grapes say they are not
ripe. The best mirror is an old friend. Gall. Hispan. Life without a friend is
death with a witness. Make not thy friend too cheap to thee, nor thy self to
thy friend. When a friend asks there is no tomorrow. Hisp. A true friend
should be like a privy, open in necessity. A friend is not so soon gotten as
lost. Have but few friends though much acquaintance. In time of prosperity
friends will be plenty. In time of adversity not one among twenty. A tree is
known by the fruit, and not by the leaves. The further we go the further
behind.
G.
WHo would be a Gentleman let him storm a town. It Is not the gay coat makes the
Gentleman. He gives twice that gives in a trice. Qui cito dat bis dat.

Dono molto aspettato e venduto non donato. Ital. A Gift long waited for is
sold and not given.

Giving is dead now a days, and restoring very sick. Who gives thee a capon
give him the leg and the wing. Hisp. To give and keep there is need of wit. A
man of gladness seldom falls into madness. Who has glass-windows of his own
must take heed how he throws stones at his house. What your glass tells you
will not be told by counsel. He that has a body made of glass must not throw
stones at another. Do not say go but gaw, i. e. go thy self along. God deprives
him of bread who likes not his drink. God heals, and the Physician has the
thanks. Get thy spindle and thy distaff ready and God will send thee flax. God
comes with leaden feet, but strikes with iron hands. God comes at last when
we think he is furthest off. It. God has often a great share in a little
house. Gal. God, our parents and our master can never be requited. Gall. No
lock will hold against the power of gold. Hisp. You may speak with your gold
and make other tongues dumb. Ital. When we have gold we are in fear, when we
have none we are in danger. Ital. A good thing is soon snatched up. An handful
of good life is better then a bushel of learning. Mieux vaut un poigne de bonne
vie que plein muy'de clergy. Gal. One never loses by doing good turns. Good
and quickly seldom meet. Goods are theirs who enjoy them. Ital. Gossips and
frogs they drink and talk. The greatest strokes make not the best music. There
could be no great ones if there were no little. He that gropes in the dark
finds that he would not. Many things grow in the garden were never sown there.
Hispan. The grounsel speaks not save what it heard of the hinges.
H.
THe wise hand does not all the foolish tongue speaks. Happy is he who knows
his follies in his youth. The hard gives no more then he that has nothing.
Things hardly attained are long retained. He who would have a hare to breakfast
must hunt over night. Good harvests make men prodigal, bad ones provident. He
that has a good harvest may be content with some thistles. It Is safe riding in
a good haven. The first point of hawking is hold fast. The gentle hawk man's her
self. When the head aketh all the body is the worse. Dum caput infestat labor
omnia membra molestat.

One is not so soon healed as hurt. What the heart thinks the tongue
speaks. Who spits against heaven it falls in his face. Hispan. Hell is full
of good meanings and wishes. The highway is never about. Look high and fall
into a cowturd. Every man is best known to himself. Better my hog dirty home
then no hog at all. Dry bread at home is better then roastmeat abroad. He is
wise that is honest. Ital. Of all crafts to be an honest man is the
master-craft. A man never surfets of too much honesty. Lick honey with your
little finger. He that likes honey from thorns pays too dear for it. This is a
French Proverb. Trop achepte le miel qui sur espines le leche.

Honey is sweet but the Be stings. Honor and ease are seldom bedfellows. Who
lives by hope dies breaking of wind backwards. Ital. He that lives in hope
danceth without a minstrel. Hispan. The horse thinks one thing, and he that
rides him another. Lend thy horse for a long journey, thou may have him
return with his skin. All things are soon prepared in a well-ordered house The
foot on the cradle and hand on the distaff is the sign of a good housewife.
Hispan. An humble-bee in a cowturd thinks himself a King. It were more proper
to say a Beetle in a cowturd. An hungry man an angry man. Husbands are in
heaven whose wives chide not.
I.
IDleness turns the edge of wit. Idleness is the key of beggary. Jest not with
the eye nor with religion. Hispan. The truest jests sound worst in guilty ears.
Better be ill spoken of by one before all, then by all before one. An ill stake
stands longest. There were no ill language if it were not ill taken. The best
remedy against an ill man is much ground between both. Hispan. Industry is
fortunes right hand, and frugality her left. He goes not out of his way that
goes to a good Inn. We must not look for a golden life in an iron age. An itch
is worse then a smart. Itch an ease can no man please.
K.
WHeresoever you see your kindred make much of your friends. A knotty piece of
timber must have smooth wedges. Many do kiss the hands they wish to see cut off
His. He that eats the Kings goose shall be choked with the feathers.
L.
HE that labors and thrives spins gold. The lame goes as far as the
staggerer. The last suitour wins the maid. In a thousand pound of Law there is
not an ounce of love. The Law is not the same at morning and night. The worst
of Law is that one suit breeds twenty. Hispan. A suit of Law and an urinal
bring a man to the hospital. Hispan. A good Lawyer an evil neighbor. He laughs
ill that laughs himself to death. Let your letter stay for the Post, not the
Post for the letter. Ital. A Bean in liberty is better then a comfit in prison.
Every light is not the Sun. Like Author like book. Like to like, and Nan for
Nicholas. The Lions skin is never cheap. A little body does often harbor a
great'soul. The little cannot be great unless he devour many. Little sticks
kindle the fire, but great ones put it out. Little dogs start the hare, but the
great ones catch it. That little which is good fills the trencher. He lives
long that lives well. Life is half spent e're we know what it is. He that
lives wickedly can hardly die honestly. He that lives not well one year,
sorrows for it seven. It Is not how long but how well we live. Who lives well
sees afar off. Hispan. The life of man is a winters day and a winters way. He
loses nothing who keeps God for his friend. He has not lost all who has one
throw to cast. Gal. London Bridge was made for wise men to pass over, and for
fools to pass under. Love lives in cottages as well as in Courts. Love rules
his kingdom without a sword. Love being jealous makes a good eye look asquint.
Love asks faith, and faith asks firmness. Ital. They love too much that die for
love. They who love most are least set by. Where love fails we espy all faults.
A low hedge is easily leapt over.
M.
A Maid that gives yields. Ital. A maid that laughs is half taken. A maid
often seen, a gown often worn Are disesteem'd and held in scorn. Manners make often
fortunes. When many strike on an anvil they must strike by measure. Many
ventures make a full freight. Many without punishment, none without sin. Many
speak much that cannot speak well. The March Sun causes dust, and the wind
blows it about. When the mare has a bald face, the filly will have a blaze.
The market is the best garden. At London they are wont to say; Cheapside is the
best garden: The married man must turn his staff into a stake. Before thou
marry, be sure of a house wherein to tarry. Hispan. Ital. Honest men marry
soon, wise men not at all. Ital. He who marries for wealth does sell his
liberty. Who marries for love without money has good nights and sorry days.
Ital. Hispan. One eye of the masters sees more then ten of the servants. Ital.
Though the mastiffe be gentle, yet bite him not by the lip. Use the means, and
God will give the blessing. Measure thrice what thou buyest, and cut it but
once. Ital. Measure is a merry mean. He is not a merchant bare, that has
money, worth or ware. Good to be merry at meat. Metal is dangerous in a blind
horse. Mills and wives are ever wanting. The mill cannot grind with the water
that is past. The abundance of money ruins youth. The skilfullest wanting
money is scorned. He that has money in his purse cannot want a head for his
shoulders. Ready money will away. Money is that Art has turned up trump. Money
is welcome though it come in a sh -- clout, The morning Sun never lasts a day.
The good mother says not, will you, but gives. Ital. You must not let your
mouse-trap smell of cheese. Music helps not the toothache.
N.
ONe nail drives out another. Gall. Un clou pousse l'autre. A good name keeps
its luster in the dark. He who but once a good name gets, May piss a bed and
say he sweats. Ital. The evil wound is cured, but not the evil name. Nature
draws more then ten oxen. Who perishes in needless danger is the Devils
martyr. New meat begets a new appetite. When thy neighbors house does burn, be
careful of thine own. Tuares agitur paries cum proximus ardet.

He that runs in the night stumbles. The nightingale and the cuckoo sing both
in one month. The more noble, the more humble. Cold weather and knaves come
out of the North. Nothing down, nothing up. Nothing have, nothing crave. By
doing nothing we learn to do ill. Nihil agendo male agere discimus. It Is more
painful to do nothing then something. He that has nothing is not contented.
The Nurses tongue is privileged to talk.
O.
THe offender never pardons. Ital. The Offspring of them that are very old or
very young lasts not. It Is ill healing an old sore. He wrongs not an old man,
who steals his supper from him. Hispan. If the old dog barks, he gives
counsel. Can vecchio non baia ind arno. Ital. Old friends and old wine are
best. Gall, and old gold. Old men, when they scorn young, make much of death.
Rather, as Mr. Howell has it, When they sport with young women. When Bees are
old they yield no honey. The old man's staff is the rapper at Deaths door. His.
An old knave is no babe. Where old age is evil, youth can learn no good. When
an old man will not drink, go to see him in another world. Ital. He who has
but one hog makes him fat, and he who has but one son makes him a fool. Ital.
One shrewd turn asks another. One slumberr invites another. All feet tread not
in one shoe. If every one would mend one, all would be amended. One and none is
all one. Hispan. There came nothing out of the sack but what was in it. It Is a
rank courtesy when a man is forced to give thanks for his own. The smoke of a
man's own house is better then the fire of another. Hispan. Where shall the Ox
go but he must labor. Take heed of an Ox before, an Ass behind, and a Monk on
all sides. Hispan.
P.
MAny can pack the cards that cannot play. Let no woman's painting breed thy
stomachs fainting. Painted pictures are dead speakers. On painting and fighting
look aloof off. He that will enter into Paradise must have a good key. Say no
ill of the year till it be past. Every path has a puddle. Patch and long sit,
build and soon flit. Patience is a flower grows not in every ones garden.
Herein is an allusion to the name of a Plant so called, i. e. Rhabarbarum
Monachorum. He who has much pease may put the more in the pot. Let every
peddler carry his own burden. There Is no companion like the penny. Hispan. He
that takes not up a pin sleights his wife. He that pitieth another remembers
himself. Hisp. Play, women and wine undo men laughing. Noble plants suit not a
stubborn soil. Fly pleasure and it will follow thee. Never pleasures without
repentance. The pleasures of the mighty are the tears of the poor. If your plow
be jogging you may have meat for your horses. Poor men have no souls. There are
none p^or but such as God hates Poverty parts friends [or fellowship.]
Poverty is the mother of health. True praise takes root and spreads. Neither
praise nor dispraise thy self, thine actions serve the turn. He that will not
be saved needs no preacher. Prettiness dies quickly. Who draws his sword
against his Prince, must throw away the scabbard. It Is an ill procession where
the Devil holds the candle. Between promising and performing a man may marry
his daughter. Gall. He promises like a merchant, and pays like a man of war.
To promise and give nothing is a comfort to a fool. He is proper that has
proper conditions. Providence is better then rent. He has lest his purse in
his other hose. A full purse makes the mouth to speak. An empty purse fills the
face with wrinkles.
R.
It Is possible for a ram to kill a butcher. The rath sower never borrows
o'th'late. A man without reason is a beast in season. Take heed of enemies
reconciled, and of meat twice boiled. Hispan. A good Recorder sets all in
order. Remove an old tree, and it will wither to death. When all is consumed,
Repentance comes too late. He may freely receive courtesies that knows how to
requite them. God help the rich, the poor can beg. Riches are but the baggage
of Fortune. When riches increase the body decreaseth. For most men grow old
before they grow rich. Riches are like muck which stink in a heap, but spread
abroad, make the earth fruitful. It Is easy to rob an Orchard, when none keeps
it. A rugged stone grows smooth from hand to hand. Better to rule then be ruled
by the rout. The rusty sword and empty purse plead performance of covenants.
S.
It Is a bad sack will abide no clouting. When it pleases not God, the Saint
can do little. Hisp. Ital. Salmon and Sermon have their season in Lent. Gall. A
Scepter is one thing, a ladle another. Alia res sceptrum, alia plectrum. You
pay more for your schooling, then your learning is worth. Who robs a Scholar
robs twenty men. For commonly he borrows a cloak of one, a sword of another, a
pair of boots of a third, a hat of a fourth, etc. Who has a scold has sorrow
to his sops. Being on the Sea sail, being on the land settle. They complain
wrongfully on the Sea, who twice suffer shipwreck. Every thing is good in its
season. Would you know secrets, look them in grief or pleasure. He who seeks
trouble never misseth it. A man must sell his ware after the rates of the
market. He who serves well, needs not be afraid to ask his wages. The groat is
ill saved that shames the master. It Is a foolish sheep that makes the wolf his
confessor Ital. Ships fear fire more then water. A great ship does ask deep
waters. The chamber of sickness is the chapel of devotion. Silence does seldom
harm. Silence is the best ornament of a woman. Silks and Sattins put out the
fire in the kitchen. He that sings on I ryday shall weep on Sunday. The
singing-man keeps his shop in his throat. Hisp. Sit in your place and none can
make you rise. Slander leaves a score behind it. Calumniare fortiter aliquid
adhaerebit. Sloth turns the edge of wit. Better the last smile then the first
laughter. A smiling boy seldom proves a good servant. The Smith and his penny
are both black. Whether you do boil snow or pound it, you can have but water of
it. Sorrow is good for nothing but sin. When sorrow is a sleep wake it not.
Soldiers in peace are like chimneys in summer. Who sows his corn in the field
trusts in God. He that speaks me fair and loves me not, I Will speak him fair and
trust him not. He that speaks does sow, he that holds his peace does reap.
Ital. Speech is the picture of the mind. Spend and be free, but make no waste.
To a good Spender God is the treasurer. The Jews spend at Easter, the Moors at
marriages, and the Christians in suits of Law. Ital. Who more then he is worth
does spend, he makes a rope his life to end. Who spends more then he should,
shall not have to spend when he would. Who has spice enough may season his
meat as he pleases. It Is a poor sport that is not worth the candle. The best
of the sport is to do the deed and say nothing That which will not be spun, let
it not come between the spindle and the distaff. They steal the hog and give
away the feet in alms. Hispan. Steal the goose and give the giblets in alms.
Step after step the ladder is ascended. Who has none to still him, may weep
out his eyes. The stillest humors are always the worst. Who remove stones,
bruise their fingers. Who has skirts of straw, needs fear the fire. Hisp.
Stretch your legs according to your coverlet. It Is better to be stung by a
nettle, then pricked by a rose. I sucked not this out of my fingers ends.
Though the Sun shines, leave not your cloak at home. Hispan. In every Country
the Sun rises in the morning. He deserves not the sweet that will not taste of
the sour.
T.
THe table robs more then the thief. Talk much and err much (says the
Spaniard) Talking pays no toll. They talk of Christmas so long, that it comes.
The taste of the kitchen is better then the smell. To him that has lost his
taste, sweet is sour. Who has aching teeth has ill tenants. Tell a tale to a
mare, and she will let a fart. Gall. Asino fabulam. A thin meadow is soon mowed.
The thorn comes forth with his point forwards. The thought has good legs, and
the quill a good tongue. Ital. A thousand pounds and a bottle of hay, is all
one thing at Dooms day. There are more threatened then struck. He who dies of
threats, must be rung to Church by farts. He that is thrown would ever wrestle.
When it thunders, the thief becomes honest. The tide will fetch away what the
ebb brings. Time is the rider that breaks youth. Every one puts his fault on
the times. Soon todd soon with God. A northern Proverb, when a child has teeth
too soon. A long tongue is a sign of a short hand. Better that the feet slip
then the tongue. He that strikes with his tongue, must ward with his head. The
tongue's not steel, yet it cuts. The tongue breaks bone, though it self have
none. Gall. The tongue talks at the heads cost. Too much breaks the bag. Hisp.
Too much scratching pains, too much talking plagues Trade is the mother of
money. When the tree is fallen, every man goes to it with Gall. his hatchet.
Gall. Truth and oil are ever above. Hispan. Truth has a good face, but bad
clothes.
U.
NO cut to unkindness. Unknown unkist. Unminded unmon'd. Under water, famine;
under snow, bread. Ital. Valor that parlies, is near yielding. Valor can do
little without discretion. Vis consilii expers mole ruit sua. Et parvi sunt
foris arma nisi sit consilium domi. That Is not good language that all
understand not. Where men are well used, they will frequent there.
W.
HE that waits on another man's trencher, makes many a late dinner. For want of
a nail the shoe is lost, for want of a shoe the horse is lost, for want of a
horse the rider is lost. War is deaths feast. Who preaches war is the Devils
chaplain. War makes thieves, and peace hangs them. Gall. It. War, hunting and
Law, are as full of trouble as pleasure. He that makes a good war, makes a good
peace. He is wise enough that can keep himself warm. Good watch prevents
misfortune. He that has a head of wax, must not walk in the Sun. Where it is
weakest there the thread breaks. Wealth's like rheum, it falls on the weakest
parts. The greatest wealth, is contentment with a little. The gown's hers that
wears it, and the world's his who enjoys it. Change of weather is the discourse
of fools. Hisp. Expect not fair weather in winter on one nights ice. He that
goes out with often loss. At last comes home by weeping cross. Weight and
measure take away strife. He that does well wearieth not himself. Well to work
and make a fire, It does care and skill require. Such a welcome such a farewell.
Welcome death, quoth the Rat, when the trap fell down. As welcome as flowers in
May. I wept when I was born, and every day shows why. Whores affect not you but
your money. Whoring and bawdery do often end in beggary. A man's best fortune or
his worst is a wife. He that lets his wife go to every feast, and his horse
drink at every water, shall neither have good wife nor good horse. Ital. Or
thus, He that lets his horse drink at every lake, And his wife go to every
wake, Shall never be without a whore and a jade. Wife and children are bills of
charges, The cunning wife makes her husband her apron. Hispan. The wife is the
key of the house. He that has wife and children wants not business. Where the
will is ready, the feet are light. To him that wills, ways are not wanting.
With as good a will as ever I came from school. He that does what he will, often
does not what he ought. Will will have wilt, though will woe win. Nothing is
impossible to a willing mind. Willows are weak, yet they bind other wood. Ital.
Pull down your hat on the wind side. A good Winter brings a good Summer. Wine
is the masters, but the goodness is the drawers. Wine in the bottle does not
quench the thirst. Ital. Wine is a turn-coat, first a friend, then an enemy.
Wine that costs nothing is digested e're it be drunk. You cannot know wine by
the barrel. Wine wears no breeches. Gall. i. e. Shows what a man is. You cannot
drive a windmill with a pair of bellows. You may be a wise man though you cannot
make a watch. Wise men care not for what they cannot have. None is so wise but
the fool overtakes him. Better to have then wish. Better it be done then wish
it had been done. It Is wit to pick a lock and steal a horse, but wisdom to let
them alone. You have a little wit and it does you good sometimes. He has
enough to keep the wolf from the door. That is, to satisfy his hunger,
latrantem stomachum. Wolves lose their teeth, but not their memory. Who has a
wolf for his mate, needs a dog for his man. Ital. Who keeps company with the
wolf, will learn to howl. Chi prattica con lupi impara a hurlar. Ita. Women,
priests and poultry have never enough. Done, preti and polli non son may
satolli. To woe is a pleasure in a young man, a fault in an old. Green wood
makes a hot fire. Wood half burnt is easily kindled. You were better give the
wool then the sheep. Meglio e dar la lana che lapecora. Ital. Many words will
not fill a bushel. Words and feathers are tossed by the wind. Hisp. Good words
without deeds are rushes and reeds. One ill word asks another. They must
hunger in frost, that will not work in heat. What is a workman without his
tools. There needs a long time to know the worlds pulse. This world is nothing
except it tend to another. A green wound is soon healed. Wranglers never want
words.
Y.
THe more thy years, the nearer thy grave. Youth and white paper take any
impression.
Proverbs and Proverbial observations belonging to Health, Diet and Physic.
AN Ague in the Spring is Physic for a King.
That is if it comes off well. For an Ague is nothing else but a strong
fermentation of the blood; Now as in the fermentation of other liquors there is
for the most part a separation made of that which is heterogeneous and
unsociable, whereby the liquor becomes more pure and defaecare, so is it also
with the blood, which by fermentation (easily excited at this time by the
return of the Sun) does purge it self, and cast off those impure heterogeneous
particles which it had contracted in the winter time. And that these may be
carried away, after every particular fermentation or paroxysm, and not again
taken up by the blood, it is necessary or at least very useful, to sweat in bed
after every fit. And an Ague-fit is not thought to go off kindly, unless it
ends in a sweat. Moreover at the end of the disease it is convenient to purge
the body, to carry away those more gross and seculent parts which have been
separated by the several fermentations, and could not so easily be avoided by
sweat, or that still remain in the blood though not sufficient to cause a
paroxysm. And that all persons especially those of years may be lessoned that
they neglect not to purge their bodies after the getting rid of agues, I shall
add a very material and useful observation of Doctor Sidenham's, Sublato morbe
(says he, speaking of Autumnal fevers) aeger sedulo purgandus est;
incredibile enim dictu quanta morborum vis expurgationis defectu post febres
Autumnales subnascatur. Miror tutem hoc a medicis minus caveri, minus etiam
admoneri Quandocunque enim morborum alterutrum (Febrem t^rtianam aut quartanam)
paulo provectioris aetatis hominibus accidisse vidi, atque purgationem etiam
omissam; certo praedicere potui periculosum aliquem morbum eosdem postea
adoriturum, de quo tamen illi nondum somniaverant, quasi perfect jam sanati.

Agues come on horseback, but go away on foot. A bit in the morning is better
then nothing all day. Or, then a thump on the back with a stone. You eat and
eat, but you do not drink to fill you. That much drinking takes off the edge of
the Appetite to meat, we see by experience in great drinkers, who for the most
part do (as we say) but pingle at their meat and eat little. Hippocrates
observed of old, that (...) A good hearty draught takes away hunger after long
fasting sooner by far then eating would do. The reason whereof I conceive is,
because that acid humor which by vellicating the membranes of the stomach
causes a sense of hunger, is by copious ingestion of drink very much diluted,
and its acidity soon taken off.

An apple, an egg and a nut, you may eat after a Slut.
Pomae, ova atque nuces, si det tibi sordida, gustes.
Children an chicken must be always picking.
That is, they must eat often, but little at a time. Often, because the body
growing requires much addition of food; little at a time, for fear of
oppressing and extinguishing the natural heat. A little oil nourishes the
flame, but a great deal poured on at once may drown and quench it. A man may
carry that by little and little, which if laid on his back at once he would
sink under. Hence old men, who in this respect also, I mean by reason of the
decay of their spirits and natural heat, do again become children, are advised
by Physicians to eat often, but little at once.

Old young and old long. Divieni tosto vechio se vuoi vivere lungamente
vecchio. Ital. Mature sias senex si diu senex esse velis. This is alleged as a
Proverb by Cicero in his book de senectute. For as the body is preserved in
health by moderate labor or exercise, so by violent and immoderate it is
impaired and worn out. And as a great excess of any quality or external
violence does suddenly destroy the body, so a lesser excess does weaken and
partially destroy it, by rendering it less lasting.

They who would be young when they are old must be old when they are young.
When the Fern is as high as a spoon
You may sleep an hour at noon.
The custom of sleeping after dinner in the summer time is now grown general in
Italy and other hot Countries, so that from one to three or four of the Clock
in the afternoon you shall scarce see any one stirring about the streets of
their cities. Schola Salernitana condemns this practice, Sit brevis aut nullus
tibi somnus meridianus: Febris, pigrities, capitis dolor atque Catarrhus. Haec
tibi proveniunt ex somno meridiano. But it may be this advice was intended for
us English (to whose King this book was dedicated) rather then the Italians or
other inhabitants of hot Countries, who in the Summer would have enough to do
to keep themselves waking after dinner. The best way at least for us in colder
climats is altogether to abstain from sleep; but if we must needs sleep, (as
the Italian Physicians advise) either to take a nod sitting in a chair, or if
we lie down strip off our clothes as at night, and go into bed, as the present
Duke of Tuscany himself practices and advises his subjects to do, but by no
means lie down upon a bed in our clothes.

When the Fern is as high as a ladle,
You may sleep as long as you are able.
When Fern begins to look red
Then milk is good with brown bread.
It is observed by good housewives, that milk is thicker in the Autumn then in
the Summer, notwithstanding the grass must needs be more hearty, the juice of
it being better concocted by the heat of the Sun in Summer time. I conceive the
reason to be because the cattle drink water abundantly by reason of their heat
in Summer, which does much dilute their milk.

Every man is either a fool or a Physician after thirty years of age. After
dinner sit a while, after supper walk a mile.
Post epulas stabis vel passus mill meabis. I know no reason for the
difference, unless one eats a greater dinner then supper. For when the stomach
is full it is not good to exercise immediately, but to sit still awhile; though
I do not allow the reason usually given viz. because exercise draws the heat
outward to the exterior parts, and so leaving the stomach and bowels cold,
hinders concoction: for I believe that as well the stomach as the exterior
parts are hottest after exercise: And that those who exercise most, concoct
most and require most meat. So that exercise immediately after meat is hurtful
rather upon account of precipitating concoction, or turning the meat out of the
stomach too foon. As for the reason they give for standing or walking after
meals, viz. because the meat by that means is depressed to the bottom of the
stomach; where the natural heat is most vigorous, it is very frivolous, both
because the stomach is a wide vessel, and so the bottom of it cannot be empty,
but what falls into it must needs fall down to the bottom: And because most
certainly the stomach concocts worst when it is in a pendulous posture, as it
is while we are standing Hence, as the Lord Verulam truly observes, Gally
slaves and such as exercise sitting, though they fare meanly and work hard yet
are commonly fat and fleshy. Whereupon also he commends those works or
exercises which a man may perform sitting, as sawing with a hand-saw and the
like. Some turn this saying into a droll thus.

After dinner sleep a while, after supper go to bed.
An old Physician, a young Lawyer. An old Physician because of his experience;
a young Lawyer, because he having but little practice will have leisure enough
to attend your business, and desiring thereby to recommend himself and get
more, will be very diligent in it. The Italians say, An old Physician, a young
Barber.

A good Surgeon must have an Eagles eye, a Lions heart, and a Ladies hand.
Good keal is half a meal.
Keal, i. e. Pottage of any kind, though properly Keal be pottage made of
Colewort, which the Scots call Keal, and of which usually they make their broth.

If you would live ever, you must wash milk from your liver.
Vin sur laict c' est souhait, Laict sur vin c' est venin. Gall. This is an
idle old saw, for which I can see no reason but rather for the contrary.

Butter is gold in the morning, silver at noon, lead at night. He that would
live for ay must eat Sage in May.
That Sage was by our ancestors esteemed a very wholesome herb, and much
conducing to longevity appears by that verse in Schola Salernitana, Cur
moriatur homo cui Salvia crescit in horto?


After cheese comes nothing. An egg and to bed. You must drink as much after an
egg as after an Ox. This is a fond and ungrounded old saying.

Light suppers make clean sheets. He that goes to bed thirsty rises healthy.
Gall. He that goes to bed thirsty, etc. I look upon this as a very good
observation and should advise all persons not to go to bed with their stomachs
full of wine, beer or any other liquour. For (as the ingenious Doctor Lower
observes) nothing can be more injurious to the brain: of which he gives a most
rational and true account, which take in his own words. Cum enim propter
proclivem corpor is situm urina a renibus secreta non ita facile and prompte
uti cum erecti sumus in vesicam per uretcres delabatur. Cumque vesicae cervix
ex proclivi situ urinae pondere non aded gravetur; atque spiritibus per somnum
in cerebrum aggregatis and quiescentibus, vesica oneris ejus sensum non ita
percipiat, sed officii quasi oblita ed copid urinae aliquando distenditur, ut
majori recipiendae spatium vix detur; inde fit ut propter impeditum per renes
and ureteres urinae decursum, in totum corpus regurgitet, and nisi diarrhoea
proximo man's succedat, aut nocturno sudore evacuetur in cerebrum depon^ debet.
Tract. de Cord. cap. 2. page 141.

Qui couche avec la soif se leve avec la sante.
One hours sleep before midnight's worth two hours after. For the Sun being the
life of this Sublunary world, whose heat causes and continues the motion of all
terrestrial animals, when he is furthest off, that is about midnight, the
spirits of themselves are aptest to rest and compose, so that the middle of the
night must needs be the most proper time to sleep in, especially if we consider
the great expense of spirits in the day time, partly by the heat of the
afternoon, and partly by labor and the constant exercise of all the senses;
Wherefore then to wake is to put the spirits in motion, when there are fewest
of them, and they naturally most sluggish and unfit for it.

Who goes to bed supperless, all night tumbles and tosses. This is an Italian
Proverb. Chi va a letto senza cena Tutta notte si dimena.
That is, if a man goes to bed hungry, otherwise, He that eats a plentiful
dinner may well afford to go to bed supperless, unless he has used some strong
bodily labor or exercise. Certainly it is not good to go to ones rest till the
stomach be well emptied, that is if we eat suppers, till two hours at least
after supper. For (as the old Physicians tell us) though the second and third
concoctions be best performed in sleep; yet the first is rather disturbed and
perverted. If it be objected, that laboring people do not observe such rule,
but do both go to bed presently after supper, and to work after dinner, yet who
more healthful then they; I answer that the case is different, for though by
such practice they do turn their meat out of their stomachs before full and
perfect concoction, and so multiply crude humors, yet they work and sweat them
out again, which students and sedentary persons do not. Indeed some men who
have a speedy concoction and hot brains must to procure sleep eat something at
night which may send up gentle vapors into the head, and compose the spirits.
Chi ben cena ben dorme. Ital.

Often and little eating makes a man fat. Fish must swim thrice. Once in the
water, a second time in the sauce, and a third time in wine in the stomach.
Poisson, gorret and cochin vie en l'eau, and morten vin. Gall. Fish and young
swine live in water and die in wine.

Drink wine and have the gout, and drink no wine and have the gout too. With
this saying, intemperate persons that have or fear the gout, encourage
themselves to proceed in drinking wine notwithstanding.

Young men's knocks old men feel.
Quae peccamus Juvenes ea luimus senes.
Go to bed with the lamb, and rise with the lark. Early to go to bed and early
to rise, makes a man healthy, wealthy and wise. Wash your hands often, your
feet seldom; and your head never. Eat at pleasure, drink by measure.
This is a French Proverb, Pain tant qu'il dure, vin a mesure, and they
themselves observe it. For no people eat more bread, nor indeed have better to
eat: And for wine the most of them drink it well diluted, and never to any
excess that I could observe. The Italians have this saying likewise, Pan mentre
dura ma vin a misura.

Cheese it is a peevish else,
It digests all things but it self.
This is a translation of that old rhythming Latin verse. Caseus est nequam,
quia digerit omnia se quam.


The best Physicians are Dr. Diet, Dr. Quiet and Dr. Merryman. This is nothing
but that Distich of Schola Salernitana Englished. Si tibi deficiant medici,
medici tibi fiant.
Haec tria men's laeta, requies, moderata diaeta.


Drink in the morning staring,
Then all the day be sparing.
Eat a bit before you drink. Feed sparingly and defy the Physician. Better be
meals many then one too merry. You should never touch your eye but with your
elbow. Non patitur ludum fama, fides, oculus.


To these I shall add a few French and Italian Proverbs.

TEnez chaud le pied and la test, Au demeurant viyez en best.
Which Mr. Cotgrave englishes thus, The head and feet kept warm, The rest will
take no harm.
Jeun chair and vieil poisson. i. e. Young flesh and old fish are best. Qui vin
ne boit apres salade, est en danger estre malade. i. e. He that drinks not wine
after salade, is in danger to be sick. Di giorni quanto voi, di notte quanto
poi. i. e. Cover your head by day as much as you will, by night as much as you
can. Il pesse guasta l'acqua, la carne la concia. i. e. Fish spoils water, but
flesh mends it. Pome, pere and noce Guastano la voce. Apples, pears and nuts
spoil the voice. Febre quartana Ammazza i vecchii, and i giovani risana. A
Quartan Ague kills old men and heales young. Pesce, oglio and amico vecchio.
Old fish, old oil and an old friend are the best. Vitello, pullastro and pesce
crudo ingrassano i cimiterii. i. e. Raw pulleyn, veal and fish make the
churchyards fat. Vino di mezo, oglio di sopra and miele di sotto. Of wine the
middle, of oil the top, and of honey the bottom is best. Macrob Saturn. lib. 7.
c. 12. Quaro igitur, Cur oleum quod in summo est, vinum quod in medio, mel quod
in fundo optimum esse credantur. Nec cunctatus Disarius ait, Mel quod optimum
est reliquo ponderosius est. In vase igitur mellis pars quae in imo est
reliquis praestat pondere, and idco supernante pretiofior est. Contra in vase
vini pars inferior admixtione faecis non modo turbulenta, sed and sapore
deterior est, pars vero summa aeris vicinid corrumpitur, etc.

Aria di finestra colpo di balestra. i. e. The air of a window is as the stroke
of a crossbow. Asciuto il piede calda la testa, e dal resto vive da bestia, i.
e. Keep your feet dry and your head hot, and for the rest live like a beast.
Piscia chiaro and incaca al medico. i. e. Piss clear and defy the physician.
Proverbs and Proverbial Observations concerning Husbandry, Weather and the
seasons of the year.
JAniveer freez the pot by the fire. If the grass grow in Janiveer, It grows
the worse for it all the year.
There Is no general rule without some exception: for in the year 1667 the
winter was so mild, that the pastures were very green in January, yet was there
scarce ever known a plentifuller crop of hay then the summer following.

When Candlemas day is come and gone
The snow lies on a hot stone.
February fill dike, Be it black or be it white;
But if it be white, It Is the better to like.
Pluye de Feburier vaut es gaux de fumier. Gall. Snow brings a double
advantage: It not only preserves the corn from the bitterness of the frost and
cold, but enriches the ground by reason of the nitrous salt which it is
supposed to contain. I have observed the Alps and other high mountains covered
all the winter with snow, soon after it is melted to become like a garden, so
full of luxuriant plants and variety of flowers. It is worth the noting, that
mountainous plants are for the most part larger then those of the same genus
which grow in lower grounds; and that these snowy mountains afford greater
variety of species then plain countries.

Februeer does cut and shear. All the months in the year curse a fair
Februeer. or thus, The Welchman had rather see his dam on the beer,
Then so see a fair Februeer.
March in Janiveer, Janiveer in March I fear.
March hack ham, comes in like a lion, goes out like a lamb.
A bushel of March dust is worth a Kings ransom. March grass never did good.
March wind and May Sun, make clothes white and maids dun. March many weathers.
April showers bring forth May flowers. When April blows his horn, It Is good
both for hay and corn.
That is, when it thunders in April: for thunder is usually accompanied with
rain.

April borrows three days of March and they are ill. An April flood carries
away the frog and her brood. A cold May and a windy, makes a full barn and a
findy.
The merry month of May. May come she early or come she late she will make the
cow to quake.
May seldom passes without a brunt of cold weather. Some will have it thus,
She Will bring the Cow. quake. i. e. Gramen tremulum, which is true, but I
suppose not the intent of the Proverb.

A May flood never did good. Look at your corn in May, and you will come weeping
away: Look at the same in June, and you will come home in another tune.
Shear your sheep in May, And shear them all away.
A swarm of Bees in May, is worth a load of hay: But a swarm in July, is not
worth a fly.
When the wind's in the East, It Is neither good for man nor beast.
The East Wind with us is commonly very sharp, because it comes off the
Continent. Midland Countries of the same latitude are generally colder then
maritime, and Continents then Islands: and it is observed in England that near
the seaside, as in the County of Cornwall, etc. the snow seldom lies three
days.

When the wind's in the South, It Is in the rains mouth.
This is an observation that holds true all over Europe; and I believe in a
great part of Asia too. For Italy and Greece the ancient Latin and Greek Poets
witness: as Ovid. Madidis notus evolat alis. and speaking of the South,
Metamorph. 1. he says, Contraria tellus nubibus assiduis pluvioque madescit ab
Austro. Homer calls the North wind (...). Pliny says, In totum venti omnes a
Septentrione ficclores quam a meridie. lib. 2. cap. 47. For Judas in Asia the
Scripture gives testimony; Prove. 25. 23. The North Wind drives away rain.
Wherefore by the rule of contraries, the South Wind must bring it. The reason
of this with the ingenious Philosopher Des Carts I conceive to be, because
those countries which lie under and near to the course of the Sun, being
sufficiently heated by his almost perpendicular beams, send up a multitude of
vapors into the air, which being kept in constant agitation by the same heat
that raised them require a great space to perform their motions in, and new
still ascending they must needs be cast off part to the South and part to the
North of the Suns course; So that were there no winds the parts of the earth
toward the North and South poles would be most full of clouds and vapors. Now
the North Wind blowing, keeps back those vapors, and causes clear weather in
these Northern parts: but the South wind brings store of them along with it,
which by the cold of the air are here condensed into clouds, and fall down in
rain. Which account is confirmed by what Pliny reports of Africa, loc. cit.
Permutant and duo naturam cum situ: Auster Africae screnus, Aquilo nubilus. The
reason is, because Africa being under or near the course of the Sun, The
South Wind carries away the vapors there ascending: but the North Wind detains
them, and so partly by compressing, partly by cooling them causes them to
condense and descend in showers.

When the wind's in the South,
It blows the bait into the fishes mouth.
No weather is ill, If the wind be still.
A hot May makes a fat Churchyard. A green winter makes a fat Churchyard.
This Proverb was sufficiently confuted Anno 1667, in which the winter was very
mild; and yet no mortality or Epidemical disease ensued the Summer or Autumn
following. We have entertained an opinion, that frosty weather is the most
healthful, and the hardest winters the best. But I can see no reason for it,
for in the hottest countries of the world, as Brazil, etc. Men are longest
lived where they know hot what frost or snow means, the ordinary age of man
being an hundred and ten years: and here in England we found by experience,
that the last great plague succeeded one of the sharpest frosty winters that
has lately happened.

Winter never rots in the sky. Ne caldo, ne gelo resta may in cielo.
Ital. Neither heat nor cold abides always in the sky. It Is pity fair weather
should do any harm. Hail brings frost i'th'tail. A snow year, a rich year. Anno
di neve anno di been. Ital. A winters thunder's a summers wonder. Quand il
tonne en Mars on peut dire helas. Gall. Drought never bred dearth in England.
Whosoever has but a mouth, shall never in England suffer drought. v. in Sentent.
When the sand does feed the clay, (which is in a wet summer) England woe and
well-a-day:
But when the clay does feed the sand, (which is in a dry summer) Then it is
well with England.
Because there is more clay then sandy ground in England.

The worse for the rider, the better for the bider.
Bon pais mauvais chemin. Gall. Rich land, bad way. When the Cuckoo comes to
the bare thorn,
Sell your cow and buy you corn:
But when she comes to the full bit,
Sell your corn and buy you sheep.
If the cock moult before the hen,
We shall have weather thick and thin:
But if the hen moult before the cock,
We shall have weather hard as a block.
These prognostics of weather and future plenty, etc. I look upon as
altogether uncertain; and were they narrowly observed would I believe, as often
miss as hit.

In The old of the moon A cloudy morning bodes a fair afternoon.
As the days lengthen, so the cold strengthens.
Cresce di cresce'l freddo dice il pescador. Ital. The reason is, for that the
earth having been well heated by the Sun's long lying upon it in Summer time is
not suddenly cooled again by the recess of the Sun, but retains part of its
warmth till after the Winter Solstice: which warmth, notwithstanding the return
and access of the Sun, must needs still languish and decay, and so
notwithstanding the lengthening of the days the weather grows colder, till the
external heat caused by the Sun is greater then the remaining internal heat
of the earth for as long as the external is lesser then the internal (that
is, so long as the Sun has not force enough to produce as great a heat in the
earth as was remaining from the last Summer) so long the internal must needs
decrease. The like reason there is why the hottest time of the day is not just
at noon, but about two of the clock in the afternoon and the hotest time of the
year not just at the Summer Solstice, but about a month after, because till
then the external heat of the Sun is greater then the heat produced in the
earth. So if you put a plece of iron into a very hot fire it will not suddenly
be heat so hot as the fire can make it, and though you abate your fire, before
it be througly heated, yet will it grow hotter and hotter, till it comes to
that degree of heat which the fire it is in can give it.

If there be a rainbow in the eve, it will rain and leave: But if there be a
rainbow in the morrow, It will neither lend nor borrow.
An evening red and a morning gray, Is a sign of a fair day.
Le rouge soir and blanc matin Font rejouir le pelerin.
Gall. Sera rossa and negro matino Allegra il pelegrino.
Ital. A red evening and a white morning rejoice the pilgrim.

When the clouds are upon the hills they will come down by the mills.
David and Chad sow pease good or bad.
That is about the beginning of March.

This rule in gardening never forget,
To sow dry, and to set wet.
When the sloe-tree's as white as a sheet,
Sow your barley whether it be dry or wet.
Sow beans in the mud, and they will grow like wood.
Till St James his day be come and gone,
You may have hops or you may have none.
The pigeon never knows woe,
But when she does a benting go.
If the Partridge had the wood cocks thigh,
It Would be the best bird that ever did fly.
Yule is good on yule even. That is, as I understand it, every thing in his
season, Yule is Christmas.

Tripe's good meat if it be well wiped. A Michaelmass rot comes n'ere in the pot.
A nagg with a weamb and a mare with nean. i. e. none. Behind before, before
behind, a horse is in danger to be pricked.
You must look for grass on the top of the oak tree. Because the grass seldom
springs well before the oak begins to put forth, as might have been observed
the last year.

St. Matthie sends sap into the tree. A famine in England begins at the
horsemanger. In opposition to the rack: for in dry years when hay is dear,
commonly corn is cheap: but when oats (or indeed any one grain) is dear, the
rest are seldom cheap.

Winters thunder and Summers flood,
Never boded Englishman good.
Butter's once a year in the cows horn. They mean when the cow gives no milk.
And butter is said to be mad twice a year; once in Summer time in very hot
weather, when it is too thin and fluid; and once in winter in very cold
weather, when it is too hard and difficult to spread.

Barly-straw's good fodder when the cow gives water. On Valentines day will a
good goose lay.
If she be a good goose her dame well to pay, She will lay two eggs before
Valentines day.
Before S. Chad every goose lays both good and Bad.
It rains by planets. This the Country people use when it rains in one place
and not in another: meaning that the showers are governed by the Planets, which
being erratick in their own motions, cause such uncertain wandering of clouds
and falls of rain. Or it rains by Planets, that is, the falls of showers are as
uncertain as the motions of the Planets are imagined to be.

If Candlemas day be fair and bright
Winter will have another flight:
If on Candlemas day it be shower and rain,
Winter is gone and will not come again.
This is a translation or metraphrase of that old La-Latin Distich; Si Sol
splendescat Maria purificante,
Major erit glacies post festum quam fuit ante.
Now though I think all observations about particular days superstitious and
frivolous, yet because probably if the weather be fair for some days about this
time of the year, it may betoken frost, I have put this down as it was
delivered me.

Barnaby bright, the longest day and the shortest night.
Lucy light, the shortest day and the longest night.
S. Bartholomew brings the cold dew.
S. Matthie all the year goes by. Because in Leap-year the supernumerary day is
then intercalated.

S. Matthee shut up the Be.
S. Valentine set thy hopper by mine.
S. Mattho, take thy hopper and sow.
S. Benedick sow thy pease or keep them in thy rick.
Red herring never spoke word but even,
Broyl my back, but not my weamb.
Said the Chevin to the Trout,
My head's worth all thy bouk.
Meddlers are never good till they be rotten. On Candlemas day you must have
half your straw and half your hay.
At twelf-day the days are lengthened a Cockstride. The Italians say at
Christmas. A cherry year a merry year:
A plum year a dumb year.
This is a puerile and senceless rythme without reason, as far as I can see.

Set trees at Allhallontide and command them to prosper: Set them after
Candlemas and entreat them to grow. This Dr. J. Beal alleges as an old
English and Welsh Proverb, concerning Apple and Pear Trees, Oak and Hawthorn
quicks; though he is of Mr. Reed's opinion, that it is best to remove
fruit trees in the spring, rather then the Winter. Philosoph. Transact. N. 71.

If you would fruit have,
You must bring the leaf to the grave.
That is you must transplant your trees just about the fall of the leaf,
neither sooner nor much later: not sooner, because of the motion of the sap;
not later, that they may have time to take root before the deep frosts.


To these I shall adjoin a few Italian.

PRimo porco, ultimo cane. i. e. The first pig, but the last whelp of the
litter is the best. Cavallo and cavalla cavalcalo in su la spalla,
Asino and mulo cavalcalo in su'l culo. i. e.
Ride a horse and mare on the shoulders, an
Ass and mule on the buttocks.
A buon'hora in pescaria and tardi in beccaria.
Go early to the fish-market, and late to the butchery.
Al amico cura li il fico, Al inimico il Persico.
Pill a fig for your friend, and a peach for your enemy.

Proverbs and Proverbial observations referring to Love, Wedlock and Women.
LOve me little and love me long. Hot love is soon cold. Love of lads and fire
of chats is soon in and soon out. Darbish. Chats, i. e. chips.

Lads love's a busk of broom, Hot awhile and soon done.
Chesh. Love will creep where it cannot go. Chi ha amor nel petto ha le sprone
ne i fianchi. Italian. He that has love in his breast has spurs in his sides.

Love and Lordship like no fellowship.
Amor and seignoria non yogliono compagnia, Ital. Amor and feigneutie ne se
tindrent jamais compagnie. Gall. The meaning of our English Proverb is, Lovers
and Princes cannot endure rivals or partners. Omnisque potestas Impaticus
consortis erit. The Italian and French, though the same in words, have I think
a different sense, viz. Non been convenient nec in una sede morantur Majestas
and amor.

Love is blind. Lovers live by love, as Larks by leeks. This is I conceive in
derision of such expressions as living by love. Larks and leeks beginning with
the same letter helped it up to be a Proverb.

Follow love and it will flee,
Flee love and it will follow thee.
This was wont to be said of glory, Sequentem fugit, fugientem sequitur. Just
like a shadow.

Love and pease-pottage will make their way. Because one breaks the belly, the
other the heart.

The love of a woman and a bottle of wine,
Are sweet for a season, but last for a time.
Love comes in at the windows, and goes out at the doors. Love and a cough
cannot be hid. Amor tussisque non celatur. The French and Italians add to these
two the itch. L'amour, la tousse and la galle ne se peuvent celer. Gall. Amor
la rogna and la tousse non si ponno nascondere. Ital. Others add stink.

Ay be as merry as be can,
For love never delights in a sorrowful man.
Fair chieve all where love trucks. Whom we love best, to them we can say
least. He that loves glass without G.
Take away L, and that is he.
Old pottage is sooner heated, then new made. Old lovers fallen out are sooner
reconciled then new loves begun. Nay the Comedian says, Amantium irae amoris
redintegratio est.

Wedlock is a padlock. Age and wedlock bring a man to his nightcap. Wedding an
ill wintering, tame both man and beast. Marriages are made in heaven. Nozze and
magistrato dal cielo e destinato. Ital. Marry in haste and repent at leisure.
It Is good to marry late or never. Marry your Sons when you will, your Daughters
when you can. Marry your Daughters betimes, lest they marry themselves. I Have
cured her from laying i'th'hedge, quoth the good man when he had wed his
daughter. Motions are not marriages. More longs to marriage, then four bare
legs in a bed. Like blood, like good, and like age, make the happiest marriage.
Aequalem uxorem quaere. (...). Unequal marriages seldom prove happy. Si qua
voles apt nubere, nube pari. Ovid. Intolerabilius nibil est quam famina dives.
Juvenal.

Many an one for land takes a fool by the hand. i. e. marries her or him. He
that is needy when he is married, shall be rich when he is buried. Who weds e're
he be wise, shall die e're he thrive. It Is hard to wive and thrive both in a
year. Better behalf hanged then ill wed. He that would an old wife wed, Must
eat an apple before he goes to bed,
Which by reason of its flatulency is apt to excite lust.

Sweet heart and Honey-bird keeps no house. Marriage is honorable, but
house-keeping's a shrew. We batchelours grin, but you married men laugh till
your hearts ache. Marriage and hanging go by destiny. It Is time to yoke when the
cart comes to the caples, i. e. horses. Chesh. That is, It Is time to marry when
the woman woes the man.

Courting and woing brings dallying and doing.
Happy is the woing, that is not long in doing.
Widows are always rich.
He that woes a maid must come seldom in her sight.
But he that woes a widow must woe her day and night.
He that woes a maid must fain, lie and flatter:
But he that woes a widow, must down with his breeches and at her.
This Proverb being somewhat immodest, I should not have inserted, but that I
met with it in a little book, entitled The Quakers spiritual Court proclaimed,
written by Nathanael Smith, Student in Physic: Wherein the Author mentions it
as Counsel given him by one Hilkiah Bedford, an eminent Quaker in London, who
would have had him to have married a rich widow, in whose house in case he
could get her, this Nathanael Smith had promised Hilkiah a chamber gratis. The
whole narrative is very well worth the reading.

It Is dangerous marrying a widow because she has cast her rider. He that would
the daughter win,
Must with the mother first begin.
A man must ask his wife leave to thrive. He that loses his wife and
sixpence, has lost a tester. Che perde moglie and un quatrino, ha gran perdita
del quatrino. Ital.

He that loses his wife and a farthing has a great loss of his farthing. There
is one good wife in the Country, and every man thinks he has her. Wives must
be had, be they good or bad.
He that tells his wife news, is but newly married. A nice wife and a back
door, do often make a rich man poor.
Says Solomon the wise,
A good wife's a goodly prize.
A dead wife's the best goods in a man's house. Long-tongued wives go long with
bairn. A man of straw, is worth a woman of gold. This is a French Proverb. Un
homme de paille vaut une femme d'or.

One tongue is enough for a woman. This reason they give that would not have
women learn languages.

A woman's tongue wags like a lambs tail. Three women and a goose make a market.
This is an Italian one, Tree done and un occa fan un mercato.

A ship and a woman are ever repairing. A spaniel, a woman and a walnut tree,
The more they are beaten the better still they be.
Nux, asinus, mulier simili sunt l^ge ligata.
Haec tria nil recte faci^nt si verbera cessant.
Adducitur a Cognato, est tamen novum. All women are good, viz, either good for
something or good for nothing. Women laugh when they can, and weep when they
will. Femme rit quand elle peut and pleure quand elle veut. Gall.

Women think Place a sweet fish. A woman conceals what she knows not. Women and
dogs set men together by the ears. As great pity to see a woman weep, as a
goose go barefoot. Winter-weather and women's thoughts change often. A woman's mind
and winter-wind change often. There Is no mischief in the world done,
But a woman is always one.
A wicked woman and an evil, Is three half pence worse then the Devil. The more
women look in their glasses, the less they look to their houses. A woman's work
is never at an end. Some add, Change of women makes bald knaves. Every man can
tame a shrew, but he that has her. Better be a shrew then a sheep. For
commonly shrews are good housewives.

Better one house filled then two spilled. This we use when we hear of a bad
Jack who has married as bad a Jyll. For as it is said of Bonum, quo communius
co melius; So by the rule of contraries, What is ill, the further it spreads
the worse. And as in a city it is better there should be one Lazaretto and that
filled with the insected, then make every house in a town a Pesthouse, they
dwelling dispersedly or singly: So is it in a neighborhood, etc.

Old maids lead apes in hell. Batchelours wives and maids children are always
well taught. Chi non ha moglie ben la vest.
Chi non ha figlivoli ben li pasce.


Maidens must be seen and not heard. A dogs nose and a maids knees are always
cold. Young wenches make old wrenches. As the goodman says, so say we,
But as the good woman says, so it must be.
Better be an old man's darling, then a young man's warling. A grunting horse and
a groaning wife seldom fail their master. In time comes she whom Gods sends. He
that marries a widow and three children, marries four thieves. Two daughters
and a back door are three errant thieves. A black man's a jewel in a fair
woman's eye. Fair and sluttish, (or foolish) black and proud,
Long and lazy, little and loud.
Beauty and folly vont souvent de compagnie. Gall. Beauty and folly do often go
hand in hand, are often matched together.

Put another man's child in your bosom, and he will creep out at your elbow.
Chesh. That is, cherish or love him, he will never be naturally affected toward
you.

When the good man's from home the good wives table is soon spread. The good
man's the last knows what is amiss at home. Dedecus ille domus sciet ultimus.

It Is safe taking a shive of a cut loaf. Wine and wenches empty men's purses.
Who drives an Ass and leads a whore,
Has pain and sorrow evermore.
The Italians add, and corre in arena. The French say, Qui femme croit and asne
meine, son corpse ne sera ja sans peine. i. e. He that trusts a woman and leads
an ass, etc.

I Will tent thee, quoth Wood, If I cannot rule my daughter, I Will rule my good.
Chesh. Ossing comes to bossing. Chesh. Ossing, i. e. offering or aiming to do.
The meaning is the same, with Courting and woing brings dallying and doing.

Free of her lips free of her hips. A rouk-town's seldom a good house-wife at
home. This is a Yorkshire Proverb. A Rouk-town is a gossipping house-wife, who
loves to go from house to house.

Quickly too'd, [i. e. toothed] and quickly go, Quickly will thy mother have
more. Yorksh. Some have it quickly to'd, quickly with God, as if early breeding
of teeth, were a sign of a short life, whereas we read of some born with teeth
in their heads, who yet have lived long enough to become famous men, as in the
Roman History; M. Curious Dentatus, and Cn. Papyrius Carbo mentioned by Pliny,
lib. 7. c. 16. and among our English Kings, Rich. 3.

It Is a sad burden to carry a dead man's child. A little house well filled, a
little land well tilled, and a little wife well willed. One year of joy,
another of comfort and all the rest of content. A marriage wish. My son's my
son, till he has got him a wife,
But my daughter's my daughter all days of her life.
The lone sheep's in danger of the wolf. A light heel'd mother, makes a heavy
heel'd daughter. Because she does all her work her self, and her daughter the
mean time sitting idle, contracts a habit of sloth. Mere pitieuse fait sa fille
rogneuse, Gall. A tender mother breeds a scabby daughter.

When the husband drinks to the wife, all would be well: When the wife drinks
to the husband, all is well. When a couple are newly married, the first month
is honey-moon or smick smack: the second is, hither an thither: the third is,
thwick thwack: the fourth, the Devil take them that brought thee and I
together. Women must have their wills while they live, be-because they make
none when they die. England is the Paradise of women. And well it may be called
so, as might easily be demonstrated in many particulars, were not all the world
already therein satisfied. Hence it has been said, that if a bridge were made
over the narrow seas, all the women in Europe would come over hither. Yet is it
worth the noting, that though in no Country of the world, the men are so fond
of, so much governed by, so wedded to their wives, yet has no Language, so
many Proverbial invectives against women.

All meat's to be eaten, all maids to be wed. It Is a sad house where the hen
crows louder then the cock. Trista e quella casa dove le galline cantano e'l
gallo tace. Ital.

If a woman were as little as she is good,
A peas-cod would make her a gown and a hood.
Se la donna fosse piccola come e buona, laminima foglia la farebbe una vest
and una corona. Ital.

Many women many words, many geese many t.... Dove sonod nne and ocche non vi
sono parole poche. Ital. Where there are women and geese there wants no noise.

Not what is she, but what has she. Protinus ad censum de moribus ultima fiet
Quaestio etc. Juven.



To these I shall add one French Proverb.

Maison faicte and femme a fair. A house ready made but a wife to make, i. e.
One that is a virgin and young. Ne femina ne tela a lume de candela. Ital.
Neither women nor linen by candlelight.
AN ALPHABET Of Joculatory, Nugatory And Rustic Proverbs.
A.
YOu see what we must all come to if we live. If thou be hungry, I am angry,
let us go fight. Lay on more wood, Ashes give money. Six Awls make a shoemaker.
All asiden as hogs fighten.
B.
BAck with that leg. Of all and of all commend me to Ball, for by licking the
dishes he saved me much labor. Like a Barbers chair, fit for every buttock. A
Bargain is a bargain. His Bashful mind hinders his good intent. The son of a
Batchelour. i. e. a bastard. Then the town-bull is a Batchelour. i. e. as soon
as such an one. He speaks Bear-garden. That is, such rude and uncivil, or
sordid and dirty language, as the Rabble that frequent those sports, are wont
to use.

He that has eaten a Bear-pye will always smell of the garden. Your Belly
chimes, it is time to go to dinner. You shall have as much favor at
Billings-gate for a box on the ear. A Black shoe makes a merry heart. He Is in
his better Blew clothes. He thinks himself wondrous fine.

Have among you blind harpers. Good blood makes bad puddings without groats or
suet. (...), Nobility is nothing but ancient riches: and money is the idol the
world adores.

A Blot in his Escucheon. To be bout, i. e. without, as Barrow was. Chesh. To
leave Boyes-play, and go to blow-point. You Will not believe a man is dead till
you see his brains out. Well rhythm'd Tutour, Brains and stairs. Now used in
derision of such as make paltry ridiculous rhythmes.

A brinded pig will make a good brawn to breed on. A red-headed man will make a
good stallion. This buying of bread undoes us. If I were to fast for my life I
would eat a good breakfast in the morning. She brides it. She bridles up the
head, or acts the bride. As broad as long. i. e. Take it which way you will,
there is no difference, it is all one. To burst at the broad side. Like an old
woman's breech, at no certainty. He Is like a buck of the first-head. Brisk,
pert, forward, Some apply it to upstart Gentlemen.

The spirit of building is come upon him. He wears the Bulls feather. This is a
French proverb, for a cuckold.

It melts like butter in a Sows tail: or, works like soap etc. I have a bone in
mine arm. This is a pretended excuse, whereby people abuse young children when
they are importunate to have them do something, or reach something for them,
that they are unwilling to do, or that is not good for them.

Buroughs end of sheep, some one.
C.
EVery cake has its make, but a scrape-cake has two. Every wench has her
sweetheart, and the dirtiest commonly the most: make, i. e. match, fellow.

He Capers like a fly in a tarbox. He Is in good carding. I would cheat mine own
father at cards. When you have counted your cards you will find you have gained
but little. Catch that catch may. The cat has eaten her count. It is spoken of
women with child, that go beyond their reckoning.

He lives under the sign of the eats foot. He is hen-peckt, his wife scratches
him.

Whores and thieves go by the clock. Quoth the young Cock, I Will neither meddle
nor make. When he saw the old cocks neck wrung off, for taking part with the
master, and the old hens, for taking part with the dame.

To order without a Constable. He Is no Conjurer. Marry come up my dirty Cousin.
Spoken by way of taunt, to those who boast themselves of their birth,
parentage, or the like.

Cousin germans quite removed. He Is fallen into a Cowturd. He looks like a Cowt
-- stuck with Primroses. To a Cows thumb. Crack me that nut, quoth Bumsted. To
rock the Cradle in ones spectacles. Cream-pot love. Such as young fellows
pretend to^ dairy-maids, to get cream and other good things of them.

Cuckolds are christians. The story is well known of the old woman, who hearing
a young fellow call his dog cuckold, says to him, Are you not ashamed to call
a dog by a Christians name.

He has deserved a Cushion. That is, he has gotten a boy.

To kill a man with a cushion. A Curtain-lecture. Such an one as a wife reads
her husband when she chides him in bed.

If a Cuckold come he will take away the meat. viz. If there be no salt on the
table. It Is better to be a-cold then a Cuckold. For want of company welcome
trumpery. That Is the cream of the jest. It Is but a copy of his countenance. His
Cow has calved, or sow pig'd. He has got what he sought for, or expected.

With Cost one may make pottage of a stool-foot.
D.
THe Dasnel dawcock sits among the Doctors. Corchorus inter olera. Corchorus
is a small herb of little account: Some take it to be the Male Pimpernel:
beside which there is another herb so called, which resembles Mallows, and is
much eaten by the Egyptians.

When the Devil is blind. Heigh ho, the Devil is dead. Strike Dawkin, the Devil
is in the hemp. The Devil is good to some. It Is good sometimes to hold a candle
to the Devil. Holding a candle to the devil is assisting in a bad cause, an
evil matter.

The Devil is in the dice. When the Devil is a hog you shall eat bacon. To give
one the Dog to hold. i. e. To serve one a dog-trick. It Is a good Dog can catch
any thing. He looks like a Dog under a door. Make a-do and have a-do. I know
what I do when I drink. Drink off your drink, and steal no lambs. Drift is as
bad as unthrift. He was hanged that left his drink behind him. Good fellows
have a story of a certain malefactor, who came to be suspected upon leaving
his drink behind him in an Alehouse, at the News of an Hue and cry.

A good day will not mend him, nor a bad day impair him. I Will make him dance
without a pipe. i. e. I Will do him an injury, and he shall not know how.


E.
I Will warrant you for an Egg at Easter.
F.
YOu two are finger and thumb. My wife cries five loaves a penny, i. e. She is
in travel. It Is good fish if it were but caught. It Is spoken of any
considerable good that one has not, but talks much of, sues for, or endeavors
after. A future good, which is to be catched, if a man can, is but little worth.

To morrow morning I found an horse-shoe. The Fox was sick, and he knew not
where: He clap't his hand on his tail, and swore it was there. That which one
most forehets, soonest comes to pass. Quod quisque vitet nunquam, homini satis
cautum est in horas. Horat.

Look to him Jaylour, there is a frog in the stocks.
G.
THe way to be gone is not to stay here. Good goose do not bite. It Is a sorry
goose will not baste her self. I care no more for it then a goose-t.... for the
Thames. Let him set up shop on Goodwins sands. This is a piece of Country wit;
there being an aequivoque in the word Good-win, which is a surname, and also
signifies gaining wealth.

He would live in a gravel-pit. Spoken of a wary sparing, niggardly person.

This grow'd by night. Spoken of a crooked stick or tree, it could not see to
grow.

Great doings at Gregory's, heat the oven twice for a custard. He has
swallowed a Gudgeon. He has swore desperately, viz. to that which there is a
great presumption is false: Swallowed a false oath.

The Devils guts. i. e. The surveyours chain. A good fellow lights his candle
at both ends. God help the fool, quoth Pedly. This Pedley was a natural fool
himself, and yet had usually this expression in his mouth. Indeed none are more
ready to pity the folly of others, then those who have but a small measure of
wit themselves.


H.
HIs hair grows through his hood. He is very poor, his hood is full of holes.

You have a handsome head of hair, pray give me a tester. When Spendthrifts
come to borrow money they commonly usher in their errand with some frivolous
discourse in commendation of the person they would borrow of, or some of his
parts or qualities: The same be said of beggars.

A handsome bodied man in the face. Hang your self for a pastime. If I be
hanged, I Will choose my gallows. A King Harry's face. Better have it then hear
of it. To take heart of grace. To be hide-bound. This was a Hill in King
Harry's days. To be loosei'th' Hilts. Hit or miss for a cow-heel. A hober de
hoy, half a man and half a boy. Hold or cut Codpiece point. Hold him to it
buckle and thong. She Is an holy day dame. You Will make honey of a dogst... That
horse is troubled with corns. i. e. foundred. He has eaten a horse, and the
tail hangs out at his mouth. He had better put his horns in his pocket, then
wind them. There Is but an hour in a day between a good housewife and a bad.
With a little more pains, she that slatters might do things neatly.

He came in hos'd and shod. He was born to a good estate. He came into the
world as a Be into the hive: or into an house, or into a trade, or employment.


I.
I Am not the first, and shall not be the last. To be Jack in an office. An
inch an hour, a foot a day. A basket Justice; a Jyll Justice; a good forenoon
Justice. He Will do Justice right or wrong.
K.
THere I caught a Knave in a purse net. Knock under the board. He must do so
that will not drink his cup. As good a knave I know, as a knave I know not. An
horse -kiss. A rude kiss, able to beat ones teeth out.
L.
HIs house stands on my Ladies ground. A long lane and a fair wind, and always
thy heels here away. Lasses are lads leavings. Chesh. In the East part of
England, where they use the word Mothther for a girl, they have a fond old saw
of this nature, viz. Wenches are tinkers bitches, girls are pedlers trulls,
and modhdhers are honest men's daughters.

He Will laugh at the wagging of a straw. Neither lead nor drive. An unto ward,
unmanageable person. To play least in sight. To go as if dead lice dropped out of
him. He is so poor and lean and weak, that he cannot maintain his lice.

Thou Wilt lie all manner of colors but blew, and that is gone to the litting.
i. e. dying. Tell a lie and find the troth. Listners never hear good of
themselves. To lie in bed and forecast. Sick of the Lombard fever, or of the
idles. She has been at London to call a strea a straw, and a waw a wall.
Chesh. This the common people use in scorn of those who having been at London
are ashamed to speak their-own Country dialect.

She lives by love and lumps in corners. Every one that can lick a dish: as
much to say, as every one simpliciter, tag rag and bobtail. It Is a lightning
before death. This is generally observed of sick persons, that a little before
they dye their pains leave them, and their understanding and memory return to
them; as a candle just before it goes out gives a great blaze.

The best dog leap the style first. i. e. Let the worthiest person take place.
M.
Maxfield measure heap and thrutch. i. e. thrust. Chesh. To find a mares nest.
He Is a man every inch of him. A match, quoth Hatch, when he got his wife by the
breech. A match, quoth Jack, when he kissed his dame. All the matter's not in my
Lord Judges hand. Let him mend his manners, 't will be his own another day.
He Is metal to the back. A metaphor taken from knives and swords. It Is Midsummer
moon with you. i. e. You are mad. To handle without mittins. He was born in a
mill. i. e. He 's deaf. Samson was a strong man, yet could he not pay money
before he had it. Thou shall have moonshine in the mustard-pot for it. i. e.
nothing. Sick of the mulligrubs with eating chop't hay. You make a muck-hill on
my trencher, quoth the Bride. You carve me a great heap. I suppose some bride
at first, thinking to speak elegantly and finely might use that expression; and
so it was taken up in drollery; or else it is only a droll, made to abuse
country brides, affecting fine language.

This maid was born odd. Spoken of a maid who lives to be old, and cannot get a
husband.


N.
NIpence nopence, half a groat lacking two pence. Would No I thank you had
never been made. His nose will abide no jests. Does your nose swell [or eek, i.
e. itch] at that? I had rather it wrung you by the nose then me by the belly.
i. e. a fart. It Is the nature of the beast.
O.
A Small Officer. Once out and always out. Old enough to lie without doors. Old
muckhills will bloome. Old man when thou die give me thy doublet. An old
woman in a wooden ruff. i. e. in an antique dress. It will do with an onyon.
To look like an owl in an Ivy-bush. To walk by owl-light. He has a good estate,
but that the right owner keeps it from him. How do you after your oysters? All
one but their meat goes two ways.
P.
There Is a pad i'th'straw. As it pleases the painter. Mock no panyer-men, your
father was a fisher. Every pease has its veaze, and a bean fifteen. A veaze
vescia in Italian is crepitus ventris. So it signifies Pease are flatulent, but
Beans ten times more.

You may know by a penny how a shilling spends. Peter of wood, church and mills
are all his. Chesh. Go pipe at Padley, there is a pescod feast. Some have it, Go
pipe at Colston, etc. It is spoken in derision to people that busy themselves
about matters of no concernment.

He pisses backwards, i. e. does the other thing. He has pist his tallow. This
is spoken of bucks who grow lean after rutting time, and may be applied to men.

Such a reason pist my goose. He plays you as fair as if he picked your
pocket. If you be not pleased put your hand in your pocket and please your
self. A jeering expression to such as will not be pleased with the reasonable
offers of others.

As Plum as a jugglem ear. i. e. a quagmire. Devonsh. To pocket up an injury.
i. e. To pass it by without revenge, or taking notice.

The difference between the poor-man and the rich is, that the poor walks to
get meat for his stomach, the rich a stomach for his meat. Prate is prate, but
it is the duck lays the eggs. She is at her last prayers. Proo naunt your mare
puts. i. e. pushes. It would vex a dog to see a pudding creep. He was christened
with pump-water. It is spoken of one that has a red face. Pye-lid makes people
wise. Because no man can tell what is in a pie till the lid be taken up.

To ride post for a pudding. Be fair conditioned, and eat bread with your
pudding. He Is at a forced put.
Q.
WE'll do as they do at Quern,
What we do not to day, we must do in the morn.

R.
SOme rain some rest, A harvest proverb. The dirt-bird [or dirt-owl] sings, we
shall have rain. When melancholy persons are very merry, it is observed that
there usually follows an extraordinary fit of sadness; they doing all things
commonly in extremes.

Every day of the week a shower of rain, and on Sunday twain. A rich rogue two
shirts and a ragge. Right master right, four nobles a year's a crown a quarter.
Chesh. Room for cuckolds, etc. He rose with his A....upwards. A sign of good
luck. He would live as long as old Rosse of Pottern, who lived till all the
world was weary of him. Let him alone with the Saints bell, and give him rope
enough. The lass i'th'red petticoat shall pay for all. Young men answer so when
they are chid for being so prodigal and expensive, meaning, they will get a
wife with a good portion, that shall pay for it.

Neither rhythme nor reason. Rub and a good cast. Be not too hasty, and you will
speed the better: Make not more haste then good speed.


S.
It Is sooner said then done. Schoolboys are the reasonablest people in the
world, they care not how little they have for their money. A Scot on Scots
bank. The Scotch ordinary. i. e. The house of office. That goes against the
shins. i. e. It Is to my prejudice, I do it not willingly. He knows not whether
his shoe goes awry. Sigh not but send, He Will come if he be unhang'd. Sirrah
your dogs, sirrah not me, For I was born before you could see. Of all tame
beasts I hate Sluts. He Is nothing but skin and bones. To spin a fair thread.
Spit in his mouth and make him a mastiffe. No man ever cried stinking fish.
Stretching and yawning leads to bed. To stumble at the truckle-bed. To
mistake the chamber-maids bed for his wives.

He could have sung well before he brake his left shoulder with whistling.
Sweet heart and bag pudding. Nay stay, quoth Stringer when his neck was in the
halter. Say nothing when you are dead. i. e. be silent.
T.
HIs tail will catch the kin-cough. Spoken of one that sits on the ground.

A tall man of's hands, He will not let a beast rest in's pocket. He Is Tom
Tell-troth. Two slips for a tester. The tears o th'tankard. Four farthings and
a thimble make a tailours pocket jingle. To throw snot about. i. e. to weep.
Though he says nothing, he pays it with thinking, like the Welchmans Jackdaw.
Tittle tattle, give the goose more hay. Tosted cheese has no master. Trick for
trick, and a stone in thy foot besides, quoth one, pulling a stone out of his
mares foot, when she bit him on the back, and he her on the buttock. Are there
traitors at the table that the loaf is turned the wrong side upwards? To trot
like a Do. There Is not a t.. to choose, quoth the good wife by her two pounds
of butter. He looks like a Tooth-drawer. i. e. very thin and meager. That Is as
true as I am his uncle. Turnspits are dry.
V.
VEal will be cheap: Calves fall. A jeer for those who lose the calves of their
legs by etc.

In a shoulder of veal there are twenty and two good bits. This (...) piece of
country wit. They mean by it, There are twen (others say forty) bits in a
shoulder of veal, and but two good ones.

He Is a velvet true heart. Chesh. I Will venture it as Johnson did his wife, and
she did well. Up with it, if it be but a gallon, 't will ease your stomach.
W.
LOok on the wall, and it will not bite you. Spoken in jeer to such as are
bitten with mustard.

A Scotch warming-pan. i. e. A wench. The story is well known of the Gentleman
traveling in Scotland, who desiring to have his bed warmed, the servant-maid
doffs her clothes, and lays her self down in it a while. In Scotland they have
neither bellows, warmingpans, nor houses of office.

She Is as quiet as a wasp in ones nose. Every man in's way. Water betwitch't.
i. e. very thin beer. Eat and welcome, fast and heartily welcome. I am very
wheamow (i. e. nimble) quoth the old woman, when she step't into the milkbowl.
Yorksh. A white-liver'd fellow. To shoot wide of the mark. Wide quoth Wilson.
To sit like a wire-drawer under his work. Yorksh. He has more wit in's head
then thou in both thy shoulders. He has played wily beguild with himself. You
may trusse up all his wit in an egg-shell. Hold your tongue husband, and let me
talk that have all the wit. The wit of you, and the wool of a blew dog will
make a good medly. This is the world and the other is the country. When the
Devil is dead there is a wife for Humphrey. To wrap it up in clean linen. To
deliver sordid or uncleanly matter in decent language.

A point next the wrist.
Y.
HE has made a younger brother of him. The younger brother has the more wit.
The younger brother is the ancienter Gentleman. Old and tough, young and
tender.
Miscellany Proverbiall Sayings.
PUt a miller, a weaver and a tailour in a bag, and shake them, the first that
comes out will be a thief. Harry's children of Leigh, never an one like
another. A Seaman if he carries a millstone will have a quait out of it. Spoken
of the common mariners, if they can come at things that may be eat or drunk. Go
here away, go there away, quoth Madge Whitworth, when she rode the mare
i'th'tedder. There Is strushion, i. e. destruction, of honey, quoth Dunkinly
when he lickt up the henturd. I killed her for good will, said Scot, when he
killed his neighbors mare. Gip with an ill rubbing, quoth Badger when his mare
kicked. This is a ridiculous expression, used to people that are pettish and
froward.

He Is a Hot shot in a mustard pot, when both his heels stand right up. Three
dear years will raise a bakers daughter to a portion. It Is not the smalness of
the bread, but the knavery of the baker. I hope better quoth Benson, when his
wife bade him come in cuckold. One, two, three, four, are just half a score.
I Will make him fly up with Jacksons hens. i. e. undo him: So when a man is
broke, or undone, we say he is blown up. I Will make him water his horse at
High-gate. i. e. I Will sue him, and make him take a journey up to London.

What have I to do with Bradshaws windmill? Leycester. What have I to do with
other men's matters? He that would have good luck in horses, must kiss the
Parsons wife. He that snites his nose, and has it not, forfeits his face to
the King. A man can do no more then he can. It Is an ill guest that never drinks
to his host.
Run tap run tapster.
This is said of a tapster that drinks so much himself, and is so free of his
drink to others that he is fain to run away.

He has got the fiddle, but not the stick. i. e. The books but not the
learning, to make use of them, or the like.

That Is the way, to catch the old one on the nest. This must be if we brew.
That is if we undertake mean and sordid, or lucrative employments, we must be
content with some trouble, inconvenience, affronts, disturbance, etc.


Proverbiall Periphrases of one drunk. He Is disguised. He has got a piece of
bread and cheese in's head. He has drunk more then he has bled. He has been
in the Sun. He has a jagg or load. He has got a dish. He has got a cup too much.
He is one and thirty. He is dag'd. He has cut his leg. He is afflicted. He is
top-heavy. The malt is above the water. As drunk as a wheelbarrow. He makes
indentures with his legs. He Is well to live. He Is about to cast up his
reckoning or accounts. He has made an example. He is concerned. He is as drunk
as David's sow. He has stolen a manchet out of the brewers basket. He Is
raddled. He is very weary. He drank till he gave up his halfpenny, i. e.
vomited. Proverbiall Phrases and Sentences belonging to drink and drinking.
LIck your dish. Wind up your bottom. Play off your dust. Hold up your dagger
hand. Make a pearl on your nail. To bang the pitcher. There Is no deceit in a
brimmer. Sup Simon the best is at the bottom. Ale that would make a cat to
speak. Fill what you will, and drink what you fill. He has pist out all he
has against the walls: She Is not a good house-wife that will not wind up her
bottom, i. e. take off her drink. One that has the Fr. Pox. HE has been at
Haddam. He has got the Crinckams. He is peppered. He is not pepper-proof. He
has got a Kentish ague. He has got the new consumption. He has got a clap. He
has got a blow over the nose with a French cowlstaff. He is Frenchified. The
Covent Garden ague. The Barnwell ague. To make water. etc. TO make a little
maids water. To water the Marigolds. To speak with a maid. To gather a rose. To
look upon the wall. A Lier. HE deserves the whetstone. He Will not let any body
lie by him. He shall have the kings horse. He Is a long-bow-man. He lies as fast
as a dog can trot. A great Lie. THat was laid on with a trowel. That Is a loud
one. That Is a lie with a witness; a lie with a latchet. That sticks in's
throat. If a lie could have choked him, that would have done it. The dam of
that was a whisker. A Bankrupt. He Is all to pieces. He has sh.....in the
plum-bag. He Is blown up. He has shut up shopwindows. He dare not show his head.
He has swallowed a spider. He has shown them a fair pair of heels. He is
marched off. He goes on's last legs. He is run off his legs. A Wencher. HE
loves lac't mutton. He Will run at sheep. He Will commit poultry. He Will have a bit
for's cat. He keeps a cast of Merlins. Men of his hair are seen oftener at the
B...court then at the gallows. A Whore. She Is like a cat, she will play with her
tail. She Is as right as my leg. A light-skirts. A kindhearted soul. She Is loose
in the hilts. A Lady of pleasure. As errant a wh..... as ever pist. A
Cockatrice. A Leman. She Is as common as a barbers chair. As common as the high
way. She lies backward and lets out her fore-rooms. She is neither wife, widow,
nor maid. A covetous person. HIs money comes from him like drops of blood. He Will
flay a flint. He Will not lose the droppings of his nose. He serves the poor with
a thump on the back with a stone. He Will dress an egg, and give the offall to
the poor. He Is like a swine, never good until he come to the knife. Avarus
nisi cum moritur nil recte facit. Lab. His purse is made of a toads skin.
Proverbiall Phrases relating to several trades. THe smith has always a spark
in's throat. The smith and his penny are both black. Nine Taylours make a man.
Cobblers law, he that takes money must pay the shot. To brew in a bottle and
bake in a bag. The Devil would have been a weaver but for the Temples. The
gentle craft. S. Hughs bones. A Hangman is a good trade, he does his work by
daylight. It is good to be sure. Toll it again quoth the miller. Any tooth
good Barber. A horse-doctour, i. e. a farrier. He should be a ba^er by's
bow-legs. Take all and pay the baker. He drives a subtle trade.
Proverbs that are entire Sentences.
A
LOng absent soon forgotten Parallel to this are, Out of sight out of mind, and
Seldom seen soon forgotten: And not much different those Greek ones. (...)
Friends dwelling afar off are no friends. And (...). Forbearance of
conversation dissolves friendship.

Adversity makes a man wise not rich. The French say, Vent au visage rend un
home sage. The wind in a man's face makes him wise. If to be good be the
greatest wisdom, certainly affliction and adversity make men better. Vexatio
dat intellectum.

He that is afraid of every grass, must not piss in a meadow. Chi ha paura
d'ogni urtica non pisci in herba. Ital. He that is afraid of every nettle, must
not piss in the grass.

He that is afraid of leaves must not come in a wood. This is a French Proverb
englished. Qui a peur de fueilles ne doit aller au bois.

He that is afraid of the wagging of feathers, must keep from among wild foul.
Mr. Cotgrave in his French Dictionary produces this as an English Proverb,
parallel to the precedent.

He that is afraid of wounds must not come nigh a battle. These four Proverbs
have all one and the same sense. viz. That timorous persons must keep as far
off from danger as they can. They import also, that causeless fear works men
unnecessary disquiet, puts them upon absurd and foolish practices, and renders
them ridiculous.

He'st never have thing good cheap that is afraid to ask the price. Il n'aura ja
bon march qui ne le demand. Gall. Agree, for the Law is costly. This is good
counsel backed with a good reason, the charges of a suit many times exceeding
the value of the thing contended for. The Italians say, Meglio e magro accordo
che grassa sentenza. A lean agreement is better then a fat sentence.

A man cannot live by the air. Good Ale is meat, drink and cloth. Fair chieve
good Ale, it makes many folks speak as they think. Fair chieve is used in the
same sense here as Welfare sometimes is in the South, that is, Good speed,
Good success have it, I commend it. It shall have my good wish, or good word.
In vino veritas.

We shall lie all alike in our graves. Aequa tellus Pauperi recluditur regumque
pueris. Horat. Mors sceptra ligonibus aequat.

No living man all things can. Non omnia possumus omnes. Virgil. See many
sentences to this purpose in Erasmus's Adages.

Almost was never hanged. Almost and very nigh save many a lie. The
signification of this word Almost having some latitude, men are apt to stretch
it to cover untruths.

Angry (or hasty) men seldom want woe. Hasty in our language is but a more
gentle word for angry. Anger indeed makes men hasty, and inconsiderate in their
actions. Furor iraque mentem praecipitant.

He that is angry without a cause must be pleased without amends. Two Anons and
a by and by is an hour and half. Scald not your lips in another man's pottage.
Parallel hereto is that place, Proverb. Chap. 26. v. 17.

The higher the Ape goes the more he shows his tail. The higher beggars, or
base-bred persons are advanced, the more they discover the lowness and baseness
of their spirits and tempers: For as the Scripture says. Prove. 26. 1. Honor
is unseemly for a fool. Tu fai come la simia, che piu va in alto piu mostra il
culo. Ital. The Italians I find draw this Proverb to a different sense, to
signify one, who the more he speaks the more sport he makes, and the more
ridiculous he renders himself.

Stretch your arm no further then your sleeve will reach. Metiri se quemque
modulo suo ac pede verum est.

Lend you mine A -- and sh -- through my ribs. That is, lend you that whereof I
have necessary and frequent use, and want it my self. It is a Russick proverb,
and of frequent use in this nation; and was, I suppose, brought over to us by
some merchants that traded there.

Never be ashamed to eat your meat. Apud mensam vereeundari neminem decet.
Erasm. takes notice that this Proverb is handed down to us from the Ancients,
save that the vulgar adds neque in lecto: whereas (says he) Nusquam magis
habenda est vere cundiae ratio quam in lecto and convivio. Yet some there are
who out of a rustic shame-fac'tness or over mannerlyness are very troublesome
at table, expecting to be carved to, and often invited to eat, and refusing
what you offer them etc. The Italians say almost in the same words. A tavola
non bisogna haver vergogna. And the French. Qui a honte de manger a Honte de
vivre. He that is ashamed to eat, is ashamed to live.

Every man must eat a peck of Ashes before he dies. Lose nothing for asking.
Every Ass thinks himself worthy to stand with the kings horses. A kindly Aver
will never make a good horse. This is a Scottish Proverb quoted by K. James in
his Basilicon Doron. It seems the word Aver in Scottish signifies a colt, as
appears also by that other proverb, An inch of a nagg is worth a span of an
Aver: in our ancient writings Averium signifies any laboring beast, whether Ox
or horse, and seems to be all one with the Latin Jumentum.

Aw makes Dun draw.
B.
THat which is good for the back is bad for the head. Omnis commoditas sua fert
incommoda secum. He loves bacon well that licks the Swine-sty door. Where bad's
the best, naught must be the choice. A bad bush is better then the open field.
That is, it is better to have any though a bad friend of relation, then to be
quite destitute and exposed to the wide world.

A bad shift is better then none. When bale is hext boot is next. Hext is a
contraction of highest as next is of nighest. Bale is an old English word
signifying misery, and boot profit or help. So it is as much as to say, When
things are come to the worst they will mend. Cum duplicantur lateres venit Moses.

A bald head is soon shaven. Make not balks of good ground. A balk, Lat.
Scamnum; a piece of earth which the plow slips over without turning up or
breaking, It is also used for narrow slips of land left unplowed on purpose in
champian countries, for boundaries between men's lands or some other convenience.

A good face needs no band; and a bad one deserves none. Some make a rhyme of
this, by adding. And a pretty wench no land.

More words then one go to a bargain. A good bargain is a pick-purse. Bon
march tire l'argent horse de la bourse. Gall. Good cheap is dear, for it tempts
people to buy what they need not.

Bare walls make giddy house-wives. i. e. Idle house-wives, they having nothing
whereabout to busy themselves and show their good housewivery. We speak this
in excuse of the good woman, who does like St. Paul's widow (...), gad abroad a
little too much, or that is blamed for not giving the entertainment that is
expected, or not behaving her self as other matrons do. She has nothing to
work upon at home, she is disconsolate, and therefore seeks to divert her
self abroad: she is inclined to be virtuous, but discomposed through poverty.
Parallel to this I take to be that French Proverb, Vuides chambres font les
dames folles, which yet Mr. Cotgrave thus renders, Empty chambers make women
play the wantons; in a different sense.

The greatest barkers bite not forest: or dogs that bark at distance, bite not
at hand. Cane chi abbaia non morde. Ital. Chien qui abbaye ne mord pas. Gall.
Canes timidi vehementius latrant. Cave tibi a cane muto and aqua silente. Have
a care of a silent dog and a still water.

Sr John Barley-corn's the strongest Knight. It Is a hard battle where none
escapes. Be as it it may be is no banning. Every bean has its black. Vitiis
nemo sine nascitur. Horat. (...). Non est alauda sine crista. Omni malo Punico
inest granum putre. Ogni grano ha la sua semola. Every grain has his bran.
Ital.

Sell not the bears skin before you have caught him. Non vender la pelle del
orso inanzi che sia preso. Ital.

He must have iron nails that scratches a Bear. A man may bear till his back
breaks. If people find him patient they will be sure to load him. You may beat a
horse till he be sad, and a cow till she be mad. All that are in bed, must not
have quiet rest. Where Bees are, there is honey. Where there are industrious
persons, there is wealth, for the hand of the diligent makes rich. This we see
verified in our neighbors the Hollanders.

A Beggar pays a benefit with a louse. Beggars must be no choosers. The French
say, Borrowers must be no choosers.

Set a beggar on horseback, and he will ride a gallop. Asperius nihil est humili
cum surgit in altum. Claudian Il n'est orgueil que de pauvre enrichi. Gall.
There is no pride to the enriched begger's. Il villan nobilitado non conosce il
parentado. Ital. The villain ennobled will not own his kindred or parentage.

Sue a beggar and get a louse. Rete non tenditur accipitri neque milvio,
Terent. Phorm.

Much ado to bring beggars to stocks, and when they come there, they will not put
in their legs. Beggars breed, and rich men feed. A beggar can never be
bankrupt. It Is one beggars woe, to see another by the door go. (...). Hesiod.
Etiam mendicum mendico invidet.

A good beginning makes a good ending. De bon commencement bonne fin Gall. and
de bonne vie bonne fin. A good life makes a good death. Boni principii finis
bonus.

Well begun is half done. Dimidium facti qui coepit habet. Horat. Which some
make a Pentameter by putting in been before coepit.

Believe well and have well. The belly has no ears. Venture non habet aures.
Ventre affame ^'a point d'oreilles. Gall. Discourse to or call upon hungry
persons, they will not mind you, or leave their meat to attend. Or, as Erasmus,
Ubi de pastu agitur, non attenduntur honestae rations. Nothing makes the
vulgar more untractable, fierce and seditious, then scarcity and hunger. Nescit
plebes jejuna timere. There is some reason the belly should have no ears,
because words will not fill it.

Better belly burst then good drink lost. Better belly burst then good meat
lost. Little difference between a feast and a belly-full. A Belly full's a
belly full, whether it be meat or drink, When the belly is full, the bones
would be at rest. The belly is not filled with fair words. Best to bend, while
it is a twig. Udum and molle lutum es, nunc nunc properandus and acri, Fingendus
fine sinc rota.
Pers. Quae praebet latas arbor spatiantibus umbras, Quo pofita est primum
tempore virga fait.
Tunc poterat manibus summa tellure revelli, Nunc stat in immensum viribus acta
suis.
Ovid. Quare tunc formandi mores (inquit Erasmus) cum mollis adhuc aetas; tunc
optimis assuescendum cum ad quidvis cereum est ingenium. Ce qui poulain prend
en jeunesse. Il le continue en vie illesse. Gall. The tricks a colt gets at
his first backing, will whilst he continues never be lacking. Cotgr.

They have need of a besome that sweep the house with a turf. The best is best
cheap. For it does the buyer more credit and service.

Make the best of a bad bargain. The best things are worst to come by.
Difficilia quae pulchra: (...).

Beware of had I wist. Do as you're bidden and you will never bear blame. Birchen
twigs break no ribs. Birds of a feather flock together. Like will to like. The
Greeks and Latins have many Proverbs to this purpose, as (...). Semper
Graculus assidet Graculo. (...). Theocrit. Cicada cicadae chara, formicae
formica. (...). Homer. Odyss. 5. Semper similem ducit Deus ad similem. (...).
Simile gaudet simili. and (...). Simile appetit simile. unde and (...).
Likeness is the mother of love. Aequalis aequalem delectat. Young men delight
in the company of young, old men of old. Learned men of learned; wicked of
wicked, good fellows of drunkards, etc. Tully in Cat. maj. Pares cum paribus
(ut est in vetere proverbio) facillime congregantur.

He Is in great want of a bird that will give a groat for an owl. One bird in the
hand is worth two in the bush. E meglio aver hoggi un uovo che dimani una
gallina, Ital. Better have an egg to day, then a hen to morrow. Mieux vant un
tenez que deux vous l'aurez. Gall. (...). Theocr. Praesentem mulgeas, quid
fugientem inseq^eris? (...) Hesiod. He that leaves certainty and sticks to
chance, when fools pipe, he may dance.

It Is an ill bird that berays its own nest. (...).

Every bird must hatch her own egg. Tute hoc intristi omne tibi exedendum est.
Terent. It should seem this Latin Proverb is still in use among the Dutch, For
Erasmus says of it, Qu^ quidem sententia vel hodie vulgo nostrati in ere est.
Faber compedes quas fecit ipse gestet. Auson.

Small birds must have meat. Children must be fed, they cannot be maintained
with nothing.

Birth is much, but breeding more. If you cannot bite, never show your teeth.
He that bites on every weed, must needs light on poison. He that is a blab is a
scab. Black will take no other hue. This Diers find true by experience. It may
signify, that vicious persons are seldom or never reclaimed. Lanarum nigrae
nullum colorem bibunt, Plin. lib. 8. h. n.

He that wears black, must hang a brush at his back. A black plum is as sweet
as a white. The prerogative of beauty proceeds from fancy.

A black hen lays a white egg. This is a French Proverb. Noire geline pond
blanc oeuf. I conceive the meaning of it is, that a black woman may bear a fair
child.

It is ill to drive black hogs in the dark. They have need of a blessing, who
kneel to a thistle. Blind men can judge no colors. Il cieco non giudica de
colori. Ital. (...); Quid coeco cum speculo?

The blind eat many a fly. A man were better be half blind, then have both his
eyes out. Who so bold as blind bayard? (...). Ignorance breeds confidence,
consideration, slowness and wariness.

Who so blind, as he that will not see? Blow first and sip afterward. Simul
sorbere and flare difficile est.

A blot is no blot unless it be hit. Blushing is virtues color. Great boast,
small roast. Grands vanteurs petits faiseurs. Gall. (...). Briarcus esse
apparet cum sit lepus. And (...).

The nearer the bone, the sweeter the flesh. He that is born to be hanged,
shall never be drowned. He that was born under a three halfpenny planet, shall
never be worth twopence. He that goes a borrowing goes a sorrowing. He that
borrows must pay again with shame or loss. Shame if he returns not as much as
he borrowed, loss if more, and it is very hard to cut the hair.

The father to the bough; and the son to the plough. This saying I look upon as
too narrow to be placed in the family of Proverbs; it is rather to be deemed a
rule or maxim in the tenure of Gavil kind, where though the father had
judgment to be hanged, yet there followed no forfeiture of his estate, but his
son might (a happy man according to Horace his description) paterna rura bobus
exercere suis. Though there be that expound this Proverb thus, The father to
the bough, i. e. to his sports of hawking and hunting, and the son to the plow,
i. e. to a poor husbandmans condition.

They that are bound must obey. Bought wit is best, v. in W. Better to bow then
break. Il vaut mieux plier que rompre. Gall. E meglio piegar che scavezzar.
Ital.

A bow long bent at last waxes weak. L'arco si rompe se sta troppo teso. Ital.
Arcus nimis intensus rumpitur. Things are not to be strained beyond their tonus
and strength. This may be applied both to the body and the mind: too much
labor and study weakens and impairs both the one and the other. Otia corpus
alunt, animus quoque pascitur illis;
Immodicus contra carpit utrumque labor.


Brag's a good dog, but that he has lost his tail. Brag's a good dog if he be
well set on: but he dare not bite. Much bran and little meal. Beware of breed,
Chesh. i. e. an ill breed. That that is bred in the bone will never out of the
flesh. Chi l'ha per natura fin alla fossa dura. Ital. That which comes
naturally continues till death. The Latins and Greeks have many Proverbial
sayings to this purpose, as Lupus pilum mutat non mentem. The wolf may change
his hair (for wolves and horses grow gray with age) but not his disposition.

Naturam expellas furca licet usque recurret. Horat. and (...). Aristoph. You
can never bring a crabfish to go straight forwards. (...). Wood that grows
crooked, will hardly be straightned. Persons naturally inclined to any vice,
will hardly be reclaimed. For this Proverb is for the most part taken in the
worser sense.

Let every man praise the bridge he goes over. i. e. Speak not ill of him who
has done you a courtesy, or whom you have made use of to your benefit; or do
commonly make use of.

Bridges were made for wise men to walk over, and fools to ride over. A bribe
will enter without knocking. A broken sack will hold no corn. This is a French
Proverb englished, Un sac perce ne peut tenir le grain: though I am not
ignorant that there are many common both to France and England, and some that
run through most Languages. Sacco rotto non tien miglio. Ital. Millet being one
of the least of grains.

A broken sleeve holds the arm back. Much bruit little fruit. Who bulls the
cow must keep the calf. Mr Howell says, that this is a Law Proverb.

The burnt child dreads the fire. Almost all Languages afford us sayings and
Proverbs to this purpose, such are (...). Hesiod. (...). Homer. Piscator ictus
sapit; struck by the Scorpion fish or Pastinaca, whose prickles are esteemed
venomous. Can'scottato da l'acqua calda ha paura poi della fredda. Ital. the
same we find in French, Chien eschaude craint l'eau froide. i. e. The scalded
dog fears cold water.

Busy will have bands. Persons that are meddling and troublesome must be tied
short.

Who more busy then they that have least to do? Every man as his business
lies. All is not butter the cow shites. Non e tutto butyro che fa la vocca.
Ital.

What is a pound of butter among a kennel of hounds? They that have good store
of butter may lay it Thick on their bread. [or put some in their shoes.] Cui
multum est piperis etiam oleribus immiseet.

That which will not be butter must be made into cheese. They that have no
other meat, bread and butter are glad to eat. Who buys has need of an hundred
eyes, who sells has enough of one. This is an Italian Proverb. Chi compra ha
bisogno dicent' occhi, chi vende n'ha assai de uno. And it is an usual saying,
Caveat emptor, Let the buyer look to himself. The seller knows both the worth
and price of his commodity.

Buying and selling is but winning and losing.
C.
A Calves head will feast an hunter and his hounds. A man can do no more then
he can. Care not would have it. Care will kill a cat. And yet a Cat is said to
have nine lives. Cura facit canos.

Care's no cure. A pound of care will not pay an ounce of debt. Cento carre di
pensieri non pagerannoun'oncia di debito. Ital. i. e. An hundred cart-load of
thoughts will not pay an ounce of debt.

The best cart may overthrow. A muffled cat is no good mouser. Gatta guantata
non piglia may sorice. Ital. A gloved cat, etc.

That cat is out of kind that sweet milk will not lap. You can have no more of
a cat then her skin. The cat loves fish, but she is loath to wet her feet. Or in
rhyme thus. Fain would the cat fish eat,
But she is loath her feet to wet.
Le chat aim le poisson,, mais il n'aime pas a meuiller le patte. Gall. In the
same words, so that it should seem we borrowed it of the French.

The more you rub a cat on the rump, the higher she sets up her tail. The ca^
sees not the mouse ever. Well might the cat wink when both her eyes were out.
When the cat winketh little wots the mouse what the cat thinks. Though the
cat winks a while, yet sure she is not blind. How can the cat help it if the
maid be a fool? This is an Italian proverb, che ne puo la gatta se la massara e
matta. Not setting up things securely out of her reach or way.

That that comes of a cat will catch mice. Ital. Parallel whereto is that
Italian proverb. Chi di gallina nasce convien che rozole. That which is bred of
a hen will scrape. Chi da gatta nasce sorici piglia. Ital.

A cat may look on a King. An old cat laps as much as a young kitlin. When the
cat is away, the mice play. Ital. Les rats se promenent a l'aise la ou il n'y a
point des chats. Gall. Quando la gatta non e in casa, i sorici ballano Ital.

When candles are out, all cats are gray. Jone is as good as my Lady in the
dark. (...).

The cat knows whose lips she licks. Cry you mercy, killed my cat. This is
spoken to them who do one a shrewd turn, and then make satisfaction with asking
pardon or crying mercy.

By biting and scratching cats and dogs come together, Or, Biting and
scratching gets the cat with kitlin. i. e. Men and maidservants that wrangle
and quarrel most one with the other, are often observed to marry together.

Who shall hang the bell about the cats neck? Appiccar chi vuol'il sonaglio a
la gatta? Ital. The mice at a consultation held how to secure themselves from
the cat, resolved upon hanging a bell about her neck, to give warning when she
was near, but when this was resolved, they were as far to seek; for who would
do it. This may be sarcastically applied to those who prescribe impossible or
unpracticable means for the effecting any thing.

A scalded cat fears cold water. v. in S. He that leaves certainty and sticks
to chance, When fools pipe he may dance. They may sit in the chair that have
malt to sell. It chances in an hour, that comes not in seven years. Plus enim
fati valet hora benigni Quam si te Veneris commendet epistola Marti. Horat.
Every man is thought to have some lucky hour, wherein he has an opportunity
offered him of being happy all his life, could he but discern it and embrace
the occasion. Accasca in un punto quel che non accasca in cento anni. Ital. It
falls out in an instant which falls not out in an hundred years.

There is chance in the cocks spur. Change of pasture makes fat calves. Charity
begins at home. Self-love is the measure of our love to our neighbor. Many
sentences occur in the ancient Greek and Latin Poets to this purpose, as,
Omnes sibi melius esse malunt quam alteri. Terent. Andr. Proximus sum egomet
mihi. ibid. (...), etc. V. Erasm Adag. Fa bone a te and tuoi, Epoi a gli altri
se tu puoi. Ital. (...).

When good cheer is lacking our friends will be packing. Those that eat
cherries with great persons shall have their eyes sprinted out with the stones.
Chickens feed capons. i. e. As I understand it, chickens come to be capons, and
capons were first chickens.

It Is a wife child knows his own father. (...). Homer. Odyssa.

Child's pig, but fathers bacon. Parents usually tell their children, this pig
or this lamb is thine, but when they come to be grown up and sold, parents
themselves take the money for them.

Charre-folks are never paid. That is, give them what you will they are never
contented.

When the child is christened, you may have godfathers enough. When a man's need
is supplied or his occasions over, people are ready to offer their assistance
or service.

Children and fools speak truth. The Dutch Proverb has it thus, You are not to
expect truth from any but children, persons drunk or mad. In vino veritas, we
know. Enfans and fols sont Divins. Gall.

Children and fools have merry lives. For out of ignorance or forgetfulness and
inadvertency, they are not concerned either for what is past, or for what is to
come. Neither the remembrance of the one, nor fear of the other troubles them,
but only the sense of present pain: nothing sticks upon them, they lay nothing
to heart. Hence it has been said, Nihil scire est vita jucundissima, to which
that of Ecclesiastes gives some countenance. He that increases knowledge
increases sorrow.

Children suck the mother when they are young, and the father when they are
old. So we have the chink we'll bear with the stink. Lucri bonus est odor ex re
Qualibet. Juvenal. This was the Emperor Vespasians answer to those who
complained of his setting gabels on urine and other sordid things.

After a Christmas comes a Lent. The Church is not so large but the Priest may
say Service in it. The nearer the Church the further from God. This is a French
Proverb. Pres de l'eglise loin de Dieu.

Church-work goes on slowly. Let the Church stand in the Churchyard. Where God
has his Church the Devil will have his chapel. Non si tosto si fa un tempio
a Dio come il Diavolo ci fabrica una capella appresso. Ital.

Pater noster built Churches, and Our father pulls them down. I do not look
upon the building of Churches as an argument of the goodness of the Roman
Religion, for when men have once entertained an opinion of expiating sin and
meriting heaven by such works, they will be forward enough to give not only
the fruit of their land, but even of their body for the sin of their soul: and
it is easier to part with ones goods then ones sins.

Claw a churl by the breech, and he will sh -- in your fist. Persons of servile
temper or education, have no sense of honor or ingenuity, and must be dealt
with accordingly.

Ungentem pungit, pungentem rusticus ungit. Which sentence both the French and
Italian in their languages have made a Proverb. Oignez villain qu' il vous
poindra. Gall. etc. Insomuch that one would be apt with Aristotle to think,
that there are servi natura.

The greatest clerks, are not always the wisest men. For prudence is gained
more by practice and conversation, then by study and contemplation.

It Is the clerk makes the Justice. Hasty climbers, have sudden falls. Those
that rise suddenly from a mean condition to great estate or dignity, do often
fall more suddenly, as I might easily instance in many Court-favourites: and
there is reason for it, because such a speedy advancement is apt to beget pride
and consequently folly in them, and envy in others, which must needs
precipitate them. Sudden changes to extraordinary good or bad fortune, are apt
to turn men's brains. A cader va chi troppo alto sale. Ital.

The clock goes at it pleases the clark. Can jack-an-apes be merry when his
clog is at's heels? Close sits my shirt, but closer my skin. That is, I love my
friends well, but my self better: none so dear to me as I am to my self. Or my
body is dearer to me then my goods. Plus pres est la chair che la chemise. Gall.

A close mouth catches no flies. People must speak and solicit for
themselves, or they are not like to obtain preserment. Nothing carries it like
to boldness and importunate, yea, impudent begging. Men will give to such se
defendendo, to avoid their trouble, who would have no consideration of the
modest, though never so much needing or well deserving. Bocca trinciata mosca
non ci entra Ital.

It Is a bad cloth indeed will take no color. Cattiva e quella lana che non si
puo tingere. Ital.

Cloudy mornings turn to clear evenings. Non si male nunc and olim sic erit.

Better see a clout then a hole out. They that can cobble and clout, shall have
work when others go without. Glowing coals sparkle often. When the mind is heated
with any passion, it will often break out in words and expressions, Psalm 39. 1.

You must cut your coat according to your cloth. Noi facciamo la spese secondo
l'entrata. Ital. We must spend according to our income. Selon le pain il faut
le couteau. Gall. According to the bread must be the knife. and Fol est qui
plus despend que sa rent ne vaut. Gall. He is a fool that spends more then his
receipts. Sumptus censum ne superet. Plaut. Poen. Mess tenus propria vive. Pers.

Every cock is proud on his own dunghill. Gallus in suo sterquilinio plurimum
potest. Senec. in ludicro. The French say, Chien sur son fumire est hardi. A
dog is stout on his own dunghill.

Let him that is cold blow the coal. In the coldest flint there is hot fire.
Cold of complexion good of condition. A ragged colt may make a good horse. An
unhappy boy may make a good man. It is used sometimes to signify, that
children which seem less handsome when young, do afterward grow into shape and
comeliness: as on the contrary we say, fair in the cradle, and soul in the
sadle: and the Scots, A kindly aver will never make a good horse.

Company makes Cuckolds. Comparisons are odious. Conceited goods are quickly
spent. Confess and be hanged. An evil conscience breaks many a man's neck. He Is
an ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers. Celuy gouverne bien mal le miel
qui n'en taste and ses doigts n'en leche. Gall. He is an ill keeper of honey,
who tastes it not.

God sends meat, and the Devil sends cooks. Salt cooks bear blame, but fresh
bear shame. Corn and horn go together. i. e. for prices, when corn is cheap
cattle are not dear, and vice versa.

Much corn lies under the straw that is not seen. More cost more worship. I Will
not change a cottage in possession for a kingdom in reversion. All covet all
lose. Covetousness brings nothing home. Qui tout convoite tout perd. Gall. and
qui trop empoigne rien n'estrain'd. He that grasps at too much, holds fast
nothing. The fable of the dog is known, who catching at the appearance in the
water of the Shoulder of mutton he had in his mouth, let it drop in and lost
it. Chi tutto abbraccia nulla stringa. Ital.

A cough will stick longer by a horse then half a peck of oats. Good counsel
lightly never comes too late. For if good, it must suit the time when it is
given.

Count not your chickens before they be hatched. Ante victoriam ne canas
triumphum.

So many countries so many customs. Tant de gens tant de guises. Gall.

A man must go old to the Court and young to a Cloister, that would go from
thence to heaven. A friend in Court is worth a penny in a man's purse. Bon fait
avoir amy en cour, car le process en est plus court. Gall. A friend in Court
makes the process short.

Far from Court far from care. Full of courtesy full of craft. Sincere and
true-hearted persons are least given to complement and ceremony. It Is
suspicious he has some design upon me who courts and flatters me. Chi te sa
piu carezza che non vuole, O ingannato to ha, o ingannar te vuole. Ital. He
that makes more of you then you desire or expect, either he has cozened you or
intends to do it.

Less of your courtesy and more of your purse. Re opitulandum non verbis.

Call me cousin but cozen me not. Cursed cowes have short horns. Dat Deus immiti
cornua curta bovi. Providence so disposes that they who have will, want power
or means to hurt.

Who would keep a cow, when he may have a pottle of milk for a penny? Many a
good cow has but a bad calf. (...). Heroum filii noxae. (...). Homer. Odyss.
e. Aelius Spartianus in the life of Severus shows by many examples, that men
famous for learning, virtue, valor, success have for the most part either left
behind them no children, or such as that it had been more for their honor and
the interest of humane affairs that they had died childless. We might add unto
those which he produces, many instances out of our own history. So Edward the
first a wise and valiant Prince, left us Edward the second: Edward the black
Prince Richard the second: Henry the fifth a valiant and successful King, Henry
the sixth a very unfortunate Prince, though otherwise a good man. And yet there
want not in history instances to the contrary, as among the French, Charles
Martell, Pipin and Charl^main in continual succession, so Joseph Scaliger the
son, was in point of scholarship no whit inferior to Julius the father. Fortes
creantur fortibus and bonis, etc.

Where coin 's not common, commons must be scant. A colliers cow and an ale
wives sow are always well sed. Others say a poor man's cow, and then the reason
is evident, why a colliers is not so clear.

Much coin much care. Crescentem sequitur cura pecuniam. Horat.

The greatest crabs are not always the best meat Great and good are not always
the same thing, though our Language often makes them synonymous terms, as when we
call a great way a good way, and a great deal a good deal, etc. in which and
the like phrases good signifies somewhat less then great, viz. of a middle size
or indifferent. Bonus also in Latin is sometimes used in the same sense, as in
that of Persius. Sat. 2. Bona pars procerum. Les grands boeuss ne font pas les
grands journees. Gall. The greatest oxen rid not most work.

Crabs breed babs by the help of good lads. Country wenches when they are with
child usually long for Crabs: or Crabs may signify Scolds.

There Is a craft in dawbing. or, There is more craft in dawbing then throwing
dirt on the wall. There is a mystery in the meanest trade. No man is his
crafts-master the first day. Nessuno nasce maestro. Ital.

Shameless craving must have, etc. V. in S. You must learn to creep before you
go. Soon crooks the tree that good gambrell would be. A gambrell is a crooked
piece of wood on which butchers h^ng up the carcasses of beasts by the legs,
from the Italian word gamba signifying a leg. Parallel to this Is that other
Proverb, It early prick, that will be a thorn. Adco a teneris assuescere mulium
est.

Each cross has it is inscription. Crosses and afflictions come not by chance,
they spring not out of the earth, but are laid upon men for some just reason.
Divines truly say, that many times we may read the sin in the punishment.

No cross no crown. It Is ill killing a crow with an empty sling. The crow
thinks her own bird fairest. Afinus asino, sus sui pulcher, and suum cuique
pulchrum. So the Ethiopians are said to paint the Devil white. Every one is
partial to, and well conceited of his own art, his own compositions, his own
children, his own country, etc. Self-love is a more in every ones eye; it
influences, biasses and blinds the judgments even of the most modest and
perspicatious. Hence it is (as Aristotle well observes) that men for the most
part love to be flattered. Rhetor. 2. and A tous oiseaux leur nid* sont beaux.
Gall. Every bird likes its own nest. A ogni grolla paion belli i suoi
grollatini. Ital.

A crow is never the whiter for washing her self often. No carrion will kill a
crow. Cunning is no burden. It is part of Bias his goods, it will not hinder a
man's flight when the enemies are at hand.

Many things fall between the cup and the lip. Multa cadunt inter calicem
supremaque labra. (...). Citantur ab A. Gell^o. De la main a la bouche so perd
souvent la soupe. Gall. Between the hand and the mouth, the broth is many times
shed. Enter la bouche and le cueillier vient Souvent grand destourbier. Gall.

What cannot be cured, must be endured. Levius fit patientia quicquid corrigere
est nesas. Horat. Od

A bad custom is like a good cake, better broken then kept. A cursed curre must
be tied short. A meschant chien courtlien. Gall.

Custom is another nature. Desperate cuts, must have desperate cures.
D.
HE that will not be ruled by his own dame, must be ruled by his stepdame. He
dances well, to whom Fortune pipes. Assal ben balla a chi Fortuna suona. Ital.
The French have a Proverb, Mieux vaut une once de fortune qui une livre de
sagesse. Better is an ounce of good Fortune, then a pound of good forecast.

They love dancing well, that dance among thorns. When you go to dance, take
heed whom you take by the hand. It Is as good to be in the dark, as without
light. Jone's as good as my Lady in the dark. v. in I. One may see day at a
little hole. The better day, the better deed. A bon jour bon oeuvre. Gall.
Dicenda bona sunt bona verba die.

He never broke his hour that kept his day. To day a man, tomorrow a mouse. To
day me, tomorrow thee. Aujourd'huy Roy, demain rien. Gall.

The longest day must have an end. Il n'est si grand jour qui ne vienne a
vespre. Gall. Non vien di, che non venga sera. Ital.

Be the day never so long, at length comes evensong. It Is day still while the
Sun shines. Speak well of the dead. Mortuis non conviciandum, and De mortuis
nil nisi bonum. Namque cum mortui non mordent iniquum est ut mordeantur.

A dead mouse feels no cold. He that waits for dead men's shoes, may go long
enough barefoot. A longue cord tire qui d'autruy mort desire. Gall. He has
but a cold suit who longs for another man's death.

After death the Doctor. This is a French Proverb, Apres la mort le medecin,
parallel to that ancient Greek one, (...). Post bellum auxilium. We find it in
Quintilians Dec^am. Cadavirib. pasti, with another of the like import; Quid
quod medicina mortuorum sera est? Quid quod nemo aquam infundit in cineres?
After a man's house is burnt to ashes, its too late to pour on water.

Who gives away his goods before he is dead,
Take a beetle and knock him on the head.
Chi dona il suo inanzi morire il s' apparecchia assai patire. Ital. He that
gives away his goods before death, prepares himself to suffer.

He that could know what would be dear,
Need be a merchant but one year.
Such a merchant was the Philosopher Thales, of whom it is reported, that to
make proof, that it was in the power of a Philosopher to be rich if he pleased,
he foreseeing a future dearth of Olives, the year following, bought up at easy
rates all that kind of fruit then in men's hands.

Out of debt, out of danger. (...), Happy he that owes nothing.

Desperate cuts must have, etc. v. in C. There Is difference between staring and
stark blind [or mad.] This Proverb may have a double sense, if you read it
stark mad, it signifies, that we ought to distinguish, and not presently
pronounce him stark mad that sta^es a little, or him a rank fool who is a
little impertinent sometimes, etc. If you read it stark blind, then it has the
same sense with that of Horace, Est inter Tanaim medium soccrumque Vitelli. and
is a reprehension to those who put no difference between extremes, as perfect
blindness and Lynceus his sight.

He that would eat a good dinner let him eat a good breakfast. Dinners cannot be
long, where dainties want. He that saves his dinner, will have the more for
his supper. This is a French Proverb, Qui guard son disne il a mieux a souper.
He that spares when he is young, may the better spend when he is old. Mal soupe
qui tout disne. He sups ill who eats all at dinner.

An ounce of discretion, is worth a pound of wit. The French say, An ounce of
good fortune, etc. (...). Nazianz. Gutta fortunae prae dolio sapientiae.

I will not make my dish-clout my table-cloth. It Is a sin to belie the Devil.
Give the Devil his due. He that takes the Devil into his boat, must carry him
over the Sound. He that has shipped the Devil, must make the best of him. Seldom
lies the Devil dead in a ditch. We are not to trust the Devil or his Children,
though they seem never so gentle or harmless, without all power or will to
hurt. The ancients in a Proverbial Hyperbole, said of a woman, Mulierine credas
ne mortuae quidem, because you might have good reason to suspect that she
feigned; we may with more reason say the like of the Devil and diabolical
persons, when they seem most mortified. Perchance this Proverb may allude to
the fable of the fox, which escaped by feigning himself dead. I know no phrase
more frequent in the mouths of the French and Italians then this, The Devil is
dead, to signify that a difficulty is almost conquered, a journey almost
finished, or as we say, The neck of a business broken.

Talk of the Devil and he will either come or send. As good eat the Devil, as the
broth he is boiled in. The Devil rebukes sin. Clodius accusat moechos. Aliorum
medicus ipse ulceribus scates.

The Devils child the Devils luck. He must needs go, whom the Devil drives. He
had need of a long spoon, that eats with the Devil. The Devil shites upon a
great heap. The Devil is good when he is pleased. The Devil is never nearer
then when we are talking of him. The Devils meal is half bran. La farine du
diable n'e que bran, or s' en va moitie en bran. Gall.

What is gotten over the Devils back, is spent under his belly. Male parta male
dilabuntur. What is got by oppression or extortion is many times spent in riot
and luxury.

Every dog has his day, and every man his hour. All the dogs follow the salt
bitch. Love me and love my dog. Qui aim Jean aim son chien. Gall. Spesse
volte si ha rispetto al cane per il padrone.

He that would hang his dog, gives out first that he is mad. He that is about to
do any thing disingenuous, unworthy, or of evil fame, first bethinks himself of
some plausible pretense.

The hind most dog may catch the hare. He that keeps another man's dog, shall
have nothing left him but the line. This is a Greek Proverb, (...). The meaning
is, that he who bestows a benefit upon an ungrateful person; looses his cost.
For if a dog break loose he presently gets him home to his former master,
leaving the cord he was tied with.

What? keep a dog and bark my self. That is, must I keep servants, and do my
work my self.

There are more ways to kill a dog then hanging. Hang a dog on a crabtree, and
he will never love verjuyce. This is a ludicrous and nugatory saying, for a dog
once hanged is past loving or hating. But generally men and beasts shun those
things, by or for which they have smarted. (...). Amphis in Ampelurgo apud
Stoboeum. Et mea cymba semel vasta percussa procella,
Illum quo leasa est, horret adire locum.
Ovid.

Dogs bark before they bite. It Is an ill dog that deserves not a crust. Digna
canis pabulo. (...). Eras. ex Suida.

A good dog deserves a good bone. It is an ill dog that is not worth the
whistling. Better to have a dog fawn on you then bite you. He that lies down
with dogs, must rise up with fleas. Chi con cane dorme con pulce si leva. Ital.
Qui se couche avec les chiens se leve avec des puces. Gall.

Give a child till he craves, and a dog while his tail does wave, and you will
have a fair dog, but a foul knive. The dog that licks ashes trust not with
meal. The Italians say this of a cat, Gatto che lecca cenere non sidar farina.

Into the mouth of a bad dog, often falls a good bone. Souvent a mauvais chien
tomb un bon os en gueule. Gal.

Hungry dogs will eat dirty pudding. Jejun^^ raro stomachus vulgaria temnit. A
la faim il n'y a point de mauvais pain. Gall. To him who is hungry any bread
seems good, or none comes amiss. l'Asino chi ha fame mangia d'ogni strame. Ital.

It Is an easy thing to find a staff to beat a dog: or a stone to throw at a
dog. Qui veut battre son chien trouve assez de bastons. Gal. Malefacere qui
vult nusquam non causam invenit. Pub. Mimus. He who has a mind to do me a
mischief, will easily find some pretense. (...). To do evil, a flight pretense
or occasion will serve men's turns. A petite achoison le loup prend le mouton.
Gall.

An old dog will learn no tricks, v. in O. Do well and have well. Draffe is
good enough for swine. He that is down down with him. Drawn wells are seldom
dry. Drawn wells have sweetest water. Puteus si hauriatur melior evadit. (...).
Basil. in epist. ad Eustachium medicum. All things, especially men's parts, are
improved and advanced by use and exercise. Standing waters are apt to corrupt
and putrify: weapons laid up and disused do contract rust, nay the very air if
not agitated and broken with the wind, is thought to be unhealthfull and
pestilential, especially in this our native Country, of which it is said,
Anglia ventosa, si non ventosa venenosa.

Golden dreams make men awake hungry. After a dream of a wedding comes a corpse.
Draff was his errand, but drink he would have. Drunken folks seldom take harm.
This is so far from being true, that on the contrary of my own observation, I
could give diverse instances of such as have received very much harm when drunk.

Ever drunk, ever dry. Parthi quo plus bibunt ed plus sitiunt.

What soberness conceals drunkenness reveals. Quod est in cord sobrii est in
ore ebrii. (...). Plutarch. (...). Erasmus cites to this purpose a sentence out
of Herodotus, (...), when wine sinks, words swim: and Pliny has an elegant
saying to this purpose, Vinum usque adeo mentis a^^ana prodit, ut mortisera
etiam inter pocula loquantur homines, and ne per jugulum quidem reditur as
voces contineant. Quid non ebrietas designat? operta recludit.

He that kills a man when he is drunk, must be hanged when he is sober. The
ducks fare well in the Thames. Dumb folks get no lands. This is parallel to
that, Spare to speak and spare to speed, and that former, A close mouth
catches no flies.


E.
EArly up and never the nearer. Early sow early mow. It early pricks that will
be a thorn. Soon crooks the tree that good gambrel would be.

The early bird catches the worm. A pennyworth of ease is worth a penny. The
longer East the shorter West. You cannot eat your cake, and have your cake.
Vorrebbe mangiar la forcaccia and trovar la in tasca. Ital.

Eating and drinking takes away ones stomach. En mangeant l'appetit se perd. To
which the French have another seemingly contrary. En mangeant l'appetit vient,
parallel to that of ours, One shoulder of mutton draws down another.

He that will eat the kernel must crack the nut. Qui nucleum esse vult nucem
srangat oportet. No gains without pains.

Madam Parnel crack the nut and eat the kernel. Eaten bread is forgotten. It Is
very hard to shave an egg. Where nothing is, nothing can be had.

An egg will be in 3 bellies in 24 hours. Better half an egg then an empty
shell. Better half a loaf then no bread.

Ill egging makes ill begging. Evil persons by enticing and flattery, draw on
others to be as bad as themselves.

All ekes [or helps] as the Geni-wren said, when she pist in the sea. Many
littles make a mickle, the whole Ocean is made up of drops. Goutte a goutte on
remplit la cuve. Gall. And Goutte a goutte la mer s' egoute. Drop by drop the
sea is drained.

Empty vessels make the greatest sound. The Scripture says, A fools voice is
known by multitude of words. None more apt to boast then those who have least
real worth; least whereof justly to boast. The deepest streams flow with least
noise.

Empty hands no hawks allure. A right Englishman knows not when a thing is
well. Whosoever has but a mouth, shall never in England suffer drought, v. supra.
For if he does but open it, its a chance but it will rain in. True it is, we
seldom suffer for want of rain: and if there be any fault in the temper of our
air, it is its overmoistness, which inclines us to the scurvy and consumptions;
diseases the one scarce known, the other but rare in hotter Countries.

Every thing has an end, and a pudding has two. All Is well that ends well.
Exitus acta probat.

There Is never enough where naught leaves. This is an Italian Proverb, Non vi e
a bastanza se niente auvanza. It is hard so to cut the hair, as that there
should be no want and nothing to spare.

Enough is as good as a feast. Asser y a, si trop n'y a. Gall.

Better be envied then pitied. This is a saying in most languages, although it
has little of the nature of a Proverb in it. (...). Herodot. in Thalia. (...).
Pindar. Piu tosto invidia che compassione. Ital.

Essex styles, Kentish miles, Norfolk wiles many men beguiles. For styles Essex
may well vie with any County of England, it being wholly divided into small
closes, and not one common field that I know of in the whole County. Length of
miles I know not what reason Kent has to pretend to, for generally speaking,
the further from London the longer the miles, but for cunning in the Law and
wrangling, Norfolk men are justly noted.

Where every hand fleeceth, etc. v. fleeceth. Evening orts are good morning
fodder. The Evening crowns the day. La vita il fine, e' l di loda la sera.
Ital. The end or death commends the life, and the evening the day. Dicique
beatus Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera debet. Ovid.

Of two evils the least is to be chosen. This reason the Philosopher rendered
why he chose a little wife.

Exchange is no robbery. A bad excuse is better then none at all. Experience is
the mistress of fools. Experientia stultorum magistra. Wise men learn by others
harms, fools by their own, like Epimetheus, (...).

What the eye sees not, the heart rues not. Le coeur ne veut douloirce que
l'oeil ne peut veoir. Gall. Therefore it is not good to peep and pry into every
corner, to be two inquisitive into what our servants or relations do or say,
lest we create our selves unnecessary trouble.

Better eye out then always aching, [or watching] He that winketh with one eye,
and sees with the other, I would not trust him, though he were my brother.
This is only a Physiognomical observation.

He that has but one eye sees the better for it. Better then he would do
without it: a ridiculous saying.


F.
A Good face, etc. v. band. Faint heart never won fair Lady. (...). Suidas ex
Eupolide, Timidi nunquam statuere tropaeum. Ja couard n'aura belle amie. Gall.
For, audentes fortuna juvat.

Fair feathers make fair fowls. Fair clothes, ornaments and dresses set off
persons, and make them appear handsome, which if stripped of them would seem but
plain and homely. God makes, and apparel shapes. I panni rifanno le stanghe,
vesti una colonna and par una donna. Ital.

Fair words, etc. v. words. Fair and softly goes far in a day. Pas a pas on va
bien loing. Gall. Chi va piano va sano e anche lontano. Ital. He that goes
softly, goes sure and also far. He that spurs on too fast at first setting
out, tires before he comes to his journeys end. Festinalente.

Fair in the cradle, and foul in the saddle. A fair face is half a portion.
Praise a fair day at night. Or else you may repent, for many times clear
mornings turn to cloudy evenings. La vita il fine e' l di loda la sera. The end
commends the life, and the evening the day.

The fairest silk is soonest stained. This may be applied to women. The
handsomest women are soonest corrupted, because they are most tempted. It may
also be applied to good natures, which are more easily drawn away by evil
company.

Men speak of the Fair, as things went with them there. If a man once fall, all
will tread on him. Dejecta arbore quivis ligna colligit. Vulgus sequitur
fortunam and odit damnatos. Juven. When the tree is fallen every man goes to
it with his hatchet. Gall.

There Is falsehood in fellowship. Common fume's seldom to blame. A general
report is rarely without some ground. No smoke without some fire. (...). Hesiod.

Too much familiarity breeds contempt. Nimia familiaritas contemptum parit. E
tribus optimis rebus tres pessimae oriuntur; e veritate odium, e familiaritate
contemptus, e felicitate invidia. Plutarch.

Fancy passes beauty. Fancy may boult bran and think it flour. You cannot fare
well, but you must cry roastmeat. Sasse bonne farine sans trompe ny buccine.
Gall. Boult thy fine meal, and eat good past, without report or trumpets blast.
(...). They that are thirsty drink silently. Si corvus tacuisset haberet

Plus dapis and rixae multo minus invidiaeque. Horat.
Far fetched and dear bought's good for Ladies. Vache de loin a laict assez.
Gall.

Far folks fare well, and fair children die. People are apt to boast of the
good and wealthy condition of their far-off friends, and to commend their dead
children.

It Is good farting before ones own fire. A man far from his good, is near his
harm. Qui est loing du plat est prez de son dommage. Gall. Far from the dish
and near to his loss; for commonly they that are far from the dish, shed their
broth by the way.

As good be out of the world as out of the fashion. Fat drops fall from fat
flesh. Fat sorrow is better then lean sorrow. Better have a rich husband and a
sorrowful life then a poor husband and a sorrowful life with him, spoken to
encourage a maid to marry a rich man, though ill conditioned.

Little knows the fat sow what the lean one means. The father to the bough,
etc. v. in B. Where no fault is there needs no pardon. Every man has his
faults, or He is liveless that is faultless. Ut vitiis nemo sine nascitur.
Quisque suos patimur manes.

They that feal [i. e. hide] can find. It Is good to fear the worst, the best
will save it self. No feast to a Misers. Il n'est banquet que d'homme chiche.
Gall.

Little difference between a feast and a bellyfull. Better come at the latter
end of a feast, then the beginning of a fray. Feeling has no fellow. No fence
against a flail. Ill fortune. Some evils and calamities assault so violently
that there is no resisting or bearing them off.

No man loves his fetters though of gold. Next to health and necessary food, no
good in this world more desirable then liberty.

The finest lawn soonest stains. The finest shoe often hurts the foot. There is
no fire without some smoke. Null feu sans fumee. Gall.

Fire and water are good servants, but bad masters. First come first served.
Qui premier arrive au moulin, premier doit mouldre. Gal.

It Is ill fishing before the net. One would rather think after the net. No
fishing to fishing in the sea. Il fait beau pescher en eau large. Gall. It Is
good fishing in large waters.

Fishes are cast away, that are cast into dry ponds. It Is good fishing in
troubled waters. Il n'y a pesche qu' en eau trouble. Gall. In troubled waters;
that is, in a time of public calamity, when all things are in confusion.

Fresh fish and new come guests, smell by that they are three days old. L'hoste
and le poisson pass trois jours puent. Gall. Piscis nequam est nisi recens,
Plaut. Ordinary friends are welcome at first, but we soon grow weary of them.

The best fish swim near the bottom. Still he fisheth that catches one.
Tousjours pesche qui en prend un. Gall.

When flatterers meet the Devil goes to dinner. Where every hand fleeceth the
sheep goes naked. All flesh is not venison. This is a French Proverb, Toute
chair n'est pas venaison.

Flesh stands never so high but a dog will venture his legs. A flow will have
an ebb. No flying without wings, or, He would fain fly, but he wants feathers.
Sine pennis volare haud facile est. Plaut. in Poenulo. Nothing of moment can be
done without necessary helps, or convenient means. Non si puo volar senza ale,
Ital.

How can the fool amble, when the horse and mare trot. A fool and his money are
soon parted. No fool to the old fool. Every man has a fool in his sleeve.
Fools will be meddling. A fool may ask more questions in an hour, then a wise
man can answer in seven years. A fool may put somewhat in a wise bodies head. A
fools bolt is soon shot. De fol juge brieve sentence. Gall. A foolish judge
passes a quick sentence.

As the fool thinks, so the bell tinks, or clinks. Fools set stools for wise
folks to stumble at. Fools build houses, and wise men buy them. Fools make
feasts and wise men eat them. Le fols font la feste and lessages le mangent.
Gall. The same almost for word.

Fools lade water and wise men catch the fish. The fool will not part with his
babble for the Tower of London. If every fool should wear a babble fuel would
be dear. Si tous les fols portoient le marotte, on ne seait de quel bois s'
eschaufferoit. Gall.

Send a fool to the market and a fool he will return again. The Italians say,
Chi bestia va a Roma bestia retorna. He that goes a beast to Rome returns
thence a beast. Change of place changes not men's minds or manners. Coelum non
animum mutant qui trans mare currunt.

Fortune favors fools, or fools have the best luck. Fortuna favet fa^uis. It Is
but equal, Nature having not that Fortune should do so.

It Is good to go on foot when a man has a horse in his hand. Al aise march a
pied qui mean son cheval par la bride. Gall.

Forbearance is no acquittance. In the forehead and the eye the lecture of the
mind does lie. Vultus index animi.

To forget a wrong's the best revenge. Delle ingiurie il remedio e lui
scordarsi. Ital. Infirmi est animi exiguique voluptas Ultio. Juv.

It Is not good praising a ford till a man be over. Forewarned forearm'd.
Praemonitus, praemunitus. Forecast is better then work-hard. Every ones faults
are not written in their foreheads. The fox prey's furthest from's hole. To
avoid suspicion. Crafty thieves steal far from home.

The fox never fares better, then when he is ban'd [or cursed.] Populus me
sibilat, at mihi plaudo
Ipse domi, quoties nummos contemplor in area.
Horat. It Is an ill sign to see a fox lick a lamb. When the fox preaches,
beware of your geese. Fire quoth the fox, when he pist on the ice. He saw it
smoak't, and thought there would be fire e're long. This is spoken in derision
to those which have great expectation from some fond design or undertaking,
which is not likely to succeed.

Fie upon heps (quoth the fox) because he could not reach them. The fox knows
much, but more he that catches him. Every fox must pay his own skin to the
flayer. Tutte le volpi si trouvano in pelliceria. Ital. En fin les regnards se
trouvent chez le pelletier. Gal. The crafty are at length surprised. Thieves
most commonly come to the gallows at last.

What Is freer then gift? It Is good to have some friends both in heaven and
hell. He is my friend, that grindeth at my mill. That shows me real kindness.

A friend in need is a friend indeed. Prove thy friend e're thou have need. All
are not friends, that speak us fair. He Is a good friend that speaks well on's
behind our backs. No longer foster no longer friend. As a man is friended, so
the law is ended. Where shall a man have a worse friend, then he brings from
home? Friends may meet, but mountains never greet. Mons cum monte non
miscebitur: Pares cum paribus Two haughty persons will seldom agree together.
Deux hommes se rencontrent bien, mais jamais deux montagnes. Gall.

Many kinsfolk, few friends. Ones kindred are not always to be accounted ones
friends, though in our Language they be synonymous terms. There is a friend
that sticks closer then a brother.

One God no more, but friends good store. (...). Unus Deus, sed plures amici
parandi.

Where ever you see your friend, trust your self. A friend is never known till
one have need. Amicus certus in re incerta cernitur. Cic. ex Ennio. Scilicet ut
fulvum spectatur in ignibus aurum,
Tempore sic duro est inspicienda fides.
Ovid.

(...). Friends stand afar off, when a man is in adversity. What was good, the
Friar never loved. When the Frier's beaten, then comes James. (...). Sic est ad
pugnae parts re peracta veniendum.

The Friar preached against stealing when he had a pudding in his sleeve. Il
srate predicava, che non si dovesse robbare and lui haveva l'occha nel
scapulario. Ital. The same with the English, only goose instead of pudding.

To fright a bird is not the way to catch her. Qui veut prendre un oiseau qu'
il ne l'affarouche. Gall. The same with the English. The frog cannot out of her
bog.
Frost and fraud both end in foul.
A saying ordinary in the mouth of Sr Tho. Egerton Lord Chancellor.

Take away fuel take away flame. Remove the talebearer and contention
cease. Sine Cercre and Libero friget Venus.

The furthest way about's the nearest way home. What is gained in the shortness
may be lost in the goodness of the way. Compendia plerumque sunt dispendia.

Fields have eyes, and woods have ears. Bois ont oreilles, and champs oeillets.
Gall. Some hear and see him whom he hears and sees not; For fields have
eyes, and woods have ears, ye wot. Heywood.


G.
TOuch a galled horse on the back, and he will kick, [or wince.] Try your skill
in galt first, and then in gold. In care periculum, subaudi fac. Cares olim
notatisunt. quod primi vitam mercede locabant. They were the first mercenary
soldiers. Practice new and doubtful experiments in cheap commodities, or upon
things of small value.

You may gape long enough, e're a bird fall in your mouth. He that gapeth
until he be fed, well may he gape until he be dead. C' est folly de beer
contre un four. Gall. No gaping against an oven.

Make not a gauntlet of a hedging glove. What Is a Gentleman but his pleasure. A
Gentleman without living, is like a pudding without sewet. Gentry sent to
market, will not buy one bushel of corn. Gentility without ability, is worse
then plain beggary. Giff gaff was a good man, but he is soon weary. Giffe gaffe
is one good turn for another. Look not a gift horse in the mouth. It seems this
was a Latin Proverb in Hieroms time, Erasmus quotes it out of his preface to
his commentaries on the epistle to the Ephesians, Noli (ut vulgar est
proverbium) equi dentes inspicere donati. A caval donato non guardar in bocca.
Ital. A cheval done il ne saut pas regarder aux dens. Gall. It is also in
other modern Languages.

There Is not so bad a Gill but there is as bad a Will. Giving much to the poor,
does increase a man's store. Give a thing and take a thing, etc. Or, give a
thing and take again, And you shall ride in hells wain. Plato mentions this as
a childrens Proverb in his time. (...), which with us also continues a Proverb
among children to this day.

Better fill a gluttons belly then his eye. Les yeux plus grands que la pance.
Gall. Piu tosto si satolla il ventre chel'occhio. Ital.

A belly full of gluttony will never study willingly, i. e. the old proverbial
Verse. Impletus venture non vult studere libenter.

Man does what he can, and God what he will. When God wills, all winds bring
rain. Deus undecunque juvat modo propitius. Eras. La ou Dieu veut il pleut.
Gall.

God sends corn, and the Devil marres the sack. God sends cold after clothes.
After clothes, i. e. according to the peoples clothes. Dieu done le sroid
selon le drap. Gall.

God is where he was. Spoken to encourage People in any distress.

Not God above, gets all men's love. (...). Theogn.

God knows well which are the best Pilgrims. What God will, no frost can kill.
Tell me with whom thou go, and I Will tell thee what thou do. La mala
compagnia e quella che mena huomini a la furca, Ital.

Gold goes in at any gate except Heavens. Philip Alexanders father was reported
to say, that he did not doubt to take any castle or citadel, let the ascent be
never so steep and difficult, if he could but drive up an ass laden with gold
to the gate.

All is not gold that glisters. Toutce qui luit n'est pas or. Gall. Non e oro
tutto quel che luce. Ital. Fronti nulla fides. Juven.

A man may buy gold too dear. Though good be good, yet better is better, or
better carries it. That Is my good that does me good. Some good things I do not
love, a good long mile, good small beer, and a good old woman. Good enough is
never ought. A good man can no more harm then a sheep. Ill gotten goods, seldom
prosper. Della robba di mal acquista non se ne vede allegrezza. Ital. And, Vien
presto consumato l'ingiustamente acquistato. De mal e venu l'agneau and a mal
return le peau. Gall. To naught it goes that came from naught. (...). Hesiod.
Mala lucra aequalia damnis. Male parta male dilabuntur: and, De male quaesitis
vix gaudet tertius haeres. Juven.

That that is good sauce for a goose, is good for a gander. This is a woman's
Proverb.

There Is meat in a gooses eye. As deep drinks the goose, as the gander.
Goose, and gander and gosling are three sounds, but one thing. A Goshawk beats
not at a bunting. Aquila non capit muscas.

Grace will last, favor will blast. While the grass grows, the steed starves.
Caval non morire, che herba de venire. Ital.

Grass grows not upon the high way. Gray and green make the worst medley. Turpe
senex miles, turpe senilis amor. Ovid. An old lecher is compared to an onyon,
or leek, which has a white head but a green tail.

Gray hairs are deaths blossoms. Great gifts are from great men. The Gull comes
against the rain.
H.
HAckney mistress hackney maid. (...). Cic. Epist. At. 5. Qualis hera tales
pedijsequae. Et, (...). Catulae dominam imitantur. Videas autem (inquit
Erasmus) and Melitaeas, opulentarum mulierum delicias, fastum, laseiviam
totamque fere morum imaginem reddere.

Had I fish is good without mustard. Half an acre is good land. No halting
before a cripple. For fear of being detected. Il ne faut pas clocher devant un
boiteux. Gall.

Half an egg, etc. v. egg. Half a loaf, v. loaf. Help hands for I have no
lands. He is handsome that handsome does. Half an hours hanging hinders 5 m.
riding. It Is better to be happy then wise. E meglio esser fortunato che savio.
Ital. Gutta fortunae prae dolio sapientiae. Mieux vaut une once de fortune qu'
une libre de sagesse. Gall. An ounce of good fortune is better then a pound of
wisdom.

Happy is he whose friends were born before him. i. e. Who has rem non labor
parandam sed relictam. Happy man happy dole, or Happy man by his dole. Happy is
the child whose father went to the Devil. For commonly they who first raise
great estates, do it either by usury and extortion, or by fraud and cozening,
or by flattery and ministering to other men's vices.

Some have the hap, some stick in the gap. Hap, and halfpenny goods enough, i.
e. Good luch is enough, though a man has not a penny left him. Set hard heart
against hard hap. Tu-ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito. In re mala enimo
si bono utare adjuvat.

Hard with hard makes not the stone wall. Duro con duro non fa may buon muro.
Ital. Though I have seen at Ariminum in Italy an ancient Roman bridge made of
hewn stone laid together without any mortar or cement.

Hard fare makes hungry bellies. It Is a hard winter, etc. v. winter. It Is a
hard battle, etc. v. battle. Where we least think, there goes the hare away.
Harm watch, harm catch. King Harry loved a man, i. e. valiant men love such as
are so, hate cowards. Most haste worst speed. Come s' ha fretta non si fa may
niente che stia been. Ital. Qui trop se haste en cheminent, en beau chemin se
fourvoye souvent. Gall. He that walks too hastily, often stumbles in plain way.
Qui nimis propere minus prospere, and Nimium properans serius absolvit. Et
Canis festinans caecos parit catulos. Et festinalente. Tarry a little that we
may make an end the sooner, was a saying of Sr Amias Paulet. Presto and been
non si conviene. Ital. Hastily and well never meet.

Haste makes waste, And waste makes want, And want makes strife between the
good man and his wife. As the man said to him on the tree top. Make no more
haste when you come down then when you went up. Nothing most be done hastily
but killing of fleas. Hasty climbers, etc. v. climbers. A hasty [or angry] man
never wants woe, v. A. Hasty People will never make good Midwives. Hasty
gamesters oversee. No haste to hang true men. It Is good to have a hatch before
the door. High flying hawks are fit for Princes. Make hay while the sun shines.
A great head and a little wit. This is only for the clinch sake become a
Proverb, for certainly the greater, the more brains; and the more brains, the
more wit, if rightly conformed.

Better be the head of a pike, then the tail of a sturgeon. Better be the head
of a dog, then the tail of a lion. Meglio e esser capo di lucertola che coda di
dragone. Ital.

Better be the head of an ass, then the tail of a horse. Better be the head of
the yeomanry, then the tail of the gentry. E meglio esser testa di luccio che
coda di sturione. Ital. These four Proverbs have all the same sense, viz. Men
love priority and precedence, had rather govern then be ruled, command then
obey, lead then be sed, though in an inferior rank and quality.

He that has no head needs no hat. Qui n'a point de test n'a que fair de
chaperon. Gall.

A man is not so soon healed as hurt. You must not pledge your own health.
Health is better then wealth. The more you heap, the worse you cheap. The more
you rake and scrape the worse success you have; or the more busy you are and
stir you keep, the less you gain.

He that hears much and speaks not all, shall be welcome both in bower and
hall. Parla poco, ascolta assai, and non fallirai. Ital.

Where the hedge is lowest commonly men leap over. Chascun joue au Roy
despouille. Gall. They that are once down shall be sure to be trampled on.

Take heed is a good read. Or as another Proverb has it, Good take heed does
surely speed. Abundans cautela non nocct.

One pair of heels is often worth two pair of hands. Always for cowards. The
French say, Qui n'a coeur ait jambes; and the Italian in the same words, Chi
non ha cuore habbi gambe. He that has no heart let him have heels. So we see,
Nature has provided timorous creatures, as Deers, Hares, Rabbets, with good
heels, to save themselves by flight.

They that be in hell think there is no other Heaven. Every herring must hang by
his own gill. Every tub must stand upon its own bottom. Every man must give an
account for himself. Hide nothing from thy Minister, Physician and Lawyer. Al
confessor medico and advocato Non si de tener il vero celato. Ital. He that
does so does it to his own harm or loss wronging thereby either his soul, body
or estate.

Look not too high, lest a chip fall in thine eye. Noli altum sapere. Mr Howel
has it, Hew not too high, etc. according to the Scottish Proverb.

The higher standing the lower fall. Tolluntur in altum ut lapsu graviora
ruant. The higher flood has always the lower ebb.

The highest tree has the greatest fall. Celsae graviore casu decidunt turres.
Horat. Up the hill favor me, down the hill beware thee. Every man for himself,
and God for us all. Ogniun per se and Dio per tutti, Ital. It is hard to break
a hog of an ill custom. Never lose a hog for an half-penny-worth of tarr. A man
may spare in an ill time: as some who will rather die, then spend ten groats in
Physic. Some have it, lose not a sheep, etc. Indeed tarr is more used about
sheep then swine.

A man may hold his tongue in an ill time. Amyclas silentium perdidit. It Is a
known story, that the Amycleans having been often frighted and disquieted with
vain reports of the enemies coming, made a law that no man should bring or tell
any such news. Whereupon it happened, that when the enemies did come indeed, they
were surprised and taken. There is a time to speak as well as to be silent.

Who can hold that they have not in their hand, i. e. a fart. Home is home
though it be never so homely. (...). Because there we have greatest freedom. v.
Eras. Bos alienus subinde prospect at for as.

An honest man's word is as good as his bond. An honey tongue a heart of gall.
Honors change manners. Honores mutant mores. As poverty depresseth and
debaseth a man's mind. So great place and estate advance and enlarge it; but
many times corrupt and puff it up.

Where honor cease, there knowledge decreaseth. Honos alit arts. Quis enim
virtutem amplectitur ipsam praemia si tollas? On the other side. Sint
Mecaenates non deerunt Flacco Marones:
Virgiliumque tibi vel tua rura dabunt.


A hook well lost to catch a Salmon. Il faut perdre un veron pour pescher un
Saulmon. Gall.

If it were not for hope, the heart would break. Spes alunt exules. Spes servat
afflictos. (...). Spes bona dat vires, animum quoque spes bona firmat. Vivere
spe vidi qui moriturus crat. Hope well and have well, quoth Hickwell.

You cannot make a horn of a pigs tail. Parallel hereto is that of Apostolius,
(...). An asses tail will not make a sieve. Ex quovis ligno non sit Mercurius.

Horns and gray hairs do not come by years. Who has horns in's bosom, let him
not put them on his head. Let a man hide his shame, not publish it. It Is a good
horse that never stumbles: and a good wife that never grumbles. Il n'y a si bon
cheval qui ne bronche. Gall. Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus.

A good horse cannot be of a bad color. A good horse often wants a good spur.
It Is an ill horse will not carry his own provender. It Is an ill horse can
neither whinny nor wag his tail. Let a horse drink when he will, not what he
will. A man may lead a horse to the water, but he cannot make him drink unless
he will. On ne fait boire a l'Asne quand il ne veut. Gall. and On a beau mener
le boeuf a l'eau s' il n'a soif. Gall. In vain do you lead the ox to the water,
if he be not thirsty.

A resty horse must have a sharp spur. A scaled horse is good, etc. v. scald.
The common horse is worst shod. A short horse, etc. v. short. The best horse
needs breaking, and the aptest child needs teaching. Where the horse lies down,
there some hair will be found. Fullers Worth. The horse that is next the mill,
etc. v. mill. A galled horse will not endure the comb. Touch a galled horse,
etc. v. galled. Il tignosa non ama il pettine. Ital. Jamais tigneux n'aime le
pigne. Gall. and Cheval roigneux n'a cure qu' on l'estrille. Gall.

You may know the horse by his harness. They are scarce of horseflesh where
two and two ride on a dog. A short horse is soon wisp't, And a bare a -- soon
kissed. The horse that draws his halter, is not quite escaped. Non a scappato chi
strascina la catena dietro. Ital. Il n'est pas eschappee qui train son lien.
Gall.

Trust not a horses heel, nor a dogs tooth. Ab equinis pedibus procul recede.

He that hires the horse must ride before. The fairer the hostess the fouler
the reckoning. Belle hostess c' est un mal pour la bourse. Gall.

Hot sup, hot swallow. It chances in an hour, etc. v. chances. Better ones
house too little one day, then too big all the year after. When thy neighbors
house is on fire, beware of thine own. Tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet.

A man's house is his castle. This is a kind of Law Proverb, Jura publica savent
privato domils.

He that builds a house by the highway side, it is either too high or too low.
Chi fabrica la casa in piazza, o che e troppo alta o troppo bassa. Ital.

He that buys a house ready wrought, has many a pin and nail for naught. Il
faut acheter maison fait and femme a fair. Gall. A house ready made and a wife
to make. Hence we say, Fools build houses and wise men buy them.

When a man's house burns, it is not good playing at chess. A man may love his
house well, and yet not ride on the ridge. A man may love his children and
relations well, and yet not cocker them, or be foolishly fond and indulgent to
them.

Huge winds blow on high hills. Feriuntque summos fulmina montes, Horat.

Hunger is the best sauce. Appetito non-vuol salsa. Ital. Il n'y a saulce que
d'appetit. Gall. This Proverb is reckoned among the Aphorisms of Socrates,
Optimum cibi condimentum fames sitis potus. Cic. lib. 2. de finibus.

Hunger will break through stone walls. Hungry flies bite sore. The horse in
the Fable with a galled back desired the flies that were full might not be
driven away, because hungry ones would then take their places.

Hungry dogs, etc. v. dogs. They must hunger in frost that will not work in
heat. A hungry horse makes a clean manger. Hunger makes hard bones sweet beans.
Erasmus relates as a common Proverb (among the Dutch I suppose) Hunger makes
raw beans relish well or taste of Sugar. Manet holieque vulgo tritum
proverbium. Famem efficere ut crudae ctiam fabae saccharum sapiant. Darius in
his slight drinking puddle-water desiled with dead carcasses, is reported to
have said, that he never drank any thing that was more pleasant, for says the
story, Neque enim sitiens unquam biberat: he never had drank thirsty. The full
stomach loatheth the honeycomb, but to the hungry, every bitter thing is
sweet. Prove. (...).

All are not hunters that blow the horn.
I.
EVery Jack must have his Gill. Chascun demand sa sort. Gall. Like will to
like. It ought to be written Jyll, for it seems to be a nickname for Julia or
Juliana.

A good Jack makes a good Gill. Bonus dux bonum reddit comitem. Inferiors
imitate the manners of superiors; subjects of their Princes, servants of their
masters, children of their parents, wives of their husbands. Praecepta ducunt,
exempla trahunt.

Jack would be a gentleman, if he could but speak French. This was a Proverb,
when the Gentry brought up their children to speak French. After the conquest,
the first Kings endeavored to abolish the English Language, and introduce the
French.

More to do with one Iack-an apes, then all the bears. Jack would wipe his nose
if he had it. Jack sprat would teach his Grandame. Ante barbam doces senes.

Of idleness comes no goodness. Better to be idle, then not well occupied.
Praestat otiosum esse quam nihil agere. Plin. epist. Better be idle then do
that which is to no purpose, or as good as nothing; much more then that which
is evil.

An idle brain is the Devils shop. Idle folks have the most labor. Idle folks
lack no excuses. No jesting with edge tools, or with bell-ropes. Tresca con i
fanti and lascia stari santi. Ital. Play with children, and let the saints
alone.

When the demand is a jest, the fittest answer is a scoff. Better lose a jest
then a friend. Ill gotten goods, etc. v. goods. Ill news comes apace. Ill weeds
grow apace. Mauvaise herb croist tous jours. Gall. Pazzi crescono senza
inaffiargli. Ital. Fools grow without watering. A mauvais chien la queue luy
vient. Gall. Herba mala praesto cresce, Ital.

Ill will never said well. An inch breaks no squares. Some add, in a burn of
thorns. Pour un petit n'avant n'arriere. Gall.

An inch in a miss is as good as an ell. Ione's as good as my Lady in the dark.
(...). Erasmus draws this to another sense, viz. There is no woman chaste where
there is no witness: but I think he mistakes the intent of it, which is the
same with ours. When candles are out all cats are gray.

No joy without annoy. Extrema gaudii luctus occupat: and Usque adeo nulla est
sincera voluptas, Sollicitumque aliquid laetis intervenit.

Strike while the iron is hot. Infin che il ferro e caldo bisogna batterlo.
Ital. Il fait bon battre le fer tandis qu' il est chaud. Gal. People must then
be plied when they are in a good humor or mood.

He that has many irons in the fire, some of them will cool. Ill luck is worse
then found money. He that will not endure to itch must endure to smart.
K.
KA me and I Will ka thee. Da mihi mutuum testimonium. Cic. orat. pro Flacco.
Lend me an oath or testimony. Swear for me and I Will do as much for you. Or claw
me and I Will claw you. Commend me and I Will commend you. and Pro Delo Calauriam.
Neptune changed with Latona Delos for Calauria.

Keep some till furthermore come. The kettle calls the pot black a -- La
padella diee al paiuolo vati in la, che tu mi non tinga. Ital. Il lavezzo
fabeffe de la pignata. Ital.

All the keys hang not at one man's girdle. A piece of a kid's worth two of a
cat. Who was killed by a cannon bullet, was cursed in his mothers belly. He that
kills a man when he is drunk, v. in D. The kiln call's the oven burnt-house.
It Is good to be near of kin to an estate. A kings favor is no inheritance. The
Kings cheese goes half away in parings. Kissing goes by favor. Better kiss a
knave then be troubled with him. He that kisseth his wife in the marketplace,
shall have enough to teach him. If you can kiss the mistress, never kiss the
maid. To kiss a man's wife or wipe his knife, is but a thankless office. Many
kiss the child for the nurses sake. A carrion kite will never make good hawk.
On ne seauroit fair d'une buse un espreuvier. Gall,

Many kinsfolks, etc. v. friends. Knaves and fools divide the world. When
knaves fall out, true men come by their goods. Les larrons s' entrebatent, les
larcins se descouvrent. Gall. When Highway men fall out, robberies are
discovered.

Knavery may serve for a turn, But honesty is best at long run. The more knave
the better luck. Two cunning knaves need no broker: or a cunning knave, etc.
It Is as hard to please a knave as a Knight. It is better to knit then blossom.
As in trees those that bear the fairest blossoms, as double flowered cherries
and peaches, often bear no fruit at all, so in children, etc.

Where the knot is loose, the string slippeth. They that know one another
salute afar off.
L.
AN unhappy lad may make a good man. A ragged colt, etc.

A quick landlord makes a careful tenant. He that has some land must have
some labor. No sweet without some sweat, without pains no gains. Land was
never lost for want of an heir. A i ricchi non mancano parenti. Ital. The rich
never want kindred.

One leg of a lark 's worth the whole body of a kite. He that comes last makes
all fast. Le dernier ferme la port, ou la laisse ouverte. Gall.

Better late then never. Il vaut mieux tard que jamais. Gall. Meglio tarde che
non may. Ital.

It Is never too late to repent. Nunquam sera est. etc*

Let them laugh that win. Merchand qui perd ne peut rire. Gall. The merchant
that loses cannot laugh. Give losers leave to speak, and I say, Give winners
leave to laugh, for if you do not, they will take it.

He that buys lawn before he can fold it, shall repent him before he have sold
it. They that make laws must not break them. Patere legem quam ipsc tulisti. In
commune jubes siquid censesve tenendum, Primus jussa subi, tunc observantior
aequi Fis populus, nec far vetat cum viderit ipsum, Autorem parere sibi.
Claudian. Better a lean jade then an empty halter. Never too old to learn.
Nulla aetas ad perdiscendum sera est, Ambros.

The least boy always carries the greatest fiddle. All lay load upon those that
are least able to bear it. For they that are least able to bear, are least able
to resist the imposition of the burden.

Better leave then lack. Leave is light. It Is an easy matter to ask leave, but
the expense of a little breath, and therefore servants and such as are under
command are much to blame, when they will do, or neglect to do what they ought
not or ought, without asking it,

While the leg warmeth, the boot harmeth. He that does lend will lose his
friend. Qui priest al amiss perd au double. Gall. He that lends to his friend,
loses double, i. e. both money and friend.

Learn to lick betimes, you know not whose tail you may go by. Show me a liar,
and I Will show you a thief. Life is sweet. While there is life there is hope.
Infin que v' e fiato v' e speranza, Ital. Aegroto dum anima est spes est. Tull.
ad Attic. (...). When all diseases fled out of Pandora's box, hope remained
there still.

There Is life in a muscle, i. e. There is some hopes though the means be but
weak. Life lies not in living, but in liking. Martial says, Non est vivere,
sed valere vita.

Light gains make a heavy purse. Le petit gain remplit la bourse. Gall. They
that sell for small profit, vend more commodities and make quick returns, so
that to invert the Proverb, What they lose in the hundred, they gain in the
county. Whereas they who sell dear, sell little, and many times lose a good
part of their wares, either spoiled or grown out of use and fashion by long
keeping. Poco e spesso empie il borsetto. Ital. Little and often fills the
purse.

Light burdens far heavy. Petit far deau poise a la longue, or Petite chose de
loing poise, Gall.

Light cheap lither yield. That that costs little, will do little service, for
commonly the best is beast cheap.

Lightly come lightly go. The light is naught for sore eyes. Al'oeil malade le
lumiere nuit. Gall. He that does evil hates the light, etc.

There Is lightning lightly before thunder. A heavy purse makes a light heart.
The lion's not half so fierce as he is painted. Minuunt prasentia famam, is a
true rule. Things are represented at a distance, much to their advantage beyond
their just proportion and merit. Fame is a magnifying glass.

Every one as they like best, as the good man said when he kissed his cow. Like
will to like (as the Devil said to the Collier.) Or as the scab'd Squire said
to the mangy Knight, when they both met in a dish of buttered fish. Ogni simile
appetisce il suo simile, Ital. Chascum cherche son semblable, or, demand sa
sort, Gall. Cascus eascam ducit, i. vetulus anum. Significat a. similis
similem delectat.

Like lips like lettuce. Similes habent labra lactucas. A thistle is a sallet
fit for an asses mouth. We use when we would signify that, things happen to
people which are suitable to them, or which they deserve: as when a dull
scholar happens to a stupid or ignorant master, a froward wife to a peevish
husband, etc. Dignum patella operculum. Like priest, like people, and on the
contrary. These Proverbs are always taken in the worse sense. Tal carne tal
cultello. Ital. Like flesh like knife.

Like saint like offering. Like carpenter like chips. Trim tram, like master
like man. Quel maistre tell valet, Gall. Tal Abbate tali i monachi. Ital.

A liquorish tongue is the purses canker. A liquorish tongue a liquorish
lecherous tail. A little pot's soon hot. Little persons are commonly choleric.

Little things are pretty. (...). Many littles make a mickle. (...). (...).
Hesiod.

Add parum parvo magnus acervus erit.

De petit vient on au grand. and, Les petits ruisseaux font les grands
rivieres, Gall. All ekes, etc. The greatest number is made up of unites; and
all the waters of the sea, of drops. Piuma a piuma se pela l'occha. Ital.
Feather by feather the goose is plucked.

Little pitchers have ears. Ce quel'enfant oit au fouyer, est bien tossed cogneu
jusques au Monstier. That which the child hears by the fire, is often known as
far as Monstier, a Town in Savoy. So that it seems they have long tongues, as
well as wide ears. And therefore (as Juvenal well said) Maxima debetur puero
reverentia.

By little and little the poor whore sinks her barn. Little said soon amended.
Little strokes fell great oaks. Multis ictibus dejicitur quercus. Many strokes
fell, etc.

Assiduity overcomes all difficulty. (...).

Minutula pluvia imbrem parit. Assidua stilla saxum excavat.

Quid magis est durum saxo? quid mollius unda?

Dura tamen molli saxa cavantur aqud. Ovid.

Annulus in digito subter tenuatur habendo:

Stillicidi casus lapidem cavat, uncus aratri

Ferrcus occulte decrescit vomer in armis, Lucret.

Pliny reports, that there are to be found flints worn by the feet of Pismires.
Which is not altogether unlikely; for the Horse ants especially, I have
observed to have their rodes or foot-paths so worn by their traveling, that
they may easily be observed.

A little good is soon spent. A little stream drives a light mill. Live and let
live, i. e. Do as you would be done by. Let such pennyworths as your Tenants
may live under you; sell such bargains, etc. Every thing would live. They that
live longest, must go furthest for wood. Longer lives a good fellow then a dear
year. As long lives a merry heart as a sad. One may live and learn. Non si
finisce may d'imparare, Ital. (...), A famous saying of Solon, Discenti assidue
multa senecta vexit.

And well might he say so, for Ars longa vita brevis, As Hippocrates begins his
Aphorisms.

They that live longest must fetch fire furthest. They that live longest must
die at last. All lay load on the willing horse. On touch tous jours sur le
cheval qui tire, Gall. The horse that draws is most whipped.

Half a loaf is better then no bread. It Is a long run that never turns. The
longest day, etc. v. day. Long looked for comes at last. Look to the main
chance. Look before you leap, For snakes among sweet flowers do creep. Look not
too high, etc. v. high. Where the knot is loose, etc. v. knot. No great loss,
but some small profit. As for instance, he whose sheep die of the rot, saves
the skins and wool.

It Is not lost that comes at last. All is not lost that is in danger. In love
is no lack. Love thy neighbor, but pull not down thy hedge. Better a louse
in the pot then no flesh at all. The Scotch Proverb says a mouse, which is
better sense, for a mouse is flesh and edible.

He must stoop that has a low door. Lowly sit richly warm. A mean condition is
both more safe and more comfortable, then a high estate.

The lower millstone grinds as well as the upper. Ill luck is worse, etc. v.
Ill. What is worse then ill luck? Give a man luck, and throw him into the sea.
The honester man, the worse luck, v. honester. Thieves and rogues have the best
luck, if they do but escape hanging. He that is sick of a fever lurden must be
cured by the hasel gelding. No law for lying. A man may lie without danger of
the law.
M.
You Will never be mad, you are of so many minds. There are more maids then
Maukin, and more men then Michael, i. e. little Mal or Mary. Maids say nay and
take. Who knows who is a good maid? Every maid is undone. Look to the main, etc.
v. look. Make much of one, good men are scarce. Malice is mindful. Man
proposes, God disposes. Homme propose, mais Dieu dispose, Gall. Humana confiiia
divinitus gubernantur.

A man's a man though he has but a hose on's head. He that is manned with boys
and horsed with colts, shall have his meat eaten and his work undone. Many
hands make light [or quick] work. Multorum manibus grande levatur onus.

(...). Homer. Unus vir nullus vir. (...). Euripid.

He that has many irons, etc. v. irons. Many sands will sink a ship. We must
have a care of little things, lest by degrees we fall into great
inconveniences. A little leak neglected, in time will sink a ship.

Many littles, etc. v. little. So many men so many minds. Tant^ test tanti
cervelli, Ital. Autant de testes autant d'opinions, Gall. Quot homines tot
sententiae, Terent.

There are more mares in the wood then Grisell. You may know by the
market-folks, how the market goes. He that cannot abide a bad market deserves
not a good one. Forsake not the market for the toll. No man makes haste to the
market, where there is nothing to be bought but blows. The masters eye makes the
horse fat. l'occhio del padrone ingrassa il cavallo, Ital. L'oeil du maistre
engraisse le cheval. Gall. (...). Arist. Oeconom. 2. The answers of Perses and
Libys are worth the observing. The former being asked, what was the best thing
to make a horse fat, answered the masters eye: the other being demanded what
was the best manure, answered the masters footsteps. Not impertinent to this
purpose, is that story related by Gellius. A fat man riding upon a lean horse
asked, how it came to pass, that himself was fat, and his horse so lean. He
answered because I feed my self, but my servant my horse.

That is not always good in the maw that is sweet in the mouth. Who that may
not as he will, etc. v. will. Every may be has a may not be. Two ill meals
make the third a glutton. Measure is a treasure. After meat comes mustard. When
there is no more use of it.

Meat is much, but manners is more. Much meat much maladies. Surfeiting and
diseases often attend full tables. Our nation in former time, has been noted
for excess in eating, and it was almost grown a Proverb, That English men dig
their graves with their teeth.

Meat and mattens hinder no man's journey. In other words, Prayers and
provender, etc.

He that will meddle with all things, may go shoe the goslins. C' e da fare per
tutto, diceva colui che fer^ava l'occha. Ital.

Of little meddling comes great ease. It Is merry in the hall when beards wag
all. When all are eating, feasting or making good cheer. By the way we may note
that this word cheer, which is particularly with us applied to meats and
drinks, seems to be derived from the Greek word (...) signifying joy: As it
does also with us in those words chearly and cheerful.

Merry meet merry part. Be merry and wise. The more the merrier, the fewer the
better cheer. Merry is the feast-making till we come to the reckoning. As long
lives a merry, etc. v. lives. Can Jack-an-apes be merry, etc. v. clog. Who does
sing so merry a note, etc. v. sing. Mickle ado and little help. Might overcomes
right. No mill no meal. (...). Qui sugit molam sugit sarinam. (...). He that
would have honey, must have bees. Erasmus says, they commonly say, He that
would have eggs, must endure the cackling of hens. It is I suppose a Dutch
Proverb.

Much water goes by the mill, the miller knows not of. Assai acqua passa per il
molino the il molinaio non vede, Ital.

An honest miller has a golden thumb. In vain does the mill clack, if the
miller his hearing lack. Every miller draws water to his own mill. Amener eau
au moulin, or; Tirer eau en son moulin, Gall. Tutti tira l'acqua al suo molino.
Ital.

The horse next the mill, carries all the grist. My mind to me a kingdom is. A
pennyworth of mirth is worth a pound of sorrow. Mischiefs come by the pound,
and go away by the ounce. I mali vengono a carri and suggino a onze. Ital.

Better a mischief, then an inconvenience. That is, better a present mischief
that is soon over, then a constant grief and disturbance. Not much unlike to
that, Better eye out, then always aching. The French have a Proverb in sense,
contrary to this, Il faut laisser son enfant morveux plus tossed que luy arracher
le nez. Better let ones child be snotty then pluck his nose off. Better endure
some small inconvenience, then remove it with a great mischief.

There Is no feast to the misers, v. feast. Misfortunes seldom come alone. The
French say, Malheur ne vient jamais seul. One misfortune never came alone. and
Apres perdre perd on bien. When one begins once to lose, one never makes an
end. and Un mal attire l'autre. One mischief draws on another, or one mischief
falls upon the neck of another. Fortuna nulli obesse contenta est semel.

Misreckoning's no payment. Misunderstanding brings lies to town. This is a
good observation, lies and false reports arise most part from mistake and
misunderstanding. The first hearer mistakes the first reporter, in some
considerable circumstance or particular; the second him, and so at last the
truth is lost, and a lie passes current.

Money will do more then my lords letter. It Is money makes the mare to go.
Pecuniae obediunt omnia. (...) etc. I danari san correre i cavaili. Ital.

Prate is but prate, it is money buys land. Beauty is potent, but money is
omnipotent. Amor fait beaucoup, mais a gent fait tout. and Amor fait rage,
mais argent fait marriage, Gall. Love makes rage, And money makes marriage.

God makes, and apparel shapes, but money makes the man. Pecunia vir. (...).
Tanti quantum habeas fis, Horat.

Tell money after your own father. Do as the most do, and fewest will speak
evil of thee. The moon's not seen where the sun shines. A mote may choke a man.
A child may have too much of his mothers blessing. Mothers are oftentimes too
tender and fond of their children. Who are ruined and spoiled by their
cockering and indulgence.

The mouse that has but one hole is easily taken. Tristo e quel topo, che non
ha ch' un sol pertuggio per salvarsi. Ital. La souris qui n'a qu' une entree
est incontinent happee, Gall. Mus non uni fidit antro. Good riding at two
anchors, having two strings to ones bow. This sentence came originally from
Plautus in Truculento, v. Erasm. Adag.

A mouse in time may bite in two, etc. v. time. God never sends mouths, but he
sends meat. This Proverb is much in the mouth of poor people: who get children,
but take no care to maintain them.

Much would have more. Multa petentibus desunt multa, Horat.

Creverunt and opes and opum furiosa Cupido,

Ut quo possideant plurima plura p^^ant.

Sic quibus intumuit suffusa venture ab unda,

Quo plus sunt potae plus sitiuntur aquae. Ovid. Fast.

Muck and money go together. Those that are slovenly and dirty usually grow
rich, not they that are nice and curious in their diet, houses and clothes.

Murder will out. This is observed very often to fall out in the immediate
sense, as if the Providence of God were more then ordinarily manifested in such
discoveries, It is used also to signify, that any knavery or crime or the like
will come to light.

Men muse as they use, measure other folks corn by their own bushel, When a
musician has forgot his note, he makes as though a crum stuck in his throat.
(...). When a singing-man or musician is out or at a loss, to conceal it he
coughes. (...). Some seeking to hide a escape with a cough, render themselves
doubly ridiculous.

He loves mutton well, that dips his bread in the wool.
N.
IF ones name be up he may lie in bed. Qui a bruit de se lever matin peut
dormir jusques a disner, Gall. Etiam trimestres liberi felicibus, Sue.

He that has an ill name is half hanged. Take away my good name and take away
my life. Naught is never in danger. Near is my petticoat, etc. v. petticoat.
Necessity has no law. (...). La necessita non ha leg, Ital. Ingens telum
necessitas. Cic. de Amic.

Necessity is cole-black. They need much whom nothing will content. Need makes
the old wife trot. Bisogno la trottar la vecchia, Ital. Besoign fait vieille
trotter, Gall. All the same, word for word.

Need will have it is course. Need makes the naked man run, [or the naked queen
spin.] A good neighbor, a good goodmorrow. Qui a bon voisin a bon matin, Gall.
Chi ha cattivo vicino ha il mal matino, Ital. Aliquid mali propter vicinum
malum, Plaut. in Merc. (...), Hesiod. Themistocles having a farm to sell,
caused the crier who proclaimed it, to add that it had a good neighbor:
rightly judging that such an advantage would make it more vendible.

Love thy neighbor, etc. v. in L. Neighbour-quart is good quart, i. e. Giffe
gaffe is a good fellow. He dwells far from neighbors [or has ill neighbours]
that is fain to praise himself. Proprio laus sordet in ore. Let another man
praise thee and not thine own mouth, a stranger and not thine own lips.

Here Is talk of the Turk and Pope, but it is my next neighbor does me the harm.
You must ask your neighbor if you shall live in peace. The rough net's not the
best catcher of birds. New lords new laws. De nouveau seigneur nouvelle mesnie,
Gall.

Every one has a penny to spend at a new Alehouse. A new broom sweeps clean. No
penny no, etc. v penny. No mill no, etc. v. mill. No silver no, etc. v. silver.
No living man all, etc. v. all. One may know by your nose, what pottage you
love. Every man's nose will not make a shooing horn. Non cuivis homini contingit
adire Corinthum, Horat.

Where nothing is a little does ease. Where nothing 's to be had, the King must
lose his right. Ninno da quello che non ha, Ital. Le Roy perd sa rent ou il
n'y a que prendre, Gall.

One year a nurse and seven years the worse. Because feeding well and doing
little she becomes liquorish and gets a habit of idleness.

Fair fall nothing once by the year. It may sometimes be better to have nothing
then something. So said the poor man, who in a bitter snowy morning could lie
still in his warm bed, when as his neighbors who had sheep and other cattle,
were fain to get up betimes and abroad, to look after and secure them.


O.
AN unlawful oath is better broke then kept. He that measures oil, shall
anoint his fingers. Qui mesure l'huile il s' en oingt les mains, Gall.

To cast oil in the fire's not the way to quench it. Old men are twice
children. (...). And that not in respect of the mind only, but also of the body.

Old be or young die. Never too old to learn. v. learn. Older and wiser.
Discipulus est prioris posterior dies, Senec. Nunquam ita quisquam been
subducta ratione ad vitam suit, quin res, aetas usus semper aliquid apportet
novi, etc. Terent. (...).

You cannot catch old birds with chaff. Annosa vulpes non capitur laqueo.

If you would not live to be old, you must be hanged when you are young. Young
men may die, old men must. The old woman would never have looked for her
daughter in the oven, had she not been there her self. Se la madre non fosse may
stata nel forno, non vi cercarebbe la figlia. Ital. The same to a word.

An old ape has an old eye. An old dog biteth sore. Un vieil chien jamais ne
jappe en vain, Gall.

Of young men die many, of old men escape not any. De Giovane ne muoiono di
molti, di vecchi ne scampa nessuno, Ital.

An old fox needs learn no craft. An old sack asks much patching. Old men and
far travelers may lie by authority. Il a beau, mentir qui vient de loin. Gall.

Better keep under an old hedge, then creep under a new furze-bush. As the old
cock crows, so crows the young [or so the young learns.] Chi di gallina nasce
convien che rozole, Ital. Some have it,

The young pig grunts like the old sow.

An old thief desires a new halter. Old cattle breed not. This I believe is a
true observation, for probable it is, that all ter estrial animals both birds
and beasts have in them from the beginning, the seeds of all those young they
afterward bring forth, which seeds, eggs if you so please to call them; when
they are all spent, the female becomes effaete or ceases to breed. In birds
these seeds or eggs are visible, and Van Horn has discovered them also in
beasts.

An old naught will never be ought. An old dog will learn no tricks. It Is all
one to physic the dead, as to instruct old men. (...). Senis mutare inguam is
an absurd impossible thing. Old age is int^actable, morose, slow and
forgetful. If they have been put in a wrong way at first, no hopes then of
reducing them. Senex psittacus negligit ferulam.

An old man has one foot in the grave. An old man is a bed full of bones. The
old withy tree would have a new gate hung at it. Old mares lust after new
cruppers. That that is one man's meat's another man's poison. l'un mort don't
l'autre vit, Gall.

One swallow makes not a spring, nor one woodcock a winter. This is an ancient
Greek Proverb. Arist. Ethic. Nicom. lib. 1. (...).

One shoulder of mutton draws down another. En mangeant l'appetit vient. Gall.

One man's breath's another man's death. One man may better steal a horse, then
another look over the hedge. If we once conceive a good opinion of a man, we
will not be persuaded he does any thing amiss; but him whom we have a prejudice
against, we are ready to suspect on the sleightest occasion. Some have this
good fortune, to have all their actions interpreted well, and their faults
overlookt; others to be ill beheld and suspected, even when they are innocent.
So parents many times are observed to have great partiality toward some child;
and not to be offended with him for that, which they would severely punish in
their other children.

One beats the bush and another catches the bird. Il bat le buisson sans
prendre l'oisillon. Gall. Alii sementem faciunt, alii metent. This Proverb was
used by Henry the fifth, at the siege of Orleans: when the citizens besieged by
the English, would have yielded up the town to the D. of Burgundy who was in
the English camp, and not to the King. He said, shall I beat the bush and
another take the bird? no such matter. Which words did so offend the Duke, that
he made peace with the French, and withdrew from the English.

One does the scath and another has the scorn, i. e. One does the harm and
another bears the blame. Scath signifies loss or harm. Opportunity makes the
thief. Occasio facit furem. Therefore, masters and superiors and housekeepers
ought to secure their moneys and goods under lock and key; that they do not
give their servants, or any others, a temptation to steal.

It is good to cry ule at other men's costs. Ule that is Christmas. It Is time
to set in when the oven comes to the dough, i. e. Time to marry when the maid
woes the man: parallel to that Cheshire Prove. It Is time to yoke when the cart
comes to the caples, i. e. horses.

All Is out is good for prisoners but naught for the eyes. It Is good for
prisoners to be out, but bad for the eyes to be out. This is a droll used by
good fellows when one tells them, all the drink is out.

God send us of our own when rich men go to dinner. Let him that owns the cow
take her by the tail. It Is good christening a man's own child first. The ox when
weariest treads surest. Bos lassus fortius sigit pedem. Those that are slow are
sure.


P.
A Small pack, etc. v. small. Pain is forgotten where gain follows. Great pain
and little gain make a man soon weary. Without pains no gains. Dii laboribus
omnia vendunt.

It Is good enough for the Parson unless the parish were better Its here
supposed that if the Parish be very bad the Parson must be in some fault; and
therefore any thing is good enough for that Parson whose Parishioners are bad,
either by reason of his ill example, or the neglect of his duty.

Fat paunches make lean pates, etc. Pinguis venture non gignit sensum tenuem.
This Hierom mentions in one of his Epistles as a Greek Proverb. The Greek is
more elegant.

(...).

All the honesty is in the parting. Patch by patch is good husbandry, but patch
upon patch is plain beggary, or One patch on a knee, etc. Two patches on a
knee, etc. Patience with poverty, is all a poor man's remedy. Patience perforce
is a medicine for a mad dog. Patience is a plaster for all sores. Paul's will
not always stand. A fair pawn never shamed his master. A good play master needs
no surety, or Starts not at assurances. Once paid never craved. He that pays
last, never pays twice. He that cannot pay, let him pray. They take a long day
that never pay. He that would live in peace and rest, must hear and see and say
the best. Oy, voy, and te tais, si tu veux vivre en paix, Gall. Ode, vede,
tace, Sevuoi viver in pace, Ital.

Pen an ink is wits plough. A penny in my purse will bid me drink when all the
friends I have will not. Penny in pocket's a good companion. No penny no pater
noster. That penny is well spent that saves a groat. Bonne la maille qui suave
le denier, Gall. The halfpenny is well spent that saves a penny.

Penny and penny laid up will be many. Who will not keep a penny shall never
have many. The greatest sum is made up of pence: and he that is prodigal of a
little can never gain a great deal: besides by his squandring a little one may
take a scantling of his inclination.

Near is my petticoat, but nearer is my smock. Mu chemise m' est plus proche
que ma robe. Gall. Tocca piu la camisia ch' il gippone, Ital. i. e. Tunica
pallio propior. (...). Theocr. Some friends are nearer to me then others: my
Parents and Children then my other Relations, those then my neighbors, my
neighbors then strangers: but above all I am next to my self. Plus pres est la
chair que la chemise. Gall. My flesh is nearer then my shirt.

If Physic do not work, Prepare for the kirk. I Will not buy a pig in a poke.
The French say chat en poche, i. e. a cat in a poke.

Pigs love that lie together. A familiar conversation breeds friendship among
them who are of the most base and fordid natures.

When the pig's profer'd hold up the poke. Never refuse a good offer.

He that will not stoop for a pin, shall never be worth a point. He can ill
pipe, that wants his upper lip. Things cannot be done without necessary helps
and instruments.

No longer pipe no longer dance. Piss not against the wind. Chi piscia contra
il vento si bagna la camiscia, Ital. He that pisseth against the wind, wets his
shirt. It is to a man's own prejudice, to strive against the stream; he wearies
himself and loses ground too. Chi spuda contra il vento si spuda contra il
viso. Ital. He that spits against the wind spits in his own face.

The pitcher does not go so often to the water, but it comes home broken at
last. Tant souvent va le pot a l'eau que l'anse y demeure, Gall. Quem saepe
transit aliquando invenit. Sen. Trag.

Foolish pity spoils a city. Plain dealing's a jewel but they that use it die
beggars. He plays well that wins. As good play for nothing as work for nothing.
He that plays more then he sees forfeits his eyes to the King. He had need rise
betimes that would please every body. He that would please all and himself too,
Undertakes what he cannot do. (...).

Pleasing ware is half sold. Chose qui plaist est a demi vendu. Gall. Mercantia
chi piace e meza venduta. Ital.

Short pleasure long lament, v. in S. Plenty makes dainty. The plow goes not
well if the plowman holds it not. He that by the plow would thrive Himself
must either hold or drive. There belongs more then whistling to going to plow.
A man must plow with such oxen as he has. He is poor indeed that can promise
nothing. Poor folks are glad of pottage. Poor and proud, fie, fie. The devil
wipes his tail with the poor man's pride. A poor man's table is soon spread.
Possession is eleven points of the Law, and they say there are but twelve. A
cottage in possession, etc. v. cottage. If you drink in your pottage, you will
cough in your grave. When poverty comes is at the doors, love leaps out at the
windows. Plain of poverty and die a beggar. Poverty parts good fellowship.
Pour not water on a drowned mouse. i. e. Add not affliction to misery. Praise a
fair day, etc. v. fair. Praise the sea, etc. v. sea. Prayers and provender
hinder no man's journey. They shall have no more of our prayers then we of their
pies (quoth the Vicar of Layton.) He that would learn to pray, let him go to
sea. Qui veut apprendre a prier, Aille souvent sur la mer, Gal.

Prettiness makes no pottage. Pride will have a fall. Pride feels no cold.
Pride goes before, shame follows after. It Is an ill procession where the Devil
carries the cross. A proud mind and a beggars purse agree not well together.
There Is nothing agrees worse then a proud mind and a beggars purse. As proud
come behind as go before. A man may be humble that is in high estate, and
people of mean condition may be as proud as the highest.

It Is good beating proud folks, for they will not complain. The Priest forgets
that he was a clerk. Proud upstarts remember not the meanness of their former
condition.

He that prieth into every cloud, may be stricken with a thunderbolt. Proffered
service [and so ware] stinks. Merx ultronea putet, apud Hieronym. Erasmus
says, Quin vulgo etiam in ore est, ultro delatum obsequium plerunque ingratum
esse, So that it seems this Proverb is in use among the Dutch too. Merchandise
offe^te est a demi vendue, Gall. Ware that is proffered is sold for half the
worth, or at half the price.

All promises are either broken or kept. This is a flam or droll, used by them
that break their word.

The properer man [and so the honester] the worse luck. Aux bons meschet il,
Gall.

Better some of a pudding then none of a pie. There Is no deceit in a bag
pudding. The proof of the pudding is in the eating. Pull hair and hair, and
you will make the carle bald. Caudae pilos equinae paulatim vellere. There is a
notable story of Sertorius mentioned by Plutarch in his life. He to persuade
his soldiers that counsel was more available then strength, cause, two horses
to be brought out, the one poor and lean; the other strong and having a bushy
tail. To the poor weak horse he sets a great, strong, young man. To the strong
horse he sets a little weak fellow, each to pluck off his horses tail. This
latter pulling the hairs one by one, in a short space got off the whole tail:
whereas the young man catching all the tail at once in his hands, fell a
tugging with all his might, laboring and sweating to little purpose; till at
last he tired, and made himself ridiculous to all the company. Piuma a piuma se
pela l'occha. Ital. Feather by feather the goose is plucked.

Like punishment and equal pain, both key and keyhole do maintain. Let your
purse be your master. Mess tenus propria vive.

All is not won that is put in the purse. He that shows his purse longs to be
rid of it. Be it better or be it worse, be ruled by him that bears the purse.
That Is but an empty purse that is full of other men's money.
Q.
QUick at meat, quick at work. Bonne best s' eschausse en mangeant, Gall. A
good beast will get himself on heat with eating. Hardi gaigneur hardi mangeur,
Gall.

We must live by the quick, and not by the dead. Any thing for a quiet life.
Next to love quietness.
R.
SMall rain lays great dust. Petite pluye abat grand vent. Small rain, or a
little rain lays a great wind, Gall. So said a mad fellow, who lying in bed
bepist his farting wives back.

After rain comes fair weather. Raise no more spirits then you can conjure
down. Thou art a bitter bird, said the Raven to the Sterling. Raw leather will
stretch. There Is reason in roasting of eggs. Est modus in rebus.

No receiver no thief. The receiver's as bad as the thief. (...). Phocyl.

He that reckons without his host, must reckon again. Chi fa conto senza
l'hoste fa conto due volte, Ital. Qui compte sans son host, il lui convient
compter deux sois, Gal.

Even reckoning keeps long friends. A vieux comptes nouvelles disputes, Gall.
Old reckonings breed new disputes or quarrels. Conto spesso e amicitia longa.
Ital.

Never refuse a good offer. If I had revenged all wrong, I had not worn my
skirts so long. It Is brave scrambling at a rich man's dole. Soon ripe soon
rotten. Cito maturum cito putridum. Odi puerulum praecoci sapientia, Apul. It
is commonly held an ill sign, for a child to be too forward and rise-witted,
viz. either to betoken premature death, according to that motto I have
somewhere seen under a coat of arms,

Is cadit ante sencm qui sapit ante diem; or to betoken as early a decay of wit
and parts. As trees that bear double flowers, viz Cherties Peaches, etc. Bring
forth no fruit, but spend all in the blossom. Wherefore as another Proverb has
it; It is better to knit then blossom. Praesto maturo, praesto marzo. Ital.

Why should a rich man steal? Men use to worship the rising sun. Plures adorant
solemn orientem quam occidentem. They that are young and rising have more
followers, then they that are old and decaying. This consideration, it is
thought, withheld Queen Elizabeth, a prudent Princess, from declaring her
successor.

All Is lost that is put in a riven dish. All is lost that is bestowed upon an
ungrateful porson; he remembers no courtesies. Perit quod facis ingrato. Senec.

He loves roast-meat well, that licks the spit. Many talk of Robin Hood, that
never shot in his bow. And many talk of little John that never did him know.
Tales of Robin Hood are good enough for fools. That is, many talk of things
which they have no skill in, or experience of. Robert Hood was a famous robber
in the time of King Richard the first: his principal haunt was about Shirewood
forest in Notingham-shire. Camden calls him, praedonem mitissimum. Of his
stolen goods he afforded good penny-worths, Lightly come lightly go. Molti
parlan di Orlando chi non viddero may suo brando. Ital. Non omnes qui citharam
tenent citharoedi.

Spare the rod and spoil the child. A rogues wardrobe is harbor for a louse. A
r^lling stone gathers no moss. Saxum volutum non obducitur musco. (...). Pietra
mossa non fa muschio, Ital. La pierte souvent remuee n'amasse pas volontiers
mousse. Gall. To which is parallel that of Fabius, Qu. Planta quae saepius
transscrtur non coalescit. A plant often removed cannot thrive.

Rome was not built in one day. Rome n'a ste basti tout en un jour, Gall. and
Grand bien ne vient pas en peu d'heures. A great estate is not gotten in a few
hours.

Name not a rope in his house that hanged himself. No rose without a thorn.
Nulla est sincera voluptas. The fairest rose at last is withered. The rough
net, etc. v. net. At a round table there is no dispute of place. This deserves
not place among Proverbs, yet because I find it both among our English
Collections, and likewise the French and Italian, I have let it pass. A tavola
tonda non si contend del luoco, Ital. Ronde table oste le debat, Gall.

He may ill run that cannot go. He that runs fastest, gets most ground.
There Is no general rule without some exception.
S.
AN old sack, etc. v. old. Set the saddle on the right horse. This Proverb may
be variously applied; either thus, Let them bear the blame that deserve it: or
thus, Let them bear the burden that are best able.

Where saddles do lack, better ride on a pad, then the bare horseback. (...).

Sadness and gladness succeed each other. It Is hard to sail over the sea in an
egg shell. A young saint an old devil, v. young. A good salade is the prologue
to a bad supper. Ital. There Is a salve for every sore. A ogni cosa e rimedio
fuora qu' alla morte. Ital. There Is a remedy for every thing but death.

Save something for the man that rides on the white horse. For old age, wherein
the head grows white. It Is somewhat a harsh Metaphor to compare age to a horse.

Some savers in a house do well. Every penny that is saved is not gotten. Of
saving comes having. Learn to say before you sing. He that would sail without
danger, must never come on the main sea. Saying and doing are two things. Du
dire au faict y a grand traict, Gall.

Say well and do well end with one letter, Say well is good, but do well is
better. One scab'd sheep will mar a whole flock. Un a pecora insetta n'ammorba
una setta. Ital. Il ne faut qu' une brebis rogneuse pour gaster tout le
troupeau, Gall. Grex toius in agris unius scabie cadit and porrigine porci,
Juvenal.

Scald not your lips in another, etc. v. another. A scalded cat fears cold
water. Can scottato d'acqua calda ha paura poi della fredda, Ital. Chat
eschaude craint l'eau froide. Gall.

A scaled head is soon broken. A scaled horse is good enough for a scab'd
squire. Dignum patella operculum.

Among the common people Scoggin's a doctor. (...). Est autem Corydus
vilissimum aviculae genus minimeque canorum.

Who more ready to call her neighbor scold, then the errantest scold in the
parish? Scorning is catching. He that scorns any condition, action or
employment, may come to be, nay often is driven upon it himself. Some word it
thus: Hanging's stretching, mocking's catching.

Scratch my breech, and I Will claw your elbow. Mutuum muli scabunt. Ka me and
I Will ka thee. When undeserving persons commend one another. Manus manum fricat
and Manus manum lavat. Differ not much in sense.

Praise the sea, but keep on land. Loda il mare and tienti a terra, Ital.

The second blow makes the fray. Seldom seen soon forgotten. Seeing is
believing. Chi con l'occhio vede, col cuor creed. Ital.

Seek till you find, and you will not lose your labor. Seldom comes a better. To
see it rain is better then to be in it. The self-edge makes show of the cloth.
Self do, self have. Self-love's a mote in every man's eye. Service is no
inheritance. A young serving-man, etc. v. young. It Is a shame to steal, but a
worse to carry home. Shameless craving must have shameful nay. A bon demandeur
bon refuseur, Gall. It Is very hard to shave an egg, v. egg. A barber learns to
shave by shaving of fools. A barbe de fol on apprend a raire, Gall. Ala barba
de pazzi il barbier impara a radere, Ital. He is a fool that will suffer a
young beginner to practice first upon him.

It Is ill shaving against the wool. He that makes himself a sheep, shall be
eaten by the wolf. Chi pecora si fa il lupo la mangia, Ital. Qui se fait brebis
le loup le mange Gall. He that is gentle, and puts up affronts and injuries
shall be sure to be laden. Veterem ferendo injuriam invitas novam, Terent.
Post folia cadunt arbores, Plaut.

Shear sheep that has them. The difference is wide that the sheets will not
decide. He that shows his purse, etc. v. purse. Hang him that has no shifts. A
bad shift, etc. v. bad. A good shift may serve long, but it will not serve
ever. Close sits my shirt, etc. v. close. Shitten luck's good luck. The wearer
best knows where the shoe wrings him. Every shoe fits not every foot. It is
therefore an instance of absurd application, Eundem calceum omni pedi induere.
Or Eodem collyrio omnibus mederi.

Who goes worse shod then the shooemakers wife? or, Who goes more bare then the
shooemakers wife and the smiths mare. The shoe will hold with the sole. La
suola tien con la Scarpa, Ital. i. e. The sole holds with the shoe.

Every man will shoot at an enemy, but few will go to fetch the shaft. Keep thy
shop, and thy shop will keep thee. Short and sweet. i. e. Sermonis prolixitas
fastidiosa. Cognat. e Ficino.

Short acquaintance brings repentance. A short horse is soon curried. Short
shooting loses the game. Short pleasure long lament. De court plaisir long
repentir, Gall.

A short man needs no stool to give a great lubber a box on the ear. A sharp
stomach makes short devotion. Out of sight out of mind. This is (I suppose)
also a Dutch Proverb. For Erasmus says, Jam omnibus in ore est, qui semotus
sit ab oculis eundem quoque ab animo semotum esse. Absens hares non erit.

Silence is consent. Chi tace confessa, Ital. (...), Euripid. Qui tacet
consentire videtur, inquiunt Juris consulti. Assez consent qui ne mot dit, Gall.

White Silver draws black lines. No silver no servant. The Suisses have a
Proverb among themselves, parallel to this. Point d'argent point de Suisse. No
money no Suisse. The Suisses for money will serve neighboring Princes in their
wars, and are as famous in our days for mercenary soldiers, as were the
Carians of old.

Who does sing so merry a note, as he that cannot change a groat? Cantabit
vacuus coram latrone viator.

The brother had rather see the sister rich then make her so. As good sit still
as rise up and fall. If the sky falls we shall catch larks. Se rouinasse il
cielo si pigliarebbon di molti uccelli, Ital. Sile ciel tomboiles cailles
scroyent prinses, Gall.

A broken sleeve, etc. v. broken. Good to sleep in a whole skin. The sluggards
guise, Loath to go to bed and loath to rise. Sluts are good enough to make
slovens pottage. A small sum will serve to pay a short reckoning. A small pack
becomes a small peddler. Petit mercier, petit panier, Gall.

Better are small fish then an empty dish. The smoke follows the fair. No smoke
without some fire, i. e. There is no strong rumor without some ground for it.
Cognatus has it among his Latin Proverbs, Non est fumus absque igne, though
it be no ancient one. Snotty folks are sweet, But slavering folks are weet.
Others have it. Slavering folks kiss sweet, but snotty folks are wise. Ride
softly, that we may come sooner home. Soft fire makes sweet malt. Something
has some savor. Soon hot soon cold. Soon ripe, etc. v. ripe. Soon crooks the
tree, etc. v. crooks. Sorrow and an evil life, makes soon an old wife. Sorrow
comes unsent for. Mala ultro adsunt. Sorrow will pay no debt. Sorrow is always
dry. A turd's as good for a sow as a pancake. Truy aim mieux bran que roses,
Gall.

Every sow to her own trough. In space comes grace. Better spared, then ill
spent. Better spare at the brim, then at the bottom. Ever spare and ever bare.
Spare the rod, etc. v. rod. What the goodwife spares the cat eats. It Is too
late to spare when the bottom is bare. Sera in fundo parsimonia. Seneca Epist.
1. (...). Hesiod.

Spare to speak, and spare to speed. Speak fare and think what you will. He
that speaks lavishly, shall hear as knavishly. Qui pergit ea quae vult dicere,
ea quae non vult audict. Terent.

Speak when you are spoke to, come when you are called. Ad consilium ne
accesseris antequam voceris.

Great spenders are bad lenders. Raise no more spirits, etc. v. raise. Spend
and God will send. A qui chapon mange chapon lui vient, Gall. He that eats good
meat shall have good meat.

A man cannot spin and reel at the same time. You must spoil before you spin.
That is well spoken, that is well taken. The worst spoke in a cart breaks
first. No sport no pie. Sport is sweetest, when no spectatours. Do not spur a
free horse. Non opus admisso subdere calcar equo, Ovid.

A spur in the head's worth two in the heel. It Is a bad stake will not stand
one year in the hedge. Nothing stake nothing draw. Standing pools gather filth.
Standers by, see more then gamesters. Plus in alieno quam in suo negotio vident
homines.

He that will steal an egg, will steal an ox. He that will steal a pin, will
steal a better thing. When the steed is stolen, the stable door shall be shut.
Serrar la stalla quando s' han perduti i buovi, Ital. Il est temps de sermer
l'estable quand les chevaux en sontalles, Gall. (...).

Quandoquide accepto claudenda est janua damno, Juv. Sa. 13. Sero clypeum post
vnlnera sumo, Ovid.

(...). Lucian.

Blessed be S. Stephen, there is no fast on his even. He that will not go over
the style must be thrust through the gate. The still sow eats up all the draff.
Whosoever lacks a stock, his gain's not worth a chip. Store is no sore. Stretch
your arm, etc. v. arm. Strike while the iron, etc. v. iron. He must stop that
has a low door. After a storm comes a calm. Doppo il cattivo ne vien il buon
tempo, Ital. Apres la pluye vient le beau temps, Gall.

No striving against the stream. Contra torrentem niti. (...). Stultus ab
obliquo qui cum discedere possit, Pugnat in adversas ire natator aquas, Ovid.

Of sufferance comes ease. That suit is best that best fits me. No sunshine but
has some shadow. Put a stool in the sun, when one knave rises another comes,
viz. to places of profit. They that walk much in the sun, will be tanned at
last. Sure bind sure find. Bon guet chasse mal aventure, Gall. Abundans
cautetela non nocet.

If you swear you will catch no fish. No sweet without some sweat. Nul'pain sans
peine, Gall.

Sweet meat must have sour sauce. He must needs swim, that is held up by the
chin. Celuy peut hardiment nager a qui l'on soustient le menton, Gall.

Put not a naked sword in a mad man's hand. Ne puero gladium. For they will
abuse it to their own and others harm.

He that strikes with the sword, shall be beaten with the scabbard. Sweep
before your own door.
T.
MAke not thy tail broader then thy wings, i. keep not too many attendants. A
tailours shreds are worth the cutting. Good take heed does surely speed. A good
tale ill told, is marred in the telling. One tale is good till another is told.
Therefore a good Judge ought to hear both parties. Qui statuit aliquid part
inaudita altera, Aequum licet statuerit haud aquus fucrit.

The greatest talkers are always the least doers. (...). Non verbis sed fact is
opus est. Nec mihi diccre promptum, nec facere est lsti. Ovid. Verba importat
Hermodorus.

He teaches ill, who teaches all. Nothing dries sooner then tears. Niente piu
tosto se secca che lagrime, Ital.

When I Have thatch't his house, he would throw me down. (...). I have taught
thee to dive, and thou seek to drown me.

He that thatches his house with T -- shall have more teachers then reachers.
Set a thief to take a thief. All are not thieves that dogs bark at. Save a
thief from the gallows, and he will be the first shall cut your throat. Dispiccha
l'impicchato che impicchera poi te, Ital. Ostez un vilain du gibet il vous y
mettra, Gall.

Give a thief rope enough, and he will hang himself. One may think that dares not
speak. And it is as usual a saying, Thoughts are free. Humane laws can take no
cognizance of thoughts, unless they discover themselves by some overt actions.

Where ever a man dwells, he shall be sure to have a thorn-bush near his door.
No place no condition is exempt from all trouble. Nihil est ab omni part
beatum. In medio Tybride Sardinia est. I think it is true of the thorn-bush in
a litteral sense, Few places in England where a man can live in but he shall
have one near him.

He that handles thorns, shall prick his fingers. Thought lay a bed and besh --
himself. Certo su appiccato per ladro. Ital. i. e. Truly or certainly was
hanged for a thief.

Threatened folks live long. Three may keep counsel, if two be away. The French
say, Secret de Deux secret de Dieu, secret de trois secret de tous. The
Italians in the same words, Tree taceranno, se due vi non sono.

If you make not much of three pence you will ne'xe be worth a groat. Tickle my
throat with a feather, and make a fool of my stomach. He that will thrive, must
rise at five: He that has thriven may lie till seven. The thunderbolt has but
his clap. Tidings make either glad or sad. Time flees away without delay. Cito
pede praeterit atas, Fugit irrevocabile tempus.

A mouse in time may bite in two a cable. Time and tide tarry for no man. Time
and straw make medlars ripe. Col tempo and la paglia si maturano mespoli, Ital.
Avec le temps and la paille l'on meure les mesles, Gall.

Take time when time is, for time will away. Timely blossom timely ripe. A
tinkers budget's full of necessary tools. Too much of one thing is good for
nothing. Assez y a si trop n'y a, Gall. Ne quid nimis. (...). This is an
Apophthegm of one of the seven wise men; some attribute it to Thales, some to
Solon. Est modus in rebus, sunt, etc. Hor. l'abondanza delle cose ingenera
fastidio. Ital.

Too too will in two, Chesh. i. e. Strain a thing too much and it will not
hold. Touch a galled horse, etc. v. galled. He that travels far, knows much.
Trash and trumpery is the highway to beggary. Tread on a worm, etc. v. worm.
There Is no tree but bears some fruit. Such as the tree is, such is the fruit.
Tell racine, tell fueille. Gall. De fructu arborem cognosco. Mat. 12. 34. The
tree is known by its fruit.

If you trust before you try, you may repent before you die. (...). Theogn.
Therefore it was an ancient precept. (...). Non vien ingannato se non che si
fida. Ital. There is none deceived but he that trusts.

In trust is treason. Speak the truth and shame the devil. Truth may be blamed,
but it shall never be shamed. Truth finds foes where it makes none. Obsequium
amicos, veritas odium parit, Terent.

Truth has always a fast bottom. All truth must not be told at all times. Tout
vray n'est pas bon a dire, Gall. That is true which all men say. Vox populi,
vox Dei.

Fair fall truth and daylight. Let every tub stand on it is own bottom. Chascun
ira au moulin avec son propre sac, Gall. Every one must go to the mill with his
own sack, i. e. bear his own burden.

A t -- is as good for a sow, v. sow. Where the Turks horse once treads, the
grass never grows. One good turn asks another. Qui plaisir fait plaisir
requiert, Gall. Gratia gratiam parit. (...), Sophocl. He that would have
friends, must show himself friendly. Fricantem refrica, (...). It is meet and
comely, just and equal to requite kindnesses, and to make them amends who have
deserved well of us. Mutual offices of love, and alternate help or assistance,
are the fruits and issues of true friendship.

Swine, women and bees cannot be turned. For one good turn another does itch,
claw my elbow, etc. All are not turners that are dish-throwers. As good twenty
as nineteen. If things were to be done twice, all would be wise. Two heads are
better then one. (...). Unus vir nullus vir.

Two good things are better then one. Two eyes see more then one. Deux yeux
voyent plus clair qu' un, Gall. Plus vidont oculi quam oculus.

Two of a trade seldom agree. Two ill meals, etc. v. meals. Between two stools
the breech comes to the ground. Tener il cul su due scanni, Ital. Il a le cul
enter deux selles, ar, Assis enter deux selles le cul a terre, Gall. Tout est
fait negligemment la ou l'un l'autre s' attend. While one trusts another, the
work is left undone.

Two dry sticks will kindle a green one. Two to one is ods. Noli pugnare
duobus, Catull. and Ne Hercules quidem adversus duos. It Is no uncomely thing to
give place to a multitude. Hard to resist the strength, or the wit, or the
importunity of two or more combined against one. Hercules was too little for
the Hydra and Cancer together.

Two cats and a mouse, two wives in one house, two dogs and a bone never agree
in one. Deux chiens ne s' accordent point a un os, Gall.

Good riding at two anchors men have told, For if one break 'tother may hold.
Duabus anchoris fultus. (...), Aristid. (...). Pindar. It Is good in a stormy or
winter night, to have two anchors to cast out of a ship.

Two dogs strive for a bone, and the third runs away with it.
V.
HE that stays in the valley, shall never get over the hill. Valor would
fight, but discretion would run away. You cannot make velvet of a sows ear.
Venture a small fish to catch a great one. Il faut hazarder un petit poisson
pour prendre un grand, Gall. Butta una sardola per pigliar un luccio. Ital.

Venture not all in one bottom. Nothing venture nothing have. Chi non s'
arrischia non guadagna, Ital. Qui ne s' adventure n'a cheval ny mule, Gall.
Quid enim tentare nocebit? and Conando Graeci Troja potiti sunt.

Where vice is, vengeance follows. Raro antecedentem scelestum deseruit pede
poena claudo, Horat.

Unbidden guests, etc. v. in G. Better be unborn then unbred. Make a virtue of
necessity. Il savio fa della necessita virtu, Ital. (...). Erasmus makes to be
much of the same sense, That is, to do or suffer that patiently which cannot
well be avoided. Levius fit patientia, Quicquid corrigere est nefas. Or to do
that our selves by an act of our own, which we should otherwise shortly be
compelled to do. So the Abbeys and Covents which resigned their lands into King
Henry the eight his hands, made a virtue of necessity.

Ungirt unblest. Better be unmannerly, then troublesome. Unminded unmoned. Use
makes perfectness. Usus promptos facit.

Use legs and have legs. Once an use and ever a custom. To borrow on usury
brings sudden beggary. Citius usura currit quam Heraclitus. The pay days recur
before the creditour is aware. Of the mischiefs of usury I need say nothing,
there having been two very ingenious treatises lately published upon that
subject, sufficient to convince any desinteressed person of the evil
consequences of a high interest and the benefit that would accrue to the common
wealth in general, by the depression of interest.


W.
NO safe wading in an unknown water. It Is not good to wake a sleeping dog; or
lion. Ital. Good ware makes quick markets. Proba merx facile emptorem reperit,
Plaut. poen.

When the wares be gone, shut up the shop windows. One cannot live by selling
ware for words. War must be waged by waking men. Wars bring scars. No marvel
if water be lue. Lue, i. e. enclining to cold, whence comes the word lukewarm.

Foul water will quench fire. Where the water is shallow, no vessel will ride.
It Is a great way to the bottom of the sea. There are more ways to the wood then
one. The weakest must go to the wall. Les mal vestus devers le vent, Gall. The
worst clothed are still put to the wind-ward.

Weak men had need be witty. Wealth makes worship. The wearer best knows where
the shoe, etc. v. shoe. Never be weary of well doing. It Is hard to make a
good web of a bottle of hay. There goes the wedge where the beetle drives it.
One ill weed marrs a whole pot of pottage. An ill-spun weft, will out either
now or est. Weft, i. e. web. This is a Yorkshire Proverb. Great weights hang on
small wires. Tutte le gran facende si fanno di poca cosa. Ital.

Welcome is the best cheer. (...). In muncribus res praestantissima men's est.
Super omnia vultus accessere boni.

That that is w^ll done is twice done. Well well, is a word of malice, Chesh.
In other places, if you say well well, they will ask, whom you threaten.

If well and them cannot, then ill and them can, Yorksh. A whet is no let. As
good never a whit as never the better. A white wall is a fools paper. Muro
bianco carta da matti, Ital Some put this in rhyme; He is a fool and ever
shall, that writes his name upon a wall.

Two whores in a house will never agree. A young whore an old saint. Once a
whore and ever a whore. Qui semel scurra nunquam patersamilias, Cic. Orat.
Aliquando qui lusit iterum ludet.

Wide will wear but narrow will tear. Who so blind, as they that will not see?
v. in B. Who so deaf, as they that will not hear? Il n'est de pire sourd que
celuy qui ne veut ouir, Gall.

He that will not when he may, when he wills he shall have nay. Nothing is
impossible to a willing mind. Will is the cause of woe. They who cannot as they
will, must will as they may: or must do as they can. Chi non puo sare come
voglia faccia come puo, Ital. and Chi non puo quel che vuol, quel che puo
voglia. Quoniam id fieri quod vis non potest, velis id quod possis. Terent.
Andria.

Puff not against the wind. It is an ill wind blows no body profit. A quelque
chose malheur est bonne, Gall. Misfortune is good for something.

The wind keeps not always in one quarter. Good wine needs no bush. Al buon
vino non bisogna frasca, Ital. A bon vin il ne faut point d'enseigne, Gall.
Vino vendibili hedera suspensa nihil est opus.

When the wine is in, the wit is out. In Proverbium cessit, Sapientiam vino
obumbrari, Plin. lib. 27. cap. 1. Vin dentro, senno fuora. Ital.

The sweetest wine, makes the sharpest vinegar. Vinegar, i. e. Vinum acre.
Forte e l'aceto di vin dulce, Ital. Corruption optimi est pessima.

Wink at small faults. It Is a hard winter, when one wolf eats another. This is
a French Proverb, Mauvaise est la saison quand un loup mange l'autre.

Winter is Summers heir. He that passes a winters day, escapes an enemy. This
is also a French Proverb, Qui pass un jour d'hyver pass un de ses ennemis
mortels.

Winter finds out what Summer lays up. By wisdom peace, by peace plenty. Wise
men are caught in wiles. A wise head makes a close mouth. Some are wise, and
some are otherwise. Send a wise man of an errand, and say nothing to him.
Wishers and woulders are never good householders. If wishes were butter-cakes
beggars might bite. If wishes were thrushes, beggars would eat birds. If wishes
would bide, beggars would ride. Si souhaits furent vrais pastoureaux seroyent
rois, Gall. If wishes might prevail, shepherds would be Kings.

It will be long enough ere you wish your skin full of holes. I never fared
worse, then when I wished for my supper. Wish in one hand and sh -- in the
other, and see which will be full first. Bought wit is best. Duro flagello men's
docetur rectius. (...), Nazianz. (...), Nocumenta documenta, Galeatum sero
duelli poenitet.

Good wits jump. Wit once bought, is worth twice taught. A wonder lasts but
nine days. A wooll-seller knows a wooll-buyer. Yorksh. A word is enough to the
wise. A buon intenditor poche parole, Ital. A bon entendeuril ne faut que demye
parole, Gall. So the Italians say, A few words; we say one word; and the French
say, half a word is enough to the understanding and apprehensive.

Many go out for wool and come home shorn. Words are but wind, but blows
unkind. (...).

Words are but sands Its money buys lands. Fair words make fools fain, i. e.
glad. Douces promesses obligent les fols, Gall. I fatti sono maschii, le parole
femine. Ital. Deeds are males, words are females.

Few words are best. Poche parole and buon regimento. Ital. A fools voice is
known by multitude of words. Nature has furnished man with two ears and but
one tongue, to signify, He must hear twice so much as he speaks.

Fair words butter no parsnips. Re opitulandum non verbis: the same in other
terms,

Good words fill not a sack. Good words cost naught. Good words cool more then
cold water. Soft words hurt not the mouth. Douces or belles paroles ne
scorchent pas la langue, Gall. Soft words scald not the tongue.

Words have long tails; and have no tails. Soft words break no bones. Soft
words and hard arguments. Many words hurt more then swords. An ill workman
quarrels with his tools. Meschant ouvrier ja ne trouvera bons outils, Gall.

He that kills himself with working must be buried under the gallows. The
better workman the worse husband. Though this be no Proverb, yet it is an
observation generally true (the more the pity) and therefore as I have found
it, I put it down.

Account not that work slavery, That brings in penny savoury. All work and no
play, makes Jack a dull boy. The world was never so dull, but if one will not
another will. It Is a great journey to the worlds end. I wot well how the world
wags, he is most loved that has most bags. (...). Felicium multi cognati. It
was wont to be said, Ubi amici ibi opes, but now it may (as Erasmus complains)
well be inverted, Ubi opes ibi amici.

Tread on a worm and it will turn. Habet and musca splcnem. (...). Inest and
formicae and serpho bilis. The meanest or weakest person is not to be provoked
or despised. No creature so small, weak or contemptible, but if it be injured
and abused, will endeavor to revenge it self.

Every thing is the worse for wearing. He that worst may, still holds the
candle. Au plus debile la chandelle a la main, Gall.

The worth of a thing, is best known by the want. Bien perdu bien connu, or
Chose perdue est lors connue, Gall. Vache ne seait que vaut sa queue jusques a
ce qu' elle l'ait perdue. The cow knows not what her tail is worth, till she
has lost it.

He that wrestles with at -- is sure to be besh -- whether he fall over or
under. That is, he that contends with vile persons, will get nothing but a
stain by it. One cannot touch pitch without being defiled.


Y.
AS soon goes the young lambs skin to the market, as the old ews. Aussi tossed
meurt veau comme vache, Gall. Cosi tosto muore il capretto come capra, Ital.

Young men think old men fools, and old men know young men to be so. This is
quoted by Camden, as a saying of one Doctor Metcalf. It is now in many peoples
mouths, and likely to pass into a Proverb.

A young saint an old Devil. De jeune Angelote vieux diable, Gall. A Tartesso
ad Tartarum.

A young serving-man an old beggar. Chi vive in corte muore a pagliaro. Ital.

A young whore an old saint. v. in W. Young men may die, but old men must. v.
in O. If youth knew what age would crave, it would both get and save.
Proverbial Phrases and forms of Speech that are not Entire Sentences.
A.
TO bring an Abbey to a Grange. To bring a noble to nine-pence. We speak it of
an unthrift. Ha fatto d'una lanza una spina, and d'una calza una borsetta.
Ital. He has made of a lance a thorn, and of a pair of breeches a purse:
parallel to ours, He has thwitten amill-post to a pudding-prick.

To commit as many absurdities as a clown in eating of an egg. Afraid of far
enough. Chesh. Of that which is never likely to happen. Afraid of him that died
last year. Chesh. Afraid of the hatchet lest the helve stick in's a -- Ches.
Afraid of his own shadow. More afraid then hurt. They agree like cats and dogs.
They agree like harp and harrow. This has the same sense with the precedent.
Harp and harrow are coupled, chiefly because they begin with the same letter.

They agree like bells, they want nothing but hanging. He is paced like an
Alderman. The case is altered, quoth Ployden. Edmund Plowden was an eminent
common Lawyer in Queen Elizabeth's time, born at Plowden in Shropshire, of whom
Camden gives this character, Vitae integritate inter homines suae professionis
nulli secundus. Elizabeth. Ann. 1584. And Sr Edward Coke calls him the Oracle
of the common Law. This Proverb is usually applied to such Lawyers or others as
being corrupted with larger fees shift sides and pretend the case is altered;
such as have bovem in lingua. Some make this the occasion of the Proverb:
Plowden being asked by a neighbor of his, what remedy there was in Law against
his neighbor for some hogs that had trespassed his ground, answered, he might
have very good remedy, but the other replying, that they were his hogs, Nay
then neighbor (quoth he) the case is altered. Others more probably make this
the original of it. Plowden being a Roman Catholic, some neighbors of his
who bare him no good will, intending to entrap him and bring him under the lash
of the Law, had taken care to dress up an Altar in a certain place, and
provided a Layman in a Priests habit, who should do Mass there at such a time.
And withal notice thereof was given privately to Mr Plowden, who thereupon
went and was present at the Mass. For this he was presently accused and
indicted. He at first stands upon his defense and would not acknowledge the
thing. Witnesses are produced, and among the restone, who deposed, that he
himself performed the Mass, and saw Mr Plowden there. Says Plowden to him, art
thou a Priest then? the fellow replied, no. Why then Gentlemen (quoth he) the
case is altered: No Priest no Mass. Which came to be a Proverb, and continues
still in Shropshire with this addition. The case is altered (quoth Ployden) No
Priest no Mass.

To angle with a silver hook. Peschar col hamo d'argento. The Italians by this
phrase mean, to buy fish in the market. It is also a Latin Proverb, Aureo hamo
piscari. Money is the best bait to take all sorts of persons with.

If you be angry you may turn the buckle of your girdle behind you. To cut
large shives of another man's loaf. To cut large thongs of another man's leather.
De alieno corio liberalis. Del cuoio d'altri si fanno le corregge largee. Ital.
Il coupe large courroye du cuir d'autruy. Gall. It may pass for a sentence
thus, Men cut large shives of others loaves. This should seem to be also a
Dutch Proverb: for Erasmus says, Circumfertur apud nostratium vulgus non
absimile huic Proverbium, Ex alieno tergore lata secari lora.

To hold by the Apron-strings. i. e. in right of his wife. To answer one in his
own language. Ut salutaris ita resalutaberis.

A bit and a knock [or bob] as men feed apes. Arsy versy. (...). She is one of
mine Aunts that made mine uncle go a begging. A pretty fellow to make an
axle-tree for an oven. Chesh.
B.
HE knows not a B from a battledoor. His back is broad enough to bear jests. My
Lord Baldwin's dead. It is used when one tells that for knews which every body
knows. A Sussex Proverb, but who this Lord Baldwin was I could not learn there.

You Will not believe he is bald till you see his brains. Never a barrel better
herring. Bate me an ace, quoth Bolton. Who this Bolton was I know not, neither
is it worth the enquiring. One of this name might happen to say Bate me an ace,
and for the coincidence of the first letters of these two words Bate and Bolton
it grew to be a Proverb. We have many of the like original as v. g. Sup Simon.
etc. Stay quoth Stringer, etc. There goes a story of Queen Elizabeth, that
being presented with a Collection of English Proverbs, and told by the Author
that it contained all the English Proverbs, nay replied she, Bate me an ace
quoth Bolton: which Proverb being instantly looked for happened to be wanting
in his Collection.

You dare as well take a bear by the tooth. If it were a bear it would bite
you. Are you there with your bears. To go like a bear to the stake. He has as
many tricks as a dancing bear. If that the course be fair, again and again
quoth Bunny to his bear. I bear him on my back. That is I remember his injuries
done to me with indignation and grief, or a purpose of revenge.

To bear away the bell. You Will scratch a beggar before you die. That is, you will
be a beggar, you will scratch your self.

It would make a beggar beat his bag. I Will not hang all my bells on one horse.
That is, give all to one son.

Better believe it then go where it was done to prove it. Voglio piu tosto
crederlo che andar a cercarlo. Ital.

The belly thinks the throat cut. To have the bent of ones bow. There Is never a
best among them, as the fellow said by the Fox-cubs. Between hawk and buzzard.
To look as big as if he had eaten bull-beef. He Will have the last word though he
talk bilk for it. Bilk, i. e. nothing. A man is said to be bilkt at Cribbets
when he gets nothing, when he can make never a game.

Bill after helve. He Will make 19 bits of a bilberry. Spoken of a covetous
person.

To bite upon the bridle. That is, to fare hardly, to be cut short or suffer
want, for a horse can eat but slowly when the bridle is in his mouth. Or else
it may signify to fret, swell and disquiet himself with anger. Froena mordere
in Latin has a different sense, i. e. to resist those who have us in
subjection, as an unruly horse gets the bridle between his teeth and runs away
with his rider, or as a dog bites the staff you beat him with. Statius uses it
in a contrary sense, viz. to submit to the Conqueror and take patiently the
bridle in ones mouth. Subiit leges and froena momordit.

Though I be bitten I am not all eaten. What a Bishops wife? eat and drink in
your gloves? To wash a Blackmore white. Aethiopem lavare or dealbare, (...) seu
(...). Labor in vain. Parallel whereto are many other Latin Proverbs, as
laterem lavare, arenas arare.

You cannot say black is his eye [or nail] That is you can find no fault in
him, charge him with no crime.

Blind-mans holiday, i. e. twilight, almost quite dark. As the blind man shot
the crow. He has good blood in him if he had but groats to it. That is, good
parentage, if he had but wealth. Groats are great oatmeal of which good
housewives are wont to make black puddings.

To come bluely off. He Is true blue, he will never stain. Coventry had formerly
the reputation for dying blues, in so much that true blue came to be a Proverb,
to signify one that was always the same, and like himself.

To make a bolt or a shaft of a thing. There Is a bone for you to pick. Egli m'
ha dato un osso da rosegar. Ital.

To be bought and sold in a company. She has broken her elbow at the Church
door. Spoken of a housewively maid that grows idle after marriage.

You seek a brack where the hedge is whole. His brains are addle. His brains
crow. His brains will work without barm. Yorksh. He knows which side his bread
is buttered on. 'Twould make a horse break his bridle, or a dog his halter. One
may as soon break his neck as his fast there. Break my head, and bring me a
plaster. Taglia m' il naso and soppi me poi nelle orecchie. Ital.

Spare your breath [or wind] to cool your pottage. You seek breeches of a
bare-ars'd man. Ab asino lanam.

His breech makes buttons. This is said of a man in fear. We know vehement fear
causes a relaxation of the sphincter any, and unvoluntary dejection. Buttons,
because the excrements of some animals are not unlike buttons or pellets: as of
sheep, hares, etc. Nay they are so like, that they are called by the same name;
this figure they get from the cells of the Colon.

As they brew even so let them bake. Some have it, so let them drink, and it
seems to be better sense so. Tute hoc intristi tibi omne exedendum est. Terent.
Phorm. Ut sementem feceris ita metes. Cic. de Orat. lib. 2.

To make a bridge of ones nose. i. e. to intercept ones trencher, cup, or the
like; or to offer or pretend to do kindnesses to one, and then pass him by and
do it to another, to lay hold upon and serve himself of that which was intended
for another.

To leave one in the briers or suds. He has brought up a bird to pick out his
own eyes. (...). Tal nutre il corvo che gli cavera poi gli occhi. He brings up
a raven, etc. Ital.

He Will bring buckle and thong together. To build castles in the air. Far
castelli in aria. Ital.

He thinks every bush a boggard, i. e. a bugbear or phantasm. Bush natural,
more hair then wit. No butter will stick to his bread. To buy and sell and live
by the loss. To have a breez, i. e. a gad-fly, in his breech. Spoken of one
that frisks about, and cannot rest in a place.

The butcher looked for his knife when he had it in his mouth. His bread is
buttered on both sides. i. e. He has a plentiful estate: he is fat and full.


C.
I Think this is a butchers horse, he carries a calf so well. His calves are
gone down to grass. This is a jeer for men with over-slender legs.

His candle burns within the socket. That is, he is an old man, Philosophers
are wont to compare man's life not ineptly to the burning of a lamp, the vital
heat always preying upon the radical moisture, which when it is quite consumed
a man dies. There is indeed a great likeness between life and flame, air being
as necessary to the maintaining of the one as of the other.

If his cap be made of wool. In former times when this Proverb came first in
use men generally wore caps: Hats were a thing hardly known in England, much
less hats made of rabbets or beavers furr. Capping was then a great trade and
several statutes made about it. So that, if his cap were made of wool, was as
much as to say most certainly, As sure as the clothes on his back. Dr Fuller.

They may cast their caps at him. When two or more run together, and one gets
ground, he that is cast and despairs to overtake commonly casts his hat after
the foremost, and gives over the race. So that to cast their caps at one is to
despair of catching or overtaking him.

He carries fire in one hand and water in the other. Altera manu sert aquam,
altera ignem. (...), etc. Plutarch. Il port le feu and l'eau, Gall. Altera
manu sert lapidem, altera panem ostentat. Plaut.

To set a spoke in ones cart. To set the cart before the horse. Currus bovem
trahit. Metter il carro inanzi aibuoi. Ital. La charrue va devant les boeufs.
Gall.

The cat's in the cream-pot. This is used when People hear a great noise and
hubbub amongst the good wives of the town, and know not what it means; but
suppose that some sad accident is happened; as that the cat is fallen into the
cream-pot, or the like.

Before the cat can lick her ear. You shall have that the cat left in the
malt-heap. They are not catercousins. He has good cellarage. That char is
char'd (as the good wife said when she had hanged her husband.) A char in the
Northern dialect is any particular business, affair or charge, that I commit to
or entrust another to do. I take it to be the same with charge (...).

To go cheek by jowl with one. To chew the cud upon a thing. i. e. To consider
of a thing, to revolve it in ones mind: to ruminate, which is the name of this
action, is used in the same sense both in Latin and English.

The child has a red tongue like its father. Children to bed, and the goose to
the fire. I cannot conceive what might be the occasion, nor what is the meaning
of this saying. I take it to be senseless and nugatory.

A chip of the old block. Patris est silius. He is his fathers own son; taken
always in an ill sense.

Like a chip in a pottage-pot, does neither good nor harm. It goes down like
chop't hay. I Will make him know churning days. To clip ones wings. Pennas
incidere alicui.

He has a cloak for his knavery. He is in the cloth-market, i. e. in bed. To
carry coals to Newcastle. Soli lumen mutuari; coelo stellas; ranae aquam.
Crocum in Ciliciam, ubi sc. maxim abundat: Noctuas Athenas. Porter de fueilles
au bois. Gall. To carry leaves to the wood. Alcinoo poma dare.

To set cook on hoop. This is spoken of a Prodigal, one that takes out the
spigget and lays it upon the top of the barrel, drawing out the whole vessel
without any intermission.

His cockloft is unfurnished. i. e. He wants brains. Tall men are commonly like
high houses, in which the uppermost room is worst furnished.

To have a colis tooth in his head. It is usually spoken of an old man that is
wanton and petulant.

To cut ones comb. As is usually done to cocks when gelded; to cool ones
courage.

They Will come again, as Goodyers pigs did, i. e. never. Come and welcome, go
by and no quarrel. Command your man and do it your self. Ask my companion if I
be a thief. In the North they say, Ask my mother if my father be a thief.
Demanda al hosto s' egl'ha buon vino. Ital. Ask your host if he have good wine.

To complain of ease. To outrun the Constable. To spend more then ones
allowance or income.

You might be a Constable for your wit. Cook-ruffian, able to scald the devil
in's feathers. To cool ones courage. He Is corn-fed. A friend in a corner. To
take counsel of ones pillow. La nuict done conseil. Gall. Noctu urgenda
consilia. Inde nox (...) dicitur, (...). La notte e madre di pensieri. Ital.
The night is the mother of thoughts.

Counsel's as good for him as a shoulder of mutton for a sick horse. What is
got in the County is lost in the hundred. What is got in the whole sum is lost
in particular reckonings; or in general, what is got one way is lost another.

Court holy water. Eau beniste de la cour. Gall. Fair words and nothing else.

One of the Court but none of the Counsel. All the craft is in the catching.
To speak as though he would creep into ones mouth. He has never a cross to
bless himself withal. i. e. No money which has usually a cross on the averse
side.

To have crotchets in ones crown. You look as if you were crow-trodden. You
look as if you would make the crow a pudding, i. e. die. I have a crow to pluck
with you. You need not be so crusty, you are not so hard baked. Here Is a great
cry and but a little wool (as the fellow said when he shear'd his hogs.) Assai
romor and poca lana. Ital. A sinum tondes. Parturiunt montes, etc.

You cry before you're hurt. Let her cry, she will piss the less. To lay down the
cudgels. His belly cries cupboard. To curse with bell, book and candle. To be
beside the cushion. Aberrari a janua.

To stand for a cipher.
D.
TO take a dagger and drown ones self. To be at daggers drawing. To look as if
he had sucked his dam through a hurdle. To dance to every man's pipe or whistle.
To burn daylight. Dead in the nest. To deal fools dole. To deal all to others
and leave nothing to himself.

Good to send on a dead bodies errand. To work for a dead horse or goose. To
work out an old debt or without hope of future reward. Argent receu le bras
rompu. Gall. The wages had the arm is broken. Chi paga inanzi e servito
indietro. Ital. He that pays beforehand is served behindhand. Chi paga inanzi
tratto Trova il lavor mal fatto. Ital.

If thou had the rent of Dee-mills thou would spend it. Chesh. Dee is the
name of the river on which the city Chester stands: the mills thereon yield a
great annual rent, the biggest of any houses about that city.

As demure as if butter would not melt in's mouth. Some add, And yet cheese
will not choke him.

To get by a thing as Dickson did by his distress. That is, over the shoulders,
as the vulgar usually say. There is a coincidence in the first letters of
Dickson and distress: otherwise who this Dickson was I know not.

Hold the dish while I shed my pottage. To lay a thing in ones dish. He claps
his dish at a wrong man's door. To play the Devil in the bulmong, i. e. corn
mingled of pease, tares and oats. If the Devil be a vicar thou will be his
clerk, Do and undo, the day is long enough. To play the dog in the manger, not
eat your self nor let any body else. (...). Lucian. Canis in praescpi. E come
il cane del ortolano, che non mangia de cauoli egli and non ne lascia mangiar
altri. Ital. Like the gardners dog who cannot eat the coleworts himself, nor
will suffer others.

Dogs run away with whole shoulders. Not of mutton, but their own; spoken in
derision of a misers house.

We dogs worried the hare. To serve one a dog-trick. It would make a dog doff
his doublet. Chesh. A dogs life, hunger and ease. To dote more on it then a fool
on's babble. He Will not put off his doublet before he goes to bed, i. e. part
with his estate before he die.

You need not doubt you are no Doctor. A dram of the bottle. This is the
Seamens phrase for a draught of brandy wine or strong waters.

To dream of a dry summer. One had as good be nibled to death by ducks, or
pecked to death by a hen. To take things in dudgeon, or to wear a
dudgeon-dagger by his side. To dine with Duke Humphrey. That is, to fast, to go
without ones dinner. This Duke Humphrey was uncle to K. Henry the sixth, and
his Protector during his minority, Duke of Gloucester, renowned for hospitality
and good housekeeping. Those were said to dine with Duke Humphrey, who walked
out dinner time in the body of S. Paul's Church; because it was believed the
Duke was buried there. But (says Dr Fuller) that saying is as far from truth
as they from dinner, even twenty miles off: seeing this Duke was buried in the
Church of St Albans, to which he was a great benefactour.

She Is past dying of her first child, i. e. she has had a bastard.
E.
HE dares not for his ears. To fall together by the ears. In at one ear and out
at the other. Dentro da un orecchia and fuora dal altra. Ital.

To eat ones words. You had as good eat your nails. He could eat my heart with
garlic. That is, he hates me mortally. So we know some of the Americans feast
upon the dead carcases of their enemies.

There Is as much hold of his word as of a wet cel by the tail. (...).

I have eggs of the spit. I am very busy. Eggs if they be well roasted require
much turning.

Neither good egg nor bird. You come with your five eggs a penny, and four of
them be rotten. Set a fool to roast eggs; and a wise man to eat them. An egg
and to bed. Give him the other half egg and burst him. To smell of
elbow-grease. Lucernam olere.

She has broken her elbow. That is, she has had a bastard; another meaning of
this phrase see in the letter B, at the word broken.

Elden hole needs filling. Darbysh. Spoken of a lier. Elden hole is a deep pit
in the Peak of Darbyshire near Castleton, fathomless the bottom, as they would
persuade us. It is without water, and if you cast a stone into it you may for a
considerable time hear it strike against the sides to and again as it descends,
each stroke giving a great report.

To make both ends meet. To bring buckle and thong together. To have the better
end of the staff. He Will have enough one day when his mouth is full of moulds. A
sleeveless errand. Find you without an excuse and find a hare without a muse.
Vias novit quibus effugit Eucrates. This Eucrates was a miller in Athens who
getting share in the Government was very cunning in finding out shifts and
pretenses to excuse himself from doing his duty.

I was by, (quoth Pedley) when my eye was put out. This Pedley was a natural
fool of whom go many stories.

To cry with one eye, and laugh with the other.
F.
TO set a good face on a thing. Fair bonne mine. Gall.

I think his face is made of a fiddle, every one that looks on him loves him.
To come a day after the fair. (...). Post festum venisti. Plat. in Gorg.

It will be fair weather when the shrews have dined. He pins his faith on
another man's sleeve. To fall away from a horse-load to a cart-load. Fall back,
fall edge. Farewell and be hanged, friends must part. Farewell frost, Nothing
got nor nothing lost. He thinks his fart as sweet as musk. He farts
frankincense. This is an ancient Greek Proverb, (...). Self-love makes even a
man's vices, infirmities and imperfections to please him. Suus cuique crepitus
been (...).

He makes a very fart a thunderclap. All the fat's in the fire. To feather ones
nest well. To go to heaven in a featherbed. Non est e terris mollis ad astra
via.

Better fed then taught. All fellows at football. If Gentlemen and Persons
ingeniously educated will mingle themselves with rusticks in their rude sports,
they must look for usage like to or rather courser then others.

Go fiddle for shives among old wives. Fight dog, fight bear. Ne depugnes in
alleno negotio.

To fight with ones own shadow. (...). To fight with shadows, to be afraid of
his own fancies; imagining danger where there is none.

To fill the mouth with empty spoons. To have a finger in the pie. He had a
finger in the pie when he burnt his nail off. He has more wit in's little
finger then thou in thy whole body. To put ones finger in the fire. Prudens in
flammam ne manum injicito. Hieron. Put not your finger needlessly into the fire.
Meddle not with a quarrel voluntarily wherein you need not be concerned. Prove.
26. 17.

To foul ones fingers with. To have a thing at his fingers ends. Scire tanquam
ungues digitosque.

His fingers are lime-twigs, spoken of a thievish person. All fire and tough.
To come to fetch fire. To go through fire and water to serve or do one good.
Probably from the two sorts of Ordeall by fire and water

To add fuel to the fire. Oleum camino addere.

All is fish that comes to net. You fish fair and catch a frog. Neither fish,
nor flesh, nor good red herring. I have other fish to fry. By fits and starts,
as the hog pisseth. To give one a flap with the foxes tail, i. e. to cozen or
defraud one. He would flay a flint, or flay a groat, spoken of a covetous
person. To send one away with a flea in his ear. Lo gli ho messo un pulce nel
orecchio. Ital. It Is not easy to conceive by them who have not experienced it,
what a buzzing and noise a flea will make there.

It Is the fairest flower in his crown or garden. To fly at all game. More fool
then fiddler. The vicar of fools is his ghostly father. To set the best foot
forward. He has a fair forehead to graft on. Better lost then found. Too free
to be fat. He Is free of Fumblers hall. Spoken of a man that cannot get his wife
with child. He may even go write to his friends. We say it of a man when all
his hopes are gone.

To fry in his own grease. Out of the drying pan into the fire. Cader dalla
padella nelle bragie. Ital. Saulter de la poile and se jetter dans les braises.
Gall. De fume in flammam (which Ammianus Marcellinus cites as an ancient
Proverb) has the same sense, Evitata Charybdi in Scyllam incidere. Ne cinerem
vitans in prunas incidas. (...). Lucian.

You are never well full nor fasting.
G.
THe gallows groans for you. To gape for a benefice. He may go hang himself
in's own garters. All your geese are swans. Suum cuique pulchrum. Ill suo soldo
val tredeci danari. Ital. His shilling's worth 13 pence.

You're a man among the geese when the gander is away. What he gets he gets out
of the fire. To get over the shoulders. All that you get you may put in your
eye and see never the worse. He bestows his gifts as broom does honey. Broom is
so far from sweet that it is very bitter.

I thought I would give him one and lend him another, i, e. I would be quit
with him. Give a loaf and beg a shive. There Is a glimmer in the touch-box. Out
of Gods blessing into the warm sun. Ab equis ad asinos.

Go in Gods name, so ride no witches. Go forward and fall, go backward and mar
all. A front praecipitium, a tergo lupi.

I Will go twenty miles on your errand first. To give one as good as he brings,
or his own. Qui quae vult dicit quae non vult audiet. Terent. ut salutaris ita
resalutaberis.

One Yate for another, good fellow. v. in O. I am a fool, I love any thing that
is good. To come from little good to stark naught. Ab equis ad asinos.
Mandrabuli in morem. Mandrabulus finding gold mines in Samos, at first offered
and gave to Juno a golden ram, afterward a silver one, then a small one of
brass, and at last nothing at all.

Some good some bad, as sheep come to the fold. Sunt bona, sunt quaedam
mediocria, sunt mala plura Quae legis, etc. Mart.

I Will do my good will, as he said that thresht in's cloak. This was some
Scotchman, for I have been told, that they are wont to do so: my self have seen
them hold plough in their cloaks.

He did me as much good as if he had pist in my pottage. To brag of many
goodmorrows. A goose cannot graze after him. He hopes to eat of the goose shall
graze on your grave. Steal my goose and stick me down a feather. He cannot say
shooh to a goose. You're a pretty fellow to ride a goose a gallop through a
dirty lane. You find fault with a fat goose. You Will be good when the goose
pisseth. All is not Gospel comes out of his mouth. He must have his grains of
allowance. A knave or a rogue in grain. That is of a scarlet dye, The Alkermes
berry wherewith they dye scarlet is called in Greek, (...). that is granum in
Latin, and in English grain.

It goes against the grain. The grain, Pecten ligni, longways the wood, as the
fibers run. To go transversly to these fibers is to go against the grain.

Teach your grandame to grope her ducks. Teach your grandameto sup sour milk.
Aquilam volare, Delphinum natare doce. Il ne faut apprendre aux poissons a
nager. Gall. You must not teach fish to swim. Teach me to do that I know how to
do much better then your self. Teach your father to beget children. Sus
Minervam.

He Is gray before he is good. To grease a fat sow on the A -- On ne doit pas a
gras porceau le cul oindre. Gall.

To grease a man in the fist. That is to put money into his hand; to fee or
bribe him.

I Will either grind or find. All brings grist to your mill. To grow like a cows
tail, i. e. downwards. He has no guts in's brains. The anfractus of the brain,
looked upon when the Dura matter is taken often, do much resemble guts.

He has more guts then brains. Out of gunshot.
H.
TO be hail fellow well met with one. It goes against the hair. The hair of
most animals lies one way, and if you stroke them down that way the hair lies,
your hand slides smoothly down; but if you stroke the contrary way, the hair
rises up and resists the motion of your hand.

To take a hair of the same dog. i. e. To be drunk again the next day.

To cut the hair. i. e. To divide so exactly as that neither part have
advantage.

You halt before you're lame. To make a hand of a thing. To live from hand to
mouth. In diem vivere, or as Persius, Ex tempore vivere.

Hand over head, as men took the Covenant. Two hands in a dish and one in a
purse. To have his hands full. IN ay assez a fair environ les mains. Gall.

I Will lay my hand on my halfpenny e're I part with it. To hang ones ears.
Demitto auriculas ut iniquae mentis ascllus. Horat.

They hang together like burs, or like pebbles in a halter. To catch a hare
with a tabret. On ne prend le lievre au tabourin. Gall. One cannot catch a hare
with a tabret. Bove venari leporem.

You must kiss the hares foot, or the cook. Spoken to one that comes so late
that he has lost his dinner or supper. Why the hares foot must be kissed I know
not; why the cook should be kissed there is some reason, to get some victuals of
her.

Set the hares head against the goose giblets. i. e. Balance things, set one
against another.

It Is either a hare or a brake-bush. (...). Aut navis, aut galerus. Something
if you knew what.

To be out of harms way. Ego ero post principia. Terent.

To harp upon the same string. Eandem cantilenam recinere; and eadem chorda
aberrare. Horat.

He is drinking at the harrow when he should be following the plow. To make a
long harvest of a little corn. To hear as hogs do in harvest, or with your
harvest ears. He is none of the Hastings. Spoken of a slow person. There is an
aequivoque in the word Hastings which is the name of a great family in
Leicestershire, which were Earls of Huntington. They had a fair house at Ashby
de la zouch, now much ruined.

Too hasty to be a parish Clerk. He knows not a hawk from a hand-saw. To be as
good eat hay with a horse. To have his head under ones girdle. He cannot hear
on that ear. He may be heard where he is not seen. His heart fell down to his
hose or heels. Animus in pedes decidit. He is heart of oak. Hell is broken
loose with them. Harrow [or rake] hell, and scum the devil. To help at a dead
lift. To throw the helve after the hatchet. To be in despair. Ad perditam
securim manubrium adjicere.

To fish for a herring, and catch a sprat. To be high in the instep. To hit the
nail of the head. Toucher au blanc. Gall. To hit the white.

To hit the bird of the eye. Hobsons choice. A man is said to have Hobsons
choice, when he must either take what is left him, or chose whether he will
have any part or no. This Hobson was a noted Carrier in Cambridge in K. James
his time, who partly by carrying, partly by grazing raised himself to a great
estate, and did much good in the Town; relieving the Poor, and building a
public Conduit in the Marketplace.

To make a hog or a dog of a thing. To bring ones hogs to a fair market. To
hold with the hare and run with the hound. Not much unlike hereto is that
Latin one, Duabus sellis sedere, i. e. incertarum esse partium, and ancipiti
fide ambabus servire velle, v. Erasm. Liberius Mimus chosen into the Senate by
Caesar, coming to sit down by Cicero, he refusing him, said, I would take you
in did we not sit so close [nisi anguste sederemus] reflecting upon Caesar, who
chose so many into the Senate that there was scarce room for them to sit.
Liberius replied, but you were wont to sit upon two stools [duabus sellis
sedere] meaning to be on both sides.

He Will find some hole to creep out at. He Is all honey or all t -- As honest a
man as ever brake bread. As honest a man as ever trod on shoe leather. An
honest man and a good bowler. By hook or by crook. Quo jure, quaque injuria.
Terent. Soit a droit ou a tort. Gall.

You Will ride on a horse that was foal'd of an acorn. That is the gallows.

They cannot set their horses together. He has good skill in horseflesh to
buy a goose to ride on. See how we apples swim quoth the horse-t -- To throw
the house out of the windows. (...).

He is so hungry he could eat a horse behind the saddle.
I.
TO be Jack on both sides. (...). A turn-coat, a weathercock.

To play the Jack with one. To break the ice. Romper il giaccio. Ital. Scindere
glaciem. To begin any hazardous or difficult thing.

Sick of the idles. Sick of the idle crick, and the belly-wark in the heel.
Belly-wark, i. e. belly-ake. It is used when People complain of sickness for a
pretense to be idle upon no apparent cause.

You Will soon learn to shape idle a coat. Give him an inch and he will take an
ell. He has no ink in's pen, i. e. no money in his purse, or no wit in his
head.
K.
TO lay the key under the threshold. To kill with kindness. So the Ape is said
to strangle her young ones by embracing and hugging them. And so may many be
said to do, who are still urging their sick friends to eat this and that and
the other thing, thereby clogging their stomachs and adding fuel to their
diseases. fondly imagining that if they eat not a while they will presently die.

Kim kam. It comes by kind, it costs him nothing. A man of a strange kidney.
Whosoever is king thou wilt be his man. I Will make one, quoth Kirkham, when he
danced in his clogs. You Would kiss my a -- before my breeches are down. She had
rather kiss then spin. Kit after kind. A chip of the old block. Qui naist de
geline il aim a grater. Gall. He that was born of a hen loves to be scraping.

Kit careless, your a -- hangs by trumps. As very a knave as ever pist. Knit my
dog a pair of breeches and my cat a codpiece. He has tied a knot with his
tongue that he cannot untie with all his teeth. Meaning matrimony. It Is a good
knife; it will cut butter when it is melted. A good knife, it was made fives
miles beyond Cutwell. You say true, will you swallow my knife? It does me
Knights service. He got a knock in the cradle. To know one from a black sheep.
To know one as well as the beggar knows his dish. To know one no more then he
does the Pope of Rome. Better known then trusted.
L.
To have nothing but ones labor for ones pains. Avoir l'aller pour le venir.
Gall. To have ones going for ones coming.

You Will go up the ladder to bed, i. e. be hanged. At latter Lammas. Ad Graecas
calendas, i. e. never. (...). Cum muli pariunt. Herodot.

Help the lame dog over the style. He was lap't in his mothers smock. The
lapwing cries most furthest from her nest. To laugh in ones face and cut his
throat. As bottled Ale is said to do. Da una banda m' onge, da l'altra me
ponge. Ital.

He can laugh and cry both in a wind. To laugh in ones sleeve. More like the
devil then S. Laurence. He Will go to Law for the wagging of a straw. To have
the Law in ones own hand. She does not leap an inch from a shrew. To leap over
the hedge before you come at the style. She has broken her leg above the knee,
i. e. had a bastard. He Is on his last legs. To have the length of ones foot. To
lick ones self whole again. To lick honey through a cleft stick. To lie as fast
as a dog can lick a dish. That Is a lie with a latchet, All the dogs in the town
cannot match it. To tell a man a lie, and give him a reason for it. To stand in
ones own light. Like me, God bless the example. If the Lions skin cannot the
Foxes shall. Si leonina pellis non satis est, assuenda vulpina. Coudre le peau
de regnard a celle du lion. Gall. To attempt or compass that by craft which we
cannot obtain or effect by force. Dolus an virtus quis in host requirit.

If he were as long as he is lither, he might thatch a house without a ladder.
Chesh. To send by Tom Long the carrier. He looks as if he had neither won nor
lost. He stands as if he were mop't, in a brown study, unconcerned. To lose
ones longing.

He Will not lose the droppings of his nose. He Will not lose the paring of's
nails. Egli scortarebbe un pedocchio per haverne la pelle. Ital. He would flay
a louse to get the skin. Aquam plorat cum lavat fundere. Plaut.

Ware skins, quoth Grubber when he flung the louse into the fire. There Is love
in a budget. To love at the door and leave at the hatch. See for your love, and
buy for your money. I could not get any neither for love nor money. To leave
one in the lurch.
M.
MAdge good cow gives a good pail of milk, and then kicks it down with her
foot. To correct or mend the Magnificat. i. e. To correct that which is without
any fault or error. Magnificat is the Virgin Mary's hymn Luke 1. So called
from the first word of it, which is Magnificat. As the other hymns are called
Benedictus, Nunc dimittis, Te Deum, etc. For the same reason. Nodum in scirpo
quaerere.

She Is a good maid but for thought, word and deed. There are never the fewer
maids for her. Spoken of a woman that has maiden children.

For my peck of malt set the kiln on fire. This is used in Cheshire and the
neighbor Countries. They mean by it, I am little concerned in the thing
mentioned: I care not much come on it what will.

One Lordship is worth all his manners. There is an aequivoque in the word
manners, which if written with an e signifies mores, if with an o manneria;
howbeit in the pronunciation they are not distinguished; and perhaps in writing
too they ought not.

You know good manners, but you use but a few. To miss his mark. Aberrare a
scopo, non attingere scopum, or extra scopum jaculare.

She has a mark after her mother. That is, she is her mothers own daughter.
Patris est filius.

The gray mare is the better horse. i. e. The woman is master, or as we say
wears the breeches.

I Will not go before my mare to the market. I Will do nothing preposterously: I Will
drive my mare before me.

All is well, and the man has his mare again. Much matter of a wooden platter.
(...). Mira de len^e. A great stir about a thing of nothing.

One may know your meaning by your gaping. You measure every ones corn by your
own bushel. Tu misuri gli altri col tuo passetto. Ital.

To measure his cloth by another yard. To bring meat in its mouth. Meddle with
your old shoes. I Will neither meddle nor make, said Bill Heaps when he spil'd
the butter-milk. To mend as sour ale does in summer. I cry you mercy, I took
you for a joined stool. To spend his Michaelmas rent in Midsummer moon. You Would
marry a midd^n for muck. Either by might or by sleight. I can see as far into a
millstone as another man. A Scotch mist, that will wet an English man to the
skin. Mock not (quoth Montford) when his wife called him cuckold. To have a
months mind to a thing. In ancient wills we find often mention of a months
mind and also of a years mind and a weeks mind: they were lesser funeral
solemnities appointed by the deceased at those times, for the remembrance of
him.

Tell me the moon's made of a green cheese. Quid si coelum ruat?

You may as soon shape a coat for the moon. To make a mountain of a molehill.
Areem ex cloaca sacere, ex elephanto museam.

To speak like a mouse in a cheese. Your mouth has beguiled your hands. You'st
have his muck for his meat. Yorksh. He has a good muckhill at's door, i. e. he
is rich.
N.
HE had as good eat his nails. You had not your name for nothing. (...). I took
him napping, as Moss took his mare. Who this Moss was is not very material to
knew: I suppose some such man might find his mare dead, and taking her to be
only asleep might say, have I taken you napping?

I Will first see thy neck as long as my arm. To seek a needle in a bottle of
hay. I may see him need, but I Will not see him bleed. Parents will usually say
this of prodigal or undutifull children; meaning I will be content to see them
suffer a little hardship, but not any great misery or calamity.

As much need on it as he has of the pip, or of a cough. Tell me news. More
nice then wise. Nichils in nine pokes or nooks. Chesh. i. e. nothing at all. To
bring a noble to ninepence, and ninepence to nothing. Il fait de son teston six
sols. Gall. To bring an Abbey to a Grange.

He has a good nose to make a poor man's sow. Il seroit bon truy a pauvre
homme. Gall.

To hold ones nose to the grindstone. To follow ones nose. To lead one by the
nose. Menar uno per il naso, Ital. (...). This is an ancient Greek Proverb.
Frasmus says the metaphor is taken from Buffles, who are led and guided by a
ring put in one of their nostrills, as I have often seen in Italy: so we in
England are wont to lead Bears.

To put ones nose out of joint. You make his nose warp. It will be a nosegay to
him as long as he lives. It will stink in his nostrils, spoken of any bad
matter a man has been engaged in.
O.
TO cut down an Oak and set up a Strawberry. Cavar un chiodo and piantar una
cavicchia. Ital. To dig up a nail and plant a pin.

To have an oar in every man's boat. Be good in your office, you will keep the
longer on. To give one a cast of his office. He has a good office, he must
needs thrive. To bring an old house on ones head. To rip up old sores. To cast
up old scores. Once at a Coronation. Never but once at a Wedding. Once and use
it not. One yate for another, Good fellow. They father the original of this
upon a passage between one of the Earls of Rutland and a Countrey-fellow. The
Earl riding by himself one day overtook a Countryman, who very civily open^d
him the first gate they came to, not knowing who the Earl was. When they came
to the next gate the Earl expecting he should have done the same again, Nay
soft, says the Countryman, One yate for another, Good fellow.

A man need not look in your mouth to know how old you are. Facies tua computat
annos.

To make orts of good hay. Over shoes over boots. This has almost the same
sense with that, Ad perditam securim manubrium adjicore.

A shive of my own loaf. A pig of my own sow. To outshoot a man in his own bow.
The black ox never trod on his foot. i. e. He never knew what sorrow or
adversity meant.


P.
MAke a page of your own age. That is* Do it your self.

To stand upon ones pantofles. To pass the pikes. He is pattring the Devils
Pater noster. When one is grumbling to himself and it may be cursing those that
have angered or displeased him.

To pay one in his own coin. He is going into the pease-field, i. e. falling
asleep. To be in a peck of troubles. To take one a peg lower. Penny-wise and
pound foolish. (...), i. e. Ad mensuram aquam bibunt, sinc mensura offam
comedentes. He spares at the spiggot and lets it out at the bung-hole.

He thinks his penny good silver. To take pepper in the nose. To take physic
before one be sick. To pick a hole in a man's coat. He knows not a pig from a
dog. Pigs play on the Organs. A man so called at Hogs Norton in Leicestershire,
or Hocks Norton.

Pigs fly in the air with their tails forward. To shoot at a pigeon and kill a
crow. Not to high for the pie, nor to low for the crow. If there be no remedy
then welcome Pillvall. To be in a merry pin. Probably this might come from
drinking at pins. The Dutch, and English in imitation of them, were wont to
drink out of a cup marked with certain pins, and he accounted the man that
could nick the pin; whereas to go above or beneath it was a forseiture. Dr
Fuller Eccles. Hist. lib 3. p. 17.

As surly as if he had pist on a nettle. To piss in the same quill. To stay a
pissing-while. He Will play at small game rather then stand out. Auloedus sit qui
citharoedus esse non potest.

Let the plough stand to catch a mouse. To be tossed from Post to Pillory. To go
to pot. I know him not should I meet him in my pottage dish. To prate like a
Parrot. To say his prayers backward. To be in the same Predicament. To have his
head full of proclamations. Provender pricks him. To come in pudding time. Her
pulse beats matrimony. To no more purpose then to beat your heels against the
ground or wind. To as much purpose as the geese slurr on the ice. Chesh. To as
much purpose as to give a goose hay. Chesh.
Q.
TO be in a quandary. To pick a quarrel. Ha'll be Quartermaster where e're he
comes. To touch the quick, or to the quick.
R.
TO lie at rack and manger. If it should rain pottage he would want his dish.
He is better with a rake then a fork, and vice versa. Most men are better with
a rake then a fork, more apt to pull in and scrape up then to give out and
communicate.

No remedy but patience. Set your heart at rest. You ride as if you went to
fetch the midwise, You shall ride an inch behind the tail. He Will neither do
right nor suffer wrong. Give me roastmeat, and beat me with the spit or run it
in my belly. You are in your roastmeat when others are in their sod. Priusquam
mactaris excorias.

To rob the spittle. To rob Peter to pay Paul. Il oste a S. Pierre pour donner
a S. Pol. Gall.

He makes Robin Hoods pennyworths. This may be used in a double sense; either
he sells things for half their worth: Robin Hood afforded rich pennyworths of
his plundered goods; or he buys things at what price he pleases: The owners
were glad to get any thing of Robin Hood, who otherwise would have taken their
goods for nothing.

To have rods in piss for one. You gather a rod for your own breech. Tell port
le baston don't a son regret le bat on. Gall. (...). Hesiod. (...). In tuum
ipsius caput lunam deducis.

Right Roger, your sow is good mutton. To twist a rope of sand. (...).

A rope and butter, if one slip the other may hold. I thought I had given her
rope enough, said Pedley when he hanged his mare. He rose on his right side. To
give one a Rowland for an Oliver. That is Quid pro quo, to be even with one. Je
lui bailleray Guy contre Robert. Gall.

To run through thick and thin. His shoes are made of running leather. To run
the wild goose chase. To row one way and look another. As skullers do, (...).
Aristoph. apud Suidam. Altera manu fert lapidem, panem ostentat altera. Plaut.


S.
MOre sacks to the mill. To come sailing in a sows ear. To escape a scowring.
You make me scratch where it does not itch. The sea complains it wants water.
That would I fain see said blind George of Hollowee. To set up ones staff. i.
e. To resolve to abide in a place.

To set up his sail to every wind. Fair voile a tout vent. Gall. Evannare ad
omnem auram. Nazianzen.

Share and share like, some all, some never a whit. Leonina Societas.

To cast a sheeps eye at one. To cast an old shoe after one. Not worth
shooe-buckles. To make a fair show in a Country Church. Good to fetch a sick
man sorrow and a dead man woe. Chesh. To pour water into a sieve. Cribro aquam
haurire.

To sing the same song. Cantilenam candem canere. Terent. Phorm. Crambe bis
cocta. Nothing more troublesome and ungrateful then the same thing over and
over.

Thou singest like a bird called a swine. Sink or swim. To call one Sir and
something else, i. e. Sirrah. To set all at six and seven. To sit upon ones
skirts. To slander one with a matter of truth. To sleep dogs sleep. Slow and
sure. This might have been put among the Sentences. I smell a rat. To drive
snails: A snails gallop. Testudineus gradus. Plaut. Vicistis cochleam
tarditate. Idem.

Tell me it snows. To take a thing in snuff. To have a soft place in's head.
Fair and softly, as Lawyers go to Heaven. As softly as foot can fall.
Suspensos pedes ponere. Quintil. Suspenso gradu ire. Terent.

To take a wrong sow by the ear. A sow to a fiddle. (...). Asinus ad lyram.

To sow his wild oats. As they sow so let them reap. Ut sementem seceris ita
metes.

To be tied to the sour apple tree. i. e. To be married to an ill husband. To
call a spade a spade. You never speak but your mouth opens. Spick and span new.
From spica an ear of corn, and the spawn of fishes, says Mr Howel: but rather
as I am informed by a better author; Spike is a sort of nail, and spawn is a
chip of a boat; so that it is all one as to say, Every chip and nail is new.

Spare at the spigget and let it out at the bunghole. E tien su dalla spina and
spande dal coccone. Ital.

He has spit his venom. Spit in your hand and take better hold. You would spy
faults if your eyes were out. To make one a stalking horse. What starve in a
cooks shop? Endurer la soif aupres d'une fontaine. Gall. Mourir de faim aupres
de mestier. Gall. This may be made a sentence by putting it imperatively. Never
starve, etc.

To go through stich with a business. To stick by the ribs. He has swallowed a
stake, he cannot stoop. The more you stir the worse you stink. (...). Plus
foetent stercora mota. Quanto piu si ruga tanto piu puzza il stronzo. Ital. The
more you stir a t -- etc.

To strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel. To stumble at a straw, and leap over
a block. These two Proverbs have the same sense: the former is used by our
Savior. Matthew. 23. 24.

When two Sundays meet, i. e. never. Ad Graecas Calendas. To swallow an ox, and
be choked with the tail. It has the same sense with the two last save one.

He Will swear through an inch board. He Will swear dagger out of sheath. He Will
swearthe devil out of hell.
T.
TO thrust his feet under another mans' table. Aliena vivere quadra.

To take from ones right side, to give to ones left. To take one up before he
is down. Tell you a tale, and find you ears. A tale of a tub. To tell tales out
of school. To talk like an Apothecary. Tenterden steeple's the cause of
Goodwins sands. This Proverb is used when an absurd and ridiculous reason is
given of any thing in question: an account of the original whereof I find in
one of Bishop Latimers sermons in these words. Mr Moore was once sent with
commission into Kent, to try out, if it might be, what was the cause of
Goodwins sands, and the shelf which stopped up Sandwich haven. Thither comes
Mr Moore, and calls all the Country before him, such as were thought to be
men of experience, and men that could of likelihood best satisfy him of the
matter concerning the stopping of Sandwich haven. Among the rest came in before
him an old man with a white head, and one that was thought to be little less
then an hundred years old. When Mr Moore saw this aged man, he thought it
expedient to hear him say his mind in this matter (for being so old a man, it
was likely that he knew most in that presence, or company) So Mr Moore called
this old aged man unto him and said, Father (said he) tell me if you can, what
is the cause of the great arising of the sands and shelves here about this
haven, which stop it up, so that no ships can arrive here. You are the oldest
man I can epsy in all this company, so that if any man can tell any cause of
it, you of all likelihood can say most to it, or at leastwise more then any man
here assembled. Yea forsooth, good Mr Moore, quoth this old man, for I am well
nigh an hundred years old, and no man here in this company any thing near my
age. Well then (quoth Mr Moore) how say you to this matter? What think you to
be the cause of these shelves and sands, which stop up Sandwich haven? Forsooth
sir (quoth he) I am an old man, I think that Tenterton-steeple is the cause of
Goodwin's sands. For I am an old man sir (quoth he) I may remember the building
of Tenterton-steeple, and I may remember when there was no steeple at all
there. And before that Tenterton-steeple was in building, there was no manner
of talking of any flats, or sands that stopped up the haven; and therefore, I
think that Tenterton-steeple is the cause of the decay and destroying of
Sandwich haven. Thus far the Bishop.

I Will thank you for the next, for this I am sure of. There Is a thing in it
(quoth the fellow) when he drank the dish-clout. I Will not pull the thorn out of
your foot and put it into my own. To stand upon thorns. Thrift and he are at a
fray. When thrift's in the field, he is in town. He struck at Tib, but down fell
Tom. His tongue's no slander. Your tongue runs before your wit. This is an
ancient form of speech; I find it in Isocrates his oration to Demonicus, (...).

His tongue runs on wheels [or at random.] To have a thing at ones tongues end,
or at the tip of ones tongue. Tooth and nail. Manibus pedibusque. Remis
velisque.

To have an aching tooth at one. From top to toe. Topsie turvie. I Would not touch
him with a pair of tongs. To it again, no body comes. Nemo nos infequitur aut
impellit, Erasmus e Platone; who tells us that this Proverb continues to this
day in common use (among the Dutch I suppose) to signify that it is free for
us to stay upon any business [immorari in re aliqua.]

To drive a subtle trade. To put one to his trumps. I Will trust him no further
then I can fling him, or, then I can throw a millstone. You may trust him with
untold gold. To turn with the wind, or tide. To turn over a new leaf. To turn
cat in pan. In the twinkling of an eye. To stop two gaps with on bush. To stop
two mouths with one morsel. Duas linit parietes eadem sidelia. Unicasilia duos
parare generos: This is a modern Proverb, but deserves (says Erasmus) to be
numbered amongst the ancient ones. I find it among the French, D'une fille deux
gendres. To get himself two sons in law with one daughter.

To kill two flies with one flap. To kill two birds with one shaft [or stone.]
D'une pierre fair deux coups, Gall. Di un'dono far duoi amici, Ital. To make
two friends with one gift. Pigliar due colombe con una fava, Ital. To take two
pigeons with one bean.

To carry two faces under one hood. Il a une face a deux visages, Gall. Due
visi sotto una beretta, Ital.

To have two strings to ones bow. Il fait bien avoir deux chordes en son are,
Gall. This may be made a sentence by adding to it, It is good, or such like
words. Duabus ancoris fultus.

Two hands in a dish, and one in a purse. To have thwitten a mill-post to a
pudding prick. She Is cured of a tympany with two heels.
U.
TO nourish a viper in ones bosom. Tu ti allevi la biscia in seno, Ital. (...),
Theocr. in hodoep. Colubrum in sinu fovere. Est apud Aesopum Apologus de
rustico quodam in hanc rem.

Nothing but up and ride? To be up the Queen apple tree. No sooner up, but the
head in the Aumbrey, and nose in the cup.
W.
A warrant sealed with butter. To look to ones water. To cast water into the
Thames. Lumen soli mutuari, etc.

You cant't see green cheese, but your teeth must water. I Will not wear the
wooden daggar, i. e. lose my winnings. Wear a horn, and blow it not. To come
home by weeping cross. This weeping cross which gave occasion to this phrase,
is about two miles distant from the town of Stafford.

You may make as good music on a wheelbarrow. Without welt or guard. All shall
be well, and Jack shall have Jyll. With a wet finger. Levi brachio and molli
trachio.

But when, quoth Kettle to his mare? Chesh. Whist whist, I smell a birds nest.
You Will make an end of your whistle though the cart overthrow. Whist and catch a
mouse. To let leap a whiting. i. e. To let slip an opportunity.

She Is neither wife, widow nor maid. Your windmill dwindles into a nut-crack.
All this wind shakes no corn. Either win the horse or lose the saddle. Aut ter
sex aut tres tesserae. (...). The ancients used to play with three dice, so
that thrice six must needs be the best, and three aces the worst chance. They
called three aces simply three dice, because they made no more then the number
of the dice. The ace side was left empty without any spot at all, because to
count them was no more then to count the dice. Hereupon this chance was called,
Jactus inanis, the empty chance.

Wind and weather do thy worst. To go down the wind. Win it and wear it. To
have one in the wind. To have windmills in's head. Keep your wind, etc. v
breath. You may wink and choose. (...). Thrax ad Thracem compositus*

He shows all his wit at once. God send you more wit, and me more money. You
were born when wit was scant. Your wits are on wool gathering. You have wit
enough to drown ships in. You give the wolf the weather to keep. Ha dato la
pecora in guardia al lupo, Ital. Ovem lupo commisisti.

To have a wolf by the ears. This is also a Latin Proverb, Lupum auribus
tenere. When a man has a doubtful business in hand, which it is equally
hazardous to pursue or give over; as it is to hold or let go a wolf which one
has by the ears.

To be in a wood. You cannot see wood for trees. In mari aquam quaeris.

To make woof or warp of any business. A word and a blow. When he should work,
every finger is a thumb. If any thing stay let work stay. The world is well
amended with him. To have the world in a string. He has a worm in's brain. Not
worthy to carry his books after him. Not worthy to be named the same day. Not
worthy to wipe his shoes. Indignus qui illi matellam porrigat.
Dispeream si tu Pyladi praestare matellam
Dignus es, aut porcos pascere Pirithoi.
Martial.

Not worthy to carry guts after a Bear.
Proverbial Similies, in which the quality and subject begin with the same
letter.
AS bare as a birds arse, or as the back of my hand. As blind as a beetle or
bat. Talpa caecior, As blind as a mole, though indeed a mole be not absolutely
blind; but has perfect eyes, and those not covered with a membrane, as some
have reported; but open and to be sound without side the head, if one search
diligently, otherwise they may easily escape one, being very small and lying
hid in the furr. So that it must be granted, that a mole sees but obscurely,
yet so much as is sufficient for her manner of living, being most part under
ground. Hypsaea caecior. This Hypsaea was a woman famous for her blindness.
Tiresia caecior, The fable of Tircsias, and how he came to be blind, is well
known. Leberide caecior. Est autem Leberis exuviae sive spolium serpentis, in
quo apparent effigies duntaxat oculorum, ac membranula quaedam tenuissima qua
serpentum oculi praeteguntur. A Beetle is thought to be blind, because in the
evening it will fly with its full force against a man's face or any thing else
which happens to be in its way; which other insects as Bees, hornets, etc. will
not do.

To blush like a black dog. As bold as blind bayard. As bold as Beauchamp. Of
this surname there were many Earls of Warwick, amongst whom (says Doctor
Fuller) I conceive Thomas the first of that name, gave chief occasion to this
Proverb; who in the year 1346, with one Squire and six archers, fought in
hostile manner with an hundred armed men at Hogs in Normandy and overthrew
them, slaying sixty Normans, and giving the whole fleet means to land.

As brisk as a body louse. As busy as a be. As clear as crystal. As cold as
charity. As common as Coleman hedge. As coy as Crokers mare. As cunning as
Craddock, etc. As dead as a door nail. As dull as dun in the mire. To feed like
a farmer; or freeholder* As fine as five pence. As fit as a fiddle. As flat as
a flounder. As grave as an old gate-post. As hard as horn. As high as three
horse loaves As high as a hog all but the bristles. Spoken of a dwarf in
derision.

As hungry as a hawk, or horse. As kind as a kite, all you cannot eat you will
hide. As lazy as Ludlams dog, that lean't his head against a wall to bark. As
mad as a March hare. Foenum habet in cornu.

As merry as the maids. As nice as a nuns hen. As pert as a Pearmongers mare.
As plain as a packsaddle, or a pike staff. As plump as a Partridge. As proud as
a peacock. As seasonable as snow in summer. As soft as silk. As true as a
turtle to her mate. As warm as wool. As wise as Walthams calf, that ran nine
miles to suck a bull. As wise as a wisp, or woodcock. As welcome as water into
a ship, or, into ones shoes. As weak as water.
Others.
AS angry as a wasp. As bald as a coot. As bare as the back of my hand. As
bitter as gall. Ipsa bile amariora. As black as a coal; as a crow or raven; as
the Devil; as jet; as ink; as soot. As busy as a hen with one chicken. As
busy as a good wife at oven; and neither meal nor dough. He Is like a cat;
fling him which way you will he will light on's legs. She Is like a cat; she will
play with her own tail. He claws it as Clayton clawed the pudding, when he eat
bag and all. As clear as a bell. Spoken principally of a voice or sound without
any jarring or harshness.

As clear as the Sun. As comfortable as matrimony. It becomes him as well as a
sow does a cartsaddle. As crowse as a new washen louse. This is a Scotch and
Northern Proverb. Crowse signifies brisk lively.

As dark as pitch. Blackness is the color of darkness.

As dead as a herring. A Herring is said to die immediately after it is taken
out of its element the water; that it dies very suddenly my self can witness:
so likewise do Pilchards, Shads, and the rest of that tribe.

As dear as two eggs a penny. As like a dock to a daisy. That is very unlike.

As dizzy as a goose. As drunk as a beggar. This Proverb begins now to be
disused, and in stead of it people are ready to say, As drunk as a Lord: so
much has that vice (the more is the pity) prevailed among the Nobility and
Gentry of late years.

As dry as a bone. As dull as a beetle. As dun as a mouse. As easy as pissing
a bed; as to lick a dish. As false as a Scot. I hope that nation generally
deserves not such an imputation; and could wish that we English men, were less
partial to our selves, and censorious of our neighbors.

As fair as Lady Done. Chesh. The Dones were a great family in Cheshire, living
at Utkinton by the forest side: Nurses use there to call their children so if
girls, if boys Earls of Derby.

As fast as hops. As fat as butter; as a Fool; as a hen in the forehead. To feed
like a freeholder of Macklesfield, who has neither corn nor hay at Michaelmas.
Chesh. This Macklesfield or Maxfield is a small market town and borough in
Cheshire.

As fierce as a goose. As fine [or proud] as a Lords bastard. As fit as a
pudding for a Friars mouth. As fit as a shoulder of mutton for a sick horse. As
flattering or fawning as a spaniel. As fond of it as an Ape of a whip and a
bell. To follow one like a St. Anthonies pig. It is applicable to such as have
servile saleable souls, who for a small reward will lacquay it many miles,
being more officious and assiduous in their attendance then their patrons
desire. St. Anthony is notoriously known to be the patron of Hogs, having a pig
for his page in all pictures, I am not so well read in his legend as to give
the reason of it; but I dare say, there is no good one.

As freely as S. Robert gave his cow. This Robert was a Knareburgh Saint, and
the old women there can still tell you the legend of the cow.

As hollow as a gun; as a kex. A Kex is a dried stalk of Hemlock or of wild
Cicely.

As free as a blind man is of his eye. As free as an ape is of his tail. As
free as a dead horse is of farts. As fresh as a rose in June. As full as an egg
is of meat. E pieno quanto un novo. Ital.

As full as a pipers bag; as a tick. As full as a toad is of poison. As full as
a Jade, quoth the Bride. As gant as a greyhound. As glad as a fowl of a fair
day. To go like a cat upon a hot bake stone. To go out like a candle in a
snuff. As good as George of Green. This George of Green was that famous Pinder
of Wakefield who fought with Robin Hood and little John both together, and got
the better of them, as the old ballade tells us.

As good as goose-skins that never man had enough of. Chesh. As good as ever
flew in the air. As good as ever went endways. As good as ever the ground went
upon. As good as ever water wet. As good as ever twang'd. As good as any
between Bagshot and Baw-waw, There Is but the breadth of a street between these
two.

As greedy as a dog. As green as grass; as a leek. As hail as a roch, Fish
whole. E sano come un pesce. Ital.

As hard-hearted as a Scot of Scotland. As hasty as a sheep, so soon as the
tail is up the t -- is out. To hold up his head like a steed of ten pounds. As
hot as a tossed. To hug one as the Devil hugs a witch. As hungry as a
Church-mouse. As innocent as a Devil of two years old. A conscience as large
as a shipmans hose. As lawless as a Town-bull. As lazy as the tinker who laid
down his budget to fart. As lean as a rake. To leap like a cock at a
black-berry. Spoken of one that desires and endeavors to do harm but cannot.

As lecherous as a he-goat. As light as a fly. To lick it up like Lim hay.
Chesh. Lim is a village on the river Mersey that parts Cheshire and Lancashire,
where the best hay is gotten.

As like his nown father as e're he can look. As like one as if he had been
spit out of his mouth. As like as an apple to an oyster. As like as four pence
to a groat. As like as nine pence to nothing. No more like then chalk and
cheese. To look like the picture of ill luck. To look like a strained hair in a
can. Chesh. To look like a droun'd mouse. To look like a dog that has lost his
tail. To look as if he had eaten his bedstraw. To look on one as the Devil
looks over Lincoln. Some refer this to Lincoln-minster, over which when first
finished the Devil is supposed to have looked with a torve and tetrick
countenance, as envying men's costly devotion, says Dr Fuller, but more
probable it is that it took its rice from a small image of the Devil standing
on the top of Lincoln College in Oxford.

As loud as a horn. To love it as a cat loves mustard. To love it as the Devil
loves holy water. To love it as a dog loves a whip. As good luck as had the
cow, that stuck her self with her own horn. As good luck as the lowsy calf,
that lived all winter and died in the summer. As melancholy as a gib'd cat. As
merry as cup and can. As merry as a cricket. As mild [or gentle] as a lamb. As
natural to him as milk to a calf. As necessary as a sow among young children.
As nimble as an Eel. As nimble as a cow in a cage. As nimble as a new gelt dog.
As old as Charing Cross. As plain as the nose on a man's face. As poor as Job.
This similitude runs through most Languages. In the University of Cambridge the
young Scholars are wont to call chiding Jobing,

As proud as a cock on's own dunghill. As proud as an Apothecary. To quake like
an Aspen leaf. To quake like an oven. He Is like a Rabbet, fat and lean in 24
hours. As red as a cherry; as a petticoat. As rich as a new shorn sheep. As
right as a rams horn; as my leg. As rotten as a t -- As rough as a tinkers
budget. As safe as a mouse in a cheese; in a malt-heap. As safe as a crow in a
gutter. As safe as a thief in a mill. As scab'd as a cuckoo. To scold like a
cutpurse; like a wych-waller. Chesh. That is a boiler of Salt: Wych houses are
Salt-houses, and walling is boiling.

To scorn a thing as a dog scorns a tripe. As sharp as a thorn; as a rasour; as
vinegar. Aceto acrius. As much sib'd as sieve and ridder, that grew in the same
wood together. Sib'd that is a kin: In Suffolk the banes of matrimony are
called Sibberidge.

As sick as a cushion. She simpers like a bride on her wedding day. She simpers
like a riven dish. She simpers like a furmity kettle. To sit like a frog on a
chopping block. As slender in the middle as a cow in the wast. As slippery as
an Eel. As smooth as a carpet: Spoken of good way. As softly as foot can fall.
As sound as a trout. As sour as verjuice. As spruce as an onyon. To stink like
a poll-cat. As straight as an arrow. As straight as the backbone of a herring.
Thou Wilt strip it as Slack stripped the cat, when he pulled her out of the churn.
As strong as mustard. To strut like a crow in a gutter. As sure as a gun [or as
death.] As sure as check or Exchequer pay. This was a Proverb in Q. Elizabeth's
time; the credit of the Exchequer beginning in and determining with her reign,
says Dr Fuller.

As sure [or as round] as a Juglers box. As sure as a louse in bosom. Chesh.
As sure as a louse in Pomfret. Yorksh. As sure as the coat's on ones back. As
surly as a Butchers dog. As sweet as honey, or as a nut. As tall as a May Pole.
As tender as a chicken. As tender as a parsons leman, i. e. whore. As tender as
Parnell that broke her finger in a posset-curd. As testy as an old cook. As
tough as whitleather. As true as God is in heaven. As true as steel. As warm as
a mouse in a churn. As wanton as a calf with two dams. As welcome as Hopkin,
that came to jayl over night, and was hanged the next morning. As white as the
driven snow. As wild as a buck. As wily as a fox. As much wit as three folks,
two fools and a madman. Chesh. As well worth it as a thief is worth a rope.
Like Goodyers pig, never well but when he is doing mischief. Chesh. He stands
like Mumphazard, who was hanged for saying nothing. Chesh. Like the parson of
Saddleworth, who could read in no book but his own. Chesh. To come home like
the parsons cow with a calf at her foot. Chesh. To use one like a Jew. This
poor nation was into lerably abused by the English, while they lived in this
land, especially at London on Shrove-tuesday. Thus it came to pass, which God
frequently foretold, that they should become a byword and a reproach among all
nations. Dr Fuller.

He Is like a swine, he will never do good while he lives. Undone as a man would
undo an oyster. He feeds like a boar in a frank. He Is like a bagpipe, he never
talks till his belly be full. Like Hunts dog, that will neither go to Church
nor stay at home. She goes as if she cracked nuts with her tail. As wilful as
a pig, he will neither lead nor drive. As honest a man as any is in the cards
when all the kings are out. As good as ever drove top over til'd house. You
been like Smithwick, either clem'd or borsten. Chesh.
Proverbial Rhythmes and old saws.
THe crab of the wood is sauce very good
For the crab of the sea.
But the wood of the crab is sauce for a drab,
That will not her husband obey.
Snow is white and lies in the dike.
And every man lets it lie:
Pepper is black and has a good smack,
And every man does it buy.
Alba ligustra cadunt, vaccinia nigra leguntur. Virg.

My horse pisseth whey, my man pisseth amber,
My horse is for my way, my man is for my chamber.
The higher the plum-tree the riper the plum.
The richer the cobbler, the blacker his thumb.
When Adam delv'd and Eve span,
Where was then the gentleman:
Upstart a churl and gathered good,
And thence did spring our gentle blood.
Le rob fanno il primo sangue. Ital.

With a red man read thy read;
With a brown man break thy bread:
At a pale man draw thy knife;
From a black man keep thy wife.
Bounce buckram, velvet's dear,
Christmas comes but once a year;
And when it comes it brings good cheer,
But when it is gone it is never the near.
He that buys land buys many stones;
He that buys flesh buys many bones:
He that buys eggs buys many shells,
But he that buys good Ale buys nothing else.
Jack Sprat he loved no fat, and his wife she loved no lean:
And yet betwixt them both, they lick't the platters clean.
He that has it and will not keep it,
He that wants it and will not seek it,
He that drinks and is not dry,
Shall want money as well as I.
The third of November the D. of Vendosme past the water,
The fourth of November the Queen had a daughter,
The fifth of November we escaped a great slaughter,
And the sixth of November was the next day after.
A man of words and not of deeds,
Is like a garden full of weeds.
Fridays hair and Sundays horn
Goes to the D'ule on monday morn.
Our fathers which were wondrous wise,
Did wash their throats, before they washed their eyes.
When thou do hear a toll or knell,
Then think upon thy pasting bell.
If Fortune favor I may have her, for I go about her;
If Fortune fail you may kiss her tail, and go without her.
A red beard and a black head,
Catch him with a good trick and take him dead.
He that has plenty of good shall have more;
He that has but little he shall have less;
And he that has right naught, right naught shall possess.
Cardinal Wolsey.

A whip for a fool, and a rod for a school,
Is always in good season.
Will. Summers.

A halter and a rope for him that will be Pope,
Without all right or reason.
The shape of a good greyhound.
A head like a snake, a neck like a drake,
A back like a beam, a belly like a bream,
A foot like a cat, a tail like a rat.
Punch Cole, cut candle, set brand on end,
Neither good housewife, nor good housewives friend.
Alum si sit stalum non est malum.
Beerum si sit eleerum est syncerum.
If one knew how good it were,
To eat a hen in Janivere;
Had he twenty in the flock,
He Would leave but one to go with the cock.
Children pick up words as pigeons pease,
And utter them again as God shall please.
Deux ace non possunt and six cinque solvere nolunt
Omnibus est notum quater trois solvere totum.
As a man lives so shall he die,
As a tree falls so shall it lie.
Aegrotat Demon monaechus tunc esse volebat:
Demon convaluit Demon ut ante fuit.
The Devil was sick, the Devil a monk would be,
The Devil was well the devil a monk was he.
Thither as I would go I can go late,
Thither as I would not go I know not the gate.
No more mortar no more brick,
A cunning knave has a cunning trick.
Tobacco hic If a man be well it will make him sick.
Tobacco hic Will make a man well if he be sick.
Per ander salvo per ill mondo bisogna havere occhio di Falcone, orecchie di
Asino, viso di Scimia, parole di Mercante, spalle di camelo, bocca di Porco,
gambe di cervo. Ital.

To travel safely through the world a man must have a Falcons eye, an Asses
ears, an Apes face, a Merchants words, a camells back, a hogs mouth, and a
Hearts legs.

It would make a man scratch where it does not itch,
To see a man live poor to die rich.
Est furor haud dubious simul and manifesta phrenests,
Ut locuples moriar is egenti vivere fato. Juvenal.
Out of Doctor Fullers Worthies of England, such as are not entered already in
the Catalogues.
Barkshire.
THe Vicar of Bray, will be Vicar of Bray still. Bray is a village well known
in Bark-shire, the vivacious Vicar whereof living under King Henry the eighth,
King Edward the sixth, Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth: was first a Papist, then
a Protestant, then a Papist, then a Protestant again. This Vicar being tax't by
one for being a turncoat, not so (said he) for I always kept my Principle;
which is this, to live and die Vicar of Bray.


Bedfordshire.
AS plain as Dunstable road. It is applied to things plain and simple, without
either welt or guard to adorn them; as also to matters easy and obvious to be
found out without any difficulty or direction. Such this road being broad and
beaten, as the confluence of many leading to London from the North and
North-west-parts of this land. I conceive besides this, there is an allusion to
the first syllable of this name Dunstable, for there are other roads in England
as broad, plain and well beaten as this.

As crooked as Crawley brook. This is a nameless brook arising about Wobourn,
running by Crawley and falling immediately into the Ouse, a river more crooked
and Maeandrous then it, running above eighty miles, in eighteen by land.

The Bailiff of Bedford is coming. The Ouse or Bedford river is so called in
Cambridgeshire, because when swollen with rain, etc. in the winter time it
arrests the Isle of Ely with an inundation, bringing down suddenly abundance of
water.


Buckinghamshire.
BUckinghamshire bread and beef. The former as fine, the latter as fat in this,
as in any other County.

Here if you beat a bush, it is ods you will start a thief. No doubt there was
just occasion for this Proverb at the original thereof, which then contained a
Satirical truth, proportioned to the place before it was reformed: whereof thus
our great Antiquary. It was altogether unpassable in times past by reason of
trees, until Leofstane Abbot of St. Albans did cut them down, because they
yielded a place of refuge for thieves. But this Proverb is now antiquated as to
the truth thereof; Buckinghamshire affording as many maiden Assizes as any
County of equal populousness.


Cambridgeshire.
CAntabridgia petit aequales or aequalia. That is (as Doctor Fuller expounds
it) either in respect of their Commons; all of the same mess have equal share:
or in respect of extraordinaries, they are all (...), club alike: or in respect
of Degree, all of the same degree are fellows well met. The same degree levels,
although of different age.

Cambridgeshire. camels. I look upon this as a nickname groundlesly fastened on
this country men, perhaps because the three first letters are the same in
Cambridge and camel. I doubt whether it had any respect to the Fen men stalking
upon their stilts, who then in the apparent length of their legs do something
resemble that beast.

An Henry-sophister. So they are called, who after four years standing in the
University, stay themselves from commencing batchelours of Arts, to render them
in some Colleges more capable of preferment.

That tradition is senseless (and inconsistent with his Princely magnificence)
of such who fancy that King Henry the eighth coming to Cambridge, stayed all
the Sophisters a year, who expected that a year of grace should have been given
to them. More probable it is, that because that King is commonly conceived of
great strength and stature, that these Sophistae Henriciani were elder and
bigger then others. The truth is this, in the reign of King Henry the eighth,
after the destruction of Monasteries, learning was at a loss; and the
University (thanks be unto God more scared then hurt) stood at a gaze what
would become of her. Hereupon many students staid themselves two, three, some
four years; as who would see, how their degrees (before they took them) would
be rewarded and maintained.

Twittle twattle, drink up your posset drink. This proverb had its original in
Cambridge, and is scarce known elsewhere.


Cheshire.
CHeshire chief of men. It seems the Cestrians have formerly been renowned for
their valor. v. Fuller.

She has given Lawton gate a clap. Spoken of one got with child and going to
London to conceal it. Lawton is in the way to London from several parts of
Cheshire.

Better wed over the Mixon then over the Moor. That is hard by or at home, the
Mixon being that heap of compost which lies in the yards of good husbands, then
far off or from London. The road from Chester leading to London over some part
of the Moor-lands in Staffordshire. The meaning is, the gentry in Cheshire find
it more profitable to match within their own County, then to bring a bride out
of other shires. 1. Because better acquainted with her birth and breeding. 2.
Because though her portion may chance to be less, the expense will be less to
maintain her. Such intermarriages in this County have been observed both a
prolonger of worshipful families, and the preserver of amity between them.

Every man cannot be vicar of Bowden. Bowden, it seems, is one of the greatest
livings near Chester, otherwise doubtless there are many greater
Churchpreferments in Cheshire.

The Mayor of Altringham lies in bed while his breeches are mending. The Mayor
of Altringham and the Mayor of Over. The one is a that cher the other a dauber.

These are two petty Corporations whose poverty makes them ridiculous to their
neighbors.

Stopford law, no stake no draw. Neither in Cheshire nor Chawbent That is,
nither in Kent nor Christendom. Chawbent is a town in Lancashire.

The Constable of Oppenshaw sets beggars in Stocks at Manchester. He feeds
like, a Freeholder of Maxfield [or Macklesfield,] who has neither corn nor hay
at Michaelmas. Maxfield is a market town and borough of good account in this
County, where they drive a great trade of making and selling buttons. When this
came to be a Proverb, it should seem the inhabitants were poorer or worse
husbands then now they are.

Maxfield measure heap and thrutch, i. e. thrust.
Cornwall.
BY Tree, Pol, and Pen,
You shall know the Cornish men.
These three words are the Dictionary of such sirnames as are originally
Cornish; and though Nouns in sense, I may fitly term them Prepositions. 1. Tree
signifies a Town, hence Tre-fry, Tre-lawney, Tre-vanion, etc. 2. Pol
signifies an head hence Pol-wheel. 3. Pen signifies a Top.hence Pentire,
Pen-rose, Pen-kevil, etc.


To give one a Cornish Hug. The Cornish are masters of the Art of wrestling.
Their hug is a cunning close with their fellow combatants, the fruit whereof is
his fair fall or soil at the least. It is figuratively appliable to the
deceitful dealing of such, who secretly design their overthrow whom they openly
embrace.

Hengsten down well ywrought,
Is worth London town dear ybought.
In respect of the great quantity of tin to be found there under ground. Though
the gainful plenty of metal this place formerly afforded, is now fallen to a
scant-saving-scarcity. As for the Diamonds which Doctor Fuller fancieth may be
found there, I believe they would be little worth.

He is to be summoned before the Major of Halgaver. This is a joculary and
imaginary court, wherewith men make merriment to themselves, presenting such
persons who go slovenly in their attire: where judgment in formal terms is
given against them, and executed more to the scorn then hurt of the persons.

When Dudman and Ram-head meet. These are two forelands, well known to sailers,
nigh twenty miles asunder, and the Proverb passes for the Periphrasis of an
impossibility.

He does sail into Cornwall without a bark. This is an Italian Proverb, where
it passes for a description (or derision rather) of such a man as is wronged
by his wives disloyalty. The wit of it consists in the allusion to the word
horn.


Cumberland.
IF Skiddaw has a cap,
Scruffell wots full well of that.
These are two neighbor hills, the one in this County, the other in Anandalc
in Scotland: if the former be cap't with clouds and foggy mists, it will not be
long e're rain falls on the other. It is spoken of such who must expect to
sympathize in their sufferings by reason of the vicinity of their habitations.

Skiddaw, Lauvellin and Casticand.
Are the highest hills in all England.
I know not how to reconcile this rhythme with another mentioned by the same
Author, Camden. Britan. in Lancashire.

Ingleborough, Pendle and Penigent,
Are the Highest hills between Scotland and Trent.
Unless it be, that the later ternary are highest in Yorkshire men's account;
the former in Cumberland men's account: every County being given to magnify
(not to say altifie) their own things.


Devonshire.
TO Devonshire or Denshire land. That is, to pare off the surface or top-turf
thereof, and to lay it upon heaps and burn it; which ashes are a marvelous
improvement to battle barren land, by reason of the fixed salt which they
contain. This course they take with their barren spungy heathy land in many
Counties of England, and call it Denshiring. Land so used will bear two or
three good crops of corn, and then must be thrown down again.

A Plymouth cloak. That is, a cane or staff; whereof this the occasion. Many a
man of good extraction coming home from far voyages, may chance to land here,
and being out of sorts, is unable for the present time and place to recruit
himself with clothes. Here, (if not friendly provided) they make the next wood
their Drapers shop, where a staff cut out, serves them for a covering. For we
use when we walk in cuerpo to carry a staff in our hands, but none when in a
cloak.

He may remove Mort-stone. There is a bay in this County called Morts-bay, but
the harbor in the entrance thereof is stopped with a huge rock, called
Mort-stone, and the people merrily say, none can remove it but such as are
masters of their wives.

First hang and draw;
Then hear the cause by Lidford law.
Lidsord is a little and poor (but ancient) Corporation in this County with
very large privileges, where a Court of Stanneries was formerly kept. This
libellous Proverb would suggest unto us, as if the Townsmen thereof (generally
mean persons) were unable to manage their own liberties with necessary
discretion, administering preposterous and preproperous justice.


Dorsetshire.
AS much a kin as Lenson-hill to Pilsen pen. That is no kin at all. It is
spoken of such who have vicinity of habitation or neighborhood, without the
least degree of consanguinity or affinity betwixt them. For these are two high
hills, the first wholly, the other partly in the Parish of Broad Windsor. Yet
the seamen make the nearest relation between them, calling the one the cow,
the other the calf, in which forms it seems they appear first to their fancies,
being eminent sea-marks.

Stabbed with a Byrdport dagger. That is hanged. The best if not the most hemp
(for the quantity of ground) growing about Byrdport, a market town in this
County. And hence it is that there is an ancient statute (though now difused
and neglected) that the cable ropes for the Navy-royal were to be made
thereabouts.

Dorsetshire dorsers. Dorsers are peds or paniers carried on the backs of
horses, on which Higlers use to ride and carry their commodities. It seems this
homely but most useful instrument was either first sound out, or is most
generally used in this County; where fish-jobbers bring up their fish in such
contrivances, above an hundred miles from Lime to London.


Essex.
ESsex styles. See the catalogue of Sentences.

Essex calves. This County produces calves of the fattest, fairest and finest
flesh in England, and consequenly in all Europe. Sure it is that a Cumberland
cow may be bought for the price of an Essex calf at the beginning of the year.
Let me add that it argues the goodness of flesh in this County, and that great
gain was got formerly by the sale thereof, because that so many stately
Monuments were erected therein anciently for Butchers inscribed Carnifices in
their Epitaphs in Cogshall, Chelmsford and else where, made with marble, inlaid
with brass, befitting (says my Author) a more eminent man: whereby it
appears, that those of that trade have in that County been richer (or at least
prouder) then in other places.

As valiant as an Essex lion, i. e. a calf.
The Weavers beef of Colchester.
That is sprats, caught hereabouts, and brought hither in incredible abundance,
whereon the poor Weavers (numerous in this Town) make much of their repast,
cutting ^ands, rumps, Surloyns, chines, etc. out of them, as he goes on.

Jeering Cogshall. This is no Proverb: but an ignominious Epithete fastened on
this place by their neighbors, which as I hope they do not glory in; so I
believe they are not guilty of. Other towns in this Country have had the like
abusive Epithetes. I remember a rhyme which was in common use formerly of some
towns, not far distant the one from the other.

Braintree for the pure, and Bocking for the poor,
Cogshall for the jeering Town, and Kelvedon for the whore.

Gloucestershire.
AS sure as God's in Gloucestershire. This is a foolish and profane Proverb,
unfit to be used. However some seek to qualify it, making God eminently in
his, though not exclusively of other Counties; where such he former
fruitfulness thereof, that it is (by William of Malmesbury, in his book of
Bishops) said to return the seed with the increase of an hundred fold: others
find a superstitious sense therein, supposing God by his gracious presence more
peculiarly fixed in this Country, wherein there were more and richer mitred
Abbeys, then in any two shires of England besides.

You are a man of Duresley. It is taken for one that breaks his word, and fails
in performance of his promise; parallel to Fides Graca or Punica. Duresley is a
market and clothing Town in this County, the inhabitants whereof will endeavor
to confute and disprove this Proverb, to make it false now, whatsoever it was
at the first original thereof.

It Is as long in coming as Cotswald barely. It Is applied to such things as are
slow, but sure. The corn in this cold Country on the Wowlds, exposed to the
winds bleak and shelterless, is very backward at the first, but afterward
overtake, the forwardest in the County, if not in the barn in the bushel, both
for the quantity and goodness thereof.

He looks as if he had lived on Tewksbury mustard. Tewksbury is a fair
Market Town in this County, noted for the mustard-balls made there, and sent
into other parts. This is spoken partly of such, who always have a sad, severe
and tetrick countenance. Si ecastor hic homo sinapi victite^ non conseam tam
tristem esse posse. Plaut. in Trucul. Partly of such as are snappish, captious,
and prone to take exceptions.

The Traceys have always the wind in their faces. This is sounded on a fond and
false tradition, which reports, that ever since Sr William Tracy, was most
acti^ among the four Knights, which killed Thomas Becket, it is imposed on the
Tracies for miraculous penance, that whether they go by land or by water, the
wind is ever in their faces. If this were so (says the Doctor) it was a
favor in an hot summer to the females of that family, and would spare them the
use of a Fan, etc.

As fierce as a lion of Cotswald. i. e. A sheep.


Hampshire.
MAnners make a man,
Quoth William of Wickham.
William of Wickham was a person well known. He was Bishop of Winchester,
founded New College in Oxford, and Winchester College in this County. This
generally was his Motto, inscribed frequently on the places of his founding. So
that it has since acquired a Proverbial reputation.

Canterbury is the higher Rack but Winchester is the better Manger. W. Edington
Bishop of Winchester was the Author of this expression, rendering this the
reason of his refusal to be removed to Canterbury, though chosen thereunto.
Indeed though Canterbury be graced with an higher honor; the revenues of
Winchester are greater. It is appliable to such, who prefer a wealthy privacy
before a less profitable dignity.

The Isle of Wight ath no Monks, Lawyers nor Foxes. This speech has more mirth
then truth in it. (Speeds Catal. of religious houses.) That they had Monks I
know, Black ones at Caris-brook, White ones at Quarter in this Island. That
they have Lawyers they know when they pay them their fees: and that they have
Foxes their Lambs know. But of all these, perchance fewer then in other places
of equal extent.


Hartfordshire.
HArtfordshire clubs and clouted shoon. Some will wonder how this shire lying
so near to London, the staple of English civility, should be guilty of so much
rusticalness. But the finest cloth must have a list, and the pure Pesants are
of as course a thread in this, as in any other place. Yet though some may smile
at their clownishness, let none laugh at their industry; the rather, because
the high-shoon of the tenant, pays for the Spanish leatherboots of the
Landlord.

Hartfordshire hedgehogs. Plenty of hedgehogs are found in this high woodland
Country, reported to suck the kine, though the Dairy-maids conne them small
thanks for sparing their pains in milking them. Whether this Proverb may have
any further reflection on the people of this County, as therein taxed for
covetousness and constant nudling on the earth, I think not worth the enquiry;
these nicknames being imposed on several Counties groundlesly, as to any moral
significancy.

Ware and Wades-mill are worth all London. This I assure you is a masterpiece
of the vulgar wits in this County, wherewith they endeavor to amuse
travelers, as if Ware a through-fare market, and Wades-mill part of a village
lying two miles North thereof were so prodigiously rich, as to countervail the
wealth of London. The sallacy lies in the homonymy of Ware, here not taken for
that Town so named, but appellatively for all vendible commodities. It is
rather a riddle then a Proverb.

Hartfordshire kindness. It is, when one drinks back again to the party, who
immediately before drank to him: and although it may signify as much, as,
Manus manum fricat, and par est de merente be ne mereri, yet it is commonly
used only by way of derision of those, who through forgetfulness or mistake,
drink to them again whom they pledged immediately.


Herefordshire.
BLessed is the eye,
That is between Severn and Wye.
Not only because of the pleasant prospect; but it seems this is a prophetical
promise of safety, to such as live secured within those great rivers, as if
privileged from Martial impressions.

Sutton wall and Kenchester hill
Are able to buy London were it to sell.
These are two fruitful places in this Country, says Mr Howell.

Lemster Bread and Weabley Ale. Both these the best in their kinds, understand
it of this County. Otherwise there is Wheat in England that will vie with that
of Lemster for pureness: for example that of (Nordens Middlesex. Camden. Brit.)
Heston near Harrow on the hill in Middlesex, of which for a long time the
manchet for the Kings of England was made: and for Ale Derby town, and
Northdown in the Isle of Thanet, Hull in Yorkshire, and Sambich in Cheshire
will scarce give place to Webley.

Every one cannot dwell at Rotheras. A delicate seat of the Bodmans in this
County.


Huntingtonshire.
AN Huntington Sturgeon. This is the way to Beggers-bush. It is spoken of such,
who use dissolute and improvident courses, which tend to poverty. Beggers-bush
being a tree notoriously known, on the left hand of London road from Huntington
to Caxton.

Nay stay quoth Stringer when his neck was in the halter. Ramsey the rich. This
was the Croesus of all our English Abbeys, for having but sixty Monks to
maintain therein, the revenues thereof according to the standard of those times
amounted unto seven thousand pounds per annum; which in proportion was an
hundred pounds for every Monk, and a thousand pounds for their Abbot; yet at
the dissolution of Monasteries, the income of this Abbey was reckoned at but
one thousand nine hundred eighty three pound a year; whereby it plainly appears
how much the Revenues were under-rated in those valuations.


Kent.
NEither in Kent nor Christendom. That is, says Dr Fuller, our English
Christendom, of which Kent was first converted to the Christian says, as much
as to say as Rome and all Italy, or the first cut and all the loaf besides: not
by way of opposition, as if Kent were no part of Christendom, as some have
understood it. I rather think that it is to be understood by way of opposition,
and that it had its original upon occasion of Kent being given by the ancient
Britains to the Saxons, who were then Pagans. So that Kent might well be
opposed to all the rest of England in this respect, it being Pagan when all the
rest was Christian.

A Knight of Cales, a Gentleman of Wales, and a Lord of the North-countree,
A Yeoman of Kent with his yearly rent, will buy them out all three.
Cales Knights were made in that voyage by Robert Earl of Essex, to the number
of sixty; whereof (though many of great birth) some were of low fortunes; and
therefore Queen Elizabeth was half offended with the Earl, for making
Knighthood so common.

Of the numerousness of Welsh Gentlemen nothing need be said, the Welsh
generally pretending to Gentility. Northern Lairds are such, who in Scotland
hold lands in chief of the King, whereof some have no great Revenue. So that a
Kentish Yeoman (by the help of an Hyperbole) may countervail, etc.

Yeomen contracted for Gemen-mein from Gemein signifying common in old Dutch,
so that a Yeoman is a Commoner, one undignified with any title of Gentility: a
condition of people almost peculiar to England, and which is in effect the
basis of all the Nation.

Kentish long-tails. Those are mistaken who found this Proverb on a miracle of
Austin the Monk; who preaching in an English village, and being himself and his
associates beat and abused by the Pagans there, who opprobriously tied
Fish-tails to their back-sides; in revenge thereof such appendants grew to the
hind-parts of all that generation. For the scence of this lying wonder was not
laid in any part of Kent, but pretended many miles off, nigh Cerne in
Dorsetshire. I conceive it first of outlandish extraction, and cast by
foreigners as a note of disgrace on all English men, though it chances to
stick only on the Kentish at this day. What the original or occasion of it at
first was is hard to say; whether from wearing a pouch or bag to carry their
baggage in behind their backs; whilst probably the proud Monsieurs had their
Lacquies for that purpose; or whether from the mentioned story of Austin. I am
sure there are some at this day in foreign parts, who can hardly be persuaded
but that English men have tails.

Why this nickname (cut off from the rest of England) continues still entailed
on Kent, the reason may be (as the Doctor conjectures) because that County
lies nearest to France, and the French are beheld as the first founders of this
aspersion.

Dover-court all speakers and no hearers. The Doctor understands this Proverb
of some tumultuous Court kept at Dover, the confluence of many blustering
seamen, who are not easily ordered into any awful attention. It is appliable
to such irregular conferences, where the people are all tongue and no ears.

A jack of Dover. I find the first mention of this Proverb in our English
Ennius, Chaucer in his Proeme to the Cook.

And many a jack of Dover he had sold,
Which had been two times hot, and two times cold.
This he makes parallel to Crambe his cocta; and appliable to such as grate the
ears of their Auditors with ungrateful tautologies, of what is worthless in
it self, tolerable as once uttered in the notion of novelty, but abominable if
repeated.

Some part of Kent has health and no wealth, viz. East Kent. Some wealth and
no health, viz. The weald of Kent. Some both health and wealth, viz. the middle
of the Country and parts near London.


Lancashire.
LAncashire fair women. Whether the women of this County be indeed fairer then
their neighbors I know not; but that the inhabitants of some Countries may be
and are generally fairer then those of others, is most certain. The reason
whereof is to be attributed partly to the temperature of the air, partly to the
condition of the soil, and partly to their manner of food. The hotter the
climate, generally the blacker the inhabitants, and the colder the fairer: the
colder I say to a certain degree, for in extreme cold countries the inhabitants
are of dusky complexions. But in the same climate that in some places the
inhabitants should be fairer then in others, proceeds from the diversity of the
situation (either high or low, maritime or far from sea) or of the soil and
manner of living, which we see have so much influence upon beasts, as to alter
them in bigness, shape and color, and why it may not have the like on men, I
see not.

It is written upon a wall in Rome,
Ribchester was as rich as any town in Christendom.
Some monumental wall, whereon the names of principal places were inscribed
then subject to the Roman Empire. And probably this Ribchester was anciently
some eminent colony (as by pieces of coins and columns there daily dig'd out
does appear) However at this day it is not so much as a market town, but
whether decayed by age, or destroyed by accident is uncertain. It is called
Ribchester because situate on the river Ribble.

As old as Pendle hill.
If Riving pike do wear a hood,
Be sure that day will never be good.
A mist on the top of that hill is a sign of foul weather.

He that would take a Lancashire man at any time or tide,
Must bait his hook with a good egge-pie or an apple with a red side.

Leicestershire.
BEan-belly Leicestershire. So called from the great plenty of that grain
growing therein. Yea those of the neighboring countries use to say merrily,
Shake a Leicestershire man by the collar, and you shall hear the beans rattle
in his belly. But those Yeomen smile at what is said to rattle in their
bellies, whilst they* know good silver ringeth in their pockets.

If Bever has a cap,
You churls of the vale look to that.
That is when the clouds hang over the towers of Bevercastle, it is a
prognostic of much rain and moisture, to the much endamaging that fruitful
vale, lying in the three Counties of Leicester, Lincoln and Notingham.

Bread for Borrough -men, At Great Gleu there are more great dogs then honest
men. Carleton wharlers. I Will throw you into Harborough field. A threat for
children, Harborough having no field. Put up your pipes, and go to Lockington
wake. The last man that he killed keeps hogs in Hinckley field. Spoken of a
coward that never durst fight. He has gone over Asfordby bridge backwards.
Spoken of on that is past learning. Like the Mayor of Hartle pool, you cannot
do that. Then I Will thatch Groby pool with pancakes. For his death there is
many a wet cye in Groby pool. In and out like Billesdon I wot. A
Leicestershire plover, i. e. a Bag-pudding. Bedworth beggars. The same again,
quoth Mark of Bellgrave. What have I to do with Bradshaws windmill, i. e.
What have I to do with another man's business?
Lincolnshire.
LIncolnshire, where hogs shite soap and cows shite fire. The inhabitants of
the poorer sort washing their clothes with hogs dung, and burning dried
cow dung for want of better fuel.

Lincolnshire bagpipes. Whether because the people here do more delight in the
bagpipes then others, or whether they are more cunning in playing upon them,
indeed the former of these will infer the latter.

As loud as Tom of Lincoln. This Tom of Lincoln is an extraordinary great bell
hanging in one of the towers of Lincoln Minster; how it got the name I know
not, unless it were imposed on it, when baptized by the Papists. Howbeit this
present Tom was cast in King James his time, Anno 1610.

All the carts that come to Crowland are shod with silver. Crowland is situate
in so moorish rotten ground in the Fens, that scarce a horse, much less a cart
can come to it. Since the draining, in summer time carts may go thither.

As mad as the baiting bull of Stamford. Take the original hereof. (R. Butcher
in his Survey of Stamford p. 40.) William Earl Warren Lord of this Town in the
time of King John, standing upon the Castle walls of Stamford, saw two bulls
fighting for a cow in the meadow, till all the butchers dogs great and small
pursued one of the bulls (being madded with noise and multitude) clean through
the town. This sight so pleased the said Earl, that he gave all those meadows
(called the castle meadows) where first the Bull duel begin, for a common to
the butchers of the Town (after the first grass was eaten) on condition they
find a mad Bull, the day six weeks before Christmas day, for the continuance of
that sport every year.

He was born at little Wittham. Little Wittham is a village in this County. It
is applied to such as are not overstock't with acuteness, being a nominal
allusion; of the like whereto we have many current among the vulgar.

Grantham gruel, nine grits, and a gallon of water. It is appliable to those
who in their speeches or actions, multiply what is superfluous, or at best less
necessary, either wholly omitting or less regarding the essentials thereof.

They hold together as the men of Marham, when they lost their common. Some
understand it ironically, that is, they are divided with several factions,
which ruins any cause. Others use it only as an expression of ill success,
when men strive and plot together to no purpose.


Middlesex.
MIddlesex clowns. Because Gentry and Nobility are respectively observed
according to their degree, by people far distant from London, less regarded by
these Middlesexians (frequency breeds familiarity) because abounding there
abouts. It is generally true where the common people are richer, there are they
more surly and uncivil: as also where they have less dependence on the Gentry,
as in places of great trade.

He that is at a low ebb at Newgate, may soon be aflote at Tiburn. Mr Bedwell
descript. of Tottenham, Chap. 3.
When Tottenham wood is all on fire,
Then Tottenham street is naught but mire.
That is, when Tottenham wood standing on an high hill at the west end of the
Parish, has a foggy mist hanging over it in manner of a smoke, then generally
foul weather follows.

Idem ibid.

Tottenham is turned French. It seems about the beginning of the reign of King
Henry the eighth, French mechanics swarmed in England, to the great prejudice
of English artisans, which caused the insurrection in London on ill May Day, A.
D. 1517. Nor was the City only but the Country villages for four miles about
filled with French fashions and infections. The Proverb is applied to such, who
contemning the customs of their own Country, make themselves more ridiculous
by affecting foreign humors and habits.


London.
A London Jury, hang half and save half. Some affirm this of an Essex, others
of a Middlesex Jury: and my charity believes it equally true, that is equally
untrue of all three. It would fain suggest to credulous people, as if Londoners
frequently impannel'd on Juries, and loaded with multiplicity of matters, aim
more at dispatch then justice, and to make quick riddance, (though no have to
hang true men) acquit half and condemn half. Thus they divide themselves in
aquilibrio between justice and mercy, though it were meet the latter should
have the more advantage, etc.

The falseness of this suggestion will appear to such, who by perusing history,
do discover the London Jurors most conscientious in proceeding secundum
allegata and probata, always inclining to the merciful side in saving life,
when they can find any cause or color for the same.

London lick-penny. The country man coming up hither, by his own experience
will easily expound the meaning thereof.

London bridge was made for wise men to go over, and fools to go under. A
London Cockney. This nickname is more then four hundred years old. For when
Hugh Bigot added artificial fortifications to his naturally strong Castle of
Bungey in Suffolk, he gave out this rhythme, therein, vaunting it for
impregnable,

Were I in my castle of Bungey,
Upon the river of Waveney,
I would ne care for the King of Cockney.
Meaning thereby King Henry the second, then quierly possessed of London,
whilst some other places did resist him: though afterward he so humbled this
Hugh, that he was fain with large sums of money, and pledges for his loyalty to
redeem this his Castle from being rased to the ground. I meet with a double
sense of this word Cockney. 1. One coaks'd and cocquer'd, made a wanton or
Nestle-cock, delicately bred and brought up, so as when grown up to be able to
endure no hardship. 2. One utterly ignorant of country affairs, of husbandry
and housewivery as there practiced. The original thereof, and the tale of the
citizens son, who knew not the language of a Cock, but called it neighing is
commonly known.

Billings-gate language. Billings was formerly a gate, and (as some would make
us believe) so called from Belinus the brother of Brennus: it is now rather
portus a haven, then porta. Billings-gate language is such as the fishwives and
other rude people which flock thither use frequently one to another, when they
fall out.

Kirbes castle and Megses glory,
Spinola's pleasure and Fishers folly.
These were four houses about the City, built by citizens, large and sumptuous
above their estates. He that would know any thing more of the builders of these
houses, let him consult the Author.

He was born within the sound of Bow-bell. This is the Periphrasis of a
Londoner at large. This is called Bow-bell because hanging in the steeple of
Bow Church, and Bow Church, because built on bows or arches (says my Author)
But I have been told that it was called from the cross stone arches, or bows on
the top of the steeple.

St Peter's in the poor,
Where no Tavern, Alehouse, or sign at the door.
Under correction I concelve it called in the Poor, because the Augustinian
friars professing willful poverty for some hundreds of years, possessed more
then a moiety thereof. Otherwise this was one of the richest Parishes in
London, and therefore might say, Malo pauper vocari quam esse. How ancient the
use of signs in this city on private houses is to me unknown; sure I am it was
generally used in the reign of King Edward the fourth.

Good manners to except my Lord Major of London. This is a corrective for such,
whose expressions are of the largest size; and too general in their extent.

I have dined as well as my Lord Major of London. That is, though not so
dubiously or daintily on variety of costly dishes, yet as comfortably, as
contentedly, according to the Rule, Satis est quod sufficit, Enough is as good
as a feast, and better then a surfeit.

As old as Paul's, or as Paul's steeple. Different are the dates of the age
thereof, because it had two births or beginnings, one when it was originally
cofounded by King Ethelbert, with the body of the Church, Anno 610. another
when burnt with lightning, and afterward rebuilt by the Bishops of London,
1087.

He is only fit for Ruffians-hall. West Smithfield (now the house-market) was
formerly called (continuer of Stows annals.) Ruffians-hall, where Ruffians met
casually, and otherwise to try masteries with sword and buckler.

A loyal heart may be landed under Traitors bridge. This is a bridge under
which is an entrance into the Tower, over against Pink-gate, formerly fatal to
those who landed there; there being a muttering that such never came forth
alive, as dying, to say no worse therein, without any legal trial. The Proverb
imports that passive innocence overpowered with adversaries, may be accused
without cause, and disposed at the pleasure of others.

To cast water into the Thames. That is, to give to them who had plenty before;
which notwithstanding is the Dole general of the world.

He must take a house in Turn-again Lane. This in old Records is called
Wind-again Lane, and lies in the Parish of St Sepulchers, going down to
Fleetdike, having no exit at one end. It is spoken of, and to those who take
prodigal or other vicious and destructive courses.

He may whet his knife on the threshold of the Fleet. The Fleet is a place
notoriously known for a prison, so called from Fleet-brook running by it, to
which many are committed for their contempts, more for their debts. The Proverb
is appliable to such who never owed ought; or having run into debt have crept
out of it, so that now, they may triumphare in hostico, defy danger and
arrests, etc.

All goes down Gutter-lane. Guttur-lane (the right spelling whereof is
Guthurn-lane, from him the once owner thereof) is a small Lane (inhabited
anciently by gold-beaters) leading out of Cheap Side, East of Foster-lane. The
Proverb is applied to those, who spend all in drunkenness and gluttony, mere
belly gods: Guttur being Latin for the throat.

As lame as St Giles Cripple-gate. St Giles was by birth an Athenian, of noble
extraction but quitted all for a solitary life. He was visited with a lameness,
(whether natural or casual I know not) but the tradition goes, that he desired
not to be healed thereof, for his greater mortification. Cripplegate was so
called before the Conquest, from cripples begging of passengers therein.

This Proverb may seem guilty of false heraldry, lameness on lameness; and in
common discourse is spoken rather merrily then mournfully of such, who for some
slight hurt lag behind; and sometimes is applied to those who out of laziness
counterfeit infirmity.

You are all for the Hoistings or Hustings. It is spoken of those, who by pride
or passion, are elated or mounted to a pitch above the due proportion of their
birth, quality or estate. It comes from Hustings the principal and highest
Court in London (as also in Winchester, Lincoln, York, etc.) so called from the
French word haulser to raise or lift up.

They agree like the clocks of London. I find this among both the French and
Italian Proverbs for an instance of disagreement.

Who goes to Westminster for a wife, to Paul's for a man, and to Smithfield for
a horse, may meet with a whore, a knave and a jade.

Grayes Inn for walks, Lincolns Inn for a wall,
The Inner Temple for a garden, and the Middle for a hall.

Westminster.
THere is no redemption from Hell. There is a place partly under, partly by the
Exchequer chamber, commonly called Hell, (I could wish it had another name,
seeing it is ill jesting with edged tools) formerly appointed a prison for the
Kings debtors, who never were freed from thence, until they had paid their
utmost due.

As long as Megg of Westminster. This is applied to persons very tall,
especially if they have hop-pole height, wanting breadth proportionable. That
there ever was such a Gyant-woman cannot be proved by any good witness, I pass
not for a late lying Pamphlet, etc. vide sis. He thinks it might relate to a
great gun lying in the Tower called long Megg, in trouble some times brought to
Westminster, where for some time it continued.


Norfolk.
Norfolk dumplings. This referres no^ to the stature of their bodies; but to
the fare they commonly feed on and much delight in.

A Yarmouth Capon. That is a red herring: more herrings being taken then capons
bred here. So the Italian Friars (when disposed to eat flesh on Fridays) call a
capon piscem e corte, a fish out of the coop.

He is arrested by the Bailiff of Mershland. That is, clapped on the back by an
ague, which is incident to strangers at first coming into this low, fenny and
unwholesome Country.

Gimmingham, Trimmingham, Knapton and Trunch,
North Repps and South Repps are all of a bunch.
These are names of Parishes lying close together.

There never was a Paston poor, a Heyden a coward, nor a Cornwallis a fool.
Northamptonshire.
THe Major of Northampton opens oisters with his dagger. To keep them at a
sufficient distance from his nose. For this Town being eighty miles from the
sea, fish may well be presumed stale therein. Yet have I heard (says the
Doctor) that oisters put up with care, and carried in the cool, were weekly
brought fresh and good to Althrop, the house of the Lord Spencer at equal
distance: and it is no wonder, for I my self have eaten in Warwickshire, above
eighty miles from London, oisters sent from that city, fresh and good; and they
must have been carried some miles before they came there.

He that would eat a buttered faggot, let him go to Northampton. I have heard
that king James should speak this of Newmarket; but I am sure it may better be
applied to this Town, the dearest in England for fuel, where no coals can come
by water, and little wood does grow on land.

One Proverb there is of this County, which I wonder how Doctor Fuller being
native thereof could miss, unless perchance he did studiously omit, as
reflecting disgrace on a Market town therein.

Brackley breed, better to hang then feed. Brackley is a decayed Market town
and borough in Northamptonshire, not far from Banbury, which abounding with
poor, and troubling the country about with beggars, came into disgrace with
its neighbors. I hear that now this place is grown industrious and thriving,
and endeavors to wipe off this scandal.

Like Banbury tinkers that in mending one hole make three.
Northumberland.
From Barwick to Dover, three hundred miles over. That is from one end of the
land to the other, parallel to that Scripture expression, From Dan to
Beer-sheba.

To take Hectors cloak. That is to deceive a friend, who confideth in his
faithfulness. When Thomas Percy Earl of Northumberland, Anno 1569. was routed
in the rebellion he had raised against Queen Elizabeth, he hid himself in the
house of one Hector Armstrong of Harlaw in this County, having confidence he
would be true to him, who notwithstanding, for money betrayed him to the Regent
of Scotland. It was observable that Hector being before a rich man fell poor of
a sudden, and so hated generally that he never durst go abroad. Insomuch that
the Proverb to take Hectors cloak is continued to this day among them, in the
sense above mentioned.

We will not lose a Scot. That is, any thing how inconsiderable soever that we
can save or recover. During the enmity between the two nations, they had little
esteem of, and less affection for a Scotchman in the English border.

A Scottish man and a Newcastle grindstone, travel all the world over. The
Scots are great travelers into foreign parts, most for maintenance, many for
accomplishment. And Newcastle grindstones, being the best in their kind, must
needs be carried far and near.

If they come they come not. The cattle of people living hereabout, turned into
the common pasture, did by custom use to return to their home at night, unless
intercepted by the Free booters and borderers. If therefore those Borderers
came, their cattle came not: if they came not, their cattle surely returned.


Notinghamshire.
As wise as a man of Gotham. It passes for the Periphrasis of a fool, and an
hundred sopperies are feigned and fathered on the Towns folk of Gotham, a
village in this County. Here two things may be observed.

1. Men in all ages have made themselves merry with singling out some place,
and fixing the staple of stupidity and stolidity therein. So the Phrygians in
Asia, the Abderita in Thrace, and the Boeotians in Greece were notorious for
dulmen and block heads.

2. These places thus slighted and scoffed at, afforded some as witty and wise
persons as the world produced. So Democritus was an Abderite, Plutarch a
Boeotian, etc. Hence Juvenal well concludes, Summos posse viros and magna
exempla daturos,
Vervecum in patria crassoque sub aere nasci.


As for Gotham it does breed as wise people as any, which causlesly laugh at
their simplicity. Sure I am, Mr William de Gotham, fifth master of
Michael-house in Cambridge 1336, and twice Chancellor of the University, was
as grave a governor as that age did afford. Sapientum octavus. Hor.

The little smith of Notingham,
Who does the work that no man can.
Who this little smith and great Workman was, and when he lived I know not, and
have cause to suspect, that this of Notingham is a Periphrasis of Nemo, (...)
or a person who never was. By way of Sarcasme it is applied to such, who being
conceited of their own skill, pretend to the atchieving of impossibilities.


Oxfordshire.
You were born at Hogs Norton. This is a village properly called Hoch Norton,
whose inhabitants (it seems formerly) were so rustical in their behavior, that
boarish and clownish people are said to be born there. But whatever the people
were, the name was enough to occasion such a Proverb.

To take a Burford bait. This it seems is a bait not to stay the stomach, but
to lose the wit thereby, as resolved at last into drunkenness.

Banbury veal, cheese and cakes. In the English edition of Camdens Brit. it was
through the correctours mistake, printed Banbury zeal, etc. vide Autorem.

Oxford knives, and London wives.

Testons are gone to Oxford to study in Brazennose. This began about the end of
the reign of King Henry the eighth, at such time as he debased the coin,
allaying of it with copper, (which common people consound with brass) It
continued till about the middle of Queen Elizabeth, who by degrees called in
all that adulterate coin. Testone and our English tester come from the Italian
testa signifying a head, because that money was stamped with a head on one
side. Copstick in high Dutch has the same sense, i. e. Nummus capitatus, money
with a head upon it.

Send Verdingales to Broad-gates in Oxford. For they were so great, that the
wearers could not enter (except going sidelong) at any ordinary door. Though
they have been long disused in England, yet the fashion of them is still well
enough known. They are used still by the Spanish women, and the Italian living
under the Spanish dominion, and they call them by a name signifying
cover-infant; because they were first brought into use to hide great bellies.
Of the name Verdingal I have not met with a good, that is, true Etymology.


Rutlandshire. Draitons Polyolbion.
RUtland Raddleman. That is perchance Reddleman, a Trade and that a poor one
only in this County, whence men bring on their backs a pack of red stones or
oker, which they sell to their neighboring Countries for the marking of sheep.

Stretton in the street, where shrews meet.
An Uppingham trencher.

Shropshire.
HE that fetches a wife from Shrewsbury, must carry her into Staffordshire, or
else he shall live in Cumberland. The staple wit of this vulgar Proverb,
consisting solely in similitude of sound is scarce worth the inserting.


Somersetshire.
'CH was bore at Taunton Dean, where should I be bore else. This is a parcel of
ground round about Taunton very pleasant and populous (containing many
Parishes) and so fruitful, to use their own phrase, with the Zun and Zoil
alone, that it needs no manuring at all. The pesantry therein are as rude as
rich, and so highly conceited of their own Country, that they conceive it a
disparagement to be born in any other place.

The beggars of Bath. Many in that place; some natives there, others repairing
thither from all parts of the land, the poor for alms, the pained for ease.

Bristol milk. That is Sherry-sack, which is the entertainment of course, which
the courteous Bristolians present to strangers, when first visiting their city.


Staffordshire. Camdens Britan. in this County.
IN April Doves flood.
Is worth a Kings good.
Dove is a river parting this and Derbyshire, which when it overflows its banks
in April is the Nilus of Staffordshire, much battling the meddows thereof.

Idem ibidem.

Wotton under Weaver,
Where God came never.
This profane Proverb it seems, took its wicked original from the situation of
Wotton, covered with hills from the light of the Sun, a dismal place, as report
represents it.

The Devil run through thee booted and spurred, with a sith on his back. This
is Sedgeley curse. Mr Howel.


Suffolk.
SUffolk milk. This was one of the staple commodities of the land of Canaan,
and certainly most wholesome for man's body, because of Gods own choosing for
his own people. No County in England affords better and sweeter of this kind,
lying opposite to Holland in the Netherlands, where is the best dairy in
Christendom.

Suffolk fair maids. It seems the God of Nature has been bountiful in giving
them beautiful complexions; which I am willing to believe, so far forth as it
sixeth not a comparative disparagement on the same sex in other places.

You are in the highway to Needham. Needham is a market town in this County;
according to the wit of the vulgar, they are said to be in the highway
thither, which do hasten to poverty.

Beckles for a puritan, Bungey for the poor,
Hallsworth for a drunkard, and Bliborouh for a whore.
Between Cowhithe and merry Cassingland, The Devil sh -- Benacre, look where it
stands. It seems this place is infamous for its bad situation.


Surrey.
THe vale of Holms-dale Was never won, ne ever shall. This Proverbial rhythme
has one part of History, the other of prophecy. As the first is certainly
untrue, so the second is frivolous, and not to be heeded by sober persons, as
neither any other of the like nature.


Sussex.
A Chichester lobster, A Selfey cockle, an Arundel mullet, a Pulborough eel, an
Amberley trout, a Rye herring; a Bourn wheat-ear, Are the best in their kind,
understand it of those that are taken in this Country.


Westmorland.
LEt Uter Pendragon do what he can,
The river Eden will run as it ran.
Parallel to that Latin verse,

Naturam expellas fured licet usque recurret.
Tradition reports, that Uter Pendragon had a design to fortify the castle
of Pendragon in this County. In order whereto with much art and industry, he
invited and tempted the river Eden to forsake his old channel, but all to no
purpose.

As crafty as a Kendale fox.
Wiltshire.
IT is done secundum usum Sarum. This Proverb coming out of the Church has
since enlarged it self into a civil use, signifying things done with exactness,
according to rule and precedent. Osmund Bishop of Sarum about the year 1090,
made that Ordinal or Office, which was generally received all over the land, so
that Churches thence forward easily understood one another, speaking the same
words in their Liturgy.

Salisbury plain is seldom without a thief or twain.
Yorkshire.
FRom Hell, Hull and Halifax -- deliver us. This is a part of the beggars and
vagrants Letany. Of these three frightful things unto them, it is to be feared,
that they least fear the first, conceiting it the furthest from them. Hull is
terrible to them as a town of good government, where beggars meet with punitive
charity, and it is to be feared are oftener corrected then amended. Halifax is
formidable to them for the Law thereof, whereby thieves taken (...) in the very
act of stealing cloth, are instantly beheaded with an engine; without any
further legal proceedings. Doubtless the coincidence of the initial letters of
these three words, helped much the setting on foot this Proverb.

A Scarborough warning. That is none at all but a sudden surprise, when a
mischief is felt before it is suspected. This Proverb is but of an hundred and
four years standing, taking its original from Thomas Stafford, who in the reign
of Queen Mary, Anno 1557 with a small company seized on Scarborough castle
(utterly destitute of provision for resistance) before the Townsmen had the
least notice of his approach. However within six days by the industry of the
Earl of Westmoreland he was taken, brought to London and beheaded, etc. vide.

As true steel as Rippon rowels. It is said of trusty persons, men of metal,
faithful in their employments. Rippon in this County is a Town famous for the
best spurs of England, whose rowels may be enforced to strike through a
shilling, and will break sooner then bow.

A Yorkshire way-bit. That is an overplus not accounted in the reckoning, which
sometimes proves as much as all the rest. Ask a countreyman, How many miles it
is to such a Town, and he will return commonly so many miles and a way-bit.
Which way-bit is enough to make the weary Traveller surfeit of the length
thereof. But it is not way-bit though generally so pronounced, but wee-bit, a
pure Yorkshirism, which is a small bit in the Northern language.

Merry Wakefield. What peculiar cause of mirth this Town has above others, I
do not know and dare not too curiously enquire. Sure it is seated in a fruitful
soil and cheap country: and where good cheer and company are the premises,
mirth (in common consequence) will be the conclusion.

Pendle, Ingleborough and Penigent.
Are the three highest hills between Scotland and Trent.
And which is more common in the mouths of the vulgar,

Pendle, Penigent and Ingleborough,
Are the three highest hills all England through.
These three hills are in sight of each other, Pendle on the edge of
Lancashire, Penigent and Ingleborough near Settle in Yorkshire, and not far
from Westmorland. These three are indeed the highest hills in England not
comprehending Wales. But in Wales I think Snowdon, Caderidris and Plimllimmon
are higher.

If Brayton bargh, and Hambleton hough, and Burton bream,
Were all in thy belly 't would never be team.
It is spoken of a covetous and unsatiable person, whom nothing will content.
Brayton and Hambleton and Burton are places between Cawood and Pontefraict in
this County. Brayton Bargh is a small hill in a plain Country covered with
wood. Bargh in the Northern dialect is properly a horse-way up a steep hill,
though here it be taken for the hill it self.

When Dighton is pulled down.
Hull shall become a great Town.
This is rather a prophecy then a Proverb. Dighton is a small Town not a mile
distant from Hull, and was in the time of the late wars for the most part
pulled down. Let Hull make the best they can of it.

Cleveland in the clay,
Bring in two soles and carry one away.
Cleveland is that part of Yorkshire, which borders upon the Bishopric of
Durham, where the ways in winter time are very foul and deep.

When Sheffield Park is plowed and sown,
Then little England hold thine own.
It has been plowed and sown these six or seven years.

You have eaten some Hull cheese. i. e. Are drunk, Hull is famous for strong
Ale.

When all the world shall be aloft,
Then Hallam-shire shall be Gods croft.
Winkabank and Temple brough,
Will buy all England through and through.
Winkabank is a wood upon a hill near Sheffield where there are some remainders
of an old Camp. Temple brough stands between the Rother and the Don, about a
quarter of a mile from the place where these two rivers meet. It is a square
plat of ground encompassed by two trenches. Seldom often enquired for the
ruins of a temple of the god Thor, which he said was near Rotherham: This
probably might be it, if we allow the name for any argument: besides there is a
Pool not far from it called Jordon-dam, which name seems to be compounded of
Jor one of the names of the god Thor and Don the name of the river.


Miscellaneous local Proverbs.
Dunmow bacon and Doncaster daggers, Monmouth caps and Lemster wool, Derby ale
and London beer. There is a current story, that the Prior and convent of Dunmow
were obliged by their Charter, to give a Flitch of Bacon to any man, who coming
with his wife, should depose both of them that they had been married a twelve
month, and neither of them had at any time repented.

You may sip up the Severn and swallow Mavern as soon. Little England beyond
Wales, i. e. Pembrokeshire. Little London beyond Wales; i. e. Beaumaris in the
Isle of Anglesey: both so called because the inhabitants speak good English:
indeed in Pembrokeshire many of the people can speak no Welsh. There Is great
doings in the North when they bar their doors with tailours. There Is great
stirring in the North when old wives ride scout. Three great evils come out of
the North, A cold wind, a cunning knave, and a shrinking cloth.
Proverbs communicated by Mr Andrew Paschall of Chedsey in Somersetshire, which
came not to hand till the copy of this second Edition was delivered to the
Bookseller, and so could not be referred to their proper places.
STeal the horse, and carry home the bridle. What are you good for? to stop
bottles? I Will not pin my faith on your sleeve. A fine new nothing. What wine
blew you hither? As nimble as a cow in a cage. Set a cow to catch a share. Is
the wind in that corner? I Will watch your water. One's too few, three too many.
He put a fine feather in my cap. i. e. Honor without profit.

All Ilchester is Gaol, say prisoners there. i. e. The people hard-hearted,
Summers.

The Bird that can sing and will not sing must be made to sing. After a lank
comes a bank; Said of breeding women.

There or thereabouts, as Parson Smith says. Proverbial about Dunmow in Essex.
I wiped his nose on it. Tomorrow come never. Choke up, the Church-yard's nigh.
Sow or set beans in Candlemas waddle. i. e. Wane of the Moon. Somerset.

You are right for the first -- miles. Eat thy meat and drink thy drink, and
stand thy ground old Harry. Somerset. Blow out the marrow and throw the bone to
the dogs. A taunt to such as are troublesome by blowing their nose.

'Twere well for your little belly if your guts were out. Murder will out. This
is remarkably true of murder however secretly acted, but it is applied also to
the discovery of any fault.

To put out the millers eye. Spoken by good-housewives when they have wet their
meal for bread or paste too much.

As your wedding-ring wears your cares will wear away. Somerset. She stamps
like an Ewe upon yeaning. Summers. Pinch on the Parsons side. A old as
Glaston-bury torre. Somerset. This torre, i. e. tower, so called from the
Latin Turris, stands upon a round hill in the midst of a level, and may be
seen sar off. It seemed to me to have been the steeple of a Church that had
formerly stood upon that hill, though now scarce any footsteps of it remain.

On Candlemas day throw candle and candlestick away. Share and share-like, some
all, some n'ere a white. To help at a dead lift. To water a stake. As welcome
as water into ones shoes. March birds are best. I will not want when I have
and when I have not too. Somerset. So many frosts in March so many in May. It Is
year'd. Spoken of a desperate debt. The Snite need not the woodcock betwite.
Some. You shall have the Whetstone. Spoken to him that tells a lie.

You have no more sheep to shear. Somerset. That Is a dog-trick. You shall have
the basket. Taunton. Said to the journeyman that is envied for pleasing his
master.

You are as fine as if you had a whiting hanging at your side, or girdle. April
cling good for nothing. Somerset. You must go into the country to hear what
news at London. 'Twill not be why for thy. Somerset. Of a bad bargain or great
loss for little profit.

The lamentation of a bad market. The chicken crammes the capon. Somerset. I
have victualled my camp: (filled my belly.) Parsley fried will bring a man to
his saddle, and a woman to her grave. I know not the reason of this Proverb.
Parsley was wont to be esteemed a very wholesome herb, however prepared, only
by the Ancients it was forbidden them that had the falling sickness, and modern
experience has found it to be bad for the eyes.

I Will make you know your driver. Somerset. I Will vease the. (i. e. hunt, drive
thee.) Somerset. Better untaught then ill taught. Snapping so short makes you
look so lean. Wondering makes you look so lean. It Is long of your eyes, the
crows might have helped it when you were young. Quick and nimble, 'twill be
your own another day. In some places they say in drollery, Quick and nimble,
more like a bear then a squirrel.

Upon S. David's day put oats and barley in the clay. With us it is accounted a
little too early to sow barley (which is a tender grain) in the beginning of
March.

Be patient and you shall have patient children. Too hot to hold. Moderata
durant. Talk is but talk, but it is money buys lands. You cry before you are
hurt. Cradle-straws are scarce out of his Br. God send me a friend that may
tell me my faults; if not, an enemy, and to be sure he will. He is a fool that
is not melancholy once a day. He frets like gum'd tasfaty. You speak in
clusters, you were begot in nutting. He Will turn rather then burn. I never
see it but once and that was at a wedding. Hang him that has no shift, and him
that has one too many. How does your whither go you? (your wife.) Farewell
and be hanged, friends must part. What she wants in up and down she has in
round about. He Is steel to the back. A man every inch of him. Cut off the head
and tail, and throw the rest away. To play fast and loose. You are mope-ey'd by
living so long a maid. Your horns hang in your light. What do you come or send.
Look to the Cow, and the Sow, and the Wheatmow, and all will be well enough.
Somerset. Better have it then hear on it. Here Is to our friends, and hang up the
rest of our kindred. Do, jeer poor folks, and see how 'twill thrive. You love
to make much of naught. (your self.) In the shooe-makers stocks. Neck or
nothing. They two are hand and glove. Somerset. They love like chick. Somerset.
To give one the goe-by. I Will not play with you for shooe-buckles. God make you
an honester man then your father. One may wink and choose. Want goes by such an
ones door. Somerset. Maids want nothing but husbands, and when they have them
they want every thing. Some. Often to the water often to the tatter. (of
linen.) Beware of him whom God has marked. Most take all. A Somerton ending.
Summers. i. e. When the difference between two is divided.

Truth fears no colors. Never good that mind their belly so much. Old head and
young hands. Somerset. Lend and lose, so play fools. Cast not thy cradle over
thy head. The dunder clo gally [affright] the beans. Summers. Beans shoot up
fast after thunder-storms.

Wheat will not have two praises. (Summer and Winter.) If size cinque will not,
and deuce ace cannot, then quatre trey must. The middle sort bear public
burdens Taxes, etc. most.

Deux ace non possunt and size cinque solvere nolunt:
Est igitur notum quatre trey solvere totum.
Take all and pay the baker. Never sigh but send. My son, buy no stocks. Good
counsel at Gleek. There Is never a why but there is a wherefore. Spend not where
you may save; spare not where you must spend. Listners seldom hear good of
themselves. Where there is whispering there is lying. Happy is the bride the
Sun shines on, and the corse the Rain rains on. By fits and girds, as an ague
takes a goose. Will you snap [or bite] off my nose? You will tell another tale
when you are tried. You eat above the tongue like a calf. Recipe scribe, scribe
solve. A good rule for stewards.

He needs a bird that gives a groat for an owl. You go as if nine men held
you. Under the furze is hunger and cold; Under the broom is silver and gold.
Nine tailours make but one man. I am loath to change my mill. Somerset. i. e.
Eat of another dish.

Your horse cast a shoe. To hit over the thumbs. Win at first and loose at
last. He Will bear it away, if it be not too hot or too heavy. Spoken of a
pilferer. Hickledy pickledy, one among another. We have in our language many
the like conceited, rhyming words or reduplications to signify any confusion
or mixture, as hurly burly, hodge podge, minlge mangle, arsy versy, kim kam,
hub bub, crawly mauly, hab nab.

Londoner-like ask as much more as you will take. So got so gone. Oysters are
not good in a month that has not an R. in it. I love thee like pudding, if
thou were pie I Would eat thee. Here Is nor rhythm, nor reason. This brings to mind
a story of Sr Tho. More, who being by the Author asked his judgment of an
impertinent book, wished him by all means to put it into verse, and bring it
him again, which done, Sr Tho. looking upon it says, yea now it is somewhat
like, now it is rhythm, before it was neither rhythm nor reason.

Take all and pay all. A penny saved is a penny got. A lisping lass is good to
kiss. When the shoulder of mutton is going it is good to take a slice. Make the
vine poor and it will make you rich. (prune off its branches.) Not a word of
Pensants. You may if you list, but do if you dare. Set trees poor and they
will grow rich, set them rich and they will grow poor. Remove them always out
of a more barren into a fatter soil. No cut to unkindness. A good saver is a
good server. Somerset. To slip ones neck out of the collar. I will keep no more
cats then will catch mice (i. e. no more in family then will earn their living)
Somerset. Blind-mans holy day. If you would a good hedge have, carry the leafes
to the grave. As yellow as the golden noble. As good be hanged for an old sheep
as a young lamb. Somerset. She loves the poor well, but cannot abide beggars.
Somerset. (of pretenders to charity.) You put it together with an hot needle
and burnt thread. Like a loaders horse that lives among thieves. (the country
man near a town.) Some. Apples, pears, hawthorn-quick, oak, set them at
All-hollontide and command them to prosper, set them at Candlemas and entreat
them to grow. It Is good sheltring under an old hedge. Let not a child sleep
upon bones. Somerset. i. e. The nurses lap.

The more Moors the better victory. No man has a worse friend then he brings
from home. Defend me and spend me. (says the Irish churl.) To fear the loss
of the bell more then the loss of the steeple. Nab me, I Will nab thee. He has a
conscience like a Cheverels skin. (That will stretch) A Cheverel is a wild
goat. Summers.

If you touch pot you must touch penny. Summers. (Pay for what you have.)

He has a spring at his elbow. (spoken of a Gamester.) Pull not out your teeth
but with a leaden instrument. When Tom pitcher's broken I shall have the
sheards. (i. e. Kindness after others have done with it; or refuse.)

A child's bird and a boys wife are well used. Some. Be it weal or be it woe,
Beans blow before May does go. Little mead little need. Somerset. (A mild
winter hoped for after a bad summer.)

A good tither a good thriver. Somerset. Who marries between the sickle and the
sith will never thrive. She will as soon part with the crock as the porridge.
Somerset. You shall have the red cap. Somerset. (Said to a marriage-maker.) Let
them buckle for it. Somerset. She is as crousty as that is hard baked.
Somerset. (One that is surly and loath to do any thing.) Money is wise, it
knows its way. Somerset. Says the poor man that must pay as soon as he
receives. After Lammas corn ripens as much by night as by day. If you will have
a good cheese and have'n old, you must turn'n seven times before he is cold.
Some. He is able to bury an Abbey. (a spendthrift.) When elder's white brew and
bake a peck; When elder's black brew and bake a sack. Some. More malice then
matter. Somerset. He builds cages for oxen to bring up birds in.
(Disproportionable.) Where there is store of oatmeal you may put enough in the
crock [pot.] Somerset. He that has more smocks then shirts in a bucking, had
need be a man of good fore-looking. Chaueer. You never speak but your mouth
opens. The charitable gives out at door and God puts in at the window. All the
leavers you can lay will not do it. Some. Hampshire ground requires every day
of the week a shower of rain, and on Sunday twain. As cunning as captain Drake.
Let him hang by the heels. Some. (Of a man that dies in debt: His wife leaving
all at his death, crying his goods in three markets and three Parish Churches
is so free of all his debts.)

He is ready to leap over nine hedges. She looked on me as a cow on a bastard
calf. Some. I will wash my hands and wait upon you. The death of wives and the
life of sheep make men rich. April fools. (People sent on idle errands.) After
a famine in the stall, Comes a famine in the hall. Somerset. Wellington
roundheads. Proverbial in Taunton for a violent fanatic.

None so old that he hopes not for a year of life. The young are not always
with their bow bent. i. e. Under rule.

To catch two pigeons with one bean. Every honest miller has a golden thumb.
They reply, None but a cuckold can see it. Somerset.

In wiving and thriving a man should take counsel of all the world. It Is good
grafting on a good stock. The eye is a shrew. To measure the meat by the man.
(i. e. The message by the messenger.)

He sucked evil from the dug. They are so like that they are the worse for it.
Out of door out of debt. Somerset. Of one that pays not when once gone.

Words may pass, but blows fall heavy. Some. Poverty breeds strife. Somerset.
Every gap has its bush. A dead woman will have four to carry her forth. K.
Harry robbed the church, and died a beggar. To take the birds by its feet. The
hogs to the honey-pots. Their milk sod over. He has good cards to show. It Is
best to take half in hand and the rest by and by. (The tradesman that is for
ready money.)

To heave and theave. Summers. (The laboring husbandman.)

Here is Gerards Bailiff, work or you must die with cold. Summers. Come every
one heave a pound. Some. As fond as an Ape of a whip. Some. You make the better
side the worse. Some.
Northern Proverbs communicated by Mr Fr. Brokesby of Rowley, in Yorkshire.
AS blake [i. e. yellow] as a paigle. He Will never dow [i. e. be good] egg nor
bird. As flat as a flaun, i. e. a custard. I Will foreheet [i. e. predetermine]
nothing but building Churches and louping over them. Meeterly [indifferently]
as maids are in fairness. Weal and women cannot pan, i. e. close together. But
woe and women can.
SCOTTISH PROVERBS.
A.
ALl things has a beginning (God excepted) A good beginning makes a good
ending. A slothful man is a beggars brother. A vaunter and a liar is both one
thing. All is not tint that is in peril. All is not in hand that helps. A toom
purse makes a bleat merchant. As long runs the fox as he feet has. A hasty man
never wanted woe. A wight man wanted never a weapon. A fools bolt is soon shot.
A given horse should not be looked in the teeth. A good asker should have a good
naysay. A dear ship stands long in the haven. An oleit mother makes a sweir
daughter. A carless hussie makes money thieves. A liar should have a good
memory. A black shoe makes a blithe heart. A hungry man sees far. A silly
bairn is eith to lear. A halfpenny cat may look to the King. A greedy man God
hates. A proud heart in a poor breast, hes meikle dollour to dree. A scald man's
head is soon broken. A skabbit sheep fyles all the flock. A burnt bairne, fire
dreads. Auld men are twice bairnes. A tratler is worse then a thief. A borrowed
len should come laughing hame. A blithe heart makes a blomand visage. A year a
nurish, seven years a daw. An unhappy man's cairt is eith to tumble. An old
hound bites fair. A fair bride is soon buskt, and a short horse soon wispt. As
good haud as draw. A man that is warned, is half armed. An ill win penny will
cast down a pound. All the corn in the country, is not shorn by pratlers. Ane
beggar is wae that another be the gate gae. A traveled man has leave to lie.
Ane ill word meets another, and it were at the bridge of London. A hungry louse
bites fair. A gentle horse would not be over fair spurred. A friends dinner is
soon dight. An ill cook wald have a good claver. A good fellow tint never, but
at an ill fellows hand. At open doors, dogs comes in. A word before, is worth
two behind. A still sow eats all the draff. A dumb man holds all. All fails
that fools thinks. A wool seller kens a wool buyer. All fellows, Jock and the
Lord. As the sow fills, the draff soures. A full heart lied never. As good
merchant tynes as wins. All the speid is in the spurs. As fair greits the
bairne that is dung afternoon, as he that is dung before noon. An ill life, an
ill end. Anes wood, never wise, ay the worse. Anes pay it never cravit. A good
rufer, was never a good rider. All the keys in the country hangs not at ane
belt. A dumb man wan never land. As soon comes the lambs skin to the market, as
the old sheeps. As many heads, as many wits. A blind man should not judge of
colors. As the old cock craws, the young cock leares. A skabbed horse is good
enough for a skald squire. A mirk mirror is a man's mind. As meikle up with, as
meikle down with. An ill shearer gat never a good book. A tarrowing bairn was
never fat. A good cow may have an ill calls. A cock is crouse in his own
midding. A new bissome soupes clean. As fair fights wranes as cranes. A yelt
sow was never good to gryses. As the carle riches he wretches. A fool when he
hes spoken hes all done. An old seck eraves meikle clouting. An old seck is ay
skailing. A fair fire makes a room flet. An old knave is na bairne. A good
yeaman makes a good woman. A man has no more good then he has good of. A fool
may give a wise man a counsel. A man may speir the gate to Rome. As long lives
the merry man as the wretch for all the craft he can. All wald have all, all
wald forgive. Ane may lead a horse to the water, put four and twenty cannot gar
him drink. A bleat cat makes a proud mouse. An ill willy kow should have short
horns. A good piece steil is worth a penny. A shored tree stands lang. A gloved
cat was never a good hunter. A gangand foot is ay getting, an it were but a
thorn. All is not gold that glitters. A swallow makes not summer or
springtime. A man may spit on his hand and do full ill. An ill servant will
never be a good master. An hired horse tired never. All the winning is in the
first buying. Anuch [enough] is a feast (of bread and cheise.) A horse may
stumble on four feet. All thing wytes that well not faires. All things thrives
but thrice. Absence is a shroe. Auld sin new shame. A man cannot thrive except
his wife let him. A bairne mon creep or he gang. As long as ye serve the tod,
ye man bear up his tail. All overs are ill, but over the water. A man may woo
where he will, but he will wed where he is weard. A mean pot [where several
share in it] played never evin. Among twenty four fools not ane wise man. Ane
man's meat, is another man's poison. A fool will not give his babble for the tower
of Lon. A foul foot makes a full weamb. A man is a lion in his own cause. A
hearty hand to give a hungry meltith. A cumbersome cur in company, is hated for
his miscarriage. A poor man is fain of little. An answer in a word. A beltless
bairn cannot lie. A yule feast may be quat at Pasche. A good dog never barket
bout a bone. A full-seek will take a clout on the side. An ill hound comes
halting home. All things help (quod the Wran) when she pished in the sea. All
cracks, all bears. A houndless man comes to the best hunting. All things hes
an end, and a pudding hes two. All is well that ends well. As good hads the
stirrep, as he that loups on. A begun work is half ended. A Scottish man is ay
wise behind the hand. A new sound, [per onomatop.] in an old horn. As broken a
ship hes come to land. As the fool thinks, ay the bell clinks. A man may see
his friend need, but he will not see him bleed. A friend is not known but in
need. A friend in court, is better nor a penny in the purse. All things is good
unseyed. A good goose indeed, but she hes an ill gander. All are not maidens
that wears bair hair. A mache and a horse-shoe are both alike. Airlie crooks
the tree, that good cammok should be. An ounce of mothers wit is worth a pound
of Clergy. An inch of a nag is worth the span of an aver.
B.
BEtter sit idle then work for naught. Better learn by your neighbors skaith
nor by your own. Better half egg nor an empty shell. Better apple given nor
eaten. Better a dog fan nor bark on you. Bodin [offered] geir stinks. Bourd
[jest] neither with me, nor with my honor. Buy when I bid you. Better late
thrive then never. Better hand louse nor bound to an ill baikine. Better lang
little nor soon right naught. Better give nor take. Better bide the cooks nor
the mediciners. Better saucht with little aucht, nor care with many kow. Bring
a kow to the hall, and she will to the byre again. Bear wealth, poverty will
bear it self. Better good sale nor good ale. Better woo over midding nor over
moss. Blaw the wind never so fast it will lower at the last. Bind fast, find
fast. Better auld debts nor auld saires. Better a fowl in hand nor two flying.
Better spaire at the breird nor at the bottom. Bind the seck before it be full.
Better be well loved nor ill won geir. Better finger off nor ay warking. Better
rue sit, nor rue flit. Bourd not with bawty, fear lest he bite you. Better say,
Here it is, nor here it was. Better plays a full weamb, nor a new coat. Better
be happy nor wise. Better happy to court, nor good service. Better a wit
bought, nor two for naught. Better bow nor break. Better two seils, nor ane
sorrow. Better bairnes greit nor bearded men. Betwixt two stools, the arse
falls down. Better na ring nor the ring of a rush. Better hold out nor put out.
Better sit still, nor rise and get a fall. Better leave nor want. Better unborn
nor untaught. Better be envied nor pitied. Better a little fire that warms, nor
a meikle that burns. Be the same thing that thou wald be called. Black will be no
other hew. Beauty but bounty avails naught. Beware of had I wist. Better be
alone, nor in ill company. Better a thigging mother, nor a ryding father.
Before I wein and now I wat. Bonie silver is soon spendit. Better never begun
nor never endit. Biting and scratching is Scotsfolks woing. Breads house skiald
never. Bairns mother burst never. Bannoks [a tharfecake oat bread] is better
nor na kin bread. Better a laying hen nor a lyin crown. Better be dead as out
of the fashion. Better buy as borrow. Better have a mouse in the pot as no
flesh.
C.
COurt to the town, and whore to the window. Cadgers [meal-men] speaks of
packsaddles Changing of words is lighting of hearts. Charge your friend or you
need. Cats eats that hussies spares. Cast not forth the old water while the new
come in. Crabbit was, and cause had. Comparisons are odious. Come not to the
counsel uncalled. Condition makes, and condition breaks. Cut duelles in every
town. Cold cools the love that kindles over hot. Cease your snowballs casting.
Come it air, come it late, in May comes the cow-quake. Courtesy is cumbersom
to them that kens it not. Chalk is na sheares.
D.
DO in hill as ye wald do in hall. Do as ye wald be done to. Do weill and have
weill. Dame deem warily. Dead and marriage makes tearm-day. Draff is good
enough for swine. Do the likliest, and God will do the best. Drive out the inch
as thou have done the span. Dead men bites not. Daffling [jesting] good for
nothing. Dogs will red swine. Dirt parts company. Drink and drouth comes sindle
together. Daft talk dow not. Do well and doubt na man, and do weill and doubt
all men. Dead at the one door, and heirship at the other. Dummie [a dumb man]
cannot lie.
E.
EArly master, lang knave. Eaten meat is good to pay. Eild [old age] wald have
honor. Evening orts is good morning fodder. Every land hes the lauch, and
every corn hes the caffe. Every man wishes the water to his own mylne. Every
many can rule an ill wife but he that hes her. Eat measurelie and defy the
mediciners. Every man for himself (quoth the Merteine) Every man flames the fat
sows arse. Experience may teach a fool. Every man wates best where his own shoe
binds him. After lang mint, never dint. After word comes weird. After delay
comes a let.
F.
FAir fowls hes fair feathers. Fair hights makes fools fain. Fools are fain of
flitting. Falsehood made never a fair hinder end. Freedom is a fair thing. For a
lost thing care not. Fool haste is no speed. Fools let for trust. For love of
the nurse, money kisses the bairne. Folly is a bonny dog. Fair words break never
bone; foul words breaks many ane. Foul water slokens fire. Far fought, and dear
bought, is good for Ladies. For fault of wise men, fools sit on binks. Fools
makes feasts, and wise men eats them. Fools are fain of right naught. Forbid a
thing, and that we will do. Follow love and it will flee thee, flee love and it
will follow thee. Fegges after peace. Fools should have no chappin sticks.
Frindship stands not in one side. Few words suffices to a wiseman. Fire is
good for the farcie. Fiddlers dogs and flies comes to feasts uncalled. Fill fow
and had fow makes a stark man.
G.
GRace is best for the man. Giff gaff [one gift for another] makes good
friends. Good wine needs not a wispe. Good cheir and good cheap garres many
haunt the house. God sends men cold as they have clothes to. Gods help is
neirer nor the fair evin. Give never the wolf the wether to keep. Good will
should be taken in part of payment. God sends never the mouth but the meat with
it. Girn when ye tie, and laugh when ye louse. Go to the Devil and bishop you.
Go shoe the geese. God sends meat, and the Devil sends cooks.
H.
HUnger is good kitchine meat. He that is far from his geir, is neir his
skaith. Had I fish, was never good with garlic. He mon have leave to speak
that cannot had his tongue. He that lippens to lent plows, his land will ly
ley. He rides sicker that fell never. He that will not hear motherhead, shall
hear stepmotherhead. He that crabs without cause, should mease without mends.
He that may not as he would, mon do as he may. He that spares to speak, spares
to speed. He is weil easit that hes ought of his own, when others goes to the
meat. He that is welcome, faires weil. He that does ill hates the light. He
that speaks the thing he should not, hears the things he would not. He that is
evil deemd is half hanged. Help thy self, and God will help thee. He that
spends his geir on a whore, hes both shame and skaith. He that forsakes
missour, missour forsakes him. Half a tale is enough to a wise man. He that
hewes over hie, the spail will fall into his eye. He that eats while he lasts,
will be the war while he die. He is a weak horse that may not bear the saidle.
He that borrows and bigs, makes feasts and thigs, drinks and is not dry, these
three are not thrifty. He is a proud Tod that will not scrape his own hole. He
is wise when he is well, can had him sa. He is is poor that God hates. He is
wise that is ware in time. He is wise that can make a friend of a foe. Hair and
hair, makes the cairles head baire: Hear all parties. He that is redd for
windlestraws, should not sleep in lees. He rises over early that is hangit or
noon. He is not the fool that the fool is, but he that with the fool deals. He
that tholes overcomes. He loves me for little, that hates me for naught. He
that hes two herds, is able to get the third. He is a sairie beggar that may
not gae by ane man's door. Hall binks are sliddery. He is not the best wright
that hewes the maniest speals. He that evil does, never good weines. Hooredome
and grace, can never bide in one place. He that compts all costs, will never
put plough in the earth. He that slays, shall be slain. He that is ill of his
harberie, is good of his way kenning. He that will not when he may, shall not
when he wald. Hanging ganges be hap. He is a fool that forgets himself. Happy
man, happy cavil. He that comes uncalld, sits unservd. He that comes first to
the hill, may sit where he will. He that shames, shall be shent. He gangs early
to steal, that cannot say na. He should have a long shafted spoon that sups
kail with the Devil. He sits above that deals aikers. He that ought the cow,
goes nearest her tail. He is worth na weill that may not bide na wae. He should
have a hail pow, that calls his neighbor nik^ienow. He that hes gold may buy
land. He that counts without his host, counts twice. He that looks not or he
loup, will fall or he wit of himself. Haste makes waste. Hulie [softly] and
fair, men rides far journeys. He that marries a daw [slut] eats meikle dirt. He
that marries or he be wise, will die or he thrive. Hunting, hawking, and
paramours, for ane joy, a hundred displeasures. Hald in geir, helps well. He is
twice fain, that sits on a stean. He that does his turn in time, sits half
idle. He plaints early, that plaints on his kail. He is good that faild never.
Half anuch, is half fill. He is a sairie cook that may not lick his own finger.
Hunger is hard in a heal maw. He should wear iron shone that bydes his
neighbors deed. Hame, is hamelie. He that is hated of his subjects, cannot be
counted a king. Hap and a halfpenny, is warlds geir enough. He calls me
skabbed, because I will not call him skade. He is blind that eats his marrow,
but far blinder that lets him. Have God, and have all. Honesty is na pride. He
that fishes before the net, lang or he fish get. He tint never a cow, that great
for a needle. He that hes na geir to lose, hes shins to pine. He that takes all
his geir fra himself, and gives to his bairns, it were weill ward to take a
mallet and knock our his brains. He sits full still that hes a riven breech. He
that does bidding, deserves na dinging. He that blaws best bears away the horn.
He is weill staikit within, that will neither borrow nor len. Hea will gar a
deaf man hear. He is fairest dung when his awn wand dings him. He hes wit at
will, that with angry heart can hold him still.
Proverbial speeches of persons given to such vices or virtues as follows.
Of greedy persons it is said,
HE can hide his meat and seek more. He will see day at a little hole. He comes
for drink, though drafft be his errand.
Of well skilled persons.
He was born in August. He sees an inch before his nose.
Of willful persons.
He is at his wits end. He hears not at that ear. He wald fain be forwart if he
wist how. He will not give an inch of his will, for a span of his thrift.
Of vousters or new upstarts.
His wind shakes no corn. He thinks himself na pays peir. He counts himself
worthy meikle myce dirt. Henry Cheike never slew a man until he came to him.
Of fleyit persons.
His heart is in his hose. He is war frighted nor he is hurt. He looks as the
wood were full of thieves. He looks like the lord of pity. He looks like a
Lochwhaber axe,
Of false persons.
He will get credit of a house full of unbored millstones. He looks up with the
one eye, and down with the other. He can lie as weill as a dog can lick a dish.
He lies never but when the holen is green. He bydes as fast as a cat bound with
a sacer. He wald gar a man trow that the moon is made of green cheis, or the
cat took the heron.
Of misnortured persons.
He hes a brazen face. He knows not the door be the door bar. He spits on his
own blanket.
Of unprofitable foolish persons.
He harpes ay on ane string. He robs Peter to pay Paul. He rives the kirk to
thatch the quier. He wags a wand in the water. He that rides or he be ready,
wants some of his geir.
Of weillie persons.
He can hald the cat to the sun. He kens his oatmeal among other folks kail. He
changes for the better. He is not so daft as he pretends him.
Of angry persons.
He hes pisht on a nettle. He hes not gotten the first seat of the midding the
day. He takes pepper in the nose.
Of unconstant persons.
He is like a widder cock. He hes changed his tippet, or his cloak on the other
shoulder. He is like a dog on a cat. His evening song and morning song are not
both alike. He is an Aberdeens man, taking his word again.
Of persons speaking pertinently.
He hes hit the nail on the head. He hes touched him in the quick.
Of weasters and diverse.
He hes not a heal nail to claw him with. He hes not a penny to buy his dog a
leaf. He is as poor as Job. He is as bair as the birch at Zule evin. He begs at
them that borrowit at him. He hes brought his pack to a fit spead. He is on the
ground. His hair grows through his hood. He hes cried himself diver.
Of proud persons.
He counts his halfpenny good silver. He makes meikle of his painted sheits.
He goes away with lifted up head. He answers unspoken to. He hes not that
bachell to swear by.
Of untymous persons:
He is as welcome as water in a rivin ship. He is as welcome as snaw in
harvest.
Of rash persons:
He sets all on sex or sevin. He stumbles at a strea and loupes at a bank.
Of ignorant persons.
He does as the blind man when he casts his staff. He brings a staff to his own
head. He gars his awn wand ding him. He takes after the goat that casts all
down at evin. He hes good skill of roasted wool, when it stinks it is enough.
Of effeminate persons:
He is John Thomsones man, coutching carle. He wears short hose.
Of drankards.
His head is full of bees. He may write to his friends. His hand is in the
panyer. He is better fed nor nortured. He needs not a cake of bread at all his
kin.
Of hypocrites.
He hes meikle prayer, but little devotion. He runs with the hound and holds
with the hair. He hes a face to God, and another to the Devil. He is a wolf in
a lambs skin. He breaks my head, and since puts on my hood. He can say, my joy,
and think it not. He sleeps as dogs does, when wives sifts meal. He will go to
hell for the house profit.
I.
IT is a sairie brewing, that is not good in the newing. It is tint that is
done to child and auld men. Ill weids waxes weill. In some men's aught mon the
auld horse die. It is a sooth bourd that men sees wakin. In space comes grace.
It is ill to bring out of the flesh that is bred in the bane. Ill win, ill
warit. It is a silly flock where the you bears the bell. It is a sin to lie on
the Devil. It is eith till, that the awn self will. It is good mowes that fills
the womb. It is na time to stoup when the head is asf. It is fair in hall,
where beards wags all. It will come in an hour that will not come in a year. If
thou do na ill, do na ill like. If thou steal not my kail, break not my dyke.
If ye may spend meikle, put the more to the fire. If I can get his cairt at a
wolter, I shall lend it a put. If I may not keep geese, I shall keep gesline.
It is kindly that the poke savor of the herring. It is eith to cry zu^o on
another man's cost. like [each] a man as he loves, let him send to the cooks. It
is eith to swim where the head is holden up. It is well warit they have sorrow
that buys it with their silver. If ane will not, another will. It is ill to
take breeches off a bare arse. It is dear bought honey that is lickt off a
thorn. If God be with us, wha will be against us. It is weill warit that
wasters want geir. It is ill to bring up the thing that is not therein. It that
lies not in your gate, breaks not your shins. It is na play where ane greits,
and another laughs. If a man knew what wald be dear, he wald be but merchant
for a year. It is true that all men says. I have a good bow, but it is in the
castle. It is hard to fling at the brod [a stick that children use, when they
play at penny prick] or kick at the prick. Ilk man mend ane, and all will be
mendit. It is a fairie collope that is tain off a Capone. Ill bairnes are best
heard at home. It is ill to wakin sleeping dogs. Ill herds makes fat wolffs. It
is hard to wife, and thrive in a year. It is good sleeping in a heal skin. It
is not tint that is done to friends. It is ill to draw a strea before an auld
cat. It is a pain both to pay and pray. It is good fishing in drumbling
waters. It is little of Gods might, to make a poor man a knight. It is good
baking without meal. It is a good goose that drops ay. It is not the habit
that makes the monk. It is not good to want and to have. It hes neither arse
nor elbow. I shall sit on his skirt. It is a bair moore that he goes over and
gets not a cow. I shall hold his nose on the grindstone. It goes as meikle in
his heart as in his heel. It goes in at the one ear, and out at the other. It
is na mair pity to see a woman greit, nor to see a goose go bare fit. It is
weill said, but wha will bell the cat. It is short while seen the louse boore
the langelt. I have a sliddrie eill by the tail. It is as meit as a sow to bear
a saddle. It is as meit as a thief for the widdie. I wald I had as meikle
pepper as he compts himself worthy myse dirt. It will be an ill web to bleitch.
I cannot find you both tales and ears. It is ill to make a blown horn of a
tods tail. If ever ye make a lucky pudding I shall eat the prick. It that God
will give, the Devil cannot reave. In a good time I say it, in a better I leave
it. It Is a silly pack that may not pay the custom. I have seen as light green.
It Is a cold coal to blow at. It Is a sair field where all are dung down. It Is a
sair dung bairn that dare not greit. I wat where my awn shoe binds me. If ye
wanted me and your meat, ye wald want ane good friend.
K.
KAme single, kame sair. Kindness comes of will. Kindness will creep where it
may not gang. Kindness cannot be bought for geir. Kail spaires bread. Kamesters
are ay greasy. Knowledge is eith born about. Kings are out of play. Kings and
Bares often worries their keepers. Kings hes long ears. Kings caff is worth other
men's corn. Kindness lies not ay in ane side of the house.
L.
LIttle intermeddling makes good friends. Long tarrying takes all the thank
away. Little good is soon spendit. Lang lean makes hameald cattle. Little wit
makes meikle travel. Learn young, learn fair. Like draws to like, and a skabbed
horse to an ald dyke. Laith to the bed, laith out of the bed. Little may an ald
horse do, if he may not nigh. Let them that are cold blow at the coal. Lang
standing, and little offering makes a poor prise Love hes na lack. Leave the
court, before the court leave thee. Light supper makes long life. Lykit geir is
half bought. Lordships changes manners. Light winning makes a heavy purse. Live
and let live. Liveless, faultless. Little said, soon mendit. Laith to the
drink, and leath fra it. Lightly comes, lightly goes. Last in the bed, best
heard. Lata is lang and tedious. Little waits an ill hussie what a dinner holds
in. Laddes will be men. Lauch and lay down again. Likely lies in the mire, and
unlikelie goes by it. Let him drink as he hes brewed. Like to die mends not the
kirk yard. Luck and a bone voyage. Lang or ye cut Falkland wood with a pen
knife. Love me little and love me lang. Let alone makes money lurdon. Little
troubles the eye, but far less the soul. Little kens the wise that sits by the
fire, how the wind blows cold in hurl burle swyre.
M.
Money yrons in the fire part mon cool. Maidens should be meek until they be
married. Men may buy gold over dear. Money purses holds friends together. Meat
and cloth makes the man. Money hands make light work. Make not two mews of ane
daughter. Meat is good, but mense is better. Money masters, quoth the frog to
the harrow, when every tooth took her a knock. Mint [offer] or ye strike.
Measure, is treasure. Money men does lack, that yat wald fain have in their
pack. Misterfull folk mon not be mensfull. Many smals makes a great. Maisterie
mawes the meadows down. Money speaks of Robin Hood, that never shot in his bow.
Mister makes men of craft. Meikle water runs where the miller sleeps. Meikle
mon a good heart endure. Money cares for meal that hes baking bread enough.
Meikle spoken, part mon spill. Messengers should neither be headed nor hanged.
Men are blind in their own cause. Money words wald have meikle drink. Man
propons, but God dispons. Money man serves a thankless master. Money words fills
not the furlot. Money kinsfolk, but few friends. Men goes over the dyke at the
ebbest. Might oftentimes overcomes right. Mends is worth misdeeds. Meikle head,
little wit. Mustard after meat. Millers takes ay the best toll with their own
hand. Money man speirs the gate he knows full well. Mussel not the oxens mouth.
Meikle hes, wald ay have mair. Money tynes the half mark whinger, for the
halfpenny thong. Make not meikle of little. Money man makes an errand to the
hall, to bid the Lady good-day. Money brings the raike, but few the shovell.
Make no balkes of good bear land. March whisquer was never a good fisher. Meat
and mass never hindered no man.
N.
NAture passes norture. Na man can both sup and blaw at once. Nothing enters
in a close hand. Need makes virtue. Need hes na law. Neirest the Kirk, farrest
fra God. Neirest the King, neirest the widdie. New lords, new laws. Na man may
puind for unkindness. Neirest the heart, neirest the mouth. Never rode, never
fell. Need gars naked men run, and sorrow gars websters spin. Neir is the
kirtle, but neirer is the sark. Nothing is difficile to a well willit man. Na
man makes his awn hap. Na reply is best. Nothing comes sooner to light, then
that which is long hid. Na man can play the fool sa weill as the wise man. Na
penny, na pardon. Na man can seek his marrow in the churne, sa weill as he that
hes been in it himself.
O.
OVer fast, over louse. Of anuch men leaves. Over great familiarity genders
despite. Often compting makes good friends. Over narrow compting culzies na
kindness. Out of sight, out of langer. Of two ills choose the least. Of other
men's lether, men takes large whanges. Over jolly dow not. Of the abundance of
the heart, the mouth speaks. Of all war, peace is the final end. Of ill
debtours, men takes oats. Of need make virtue. Of the earth mon the dyke be
builded. Of ane ill, comes many. Over hot over cold. Over heigh, over low.
Over meikle of ane thing, is good for nathing.
P.
PEnny wise, pound fool. Priest and doves makes foul houses. Pride and laziness
wald have meikle uphald. Put your hand na farther nor your sleive may reach.
Poor men are fain of little thing. Play with your peirs. Pith is good in all
plays. Put two half-pennies in a purse, and they will draw together. Painters
and Poets have leave to lie. Possession is worth an ill chartour. Pride will
have a fall. Poverty parts good company, and is an enemy to virtue. Put not
your hand betwixt the rind and the tree. Poor men they say hes na souls.
Patience perforce. Provision in season, makes a rich house. Put that in the
next parcel. Peter in, and Paul out. Plenty is na dainty. Puddings and
paramours wald be hotelie handlit.
Q.
QUhair [where] the Deer is slain, some blood will lie. Quhen the eye sees it
saw not, the heart will think it thought not. Quhen wine is in, wit is out.
Quhen the steed is stowen, shut the stable door. Quhen the Tod preaches, beware
of the hens. Quhen the cup is fullest, bear it evinest. Quhat better is the
house that the da rises in the morning. Quhen thieves reckons, leall men comes
to their geir. Quhen I am dead, make me a cawdle. Quhiles the hawk hes, and
whiles he hunger hes. Quhen the craw flees, her tail follows. Quhen the play is
best, it is best to leave. Quha may woo without cost. Quhiles thou, whiles I,
so goes the bailleri. Quhen a man is full of lust, his womb is full of leesings
Quha may hold that will away. Quhen taylours are true, there little good to
show. Quhen thy neighbors house is on fire, take heed to thy awn. Quhen the
iron is hot, it is time to strike. Quhen the belly is full, the bones wald have
rest. Quhom God will help, na man can hinder. Quhen all men speaks, na man
hears. Quhen the good man is fra hame, the tablecloths tint. Quhair stands your
great horse. Quhair the pig breaks, let the shells lie. Quhen friends meets,
hearts warmes. Quhen the well is full, it will run over.
R.
REason bound the man. Ruse [praise] the foord as ye find it. Ruse the fair day
at evin. Rackless youth, makes a goustie age. Ryme spares na man. Reavers
should not be rewers. Rule youth weill, and eild will rule the sell. Rome was
not biggit on the first day.
S.
SIke man, sike master. Seldom rides, tynes the spurs. Shod in the cradle,
bairfoot in the stubble. Sike lips, sike latace. Sike a man as thou wald be,
draw thee to sike company. Soothe bourd is na bourd. Seldom lies the Devil
dead by the dyke side. Saying goes good cheap. Spit on the stane, it will be
wet at the last. Soft fire makes sweet malt. Sorrows gars websters spin. Sturt
pays na debt. Silly bairns are eith to lear. Saw thin, and maw thin. Soon
ripe, soon rotten. Send and fetch. Self deed, self ha. Shame shall fall them
that shame thinks, to do themselves a good turn. Sike father, sike son, etc.
Seill comes not while sorrow be gone. She Is a foul bird that fyles her own
nest. Speir at Jock thief my marrow, if I be a leal man. Soon gotten, soon
spendit. Sike priest, sike offering. She is a sairie mouse that hes but ane
hole. Surfeit slays mae nor the sword. Seik your sauce where you get your ail.
Sokand seall is best. Sike answer as a man gives, sike will he get. Small
winning makes a heavy purse. Shame is past the shedd of your hair. Send him to
the sea and he will not get water. Saine [bless] you weill fra the Devil and
the Lairds bairns. She that takes gifts her self, she sels, and she that gives,
does not else. Shroe the ghast that the house is the war of. Show me the man,
and I shall show you the law. Swear by your burnt shines. Sairie be your me^l
poke, and ay your fist in the nook of it.
T.
THe mair haste the war speid. Tide bydes na man. Two daughters and a back
door, are three stark thieves. There was never a cake, but it had a make. There
came never a large fart forth of a Wrans arse. Toome [empty] bags rattles.
The thing that is trusted, is not forgiven. Take part of the pelf, when the
pack is a dealing. Tread on a worm, and she will steir her tail. They are
lightly robbed that hes their awn. The Craw thinks her awn bird fairest. There
is little to the rake to get after the bissome. They buy good cheap that brings
nathing hame. Thraw [twist] the wand while it is green. The shooemakers wife is
worst shod. The worst world that ever was, some man wan. They will know by a
halfpenny if a Priest will take offering. Time tryes the truth. The weeds
overgaes the corn. Take time while time is, for time will away. The piper wants
meikle that wants the nether chaps. They are welcome that brings. The langer we
live, the mae strange sights we see. There are many soothe words spoken in
bourding. There is na thief without a receiver. There is many fair thing full
false. There came never ill of a good advisement. There is na man sa deaf, as
he that will not hear. There was never a fair word inhicding. The mouth that
lies, slayes the soul. Trot mother, trot father, how can the foal amble. They
were never fain that shrugged. Two wolfs may worrie ane sheep. Two fools in ane
house is over many. The day hes eyne, the night hes ears. The tree falls not at
the first straike. The mair ye tramp in a turde, it grows the breader. There is
none without a fault. The Devil is a busy Bishop in his awn diocie. There is
no friend to a friend in need. There is na fool to an auld fool. Touch a good
horse in the back, and he will fling. There is remeid for all things but stark
deid. There is na medicine for fear. The weakest goes to the walls. That which
hussies spares, cats eats. Thou will get na mair of the cat but the skin. There
mae madines nor makine. They laugh ay that winnes. Two wits is better nor ane.
They put at the cairt that is ay gangand. Three may keep counsel if two be
away. They are good willie of their horse that hes nane. The mae the merrier,
the fewer the better cheer. The blind horse is hardiest. There mae ways to the
wood nor ane. There is meikle between word and deed. They that speirs meikle,
will get wot of part. The less play the better. The mair cost, the mair honor.
There is nothing more precious nor time. True love kyths in time of need. There
are many fair words in the marriage making, but few in the portion paying. The
higher up, the greater fall. The mother of mischief is na mair nor a gnat wing.
Tarrowing bairns were never fat. There little sap in dry pease hulls. This bolt
came never out of your bag. Thy tongue is na slander. Take him up there with
his five eggs, and four of them rotten. The next time ye dance, wit whom ye
take by the hand. The goose pan is above the roast. Thy thumb is under my belt.
There is a dog in the well. The malt is above the beir. Touch me not on the
fair heel. The pigs overgaes the ald swine. Take a man by his word, and a cow
by her horn. There meikle hid meat in a goose eye. They had never an ill day
that had a good evening. There belongs mair to a bed nor four bair legs. The
greatest clarks are not the wisest men. Thou should not tell thy foe when thy
fit slides. The grace of god is geir enough. Two hungry meals makes the third
a glutton. This world will not last ay. The Devil and the Dean begins with a
letter, when the Devil hes the Dean, the kirk will be the better. They are as
wise that speir not. There is nothing so crouse as a new washen louse.
W.
WRang hes nea warrant. Will hes that weill is. Well done, soon done. Weapons
bodes peace. Wiles helps weak folk. Wishers and walders are poor house halders.
Words are but wind, but dunts are the Devil. Wark bears witness wha weill does.
Wealth gars wit waver. Weill bydes, weill betydes. Wrang count, is na payment.
Wrang hears, wrang answer gives. With empty hand, na man should hawks allure.
Weill wats the mouse, the cats out of the house. Well worth aw, that gars the
plough draw. We hounds slew the hair, quoth the messoun. Wonder lasts but nine
nights in a Town. Women and bairns keeps counsel of that they ken not. Wont
beguilt the Lady. Waken not sleeping dogs. We have a craw to pluck. Well good
mother daughter. Wood in wilderness, and strength in a fool. Wit in a poor man's
head, moss in a mountain avails nothing. Weils him and wooes him that hes a
Bishop in his kin. Use makes perfectness. Unskild mediciners, and
horsemarshels, slays both man and beast. What reakes of the feed, where the
friendship dow naught.
Y.
YE will break your crag and your fast alike in his house. Ye strive against
the stream. Youth never casts for perrill. Ye seek hot water under cold ice. Ye
drive a snail to Rome. Ye ride a bootless errand. Ye seek grace at a graceless
face. Ye learn your father to get bairns. Ye may not sit in Rome and strive
with the Pope. Youth and age will never agree. Ye may puind for debt, but not
for unkindness. Ye breid of the cat, ye wald fain eat fish, but ye have na will
to weet your feet. Ye breid of the gouk, ye have not a ryme but ane. Ye should
be a king of your word. Ye will get war bodes before Belten. Ye may drink of
the bourn, but not byte of the brae. Ye wald do little for God an the Devil
were dead. Ye have a ready mouth for a ripe cherry. Ye breid of the millers
dog, ye lick your mouth or the pok be open.
Adagia Hebraica.
(...) The axe goes to the wood, from whence it borrowed its helve: It is used
against those who are injurious to those from whom they are derived, or from
whom they have received their power.

(...) If any say that one of thine ears is the ear of an ass, regard it not:
If he say so of them both, procure thy self a bridle. That is, it is time to
arm our selves with patience when we are greatly reproached.

(...) Do not speak of secret matters in a field that is full of little hills.
Because it is possible some body may lie hid there and here what is said.

(...) That city is in a bad case whose Physician has the gout. (...) Do not
dwell in a city whose governor is a Physician. (...) A myrtle standing among
nettles does notwithstanding retain the name of a myrtle. (...) i. e. Where
there is a man, there do not thou show thy self a man: The meaning is, that it
becomes us not to intermeddle in an office where there is already such good
provision made that there is no need of our help.

(...) i. e. At the door of the fold words, within the fold an account. The
shepherd does with fair words call back his fugitive sheep to the door of the
fold, but when he gets them in he punishes them for straying away. It is
applicable to what may be expected from our governors against whom we have
rebelled:

(...) i. e. He is pleased with guourds, and his wife with cucumbers. A Proverb
by which is expressed that both the man and his wife are vicious much alike.

(...) i. e. It is not as thy mother says, but as thy neighbors Say: The
meaning is that we are not to regard the praises of a near relation, but to
listen to what is said by the neighborhood.

(...) i. e. If the dog bark, go in; if the bitch bark, go out. (...) i. e. We
may not expect a good whelp from an ill dog. (...) i. e. Sichem marries the
wife (viz. Dinah) and Mifgaeus is circumcised (i. e. punished.) Delirant Reges
plectuntur Achivi.

(...) A Camel in Media dances in a little cab: This Proverb is used against
those who tell incredible things.

(...) i. e. The Camel going to seek horns, lost his ears. Against those who
being discontented with what they have, in pursuit of more lose what they once
had.

(...) i. e. Many old Camels carry the skins of the young ones to the market.
(...) i. e. The great Cab, and the little Cab go down to the grave. (...) i. e.
He that hires one garden (which he is able to look after) eats birds; He that
hires more then one will be eaten by the birds. (...) i. e. As is the garden
such is the gardener. (...) i. e. If I had not lifted up the stone you had not
found the Jewel. It is used when one man reaps the fruit of the labors of
another.

(...) i. e. When the Sun rises, the disease will abate. It is said by one of
the Jews that there was a precious stone which did hang on the neck of Abraham,
which when the sick man looked on he was presently healed; And that when
Abraham died God placed this stone in the Sun: This is thought to have given
occasion to the Proverb above named. V. Buxtorf. Lexic. Rabbin: in voce (...).

(...) i. e. Whoever has a divided beard, the whole world will not prevail
against him: This Proverb is used of those who are cunning, and such are they
thought to be whose beard is divided, which, by their much handling; when they
are musing and thoughtfull, they are said to divide.

(...) i. e. Go down the ladder when thou marriest a wife, go up when thou
choosest a friend. The meaning is, that we should not marry a wife above our
rank, though we choose such a friend.

(...) i. e. Rather sell then be poor. (...) i. e. He that buys and sells is
called a merchant. This Proverb is used in derision of those who buy and sell
to their loss.

(...) i. e. While the dust is on your feet sell what you have bought. The
meaning is that we should sell quickly (though with light gains) that we may
trade for more.

(...) i. e. Cast your staff into the air, and it will fall upon its root, or
heavy end. Naturam expel as furca licet usque recurret.

(...) i. e. The wine is the masters, but the goodness of it is the butlers.
(...) When an ass climbs a ladder we may find wisdom. in women. (...) i. e. An
ass is cold even in the summer solstice. The meaning is, that some men are so
unhappy that nothing will do them good.

(...) i. e. Asinario -- Camelarius: i. e. A man that has the care of leading
a Camel, and driving an Ass. Such a man is in the midst and knows not how to go
forward or backward; For the Ass will not lead, nor the Camel be driven. It is
applicable to him who has to do with two persons of contrary humors, and knows
not how to please both, nor dares he displease either of them.

(...) i. e. They had thought to have put others into a sleeve and they are put
in themselves. (...) i. e. The poor man turns his cake and another comes and
takes it away. (...) i. e. Open thy purse (viz. to receive thy money) and then
open thy sack; i. e. then deliver thy goods. (...) i. e. An hungry dog will eat
dung. (...) i. e. If you take away the salt you may throw the flesh to the
dogs. (...) i. e. The servant of a King is a king. (...) i. e. Do not dwell in
a city where an horse does not neigh, nor a dog bark: The meaning is that if we
would be safe from danger we must not dwell in a city where there is neither
horse against an enemy, nor dogs against thieves.

(...) i. e. Make have when you are purchasing a field; but when you are to
marry a wife, be slow. (...) When the shepherd is angry with his sheep he
sends them a blind guide. (...) i. e. In the time of affliction, a vow; in the
time of prosperity an inundation: or a greater increase of wickedness. The Devil
was sick, the Devil a monk would be;
The Devil was well, the Devil a monk was he.


(...) i. e. An old man in an house is a good sign in an house. Old men are
fit to give wise counsel:

(...) i. e. Woe be to him whose advocate becomes his accuser. This Proverb is
accommodable to various purposes: God required propitiatory sacrifices of his
people; when they offered them up, as they should, they did receive their
pardon upon it; But if they offered the blind or lame, etc. they were so far
from gaining their pardon, that they increased their guilt: And thus their
advocate became their accuser.

(...) i. e. While thy shoe is on thy foot tread upon the thorns. (...) i. e.
Your surety wants a surety. This Proverb is used of an infirm argument that is
not sufficient to prove what it is alleged for.

(...) i. e. One bird in the net is better then an hundred flying. (...) i. e.
Little and good. (...) i. e. Never cast dirt into that fountain of which thou
have sometime drank. The meaning is that we should not proudly despise or
reproach that person or thing which formerly have been of use to us.

(...) i. e. Do not look upon the vessel, but upon that which it contains.
(...) i. e. A lie has no feet. (...) i. e. One sheep follows another. So one
thief, and any other evil doer, follows the ill example of his companion.

(...) i. e. We never find that a fox dies in the dirt of his own ditch: The
meaning is that men do rarely receive any hurt from the things to which they
have accustomed themselves.

(...) i. e. If a word be worth one shekel, silence is worth two. Nunquam
etenim tacuisse nocet, nocet esse locutum.

(...) i. e. If the Ox fall, whet your knife. The meaning is, we must not let
slip the occasion of getting the victory over an Enemy.

(...) i. e. When the Ox falls, there are many that will help to kill him. The
meaning is, that there are many ready to trample upon him that is afflicted.

(...) i. e. We must fall down before a fox in season: The meaning is that we
ought to observe cunning men and give them due respect in their prosperity.

(...) i. e. Choose rather to be the tail of Lions then the head of Foxes.
(...) i. e. When the weasil and the cat make a marriage it is a very ill
presage. The meaning is that when evil men, who were formerly at variance, and
are of great power, make agreement, it portends danger to the innocent and to
others who are within their reach. Thus upon the agreement of Herod and Pilate
the most innocent blood is shed. The Jews tell of two dogs that were very
fierce one against the other; one of them is assaulted by a Wolf, and
thereupon the other dog resolves to help him against the Wolf who made the
assault.

(...) i. e. In two Cabs of dates there is one Cab of stones and more. The
meaning is that there is much evil mingled with the good which is found in the
world.

(...) i. e. If the whole world does not enter yet half of it will. It Is meant
of Calumny and reproach, where many times some part is believed though all be
not. Calumniare fortiter, and aliquid adhaerebit.

(...) i. e. He that has been bitten by a Serpent is afraid of a rope. The
meaning is, he is afraid of any thing that has the least likeness to a Serpent.

(...) i. e. She plays the whore for apples and then bestows them upon the
sick: This Proverb is used against those who give Alms of what they get
unjustly.

(...) i. e. The door that is not opened to him that begs our alms, will be
opened to the Physician. (...) Let but the drunkard alone, and he will fall of
himself. (...) i. e. Thou have dived deep in to the water and have brought up a
potsherd. (...) i. e. If thou have increased thy water, thou must also increase
thy meal. Thus he that raises many objections is obliged to find solutions
for them also.

(...) i. e. There is nothing so bad, in which there is not something of good.
(...) i. e. He that has had one of his family hanged, may not say to his
neighbor hang up this fish. The meaning is, we must abstain from words of
reproach, and then especially when we are not free from the crimes which we
reproach others for.

(...) i. e. O thou Nazarite go about, go about and do not come near the
Vineyard. The meaning is that we should avoid the occasions of sin. The
Nazarite was forbidden the use of wine, and it was therefore his wisest course
to avoid all occasions of trespassing.

(...) i. e. Thy secret is thy prisoner, if thou let it go thou art a prisoner
to it. The meaning is plain, viz. That we ought to be as careful in keeping a
secret as an officer in keeping his prisoner, who makes himself a prisoner by
letting his prisoner go. There is sometimes a great danger in revealing a
secret, and always it is an argument of great folly. For as the Jews say well,
thy friend has a friend, and thy friends friend has a friend: And therefore
what thou would have kept as a secret reveal not to thy friend. And they
elsewhere say, that He who has a narrow heart: i. e. but a little wisdom, has
a broad tongue. i. e. Is apt to talk at large.

(...) i. e. The Magician mutters and knows not what he mutters. This is
Proverbially used against those who pray in an unknown Tongue; or do any thing
which they do not understand.

(...) i. e. If thy daughter be marriageable set thy servant free, and give her
to him in marriage. (...) i. e. To expect, to expect is worth four hundred
drachms. Zuz is the fourth part of the Sacred Shekel. This Proverb is used to
recommend to us the advantage of deliberation in our actions.

(...) i. e. They can find money for mischief, when they can find none to buy
Corn. (...) In my own City my Name, in a strange City my Clothes procure me a
respect. (...) i. e. It Is not a basket of hey but a basket of flesh which will
make a lion roar. That is, it must be flesh and not hey which will give courage
and strength to a lion.

(...) i. e. Let thy grandchild buy wax and do not thou trouble thy self. (...)
i. e. Pull off the skin in the streets and receive thy wages. That is, we were
better submit to the meanest emploiment then want necessaries.

(...) i. e. One grain of sharp pepper is better then a basket full of
guourds. That is, One wise man, how mean soever is more valuable then many that
are unwise.

(...) i. e. As if a man that is killed should come home upon his feet: This is
used proverbially of those things which we give for lost.


These that follow are the sentences of Ben Syra, a man of great fame and
antiquity among the Jews.
(...) i. e. Honor a Physician before thou have need of him: That is, we must
honor God in our health and prospetity that he may be propitious to us in our
adversity.

(...) i. e. Thy Child that is no child leave upon the waters and let him swim.
That is, where our Child is not reclaimable by fair means we may not hinder him
from condign punishment.

(...) i. e. Gnaw the bone which is fallen to thy lot: That is, He that has an
ill wife must patiently bear with her: It may also be applied to other things.

(...) i. e. Gold must be beaten, and a child scourged. (...) i. e. Be good,
and refrain not to be good. (...) i. e. Woe be to the wicked, and woe be to them
that cleave to them. Or, to their neighbors that live near them. (...) If we
would avoid a mischief we must not be very kind and familiar with an evil man.
(...) i. e. Withhold not thine hand from showing mercy to the poor. (...) i. e.
The Bride goes to her marriage bed, but knows not what shall happen to her. The
meaning is, that we ought not confidently to promise our selves in any thing
any great success. Thus it is said, that a certain man said he would enjoy his
Bride on the morrow, and when he was admonished to say he would; if God will:
He answered that he would, whether God would or not. This man and his bride
were both found dead the following night. Thus was the saying of Ben Syra
verified, the Bride, etc.

(...) i. e. A nod for a wise man, and a rod for a fool. (...) i. e. He that
gives honor to his enemy is like to an Ass. (...) i. e. A little fire burns up
a great deal of Corn. This saying is to be understood of the mischief which an
evil and slandring tongue does, and is exemplified in Doeg, who by this means
brought destruction upon the Priests. (...). Jam. 3. 5.

(...) i. e. An old man in an house is a good sign in an house. (...) Spread
the table and contention will cease. (...) i. e. If thou must deal, be sure to
deal with an honest man. (...) Be not ungrateful to your old friend. (...)
Though thou have never so many Counselors, yet do not forsake the Counsel of
thy own soul. (...) i. e. The day is short, and the work is much. Ars long a
vita brevis.


FINIS.
Books sold by W. Morden Bookseller in Cambridge.
DR Henry Mores Philosophical Collections, Fol. Mystery of Iniquity, Fol.
Enchyridion Metaphysicum Lat. 4o. cum Fig. Enchyridion Ethicum Lat. 8o. Divine
Dialogues in 2 Vol. 8o. His Epist. to the 7 Churches with an Antidote against
Idolatry 8o. Introductio ad Cartesium, 8o. Observations on Antroposophia
Theomagica. Merceri in Job Proverb. Eccles. and Cant. Fol. Cocceius in
Prophetas Minor. Fol. Bullialdi Astro. Fol. Origines contra Celsum; Ejusdem
Philocalia, cum Ann. Gulielmi Spenceri, 4o. G. L. Edit. secund. Scheyneri
Fundamenta Optica, 4o. Glissoni de Natura Substantiae, 4o. Cartesii Epistolae,
4o. Causabons Letter against the Royal Society, 4o. Smiths select Discourses,
4o. Enjedini in Vet. and Novum Testament. 4o. Letter of Resol. concerning the
chief of Orig. Opinions, 4o. Warrens no Praeexistence, 4o. Godmans Sermon, 4o.
Officium Concionatorium, 8o. Epicteti Enchyridion cum Cebetis Tabula.
Accesserunt Simplicii and Arriani Comment. G. L. 8o. Gassendi Astronomia, 8o.
Billingsly's Idea of Arithmetic, 8o. Rami Logica cum Comment. Amesii, 8o.
Ray's Collection of English and Scotch Proverbs, 8o. Templeri Idea Theolog.
Leviathanis, 8o. Psalterium Lat. 8o. Gazaei Pia Hilaria. Tomus alter cum Indice
Philologico, 12o. Lucretius cum not. Tan. Fabri, 12o. Florus Germanicus, 16o.
Dr Templers Sermon at the Bishops Visitation Camb. 1676.

