REASONS Humbly Offered, For not Doubling the Subsidy on Tobacco from Virginia
and Maryland, etc.
THat the laying such additional Subsidy on Tobacco of 1 d. per Pound, above
the 5 d. already laid by Act of Parliament, will become a great Injury to the
Trade of this Kingdom, and to the Plantations of Virginia and Maryland.

I. Because thereby it will be advanced to Foreign Markets, which will
gradually bring the Trade of our Plantations out of use, by the planting it in
Europe, it being evident that the affording our Plantations Tobacco cheap, is a
considerable Occasion and Support of our Trade to Holland and the Baltic Seas,
the great Expense of Tobacco being amongst the poorer sort of People. Besides,
it is evident, to all that know Holland and other parts adjoining as Gelderland,
Vtricb, Hanover, Brabant, and several other Parts of Germany, plant great
Quantity of Tobacco yearly, computed to be of equal Quantity with either of the
Provinces of Virginia or Maryland, and would sooner enlarge their Planting if
made dearer by Law.

II. Besides, such Duties may occasion others in Foreign Parts, to add greater
Duty on our Plantation Tobacco, to encourage their own Growth, which hitherto
they have not done.

III. It will occasion the lessning the Consumption by its dearness, because
the poorest sort of laboring People are the greatest Consumers, besides the
debauchery by Stalks, and otherwise used to make it cheap.

IV. Such great Duty will occasion great Quantities to be run on Shore, and
smugled in many Out ports and Creaks of the Kingdom, to the Ruin of those that
shall pay the Duty, and to the Destruction of fair Traders.

V. It will also swell the Duty to such a great Sum, that the Traders in it
will not be able to advance it, nor will it be worth any Man's doing it,
because that the Interest of the Money that must redeem the Goods, will in
Value exceed the Principle of the Goods; so that thereby the Plantations will
inevitably be discouraged.

VI. And further the Hazards of Debts contracted by Sale of Tobacco, will be so
great, that no Man will trade in it, when the Merchants must give Credit for
eight times the Value of his Principle by Custom, Freight and Charges, by which
means all Merchandise will be discouraged.

VII. It will also hereby greatly abate the Navigation to those Plantations, to
the Prejudice of this Nation, which employs 200 Sail of Ships at least yearly
in it.

VIII. It will also abate the Consumption of the Manufactures of this Kingdom,
on which those Plantations have hitherto depended, and have in this particular
been more useful to this Nation than any Plantations of his Kingdom whatever,
and that while Laws are making to encourage the Wooling Manufactory, this
wholly discourages it as to those Plantations.

IX. It will engage the Planter to leave off planting Tobacco, and fall in to
Manufactories, and to plant Cotten-wool, Hemp and Flax, and breed up Sheep for
their Clothing, which has in some measure been already attempted, finding
that their Labor in making Tobacco could not cover their Nakedness. And being
once put upon that thoughtfulness, will in a manner dissolve the Trade in
Tobacco, so useful to our Commerce at home and abroad.

X. This heavy Duty will wholly take off the Affections of those Plantations
from England, to see themselves charged twenty times higher in this Duty than
any their Neighboring Plantations for their Growth, which is more profitable
to them than Tobacco is to Virginia and Maryland.

XI. And its by late Experience found, that the Import of 3 d. per Pound, has
so affected the Planter, that several Counties in Virginia and Maryland have
abated the planting Tobacco, and fallen into Manufactories of both Linen and
Woollen, to such a degree, as to give some Supply to their Neighboring
Counties, and Wool which was four or five Years ago useless to them, is now
fought after and bought up for 12 d. per Pound.


