Anabaptism Routed: OR, A SURVEY of the Controverted Points: Concerning 1.
Infant Baptism. 2. Pretended Necessity of Dipping. 3. The dangerous practice
of Re-baptising.
Together, With a particular Answer to all that is alleged in favor of the
Anabaptists, by Dr. Jer. Tailor, in his Book, called, The Liberty of
Prophesying.

By John Reading, B. D. and sometimes Student of Magdalen-Hall in Oxford.

LONDON; Printed for Thomas Johnson, at the Golden Key, in Saint Paul's
Churchyard, 1655.

To the Right Worshipful Sir WILLIAM BROCKMAN KNIGHT; And to his truly virtuous
Lady The LADY ANNE BROCKMAN.
THIS Antiphrastical age perverting terms to contrary meanings, calling Truth
Falsehood, Falsehood Truth, Virtue Vice, and Vice Virtue, etc. not only minds us
of Ephesian Wolves and spekers of ^perverse things, (...)Act, 20. 30.
but evidently shows, that the time of which the Apostle warned, is not instant
but extant. The deaf Adders will not be charmed, or hearing 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4
endure sound doctrine ( Amara sunt vitiosis ac maleviventibus praecepta
justitiae, Lactant. l. 1. c. ^
that is bitter to the wicked) but after their own lusts heap up to themselves
Teachers (like Jeroboams 1 Kng. 12. 31
Priests of the lowest of the people) having itching ears. (...)Oecum. in 2 Timothy
(...)2 Timothy 4. 3.
We have so much experience hereof, that we cannot but know that for the
loud-crying sms of this Nation proceeding from contempt of his Word and
Ministry, the Lord has smitten many tongues and ears with a worse then Deuteronomy.
28. 27.
Egyptian plague, a spiritual (...)
botch, scab, incurable itch, madness, blindness and astonishment of heart, so
that they Joh. 3. 3, 20.
hate the light and learning, (...). Gr. Nazianz. orat^ 20.
because they would have all like themselves, that their ignorance might lie
hid in one common darkness, unreproved, undiscovered; all which like a shril
Trumpet from the clouds of heaven, sounding louder and louder, gives the alarm
to all faithful Ministers to Act. 20. 28.
take heed to themselves and to all the stock over which the H. Ghost has made
them overseers: spiritually furnished, like those repairers of the Temple, both
for Nehem. 4. 17
building and defense, taking to them the whole Ephesians. 6. 13.
armor of God, that they may be able to stand. I may safely say, no one age
ever felt such various oppositions of truth; Satan seeming in former times but
to skirmish, but now to storm the Rev. 20. 9.
beloved City and Tents of the Saints with all his Legions of errors drawn up
into one body: of all which none more infest or hinder our work, then those
Moabites and Ammonites; Deur. 23. 3.
who contrary to Gods ordinance, have intruded into the work of the Temple,
pretending to build with us; saying with those enemies of Israel, Ezra 4. 2.
We seek your God as ye do. Now the noontide Devil is on the Stage in his last
scene, whose part is (if it Mar, 24. 24.
were possible) to deceive the very Elect. To which no ordinary dress can now
fit him or his Ministers; it must be (and so is) some close semblance of
sanctimony, in which the Saints delight; without which Satan could not easily
take them, with which he often does; whilst Incau^e creduli circumveniuntur ab
iis quos bonos putabant. Minuc Fell. Oct.
incautiously credulous, they are deceived by those whom they esteemed (...),
etc. Strab. l. 16.
good. The hunters of Ostriches used to dress themselves up with their
feathers, imitate their motions, and scatter grains of seeds before them; so
the false 2 Cor. 11. 13, 15.
Apostles, deceitful workers, seduce by transforming themselves into Apostles
of Christ, Ministers of righteousness; scattering out of their delightful bags,
seeds of dangerous Heresies and Schisms.

Why I undertook this polemical task, you know who were present at my first
imbarquing in this controversy; as also many of my reverend brethren, who
afterward importuned me to the first part hereof. If any ask, why it comes out
so late to public view? let the false 2 Samuel 16. 3. 2 Samuel 19. 25, etc.
Zibaes answer; I can conjecture but not resolve; it is now about two years
since it was much desired, fairly promised, and accordingly sent to one Press;
where the Vid. Isa. 37. 3
children were come to the birth and there was no strength to bring forth. Why
I write after so many, so much more able to defend the truth, might possibly
put me to the Orators quaere^ Quae sunt igitur meae parts, etc. Cic. orat.
pro L. Cornel. Balb^. init.
What is left for me to do? but new adversaries arising, giving fresh assaults,
and impudently affronting and challenging me in my public charge to answer
them; what could I have answered the Lord, if seeing the Wolf coming into the
fold, I had withdrawn or betrayed the soul of my^ Auditors; who might possibly
have thought our cause deserted, for which none durst plead. All lovers of
truth owe it respective defense: and too much caution cannot be in things of so
great moment as salvation of Similiter facis, ae si me roges, cur te duebus
contuear oculis, and non altero tantum, cum idem uno assequi possim. Cic.
denat. deor. l. 3.
souls. No man rationally asks, What need we two eyes who can see with one? I
am far from pleading universality for defense, or multitudes for Patronage of
truth: let our adversaries reckon themselves many, and think that -- Illes

Defendit numerus, junctaeque umbone Phalanges: They have many Writers; but if
the cause be weighed by Scripture and solid reason, then as 2 King. 6. 16.
Elisha said, they are more with us then with them: yet I heartily wish that
many more would show themselves on our part, and neither betray the truth by
their silence, who can seasonably and ably speak in its defense, nor encourage
the adversaries thereof by such a Laodicea-like lukewarmness as shows a
dangerous symptom of neutralitie. For my part I cannot but be conscious of
much disabilitie, yet dare not but endeavor to defend the (...). Gr. Nazianz.
Orat. 13.
truth: for this, let whosoever will condemn or acquit me; God is all-sufficient.
Such as these endeavors are, I submit to the judgment of the 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Church of God, the pillar of truth, and dedicate them to you who love the
truth; and by Gods assistance: 2 Pet. 2. 12, ^^.
will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things, though
you know them, and be established in the present truth; yea, I think it meet,
as long as I am in this Tabernacle. God alone gives the Cor. 3. 5, 7.
increase: To him be L^c. 2. 14
glory in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men: to you and
yours, constancy in the truth, and happiness temporal and eternal; which is
the daily prayer of

December. 8. 1653. Your faithful and affectionate Servant in the Lord Jesus JO.
READING.

The Preface to the Christian and Candid Reader.
GGood Reader know, that as I was addressing my self to discharge a public
Engagment, Made with Mr^ Fisher at Folksten in Kent, Mar. 10, 1650.
for writing something in answer to certain Objections made against
Paedobaptism, there came to my hand from a friend, a Treatise under this
Title,(...), The Liberty of Prophesying, etc. in the 18 section whereof, I
find, A particular consideration of the opinion of the Anabaptists; In which
part of this Florelegie, or flowers and selected points of Divinity, are not
only some stingy expressions, but also such a wilful or incautious collection
of wild Vines, as may cause the children of the Prophets not unjustly to cry,
Mors est in olla. 2 King 4. 39, 40
It was truly reported by some judicious Divines, who had perused the same,
that there are many dangerous stumbling blocks to weak Christians, and subtle
arguments for defense and animation of the Anabaptists, being clothed with so
much wit, sophistry and learning, as indeed make the Piece a very shrewd
Bugbear, formidable to many; yet in truth it is not much unlike that
Cuman-beast, which going up and down in a Lions skin, frighted many, which
being pulled off, the silly Animal appeared more ridiculous then dangerous.
Being therefore exhorted by sundry of my reverend brethren, to answer the
Arguments herein laid down by way of Plea (I hope rather tentatively, then
dogmatically) and being persuaded, that in so doing I might in a great part
satisfy my engagement, the learned Author having said much more, or in more
plausible terms, then ever the Anabaptists, for ought that I have ever seen or
heard have yet alleged for their own opinion, I have adventured so to do.

And now concerning my learned Antagonist, Judge. 2. 16.
although I hope he let fall these things, as Boaz Reapers, on purpose that
some might for good advantage to the truth of Christ glean after him; yet
seeing he has so sharply and strenuously pleaded against the same; that
Religion may say of her hurts on some less armed parts, Zach. 13. 6
Thus was I wounded in the house of my friends: And we may say in these giddy
times, as Joshua to him whom he spied with his drawn sword by Jericho, Art thou
for us, or for our adversaries? Josh. 5. 13.:
and seeing that they who for private ends and interests carry arms and
ammunition to any known and professed enemies, are justly made lawful prize, at
least, if taken; we must lay by all personal interests, with a magis amica
veritas; and he ought to be patient if he meet with any more rough and
unpleasing language then he uses to receive, or I love to give.

Concerning this whole piece, I have no more to say, then that of Venerable
Beda, Ita carpat botrum, ut and spinam caveat. i.e. in dictis ejus sanos sensus
scrutetur and eligat, ut non minus vitet insanos. Bed. in Caut. exp. l. 1.
exord.
concerning the Book of Bishop Julian to the Reader, let him so gather the
grapes, that he may beware of the thorn; that is, let him in his sayings,
search and choose out the wholesome sense, so as with no less care he may avoid
the unwholsom. He does but plead, and so pretend to a lawfulness of biting us,
from the privilege of custom; and so in reason must expect the like returns:
If he that dresseth himself up in a Bears skin, to make others or himself
sport, be seriously baited, whom has he to blame but himself? What this
Authors council was, thus to write that which himself condemns, and of which
he says, it is A Doctrine justly condemned by the most sorts of Christians --
I know not; ^. 23. 1. N. 2.
but do heartily wish, that if he have not yet repented of digging this pit,
whereinto diverse are fallen, not without great and apparent hazard to their
souls, he timely may; if he have come to some second better thoughts, he may do
commendably to cover it with some seasonable endeavor, that no more may fall
by the stumblingblock which he has laid before them: I wish he would revise
his own writings with some judiciary severity, as St. Augustine Qua^^^r jud^^
a^^a severita^e Aug. retract. ^^^ prol^g.
speaks, so that those things which his self likes not in his plea, he might
mark and censure: he need not be informed, but may be remembered, that true
repentance is inseparably united to a sincere desire, and faithful endeavor to
satisfy and make a mends; neither is he to learn what that great light of the
Western Church says: -- No man, (...)
(says he) that is wise, will therefore presume to reprove me, because I
reprehend my own errors: but if he shall say, I ought not to have said such
things which should afterward even displease my self, he says true, and does
as I do; for he reprehends those very things which I also do; for neither ought
I to reprove them, if I ought to have said them: What he did in his
Retractations, many good and learned men have done, because they loved Gods
truth and honor more then their own reputations: and whosoever can truly say
with S Peter, Thou know that I love thee, ought no more to be ashamed of the
fruits of Repentance, then Peter was: It is no dishonor to amend, and turn to
better, and therefore it cannot but be safe to give God his due honor, and
security to those souls who have strayed, been misled, or scandaled by this
Patronage of untruth, by acknowledging the truth, and disavowing a known
error. He denies Christ, who is silent for fear or favor of men, when and
where he ought to speak in defense of his truth; how much more he that does
omnes nerves intendere, in the opposition thereof? possibly the Author had
some better intention and aim then appears to the Vulgar; but it is true, it
skilleth not with what intention one does that which is evil, and ought not to
be done; because facts are seen, but the mind is not. Atqui nihil interest quo
animo facias, quod fecisse vitiosum est quia facta cernuntur, animus non
videtur. Lactant. l. 3. c. 3. p. 221.
Let the good Reader take notice, that in the conclusion of this Plea, the
advocate says, That men have disputed against them (the Anabaptists) with so
much weakness and confidence, that they have been encouraged in their error
more by the accidental advantages we have given them by our weak arguings, then
by any truth of their cause, or excellency of their wit: And I conceive that he
will think with me, that it should be a motive to him, to whom God has given
more excellency of art and nature to defend the truth which he has opposed,
lest otherwise he sacrilegiously eclipse Gods honor, by a kind of
Interposition of that body which shines by no other light then that which God
lent. If he that hid his Masters talent, so that it did neither good nor harm,
yet heard his(...), what (except in case of timely repentance) may they expect,
who with those many talents which their Master entrusted to them, have assisted
and furnished the known enemy with arms against their Master? Consider what I
say, and the Lord give you a right understanding in all things. Lastly, I have
to entreat the well-affected Reader, not to misdeem some repetitions of the
same things (in cases of such conflicts unavoidable) wherein the adversaries
often striking at the same parts, requires the same or the like wards for
defense of the truth: And now the God of all grace, who has called us into his
eternal glory by Christ Jesus -- make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle
you: To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever.

AMEN.
AN Antidote against Anabaptisme: OR, Animadversions on that part of the
liberty of Prophesying, which sect. 18. page 223. bears this Title, A
particular Consideration of the opinion of the ANABAPTISTS:
-- Their denying Baptism to Infants, although it be a Doctrine justly
condemned by the most sort of Christians, upon great grounds of Reason] Page
223. Number. 2.

WE say, That denying Baptism to Infants, is justly condemned by all true
Christians; we cannot understand them to be such, who renounce their Savior
Christ by a pretended Baptism in their rebaptizing never warranted by precept,
or example in holy Scripture, or those who by their Doctrine annull and make
void their Baptism by a kind of self-excommunication.

Again we say, That to condemn the Doctrine of Anabaptists upon great grounds
of Reason, seems to lay too narrow a ground, and possibly too unsound a
foundation for our profession; specially, if we consider what is here said,
Page 165.
Sect. 10. Number. 2. concerning the pretended authority of Reason, and following
his guide so far as his Reason goes along with him, -- Or, which is all one, he
that follows his own Reason, etc. which guidance by Divine Revelation, and I
know not, what other good means he means, he says, has great advantages --
But to leave ambiguities of words, -- regula Catholicae fidei certa, notaque
esse debet; nam si nota non fit, regula nobis non erit, si certa non sit, ne
regula quidem erit.
and confusion of senses; we affirm, That the word of God is our ground and
guide in matters of Faith and Religion (which even the greatest pretenders to
humane authority, and undervaluers of holy Scriptures, do acknowledge in their
soberer fits) and that the Spirit of God illuminateth the elect whom he
calls, guides, and enableth to obedience, against the dictates of carnal
reason, and the corrupt affections of^flesh and blood. -- quare cum sacra
Scriptura ^regula credendi certissima, tutissimaque sit, sanus profecto non
erit, qui ea neglecta, spiritus interni saepe ^allacis, and semper incert
judicio se commiserit, etc. Bellarm. tom. 1. de verb. Dei, l. 1. c. 2.
If he mean any other Divine Revelation then that which is consonant to the
known and invariable Rule of Gods word, I know not what greater advantage Satan
could desire for leading beguiled souls to hell blindfold, then to find them
following their own reason, and putting their salvations upon pretended
revelations; our faith is on Gods truth, not humane Reason; which, in this
life, is not so absolutely purged from the contagion of sin, ignorance and
error, since the Apostles being furnished with infallibility of Spirit, but
that it is subject to some errors: and therefore though we disclaim all blind
obedience to man in acts of Religion, yet we submit to God in believing every
thing which he says; adoring his Truth, which we cannot by any strength of
humane Reason examine.... fidei non potest subesse aliquod falsum. 22. q. 1. 3.
c. fides mnititur veritati divinae quae est in fallibilis: and ita non potest
ei subesse falsum. ib. q. 4. a. 5. 2.
Moreover we say, seeing that only may, and can be the ground of our Faith,
which cannot err, or be false; and seeing that we are built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
Cornerstone, Ephesians. 2. 20. we cannot consent to be taken off from that
infallible certainty, and to be set upon the moveable and loose sand of only
Great grounds of Reason, or any thing less known, certain, and infallible then
the holy word of God, which we know cannot deceive us.

It will neither be unpleasant nor unprofitable to draw a short Scheme of plea
for each party, the result of which possibly may be, that though they be
deceived, yet they have so great excuse on their side, etc.] Page 223. Numb. 2.
Surely unpleasing to God it is to make sport with matters of so high
concernment, and to play with holy things (for so this plea must be, except you
are in earnest for the Anabaptists) or for fear or favor of men, so to
temporize, as thereby to endanger (as much as you can) the Cause and Truth of
Christ. And how it can be either pleasing to any good Christian, which
displeases God, or profitable which causes any to err from the truth in
pleading for that which you acknowledge to be a Doctrine justly condemned -- I
confess I understand not. Possibly Joash would here have replied to such a
short Scheme of plea, -- will ye plead for Baal? Judge 6. 31.


That their error is not impudent or vincible.] See Joh. Cloppenburg. Gangren.
of Anabap. etc.
To say an impudent error, is but an(...), and impropriety of speech, which in
more exact expression I suppose you would render, they are not impudent in
defense of their error; If so, I only appeal to experience. As for that which
you say -- They have so great excuse on their side, that their error is not --
vincible, seems a contradiction in the adject; who believes any error to be
invincible, who believes that Christ (the Truth. John 14. 6.) has
sufficiently delivered that heavenly light in the Gospel, which (though God
permit it sometimes to be clowded) shall shine clear, and the gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it; but it shall put to flight and overcome every
darkness of error, specially in things pernicious, and about the foundation. I
say not, to the sense of those whom God justly gives over to strong delusions,
that they may perish who receive not the love of the truth that they might be
saved; but to the Goshen and Israel of God, appointed to salvation: How else
should it be, that our faith should be the Victory that overcomes the world, 1 John 5. 4.
except it be in the invincible truth and faith in him who has overcome the
world? John 16. 33. For by World, Christ here means and comprehends all
that which is contrary to the salvation of the Elect, specially those
falsehoods and errors, which Satan by any means broacheth to corrupt and
overthrow the true Faith. See Heb. 11. 1, etc. Mat. 16. 8.

The Baptism of Infants rests wholly on this Discourse.] Page 223.
If that were true, your plea for Anabaptists were less condemnable; but the
contrary will appear in due place.

But whether they have original sin or no -- ] Page 224. Number. 5.
Indeed the Pelagians (an old Sect of Heretics) denied that Infants were born
in original sin: And Celestius affirmed, That Adams sin hurt only himself,
but not mankind. Prosper de vocat. Gent. lib. 1. c. 22. Negant parvulos trahere
originale peccatum omnes qui fine ullo vitio, natos esse ^nten lunt.
And others, that Infants are born in the same state in which Adam was before
his transgression: But the holy Scripture plainly condemns this Heresy. See
Job. 14. 4- Psalm 51. 5. John 3. 5. 1 Cor. 15 50. Romans ^. 12. 1 Cor. 15. 22.
Ephesians. 2. 3. So do all the Reformed Churches, and Papists too, vid. Bellar. l. 4.
de amissione gratie, and stat. peccati. Besides woeful experience teaching us,
Et Celes^ius, etc. Augustine tom. 7. de peccato orig. contra Pelag. and Celest.
lib. 2. c. 2. and 3. and 4.
that children die; demonstrateth, that they brought that guilt into the world
with them which subjected them to the sentence of death, and participation of
the punishment of Adams sin, which could not be, except they were partakers of
his guilt, because God is just. That they have contracted the guilt of Adams
sin, you confess, page 230, Number 16. Credimus totam Adami sobolem bac contagione
infecta^, quam peccatum originale vocamus, vitium videlicet ex propagatione
m^nans non autem ex imitatione duntaxat, sicut Pelagiani senserunt, etc.
Confess. Eccles. Gal. Art. 10. 11. Idem d^cent omnes reformatarum Ecclesiarum
confessiones, ut videre est 4. Sect. Harmoniae, etc. Andr. Rivet. Sum.
Controvers. q. 3. P. 32.


-- Infants cannot by any act of their own, promote the hope of their own
salvation, which men of reason and choice may, by acts of virtue and election.
Page 225. Number. 6.
Faith and hope of salvation are not of our selves, but the gift of God, Ephesians.
^. 8. Cur in Adam omnis homo moritur si originalis peccati vinculis non
tenetur. Greg. lib. 7. Epist. 53. Secundin^.
And what hope infants have or acts of reason, how God applies the merit of
Christ to Infants, who became an infant that he might also save them; is a
secret unknown to me; and therefore I do neither anxiously enquire, nor rashly
determine.

That men of reason and choice may promote their hope of salvation by acts of
Virtue and Election, must cautiously be understood; seeing they neither can do
any thing hereto, as they have reason or election; both which are natural, and
so corrupted, that they are utterly inactive to any moral good, without the
help of Gods preventing and quickening grace supervenient. The Scripture is
express: You has he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins, -- and
were by nature the children of wrath, even as others, etc. Ephesians 2. 1, 3.
It is neither of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that
shows mercy. -- And where he said, Work out, or finish your salvation, -- we
may not think it depends on our works, or of our own ability; for, says he,
it is God which works in you both to will and to do, of his good pleasure.
Romans 9. 16.(...)At ver^ number a nostris operibus pende^ sa^^is nestra? Minime id
^^idem, etc. Be^ in Phil. 2. 12, 13.
Lest we should think our selves excused from our uttermost endeavor, whom he
has made voluntary agents, and in some part repaired in our regeneration, he
requires that we work, that we receive not that grace in vain, that we so run
that we may attain; yet that we may not think that this is, or can be by any
choice or ability of our own, he tells us presently, it is God which works
in us, all which he requires of us; and so good works which follow the
justified person, being fruits of our calling and election, give us a
comfortable hope thereof. Yet is it most true that God alone according to his
abundant mercy (not our merit). bath begotten us again to a lively hope, 1 Pet.
1. 3. and that if we do these things, we shall never fall. 2 Pet. 1. 10.


You say again, That God requires nothing on man's part, but that its efficacy
be not hindered.] Page 225. Number. 6.
This Proposition, though plausible, yet is unsound, as may appear by that
which has been said: to which I add; It is indeed required, that we do not
ponere obicem, by unbelief impenitency, contempt of Gods ordinance, etc. but
he that says, Cease to do evil, says also, Learn to do well. Isa. 1. 16, ^^
2 Pet. 1 ^^
So the Apostle exhorts -- To give all diligence to make your calling and
election sure: for if ye do these things ye shall never fall. And indeed this
is the end of our implantation into Christ by Baptism, that we should walk in
newness of life; and no doubt but God requires of his Israel, Romans 6. 4.
that they should not quench the Spirit, or ponere obicem, in that he said,
Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, and harden your necks no more,
Deuteronomy. 10. 16. Yet he requires them to fear the Lord their God, to walk in all
his ways, -- to keep all the commandments of the Lord -- v. 12. 13. And into
the same covenant are children admitted by baptism, which binds them on their
first abilities to perform the same, though for the present they are no more
active then circumcised Infants were, who were received and sealed into the
present covenant of future faith and obedience.

Then (you say) there is a necessity that they should be brought to baptism,
there being an absolute exclusion of all persons unbaptized.] Page 226. Number. 6.
There is a necessity of Baptism in respect of Gods ordinance, which binds us
to administer it: but we affirm not such a necessitatem medii, ^. Lombard l. 4
did. 1. l.
that all they should be absolutely excluded from the Kingdom of Heaven, who
die without baptism, as many infants do. Council. Trident. Sess. 6. c. 3.and.
Sess. 7. c. 3.
That uncharitable opinion we leave to the maintainers thereof, we have no
warrant so to judge: and therefore we say, Bellarm. de Sacrament. Baptis, l. 1.
c. 4.
that not the bare privation, but the contempt of the Sacrament condemns; of
which Infants cannot be guilty. So that if you clearly mean a necessitatem
medii in respect of the external ministry of man, your Proposition is not
true, nor owned by us: but if you mean a necessity in respect of our duty in
baptizing infants, or their spiritual baptism by regeneration, we so far
consent; but then we cannot excuse your medium for an homonomia, which
concludes not an absolute exclusion of all persons unbaptized; is apparently
falls, in the example of the penitent Thief, saved but not baptized, and in
charity to be concluded so, in elect children dying before they are baptized:
so that if our Arguments for baptizing children were no better, you might
confidently say as you do in the Epilogue of your Plea, Page 245.
They have been encouraged in their error more by -- our weak arguings, then by
any truth of their cause, or excellency of their wit.

You say -- Internal ( means of bringing them to an eternal happiness) they
have none: for grace being an improvement and heightning the faculties of
Nature, in order to an heightened and supernatural end, grace has no
influence, or efficacy upon their faculties, who can do no natural acts of
understanding -- ] Page 225. Number. 8.


What acts of understanding elect Infants dying have, I cannot determine, but I
am confident all considering Readers will abominate and loath this bold and
uncharitable censure. Who admitted you into the secret of Gods council,
concerning thestate of Infants, whom either he preserves to age, or takes
away before they could be baptized? It is better resolved, to a worse end, by
your self, p. 231. Number. 16. Many thousand ways there are by which God can bring
any reasonable soul unto himself. -- And here in the very next place you
affirm, That God has made a promise of the holy Ghost to Infants as well as to
men. -- Reconcile these two, and your self to your self, if you can. First, you
say, -- Grace has no influence or efficacy upon their faculties, who can do no
natural acts of understanding: And next you affirm, that God has made a
promise of the holy Ghost to Infants as well as to men. I demand, Does God
perform every one of his promises? Do you mean by the Holy Ghost, the gifts and
graces of Gods holy Spirit regenerating the elect to the Kingdom of Heaven?
Can any be saved without such grace? can the holy Ghost be inactive, and
without effectual influence in any soul? Does God give in his good time, and
measure, his grace of Regeneration to all the elect, that is, a powerful
influence on them to regenerate, sanctify, and finally save them? Does God
save any Infants? These things being concluded on, I would fain learn how it
can be true, that children have no internal means of salvation: or that Gods
Spirit has no influence upon their faculties? Does the reasonable soul of an
Infant express an admirable influence on the bodily faculties, by a natural
instinct for its preservation; and shall not the Creator, the Spirit of
Almighty God, have much more active influence on the soul of the elect to save
it, though there appear none, or very slender acts of understanding to the
judgment and sense of man.

This your Proposition will appear false, if we consider infants circumcision;
those could do as few acts of understanding, as infants now can: neither can
any man without high impiety affirm, that Gods grace had no influence or
efficacy on them whom he did not in vain command to be sealed into his
covenant. It is well observed by our party, that the Sacraments are not bare
resemblances, or memorials of things past, neither naked signs or testimonies
of grace received; but also Canales gratiae, Ursin Catech. part. 2. de Bap.
Conclus. 9.
whereby God ordinarily deriveth to us those Rivers of living Water, Joh. 7.
38. and both delivers and seals unto us the grace which they represent; so
that these holy signs are not empty, void of, or without the things signified,
although the things are received after one manner, and the signs after
another; one is given by God alone, without the observation and knowledge of
man, and the other only by the ministry of man, and before men: As at first
John Baptist baptized with water, and Christ baptized with the holy Ghost,
though he baptized not with water, but his Disciples and substitutes; neither
did John baptize with the holy Ghost, but Christ: So is it now, Christ
baptizeth elect infants by the secret influence of his holy Spirit, the fruits
whereof appear in their season, and his Ministers, according to his
appointment, baptize with water.

To all this ( you say) the Anabaptists give a soft and gentle answer:] Page
228. Number. 12.
Sure you do but, herein, landando praecipere, and by saying they do so, rather
show them what they should do, then us, what they do. July 27. 1649.
M. Fisher in his Position at the Disputation at Ashford in Kent, styled the
maintainers of Pedobaptism, an evil and adulterous generation, this is one of
their soft and gentle answers. Mr. Francis Cornwell in his Sermon at Crambrock
in Kent, called Pedobaptism an Antichristian Innovation, a humane Tradition
etc. Preface p. 1.
Mr. Cha. Blackwood, Title Page, calls his Pamphlet against us, The storming
of Antichrist. John Spislbury J. Spilsbury treat concerning the subject of
Baptism, p. 31.
calls Pedobaptism, Baptism administered and received in a false Antichristian
estate, and by the power of Antichrist. Edward Barber calls it Antichristian
and abominable. And before he says, conterning Mark 10. 14. This place is put
in to be read at the sprinkling of children, for the Whore has sweet words,
etc. Ed. Barber, page 30. and p. 13.
Is this, as you say for your Clients, to give a soft and gentle answer? or a
Boyish manner of contest, to call Whore, and all ill names, where they have not
other power to prevail? Let all judge who have any sense of humanity, whether
this be a soft and gentle answer, to call his mother Whore, and the worst of
such, Antichristian: whereas in spite of calumnies, with other reformed
Churches, the Church of England has excluded Popery, and what she could,
banished that mystical Whore out of her communion. But this is their(...)
(...), to conclude their Scene where they have no evicting reason against that
which they dislike, to pronounce it Antichristian. Deus e machind Suid. Er^sm.
adag child. 1. cent: 1.
And who is so ready to cast this odious Livery upon others, as the most
Antichristian? -- Baptismum infantum, esse idolatricum -- esse ex Draccne and
Bestid, nec aliud quam ceremoniam Antichristi. Memno Simonis. f. 40, 50, etc.
I might hereto add many more the like instances of Railers at Infant Baptism,
calling it Idolatrous, of the Dragon and Beast, none other then a ceremony of
Antichrist, a Satanicall Institution, etc. but that we have too much of our own
at home. It is the quality of the Beast to open his mouth unto blasphemy
against God, to blaspheme his Name and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in
Heaven: But we like not our cause the worse, because such rail at it; but wish
them to consider where the Railers place shall be, 1 Cor. 6. 1. Lucas
Sternberg. de quitus Joh. Gerhard. loc. theol. to. 4 de bapt. fol. 568. Rev.
13. 6.


You say -- The Argument from Circumcision is invalid upon infinite
Considerations.] Page 228. Number. 13.
It will, I doubt not at last prove so strong, that neither you, nor any other
Advocates shall ever be able to overthrow it: for that which circumcision was
in the Old Testament, Baptism is in the New, which succeeded it, and has the
same end and use, that is, to be a seal of the Righteousness of Faith, Rom 4.
11. the same Faith in the same Christ: and therefore the Apostle tells the
Colossians Coloss. 2. 11.
that they were Circumcised in Christ, -- in that they were buried with him in
Baptism: so that Baptism is our Circumcision, Ursin quo sup.
or Sacrament, whereby the same things are conferred and confirmed: an inlet
for us into the visible Church of Christ, a Seal of the Covenant of Grace, and
free remission of sins by Faith in him into whom it implanteth us. Romans 6.
But you say,

Figures and Types prove nothing, unless a Commandment go along with them, or
some express to signify such to be their purpose.] Page 228. Number. 13.
We answer, 1. They signify something which is their end; and the argument a
type ad veritatem, holds good from the signs in the Law, to the things
signified in the Gospel: as Children were typically baptized under the law,
under the Cloud, and in the red Sea, 1 Cor. 10. 1, etc. and their washing with
rain from the cloud, prefigured our washing in Baptism, and by the Spirit. Dr.
Featly child. bapt. justified. Arg. 6. p. 45. f.
And the red Sea, in which the Egyptians were drowned, and Israel saved, was
an Emblem of Christ's blood, in which all our ghostly enemies are drowned, and
we saved.

2. Here is a mere ignoratie elenchi, and mistake of the question in hand,
which is not whether Circumcision were a type and figure of Baptism, but
whether Baptism so succeed Circumcision, as a Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith. That such sorts of persons (to wit, young and old) within the covenants,
as had right to the one, have the like right to the other, which we affirm.

3. Where you say, Unless a Commandment go along with them, etc. First, we say,
that where the question is mistaken, we are not in reason bound to answer
until it be rightly stated, and so may wave all that you infer concerning the
Deluge and Paschal Lamb, etc. as merely impertinent to our present
controversy. Secondly, concerning a command for baptizing, you doubt not, nor
we for baptizing of Infants; seeing that where the Reason and Equity of the Law
remains, there the Law, for substance, is still in force, though not for every
circumstance: Now nothing can reasonably be alleged, why children have less
use of Reason now, then they who then lived, had under the Law; or why they
should for present want of the use of reason, be now less capable of the Seal
of the Righteousness of Faith, then they were who lived under the Law? But you
say further,

-- Supposing a correspondence of Analogy between Circumcision and Baptism,
yet there is no correspondence of Identitie. Ib. Page 228.
This Bull deserves some baiting, were we not treating of sacred things;
therefore I only say, If correspondence import answering unto, in some
similitude and likeness, there can be no correspondence of identity, for no
like is identically the same with that to which it is like.

For although it were granted that both of them (Circumcision and Baptism) did
consign the Covernant of Faith.] Ibid.
Speak you this as a matter doubtful? Is not the Scripture evident? Do you
also call the truth thereof in question? See Romans 4. 11.

There is nothing in the circumstance of childrens being circumcised, that so
concerns that mystery, but that is might very well be given to children, and
yet baptism to men of reason.] Ibid.
This Argument is a childish caption: Fallacia condentis
We say that Baptism succeeded Circumcision in substance, not in circumstance;
in the end and use, as has been said, and whereof we shall say more anon: To
what purpose do you argue from the circumstance? But you say,

Circumcision left a Character in the flesh, which being imprinted upon
Infants, did it work upon them when they came to age?] Ib. Page 228.
We answer: 1. That the word Character Von character is potest accipi
proqualibet nota vel signo, rem unam ab aliis distinguente, Andr, Rivet, Su^.
Contr^^. tract. 3. q. 6.
may be taken for any sign, or note distinguishing one thing from another: so
Baptism may be also said to be a character, distinguishing Christians from
unbelievers, not as an absolute quality, but as a relative thing: as a tessera
militaris, by which God will own his who fight under the Banner of Christ, and
by which the baptized have a comfortable assurance that they are marked for the
children of God when they believe in Christ, according as it is written, -- In
whom also after that ye believed, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14,
ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise; which is the earnest of our
Inheritance. -- a. Your instance imports only a circumstantiall, not a
substantial difference: Now the variety of signs vary not the thing
signified: It is the same Christ, the same Faith, under the Gospel and under
the Law; though the Sacraments by God appointed for the one and for the other,
were much different: And the ends of Circumcision and Baptism are the same; to
implant us into Christ's visible Church; to be an inlet and door to the same,
to seal up the admitted to faith, repentance, mortification, and newness of
life: which work is as truly done to the baptized Christian when he comes to
age as it was to the Israelite circumcised, to wit, to and in them that
believed and repented; to others the work was so far from being done, that
that very seal of Gods Covenant which they bare in their flesh, served for a
witness against the soul of the Covenant-breaker to his greater condemnation:
and so it is proportionably with the baptized Apostate: which may be a warning
to your Clients, to repent before it be too late. You say again,

-- It is requisite that the persons baptized should be capable of Reason, that
they may be capable both of the word of the Sacrament, and the impress made
upon the Spirit.] Page 229.
We answer: 1. This weakly follows from unsound premises; was there no word
added to Circumcision? How does that appear? Was there not a word of
Institution? Genes. 17. 10, 11, 12. Was not the reason of the Covenant declared
to Abraham? See Genesis 18. 19.
Did not he, and others, preach the same to all of age to be circumcised, as
Proselytes, and to the circumcised infants when they came to age capable of
Doctrine? so do we to the baptized: but to persons of years we preach the
Gospel first, and then baptize them; infants we baptize first, and instruct
them when they come to be capable.

2. That it is requisite that the persons baptized should be capable of Reason,
that they may be capable both of the word, etc.] We say so also, they must be
capable of Reason, either in act, that they may presently understand those
things; or in habit, that they may afterward understand the same; to what end
else should we baptize infants, or why were they circumcised into future faith,
repentance, and newness of life? Durand. ^^^ ^^^. l. 1. c. 7. n. 12, etc.
We utterly dislike Popish baptizing of Bells, Churches, Altars, etc.

3. We say further, That Covenants between man and man, require that both
parties expressly understand and know the tenor, substance, and particulars of
the same; but in Covenants between God and his Creatures, that Rule does not
universally hold; for here God stipulateth and principally transacteth with the
creature according to that which he will have done, or do in, or by them. So he
established his Covenant with Noah and his seed after him, and with every
living creature, the Foul, Cattle, Beasts, etc. Genesis 9. 10. How much more
rationally may he make covenant with infants, though yet without the actual
use of reason? Again, sometimes such covenants are made between men, as that
the parent or parents covenant for, or in stead of their children, because they
are not yet of age to understand the words and purport of the covenant, and it
stands good. How much rather may God covenant with an infant, whose mouth and
Advocate, Christ Jesus, said expressly, Suffer little children to come unto me,
and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mark 10. 14. Luke
18. 16. I demand, quojure, by what right is the Kingdom of Heaven theirs? What,
by descent from natural parents? Nay, but that which is born of the flesh, is
flesh, John 3. 6. And flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor.
15. 50. It must therefore be by the free covenant of God with them, out of
which it can belong to none by right of any infant-innocency, seeing all are
conceived and born in sin, the children of wrath, Psalm. 51
but for the grace and covenant of God with them, Ephesians 2^
which they yet understand not, yet is it valid and effectual to their
salvation, as we may also understand in case of Circumcision, in which the
circumcised Child understood as little what was said, or done, as the baptized
infant now does, and yet it was Gods covenant with them, Genesis 17. 7, 10, 11,
12. and effectual for them. To conclude, if you mean that it is requisite that
none should be admitted to baptism, but those that have the actual use of
reason, that is, men and women of years, you beg the question.

-- of the Sacrament, and the impress made upon the Spirit.] Page 229.
Concerning a Character or impress set upon the baptized, the Schoolmen and
Jesuits have moved sundry questions: whether it be an absolute or relative
quality, which yet they say, sticks fast upon them also that are in hell?
Whether it be an ens rationis, or a relatio realis? Whether a quality, action,
or passion? And if a quality, of what kind it is? Whether the subject thereof
be the soul, or some active or passive faculty thereof? Whether it be a figure
or form? Whether the Sacraments of the old Testament made the like impress?
etc. In all which, and the like vain speculations, we may not unprofitably note
the just judgment of God, giving them over to unfruitful delusions, who
forsaking the true and constant light of his holy word, give themselves ^ver to
follow the ignes fatuos of their own fancies. I hope you are not of their
sense, though you mention this impress. Concerning the seal of our implantation
into Christ, I have spoken a little before; and only add, that we receive
grace, and the obsignation thereof, but are not sensible of all, until we
receive a greater measure, -- that we might know the things that are freely
given unto us of God. 1. Cor. 2. 12.


Since therefore (say you) the reason of this parity does wholly fail, there is
nothing left to infer a necessity of complying in this circumstance of age
any more then in the other annexes of the type.] Page 229.
It wholly holds in substance for ought you have said to the contrary: and
therefore your following instances are frivolous. Calv. Instit. lib. 4. c. 16.
As concerning baptizing the eighth day, we answer, 1. That, whereas God
appointed no set day for baptism, we have the greater liberty to do it at the
most convenient season, on the first, second, third, fourth, etc. or on any
day, so that we neither contemn Gods ordinance, nor unnecessarily delay it.
Ursin. Cat. part. 2. de Baptism.
2. As has been noted, baptism succeeded circumcision, not in every
circumstance, but in the thing signified, in the end and use. 3. This your
argument is a fallacious and childish caption: a fallacia accidentis, from the
subject to the accident, from the substance to the circumstance, as the learned
Dr. Featly observes, Fallacia accidentis est, cum quid^is rei, and accidenti:
^. c. subjects and ejus attributo, similiter attribuitur, Arist. l. 1. Elench.
c. 4. Dr. Featly child. Bap. justified. page 72. m.
such a fallacy is this.

What the Jews were commanded in the fourth Commandment, that we Christians
are bound to perform: But the Jews were commanded to keep holy the seventh day
from the creation; Therefore we Christians are bound to keep that day. Such is
this Paralogism.

If Baptism succeeded Circumcision, then children ought to be baptized the
eight day: it no more follows, then that children ought to be baptized in the
same part where they were circumcised: it will follow rather, That because
Circumcision was administered to the infant as soon as it was capable thereof,
or could receive the Sacrament without danger, therefore children ought to be
baptized as soon as conveniently they may. Non a bs re ^. diem praeteriisse
expectabant Judaei, quod is Plutar. in Problem, and Fest^ testificantibus,
maxim periculosus sit infantibus, si ve^entur, nec ante cum terminunt,
umbilicus resolvatur, ante quem homo proprior est pa^ltae quam animali, etc.
Poly. Virg. de inven. rer.l. 4. c. 4.
But you say,

The case is clear in the Bishops question to Cyprian, for why shall not
infants be baptized just upon the eighth day, as well as circumcised? If the
correspondence of the Rites be an Argument to infer one circumstance which is
impertinent and accidental to the mysteriousnesse of the Rite, why shall it
not infer all?] The case is as clear in the Question of Fidus the Presbyter,
(whom you call Bishop) as it is in your objecting it. Fidus made a querie, or
rather affirmed, that Infants ought not to be baptized on the second or third
day, Esse apud omnes, sive infantes, sive majores natu, unam Divini muneris
aequalitatem. --.nam Deus ut personam non accipit, sic nec aetatem, cum se
omnibus ad coelestis gratiae consecutionem aequalitate librata praebeat parem
-- si etiam gravissimis delictoribus, and in Deum multum ante peccantibus, --
and a baptismo atque gratia nemo prohibetur; quantomagis prehiberi non debet
infans, qui recens natus nihil peccavit, nisi quod secundum Adam -- contagium
mortis antiquae prima nativitate contraxit. Cyprian.l. g. ep. 8. Fido.

Quantum vero ad causam infantium pertinet, quos dixisti intra secundum vel
tertium diem qu^ nati sunt, constitutos, baptizare non opartere, and
considerandam legem esse circumcisionis antiquae, ut intra octavum diem, cum
qui natus est baptizandum and sanctificandum non putares; long aliud in
concilio nostro omnibus visum est. In hoc enim quod ^^ puta^as esse faciendum,
nem^ consensit: sed universi potius judicavi^nus, nulli hominum nat^,
misericordiam Dei and gratiam esse denegandem. Cyprian. q. s.


but that the law of ancient circumcision ought to be considered; so that he
thought the newborn infant might not be baptized within, or before the eighth
day: Cyprian answers: There is one equality of the Divine gift to all,
whether they are infants or old men: for as God is no accepter of persons, so
neither is he of ages, but he shows himself in an even-ballanced equality,
alike to all, as to their attaining heavenly grace -- if to grievous offenders,
and to those who have before that much sinned against God -- and no man is
prohibited baptism and grace, how much less ought the infant to be prohibited,
who being newborn, has committed no sin, only that in Adam. -- He has in
his first nativity been infected with the contagion of ancient death. But
concerning the cause of infants who you say are not to be baptized at two or
three days old, and that we are to consider the law of ancient circumcision,
so that you think that a child born may not be baptized before the eighth day;
all that were in our Council are of a far different judgment; for no man
consents to that which you thought was to be done: but we all rather judged,
that the mercy and grace of God is to be denied to no man born. Let the Reader
judge how clear the case is in the Bishops question to Cyprian. To the rest of
your Arguments we say you dispute ex non concessis: We do not say that the
correspondence of Rites infer the circumstances, but the substance: but
errors are fruitful, and one absurdity granted, many easily follow. For that
you say from your own fancy, which you run away witha^.

And then also females must not be baptized, because they were not
circumcised.] We answer, 1. As we have said before, baptism succeeded
circumcision not in every circumstance (which your selves justify in that you
baptize women) but in the substance, the thing signified, the end and use: or
as others say, in the inward mystery, in the promises, in use, in effects.
Calv. Instit. l 4. c. ^^. sect. 10. fin.


2. God expressly restrained circumcision to males, Genesis 17. 10, 12, 14. yet
the females were comprehended in the males: and to be born of circumcised
parents, was to them in stead of circumcision, and so were they born to God,
and in his account Daughters of Abraham, Luke 13. 16. and so within his
covenant of grace and mercy: and the sealing of males was then limited to the
eighth day; but now in baptism the circumstances of sex, age, and a fixed day,
are not expressly mentioned, but we have a general commandment to baptize
all, without exception to any time, sex, or age.

3. Though women were not capable of circumcision, and therefore it was not
enjoined them, yet the female is as capable of baptism as the male, and
therefore without exception to sex, they who are all one in Christ's account,
must equally be baptized into him. 4. Circumcision and Baptism agreeing in
substance, did yet differ in many circumstances. First, in the Rite or
Ceremony. Secondly, in the manner of signifying: For Circumcision held out
grace in the Messiah then to come; but baptism presents it in Christ
exhibited. Thirdly, in the particular testimony annexed to make good the
promise: for then God promised, not only a covenant with his Church, but a
peculiar place for the same, the land of Cauaan, until the coming of the
promised Seed: but baptism has no particular promise of this, or that fixed
place. Fourthly, in the manner of binding; Circumcision did oblige the
circumcised to the observation of the whole Law, Moral, Ceremonial, Gal. 5. 3.
and Judicial: but baptism binds us only to the observation of the Moral
Law; that is, faith, repentance, and newness of life, according to the holy
Rule of Gods will revealed in the Moral Law, from the curse whereof, in respect
of nonperformance, Gal. 3. 13.
we are delivered in Christ, into whom we are baptized. Fifthly, in their
appointed continuance; Circumcision was appointed only for Abraham's posterity;
and to^ continue only unto the coming of Christ: but baptism was instituted
for all Nations and times unto the worlds end. Gal. 3. 19.
Lastly, Gal. 5. 2.
in circumstance of sex and age, Matthew. 28. 19. 20.
so far as circumcision was limited to males and the eighth day. So that to
argue, as you do, from the substance to the circumstance, or that which is
accidental, is fallacions, Fallacia accidentis.
and captions, as has been showed.

You say -- Therefore as Infants were circumcised, so spiritual Infants shall
be baptized etc.] This you think a right understanding of the business; after
your shuffling together many strange impertinencies, to tell us of baptizing
spiritual Infants. To which we answer: If you mean by Spiritual Infants, such
as are born again of water and the holy Ghost, then you would have them twice
regenerate or born: If you mean Believers only, (for in reason you cannot call
an unbeliever or wicked person a spiritual infant) then I would fain learn by
what discerning spirit you can know when, and whom to baptize, and whom to put
by; or which infant, according to the flesh, is not a spiritual infant, by the
spirit of regeneration: If you say that those who are of years, profess faith
and repentance, and therefore are to be baptized, it is easily rejoined; what
ere they profess they may be hypocrites; and then no more spiritual Infants
then Judas or Simon Magus were: If you say that in charity you take them for
spiritual. I answer, That an opinion that may be so easily false, and in which
any man without special revelation may be deceived, is a very unproportionable
ground of so sharp a controversy, as causes your Clients to forsake the
Church of Christ. Next, I say, had you but as much charity toward infants,
whom no actual sins have yet stained, you would as freely judge them
spiritual infants, and so, by your own Principle, to be baptized, as those of
years, of whom possibly you may know much evil, without all controversy they
have many sins to be repented of; and why should you not afford harmless
Infants who cannot dissemble, as much charity as you do to many hypocrites, of
whose spiritual regeneration, or being spiritual Infants, you cannot be
certain?

And this seems to have been the sense of the primitive Church, for in the age
next to the Apostles, they gave to all baptized persons milk and honey, to
represent unto them their duty, that though in age of understanding they were
men, yet they were babes in Christ, and children in malice, etc.] Page 229.
Indeed we read of such a custom in Tertullians Ind^ suscepti, lactis and
me^^is concordiam praegustamus. Tertul. de Corona mil. c. 3. and ib. advers.
Marcion. l. 1. c. 14. Nec me^lis and lactis societatem qua su^ infantat. --
Haec citat Pol. Virg. l. 4. c. 4. Buch^lcer. lnd. Chr^n^. Anno Christi 208.
Christ. Helvici. Theatr. Histor. p. 91.
time, but that was two hundred years after Christ: but I find not the sense of
the Church therein by him expressed to your purpose. And Hierom Hieron. in
Isai. 55.
mentions the same custom, but gives no such sense as you pretend to; it
being well known that he was for Infant Baptism. -- qui mos ac typus in
occidentis Eccles^h^ die usque ser^^ ut ^^ in Christ^ vinam, lacque tri^^tar
ad^^^ Pelag. al. 3.
And it appears not by any thing you here cite or say, that such a custom
proves any thing against Baptism of Infants, for whom milk and honey is fitter
nourishment th^n for the strong, 1 ^orinth. 3. 2. Hebr. 5. 12, 13. Your other
conjecture is but feebly grounded; yet you say,

But to infer the sense of the Pedo-baptists is so weak a manner of arguing,
that Augustine, whose device it was (and men use to to be in love with their
own fancies) at the most pretended it but as probable, and a mere c^njecture.]
To which we answer, 1. That things which Christ commanded to his Apostles,
Bea^us quidem Cyprianus non aliqu^d decrei^ ^^ndens n^^^m, ^ed Ecclesiae Fidem
firmissim^m servans, ad corrigendum ^os qui putabent ante octa^^m diem
nativitatis, non esse par^ulum baptizandum -- mox n^tum rite baptizari posse,
cum s^^ quibusdam coepiscopis censuit.
could not be Augustines, or any humane invention, but a divine Institution,
such was baptizing of Infants, as will appear in due place. And this is the
ground of this whole controversy. 2. That it was none of Augustines device or
fancy, with which he was therefore in love, as being his own, Augustine
Augustine, Hieron. ep. 28. -- contra Ecclesiae sundatissimum morem nemo sentiat.
ib. Hec Ecclesia semper habuit, semper tenuit, hoc a majorum fide percepit, hoc
usque in finem perseveranter cust^dit. Ib. Aug. de verb. Apostlie. Ser.10.
his self clearly testifies. S. Cyprian Cyprian lib. 3. Epist. 8.
(says he) not composing any new decree, but holding the most firm faith of
the Church, to correct their error, who thought that an infant might not be
baptized before he were eight days old; he, with certain his fellow. Bishops,
was of this sense, that a newborn infant might rightly be baptized. As for the
words of Cyprian, we have cited them a little before. Cyprian with a Conncell
of 66. Bishops, resolved so, not out of any then newborn opinion, or decree,
but maintained that which was of old, the firm faith and doctrine of the Church
which was long before him: And Cyprian flourished about the year of our Lord:
22, and was crowned with martyrdom under the persecuting Emperor Valerian,
about the year 260. Bucholcer. lnd. Chronol. Passus est sub Valeriano and
Galieno principibus persecutione Octava. Catalog. script. Eccles. Hieronym.
^om. 1.
And St. Augustine flourished about the year 410. and died about the year 430.
Ecclesia ab Apostol^ traditionem accepit etiam pervulis dare baptismum. Orig.
com. in Romans 6. Vid. ib. in Levit. hom. 8 and ib. in Luc. hom 14.
So that had Augustine (as you say) devised it, i^ must have 150 years years
before Augustine was born, been devised by Augustine, which had been a singular
device indeed. Origin of whom you say Augustine had this tradition of Baptizing
Infants ( page 237. N. 25) says, because we are all conceived and born in sin,
the Church has received a Tradition from the Apostles to administer Baptism to
little child^^. Now Origin lived about the same time with Cyprian. How you can
reconcile your self (in that you here affirm that Pedobaptism was Augustines
device, and yet confess that Augustine had it from Origin, who died so many
years before Augustine was born) I say not to the truth, but to your self, I do
not understand. Tertul. advers. Valentin. c. 5. Hieron. Catol script.
Eccles^ren l. 4 c. 14.
Justin Martyr, Just. Martyr. q. ^^ ort^. 56.
whom Tertullian mentions as an Ancestor (he lived under the Emperor
Antoninus Pius) and. Omnem atatem sanctificans per illam quae ad ip sumerat
similitudinem. Omnes enim venit per semetipsum salvar^. Omnes inquim, qui per
cum renascuntur in D^^m, insantes and parvulos, and ^^^^s, and ju^enes, and
seniores. Ide^ per omnem venit, aetatem, and insantibus infans factus
sanctisicans infantes, etc. Iren. l. 2. c. 29.
Irenaeus speaks of Infants baptized in his time. Irenaeus speaking of
Christ's Baptism and entrance into his public Ministry, says, He sanctified
every age by that similitude which was to himself, for he came to save all by
himself; I say all, who by him are regenerate to God, infants and little ones,
boys, young men and old: therefore passed he through every age, for infants he
became an infant, sanctifying infants, etc. This Irenaeus was so ancient, that
he saw Polycarp Polycarpus ^utem non solum ab Apostolis edoctus, and
conversatus cum multis ex eis, qui dominum nostrum viderunt. -- quera and nos
vidimus in prima nostra a^ate, etc. Iren. l 3. c. 3. ^^id. Hieronym. Catol.
scriptor: Eccles. Igna^.
who was an hearer of some of the Apostles of Christ. It was therefore none of
Augustines device. Si quisquam in hac re au^^^tatem divinam quaerat, quanquam
quod universatenet Ecclesia, nec confiliis inftitut^^, sed semper retentum est,
non nisi authoritate Apostolica traditum, rectissime creditu^ tamen verac^ter
con^inere possumus, quid valeat in parv^lis, baptismi sacramentum, ex
circumcisine carnis, quam prior populus accepit; quam priusquam acciperet
justificatus est Abraham ^cut Cornelius etiam ^on^ Spiritus sancti priusquam
baptizaretur, etc. Cur ergo praeceptum est, ut o^^^ d^inceps infantulum
masculum octavo die circumcideret, qui nondum poter^t cord credere, etc. nisi
quia and ipsum per s^ipsum sact amentum multum valebat? Aug. ^^^^ 7. part. ^.
de baptism. ^^^, Donat. l. 3. c. 24.


3. Whether this be true which you affirm, that Augustine at the most pretended
it but as probable, and a me^^conjecture (to baptize infants, as infants were
circumcised) let Augustine speak for himself (who says) If any man in this
thing look for Divine authority, although that which the universal Church
holds, being no Decree of any Council, but has been always observed, that
we must rightly believe to have been delivered no otherwise then by
Apostolical authority: yet we may truly apprehend of what value the Sacrament
of Baptism of Infants may be, from the circumcision of the flesh, which the
former people received. Abraham was justified before he received it; as also
Cornelius was endued with the gift of the holy Ghost before he was baptized,
etc. why therefore was ^e commanded thenceforth to circumcise every male child
on the eighth day, seeing they could not yet believe with the heart? etc. but
because the Sacrament it self, is of it self of great moment: so untrue is it
that Augustine either devised Infant Baptism, or so slightly pretended to it,
as you report. But you go on,

And as ill success will they have with their other Arguments as with this]
Page 229. Number. 14.
And what is that for which you cry victory in your former encounters? I will
not be so expensive of time, or so much entrench upon the Readers patience, as
to repeat, let him judge of what he has read. But what other battalio's come
next up? You say,

From the action of Christ's blessing Infants, to infer that they are to be
baptized, proves nothing so much, as that there is great want of better
Arguments.] A gallant flourish indeed: but seriously; Did Christ take them up
in his arms, and bless them; and are they not blessed? Does not Gods blessing
give both end and means that we may be so? Or spoke Christ only concerning the
carnal seed of Abraham, and not of the spiritual when he said, Of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven? Surely if Christ adjudge and give the Kingdom of heaven
(which himself only can give, and in which none but the elect shall be) to an
infant, it must be no less then impious in man, to abridge, abjudge, and bar
him of admission into the visible Church of Christ by baptism, which sinful
and ignorant man can administer, and which reprobates as well as the elect may
and do receive. But what follows?

The conclusion would be with more probability derived thus: Christ blessed
children and so dismissed them, but baptized them not, therefore infants are
not to be baptized.] Page 230.
It Is a pretty argument wherein both Antecedent and Consequent are lame; John
4. 1.
it is true and granted, that Christ in his own person baptized them not; but
how prove you that he baptized them not by some one of his Disciples? What;
because it is not written? The Apostle may give you satisfaction herein, who
says, -- There are also many other things which Jesus did, the which if they
should be written every one, I suppose that even the world it self could not
contain the books. John 20. 3.
How invalid is the Moderators Agument, John 21. 25.
a non scripto, ad nonfactum? Can there be a sound conclusion from rotten
premises? Christ blessed children and so dismissed them, but baptized them not,
therefore Infants are not to be baptized. -- Antonii gladios potuit contemnere,
si sic omnia dixisset. -- Would it not as well follow a non scripto? Jesus
granted the Centurions request, and cured his servant, and so for ought we read
dismissed them, but baptized them not, Mat. 8. 10, 3. Christ healed the sick of
the palsy and dismissed him; but for ought we read baptized him not; Matthew. 9.
2, 6, 7. Mark 2. 23. 5. 11, 12. He healed the woman of the bloody issue; but
for ought we read baptized her not, Mat. 9. 22. Mark. 5. 34. So the Ruler of
the Synagogues daughter, Matthew. 9. 25. Mark 5. 41, 42. So he dismissed the man
out of whom he had cast many Devils, Luke 8. 38, 39. we read not that he
baptized him. So he pronounced pardon, accepted the repentance, and dismissed
the penitent sinner in peace, Luke 7. 50. It were too long to repeat all. So he
cured the lame at Bethesda, John 5. 8. Where (though so near the convenience of
water) we read not that he so much as once spoke of Baptism to him; neither
when finding him in the Temple he said to him, -- thou art healed, sin no more
lest a worse thing come unto thee, Verse. 14.
can any therefore reasonably conclude those men and women of years whose
bodies Christ cures, whose repentance he accepts, whose faith his self
testifies (who cannot be deceived) were not, and therefore are not (though of
years) to be baptized? He that had his time of doing those favors to them, was
free to take his time of enjoining their baptism: And how could you prove that
these children were not baptized before or after they were brought to Christ?
Before you censure our Arguments as invalid and weak; do your self the right to
consider your own.

-- As we are sure that God has not commanded Infants to be baptized]. Page
230. Number. 15.
True, God has not given the command to the Infant himself, but to others whom
it concerns, we are sure he has: if you mean the first, you triste; if the
second, you do, upon the matter, beg the question.

Quid ego festinat innocens aetas ad remissionem peccatorum, was the question
of Tertullian (lib. de Bapt.) he knew no such danger from their original
guilt, as to drive them to a laver, of which in that age of inn^cence, they had
no need, as he conceived.] Page 230. Number. 16.
Whether infants can make haste to baptism, I appeal to experience: Whether
they are innocent and have no need of baptism, as Pelagius affirmed, I appeal
to your own conscience. Praeser, bitur nemini sine baptism^ ^^mpetere salutem
-- ^^m a pri^^dia cir^^^^ ut praeceptam Dei excederet, and propterea in mortem
datus exinde totum ge^^ de suo semine insectum, s^ae etiam d^^^^^tionis
tradacem fecit. Te tul. de ^est. anim. c. 3.
Do you think there is no danger from infants original guilt which maks them
stand in need of the laver of regeneration for the remission of their sin? If
you do not, why do you urge against us an authority which your self consents
not unto? To let pass what Tertullian meant when he affirmed such a necessity
of baptism, as that he said, It is prescribed that no man shall be saved
without baptism; which he infers from John 3. 5. pray teach me what he meant
when he said; Man from his beginning circumvented, so as that he would
transgress Gods command, therefore was condemned to death, whereby he also made
all mankind, being infected from his seed, a traduction (or derivation from one
to another) of his own damnation: Think you damnation no danger? or did not
Tertullian Tertal. de Bapt. c. 18.
know what he wrote? How he forgot himself and the truth when he would have
children come to Christ only then when they could learn and know Christ,
whereas Christ said, Mark 10. 14.
Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not; I can give no
better account, then for other his errors; only let the Reader note, that in
the same place he affirms, that the unmarried also are to be deferred, and
not baptized until they are married, or settled in continency; but I spare
this: We look for truth, and shall be glad to own and embrace it, in what
Author soever we find it; but against the truth we are bound to none: only we
may note, that if Tertullian Non minore de causa innpti quoque procr^sti^^ndi.
Tertul. q. sup.
spoke in the forecited place concerning Infants that Pedobaptisme was in his
time in use in the Church; and so it must appear most false, which you before
said, that it was Augustines device.

What need all this stir? As infants without their own consent, without any
act of their own, and without any exterior solemnity, contracted the guilt of
Adams sin, and so are liable to all the punishment which can with justice
descend upon his posterity, who are personally innocent, so infants shall be
restored without any solemnity, or act of their own, etc. Page 229.
What need this stir you make to trouble the peace of Christ's Church? Why
trouble you your self with our stir to do that which Christ commands us?
Shall we suffer the Wolf quietly to take away sheep from Christ's flock (as we
daily see by the sleepy cowardice and dangerous silence of some temporizing
Pastors, who possibly have learned from that old Courtier Crispus --. -- qui
nunquam direxirbrachia contra torrentem) nay, but we know there is a dangerous
silence. See Ezekiel. 3. 18. Ester 4. 14. But to the matter, we say, that as in
Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15. 22. which being
restrained according to the Apostles intention, to the faithful and elect,
might reasonably conclude, that as all men, even the faithful and elect, were
by natural propagation condemnable in Adam, God justly imputing to his whole
posterity that his act, whereby he not only made his own person guilty, but
also corrupted his nature: so are they by regeneration saved in Christ, God
mercifully imputing his merits to them for their justification: so that, as
they were condemnable for that they did not in their own persons commit, so
shall they be saved by that which Christ, not they, did freely without the
works of the Law: but of what consequence is solemnity? Would you have our fall
in Adam, and repair in Christ run literally parallel, even to circumstances?
But what manner of arguing this were, we have often said. How many ridiculous
consequences would you thence infer? concerning a man, a woman, and a
Serpent, and no more in the Scene: a garden, a fruit, etc. But remembering that
we are speaking of sacred things, we resolve; that a Sacrament which is
instituted of God to this end, Ursin. Catech.
that it may be a solemn receiving into the Church, and a severing, or sign of
distinguishing the whole Church, and all her parts, from all other Sects, ought
to be ministered solemnly, that others may take notice of the same, and that it
may be the stricter bond to the baptized when they come to years, to hold them
into says, obedience, renunciation of the world, impious desires, and carnal
affections, into which condition they were solemnly, and before many witnesses
admitted by baptism.

And it is ( you say) too narrow a conception of God Almighty because he has
tied us to the observation of the Ceremonies of his own institution, that
therefore he has tied himself to it.] Page 231.
We never had that conceit, you mistake the matter: we say not that God is tied
to his own Ordinances, as if he could no otherwise save any, but that we are
tied to Gods Ordinances, because they are the revealed will of God, which man
is bound to obey. -- Interim tamen ex eo ^^n potest inferri baptismum non esse
ordinarium regenerationis medium ad cujus usunt a^^igati ^urnus. Joh. Gerhard;
de Baptism. Sect. 2. class. 2.
And though God be the most free Agent, and not tied, yet it does not hence
follow, that baptism is not the ordinary means of regeneration, to which we are
tied. God has not in your sense tied himself to the baptism of persons in
years, as may appear in the penitent thief, who unbaptized was saved, Luke 23.
43. It is so in his other ordinances. -- It pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching, to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1. 21. Therefore ordinarily faith
is by hearing the word, Romans 10. 17. yet God has not so absolutely tied it to
preaching, but that he could at his pleasure convert Saul breathing
threatenings, Acts 9. Neither is he tied to the E^charist: would you conclude
hence that men and women of years are not tied to be baptized, hear the word,
or receive the Lords Supper, because God, and his free grace, are not tied to
these external and ordinary means? If not, what means that your medium (God
has not tied himself) and what can it more conclude against Infants baptism,
then against the baptism, hearing, receiving the E^charist by persons of years?

Yet we affirm, that when God made the promise to Abraham, being willing more
abundantly to show to the heirs of promise, the immutability of his council,
confirmed it by an oath, that by two immutable things, in which it was
impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, etc. Heb. 6. 17,
18. In which sense, God has bound himself to make good to us, all that which
the Seals of his Covenant by himself appointed, hold forth unto us. But you add,

Many thousand ways there are by which God can bring any reasonable soul to
himself.] We answer: The admitting of the one is not always the excluding of
all other: and we question not Gods power herein, but his will; here is an
Ignoratio elenchi. Inclus^ unius non est exclusio alterius. Gerh. ^^^. ser. 3.
n. 188 sin.
What think you of the validity of that Argument which is from Gods power to
his will? He can open the eyes of the blind, and convert the hearts of
temporizers, and professed enemies of his Church and Truth, I would I were
assured that he would now do so.

But ( you say) nothing is more unreasonable, then because he has tied all men
of years and discretion to this way, therefore we of our own heads shall carry
infants to him that way without his direction. Here is again a fallacious
arguing: You take the thing in question for your medium: The question is,
Whether baptism of Infants he a divine or humane institution, upon which
depends wholly whether we ought o^ught not to baptize Infants? Now you would
prove that we ought not to carry infants to Christ by baptism, because he
appointed or directed us not so to do; but (as you say) we do it of our own
heads: Nay, but confining sacramental administrations to such time, age, or
other circumstance, by Christ never limited or enjoined, it will worship, and
man's invention: This your conceit is so poor and low, that a puny Sophister
would be ashamed of it.

Only this ( you say) that God has as great a care of Infants, as of others,
etc.] Page 231. Number. 17.
Here is another argument as fe^ble as the foregoing: What? because God has
as great a care of them as of others, therefore we must have no care of them in
the application of the ordinary means? so has he a care for their bodily
preservation and sustenance; does that prove that we ought not to feed or
cloth them? God respectively cares for all the Creatures, he gives to the
beast his food, Psalm. 147. 9. Mat. 6. 26, 28.
Were it good Georgicks to say, Trouble not your self to fodder your cattle, or
loose them from their stall that they may drink? Who knows not that God has
appointed ordinary mean, although he can do it without such means, and though
he say not that he will not otherwise preserve them, but leave them to the
dictates of common reason to conclude?

-- God ( you say) will by his own immediate mercy bring them thither where he
has intended them; but to say that therefore he will do it by an external act
and ministry, -- is no good Argument, etc.] Prove that one Assertion, That God
will by his own immediate mercy save Infants, and have no means used thereto,
and you have the Cause: but Christ has appointed baptism for the ordinary
means to bring people into his visible Church, that they may be saved: that he
does otherwise, that is, by an immediate act of mercy save some, to whom his
all-disposing providence has not given time or means, as in Infants dying
before they were or could be baptized; this variet^ not the Rule, for our
question is not concerning them, and to say that therefore he will do it by an
external act, because he will save them, or bring them thither whither he has
intended them, by his own immediate mercy, is no good Argument, you may lay
your life o^'t. Immediately signifies without means, so that Immediately by
means is a contradiction in the adject: this were to my sense so far from a
good argument, that I should doubt whether such a Disputant were awake, or not:
Immediately by an external act and ministry? none of ours ever so reasoned.

And why cannot God as well do his mercies to infants now immediately, as he did
before the institution either of circumcision or baptism? Once again we say, We
question not Gods power: truly nor his will in many Infants dying before they
could be baptized: the question is, whether we may or ought, according to Gods
revealed will, baptize them? In which it seems to us a very weak querie, And
why cannot God as well do his mercies to Infants now immediately? etc.]

However (you say) there is no danger that Infants should perish for want of
this external ministry, etc. Page 231. Number. 18.
] Not to dispute Gods secret counsels, we say, the danger will be to the
despiser and neglecter of Gods Ordinance; wherein Tertullians Assertion may
serve for a reason: Because (says he) he shall be guilty of a man's
destruction, who shall omit to do that which he freely might have performed.
Quoniam reus erit perditi hominis, si supersederit pr^^^are, quod lib.^^
potuir. Tertul. de bapt. c. 17.


For (say you) Water and the Spirit in this place ( John 3. 5.) signify the
same thing; and by water is meant the effect of the Spirit, cleansing and
purifying the soul etc.] It is true that Calvin, Oecolampadius, and some
others, do not think that Christ does there precisely speak of Baptism, but
that he either opposed it to Pharisaicall washings and purifications; to which
possibly Nicodemus, with whom he then discoursed, might be too much addicted:
Or, that those words are simply to be interpreted concerning Regeneration; but
Justin Martyr, Just. Mart. Ap^l. 2. Ambresde Abraham. l. 2 c. 11. and ib. ^^.
^^. lib. 10
Chrysostom, Theophilact, Cyril, Euthymius, Augustine, Rupertus, Bonaventure,
Musculus, B. Aretius, R, Rolloc, Pelargus, and others expound these words
concerning Baptism, the Sacrament of Regeneration; the present speech of Christ
being concerning Regeneration; and it is most probable that Christ therein
respected the common order of the Church, mentioning the Spirit and Water; to
show that we must be baptized if we will be saved; yet it is not the water but
Gods holy Spirit which washes away our sins: Neither does he so simply and
necessarily tie the grace and efficacy of Gods Spirit to the Sacrament of
Baptism, as if none could be saved without Baptism, Sic accipienda, est, etc.
^t respe^^erit communem Ecclesiae ordine^, neque tamen simpliciter gratiam Dei
adsirixerit sacramento, quasi sit absolute and sine exceptione necessarium,
Beza in Joh 3. 5.
and that God could not extraordinarily and immediately save. Whatsoever
Papists say to the contrary to assert their bloody decree and cruel doctrine
concerning Infants dying without Baptism: yet their Schoolmen, and they, in
their more sober fits, confess, that God has not absolutely tied his grace to
the Sacraments. Christ says, He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be
saved; Deus non alligavit gratiam suam sacramen^us.
but in the Antithesis he says not, Whosoever shall not be baptized, shall not
be saved; to show us, that faith alone may sometime be sufficient to salvation,
as in the penitent Thief; but nothing can suffice without faith; because
without it, Ipse (Christius) p^^uit effe^^ium sacramentorum sine exteriore
sacramento confer. Aquin. 3^. l. 64 a. 3. c.
it is impossible to please God. And because faith only apprehends Christ,
in whom alone there is salvation, Acts 4^^^^ To conclude, it does not appear,
that Water and the Spirit in the forecited place, John 3. 5. signify one and
the same thing. Although Christ's Baptism with the Spirit, (which gives the
effect of Baptism) were more excellent then John Baptists, -- Deus qui suam
potentiam sacra mentis non alligavit. P. Lombard. l. 4. distinct. 4. ^. Mark.
16. 16.

-- Caute and vigilanter non re^^tierit (qui ver^ baptiza^us non fueri^t) sed
tantum, qui vere non ^rediderit condemnabiiur nimirum inn ^ens solum interdum
sidem sufficere ad salatem, and sine i^sa, sufficere nihil. ^ Bernard. Ep 77.


or any Ministers of the Gospel: for so is it still, and yet no sober man will
deny, that the water in baptism and the Spirit, do differ, as the external
sign and inward grace thereby signified. You say further,

-- You may as well conclude, that infants must also pass through the fire, as
through the water, etc.] This assertion might better have suited with the dream
of some fanaticall Jacobite: Jacobite n^n aquam sed ig ^^^ ma^e^ium baptisim
^^^^ ^^.
What will not such an advocate say for his Clients? I appeal to your own
conscience, may we as well conclude against Gods word, as for it? God expressly
says, Deuteronomy. 18. 10. There shall not be found among you any one that makes his
son or his daughter to pass through the fire; and it is above all rational
controversy, that he instituted baptizing with water, who said, Baptize all
Nations, without any exception at all to infants: this is a poor trick of yours
to elude Scripture: And where does Peter say the same thing, that we may as
well conclude that infants must also pass through the fire, as through the
water? No, no, Peter by the Spirit of truth speaks another thing, indeed
intimating by those words, 1 Pet. 3. 21. Not the washing of the flesh, but the
confidence (as we translate, but the answer) of a good conscience toward God --
the effects of the inward baptism; which the Syriac in his Paraphrasticall
interpretation of that place, (...)
makes more clear, but confessing God in a pure conscience: as when in the
peace thereof we call upon him with an holy security of his hearing us, Sed
confitentes Deum in conscientia pura. Tremel.
which can be only in the inward Baptism, which the Spirit of Jesus gives by
faith and sanctification, wherein we have peace toward God in the assurance of
our justification, Romans 5. 1. Romans 8. 15, 16. So that the sum is, that the
outward sign, the water and washing of the body in baptism, is not sufficient
to salvation, if the Spirit of Jesus give not the inward effect thereof; and
therefore it is dangerous to live securely in sin and unbelief, as too many do,
in vain confidence that they must needs be saved, because they have been
baptized into the visible Church of Christ: No, but the external sign avails
not where the inward grace thereby signified is wanting. So in the preaching of
the Gospel, and administration of the holy Eucharist, man's ministry can
nothing prevail to the receivers salvation, without Gods Spirit giving the
inward effect: so that Peter briefly touches the power and use of baptism,
recalling us to the testimony of a good conscience, and that confidence
therein, which can endure the sight of God and his Tribunal, and fly unto him
in all wants through Christ, But this Scripture is fanatically Perverted by
Schuincfeld and others, who would hence conclude against the effect of the
Sacrament in the elect, whereas the Apostle affirms not, that the institution
of Christ for baptizing the body with water, is vain or effectless; but
secretly admonishes carnal Gospellers, that they rest not in their security,
but consult their own consciences, whether they find there the effect of their
baptism: so that he neither says, that infants may as well pass through the
fire as through the water, as you trifle; nor is this place any thing to the
purpose in this question of Infant Baptism: so that your following confused
Hypotheses are of no value or use, except to puzzle the Reader to find out what
you mean, which he hardly shall: Therefore when you express your self more
orderly and clearly, we owe you an Answer.

This ( you say) no more inferres a necessity of Infants Baptism, then the
other words of Christ infer a necessity to give them the holy Communion, Nisi
comederitis carnem filii hominis, etc.] This is another argument of Anabaptists
a pari: if infants (say they) are to be baptized, they are also to be admitted
to the Lords Supper. But in this agument there is a Sophisma ^lenchi: for first
it wants the condition(...); if we follow your sense concerning spiritual
infants, Page 229.
taking infants for spiritual or regenerate persons in the major, and for
those who are literally infants in the minor: and it wants also(...)There is
no question but that baptized infants have right to the holy Communion, as they
have to strong meat, but not a capacity as such, or while they are infants: and
God has in express terms restrained the Lords supper to those who can actually
apprehend, remember, and declare forth Christ's death, 1 Cor.11. 26. which
because infants cannot do, we give them not the Communion. Secondly, God has
denounced a grievous curse, or punishment against any that shall presume
without due examination of himself, to eat of that bread and drink of that cup:
but not so concerning Baptism, it being the seal of our new birth and reception
into the visible Church and Covenant, which has no such condition annexed, as
may justly exclude Infants in respect of any present nonperformance thereof.
But the Lords Supper is the Seal of our gro^^h in grace, and spiritual
strength, instituted for the confirmation of our admittance into, and our
continuance in the Church of Christ, whose death and passion for our
redemption, we thereby show forth and commemorate, for our spiritual
perfection, nourishment, and strengthening in faith and other graces of his
Spirit, for our assurance, that God having once received us into his favor,
will continue his mercy to us in Christ: By these disparities the invalidity of
the Pleaders Argument may appear. Se more hereof, Mr. Cobbet explic. Luke 18.
15. Page 121, 122. ^nit.
And if it were true which he further says, that the wit of man is not able to
show a disparity in the sanction, etc. yet the wisdom of God is able, and has
declared this difference in holy Scripture; and the same can show more then the
wit of man can discern, and has showed more then the learned Pleader does, or
will understand, who I conceive, does not yet know all that the wit of man, or
all the world can inform him of; but is it not better even for those who have
been in the Mount with God, to cast the veil of modest humility over those
excellencies which they have received, and with which they shine to others
admiration, then to ostent them to the contempt of others? The Apostle of
Christ was raped up into the third Heaven, and yet professed -- we know in
part, and we prophecy in part, -- 1 Cor. 13. 9. 2 Cor. 12. 2.


But you further say, -- Since the ancient Church did with an equal opinion of
necessity, give them the Communion, etc.] That which you said a little before,
-- They are as honest and as reasonable that do neither, to wit, baptize
infants, or give them the Comunion, as those that understood the Obligation to
be Parallel, we may very well believe and wish, that either of them may prove
honest hereafter. But to that which you say, That the ancient Church did with
an equal opinion of necessity give them the Communion, I answer, 1. with
Tertullian, Id esse Dominicum and verum quod sit prius traditum: id autem
extraneum and falsum quod sit posteriu^^nmissum. Tertul. de Praescript. c. 31.
That is of the Lord and true, which was first delivered; but that is
extraneous and false which is afterward received in. Non debemus attendere,
quid aliquis ante nos faciendum pu^averit; sed quid qui aute omnes est Christus
fe^erit: neque enim hominis consuetudinem sequi oportet, sed Dei veritatem.
Cypr. l. 2. Ep. 3.
And with Cyprian, We ought not to heed what some before us have thought was to
be done; but what Christ did, who was before all: for we ought not to follow
the custom of men, but the truth of God. 2 Your own rule must bind you,
(though it cannot others who consent not thereto) they who reject tradition
when it is against them, must not pretend it at all for them, page 237. Numb 25:
3 It is considerable in that custom of the church, as some other
incoveniences, which Augustine says, Aluid est quod docemus, aliud quod
sustinemus: aliud quod praecipere jubemur; aluid quod emendare praecipimur, and
d^ee emendemus tolerare compellimur. To. 6. contr. Faust. Manich. l. 20. c. 21.
Quis comeditur zelo demus Deit qui omnia quae forte ubi vidit perverta satagit
emendare, cupit corrigere, non quiescit, si ^mendare non potest, tolerat,
gemit: non excutitur de area gran^m: sustinet paleam, ut intret in horreum cum
pales fuerit separata. Aug. tract. 1^. in Joh. 2. In his enim rebus de quibus
nihil certi statuit Scriptura divina, vios populi Dei, vel instituta majorum,
pro lege temenda sunt -- orietur interminata lucta^io -- utique cavendum est ne
tempestate contentionis serenitas charitatis obnubile^^. Aug. Casulano ep. 86.
It is (says he) one thing which we teach, and another which we endure; one
thing which we are enjoined to command, and another thing which we are
commanded to amend; and until we amend, we are compelled to endure it. And
again, who is eaten with the zeal of Gods house? why, he that endeavors and
desires to amend all that he sees amiss; he rests not; if he cannot amend
it, he endures it, he sigh's: the grain is not tossed out of the floor; it
endures the chaff, that it may enter into the granary when the chaff is
winnowed out. 4 We adhere not so to tradition, that we universally receive all
that which was done or said of old: things delivered by some, but not generally
received by the Church, we esteem but superstructions of particular men, or
superseminations, which possibly may spread far, as many pernicious opinions
have done; yet no sober man ever took them for Apostolical, or so much as
Ecclesiastical traditions: we neither reject any tradition which appears to
be Apostolical (if not peculiar to their times, or suited peculiarly to
certain times, places, or persons) nor do we rashly receive any tradition for
such, except we are certain that the Scripture determines nothing against it,
or where strong consequence from thence justifies it. 5 We conceive Augustines
rule herein to be good: In those things (says he) concerning which divine
Scripture determines nothing certainly, the custom of Gods people, or
institution of our ancestors are to be held for a law -- otherwise, endless
contention will arise -- also we must beware that the calm of charity be not
clouded by the storm of contention. 6 We will not rashly dissent from reverend
antiquity, wherein it dissenteth not from the truth: we love peace with all who
hold that in fundamentalls at least, and therefore will follow Augustin's
advice, in that he piously says concerning his reader -- where (says he) he
knows his error, Ubi errorem suum cognoscit, redeat ad me; ubi meu^, revocet
me, etc. Aug. de triuit. l. 1. c. 2.
let him return to me; where mine, let him recall me: our rule being, that of
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11 1. be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ:
more no good man will require, nor render less to Ancestors. 7 Lastly we say
that the Scripture which you cite, Joh. 6. 53. except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you; is not spoken
concerning a Sacramental, but a spiritual feeding; and although Bellar^^. de
sacr. Euch l. 1. c. 5. 7. ib. l. 2. c. 8. ib. l. 4. c. 25. Goster Enchirid. de
Eucharist. Sacr. 7. Suares. disp. p. 46. Sec. 2. Maldon in Joh. 6. Gab^.
Vasquez. disp. 179. c. 4. ^^ Aquin. 3a. q. 65. a. 4. 2m. dicit illud -- est
intelligendum de spirituali m^nducatione. Sci Pet. Lombard. did. 8. D. Did.
9. A. B. Jansenius concord. Evang. c. 59. Dan. Chamier Panstrat. To. 4. l. 11.
c. 3. 4.
* some of the Jesuits and other Papists contend against us herein, yet ^^
some of the most sober of them acknowledge that those words are not to be
understood concerning eating or receiving the Lords super; which ours generally
maintain: you might do your self right to join with us, and not with the most
eager Jesuits concerning the spiritual feeding of infants to eternal life by
the merit of Christ applied to them for their Union with him, and salvation in
and by him, we willingly accord: the manner of effecting by the secret power of
the holy Ghost, we enquire not after, because it is not revealed, but for the
reasons alleged, we give them not the communion.

Next you say -- If Anabaptist shall be a name of disgrace, why shall not some
other name be invented for them that deny to communicate infants, which shall
be equally disgraceful, etc?] That would be a rare invention indeed: but if to
call Anabaptists Anabaptists, be just, why find you fault with it? if evil or
unjust, why consult you how to imitate it by way of revenge? is it not a shame
to be such, as we are or may well be ashamed to be called? truly we allow not
any disgraceful name or reviling; but know that the name injureth not where
the thing it self is not disgraceful: some name we must distinguish them by: if
you can invent a more true and proper one, we shall be beholding to you for an
invention, and they for a new name. Next you say,

That the discourse of S. Peter, Page 233. Nam. 19.
which is pretended for the intitling infants to the promise of the holy Ghost,
and by consequence to baptism, which is supposed to be its instrument and
conveyance, is wholly a fancy, and has in it nothing of certainty
ordemonstration, and not much probability.] We answer: your words carry a
dangerous show of blasphemy, but we desire to allow them the fairest
interpretation which can be made of them, and suppose you meant not to say (as
the connection of your words imports) that S. Peter's discourse is wholly a
fancy, etc. but either that the pretense from these words intitling infants to
the promise of the holy Ghost, and so by consequence to baptism, or as you
after affirm, that baptism is not the means of conveying the holy Ghost,
some of these you take to be wholly a fancy. Page 234.
To which we reply; that we neither affirm, nor conceive that these words of
S. Peter had a promise for infants as such, to receive the extraordinary, and
visible gifts of the holy Ghost which then flourished in the primitive Church,
and which men of years commonly after baptism then received; but that promise
was for present addressed to S. Peter's hearers which were pricked in their
hearts and said unto Peter and the rest of the Apostles, men and brethren what
shall we do? and to whom Peter said, repent and be baptized every one of you,
etc. to which he encourages them by three arguments or motives: first from
Gods abundant mercy in the remission of their sins, however grievous. Secondly
from his gracious benificence, as well in giving, as forgiving, and ye shall
receive the gifts, etc. for your confirmation. Thirdly from the extent of Gods
federall promise; for the promise is to you and your children: that promise is
recorded Genesis 17. 7. I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy
seed after thee, to be a God unto thee and thy seed after thee, etc. these
words S. Peter relates to, when he persuaded them to receive baptism the seal
of Gods new covenant with them in Christ, Romans 4. 11.
a seal of the same righteousness of faith in Christ; and he brings down
infants right to the seal of the covenant with Abraham's carnal seed (that is,
circumcision) to their right to the seal of the covenant with his spiritual
seed under the gospel, that is baptism for the remission of sins: so that if
S. Peter's argument may pass with you for demonstration, and not be mistaken
for a fancy, this shows the right and title which infants have to baptism,
grounded on the sure promise of God, which the Apostle well knew was first
sealed with infantcircumcision, as well as circumcision of proselyted men of
years; and therefore applies it to the seal of the promise under the gospel,
to wit baptism: Be baptized every one of you^ who? all those to whom the
promise of God is: that is, you and your children, for the promise is to you
and them. But you say,

This is a promise that concerns them, as they are reasonable creatures, etc.
This is a reasonlesse assertion: for it baptism concern them as they are
reasonable creatures, then all such are concerned herein: and so the promise
which S. Peter there mentions, is to all reasonable creatures, Acts 2. 38, 39.
Jews, Turks, Painims, for these are all reasonable creatures, and may in
their conversion have a title to it, in proportion to their nature: The
argument is fallacious a non causa pro causa (except the causa stolida, or
causa sine qua non) though none but reasonable creatures have interest herein,
yet all reasonable creatures have it not; neither always; as in unbelief,
impenitency, or out of the covenant, as infants of unbelieving parents: it is
not their reason, but Gods covenant which gives them interest in the promise of
salvation and all things thereto subordinate and belonging. Note here, to what
unreasonable conclusions wilful error will lead men at last: what more
perverse, then in the prosecution of their dislike to infant baptism, See Mr.
Cobbet explicat. Luke 18. 15. Pa. 126.
to allow more to children of professed enemies of Christ, as Turks and Jews,
then to infants of Christian parents with whom God made his covenant of grace
and mercy? They affirm that even infants of Turks and Jews are sanctified in
the moment of their birth, Mr. Fisher in his dispute at Folkston in Kent. March
10 1650.
but will not allow children of believing parents baptism, which is but the
external seal of the covenant, which the very reprobate may, and does sometime
receive at their hands, who cannot judge of any persons final estate: and who
knows not, that sanctification is incomparably greater and more excellent then
the external seal: this man can give, that God only can give, and gives it to
the elect only; and without that, the external seal shall avail nothing. But
you go on.

Besides this, I say, the words mentioned in S. Peter's Sermon (which are the
only record of the promise) are interpreted upon a weak mistake: the promise
belongs to you, and to your children; therefore infants are actually receptive
of it in that capacity.] Certainly Gods promise is of that invincible strength
that whosoever pleads against it, none (no not the gates of hell) shall ever
overthrow it: and as certainly the inference was strong once, upon the same
ground, when God had made the promise to Abraham and his seed; and therefore,
and then his infants in that capacity were receptive, actually receptive, of
the seal of the same righteousness of faith: and certainly infants do no less
belong to the covenant and Church of God, Jerem. Basting, de baptism.
then those that are of years of discretion, which is evident by Gods promise
made unto Abraham, I will establish my covenant between me and thee, Quaest.
74. 4. See the learned and judicious Mr. Richard Baxter, on Matthew. 28. 19.
plain Scripture proof of infants Church Membership, and baptism.
and thy seed after thee -- this is my covenant -- every male child among you
shall be circumcised -- he that is eight days old shall be circumcised -- the
very same promise does S. Peter rehearse and expound Act. 2. 39. for to you is
the promise, and to your children, and to all that are a far off, even as
many as the Lord our God shall call: for indeed, by one spirit we are all
baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, etc. And let the
reader mark, that after the Apostle had exhorted every one of them to be
baptized for the remission of sins, Genes. 1^. 7. 10, 12.
he deriveth not the ground and reason thereof from their age, 1 Cor. 12, 13.
nor from their repentance, nor from their years of discretion, but from the
promise of God, which was no less to their children in that very capacity,
then to themselves: for the sign of the covenant, Baptism, appertains to
them also, as being partakers of the common salvation in Christ, Lastly, how
our infants have forfeited or lost the capacity, which it is most certain the
infants of Jews had, I know not, nor will the pleader ever make it appear to
us. You say further,

But he, that whenever the word (children) is used in Scripture shall by
(children) understand infants, must needs believe, that in all Israel there
were no men, but all were infants: and if that had been true, it had been the
greater wonder they should overcome the Anakims, and beat the King of Moab, and
march so far, and discourse so well, for they were all called the children of
Israel. We know the word ( children) imports not always infants; what then?
because it does not in every place of Scripture signify infants, Videat
jui^ult. V. Schindler. pentegl^^ in ^^
therefore does it not any where, no not where infants are spoken of? the
promise before specified was to all Israel, Page 212. E 213. c. 214 c. l. Genesis
17. ^. Act. 2. 39.
and their infants, and unto them the seal of the covenant and promise
appertained; but because the men of wisdom and valor were included under the
name of children, were there no infants among them? or do you not take a child
of eight days old (when it was by Gods command and covenant to receive the
seal) to be an infant? and why not now? seeing the promise is as well and sure
to us, who (though then far off) have now by the free mercy of God, been
called to the saving knowledge of the gospel: for that promise of God to
Abraham, did not so belong to his seed according to the flesh, as that it
appertains not unto us also: for the Apostle clearly testifies, that it was
not given to Abraham or his seed through the law, but through the righteousness
of faith -- and he was the father of all them that believe, though they be not
circumcised, that righteousness might be impured to them also -- and again he
says -- they which are of faith, Romans 4. 11. 13. Gal. 3. 7.
the same are the children of Abraham: so Christ said that Zache converted to
the same faith, Luke 1^. 9.
was that day the son of Abraham: and indeed the eternal covenant which God
made with Abraham's seed, that he would be their God, is not chiefly verified
in his carnal seed, for very few of them for some hundred years last past have
been Gods people, but rather professed enemies to those that are: and therefore
that covenant must be understood of Abraham's children according to that
promise, which is as sure and well to us who believe, as ever it was to the
Israelites: and so we and our children are as justly to be reckoned children of
Abraham, and heirs of that promise, as they ever were: and if within the
covenant, and heirs of the same promise, what incapacity barreth our children
from the same privileges thereto subordinate, and from the seal of admittance
unto the same, more then barred the carnal or natural children of Abraham
from the seal of the covenant, which then was in use?

And for the allegation of S. Paul, that infants are holy if their parents be
faithful, Page 233. Numb. 20.
it signifies nothing but that they are holy by designation, just as Jeremy,
and John Baptist were sanctified in their mothers womb, that is, they were
appointed and designed for holy ministeries, etc.] We answer, whether you mean
literally by holy ministries, the office of priest or prophet; or mystically,
Rev. 1. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
a royal priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifice acceptable to God by
Jesus Christ, that which you affirm will appear very false; for many of the
children of believers, are neither priests, prophets, nor so sanctified as to
offer up spiritual sacrifice acceptable to God: now the Apostle says not,
else were some of your children unholy; but, 1 Cor. ^. 14.
now are they holy, without exception of any: so that his words being
infallibly true, there must be some such holiness there intended, as
universally concerns all that are born of believing parents; which cannot be
true in your sense of disignation to holy ministries, nor in the other sense
concerning sanctification by the spirit of adoption and regeneration peculiar
to the elect of God: nor is it to be understood, as some think, of a mere
political cleanness (seeing that, out of the Church also, there is a
difference between the legitimate and spurious children) it must be understood
therefore of a federall, or ecclesiastical holiness, to which reprobates (if
born of believing parents, or at least of either parent being a believer, and
within the covenant) may have right as well as the elect: so had Ismael, Esau,
and millions more, as well as Isaac and Jacob, by this federall or
ecclesiastical holiness they have right unto the seal of initiation, and
admittance into the Church; whereas they who are born of both parents without
the Church, are counted unclean, that is, Gods promise and the seal thereof
appertain not unto them: neither may they be baptized, until growing up and
being instructed, they repent and embrace the faith of Christ, and it is not
improbable which some say, that the form of the Apostles speaking seems
derived from the Leviticall law; in which it was ordained, Jo. Gerhard. de S.
Bap. S 4. de paedobapt.
that some persons should for a time be barred (as unclean) from coming within
the tents of Israel: so the children of infidels are unclean, and not presently
to be admitted into the Church by baptism which is the door and inlet thereto,
ever standing open to the clean: and as under the law, some beasts were clean
and some unclean, that is by a Leviticall or ceremonial cleanesse, or
uncleanesse, for it was neither spiritual, nor civil: so the Apostle 1 Cor.
7. 14. understands an ecclesiastical holiness, D. Mencer. To. 3. disp. 14.
these. 116. citat. a J. Ge^h. quo sup.
that is, a Church -- privilege, to be admitted to baptism: so that indeed
the Pleader weakly mistaketh when he concludes, that just so the children of
Christian parents are sanctified, that is, designed to the service of Jesus
Christ, and the future participation of the promises: but he says further,

And as the promise appertains not (for ought appears) to infants in that
capacity and consistence, but only by the title of their being reasonable
creatures, and when they come to that act of which by nature they have the
faculty, etc. Page 234. Number. 21.
] No color or proportion can appear to the blind, or those who wilfully shut
their eyes, nor any truth, be it never so evident to them on whom is the curse
Isai. 6. 9, 10. Matthew. 13. 14, 15.
As for that you say concerning the title of their being reasonable creatures,
I refer the reader to that which has been answered, Numb. 19. Page 226.
Only adding here: if the promise of God appertain to infants only as they
are reasonable creatures, what was the privilege of the Jew, or what profit
was there of circumcision? Romans 3. 1. 2^
the Apostle says, much every way: and what is the advantage of the believing
Christians child, and Gods covenant with them? what, no more then of Turks,
and Jews? where is then that promise, Genes. 1^. 7. Act. 2. 39.
I will be a God unto thee, and thy seed, interpreted by S. Peter, the promise
is to you and your children, and to as many as the Lord our God shall call?
what, is it of force only to men and women of years; where is the infants part?
where is his privilege of federall holiness, as being borne of believing
parents? What must they be interessed only when they come to that act of which
by nature they have the faculty? That is the act of understanding, faith and
repentance? In those acts, the persons and children of Turks, and Jews have a
right in the same promises; you cannot exclude any person from baptism, who
believes in Christ, repents, and desires baptism at your hands: Thus you
make the promise of God concerning the children of the faithful of no effect,
by your tradition and vain opinion. But to amend this, you say,

Baptism is not the means of conveying the holy Ghost.] I suppose you mean the
ordinary gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, as faith, love, hope, sanctity,
etc. if not, there may be a double fallacy in your assertion: First in the term
( conveying) and next in the term ( holy Ghost) both which may be homonymically
intended; and then your discourse is merely captions; and ^o discover it, is a
sufficient answer: and indeed by your following words, ( God by that miracle
did give testimony, etc.) it seems you mean, that baptism is not now the
ordinary means of conveying the holy Ghost, that is, the gift of miracles unto
the baptized: if so, here is both an homonymia, and an ignoratio elenchi: Your
reason being reduced to a Syllogism, you might take these words ( the holy
Ghost) for the ordinary gifts and graces of God, necessary to salvation, in the
one proposition, and for the extraordinary in the other, and so the question
were mistaken; which is not whether baptism be an ordinary means of conveying
the extraordinary gifs of the holy Ghost into the baptized, as speaking diverse
unstudied languages, curing the sick, raising the dead, casting out devils,
etc. which we affirm not; but whether baptism (as the word preached) be not the
external ordinary means by God appointed, to seal us up to a lively hope in
Christ, to beget faith, and to engage us to repentance and newness of life? to
which, all that you here trifle concerning imposition of hands, and insinuation
of rite to confirmation, is nothing to purpose; neither is the case of
Cornelius and Peter's argument thereon, any ways advantageous to you: for, you
confess it a miracle; and how then is it pertinent to our present question? You
say, that God by that miracle, did give testimony, that the persons of the men
were in great disposition to heaven, and therefore were to be admitted to those
rites, which are the ordinary inlets into the kingdom of heaven: I then demand,
if that argument be good, Are not children of believing parents to be admitted
to those rites which are the ordinary inlets into the kingdom of heaven, seeing
they are also in great disposition to heaven whom Christ blessed, and proposed
for paterns to all that shall enter therein? But we answer, 1. That the great
disposition which you talk of, was not so much the gift of miracles, as the
persons inward baptism by the spirit of regeneration and sanctification: for
the gift of miracles is not of it self, any certain argument of salvation: see
Matthew 7. 22, 23. but this was a sufficient warrant to Peter to baptize them, as
being marked out thereby for the visible Church at least, into which elect and
reprobate may come. 2. To the main we answer, That as by delivering a key,
putting in possession of an house is not only signified, but also livery and
seisin, Basting. quo sup, de bapt. in^^. 1.
the conveyance and chirogrophu^^ are passed, confirmed and actually made sure:
So in baptism by water, the washing which is wrought by the blood of Christ,
^^^ de relig. Christian. par, ^. conclus. 9.
is not only figured, but also at last fulfilled in the elect by Christ. 3. In
a right use of the Sacraments, the things thereby signified are ever held out
and conveyed together with the fignes, which are neither fallacious, empty, nor
void of a due effect, or without the thing represented (because they are of
God, who cannot deceive, and is able to give the effect) if the receiver do not
ponere obicem: therefore the Sacraments are rightly called the Channels or
Conduits of grace, that is, the ordinary means to convey the graces of God into
the receivers. Math. 20. Luke 10. 16.
4. God confirms his mercies to us by the Sacraments, wherein the Minister, by
Gods own deputation, bears his person or place in the Church, as well as in
preaching the word, so that what they do (who are his Ministers) by his
appointment, he does, both in respect of the institution and effect. So the
Lord is said to have a^ointed Saul, whereas Samuel ^nointed him: 1 Samuel 10. 11
so Jesus made and baptized more disciple then John, Joh. 4. 1, 2.
whereas Jesus baptized no^, but his disciples, by his assignement: Therefore
although these signs neither convey grace, nor confirm any thing to them for
good who keep not the Covenant (for God made no promise to them) yet are they
means to convey the graces of God to those that do. To conclude, we affirm not
that baptism conveyeth Gods grace to all that are baptized, but to the elect
only, as that whereof he has made a peculiar promise to them; and that so
certain as are those things which God himself seals, covenanteth for, and
testifies in heaven and earth; as it is written, There are threo that bear
record in heaven, the father, the word, and the holy Ghost -- and there are
three that bear witness in earth, the spirit, and the water, and the blood. --
Now if we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater. 1 John 5.
7. etc.
Under the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word must be confirmed, and
taken for sure; how much more when we have by Gods blessing, the same witnesses
of our faith, who are also the promisers (workers, and sureties of our
salvation? Si in tribus testibus stabit omne verbum, quanto magis dum habemus
per benedictionem eosdem arbitros fidei, quos and sponsores salutis. Tertul. de
bapt. c. 6.


But from thence (you say) to argue, that wherever there is a capacity of
receivinig the same grace, there also the same sign is to be ministered, and
from thence to infer poede-baptism, is an argument very fallacious, etc.] Quis
tulerit Gracchos --? your dispute is fallacious upon your grounds, on which we
go not; and so all your impertinent superstruction here falls together.

They that are capable of the same grace, are not always capable of the same
sign: for women under the law of Moses, although they were capable of the
righteousness of faith, yet they were not capable of the sign of
circumcision.] I would gladly be resolved, quanta est illa propositio? is your
meaning, Some of them that are capable of the same grace, are not always
capable of the sign thereof? If so, alta pax esto: We say so too: for infants,
being capable of the same grace which is exhibited and received in the Lords
supper, are not always (that is, while they are children) capable of the same
sign, because they cannot examine themselves, nor show forth the Lords death:
and women not only under the Law, but now also have and ever will have for
ought you can say, the same incapacity of circumcision; what makes this to
conclude childrens incapacity of baptism? this is to argue a genere ad genus;
though women had not a capacity of that sign, they have a capacity of baptism;
infants had then a right to that whereof they had a capacity: let them have so
still, and the controversy is ended. You further say,

The gift of the holy Ghost -- was ordinarily given by imposition of hands, and
that after baptism.] By this it appears, Page 235. Concerning imposicion of
hands, see the learned Animadversion of N Homes upon Mr. Tombs his exercit.
about infant-bapt. page 59. 60. Page 235. Number. 22.
that your foregoing argument was fallacious, you intending the extraordinary
gifts of the holy Ghost, which we pretend not to; and what is this dispute to
us now, or to the present question, seeing they are long since ceased? But
beware your lying too near a wind, and mentioning crisme, or confirmation and
sanctifying the holy Apostles, displease not your clyents, and you be taken for
an ambodexter. But you say,

After all this, lest these arguments should not ascertain their cause, they
fall on complaing against God, etc.] Tell true, and shame the devil: where? to
whom? when? which of all the reformed Churches ever did so? We clearly affirm
that God is ever, U^sin. de Christ. relig. par. 2.
and alike to be believed, whether by signs, or by words which signify his
will: we say not that God did more for the children of the Jews; but that your
peevishness, denying children baptism, would have it seem so. Do we then
complain against God, when we complain of the Anabaptists abridging children of
that which God has allowed them? How vain and ma^tious is this calumny of
yours? But you say,

He made a covenant of spiritual promises on his part, and spiritual and real
services on ours.] What are these real services, and whose? if of children,
what can they, as such, perform? but you say, this pertains to children when
they are capable, but made with them as soon as they are alive (that is in the
mothers womb) what this? this covenant? so the words seem to import: nay, but
undeniably Gods covenant and spiritual promises on his part, presently belong
to them who shall be saved, for many of them presently die: or mean you by^ (
this) spiritual and real services on our part, belong to children when they are
capable? Surely then they cannot have this covenant made with them as soon as
they are born, otherwise then by baptism; because for the present they can
perform nothing real: If you mean spiritual and real services of parents in
relation to their covenanted infants, as such, they cannot yet teach them; they
can only present them to the Church, that the public seal of Gods covenant
being set to them, they may according to their true interest in her external
communion, be thereby marked, and known for parts and members of the same and
this indeed pertains to children when they are capable, that is, as soon as
they are born. That which you infer to show a disparity between Christian
infants, and the Jews babes, is frivolous: for thoug there appear some show of
difference in circumstance, as the particular promise of the inheritance of
Canaan, etc. yet for substance there is none; there being as real a promise of
blessings to Christians and their children in every kind; for godliness has
the promise of this life, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Tit. 3. 5, 6. etc. Tit. 3. 14.
and that which is to come, and the present seal of faith marketh them for Gods
peculiar people; the effect whereof being wrought and perfected by the spirit
of Jesus in their regeneration, the work is done in them (and no otherwise was
it in the Jews children) for he is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is
that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh, -- but circumcision is that
of the heart, in the spirit, Romans 2. 28, 29. Col 2. 11, ^2, and the Jewish
children were no otherwise sealed then into the same faith of Jesus, nor
otherwise saved, then by faith in him, neither less saved then we and our
child^en.

This ( say you) is the greatest vanity in the world page 136.
] What vanity? you say, to affirm that unless this mercy be consigned by
baptism, as good not at all in respect of us, because we want the comfort of
it. This is the vanity -- well let it be so; and let them own it that will: I
known not whom you mean; I am sure there appears vanity enough in your
following assertion, and reason offered for proof.

Shall not (say you) this promise, this word of God be of sufficient truth,
certainty, and efficacy, to cause comfort, unless we tempts God, and require a
sign of him?] Yes, Gods promise is of sufficient truth and certain efficacy
thereto: therefore we baptize our children: and it had been sufficient on Gods
part, and it must have been on ours, had he not seen good further to confirm us
by a seal set to his promise; or had he not required more of us, as our duty
and a condition and seal of his covenant with us and our children: for as
Augustine says, how much available, Luke 23. 42. 47 Quantum valet etiam sine
visibi^i sacramento baptism^, quod ait Ap^stolus, cord creditur ad justitiam,
ere autem confessio fit ad salutem, in illo latrone declaratum ests sed tunc
imple^ur invisibiliter, cum mysterium baptismi non c^ntemptus religienis, sed
articulus necessitatis excludi^^nam multo magis in Cornelio and in amiois ejus,
quam in latrone, possit videri superfluum, ut aqua etiam ^ingerentur in quibus
jam donum spi^i^us Sancti, etc Aug. de bapt. co^tr. Donat. l. 4. c. 22.^.
even without the visible Sacrament of baptism, is that which the Apostle
says Romans 10. 10. with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with
the mouth Confession is made unto salvation, was declared in the penitent
thief: but then it is invisibly fulfilled, when not any contempt of religion,
but a point or moment of necessity, excludes or preventeth baptism: for it
might have seemed much more superfluous in Cornelius and his friends to be
baptized, who had already received the gift of the holy Ghost, then in the
thief: yet they were baptized: and in that act, the Apostolical authority is
extant, as also the necessity of obeying God in his ordinance: now how childish
and perverse is that cavil -- unless we tempt God, and require a sign of
him? Do you account obedience to God and his holy ordinances, to be a tempting
of God? is bringing children to Christ (which he commands) and that by
baptism (which you confess is the ordinary inlet into the kingdom of heaven)
to require a sign of him, or is it to receive a sign of him by his own
appointment? and what certainity of comfort could we concieve, if on the
contrary, we should wilfully disobey, neglect, and contemn Gods ordinance, as
your clients do? were it not rather to tempt God, if (as much as in us lies) we
should shut up the door and inlet into his kingdom against infants? man can
do no more to shut them out, then by denying them baptism: it is true, that God
can, and often does save them without our ministry, as when death preventeth
our baptising them; but to neglect the ordinary means of our own or others
salvation, and to put it on the extraordinary power of God, is to tempt God: if
I should ask you, why you eat, or feed your infants, seeing God can preserve
you and them without food? you would easily say, to neglect the ordinary means,
were to tempt God, so it is here. But you say.

A wicked and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, etc.] Possibly, Mr.
Fisher at his Ashford-conference was beholding to you for this opprobrie, See
Mr. Wilcocks infant. baptism maintained. Page 2.
and abuse of holy Scripture; but we entreat you seriously and timely to
consider the severity of the Judge who has said concerning any that take his
name in vain, Exodus 20.
I will not hold him guiltless, and whether pernicious playing with holy
Scripture, and wilful perverting the sense thereof, fall not under the
sentence of self-destruction: consider the terrors which Christ uses Matthew 12.
38. 39. 2 Pet. 3. 16.
and Matthew. 16. 4. the thing which the Scribes and Pharisees required;
was(...)which word, though it signify diverse things, as may appear by
comparing Mat. 14. 3. and 26. 48. Luke 2. 12. Romans 4. 11. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 17. yet
is it more then manifest, (...)Joh. 4. 48. Acts 2. 43. Acts 4. 3. Acts 5. 12.
Acts 6. 8. Acts 7. 37. etc.(...)Quod praeter naturam st natum ib. suid.
portentum, etc. Stephan. saepe de inusitat is and insolius. se^ monsiris ^
prodigius, etc Tr^st. lex. svr. p. 186.
that they required a miracle, and that extraordinary, and above all those
divine works of Christ, which hitherto they had ever seen, as casting out
devils, raising the dead, etc. they required a sign from or out of heaven,
Matthew. 16. 1. Mark. 8. 11. and then Christ answered, a wicked and adulterous
generation seeks after a sign; that is(...)a wonder; which words are often
joined to express the same thing;(...)commonly signifies a prodigy, or
monster. Suidas gives it by(...), praeter ordinariamrationem formatum, praeter
naturam genitum: such a sign as begets admiration and amazement in the
beholders; and so the Syriack Joh. 4, 48, expresses it by a word coming of
that verb which signifies, to be amazed, or very much to admire: now I
appeal to your conscience; do we seek any such sign or miracle from heaven,
when we bring children to be baptized? (...)Tremel. and M. Trost. Sir.
Test.(...)a verbo(...) Ethpah. stupuit, obstupuit Joh. Buxtorf. Jun. lex.
Chald. and sir. Val. Shindl. Pent^n(...)Jo. 8. 39. 44.
is not this froathy- Rethorick? you confess baptism to be the ordinary inlet
into the kingdom of heaven; and is an ordinary thing a sign or miracle?
consider also the persons of whom Christ spoke; they were a wicked and an
adulterous generation: for though they pretended to be Abraham's children, yet
neither heiring him in faith or works, but degenerating from him, they
deservedly heard -- ye are of your father the devil: if this present generation
be such, consider who makes it so; and whether you have any commission to judge
them wicked who profess true faith and obedience to Jesus Christ, and his holy
gospel, in all things, that any shall, or can make appear to us to be the
truth? But you say

The truth^out is, this argument is nothing but a direct quarrelling with
almighty God.] The untruth of this assertion is so evident, that it were but
lost labor to bestow more words to refute it.

Now since there is no strength in the doctrinall part, etc.] Page 236.
I appeal to the judicious reader; Numb. 23.
let him judge what strength has appeared in your oppositions, concerning the
words which you here multiply to little if any purpose. I shall say no more,
but only mark the strength of the pleaders present argument, the sum whereof
is; Some Apostolical traditions were pro loco and tempore, accommodate to
place and time (as the forementioned, love -- feasts, saluting with an holy
kiss, anointing the sick absteining from blood, etc.) therefore no
Apostolical traditions passed an engagement upon following ages. We answer: we
contend not for any such traditions as were pro loco and tempore, yet does it
not follow that because all Apostolical traditions engage not posterities,
therefore none do, as in that instance concerning the sabbath, I suppose you
will accord with us. But you say

Because other parallel expressions of Scripture do determine and expound
themselves to a sense that includes not all persons absolutely, but of a
capable condition, as, Adorate eum omnes gentes, and psallite Deo, etc.]
Suppose all that granted what then? you would infer that infants have not a
condition capable of baptism, because some other places of Scripture are
relating to capahcity; what makes this against the baptism of infants, who
being within Gods covenant are therefore capable of the feal thereof, as they
were under the law, although even then the Scripture saying psallite Deo omnes,
etc. said that to those only who could sing to God and praise him, and not unto
infants of eight-dayes old to be circumcised? who know's not, that God
commanded several things with respect to several capacities? does the
incapacity in respect of one command, conclude an incapacity of all? women were
not capable of circumcision, nor of the office of teaching in the congregation,
nor of execution of priestly offices; yet they also could and ought to sing to
the Lord, and were of that part of nations commanded to praise the Lord. Psalm.
148. 12. Psalm. 149. 3, 5. Exodus 15. 20, 21. ^udg. 5. 1. Infants had not a
capacity of singing praises to God, they had of circumcision, and therefore
they were then circumcised, though they could not sing: infants cannot sing
now, therefore that precept, sing unto the Lord, etc. concerns them not for
present; but they can be baptized as such, therefore that precept baptize all
nations, reaches unto them; you say more,

As for the conjecture concerning the family of Stephanas, at the best it is
but a conjecture, and besides that it is not proved that there were children in
the family: yet if that were granted, it follows not that they were baptized,
because by (whole families) in scripture is meant all persons of reason and age
within the family] Page 236. 237. Numb. 24. 1 Cor. 1. 16.
Admit that to be conjectural, and we take it for no more; yet it is no light
conjecture, (...)Tremel.(...)
(the Syriac gives it and filij domus ^jus omnes, speaking of the keeper of the
prison, Act. 16. 33.) that children were baptized with the rest of the family:
for though ^^ there also may signify any domestic, yet certainly it signifies
a child also, and children were usually domestics: but it can be no more then
a light conjecture of Anabaptists, that there were no infants in this family,
or that of Stephanas which Paul baptized; howsoever it can be no conjecture,
but certain truth, that in all nations there ever were and still are, a great
part infants; and it is more then conjecturall, that the Apostles did as Christ
commanded them, saying baptize all nations; as for that which you say, in
Scripture is meant all persons of reasons and age within the family, because it
is said that the ruler at Capernaum believed, and all his house: is that
proposition universal? do you affirm that by whole families, is ever meant
all persons of age within the family, and such only? if so, your assertion is
apparently false; but if your proposition be particular, it falls short of
our cause; for what can it hurt it, Gen 1:5. Acts. 3 23.(...) omnes familiae
terrae. 70.(...). Acts 2. 39. See Lev. 25. 10 Numb 2. 34. and 3. 15. 39. and
18. 31. and 33. 54. Levit. 25. 13. Number. 20. 22. Acts 7. 10. Romans 4. 16. and 10.
12. and 11. 31. Matthew. 12 15. 1 Cor. 10. 1. 2. etc. I The. ^. 12 2 These. 3. 16.
18. 1 Timothy 4. 10. Joh. 11. 50, etc.
if by all, or whole families in Scripture, sometimes is meant all persons of
reason and age? deal ingenuously then; do you affime that by whole, or all,
the Scripture does always mean, persons of reason and age? what does God,
when he said to Abraham -- and in thee all the families of the earth shall be
blessed; does he mean only all persons of age? are children in their nonage
excluded from the blessing in Christ? Nay but the Apostle says expressly, the
promise is unto you, and to your children: and such Christ blessed, and of such
is the kingdom of heaven. Does the Scripture, Genes. 7. 21^ saying all flesh
dyed -- every man -- mean only all of reason and age? were the infants
excepted? many places of Scripture may show the vanity of this your assertion:
but if your proposition be particular, that is, that sometimes the Scripture by
whole families means persons of reason (that is who have the use of reason) and
age: we can grant it you. I add; sometimes, all, signifies only a great part;
as Mat. 10. 22 ye shall be hated of all men for my name sake: that is of many:
times in the Hebrew manner of speaking it signifies, none, or not any one: as
Psalm. 147. 20. he has not done so(...), to all, or every nation: Est autem and
hoc Scripturae idioma utomnes dicat pro pluribus. Euth. in Matthew. 10.
that is, not to any; so Exodus 12. 43. (...), etc. every son of a stranger
shall not eat thereof, that is none: now would you have the sense of Christ's
words go and baptize all nations, to be, go and baptize some nations, or a
major part of the nations? the evidence of the truth is against that, as well
as against the other, go and baptize none; but you would feign have it, go and
baptize those that are persons of reason and age within the nations: show us
any such precept of Christ, and we will obey it; in the mean time we must do
that which we know he commanded us, that is, baptize all nations, all against
whom we find no exception: and why should we look for exception in families,
seeing we find none mentioned by our Savior in nations? but you would have
here, a limitation to capacity, which you think infants have not: first we say,
show us any Scripture-proofe for such limitation: secondly we say that although
the incapacity of an infant limit a command where there appears a present
impossibility of doing that which God in general commands (as where he says
believe, repent, confess your sins, sing unto God, praise him, etc) for God
commands no impossibilities: yet where it is possible that the command may be
fulfilled, there lies no such limitation: now you will not say that it is
impossible for infants to be baptized: if you say they ought not to be baptized
until they can actually believe, repent, etc. we must answer you with your
own: this is unmanlike to build upon such slight and aerie conjectures: as are
humane fancies, to forbid infants baptism; and when you can bring us no solid
ground for that you would have, to beg the question. But you say, P. 237. Nu.
25.


Tradition by all means must supply the place of Scripture: and there is
pretended a tradition Apostolical, that infants were baptized, etc.] You seem
here to speak three things: first, that when we cite traditions, we use them
in place of Scripture, or for defect of Scripture-proofe: which to deny, is
confutation enough until you can show which of us so pretend to tradition.
Secondly in your following words you pretend, that we sometimes reject
Apostolical tradition (for of that you speak) to which we say, that when the
quaestion is concerning a tradition of the gospel or Apostles, (...). Ephiphan.
To. 2. exposit. fidei(...). Council. Gangrens. Canon. 21. Severin. Bin. Council.
To. 1. Jud. 12. v. de quibus Council. La^dicen. Can. 28. 16. Bin. Quod traditum
tenet universitas Ecclesiae, cum parvuli infantes Laptizantur. Aug. To. 7. part
1^ de bapt. contra Donat. l. 4. c. 23, etc.
as Epiphanius speaks, we receive it; and with an ancient Council wish that
those things may be done in the Church, which were delivered by divine
Scripture or Apostolical tradition; which we add hereto, though we have no
reason to admit of all that is alleged for such: as for those things which the
Apostles desivered in compliance with particular times, places, or persons, as
anointing with oil, saluting with an holy kiss, lovefeasts, etc. they were
necessary then and to that people who had been long accustomed thereto, of whom
a gospelChurch was now to be gathered; but they were neither universally
prescribed, neither do they concern us now. Next we say with S. Augustine; the
whole Church holds by tradition the baptism of infants; and that being
continually observed, we justly believe to have been delivered and confirmed by
Apostolical tradition. But you say,

So far as it can appear, it relies wholly upon the testimony of Origin; for
from him Augustine had it, etc.] Yet before you affirmed, that infant baptism
was Augustin's device; how had Augustine it from Origin if it were Augustin's
device? That it was neither his device, neither that it relyeth wholly upon the
testimony of Origin, many other testimonis by us alleged, make manifest; as
Dionysius, Dionys. Hierar. c. ult. Jrenae. l. 2. c. 39. Cyprian l. 2. cp. 8. ad
Fidum. Amb. de Abraham. l. 2. c. 11. nec senex (inquit) nec infans vernaculus
excipitur, quia ^mnis ^^ peccato obnoxia, and ideo omnis aetas sacramento
idenea; nus^um excipit, non infintem, etc. Hieronym. contra Pelag. 1. 3.
Jrenaus, Cyprian, Ambros Jerome, Cyril, Gre. Nazianzen, Basil, etc. as also
ancient, Councils, as that of ^arthage An^. 407. the Milevitan. An^. 420, etc.
to conclude, we rely not upon the testimony of man, though we reverence holy
antiquity, but on the command of Christ and the Apostles practices, baptising
whole nations without any appearing exception to infants of believing parents;
and therefore you following inferences either nothing concern, or nothing hurt
us. You say further,

There was no command of Scripture to oblige children to the susception of it.]
No command to children to oblige them! a dainty caption: neither was there any
command to infants to oblige them to the susception of circumcision; for they
could neither act nor understand that or any other command: The command was to
the parents for present, and to children for the future: therefore, if you
mea^e that there was no command of Scripture to oblige ^s to the baptizing of
infants, the contrary appears Matthew. 28. 19. But you require express terms:
we rejoyns; what express terms in Scripture have you to prove that there is
an holy Trinity in the unity of the deity? or for the abrogating the Jewish
Sabbath, and observation of our Lord-day Sabbath, or for women's receiving the
Lords supper, or for your rebaptizing, or dipping over head and ears? But you
say,

The necessity of pedobaptism was not determined in the Church till in the
eighth age after Christ; but in the year 418. in the Milevitan Council -- never
till then] What necessity speak you of? de necessitate medii, in respect of
infants salvation, as if they could not be saved without it? we maintain it
not; if you mean such a necessity on our part, as binds us to obedience, that
is, to baptize infants of believing parents; we say with S. Augustine, the
custom of our mother the Church in baptizing infants is not at all to be
despised, Consuet^ch tamen ^atris ecclesiae in baptizandis paruxlis,
nequaquanispernenda est; neque ulla modo superflua deputanda, nec omnin^
credenda nisi Apostolica esset traditio. August. de Genes. ad lit. l. 10. c.
23. vid. ad Numb. 13. p. 229.
or by any means to be esteemed superfluous, nor to be believed any other then
an Apostolical tradition; the ground hereof is laid down, l. 3. c. 24. Contra
Donat. before by us cited, to which I refer the reader; the sum is, That
whatsoever is universally observed in all Churches, and no man can say by what
Council it was determined, or when it began, must be thought to have descended
from the tradition of the Apostles themselves, and therefore we hold it as we
are commanded, 2 These. 2.15. and we believe it is necessary to be held, because
it is so commanded. That which you say, that it was not determined in the Church
till in the eighth age after Christ, and but in the year 418. in the Milevitan
Council, will easily appear false: for the Council of Carthage in Cyprians
time, who flourished about the year 250. determined that children might be
baptized, and that even before the eight day, against the opinion of Fidus, as
was before noted out of Cyprian; Cyprian. l. 3. ep. 3.
but you say that infant baptism was not determined in the Church until the
Milevitan Council. August ep. 28.


1. I demand, Does a determination by a succeeding Council exclude a
determination of the same thing by a foregoing^ or does it conclude a thing to
be no Apostolical tradition? What think you then of our Christian Sabbath? will
you say that the abrogation of the Jewish Sabbath, that our Christian Sabbath
might succeed, was not an Apostolical tradition, or that it was not
sufficiently determined in the Church until about the year 364. because then
there was a Canon made for the same in the Council of Laodicea? On
uphrius.(...)Council. Laodic. Canon. 29.
Nay but the practice of the Apostles was a sufficient determination thereof:
And truly, Ecclesiastical Canons (as also municipal Laws and Statutes) may with
good reason be made for confirmation of things rightly and long before
sufficiently determined, where some emergent opposition to the former,
requires a due revisal, and further expression, interpretation, or
confirmation of the same.

2. I say, that there needed no determination by a general Council, before any
opposition was made publicly against a received custom of the Church; but so
soon as it was questioned and openly opposed by the Pelagians, then the second
Milevitan Council was called against Pelagius and Celestius. It were but a weak
argument against an Apostolical tradition, if we should find little or no
mention thereof in any writer, in some ages of the Primitive Church; seeing
that besides that there were some of them obscure, generally without
Ecclesiastical Writers; what necessity can be alleged, that in every age some
writers must make particular mention and rehearsal of all Apostolical traditions
or practices of the Church, when an uninterrupted peace thereof sufficed, and
no opposition gave occasion of providing for defense? Indeed when any turbulent
and disobedient spirit of contradiction brake out to disturb the peace and
unity of the Church, then the Ministers disputed, preached, or wrote, as need
required, or Councels were called, which could not come together from diverse
Nations without much trouble and charge; and therefore they were not assembled
except in case of some urgent necessity; and then their Canons were agreed upon
for suppressing of emergent errors, and that in all reason; for what need
arming without an enemy? Celebratum est p^^mum Conciliu^ Hierosolymis. Act. 15.
1. Corranzasum. c^ncil.
to make Statutes, provisions, Ordinances or Canons without some present
danger, might possibly teach men to offend, or err, who without such occasion,
had not minded it at all. The first Apostolical Synod, had an apparent cause;
-- certain men -- taught the brethren, saying, Except ye be circumcised, after
the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved: Then the Apostles and Elders ^ame
together to consider of this matter. Quatuor concilia suscipere and venerari me
fatetor; Nicenum, in quo perversum Arii degma desirui^ur. Constantinepolitanum
-- in quo Eunomii and Maedonii error convincitur. Ephesinum pr^mum, ^n quo
Nestorii impietas judicatur. Calcedonense -- in quo Eutychis Dioscorique
pravitas reprobatur^ Gregor. ep. 24. l.1.
So the four first Councels had their several occasions. The Nicen Council was
called by Constantin, to suppress the damnable heresy of the Arians. The
Council of Constantinople was called against Maedonius and Eunomius denying the
deity of the holy Ghost (in the reign of Gratian and Theodosius.) The Council
of Ephesus (in the reign of Theodosius the younger) against Nestorius and
Caelestius; and the Calcedon Council was gathered against the heresy of
Eutychus and Dioscorus: so was the Council of Gangris against Eustathius: The
first Council of Carthage against the rebaptizing Donatists; the Arelatense was
occasioned by their appeal: and the second Milevitan Council was called against
Pelagius and Caelestius his great Factor, denying infants original sin and
baptism: So that the non determination of a thing for many ages in the Church,
the Church constantly holding and practicing it, proves nothing, but that no
body opposed it all that time; and had Pelagi^u^s heresy concerning
infantbaptism, after the Milevitan Council, and after the writings of Jerome,
Augustine, Optatus and others, still slept, I know not why any man should now
have written, or spoken against it. Severin. Bin. Coneil. To. 1. Carranza. sum.
Council.


I grant (you say) it was practiced in Africa before that time, and they or
some of them thought well of it; and though that be no argument for us to think
so, yet none of them did ever before pretend it to be necessary, none to have
been a precept of the Gospel: St. Augustine was the first that ever preached it
to be absolutely necessary, and that was in his heat and anger against
Pelagius, who had warmed and chased him so in that question, that it made him
innovate in other doctrines possibly of ^^re concernment then this,] You grant
the practice of infant baptism in Africa, and that some of them thought well of
it. It has been proved that an ancient Council there established it, as a
custom of the Church derived from the practice or tradition of the Apostles,
obeying Christ's general precept to baptize all nations: that none of them
before Augustine pretended it to be necessary, cannot be true; for they would
not have practiced a thing of so high concernment, except they ^ad held it to
be necessary on the part of the administrers. Further I say that the Churches
of Africa were of a very ancient plantation, See Rev. 1. 11. Act. 19. 10.(...).
Epiphan. haeref. 46 See also Mr. Homes, c. 13. pago 110. etc. Romans 10. 18.
as were also the Churches of Asia, of which was Justin Martyr, by birth a
Samaritan, which is of Asia the greater, and he was for infant baptism; above
all controversy, the sound of the Apostles preaching went into all the earth,
and their words unto the ends of the world; and therefore all the Christian
Churches were first planted according to the Gospel and traditions of the
Apostles, among which we have showed infant baptism to be one: for good cause
therefore they thought well of it, and so do we. That none of them did ever
before Augustine, pretend it necessary, is apparently false; for it was in
liking and use in Cypriant time, as has been proved; therefore if Augustine
were the first that ever preached it to be absolutely necessary to salvation,
and in his heat against the Pelagians did something innovate, it hurts not
our cause, who do not affirm so rigid a necessity of baptism, as we have said
formerly. But you sa

-- Nor at all in other places; we have the testimony of a learned Pedobaptist
Ludovicus Vives, who in his annotations upon S. Augustine de. C. Dei l. 1. c.
2^. affirms, neminem nisi adultum antiquitus solere baptizari.] That
infant baptism was not at all practiced in other places, is very untrue, as
appears by that which has been alleged out of Ireneus, who was of France,
and Justin Martyr, Jerome, Ambrose, etc. Lugdunensem in Gallia regebat
ecclesiam. Ca^ol. scriptor. eceles. Hieron. To. 1. L. Vives. in Aug. de. C. D.
l. 1. C. 27.
That which you cite out of Ludovicus Vives, neminem nisi adultum antiquitus
solere baptizari; I suppose you may read in some index or marginal ^^^e, or in
Bellarmin with a little change; the words of V^^^ in the cited place are -- ne
quis fallatur hoc loco; nemo olim sacro admovebatur baptisterio, nisi adulta
jam aetate, etc. lest any should be deceived in this place, none anciently was
moved to the sacred font, but such as were come to full age, etc. Certainly
Augustine spoke there concerning those who being of years, could understand what
the sacred mystery signisied, and could desire the same: What is the cause
(says he) why we should spend times in exhorting them, wherein by speaking we
endeavor to inflame the baptized either unto virgin integrity, or vidual
continency, or unto a conjugal fidelity, etc. Quid igitur causae est, cur cis
exhortationibus tempore consumamus quibus baptizates alloquend^ sludeamus
accentere, sive ad virgina^em integr^tatem. sive ad c^nt^ne^tiam vidu^lem, sive
ad ipsam thori ^^^ jugalis fidem, etc. Aug. de G. D. l. 1. c. 2^.
he meant not such words to infants. What did vidual continency, or conjugal
fidelity concern infants, as such? and L. Vives words immediately following
intimate the same; The image of which thing (says he) we yet see in our
baptizing of infants. If this were not his meaning, as it was Augustins, it was
frivolous enough, and such as I cannot easily believe so learned an Author, and
so well acquainted with Augustins sense, and judgment in this matter could be
guilty of; possibly his olim, related to the baptism which was administered in
ecclesia constituenda (when the partition wall being broken down, Cuius rei
imagine in a^^^ue, in nostris infantium baptismis videm us. L. Viv. loco citato.
Ephesians. 3 14.. Romans 11. 19
and the natural branches broken off, that others might be grassed into Christ)
which was, and could no otherwise be then by instructing people in the faith of
Christ, and then baptizing them, that their children might afterward be
baptized, as being within the covenant by their fathers privilege, and their
own, as being children of believing parents; so that in the constituting a
Christian Church, the Ministers first, and most general work of administering
baptism, was with persons of years (by their preaching to them) converting to
the faith, but in ecclesia constituta it is much otherwise: our general work of
administration of baptism is with infants of enchurched parents; we seldom
meeting with any Turk, or Pagan, or Jew converted, and desiring baptism; to
conclude, if L. Vives by you cited, had been of your opinion (to spare the
mentioning the authority of Ireneus, Cyprian, Augustine, Jerome, etc. or the
African or other Councels, who much better knew the custom of the ancient
Churches then Lud. Vives could) we can balance Vives with Polydor Virgil, Vt
cutem insantes apud Iudaeos octavo ab ortu die circum cidebantur, sic apud nos
plurimum (...), quod t^men Angli in ipso natali die faciunt, id quod di ^us
Cyprianus -- mulus rati^nibus esse faciendum probat. Polydor. Virg. de invent.
l. 4. c. 4.
another learned Author, who says, As infants among the Jews were circumcised
the eight day from their nativity, so are they for the most part, with us
baptized, which yet the English do in the very day wherein they are born, that
which S. Cyprian -- by many reasons proves may be done.

But (you say) besides that the tradition cannot be proved to be Apostolical,
we have very good evidence from antiquity; that it was the opinion of the
Primitive Church, that infants ought not to be baptized, and this is clear in
the sixth Canon of the Council of Neocaes^rea, etc.] It is proved to be
Apostolical, and therefore (above controversy) it can be proved: You talk of
very good evidence from antiquity, that it was the opinion of the Primitive
Church, that infants ought not to be baptized, and this, you say, is clear in
the sixth Canon of the Council of Neocaesarea: so then, it is likely that one
testimony is very good and clear evidence for you; and shall not many, and of
them, some more ancient, witnesses be good for us? Origin, Ireneus, Cyprian,
with the whole Council of Carthage, held about anno 258. were more ancient then
the Council of Neocaesarea held about the year 316. and those, as has been
showed, were for infant baptism, ^^^n. council. To 1. p. 288. Aug. ep. ^^^.
autoritare Apostolica tradi^um. Aug. contra. Dona^ist. l 3. c. 24.(...)C^ncil.
Neocaesar. cor: 6. Binn. council. To. 1.
as many others also express. Augustine, as we have before noted (on Number. 13)
calls it ecclesiae fidem firmissimam, and fundatissimum morem, the most firm
faith of the Church, and the most grounded custom. And again, that which was
delivered by Apostolical authority. But let us now behold how clear it is in
the sixth Canon of the Council of Neocaesarea which you alleged. The Canon
says, A woman with child may be baptized when she please; for the baptism of
her that is to be delivered, in this matter concerns not the infant to be
born, because every ones own choice or purpose is manifested or declared by his
own confession, the mothers baptism does not so concern the infant that is to
be born, as if that needed not to be baptized when it is born: The woman must
for the present make her confession of faith, whereby she may declare he
choice; and so must the child for his own part, when he comes to age, and can
show that he embraces the Christian faith. Si quaeritur an baptizati mat^e
infans in uter^ tan ^u^n pars ejus baptizelur, dicendum est quod non, ut dicit
Augustinus contra lalia^ etc. Gabriel. B^el in 4. sent. did. 4. l. 2.
Mark how clear this Canon makes it, that Infants ought not to be baptized.
Here Is not one word forbidding infant baptism, the whole scope being rather to
show that the infant must be baptized for himself; because the mothers baptism
(in whose womb he then was) cannot excuse him from being baptized. Add hereto
that which some observe, That regeneration by baptism, presupposes a precedent
natural birth, which the unborn child has not; therefore the unborn infant
cannot be regenerate in his mothers baptism: Indeed it gives him a right
hereto, if he have none by the fathers side, 1 Cor. 7. 14. Nemo pote^t ranas^i
nisi priu^ nascatur. Gerard. de baptism. sol. 606. sin.
So that if any man lift to think that the Council spoke Gospel; yet it will no
more thence follow, that infants ought not to be baptized, because they cannot
yet make confession of their faith, then that all that which is said of the
adult, is precisely to be applied to in^ants for present, as that 2. These. 3.
10. -- Quandoqui^em non potest quis ^^^ nisi prius nascatur, Alex. Alensis
part. 4. desa^r baptism. q. 8. m. ^^. 1. resol.
-- This we command you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat --
which concerns infants no otherwise then when they should be able; but in the
mean time would you not have them eat? you know that though the rule bear a
show of universality^ yet it concerns persons of age and ability, not
infants; so here, the Ministers interrogating persons of years to be baptized,
was simply necessary; for how else should it have been known whether they were
fit to be admitted into the Church privileges by baptism? that therefore they
did not admit infants to baptism, because they did not examine them, follows
not, except you could show that they admitted none to baptism but persons of
years, which is the question in hand, and therefore may not be a medium to
prove your assertion by: as for asking them questions to be answered by
Sponsors, Godfathers and Godmothers, we shall speak anon.

And to supply their incapacity by the answer of a Godfather, is but the same
unreasonableness acted with a worse circumstance: and there is no sensible
account to be given of it.] We say that by your present confession, such
sponsion by Godfathers is but a circumstance; therefore the sponsors supply
not any incapacity of infants in the respect of the substance of baptism, which
is to be sprinkled, washed with, or dipped in water, in the name of the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost: for this their own capacity is sufficient (they
being born of believing parents, and within the Church) without the supply of
any answer of others for them; which if you grant us, we have the end of our
dispute; as for circumstances, neither commanded nor forbidden by God in the
holy scriptures, we shall willingly submit to the authority and practice of the
Church in which we live: If you dispute from the circumstance, or any pretended
inconvenience therein, to the anulling the substance controverted, you know how
unreasonable that fallacia accidentis is; and what sensible account can be
given of it? But you say.

That which some imperfectly murmur concerning stipulations civil performed by
Tutors in the name of their Pupils, is an absolute vanity, etc.] Have a care
that you be not answered with a turpe est Dactori, etc. Do you not vainly
argue, that in the use of God fathers, etc. God is tied, and Christian Religion
transacts her mysteries by proportion and compliance with the Law of the
Romans; concerning which something has been answered before; I only add here,
Ad number. 16. page 231.
that God neither commanding nor forbidding Godfathers, it is no vanity to
obey authority herein: But to disturb the peace of the Church, and make
schisms for things in their own nature indifferent, and commended to us by
venerable antiquity, is not only vain, but impious: And how is God tied, where
he neither forbids nor commands? To the rest we say not that Christian Religion
must transact her mysteries by compliance with Roman Laws, or humane customs;
but that in some things she may, in things circumstantial, and no ways
repugnant to the word of God. You say further,

I know God might, page 239.
if he would, have appointed God fathers to give answer in behalf of children,
and to be fideiussors for them, but we cannot find any authority or ground that
he has; and if he had, then it is to be supposed he would have given them
commission to have transacted the solemnity with better circumstances, and
given answers with more truth.] We answer 1. In that you can find no authority
or ground for it, nor against it, as we know it can be no other then
adiaphorous, or indifferent, and in or for such things as are merely
circumstantial and in their own nature indifferent to dissent from antiquity;
disobey the Churches authority, and break the sacred band of unity, let your
own consciences tell you what you do.

2. Whereas you would bespatter this custom of imputation of will worship and
untruth in the users thereof; I say first, That whatsoever God has commanded
or forbidden in holy Scriptures, that is necessarily to be observed; and this
faithful word we must hold fast, Tit. 1. 9. But those things which he has
neither commanded nor forbidden, neither expressly, nor by necessary
consequence, fall under the general rule belonging to things arbitrary and
indifferent, Let all things be done decently and in order, ^ Cor. 14. 4^. which
then only can be when we unanimously and uniformly do that which a general
consent and constant practice of the Church warranteth; not that which every
private spirit likes or disliketh: There can be no decency without order, nor
order in confusion of practices: therefore God having left many things
circumstantial, arbitrary as to the authority of the Church, we ought to tender
her unity, and reverence her authority; the contempt whereof has opened so
wide a door to schism as now troubles the Christian world. Secondly, there may
be falsehood in some men's answers, though no fault in the order which God will,
Sicut e^g^ peccatum in eo non est, ita peccatum ex eo nom est.
it being his perfection that he is (...); God that cannot lie, Tit. 1. 2. and
it is the inviolable holiness of his will, that he will not, neither can will
any evil; and it is certainly true which Fulgentius says, As there is no sin
in him, so there is no sin of him. Fulgent. de prae. dest. ed M^nim. l 1.


For the question (you say) is asked of believing in the present; and if the
Godfathers answer in the name of the child (I do believe) it is notorious that
they speak false and ridiculously; for the infant is not capable of believing,
etc.] For answer, we may say with Augustine, Who knows not, that to be baptized,
is in, or for infants, instead of believing? And again, they are borne to
Church, and although they cannot run thither on their own feet, yet go they on
others feet, that they may be healed: our mother the Church lends them others
feet, that they may come, others heart that they may believe, others tongue
that they may confess, that for as much as in that they are sick, they are more
grievously burdened with another sin (that is, which they acted not in their
own persons) so when these are cured, they may be healed or saved, another
confessing for them. Quis autem n^^^^^ creder^ esse infani^bus bapt^zari. Aug
de piece. ^^^ merit. l. 1. c. 27. -- ipsi p^rtantur ad ^^^, ^pedibus illuc
currere n^n p^ssunt, alienis pedibus curruntut sanentur: accommodat illis matter
ecclesi^ aliorum pedes ut veniant, aliorum c^r ut credant, aliorum linguam ut
fateantur, ut quoniam quod aegri sunt alio peccante praegravantur, sic cum hi
sani sunt al^^ pro eis confitente salvantur. Augustinide verb. Apost. sermon. 10.
But I demand, Why may we not here with better reason understand present, for
future believing, then you do children of believers holiness, which the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 14. pronounces in the present) by a designation to the
service of Jesus Christ, and the future participation of the promises?

But Augustine says very well, -- If the Sacraments had not a certain
similitude of those things whereof they are Sacraments, page 233, 234. Number. 20.
Si enim sacramenta quandam similitudinem earum retum quarum sacramenta sunt non
haberent, omnino sacramenta non essent: ex hac autem similitudine plerumque
etiam ipsarum return nomina accipiunt; sicut ergo secundum quendam modum,
sacramentum corporis Christi, corpus Christi, est, sacramentum sanguinis
Christi, sanguis Christi est, ita sacramentum fidei fides est; nihil autem est
aliud credere, quam fidem habere, ac per hoc, cum respondetur parvulum credere,
qui fidei nondum habet affectum, respondetur fidem habere proper fidei
sacramentum, and convertere se ad Deum propter convulsionis sacramentum, quia
and ispa re^ponsio ad celebrationem pertinet sacramenti; sicut de ipso baptismo
Apostolus; Consepulti, inquit, sumus Christo per baptismum in mortem: non ait
sepulturam significamus, sed prorsus ait, consepulti sumus: sacramentum ergo
tantae rei, non nisi ejusdem rei vocabulo nuncupavit. Itaque parvulum et^i
nondum fides illa, quae in credentium voluntate consistit, jam tamen ipsius
fidei sacramentum fidelem facit: nam sicut credere respondetur, ita etiam
fidelis vocatur, non rem ipsa mente annuendo, sed ipsi^s rei sacramentum
percipiendo. Augustine. ep. 23. Bonifac:
they should not at all be Sacraments; but by reason of this likeness, they
oftentimes receive the very names of these things themselves; therefore as
after a certain manner, the Sacrament of Christ's body is the body of Christ;
the Sacrament of Christ's blood, is the blood of Christ; so the Sacrament of
faith, is faith: Now to believe, is nothing else but to have faith; and so when
it is answered that the infant believes, who has not yet the affection of
faith; we answer, that he has faith in respect of the sacrament of faith; and
that he converteth to God, in respect of the sacrament of conversion; because
even that very answer appertains unto the celebration of the Sacrament; as
the Apostle speaks of baptism it self; We are, says he, Buried with him by
baptism into death; he says not, we signify burial, but altogether says, We
are buried -- therefore he called the Sacrament of so great a matter, by no
other name then of the thing it self: So that faith, though it be not yet such
as consists in the will of believers, yet the very Sacrament of that faith,
makes a (baptized) infant faithful, or a believer: For as it is answered that
he believes, so is he called a believer; not signifying that thing in the very
mind, but in respect of his receiving the Sacrament of that very thing; to wit,
of believing, and giving his name to Christ. But what unreasonableness acted
with a worse circumstance, is there for Godfathers thus answering -- All this
I steadfastly believe (wherein though possibly there may be untruth, Cum
patrimi respendent credo, sensus est, puerum ad credendum and me obligo. etc.
A. lex. Alens. par 4. q. 7. m. 3. ^ 1. resol.
because the Sponsor does not as he professes, steadfastly believe, yet so may
there also be, when persons of years answer for themselves, that they believe)
seeing the lawfulness of baptizing infants, is affirmed on condition of their
parents believing, and Church-priviledge, which is often testified personally
by the very parents, Baptisinus confertur public in ext^ Christianorum, quorum
testimenium non petest repudiari; e^dem fine adhibentur patrimi, tanquam testes
batismi, etc. loh. Gerard des. baptis. class 4. 164. -- adhibentur veluti rei
gestae testes. Polydo^. Virgil. de invent. l. 4. c. 4.
Grandfathers, Grand-mothers, and sometimes in defect, or necessary absence of
such, by some fellow-believers testifying for them, and the child's privilege
and baptism: but your sensible account is, that they speak false and
ridiculously; if you can bear the echo of your own words, we therein answer
you; yet for the sober readers sake, we further answer after Augustine, treating
of the same argument, Let no man whisper to you other doctrines; this the
Church ever had, ever held, etc. doubtless the custom is very ancient;
Histories tell us of it in the time of Higinus, who was coetaneous with
Polycarp a disciple of S John's, they lived under the reign of Antoninus Pius,
about the year 140. some think it came into the Church from the custom of those
who were Catechumenists, who being examined before they were admitted to
baptism, concerning their faith and repentance, were not only to answer in
their own persons, but to have sponsors as witnesses of their faith,
conversion, and baptism. Nemo ergo vobis: susu^rat ^^^ alienas, hoc ecclesia
^^per ha^uit, temper teruit, etc. Aug. d verb. Apos^. Sermon. 1^3.

-- V^^^it item ^^um salt^m p^rimam, ^^^^ ^^^ marrim^m baptism^ ^^teresse sic
enim cos appellant qui in^^ntes tenent, dum baptizantur; huyus quo que temp^ris
fuit Polycarpus Johannis Apostoli discipulus -- Platina de vit. Pont. Telesph.
and Higin. -- mentio patrimorum fit apud Dionys. Areopag. Hierarch. Eccles. c.
2. Tertul. de bapt. c. 18. Eusebius. l. 7. c. 20. vid. Polyd^r. Virgil. de invent.
l. 4. c. 4. Hugo de S. victor. part. 6. c. 12. Mr. Homes anim advers. upon Mr.
Tombs Exerc. c. 14. page 181.


It is not improbable which some here propose, that -- As children were
baptized when their Christian parents had formerly made confession; so sureties
confessed in relation to themselves, that they might be fit to stand as a kind
of parents, etc. Seeing therefore this custom is nothing repugnant to holy
scripture, neither has in it any appearance of evil, but rather of profit and
edification, though it be not of the essence of baptism, but a ceremonial
circumstance, it is foolish and impious to quarrel it, and for it to break unity
and disturb the peace of the Church. But you say,

-- The infant is not capable of believing, and if he were, he were also
capable of dissenting; and how then do they know his mind?] page 239.
If it be necessary to baptism that the baptizer know the mind of the person to
be baptized, how can you baptize men of years? You will say they express their
minds, and so we baptize them. I grant you may know their, words, their minds
you cannot; because they may dissemble. If you say you are in charity to
believe the best; once more we say, Be but as charitable toward infants, of
whom you can know no actual evil, nor show any just cause why you should
suspect it for the future. And I pray how could the Priest under the Law know
the minds of children to be circum^^sed? To conclude, it is nothing material
whether we know the infants mind, it is behoofull that we know his privilege, as
being born within the Church and Covenant of God, which gives him a sufficient
right to the seals thereof. But you say,

Tertullian gives advice that baptism of infants should be deferred till they
could give account of their faith.] I answer, 1. Tertullian speaking of
deferring baptism, lest they should rashly give it, as to persons out of the
Covenant, or unbelievers, instanceth specially children; that is, extraneorum,
non foederatorum, as the learned Fra. lunius interprets the same: so that
this concerns not our present question which is of children of Christians. 2.
This shows then that the practice of infant baptism was none of Augustins
device, as you charge him, seeing it was in use in the time of Tertullian. 3.
But let us hear the rest of Tertullians advice; was it only concerning the
deferring infants baptism? Let them come when they can learn, when they are
taught whither they come, let them be made Christians when they shall be able
to know Christ -- nay but presently he says, For no less cause the unmarried
also are to be delayed, in whom the tentation is prepared, both in virgins by
their maturity, and widows by their going up and down until they are either
married or confirmed in constancy -- Will you follow Tertullians advice herein?
But what if they never marry, must they never be baptized? If not, give us
leave to decline it in the other, or to take it in the sense he means it, as
may appear in that he specifieth widows, who being at that age, are necessarily
to be supposed either baptized after their first marriage, or out of the
Covenant. Veniant ergo dum adoles^unt, veniant dum dis^unt, lum sus veniant
docentur, fiant Chri^liani qu^m Christum nesse potuerint -- non minore de cause
^innupti quoque pr^^sstinandi, in quibustentatio praeparatae est tam virginibus
per maturitatem, quam viduis per vagationem, donec aut nubant, aut c^ntinentia
^^^^rentur, etc Tertul. de bapt. c. 18.


And the same (you say) is also the Council of Gregory Bishop of Nazianzum,
etc. Gregory Nazianz^n in his fortieth Oration (which you cite in your margent)
says, Sow when the time of sowing is -- plant prune thy vine when the season
is, etc. (...), etc. Greg. Nazian. Orat. 40. ib ip. sis unguiculis spiritu
consecretur.(...), etc. ib. Greg. Naz.
But at all times intend thy salvation, and think that any time is seasonable,
or appointed for baptism: among other ages of man be instanceth in Infancy.
Have thou an Infant (says he) let not wickedness take away the occasion, let
it be sanctified from its infancy, let it be dedicated to the Spirit from it
^ender years: fear thou the seal in respect of the infirmity of Nature? How
poor a spirited mother art thou, and of how little faith? But Anna promised
Samuel unto the Lord before he was born, etc. You say concerning Gr. Nazianzen,
that his reason taught him that which was fit, (true, for he allowed
Infant-baptsm) yet he was overborn with -- the opinion of his Age, etc. So far
also I consent as this relates to that they thought, that Infants dying without
Baptism, should neither he glorified nor punished. That which you further say,
although he allowed them to hasten in case of necessity, falls under a double
consideration: First, in respect of those times appointed for Baptism in the
primitive Church, to wit, Easter, and Whitsontide, or Pentecost, which he
mentions: But when he comes to the question, whether Infants should be
baptized, he answers positively; By all means, if any danger urge, and
shows it from the Analogy between Circumcision and Baptism. (...). 10. part.
post^
He takes away the objection from the years at which Christ was baptized,
which was indeed to be deferred until the fullness of time for the worlds
redemption was come: and that we are not to imitate all the actions of Christ.
To that which you say -- Yet in another place he makes mention of some to whom
Baptism was not administered,(...), (...), etc.
by reason of Infancy; we say you utterly mistake: for Nazianzen in the same
Oration speaking of delay in performance of that duty, reckons up several
sorts of those whose Baptism was deferred; some for sloth, or insatiable desire
of sinning; others are not in ability to receive it, either for their infancy,
or some sudden and violent accident, disabling them so that they cannot receive
this grace if they would. True, infants have neither ability nor will to come
to Baptism; nor can those (though of years) who are accidentally disabled: they
have not power, though they have a will to come. What is this to our deferring
Infants Baptism in the Rule, which in some cases may reasonably and lawfully be
done. As for example, Suppose an infant near some Mahumetan border were found,
and the parents not known, we may and ought to demur: But what makes this
against baptizing infants of parents known to be within the Church? But you say,

To which if we add that the parents of S. Augustine, S. Hierom, and St.
Ambrose, although they were Christian, yet did they not baptize their children
before they were 30 years of age, it will be very considerable in the Example,
and of great efficacy for the destroying the supposed necessity or derivation
from the Apostles. This may make a formidable noise in some vulgar ear; it is
true which Mr. Homes notes, A nen facto. ad n^n jus faciendi, non valet
argumentu^.
page 188. that the opinions or practices of some few, conclude no more against
the general tenet and practice of the Church, then the Hills and Valleys do
against the roundness of the world. But to what purpose do you propose any of
these examples to your clients imitation? If not, why infer you them?
Possibly the parents of some great and excellent men, might err in such
omission of duty; or there might be some in. vincible lets or obstructions to
their desires: however you would not have your childrens Baptism deferred ^0
years. To the particulars I say, Possidonius in the life of Augustine, Et
Aug^^^ract. l. 1. c. 6
says, that he was born of honest and Christian parents, and that he received
of St. Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, both the wholesome doctrine of the Catholic
Church, and the Divine Sacraments. Aug. Confess l. ^ c. 11. his words are
these, -- Vidifii Demine cum adhuc puer essem, and quodam die pressus stomachi
dolor, repent ^s^uarem paene m^riturus, vidisti Deus meus -- quo ino^^ animi,
and qua fide baptisinum Christi tui -- fiagitavi ^ pita^e matris meae, and
matris omnium nostrum ecclesiae tuae -- dilata est ^taque ^^^^^^ mea -- ita jam
credebam, and illa, and omnisd^mus, ^si pater solus, qui tamen, non ^^^^^ in me
jus maternae pietatis quo minus in Christum crederem, si^ut ille n^n^um
credi^ert^.^
But Augustine says, he believed and desired baptism from his childhood; the
cause of the delay thereof he putte^h on a sudden great sickness, See
A^g^^stin. c^n^^ll. l 3 c. c. 11.
and his fathers unbelief: but if the parents were then Christian when he was
born, Fieri enim n^n p^test at plius istar^^m lach^yinarum perea^.
and either understood not, or neglected his Baptism, what is this to our
cause? I know nothing hence following but that, if so they neglected, they were
culpable. Ib. c. 12. Ab his domi^^^ genter institutus una cum ^^^^ in^er i p^os
sia^^ p^rentun anple^cus, and n^tricam bianditias Chris^^^ im^i^it, a^ m^x
Christian pletatis rudimentis imbutus, etc.
We read of his dangerous estate while he was a Maniche, and his mothers
constant and importunate tears and intercession for his conversion, as her
sorrow for the delay thereof; which at last happily obtained, according to that
which the Prelate answered her, It cannot be that the son of those tears should
perish. After his conversion he seriously learned, Erasm. in vie. D, Hieron.
and happily taught others, not to defer infant baptism, as may appear by that
which has been alleged out of him.

As for St. Hierom, they also say that both his parents were Christian, and
that he was diligently taught and brought up of them at home, and that with
Bonosus presently even in his Parents embraces, and Nurses gentle language he
received in Christ, and presently he was instructed in the rudiments of
Christian piety, which very probably imports his infant baptism, rather then
that he had any Nurses at his being ^0 years old. That which Erasmus (who
gathered his story out of other Authors) after says on Hieroms Epistle to
Damasus, Ejus urbis silem v^lle se sui, in qua Christi^^^ accepi^^^ Erasm. s. 1.
that he would follow the says of that City in which he had received the
garment of Christ, as the same Erasmus gives the sense in the life of Hierom,
proves not that he was not baptized before he was 30 years old: for Hieroms
words are to this sense, because the Eastern Churches have rent the seamless
Coat of Christ (by their schisms) so that it is hard there to know where the
Church is, therefore. I thought it meet that I should consult with Peter's
Chair, and the faith commended by the Apostles mouth (Romans 1.) thence now
requiring food for my soul, where long since I took on me the garment of
Christ. What was it which he called Peter's Chair? What the City of Rome? Was
that faith which the Apostle commended only there, or then when Hierom wrote
in all the Western Church? his words concerning the Eastern Churches divisions
by reason of the Arian faction, and the following, concerning the great
distance at which Hierom (being then in Syria, near Antioch) was make it plain,
that he spoke of the Western Church in which he was baptized, probably in
oppido Stridonis, where he was born, not in Rome: As for Erasmus's opion of his
being baptized in Rome, it is grounded but upon an opinor. I think says he) he
means it not of his Priestho^d, or orders. And what solidity is there on
these conjectures, to conclude that Hieroms parents, though Christian, deferred
his baptism until he was 30 years old? or what will it advantage you if it were
true? there may be such lets to sealing, as to Israel in the Wilderness, and
God bare with them 40 years together, yet they should have circumcised the male
children at eight days old upon a severe penalty, Gen, 17. 14. an inevitable
necessity varieth not the rule.

Concerning the last instance in Ambrose, Paulinus vir. D. Ambros.
I find that his Father was Deputy, or Governor of France; but whether
Christian or not, Nee senex erg^ Mase^^tus, ne^infans vernacalus excipitur,
^^emnis ^^ paceato obnoxia, and i^^^ omnis atas ^^ramento idenea -- ni quis
icnatus f^erit ex ^^ sp. S. etc. atique null. um ^^infantum, etc. Ambred.
I find nothing in Paulinus who wrote his life, and you avouch no Author for
that you say. We read that after he was chosen Bishop of Milan, after Auxentius
the Arian, by the joint suffrages of the discordant parties; and being (though
much against his own will) confirmed in that charge by Valentinian the Emperor,
he was baptized; and with the Church held Infant Baptism against Pelagius and
the Donatists, upon this ground, Because every age is subject to sin, therefore
every age is fit for the Sacrament; let the reader mark how this also is very
considerable in the example, and of what great efficacy it is for the
destroying the supposed necessity, or derivation from the Apostles, as the
pleader says: But seeing he can raise no stronger batteries against it, Abra.
l. 2. c. 11. vid. lb. l. 10. etc. 84 ad Demerriadem. page 239. Number. 28. page
240.
he might more easily and certainly conclude, that it will stand whether he
will or no.

But however (says he) it is against the perpetual analogy of Christian
Doctrine to baptize infants]. This is gallantly spoken, if he could tell how to
prove it, or any part thereof.

Besides that Christ never gave any precept to baptize them, etc.] This is his
Argument; all that for which Christ never gave any precept for the doing it,
and which neither himself nor his Apostles (that appears) did, is against the
perpetual Analogy of Christ's Doctrine; but Christ never gave any precept to
baptize them, etc. ergo. -- I answer, This foundred Argument, lame on both
feet, does poorly charge. 1. It Is not true that all is against the perpetual
Analogy of Christ's Doctrine for which no express precept of Christ, or
practice of himself or his Apostles appears, for there are many things
circumstantial and indifferent, neither commanded nor forbidden, which yet on
second thoughts you will not say are against the perpetual Analogy of Christ's
Doctrine: I might instance the postures, or numbers, or sexes, or places where,
in the receiving the Lords Supper: Where do you read of any command of Christ,
or practice of himself or Apostles, that the Communicants should stand, or sit,
or kneel, or lie down; one of these (or if you can think of any other) must
needs be; show us either precept or practice obliging to either; where is any
precept of Christ obliging to a set or determined number of Communicants: where
are we commanded to administer to women? where is any precept obliging to a
place? who knows not that these and the like things are left under the general
rule, Let all things be done decently, and in order? which observed they are
not against the Analogy of Christ's Doctrine. Again, what think you of the
Sabath, is that which we now do therein against the Analogy of Christ's
Doctrine, because we find no express precept or practice of Christ or his
Disciples for the translation of it? That it is and ought to be the Christian
Sabbath, is grounded on necessary consequence, but no express precept. 2. It is
also notoriously false, that Christ never gave any express precept to baptize
all Nations, without any exception to infants within the Covenant; and who
knows not that infants ever were and are a great part of every Nation; what
then? though he never said in so many syllables, or by naming infants, go and
baptize them also, is it not sufficient to name all Nations without enumeration
of particulars? Indeed he needed not give such an express command concerning
children, seeing that he sent them to administer this seal of the new Covenant
and Sacrament of initiation, who were in the old, their selves sealed in their
infancy by circumcision, and so used to that Doctrine of childrens being within
the Covenant with believing parents, and the daily practice of their initiation
and reception into the communion of a visible Church, that it might have seemed
very superfluous to say any more then Go baptize all Nations. There is also
much difference, Inter ecclesiam constituendam, and constitutam; the Apostles
business was generally to baptize Heathens and converted unbelievers; but we
have to deal with a Church constituted; therefore faith and repentance, were so
often mentioned in the story of the Apostles practice; but we living in a
settled Church, have to deal with baptizing infants who cannot yet actually
believe or repent: But in that no particulars are mentioned in Christ's
universal command to baptize, it shows that all within the Church-priviledg
and Covenant of God are included. Again, whereas you require a command in
terminis for baptizing infants, I demand, Where does he in terminis say,
Baptize men of years, or Kings, peasants, rich, poor, high, low, men, women,
Citizens, Contrymen, Fishers, Husbandmen, Threshers, Shooemakers, Tailors,
Shopkeepers, or Mechanics? Ursin. par. 2.
He commands that all be baptized, of what sex, age, condition or estate
whatsoever they be, which appertain to any Nation. See Mr. Cobbet of childrens
baptismal right. s. 8. page 143. ^.
So in general Prescripts, Laws, Grants, and Franchises, the rehearsal of
particulars is not requisite; because such things pass on the whole kind
therein contained, and will that the censure or privilege concern all
particulars within that general, except in case of any exemption of some
specified particular, or exception made by him who made the Covenant, or
granted the Privileges. We cannot find(...)in these very words in any place of
Scripture, Jo. Gerard. de baptism. sect. 3, de paedobapt. 193.
Baptize Women, or administer the Lords Supper to women yet from these general
precepts, Baptize all Nations -- take eat this is my body -- and -- d^i^k ye
all of it (now it is -- evident that the twelve Apostles only were then present
when he instituted this Sacrament, Mat. 28. 19. Mar. 26. 20, 27.
and that he spoke and administered it unto them only) yet I say we all, without
quarrel about it, baptize women, and respectively administer the Lords Supper
to them, as included in the general precepts; and why are we not contented with
a general precept including childrens baptism, seeing no exception of the
Covenant-maker can appear to the contrary? Lastly we say again, that the reason
why Christ gave his Disciples no express or peculiar command concerning
baptizing infants, but included them in the general, was because the Apostles
were so well acquainted with childrens reception into the Church Priviledges,
and sealing into the same, that they could not reasonably make any question of
baptizing infants, having a general command to baptize all Nations, infants
being under the Law circumcised; -- Cum gratta Det non sit stricti^r and
a^gusti^r in novolqu^^ in V. T. Io. Gerard. S. S.
and knowing moreover that the grace of God was not more strict or restrained
in the new Testament then in the old; but contrariwise, more diffused or large;
and therefore a greater and more difficult question might have been concerning
the baptism of women, there being neither analogy from circumcision, nor
particular precept to induce them to baptize them; but that they knew that the
general precept was authority sufficient, without specifying particulars in
terminis. You say more,

All that either he or his Apostles said concerning it, requires such previous
dispositions to baptism, of which infants are not capable, and these are faith
and repentance.] Your whole scope is fallacious: form your Argument,

Christ and his Apostles in all that he or they said concerning baptism,
required faith and repentance, as previous dispositions to baptism, but no
infant can believe or repent; ergo, infants are not previously disposed to, or
capable of baptism, according to that Christ or his Apostles ever said. 1. We
say here is a Paralogism or fallacy, a dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter; Your Major is true, if you speak of persons of years to be
instructed; but false concerning children, because he never requires any
impossibility. 2. He that appointed Infants baptism, requires no other previous
disposition to infant baptism, but such as they are capable of, that is, of
being admitted into the visible Church, and sealed with the external Seal
thereof into the future profession of faith and repentance. Add hereto, that
children under the Gospel, are thus capable of the seal of faith, as children
were under the Law, although they cannot actually repent or believe, which were
and are no less previous dispositions, if we speak of persons of mature years
to be baptized: But if your dispute be(...), your ignoratio elenchi may not
pass for current reason, if by previous dispositions to baptism of men of
years, you would obtrude the same on infants, concerning whom we say that
actual faith or repentance are no more previous dispositions to baptism, then
they were to circumcision. And so you see that I might reasonably answer all
that you say herein by rejecting your consequence; but for the prudent Readers
further satisfaction, I say, 3. Aprevious disposition necessary to the capacity
of a thing, is considerable, either as it is in or of the subject.

1. A previous disposition in the subject, we may understand either as a
self-disposing by some intrinsecal and inward faculty, or as a being
extrinsecally disposed and fitted by some other power, to a capacity or
receptibility of something which yet it has not, neither was capable thereof
before such a disposition: Now this in our present instance presupposes, or
speaks some change of the mind by illumination, faith, remorse of conscience,
purpose of leading a new life, and desire to be implanted into Christ and the
communion of Saints by baptism; and so it is internal; or professing of that
endeavor of knowing the mysteries of the Gospel, faith and repentance
testified before men; and so these dispositions are external, or expressed to
men whom it may concern; these are necessary in persons of years coming to
baptism.

2. there is a previous disposition of the subject without any present change
of the mind, which springs from his relation to some other, or some others
act: So some titles of honor come on children in their fathers Charters
without any present change of the child's mind; so Lands and Inheritances, by
right of adoption, may be settled on them in their infancy, without their
present change or knowledge: so also the believing parents privilege, and being
within Gods Covenant made with them and their children, previously disposes
infants to the seal thereof, to wit, by giving them a certain right thereto,
and so was it in circumcision: But if a Proselyte were to receive the seal of
the Covenant, he must necessarily be prepared and first disposed thereto, by
the knowledge of Gods Law and Covenant, faith, repentance, or at least the
profession thereof, and those other rites which the Law required on that
behalf. The infants previous disposition to circumcision, was no other then his
fathers and his own privilege, and being within Gods Covenant: Of the child was
neither faith nor repentance required for the present, but future; so must we
understand concerning baptism, the seal of faith under the Gospel.

And not (say you) to instance in those innumerable places that require faith
before this Sacrament, there needs no more but this one, He that believes and
is baptized shall be saved -- ] I answer, 1. Deal fairly, dispute ad idem; and
show me one place of Scripture which universally requires faith before this
Sacrament, and you shall be excused for the innumerable places which you speak
of: We can show that the rule holds not universally that faith must precede the
Sacraments: for though Abraham's faith preceded the seal thereof, yet Isaaks
seal preceded his faith: Mr. Calvin expresses the reason hereof: Why (says
he) does in Abraham the Sacrament follow faith, and in Isaak his son it goes
before all understanding? because it is meet that he, which being in full-grown
age is received into fellowship of the Covenant, from which he had hitherto
been a stranger, should first learn the conditions thereof: but an infant
begotten of him, needed not so, which by right of inheritance, according to the
form of the promise, is even from his mothers womb contained in the Covenant.
And certainly in this respect God calls the infants of covenanted parents,
sons and daughters born unto him, Genesis 17. 7.
Ezekiel. 16. 20. and 23. 37. Act. 2. 39. etc. 2 Cor. 6. 18.
be esteeming them his children who are born of those parents to whom God made
the promise to be a God unto them and their seed after them; which promise as
truly concerns us and our children, as it concerned Abraham and his. 2. If the
argument be good from that place, Mark 16. 16. He that believes and is
baptized; faith is first named, and then baptism: ergo, faith must precede
baptism: Why shall not the Argument from other places be good to the contrary?
as John 3. 5. Except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God: Baptism is first named, and then regeneration;
therefore baptism must precede regeneration. So again Ephesians. 5. 26. Washing
with water, that is, baptism is mentioned before the word, ergo, we must first
be baptized, and afterward receive the word. 3. If this argument were good, how
many men and women of age, must by the same reason be denied baptism? For all
have not says; but the truth is, that to be born in the Church, is unto, or in
infants instead of profession of faith and repentance, as to the outward seal,
for which we contend; and profession of faith and repentance, is to and for the
adult instead of the same, for their right to the desired seal (so was it to
Ismael, and Esau whom God hated) because they were born of covenanted parents.
4. Sure it is that Christ in the forementioned place, speaks of men and women
of years: For you confess that infants as such, cannot believe; and what then
must follow if your cruel principles were true? Christ says, But he that
believes not, shall be damned: If this were as you would have it, spoken
concerning infants also, what should become of all those that die in their
infancy? what are they damned? Here appears an inexcusable perverseness of these
men, who when children are proposed to their interest in general terms granted
them, there they would exclude them, except they show a particular warrant; and
baptize all Nations, without a baptize infants, shall not advantage them for
the seal of their admission into Christ's visible Church: But where a general
rule is mentioned, from whence they are in reason and all charitable
construction to be exempted, there it must include them for their disadvantage,
even to damnation, without any particular warrant for such inteterpretation.
Mr. Cobbet observes well, That the Covenant-priviledges of grace, -- Of child.
baptismal right, cap. 8. conclus. 7. page 143.
are ever to be expounded in favor of the principal or less principal
counterparties, unless any exception be made of persons or privileges by him
which was the Covenant-maker. To avoid this, you must either acknowledge that
the place you cite, is either to be understood of those of years who
contumaciously reject the Ordinances of God, being hardened in wilful blindness
and unbelief, and so that i^ does not concern children, as such; or else you
must allow infants some secret seeds of faith and regeneration, and so you
shall justly acknowledge their capacity of baptism.

Plainly (you say) thus, faith and baptism in conjunction, will bring a man to
heaven; but if he have not faith, baptises shall do him no good.] True in those
(who though baptized) as Simon Magus, In^^^lem sanetificati^nem quibui^lam ^^^^
a^^aisse and profuisse five visibilibus sacramentis: visibilem vero
sa^^^ficati^nem, quae fit sacramento visibili, sine invisibili, p^sse adesse,
non posse prodesse: ne^tonen visibile sacramentam ide^ centemnendum est,
quiatcontemp^or ejus invisibiliter sanctificari non potest, etc. P. Lombard. l.
4. did. 4. E. Post Aug. sup. Lev. in fine. c. 8.
are yet but in the gall of bitterness; but this is a mere ignoratio elenchi,
hence to conclude against infants baptism; our question not being whether all
that are baptized shall be saved; but whether children of believing parents
ought to be baptized; which if you would thus disprove, whosoever have not a
saving faith that the Sacrament may do them good, may not be baptized; but
children have not such faith, that baptism received may do them good: ergo,
children are not to be baptized: your reasoning would appear unreasonable, both
Propositions being false or fallacious. The Major, because baptism is but the
external seal of admission into the visible Church, into which elect and
reprobates may enter, as it were into the outward Court of the Temple. And if
saving faith finally doing the baptized good, or, which is the same, if the
inward baptism by the holy Ghost, were the rule by which the baptizing Minister
must proceed, what man were sufficient for that Office? The examples of Simon
Magus, Judas, Demas, etc. show enough that the most discerning men may be
deceived in others fair profession; and who can foresee the final estates of
men and women baptized? I cannot reasonably think that you take all those for
elect, whom your selves baptize, or that your baptism shall do them all good.
And if you dispute (...), Calvin. ii stir. l. 4. c. 16 N. 20.
concerning one and the same faith in several degrees, that is, if you mean the
seeds or habit of faith; that Minor is false; for elect infants have the seeds
of faith in baptism, though they be not formed in them, yet by the secret
working of the spirit, the seeds thereof for a time lying hidden in them, shall
flourish and show their growth in them in newness of life. If you mean it of
actual faith, At enim qui^^^(...)Aug. ^p. 48 Vincan.
that want of that condition,(...) discovers the Paralogism: And we say
infants want of actual faith in present infancy thereof incapable, concludes
nothing against their having of it in mature age; and so as little against
their baptism. I cannot conclude so well as in Augustins words; But (some may
say) the things do some men no good; what must the Medicine therefore be
neglected, because some men's pestilence is incurable?

So that if baptism be necessary, then so is faith, and much more; for want of
faith damneth absolutely.] I demand then, Do infants believe? Why do ye deny
them baptism? or because they have not faith, do you conclude them all damned
who die in their infancy? That were a damnable assertion; and to pay you with
your own coin, Against the perpetual analogy of Christ's Doctrine, who
commanded infants to be brought unto him, bless them, and positively affirmed,
that Of such is the Kingdom of heaven, Further I say, If your Proposition be
universal, it is notoriously false; for all want of faith does not absolutely
damn: For 1. They who pray for faith, or the increases thereof, (as the
Disciples did) want faith, yet were they not damned; he that hungereth and
thirsts for the righteousness of faith, wants the same; for hunger and
thirst are of emptiness: yet Christ pronounces such blessed. Mat. 5. 6. 1 Timothy
1. 13.
2. He that now believes not, may hereafter believe: It was Paul's case; had
you seen him persecute the faith and faithful in ignorance and unbelief, would
you presently have devoted him to absolute damnation? Judge not, that you be not
judged: I know no man living that wants not faith; and I pray the good Lord
to help my unbelief, and exhort you otherwise to express your fancies, that
they prove not snares to weak and afflicted consciences:

Then (you say) it is sottish to say the same incapacit^ of reason and faith,
shall not excuse from the actual susception of baptism, etc.] A very acute and
witty assertion indeed; but we answer, 1. By this principle you might have been
as blasphemous against Gods Ordinance in circumcision, had you lived under the
Law. 2. We say not but that infants by their incapacity, are excused from
actual susception of baptism, for they cannot act thereto: But parents are not
excusable, if they contemn or neglect their parts in sealing those that are
joint heirs of the Promises and Covenant of God with them and their children,
because they have a capacity to promote and effect it: and this appears in
the History of Moses, Exodus 4. 24, 25. Quod in filio Most per Ang^^um
manifestatum est, qui own ad^uc incircum^^^ ^^tre ferretur. praesenti and
evidenti periculo ut circumcideretur exactum est, and cum factan ^^^^, depuija
est pernicies. Aug. cont. Donatist. 1. 4. c. 24.
We very well know that infants cannot come and desire the Seals, their present
incapacity excuses them from that they cannot possibly do: but their parents
or friends can entreat it for them, and present them to it: so that infants
have a passive capacity; they cannot profess faith and repentance; but their
parents professing of the same, interesseth them in all those external
Church Priviledges whereof they are capable: and so to be born in the Church,
is to them and for them, instead, and in place of their profession. What your
terms of reasonably and humanely received, do mean, if to any purpose, want
interpretation.

The conclusion (you say) is, that baptism is also to be deferred till the time
of faith.] Why might you not say the same also concerning circumcision? It is
certain that by the same you may conclude, that many thousand persons of age
must never be baptized, because they never come to believe; as for their
profession, no man can say whether it be hypocritical or not.

Since faith is necessary to the susception of baptism, etc.] Page 240. Number. 29.
True in adult is; what is this to our present question concerning infants? We
have often said that this your arguing a dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter, is fallacious, and not passable among young Sophisters; and we owe
no other answer then denying the consequence. Our contest is about
Infant Baptism, wherein we say a present actual faith is not required: It is
necessary, or at least the profession thereof in those who present to, or
administer baptism; we cannot say so of infants, to whom God does not yet give
the use of reason: therefore they cannot first believe and after receive the
Seal, Ergo sunt baptizandi ut sidem and salutem co^sequantur. Jo. Gerard. de
poe. dobap. sect. 3. Numb. 196. Heb. 4. 2. Romans 10. ^ Ioh. 17. 20.
as Abraham did: But therefore they are to be baptized that they may attain
faith and salvation: So the word preached profits not, if it be not mixed
with faith in them that hear; yet is the preaching thereof an effectual means
whereby God will work faith in the hearers: To conclude, Baptism profits not
without faith; yet is it an effectual means whereby God works regeneration
and salvation, therefore none within his Covenant are to be barred from it. It
is not improbably conjectured by some, that therefore the Disciples forbad them
to bring children to Christ, because they thought children have not faith, nor
can any teach them, who are yet incapable of doctrine: Possibly they did not
yet understand the abolition of the old Seal for the introduction of the new,
Gal 5. 2.
nor how baptism was to succeed circumcision; that was sometime after disputed
and determined, Act^ 1 ^^, 2. but Christ was much displeased with it, rebuked
them, and seriously protested, that of such is the kingdom of heaven.

Whatever can be said to take off from the necessity of actual says all that,
Page 241.
and much more (you say) may be said to excuse from the actual susception of
baptism.] True in adultis, but most faise in infants; I am weary of telling you
of your fallacious arguing, a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter: Again,
if here by actual susception of baptism, you mean that infants are to be
excused from it, we have answered in the foregoing paragraph; if you mean from
administration of infant baptism, we deny your assertion, and expect proof.

The second device (you say) was of Calvin and his.] You said before that some
said infants have imputative says, (...)
and by the number you now attribute it to Calvin; indeed Mr. Calvin says, as
I have noted, That infants are baptized into future repentance and faith, which
although they be not yet formed in them, yet by the secret operation of the
spirit, the seed of either lies hid in them: and in the same chapter he says
as Paul there reasons, That the Jews are sanctified of their parents; so in
another place he teaches. That the children of Christians receive the same
sanctification of their fathers: Also in the same chapter be says -- not that
I mean rashly to affirm, that they be endued with the same faith which we feel
in our selves, or that they have at all knowledge of faith (which I had rather
leave in suspense, etc.) but concerning imputative faith, I find neither device
nor approbation of Calvin's. Why did you not rather say that this device was P.
Lombards (who mentions the Imputative faith you speak of) or some of the
following Schoolmen? -- ^equiritur fides Ecclesiae, Al. Aleni. de sacr. bapt.
q. 8. m. 3. a. 1. sect. 3. resol. Itemque -- par^ui^^ in baptistis^^, ^m^^^to.
Chris^^^, ^fferentium fide, etc.^b. m. 8. a. 3. sect. 1. resol.
Or Polydor Virgil who in his fourth book concerning the Inventors of these
things clears Calvin from this invention, saying -- Seeing infants, by reason
of their age, cannot testify their own says, as Cyprian says, it was
provided from the beginning, that they should profess their faith by others;
that as another fault, to wit Adam cur first parents sin was evil to them, in
so much that from their birth they were subject to original sin, so others
endeavor might be good to them, Who therefore (as Ambrose says in his second
book concerning the calling of the Gentiles) believe and are baptized by
another confession. Or why do you not rather lay the invention hereof to
Justin Martyr, who living long before any of these, Fides aliena, sine qua non
datur parvulis remissi^, non est fides offerentium, sed est fides ecc^^sis.
Gab. Byel. in 4. lent. distinct 4 q.z. G. ib. did. 5. q. 1. R; Re quiritur
fides ecclesiae, etc. Polydore Virgil. de invent. l. 4. c. 4. inquir,... Quibus
cum per ^tatem nen licer^t de sua fide testari, ^ principi^ sie^t tradit
Cyprianus, provisuin suit, ut per alios credere profiterentur; quo queinadmedum
aliena culpd, id est Adam primi parentis delictam eis qu^^ malo suit, quod
statim nati originali peccato obligarentur, sic aliena opera bono e^^^t, qui
ideirco, velut ait, Ambrosiu, l. de vocat. Gent. 2. ex alien^ confessione
credunt and baptizant^r.(...).Just. Mart. q. and relpons. aa orthodox. q. 56.
says, They are made worthy of the good things of Baptism, by their faith who
present them to be baptized? The Reader may hence gather how little Calvin said
for imputative faith; and if he had affirmed any such thing, yet how untrue it
is, that Calvin, or any of his, invented it. But the pleader says further,

Can an infant sent into a Mahumetan Province, be more confident for
Christianity when he comes to be a man, then if he had not been baptized? Page
241. Yes, caeter is paribss: for though the Sacraments work not the same effect
in all receivers, yet Gods holy Spirit deserteth not his ordinance in the
elect, though for causes ever just, though most unknown to us, it does not
always alike show its power in the recipient. It is true, that the seal and
ministration of man can nothing profit where God gives not the inward Baptism
by his holy Spirit; though the inward may save without the outward, as has
been noted: but your supposition being rightly laid concerning an elect infant
baptized, and so carried away, you must grant, that God, whose election can by
no means be defeated or made void, will give and make effectual the means to
the end, that is, salvation, whether by acquainting the party baptized with his
will declared in his word preached to him, or by his secret work within him, if
he will take him away in infancy: in the adult, coming to the knowledge of Gods
covenant in Christ, and of his own sealing in infancy, it must make him more
confident of his implantation into Christ, then if he knew that he never had
been baptized. What then? Must this be by virtue of baptism by water only, or
the external ministration thereof? No, but by the power of Gods Spirit working
on his ordinance, and accomplishing his own decrees, do we follow your
supposition, dividing preaching of the word to such when they come to years,
from the precedent seal? Truly such a strange invention were absolutely without
Art, without Scripture, reason or authority, I would say, as is your argument
here alleged against insant-baptism, but that you call it Demonstrative and
Unanswerable: but consider how to overcome before you cry victory. To answer
your supposition; suppose that an infant were not by any habitual faith so
much as disposed to any actual belief without a new master; what could this
conclude more then that it is necessary to the actual faith of an insant come
to fit years, that he be taught the doctrine of faith, repentance, etc. which
we constantly affirm: what makes this against infant baptism? We unanimously
confess, and solemnly profess, that the infant, so soon as it shall be able to
learn, ought to be, and shall be taught the mysteries of eternal life and
salvation by Christ: so your demonstration proves but a poor fallacy: you
utterly mistaking or willingly dissembling the question. We affirm not that the
Word ought to be divided from the Sacrament whereof newborn infants are
capable, but that the word is to be preached to them, and they are to be
instructed in all the Rudiments of Christian Religion, so soon as they shall be
able to learn: I only add hereto, what have you said in this your so much
applauded argument against infant baptism, which might not as reasonably and
religiously have been urged against infant-circumcision? Could they if sent
into Painim-Countreys with all the terms of your supposition, have been more
disposed to an actual belief without a new Master? yet they had, and we have
right to the seal of the righteousness of Faith, not for any excellency or
ability to produce any good and saving effect in our selves, but through the
merits of our Savior, the free mercy of God, and the right of our Fathers,
with whom God made his Covenant for their persons and posterity. Next, you say,

To which also this consideration may be added, Page 241: Numb. 30.
That if baptism be necessary to the salvation of infants, upon whom is the
imposition laid?] Concerning Baptism in general, it is considerable which
Tertullian says, The Lord himself who owed no repentance, was baptized; and
was it not necessary to sinners? his reason will reach (possibly beyond his
opinion) to infants also, except we should say with Pelagius, that they are not
sinners. Further we say, that Baptism, the laver of regeneration, is necessary
to the salvation of infants; yet in case of privation or impossibility, they
are saved by the peculiar and extraordinary goodness and providence of God. So
that the necessity of Baptism, as has been avowed, is not absolute, as if none
could be saved without it; but necessary on our part, who are to obey the
ordinance of God. God is not tied to his ordinance, but we are: he can
otherwise save, but we cannot be saved in the contempt thereof God (says
Tertullian) has bound faith to the necessity of Baptism; therefore Cernelius
and those that were with him, after they were sanctified by the holy Ghost,
Disringui^^ igitur inter necessitatem ex part Dei and ex part nostri: inter
casum pri^ationis and viam ordinariam, etc. Ioh Gerhard de Baptism. c. 7. c.
23^.

Obstrinxit sidem ad bapt j^^^ necessitatum. Tertul. q. s. c. 13.

-- Nec tamen visibile Sacramutum ideo contemnendum; quia c^ntempter e^us
invisibiliter sanctisi^^ri non potest: Hinc Cornelius, and qui cum eo crant,
jam Spirita Sanctificati, baptizati sunt: nee su^eis^^ jud^^ aest, etc. P.
Lemb. sent. l. 4. did. 4. E.


were yet baptized; neither is the visible sanctification superfluous, because
the invisible preceded; seeing God alone gives the one, and appoints man to
do the other for a seal and confirmation of his covenant. You say more,

To whom is the commandment given? To the Parents or to the children? Not to
the children, for they are not capable of a law; not to the parents, for then
God has put the salvation of innocent babes into the power of others, and
infants may be damned for their fathers carelessness or malice, etc.] You trifle
here; you know that we hold no such necessity of the means, as has been said;
your foundation therefore failing, nothing of your superstructure can stand. If
men neglect or contemn the ordinance of God toward their infants salvation,
they do as much as in them lies, 2. ^^n. 2. 19.
to shut them from heaven: but yet the foundation of the Lord remains sure,
having this seal, the Lord knows them that are his though men neglect to mark
them, who cannot help themselves thereto, yet the Lord knows all his, ^^e Mr.
Cobbet of child. Baptism. right, sect 10. p. 447, 448,
and is not unjust to punish the child's involuntary defect for the parents
voluntary neglect, which God will severely punish, though the child shall be
held guiltless thereof, as may appear in the fore-recited example of Moses;
which might persuade considering men to beware of denying children baptism (for
if the neglect be such a sin, -- qui dam eis etc. talibus parentibus ^^ secit,
oftendis, qu^^d cum f^^de^e sa^ dignitus Andr. Rivet to. 2. ^tract. 3. q. 3. n.
2.
what is the contempt thereof?) to which their parents faith gives them right;
not as an efficient, principal, or meritorious cause of infants salvation, but
as a sign and seal of Gods good will toward their children, whose providence
causing them to be born of such parents shows that he vouchsafes them the
privilege of his covenant: and how horrible a presumption is it for man to
take away that which God pleases to give?

It follows (say you) that it is not necessary at all to be done to them to
whom it cannot be prescribed as a law, and in whose behalf it cannot be
reasonably entrusted to others with the appendant necessity.] We have said
enough concerning the necessity you still harp on, and fear to weary the Reader
by telling you, we hold no such absolute necessity as we have expressed; but
that it follows not that it is necessary at all to be done, etc. is evidently
false, as may appear in circumcision, which was enjoined the parents, not the
children; as untrue is your second branch ( in whose behalf it cannot be
reasonably entrusted to others --) for the infants circumcision was reasonably
entrusted to the parent under this necessiry -- The uncircumcised man child --
that person shall be cut off from his people, Genesis 17. 14.

And (you say) if it be not necessary, it is certain it is not reasonable.]
Stay and prove that it is not necessary, before you build up many conclusions
upon that which never was, not will be granted you. We have showed how it is
necessary.

It is nowhere in terms prescribed.] Neither is the Sabbath which we observe,
nor many other things which of duty we do perform: See what has been answered
hereto, page 240. Number. 28. and so we baptize infants; for it is both
reasonable, and they have a capacity thereof, though you deny both.

Either baptism produc^th spiritual effects, or it produces them not, etc.]
Page 2 42. Number. 31;
A rare Dilemma, but that it is fallacious. Reduce it to a Syllogism, and it
will appear a Paralogism ex accidente. Suppose thus,

That which produces no spiritual effects, is not to be contended for; but
baptism produces no spiritual effect; ergo, it is not to be contended for: Who
knows not that it is accidental to baptism to produce no spiritual effect in the
baptized? This is for man's unbelief and forsaking the Covenant^, by wilful
sinning which does ponere ^bicem, and make the Ordinance of none effect to
salvation: If we should thus dispute, Romans 4. 15.
That which causes wrath is evil; but the Law causes wrath, Romans 7. 12. Psalm.
19. 7, 8.
ergo, the Law is evil: the Fallacy were the same: For it is accidental, and
through man's disobedience that the Law causes wrath; of it self it is good and
holy, right and pure: so here, though baptism produce no good spiritual effect
in the reprobate (or not ex opere operato) yet by the institution of God, whose
spirit works on his Ordinance, it does.

What are we nearer heaven if we are baptized?] If I were of your Council, I
would entreat you to beware of these political temporizings which come so near
Atheism: Believe you the Scriptures who thus slight Gods holy Ordinances?

But if -- baptism does do a work upon the soul, producing spiritual benefits
and advantages, these advantages are produced by the external work of the
Sacrament alone, or by that as it is helped by the cooperation and
predispositions of the suscipient. Here you bring another fallacy, a non causa
pro causa We say that neither are the effects or spiritual advantages of
baptism, produced by the external work of the Sacrament alone, nor by that as
it is helped by the cooperation and pre-disposition of the suscipient (as has
been proved) but by the spirit of God working on his own Ordinance.

If (you say) by the external work alone, how does this differ from the opus
operatum of Papists, save that it is worse? If the Sky fall we shall have
Larks. Who affirms that which you suppose?

For they say the Sacrament does not produce it is effect but in a suscipient
disposed by all requisites and due preparations of piety, faith and
repentance.] Do they say so when they speak of infant baptism? slander them
not; herein they are better then you who deny infants baptism, which they grant
though children cannot actually believe, confess, profess or repent.

But this opinion says it does of it self, without the help or so much as the
coexistence of any condition but the mere reception.] Make much of the Minerva
of your own brain; if it be your opinion, we own it not.

But if the Sacrament does not do its work alone, but per modum recipientis,
according to the predispositions of the suscipient, then because infants can
neither hinder it, nor do any thing to further it, it does them no benefit at
all.] You might have pleaded the same against circumcision, with as good
success: They could neither hinder it, nor do any thing to further it; did it
therefore do them no benefit at all? But who says it is per modum recipient
is, etc. which is not properly expressed according to the predisposition, Per
modum speaks a cause, ad, or secundum, a condition: We say that the Sacrament
does work according to the dispositions of the receivers, because God gives
that to infants which makes them fit to be baptized, giving them by his own
Covenant with his believieving parents, federal holiness, and so a right to the
external initiatory seal of his Covenant with them: Whether it do them good or
no, whether it produce a spiritual good effect or no (that is to regeneration
and salvation) a right they have to the external seal, as being born within the
Church, and that as soon as they are born; we understand not any other
predisposing cause in the infant to be baptized, as if he were able to
contribute any thing to his receptibility, more then the unborn Jacob was in
relation to the love of God, which indeed never found any cause but it self;
Romans 9. 11. etc. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Romans 3 20.
yet ere the children were born, God loved Jacob and hated Esau. Further we
say, as we shall be saved secundum opera, but not propter opera: Good works are
in the regenerate excellent signs of justification and salvation future, they
cannot be the causes of either; they follow, they cannot precede justification:
So we may say that baptism works according to the dispos^^ons of the
suscipient, which are not in infants, faith, profession, repentance, etc. which
God gives not to infants, but to persons of years; but as to their ri^^ baptism
by his Covenant: what other predispositi^^ ^re in them are secret, and known to
God above. And so your exploded fancy and dream of a notable advantage
vanishes.

Either baptism (you say) is a mere Ceremony, or it implies a duty on our part.
If it be a ceremony only, how does it sanctify us, or make the comers
thereunto perfect? If it implys a duty on our part, how then can children
receive it, who cannot do duty at all?] How many impertinences are here twisted
up together? We answer pla^nly, Ceremony and duty on man's part, are not membra
dividentia nor always contradistinct for they may coincidere; as in those
ceremonies of the Law, which being commanded of God, were duties of men subject
to the Law, and to be performed, though they could not make the comers
thereunto perfect: and so is baptism now a duty on our part to be administered,
though of it self it cannot make all the comers thereunto perfect. But you
demand, if it implies a duty on our part; how then can children receive it, who
cannot do duty at all? Where is now the revelation, reason, common sense, and
all experience in the World, in which you so lately triumphed, as if you had
driven us to take sanctuary? If it be a duty on our part to administer it^ how
can children receive it, who cannot do any duty at all? Nay but tell me, if you
can, by all your reason, how could infants receive baptism except we did
administer it? say you, how can he be passive who cannot be active at all? how
could infants receive circumcision, who could do as little duty as infants now
can? That homonymical (on our part) must be otherwise limited by some
expression, or else your Argument will appear fallacious. It is a duty on our
part to baptize infants; on the childrens part no duty is required^ they can do
none, as such; for God enjoyneth no impossibilities. But you say,

^This way of ministration, makes baptism to be wholly an outward duty, a work
of the Law, ^^rnal Ordinance, it makes us adhere to the letter, without any
regard of the spirit, etc.] This Rhetoric would something better ^^^^^ ^im that
cares not what, but how much he says ^ ^^^^^ vain and injurious expressions,
are mere aspersions: and call you this an Argument considerable? wherein
appears either matter or form thereto pertinent? For the rest (which in some
other man I should take for some aegri insomnium) we say if you mean by
Mystery, the spiritual baptism mysteriously signified by the outward
ministration, to which you seem to drive, it is evident that it does not always
accompany it (except you will say that the Sacrament justifies ex opere
operato, Page 242.
which a little before you would have pinned on our backs) which appears in
Judas, Simon Magus, Page 243.
and all others who fall away: And as certainly false is it, that it never
follows in order of time; common experience showing that the spiritual seed
sowed in baptism, many times, and in many of the baptized, lies long before it
actually appears, either in any outward effects, inward signs of calling, or
fruits of regeneration; as in Abraham faith preceded, and circumcision the seal
of the righteousness of faith, followed: so in Cornelius, a spiritual
sanctification preceded, and baptism followed; but in Isaak circumcised the
eight day, the seal preceded, and faith and sanctity followed: So in
Infant Baptism the seal and laver of regeneration goes before, Augustine.
contr. Donat. l. 4. c. 21.
and actual faith follows it in season, if they hold fast the faith of
Christ. You say again,

Baptism is never propounded, mentioned or enjoined as a means of remission of
sins, or of eternal life, but something of duty, choice, and sanctity is joined
with it, in order to production of the end so mentioned. Know you not that as
many as are baptized into Christ Jesus, are baptized into his death, etc. Romans
6. 3.
] Good reason that such things should be propounded, mentioned and enjoined to
those who converting to the faith in years capable of Doctrine, require the
seal of Gods Covenant; and certainly so was it to Proselytes to be circumcised;
but you cannot reasonably think, that they proposed or enjoined Infants to be
circumcised any such things: and it were as vain to propose any of these to
Infants now to be baptized: Therefore we seal them now, and propound these like
things to them when they be capable: Now the Scripture speaking to men or women
of understanding, propounds to them their present duty who are to be baptized,
or who are baptized, as faith, repentance, walking in newness of life,
mortification; and (as has been said) the Apostles in the ecclesia
constituenda had mostly to do, being to endeavor the calling and conversion of
the Gentiles, who before were aliens from the Covenant of God: But in ecclesia
constituta, we rarely meet with any first to be taught, and then to be sealed;
the children of Christian parents having Church-priviledg, are now baptized
first (as in the settled Covenant under the Law they were first circumcised) and
when they come to fit years, instructed: And what then do all your
impertinences disadvantage our cause, seeing elect infants in their baptism,
are implanted into Christ, and in due time walk in newness of life?

This is indeed truly to be baptized, both in the Symbol and the Mystery:
Whatsoever is less then this, is but the Symbol, only a mere ceremony, etc.]
The effects of elect childrens baptism being nothing less, this Rhetoric might
have been spared.

Plainer yet; Whosoever are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, have put
on the new man: But to put on this new man, is to be formed in righteousness,
and holiness, and truth, etc.] All this plainly makes for infants baptism, who
being naturally flesh and blood, such as cannot enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, conceived and born in sin, children of wrath, must indeed put on Christ
Jesus that they may be saved: These premises we willingly adhere to; but your
conclusion is liable to a non sequitur; because it is either fallacious,
disputing ab adultis ad infantes, which wanting the condition(...), becomes an
ignoratio elenchi, and mistaking or mispursuing the Question, or begging it in
those terms ( remaining in the present incapacities) which cannot be granted. I
answer two things, 1. God can give capacity of regeneration, and newness of
life to any age; That he does not give it to infants, cannot appear to us: The
contrary does; for he gives the spirit of sanctification to some infants, in,
and from the womb, for many dying young, are saved, which being conceived in
sin, and born the children of wrath^ they could not be, without regeneration
and sanctification: And truly when I consider what marvelous instinct God
gives to the new-cast young of beasts, to take the breast (as well as to
newborn infants) for their bodily preservation. I cannot but conceive that the
good God gives infants (on whom he has set his own image, which consists in
understanding, sanctity, immortality, etc. Quae consu^it in immortalitate, in
innocentia, ^^ju^ii^a ^ireli^^^ ^^^ ^ianimi d^^bus. Va^abl. in Genesis 1 26. See
Mr. Cobbet. Explicat. of Mar 28. and Mar. 16. page 177. page 244. 1 Pet. 3. 21.
) some admirable, though to us secret, light of mind, and capacity of that
which is snbordinate to the preservation of their immortal souls. 2. Children
under the Gospel have no less capacity then children under the Law had who yet
received the seal of the same righteousness of faith in their infancy, and were
circumcised to newness of life. Romans 2. 29. But you say,

-- And then have they but one member of the distinction used by S. Peter, they
have that baptism which is a putting away the filth of the flesh; but they have
not that baptism which is the answer of a good conscience toward God, which is
the only baptism that saves us -- ] I answer, 1. You vainly dispute e non
concessis; it is not granted, nor can it ever be proved that elect children in
baptism are not formed new in righteousness and holiness; and so your
superstruction concerning their having only that baptism which is a putting
away the filth of the flesh, but not the rest necessary to salvation, is
frivolous. 2. The answer of a good conscience toward God, is an effect of the
inward baptism by the spirit of Jesus, peculiar to the elect. Now if your
reason hence taken, for the exclusion of infants from baptism, the external
seal, were good; by the same reason none but the elect, or those who have the
answer of a good conscience toward God, must be admitted to baptism and whom
then might you with good conscience baptize? certainly but few; and for ought
you can certainly know, none: For in these last and worst days, what know you,
but that they who fairly profess faith and repentance, etc. may yet
notwithstanding be mere hypocrites? And where is then their answer of a good
conscience toward God? 3. I say, what secret light, and sweet confidence elect
infants have in God, I know not; sure I am they have that which is and shall be
sufficient to their salvation in Christ, though they die before man can teach
them mor^^ and why shall man exclude them from the external Seal of Gods
Covenaut with them (as being born within the Church) of which they have as
evident (and a more easy) capacity then children had of circumcision? God
gives Infants the incomparably greater and more excellent part, sanctity and
sealing to salvation; and shall man presume to deny the less and subordinate
part, the external Seal of Christ's visible Church, whereof Reprobates, born
within the Church, have a capacity? 4. Faith, good conscience, repentance, etc.
are in the elect those fruits, whose seeds were sown in baptism; and (as has
been said) were it reasonable to say, we may not sow until the fruits thereof
appear? Nay, but we therefore sow in hope, that we may in due season see and
reap the fruits thereof. 5. Whereas you say that the answer of a good
conscience toward God, is the only baptism that saves us; I answer, 1. It is
not the answer of a good conscience that saves any man, though a good
conscience be an excellent sign of our salvation by Christ; for, Being
justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom also we have access by faith, etc. 2. Romans 5. 1, 2.
Your reasoning is fallacious, your medium being homonymical: For, allowing you
the sign for the cause, yet if that ( which saves us) though it may be true,
if understood concerning persons of years, and as good conscience, an undoubted
effect of regeneration, is opposed to the bare seal thereof, without any inward
effect of the spirit. I say if it be understood of Infants, as in your sense,
excluded from a capacity of good conscience, or the acts thereof, it is very
false, except you will also exclude all Infants from salvation, which were
against the express doctrine of Christ.

As infants ( you say) by the force of nature cannot put themselves into a
supernatural condition (and therefore say the Poedobaptists, they need baptism
to put them into it) so if they be baptized before the use of reason, before
the works of the spirit, before the operation of grace, before they can throw
off the works of darkness, and live in righteousness and newness of life, they
are never the near.] I answer, 1. Neither can men of years by the force of
naeture put themselves into a supernatural condition, supposing you mean
subordinate to salvation; and what then can the use of reason without the works
of the Spirit, advantage them hereto? Shall not they therefore that have the
use of reason be baptized? 2. What do you herein say which might not as well
have been objected against the circumcision of infants? Would you have
concluded them never the near, because at eight days old they had not the use
of reason to know what or why it was so done unto them before they could throw
off the works of darkness, and live in righteousness and newness of life? 3. If
you will have none baptized before the works of the Spirit, before the
operations of grace, etc. when and whom may you baptize? For the wind blows
where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence
it comes and whither it goes: so is every one that is born of the Spirit.
John 3. ^.
God can, and does sanctify infants (as in the elect infants, dying such must
be granted, if you have so much reason or charity as to think that at least
some of them are elected and saved) and he can and does sanctify in age,
sometimes in the very last act thereof, as appeared in the penitent thief; how
then will it follow that infants are never the nearer if they be baptized
before the use of reason, etc. 4. We must understand that baptism comprehends
first, the sign water, and the whole ceremony, sprinkling, washing, or dipping
into water in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. Secondly,
the things themselves signified by the visible and external things, which are
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus on the baptized for the remission of sins,
mortification of the old man, quickening the new man into certain hope of
resurrection to eternal life to come. Thirdly, the commandment and promise of
Christ, whence the sign has authority and power of sealing and confirming
these things unto the baptized. They then that say baptism is an external sign
and washing of the body, and therefore a bare and effectless sign, do
fallaciously dispute, Fallacia, divisionis.
dividing that which God (who cannot deceive us) has joined together, by
giving us order to baptize, and be baptized for the remission of sins freely
for Christ's sake, into whom we are implanted by Baptism. How false then must it
be which you, upon the matter, affirm that we shall be never the nearer, if we
cannot contribute something to the efficacy of Baptism in the use of our own
reason? Certainly Gods Spirit accompanies his ordinance in the elect, sooner
or later: If the reprobate be never the nearer salvation for his baptism, that
is accidental, and makes nothing against the effectual sealing of the elect
to eternal life in their baptism. There are many sorts of hearers of the Word;
some like the stony ground, Matthew. 13.
some like the thorny, some like the highway; shall the Apostasy, unbelief,
and barrenness of the greater part, make the ordinance of God of none effect to
believers? ^Quicunque partulosrecentes al uteris ma^rum baptizaudos negat aut
dicit, in re^issi^^e^ peccatorum eos baptizari, sed nihil ex Adam trahere
criginalis peccati, quod regenerationis la^acr^ expictur, etc. Anat ema sit.
Council Milvetian 2. can. and ib. eod Can. Eccles. Afric. 1 ^c. Aug. l. 3. de
peccaturum merit. Hieron. romans 2. advers. ^elag. l. 3. Psalm.^ 1. 5. Ephesians 23.
John 3. 6. 1 Cor. 15. 50. John 3. 5.
To conclude, it is but the outward ministration which is committed to us; the
capacity or incapacity, fruit-bearing or sterility of receivers, belongs to God
to judge of, not to us; we must do our duty, and leave the issues to to him.
But you say,

From the pains of hell they shall be saved by the mercies of God and their own
innocence, though they die in puris naturalibus, and baptism will carry them no
further.] What? Popery and Pelagianism twisted together? If you speak of
childrens salvation by the mercies of God to his elect, so far we accord: if
you say by their own innocence, that Pelagians and Donatists taught, who
affirmed that infants were born without original sin, and therefore would not
have them baptized. Against this heresy the second Milvetian Council
determined. Canon 2. as has been noted. For that you say they shall be saved
though they die in puris naturalibus, that is, such as they are by nature
without regeneration, it is against the express word of God, as may clearly
appear, in that all are conceived and born in sin, the children of wrath by
nature: That which is born of the flesh is flesh, -- and flesh and blood cannot
inherit the kingdom of God, that is, such as it is by, and in the state of
corrupted nature; therefore except the infant be regenerate, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of God. That which you say, that Baptism will carry infants
no further, then from the pains of hell, smells strongly of Popery: They say
that children dying without Baptism, shall have poe^am damni, non sensus, that
is, they shall be free from hell fire, but that they shall not enter into
heavenly joys: But Augustine so far said well, there is not to any, and middle
place, that he can be any where but with the Devil, who is not with Christ.
Certainly the Scripture mentions only heaven for the elect and blessed, and
hell for the reprobate and damned. Vid. Bellar. to. 4. de amiss. gratiae. l. 6.
c. 2, 3, 4. N^^ est ullus ulli medius locus ut possit essenisi cum diabolo, qu^
n^n est cum Christo. de p^. cat. merit. c^ 28. and ^^. sermon. 14. de verb.
Apostoli.


For that Baptism that saves us is not only the washing with water, of which
only children are capable, but the answer of a good conscience toward God, of
which they are not capable till the use of reason, till they know to choose the
good and refuse the evil.] If you mean by washing with water, baptism
according to Christ's institution administered; we say also it is not that only
(which is the Ministers part to give) which saves us, but the power and grace
of Gods Spirit inwardly baptizing, sanctifying, regenerating and cleansing us
from our sins by the precious blood of Jesus that saves us: Now that infants
are not hereof capable till the use of reason, is evidently false, if you but
hold these three Principles; 1. That no unregenerate unclean person can be
saved, 2. That all mankind is born in sin, Romans 5. 12. 3. That some infants
dying before their use of reason, are saved. That which you say, that infants
are capable of washing with water (that is of baptism, or else you trifle) we
asser^t to, and desire you to say no more; infants of believing parents, that
is of professed Christians, are capable of baptism: for the rest we contend
not, we refer the effect thereof in particulars to God, who alone knows his
elect, and how and when to give them the inward fruit of his own ordinances: we
neither affirm that all the baptized shall be saved, neither can we or you
determine which shall, and which shall not, but indifferently, as charity
requires, hope well of every one whom we baptize, concerninig. whom we can say
nothing to the contrary: But you say,

All vows made by persons under other names, stipulations made by minors, are
not valid till they (be) by a supervening act after they are of a sufficient
age to racifie them.] To which we answer, 1. though all be not valid in such
case, it is enough that some are: 2. Your assertion, if granted, that is, that
all vows, or (which is more then you affirm) if no vows made by persons under
others names, or stipulations made by minors, or persons in their minority, are
not valid until by a supervening act after they are of sufficient age to
ratify them they are confirmed: what could this make against our duty of
Infant Baptism? the case being much different between stipulations of men, and
the covenant between God and man, as has been showed, and as appeared in
circumcision which was with Infants eight days old. Mr. Cobbet well observes,
that the covenant of grace is as well a testament, 1 Cor. 11. 25. Heb. 9. 15,
etc. In Genesis 17. ^. ^. 99, etc.
Now a testament may be, and uses to be made in reference to little ones
without knowledge: nor do any use to deny a child's right in the Testators will,
-- because it understood not the same: and that many Infants with whom God made
the covenant, Genesis 17. dying such, were yet saved: and that they restipulate in
their Parents knowing acceptance of the covenant, and professed owning of it
upon the Covenant terms, as well on their childrens parts as their own: and they
restipulate in a passive reception of the Covenant condition and bond to after
imitation of their father Abraham's faith and obedience. Again, our question is
not concerning the ratification or effect of Infant Baptism, by their act or
acts, to make it good to themselves and effectual, when they come of age; but
concerning a Church-priviledge on Infants part, which is to be admitted unto
the external seal of Gods Covenant with his Church, it being to Parents and
their children; and this dependth on Gods institution to appoint it, and his
inward working to make it good: Secondly, in the confirmation of children come
to age, they then professing faith, obedience, repentance, newness of life,
etc. into which in their infancy they were baptized, that is, then ratified
which others promised and stipulated for them, as concerning outward
profession, which is in your language a supervening act, to make the former
appear valid. Thirdly, the question is not concerning the final effect of
baptism in particula^^ baptized, which cannot fall under the Ministers
cognizance (it being kept in heaven in the archives and secret counsel of God)
but concerning their right to baptism, who are born within the verge and
precincts of the Church. 1 Pet. 1. 4.
Whether such infants do afterward believe, repent, and amend their lives to
salvation by Christ, or not, we cannot foresee, nor have we any exception to
supersede or limit our duty of administering the outward seal of baptism: For as
much as children born of Christian parents and within the Church, are thereby
partakers of the Covenant of grace, even they who are not partakers of the
grace of the Covenant, Fourthly, we answer, That children in Gods account, do
vow, confess, and avouch the Lord in their parents vowing, confession, or
avouching him, as they did of old; which the learned Mr. Cobbet observes from
Deuteronomy. 26. 17, 18. Page 121.
where we read -- Thou have avouched the Lord this day, to be thy God, and to
walk in his ways, etc. and the Lord has avouched thee this day, to be his
peculiar people, as he has promised thee -- and Deuteronomy, 19. 10, 11, etc. Ye
stand this day all of you before the Lord your God: Your Captains and your
Tribes, your Elders and your Officers, with all the men of Israel, your little
ones, your wives and strangers -- that those should enter into a Covenant
with the Lord thy God, and into his Oath which the Lord thy. God makes with
thee this day, that he may establish thee to day for a people unto himself, and
that he may be unto thee a God, as he has said unto thee, and as he has sworn
unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaak, and to Jacob, etc. whereof see Genesis 17.
7. Though therefore some stipulations made in minority and nonage, bind not the
person under age, except he confirm it when he comes to age, yet you will not
say that the same is not valid if made by Parents, Governors, or Guardians for
children: and so in some public Covenants and Acts of one City or State, with
another, which concern the present and future ages, the infants within that
City or State, as being in minority free Denisons, are bound by the same
Covenant and Act, though as such, they could neither transact, speak, nor
consent to the same, but all was agreed on and done by their Parents or
Commissioners of years thereto designed, in their own and childrens name: which
may apear in Isreal's Covenant with the Gibeonites, Jo^^. 9. 15.
which, though the stipulators were beguiled, yet Isreal's children were bound
to, and when Saul out of a perverse zeal, about 380 Rather 433. ^. Sam. 21. 1.
years after, would needs violate, how hinding that Covenant was, God declared
in a severe judgment on Saul's Family, and all Israel. But upon this invalid
supposition you build another quere.

-- Why were it not as good they stayed to make it, till that time, before
which time if they do make it, it is to no purpose? this would be considered.]
It would, or should be considered, that it is very dangerous playing thus with
the sacred Ordinances of God: You confess that baptism is the only inlet into
the Church of Christ; and is it to no purpose to be let into his Church and
Covenant, out of which you say there is no salvation? It Is true that all are
not saved that are within the Church and Covenant, but no man is saved out of
it. God has appointed baptism to be a seal and token of our receiving and
entrance into the Church; is it to no purpose to obey him in his Ordinances?
God would not only have all the Citizens of his Church thus enfranchised, but
those who are not baptized when they may, he will not have reckoned in the
number of his Church: And say you, it is to no purpose to have children marked
for members of Christ's Church? ^rfin part. 2. Christ. relig.
Baptism is Gods mark whereby he will have his people discerned from all other
false Churches and Sects; and think you it is to no purpose to have Gods mark
set on children, that they may not with a perishing world be touched by the
destroyers? Yet you say,

Our way is the surer way; for not to baptize children till they can give an
account of their faith, is the most proportionable to an Act of Reason and
humanity, and it can have no danger in it.] Page 244. Number. 2.
How often has Satan in tempting to sin, misled the incaucious with this
suggestion, there can be no danger in it, it is the surer way? it is neither
reasonable not humane wilfully to act his part, and as much as in us lies, to
shut infants from the kingdom of heaven; and so to do that which much angered
Christ in the days of his flesh; to wit, to bar or forbid children to come to
him; this would be considered. Mark 10.
And why is it more proportionable to an act of reason and humanity to defer
childrens baptism, then in due time to baptize them? Infants were circumcised
long before they could give any account of their faith, and yet that act was
proportionable to reason; and Moses was near a sad affliction for delaying it.
You say further,

For to say that infants may be damned for want of baptism, etc. Exodus 4. page
245.
I know no Protestant that ever said so: but take heed you damn not your selves
by teaching contempt of the Sacrament. We are well satisfied that the privation
thereof shall not condemn infants, it not being their fault if they want it; it
may be, and certainly is theirs, who teach men to deny it them: And then
consider in the inviolable justice of God, whose the damnation will be.
Contemp^^s sacramenti damnat, non priv^tio. Bern, ep. 37. Voluntos pro facto
input^tur ubi factum excludit necessita^. ib. ep. 77.
We cannot conceive that a mere privation of circumcision condemned those
Hebrew babes who died before the eighth day; because God is unchangeably just,
who confined their sealing to that day; yet you will grant that it was a great
sin (except in case of evident and inevitable necessity, as during Isreal's
marches in the Wilderness) a great sin I say of parents to neglect the
administration thereof (for God never threatened any punishment, such as is
mentioned, Genesis 17. 14. but in respect of great sin) much more was it
obstinately to deny it them: It is certainly true which has been noted out of
Augustine. There may be conversion of the heart without baptism; but it cannot
be in the contempt of baptism; for it can by no means be called the conversion
of the heart to God, when the Sacrament of God is contemned. Conversio
autem(...)
And so take your dirt back again into your own faces which you cast at ours,
Whosoever will pertinaciously persist in this opinion of Anabaptists, and
practice it accordingly, they pollute the blood of the everlasting Testament;
and in the Apostles sense; Heb. 4, 5, 6. They crucify to themselves the Son of
God afresh, and put him to open shame, who being once baptized (and thereby
planted together in the likeness of his death, Romans 6. 4 5. Who having once
died, dies no more, death has no more dominion over him) will yet be baptized
again: The Apostles saying, It is impossible for those who were once enlightened
(that is, baptized, as the Syriac Interpreter renders it, and as we shall make
it appear more anon) -- If they fall away, to renew them again unto repentance,
seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an
open shame: How do they crucify him afresh to themselves, that is, as much as
in them is? P^^. 245.(...)anim^d. in ep. ad Heb. ^.
Why, 1. They are said so to do, who iterate, or again do, or resume that which
is a resemblance or similitude of Christ's suffering, who died but once: for in
a reiterating it, we declare or intimate the first to be void: and so if we
will have a new baptism, we must have a new Christ, and he must in our Symbol
suffer, as if one Christ, or his once suffering were not sufficient for our
redemption. And is not this to pollute the blood of the everlasting Covenant
and Testament, and to crucify again the Son of God. (...)(...)
Secondly, this may be said in respect of reciduation or falling away from
Christ (as they do who renounce their baptism by which they were implanted into
him, by receiving another baptism) because the merit of Christ's Cross being
abolished and made void, by which they were once renewed, it must needs be that
Christ should be crucified again and put to shame, that they might be renewed
by a fresh, or new merit of the Cross; which seeing it cannot be, the Apostle
possibly would infer that it was impossible that they which are once sealed and
regenerate, should ever fall away, and that therefore all Christians should do
their uttermost endeavor that they may be like good ground, near the blessing,
and that they may not want an iterated renovation, which no man can possibly
a^^ain. Quia ab^lito and irrito r^^dd^to ^^u^is Christi i^erito, quo jemel
ren^^^^^(...)sup.


As for the rest of your revilings, though we have no cause to be troubled at
your dogged eloquence; yet for their sakes who are weak, I shall endeavor to
show the injurious falsehood thereof: You say that we in baptizing infants,
dishonor and make a Pageantry of the Sacrament, etc. We answer to this puted
calumny, 1. You may as well in this your Theomachy; and fighting against Gods
Ordinance, object the same against Circumcision of Infants, if incapacity of
present giving account of their faith, as you pretend, can make the Sealers of
infants liable to your unjust censure: for infants could then no more give an
account of their faith then now they can^ 2. Infants have a capacity of the
holy Ghost (as has been proved in the examples of Jeremy and John Baptist,
etc:) yea such a measure of sanctification, ^^^ 1. 5. Lu^. 1.
and so certain a regeneration, working in them all such things as God knows
to be necessary to their salvation; or himself supplying all those things; as
that Christ both pronounces their propriety in the Kingdom of heaven, and
proposed them as patterns to all those who should enter thereinto. Ma^^. 22,
23. Act. 1^^^ 47.
Therefore the Apostles Argument being good, from the extraordinary and visible
gifts of the holy Ghost (gifts of miracles flourishing in the primitive Church,
and marking many receivers to a capacity of baptism, which yet might then be
had without any interest in the Kingdom of heaven) who can forbid water that
these should not be baptized, which have received the holy Ghost as well as we?
It must as certainly hold from the gift to regeneration, and the spirit of
sanctification, which is in many infants, because many infants, dying such, are
saved: And now in your judgment does the baptism of such as are saved dishonor
the Sacrament (the outward seal which man can give, and wicked men receive) who
have received the thing signified, the inward seal of Gods holy spirit, which
none but himself can give, and none but the elect receive? Or do you dishonor
your self, who were so admitted into the Church, the Church our holy Mother,
who ma^gre the Devils malice, and the powers of hell, by Infant Baptism
brings an holy seed to Christ, Christ himself commanding us to baptize all,
without exception to any estate, sex, age, or condition, that either are within
the Church as born of Christian parents, or in their conversion, profession of
faith and repentance, desire to be admitted into the same: Add hereto that
Christ particularly cautioned for children, left any should despise them,
openly declaring, that of such is the kingdom of heaven: And yet the doing of
this duty is dishonor to the Sacrament, and Pageantry with you: Mat. 12. 30.
But, If of every idle word which men shall speak they shall give an account in
the day of judgment, it concerns them speedily to repent of these blasphemous
calumnies, left it prove a black and dismal day to them, in respect of these
things for which they can give no better account then their own fancies and
others.

And whereas you say, they that baptize infants ineffectually, represent a
Sepulture into the death of Christ, and please themselves with a sign without
an effect, making baptism like the fig tree in the Gospel, full of leaves, but
no fruit: To say this is an untruth, is as much answer as we owe to so
reasonless a calumny: yet I shall be contented to lay it further open.

I say, 1. Can you be assured that none of these who are baptized in infancy,
and no otherwise, are regenerate and saved? Whence have you either such
knowledge or commission so to judge? You say the Anabaptists say so; so said the
Pharisees concerning those that believed in Christ -- This people who knows not
the Law, are cursed: Joh. 7. 49.
But what warrant is this for you to blaspheme for company?

2. God be blessed that we who believe one God, one Mediator, one Faith, one
Baptism which we received in our infancy, have such a testimony of Gods holy
spirit, effectually working faith, repentance, mortification, and a comfortable
measure of sanctification in us, as that we know you speak untruth in that you
say, that Poedobaptists ineffectually represent a Sepulture into the death of
Christ, and please themselves in a sign without an effect, etc. God be
blessed, which according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again to a
lively hope -- wherein as we need not be beholding to you for testimony, so
neither are we to regard what you say against it. 1 Pet. 1. 3.
With me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you, or of man's
judgment -- but he that judges me is the Lord; therefore judge nothing before
the time. 1 Cor. 4. 3. 4.
He that says that baptism is a bare sign only, fallaciously concludes,
dividing things which God has joined together.

3. Although baptism of infants be effectless to the reprobate, whether infant,
or person of years, as in Judas, Simon Magus, Demas, and others like, ^et it is
effectual to salvation to all the elect, in whom Gods spirit powerfully works
to faith, repentance, sanctification, etc. without which all the waters under
heaven cannot be effectual for the cleansing of one soul.

4. We please not our selves with a sign without effect; if you do, rest not
in that state, lest you and your stingie leaves without fruit, withering,
become fuel for the fire which goes not out, to fill up the measure of impious
calumny. Cyril. Hierosol. car 2. 3, etc. Grug. Naz. orat. 40. Clem-Alexandr.
Poedag. l. 1. c. 6. says,(...)
You say,

They invocate the holy Ghost in vain, doing as if one should call upon him to
illuminate a stone or a tree.] 1. I wonder what they will be ashamed to say,
who blush not at such assertions? It Is true that the Apostle uses(...), to be
illuminated, for to be baptized, as the Syriac Interpreter gives it, Hebr. 4.
6. Hebr. 10. 32. and that the Greek Fathers so commonly used the word: and it
is no improbable conjecture, that there was an allusion to the Hebrew manner of
speaking; who by one and the same word express illumination, and a River or
Source of water, and by a Metaphor, Illumination of the mind: For they who are
baptized by water, and the spirit of Jesus, are in Gods good time and the
measure he knows fit, illuminated, and find not only a River of elementary
water, but of that water which flows to eternal life, whereof Christ spoke.
John 7. that is, the spirit of illumination and sanctification. Chrysostom. hom.
4.(...)i.e. ad baptiz. Just. Mar. Ap. (...)illiminatus fuit, ut Psalm. 34. 5
respexerunt ad eum(...)and illuminati sunt. 70.(...)per m^taph. mente
illuminatus sui^. V. Shin^^er.


2. I would desire you again consider, is the case all one, or alike, when we
pray that God would be pleased to illuminate, sanctify, and save an elect
infant for whom Christ shed his precious blood, for whose salvation he came
from heaven, became an infant, and man of sorrows to the death, whom he
blessed, of whom he said, Of such is the kingdom of heaven, and except ye
become as one of these, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven; Is I
say, the case all one when we pray according to Gods word and promise, for
these, as if we should pray God to illuminate, sanctify and save a stone, or a
tree? has a stone or tree any habitual faith, or reason, or any capacity of
the holy Ghost, illumination, or sanctification? Do any creatures under the
degrees of man, bear the image of their Creator, in immortality, sanctity and
light of understanding? Would God you could be ashamed of blaspheming, and
laying such pernicious stumbling blocks before the blind to make them fall.
Pentaglot. item fluvius; nam qui ad fluvium baptismi Christi accedit,
illuminatur, invenitque fluvium n^n tantum aquae eleme^taris, sed and aquae
vi^^^ profluentis e ven, ^^^ ^^^ caristas Jo^^ ^ec aliud est quam denum
illuminationis. Ludo vi^ de Die^. ^^^ sup.


Since ( you say) there is no direct impiety in the opinion (of Anabaptists)
nor any that is apparently consequent to it, and they with so much probability
do, or may pretend to true persuasion, they are with all means, Christian, fair
and humane, to be redargued, or instructed.] I hoped that the Plea being ended,
the Pleader would have come to himself again; but this and another strain
promise no more but a lucid interval. See John Cloppenburg Gangren of
Anabaptist. cited by N. Homes animadvers. etc. p. 106.


I answer, As to your charity toward the persons of the Anabaptists: I also
wish they may by all Christian, fair, and humane means, be reproved, convinced,
or instructed: but that there is no direct impiety in their opinion, nor any
that is apparently consequent to it, Vid. Joh. Sleid^ com. l. 6. impress.
Argentorati. An. 1558 p 93. a. ib. l. 10. p. 161. b. f. etc.
is apparently untrue, for that which is displeasing to Christ, is directly
impious; and such is withholding Infants from him: that which is uncharitable,
is direct impiety; and such is that opinion which barreth Infants from the
Seal of Gods Covenant with them, and the Communion of Saints; as also in that
it damneth so great a part of the world; presupposing that God had no Church in
the world for so many hundred years, as Infant Baptism has been the general
inlet to the same; except a little while in the schism of Pelagians and
Donatists; and again, when the same Heresy revived in Germany, in Charles 5.
Joh. Sleidan. com. l. 10.
his reign, and now again in these distracted and calamitous times: much more
has been, and might be said herein: but I shall be so far from being their
accuser, that I heartily pray the Lord to open their eyes that they sleep not
in death: only I say to the Pleader who would so courteously vail others
impiety,(...). -- Lastly, you say that you think

That there is much more truth then evidence on our side, and therefore we may
be confident as for our own particulars, but not too forward peremptorily to
prescribe to others, much less to damn, or to kill, or to persecute them that
only in this particular disagree.] That we may be confident of the truth on our
side, I assent: likewise, that none be too forward peremptorily to prescribe,
except where the Word of God and necessary consequence from thence prescribes;
that none should persecute, kill, or much less for opimons less then
blasphemous against God, or destructive to Religion, Religio cogi non pote^;
verbis p^^ius quam ^erberibus res Lactant. l. 5. c. 20.
and salvation of souls, (saving to Supreme Authority their lawful right)
agenda est, ut sit voluntas. Long diversa sunt carnificina and pietas, I also
assent to: but can by no mean^ be of your opinion, that there is less evidence
then truth or our side; as any ways intimating a defect of evidence: therefore
I say, 1. That evidence, sensu forensi, in common sense of controversies, or
matters of judicatuye, imports sufficient proof: so we say that witnesses
give in evidence; that is, not always in terminis, and express words, as in
actions of case is requirable; nor as they say, ore rotundo, as to say, Verres
is a Thief, etc. but from considerable circumstances, or necessary
consequences sufficient to evince, and to inform to sentence. This evidence on
our side you will not deny in this case, nor (I suppose) affirm that falsehood
has more proof or evidence in Scripture then truth. 2. Sometimes we speak of
evidence in relation to the party or parties to be informed; in which, not
only his or their capacity is considerable, but also other circumstances; as
the Informers expression, which possibly may be defective; the Informeds
attention, for want whereof, that may not appear which were otherwise
sufficiently evident. Again, In case of Gods judgment over the disobedient
given over to strong delusions, that they should believ lies and he damned, who
received not the love of the truth (of it self evident enough)^ that they might
be saved: here of see Isa. 6. 9, 10. Mat. 13. 13, 14, 15. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
To a blind man, or one that winketh in the clearest and most evident light, no
colors or proportions are evident; because men if blind cannot, if obstinate
and schismatical, will not see and understand.

3. There is a notius natura, and a notius nobis: if in the evidence you speak
of, you mean the first, and that error and falsehood is more known in nature,
that is manifestly false; for the truth is first and best known in nature. If
you mean the second, that is, that we less know the truth then the evidence;
what blame you in our cause, or advantage your Clients? If you say we see no
evidence, nor can the blind see the Sun; what can you gain hereby? it may be,
and certainly is, that the Gospels light is hid to some, the Apostle will tell
you to whom, and why, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. It is hid to them that are lost, in whom
the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest
the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ -- should shine unto them -- we
undertake not to make the truth evident to every gain-sayer and despiser
thereof, but say of such an one, as Elisha for his servant at the beleaguered
Dothan, 2 King. 6. 17. Lord, I pray thee open his eyes that he may see. The
most manifest light of the Gospel had not evidence enough with the Pharisees,
whom Christ pronounced blind; and it concerned them chiefly which he said, they
have winked with their eyes, etc. an unbeliever may doubt of any truth, and
then it is not evident to him. Mar. 13.
The old Academicks were wont to question the testimony and evidence of their
own senses with a quid si falleris? being not confident of the truth of that
they saw with their eyes, and heard with their ears. Carneades doubted of all
things; yet certainly many things were evident of themselves to those who could
and would see and know manifest truths, though not to him. 4. They who deny
convincing evidence in Gods Word, not only err not knowing the Scriptures, but
tacitly accuse the Wisdom and Providence of God for man's salvation, of
insufficiency: for how shall matters of controversy concerning faith and
manners be decided without sufficient evidence? and if you think there is not
sufficient evidence in Scripture to keep us from error, and to direct us in
the way of truth and salvation, in what other rule, or testimony will you
place such evidence as you would have? what in Traditions and unwritten
verities? where shall we feek these, among our adversaries? nay, but no man can
be edified by that which is destructive; or in Enthusiasms and Revelations?
Nem^ inde ^^^^ ^^^^ unde d^struitur, Teriul. de praes^r. c. 1^.
but what evidence can there be in those things, whose authority cannot be
proved, and whose truth cannot be infallible? nothing less then that which
cannot be false, can be the ground of faith and religion: whatsoever falls
below that supreme certainty, is but opinion at most. Now the Word of God only
is infallible, because he cannot lie, T^^. 1. 2. and therefore his Word is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works, 2 T^^. 3. 16, 17. 5 If it be rejoined, that in our present
question, and some other cases, the Scripture says nothing expressly and
positively to evidence the truth. Nec p^riclitor dicere ipsas quo que
Scriptures, sic esse ex Dei volun^a^e disposit^^s, ut Hereti. cis ^aterias
subministrarent, cum legam o^ or. ^ere h^reses esse quae sine Scripturis esse
non possent. Tertul. de prescrip. c. 39.
I answer, 1 with Tertullian, I am confident to say, that the Scriptures
themselves were so disposed by the will of God, that they might administer
matter to Heretics; seeing that I read, there must be Herefies, which could
not be without Scriptures. 2 That is Scripture truth which the Scripture
proposes or enjoineth, by necessary consequence, though not in express words;
and whosoever disbelieveth or disobeyeth that, so far he rejects the
Scripture, in his error and ignorance of Scripture. So the Sadduces --
Secundum (argumentum Sadducaeorum) est ^ non scripto. Jo Drus. praerer^a l. 1.
in Mat. 22. ex libris V. T. tantum recipiebant Pentateuchum, Jo. Drus. at ^oc.
N. T. com. 1.
denied the resurrection of the dead, among other vain arguments, so
principally a non scripto, because Moses (whose writings only, they received)
did not in terminis, or express words, and syllables, say, the dead shall rise
again: now though that is true, Moses did not expressly say so; yet our Savior
told them that therein they erred, not knowing the Scriptures, Mat. 22. 29.
Sadducaei) hi quoque tantum libros Mofis recipiebant, Pro^^etarum vatic nia
respuentes, Hierorym in Mat. 22.
where he means not express words of Scripture, but necessary consequence:
for certainly, they knew the express letter, yet thought they had not evidence
enough from Scripture, because they found nothing there in terminis, against
their error, which Christ yet justly charge on them -- Ye do err, not
knowing the Scriptures, Hi ergo resurrectionem ex mortuis negabant; eo quod in
Mosaicis Scrip^^ris hujus manifest non flat mentio: nam bas solas agnoscebant,
aliis libris non receptis. Euthym. in Mat. 22. c. 53. init.
-- as touching the resurrection of the dead, have you not read that which was
spoken unto you by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob! Well, what express Scripture is here to prove the
resurrection of the dead, that Christ should charge those that denied the same
with error and ignorance of Scriptures? Truly no more then we find for
Infant Baptism, in appearance much less; yet thus he who could not be deceived,
charge them; because denying necessary consequence they required express
words: now the consequence was thus, God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living, therefore the dead shall rise again.

To the folding up of all, I might repeat sundry things which as necessarily
conclude our Infant Baptism, as Infants circumcision into the same faith: Gods
Covenant with Abraham and his spiritual seed, that is, all Believers: Christ's
honoring Infants with sacred embraces, proposing them as heirs and patterns
designed for the Kingdom of heaven; the extent of Gods federal promise to us
and our children; childrens capacity of the inward baptism, signified in the
external sign: whole Families and Nations baptized, Act. 2. 39.
of which children are, and ever were a great part; Christ's absolute command to
baptize all Nations, without any tittle of exception to Infants; Infants
federal and ecclesiastical holiness by their parents, and their own right: But
that I would not be irksom to the prudent and pious Reader, to whom I heartily
wish a right understanding in all things, constancy in the truth, and unity
of the holy Spirit, that we may all meet in Gods eternal kingdom of glory.

AMEN.
A SURVEY OF The Controverted Points, CONCERNING INFANT BAPTISM, etc. THE
SECOND PART.
CHAP. I.
Infants of Christian Parents ought to be baptized.
I Need not be long in describing this Sacrament; Col. 2. 11.
only I say that Baptism is a Sacrament of the New Testament, 1 Cor. 10. 2.
succeeding Circumeision the Seal of the Old, Mat. 28. 19.
appointed by Christ for our Inlet into his Church, Romans 6. 3, 5.
our implantation into Him, and the similitude of his death and resurrection,
in which the water sanctified by the word, 1 John 5 8: ^ Cor. 1. 2^.
represents the blood of Christ, seals and exhibiteth to the Elect all the
benefits of his inestimable merits, death, passion, Ephesians. 1. 13.
and resurrection, to our regeneration, Act. 2. 38. 5. 31 1 Cor. 6. 11.
remission of sins, and cleansing our bodies and souls from them all; Joh. 13.
10: Tit. 3. 5.
though not presently so, that we have no sin; yet so, as that believing in
Christ we have no guilt of original or actual sin imputed to us to
condemnation: for the water, 1 John 1. 7, 8: and 3. 9.
by the Ordinance of God, Romans 8. 1.
touching the body, Mat. 3. 11.
the Spirit of Jesus baptizeth body and soul. Joh. 1. 33.
Hence Baptism is said to save us, 1 Pet. 3. 21. the end of Baptism is, Aqua
tangit corpus, sed Spiritus Dei tangit animaem.
that being baptized we might be illuminated; being illuminated, we might be
adopted sons of God; being adopted, we might be perfected, that we may become
immortally blessed. Clem. Alexand. Poed. l. 1. c. 6. inquit(...) -- Cum
baptiza^ur in nomen Pa^ris, Fi^ii, and Spiritus Sancti, tanquam solenni
jur^jurando decla^^^, nos totos uni Deo and trino addictos esse, and Deus
testatur se recipere eum qui baptizatur etc. Fay, Enchirid, Theolog. de Sacr.
Bapt. disp. 77.
In our being baptized in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
we do, as it were, by a solemn Oath or Covenant, declare and protest, that we
are wholly devoted to one God in Trinity of Unity; and God on his part herein
testifies, that by this Seal of his Covenant, he receives us into the
participation of his free mercies in Christ, and into the holy communion of his
Church, the body of Christ, I Joh. 5. 7, 8.

The Protestant Church holds, That the subject of Baptism are all they who
either are, or (professing faith, repentance, etc.) desire to be admitted into
the Church and Covenant of God: and that Infants of Christian Parents, being
within the same, ought to be baptized, forasmuch as the Covenant and Promise of
God is to Parents and their children.

The Pelagians, and Douatists (long since condemned of Heresy by the Church)
and now again of late, the Anabaptists deny the baptism of children to be
lawful, until they come to years that they may be taught, and profess their
faith, and repentance, and desire of baptism, upon these and the like grounds:
Object. ^^


Christ says -- Go therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name
of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: therefore Teaching must go before
Baptism; Mat. 28. 19.
and consequently Infants may not be baptized before they be taught Unto which
we answer, 1 That in the cited place there was not intended an exact and
complete model of Christ's commission to the Apostles; for there is no mention
of the Lords Supper: Christ only names the two more usual things for making or
initiating disciples for the gathering of a Church, that is, teaching for them
who were capable, thereof, and baptizing for them and their children not yet
capable of doctrine; that having their names given unto Christ, and being
admitted into his school, they might as they grew up to capacity, be
instructed concerning the mysteries of salvation in Christ: neither was this
the first institution of baptism; for when Christ spoke these words, he was
about to ascend up into heaven: he had some years before that time appointed
baptism among the Jews converted to the faith, and confirmed it by his own
reception of baptism, not that he needed it, or had any sin to be washed away
therein; but to sanctify the element of water by his sacred body, -- (...), --
(...)etc. Epi^^. to. 2. l. 3. fi. expos. N: 14. ad aquas desen^^i^^ ^^ timen,
ut po^ius aliquid conse^^, quam ^c. cip^ris -- quippe ^^ su^lu. co coustravit
etc. vid. and Greg. Nazia^^. ^^. 40. tinctus est a I^^^ut ^^^^, spi^^li peccu^
non sua quae ^^ique non b^^ b^bat, sed carnis quam ge^^^, aboler^^ Lactant. l.
4. c. 15. vid. Ephesians. 5. 26. Tit. ^. 5.
to the use and end of baptism; that is, to appoint for us a laver of
regeneration: and in the cited place (being to leave the world) he enlarged the
commission of baptism on the receivers part; as if he had said, Hitherto ye
were not to go into the way of the Gentiles, but to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel: but now go and call the Gentiles also, go baptize and teach all
Nations the mysteries of the Gospel, as I have taught you: now therefore the
order and laws of Baptism are not hence to be derived.

2 Christ then sent his Disciples to convert and baptize those Gentiles, who
possibly had not so much as heard of Christ, much less of faith in him, and
baptism into his Church: it was necessary therefore that the Apostles should
first instruct them what they were to do in baptism, and why: but when the
parents were baptized and instructed, so that there were Churches settled among
the Gentiles; then their children were also to be baptized into the same
Covenant of God, which runs to covenanted parents and their children; which
before their parents sealing and admission into Christ's Church might not be: so
that (as has been often noted) we must distinguish between a Church to be
constituted and settled, Inter Ecclesiam constituendam and constitutam.
and a constituted or settled Church: as also between persons of years, and
Infants presented to baptism. In a Church to be constituted and converted from
Judaism or Paganism, those that are of years must necessarily first be taught,
and afterward baptized; but in a constituted or settled Church, Infants are
first to be baptized, and then to be taught when they are able to learn: no
otherwise was it in circumcision which was the former Seal of the same Covenant
and righteousness of Faith, into which we are now, under the Gospel, baptized.
Romans 4. 11.
When Abraham according to Gods commandment, came to circumcise the men of his
family, doubtless he first instructed them, and preached to them the reason,
use, and end of that sacrament, according as the Lord said, Genesis 18. 19. I know
him that he will command his children, and his household after him, and they
shall keep the way of the Lord: but when Isaac was born, he did not expect till
he was come to years of discreetion to learn, but circumcised him on the eighth
day, Genesis 21. 4.

3 In the cited place, the word(...) (...)) distinguitur autem a(...)e^
quod(...)sit eos decere(...)erudire qui a magisteris(...)doctrina nostra alieni
sunt, ut discipu^i reddantur:(...)vero docere significat eos, qui jam discipuli
redditi sunt(...)magisterio nostro jam addicti: qua duae noticens hic optime
recurrunt. E. Leigh, Crit. Sacr. ex Nov. in Mat. ^8.
signifies also make Disciples; which was to gather a Church both by preaching
the Gospel, and administration of Baptism, the Sacrament of initiation, and
first entrance of Infants thereto. So these two means are expressed in the very
next words of Christ -- (...) -- (...) etc. that is, Baptizing them in the Name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all that I have
commanded. Some do well observe that(...) is to teach them that are strangers
to doctrine, that they may become Disciples (and so in any humane school also,
scholars are entered or admitted, before they are therein taught,)
but(...)signifies to teach them that are Disciples. (...), discipu^^^s
sum,(...). P^ut. vit. I^^crat. In^^.pre^ Suidae reddit(...).
So Mat. 27. 57. it is said of Joseph of Arimathea, (...) -- who also was Jesus
Disciple. And so the same word is expounded Job. 4. 1.(...), to make Disciples
-- the Pharisees heard that Jesus made and baptized more Disciples then John.
And so the Hebrews from their word(...) didicit, assuevit, derive their(...)
Talmid, a Disciple or Scholar. So that here appears no such necessity of the
order (by our adversaries pretended to) as can conclude that none may be
baptized, but such as are first taught. Inde ver^uin Syrum(...)docuit, absolute
discipulus fuit. Val Shind^^pen t^gl^ in(...)


4 If the order of those words must determine the order of the actions, then by
the same reason, repentance must be before faith; for Mark. 1. 15. it is said,
Repent ye and believe the Gospel. So Romans 10. 9. If thou shall confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, etc. thou shall be
saved. Does it follow therefore a man may make confession of Christ with his
mouth to salvation, before he believes in him in his heart? and indeed if the
order of words may determine in what order we must act in this business, then
from other places of Scripture it may be concluded that Baptism must precede
teaching, as Mark. 1. 4. John did baptize in the Wilderness, and preach the
baptism of repentance, and Mat. 28. 19, 20. when Christ had said -- baptizing
them, etc. he presently infers teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded. So Joh. 3. 5. the water is named before the
Spirit, and Ephesians. 5. 26. the washing of water, that is, of baptism, is named
before the Word.

5 Christ does not in the cited place, in one syllable prescribe or limit the
Apostles, whom they should baptize, and whom not, but only enjoineth that they
baptize all Nations in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the H.
Ghost, teaching them to observe all those things which he had formerly taught
them: his principal end being there to command them to preach and to set to the
Seal of the Gospelcovenant; mentioning no particulars, but intimating, that all
those that were of capacity should be taught; and that those that were not of
present understanding (yet if born of such persons as had given their names to
Christ): should be admitted to the seal of the righteousness of faith in
Christ, that they might be instructed when, and as they were able to learn.

There are two conditions of Baptism, Believe and Repent, which seeing Infants,
Object. 2.
as such, cannot do, their baptism ought to be deferred until they can. We
answer, 1 These are the conditions, If the question were concerning persons of
years to be baptized; but it is concerning Infants, on whom no such condition
is, or can reasonably for the present, be laid.

2 The argument is impious and ridiculous, as if one should say, the condition
of eating is laboring, which seeing Infants cannot do, let their eating or
feeding be defered till they can. The Apostle says, If there be any that will
not labor, let him not eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. who (of any sense) does not
understand that of those that can, Ut in baptismo adultorum requiritur fides
praevia -- Sic ab illis qui baptizantur cum jam infantes fint, requiritur fides
subsequens, quam si non praestiterint poste^, retinent externam tantummodo
baptismi sanctificationem, interna sanctificationis effecta non habent.
Davenant. exposit, Col. 2. 12.
and will not? and why not so in believing and repenting, seeing that God
requires impossibilities neither in things temporal nor spiritual?

3 As in the baptism of those who are of years, a previous faith is required,
so is a subsequent faith of those who are baptized Infants, which if they
afterward have not, they forfeit the benefit of the Seal which they received.

4 Though Infants, as such, cannot have actual faith, yet have they the seeds
thereof in baptism, covered or shut up in the habitual beginning of grace,
which Christ both can, and does work in them. In habituali principio gratiae
inclusam -- porro, n^n necesse ^st ut sacramenta e^ ipso momento quo
administra^tur efficiant ea omnia quae figarant; im^ pactio dila^oria l^um
ba^t, cum in ips^ suscep^ione obe^ p^nitur, ib. page 209.
Nor is it simply necessary that the Sacraments should in the same moment in
which they are administered, effect all things which they figure or represent --
yea a dilatory paction has place, when in the making thereof there is some
invincible let to present performance, as want of the present use of reason is
to infants faith, repentance, and obedience to the Gospel, unto which they are
by Covenant bound in their baptism: and indeed to be within the Covenant gives
the Infant a just capacity to the seal of the same: Now Infants of believing
and baptized parents are within the Covenant, Genesis 17. 7. Act. 2. 39. Object. 3.


Christ was not baptized in his Infancy, although the Deity hypostatically
united, dwelt in him fully; but deferred the same until he was about 30 years
of age: therefore what ever habitual faith or seeds of grace can be pretended
to for infants, they ought not to be baptized until they come of years to know
what they do. We answer, 1 Christ requires not that we should imitate him in
all that he did, which is proposed to us for doctrine, but not for imitation:
for example, he was both circumcised (as being of the feed of Abraham under the
Law, the righteousness whereof he was to perform, Mat. 3. 15.) and also
baptized: if we should be so, Christ should profit us nothing, Gal. 5. 2.

2 The time was not come at the birth of Christ, for the repealing of the seals
of the ceremonial Law,: nor was the seal of the new Covenant to be instituted
until the time drew near wherein he was to publish it by preaching the Gospel,
Quemadmodum Jud^os suscept^ circumcis^me, sic etiam ge^tes baptismo --
salvaret. Licta^. l. 4 c. 15.
and accomplishing the great work of our redemption in his blood: therefore he
that was Savior both of Jews and Gentiles, was circumcised in his Infancy,
and baptized as soon as that Sacrament was instituted.

3 They that herein require imitation of Christ, intimate a necessity of
deferring baptism until the age of 30 years, See Calv. instit. l. 4. c^ 16.
sect. 29.
which our Antagonists (that I know of) do not practice.

4 A bare example without a precept does not bind to imitation: Christ
administered the communion with unleavened bread after supper, in an upper room
to twelve men only and no women: but seeing we find no precept in the Gospel
which commands us to do the same, we believe we are not bound by that example.

5. There was neither neglect, (...), etc. Gr. Nazianz. Or^ 4
contempt, nor danger in so long delaying Christ's Baptism; there must needs be
some of all these in the delay of our childrens Baptism: Christ had no sin, but
we have both Original and Actual: he not only foreknew, but foreordained (as
God) the manner and time, as of his nativity, so also of his death: We neither
know nor can appoint the time of our departures hence; therefore we may not
defer our childrens Baptism; they may suddenly dye

6. Christ would not before that age be baptized, and enter into his public
Ministry, among other causes, for this also, that the truth hereof might answer
the type preceding in the Levitical Priests, who although they were received
into the College of Priests at five and twenty, yet were they not admitted to
exercise their Ministry until they were thirty years old, Numb. 4. 3.

The Lords Supper may not be given to Infants, Object. 4.
by reason of their incapacity: On the same ground neither ought Baptism the
other Sacrament. We answer, That the reason why we may not administer the
Communion to Infants, 1 Cor. 11. 28^ 29.
is because God has given an express command, -- Let a man examine himself,
and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup -- And there follows
a dreadful reason, -- For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body: Now Infants can
neither examine themselves, nor discern the Lords body, because they cannot
understand the institution, end, use and condition of that Sacrament: Therefore
we do not administer it unto them until they can be instructed therein. No such
limitation can be showed concerning Baptism; for though Faith and Repentance be
mentioned as conditions of Baptism and Remission of sins, and Salvation to
persons of years; yet the case is far otherwise with Infants, who though they
cannot (as such) actually believe and repent, yet we doubt not of their
Remission of sins and salvation: neither could those Infants who were
circumcised actually believe and repent, yet that barred them not from the Seal
of the same Righteousness of Faith. Again, that which is said Mark 16. 16. is
very considerable (as has been noted) He that believes and is baptized shall
be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned: It shows that the
condition of believing is proposed to persons of years, who may believe, or
obstinately reject the Gospel, which Infants (as such) cannot do: and therefore
it cannot for present concern them, without involving them all in the sentence
of damnation; which opinion were damnable and Antichristian, Mark 10. 14.
Christ having positively pronounced for them -- Of such is the Kingdom of God:
To Infants, to be born within Gods Covenant, and to receive the Seal thereof
obliging them to future Faith, Repentance and Obedience, is instead of all
these. Lastly, Baptism is the Seal of Initiation, Entrance and Admittance into
the Church; that therefore we give Infants, that when they shall be capable of
the Sacrament of Confirmation (the Lords Supper) they may receive that also.

The Spirit acknowledges no other means of Regeneration then the incorruptible
Seed, Object. 5.
, the Word of God, 1 Pet. 1. 23. which seeing Infants cannot receive, they
cannot be regenerate; Servet. l. 4. de regenerat.
therefore their Baptism is effectless to Regeneration. We answer, Object. 6.
The major appears false by Tit. 3. 5. St. Peter speaks there only of those
Believers who had been taught by the preaching of the Gospel, Non solum verbum
sed baptismus est Regenerati^n is ^redium, Gerh. de S. Bapt.
comprehending under it the Seal thereof; Baptism, the Laver of Regeneration,
which is taught in that Word as a means of Regeneration.

Faith must go before the Sign or Seal thereof; Object. 7.
as Abraham believed first, and then received the Seal, Circumcision; Therefore
until Infants can actually believe, they must not be baptized. We answer, That
if we speak of persons of years, they must first believe, or make profession of
their faith; because by Baptism they are to be admitted into the Covenant of
God, and Communion of his Church, to which they were formerly Aliens and
Strangers: But it holds not in Infants born of Christian Parents, they being
already within the Covenant and Church, and so having present right to the Seal
thereof: So in Isaac's Circumcision at eight days old, the Seal went long
before the faith or profession thereof.

God brings not the blind into his Covenant, Object. 7.
but enlighteneth them, that they may know the will of God for their Salvation:
But Infants, as such, are not capable of Illumination; therefore they are not
to be baptized. We answer: 1. God calls the poor, maimed, halt, and lame unto
the great supper, that is the Communion of Christ, Luke 14. 21.

2. The Greek Divines were wont to call Baptism(...), Illumination; and it can
be no less then impious presumption to affirm, That God does not in the Baptism
of Elect Infants, secretly infuse such a light as he knows sufficient to
their salvation; seeing that it is certain, that as God dwells not in all
that know him, Aug. Epist. 57.
Romans 1. 21. so neither do all those presently know him in whom he dwells by
the spirit of illumination and regeneration (until they have received such a
further measure of the Spirit which is of God, that they may know the things
which are freely given to them of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12.) which appears, in that
Elect children are saved; which, without the Spirit of Regeneration, none can
be, John 3. 3, 5 and doubtless the soul of an Infant in Gods divine presence in
heaven, has therein more illumination then the most knowing mortal in the
world has.

3. Neither did the Apostles their selves presently understand all these things
necessary to salvation which Christ taugh them; John 16. 12.
neither did he propose Doctrines to them above their present capacity: -- I
have yet many things, to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now: He
patiently expected their future abilities; with a -- What I do, thou know
not now, but thou shall know, -- John 13. 7. which both Peter and the rest had
experience of, when the promised Comforter taught them, and brought all things
to remembrance which Jesus had said unto: them, John 14. 26.
and the Spirit of Truth guided them into all truth; John 16, 13.
and shall we not believe that God will graciously bear with an Infants present
defect of understanding, which himself gives him by degrees, and in such
measure and time as his self appoints?

4. As Faith and Confession sufficed the penitent Thief, without Baptism; so
Baptism, the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith and Repentance suffices an
Elect Infant, dying without confession of Faith, and actual Repentance; and the
living, until he come of age and ability to know and make profession.

With the heart man believes unto Righteousness, Object. 8.
and with the mouth confession is made unto Salvation, Romans 10. 10. But Infants
can do neither of these; therefore they profane the holy Seal, who give it to
them who cannot be profited thereby. We answer. 1. The same might have been
objected against circumcision, where the Seal sufficed, until the sealed came
to years and ability to believe and confess. 2. The Apostles speaks there
concerning persons of years, it nothing concerns Infants, as such. 3. If giving
the Seal to those who cannot be profited thereby, be profanation of the same,
how often do you profane the holy Seal? How can any mere man know whom to
baptize, though of years, and whom to put by? None can foresee men's final
estates but God alone. We know that Judas and Simon Magus were baptized, though
whatsoever they confessed with their mouth, it is certain they did not believe
with their heart unto righteousness. Did their Baptizers profane Baptism? If
not, how maliciously is this objected against us, baptizing Infants of
Believers, Christ himself expressly avowing them as subjects of his Kingdom?

The Seals of the New Testament are perfect and spiritual: Object. 9.
But Infants are carnal; and, The natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Therefore these Seals agree not to, and with
Infants present incapacity. We answer, The Apostle there speaks concerning the
understanding of divine mysteries, not comprehensible of profane and carnal
men: Now Infants being carnal, as born of flesh, want Regeneration, that they
may become spiritual, John 3 35.
and enter into the Kingdom of God; and because they are by corrupted nature
imperfect, therefore they ought to be admitted to the ordinary means by God
appointed to make them perfect.

The Apostle bids us, Draw near with a true heart, Object. 10.
in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water, Hebr. 10. 22. Which seeing
Infants cannot for present do, the washing of their bodies with the pure water
of Baptism belongs to others who can have a good conscience, not to them. We
answer, The Apostle there shows, what we who are baptized, and of age ought
to do, and with what confidence, not who ought to be baptized; and so it
nothing concerns Infants till they come of age.

Baptism which saves us, Object. 11. 1 Pet. 3. 21.
is with the testimony of a good conscience: This Infants cannot have who have
no knowledge; Therefore Infants ought not to receive that Baptism which cannot
save them. We answer, 1. The Apostle speaks not there of the subject of
Baptism, but of the fruits and effects thereof in those who are of ripe years;
the fruits which indeed Elect Infants, if living, shall here reap in due time;
and into which they are for present sealed: Now the outward Administration of
the sign of the Covenant (concerning which our present question is) is one
thing, and the inward effect thereof another: As it is also in the Word
preached, Matthew. 13.
the Administration must be indifferently to all, Mark 16. 15. whether stony,
thorny, highway, or good ground, Gods Seeds-men must diligently sow; the fruit
and efficacy will be to Believers only, Hebr. 4. 2. but that no mere man can
foresee.

2. What Illumination Infants have by the secret working and influence of Gods
holy Spirit, belongs to Gods secret council, and therefore not to our inquest.

3. Sanctification, more then Ecclesiastical, in order of time does not always
precede the Seal and Sacrament thereof, as may be proved from Infant
Circumcision, but by the Sacrament which implanteth us into Christ, and which
is therefore the washing of Regeneration and Renovation, the seeds of Faith,
Sanctity, and good conscience are sowed in us, which by a powerful and secret
working of the Holy Ghost, shows it self in due season; without which work of
the Spirit, the Gospel most powerfully preached, and Sacraments, duly
administered to the most knowing men and women, could bring forth no better
effects, then a savor of death, unto death and condemnation: Seeing then the
effect to Sanctification and Salvation is neither in the Minister, nature of
the Water, Causa formalis Sacramentoium est ^rdinati^^ Dei in i^sius ve^b^
comprehense, etc. Beza ^um. doct. de re ^a. ^ra^^. q. 3. Nallum tamen est
^icopus ^peratum, sed omnis efficacia venit^ spirit^, etc. Dr. Andr. Rive^.
C^thol. Or^^d. To. 2. q. 1.
and Washing therewith, but in the Ordinance of God; nor in the capacity or
ability of the most prudent sons of men, but in the sole working of Gods
gracious Spirit; why should any rest in ope^e operato, the work it self done?
or deny it to any within the Church, needing Regeneration, that they may be
saved?

Christ joyneth these two together, Object. 12.
Teach and Baptize; and, Believe, Non Baptismus ^^^is ^^sq^ praedi, ^t one
saliem in^litutium. ^r Andr. Rivet^^. 5. De^r^he ver. hum, and quid est aquae
nisi aqua? accedit verbum ad elementam and sit Sacramentuum, -- und^ ista tanta
virtus aquae, ut c^rpus tangat and cor abluat, ^^ faciente ver^^, non quia
dicitur ^ed quia creditur Aug. 10. in ^ han. treat. I.
Repent, and be Baptized: But Infants are not capable of Faith and Repentance;
Therefore they ought not, as such, to be Baptized. We answer, Here is an
Ignoratio Elenchi in the mistake of the Question; which is not, Whether that
teaching ought to be divided from Baptism, which we affirm not: but the
contrary; persons of years ought first to be taught to believe and repent, and
then to be baptized: But our question is not concerning the Baptism of Adults,
or persons capable of these things for the present, but of Infants; here again
the question is mistaken, and therefore such disputes are fallacious. It is
true, the water without the Word can make no Sacrament, nor give any
sacramental effect; therefore neither young nor old may be baptized; where the
Gospel is not first preached and received: For Baptism is a seal of the Gospel;
but believing Parents have been taught, received the Gospel, and been sealed
into Gods Covenant; therefore they ought to present their children to Baptism,
who are joint Covenanters with them. Again, Baptism is administered with the
words of institution by Christ appointed; take away the Word, and what is the
Water but ordinary water? The Word is added to the element, and makes the
Sacrament -- of the Water, that it but touches the body, and cleanses the
heart, but by the Word; not because it is spoken; but because it is believed.
Moreover, though God taught Abraham concerning the Sacrament of Circumcision,
and so he was circumcised and all his Males, yet he circumcised Isaac at eight
days old; and so long before that word of faith could be preached to Isaac, he
received the same^ Sacrament and Seal of the same Righteousness of faith in
Christ, in whom believing we also are saved. Men of ripe years were first
instructed concerning the institution, end and use of Circumcision, and then
received the Seal; but Infants (as such, not capable of instruction) first
received the Seal of Faith; and if they lived to years, then they were taught,
yet the Word and the Seal were not parted in either: So is it in Infant Baptism
now.

Those Infants whom Christ blessed, Object. 13.
and of whom he pronounced, Theirs, or, Of such is the Kingdom of heaven; were
such as were fit to be taugh^: for so the word(...) also signifies: And Christ
in the persons of children, blesses those that were such in humility and
innocence, not in age. We answer, It Is true, -- (...), Mark 10. 14.
that in their persons Christ commended humility and innocence; and also showed
their interest in the Kingdom of heaven; saying, Of such is the Kingdom of
Heaven; that is, of such persons, and of persons of such quality; (...), Mat.
19. 14.
for he proposes Infants for a pattern: Now as they are called(...), which
sometimes signifies a Son or Servant of years; yet not always, as common use
of that word shows, -- (...)Infans, faetus recens editus, Hen. Ste.
Matthew. ^2. 13, 14, 20. Luke 2. 21, etc. so are the same called(...), Luke 18.
15. which without controversy properly signifies Infants lately born; as Luke
2. 12, 16. Acts 7. 19. 1 Pet. 2. 2. new born babes; and sometimes children in
the womb; as Luke 1. 41, 44. that which is said, (...), etc. Gr. Nazianz. orat.
40.
2 Timothy 3. 15.(...) --: From a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, is
as much as the Greeks proverbially said, (...); and the Latins, a teneris
unguiculis, from thy tender years; that is, so soon as it was possible for thee
to learn: so Psalm. 58. 3. The wicked are estranged,(...)from the womb, they go
astray(...)ab utero, as soon as they are born speaking lies: So Psalm. 22. 9.
Thou did make me hope, Super uberamatris meae. Montanab. infanti^ Val.
Shidler Pent in
(...), when I was upon my mothers breasts; that is, very soon, very young. The
Syriac, 2 Timothy 3. 15. translateth(...), from a child (from thy tender years,
so soon as it was possible for thee to learn) by a word indifferently
signifying Infancy, Childhood, (...)et quod a pueriti^ tua Trem.
or Youth; but that Luke 18. 15. the same render by the word which signifies
Infants, 1 Timothy 2. 15. Acts 7. 19. 1 Pet. 2. 2. and Mark 10. 16. it is said
that Christ took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them, (...)Sir. est.
and blessed them -- which shows, that they were little portable children;
had they been of man's growth, though never so humble or innocent, they would
have been too heavy to have been carried in the arms. Lastly, there can be no
rational doubt, but that he blessed Infants, properly so called, who took on
him Infancy to save them: Nor may we think that they are less then blessed of
Christ, who are saved by his blood, as Infants are.

That which God Commands not in some express precept concerning his worship,
is not any better then man's invention, Will Worship, and may not be done: But
Infant Baptism is no where in Scripture commanded in any express Precept;
Therefore it is no better then man's invention, Will Worship, and may not be
done. We answer, 1. By demanding, quanta est major Propositio? if it be
universal, the sense running thus, All that is Will Worship, which is not
commanded in some express Precept; it is evidently false: For there is no
express Precept for many things left arbitrary, and falling under the Rule of
Decency and Order, which yet are not Will Worship.

Next we say, That the substance and Institution of Gods worship, must have an
express precept for it, or it will fall under the notion of Will Worship; but
in the circumstances and accidents it is not always so; for example, had not
Christ somewhere commanded to baptize, it had been Wilworship for any man to
have instituted that Sacrament: but though Christ say nowhere baptize children
at seven days, six months, seven years; or though he say nowhere Baptize
women; yet neither of these are Will Worship, Mat. 28. 1^. Mark. 16. 15. 16.
because the substance and institution of Baptism is grounded on his express
command; age and sex are accidents. Lastly, If the major proposition be
particular, Ex puris particularibus nihil sequitur.
the rule is well known, Of mere particulars nothing is concluded.

2 There was an express command for the sealing of Abraham's sons in their
generations, in their infancy, Genesis 17. 7. etc. and Believers are expressly the
sons or children of Abraham, Gal. 3. 7. that is, his spiritual seed, who have
no less privilege in things belonging to salvation, then his carnal seed. And
the Apostles who were Jews and brought up amongst them, who were sealed in
their infancy, did not (that we read of) so much as ask Christ any question
what they were to do with Infants: and Christ giving them no prohibition
concerning them, he did thereby sufficiently intimate, that he having not
repealed the law of sealing Infants into his covenant, would have them proceed
according to the Analogy of the first seal of his covenant. The greater doubt
might possibly have been concerning baptizing of females, who were not formerly
sealed, the doubt concerning the Gentiles sealing, being removed by an express
precept, Baptize all Nations, Mat. 28. 19.

3 On this very ground on which Anabaptists deny Infant Baptism, Euthym. in
Mat. 22.
the old Sadduces denied the resurrection of the dead, because they found it
not expressly written in the books of Moses, which only, they received. See what
has been answered to the Pleader near the end

4 Although we read not in terminis, and so many words and syllables in holy
Scripture, Baptize Infants, yet we read it in most firm and evident
consequence, if we but hold these three certain conclusions. 1 That Children
are conceived and born in sin, the children of wrath. 2 That God would not have
them perish, but rather be brought into the holy communion of Christ and his
Church, that they may be saved. 3 That he has appointed no other external
ordinary means, to us known, for Infants regeneration, but baptism.

5 If the matter must be put upon express words of Scripture, let our
Antagonists show us where they are expressly forbidden to baptize Infants? where
is there any syllable express, or probable for re-baptizing any? where have
they any express precept for dipping over head and ears? where have they any
express precept for their long prayers, for baptizing women, or administering
the communion to them? show us any express precept for the change of the
Sabbath.

That which we read not expressly mentioned in Scripture that the Apostles did,
Obj. 15.
that we may not do: but we read not in express words in Scripture, that the
Apostles ever baptized Infants, therefore we may not baptize them. We answer, 1
If your principle were true, it might thence be concluded, that the Lords
Supper may not be administered to women, for we no where read in express words,
that the Apostles ever administered it unto them.

2 Express words in Scripture are not always necessary to prove a thing which
necessary consequence does conclude: we have no express words in Scripture
naming an holy Unity, in Trinity and Trinity in Unity, most undeniable
consequence we have Mat. 28. 19, 1 John 5. 7. Again, we have no express word
that the Apostles were baptized; for Christ himself baptized none, Joh. 4. 1.
etc. and we read not where, or when John Baptist baptized them; yet certainly
they were baptized: we read not expressly that the Apostles in baptizing
mentioned the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost; but most certain consequence
concludes it; because Christ so appointed it, and it was of the essence of the
Sacrament: and why should we more tie the baptism of Infants to express words,
then any of these fundamental things are tied? and on the like consequential
grounds, why should we doubt whether the Apostles did indeed usually baptize
Infants of Christians, Joh. 20. 30. and 21. 25.
because it is not expressly written; seeing that many other words, Act. 2. 40.
matters, and actions of the Apostles, and Christ himself, were not written?

3 Christ expressly commanded to baptize all Nations, in no one syllable, title,
or word therein excepting Infants, who are and ever were a great and numerous
part thereof: and that which concerns all alike, concerns every part
thereof.

When Peter was asked what was needful to be done for the Jews pricked at heart,
Obj. 16.
Act. 2. 37, 38. he said, Repent and be baptized: but Infants can neither
actually repent, nor contribute any thing toward their baptism: therefore they
ought not to be baptized. And again, Mat. 3. they confessed their sins and were
baptized, which Infants cannot do. We answer, 1 Forasmuch as Infants cannot
actually (as such) repent or confess, it concludes that these things for the
present, concern not Infants; (for no impossibility is reasonably enjoined
any) but belong to persons of years, or those who were not yet sealed into the
communion of Christ's Church, and it is apparent that unto such Peter spoke: as
far as his words concerned Infants is also express, -- be baptized every one of
you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins -- for the promise is
to you and to your children; What promise? why that Genesis 17. 7. To what
children was that promise made? what, to those who had been children, but were
now of years to be taught, believe and repent? No, but to those first who were
to be sealed the eighth day after they were born; who certainly could then no
more actually believe, or repent, then can our Infants now: therefore it is
plain to those who will understand, that persons of years to be taught, must
first repent, etc. but Infants, to whom the promise, covenant, or seal thereof
jointly belongs, must besealed as joint-covenanters with their Parents,
before they can actually believe or repent: for why else after this exhortation
to repentance and baptism, does he mention their children? were they no ways
liable to this double precept, repent and be baptized every one of you? who?
they only who can actually for the present repent? nay, but Peter knew well
that children of whom he spoke, could not do that, by reason of their present
want of the use of reason: yet he knew they had need of remission of sins by
Christ, and that the promise of God was made to them (without which 'twere but
vain for men to seal) and as firmly concerned them, as their enchurched
parents, and therefore he mentioned them.

There appears neither act nor habit of regeneration in Infant Baptism, Obj. 17.
until they be taught the Word; neither any more promptitude to learn it, then
is in unbaptized children coming to years; therefore their baptism is
effectless, and consequently unlawful. We answer, (...)ita ut observari possit.
Beza.
1 The Kingdom of God comes not with observation, Luke 17. 20. and the
internal acts of the Spirit are secret: for what man knows the things of a
man, save the spirit of a man which is within him, 1 Cor. 2. 11.

2 If outward appearance be a good argument to the denying of internal acts and
habits; you might by the same medium as well conclude that Infants are not
reasonable creatures: Infants inspired by Gods Spirit may be said to be
Believers, as they are said truly to be rationals; that is, actu primo, non
secundo: and they confess and avouch the Lord, in their Parents avouching of
him, as appears, Deuteronomy.. 26. 16, 17, 18. Deuteronomy. 29. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

3 It is not true, that baptized Infants have no more promptitude to learn the
mysteries of salvation when they come to years to be taught, then other
unbaptized children, have cateris paribus: for the H. Ghost does not desert his
own ordinance in the Elect; though for causes very just, yea, when most unknown
to us, it does not always alike show its power: as for the reprobate, the seal
or administration of man can nothing profit him who abuses it, and where God
ever denies inward baptism by his holy Spirit of sanctification.

Reprobates who cannot be profited by baptism, Obj. 18.
ought not to be baptized, lest we add to their condemnation: but of Infants
some are such, and we cannot say which of them, offered to baptism is elect,
and which not: therefore seeing we cannot distinguish them, nor can they
express themselves, we ought not to baptize them until they can. We answer, If
the major proposition in this argument be universalis negans, it is most false;
for Simon Magus and Judas, who were not profited by their baptism, were yet
rightly baptized; if particular, though granted, it would conclude nothing
against Infant Baptism; for by the same reason they may deny baptism to persons
of years: for alas, many of them are Reprobates. Neither can any mere man
distinguish between the one and the other, seeing that whatever profession of
faith and repentance men make, it is possible they may dissemble or fall away.
Now we in charity, hope the best, where the contrary is not manifest, and
therefore deny them not baptism, who do but prosess faith, repentance, and
desire of baptism: and if we can have as much charity to innocent Infants, we
must also allow them baptism, who being born of Christian parents, are within
Gods covenant of Grace. And indeed the final estate of Infants or aged people,
being alike secret and known to God alone; we must perform our ministry
respectively, and leave the fruit and issue thereof to God: so in preaching the
Gospel, the sincere Milk of the Word, 1 Pet. 2. 2. we do often as it were, draw
out the breast like the mother of the living child, 1 King. 3. 20, 21. to some
dead (in belief, sins, and trespasses) laid in our bosom; who know not who
shall profit by it, nor to whom it shall prove a favor of death unto death;
that must be left to God, but we must instantly preach the Gospel.

When the Eunuch said to Philip, Act. 8. 36: see here is water, Obj. 19.
what does let me to be baptized? he answered, If thou believe with all thy
heart, thou may: therefore he that beli^veth not may not be baptized: such
are Infants. We answer, 1 It is manifest enough that Philip spoke to a man who
could hear and read, Act. 8. 30. 35.
and was then something instructed in the Gospel of Christ: what does this
concern Infants?

2 Infants have now as much capacity of baptism, as under the Law they had of
circumcision; both had faith, as reason, in the seed, though not in the fruit:
and the sacrament of baptism now performs the same to us, which circumcision
did to them: as that was to them a sign of their receiving into the Church and
people of God, so is baptism to us, Ursin. de relig. Christian. part. 2
the first mark which severeth and distinguishes the people of God from the
profane and wicked aliens

Faith ought not to be separated from the seal thereof; Obj. 20.
therefore Infants, who cannot actually believe, ought not to be baptized until
they can. See what has been said Obj. 12. to which we here add, that this
proposition is ture concerning persons of years; but concerns not Infants in
whom we cannot know Gods present work: but in baptism, the seed of faith,
regeneration, mortification, and newness of life is sowed in them: and all know
that precedence concludes not separation. Lastly, we say that if faith and
baptism must so indivisibly be united, as that none may be baptized but they
who do actually believe, whom might our adversaries baptize, or whom put by,
though of years? If they say they profess says, there is much difference
between professing and actual believing: and I much fear that many will too
late find as much distance between justifying faith, and temptation of
security, as is between heaven and hell.

Such are to be baptized as confess their sins, Obj. 21.
Mat. 3. 6. as gladly receive the Word, Act. 2. 41. as give heed to the Word
preached, Act. 8. 6. but this Infants cannot do, therefore they are not to be
baptized. We answer, The affirmative may from such places be concluded, Such
ought to be baptized: but the negative cannot (therefore none but men so
qualified may be baptized) it no more follows, then if you should say,
Cornelius and those that were with him when Peter preached, Act. 10.
received the holy Ghost in the extraordinary gifts thereof; therefore none but
such as have received the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost may be
baptized: nay, but though it well concluded affirmatively for them, that they
were to be baptized; it cannot conclude negatively against others, that they
may not be baptized who have not received such gifts.

If baptizing Infants be grounded on circumcision, Obj. 22.
the males only must be baptized: but that is not true, for females also ought
to be baptized. We answer, Here is a fallacia accidentis, an arguing from the
substance to the circumstance: whereas baptism succeeded circumcision in
substance, not in every circumstance: The substance was; that was a seal of
faith, and Church-priviledge; so is this; that was administered to all that
would join in the faith of Abraham, and their children as being in Gods
covenant; so must it be here: in that was sealed to the Covenanter the promise
of grace and mercy by Christ, which is always one and the same; so here; that
signified mortification, and a promise on man's part, of faith and obedience to
God; so it is here: that was the inlet to Gods Church, the Sacrament of
initiation, admission, and engraffing into the Church; Ursin q. sup. See Reply
p. 12, 13. ad number. 13.
so is baptism: so they agree, 1 In the end, Romans 4. 11. Tit. 3. 5. 2 In
signification, Col. 2. 11, 12. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Ier. 4. 4. Romans 2. 29. Mark. 1. 4.
Romans 6. 3. 3 In the effect. In circumstance they differ, as has been formerly
showed.

Though Christ took little children into his arms and blessed them, Obj. 23.
yet he baptized them not: therefore, though we may pray for our Infants, yet
we may not baptize them. We answer, 1 If you speak of Christ's baptizing
personally, he baptized none, Joh. 4. 2. but it follows not that therefore
none ought to be baptized.

2 It cannot appear that Christ commanded not some of his Disciples to baptize
those Infants, neither that ever he commanded them not to baptize Infants.

3 If it could appear that these Infants were not now baptized, there might be
some obstruction and let which we know not; as possibly their parents were not
yet baptized, etc.

4 These children were not brought to Christ that he should baptize them, D.
Featly chil. bapt. justified, p. 76.
but that he should touch them; and that he did, for he laid his hands upon
them, and blessed them; and his blessing them was as effectual to their
salvation, as if he had christened them: for Christ's grace depends not upon
the virtue of the Sacrament: but contrarily the virtue of the Sacrament upon
his grace and blessing. And that which Christ did to them, is more then the
ministry of all the men in the world could, or can do in baptizing or blessing
them.; for Christ's blessing makes men truly and really blessed: See what has
been said Reply number. 14. sine.

Infants circumcised were inserted into the Covenant and Church privileges by
an express command: but we have no such express command for baptizing Infants,
Obj. 24.
therefore we may not on that ground baptize them. To that which has been
said, ^ ^. Ob^, 14, 15.
we further add for answer, because they were expressly commanded to put the
seal of the same righteousness of faith on Infants; therefore (neither that
faith nor the object thereof being changed, in the change of the seal) there
needed not a particular, or express command concerning the subject or persons
to be sealed, seeing the commission was so much enlarged as the whole World,
and the Nations thereof, were greater then the land of Canaan, and Abraham's
carnal children therein planted. Add hereto, that which has been noted, those
whom Christ sent to baptize were sealed in their infancy, and daily used to
Infant-sealing: so that they needed no express command, or other Information
concerning Infants, then that which they had sufficiently learned in Christ's
blessing Infants, blessing and embracing them, as it were, with special
affection to them: and in that they could not be ignorant that baptism
succeeded circumcision in all the substance thereof; and that the same cause
still remains for Infants reception of the seal, to wit, Act. 2. 38.
Baptism for the remission of sins.

Christ appointed the Sacraments for a remembrance of his death and
bloodshedding for our redemption: But Infants, Object. 25.
who have no acts of understanding, cannot remember; Therefore they ought not
to be baptized. We answer, This Argument would conclude; 1 Cor. 11. 26.
that Infants, as such, may not receive the Lords Supper, because they cannot
do it in remembrance of Christ, Tit. 3. 5.
nor show his death thereby, therefore we do not administer it unto them. But
Baptism is the Laver of Regeneration, which they have present need of, and
whereof they are passively capable, because their Parents are within the
Covenant, which is to them and their children; and the Seal thereof is a part
and condition of the same to their children, Genesis 17. 7.
as well as to themselves: Acts 2. 39.
Neither was the Covenant on Abraham's part fulfilled any more then to halves,
Mark 16. 16.
before he had sealed his children; and by proportion, neither do we fulfill our
Covenant with God in Baptism, if we refuse to baptize our Infants, who have as
indefeasible a right to the same as we; the same promise for the main being to
us and our children, Acts 2. 39.

In the Old Testament it was not lawful to offer sheep or goats so soon as they
were cast, Object. 26. Ser^^t. ^.^up. l. 4. de regenerat.
but at a certain age and maturity of their perfection: This figured Infants
not presently to be offered to God, or Sealed. We answer: 1. By the same
Argument (if it were good) neither ought the Jews to have circumcised their
Infants on the eighth day.

2. Allegorical Arguments, Theolegio allcg^rica non est argumentat. J.
Gerhardde S. bapt.
when they are well applied, illustrate rather then prove: And if you will
plead thus, tell us why every firstborn of man or beast, so soon as it came
into the world (that is, every male) was sacred to the Lord; Exodus 13. 11, 13.
and the firstborn of the unclean beast was to be redeemed or destroyed? and
why seek ye further, omitting the type of Circumcision?

Christ says, Object. 27.
He that believes and is baptized shall be ^ saved, Mark 16. 16 without
believing there is no salvation, nor saving effect of Baptism: But Infants
cannot believe; Therefore their Baptism is effectless and vain. We answer: 1.
That wholly concerns those who are of years; who when the Church was to be
collected and settled, were first and generally such persons as were first to be
instructed in the faith of Christ, and then to be baptized; it concerned not
Infants.

2. That which immediately follows, But he that believes not shall be damned
-- manifests that it concerned not Infants, who though they cannot actually
believe, yet shall not all be damned, though dying Infants.

3. If those words were to be presidential to all Churches and times as a rule,
what persons we are to baptize, and what not; that is, that we ought to baptize
none but such and so qualified as are there described; then it would follow,
that you must baptize none, but those who appear to have a justifying faith;
for such there Christ speaks of, and only such, relating to their salvation:
And how few have this? and how can you who baptize discern this? Secondly, They
must be such as can cast out Devils, speak unstudied Languages, take up
Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them, such as
can cure the sick: For Christ there thus marked out Believers of those times.

4. He says not, He that believes not shall not be baptized; for that indeed
might have concerned Infants Baptism: But he says, He that believes not shall
be damned; which cannot concern Infants, except you will say they have faith
(and so you must grant them a capacity of Baptism) or pretend that they all are
damned who dye in Infancy, which is a damnable fancy.

Lastly, We must distinguish between an interest in, and the effects of
Baptism. Many thousands born within the Covenant, have therefore a just
interest in the Covenant of Grace, In Baptisma induitur Christus interdum
sacramenta tenus, interdum quoad vitae sanctiste ationem: primum bonis and
malis est commune; secundum b^norum and piorum est proprium. Aug. contr.
Dona^ist. l. 5. c. 24.
and the Seal thereof, who neither believing nor obeying, have no effects
thereof, nor grace of the Covenant: So some put on Christ only sacramentally,
and others to sanctification and salvation also.

It is absurd and to no purpose to baptize any unto they know not what: Such is
Infants Baptism; Object. 28.
Therefore they are absurdly and to no purpose baptized. 1. We answer:
Circumcision was to Isaac and Evangelical Ordinance and Seal of Gods Covenant
of the same Grace common to him and us; yet that being administered to him at
eight days old, he knew not what he was circumcised to; yet was it neither in
vain nor absurdly administered to him.

2. Some mysterious things have been done to them, who though of age, knew not
for the present what was done unto them; yet not absurdly, nor to no purpose;
as when Peter's feet were washed, John 13. 7, etc. Christ told him, What I do,
thou know not now -- yet was it not absurdly, or to no purpose done. 3. No
circumcised Infants knew what was done to them for present, yet was it to
purpose done to all, either to salvation, or further condemnation.

That Tenet and Practice, Object. 29.
which being put, or supposed Baptism, cannot be administered as John Baptist
and the Apostles administered it, agrees not with the Practice of John Baptist
and the Apostles: But the Tenent and Practice of Infant Baptism being put, Mr.
Tombs: exercit. arg. 3. sect. 16.
Baptism cannot be administered as John Baptist and the Apostles administered it;
Ergo. We answer: Here is an Ign^ratio elenchi, the argument driving at that
which is not in question. The question is not whether John B. and the Apostles
did baptize Infants; for in case they had not opportunity so to do, it follows
not, that when opportunity was, baptizing such agreed not with their practice;
no more then to have circumcised men of years had not agreed with Moses
Institution of Circumcision, because we never read that he ever did circumcise
any Jews of years.

2. The Minor can never be proved. How know you that John B. or the Apostles
never baptized any Infants? You have been often told, a non Scripto ad non
factum follows not: No man can certainly say, that John B. and the Apostles
never baptized Infants: The contrary appears in that which has been said.

CHAP. II.
Mr. Fishers Objections, at Folkstone in Kent, March 10. 1650. answered.
IF Baptism of Infants be no Ordinance of Christ, Obj. 1.
then it is unlawful: But the Baptism of Infants is no Ordidinance of Christ:
Ergo.

We deny the Minor.

If the Baptism of Infants is not ordained in the New Testament of Christ,
Object. 2.
then it is no Ordinance of Christ^ But it is not ordained in the New Testament
of Christ; Ergo, etc.

We deny the Minor.

If it be ordained in the Testament of Christ, Object. 3.
then it is to be found where; Ergo, etc.

We answer: 1. The minor is again denied; for the matter in question is to be
found in several places, from firm and good consequence.

2. If otherwise, you argue negatively from Scriptures in respect of express
terms. We further say: 1. That the like reason might be urged against baptizing
of women, and administering the Lords Supper to them, there being no express or
particular precept in terminis for either; nor express example of the latter,
nor promise to it in all the Scripture: And if you say women are comprehended
in the general precepts; we answer, so are Infants of believing Parents, as
parts of Families and Nations: If you say women are admitted to the Communion,
because Christ dyed for them as well as men. We say so to; and that he as
certainly dyed for Infants. 2. The command for baptizing Infants, is Matthew. 28.
19. The examples, Acts 16 33. 1 Cor. 1. 16. And the promise, Acts 2. 39.

If Infant Baptism be an Ordinance of Christ, Object. 4.
then it is expressly set down: But it is not expressly set down; Ergo, etc. We
answer: 1. If the question be concerning the example of Christ or his Disciples
baptizing Infants; and you would reason thus. They did never baptize Infants,
because it is not expressly written: We have often said, a non scripto ad non
factum, non valet argumentum: Christ and his Apostles did many things which are
not expressly written.

2. We may understand this word (Expressly) to signify either a writing in
terminis; that is, so many words and syllables (Go and Baptize Infants) if you
would have it so strictly understood, that it is not the Ordinance of Christ
that any should be baptized, but such as are so mentioned in Scriptures; then
you must also conclude, that the Baptism of women is no Ordinance of Christ
(and indeed there might appear more color of doubting concerning their
baptizing, who were not sealed under the Law, then of male Infants which were)
and then giving the Eucharist to women must be no Ordinance of Christ; nay,
baptizing of men and women of ripe years, must then be no Ordinance of Christ;
for where can you show us, where Christ expressly said, Go and baptize men and
women of ripe years? Where can you show us in terminis, Thou Thomas, John,
Andrew, etc. shall be baptized and saved? This you will put upon necessary
consequence, where you have no express word: And why shall we not have the like
liberty for Infant Baptism? Or we may understand this word (Expressly) in a
greater latitude, to import a general and implicit command in such terms and
grounds, quibus positis, alia necessario consequuntur: So we say Christ
expressly commanded Infant Baptism, where he said, without any limitation or
exception to Infants, Go baptize all Nations: whereof Infants then and ever
were, and are a great part; because (except in case of some evident incapacity)
eadem est ratio partis and totius.

3. Taking (Expressly) in a proper and strict sense, as it seems you here do,
for (in terminis) so many words and syllables: We say from other instances,
that your assertion may appear false and erroneous: For 1. There is no express
place of Scripture which names three persons in the unity of the Deity, which
yet we must believe; again, there is no Express Precept for abrogating the
Jewish Sabbath, and religious observation of the Christian Sabbath, as has
been noted.

If Matthew. 28. 19. Object. 5.
Christ gave Commission to teach those whom they were to baptize; then not to
baptize Infants: But Matthew 28. 19. he gave commission to teach those they were
to baptize: Therefore there he gave no commission to baptize infants. 1. We
answer: Your major is Amphibologi^ae: For it is doubtful whether you affirm by
(those whom they were to baptize) all those, or only some of those: If you mean
All, your minor is false: For Christ gave them no commission to teach Infants,
as such, though he gave them commission to baptize them into future faith and
obedience: If you mean thus, Christ gave commission, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. to
teach some of those whom they were to baptize; therefore he gave them not
Commission to baptize Infants: then the Sequel of your major is lame, and
cannot follow; for though Christ there gave them commission to teach and
baptize the Parents first; it follows not thence, that therefore he gave them
not commission to baptize their Infants; but contrariwise he therefore gave
them commission to baptize the Infants of such: For the Parents being taught
and sealed, entitled their children to the Seal of the same Promise and
Covenant of God, which is jointly to sealed Parents and their Children, Genesis
17. 7. and so Christ commanded them to teach those who were capable of
doctrine, and only to baptize them who were capable of Baptism only, as Infants.

2. Christ not repeating there an exact copy of his commission formerly given
them at sundry times, and on sundry occasions (for there he mentions not any
particular heads of doctrine or discipline, nor so much as the Eucharist) but
to those things relates in general, verse 20. Teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you -- whereof he names the two first and
and most usual things, -- Teaching and Baptizing, for the making of Disciples
and gathering a Church of all Nations: So that he names not here the matter or
subject of baptism in particular; but says in general -- Baptizing them etc.
Teaching them to observe all, etc. See answer to Obj. 1. number. 3.
Now although children cannot be first taught before they are baptized, as
such, as their Parents might and ought to be, yet might they be first baptized,
and in due time taught, as Christ commanded. And it is here to be noted, That
children of sealed Parents were called Disciples, and so accounted in both
Testaments: See Acts 15. 10. John 9. 28. We are Moses Disciples, -- said the
Jews: Now the only thing which entered them into the School of Moses, or
denominated them Moses Disciples, was their Circumcision in their infancy,
which obliged them coming to years, to the observation of the whole Law, Gal.
5. 3. delivered by Moses. So Baptism of Infants does not anticipate profession
of Christianity, but oblige unto it in d^e time; and therefore is Baptism a
sign that the baptized professes himself a Disciple of Christ, who appointed
it as a mark and cognizance of his Disciples: Baptism makes Infants Disciples
in the first form of his School, into which they are thereby entered, though not
actually for the present taught, because they are not yet capable of Doctrine:
Yet so is fulfilled in Infants Baptism that same(...)(in Christ's commission,
Mat. 28. 19.) Make Disciples, baptizing them etc. and children of Believers are
counted Disciples, Acts 15. 10. Why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck
of the DISCIPLES? What yoke? Why Circumcision; as appears Verse 1. Now those
upon whom the false Teachers would have laid this yoke, are called by the
Apostle DISCIPLES: and that yoke of Circumcision was put upon children most
commonly, in respect of whom the Proselytes were very few: And there is no
great doubt but that those false Masters who would have grown Disciples
circumcised, as much, at least, urged, that their children should be
circumcised; therefore Infants were accounted Disciples. And I see not but that
Christ spoke of Infants, Matthew. 10. 42. as well as others -- Whosoever shall
give to drink, unto one of these little ones -- in the name of a DISCIPLE, that
is, as is interpreted, Mark 9. 41. -- because ye belong to Christ (as do
baptized Infants) and so Matthew. 18. 5. Whosoever shall receive one such little
child in my name, receives me -- that is, a child which is a Christian: Nor
do the following words, v. 6. (Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones,
which (as our common translation has it) believe in me) conclude that he spoke
there only of such as were little in their own eyes; (...)Mat. 18. 6.
that is, humble (as 1 Samuel, 15. 17.) though of years, or of such children as
were of years to believe: for the words may as well be translated, One of these
little ones of those that believe in me; or of believers in me; that is, any
infant of a Believer or Christian.

3. Christ Matthew 28. 19, 20. spoke concerning the plantation of Christian Faith
and Conversion of nations, in which work preaching must go before Baptism. So
was it in the beginning, and so must we do now, if we were sent to convert
Turks, Pagans, or Jews: but where the Gospel is planted, and believing Parents
are received into the Church by baptism, their children are first to be
baptized, and afterward taught, so soon as they are able to learn; So that the
cited place can conclude no more, then that administration of baptism began
first on the Parents that received the word, and were made disciples by
baptism, and so it descended to their children: So was it in circumcision.

4 Children are to be taught when they are capable, concludes nothing against
their present baptizing, Mr Cobbet. part. ^. exp. o^ Matthew. 2^. page, 179.
of which they are passively capable: one affirmative excludes not another
thereto subordinate: nor do affirmative precepts which bind always, bind to
all and every particular time, as negatives do: teaching them therefore
concludes not a present teaching the baptized, but a duty of teaching them as
they became capable of being taught.

5 The particle(...)relates to(...)in general and indefinitely, though it
agree not Grammatically with it: for Christ faith not baptize some, or only
those who are taught (in deed such a determination of the subject, would have
excluded Infants, as such, from baptism) but(...), baptizing them; that is,
men, women, and children of believers and baptized Parents of all Nations: it
is not now as when Religion was, as it were, shut up in Judea; now the stop of
the Partition wall is broken down; Ephesians. 2.
now Christ will have all Nations come and be sealed into the Covenant of his
free grace and mercy: and this Enallagie or change of Gender is often found in
Scripture, as Rev. 2. 26, 27. Rev. 19. 15. Act. 15. 17. Act. 26. 17. Act. 21.
25. Ephesians. 2. 11. So here he says collectively, teach, or disciple(...), and
distributively,(...), baptizing them, one by one, of what Nation soever they
are. So Mat. 25. 32. before him shall be gathered(...) -- all Nations, and he
shall separate them one from another; some on the right hand and some on the
left; but all by particulars must be distributed without exception of any
person, age, or condition: otherwise it might seem that some Nations should be
gathered to judgment, and not some others; which cannot be, because God is
impartially just.

If the children of Israel had only a ceremonial holiness, Obj. 6.
then the pretense from circumcision to baptism of Infants is invalid: but the
children of Israel had only a ceremonial holiness; ergo, etc. The minor being
denied, was thus attempted to be proved:

If the Covenant Genesis 17. 7. etc. was only for the land of Canaan, then the
Israelites had only a ceremonial holiness: but the Covenant Genesis 17. 7. etc.
was only for the land of Canaan; ergo, etc. We answer, 1 If by ceremonial, you
mean federal holiness as appertaining (by Gods Promise and Covenant with
Abraham and his carnal seed) to some of the Israelites, not of the election to
salvation, it may be granted you without prejudice to our cause that such
carnal Israelites had only a ceremonial holiness; not because Gods covenant
held forth no more then external and temporal things unto them; but because
through unbelief they apprehended no more. But if the proposition be universal,
as also relating to the chief and best part of Israel, to wit, the Elect, for
whose sakes others enjoyed secular blessings with them; then your minor is
apparently false; for they had internal circumcision of the heart, as well as
the external in the flesh, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. Deuteronomy. 20. 6. Romans 2. 29. Jer. ^4. 4.

2 To say that God made no promise of spiritual things in the covenant of the
Old Testament is evidently false, See Cloppenburg, Gangren. of Anabapt. etc. N.
3.
as appears Genesis 17. 7. 2 Cor. 6. 18. I will be a father unto you, and ye shall
be my sons and my daughters, says the Lord Almighty. See also Joh. 1. 12, 13.
1 John 3. 1, 2, 8, 9. 1 John 2. 25. God covenanted Genesis 17. 7. to be their God,
and repeateth it, Lev. 26. 12. and applied it to the Gentiles, 2 Cor. 6. 16.
Jer. 31. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 6. 18. Act. 2. 39. whence it may clearly appear that the
main substance of the covenant and promise of God, with and to Abraham and his
seed, was for eternal life, as also in the New Testament, 1 John 2. 25. The
land of Canaan, and other secular blessings were promised as other temporal
goods subordinate, and as a (...)or additament over and above, or an accession
to the main, as Mat. 6. 33. and 1 King. 3. 10, 11, 13. and also for a figure of
their heavenly inheritance, Heb. 4. 8, 9, 11. and for a confirmation of their
interest therein, to which they were to come through the red sea which figured
our baptism.

3 If the Covenant of God with Abraham and his spiritual seed, that is,
Believers, had been only for the land of Canaan, and temporal blessings there
into be enjoyed, then that gracious Covenant had entitled him to no more then
many wicked enemies of God, and mere reprobates had, and at this hour have: for
the impious Canaanites then had all that good land and the temporal profits
thereof, as the more impious Turks now have; as it is written Psalm. 73. 12.
Behold these are the ungodly who prosper in the world, they increase in riches:
but this were foolish to affirm, and against the whole Analogy of Scriptures,
which expressly affirm that godliness has the promise of this life that now is,
and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8.

The seal of Circumcision was set to Abraham to seat him up only to the honor
of the Father of the faithful, Obj. 7.
that is, under this notion only (as a seal) to honor him as the Father of the
faithful, etc. We answer, This makes nothing to the proof of the former
assertion; yet we say, it was not only to seal this honor unto him, but for a
seal of the righteousness of faith, Rom, 4. 11. and to seal him personally, or
to his own personal interest in Christ to come, as it is written, Abraham
rejoiced to see my day, Joh. 8. 56.

That which was set only to honor the greatness of Abraham's faith, Obj. 8.
not to strengthen the weakness of his faith, was set to him only as a seal to
honor him as the father of the faithful: But Circumcision was set only to
honor the greatness of his faith, not to strengthen the weakness of his
faith. ergo, etc. We answer to this caption and weak argument That Abraham's
circumcision was set both to confirm his strong faith, and also to carry a
remembrance thereof to posterity, and to confirm that which was weak; for faith
has certain degrees, and the greatest measure thereof may be greatned (because
it is not infinite) and so more confirmed. Abraham's circumcision. Gen, 17. 23,
24, 26. was a seal of the righteousness of faith which he had being yet
uncircumcised, that he might be the father of all them that believe, though
they be not circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed to them also. Romans
4. 11. his faith preceded the seal who believed in hope, that he might become
the father of many Nations. Romans 4. 18. this was when God spoke to him, Genesis
15. 6. and he not weak in faith -- being fully persuaded, etc. Rom.4. 21. of
what? See Genesis 15. 4, 5, 6. so shall thy seed be; and he believed in the Lord
-- he was afterward circumised, Genesis 17. 24. and his great trial of faith was
some years after his circumcision: and then to confirm his faith yet more, the
Lord said Genesis 22. 16. By my self have I sworn -- blessing I will bless thee,
and multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and in thy
seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed, Genesis 22. 17, 18 and the
effect of this faith the Apostle magnifieth, Heb. 11. 17. by faith Abraham when
he was tried offered up Isaac^and mentioning the same, Heb. 6. 13, 16, 17. he
says, an oath for confirmation is to them and end of all strife: wherein God
to show more abundantly unto the heirs of Promise the immutabilitie of his
counsel, confirmed it by an oath: what in respect of Gods truth? nay, but
nothing can be added to an infinite: such is Gods truth, which is no accident
in him, but his essence; for whatsoever is in God, is God: it was therefore
that the heirs of promise (of which number you will allow Abraham to be one)
might be confirmed, Heb. 6. 18.
and have strong consolation to lay hold upon the hope set before them: whence
it appears that even Abraham's strong faith might be confirmed; and so his
circumcision had other ends then to honor him as the father of the faithful:
nor is that of any better value which was farther objected to the same end.

That which was not set to any of his posterity to confirm them in their faith,
Obj. 9.
was set only to Abraham to honor his faith, etc That. What? the seal of
circumcision? Your minor is so false that it needs no more confutation then
denial; for circumcision the seal of the righteousness of faith was set to
Abraham's seed and posterity to confirm them in the same faith, and to assure
them that God was their God, as he promised Genesis 17. 7. and indeed Abraham was
not styled the Father of the faithful in regard of Isreal's carnal propagation;
for that which is born of the flesh is flesh, Joh. 3. 6. and they which are of
the faith, the same are the children of Abraham, Gal. 3. 7. Meta^
heri^(...)pater, dici^tur, anti^ior, major, magister, prin^e^s, inventor,
primus a^icuju^, ^ci author, and crig. V. Shi^^^. Pent. 1. 9.
nor as the first believer; for many others believed before him, as Abel,
Enoch, Noah, Shem, etc. moreover Father is used by the Hebrews to signify
diverse relations, as Prince or Lord, 2 King. 5. 13. first teacher, 1 Cor. 4.
14. God our heavenly father, Deuteronomy. 3. 2. Mat. 6. Isa. 9. 6. or Master, 2 King.
2. 12. (hence Disciples were called sons of the Prophets, 1 Samuel 10. 12.) or a
Counselor, Genesis 45. 8. or an Inventer or Author, as Jabel was the father of
such as dwell in tents, Genesis 4. 20. and Jubal, the father of all such as handle
the harp and organ: but Abraham is called the father of the faithful, as being
first sealed with this seal into the covenant of the righteousness of faith:
and as a pattern and example to which we must frame our lives in faith and
obedience; faith is the condition of our covenant with God in Christ, made with
Abraham and his seed, Gal. 3. 7. Romans 4.
that is, believers; and thereupon the first seal of the righteousness of faith
was given to his natural seed: and now a believing Parent, being by faith of
the seed of Abraham, the first seal of the present covenant, is by the same
proportion to be given to his natural-born Infants.

In that commission in which those only are meant which are capable of being
taught, Obj. 10.
and to learn, Infants are neither named, intended, nor meant: but such is that
commission Mat. 28. 19, 20. therefore there is no commission to baptize
Infants. For proof of the minor, which was denied, was offered this reason:

He that gives commission to teach persons before they are baptized, Obj. 11.
requires no more to be baptized then are capable to be taught, etc. ergo.
Though enough has been said to satisfy herein; yet to satisfy your instance,
we say further, 1 The minor is fallacious, the condition,(...), is here
considerable; without which it is a Paralogism or fallaeious disputing: we
affirm not a present capacity or actual docibility of Infants, but an
habitual; that is, that Infants have reason whereby they will in time to come
be capable of being taught (though for the present they have so slender an use
thereof, that they cannot apprehend spiritual things) otherwise we might not
baptize them, could they not bear the image of God: to baptize bells, altars,
etc. or beasts, were a most detestable and blasphemous profanation of the holy
Sacrament.

2 If ( capable of being taught, and to learn) be taken for a present
capacity, and the sense of your proposition runs thus in that commission in
which only persons of years are meant, Infants are not intended or meant ^ it is
easily granted; but then your minor being this: in that commission Mat. 28. 19,
20. only persons of years are meant, is a gross begging of the Question, which
is, whether in that commission Christ intended only the baptism of persons of
years, and for the present apt to be taught and learn, or also with such
Infants of Christian Parents? which we affirm:

3 It appears by that which has been formerly answered to Obj. 5. that
Christ says in the cited place,(...) make Disciples, baptizing them, etc. and
though children, as such, cannot be taught, yet they may be made Disciples of
Christ, by being admitted into his school, their Parents, giving their names to
Christ, both for themselves and their families: and in Christ's commission in
that place, teaching does follow baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
(...)etc. Mat. 28. 19, 10.
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost -- which we do, teaching our baptized
Infants, so soon as they become fit to be taught, what Christ has commanded.

4 Though Infants, as such, are not capable of teaching, yet are they capable
of baptism, that is, of being washed with water in the name of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, of being prayed for, and of being received into
Christ's congregation; and so were Infants capable of circumcision the eighth
day.

Those that are not in the cited place, Obj. 12.
commanded to be baptized, are not to be baptized: But Infants are not there
commanded to be baptized; therefore they are not to be baptized, We answer: 1
The minor is false: It is there commanded to baptize Infants. 2. If you mean
that the command is not addressed to Infants, you trifle, the Amphibologie
being in (those that are not commanded) and so that being understood personally
of Infants, there is an Ignoratio Elenchi in the Minor, we not affirming that
which you assume; to wit, That Infants in their own persons are commanded. 3.
The Major is fallacious in another respect, in this word Commanded, which may
import either Implicitly Comprehended; so are Infants commanded to be
baptized: or explicitly and in terminis, which if you mean, which say again,
neither are women nor persons of years there or elsewhere in terminis,
commanded to be baptized, though by the series of holy Scipture and necessary
consequence, it is certainly employed. See more Obj.14.

The Apostle 1 Cor. 7. 14. intended by holy, Obj. 13.
legitimacie, not sanctity: for if it were not the faith of the parents, So Mr.
Tombs Ed. Barber etc.
but their matrimony which the Apostle there spoke of, then it was not
sanctity or holiness, but legitimation which he there intended: But it was not
faith, but their matrimony that the Apostle there spoke to; ergo, etc. the
argument for Infant Baptism thereon grounded, is invalid. We answer 1 The
scruple of the Corinthians was concerning spiritual pollution by a believers
cohabiting with an husband or wife not converted: the Apostle answers in
effect, that they need not fear that; for the unbelieveng husband is
sanctified(...), in the wife, that is, in respect of the wife, not as if an
unbelieving husband were made holy by the faith of the wife: but because the
believing wife may with good conscience live as a wife with such an husband
(for why should another conscience make her guilty of sin?) for unto the pure
by faith, Ob uxorem, vel propter uxorem, respectu uxoris. Piscarr in loc. sic
Beza, -- quia ratione faederis, qued hic spectar Apostolus fidelis primartum
and principalem obtiner locum; hinc fit ut maritus infidelis eo respectu
accessorium sit uxoris fidelis, adeoque ipsa sanctificata, ipse quoque in ca
sanctificetur -- 1 Cor. 3. 21. -- omnia vestra sunt, i.e. in omnia jus,
dominium and potestatem habetis fideles, etc. L. de Dieu. in loc.
all things are pure, Tit. 1. 15. marriage, meats, all, being sanctified by the
Word allowing them, and promising a blessing to believers, as also by prayer of
faith obtaining the same. This he proves by their childrens holiness, as from
the absurdity and falsehood of the contrary, else were your children unclean,
but now are they holy, that is, within the covenant of the Lord, who says, I
will be a God unto thee and thy seed after thee: and this he leaves on a known
and common practice of the Churches everywhere, 1 Timothy 4. 5. Genesis 17. 7.
that if but one of the Parents were a believer, the children of him or her,
were brought to baptism as the seal of the Covenant.

2 This cannot reach to children born of both unbelieving parents, though so
born in lawful matrimony, they were civilly legitimate, for that would make
the Apostles supposition void: for what was it to his purpose to speak of
legitimacie or illegitimacie of Panims children? neither could civil
legitimacie give them any privilege in Gods covenant, out of which can be no
holiness; nor illegitimacie exclude those from the seal thereof, who converted,
professed their faith and desired the same. That which is said Deuteronomy. 23. 2. A
bastard shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord, even unto his tenth
generation -- is not to be understood, as if it barred them from salvation, or
any means thereto subordinate, the covenant of God, seals thereof, sacraments,
or public service of God; but that it excluded them from a right to bear any
public office, Ecclesiastical or Civil: neither may Jophta's extraordinary
calling to public office, make void the general rule: in the forecited place
it is said -- the Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of
the Lord, etc. what, not in case of their becoming proselytes? nay, but Ruth
the Moabitess is rehearsed in the genealogy of our Savior Christ, and there
was but one law to him that is home-born, and unto the stranger; he may not
bear any public office, but he might be received into Gods covenant, and so be
capable of all holy duties. So, v. 1. the maimed or Eunuch shall not enter into
the congregation of the Lord etc. what? might he not be sealed or saved? the
contrary expressly appears Is. 56. 4, 5, 6, 7. Mat. 19. 12. To our present
purpose, the Apostle gathers that matrimonial conjunction between a believer
and an unbeliever, is holy, because the denomination and estimate being from
the better part, their children are within the covenant of God, by an argument
from the effect to the cause. Genesis 17. 13. Exodus 12. 19. Mat. 1.


3 The Apostle discoursed not there of civil Policy, but of conscience; and
how could it satisfy any Christians conscience to take an argument from the
civil laws of any of the Nations? it is notorious that among those, many things
were established by their laws, which a Christians conscience would, and must
abhor: yea, even such divorces without the case of adultery, as were in civil
respects tolerated by Moses; Beza in 1 Cor. 7.
for the hardness of the Jews hearts, excused not the offenders conscience,
though that permissive law would bear him out before men?

4 When the Apostle says the unbelieving husband is sanctified in the wife; if
any ask, what wife? we cannot say in a wife as she is only civilly legitimate;
for so far that husband has as good and evident a ground of sanctification on
his part and in himself without any accession of privilege from his wife; for
he must needs be as lawfully her husband as she is his wife; we can therefore
no otherwise rationally answer, then, a believing wife: and so on the other
side. Now seeing the Apostle puts it on a peculiar privilege, which is
sometimes in the man when he is a believer, and his wife is not; and sometimes
in the wife, if she be a believer, and her husband is not so; it appears that
the foundation of comfort here intended by the Apostle, is laid in faith,
peculiar but to one of the two, and not in matrimonial legitimacie common and
equal to both.

5 Faith which renders us acceptable to God in Christ, purifieth us, and all
estates and possessions to us: that sanctifies marriage, not marriage it; that
uniteth us by one Spirit to Christ, and is therefore far more excellent then
marriage, which uniteth man and woman only in one flesh: Tit. 1. 15.
faith therefore gives our children a denomination and right to the seals of
the covenant as they are holy, not marriage, which though civilly lawful, may
yet be impious before God; as where one puts away his wife for less then
adultery and marries another, or another man marries her so put away: Mat.
13. 9.
it is therefore the faith and Church-priviledge of parents which thus
denominateth children holy.

6 The Apostle could not here mean legitimacie of children: for that can
neither sanctify them, nor entitle them to the seal of Gods covenant; neither
is sanctification here or in any other place of Scripture taken otherwise then
for separating some way from some thing profane or impious. So persons, times,
places, etc. are said to be sanctified, which legitimation cannot do: neither
can (holy) necessarily imply (no bastard) for some holy men have been such;
neither can (no bastard) conclude a man holy. The children of infidels, and
aliens from the covenant of God, born in lawful wedlock, are legitimate and no
bastards; and yet as such, far from holy: and bastardie, though the effect and
product of foul sin of parents, and the child's indelible dishonor before men,
yet makes them not such as belong not to the covenant of God, as appears in
Pharez and Zarah, Genesis 38. 18, 29, 30. Jephtah, Judge. 11. 1, 2. etc. it must
needs be therefore, that the Apostle in that term of holy, signified some thing
peculiar to those that are within the Church of God, and not communicable to
children of Infidels, as such: so Tertullian speaks of the unregenerate, I. e.
non erit sa^ctus, ita omnis anima eo usque censetur in Adam, donec in Christa
recenseatur, vid. Tertul. de anim. c. 39. 40.
from Joh. 3. 5. he shall not enter into the kingdom of God: that is, he shall
not be holy: such every soul is counted in Adam, until he be recounted in
Christ.

7 We must consider that legitimacie of children (which our Antagonists would
here have intended) is a proceed of legitimacie of marriage, which is, of one
man and one wife joined together in matrimony according to Gods ordinance, as
it is written, Mat. 10. 4, 5. Calv. in. Mal. 2. 15.
they two shall be one flesh: not they many: and he that made them at the
beginning, made them male and female; now the institution of marriage is in
place of a perpetual law, the violation whereof is sin and wickedness:
Therefore Christ refuted their objection from Moses permission of the bill of
divorcement from the original, and Gods first institution of marriage, because
he in the beginning appointed it otherwise, and the same sanction is
inviolable. Mal. 2.^5.
So when the Prophet would recall the Jews from Polygamie to pure wedlock, he
said, did not he (that is God the Creator) make one? that is, did he make any
more wives for Adam then one? or did he at first make any more then one husband
and one wife? (...)and resi^^^uin ^ut excellentia spiritus ci.
yet had he the residue (or excellency) of the Spirit, that is, he had power
enough if he had pleased, to have made more: that therefore is illegitimate
which agrees not with the first unrepealable law and institution of God, who
created but one man and one woman for the fountain of all humane propagation,
as it is written Genesis 1. 27. God created him-male and female created be them:
both one flesh, and so but one -- and wherefore one? (...)semen Dei. Unum tamum
par conjugavit, qu^d semen Dei, i.e. pastes libe^^s progigneret: qaic quid
supra est, perfidiae^^^^^ae acceptum ferendum est. Jun. in Mal 2. Semen in
matrimonio promi^an a Dei. Vatabl. in Mal. 2.
says the Prophet -- that he might seek a godly seed: that is, a generation
according to Gods holy institution, which is between one man and one woman
lawfully joined in matrimony; this he opposes to their Polygamie, secretly
here intimating that all they are spurious who are born of Poligamie; because
they cannot and ought not to be esteemed legitimate, who are begotten otherwise
then in that matrimony which God appointed, which is only between one man and
one woman. Now this legitimacie all the tribes of Israel (though they were
otherwise holy) had not in the Prophets sense; but they had it in the Apostles
sense, 1 Cor. 7. 14. for (not to question more) Dan and Nephtali, Bilhab the
handmaids sons, and God and Ash^r, Zilpah the other handmaids sons, liad not
this legitimacie, and yet were they and their posterity holy to the Lord: it
must needs be therefore that it was from some other fountain of holiness then
civil^ legitimacie can give; and that could be none but federal holiness from
the covenant of God made with Abraham and his seed, wherein he contracted to be
their God, and that they should be his people, sealed and set apart to him
according to him own appointment which privilege, neither the wisdom, power,
honor, will of man, consent of Nations, nor any civil Laws or Ordinances of
man, ever could or can give; but God alone who freely bestows that favor,
and appoints the conditions thereof.

Only believers are the lawful subject of baeptism (that is, Obj. 14.
such as appear to believe with all their heart, Act. 8. 37.) but children
appear not to believe so; therefore they are not the lawful subject of baptism.
We answer, 1 That such are to be baptized, is granted; so that you may conclude
affirmatively for such persons of years; but this cannot conclude negatively to
the exclusion of Infants born within the Church of Christ.

2 If believing with all the heart were the rule of lawful administration of
baptism: who could securely presume to baptize persons of years, concerning
whose hearty believing they cannot be certain: as for outward appearance, that
many times deceives the most discerning men: Jerusalem and all Judea, etc.
came and were baptized of John Baptist, Mat. 3. 5. Joh. 6. 66.
yet many of them proved blasphemers and persecutors of Christ: some of them
came so far as to be professed Disciples, and yet proved Apostates: others were
said to believe in Christ, yet he discerning their hearts, would not commit
himself unto them; Joh. 2. 23. Ananias and Saphira came up to so real a
profession as to sell their possession for the advancement of the Gospel: and
did these believe with all their heart, or were they not baptized? I might add
hereto, Judas, Demas, and Simon Magus; all these show that outward appearance
demonstrateth not faith in the heart: and therefore, if only believers, that
is, with all their hearts, be the lawful subject of baptism; either your
supposed rule of baptizing, leaves it uncertain to you, whom you may, or may
not baptize: or else admits of hypocrites, whom God abhors, and on whom
Christ denounced so many woes, and excludes believers Infants from the seal of
Gods covenant, in which God himself testifies children of such are, and whom
Christ embraced in his sacred arms, testifying that of such is the kingdom of
heaven.

3 Show us a rule in all the New Testament in terminis (as you require of us
for Infant Baptism) for baptizing only persons of ripe years to make profession
of their faith, and at once (if you can, set an end to this unhappy
controversy which has so much troubled the Church) put it out of doubt that
none may be baptized until there be an appearance of their faith and
repentance; or give us some infallible proof, that all those whom you baptize
are indeed and certainly belonging to the kingdom of heaven: nay, show us any
necessary consequence for the exclusion of our Infants from baptism: what?
because those of years professed their faith, and confessed their sins?
therefore Infants who cannot so do, may not be baptized? it follows not: nay,
yet further, were there an express precept, if any believe not with all the
heart, baptize them not; it would no more exclude Infants from their right to
baptism, then that which the Apostle says (as has been noted) if any would
not work, neither should he eat, excludes them from their right to be fed. ^ Thessalonians 3. 10
To conclude, we show you an infallible word of Christ, that Infants belong to
the kingdom of heaven; and therefore the appearance (from these words of
Christ, and the covenant of God with believing parents and their children) is
as good and certain that the kingdom of heaven belongs to the Infants of
constant professors whom we baptize, as any profession of new Converts can
show; for men and women may and often do deceive men, who know not the heart,
or future condition of professors, whatsoever they now seem or say: but Christ
who knows all things, yea the secrets of every heart, and ends of all that are
or shall be, could not be deceived in so judging of Infants. The foundation of
the Lord remains sure, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Genesis 17. 7. Act. 2. 39.
and has this seal, the Lord knows who are his: and his covenant being that
he will be to the covenanted and his seed a God, whose promises are therefore
sure to them; and the parent, as such, being as well known to be converted, as
any new proselyte is or can be known to be converted; Gods promise to me
concerning my children, is more sure to me, then man's judgment concerning the
sincerritie of any new Convert can be, whatsoever appears in his words, or
professions.

4 The interest of sealing into the covenant of grace depends not on the
sealed persons worthiness or unworthiness, sex, age, or condition, but upon
God the author and free appointer thereof: so circumcision was one and the same
in the external seal, to the elect and reprobate, Infant or Proselyte of years.
The commandment of God did not put any difference, but equally enjoined it to
all sorts of males within the pale of Israel: he said not circumcise only
believers, the penitent, etc. (though in persons of years, that was to be
understood) but circumcise every male^ child the eighth day; when `tis sure
they could neither actually believe, repent, nor make any appearance thereof;
as then the external seal was one and the same, though the effect in the sealed
was variable; so is it in baptism; the secret unworthiness or Apostacy of the
receiver foreseen only by God, did not make them incapable of the seal;
therefore man administering, was to do his part according to the general command
of God, and to leave the particular success and effect to God, and so is it in
baptism.

5 Though unbelievers who reject the word of God, may not, as such, be
baptized; yet Infants, who at most may be called but negatively unbelievers,
cannot be included in that rule which excludes contemners, seeing they have
faith as they have reason, in the seed, not in the fruit, in the root, though
not in the leaf; in some inward operation, though not in any outward
expression, as Tidenus cited by the learned Dr. Fearly well observes.

6 None are required to manifest their faith and repentance before baptism, but
such as having the use of reason, have been taught and instructed in the same;
for God requires no impossibilities in respect of the abilities which himself
ever gave: so that in common reason, all texts of Scripture which require
confession of faith, repentance, etc. are to be understood of such as have the
use of reason and tongue, whereby they are enabled so to do.

If the parents: Obj. 15.
to whom the Apostle spoke, Act. 2. 39. were not believers, then the promise
was not to them and their children: but they were not believers; ergo, etc. We
answer, The Apostle saying expressly- the promise is to you and to your
children, your dispute, laboring to prove that the promise was not to them and
their children, is point blanck against the express Word of God; and you
denying that principle, are not worthy of further answer: yet for the pious
Readers sake, we say further; 1 That believers may be taken two ways: Rom, 10.
20.
first for such as do in heart believe unto righteousness: this God alone can
judge of; and therefore man is not to expect his rule and direction for his
ministration from hence. Secondly, for such as profess faith or show good and
probable signs and symptoms thereof, as those hearers of, Peter did: for they
received the word gladly and were baptized: and before that there appeared an
excellent sign of faith in them, in that the word which they heard, profited
them to compunction of heart and repentance, with desiring remedy: but where
the Word of God is not mixed with faith in the hearers, it profits not, as
appears, Heb. 4. 2. Therefore that assumption is irrational where you say,
they to whom the Apostle spoke were not believers. 2 There may be an
amphibologie in the major, believers being either such only in profession and
bearing the external seal of the righteousness of faith, or for such in the
heart; and so the sequel is unsound: for the promise of Gods covenant was to
all Israel^ as being the seed of Abraham within that covenant; although many of
them through unbelief obtained not remission of sins and eternal life held out
to them in the same: 1 Cor. 10. 5. Heb. 4. 2.
which made not the promise of nose effect to them who believed; and many
unbelieving parents had and have believing children: but a covenanted Parents
unbelief barreth not his Infant born within the Church from the external seal
of the covenant: so that the promise did belong to them though their Parents
had secretly been unbelievers and impious persons; much more, seeing they so
expressed and professed their faith, repentance, and care to be saved.

If those children Act. 2. 39. were entitled to baptism in their infancy, Obj.
16.
then they were, or must have been baptized in their infancy: but they were
not baptized in their infancy, but their fathers only, who received the word
gladly; therefore they to whom the promise is Act. 2. 39. were not entitled to
baptism in their infancy. We deny your minor, and you can never prove it:
their fathers were first baptized; but it appears not that they only were
baptized. 1. It has been often said, and you need still to hear it; it
follows not that it was not done, because it is not written. Christ spoke and
did many things which are not written. See the answer to Obj. 4.
2 If you could from Scripture prove that de facto they were not baptized in
their infancy; yet that would not prove that de jure they might not be
baptized. The parents neglect of their duty, or any other intercident
obstructions could not make void, the childrens interest. Moses son was not
circumcised on the eighth day, Exodus 4.
nor many thousand Israelists Infants in the wilderness for 40 years; yet we
cannot hence conclude that they ought not to have been circumcised had there
been no let, or that, they had no interest in the seal because there were lets.

Only Abraham's spiritual ^seed are to be baptized: Obj^ 17.
but Infants are not the spiritual seed of Abraham; therefore Infants are not
to be baptized. We answer, 1 This is the same argument under another
synonimical dress, to which we have answered: there you said, only believers
are to be baptized; here you say only Abraham's spiritual seed are to be
baptized; whereas believers and Abraham's spiritual seed are one and the same in
the Apostles account, Gal 3. 7. 2 Many thousands which were Abraham's carnal
seed, were baptized; which were indeed not his spiritual seed, that is, true
believers: See Mat. 3. 5, 6. Act. 2 41. which being done by John Baptist and
Christ's disciples, and so precedentially to us, shows the falsehood of your
major. 3 If Abraham's spiritual seed, by your own confession be to be baptized,
then Infants of believers within the Church must be baptized, they being
Abraham's spiritual seed, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. ^al. 3. 7.
(except you will say that Gods promise was to some who were not within the
covenant made with Abraham) and indeed the whole mystical body of Christ, is
the spiritual seed of Abraham, of which none can rationally deny Infants of
covenanted Parents to be a part, who acknowledge Christ to be their Savior.
See Ephesians. 5. 28. and that out of him and his body the Church, is no salvation.
So that by the way we may note, that to exclude Christian Infants from being a
part of Christ's visible Church in general, is to exclude them from the ordinary
state and way to salvation: and so to deny them to be Abraham's spiritual seed,
is to exclude them from the same, and to leave them to an extraordinary means
thereto; in which some Pagans, Turks, and obstinate Jews etc. by the mercy of
God, (illuminating and converting them to the faith of Christ by extraordinary
means) may be saved: and this is to suppose Infants of Christian Parents as bad
as Heathens, Ephesians. 2. 12. 1 These, 4.
without Christ, aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the
covenants of promise-without God in the World. Add hereto, that if parents may
not sorrow as men without hope for their deceased Infants, they cannot have
sound hope without faith, nor faith without a promise or word of faith, that
is, Scripture-promise to confirm and ground it on: and that not in general, but
such as properly concerns their children, as that Genesis 17. 7. Act. 2. 39. Luke
18. 16, 17: etc. Now to deny childrens interest herein, or that they are the
spiritual seed of Abraham, is to leave afflicted Parents hopeless of their
childrens salvation, in that by such an an uncharitable and impious tenet,
Parents must not believ those comfortable promises belong to their children,
and that God will not so much as by an external seal, assure them that he is by
covenant a God unto their Infants. Nor can we think that ever any were saved
ordinarily, if at all, touching whom God never made any promise, neither in
respect of internal and saving faith, nor so much as in respect of external
right to sealing thereto: so that to avoid this, we must say, that Christian
Infants are Abraham's undoubted spiritual seed and therefore they have at least
an ecclesiastical right as to the covenant made with Abraham, so to the
Church Priviledges respectively; that is, to baptism, which is now the seal of
Gods covenant in Christ exhibited.

CHAP. III.
Infant baptism asserted and justified, by sundry arguments by the Church of
Christ alleged.
1 ALl they who are members of Christ's body the Church, are to be baptized that
they may be admitted into the same by the initiatory seal thereof, which is
baptism, that they may be externally known to be of the Church: but Infants of
Church-priviledged persons are members of Christ's body the Church; Basting de
bap^quaest. 74. Vis^ a. Catech. etc.
ergo, they ought to be baptized that they may be admitted into the same by the
initiatorie seal thereof, which is baptism, etc.

The major is thus confirmed; such persons as were circumcised under the Law,
that they might be known to be of the Church, ought to be baptized under the
Gospel for the same end; for baptism answers circumcision; and is called by
the same name, Col. 2 11, 12. as having the same end and effect to seal up the
same grace unto faith, mortification, remission of sins, and admission into the
visible Church. If it be excepted that under the Law, there was an express
command for Infant-circumcision on the eighth day, but there is none for
Infant Baptism; We say, 1 Because there was an express command under the Law
never repealed in the Gospel, and the same end and use still remain; therefore
there need be none in the Gospel more then that general opening the kingdom of
heaven to all believers, in taking away the stop of the partition wall by that
which is said, Baptize all Nations. None but Israelites and their proselytes
were sealed under the Law, none but male children at eight days old; but now go
baptize all nations, without exception to nation, age, sex, or condition. 2
There is in all the Scripture no express prohibition, neither can any by any
sound consequence imply it.

The assumption is thus confirmed, Those whom Christ saves are members of his
body, (for he is the head of the Church, and Savior of the body, Ephesians. 5. 23.)
But Christ saves Infants of believing parents; therefore Infants are members
of Christ's body the Church. The major is evident; for Christ saves none but
those who are members of his body the Church. The minor is as evident, it being
granted that any Infants are saved, which is apparent from the covenant of God,
Genesis 17. 7. and the words of Christ, Luke 18. 16.
of such is the kingdom of God, as also by this argument: Those whom Christ
loved, and for whom he gave himself to death^ those he will sanctify and
cleanse with the washing of water by the Word, Ephesians. 5. 26. that they may be
received into the Church, and be made partakers of the benefits of his death:
but Christ not only loved and gave himself for persons of years, but also for
Infants; therefore he will sanctify and cleanse Infants with the washing of
water by the Word, etc.

2 All Infants were by Adam capable of sin and the expressions of Gods justice
punishing the same by death, sickness, etc. but Infants are not less capable of
the grace and mercy of God in Christ in respect of the expressions thereof,
then they were of his justice in Adam: Therefore Infants are capable of the
expressions of Gods grace and mercy in Christ, which in the ordinary
dispensation thereof is baptism. The major is evident, Romans 5. 12. 1 Cor. 15.
22. The minor Romans 5. 20 where sin abounded, grace did much more abound, that
is, Gods grace does more abundantly appear in holding out the visible remedy,
then his justice inflicting the denounced punishment; which could not be, if
Infants (visibly involved in the condemnatorie sentence and execution thereof)
should be excluded from the ordinary and visible means of recovery and
salvation by Christ, which in them can be no other external means but baptism
the laver of regeneration: and it can be no less then a sacrilegious injury to
the grace and mercy of God in Christ, to suppose that the sin of man is more
powerful to hurt then the grace of God in Christ is to heal and save.

3 If we ought not to baptize Infants, then there must be some apparent let and
impediment thereto, either on Gods part prohibiting, or on the Ministers part,
or in the Sacrament it self, or in the incapacitie of the receiver; but there
is no apparent let or impdiment on the part (or in any) of these therefore
there is none at all. 1 There is no impediment on Gods part, for God no where
expressly or by good consequence says, Baptize not Infants, or Baptize none but
those who do first testify their faith and repentance. 2 There is no
impediment on the Ministers part, for he can as easily baptize Infants as
persons of years. 3 There is no impediment in respect of the Sacrament it self;
for all the essentials of baptism may be placed on children: profession of
faith, repentance, etc. are conditions of baptism in persons of years, and
effects of it, which may in due time appear and follow in baptized Infants:
those therefore are not of the essence of baptism, nor so much as universal
conditions thereof; for the present sprinkling, washing, or dipping in water,
in the name of the Father, the Son, and the H. Ghost, are the essence of
baptism; so are not faith, repentance, or newness of life: for it may be a true
baptism, where these graces do neither precede nor follow it, though without
these preceding or following, baptism cannot be effectual to salvation; which
need not seem strange to him that considers that Judas, Simon Magus, and many
who were, and now are truly baptized, are not saved. 4 Neither can the let be
in the Infant, who cannot by any actual hardness of heart, impenitency, or
positive unbelief, or contempt of the ordinance of God, refuse or despise the
grace of God offered in baptism. Therefore they are to be admitted to that
whereof they are apparently and undeniably capable; which is the external seal at
least: which is all that man for present can administer, or we will contend
for; being most willing to leave secret things to God, and to hope the best,
where the contrary cannot appear unto us: only add hereto, if the issue be put
upon the capacity or incapacitie of the Infant, with relation to any condition
so much insisted on, let any of our Antagonists show us how or wherein Infants
under the Gospel and covenant of grace in Christ, have less capacity in respect
thereof then Infants under the Law of Moses had, Romans 4.
or that baptism is not the seal of the same righteousness of faith in Christ,
whereof circumcision for the time was the seal.

4 That which without any expressed exception to particulars Christ's commission
holds forth to all nations, Matthew. 28. 19. Mark 16. 16.
belongs to Infants as well as persons of years; for Infants are always a
great part of all nations: but Christ's commission holds forth baptism to all
nations without any expressed exception to particulars: therefore baptism
belongs to Infants (of believing Parents) as well as to persons of years.

5 No man may forbid water, that is, the outward administration, where God has
given the inward operation of his H. Spirit (which maxim the Apostle built on,
Act. 10. 47. See Act. 10. 1, 14, 15, 20. Act. 11. 3, 15, 17.
in that then -- difficult question, whether the Gentiles might be sealed into
the covenant of grace.) But God has given the inward operation of his H.
Spirit to Infants. Ier. 1. 5. Luke 1. 15. 1 Cor. 7. 14 therefore no man may
forbid water, or the outward administration for the baptism of Infants. The
reason of the major is that all they who are partakers of the grace both
signified and exhibited in baptism, have right to the sign and sacrament
thereof, and therefore may not be barred from it; for that were to withstand
God, Act. 11. 17. In reason where God has bestowed the grace signified, man
may not deny the signifying element; and in common right, the apparent heirs
are unjustly denied the deeds and evidences whereby that right is assured upon
them: for these are a part of their inheritance, and ought by right to follow
the same: moreover it is impious to divide that which God has joined, the sign
from the thing signified; as they do, who allow children, grace, remission of
sins and salvation by Christ, and yet deny them baptism into Christ; they will
yield them the Jewels, but not the Cabinet, the Treasure, but not the Purse.

6 All that are capable of the initiatorie seal of future faith, ought to be
baptized: but Infants are capable thereof, therefore they ought to be baptized.
So under the law Infants were capable of circumcision, the seal of their future
faith: and our Infants have no less capacity thereof then they had.

7 All they to whom Gods covenant of Grace extends, are to receive the
initiatory seal thereof (for sealing of the covenant respectively, is a part
thereof, Genesis 17. 10, 11. Mark. 16. 16.) but Gods covenant of Grace in Christ
extends to Infants of covenanted persons: therefore Infants ought to receive
the initiatory seal of the covenant, which is baptism. The assumption is proved
from Act. 2. 38, 39. Be baptized every one of you -- for the remission of
sins-for the promise is unto you, and to your children. What promise? that upon
which the Covenant was sealed to Abraham and his seed, the faithful: and when,
where, or how have Infants of Christians forfeited their right to the seal, who
as such, cannot forfeit?

8 If circumcision and baptism were for substance, both respective seals of the
same covenant of God in Christ, then those sorts of men who were capable of the
one, are capable of the other: but circumcision and baptism were for substance
both respective seals of the same covenant of God in Christ, therefore those
sorts of men (to wit, Infants as well as persons of years) who were capable of
circumcision, are capable of baptism. The major may appear in that God never
made any covenant of grace but only in Christ, and the same Gospel was preached
to Abraham, and he believed in the same Christ, Gal. 3. 8. add hereto, there is
the same efficient primary cause, to wit, God making a covenant with his, and
appointing the respective seals thereof: the same necessity on the receivers
part, original sin in Infants, who have therefore as much need of regeneration
and admission into the covenant of God for remedy, as they had under the law,
and there is the same power and efficacy of the holy Ghost still remaining;
otherwise Gods grace in the New Testament, and covenant in Christ exhibited,
should be more restrained, and of less latitude, then it was in the Old, under
that severe Schoolmaster the Law; and, which were impious to affirm, then
Christ's coming into the world should be so much disvantageous to believers, as
that the Gospel should take away the seal of Gods covenant of grace from our
children, which the Law allowed them under the severity thereof.

No part or condition of the covenant by God appointed for remission of sins
and salvation, may be withheld by man from those who have right to the covenant
and promise of God, under severe punishment: but the initiatory Sacrament,
Baptism, now is a part or condition of the covenant by God appointed for
remission of sins and salvation, whereto Infants have right: therefore it may
not be withheld from such Infants as are within the covenant, and have right
thereto and to the promise of God, See Exodus 4. Luke 3. 3. Act. 2. 38, 39. Tit.
3. 5. now the initiatorie seal of the covenant was, and is a part or condition
of the same, Genesis 17. 10, 11. Mark. 16. 16. Joh, 3. 5.

10 All they whom God accounts holy, have a capacity of baptism the feal
thereof: but God accounts children of believing parents holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14.
Therefore children of believing parents have a capacity of baptism; See Andr.
Riv. Cath. Or^hod. to 2. q. 3. tract. 3. p. 31, 38, 39.
nor does that ridiculous interpretation which Anabaptists have borrowed of the
Jesuits concerning legitimacie, overthrow this argument.

11 All those who being redeemed by Christ, have right to the kingdom of
heaven, have right to the ordinary Port and Inlet into the same, that is
baptism: but children of believers have right to the kingdom of heaven, Mark.
10. 14 Mat. 19. 13. therefore children of believers have right to baptism.
Christ expresses the entrance or means to regeneration and the kingdom of
heaven Joh. 3. 5. to wit, water of baptism, by which the H. Ghost does
ordinarily work thereto; and presently gives the reason -- that which is born
of the flesh is flesh: that, as such, cannot enter into the kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 15. 50. now Infants are from their natural birth, but flesh and blood, Ps.
51. 7. Ephesians. 2. 3. therefore if they must enter into the kingdom of God, they
must be born again of water and the H. Ghost: it is true, that God can and does
regenerate many Infants without baptism by his H. Spirit, so that they dying
without the Sacrament, are yet saved in an extraordinary way: but for us to
deny them baptism, and to put their salvation upon extraordinary means, where
God has appointed and declared the ordinary, is as much as man can do to shut
them from the kingdom of heaven; and so though their want of baptism shall not
be their eternal loss whom God has elected, yet is it their great sin who
neglect or despise the ordinance of God, and thereby (except in case of
repentance) they shall exclude themselves.

12 Whatsoever Christ commanded Ministers to do, and which the Apostles in the
ordinary office of Ministers did do, that is right and just to be done, and we
ought to do: but Christ commanded Ministers to baptize all nations without
exception of children; and that the Apostles did do (for above all
contradiction they obeyed Christ therein) therefore it is right and just to
baptize Infants, as being a great part of all nations, and we ought to do it.

13 That which agrees with the nature of the seal of the righteousness of
faith and the institution of Christ, ought to be done: but Infant Baptism
agrees with these; therefore it ought to be done: it agrees with the
institution of Christ, who commanding to baptize all nations, well knew that
there were many Infants therein, yet makes no exception of them, but gives them
so high an eulogium, that we may know that the initiatory seal belongs
principally to them, as it did under the Law: what though God name not Infants
to be baptized, in so many words and syllables? yet seeing he neither names
men of years nor women, it must needs be that under these words all nations, he
comprehended all those of which, nations, as their integrant parts, consist;
which are men, women and children: it agrees also with the nature of the seal,
which is the initiatorie Sacrament of regeneration, implantation into Christ,
faith, mortification, putting off the old man, putting on Christ, remission of
sins, deliverance from the wrath of God and curse of the Law; all which is as
necessary for Infants that they may be saved, as for any others, and into these
either for present or future they are baptized.

14 God ever since his covenant made with Abraham, appointed Infants some seal
of his covenant as well with them as their parents, whereof they were some ways
capable, and whereby they might be externally known not only to God (that they
are long before any man can seal them, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Tit. 1. 2. Romans 8. 29. and
9. 11.) but also of men (or otherwise he must have cast out Infants under the
Gospel from right to the seal of his covenant which he gave them under the Law)
to be within Gods covenant; therefore God has appointed baptism to Infants:
add hereto, that whereas poor Infants need mercy for remission of original
sin; they are not for present capable of the other ordinary means appointed
persons of years, as hearing the Word, receiving the Lords Supper, prayer,
repentance, etc. they are passively capable of baptism, as under the law they
were of circumcision; therefore seeing remission of sin is simply necessary;
baptism, the ordinary means thereto, is necessary, if it may be had.

15 Whatsoever Infants of believers are capable of, as interested in Gods
covenant, without the help of present understanding, that man ought not to bar
them of: but such Infants as interested in Gods covenant, are capable of
baptism without the present help of understanding: therefore they ought not to
be barred thereof by man. The major appears in Infants circumcision on the
eighth day; that was the seal of the same faith and covenant of God in Christ,
Genesis 17. 10, 11. Mark. 16. 16. Joh. 3. 5.
and a part or condition of the same, as baptism now is, as has been proved.
The minor appears Genesis 17. 7. I will establish my covenant between me and thee,
and thy seed after thee, etc. that is, with thy Infants also as well as with
thee: and by virtue hereof Isaac at eight days old received the seal of the
righteousness of faith without the help of present understanding: and there is
the same reason of baptism in respect of Gods promise, Act. 2. 39. and the
alteration of the seal alters not the covenant in substance, subject or end.
I suppose all know that children of Christians without the help of present
understanding, are now as capable of Baptism the more easy seal, as they were
of Circumcision the more painful and bloody: And lest any should think that
this Privilege of Infants-sealing, belonged only to Abraham's Carnal-seed the
Jews, the Holy Ghost testifies that they which are of the Faith, the same are
the children of Abraham, Gal. 3. 7. and again, The Promise is to you, Acts 2 39.
and to your children, and to all that are a far off, even as many as the Lord
our God shall call: Now he has called us Gentiles to the faith in Christ, who
were once a far off: Therefore Infants of those who by Calling are interessed
in Gods Covenant, are capable of Baptism: Moreover, as has been noted, as the
worldly wise men (by the creatures, Romans 1. 21.) knew God, Quem^ potuerunt ill^
nosse nec ha. bear, isti potuerunt habere antequam nosse. Aug. Ep. 57.
but loved him not (by grace dwelling in them) neither glorified him as God. So
these (Infants) may have him, before they can know him; that is, they may be
regenerate by the holy Spirit before they have the use of understanding, that
they may know the things which are given them of God; and certainly all Elect
Infants, though dying young, are regenerate, (else could they not be saved) yet
so young they can have no actual knowledge of their regeneration, or means
thereunto belonging; and if they are saved, and have the inward Seal of Gods
Spirit, how injuriously are they barred from the external seal by man? Acts 2.
39.
To conclude, Infants are interressed by Gods promise, which depends not on
any man's understanding, sanctity or excellency, but on the free grace of God,
Romans 5. 10.
who made this Covenant with us when we were all in the course of corrupted
nature, enemies, without Christ, aliens, strangers from the Covenants of
Promise, having no hope, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. Lastly, as
by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, and so sin is communicated to
all mankind, yea, to those who have not yet the use of reason; for we see that
Infants dye as well as old men: So by one, Christ's Righteousness imputed, many
are made righteous in Baptism the Laver of Regeneration, though they yet
understand it not: So put they on Christ, though it be not yet given them to
know the things which are given them of God. Oct. 2. 12.
See Argument 2.

16. The command for baptizing is for all that are to be saved: But among those
are many Infants; therefore the command for baptizing is for Infants also,
Ma^th. 28. 19. Mark 16. 16.
or without exclusion of all Infants.

17. That opinion which makes the Covenant or Privilege of the Gospel worse to
Abraham's spiritual seed, then it was to his carnal, is false and erroneous, yea
Antichristian: But to deny Believers Infants baptism, (the initiatory Seal of
the Covenant, and the privilege thereof) makes this worse then that; Therefore
it is false etc. The major is confirmed in that God avoweth the Gospel to be a
better Covenant then that of the Law, Heb. 8. 6. The minor likewise, because
under the Law, Infants had the privilege of the initiatory seal. The
Gospel Covenant holds forth an enlargement of the signs and subject of Gods
mercy: It was before only to the Jews generally, who had the Ordinances of
Righteousness, as Gideons Fleece the dew, while all the floor (which then
figured the Gentiles) was dry: But now Christ says, Psalm. 47. 20.
Go Teach all nations, baptizing them -- So far was it from diminishing, or
contracting the grace of God by the coming of Christ like rain into the Fleece,
that now he sent it to all Nations, who before gave it only to one. And the
Covenant of God made with Abraham, was testified by an external Seal, to
comfort Parents in assurance that God had care for, and a Covenant with their
children also. Now they that take this away from children under the Gospel,
make the Gospel Covenant much worse, as being less testified then that under
the Law. Add hereto, that the coming of Christ (which set an end to Legal
ceremonies, and appointed Baptism) diminished not the grace of his Father in
the Signs and Dispensations thereof, making it more dark, or less testified by
a Seal toward those who are within the Covenant of Grace; but rather increased
or communicated it more clearly, and therein it is a better Covenant, Hebr. 8.
6. not in respect of God the appointer thereof, he is one and the same for
ever; not in respect of Christ the Mediator, he is the same under the Law and
Gospel; but in respect of the exhibition of things promised and shadowed out in
the Law, and clearer manifestation of Gods grace and truth in Christ. Now they
who deny Infants of believers the initiatory seal of Gods Covenant, as much as
in them lies, diminish the grace of God; and make the Covenant seem worse by
Christ's coming, in that they diminish the comfortable assurance of our
childrens implantation into Christ, and of his care of, and favor to them, if
they may not so much as be marked with the external sign and seal thereof,
which yet elect and reprobates, if of years, may by your leave, and do receive.

18. That which is evil to be done, is forbidden in some express and known Law
and Word of God: But Infantbaptism is forbidden in no express and known Law and
word of God; therefore it is not evil, as our Antagonists would make the world
believe.

19. That whereof God will severely punish the contempt or neglect, we must not
omit: But God will severely punish the contempt or neglect of his Covenant of
grace and mercy, whereof Baptism is a part or condition, as well with Infants
as persons of years; therefore we may not omit it. See Genesis 17. 14. Exodus 4.
Mark 16. 16 Hebr. 10. 28, 29. and that being supposed (which has hitherto been
proved) that Infants of Church-priviledged Parents, ought to be baptized, the
Minister who upon such fancies and unsufficient grounds as are alleged by our
Antagonists, refuses to baptize them (or the Parent who will not have them
baptized) must needs be under a woeful condition; the Apostles argument being
good from the dispensation of the Gospel committed to him to the necessary
administration of the same, as in preaching the word, so in the seals thereto
belonging, whereof he expressly says, 1 Cor. 9. 16. Woe is unto me, if I preach.
not the Gospel: For though his principal and first office was to preach, as
being appointed the Doctor of the Gentiles, first to be taught, and then
respectively to be baptized, yet it is manifest that the Dispensation of
Baptism, the seal of the Gospel, and Covenant of God in Christ, went along in
charge with preaching of the same, and was committed to the Apostles, Matthew.
28. 19, 20.
and all Ministers their Successors, and so woe will be to them if they baptize
not (where Christ intended the seal of his Grace) as surely as if they preach
not the Gospel.

20. They are to be held as Heathens and Publicans, who refuse to hear and obey
the Church of Christ: But such are Anabaptists; nor is it any excuse, but an
aggravation of their sin to bespatter the Church with impious calumnies: It had
been and ever was, as easy for all sorts of heretics in and since Christ and
the Apostles time, and in the purest ages of the primitive Church, to have said
for a pretended defense of their error and contumacy, you are not the true
Church; but in spite of Satan and the powers of hell, we are through the mercy
of God, a member of the true Church of Christ, and therefore their schism and
contempt is the more condemnable.

21. Those to whom the things signified belong, unto them belong also the signs
and seals thereof, except in case of some apparent condition making an evident
exception (as want of ability to examine themselves, barreth Infants from the
holy Eucharist) But the thing signified by Baptism belongs to Infants, and
there is no apparent condition making any evident exception to bar them from
it; therefore Baptism belongs to them. The things signified by Baptism, are,
that we are thereby received into Gods favor, for the blood of Christ shed for
us, to bind us to a sincere obedience to faith, and endeavor to newness of
life; Gods promise of grace and mercy in Christ, marking us for sheep of his
pasture; our putting on Christ, regeneration, washing from our sins,
justification and salvation by Christ; these things belong to all the elect,
whereof Infants of Believers are a very considerable part: And these things are
held forth in Baptism as things signified in the sign by God appointed to all
receivers sacramentally, and to an external communion, of which lambs as well
assheep, Infants as well as the aged are capable: Therefore Baptism belongs to
Infants of Christian Parents.

22. To whom the Covenant in force runs in the same tenor in the new
Testament as in the old, to such persons the application of the Initiatory seal
of the new Testament ought to be administered, N. Home^ page 9.
as well as was the Initiatory seal of the old: But the Covenant in force runs
in the same tenor, etc. therefore the Initiatory seal of the Covenant ought
now to be administered to such persons as the Initiatory seal of the Covenant
was administered to in the old: The tenor of the Covenant was to Parents and
their children upon condition that they should be sealed according to the
promise, that God would be their God, who would observe the Laws and conditions
thereof: the same is still for substance in force, though the seals are
changed: So that as Infants were circumcised, so ought they now to be baptized:
and except this be allowed to our Infants as well as to our selves believing in
Christ, we are not (as the Apostle affirms, Col. 2. 10.) Complete in him -- In
whom we are circumcised with the Circumcision made without hands -- Buried with
him in Baptism, etc. Nor are we and our children so sealed into our
implantation into the death of Christ, that we may (in the ordinary way)
thereby be assured, that as he put off the infirm affections of the natural
body, so we put off the body of sin spiritually. See Romans 6. 3, etc.

23. Such persons as were typically baptized unto Moses, Dr. Feath child. bapt.
justified, page 45. 46.
are capable of the real and true baptism under the Gospel of Christ: For in
the main the argument holds from the type to the truth, though possibly not in
every circumstance: But children as well as persons of years were baptized in
the cloud, and in the red sea unto Moses, 1 Cor. 10. 2. and their washing with
rain from the cloud, prefigur'd our washing in Baptism, and by the Spirit;
therefore children of covenanted persons are capable of the true and real
Baptism under the Gospel of Christ.

24. Where there is a command for a thing never remanded or countermanded, Hen
Ainsworth ot the Anabapt. Genesis 17. 7, 9.
there that thing is still in force: But there is a command for the signing of
Infants of Believers with the sign of Gods Covenant with their Parents and
them, never yet remanded or countermanded; Therefore the signing of Believers
children with the sign of Gods Covenant, which is Baptism, is still in force.

24. That, which depends not on any age, or act of man, but on the mere
institution and gracious promise of God, as its ground, may not be denied by
man to any comprehended under the general term of All Nations, in respect of
any age, or defects thereof, as want of understanding, and the acts thereof in
faith, repentance, etc. in Infants: But Baptism depended not on any age or act
of man as its ground, but on the mere institution and gracious promise of God;
therefore ^t ought not by anyman be denied infants, in respect of their present
defect or want of understanding, or the acts ^hereof in faith, repentance, etc.
they being comprehended in All Nations.

The minor appears in S. Peter's answer to his hearers pricked in heart, Repent
and be baptized every one of you for the remission of s^^^; For the Promise is
unto you and unto your children, Gen 17. 7.
etc, He says not, Be baptized, for ye have repented, ye are of age, and a
good understanding; but, Be baptized, etc. for the Promise is to you and to
your children; Deus ut personam non accipit, fie nec ^tatem, Cypri. ad Fid. Ep.
59. ^asting. de bapt. infant,
though they cannot yet actually believe, repent, understand, etc. yet they
have Gods promise for the ground of their sealing, on whose grace and ordinance
the whole power and virtue of the sacrament depends: But his grace and
Ordinance depend not on any excellency, ability or act of man; therefore the
Apostle fetched not the reason of his Exhortation from their age or repentance,
but from the promise and mercy of God calling them who were far of.

26. For conclusion, I take up this congeriem of arguments out of the learned
Urs^^^s. That opinion is pernicious which robs poor Infants of their right,
which obscureth the grace and mercy of God (who would that Infants of Believers
should from the womb be reckoned members of his Church) which derogates from
the grace offered in the new Covenant, making it less then that in the old;
which weakneth the comfort of the Church and faithful Parents; which denies
Infants that seal which should differ them from the children of Jews and
P^gans; which contradicts, the Apostles reason (Can may man forbid water,
that these should not be baptiptized, which have received the holy Ghost as
well as we?) which keeps Infants (as much as man can) from Christ; he
expressly saying, Saffer little children to come unto me, which without a
Covenant they cannot do spiritually, nor without the external seal
sacramentally: Now such is the opinion of Anabaptists, denying Christians
Infants Baptism.

CHAP. IV.
Anabaptists Arguments concerning the necessity of Dipping over head and ears
in Baptism, examined and answered.
THe envious Philistims will still be casting earth into Isaacs wells of
livings waters, Genes. 26. 15.
to stop them up: Satan envying man, these waters of life in the Laver of
Regeneration, e^tsoon casts in scruples to obstruct and make void the holy
ordinances of God to deluded souls, by causing them to renounce their Baptism
(and Christ whom they sacramentally had put on therein) by taking on them
another Baptism under a vain pretense, that they were not susceptive of Baptism
in their infancy, A. R. vin. of child. bcp p 8.
nor lawfully baptized, neither at all truly, if happily they were not dipped
under water; for they say, the institution of Christ requires that the whole
man be dipped all over in water: so that the Anabaptists now hold, that dipping
the whole body into water is essential to baptism, Acts 15. 1.(...), etc.
Epiphan. haeres. 40. n, 1. Archon.(...)ib. Epiphan. Chari. haeres. 39. n. and.
Cyprian. EP. ^9.
and so necessary, that except they are so dipped, they are not duly and truly
baptized according to the institution of Christ. Since the infancy of the
Gospel, Satan has not ceased to trouble the Church concerning baptism: Some of
the Jews would have circumcision joined with baptism; the Archontici condemned
baptism with a curse: the Novatians deferred if to the last, because they
understood not the power of this ordinance of God to cleanse the whole life,
but thought that there was no mercy for him who sinned after baptism: Liberius
the Monk, as also Fidus, would have childrens Baptism tied to the eighth day;
Anabaptists not only deny believers children Baptism, as the Pelagians and
Donatists did of old; but affirm, That dipping the whole body under water is so
necessary, that without it, none are truly baptized (as has been said). So the
subtle enemy still assaileth Baptism in one part or another, that we may not
unaptly apply that to him. and his factors, which Tertullian once said
concerning the most impious Persecutor Nero, Qui enim scitillum, intelligere
potest, non nissigrande aliquod bonum a Nerone damnatum. Tertul. Apol. c 15.
He that knows him well, may understand, that nothing but some great (or
singular) good thing is condemned by Nero^ And indeed we ought more highly to
esteem Gods favor in sealing us into his Covenant of grace, and more seriously
and carefully endeavor to answer thereto in newness and sanctity of living, by
how much more the enemy rages against it. The Protestant Church holds, that
the word and the element make the Sacrament; and that neither sprinkling is
simply necessary, nor washing or dipping unlawful; but that according to the
convenience of times, places and persons, either sprinkling, washing or dipping
in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, is the true form of
Baptism; and that, caeteris paribus, either of these three applications of the
water have the same effect, and may as convenience serves, indifferently be
used, being fit to signify the application of the benefit of Christ's blood for
the remission of sin, and cleansing therefrom. But our Antagonists say;

We are buried with Christ by baptism into his death, Object. 1.
that like as Christ was raised up from the dead, even so we also should walk
in newness of life, Romans 6. 4. But Christ in his burial was covered, that he
might thence rise out of the eart^; therefore in Baptism we must be covered,
and as it were buried. under water, that we may rise again as Christ did. We
answer, Scire autem? oporte^, quod non undiqueque exempla ad omne propos^ium
aptantur rebus ad quas assu^^nu^ sed ut plurimum in magis propriis ac
principalioribus partibus. Euthym. in Matthew 22. Non tportet parabolss ad verbum
interpretari. ib. in Matthew. 24. post Chrysostom. Parabolica it^ oractanda sunt
quasi significantia solum ea qual necessaria sunt. Euthym, in Matthew. 24.
1. Similitudes run not on four feet; types, signs and similitudes are not to
be extended beyond the scope and meaning of the Speaker (as might be showed in
almost innumerable instances) lest not only absurdities, but horrid blasphemies
should be thence inferred. The Ark in the Deluge was a type of Baptism, 1 Pet.
3 20, 21. what, must the type and truth agree in all things? must all the world
be drowned, and only eight persons saved? I doubt you would hardly agree among
your selves, which should be the eight. The redsea and cloud, figured baptism,
1 Cor. 10. 1, etc. what, would you have your disciples baptized with the sprie
of two neighboring seas, and a cloud of fresh water raining on their heads?
Jonah's being in the Whales belly, was a type of Christ's burial and
resurrection; you would not have your disciples in their conformity, be three
days under water. These instances may show the vanity of stretching types and
signs to every fancy of Hectic brains; and now deal ingenuously; what reason
or warrant have you to wrest this similitude to what you please? in those
similes which are most apt, there may be many disconveniences found: Or what
commission can you dream of, that gives you authority to draw this alleged.
Scripture beyond the Apostles scope and purpose, rather to that which seems to
favor your fancy and practice of immersion, then to another sense?

2. Those expressions, Romans 6. 4. are merely figurative, and therefore do not
at all bind us to any external, or literal sense or observance in the manner of
baptizing; and if the similitude: must fully hold, some might possibly reason
thus; as Christ was first dead and buried, and rose again the third day, so we
must first be dead and buried, and then be baptized, and rise with Christ a
third time (Marcion, that old pernicious heretic, held, that one might be
three times baptized) or they might infer that we must not rise up out of the
water into which we are dipped, until the third day: but how absurd such
inferences are, none can be ignorant.

3. The alleged scripture concludes not the manner of our baptism, but the
effects thereof; not how the water should be applied, or in what manner we
should be baptized, whether by sprinkling, washing or dipping; but how we ought
to live who are baptized; that sin should henceforth have no more power over
us, then if we were dead; that we should so live to righteousness, and bringing
forth fruits thereof, as being implanted into Christ, and so no more living our
own life, but the holy life of Christ.

4. He says not, We are buried with Christ in water, or just as Christ was
buried in his baptism; but, into the ^ikeness of his death; that like as Christ
was raised up from the dead, so we should (not be raised out of the water, but)
walk in newness of life: Here is the main substance of the similitude; it is not
in any circumstance. Now I would sain know whether a man may not walk in
newness of life, being baptized with sprinkling, as well as if he had been
doused.

5. The argument here drawn to prove necessity of immersion is a fallicia
accidente is; a reasoning from the the substance to the accident. Suppose thus,
We must be baptized into the similitude of Christ's death: But he was covered
and rose again; ergo, We must be covered with water that we may be raised
again, etc. Non sequitur: his being covered in the rocky vault, was but a
circumstance, as was his lying covered to the third day: therefore it can be no
more here concluded, that we must be like Christ in being covered with water in
baptism, then that we must lie under water three days and nights in our
baptism, because he lay so long in his grave; for why should one circumstance
or accident be concluded, rather then another?

6. If the similitude must be so strictly urged, it will be rather for us.
Christ was not thrown down, prone, with his face downward (as they use to dive
their disciples) but honorably embalmed, and decently laid in a new Sepulcher;
and we use solemnly to bury our dead with their faces upward, and sprinkle dust
and earth upon them; and in such decent posture we baptize Infants, by putting
our sprinkling water on them, or by dipping them.

7. Corpus Christi natural fuit vere sepultum; an putandum est nostra corpora
eodom modo sepeliri in administratine baptismi? non id vult Apostolus; sed us
recte. Chrysostom. observavit in 6. ad Rom quod in Christo factum est per naturam,
id innobis fieri intelligit per analogiam and propartionem: corpus igitur
peccati sepelitur quando ejus vis enervatur -- obruitur, and quasi eadaver
terra ob^atum, non possit amp^ius m^vere, and quoquo velit hominom impel. lere,
etc. Davn. in Col. 2. 12.
Christ's natural body was truly dead and buried, we must therefore understand
that which must be done in us by analogy and proportion, and not wrest the
Apostles words to a litteral sense: The body of sin is then buried, when the
power thereof is enervated and weakened, and as it were a dead carcass, is so
over whelmed and buried, that it can no more move and force a man whither it
would, and was wont: and this is said to be done in Baptism in a twofold
respect, 1. In respect of Christ, into whom when we are implanted by baptism,
all the benefits of his death are freely given and sealed to us; so that our
sins are buried in his grave, who bare our sins in his own body, 1 Pet. ^^. 24
so in his burial our sins were covered, no more to appear in judgment against
us, or to be imputed to us. 2. In respect of our mortification, sacramentally
accomplished in our baptism, and by the Spirit of God by certain degrees in all
our life long; though bodily death, being a privation of life, has no degrees:
he that is dead dies no more; yet in our spiritual death to sin, there are
degrees, and we dye daily, as the power of sin is more and more broken in us.

That baptism which is not agreeable to Christ's or John's baptism, Object. 2.
is not instituted by Christ (and therefore man's invention, and will worship)
But washing or sprinkling with water agrees not with the baptism of Christ or
John (for they baptized and were baptized in Jordan; and the Eunuch was
baptized in the brook, Acts 8. 38.) therefore baptizing with sprinkling, or
only washing, is not instituted by Christ. We answer, 1. This is a fallacious
arguing, the term (agreeable) being bo^o^ymical:'it is doubtful in the
assumption, whether he mean agreeable in substance, or in circumstance: that
which is not agreeable in substance with the baptism of Christ and John
Baptist, is not instituted by Christ; but this holds not in point of
circumstance; for then there could be no lawful baptism but in Jordan, or some
other water of Palestine.

2. It follows not that John B. dived Christ or any other into water; or Philip
the Eunuch, because John baptized in Jordan (where were some sandy places)
because we read, they went down into the water; for so they may do, who only
wet their feet, or go up to their knees or anckles: and we must consider, that
in the infancy of the Gospel, they had not public Oratories and Fonts to
accommodate them baptizing, as in a settled state of the Church we have seen;
and therefore they baptized where they could have convenience of water, which
in that dry region was not every where to be had; as appears in that reason
of^ John's John 3. 21.
baptizing in AEnon near Salim, given by the Evangelist -- becauso there was
much water there.

3. It is not probable that Christ was dipped clothes and all in Jordan, and so
went immediately wringing-wet into the wilderness: see Mark 1. 1, 2, 10. nor
that he was stripped naked with such a confused multitude of men and women as
came to John's baptism: see Luke 3. 21. Matthew. 21. 31, 32. Matthew 3. 5, 6.

4. It is but a weak Fallacy to dispute a particulari, ad generale; thus, some
went into the river to be baptized; therefore all that are to be baptized ought
so to do: for in things circumstantial, and without some binding Precept to
impose them as duties, a particular example can beget no general rule for our
due and necessary imitation.

5. If it could be proved (which all our Antagonists can never do) that Christ
and those whom John baptized, were duckt into the water when they were
baptized, yet it does no more follow thence, that all must everywhere, and at
all seasons be so baptized, then that the Lords Supper may be administered with
none but unleavened bread, in an upper room after Supper, to twelve men only,
no women; because Christ so administered it; or that we must anoint the sick
with oil, or salute with an holy kiss, because these things were in use in
those Regions; nay, but matters circumstantial are ever liable to the test of
accommodation and customs of times and places, and persons: dipping might be
convenient in those hot Regions, and at Easter and Pentecost, to which their
baptizing Baptisma olim non nisi in Pascha and Pentecoste collatum, etc. vid
Council. Constantinop. 2 c. 1. n. 2. Greg. Nazianz. ora. 40 Tertul de bapt. c.
19, etc.(...), fundo, of. fundo, interp. Suid. reddit fundo, etc.(...)fundo,
etc.(...)-^ibamina manibus fundo. Budaus. Sir.(...)^quem effudit ju^ er nos.
Tran el. Beza, etc. a verbo Siro(...)effudit. Shindler, in Romans 3. 15. Matthew 9.
17. and 13. 35.
was limited of old, which in these Northern climats, and in the dead of
winter, were near deathful to tender bodies.

6. Christ's baptism is washing, Ephesians. 5 25, 26. and washing is as well by
sprinkling, or pouring on of water, as by dipping into water: hence the Apostle
speaking of the washing of Regeneration, presently says,(...), which he has
poured out on us; and the Scripture calls the diverse sprinklings mentioned,
Heb. 9. 13, 19, 21.(...), baptismes, v. 10. As washings or sprinklings are also
called, Mark 7. 4. but hereof we shall see more anon; for the present only
note, that the Holy Ghost, the surest Interpreter of Scripture, interprets
Baptizing by sprinkling or washing, so that there is no necessity (as our
Antagonists would sain have it) of dipping or dousing the whole body under
water.

Dipping (say they) is baptizing, Object. 3.
and baptizing dipping: Christ therefore who instituted Baptism, therein
appointed that the whole man should be dipped in Baptism. We answer: 1. If this
bubble had any weight or solidity, it were easily retorted; washing or
sprinkling is baptizing (in Gospel-sense) Christ therefore who instituted
Baptism, therein appointed men to be washed or sprinkled with water.

2. Prove that Christ appointed the whole man should be dipped all over in
water, by some other medium if you can: by this you cannot; true it is, that
all dipping all over in water is baptizing, but not convertibly; for all
baptizing is not dipping: for it is proved by the fore-alledged Scriptures,
that washing by pouring on, or sprinkling water, is also a kind of baptizing:
If you should say, every man is a living creature, that is true, but not
convertible, therefore every living creature is a man: it follows not; because
there are more species of living creatures then one; all dipping is baptizing;
therefore all baptizing is dipping, follows not, because there are more sorts
of baptizings then one by dipping. (...)sometimes signifies to dip, but not
always: The Apostles according to Christ's promise, were baptized with fire;
Matthew. 3. ^1. Acts 2. 3.
they were not (after the foolish Jacobites opinion) dipped into fire, the cloven
tongues sat upon each of them. The Pharisees among many other traditions, used
the baptism of beds. Mark 7. 4. (...)
You will not understand that to have been dipping their beds into water (that
would quickly, have rotted and made them useless and unwholsom) but of some
light sprinkling with water: So when they came from the market, they eat
not,(...) -- except they be baptized: You will not understand, except they be
dipped over head and ears in the Water; but, except they washed as our
translation gives it, after the Syriac; neither had they in that dry Climate,
(...) Nisi abluant ^^ Tremel.
convenience and store of waters every where to dive into. They had commonly
their(...), waterpots, after the manner of the purifying of the Jews, John 2.
6. out of which they drew a little, for lustrations or sprinklings, Moreover,
the Israelites, 1 Cor. 10. 2.(...), were baptized in the cloud -- not dipped into
it, but be sprinkled with the distilling drops thereof: for the prepositoin in
there used, in such expressions, signifies not in, but with; as, He shall
baptize you in(...) with (not in) the holy Ghost and fire, Matthew 3. 11. So Rev.
19. 11. The rest were slain,(...) with (not in) the sword, it is an usual
Hebraism(...), in the sword; that is, with the sword, Exodus 6. 6. ^ In
Principio nominum notat casum ablati, v^m, quo-instrumentum, causa, modus
agendi, etc. significatur. vide si vacat. Shindl. Penteg. See the like 1. 17.
4^. Genesis 27. 40. and 32 10. and 48. 22. Exodus 17. 13. Numb. 21: 24, etc.
Tertul. de corona milit^
I will redeem you,(...)in braehio extenso. So Deuteronomy. ^. 15. The Lord thy God
brought thee out thence. (...)in, that is, by a mighty hand, and a stretched
out arm. Again, the sons of Zebede^ were to be baptized with the baptism of
blood, Mark 10. 39. that is, in Tertullians phrase, Russari suo sanguine,
beseneared, or wet with drops of their own blood; not dipped into blood. The same
use of ^^, derived from the Hebrew^, we often find in the new Testament, Romans
10. 9. 1 Cor. 4. 21. 1 Per. 1. ^1. Rev. 2. 16. and 12. 5. and 19. 15.

3. It is granted, that Christ and many others were baptized in Jordan, and
that Philip did go down into the water to baptize the Eunuch, and that such
baptisms in hot Climates have, and may lawfully be used; yet no scriptureproof
at all appears, that Christ in his own person was dived under water, or the
Eunuch, or any of those whom John or any of the Apostles baptized; neither do
we at all deny immersion to be lawful; but we deny it to be so necessary, as to
the exclusion of washing or sprinkling, as if they were not as effectually
used; We deny that dipping in rivers is so necessary to baptism, as that none
ought to be accounted baptized, but those who are dipped after such a manner: And
we say, that where we have other conveniences in the settled Churches, that
practice appears merely Schismatical, affected and unnecessary.

Baptism being a sign, must answer to the thing signified; as. The washing of
the whole soul in the blood of Christ. 2. That interest which the Saints have
in the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ, is not partial, but total; so
therefore ought the baptizing of the body to be. We answer: 1. It must still be
remembered, that this sacrament may be rightly and effectually administered by
any of the three ways, Immersio, vel aspersio trina an una,(...)eseputamus, pro
loco, tempore, and ^clefi^ consuetudine. An. Fayi. Enchivid, Theol. de Sacr.
bapt. Vrsin. Cateth. de bapt. In una fide nihil efficit sanctae ecclesi^
consuetudo diversa. Greg, Ep. 41. sordes -- and maculas mentis lavare non
potest, nisi qui ejusdem fabricator est mentis. Opratus. l 5. Dicimur in
baptisms sepulti cum Christo, resurrexisse etiam in Christo vel per Christum,
ne haec supernaturalia effecta, vel externo elemento, vel nostris propriis
viribus tribuainus. Christi it ^que mors, sepultura, resurrectio causa est
mortificationis and vivificaticnis nostrae spiritualis, etc. Davenant. q. sup.
Nomen est qued sanctisicat non opus, Optatus. q. sup.
dipping, washing or sprinkling, and we approve of dipping, where custom and
convenience require it, so far, as that it excludes not the other: For a diverse
custom of several Churches, makes no difference, where they all hold one faith
in the main.

2. It is not in the quaintity of the Element, but the institution of Christ,
the virtue of his death and passion, and the powerful working of his holy
Spirit, which gives the fruit and effect of baptism; therefore John 3. 5. the
Spirit is mentioned with water, because the power of regenerating is not of the
water, but of Gods Spirit and Ordinance effectually working by the water of
baptism: And here we may note, that Infants are capable of this operation, as
has been proved; and Christ in his institution of baptism, prescribed not (so
far as can appear in Scripture) how much water must be used herein, not how
deep it must be (as there is no quantum of the elements prescribed in the
Eucharist) neither is there in all the new Testament, either one precept for,
or example of plunging or dousing the party to be baptized over head and ears
under water.

3. In Circumcision, the whole body was not cut, but only the foreskin of the
flesh, whereby the whole person, body and soul was sealed and admitted into
Gods Covenant; and so is it proportionably in baptism, the seal of Gods present
Covenant: In common use we know the seal of a writing obligatory is not set all
over the deed, but to some one part, by which the whole is confirmed; and as in
Livery and Seisin a little turf of grass, with a twig or small bough delivered
to the Purchaser, investeth him in the whole state of the demeasn: So here,
it is the seal and subscription of a just Deed which passes the estate, not the
quantity of the wax, or largeness of the parchment, nor greatness of the
Character, whether Text-hand, Chancery, Court-hand, Secretary; all these things
are circumstantial, and no more: and so is it in the matter of much or little
water in baptism, the essence whereof is applying water to the body of the
baptized in the name of the Father, Totum corpus mergi non est nece ^e. A.
Fay^q. sup. est enim uni^ss Partis ablutio ejusdem naturae cum totius
ablutione. Dan. Chamier. To. 4. lib. 5. c. 2. de Baptismo; uno corporis membro
aqua baptismi loc^ totius hominis, reg^ne ratio a spiritu sancto perficitur.
Jo. Gerhard. de s. Bapt. c. 5. N. 99.
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. There is therefore no simple necessity of
dipping the whole body under water; it is sufficient if the face, (which is as
it were the representative, or epitome of man, in which are united all the
senses) be dipped, washed, or sprinkled.

4. In baptism lawfully administered by washing. sprinkling or dipping, the
elect have the same interest in the death, burial and resurrection of Christ,
as if they were baptized in the deepest channel of Jordan, or any other water:
Faith, which instrumentally gives them interest in Christ, being no effect of
deep waters, but of those Rivers of living waters whereof Christ spoke, John 7.
38, 39. to wit, the Holy Ghost.

5 Sprinkling does also aptly signify our sprinkling with the blood of Christ
in baptism, cleansing us from our sins, and sealing our election, 1 John 1. 7.
1 Pet. 1. 2. and pousing water, signifies the effusion of the Spirit upon us,
Tit. 3. 5. and those sprinklings of the blood of sacrifices, signified the very
same.

Christ being baptized, is said to have come up out of the water, Matthew. 3. 16.
therefore he was in it: And the Eunuch went down into the Water with Philip; in
neither appears any sprinkling or washing, but rather dipping. We answer: 1. It
appears that Christ and the Eunuch were baptized: it appears not that either
they, or any other whom John B. or any of Christ's Disciples baptized, were
dipped all under water (as has been said) any more then that they were washed
or sprinkled with water. The word Baptizing ^n the original signifying
sprinkling, washing or dipping; therefore we take it to be indifferent which of
the three ways baptism be administered, respect being had to convenience of
times, places and persons.

2. The Preposition(...)in the cited places, rendered Out of, signifies
properly From; as, (...), Matthew. 3, 16.(...)respondet Latinis praepesionibus,
A, Ap, E, etc. Fra^iger de praecip. Graer. dict. idiem l. 9. sect. 1. n. 11.
Ezekiel 37. 3, 4. Josh. 3. 15. and 13. 9, 16. ^ Chron. 12. 5.
(...), From (not from under) the ships; and so Christ might come from the
water, though he were never dived under it, or though he had gone only to the
depth of the first or second measure of the Sanctuary waters, to the anckles,
or to the knees.

3. Philip and the Eunuch are said to have gone down into the water, Act. 8.
38. for it was a descent to them; the waters (though shallow, or possibly not
within very low or hollow banks, as Jordan and all great waters of Rivers
usually run) yet always running lower then the Superficies of the earth near
the sources and channels thereof.

4. The words Acts 8. 38. are(...), And both of them descended, etc. so the
word also signifies, to descend, or to alight; as,(...), to alight from (not
to come from under) an horse: or to descend, or lot down ones self; or to come
down from some higher place; as, (...), says Budaeus, Aristophan. Batrac.(...).
after Suidas,) or to go down to some even place, as to invest an enemy, to
wrestle, fight, or encountre; also to go from one place to another; as Acts 17.
15. it is said -- (...) Jacob descended, or went into Egypt, Acts 10. 20.(...)
-- Get thee down and go with them. So Acts 14. 25.(...), they went down unto
Attalia; for so they usuually expressed going from one place to another, as the
Hebrews by(...). So far is that word(...) Acts 8. 38. they Went down both to,
or into the water, from enforcing the conclusion aimed at ( therefore the
Eunuch baptized was dived under water) that it makes nothing for it, more then
that Jacob going down into Egypt, was therefore duckt in Nilus, or Peter in the
waters of Cesarea, or Paul and Barnabas in some Attalian waters; because these
were said in the very same word, to go down to these places. all which being
frivolous and vain, your assertion must be left unconcluded, for any thing to
the contrary in these cited Texts appearing. Add hereto, that here is nothing
said of the Eunuch, as going down into the water, more then of Philip (for they
both went down, etc.) now I suppose you will not affirm, that Philip, as, and
then when he baptized the Eunuch, in that administration, stood all under water
with the Eunuch; or that John B. in the like action in Jordan, was ever doused
over head and ears for company: And how then can it hence appear, that the
baptized were more dived then the baptizers? Behold upon what unsound grounds
our Antagonists build their pretended necessity of ducking their disciples in
Rivers or deep waters.

CHAP. V.
Protestants arguments against the supposed necessity of dipping, rather then
sprinkling or washing with water in Baptism.
THat which the word used by Christ (enjoining the duty of Baptism) does
indifferently signify, and commonly import (there being neither express
example nor precept to restrain it precisely to either) that is lawfully and
warrantably to be done in baptizing: But the word used by Christ enjoining the
duty of Baptism (or Baptizing) does indifferently and commonly signify
dipping, washing or sprinkling; and there is no express example or precept (in
Scripture) to restrain it precisely to either; Therefore in Baptizing we may
lawfully and warrantably (pro more loci, temporis and statu personarum) either
dip, wash, or sprinkle in water ( In the name of the Father, and the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost) The major is out of controversy. The minor thus confirmed:
The Word used by Christ, Matthew 28. 19, is, (...), and(...), signifies
indifferently, to was, sprinkle, or dip; and as the learned Mr. Leigh well
notes, it is taken largely for any kinds of Washing, (...),-a verb^ differt
quod profundum etere, and subtermergere significat. Mr. Leigh. Crit Sacr.
primum parva(...). Lavant aqua calida. Aristophan.
Rinsing or Cleansing, even when there is no dipping at all. So AEmilius Portus
gives it by mergo, immergo, tingo, intingo, madefacio, lavo, abluo, etc. Suidas
interprets(...), by (...), lavant. The same word signifies washing or
sprinkling in many places of Scripture, and from necessary consequences.

1. From the types of that which was signified in the old Testament, (...),
Heb. 9. 10.(...)perfundo, aspergo, irroro(...). Aristophan. aspergo
paspebras.(...), idem, inde(...), and(...)aspersio. Lactan, l. 4. c. 15 (vocat
baptismum) purifici rorisaspersienem
which the holy Ghost (as has been noted) calls Baptisms or Washings: to
wit, by Sprinklings: for how were they performed? see Numb. 19. 2^.(...) the
70. gives it(...), the water of Separation has not been Sprinkled upon him:
so is it often named there: and Levi^. 4. 17. The Priest shall dip his finger
in the blood, and Sprinkle it Seven times, etc. 70.(...). So Lev. 14. 16. and
Lev. 16. 14, 15. he shall take the blood of the bullock.(...), and shall
sprinkle it with his finger. So Numb. 8. 7. Thus shall thou do unto them to
cleanse them, Sprinkle water of purifying upon them. So Numb. 19. 18, 19. A
clean person shall take hysope and dip it into the water, and Sprinkle it upon
the Tent -- and upon the persons -- so Exodus 24. 8. Moses took the blood, and
Sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the Blood of the Covenant, which
the Lord has made with you: 1 John 1. 7.
which signified the blood of Christ to cleanse them from sin, as the water of
Baptism now does: And these very Sprinklings the holy Ghost calls Baptisms,
Heb. 9. 10. 13, 2c. where the mystery is clearly unfolded.

2. From the truth thereby signified: So Ezekiel. 36. 25. (...)70.(...), I will
sprinkle you with clean water, (or -- clean water upon you) and ye shall be
clean: how? The Apostle tells us, 1 Pet. 1, 2.(...), unto obedience (that is,
by the Spirit of Sanctification) and Sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ;
as, Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of
faith, having our hearts Sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies
washed with pure water; that is the water mentioned by Ezekiel, (...)
the purifying water of baptism; and Heb. 12. 24. We are come to Jesus the
Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of Sprinkling -- that is, the
application of the blood and merit of Christ in Baptism, for the remission of
our sins.

3. From necessary consequences, from the common use of the
words(...)and(...)in Scriptures, where they cannot reasonably be interpreted by
dipping, but by washing or sprinkling; Baptismum ^ui sit per sanguinem Euthyn.
in Mark 20. 23.
as Matthew. 26. 23.(...), etc. he did not dip his whole fist into the dish, but
only wet his fingers therein: So Matthew. 20. 23. Christ mentions his baptism,
which all understand of his bloodshedding, not dipping therein but
besprinkling therewith. So Luke 11. 38. when the Pharisee invited Christ to
dinner, (...)Mark 7. 2
he wondered,(...)-that he had not first washed before dinner; it cannot there
reasonably be interpreted, that he had not first been dipped over head and ears
in water. So 1 Cor. 10. 2. They were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and
in the sea: No reasonable man can think that all Israel, Lotiones lectorum. Ar.
M^ntan. Beza, c. Sir.(...)and lectorum. Tremel. (^a^d and Sir.(...)lectus. ut.
Ma^c. 2. 4. (ab Hab. Mat^c.(...)) 2. 6. interdum thalamus nupti alis. Hebr. 13.
4 Luc. 11. 7 and 17 34, Act. 9. 33. 2
with their wives and children were dowsed into the sea (nay, but they passed
through dry^ foot) nor were they dived into the cloud, but only as those who
were rinsed or wetted under a rainy cloud by the drops thereof distilling on
them. So Mark 7. 4.(...), to the letter, Except they baptize^, or be baptized:
he means not by dipping the whole into the water; but as it is clearly
manifested by the Holy Ghost (the best interpreter of himself) a little before,
they ear not(...), with common hands; that is,(...) unwashen: and in the same
place (as has has noted) we read also, (...), to the letter Baptisms of beds;
which was not by dipping into, but (though understood of tables, which they
commonly made of Couchbeds set together) by sprinkling them with a little
wate^, which manner of purification they too superstitiously and commonly used.

As for the second clause of our minor proposition, we appeal to Scriptures,
whether there be any express example or precept restraining baptism only to
dipping over head and ears.

2 In the Lords Supper the efficacy of the Sacrament is not in the quantity
of the element: a little bread, therein, is as good and effectual as a whole
loaf: so here^ it is not (as has been said) in the quantity of the element,
but in the ordinance of God, and operation of his Spirit: Now herein Christ
never gave any precept concerning the quantum: the Word and the Element make
the Sacrament; and a few drops sprinkled, are as truly water as all Jordan.

3. If Baptism in the type thereof were administered by God by sprinkling, then
it is lawfully and effectually so to be administered by man in the truth (for in
the main Analogy the truth must answer the type) But Baptism in the type was
administered by sprinkling (infants as well as persons of years) for all Israel
were baptized under the Cloud, 1 Cor. 10. 2. Therefore Baptism may lawfully and
effectually be administered by sprinkling of water.

4. That administration of Baptism whereby Christ cleanses his Church, is
lawful and effectual. But Christ cleanses his Church with the washing of
water through the word, Ephesians. 5. 26. Acts 2. Videntur tria millia uno die a
paucis Apostostalis non potuisse baptizari si singuli inersi fu^^sent: nec
vero, carceraris intra carcerem fuisse ad manum tantum aequae quantum mergendo
opus erat. Dan. Chamier. de bapt. l. 15. c. 2.
Therefore that administration of Baptism which is by washing with water
(according to his precept, Matthew. 28. 19.) is lawful and effectual.

5. The Jailer, Acts 16. 33. was baptized about midnight, and it is improbable
that he had any such store and convenience of water in his house, as to dip
himself and family, or that they went out to some river at such a season;
neither was it probable that three thousand added to the Church in one day,
durs^in those times when Christians were so eagerly persecuted, go publicly
with the Apostles to the poole of Bethesda, Siloam, or the brook Cedron, or any
like place to be doused: more probably they were baptized by washing or
sprinkling with water, as they had private accommodation thereto: nor could so
many in one day have been baptized by a few Apostles, if all had been baptized
by dipping.

6. If immersion were simply necessary, and of the Essence of Baptism, then it
might not be dispensed withal in case some sick Convert should desire it
before his death for the comfort and peace of his afflicted conscience, which
were extreme uncharitableness, which belongs not to any Ordinance of God.
Therefore it cannot be simply necessary.

7 That which can neither be proved by example of Christ, John Baptist, or any
of the Apostles baptizing, nor by any precept of Christ concerning the same, is
not essential or simply necessary to baptism: but dipping or dowsing in
baptism, can neither be proved by example, etc. or any precept of Christ
concerning the same: therefore diping or dowsing is not essential, or simply
necessary to baptism: and indeed were there to be found in Scripture any
example hereof, without a precept to lay the same universally upon the
Ordinance, it were not binding, as has been proved from Christ's administering
the communion with unleavened bread, after supper in an upper room to twelve
men only and no women. So that if that which you can never prove, should be
granted you, that John Baptist and Christ's disciples, did then and there
baptize by dipping; yet it would not follow that we ought to baptize in the
like and no other manner. In the infancy of the Church they had not
Baptisteries or Churches as we have; there was a kind of necessity for them as
they met with occasions, to make use of waters as they could find them in
rivers or sources; wherein it cannot be proved that they dipped: nor could it
conclude our Antagonists pretended necessity, if it were supposed.

8 Whatsoever was or is essential to baptism, or simply necessary thereto, is
mentioned in some clear example or express precent of Christ: But dipping the
whole body in baptism is neither mentioned in any clear example, nor any
express precept of Christ: therefore it is not essential or simply necessary to
baptism. Christ omitted nothing necessary, 2 Timothy 3. 16. etc.
and the holy Scriptures are able to make men wise to salvation. And let our
Antagonists now seriously consider what they do, when they rebaptize upon that
fancy, that washing or sprinkling with water (in the Name of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost) is not true baptism.

CHAP. VI.
Anabaptists Arguments for their dangerous practice of Re-baptizing examined
and answered.
THE malicious Serpent (ever attempting to poison or trouble these
sanctuary-waters, obstructing, or hindering their effect, lest they should heal
sin-wounded souls) sometimes moved Pelagius, Donatus, and others, reviving their
errors, to deny the most innocent children, of believers baptism; sometimes he
teaches them to except against the manner of baptizing, De Eunomio dicit
Epiphanius,(...), Ano^, haeres. 75. N. 6. -- Auxentius solvit baptismum Christi
-- curigit^r rebaptizand^s Auxentius fideles populos putat baptize^os in nomine
Trinitatis,(...)Ambros. l. 5. cp. 32: fine, orat. in Auxent.
as if the virtue of the Sacrament depended on the quantity of the element,
and not solely on the Ordinance and power of God working thereon: sometimes he
causes deluded people to annul their baptism, and in effect, to renounce their
faith, and Christ, whom they had sacramentally put on in baptism, by receiving
a second, third, or iterated baptism: we read that the(...)baptized every day,
supposing that their former baptisms were made void by any sin after committed:
on which fancy, possibly the Novatians Novatianus -- quos iterati baptismatis
labe inquinevit. Ambros. de paenit. l. 1. c. 6.(...)Epiph. haeres. 42. ^o. 3.
l. 1.(...)Mr Tombs exercit^ about Infant Baptism.
thought that baptism ought to be deferred to the end of their lives. Auxentius
the Arrian taught that baptism ought to be iterated: the Marcionites baptized
their disciples three times: The Anabaptists rebaptize baptized Infants coming
to age, and affirm that the assuming of baptism in ripe years, by those who
were washed in Infancy, is not a renouncing baptism -- but a firmer avouching
thereof according to Christ's mind; errors are fruitful; one absurdity granted,
many will readily follow: they think, first that Infants having no present
actual faith and repentance, not present use of reason to understand the Gospel
preached, are not as such to be baptized; but, until they ^ome to years to be
taught and to make profession of their faith and repentance, to be kept from
baptism; and that so Infant Baptism is void, and to be esteemed no baptism.

Secondly, they dream that those who are not dived under water, are not
baptized, and therefore they rebaptize them who were baptized in Infancy;
though that ground may often fail them, because some have been baptized by
immersion. Now that which has been said on our part is enough to satisfy
those in those things, ^^^^^ potius qu^m perducte^ quispiam. Plaut. ^^^stel.
who are not wilfully bent with Simo in the Comedian, rather to err then to be
directed by any. Therefore to avoid repetitions, let the issue be, if
Infant Baptism, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, either
by washing, sprinkling with, or dipping into water, be indeed a complete and
warrantable baptism according to the institution of Christ; then Anabaptists
rebaptizing, do impiously seduce and teach simple people to renounce that
baptism by which they had, at least sacramentally, put on Christ, and thereby
were readmitted into that Church out of which can be no salvation. And let the
prudent Reader judge, whom I herein refer to an impartial and serious
consideration of that which has been said: which being proved, the Anabaptists
whole fabric of dowsing and rebaptizing falls heavily on their Dippers heads.

The Church of Christ holds, ^^^si esset di^^^^^, diceret qui semel been l^tus
fuerit: sed ^m non addidit verbum ben^ in^icat quia quic quid in Trinitate
factum fuerit, been est, etc. Optatus l.s. See Epiph. haeres. 65. N. 7. ib.
haeres. 62. l. 2. N. ^. ib. haeres. 42. N. 2. ib.haeres. 69.
that Infants of enchurched Parents, or others of yea^s converting to the
faith, being once sprinkled, washed, or dipped, in the name of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, according to Christ's institution, ought not on any
pretense to be rebaptized. I say thus baptized according to the ordinance of
Christ, because the Samosatenians, Sabellians, Marcionites, Arrians, or the
like, who any ways opposed the holy Trinity, or denied any persons thereof,
did not baptize according to the prescript of Christ; and therefore in case any
of their disciples converted, the true Church baptized them; because the former
pretended baptism was not according to the Ordinance of Christ (and so no true
baptism) it being the peculiar prerogative of Christ to appoint the seals of
his own Covenant of free Grace and mercy with man.

But the Anabaptists after their manner, object: Obj. I.


We are regenerate, not only by Baptism, but also by the Word, Ephesians. 5. 26. 1
Pet. 1. 23. but the Word is often repeated, and therefore so may baptism. We
answer, 1 The word mentioned, Ephesians. 5. 26. is that, which coming to the
element, makes the Sacrament, as Chrysostom well interprets, that he might
sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water, (...)Chrysostom. hom. 2. in Ephesians.
5.
by the Word. What Word? (says he) why, this, In the name of the Father, of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost: that Word which coming to the element makes the
Sacrament, ought not to be more repeated then the Sacrament it self, because it
is essential thereto.

2 The regeneration of man, is only one, whose principal efficient cause is the
holy Ghost: the means or instrumental causes, on Gods part, are the Word and
Sacraments; on our part, faith which the holy Ghost begets, increases, and
confirms ordinarily by those external means. Therefore when they are
baptized, who were before regenerate by the Word, as a spiritual feed, they
have not need of any other regeneration, nor can they be twice regenerate; but
then baptism is to them an obsignation and confirmation of their regeneration.
R^n. 4. II. Vid. Aug. de bapt l. 4. c. 24.
So Abraham first believed (as so, was regenerate) and afterward was sealed. So
Cornelius spiritual sanctification preceded in the gift of the holy Ghost, and
then he received the Sacrament of regeneration, to confirm the same to him. But
when the elect, who being baptized, dye in their infancy, it is certain that
they are regenerate by the Sacrament, without the ministry of the word preached
unto them, whereof they are not capable, who yet without regeneration, could
not enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3. 5. And if the baptized Infant live
to be capable of teaching, and so receive the word, as that it begets in him
actual faith, repentance and obedience to God, then that word is as Sincere
milk, to nourish and confirm, not to regenerate, but to promote the degrees of
regeneration, producing that faith and the fruits thereof sowed in baptism, to
a clearer and more evident maturity. So was it in Isaac, who was first
regenerate by the seal of the righteousness of faith, which was after he came
to years nourished and confirmed by the word preached unto him: So that though
the word in the ordinary dispensation thereof, be often repeated, and does by
many degrees promote our regeneration, and cause us to grow to a better stature
and strength, according to our measure in Christ, of which we have continual
need, yet it follows not thence, that baptism may also be iterated; no more,
then that a man may be often born into the world, because he is often fed, and
grows up by degrees, and diverse accessions to his stature.

Though corporal generation or birth, Object. 2.
be naturally but one, yet may it be supernaturally iterated: Yea, so shall it
be in the resurrection which our Savior calls Regeneration^ (...)
Matthew 19. 28. We answer: 1. The present question is concerning regeneration in
this life, (...)in seeulo no^.
not of that which shall be in the new age, as the Syriac has it; that is, in
the world to come.

2. Christ there calls the resurrection regeneration, to teach us who have
received the first fruits of the Spirit, in our regeneration, that admirable
thing which shall come to pass in our resurrection; Sic enim caro nostra
regenerabi^ur per incerruptionem, quemadmodum est anim a nossra re^e^erat^ per
fidem, Augustine de C. D. l. 10. c. 5:
for so shall our flesh be, as it were born again by incorruption, as our soul
is now regenerate by faith in Christ.

3. That regeneration in the end of the world shall be but once; therefore by
proportion, regeneration in this world by baptism, must be, can be but once.

The spiritual death to sin, Object. 3.
is by many acts of regeneration, as examination of our selves, daily renewing
our repentance, beating down our bodies by fasting, prayer, humiliation, and
rising again to newness of life in our increases of faith; and growth in
holiness is by sundry acts of the Spirit regenerating, and making our
endeavors effectual in the use of the means, as hearing, praying, receiving
the Sacrament: In and by these is regeneration; A^^^s ^.^^.
therefore not one, nor only once: Add hereto, that we are baptized into
remission of sins, which being daily, we have need of daily remission, and
therefore of Baptism. We answer: 1. That dying to sin, and rising to newness of
life, are the certain effects of regeneration; and therefore it may conclude,
that where these are, and their several acts appear, there undoubtedly is
Regeneration: But it can no more conclude diverse Regenerations, then the diverse
acts of a living man, can prove that he had several Generations or Births,
because these prove that he lives.

2. Our need of daily pardon for our daily sins may conclude our daily need of
repentance, Maith. 6
as our Savior taught us; but it concludes not any necessity to iterate our
Baptism, but rather the contrary, ^^r. 31. 34.
because the Covenant of God once sealed to us in Baptism (for the free
remission of all our sins, through the inestimable and never dyingmerit of
Christ's death, into which we are implanted by Saptism) is unchangably
perpetual; and the condition of our comfortable assurance of pardon, cannot be
iteration of our Baptism, but renewing of our repentance, and amendment of our
lives, which demonstrate our faith to be lively. See Jer. 3. 12, 13. Ezekiel. 16.
60. Nor does that hinder which some object; Some hypocrites receive the seal,
therefore they have need to receive it again, that they may obtain the fruits
thereof, which believing they shall have; It follows not, that they ought to be
baptized again, but that they ought to be sincere, and to repent of their
hypocrisy, and then the seal formerly received, shall be effectual for them to
Remission of sins and Salvation.

Spiritual death in sin, Object. 4.
is by many acts; and Regeneration is a rising again from the same; which in
the regenerate, who also often fall, must and is often to be iterated;
therefore Regeneration may and must be iterated, and consequently, so must
Baptism, the Laver of Regeneration. We answer; 1: The acts of Regeneration are
many, but that proves not pluralities of Regenerations, more then many acts of
life prove many lives of one and the same person, as we said.

2. As many wounds, or other concurrent causes of death, conclude not many
deaths of one and the same person, so it is here; many sins wound and
spiritually destroy the soul, yet are there not more deaths then lives of one
man; for death is a privation of life: So that our often falling into sin,
concludes only a need of frequent renewing our repentance; and has been showed.

That which the Apostles of Christ did, Object. 5.
that we may do in the work of the Ministry: But they rebaptized, as may appear
Acts 19. 4, 5. therefore we may rebaptize. We answer. 1. This main argument
which the Anabaptists have, is built, as the rest, upon a mere mistake of that
Scripture S. Luke thus relates, Then, said Paul, John verily baptized with the
baptism of repentance; saying unto the people, that they should believe on him
which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus. When they heard this (to
wit, that which John spoke) they (that is, the people mentioned verse 4. which
heard those words of John B.) were baptized; that is, by John B. or his
Disciples, not by Paul; for he is only said, verse 6. to have laid his hands
upon them, that they might be confirmed in their receiving the extraordinary
gifts of the Holy Ghost, of which those Disciples to whom Paul there spoke, had
not before that time, so much at heard, verse ^.

2. There was no difference in substance or signification between the Baptism
of John B. and that which was administered by the Disciples of Christ, Vid,
d^ctissimum A. R v^t. sum co^tro^^r. To. 2. q. 2. tra. 3. pa^e 26, 27.
as has been showed.

3. It is not said in the cited place, that Paul baptized them; but only, that
he laid his hands on them (as we noted.) Add hereto, that his self says, 1
Cor. I. I4. 15 Acts 18. 8
That he baptized only Crispus and Gaius, and the household of Stephanus; but
besides, he knew not whether he baptized any other. Now Crispus was a
Corinthian, Gaius a Macedonian, Acts 19 29.
and Stephanus of Achaia, I Cor. 16. 15. but it is apparent that these Disciples
mentioned Acts 19. were Ephesians, verse I. and Ephesus a City of Asia, Rev.
I'II. therefore he baptized them not; and so here was no rebaptizing.

4. These words ( When they heard this) do not at all relate to the speech of
Paul there historified, but unto the preaching of John B. for if otherwise, it
would follow, which the Papists affirm, that John's baptism was not the same
with the Baptism of Christ; and consequently, that Christ whom John baptized,
and we, baptized by the successors of Christ's Disciples, are not baptized with
one and the same baptism; C^ncil. Trident. Bellarmin, To. 3 de Sacram. bapt, l.
2. c. 20. Vasquez. in 3. The. Aquin. T^m. 2. q. 66. a. 2: disp. 140. N. 18. P.
Lombard. l. 4. did. 2. D. Aquin, part. 3, etc.
whereas Christ bare the same circumcision which the Jews, and for substance
the same baptism with us Gentiles, that he might declare himself the Savior
both of Jews and Gentiles.

The Lords Supper does no less signify the blood of Christ for our Salvation,
Object. 6.
then does the water of Baptism; nor less represent his death, then does
baptism, in which we are implanted into the similitude of his death and
resurrection: Rem, 6. 4. 5.
But the Lords Supper is often to be administered and received; and therefore so
is Baptism. We answer: 1^ There is in Scripture express command for often
administering and receiving of the Lords Supper, I Cor. II. 24. Verse^^, 6.
This do in remembrance of me -- As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this
cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come: show us any one such warrant for
rebaptizing, and this controversy is at an end.

2. The Lords Supper proposes not any new Covenant with God, but confirms
that to us, which he made with us in our baptism: But baptism is the Initiatory
Seal of our entering into Covenant with God (as it was in circumcision) which
Covenant is but one.

3. The virtue and efficacy of baptism in the elect, extends it self to the
whole life of the regenerate, and is, as it were, a fountain of living waters,
perpetually running to cleanse away the pollutions of sin; so that there need
not new or more baptisms, but a daily renewing of our repentance, to which we
were in our covenanting with God, at first baptized. As Ambrose says, after
baptism there remains no remedy but true repentance.

Cyprian and the Council of Carthage; Obj. 7.
held, that those who were baptized by heretics, upon their return to the
Church, ought to be rebaptized. We answer: 1. The question being proposed in
the first Council of Carthage, Whether those who were once baptized, might be
rebaptized; all the Bishops answered, God forbid, God forbid; we resolve and
determine, that all rebaptizings, are unlawful, and far from sinc^re faith and
catholic discipline. The business which troubled the Churches in Cyprians time
was, Whether baptism administered according to the lawful form of the Catholic
Church (that is, with water, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost) though by an Heretical Minister, Vniversi Episcopi dixerunt absit,
absit: illicit^^ esse sa^cimus rebaptizationes omnes, and sa^is esse ^ienum a
sincera side and Catholica disciplina -- Council. I. Carthag. cap. I. Severin.
Bin. Council. To. I.
were invalid, and therefore to be iterated. Cyprian, Cyprianus affirmabat cum
aliis Orientalibus Episcopicunum esse baptismam, qui extra unam Ecclefiam
Catholicam, u^^ (...) -- (^^ii dicebant) i^^^^ baprisina, r^tum validum, and
nequs quain reiterandum ^^ quem Minister haereticus juxta formam a Christo
praeseriptam and ab Ecclesi^ usurpatam, contuliss. Bin ^.T. V. de^t qui vult
Augustine. ad Vincent. ^p^18. and de bapt.contr. Donat. 1. 6. c. 2. Hieronyirum
contr. Luc^ferian. Baptisnum autem non esse quo haretici utuntur. Cyprian 1.
etc. Stephan. 1. 2. ep. 1. quis enim potest dare quod ipse n^n habeat?^^, Cypr.
l. 1. ep 12. quod semel s^mitur nec rurs^s iteratur. Cyprian. l. 2. ep. 3 and
Bin. q. s.
with other Eastern Bishops, affirmed, that there is but one Baptism, which is
not to be found out of the Catholic Church. The other orthodox Bishops
determined, that baptism which an heretical Minister administered according to
the form prescribed by Christ, and practiced by the Church, was valid, and not
to be iterated. So that indeed, neither Cyprian, nor the rest of that Council,
did maintain rebaptizing, but held that there could be no true or valid baptism
out of the Catholic Church; or that it was not baptism which Heretics
administered. Against rebaptizing, Cyprian speaks clearly, L. I. Ep. 12. on that
John 4. 14, applying it to baptism; Which, says he, is once received, and not
again iterated: And in the Canons of the Apostles, there is a severe caution
against rebaptizing, If any Bishop or Elder shall again baptize him who had
truly received baptism, let him be deposed.

2. We must distinguish between Heretics (as has been said) whereof some are
such, as that though they err in some fundamental point or points; yet they
hold the true form of baptism. Some so err concerning the holy Trinity, as
that in such error they cannot have with them the true form and essence of
baptism: Now there may be true baptism administered by the first sort; and such
as are baptized by them, returning to the true Church, must repent, but not to
be rebaptized: But those who were pretended to be baptized by the second sort,
(...)etc. Apost. Can. 46.(...)Theophy^a^^, in loh. 3. videat qui vult de his,
Epiphan. haeres. (...) Pneumat^inach^s. ^nit. and haeres. 76. N. 6.
as Arians, denying the Deity of Christ, or those Pneumatomachi, Eunomius, and
others, blasphemous against the holy Ghost, in case they came to the true
Church, they were to be baptized, because there can be no true baptism, where
the essentials thereof are wanting; as the element, and the word constituting
the Sacrament; to wit, In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost:
Baptizing such as have not so been baptized, is no rebaptizing, seeing the
first pretended was truly none. Praeter Ecclesi^ consuetudinem. etc.(...),
pi^hen. expos. s^^^ ath, l. 3, To 2. N. 13.
Otherwise, the ancient Church did not rebaptize a repenting Apostate, though
he had fallen into the errors of Arrians, Eunomians, or the like, after that
he had been baptized by the true Church; and the reason thereof was, that which
Chemnitius well observed; See 1 Cor. 6. 11. and 12. 13. ^al 3. 27.
as on Gods part, the Covenant which he made with the circumcised Israelites,
remained firm and ratified, unto which after their falling into sin, they
returned by repentance, so the Corinthians and Galathians having fallen, were
recalled by S. Paul, and remitted to the promise and consolation of their
baptism formerly received: Therefore as Circumcision was not, so ought not
baptism to be iterated.

CHAP. VII.
Protestants arguments against the dangerous practice of Rebaptizing.
1. BAptism is the Sacrament of Regeneration by our implantation into Christ.
See Council. Nicen. can. 19. Council. Arelat 1 Can 8. Council. Carthag. c.
4.(...)etc. Nazianz. orat. 40. itemque orat. 25. inquie(...) -- Regeneratio
spiritualis una est, sicut generatio carnalis una est. Aug. tract. 12. in Joh.
-- Quomodo uterus non potest repeti, sic nec baptismus iterari. Prosper. p^^^
Augustine. tract. 11 in Job. vid. and Chrysostom. in Hebr. 6. hom. 9. and
Theoplylact. ib.
But we cannot be twice regenerate (for regeneration presupposes a precedent
natural birth, which can be but one: nor can we be more often regenerate or
born a new, then born naturally) therefore we ought not to be twice baptized.
The major is evident, Tit. 3. 5. The minor is also evident in reason. Add
hereto, that whereas we are by nature children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. enemies
to God, Rom 5. 10. and so without a new birth, aliens from the Kingdom of God,
John 3. 5. but being implanted into Christ by baptism, we become (...), a new
creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Gal. 6. 15. Now as one and the same creature can be but
once created (except that either the created essence of a man is destroyed by
sin, which the sin of the Devil cannot do; or that a man may have pluralities
of essences by several creations of one and the same person, which no reason
can suppose) of neither can we have any more then one regeneration: Therefore
we ought to be but once baptized.

2. Gods faithfulness in his Covenant sealed, cannot become void by man's
infidelity; neither is his Covenant of peace momentany, but perpetual, which is
sealed in baptism; Rom 3. 3. Romans 11. 29. 2 Timothy 2. 13.
so that still we may return unto it by true repentance: Council. Eliberit. Can.
46. and 69. and 73. Council. Carthag. 1. Council. Arelateus. c. 6. 23. Council.
Nicaen. 2. vid and Bart. Carranz, sum. Council. page 673. 679. Roth^^mag. 1633.
^^^ aliud remedium constitutum esse post baptismum, quam paenitentiae
solatium^^ Ambros. ^10. 1. Ursin. de relig, Christ. pa^ 2. Conclus. 13.
See Isa. 54. 10. and so they who sinned after baptism, though notoriously and
scandalou^^, were not rebaptized by the ancient Church, but upon their
repentance received again into holy communion; and it is truly observed by
some, that baptism being once received, confirms and assures the penitent of
their sins remission, and that the efficacy and virtue thereof extends it
self to all our life; and therefore neither ought it to be iterated, nor
deferred unto the end of our lives, as if it so only cleansed men from their
sins, upon condition that they never fall into any sin after their baptism
received; which cannot be in this frail state of flesh and blood subject to so
many temptations and innate infirmities: Therefore after the Apostle had showed
us how being implanted into the similitude of Christ's death and resurrection,
we ought not to suffer sin to reign in our mortal bodies; Romans 6. 11. Chrysostom. in
Romans 6. ^^ 11.
he says not, Let not flesh and blood, the natural man live any longer, or any
more be active, but, Let not sin reign, etc. for Christ came not to destroy our
nature, but to correct our depraved will and affections.

3 There is not in all the New Testament any one precept or example for
rebaptizing; therefore it ought not to be done: the constant judgment and
practice of the Church of Christ being to the contrary: it is neither commanded
in the institution of baptism, nor in any Scripture admitted: nor is it
tolerable by any necessary consequence, as is the contrary. John's baptism and
Christ's were one, whatever Jesuits pretend to the contrary: Apollos knew only
John's baptism, Act. 18. 25. that is, the doctrine of John Baptist; we read not
that Apollos or any other mentioned in Scripture, was rebaptized; no not any of
John's Disciples coming to Christ and his magistery, which had surely been done,
had Christ's baptism and John's been different in substance; and had it been
done, we should have had in Scripture either some express proof for the same,
or something so laid down, that we might by good consequence have gathered the
same, which nowhere appears: but (as has been said) the Apostle recalleth
penitent sinners once baptized, unto the comfort of that which they had once
received in baptism, 1 Cor. 6. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 13. and Gal. 3. 27.

Circumcision was only once administered, Genesis 17. 7.(...)in pactum secu^^
but was perpetual and everlasting; and under the Law sinners were to return
unto the Lord by true repentance; compare Jer. 11. 3, 4. Jer. 4. 1, 2. etc.
with Jer. 18. 8 etc. Ezekiel. 18. 31, 32. Isa. 55. and the principal cause why
circumcision was not iterated, was Gods divine ordinance and institution; the
impressed character was secondary: on Gods part it ever remained sure, to which
after their forsaking his covenant, into which they had been once sealed, he
recalled them not to a susception of a new, or the same seal iterated, but only
to repentance, as to humble them, so to show that the fault and failing of the
fruits and effects thereof (which should have appeared in their newness of
life) was wholly on their parts, not on Gods, who is unchangeable and the same
for ever. So has he appointed it in our sins after baptism. I further add,
that those Christians which had apostated to the most pernicious heresy of
Arrians denying the deity of Christ by the judgment of the Catholic Church,
if they returned to her, were not to be rebaptized, but to be received again
into the Church and communion thereof by repentance, as has been proved.

5 All they that are baptized into the similitude of Christ's death and
resurrection, are but once to be baptized; (...). Chrysostom. in Romans 6. hom. 11.
ineadem sententia est Basilius de S. S. c. 14. sicut semel Christus crucifixus
est, sic baptismiss iter andus non est; una enim morte sa^, omnes redemit, ut
amplius mori non oporteat; quod videns Ecclesia intellexit, non iterandum
baptismum. Aug. de vera and falls. poenit. c. 3. intemque de verb. Div.

(...)Epiph. to. 1. haeres. 59. l. 2. N. 5. Si Christus tantum semel mortuus
est, and nos tantum semel baptizari convenit, Alex. Alens. to. 4. de sacrament.
Baptis. q. 8. Mem. 12. resol. -- Donatum sunt hae sententiae latae, quod
confessus sit se rebaptizasse, etc. quod ab ecclesia alienum est. Optatus, l.
1. de schism. Donat idem lib. 5. de circumcisione dicit -- semel enim factum
servat salutem: si iterum fiat, potest afferre perniciem: sic and baptisma
Christianorum etc. confert gratiam; si repetatur, facit vitae jacturam.-de hoc
lavacro dixit, Qui semel lotus est, non habet iterum necessitatem lavandi: qui
semel dixit, prohib^it iterum fieri -- haec sententia generalis est, non
specialis -- ibsit ut lotum revocemus ad sontem -- absit ut iteremus quod semel
est, aut duplicemus quod uoum est; semel ergo lavacrum inimus, semel delicta
diluuntur, quia ea iterari non oporter. Tertul de bapt. c. 15.

Baptisma salutaris aquae significatur, quod semel scilicet sumitur, nec rursus
iteratur. Cypr. l. 2. ep. 3. ad Caecilium, vid. and Augustinum ep. 173. Crisp.

(...) -- Epiph. quo. sup.

Iuxta fores templi, in latere quod opponitur meridiei -- ingressus templi ad
Orientem era^ more primum occurrebat etc. Vatabl. in 1 Reg, 7. 39. -- Ezekiel 36.
25. Ephesians. 5. 25. A^ 2. 38. 1 Pet. 3. 21. Romans 8. 1.


but all they that are baptized according to Christ's Institution, In the name
of the Father, and the Son, and the H. Ghost, are baptized into the similitude
of Christ's death and resurrection; therefore they are but once to be baptized:
and thus the Church has ever clearly judged. The major is proved, because
Christ dyed and rose again but once: Romans 6. 3, 4, 5, 9, 10. we being therefore
baptized into the similitude of his death and resurrection, ought to be
baptized but once, seeing that pluralities of baptisms or baptizings cannot
answer in similitude to his death and resurrection, who dyed and rose again but
only once for our justification, Romans 4. 25. Heb. 8. 25, 26, 28. Again, we are
buried with Christ by baptism, Romans 6. 4. but Christ was but once buried;
therefore neither ought we to be baptized any more then only once. How then
shall we be renewed after our falling into sin? the Apostle says Gal. 6. 1.
Restore such a one -- but how? he says no^ baptize him again: no, but godly
sorrow (says he, 2 C^^ 7. 10.) works repentance to salvation: for we must
still remember that baptism is the ordinary gate and entrance into Christ's
Church: which stands like that brazen Sea at the entrance into the Temple, 1
King. 7. 39. in which our sins are washed away and remitted by Christ, so, not
that they should be no more, but that they shall be no more imputed: and
therefore all this life long, we have need of daily repentance (because we daily
fall into some sin) repentance being a condition of Godspronouncing pardon to
the sense of our consciences, which he sealed to us in our baptism: and so we
may understand that which Christ said to Peter, Joh. 13. 10. He that is was'd
needs not; save to wash his feet. We are washed from our sins by baptism
(because, though we are, in respect of the meritorious cause cleansed from
them, only by the sacred blood of Christ, 1 John 1. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 19. Heb. 9.
14. Rev. 1.5. yet baptism being the ordinary external seal and instrumental
cause, Ephesians. 5. 26. Ti^. 3. 5. 1 Pet. 3. 21. Baptismo quidem homo totus
abluitur, sed dum isto posica vivit in secalo, humanis affectibus terram velut
pedibas calcans, etc. undedicat dimitte nobis debita nostra, ac sic etiam
mandatur ab eo, qui pedes l^it discipulis suis, nec desinit interpellare pro
nobis. Aug. tract. 37. in Ioh.
for the application thereof, as also in respect of the analogy between the
sign and the thing signified, that is often ascribed to the sign, which is
proper to the thing signified, to wit, the blood and merit of Christ sealed to
us in baptism: therefore we need no more clearing by iteration of baptism, but
only, as it were, washing our feet, that is, our vicious affections and
failings, by daily repentance, that it may please God to pronouce to our
consciences, the remission of our sins which grieve and displease us.

There is but one Lord, one faith, one baptism Ephesians. 4. 5. That which the holy
Ghost testifies is but one (as one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism) no man may
multiply, iterate or make more: But the holy Ghost testifies that there is but
one God, one Faith, one Baptism: Therefore no man may iterate or make them
more: neither is it any better then a mere illusion of holy Scripture to
distinguish between the Sacrament and the administration thereof, by saying
there is but one baptism, but there may be many baptizings of one and the same
person; the Apostle saying there is but one not only in the unity of substance,
dispensation, and effect, but also in respect of lawful use, or reception by
one and the same person; Baptisma^^^ ^cam haptizat^ omnes in Christo regenerans
est; sicut unus Deus, acfides unica ^^omnibus fide^ter confitendum. quod
celebratum in aqua, in nomine Patris, and filii, and Spiritus sancti, credimus
tam adultis, quim paroulis c^muniter perfectum remedium ad sasutem.vid notas in
council. Viern. Oecumen. 15. Severin. Bin. Council. to 2. -- Denique vos qui
baptisma quasi libenter duplicare contenditis, si datis alterum baptisma, date
alteram fidem: si dais alteram fidem, date and alterum Christum: si datis
alterum Christum, date alterum Deum. Uoum Deum esse negare non potestis, ue in
Marcionis foveas incidatis: ergo Deus unus est; de uno Deo unus est Christas.
Qui rebaptizatur, jam Christianus fuerat: quomodo dici potest iterum
Christianus etc? Optatus. ^^ntr. Parm. Donatist. l. 5.


otherwise he must contradict himself, who says we are baptized into the
similitude of Christ's death, which is but only one and once suffered. Indeed it
is said of the other seal, as often as ye do this, 1 Cor. 11. 26. but not one
word in Scripture can be found more then once baptizing: but the Apostle
mentioning baptism, joins it with things incapable of multiplication, or
plurality (one Spirit, one body of Christ, the Church, one hope of our
calling, metonymically put for the thing hoped for, that is, eternal life,
which is essentially but one, one Lord, one Faith, that is, one doctrine of
faith, Gal. 1. 6, 7, 8. Jud. 3 or objectively, one truth of God, one Christ)
showing that there ought to be no more baptisms then faiths, Christ's, or Gods;
if therefore (said Optatus) you give another baptism, give another faith: if ye
give another faith, give another Christ; if ye give another Christ, give also
another God, etc. You see to what damnable absurdities rebaptizing drives unto.

That whereby men crucify to themselves the Son of, See that which has been
said, part 1. animadvers, on liberty of prophes. p. 244 245, Number 32, 33.
God afresh, and put him to open shame, may by no means be done: But to
rebaptize (or to be willingly rebaptized) in the Apostles sense, is to crucify
to themselves the Son of God afresh, and to put him to open shame: therefore it
may by no means be done. This point the Apostle lays down Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. It
is impossible for those who were once enlightened (says our Translation)(...),
(...)(...)
who have been once baptized (says the Syriac) to renew them again to
repentance, etc. (that is, bapti^mal repentance) the baptism of repentaence, as
it is called Act 19. 4. and so Heb. 10. 12. Call to remembrance the former
days in which after ye were illuminated, Gre. (...), which the Syriac (the
best and nearest Interpreter of the New Testament) renders, in which ye were
baptized: So the Greeks were wont to call baptism (...) illumination: possibly
because persons converting from darkness of Idolatry, were ordinarily
enlightened, by being taught the doctrine of the Gospel, (see Mat. 4. 16. Luk 2.
32. Ad. 26. 18. so the Hebrew ^^^ in one signification importing taught, is
rendered by the LXX illuminated) or also in respect of extraordinary gifts of
the holy Ghost in the knowledge of the mysteries of the Gospel, and unstudied
tongues, with other admirable enlargments of heart, then flourishing in the
Church. Now those who are described v. 4, 5. who have been once baptized, and
have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost,
and have tasted the god word of God, and the powers of the world to come, if
they shall fall away (says our Translation) Gre ^^^ ^^^ ^^^, and falling away;
which ( and) the Syriac omitteth, rendering the sense (as others also) non
possum iterum p^^care, ut den^o renoventur ad resipiscentiam, and ^^^
crucifigant, etc. they cannot so sin (that is, un^ death) that they should
again be renewed to repentance, and crucify afresh etc. that is in a second
baptism: where no^e by the way, that this place of Scripture so much wrested by
the enemies of truth, against the comfortable doctrine of the Saints
perseverance, makes mainly for it: for the ^^^stle says not, that those who
are described, v. 4, 5. de, ^^^ may fall away; but that it is impossible, isto
supposito, to he renewed, because in such a supposition the merit of. Christ's
Cross being abolished and made void, by which, they were renewed, it must needs
follow, that so Christ should be crucified afresh, and be put to open shame,
tha^^^ they might be renewed by a second and new merit of his Cross; which
seeing it is impossible to be, the Apostle will infer that it is impossible
that these here described v. 4, 5. should finally fall away. De Dieu. q. f. 2 Timothy 2. 19.
The foundation of the Lord remaining, sure, and having this seal, The Lord
knows who are his, whose prescience cannot possibly be deceived in electing
any who shall fall away. But to return to our purpose; the work(...), to
themselves, is very considerable. The Son of God they cannot now possibly
crucify afresh, nor put him again to open shame (who sits at the right hand
of the glory of the Father) had they the malice of the Jews and power of the
Romans, (...)(...)
`(who once crucified him) to help them: yet in iterating on themselves
baptism, the sign of heir implantation into the similitude of his death, they
crucify to themselves (that is, as much as in them is) the Son of God.
Chrysostom excellently expresses it, Baptism (says he) is the Cross; for
therein our old man is crucified with him. Again, we have been planted together
in the likeness of his death; as therefore Christ may not be crucified again
(for that were to put him again to open shame;) so neither may we be baptized
again for if death have no more dominion over him; if he be risen (in his
resurrection) a conqueror over death, etc. and should again be crucified, then
all these things were mere fables and mockeries: therefore he that rebaptizeth
himself, does again crucify him. But what is crucifying again? As Christ died
on the Cross, so do we in baptism, not in the flesh, but to sin -- therefore
there may be no second washing: for if there be, there may be a third, and a
fourth; for the first is made void by the second, and that by another, even to
an infinite.

Where there are all the essential parts of baptism rightly administered
according to the commission given by Christ to his Apostles, there baptism
cannot be made void or no true baptism, by any thing accidental,
circumstantial, or less then essential, neither expressly nor by any necessary
consequence any where in holy Scripture forbidden. But in baptizing of Infants
of Church-privi^edged Parents. by sprinkling or washing with water, in the ^^^
of the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost, there are all the essential
parts of baptism, according to Christ's commission given to the Apostles, (to
wit, the Element and the Word which constitute the Sacrament.) Therefore that
their baptism is not, neither can be made void, or no true baptism, by, or in
respect of Infant-age, or of only washing or sprinkling them with water (which
are things circumstantial, accidental, less then essential, and no where
expressly, or by necessary consequence forbidden in holy Scripture.) So that
whatever Anabaptists pretend in their eager pursuit of their opinion, that they
do not rebaptize, supposing that there preceded no essential or true baptism in
regard of the persons being baptized in their Infancy, or because they fancy
dipping the whole body to be essential to baptism, and so necessary, that
without it they think there can be no true baptism, (neither of which have any
ground in Scripture) and whereas Christ is the Savior of every age, sex, and
condition; therefore male and female, aged and Infants have right to the seal,
as has been ^shewed; it highly concerns them seriously to consider how
dangerous a thing it is, upon a mere opinion to pull off the seals of their
Disciples salvation, under pretense of putting on a new (unwarrantable) seal,
to renounce their Savior, whom they put on in their lawful baptism, at least
sacramentally; to make more baptisms then faiths and Saviors, into the
similitude of whose death and resurrection, all Christians are baptized; and to
crucify again to themselves the Son of God, and to put him to open shame.
Alas, they discern not Satan's mischievous Legerdemain, who like a cunning
finger-jugler, hereby takes from them the true seal of redemption and salvation
by Christ, put on all his who are baptized, by pretending and seeming to put
them on a new, better, or more perfect one.

And now Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are
sanctified. Act. 20. 32. Glory be to God in the highest, and on earth peace,
good will toward men. Luke 2. 14. FINIS.

