REASONS Humbly to be Offered by The Weavers and Makes of Stuffs, CALLED,
Worsteads and other Stuffs, made in the County of Norfolk and City of Norwich,
Why they should be Discharged From Paying the Duty of Subsidy or Aulnage
demanded of them for such Stuffs.
THAT the making of Worsteads in Norwich and Norfolk, is an ancient
Manufacture, and has been there used time out of mind, Ex bundell. escaet. 1
Ed. 3. mi. 47.
and thereby many Thousand Inhabitants of the said places maintained and kept
at work; and before the time of King Edward the Third an Assize of the length
and breadth thereof was affixed.

That the ancient Revenue of the Crown of England was 6 s. 8 d. on every Sack
of Wool transported, which was granted by Parliament.

Afterward, 14 Ed. 1. Co. Inst. 4 part. fol. 280.
in process of time, diverse Cloath-workers set up the Trade of making Clothes
in England, by reason whereof the English Wool was wrought up here, and an
Officer was appointed by Patent to measure the said Clothes, with a Fee for his
pains: And the Crown having then no Customs upon Clothes or other Goods
exported (as they now have) the King's ancient Revenue of 6 s. 8 d. on every
Sack of Wool, was thereby diminished.

Thereupon in Anno 24 Edw. 3. a Subsidy was by Parliament granted to be paid to
the King, Vid. in Tresrem. offic. 24 Ed. 3.
viz. 1 s. 2 d. on a Cloth of Scarlet, etc. and on a Worstead 1 d. which makes
a distinction between Clothes and Worsteads.

In Anno 25 Edw. 3. an Act was made for the Assize of Clothes; and if any was
made less than the Assize, the same to be forfeited: These Forfeitures being
grievous to the People, in Anno 27 Edw. 3. the King releaseth the Forfeitures
of 25 Edw. 3. In consideration thereof, the Parliament, over and besides the
Customs formerly due, which was that by Anno 24 Edw. 3. granted to the King a
Subsidy of 4 d. of every Cloth of Assize, 2 d. on a half Cloth, and none
under half a Cloth to pay any thing.

But in this Act of 27 Edw. 3. nor in that Act of 25 Edw. 3. any mention is
made of Worsteads; which was then an ancient Manufacture made in Norfolk and
Norwich, and taken notice of in 24 Edw. 3. distinct from Cloth, and a
particular Duty set on exportation thereof by it self. viz. 1 d. a niece and
Cloth 1. s. 2. d. a piece, so as if Worsteads had been intended to have been
within the compass of this Act of 27 Edw. 3. they would have been distinctly
named, as in 24 Edw. 3. and not put under the general name of Cloth.

Notwithstanding the grant of the Office of Aulnager in 14 Edw. 1. of Clothes,
Co. Inst. 2 par. 534.
in 22 Edw. 3. there was a particular Patent made to one Pooley of the Office
of measuring of Norwich Worsteads, with a Fee; which at a Petition of the
Commons, 25 Edw. 3. was declared to be, and was made void and null.

In Anno 11 Hen. 4. upon Petition of the Weavers in Norwich and Norfolk, to the
then Parliament, there was granted to the Mayor. etc. of Norwich, power to
search and seal Norwich Stuffs for a time. But that Act mentions not any thing
of a Subsidy.

In Anno 7 Edw. 4. the Weavers of Norwich and Norfolk were put under a
Regulation, and Wardens appointed to be yearly chosen and sworn to search and
measure Norwich Worsteads, and no mention made of saving the Aulnagers Fee, or
Duty of Subsidy.

And from the time of the Revocation of Pooley's Patent in 22 Edw. 3. till the
beginning of King James the First his Reign, no Subsidy or Aulnage was demanded
for Norwich Stuffs.

But about that time Delves and Fitzwilliams having gotten a Patent of New
Drapery, Co. Inst. 2 par. fol. 62.
gave some trouble to the Weavers; whereupon 2 Jac. questions arising
thereabout, the business was referred by the King to all the Judges of England,
who certified the King there was never any Aulnage of Norwich Stuffs.

Notwithstanding this Resolution of the Judges, the then Duke of Lenox got a
Patent from the King of the Subsidy and Aulnage of Clothes and new Draperies,
under which the pretended Norwich Stuffs to be comprehended, and gave new
disturbance to the Weavers, which occasioned several Suits, in many of which
the Weavers prevailed; but the power of the said Duke in those times so far
prevailed by his sending Pursevants and other hard Usages, that the Weavers
were compelled for some time to pay the said Duty; but about the year 1640. the
payment thereof ceased, and the Weavers were quiet till the year 1668, when the
then Duke of Lenox preferred his Bill in Parliament to have the said Duty
settled; which was rejected in the Commons House: from which time, till about
the year 1680, the Weavers were quiet; but then one Mr. Canham having obtained
to be Aulnager in Norfolk, did, again set the Claim of foot, and by taking
great Distresses, and by several Orders in the Exchequer, compelled the Weavers
to pay the said Duty of Subsidy to him.

Which Orders and Proceedings of the said Court of Exchequer are so
extraordinary, being of a different and mixed nature, in part legal, and in
part equitable, that no Writ of Error can be brought thereupon, there being no
Judgment in Law passed, nor can any Appeal be brought, for that the Proceedings
are not entirely in Equity, but partly in a legal course. Whereby the said
Weavers, although they are jointly charged with the payment of the said Duties
of Subsidy and Aulnage, yet are destitute of any Course of Law, whereby to
obtain their Relief, but must submit to the burden theoreof; which will in
great measure destroy that ancient Manufacture of Worsted-Stuffs, which has
been time out of mind exercised within the said City of Norwich and County
Court of Parliament, where Grievances of this nature, which are above the reach
of any ordinary Court of Justice to relieve, are only and properly cognizable,
and to be redressed.


