REASONS Humbly offered against GRAFTING or SPLICING, And for Dissolving this
Present East India Company, OR, JOINT STOCK: And ERECTING and ESTABLISHING A
NEW National Joint Stock or Company. More Extensive and Universal, on a better
Constitution and Terms of Settlement.
First, THis present Company or Joynt-Stock is only an imaginary Fund, not
having any real Stock of its own left to carry on the Trade, according to the
general Judgment of all that have Knowledge, and are most intuitous in that
Affair, as also of many the concerned, and so can upon no Account be conceived
a suitable Foundation to build or graft so large and National a Trade upon.

Nor will it suit with the Wisdom of Persons versed in Trade to join Stocks
with any in a hazardous, low, weak, bankrupt Condition, having but a bare
nominal Stock.

Nor will it be agreeable with the Foresight and Prudence of so Serene and
August an Assembly as the Honorable House of Commons, to entrust so vast a
Trade in the hands of such as have no Stock therein, and permit them to reap
the whole or chief benefit thereof.

And it would seem injurious to the rest of the Subjects of England, that those
that have had the benefit thereof so long, and have received all (if not much
more than all) their real principal Stock out by Dividends, should yet have the
same benefit continued to them on account of an imaginary Stock, to the
excluding and depriving all the rest of the Subjects of England who desire to
partake thereof according to their Birthright.

Nor is it the effect of Modesty, Ingenuity, or Public Spiritedness, but the
direct contrary, in any, to desire or propose any such Project.

That this present Company is in so bad and mean a Condition, may be concluded
from several Topics; as, by their studious Endeavors to conceal the true
State of their Stock, as seems manifest by that dark, general, unmercantile
Account they lately gave in to the Honorable Committee of Parliament; to whom,
in respect of their Kindness and Patience to them (if Authority had no sway)
they might have given one more candid; and probably they had if their State
would have admitted of a more clear and particular Inspect: for tho it were so
that they want three or four Years Books from India (which by the way is an
impardonable Crime, and renders their Servants worthy of severe Castigation,
and not such high Encomiums given them unless it were by direction) yet they
might have produced a more fair, clear, particular, satisfying Account, if so
it had pleased them; for had they brought in the Balance of their last Books
from India, with an Account of what quick Stock has been sent out, and Goods
received thence since, and their Debts and quick Stock here, some Computation
might have been made, somewhat more or less; and that it has been omitted
argues all is not right.

But admitting the Account as given in, by which they would have it believed
they have much about the Sum of 700000 l. yet thence being deducted the several
Sums and Articles omitted to be mentioned in the said Account, and what is
over-rated therein in their own favor, being truly valued, their Stock will
not be found to be other than merely imaginary, if not vastly behind-hand
(which if so, Justice will require of the Adventurers) as for instance;

Their Goods in Englamd (for Money they have none) they value at 635155 l. 11
s. 10 d. (they are it seems very exact;) these Goods, in all Men's Opinions
conversant therein, will not yield 400000 l. so they have in this Article
overvalued themselves at least 200000 l. Freight and Demorage on Ships
returned, more than acknowledged in their Account, not less than 40000 l.
Servants Wages due, not put down in their Account, cannot be computed less than
15000 l. Damages to the Subjects of England for Seisures, Force, Oppressions,
Violences, Rapines, etc. at a moderate Computation, 150000 l. Freight and
Demorage for about 12000 Tuns of Shipping now abroad, which cannot amount to so
little a Sum as 300000 l. Owing at Interest in India many Years, at 9, 12, and
15 per Cent. (notable good Husbandry) at least 400000 l. Satisfaction to the
Indians for all Damages, and to procure a Peace upon former Terms, a very vast
Sum. -- l. Desperate and bad Debts in India, which amounts to no small Sum, and
the constant Expense there. -- l. Satisfaction to the Relations to such of the
English Subjects as have been murdered by their Power and Orders, which
possibly may most affect the Managers that signed the Instructions, and
procured the Orders, and the price of Blood being invaluable, it is left in
Blank. -- Satisfaction to the Nation and State for all the Wrongs, Abuses to
the Subject, assuming Despotick Power, and Sovereign Authority, and exercising
the same in Captures, Violences, Rapines, Piracies, Murders, etc. 500000 l.
If any be aggrieved at the last Article, let him consider what Sums were laid
upon a World of People in the last Reigns upon Actions between Subject and
Subject for Trifles, mere Words, some perhaps only imaginary, as in the Case of
the present Lord Mayor Sir Thomas Pilkinton, Doctor Oats, Sir Trevor Williams,
Mr. Arnold, Mr. Colt and others; and many upon Indictments of the State, as Sir
Samuel Barnardiston, Sir William Williams, Mr. Hambden, Mr. Sacheverel and the
Guild Hall Rioters, etc. (whose blessed fortune it was, that the Appellation of
Rebels instead of Rioters was not blundered upon, but that Error was rectified
with a witness upon the poor S. Helenians) and then this Sum, how bulky soever
it may look at first sight will doubtless be judged a very moderate calculation
even by the Company themselves; more especially if any of the Members thereof
have been so severe, and had the conscience upon such slight matters to accept
of Verdicts for such vast Sums, on their private account, as the Defendants
were no way able to pay, and to take out Execution, and lay them in Jayl for
their lives; these sure with their Friends and Adherents, of all others, cannot
think much of paying their Quota of the abovementioned Sum, or a greater,
which, as designed, may deter others from committing the like for the future,
and be a help and ease to the Nation in reducing Ireland, and extirpating
Arbitrary Government.

Now if after these Reasons assigned for this Fine, the Age should yet be so
prodigally merciful, as to pardon or mitigate it, the Company will
notwithstanding still appear to be in a very ill plight.

And as it was no mean Affrontery to the Nation, so it brought a dismal Cloud
upon the Reputation of the Stock, rendering it more than suspected; that the
Company at such a season, under high Accusations, and upon Inquisition
thereinto by Parliament, should unreasonably make a Dividend, as was done
lately of 50 per Cent. (which is the entire first principal Stock) whenas they
had not at the same time Money enough in England to pay it; what could be the
meaning hereof? but that they designed to draw out their whole Stock and much
more, and so to leave an empty Bag, and a great Demand to embarass the Nation;
and it is the Opinion of all, that, if not prevented, they will upon the next
Sale make another Dividend, for they have refused to accept thereupon of any
Debentures or Bonds owing by them, as usual, but to have all ready Money.

Secondly, This present Company, or Joint Stock is of very ill Fame, as an
illegal, rank, bitter Stock, such as no honest Man can or dare join with, or
graft upon; being founded and planted in a direct opposition to the Native
Liberty of the Subject; cultivated, cherished and influenced by the Hand of
Tyranny and and arbitrary Power, watered with the Tears, Groans, and Estates of
the Subjects of England, and has grown up to an unbounded Despotick Power,
assuming to it self, and aspiring to by others, an unhoopable Power over Goods,
Liberties, and Properties of English Men at pleasure, and exerted the same to
the great intangling the present Stock, occasioning vast Demands, Suits, etc.
And should any join with, or graft upon such a Stock what Blessing what Success
can be expected? but that all should be cursed; it would be like the plowing
with an Ox and an Ass; and abhorring, or sowing diverse seeds to the polluting
the Harvest.

Thirdly, This present Company, or Joint Stock is under a much greater Obloquy,
as guilty of the worst of Crimes, the most infamous Impieties, not only great
Rapines and Oppressions, but of Notorious, Cruel, Bloody Murders; either to
satisfy their own savage barbarous Tempers, or to comply with a designedly
enslaving Court. These are they that have shed the Blood of War in Peace, and
to continue and graft upon such a Stock will endanger a participation of the
same Guilt, Condemnation and Punishment, and seem too much to justify what
has been done, tho justly to be abhorred by all, and harden and encourage to a
further reiterated Commission of the like in the future; whereas it rather
seems the Duty of all Men of Sense, Honor and Conscience, so to detest such a
Stock for, and on account of such flagitious Crimes, as to endeavor an utter
extirpation of the very memory of them, a total oblivion of them being the
greatest kindness can be shown them, and the best Tombstone that can be laid
upon them; and in truth how shall such an Obloquy be wiped away but by an
entire Dissolution of them?

Fourthly, This present Company, or Joint Stock, is not only guilty of those
vile infamous Acts beforementioned, but as the sad provoking Aggravation
thereof have perpetrated many of them in the sight of the Sun, under the
hypocritical Disguise of Justice declaring their Sin as Sodom, not being
ashamed thereof, glorying therein, instead of coming upon their Knees,
acknowledging their Guilt, giving Glory to God by Confession and Repentance,
(if peradventure Remission may be granted them by a merciful and just God) and
satisfaction to man for Injuries done them, they have offered in the pride and
arrogance of their hearts to justify the same at the Bar of the Honorable
House, and endeavored by base indirect means to stifle and take off the
Evidence, and still continue in the same humor, as appears in their Narrative,
and seem not all sensible of their impious Acts, more than of the Punishment
that threatens them, being Pharaoh like, as it should seem, judicially
hardened, past repentance, never to be convinced, never to be converted, but
become detestable to God and man; to man for injuries done them, to God for
their riveted impenitency; therefore by no means to be continued, grafted on,
or clouted, but as past all hopes (Ne pars sincera trahatur) there remains only
the last remedy, an utter Dissolution of them. Amen, Amen.

Fifthly, This present Company, or Joint Stock continued, and grafted on, will
not consist with the Honor and Justice of the Nation, who in their
Representatives, upon a full hearing at their Bar, and serious Debate thereon,
have voted them guilty of no less than murdering the Subjects of England. And
who can have the confidence to desire the Continuance of, or the Folly to join
with such a Society? And what a Reflection will it be to have the same Society
established by the Nation? It has been a common Observation, that such as the
House of Commons have at any time showed their Dislike of, charged or
impeached, what Interest soever they might have had before in the Nation's
Esteem, and what methods soever they may have used to keep up, or regain their
Credit; yet tho they may have secured themselves in their Stations, and
continue their Nests on high, yet they never regain the favor and good will of
the People, or Nation: nor is there any Love ever lost on the other side, it
rarely happening, but that such Persons or Societies ever after prove bitter
Enemies to a Free House of Commons. Instances hereof many might be given, but
the Living shall be spared, and the Dead covered; and will the Commons of
England, after such a Vote, ever have any thoughts of constituting them a
ruling Corporation? What might then be expected but reacting the same Mischiefs
with a greater malice, as always has been in such Cases; but let never such a
thing be said of our Healers and Restorers, but let their Votes proceed to
Judgment; and the lowest piece of Justice that can be inflicted on them, the
smallest Atonement that can be made to the Honor and Justice of the Nation, is
a disenabling them to act the same over again, which can be by no other means
than discharging them their Office, which is dissolving of them.

Sixthly, This present Company, or Joint Stock grafted on, will be a great
hazard and insecurity to the Nation; the Trade of India is of vast import to
the Kingdom, and is computed by some to amount to an eighth, by others a sixth
part of the Trade thereof; and the Power and Interest, especially Naval, of
such a Company, will be exceeding great, which according to the grafting Model
will terminate and resolve into the same Hands it is in at present, and has
been for some time; and what sort of Men these are for Principles and Practices
their own Acts have sounded forth to the whole World, as well in what has been
performed under the Conduct of this Society, as otherwhere. This very Society
was of the first that made Addresses to the late King, with a promise of
slavish compliance to that illegal arbitrary demand of continuing the Customs
then expired, to the encouraging and setting up of Popery and Tyranny, and was
a leading Card to the rest of the lesser Companies, and particular Merchants to
a tame submission to that Badge of Slavery, Raising Money by Proclamations, and
of this Action they publicly and highly boasted, valuing themselves mightily
thereon. But how much favor and respect they or their Introducers deserve of
the Nation on that account, is soon cast up: and more particularly diverse of
them have declared themselves, upon all Accounts, Friends to Arbitrary Power
and Tyranny, and have been paltry Tools of State in the late Reigns. To whom do
we owe the grand Invasion of our Liberties and Properties, the fatal Violation
of the Privileges and Rights of this great City, and all the direful unblessed
Consequences that succeeded, but to some of the prime Adventurers and Managers
amongst them, who have signalized their Zeal to a Government, in Church and
State, neither agreeable to the Laws of our Land, Good and Liberty of the
Subject, or to the pure undefiled Protestant Religion. And will the Wisdom of
the Nation think fit to put so great a Power and Interest into the Hands of the
late King's Tools? How great mischiefs might thence arise to the Nation on
sundry Accounts, is better to be imagined, and provided against, than tried and
felt; therefore may there be no Grafting, but a Dissolution, which infallibly
secures us in that respect.

Seventhly, This present Company, or Joint Stock grafted upon, will no ways
answer the End designed of making the Trade, or Management thereof more
Diffusive and National, according to the Constitution of this Kingdom, and
Native Right and Liberty of the People, but will still be a sore Monopoly to
the great Grievance of the Subject. The Proposal of Enlargement being only to
one Million, and the old Stock being calculated (tho not really worth one
Groat) to amount to three parts of four of it, the new to be joined thereto, it
follows, must amount to no more than a fourth part of the whole, or a third
part of the present Nominal Stock: so that the old Adventures will be three to
one before any new Subscriptions, and most probably four or five to one after
Subscriptions; for their own engrossing policy will oblige them to subscribe
largely to keep it in their own Hands; and then what sort of Enlargement or
Grafting will this be? What considerable part of the Nation will have room to
come in? And what kind of persons must those few be, seeing it will not be the
Interest of either wise politic men, nor of honest good men to engage, so that
it will necessarily remain in the hands of the same arbitrary persons it is now
already in, and this Grafting or Splicing will make no Alteration in the
Management neither; for as they have projected the Business by the ten Votes,
which is the same in this respect, as two hundred, tho they should be all new
Men chat come in and graft, yet they can make no Balance with the old ones, no,
not to make one Committee-Man; therefore, of course, it must fall into the
hands of the same numerical persons, and having the same Managers there will be
the same Fruits, and so continue, as hitherto it has been, an intolerable
Burden, an unsupportable Yoke of Iron, under which the whole Nation complains
and groans, and have their Eyes fixed upon the Parliament for redress, before
whom the Case is spread.

Eighthly, The present Company, or Joint Stock have enjoyed this Trade of India
solely to themselves, exclusive to all others, in a Monopoly upward of thirty
years, to their vast advantage; and surely such have no reason to complain of
Injustice, or any hard usage, if the Nation should after their so long an
Enjoyment resume the Trade into its own Hands, and dissolve their Society, more
especially seeing they may all come in, and partake of the New Joint Stock in a
National Way by becoming Subscribers thereto.

Ninthly, The dissolving this present Company, or Joint Stock, and erecting a
new one, is the most likely, probable, ready way to retrieve our lost decayed
Trade of India, and procure and settle a firm lasting Peace on good Terms with
the Indians. What Peace will they grant or keep so long as those that have been
the Causes and Executors of all the Mischiefs that have befallen, be continued
in power? Or what assurance can they have of those that have broken all Faith
and good Manners with them.

Tenthly, The Dissolution of this present Company, or Joint Stock, and
Establishing a new National One, will greatly enlighten the Nation, and make no
mean Discovery of hidden Works of Darkness, useful to be known to the public;
the grand Dispute of the Greatness of their Stock will then be at an end, all
will appear manifest and open. If it prove as they say, the Benefit will be
their own; but if otherwise, the People will be undeceived, and see what
Imposals they have been under, and what Dangers they are delivered from; the
whole Intrigue of the Management will be made apparent, how they have complied
with, and crouched to an inslaving Court, to establish in themselves a
Despotick Power, only to satisfy their own corrupt inclinations, help forward,
settle and bind on the Subject of England a Court designed Tyranny, and many
other Nests of Villainy, which then will not any longer be concealed.

Eleventhly, The dissolving this present Company, or Joint Stock, and
establishing a new National One, will much tend, be a great help, and go far
toward a full entire Settlement of the Nation, it being a Concern of such
extent, as an eighth or sixth part of the Foreign Trade of the Kingdom.

Twelfthly, The dissolving this present Joint Stock, and establishing a new
National One, is that which agrees and falls in with the Genius of the most
considerable part of the Nation at this Day; and in public Reformations it
has generally seemed expedient, to the Wisdom of Parliaments, to proceed in,
and take such Methods as are most agreeable to the Constitution of the Nation,
the Laws of the Land, Right of the Subject, and consonant to the Bent and
Spirit of the best and most thinking part of the People, which seems absolutely
against confirming any illegal, or grafting, clouting, patching, splicing any
weak, doubted, failing, drooping, Nominal Stock, but wholly for a Bran-New One,
erected by new Subscriptions, established and settled by Parliament upon such a
Basis and Constitution as may make it most Nationally extensive, according to
the Birthright of the Subject, and most suitable and advantageous for the said
Commerce.

Much more might be added upon this Subject; but what is already offered, if
well weighed, is conceived, will fully evince what was undertaken; and
therefore to sum up all, seeing the present Company appears to have only an
imaginary Stock for the carrying on the Trade, and that its Constitution is
illegal and pernicious, founded on Arbitrary Power, and accordingly have acted
so, as to bring themselves under dismal Obloquies by unlawful Dispossessions,
and girding themselves with the Blood of the Subject, without any remorse,
ready to act the same over again, tho under the Judgment of the Nation
condemned by the House of Commons, therefore never to be trusted more; so that
it will neither consist with the Justice, Honor or Security of the Nation to
have this Company continued, nor the Wisdom, Honesty, Integrity, Genius and
Spirit of any true English Men to graft thereon, seeing it can make no
Alteration in its Constitution, Management or Managers, nor any ways wipe off
that Obloquy it lies under in the sight of the Nation. Therefore it^s necessary
it be dissolved, being its Dissolution is no injury to the concerned, they
having enjoyed the same, to the Nations damage, thirty years, and upward, and
it being the most probable means of restoring the Trade, and settling a firm
lasting Peace with the Indians, and is that which will bring to light many
hidden Works of Darkness, to the Satisfaction, as well as Benefit of the
Subject, tend much to the settling the Nation, is suitable to the Laws of the
Land, Liberty of the Subject, and to the present Inclination of the sober
considerable part of the People. Surely none that have any love for their
Country, and can prefer a vast lasting National public Utility and Advantage,
but must absolutely conclude against Graftings, and entirely for dissolving
this present Company, and erecting and establishing a new National Joint Stock,
more Extensive and Universal, on a better Constitution and Terms of Settlement.
Which is the earnest Desire of all true hearted English Men; and the sole
Design of this Paper.

London, January 3, 1689/90.
FINIS.

