THE RECANTATION, AND HVMBLE SVBmission of two ancient PRELATES, of the
Kingdom of SCOTLAND: Subscribed by their own hands; and sent to the General
Assembly. As also, THE ACT OF THE said Assembly, condemning EPISCOPACY and
other abuse which are contrary to the WORD of GOD, and the Laws of this Church
and Kingdom.

Printed in the year, 1641.

THE BISHOP OF DVNKELL his Recantation.
BE it known to all men, I Mr. Alexander Lindsay Minister at St. Madois,
for so much as I by my Missive Letter sent by me to the General Assembly of the
Kirk of Scotland, holden at Glasgow, the 21. of November. 1638. did freely
submit my self, and dimit and lay down at the feet of the said Assembly my
pretended Office of Episcopacie, as pretended Bishop of Dunkell, and my Letter
promised and subscribed with ample form of dimission there anent, as the said
Assembly should subscribe. And now the said reverend Assembly has found and
declared the said Office of Episcopacie as it has been used and termed within
the said Kirk of Scotland, to be abjured by the Confession of Faith of the
said Kirk subscribed in the years 1580. 1581 and 1590. And therefore has
declared and decerned the said Office to be removed out of the said Kirk of
Scotland. As also seeing the Reverend Assembly has decerned Me according to my
said Letter, to subscribe a more ample form of Dimission of the said pretended
Office, in presence of Sir John Moncreeffe, Knight Baronett, Mr. Robert Murray
Minister at Methven, Mr. John Robertson, Minister at Perth, Mr. Alexander
Petrye Minister at Kind, and Thomas Durham Burges of Perth, Commissioners
appointed by them for that effect. Therefore and for performance of my said
Letter, and in obedience to the ordinance of the said Reverend Assembly; Wit
you me to have Dimitted, quytclamed, and simpliciter overgives the foresaid
pretended Office of Episcopacie, as pretended Bishop of Dunkell, with the whole
Title, Style, Name, and Dignity thereof: Power of Ordination, and
Jurisdiction, Voice in Parliament, and usurpation of the same in time coming.
And faithfully promises, and by these presents binds and oblidges me, never to
exerce, nor use the said pretended Office, in the said Kirk of Scotland; Nor
no power of Ordination, Jurisdiction, Voice in Parliament, neither any other
Power Ecclesiastical, belonging, usurped, and acclamed to belong to the said
pretended Office. Like as, according to the Act of the said Reverend Assembly,
I acknowledge the said Office of Episcopacy to be abjured in the f^^esaid
Confession of Faith; and therefore most justly ought to be removed out of the
said Kirk of Scotland; and these whole Premises I heartily acknowledge, As I
will answer to God. In testimony hereof, I am content and consents, that these
Presents be insert, and Registrate in the General Books of Assembly, therein
to remain Ad (...) rei memoriam. And to that effect constitutes my lawful
Procurators, conjunctly and severally, Promitter (...) rato. In witness
whereof (written by Robert Re(...), servant to Pattrick Rosse Nottar in Perth)
I have subscribed the same with my hand, as said is. At St. Madois, the 24. of
January 1639. Before these witnesses,

Students in Perth.
Mr. George Paterson, Mr. Allexander Dundie,
George Boswall, servant to. SirIohn Moncreeffe.


THE BISHOP OF ORKNAY his Recantation.
TO all and sundry whom it effeeres; To whose knowledge these Presents shall
come; especially, to the Reverend and Honorable members of the future Assembly
to be holden at Edinburgh the 12. of August 1639. I Mr. George Grahame sometime
pretended Bishop of Orknay, being sorry and grieved at my heart, that I should
ever for any worldly respect have embraced the order of Episcopacy; the same
having no warrant from the Word of God: and being such an Order as has had
sensibly, many fearful, and evil consequences in many parts of Christendom*
And particularly, within the Church of Scotland, as by doleful, and deplorable
experience this day is manifest, to have Disclamed* Like as, I, by the tenor
hereof, do altogether disclame, and abjure all Episcopal power, and
jurisdiction, with the whole corruptions thereof, condemned by lawful
Assemblies within the Church of Scotland. In regard the same is such an Order,
as, is also abjured within the said Church, by virtue of that National Oath
which was made in the year of God 1580. and 1581. Promising and swearing By the
great Name of the Lord our God, etc. That I shall never while I live, directly
exerce any such power within the Church; neither yet shall I ever approve, or
allow the same: not so much as in any private or public discourse, But on the
contrary, shall-stand and adhere to all the Acts and Constitutions of the late
Assembly holden at Glasgow* the 21. of November. 1638. Last by past: And shall
concur to the utter most of my power, sincerely and faithfully, as occasion
shall offer in executing the said Acts; and advancing the work of Reformation
within this Land; To the glory of God, the Peace of the Country, and the
comfort and contentment of all good Christians, As God shall be my help. In
testimony of which Premises, I have subscribed these Presents with my hand;
At Brecknesse in Stromnes the 12. of February 1639. Before these witnesses.

Mr. Walter Stewart Minister at Sowthronaldsay. Mr. James Cheene Minister at
Kirkwall. Mr. Robert Person Minister at Firth. Mr. Patricke Grahame Son to
the said Bishop. Minister at Holme,


THE ACT OF THE General Assembly.
THe Kings Majesty having declared, that it is his Royal will and pleasure,
that all Questions about Religion and matters Ecclesiastical, be determined by
the Church: having also by public Proclamation Indicted this free National
Assembly, for settling the present distractions of this Church; and for
establishing a perfect Peace, against such divisions and discords), as have
been sore displeasing to his Majesty, and grievous to all his good Subjects.
And now his Majesty's Commissioner John E. of Traquair, instructed and
authorized with a full Commission, being present and sitting in this Assembly,
now fully conveened and orderly constitute, in all the members thereof,
according to the order of this Church having at large declared his Majesty's
zeal to the Reformed Religion; and his Royal care, and tender affection to
this Church; (where his Majesty had both his Birth and Baptism) his great
displeasure at the manifold distractions, and divisions of this Church and
Kingdom; and his desire to have all our wounds perfectly cured, with a fair
and Fatherly hand. And although in the way approved by this Church, trial has
been taken in former Assemblies before from the Church Registers to our full
satisfaction. Yet the Commissioner making a particular inquiry, from the
members of the Assembly now solemnly conveened concerning the real and true
causes, of so many and great evils at this time past, and so sore troubling the
Peace of the Church and Kingdom. It was represented to his Majesty's
Commissioner by this Assembly; That besides many other, the maine and most
material causes were,

1. First, the pressing of this Church by Prelates with a Service Book, or
Book of Common Prayer, without direction or warrant from the Church, and
containing besides the Popish frame thereof, diverse Popish errors, and
Ceremonies; and the seeds of manifold gross superstitions, and Idolatry: with
a Book of Canons, without warrant er direction from the General Assembly;
establishing a Tyrannical power over the Church in the person of Bishop; and
overthrowing the whole discipline and government of the Church by Assemblies*
with a Book of Consecration, and Ordination, without warrant of authority
Civil or Ecclesiastical, appointing Offices in the house of God, which are
not warranted by the Word of God; and repugnant to the Discipline and Acts of
our Church: with the Commission erected without the consent of the Church,
subverting the Jurisdiction and ordinary Judicatories of this Church; and
giving to persons merely Ecclesiastical the power of both Swords; and to
persons merely Civil, the power of the Keys and Church Censures.

2. A second cause was the Articles of Perth (viz.) Observation of Festival
days; kneeling at the Communion; Confirmation; Administration of the
Sacraments in private places which were brought in by a Civil Assembly; and
are contrary to the Confession of Faith 1590 as it was meant and subscribed in
Ann. 1580. and diverse times since to the order and Constitution of this Church.

3. A third cause was, the change of the Government of the Church, from the
Assemblies of the Church to the persons of Churchmen; usurping the priority
and power over their brethren, by the way, and under the name of Episcopal
government, against the Confession, Anno 1580. Against the order set down in
the Book of Policy; and against the intentions and Constitutions of this Church
from the beginning.

4. A fourth cause was, the Civil places and power of Church men, their
sitting in Session, Counsel, and Exchequer: Their Ridding sitting and voting
in Parliament; and their sitting in the Bench as Justices of Peace, which
according to the constitutions of the Church, are incompatible with their
spiritual function, lifting up above their brethren, and worldly pomp, and do
tend to the hinderance of the Ministry.

A fifth cause was, The keeping and authorizing of corrupt Assemblies at
Linlithgow 1606. 1608. at Glasgow 1610. at Aberdene 1616. at St. Andrews 1617.
at Perth 1618. which are all null and unlawful, as being called and constitute
quite to ^ order and constitutions of this Church, received, and practiced ever
since the Reformation of Religion. And withal (...)ing to introduce Novations
within this Church, against the order and Religion established.

A sixth cause was, The want of lawful and free General Assemblies, rightly
constitute of Pastors, Doctors, and Elders yearly or oftener pro re rata,
according to the liberty of the Church, expressed in the Book of Policy, and
acknowledged in the Act of Parliament 1592. Which his Majesty's Commissioner
having heard patiently, and examined particularly, and all objections to the
contrary being answered to the full. The whole Assembly with express consent
of his Majesty's Commissioner, in one heart and voice did declare that these
and such other proceedings, from the neglect and breach of the N(...)all
Covenant of this Church, and Kingdom made in (...) have been indeed, the true
and maine cause of all our evil (...) and distractions. And therefore ordaines,
according to the Const^tutions of the General Assemblies of this Church, and
upon the grounds respective above specified, that the foresaid Service Book,
Book of Cannons, and Ordination, and High Commission be rejected still: That
the Articles of Perth be no more practiced: That Episcopal Government and the
Civil places and power of Churchmen, be holden still as unlawful in this
Church: That the above named pretended Assemblies at Linlithgow 1606. 1608. at
Glasgow 1610. at Aberdean 1616. at St. Andrews 1617. at Perth 1618. be
hereafter accounted as null and of none effect; and that for preservation of
Religion, and proventing all such evils in time coming, General Assemblies
rightly constitute, as the perfect and competent. Judge of al matters
Ecclesiastical hereafter be kept yearly and oftener as occasion and necessity
shall require. The necessity being first remonstrate to his Majesty by humble
Supplication; as also of these occasional Assemblies, that Church Sessions,
Presbyteries, and Sinodall Assemblies, constitute and ordained according to the
Book of Policies, and Constitutions of this Church, be also hereafter kept as
occasion and necessity shall require.

FINIS.

