A SERMON Delivered at MAIDSTON IN KENT, At the ASSIZES there held, August 23.
1641.

Cant. 3.5. I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and by the
Hindes of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my Love, till she please.

1 Cor. 14.33. For God is not the Author of confusion, but of peace, as in all
Churches of the Saints.

Augustine. in Johan. tract. 104. -- ut in illo pacem haberent, propter quod
totum agitur quod Christiani sumus. Haec enim pax finem temporis non habebit,
sed omnis piae nostrae intentionis actionis que, finis ipsa erit.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for John Stafford, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Chancery Lane over against the Rolls. 1642.

To the Reverend and Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Mallet Knight, one of the
Justices of the Kings Bench, and Judge of Assize in the County of Kent.
And also to the Honorable Sir Edward Deering, of Surenden Dering in Kent,
Knight and Baronet, one of the Knights of the shire for Kent: health and
happiness eternal in Christ Jesus.
Right Honorable,
THe reason why I adventure this Sermon to the public view, is because I
understand, it was, in the delivery, mistaken by some hearers, whose second
thoughts, I am confident, upon their better scanning it, will be more
charitable: my whole scope being to persuade to an holy unity in Christ, which
every son of peace wishes with me* Our present necessity may satisfy a
considering man, why I put it under the Sanctuary of both your names, one being
our Judge and interpreter of the Laws, and the other one of the lawmakers in
the most honorable high court of Parliament: seeing we now want both good
laws, and right interpretation of the same, for the suppressing the disturbers
of the Churches peace, and for the settling of an happy unity: to which I only
add the hearty prayers for the good success of your prudent endeavors and
the humble tender of the love and service of

The least of Christ's Ministers Io. Reading.
Dover, October. 25. 1641.
Romans 16.17. I beseech you brethren, mark them who cause divisions and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine ye have learned, and avoid them.


RIght Honorable, Exodus 28.1.
and the rest beloved in Christ Jesus, your knowledge of the relation between
Moses and Aaron, magistrate and minister, state and church, religion and
policy, discharges all Apology, for choice of this Text, which like the
worlds great eye upon the hemisphere, limited to no region, city or person,
looks upon all duties humane and divine, therefore I beseech you --

The sum is an exhortation to vigilant constancy: Church and state are as a
besieged city: some assail aperto Mart, they are more easily discovered, some
insidiis, more mischievous are they who sting the bosom, which are shut up in
the infected veins: therefore I beseech you brethren mark them --

He had carefully prescribed, quid enim prodest antidotum cui superfunditar
vencuum? Tertul.
now he prohibiteth: the most divine precepts cannot profit us, if some
contrary evil corrupt us. He had by name described those whom they should
follow: he gives a character of false brethren without name ('it is the candor
of holy writ, liberal in honoring the Saints memories, to forbear
unnecessary branding sinners) it is the vice, not the person which is dangerous:
therefore I beseech you brethren, mark them who cause divisions and offenses,
contrary to the doctrine ye have learned, and avoid them.

The parts are the 1 Form which is hortatory: wherein note, the 1 Obtestation,
I beseech you. 2 Compellation. Brethren.
2 Matter, which is an advertisement to a grand inquest, mark them, in which
observe, the 1 Duty enjoined 1 Mark them. 2 Avoid them.
2 Delinquents concerning whom the Apostle uses this vehement entreatie,
authors of dissension which cause divisions, and offenses.
3 Mark by which they may be known, or the offense enquired after, divisions
and offenses: with the secret danger thereof, in that they are beside, and
near, but contrary to the doctrine. 4 Aggravation of the offense, from the 1
Rule against which the transgression is: the doctrine. 2 Example which
themselves have given, which ye have learned: it were desperate levity to
desert it now.



(...). obsecro. August. in Romans oro. Ambros. (...). Oecum in Loc.
I beseech you. By a mild, and humble entreaty, he puts on the person of a
suppliant: not for the advance of his own profit, but theirs.

That which the ministers entreat you, is your own good, peace and salvation.
If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self -- Prove. 9.12. so. Romans 12.1.
I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God -- to what end? that ye may prove
what is the good will of God* so Phil. 2.1. if there be any consolation in
Christ, if any comfort of love if any fellowship of the spirit -- to what end?
that nothing be done through contention, that's your own good.

Use.
Here Is no vobis coniunctim et divisim committimus et firmiter iniungendo
mandamus -- not that he had not power of mandats ( we are ambassadors for
Christ: 2 Cor. 5.20.
as though God did beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ's stead that ye
be reconciled unto God; that is your own good) but because lenity can do more
then rigor, a mild hand makes better impression then then a rigid and
imperious injunction can: sanctity cannot be forced, neither will opinion: if
God should compel, he left no place for sin or sanctimony, which are only
in actions voluntary: the Devil cannot compel to sin, neither will God to
obedience: where necessity enforces, there is no sin; where compulsion
extorteth obedience, no sanctity. No man can be holy, or wicked, except he
will; the will must have a part in either, to denominate the good or evil. The
softened wax best takes the impression: therefore the Apostle placed this maine
exhortation amongst his salutes, which gave that temper to their affections:
it is a great matter to have a good opinion of the speakers love and integrity:
therefore meekness and lenity, is the only way to prevent, and retrench
discords, there is place for rigor, Romans 13.
that's when lenity is impiously contemned: there are that carry not the sword
in vain: but our part is entreaty. Gregor. Epist.
Pastores facti sumus, non percussores: our commission is, that which was given
Peter, Ioh. 21.15.16. pasce oves meas, not that Act. 10.13. kill and eat. When
things (especially adiaphorous) are too rigidly pressed, it wounds the
infirm, and scandaleth the strong. Lib. 5.
Lactantius said it well in general, religion cannot be compelled, verbis
potius quam verberibus res agenda est. when Peter smote Malchus in Christ's
defense ( Malchus one of them who came to lay impure and violent hands on
Christ) he not only prohibited Peter's violence, but healed Malchus ear, When
the Holyghost descended on Christ, Cyprian.
'twas not in the form of an imperious eagle or bird of prey, but in the
likeness of an harmless dove. Violence and religion are unconsistent: not
that the corrupters thereof, and state-threatning schismatiks may not be
restrained, or punished: but because our sword is only spiritual: coercive
power by smiting uncurable parts, appertains to the civil Magistrate:
therefore where we have not power to prevent an imminent danger, we pray your
help. Therefore we beseech you brethren, mark them who cause divisions and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine ye have learned, and avoid them.

Brethren.
Our second part is the compellation, Brethren -- it has a sweet violence to
persuade, among the sons of God, The name of b^otherhood is an argument of
unity, God intended it so, who made us all of one parent, all brethren, and
adopted us all in one Christ, in whom we are all members of one body. Brethren
to dwell together in unity; ecce quam bonu^, and qua^ jucundum. It Is like the
precious ointment upon the a capite venit unguentum, caput nostrum Christus
est, Aug. in Psalm.
head (the love of cuius unctio omnem ecclesiam penetraret. Prosp. Romans 13.
Matthew. 5.
Christ descending upon the whole church) like the dew of Hermon (the nurse of
plenty) there the Lord promised the blessing: brotherly love is the sum, and
perfection of the law: the balance of the sanctuary, the sal foederis: without
it God accepts no service: if this fail, religion dies.

Abraham could find no such enforcing motive to peace, as this sacred name of
(...). Chrysostem. ^^o 32. In Romans Genesis 13.8.
brother: let there be no contention between thee and me -- for we are
brethren -- if the spirit of adoption dwell in us, let it now prevail with us,
Mark Them.
I beseech you brethren.

So come we from the form, to the matter, and first to the first duty mark
them -- we must diligently mark the causers of divisions and offenses: we have
need of diligent caution, these De Arab. serpent. inquit solinus. 144. f.
morsum ante^ors, qua^ dolor i^sequitur.
serpents kill before they are perceived tosting: therefore you must (...).
Oecum
(...), thoroughly view, inform your selves, Syrus, legi^, caveatis abillis a
(...) Zabar ado onuit, diligens fuit* Vt^pe ulamini. Tremel. ut e u^^deretis.
Erasm. Heb.

(...) a verbo (...) custo. livit ut Hos. 12.2 Sam. 11 Custo. livit oves: unde
(...) Custodes, qui per noctem vigilant. Psalm. 130.6. 1 Chronicles. 9 19. unde etiam
(...) custodia, career, Genesis 40. Genesis 42. (...), est attente, and diligenter,
quasi hosts e sp^cula observare. Beza. tanquam ^x semetipsis manifesti non
sint, dicit obsecro -- ut observetis, (...). Chrysostom. 9. s. ostendit astutiam,
(...). Oecum. a (...) etc.


beware of them and restrain them: some copies have (...), mark them
diligently, as Saul said of David, he is subtle and crafty, see therefore and
know all the secret places where he hides himself: if we would mark well, we
should find that'tis the Devil who is the author of dissension; and wicked
men further it: therefore whether they veil their working, under pretense of
Zeal, care of reformation, or what ever other show of good, mark them well
who cause divisions: for (as the Romans once thought of their L Florus, hist.
Romans l. 2. c. 3. Major aliquanto labor erat invenire, quam vincere
Ligurian enemies) it is something more difficult to descry and find them out,
then to overcome them. They are of unwearied vigilance for mischief:
proportion your care hereto. 'Twas that which alluding to the name of (...),
the thief. Plut.
Demosthenes once seriously iested: my Lords of Athens (said he) how vigilant
ought we to be, seeing we have thieves of brass, and walls of clay.

He that keeps a treasure, Use.
watches all that come near it. Care has an hundred eyes. You whose charge
it is this day to mark offenders, mark them diligently: because it is Gods
work for the preservation of state and church: we want no Zeal for secular
matters: but when God and religion are interessed, how few mark diligently?
How rare are they who present, adulterers, factious schismatics, profaners of
sabboths, impious swearers, neglecters of Gods service? when it is infallible,
that from neglect of divine laws, flow all contempts of humane. Wicked men in
a state, are as ill humors in the body; if they be not corrected, all must
perish. he that punishes not the Qui de malis p^enas non sumunt, bonos affici
volunt injuriis Pytha. apud Stob. ^erm. demagistrat.
wicked, cannot preserve the good: now because it is not one Scipio minor
dicebat non possum simulet accu^ater esse and judex. Plut.
office to accuse and judge, mark them with your enditements: and be not
partial nor indulgent to sin. He that conceales another faults, makes them
his own. If you deceive the trust imposed on you: if you violate your oath to
God, to you must appertain that which Mordecai once Ester 4.14.
said in a like dangerous time, if thou hold thy peace at this time, comfort
and deliverance shall appear -- out of another place, but thou, and thy
fathers house shall perish, and who knows whether thou art come to this
office. for such a time? therefore mark them, and avoid them.

This is the second branch of the duty: authors of divisions, and offenses --
must be avoided, avoid them
receive him not to house, neither bid him good speed, 2 Ioh. 10. He says not,
raise tumults: to suppress them, it is (...). Chrys^st. in Romans Hom. 32.
enough to avoid them, meddle not with Prove. 24.21.
them that are seditious: reject him that is an heretic, after once, or twice
admonition, Tit. 3.10. be not companions with them, Ephesians. 5.7. Psalm. 18.26.
with the froward, thou will learn frowardness. Hebr. (...) s^ru. recedite a
(...) recessit, in Hubp. e^.

(...) removit abs^^it Genes. 8.13.

1 Samuel 28.3.9. (...) ab^cidit. Pythones. Montan. excidit. Iun. ^jecerat.
Vatablus.

(...) 70. exterminavit, perd^dit- (...) Targum abstulerat.


Men are, as the Astronomers say of the star Mercury, good, or malignant
according to their conjunction with others. Peter among the Apostles would lay
down his life for Christ, but among the conspirators in Annas Hall, Ioh. 18.25.
he denied him. How many millions go for company in Caravans to hell? P. Martyr
in Romans
Some understand this (...) of excommunication: but it is indeed as that reed
put into John's hand, Revel. 11.1. to measure within the temple, all that is
within the verge of the Church. Seeing then schismatics, and authors of
tumults, are as the lepers in Israel, as infected beasts in the flock, it
sounds to all Judges an amove^e, as Saul, 1 Samuel 28.3. (...) put away the
sorcerers and southsayers out of the land, so in the 2 Chronicles. 36.3. Pharaoh
Necho removed Iehoahaz, which 2 Kings. 23.33. is, he imprisoned him at
Ribrlath, thus judges must decline the authors of dissentions. To private men
who have no power of judicature it says, avoid ill company, the Syriac
interpreter gives it, long a Verb. (...) long remotum esse sic 1 Timothy 6.3.5.
Math. 7.23.
discedatis ab eis, good reason, ne mala vicini pecoris contagia laedant: it is a
desperate contagion, there is no security but in quick flight, and long distance
from it: ill company bane of hopeful youth, corrupter of innocence, sins
broker, vices pander, virtues underminer, nurse of impudence, modesties*
betrayer, gulf of many honorable patrimonies, unclean sincke of sin, I
beseech you mark and avoid all such: with how real a blessing should I
dismiss this congregation, if this one particle were fixed in the heart and
affection of every present auditor? how happy a church and state should we
presently see, if the innocent would withdraw themselves from the company of
corrupting Corahs. Satan could never prevail, did he not plow with our heifer,
and make men decoyes to betray men. What is that which precipitates young
prodigals to famine, nakedness, and so many illegal and impious ways, to
relieve themselves therein? what fills your prisons, and brings so many good
men's children to shame, and untimely ends, but ill company? Indeed God made man
a sociable creature, and said, it is not good for man to be alone, there is no
good without communion, ego ne in coelo solus: the most blessed being is in a
sacred society: but whereas God has set by thee so many good men, in whose
society thou might be happy, how wilfully do thou perish, whom none but
wicked company can please?

My Prove. 1.10. etc.
Son, Use.
if sinners entice thee, consent thou not, avoid them: if they say, come we
will lay wait for bl^ud, fill our houses with spoil -- cast in thy lot among
us; my son walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their
path, if the harlot tell thee of peace Prove. 7.15.
offerings, let not thy heart decline to her ways; avoid them which cause
divisions, and offenses.

We are next to consider the delinquents, Who cause.
concerning whom this vehement caution is used, those who cause divisions. They
that cause evil are most pernicious: thieves, harlots, murderers, all
offenders are worthy to be marked, nigro carbone, with the charactr.* of
justice; but especially they, who like the Jonah 4.7.
worm of Ionahs gourd, bite the very root of law and policy, by causing
divisions and offenses: these two like Genesis 34.25.
Simeon and Levi come upon the republique, and destroy all masculine virtue of
religion, and policy, by discurrendo d^ domo in domum adulantes quibusdam --
aliisvero detrahe^tes, and concitantes unum adversus alterum per detractiones.
Remig. (si sit eius) in Romans
running from house to house, flattering some, calumniating others, so
fomenting contentions: these Sallamanders live in the fire of strife, which
they industriously kindle: these are the pestes ecclesiarum, incendiaries of
state: Hells master workmen, who make Bethel (the house of God) (...) Cant.
2.17.
a Bether, montem divisionis. In fault are they, who being seduced, become an
accession to a tumultuous, seperating or offending party: but they are worst
who cause the mischief: in every offense, worst is he who causes others to be
bad. To make the people naked as Aaron did, is a great sin: but a greater
sin was Balaams, who taught them to cast stumbling blocks, to make Israel
fall. To cause others to sin, is to be a Devil, or his factor: the most
fearful instance of Gods justice is he, who causing others to sin becomes
impardonable.

It has ever been a great wisdom in greatest interests, to meet mischiefs
with timely preventions, by removing their causes: therefore the prudent
heathen made sundry laws of prevention. Such was that of Lentulus, to punish a
matron paena stupri who was seen in public without her Sine stola. Tertul.
Apol. c. 6.
veil: 'twas to prevent whoredom. Such was the Calpurnian law, and the
Ostracisme to prevent ambition, and oppression: such their Licinian law, to
prevent intemperance in diet. Such was Piso's law quas a provincialibus
quispiam nequiter extorsit. Alex. ab Alexand. l. 4.175. 6. a.m.
de pecuniis repetundis, to prevent extortion, oppression, and seditions,
thence arising. Such their Censorian law, punishing him that neglected to prune
his vines, or take the best season to sow, spend thrifts, prodigalls, and
company-keepers, by sequestring the wife, and childrens part, to prevent the
many mischiefs flowing into the state, through the ruin of private families.

If thou will truly serve the State, Use.
have a special eye to them who cause offenses; abetters, barraters, authors
of Libels, and seditious Pamphlets, causers of quarrels, men of unclean tongus,
and provoking language, corrupters of youth, receivers of stolen goods, lewd
houses, enticing harlots, drunkards, forcing or alluring others to excess; and
those Seminaries of innumerable evils, unnecessary and ill ordered
Victualling-houses, maintained by the sins of ill husbands, and misery of
famished wives and children: The man that Prove. 6.16.
raises contentions among brethren, God abhors; the man that persuaded to
serve other gods, was to be stoned without pity; sin is most venomous in the
root: I beseech you mark them principally which any ways cause it in others.

Here are the faults to be marked: Divisions.
1. Dissension, which is, (as Sucton. vit. Iul. Caes.
Sulla said) many Marii in one Caesar, all offenses in one. Dissension is a
fault against God, the God of peace: Religion the Doctrine of peace, and
community, and the public weal; for division imports plurality of united
parts, division pernicious to those parts whose life and safety is in unity:
Unity the Unitas enim coercet omnia, and regit. Ambros. in Psalm. 118. prolog.
Salsedo combinans of the body politic, the sacred bond of peace; the nerves
of State, the state of the blessed; but (...). Chrysostom. qo. s. Insidiarum
magistrum, vocat. Theodoret. ib.
division is the subversion of Church, and State: ^o kingdom (...). Nazian.
orat. 34.540. D.
divided, no not Satan's (the grand master of divisions) can stand: Dissensions
are the States Paralysis, policies dissenterie, bellows of devouring sedition;
therefore mark them that cause divisions. 1. Between God and man: P^ccata
enim sola separant inter hominem, and Deum, August. de p^c. mer* c. 20.
all sins are within this latitude; for these, comes the anger of God upon
the children of disobedience; for these the Lord has a controversy with the
land; for these he forsakes a people, and counsel perishes from the ancient;
valor from the strong, and equity from the Judge; retro que feruntur res
Daenaum, such was Isreal's case in their Apostacy, whither soever they went
out, the hand of the Lord was sore against them.

2. Between Gods vicegerents and his people; mischeivous practicers,
whispering jealousies into the sacred ears of Princes, to Qui a populo, and
amicis, Princ^pem submov^nt, qui internuncii sunt al. ud qua^ respondetur
referentes, claudentes Principem suu^ and agentes ante omnia ne quid sciat.
Aelius. Lampr d. Alex. sever.
alienate their affections from the people, to divide the head from the body:
(whereas the strength and securest treasuries of Princes, are their Subjects
loves) and scattering doubtful speeches, and seditious murmurings among the
people, to make them jealous of good Princes; as the tumultuous sounds from the
earths vast hollowes, are presages of ensuing earthquakes, and dreadful
Chasma's; such are these Chorahs murmurings.

3. Between the Prophets and the people, who under pretense of decrying the
ambition, corruption, and State-medling of some, show their hatred to all the
Ministers of Christ, flying on them with their Number. 16.3.
sat superque vobis, you take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation is
holy. I might say the Constantinus, in Synodo Nicaen. l^bellos acc^p^^ns
quaerelarum plenos quos ^i de privatis injuriis obtulerant Episcopi, eos ne
legendos quide sibi esse putavit, sed continuo slammis trad^dit. Ruffin. l. 1.
c. 2. Socrat. l. 1. c. 5. So^. l. 1. c. 16. Greg. epi. l. 4.75. Qui citantur.
Hist. Council. Nicaen. Bin. To. 1. p. 321. etc. 4.322.1 vid. Rev. 8.10.11.
contempt of the Ministry is the window open to Haeresie, Satan's principal
advantage, to suggest ill opinions of good ministers, seeing contempt of their
persons will like a Gangren quickly creep on to the contempt of their Doctrine;
but I must tell you, that another danger is, that the sacred band of Religion
once cast off, they who despise Aaron, will easily rebel against Moses also.

4. Between neighbors, either embarking Princes and kingdoms in bloody
quarrels; or by innovation in Rel^querunt Apostolum, sequuntur Aristotelem,
reliquerunt sapientiam quae apud Deum est, elegerunt disputationes, tendiculas,
and aucupia verboru^. Ambrose ^n Ps. 118. Ser. 22.2.
Doctrine, or Ceremonies breeding Schisms and tumultuous factions, filling
their holy Mother the Church (like that Grecian stratagem) Armato milite; or
by factious speeches, and writings, begetting dislike of wholesome government
(this is that Star Absynthium, fallen into our waters, embittering the sweet
currents of our peace and unity, and almost turning them into blood) or by
setting debate between neighbors, as talebearers, and incendiaries use; or
like men sick of opinions Calenture, casting themselves overboard by Sola igitur
Cathol^ca ecclesia est quae verum cultum retinct; hic est sons veritatis, hoc
est domiciliu^ fidei, hoc templum Dei, quod si quis non intraverit, vel a quo
siquis exiveri^^^e vitae ac salutis aeternae alie^us est Lact. l. 4. c. ull.
desperate separation from the Arc of Christ's Church.

This is the hea^ of impatience in those who consider not the offenses in the
purest age of the Church (wherefore else was this charge to mark the causers
thereof?) and that many things were endured by the Orthodox Ut causa and
persona Zizaniorum no^ prejudicaret causae, and personae tritici. August. To.
7. contr. Donat. post. col. c. 4. vid. ib. de pec. merit. c. 20. de Euch.
parvulis data. ib. To. 6. contr. Faust. Man^ch l. 20. c. 21. i^quit aliud est
quod docemus, aliud quod sustinemus, aliud quod praecipere ju^emur, aliud quod
emendare precipimur, and done^ emendentus tolerare compellimur. ib. tract. 10.
in Ioh. 2. quis comeditur zelo domus Dei? qui omnia quae forte ubi videt
perversa, satagit emendare, cupit corrigere, non quiescit: Si emendare non
potest, tolerat, gemit, non excut^tur de arca gra^^, sustinet paleam ut intret
in horreum, eum palea fuerit separata si granum es noli excuti dearea, ne prius
ab avibus colligaris, quam in horreum congregeris, etc.
Fathers for peace sake: who though they dissented in some things, yet held
they unity: it was that which Ib. To. 7. inquit quamvis ipsi and apud hereticos
eognoscant baptismum Christi; illi aute^ aliter visum sit ut per eum, minus
aliquid v^d^ntem, and in unitate firmissime permanemtem, manifestius
demonstraretur hoereticis, qua^ sacrilego scelere rump^retur vinculum pacis
etc. de bapt. contra. Donat. l. 6. c. ^.
Augustine said for excuse of Cyprian holding rebaptizing, and it was reverend
Beza's opinion, that the peace of our Church was not to be troubled for our
Ceremonies; divisions are desperate; the leprous parts may live, the divided
cannot; the Paschal Lamb was eaten in one house: Christ is no where
communicable but in his Church; Rahabs house was a type thereof, whosoever
goes out of it his blood shall be upon his head, Josh. 2.19. add hereto,
discord is the beginning of all evil; Laws are silent among Arms: divisions
in multitudes are storms upon great waters, which mischeivous breaths,
exagitate into rage: division in a State is as the bilging of a Shipp, breaches
in the wall, wounds in the body; it is Satan's Masterpiece, who taught the
Maxim, Divide, and impera: how easily shall we be overcome, if we be divided
among our selves? Concord is the nurse of plenty, the wealth of the poor, and
security of the rich, the strength of Kings, and blessing of the people: When
the dry bones in Ezekiel. 37.1.2, 3.
Ezekiels Vision, lay scattered in the fields, there was no lif^, but when they
were united, then they received breath. Wars and dissensions may seem sweet
to the ignorant; but O happy peace! did men but know thy value, what would they
not give, what not suffer for thee? Thou buildest Cities, make wholesome
Laws, plantest Vineyards, sowest the fruitful Valleys, stockest the pleasant
Gileads with numberless herds; thou make millions into one, and therefore
one strong as millions; I beseech you therefore, mark them who cause
Divisions, and Offenses.

Peace was the tenor of the Angels song, Luke 2.14. and the great (...).
Nazianz. Orat. 14.
legacy which Christ at his departure bequeathed his Disciples, John 1^.27.

(...), Off^nc^s.
Rocks of offense, 1 Pet. 2.8. to stumble at, such are all public sins;
offenses given are always sins in the givers; but offenses taken are not so,
except in the receivers; these easily flow in where (...). Oxumen.
divisions give them way: Origin takes both for dissentions, contrary to peace:
by schisms the seamelesse coat of Christ, and unity of the Church is rent; by
offenses God is dishonored, and the peace of the State is disturbed; both are
against the doctrine which we have learned.

So come we to consider the secret danger intimated, Contrary to, or beside.
in that these divisions and offenses, are near but contrary to the doctrine.
This (...), imports both: All division is not evil; come out of her my
People, cried the voice from Heaven, Revel. 18.4. that is to be understood,
where the foundation is raised; therefore we, separated from Rome, we must not
Qui malis and peccatoribus, et paenitenti (...) non agent^bus illicita
communicatione misce^tur; nocentiu^ contactibus pollu^^tur, and dum jungu^tur
in culpa sic: e^in paena separantur. Cyp l. 1. Ep. 4.
join our selves to Baal Peor out of the Church; nor with the seditious
congregation of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, within it. All division is not
dangerous; if the Chafe be gone, the Wheat is the cleaner, but evil and
mischeivous is that division, and those offenses which are (in show) near, but
(in deed) contrary to true doctrine. When the points stand like Deuteronomy. 27.12.13.
Ebal and Gerizzim, the mounts of cursing, and blessing; most pernicious is
that evil, which is near the good; take heed of the woolfe in sheep Quaenam
istae sunt pelles ovium n^si nominis Christiani extrinsecus superficies?
Tertul. de praescript. c. 4.
clothing, Use.
and of that Hi quibus multa nobiscu^ paria sunt facile possunt innoxias mentes
fraudulenta societate percutere, dum malorum suorum vir^s, per bona nostra
diffundunt. nihil enim periculosius his haereticis esse potest, quam, quicum
integre per omnia decurrant, uno tame^ verbo, ac si veneni gutta, meram illam,
ac simplicem fidem dominicae, and exinde apostolicae traditionis inficiunt;
unde nobis vehementer cavendum est, ne se vel sensibus vel auribus nostris
hujusmodi aliquid latenter insinuet, quia nihil tam cogit in mortem quam sub
obtentu fidei, fidem violare, etc. Ambrose de fide. contra. Arrian ca. 1.
poison whereof the least drop kills; evil and falsehood could not hurt, did
they not put on the appearance of good and true. Most pernicious is that Devil
which transformes himself into an 2 Cor. 11.
Angel of light. The most dangerous enemies to the repair of Ierusalems
ruins are they who say, Ezra 4.2.
we will build with you, for we seek the Lord your God, as ye do. Papists and
professed enemies may either be Vinci illi, vel facile possunt, vel facile
vit^ri. Ambrose, qo. sup.
overcome, or easily avoided; but those ambushes and stratagems are dangerous,
which are laid, (...), besides, and nigh, but contrary to the doctrine which we
have received.

Some cleave to our Church, as Barnacles to the Ship-side, only to foul and
disadvantage us; as the dead child to the womb, only to endanger us: I would
I could once say, they went out from us, as I can, they are not of us; in the
interim I say, beware of that evil, which comes near to the show of good;
none can so easily deceive you, as those Solim.
Hyaena's who have learned your voice, to draw you out to destruction; beware
of the Serpents of the color of the ground. When Paul had spoken, Acts 20.30.
of grievous wolves not sparing the flock, he adds a more dangerous
affliction; that of themselves men should arise speaking perverse things to
draw disciples after them. As Samson said to his brethren of Judah, Swear unto
me that ye will not fall upon me your selves, Judge. 15, 12. I may say to
those who profess the same Religion with us; I would I were secure of our
friends, I fear not our professed enemies: there seems no such present
danger, as that we may be wounded propriis spinis. Therefore mark them which
cause divisions seeming near, but contrary to the doctrine of God. Esaias 8.20.
This is our Cynosure, our Eastern star to lead us to Christ, the touchstone
of truth, our sheat-anchor holding us from being carried about of every wind of
doctrine; in every distraction we must have an eye to this, as the wounded
Israelites had to the brazen Serpent; and then let the adversary shake their
venomous tongues at us; it is no schism to divide from error, but from truth;
we have divided from their corruptions, according to, not contrary to the
doctrine here mentioned; to which we willingly appeal.

The doctrine of the Old and New Testament is the rule of Faith and manners;
Doctrine.
if this were limited only to Religion you would not with Gallio supersede it
as Acts 18.15.
a question of words, and names: no, no, it is no Deuteronomy. 32.47.
vain word concerning you, but it is your life; and by this word you shall
prolong your days in the land; the salvation of the people is the supreme
Law: how happy are they where the maine care is for this Doctrine; where
repair begins at the house of God, where this is neglected there is no due
Quomodo fidem praestabunt imperatori inviolata^ qui Deo sunt per ^idi? Said
Constantine the great.
obsequy to Princes, no holy duty between Children and Parents, no sanctimony
and equity between man and man; all which, and whatsoever else is good for the
societies of men, this doctrine commands in every branch, where
state-interests, humane policy, or secular cares come like those 1 Samuel 2.16.
impious novices to be served before God, no thing prospers; for the anger of
the Lord Hag. 1.9.
blasteth it; this is the 2 Timothy 3.16.
sum of all equity divine and humane; this prohibits every offense against
God, or Caesar. It will appear if we consider,

1. That God gave not only moral Laws, but judicial Statutes unto Israel;
and (though he now calls us not, by a Trumpet from the cloud to Mount Sinai) he
does Lex est velut emissa divinitus vox. Senec.
the same for us by good Lawmakers.

2. If we consider the excellency of Law, it is nothing else but the dictate of
reason, connaturall to man; an innate rule of equity, enlarged to common
necessities by prudent sanctions, Pausanias said, Legum in viros non virorum in
leges debet esse authoritas Plut. Lacon. Apoth.
which we all obey.

3. If we consider the necessity of Law; it is the Lex est, (...), Demosth.
foundation of Republiks: the sacrum Lex est vinculum civitatis, libertatis
fundamentum, sons equitatis. Cic.
vinculum societatis humanae (that is, no Commonwealth which has no Law) it is
Proprieties sanctuary; the oppressed man's releiver, preserver of men; the Quis
ergo miretur^b^s moribus, vir^ute, m^lit^a victorem Pop. Romanum fuesse L.
Flor. l. 1. c. 18
Horse and Chariot of Israel, the Vaumures of the City: what were we all
without Justice? A Ship without a rudder, Ut corpora nostra sine mete, sic
civitas sine lege: sui^ part^bus nervis sanguine and membris uti non potest.
Cael. Rhodig. lect. Anti. l. 18. c. 1^. Civitatis anima lex. Cael. Rhodig.
lect. Antiq. l. 18. c. 19. Communis r^cte vivendi regula. ib.
a body without a soul; never any State subsisted without it; never any but
flourished in the due execution of it: the Grecian, and Roman Monarchies are
instances; it was not so much their sword which made them such great Masters of
the World, as Justice which united them at home, without which, they must needs
have become a prey to other Nations: it is execution of Justice which makes
fast the bars of the Gates within, and renders a Nation renowned, and
dreaded abroad; Justice fills the veins of sovereign treasuries, whets the
sword, bends the bow, and armeth the Soldier with proof, and confidence of
the vigilant prudence of the State; whereas if ill counsel, and neglect of
justice at home, send up the cries of the oppressed (like that Josh. 8.23.
smoke of Ai) their hearts fall dead. Justice is a convoy to the solitary
traveller, an Hospital to the poor, a centinell to the sleeping, a lock to
the treasury, a fence about the fields and Vineyards, a garrison to the City, a
wall to our houses; in fine, whatsoever we have, or are in things secular,
under God we owe to Law and Justice, the nerves of War, and strength of
Peace; H^c sceler^ nisi aberunt centuplex murus rebus servandis parv'st. Plaut.
Pers.
without which, no armies can defend us, no fortifications secure us.

4. If we consider the things which differ from this Doctrine, it is not Leges
haud quaquam videri nu^ cupatione, sacrove dignas titulo, quinimo decret a dici
ver^us edictave, a^ instituta^ siquidem, lex bo^a est aeterna ^^em -- a summo
est bono ac rursum in idem restuit Cael. Rhodig. Ant^q. lect. l. 18. cap. 19.
Law which is not consonant hereto; as Cum iniquae cognoscuntur, m^r^to
damnatur -- Tertul. adv Gent. ^.4.
Platos statutes for community, Solons for Harlots: me thinks when I read of
such impiety, under the sacred name of Law, I see the Endor Devil in an holy
Prophets mantle. -- Neque religio ulla si^e sapientia sus^^pienda. Lact. l. 1.
ib. l. 4. ^. 2. l. 4. c. 3. and^ b. c. 4.
Miserable are those states where Religion and Law are divided: There Ieroboams
policy, Pharaohs working wisely, and Pharisees projection to prevent the
Romans supplanting them, must prove but Achitophels infatuated counsels.

5. Lastly if we consider, that this doctrine is the -- s^iatis ipsas quoque
leges vestras, quae videntur ad ^nnocent^am pergere de d^vina lege vt
antiquioris formae mutuatas -- Tertull. Apol. c. 45.
Ocean of Justice to every humane Law which it feeds and maintains, and that
if you follow any stream thereof, it will lead you to the Word of God; for as
wisdom and truth is all of one God, whosoever deriveth it to us; so is
Justice his, who not only has it (as the creature may) but is it, as no
creature can be. 2. Cron. 19.6.
Iehosaphat said truly to the Judges, Ye execute not the judgment of man, but
of the Lord, for vengeance is his. The Heathens had some sense of that the
Apostle says, There is no power but of God; and that all humane Justice
flows from the Lex non est tantum donum DEI, sed ipse DEVS, qui donum dedit:
quia qui paret legi, DEO paret. Arist. Pol. l. 3. Aqu^n. 12. q. 91. a. 2. dicit
esse participationem legis aeternae, in creatura rationali --
Divine: Therefore their Lawgivers pretended the derivations of their Statutes
from some supposed Deity: As Zoroaster from Oromasis, -- Lycurgus Lacedaemo^^is
leges ex Apollinis autoritate se instituisse confinx^rit. etc. August. de. Civ.
DEI. l. 2. c. 16. Strabo. l. 10. eid. Arist. pol. l. 2. Coel. Antiq. lect. l.
18. c. 10.
Lycurgus from Apollo, Minos from Jupiter, Trismegistus from Mercury, Draco
and Solon from Minerva, Plato from Jupiter and Apollo.

1. It must touch all men's hearts with a reverend esteem of the Laws ( ^egum
id^ir^o omnes servi sumus, vt liberi esse poss^mus. Coel. Rhod. qo s.
which we serve that we may be free) and the ministers thereof, not only for
fear, but also for conscience sake; their contempt is the distemper and ruin
of the State.

2. It must say to the reverend Judges (as Iehosaphat once did, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.)
Take heed to your selves, for the Lord will be with you in the cause and in the
judgment.

3. It must say to all that hear this Doctrine, lay it up in obedient hearts;
it is as the dew distilling from Heaven, Deuteronomy. 32.1. let it not be entertained
as the sweet showers falling into the Sea, turning all to bitterness, as it
must do to them whom it cannot convert: Be not like the Fauces mar^s Caspii
vacuantur imbribus, crescunt estibus. Solin.
Caspian Sea, emptied with rain, and filled with heat, as some who learn, that
they may with false zeal seem to rail, and cast dirt into our mothers face;
this is contrary to peace, and the Doctrine which we have learned.

Our own example aggravates the crime of division and offenses, Which we have
learned.
we have learned that from the supreme Lawgiver; we owe obedience on pain of
eternal death. Miserable is that State where every man makes his own Religion
and Law; a Tyranny is better then an Anarchie, where every thing is lawful,
there is nothing lawful; therefore I conclude, that All miseries and disorders
flow into Church and State through these breaches of inconstancy to the
wholesome Doctrine and good Laws received: Mutations in Policy or Nobis vero
nihil ex nostro arbitrio inducere licet, sed nec eligere quoth. aliquis de
arbitrio suo induxerit. Apostolos Dom ni habe^us auctores, qui nec ipsi
quicquam ex suo arbitrio quod inducerent el^gerunt sed acc^ptam a Christo
discipl^nam sidelter nation^bus ad signav^runt Tertul. adve^s^^er. c. 6
Religion are dangerous; recruding of wounds will gangren the sound parts. I
will shut up all with an address.

1. To you, honored Lords: (...). Synoss. Ep. 31.
souls of Cities, who give Laws life, by executing them; wherein can I more
opportunely implore your help, then in the present danger? Of all offenders,
I beseech you mark them who cause divisions; that the wrath of God may be
diverted from this land: this Kingdom never suffered so much as in Divisions,
and intestine quarrels: none but for offenses suffer. I need not say, it is
easier to extinguish sparks, then enraged flames; nor that we are come to our
Massa and Meriba, and that if the leake of separation which has begun to fill
us with the waters of strife, be a little longer neglected, we are in danger of
foundering: I beseech you therefore heal the fountains by the salt of
Justice, and cast in the branch into the Marahs which now embitter us; you best
know how to let in floods of severity, as Solim.
Caius Marius did the Sea, whereby, Perniciosam ferventis Rodani navigationem
temperavit; these variable languages, wherein we cannot understand each other,
or for impatience will not; this strife of tongues following the crying sins
of this land, do not so much portend some ensuing, as point out a present
confusion.

2. To you, faithful Jurours, this day to make inquest; my text says, as Jud.
4.22.
Iael. Come and I will show you the men ye seek. Mark them who cause
Divisions.

3. To my brethren of the Ministry, I need not say, Mark them (you know them to
your grief) I say, Jer. 27.18.
If ye be Prophets of the Lord, entreat the Lord of Hosts, that the rest of
the vessels, which are left in the House of the Lord, go not to Babel.

4. To the jeering Chams (whose pastime is their Parents opprobrie) pretending
separation from sinners, but indeed with greater sins, because with much
greater pride and hypocrisy: I would say, if they would hear, Christ taught
none of his to separate from the well known Ipse trad^tor Christi de Apostol^s
fuit. Tertul. de pres^r. c, 3. sine.
Judas; Who taught you Division? if affection have left any place for reason,
consider the advantage you give the common enemy; division weakneth us, and
strengthens them, Hoc Ithacus velit, and magno mercentur Atridae. They can
never overcome us unanimous, let them not single us our, to our own
destructions.

5. To all that hear me, I beseech you brethren avoid them; whether
Innovators, or Separatists, the two smoking firebrands, the Scylla and
Charibdis, the gulfes and Chasmas of our Church and State (of whom I think as
Cicero, of the factious Caesar and Pompey, Quem fugiam scio, quem sequar
nescio) avoyde both extremes: hold fast the wholesome Doctrine, which ye have
learned; and the God of peace and unity say, Amen, and stir up some sons of
peace to sound the retreat; that it may not be bitterness in the end: and let
the contending parties say, Amen; and and patiently hear each other, as men
who strived for truth rather then for victory; (...), etc. G. Naz^anz. orat 14.
bearing (as much as the cause will permit) with the infirm: understanding our
common interest, that we may again see the face of the Primitive Church,
wherein all were of one mind, and one soul; and let all that love the peace of
God, unity of the Church, and prosperity of the State, say Amen: and the good
God make my blessing stronger then the blessing of my elders, that peace and
truth may be in our days, that we may appear with comfort, before the
tribunal of Jesus Christ; O Lord bow down thine ear and hear us, O Lord
consider and do it, etc.

AMEN.

