REASONS FOR CROWNING THE Prince and Princess of Orange KING and QVEEN jointly,
And for placing the Executive Power in the Prince alone.
WHereas the Grand Convention of the Estates of England, have asserted the
Peoples Right by declaring, That the late King James the Second, having
endeavored to Subvert the Constitution of the Kingdom, by breaking the
Original Contract between King and People: And by advice of Jesuits, and other
wicked Persons, having Violated the Fundamental Laws: And having withdrawn
himself out of this Kingdom, has abdicated the Government, and that the Throne
is thereby Vacant. For which Mis-government He has forfeited the Trust of the
Regal Inheritance of the Executive Power, both in Himself, and in His Heirs,
Lineal and Collateral; so that the same is devolved back to the People, who
have also the Legislative Authority; and consequently may of Right Give and
Dispose thereof, by their Representatives, for their future Peace, Benefit,
Security, and Government, according to their good Will and Pleasure. And
forasmuch as it is absolutely Necessary, that the Government be speedily
settled on sure and lasting Foundations, and consequently, that such Person or
Persons be immediately placed in the Throne, in whom the Nation has most reason
to repose an entire Confidence: It therefore now lies upon Us to make to
Judicious a choice, that we may, in all Humane Probability, thereby render Our
selves a Happy People, and give our Posterity cause to rejoice, when they shall
Read the Proceedings of this Wise and Grand CONVENTION. Who is it therefore,
that has so highly Merited, the Love and good Opinion of the People? the Honor
of Wearing the Crown, and Swaying the Scepter of this Land? As His illustrious
Highness the Prince of Orange, who with so great Expense, Hazard, Conduct,
Courage, and Generosity, had happily Rescued Us from Popery and Slavery; and
with so much Gallantry Restored Us to our ancient Rights, Religion, Laws,
Liberties, and Properties: for which Heroic Action, we can do no less, in
Prudence, Honor, and Gratitude, than pray Him to Accept our Crown.

II. It is better to settle the Exercise of the Government in One who is not
immediate in the Line, than in One that is, (1.) Because it is a clear Asserting
of a Fundamental Right that manifests the Constitution of the English
Government, and covers the Subjects from Tyranny and Slavery. (2.) It cuts off
the Dispute of the pretended Prince of Wales, (3.) The old Succession being
legally Dissolved, and a new one made, the Government is secured from falling
into the hands of a Papist.


III. The making the Prince and Princess of Orange King and Queen jointly, is
the Nation's Gratitude and Generosity: And by re-continuing the Line in
Remainder, is manifested the inesteemable Value the People have for the two
Princesses, notwithstanding the Maladministration of their Unhappy Father.

IV. The present State of Europe in General, and of these Kingdoms in
particular, require a Vigorous and Masculine Administration. To recover what is
lost, rescue what is in danger, and rectify what is amiss, cannot be effected
but by a Prince that is consummat in the Art both of Peace and War. Though the
Prince and Princess be King and Queen jointly, and will equally share the Glory
of a Crown, and we the Happiness of their Auspicious Reign* yet the wisdom of
the Grand Convention is manifested, (1st.) In placing the Executive Power in
one of them, and not in both; for two persons, equal in Authority, may differ
in Opinion, and consequently in Command; and it is evident no Man can serve two
Masters. (2ly.) It Is highly necessary and prudent;, rather to vest the
Administration in the Husband than in the Wife: (1.) Because a Man, by Nature,
Education and Experience, is generally rendered more capable to Govern than the
Woman. Therefore, (2.) the Husband ought rather to Rule the Wife, than the Wife
the Husband, especially considering the Vow in Matrimony. (3.) The Prince of
Orange is not more proper to Govern as he is Man, and Husband only, but as he is
a Man, a Husband, and a Prince of known Honor, profound wisdom, undaunted
Courage, and incomparable Merit; as he is a Person that is naturally inclined to
be just, Merciful and Peaceable, and to do all public Acts of Generosity for
the Advancement of the Interest and happiness of Humane Societies, and
therefore most fit under Heaven, to have the sole Executive Power.



Reprinted in the Year, 1689.


