THE MEANS OF Preventing, and Preserving from, and CURING of that most
Contagious Disease, called the PLAGUE: WITH The Pestilential Fever, and the
fearful Symptoms, and Accidents, incident thereunto.

Also some Prayers, and Meditations upon Death.

By one who desires it may be for the glory of God, and the good of all
People.

Amos 3.6. Shall there be evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it?

LONDON, Printed for H. Million, at the Half Moon in the Old Bayley. 1665.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER,
Kind Reader,
I Must beg one thing of thee, if God by his Providence glance thine eyes
upon this little piece, to read it throughout, for it is intended for the
general good of all, and especially for the Poor. I desire thee not to slight
this opportunity put into thy hands, for thou know not how few days may
pass over thy head, but thou thy self, or some of thy Friends, may perish for
want of such Directions as this small Treatise can afford thee; which under
God, may be an Instrument of much good unto thee, or thy Friends. This I do
promise thee, that when thou have bought it, thou would not be without it
for three times what it cost thee. Therefore neglect no opportunity wherein
thou may be doing good. Some may say, this is a little Pamplet, there be
greater Volumns both of Physic and Chyrurgery, published by men of known
Abilities: To this I may answer, that the wisest men seldom judge of things by
bigness, but trying all things, they embrace the best; And again, the poor are
locked from them several ways.

First, they are in Latin, so that the poor cannot read them: Or suppose there is
are enough to be bought in English, sure I am, the prices of them are so high
rated, that the poors purse will not bear it.

Here kind Reader, thou may have Directions that tend for the good of thy
soul, as well as thy body; And if thou reapest any benefit by this little
piece, return the praise and the glory of all unto God, then have I attained
the expected end of this my labor; Farewell.

M. R.

THE Means of Preventing, and Preserving from, and Curing of that most
Contagious Disease, called the PLAGUE.
The Plague what it is.
THe Plague is a Disease Venomous and Contagious and hateful to mankind, and
deadly for the most part, accompanied with grievous sores, as Carbunkles,
Botches, Blains, and also spots, and discolorings of the skin, by ancient
Writers, called Pestities, and in English, Gods Tokens; For the Pestilential
Bubo and Carbunkle, are more manifest signs of the Plague, than the spots, for
spots are seen in Fevers, which are not Pestilential.

The Plague may be fitly called the Rod of God, for the sins of the World: The
word Plague, signifies, a wound, a stroke, or a hurt, for whosoever has this
disease, he is wounded, plagued, stricken, and that by God, it is a killing
Disease, fearful to man, unawares seizes upon man's Body, sleeping or waking,
and being once entered, produces deadly accidents, it is compared with the
Basilisk that kills man by his sight, looking upon man; The Plague kills
those whom it breaths upon, no man can account himself free from it.

Many learned Writers testify this Disease proceeds from the influence of the
Heavens, so that, by their great distemperature the Air is Poyloned and
infected, which we are enforced to receive into the secret Closets of our
Bodies.

What safety have we then* or what can be a more fearfuller enemy to man, than
Pestilential Fevers? which seizes upon man as a Thief, at unawares, and lurks
in every corner of the House, in his Secret Chambers, threatening to take away
his life; when he least mistrusts, yea, when fast asleep; Such is this horrid
Disease, from which God in his mercy deliver us and our Land.

Of the parts of Man's Body the Plague invadeth.
Three parts Subject to Infection, the Animal, Vital, and Natural faculties,
which have their Seats in the Brain, the Heart and the Liver, on one or all
these the Infection seizes upon, and once entered, tryumpheth over the whole
body of man to his destruction, if God be not more merciful in his
Preservation.

The Plague is a Fever, he that has it, is not without a Fever, neither is
he freed from the danger of this Fever, till one, or more than one of the
Crisis happen; for until the Botch, Carbunkle, Blain, or Spots manifest
themselves, no account can be given, what will become of the Patient; We may
expect death, the distemper continuing.

Symptoms of Recovery.
The first is this: If a digestion in Nature follow, and the Fever cease, the
sick rest, a Botch come to good perfection, a Carbunkle to separation, and the
Blains drying, and withering, and cheerfulness appearing, then we may hope the
worst is past.

The causes of this Disease.
And that is the sins of all people; Sin makes God Execute this Judgment upon
a Nation; Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it.

Now God can put the Host of Heaven in order, to fight against us, and we have
no way to escape his Judgments but by Prayer and true Repentance, and this is
that, which brings a blessing upon the means you use for your Recovery.

The terrestrial Causes of the Plague, are these:
Vapors from stinking Ponds, Ditches, Dung-hills, Sinks, Channels, Vaults,
unclean Slaughter-houses of Beasts, dead Carcasses of Men; Stinking Fish,
Foul, any thing that has contained life and is putrified, and in great
Cities, as in London, unclean keeping of Houses, and Lains, Alleys, and
Streets, from these recited, and the like venomous Vapors* by the warmth of
the Sun exhailed, Infects the Bodies of Men, and produces the Plague, which
once produced, is too apt to spread it self, and become popular, as experience
shows.

The Accidental signs of the Plague.
They are various and uncertain, not in all persons alike, but to speak in
general:

The first appearance of the Plague* it appears cold, pain in the head, and
in the stomach, and sometimes in the back, and them took for an Ague and little
feared.

Those whole pains begins in the back, all these kind of beginnings, are more
hopeful of healing* then when it begins with pain and giddiness of the head
and stomach.

2 Others complain of Pain with great heat inward, in the stomach, and
intrails; When the outward parts are chill and cold, ready to shake.

Again, Some in the beginning complain of great thirst, others of shortness of
breath, swelling and soreness of the throat.

Again, some are taken with desire of sleep, and unfrequent yawnings, and it is
unsafe to let these sleep before they are well sweated, And therefore my desire
is, that you would not delay, but apply this Medicine:

Take of Zedory In powther half a dram, common Treacle half a spoonful,
White Wind Vinegar three spoonfuls; Take this upon any Infection of the Plague,
as soon as you are sensible of it, and sweat upon it, as long as the spirits
will bear it; Repeat this over twice, to make the cure absolute; drink with it
Posset Drink, or Veal Broth, as in other courses of Physic.

Now as touching signs, and accidents of this Disease: No man can speak of any
terrible symptom, sign, of any Disease whatsoever, that has befallen any man,
but the like has been seen in some one person or other sick of the Plague, and
therefore it is called the sickness, as comprehending all other sickness in it
self.

Accidental signs which presage Death.
As namely, when the Patient is possessed with soundings, and faintings, and
cold and clammy sweats, often changing the countenance vomiting of slimy,
sharp, and ill-coloured phlegm either greenish, yellowish, blackish, or
blood-coloured Saines, or voiding of excrements disordered, and discolored,
either fatty, blackish, unctious, or unnaturally stinking, Convulsions,
contractions of the Nerves, grovelling and piddling with the fingers, as
plucking the Bed-cloaths.

We shall speak something of the three great out ward signs of the Plague.

Imprimis, First the Bubo, these Buboes, Boyles, or Pestilential Botches,
commonly happen in the Emunctories, Sinkes or cleansing parts of the Body, at
the Artist terms them, and seldom elsewhere if they be Pestilential: Namely,
they come in the glandulous parts, under, or behind the ears, if the brain be
oppressed, which is the place by which the brain, if Nature be able, drives
out the Venom, or Poisonous Infection which would kill the whole Body.

In the second place, it comes under the Arm holes, where are certain small
Glandules or Kernels, and to that part the heart sends out the venomous
vapors, or offending matter, which suddenly grows there to an Imposthume,
Botch or Boil.

The third and last place where the Bubo Pestilential comes; is in the Groin,
where when the Liver is oppressed, and Nature strong, she sends forth the
Disease or botch thither, and this is the third part where the botch appears.

The second outward sign of the Plague, is the fierce burning Carbunckle,
called the burning Cole, which happens in every part of man's body, without
Order, Rule, or Control, within the body, as well as without, it does appear,
first inflamed, hard in the midst thereof, with a burning pain, afflicting the
sick like the burning fire, and itching much, which if scratched, will come
forth, a redish, yellowish, dusky colored Icour; and sometimes the pain is so
great, the Patient will grow mad.

The shape of this Disease is somewhat round, and the color uncertain;
sometimes it is pale, sometimes reddish, sometimes black, or purple, or
greenish, and the two last colors are most fearful, and therefore in the
beginning of this Disease sweat the Patient well, if it appear greenish the
Party commonly dies. Thus much of the Second principal sign of the Plague.

The third sign of this Disease is the Blaine, whereof some infected have
many, and some again not one; and this Disease is a painful angry Push,
somewhat like the small Pox, but in color more red or cloudy, seldom
transparent as a small Pock usually is, but far more painful; some have them
big, and some have them little, with a small head, of an angry blew or redish
color, sometimes of a lead color, hard, or fleshy, growing upon a large root
or stool; this Disease is found in every part of the body, but this Blain
seldom kills or hinders the cure of the disease. So much for the third
sign, the Blaine.

The fourth sign of the Plague, is the Mark or Spots, called Gods Tokens, but
not always certain signs of the Plague, nor of death to the Patient, as some
ignorant Nurses, nay most Nurses imagine, for many have Spots of several forms
and colors when venomous Feaversreigne, and yet not the Plague; again, many
have suspicious and fearful Spots, which the Vulgar term Gods Tokens, and
recover, and live many years after to Gods glory; these Spots are upon some
bodies like Flea-bitings, in others larger, in some as big as a penny, their
kinds in some like Freckles, sometimes found upon the Breast, sometimes upon
the Back, the Arms, and Legs of the Patient, they are in color bluish, and
of a sad red; sometimes of a lead color, and of a purple color, they are
without pain, but many times the very sight of them to the Patient causes
fear, but let me desire the Patient to fear his sins more, and use the means,
and by the help of God you may do well. By the way, some Doctors will give
this advice, to fly from the place visited, and that quickly, and that far,
and tarry long from the danger the infected are in, where it reigns, I deny
not, but they are good Rules, but remember our God is every where; now let him
that flies fly from sin, from all sin by true repentance, and this is the
safest way, the best way to cast anchor in Christ, and depend upon Christ.

Things to be avoided in time of Plague.
1 Every fullness is uneasy for Nature to digest, and may prove vicious; in
contagious times beware of raw Fruits, of Oysters, Muskles, new Wines, or the
like novelties, as Milions, Musk-milions.

2 Beware of being abroad too early, or too late, in times of contagion;
observe a good custom with your own Bodies, do not suffer the body to be too
costive or overmuch bound, neither is it safe to keep a man's body daily in
purging, no nor in daily looseness, for it is not good nor safe; neither Bleed
but by good advice if it may be had, no not before nor after Sickness, for
fearful effects do ensue often by unadvised bleeding, and purging in
contagious times, now Preservatives are put before Curative Medicines, in the
disease of the Plague, by most Learned men the reason is; as well concerning
the Sick, as also their friends and attendants, therefore it is not amiss to
begin with things that preserve from the infection, and one is to correct the
Evil Air in houses.

A Remedy against the Infection.
Take a handful of Rue, and put it in a Gallon of Vinegar, and drink three
spoonfuls in a morning, in half a pint of worm-wood-Wine, or dip a piece of
Bread in the Vinegar only and and eat it; take Figgs and steep them in
Rue-vinegar all night, eat two or three in the morning fasting.

A Remedy if you are infected.
Take a pennyworth of Venice Treacle, and mix it in two or three spoonfuls of
Dragon-water, and drink it off and sweat.

For the prevention of the infection of the Plague, by John Jones Gentleman,
Apothecary to his Majesty's Household.
Take two quarts of the purest White Wind Vinegar, and sleep in it Juniper
Berries four ounces bruised, and half a handful of Angelica stalks, after
twelve hours infusion, add to it a quart of the purest Rose Water, then
strain it, power it upon half a handful of red Poppy-flowers, and half an
ounce of Coacheneal, and half a pound of the best double refined Sugar, dip a
piece of bread in this every morning, and eat it fasting, for prevention.

Doctor Mirons Receipt against the Plague.
Take one handful of Wood Sorrel, half an ounce of Pomcitron-seed bruised, half
a quarter of an ounce of Hartshorn, and a few Marigold flowers, boil all in
three pints of Posset Drink a little while over a gentle fire, and then take
them off the fire, and let them stand until they be almost cold, then strain
out the Posset Drink, and then let the Patient drink thereof bloud-warme half a
pint in two or three hours, or oftener if the Patient desire it; the Patient is
not to eat or drink any thing else during this distemper, other than
Water-grewel, without any bread, butter, or sugar in it; this by known
experience has recovered those which have been raving mad.

Another for the prevention of the Infection.
Take every morning the quantity of a Nutmeg, and at night when you go to bed
of this Electuary.

Take Conserve of Woodsorrel one pound, which will cost 2 s. 0.d. Cytron Bark
beaten small, four ounces 2 s. 8. Juice of Kermes half an ounce 0. 3.
Diascordiam one ounce 0. 6. London Treacle one ounce and half. 0. 6. 5. 11.

Beat this into an Electuary with six ounces of the sirrup of the juice of
Cytrons, and take it as above mentioned.

Another when any is infected.
Take half a quarter of a pint of Canary, half a spoonful of Rue-vinegar, a
quarter of an ounce of London-Treacle, mix it together, and drink it hot every
six hours, and continue so until the violent distemper be over.

Drink clear Posset Drink made of one gill of Vinegar, half a Pint of Canary,
which will make a posset of a Pottle of Milk.

To prevent the Infection.
If a house be Infected, to dissipate the Infection, keep the house always
armed with the fume of this mixture following:

0 s. d. Take six pound of Saltpeter 0 6 0 Three pound of Brimstone, 0 1 0
Assafaetida, one pound. 0 4 0 Camphry six ounces. 0 6 0 Myrrh, four ounces 0 2
8 Frankincense four pound 0 2 0 Pitch six pound. 0 1 0 Fine Benjamin two pound,
the smallest is best. 0 6 0 1 8 0

Beat all these dry substances aforesaid, into a powder, then melt your Pitch,
and when it begins to cool, put in the powders, and stir the powders with
the Pitch very well, pouring in as you stir them, about a quart of the best
Vinegar, and when they are cold crumble them into powder, and put them in pots;
Burn a small quantity of this morning and evening, to prevent Infection, but to
cure, keep the house always in the fumes of this mixture.

For to make the Nosegay Antidote.
Take Storax in powder one ounce and a half, Juniper Berries one ounce and a
half, Angelica roots, one ounce and a half, Gum Tragacanth one pennyworth,
steeped in a quarter of a Pint of Rue Vinegar six hours, then mix that with the
Ingredients aforesaid, and beat it in a Mortar into a paste; Adding thereunto a
quarter of an ounce of the oil of wormwood, as you find occasion: Then Role
them up into small balls, and put them into little Ivory Boxes, or sarcenet
Baggs, keep them to smell to. For a nosegay Antidote, Camphris one ounce is
good.

A Preservative for the poor, and a good Cordial
Take Bay Berries, the weight of nine pence, and throw away the husks, and
grate them to a powder, or beat them to a powther, and take the same in stale
Beer or Ale, or in White Wine, and go to bed, and strive to sweat therewith,
and that fully, it provokes sweat well, and thereby cures the Diseases, and
may be taken three or four times if occasion be, for it is a Cordial against
the Plague.

Again.
Also Beer of the infusion of Wormwood and Rue is very good, and to eat of the
Herb Sorrel, or of Wormwood, is good to preserve from the Plague, and used
insauce, is a very good Cordial.

Again.
The outlandish Angelica-roots are very good chewed in the mouth, and so keep
in the mouth a small root thereof for the preserving from the Plague.

Outward Medicines to be used to Cure the Plague, and draw forward the Disease.
First, when the Bubo or Carbunkle appears, take a Cock, or a Hen, or a
Pidgeon, or a Chicken, or a live Pullet, bare about the rump and vent, then
strew a little salt thin upon the Botch, then bind the birds legs and wings,
as easily as may be, and let her sit upon the Botch until she dye; burn her,
and take another, and use her as the former; and do this so long till they
live, for as long as the Venom is in the Carbuncle, they will dye, and when
out they will live:

Now you must apply remedies to draw, and Hors-leeches are very good to apply
to the place; If the Leeches take, it is a sign of health, and to make them
take the better, wet the place with fair water and sugar warmed, and gently
wiped off again, they will take the better:

Also Pigeons dung, warmed with swines fat, or Hens dung, and turpentine mixed
very warm, applied warm twice a day like to a poultis.

A good Emplaister to ripen and break the Sores.
First take the herb Crows-foot, make it into a poultis, by bruising it soft
with a Pestil, in a cloth; This will draw it, and blister the skin.

Secondly, again, Mustard Seed and Pidgeons-dung, well beaten together, with a
little Swines fat mixed, and applied warm, do much draw forward a Botch, or
Carbunkle.

Thirdly, Take Plantain leaves, or roots for want of leaves, a good quantity,
and shred them small, then bruise them well, and strain out the juice, with
crumbs of bread, household leavened bread, boiled in the foresaid juice, or in
the juice of Sorrel is as good; Make a poultesse of this and apply it, adding
in the boiling some Barrows grease, apply it very warm, shift it three or four
times a day; It asswageth the pain, draws the venom out.

Another Remedy.
Take of the greater Cumsrey hacked and beaten, boiled in Milk, with crumbs of
bread, then add a little Butter, and a few Prunes boiled therein, take out the
stones; Thus applied, does digest and suppurate the Bubo.

Another Medicine to ripen a Botch.
Take a great Onion, make a hole in the top of it, and take part of the Onion
out, fill it up with Mithridate, or Treacle, and roste it in embers, and apply
it very warm to the Botch; This is an excellent Antidote, to take away the
great pain, and to draw forth the venomous humors, and does utterly quench the
malign power thereof.

And thus I conclude, and beg a blessing upon all those that shall use the
means, and if any there be, that shall receive benefit and recovery by these
Directions: first, let him thank almighty God, that has created Medicines of
the earth to heal his people; and secondly pray for me a sinner, the Writer of
this little Treatise, for to that intent I took the pains.

And now fellow Creature who ever thou art, if it be thy chance to meet with
this Book, let me desire thee to read over these Meditations and Prayers; the
Comfort will be thine own.

SECT. I. Meditations of Death.
THe life of a Christian should be a continual Meditation of Death.

The flight of a Bird is directed by her traile, the course of a Ship is
steered by the helm; so is the life of man ordered by the serious apprehension
of his last end.

The first man was called Adam, which signifies, a piece of red Earth; he was
clothed with the skins of dead beasts, he was adjudged to the Earth, to
dig: God would have his Name, his Garments, and his Employments, remembrances
of his Grave and Mortality: And therefore Christians, read over the 90th.
Psalm, and meditate thereupon.

So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom,
verse. 12.

SECT. II. The Meditation of Death is good against the Sin of Pride.
Whatsoever thy Wealth, Birth, Wisdom, Beauty, State, or Strength be, thy
foundation is in the Dust; Job 4.19. Some are clothed in Purple, and fare well
every day, others lie at the Gates, and have not so much as the crumbs of their
Tables.

But in the Grave, Rich and Poor meet together, and the Ulcers of Lazarus will
make as good dust as the Paint of Jezabel: Kings must leave their Crowns and
Scepters at the Grave, I have said ye are Gods, and all of you are Children of
the most High, but ye shall dye like men, Psalm. 82.6, 7.

SECT. III. The Meditation of Death is good against Covet^^sness.
The Rich man in the Gospel, when he had built his Barns, and inned his
Harvest, was called away by Death, and carries nothing with him of all his
great store he had provided, Luke 12. We brought nothing with us into the
world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out of it, 1 Timothy 6.7. Be not
covetous, O dust and ashes.

The Meditation of Death, is profitable against Lust.

The Prodigal seeing many spectacles of mortality, by reason of the great
Famine, leaves his Concubines and riotous living, and returns again to his
Father* Luke 15.

I have read of one going to the Stews, who meets a dead Corpse carrying to the
Grave, the sight whereof makes him go back, and ever after lived a chaste
life. I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts,
which war against the soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. the Argument used by these Apostles to
beat down in us the lust of sin, and the sin of lust, is the mortality of our
bodies, why then art thou lustful O dust and ashes?

SECT. IV. Again, the meditation of death is an Antidote against all evil in
the world.
Death is certain.

Abraham the Father of the faithful dyed, and the friend of God.

Jacob wrestled with an Angel and prevailed, Death was too hard for him.

David triumphed over ten thousand Philistines, and Death triumphed over him.

Solomon a Wise man, he knew the nature of all Plants, and no Plant had the
virtue to make him immortal; man is like an Hourglass new turned up, which
never cease running till it be all out.

We must needs dye, and are us water spilt upon the ground, which cannot be
gathered up again, 2 Samuel 14.14.

SECT. V. The time when we shall dye, uncertain.
The rich man promised to himself many years, but fool that he was, that night
his soul was fetched from him, Luke 12.

Behold now I am old and know not the day of my death; Genesis 27.2. God would
have us ignorant of the last day, that we might be ready every day.

To defer Repentance till to morrow is dangerous; God has promised thee pardon
if thou do repent to day, but if thou do not repent, he has not promised
thou shall live till to morrow; And if it be not an end of thy sins, it may be
an end of thy life; If it bring not forth Conversion, it may bring forth
Confusion.

Do therefore as the wise Steward, before thou be turned out of this house,
make sure of God, and Heaven.

SECT. VI. The place where we shall Dye, uncertain.
Death surprised Abel in the Field, Genesis 4.8.

And Eli sitting at his Door, 1 Samuel 4.18.

Job's Children at a Feast, Job 1.19.

Eglon in his summer Room, Judges 3.20.

Herod sitting upon his Throne, Acts 12.13.

Expect that therefore in every place, which in all places expects thee, and
let not the place of thy death trouble thee, for the earth is the Lords and the
fullness thereof.

SECT. VII. The manner of Death is uncertain.
There is a natural death, when a man dies as a Lamp goes out, because there is
no more Oil to feed it.

And there is a violent Death, when the soul is thrust out of doors, and the
Lamp of life, not burnt, but blown out.

There is a timely Death, when a man dies in a full Age.

There is an untimely Death, when a man is crop'd like an ear of Corn, before
it is ripe.

There is a lingering Death, when the soul is besieged with Sickness, and as it
were, starved, and tired out of her habitation.

And there is a Death, accompanied with raving madness, and distemperature of
Body.

Now who knows which of these deaths are appointed for him?

Now the Lord prepare us to meet him, for unto God the Lord belongs the Issues
of Death, Psalm. 68.20.

Death is a sleep Brethren, I would not have you ignorant concerning them that
are asleep, 1 These. 4.13.

I will lay me down in place, and take my rest, Psalm. 4.8.

Death has nosting, Death is swallowed up in Victory; O Death where is thy
sting? Thanks be to God, who has given us Victory through Jesus Christ our
Lord. 1 Cor. 15.25, 28.

Is our death uncertain, and the manner of our death uncertain, learn to live
well, fear God, and keep his Commandments; do justly, and love mercy; walk
humbly before God, for precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his
Saints.

Blessed are they that dye in the Lord, for they rest from their labors, and
their works follow them, Revel. 14.13.

Some Directions.
1 In the time of thy Sickness, with Hezekiah, call thy self to an Account for
all thy Sins, mourn for them in the bitterness of thy soul, confess them to
God, and ask forgiveness. 2 Send for the Minister, and desire his Prayers. 3
Let him give thee the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, this is the best provision
for so long a journey, I say to thee as the Angel to Elijah, Arise, and eat,
for the journey is too great for thee; and if with Elijah thou do eat and
drink by faith and true Repentance thou may travel in the strength of this
meat to Horeb, the Mount of God, 1 King. 19.7, 8. this will not make thee dye
more quickly, but more quietly, 4 Remember Christ has purchased Heaven,
happiness, and glory for thee. 5 If thou be a Father, or Mother of Children,
call them before thee and bless them, so did Jacob when he departed. 6 Make
satisfaction if thou be able to such as thou have wronged and defrauded,
without restitution no remission; inquire with Samuel whose Ox thou have
taken, or whose Asle thou have taken; whom thou have defrauded, whom thou have
oppressed, or of whose hands thou have received a bribe, and restore it; send
for them who have offended thee, and forgive them, and for those whom thou have
offended, and ask forgiveness. 7 And lastly, resign and give over thy self to
God, Behold, here am I, let the Lord do to me as seems good to him, 2 Samuel
15.26. Not my will but thine be done; and if thus thou be prepared at the
day of death, Oh well is thee, and happy shall thou be, 1 Samuel 12.8.2.
Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find thus doing,
thus dying; Mat. 24.26.

And conclude thy life by Prayer.

A Prayer to be used by a sick, or dying man.
I Will praise thee, O Lord God, that thou have considered my low estate and
have not shut me up in the hands of my enemies, nor made my foes to rejoice
over me; and now let thy right hand protect me, and let thy mercy come upon
me, for my soul is in trouble and anguish, because of its departure from the
body. O let not the assemblies of its wicked and cruel enemies meet it in the
passing forth, nor hinder me, by reason of the sins of my passed life; O Lord,
be favorable unto me, that my soul may not behold the hellish countenance of
the Spirits of darkness; but let thy bright and joyful Angels entertain it,
that it may give glory to thy Holy Name, and to thy Majesty; Place me by thy
merciful Arm before thy Seat of Judgment, and let not the hand of the Prince
of this World snatch me from thy Presence or bear me into Hell; Mercy sweet
Jesus, Amen.

Another Prayer in time of Plague.
O Lord our God, in whose Name stands our help, and among other evils, have
promised us to deliver thy people from the snares of the hunter, and the
noisome Pestilence; we beseech thee take this thy Plague away from us, and as
the stench of our sins has ascended up into thy nostrils to provoke thy wrath
against us, so let our humble supplications come before thee to procure our
happy and speedy release from it, Lord call back thine Angel, and cause him to
sheath his Sword again, we are thy Children, the works of thy hand, we are
sorry for our sins, which are the cause of all this, and we purpose amendment;
We are but men, dust and ashes, not able to bear long, therefore, Lord have
mercy upon us, and that soon, send us comfort, and suffer us not to perish
after so miserable a sort: We thank thee O Lord, that thou have not left us
altogether comfortless, without hope, considering how many thousands are left
alive; Wherefore, O Lord, we beseech thee bless us, and all those that depend
upon us; Set thy saving mark upon out houses, as thou did upon the
Israelites, and give order to the Destroyer, that he hurt us not: Put strength
to our Medicines, let thy good blessing make the Preservatives of the
Physician, and our shuttings up, places of more security to us, and profitable;
and let us not trust too much in the outward Means, but chiefly in thy Mercies
and Blessings upon them, keep us in our down lying, and uprising, and protect
us in our vocations; Have pity upon our distressed brethren comfort the
desolate Widows, provide for all the Fatherless Children, gather us together
again, that by this means are dispersed, and continue thy Merciful Work in
diminishing our dead numbers, till we may justly say in confidence and thanks,
with the Prophet, we shall not dye, but live, and declare the Works of the
Lord: Grant this O Lord, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Savior; Amen.

A Prayer to be said in the Progress of Sickness.
O Lord my God, blessed Jesus, who by thy bitter Death and Passion have sweetened
the Cup of Death to us, taking away its bitterness and sting, and making it an
entrance to Life and Glory; Have pity upon me thy Servant, who have so deep a
share in sin, that I cannot shake off the terrors of Death but that my Nature
with its hereditary corruption still would preserve it self in a disunion from
the joys of thy Kingdom; Lord, I acknowledge my own infirmities, and beg
thy pity, it is better for me to be with thee; but the remembrance of my sins,
does so depress my growing confidence, that I am in a great strait, between my
fears and hopes, between the infirmities of my Nature, and the better desires
of conforming to thy holy Will and Pleasure: O my dear Redeemer, wean my soul
and all my desires from the flatteries of this World; Pardon all my sins, and
consign so great a favor by the comforts and attestation of thy Divinest
Spirit, that my fears being mastered, my sins pardoned, my desires rectified,
as the Heart thirsts after the springs of water, so my soul may long after thee
O God, and to enter into thy Courts; Heavenly Father, if it may be for thy
Glory, and my Ghostly good, to have the days of my Pilgrimage prolonged, I
beg of thee health and life, but if it be not pleasing to thee, to have this
Cup pass from me, thy will be done: My Savior has drunk off all the
bitterness; behold O Lord! I am in thy hands, do with me as seems good in
thine eyes: Though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of the death, I will
fear none evil, for thou art with me, thy Rod and thy Staff comfort me: I will
lay me down in peace, and take my rest, for it is thou Lord only who shall make
me to dwell in everlasting safety, and to partake of the joys of thy Kingdom,
who Live and Reignest, eternal God, World without end. Amen.

A Prayer for one in danger of Death.
O Lord Jesus Christ, our health and life, our hope and our Resurrection from
the dead; I resign my self up to thy holy will and pleasure, either to life,
that I may live longer to thy service and amendment, or to death, to the
perpetual enjoyment of thy presence and of thy Glories; Into thy hands I
commend my spirit, for I know O Lord, that nothing can perish which is
committed to thy Mercy: For my soul, strengthen it with thy Grace against all
temptations, let thy loving kindness defend it as with a shield, against all
the violences and hostile assaults of Satan: Let the same mercy be my guard
and defense, which protected thy Martyrs, Crowning them with victory in the
midst of flames, horrid torments, and most cruel deaths: There is no help in
me, O Lord, I cannot by mine own power, give a minutes rest to my wearied body,
but my trust is in thy sure mercies, and I call to mind, to my unspeakable
comfort, that thou weart hungry, and thirsty, and wearied, and whipped, and
Crowned with Thorns, and mocked, and Crucified for me: O let that Mercy which
made thee suffer for me so much, pardon me and save me; let thy mercies answer
for my impieties, let thy Righteousness cover my sins, thy blood wash away my
stains, and thy comforts refresh my soul, as my body grows weak, let thy grace
be stronger, let not my faith doubt, nor my hope tremble, nor my charity grow
cold, nor my soul be affrighted with the terrors of death, but let the light
of thy countenance enlighten mine eyes that I sleep not in death eternal; And
when my tongue fails, let thy Spirit teach my heart to pray, with strong
cryings, and groans that are unutterable: O let not the Enemy do me any
violence, but let thy holy mercies, and thy Angels, repel and defeat his malice
and fraud, that my soul! may by thy strength triumph in the joys of eternity,
in the fruition of thee, my life, my joy, my hope, my exceeding great reward,
my Lord and Savior Christ, Amen.

A Prayer for a dying person, in, or near the Agonies of Death.
MOst Merciful and Blessed Savior, have mercy upon the soul of this thy
Servant, remember not his ignorances, nor the sins of his youth, but according
to thy great mercy remember him, in the mercies and glories of thy Kingdom;
Thou O Lord have opened the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers, let thy
everlasting Gates be opened, and receive his soul; Let the Angels who rejoice
at the conversion of a sinner, triumph and be exalted in his deliverance, and
salvation, make him partaker of the benefits of thy holy Incarnation, Life, and
Sanctity, Passion and Death, Resurrection and Ascension, and of all the Prayers
of the Church, of the joy of the Elect, and all the fruits of the blessed
Communion of the Saints, and daily add to the number of thy beatifyed Servants,
such as shall be saved, that thy coming may be hastened, and the expectation of
the Saints may be fulfilled, and the Glory of thee our Lord Jesus, be advanced,
all the whole Church singing praises to the honor of thy Name, who live and
reignest ever, one God, World without end, Amen.

O most Merciful Jesus who did dye to Redeem us from death, and damnation,
have mercy upon this thy Servant, whom thy hand has visited with Sickness, of
thy goodness be pleased to forgive him all his sins, and seal his hopes of
Glory with the refreshments of thy holy Spirit; Lord give him strength and
confidence in thee, assuage his pain, repel the assaults of his Ghostly
Enemies, by thy Mercies, and a guard of holy Angels: Preserve him in the unity
of the Church, keep his senses entire, his understanding right, give him a
great measure of contrition, true faith, well grounded hope, and an abundant
charity, give him a quiet and a joyful departure, let thy ministering Spirits
convey his soul to the Mansions of peace and rest, there with certainty to
expect a joyful Resurrection, to the fullness of Joy at thy right hand, where
there is pleasures for evermore, Amen.

A Prayer for the Joys of Heaven.
O Most Glorious Jesus, who art the portion and exceeding great reward of a
faithful people, thou have beautified humane nature with glorious immortality,
and have carried the same above all Heavens, above the Seat of Angels, beyond
the Cherubims and Seraphims, placing it on the right hand of thy Heavenly
Father, and grant to us all the issues of thy abundant Charity, that we may
live in thy fear, and dye in thy favor; Prepare our Souls with Heavenly
Virtues, for Heavenly Joys, making us Righteous here, that we may be
Beatified hereafter; Amen.

Books sold by Henry Million at the Sign of the Half Moon in the Old-Bayly.
Mr. Baxter 's Saints Rest in 4.

Mr. Baxter 's True Catholic, in 12.

His Catholic Unity, in 12.

Burgess 's Godly-man 's choice, in 8.

Clark 's Apples of Gold, in 8.

Artimmidorus of Dreams, in 8.

The History of the Gentle-Craft, in 4.

FINIS.

