A COPY of a LETTER SENT FROM Constantinople, In which is a full ACCOUNT of
several Strange, and Horrible APPARITIONS, WHICH was seen at CONSTANTINOPLE,
and other adjacent Places in the Air: As also the Sultan's DREAM In the time of
the STORM
SIR,
THat, hitherto I have sent you no letters, think it not my Negligence, but the
want of something new, or worth Observation, to Write: Within this few Days at
Constantinople, and there abouts, many strange Signs have been seen in the
Heavens, and to the Ottoman Emperor himself; strange Portent's happened one
Night. Of all which I thought fit to give you an Account.

On the 10th. of November, a most horrible Tempest arose, which continued in
its Violence until, the 18th. with that fury, that several Trees were turned
up by their Roots* Houses dismounted of their Coverings, and many Elegant
Structures levelled with their Foundations. Besides the unusual flashes in the
Skies, the Emperors Palace was Rent, and many of his chief Ministers perished
by Thunderbolts, and Lightnings, which fell from the Sky: And that which
added more to their Horror and Terror, two fiery Comets was seen, from which
two Tails like Darts descended, or hung down, whose Flames so turned about,
or brandished, as tho the whole Air was set on Fire; which continued for one
whole Night over the Emperors Palace. Three Hours before the day appeared it
was seen over the Temple of Sophi. Besides these Prodigies (the Language of
Heaven) the Sultan in the Night, three hours before Day, in a Dream, did
imagine that he was set upon by many Lions, and by their exceeding Fury they
had fixed their Tallons in his Breast; from whence being overcome, with Terror
he began to Cry out, and by his own Noise, awaked himself, which being heard,
his Officers presently ran to him, fearing the Emperor was Assassinating:
Being come, they inquired the cause of his Disturbance, which to one of his
Intimates he Related. The Janissaries were commanded to their Posts, being
assured the Emperor was Well.

Moreover, as he was slumbring, in the Morning, other Fantasies occurred, as
tho a great number of Centaur's was engaged in a Bloody Conflict amongst
themselves.

But afterward from the West, a like Body of Griffons who had the Eagle for
their General, furiously falling upon and Assaulting, the Centaur's, presently
put them to Flight; part of which to save their Lives, fled and hid themselves,
the rest were most Destroyed by the Griffons* which Caesar, Dreaming, saw, out
of Commiseration offered the Centaur's a flaming Sword for their Assistance,
which the Eagle their Captain suddenly snatched out of the Sultan's Hand, and
bore it away. The Emperor wakened, desired to hear the Interpretation of these
monstrous Sights and Comets; for which cause over all Turkey the Astrologers
and Magicians, under the greatest Penalty and the Emperors Displeasure, are
commanded in Ten days time to come to Constantinople, and are conjured in three
Days time, without respect of Person, to render and declare the meaning of
those unusual Prodigies and Sights; in pursuance of which Commands the
Astrologers and Magies are joined in one Consult; all being Examined they
agreed in one Interpretation, but of their solution we are Ignorant, being only
known to the Examinant. Yet we hope these Dreams and Apparitions are Omens of
the Downfall of that great Magog, or Man of Sin, that Enemy of Christ, and
Tyrant of the Universe, the Refuge of Rebels, and the Antichrist; for whose
Extirpation and Exit, all good Christians ought to Pray, with your most

Obliged Servant, P. R.

This may be Printed,

R. P.

LONDON, Printed by George Croom, at the Blue-Ball in Thames Street, near
Baynard's- Castle. 1685/6.


