THE PILGRIMS PASS To the New JERUSALEM: OR, The serious CHRISTIAN his
Enquiries after HEAVEN.

With his Contemplations on himself, reflecting on his Happiness by CREATION,
Misery by SIN, Slavery by SATAN, and Redemption by CHRIST.

Together with Observations on the Vanity and Inconstancy of worldly Glory.

And Considerations on the Saint and Sinner, as to their disagreeing conditions
and dispositions here, their various Entertainments of Death, and different
Rewards after Death.

Relating to those four last and great things, of Death, Judgment, Hell, and
Heaven.

Seasonable for these Times.

By M. R. Gent.

Phil. 3.14. I press toward the mark, etc.

1 Cor. 9.24. So run that ye may obtain.

London, Printed by R. W. for the Author, and are to be sold by John Andrews at
the White Lion near Pye-Corner, and by William Lugger at the Sign of the Kings
Head over against the Shire-Hall in the City of Hereford, 1659.

To all those that love the Peace of Zion, and welfare of Jerusalem, Grace and
Peace be multiplied.
FRIENDS,
THe Life of a Christian is not only Speculative but Active; (speculation and
action (like the Soul and Body) attend each other in performing the Duties of
Christianity.) The most Wise God has ordered and determined a set time for Man
upon earth, to fit and prepare himself for an everlasting condition; how then
are we all concerned to redeem that short time we have allowed us, (which we
know not how soon may be taken from us) to enter into a strict examination of
our ways, knowing that one day all our thoughts, words, and actions (even our
most retired and secret sins) shall be exposed to the view both of Men and
Angels. O Time, one of the most glorious things that ever God made, how many
blessed and glorious Spirits are now in Heaven for making a right use of thee?
And how many damned Ghosts are now in Hell for abusing thee, who would now give
a thousand worlds (had they so many to dispose of) for to have that opportunity
we now enjoy, to improve thee? For mine own part I am but a young Man, who came
into the world but as yesterday, and ere to morrow (for ought I know) may be
taken hence: For how many days are alloted me upon Earth, none but the Ancient
of days know; wherefore during my continuance in this Tabernacle, I desire to
walk circumspectly, that when my Lord shall come to call me to a reckoning, I
may (like a good steward) be found faithful of the charge committed to me. You
know his doom, that hid his Talent in a Napkin.

It was in this consideration that I did now put Pen to Paper, and raised my
contemplations above the things of this world, to those of a better, in order
to the gaining and attaining a right and title to that glorious, undefiled, and
unfading Inheritance, purchaste for Believers in the highest Heavens.

Let not any tax me of Ambition for exposing my Lines to Public view, and my
self to open Censure; 'Twas not to get me a Name, but to further the weak
Christian in his approaches toward Heaven. Neither let any contemn the Work of
this Author, for the Author of this Work; but remember that God can by weal
means perform great matters. Ravens (those unclean Birds by the Law) were
Caterers to Elijah in his extremity at the Brook Cherith, brought him bread and
meat to sustain him, he neither scorned those strange kind of Purveyors, or
the Viands which they brought, but admired the hand that sent it. The Gifts and
Graces of Gods Spirit are not to be slighted where ever found; I speak not this
by way of Ostentation, but with a desire that my Readers would judiciously
read, ere they rashly censure; and instead of carping at my failings, correct
their own; that Love, which covers a multitude of faults, may cast the
favourablest construction on mine. It Is Charity to judge well of others, and
Piety to look well to our selves. If any thing of worth appear in me more then
in the meanest person upon earth, attribute it to him who is the giver of every
good and perfect gift. What have we that we have not received.

And let me further request you, that after the clashing of Armor, thunderings
of Canons, sound of Drums, and the alarm of Trumpets, you would (in this your
day) enquire after your everlasting Peace, and contest no longer about
Niceties, Circumstances, and Shadows (not worth contending for) but for that
one thing necessary, which will reward your labors with no less then a Crown.

Our present division is a sad Omen of our future miseries, and our ^y unity
would abundantly faciliate our desired felicity: I wish we did all practice
what we all profess, Faith and Love; we should all procure what we all desire,
Truth and Peace: were we all united in the Tri-une-God, we should not be thus
divided one from another. The Lord in his good time compose all our
Differences, that Malice, Error, and Debate may return to the cursed Womb,
whence they derived; and all our Strife may end in this, to excel each other in
the power of Godliness, and Christian Love.

For my Conclusion, let me request you to vouchsafe a serious perusal of this
small Manual, and the Lord make it (in some measure) beneficial to you, (for
next the Glory of God, your good is chiefly aimed at by the Author.) And if
this find civil entetainment, I shall (if God prolong my life, to finish what
I have begun) present you with something else. In the mean time accept this, as
the earnest of his Love, who subscribes himself

Your Servant in our Immanuel, M. R.

The Contents of the following Book.
1. Abraham's Profession, and the Pilgrims Condition; Or, the inquiring
Sojourner Directed. A Meditation on Genesis 23.4. 2. The Young Man's Monitor, and
Olds Man's Admonisher. A Meditation on Eccles. 12.1. 3. Sin the cause of Sorrow,
and Death the effect of Sin. A Meditation on 2 Samuel 24.14. 4. Balaam's happy
Wish, and unhappy End. A Meditation on Numb. 23.10. 5. The meritorious Ransom;
or, the unparalleld Sufferings of the Son of God, for the sons of Men. A
Meditation on 1 Timothy 1.15. 6. Observations on the Vanity and Inconstancy of
worldly Glory. 7. Considerations on the Saint and Sinner, as to their
disagreeing conditions and dispositions here, their various entertainments of
Death, and different Rewards after Death, reflecting on the Temporizing
Professor; illustrated and interlaced with the Historical Examples of Dying
men. 8. Godliness bearing its Rewards with it, both here and here after; and
Sins pursuit of the Sinner to the other world. Of the last Judgment, and those
succeding Events that ensue thereupon. A Meditation on 1 Timothy 4.8.
To his Judicious Friend, the Author.
TO praise thy Work I need not (though Divine)
It is enough I tell the world, 'twas thine.
Good Wine needs not a Bash, the more I look,
The more I love, the more I like thy Book.
So grave, so wise in Youth, Nature did place.
An August in thy Pen, May in thy Face.
Even Momus must confess, it is seldom seen,
The Fruit so sweet, so ripe, the Tree so green.
Many commit a Rape upon the Press,
And on their Readers patience do no less:
This Tract of thine, since Pamphlets so abound,
Is like a Jewel in a Dunghill found.
Who goes about thy Work for to commend,
Knows not where to begin, or where to end.
As for my part, (dear Friend) I cannot tell,
Whether Language, Modesty, or Wit excel.
Go on and prosper still, when time shall shed
Her silver Hairs upon thy aged Head;
Furrowing thy Face with wrinkles, we may say,
In Years, but not in Wit, thou art grown gray.
A. L. Esquire

To his Ingenious Friend, the Author.
IF when our Corpse in silent Tombs do rest,
Our Souls of other Bodies are possessed,
As old Pythagoras did once suppose;
Thy Breast (my Friend) contains one of those
That, heretofore, was truly thought to be
An Atlas to support Divinity.
Like Aarons budding Rod, thy youth appears,
Bringing forth Almonds in a Spring of years.
This Paradox may strike a Momus mute,
Thy Work's accutely grave, gravely accute:
Thy Phrase not circumflex, each golden Line,
Speaks thee both Rhetorician and Divine.
Let not the Reader think the Work less rare,
Because he sees the Authors Chin is bare;
He wants a Beard it is true, what though he do?
The God of Wit, Apollo, does so to.
Be not discouraged Friend, who ever heard
A Goat was honored for his reverend Beard.
Thy blooming Youth does much advance thy praise,
Though thy Chin's bare, we will cover it with Bays.
R. W.

To his Friend, the Author.
WHat, shall I write, or shall I silent be,
This makes me blush, and that ingrate to thee.
It Is true, as yet, I never made any use
Of Helicon Parnassus, or a Muse.
Yet I Will adventure, though my Verses prove
Their Master ignorant, they will show his love.
I care not though the snarling Critic know it,
I am a faithful Friend, although no Poet:
I cannot flatter, yet can truly say,
I have seen a Work far worse from one more gray,
Great are our expectations, Friend, of thee;
If this thy Spring, what will thy Harvest be?
Go on my Friend, and let thy fluent Quill
Render thee more admired, more famous still.
Whilst we poor wandering Pilgrims to thee come,
To be directed to our lasting Home.
A. H.

The Author to his Book.
TO seek the wandering Pilgrim, thou must go
Poor little Book, thy fate will have it so.
I pity thee, for this censorious Age
Will cause thee have a tedious Pilgrimage.
There Is some will think thee rash, others will spy
In thee a smack of singularity.
This laughs, and that derides, another scorns;
A wilderness is not without its thorns.
Such is the World, those that will please the times,
Write foolish Pamphlets, or lascivious Rhimes.
Thy Subejct is Divine, thy Errand is
To guide the enquiring Sojourner to Bliss.
Thy habit's poor and mean, what then, we see
That painted Windows less transparent be.
Thy state, of gorgeous Robe, will not allow,
The Pilgrim's clothed in gray, and so must thou.
The Staff thou have to lean upon must be
The ingenious Readers Candid courtesy.
Then go, if thy success be not too bad,
I Will send thee forth, e're long, far better clad.
THe Courteous Reader may be pleased to take notice, that by reason of the
Authors absence from the Press, (and the huddling up in such haste the
Composure, in that he was forced to write as fast as the Press went) there are
several Faults committed, as the wrong placing of Parenthesis, Colons,
Full-stops, etc. here a word too much, and there a word too little, which the
sense will bring in, and I hope thy Candor pass by. But one notorius fault
there is, which I thought good to advise thee of, and it is in the very face of
the Book. In the very beginning of the first Discourse (viz. of Abraham's
Profession, and the Pilgrims Condition, page 1.) there is so much left out,
that without its supply I might seem to infringe upon the borders of Nonsense,
altogether it must run thus:

This Book of Genesis ( the first that stands on Sacred Record) contains in it
the various and remarkable passages of Gods Providence toward the sons of men.
The first twelve Chapters presents us, etc. Thus craving thy pardon for this
and all other Faults in this Book, I commend it to thy perusal, and thee to
Gods protection, Vale.

Abraham's Profession, AND THE Pilgrims Condition: OR, The inquiring Sojourner
directed.
A Meditation on Genesis 23.4.
I am a Stranger and a Sojourner among you.
THis Book of Genesis, the first twelve Chapters presents us with the History
of the Worlds Creation, the fall of Adam, the desolation of the Sons of Adam by
a deluge, the replanting a new World, and the confusion of Languages. From the
twelfth Chapter to the five and twentieth, you have the History of the
Patriarch Abraham, whose many trials and troubles (so cheerfully underwent, and
so patiently endured for God) does sufficiently demonstrate his zeal and
proclaims his praises to succeeding generations (as a worthy president for
after ages.) We first find that he was the Son of Terah, and what Terah was,
and where he lived, is soon found, and as easily determined. Terah was a
stranger to the true God, and a server of strange Gods, (Idols and no Gods)
Gods made with hands, even the Gods of the Nations, and he lived on the other
side of Jordan, where Abraham's God was neither worshipped nor known: Abraham the
son of such a Father, of such an Idolatrous Family, and Nation, is summoned by
be most high God (as yet unknown to Abraham) to leave his Country, kindred, and
Fathers house, to go into a Land that he would show him. This was a strange
kind of injunction, what? to leave his Fathers house, his near relations, and
his dear country, to wait upon the commands of a God, whom neither himself or
his Father ever knew, to go into a voluntary exile, he knew not whither (and
for he knew not what!) Ulysses thought it his greatest misery to be banished his
native soil, and thought all airs odious but that in which he first breathed.
The Persians were better pleased with beholding the smoke of their own chimneys
then with the greatest honors of foreign Countries; yet Abraham readily
forsakes all for God, and cheerfully attends his commands, (though he knew
neither the aim or end of his Journey;) he stood not to dispute the case with
God, but conformed himself to the will of God, and steered his course by the
Card of his directions; so to the Land of Canaan (in the course of his
obedience) at last he comes; (that Land flowing with Milk and Honey, (after for
his faithfulness) was the inheritance of his seed.) From thence he passes into
Egypt, and no sooner is he arived there, but his Wives beauty occasions his
discontent; the King of Egypt takes her from him: she is no sooner restored
him, but forth of Egypt he goes, and now another mischance befalls him. The
increase of his Flocks occasion a difference 'twixt himfelf and his kinsman
Lot, (or rather 'twixt their Herdsmen) but having wisely and happily made up
this breach, and Lot no sooner settled in the fertile plains of Sodom, but is
taken prisoner by the Kings of Elam, Shinar, Ellasar, and Tidal King of
Nations. And now Abraham is as much perplexed about his Cosins Rescue, as he was
before in composing the difference, 'twixt their Herdsmen: well having waded
through this difficulty also, and though a rich man, and now at peace,
something is yet wanting to crown his wealth; his Wife Sarah (though fair) is
barren, and he thinks God deals very hardly with him in denying him a Son to
possess that after him, which by Gods providence and his own diligence he had
brought together. At last (in part to gratify his desires) God gives him a
Son, but such a one as the Jews define him, a Son and no Son, an Ishmael not an
Isaac; not the promised Son, not he in whom all the Nations of the World should
be blessed. At last he has an Isaac, but that he might not want a continual
supply of crosses to try his faith, and exercise his patience, his Son Isaac
(so long promised, and with such longing expectation desired) must die, and a
violent and cruel death must put a period to his new life: to the further
aggravation of the circumstances, Abraham's hands must execute him and show
himself not a Father but a Murderer; and no sooner had God prepared a Ram for
Isaacs rescue, but Abraham must banish Hagar and his Son Ishmael; and no sooner
is this over, and the tears wipt from his eyes, but behold a greater mischance
(like Jobs messengers) comes in the neck of it; his beloved Sarah dies in
Hebron, in the land of Canaan, in the hundred and twenty seventh year of her
age, whereupon Abraham with his heart full of grief, and his eyes full of
tears, makes his Apology to the Sons of Heth, for a burying-place for Sarah;
and that he might the better speed in this his so reasonable and seasonable
request, he suits his expressions in the garb of the Text; I am a stranger and
a sojourner among you; Give me a possession of a burying-place, that I may bury
my dead out of my sight.

I could take this Scripture by the four corners (like that sheet that was let
down to Saint Peter) and present you with a fourfold discourse, of Death, of
Tears, of Pilgrimage, and the Grave: first of death, and Sarah dyed. Secondly,
of tears, and Abraham wept for Sarah. Thirdly, of Pilgrimage, here is Abraham
unfolding his condition. Fourthly, of the Grave, here is Abraham purchasing a
Grave for Sarah, which is the Pilgrims Mansion, or the house of Death: but I
shall single out one of these, and only keep to that, viz. Abraham's
Profession, as being most suitable to my condition, and all of yours, (the
Readers) I am a stranger and a Sojourner among you. But was this language for
Abraham when treating with Hittites for Sarahs Grave, to discourse of his own
mortality, or what is this his profession of his own condition to the obtaining
his request of them? had it not been more proper for him to have set forth
himself in the equipage of a Prince, then in so low a form, as that of a
Pilgrim, as being most suitable for so great a person. Mean men seldom crave
when they have money in their hands to buy; and great men are apt to command:
how comes it then to pass that so eminent a person as Abraham shrouds himself
under so low a style as that of a Sojourner?

Is not this that Abraham that was the son of Terah, the brother of Nahor, the
Father of the faithful, and the friend of God; that was famous for many
excellent graces that shined in him? he was famons for his Faith, famous for
his Hope, and famous for his Charity.

First, he was famous for his Faith, in obeying the Commands of a God, then
strange to him, and leaving his Fathers house to wander in a strange Land, and
expose himself to all the hazards and hardships, as usually attend such
Journeys; and to go so far out of his own knowledge to a Country unknown both
to himself and his Fathers. Again, he was famous for his Faith, in not
mistrusting Gods omnipotency, in that he did steadfastly believe that God was
able to quicken Sarahs dead Womb, to bring him a Son in his old age; and when
God sent him that Son, (so long desired, expected, and prayed for, to be the
hope of Nations, out of whose Loins (according to the flesh) the Savior of the
World was to proceed;) and when God commanded him to take this Son, ( Abraham's
Joy and Sarahs Jewel, conceived beyond Nature, and born to do great things) and
with his own hands to butcher him. Here was the trial of Abraham's Faith, and an
injunction above the grant of nature, had it been but an ordinary private
person, whose birth had not been attended withso many remarkable Promises and
Prophecies, yet even in this, to one that had both Promises and Prophecies of
future happiness, Abraham's obedience eccho's to Gods Commands, though 'twere to
frustrate and make void those former predictions: Abraham was confident that if
God should take this from him, he was able to raise him another out of his
ashes. Posterity may adinire his faithfulness, but not parallel it.

Secondly he was famous for his Hope, in that he was assuredly confident that
not one Word from God should fall to the ground unaccomplisht, but that he
would make good all those gracions promises he had made; that he should be Lord
of that famous and flourishing Country the Land of Canaan, and that his seed
should possess it; and that in them should all the Nations of the world be
blessed.

Thirdly, famous for his Charity; first, to his servants in general: I know
(says God) that Abraham will instruct his servants etc. Famous for his love to
one, in that he intented to make him Heir of his house; famous for his love to
Hagar, in that he parted not with her without tears, though he had Gods
approbation for her banishment: famous for his love to his Nephew Lot, in that
he would not admit of any discord 'twixt their herdsmen, and hazarded his life
to rescue him out of the hands of those Triumphant Kings that took him captive:
famous for his love to his Son Ishmael, in praying so cordially for him; Oh
that Ishmael might live in thy sight: famous for his love to his Sons by
Keturah, in giving them their portions when he sent them away: famous for his
love to his Son Isaac, in making him Heir of all his wealth: Lastly, famous for
his love to his Wife Sarah, (for his respect to her living, and that living
affection to her memory which outlived her) as appears by the Religious care
he had to purchase her a Grave, (in that Country which their posterity were
after to be Lords of) which as he would not without cost, so he could not treat
of it without tears. Then Abraham stood up from before his dead, (where he had
been weeping) and requested the Sons of Heth to sell him a burying place, that
he might bury his dead out of his sight: he was famous for his uprightness, in
that he would not take to the value of a shoe-latchet from those heathen Kings
whose persons, and all they had, were at his disposal, as the spoil of war:
Famous for his near and dear Communion with God, in that he talked familiarly
with him as a man with his friend. (In a word) he was a man so famous, that
before him the world had not his fellow, nor has it since scarce produced his
parallel; yet in courting the Sons of Heth, he sets forth himself in no other
language then this, I am a stranger and a sojourner among you.

Hence we are to observe, that here the best of men are but Pilgrims; the truth
of which the Scriptures does abundantly confirm: witness old Jacob, who being
brought into King Pharaohs presence, makes an ingenious confession; Few and
evil have been the days of thy servants Pilgrimage, and have not attained to
the days of my Fathers in their Pilgrimage; (so his Fathers were Pilgrims as
well as he.) Job cries out that his days are swifter then the swiftest
creatures; either in the Earth, Air, or Sea, then an Eagle, Post, or ship; and
tells us, that man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of
trouble. A life no less short then painful, short enough, for it is measured out
not by weeks, months, or years, but days, and miserable too; for it is as
natural for frail mortals to be sufferers, as for sparks to fly upwards. And
David being ready to take his last farewell of this world, says, I go the way
of all the earth; intimating that all men, as well as he, were to pass through
the gates of death; expressing the condition of his Fathers to be nothing
different from his; I am a stranger and a sojourner with thee, as all my
Fathers were. Isaiah proclaims all flesh to be grass, and their glory as
fading, as the flower of the field: and this great Patriarck in the text, I am
a stranger and a sojourner among you.

Hence we may further observe that the Saints of God in all ages (being
thoroughly possessed of their own mortality) have ever entertained the meanest
thoughts of themselves: Abraham styles himself dust and ashes; Jacob terms
himself, less then the least of Gods blessings; David, a worm and no man; and
the Son of David expresses himself low enough, or beneath himself, (as some
think, for many in these days deride and scorn the title) I the preacher was
King in Jerusalem. Isaiah, a man of polluted lips. Jer. a child. And the great
Doctor of the Gentiles, the least of the Apostles.

How hard a lesson is this to learn, Humility is a grace contrary to most men's
humors, out of fashion, or at least request in these times; for now most men
offer that violence to modesty, as to make their tongues the trumpets of their
own praises, (though they have none to brag of.) He is no body that cannot set
forth himself without another help, and on occasion smooth up others too with
titles above their deservings. When King Josiah past by the Grave of that Old
Prophet, he demanded what Inscription that was; and may not we be as well
startled at the inscribing and attributing high titles to popular greatness
(beyond the lines, either of civility to tender, or humility to accept) which
argues the givers folly, and the receivers pride. Young Elihu was of a better
mind, he would not give high titles to any, lest his maker in fury should
snatch him away. Job 32.22.

Thus having showed what we are; (that we are all strangers and sojourners upon
earth) I now come to show what we are to do, and in order to the making our
Pilgrimage happy, and safely to arive at the blessed home, as will make those
eternally so that reach it; be pleased to take notice of these five directions,

First, to be mindeful of your home. Secondly, choose the best guides. Thirdly,
set out betimes and hold out to the end. Fourthly, sort your selves with the
best company. Lastly, I advise you as Joseph did his Brethren:
Take heed that ye fall not out by the way.

To the first. Travelers use not to stand gazing or loitering on the way, or
to be drawn aside to behold Novelties; they rise up early and come to their
Inn late, and travel hard to get homewards; nor are they satisfied till they
reach it. And shall not we that are Christians (upon a better account) be as
mindeful of our home; it being such a home that as far transcends the
stateliest habitation here, as the highest Heavens does the lowest earth; such
a home as the quickest and sharpest eye would be dazied with beholding but a
Glimpse of its glory, and the eloquentest tongue or pen (that ever was) comes
infinitely short to describe it. The great Apostle (who had once a view of that
glory) comes something near in describing it, (but it is in the negative, what
it is not, not what it is:) for (says he) Eye has seen, nor ear heard, or the
capacity of man apprehend the splendour of it. It Is such a home as all the
Patriarchs, Prophets and Saints of God in all ages have left all to enquire
after. This was the City to come, which they had ever in their eye, and wandered
about in Sheeps-skins and Goat Skins, destitute, afflicted, and tormented to
find out. It Is such a home where you shall never be troubled with any loathed
society, and your beloved company, shall never be taken from you. No struggling
of enemies there; no David and Ishbesheth to contend for one Crown; for none
but Conquerors; all heads shall be adorned with Crowns of glory, such as never
incircled the Temples of any earthly Monarch. It Is such a home where Satan, nor
any of his instruments shall be ever able to molest; no siding or taking of
parts there; no Schisms or Divisions; no room for Make-bates there: What should
such Salamanders do in Heaven? there is a fitter place prepared for such hot
spirits, (and 'twere well for them if one heat would extinguish another) for
fire and brimstone must be the portion of their cup. This place is only for
friends to dwell together in unity, and none admitted here, but those that live
in peace; here must be no spirit of Contradiction, no dissenting Brethren, no
Non-conformists there, but an unanimous conformity in all; because that here is
the God of Peace, and the Peace of God which passes all understanding. It Is
such a home, where you shall forthwith behold and enjoy the glorious beatifical
Vision, and be eternally unriddling that Mystery which Mortality could never
reach to, nor Reason apprehend, the Tri-une-God, the Trinity in Unity, and
Unity in Trinity. There you shall see the Lamb with his train of Attendants,
Cherubims, Seraphims, Principalities, Powers, Thrones, Dominions, Archangels,
and Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and Confessors, crying,
Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabbath: And there shall those good Angels which
were your Guardians upon earth, be your everlasting Companions in Heaven. (In a
word) it is such a home where you shall be made perfectly happy; Time shall not
rust or diminish your glory, nor adversity with her frowns, ever approach near
those Mansions; for you shall be ever in the Sunshine of Gods favor, and your
happiness as everlasting as his that made it.

Oh! did we but all consider the shortness of the sweetest pleasure here, in
comparison of those endless and eternal joys that the Saints shall there
partake of, and the shortness and smallness of the longest and greatest misery
or torture that can be endured here, to the Worm that never dies, to the fire
that is never quenched, to those everlasting torments that shall in full viols
be poured upon the wicked in Hell for ever; we should think less of this world,
and more to be happy in a better. And this brings me from the first particular
observable, to the second. From being mindful of our home, to our choice of
Guides to conduct us thither.

Choose the best guides.

These guides are in the Old Testament called Seers, in the New Overseers; and
these are they whom God has appointed to lead us the way to that home, to
which many Saints are already gone in Soul, and many more shall in Gods due
time arive, and be fully glorified both in soul and body. These Seers or
Overseers are those that open the Scriptures, and make plain the way of the
Lord, and cause his paths to be known to the sons of men; they are also (for
their dignity) termed Ambassadors of Christ. Christ's Stewards, Publishers of
glad Tidings, proclaimers of Salvation, Fellow-workers together with Christ,
and Ministers of the Gospel. These God has set up as lights, that by their
soundness of Doctrine and Integrity of life, many Souls may be recalled from
darkness unto his mavelous light: they are Cities set upon a Hill for men to
see, and Candles lighted upon candlesticks to light the Traveller the way; and
these (by their eminency) are (or at least ought to be) Men of excellent
qualifications, and rare endowments; (Angelical persons, men made up of
Heaven) and if we take such for our guides: we need not fear crooked paths, but
may be confident of our way. But because all is not Gold that glisters, nor all
such as they seem, it behooves us to be very cautious in the choice of our
guides; for if the blind lead the blind, whither will they go? The way to
Hell is broad and easily found, it is a pleasant way beset with Roses, able to
entice the foolish Traveller, who is ignorant that it leads to death. And on
the contrary, the way to heaven seems to flesh and blood very uncomfortable; a
narrow sharp, steep, and unpleasant way, very intricate, long, tedious
troublesome and hard to find; in which many a passenger has stumbled, and
many a blind guide lost his way. But that we may be warned by others harms,
and reach that which they fell short of; let us bear with the sharpness of the
way, and be encouraged by the happiness of the end. The advice of a late
ingenuous Author, to this purpose, is worthy your observation. Regard not
(says he) how difficult the passage is, but whither it tends; nor how delicate
the journey is, but where it ends. If it be easy, suspect, it if hard, endure
it. He that cannot excuse a bad way, accuseh this own sloth; and he that sticks
in a bad passage, can never attain a good journeyes end. It cannot be denied,
but that many a passenger has suffered by bad guides, such as have let them go
out of their way, and made them believe the pleasantest way was the best; and
the poor Traveller not sensible of the mistake, till it has been too late to
talk of returning. But of such we are cautioned to beware; and though they
speak never so smoothly, This is the way walk in it, we are to turn our deaf
ear to erring Charms of such blind guides and witless Councillors. And this
brings me from the second particular observable, to the third; from the choice
of our guides, to our haste in setting out, and perseverance in our course.

Set out betimes, and hold out to the end.

As this Exhortation is twofold, so shall be my discourse upon it. I shall in
the first place apply my self to young men, who (like my self) are but newly
risen, or scarce set out. And in the next, humbly address my self to aged
persons, who are (or at least ought to be) near their journeys end.

And first to young men, let me request you to make God and Heaven the constant
objects of your thoughts; the one of your fear, the other of your love; so walk
that ye displease not the one, and ye need not fear the attaining of the other.
Are you setting out, lose no time, remember that many have squandred away the
morning, and have not reached their journeyes end ere night; and with those
foolish Virgins for their tardiness, have been excommunicated that place of
repose, where the early Traveller safely and in good time ariv'd. An hour in
the morning (you know) is worth two at night; and God is better pleased with
young Zeal then decreped Holiness. Josiahs forwardness makes him renowned to
posterity, and young Timothy's Piety eternizes his name to future generations.
Are you on your way, persevere in your Christian course, and think upon the end
whilst ye are at the beginnings (and even now upon the race, have an eye to the
recompense) so shall the splendid glory of the one faciliate the irksome
tediousness of the other. Every true Christian (says a learned writer) is a
Traveller: His life, his walk; Christ his way, and Heaven his home: his walk
painful, his way perfect, his home pleasing. Let Us not therefore loiter, lest
we come short of home; nor wander, lest we come wide of home; but be content to
travel hard, and to be sure to walk aright, so shall our safe way find its end
at home, and our painful walk, make our home welcome. We are all concerned to
make our best use of time, lest (too late) we lament the abuse of it; yesterday
cannot be recalled, to morrow cannot be assured, to day therefore is only
ours, which if we slight, we lose; which lost, is lost for ever. Young men,
remember this, I mean you, whose bodies are strong and healthful, not beset
with any sickness or besieged with any diseases, nor loaded with those common
infirmities incident to old age; consider that you know not how short your time
is, your Sun (for any thing you know, may go down in the morning, and your
night may fall ere noon. Therefore be early up, and earnest on your way toward
home; that if death shall snatch you away in a moment, it may be, only to waft
you to happiness, whilst ye are inquiring after it. David rose up early in the
morning and was earnest in his inquiries after this Jerusalem, he longed after
it, panted for it, and perpetually did he (during his tedious Pilgrimage in
Mesech) lift up his hands, with his soul toward it. The Father of the Faithful
rose up early too, and did cheerfully set out and held out to the end, as all
those must do that hope to reach his bosom. I Will now leave the young man on his
march, and after a good beginning expect a Perseverance in well doing, and a
happy conclusion: And now come and direct my speech to the Ancients, even to
you whose decreped bodies, signify your night at hand, when you shall lie down
in the dust, and rest in oblivion, till the last Trumpet shall summon you
before that dreadful tribunal Let me humbly request you now to be inquisitive
after the other world; have you trifled away the morning of your day, and all
this while not put one foot forward on your journey for Heaven. Let me acquaint
you, that it may not now be too late, if you defer no longer; remember, there
were some called at the third hour, as well as at the first; and labourors
entertained in the evening that were rewarded with those that came in the
morning. Are you on your way, go cheerfully along, and you may yet finish the
work of the day ere the approaches of the night; wherefore be not weary of well
doing, but remember that the end crowns the work; and he only the gainer who
endures to the end. How many have set out betimes and made a promising
beginning, that have fainted on their journey, and fallen short of Heaven; that
which has a diadem in the end, may well admit some bitterness in the
beginning. Let therefore the worth of the reward promp you in your greatest
difficulties to undergo all with patience; who would not do much for such a
crown, and what will not some do for a worse?

In Races, all press toward the mark, but the foremost only wins the prize.
Not so here; here is a reward for every one that deserves it, a prize for more
then the foremost; not only he that runs swiftest and is soonest there, but
every one that runs well (though he comes behind) shall have something. My
advice to you is, that you would so prepare your selves in the evening of your
day, for the approaches of your night, that all things being ready for a
change, you may court death to convey you from the work to the reward. And it
may not unfitly be said of you, as of that glorious courser of Heaven, The Sun
knows his going down: and your setting here, may but make you rebound to
shine more glorious in a higher Sphere. And this brings me from the third
particular observable, to the fourth; from our haste in setting out and
perseverance in our walk, to the choice of our Comrades to accompany us in our
journey.

Sort your selves with the best company.

Remember thou art a Kings Son, (said Mindemus to his Pupil) so say I to thee,
Christian Reader, thou art son to a greater King then Mindemus was, and will thou undervaluethy self with base company? shall one so nearly allied to the
Prince of Light, be a companion for a brat of darkness; an heir of Heaven, for
a firebrand of Hell; the son of a King, for the slave of a Devil. It may be
guest by the company we keep to whom we belong, for birds of a feather will
flock together (says our common Proverb) It Is most certain that nothing of good
can be gained by bad company; and to shun the workers of evil, is the way to
decline an evil work for we are apt to be drawn; more by example then precept,
and to intimate those we have most converse with (be it to good or evil;)
better therefore to have no company at all, then not have good. I had rather go
to Heaven alone, then to Hell with company. How then are we all concerned to
make choice of such religious consorts, as by their Heaven-like conversations
may draw us to a trade of godliness, such as may be thought fit (by the most
wise God) to be both our companions upon earth, and with us to be admitted
Denizons of Heaven. To keep company with our betters, is the way to improve our
selves; for as a late Author wittily observes, that to be best in the company,
is the way to grow worse; and the best means to grow better, is to be the worst
there. If therefore you have chosen such, endear your selves each to other; for
there is no such friend to a tedious journey as a good companion; and let your
souls be (as it were) linkt in the bonds of true friendship, that as David and
Jonathan, ye may be lovely in your lives and in your deaths may not be divided.
And like the same David ye may bid defiance to the works and workers of
iniquity, with a depart from me ye wicked; so shall ye clearly quit your selves
from the number of those that shall at the last day be terrified with that
direful excommunication of the great judge. Depart from me, for I know you not.
And this brings me from the fourth particular observable, to the fifth; from
the choice of our company, to our deportment in our journey.

Take heed that ye fall not out by the way.

For brethren and fellow so journers to disagree is against the rules both of
Piety and Policy; small harmony nor delight in that journey where Travelers do
jangle. When two Israelites fell at variance, Moses a spectator of the discord,
uses no other arguments of persuasion to compose and appease the difference,
then this. Sirs, ye are Brethren; intimating that 'twas not for brethren to
wrong one another. The Father of the Faithful how tender was he in preserving
friendship with his Nephew Lot. Let there be no strife betwixt me and thee, for
we be brethren. What manner of men were those whom ye slew at Tabor (said
Gideon to Zeba and Zalmunna) Oh! they were my brethren. Oh! had you favored
them, I should have spared you. For my Brethren and Companions sake, (says
David) I will wish thee prosperity. It Is for enemies to fall out, not for such
near and dear allies to disagree; they must hold together, live together, and
walk together in love, as being related in an higher and nobler sense then that
of Nature; being fellows of one family, Sons of one Father, Children of one
Mother, Stones of one Building, Branches of one Vine, Sheep of one Fold,
Members of one Body, and Professors of one Truth, Made by one God, Redeemed by
one Jesus, and Sanctified by one Holy Ghost: one would think these ties enough
to debar division from among such friends. Esops bundle of Cudgels in the Fable
are very remarkable; whilst they were all fast bound up with a band, they were
secure either from cracking or bending, but when once divided by one and one,
easily snapt asunder. Whilst we are all under the bond of peace, we are secured
by Gods protection; but when once divided, at the Devils mercy. Whilst we hold
together, we need not fear treating an enemy in the Gate, but when once broke
asunder with distractions, a prey to them that hate us. Remember that Joah and
Abishai's united strengh, put the Syrians and Ammonites to flight; consider
that ye have enemies enough abroad, ye need not seek any so near home. Make not
those the objects of your malice that should be the bulwarks of your defense
against the impetuous storms and batteries of an insnaring world, a bewitching
flesh, and an envious Devil, etc. Know that there is unity amongst wicked men
(for they hold together against the Righteous.) Simeon and Levi are Brethren in
evil, and shall we be at odds? Nothing can be done well that is not done in
unity; that is not well done (that is done through discension.) The Apostle tells
us, That love is the fulfilling of the Law; how then can the Law be fulfilled
without love. Those blessed Angels who wellcomed the new Born Savior into the
world with a Song, did in a short sentence express both Tables. They sang,
Glory to God on High, Good will to men. (Peace on earth makes joy in Heaven)
and those that will not embrace peace on earth, shall have nothing to do with
the God of peace, or the peace of God in Heaven. You know what our Savior said
to his Disciples, By this shall men know ye have an interest in me, if ye love
one another. If ever therefore ye expect to end in peace, or have peace in the
end, be peaceable in your Pilgrimage, so shall ye in good time arive at your
journeyes end, and be no longer strangers abroad, but Kings at home.

The Young man's Monitor, AND Old Man's Admonisher.
A Meditation on Eccles. 12.1.
THis golden Book of Ecclesiastes was penned by the wisest King upon his
repentance; and may be fitly styled, King Solomon's Recantation, which he wrote
after he rose from that fall occasioned through his inordinate love of strange
women; and after he had with all his Wisdom found out the true Natures of all
things here below; then this wisest of Kings wrote this Book, in the Front
whereof he gives a brief, but full description of all the Glory and Pleasures
of this world: Vanity of vanities (says the Preacher) all is vanity, Says the
Preacher; (something must be said to that) Solomon the son of David, the
richest, wisest, and mightiest Monarch (that then reigned) vouchsafes to take
upon him the title of Preacher; though the Preacher in these days must not
think much of the worst of titles, (but no more of that.)

Solomon having thus truly weighed all the pomps and greatness of this world in
the balance of his understanding, and finding them too light to give
satisfaction to the enjoyers thereof, in the end of this Book he gives a
heavenly Exhortation, tending to the attainment of that true felicity, as will
make those eternally happy that reach it. Fear God and keep his Commandments,
for this is the whole duty of man. And for our better direction to keep Gods
Commandments, this last Chapter is ushered in, with a most excellent,
wholesome, and seasonable Exhortation; Remember now thy Creator in the days of
thy youth.

Before I proceed further, here must one Objection be removed. Some may perhaps
question the Preacher, why he did not as well say, Remember thy Creator in thy
old age, as in the days of thy youth?

I answer. This memento is chiefly given to young men, because they take the
greatest liberty to wallow in all kind of sensual pleasures, and with the
greatest eagerness to pursue the deceiving vanities of this world; for now are
their veins full of blood, and their bones full of marrow, and Repentance seems
as unseasonable to them as Snow in Summer, or Rain in Harvest. Is not our youth
(say they) given us to glut our selves with all kinds of pleasures, and to
walk in the ways of our own hearts? Shall I then (says one) grieve in my
prime, and repent for my crimes to hasten old age, and make my smooth face full
of wrinkles, and bring gray hairs on my head, ere I am an old man, old age will
fasten on me soon enough without all this: let me therefore make hay while the
sun shines, and make the best use of my time I can, to the utmost improvement
of Pleasures; and when I am grown so old as to be past using them, I Will cast
them off and think of repentance and another world, when it is not possible to
stay long in this. These are the Common Pleas of Youth, and therefore the
Preacher looking upon them as the furthest from instruction, and to stand in
the greatest need of advice, directs his speech in a most especial manner to
them, Remember now, etc. Young men have no more a lease of their lives then
aged persons, and there does as many of them go to the grave as of older
persons.

Death arrests some in their Cradles, and many in their Infancy, Childehood,
and Youth. The days of man upon earth are but a shadow; no certainty of any
thing as of Death, and nothing more uncertain, then the time when, and the
manner how. Come hither then thou darling of the world, thou great favorite of
flesh and blood; thou whose Honors (here) are as blooming as the Lillies and
Roses in thy youthful cheeks know Image, that though thy Head be of Gold, thy
Body of Silver, thy Feet are but of Clay. If thou walk'st into the fields in
the forward time of the Year, thou can not be unfurnisht of lively Emblemes
of thy own Mortality: how do the Lilly, the Rose, the Cowslip, and the
Gillyflower bemantle the earth, as so many stars to represent Heaven glorious
tapestry; upon sight whereof you may easily be convinced to believe, That
Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these: And yet how subject
are they to fading; pluck them, and they are stubborn; (soon crapt assunder)
smell them, and they wither; and if the wind but blows over them, they are
gone and be no more. And is it not so with thee? does not St. James compare our
life to a vapor, (and that is but short.) David to a span, a thought, a tale,
(and those not long.) Isaiah to grass, and the flower of the field, (and those
you see not lasting.) But of all the sacred Limners in holy Scripture, I find
Jobs pencil to be the freest in pourtraying man: to stubble, and that not
standing neither; to a leaf, and that not fast but shaken; and to a weavers
shuttle, and many other such transient resemblances.

He came something near the drawing man to the life, who compared this life to
a spot between two Eternities; the time past being dead, the future unborn; and
only the narrow compass of the present, all that man can challenge. We know
not how soon death may overtake us; when we are sent into the world the
greatest part of our errand is to dye, and the only business of our life to
prepare for death. We are not certain to be Masters of one minute of time; when
we begin to breath, the next moment may be our last. How many have lien down to
take a healthful sleep that have wak't in another world: Death (says a learned
man) lies in wait for us in all places, and there is no escaping his tyranny.
Death borders upon our Births, and our Cradles stand in our Graves. How many
have we seen carried from the Womb to the Tomb, from the Birth to the Burial;
and what a short cut has the longest liver from the Grave of the Womb to the
Womb of the Grave. Ever since the fall of our first Father, death has ranged
through the world, and made a general slaughter of mankind, (sparing none.)
The most eloquentest Orator that ever was, could never charm him; nor the
potentest Monarch that ever breathed, could never bribe him; the greatest
Warrior that ever was, death has civilized; and made a green turf, or
weather-beaten stone, cover that body, that living, a Lordship could not
cloathe, or the world contain: the most famous persons that ever the world
enjoyed, has death laid at his feet, without regard either to Worth, Dignity,
Majesty, Youth, or Age, Sex or Condition; he favors not the best, nor spares
the worst. Samson with all his strength, Absolon with all his beauty, Josiah
with all his zeal, David with his conquests, and Solomon with his glory; Crasus
with his wealth, and Irus with his poverty; Lazarus with his boyles, and Dives
with his bravery; the Beggar with his rags, and the Courtier with his robes;
all come under the rugged embraces of this grim Sergeant. He spared not
Innocence it self, but had the confidence to look the Son of the Highest in the
face, arrests him, and keeps him three days his prisoner in the Grave. The
mortal Sithe is master of the Royal Scepter, and it mows down the Lillies of
the crown, as well as the grass of the field; death uses no civillity to
Princes more then Pesants; he finds them out in their Palaces, and it may be
in their most retired Closets, and handles them no otherwise then the meanest
person in the street. Death (says a learned Divine) suddenly snatcheth away
Physicians, as it were, in scorn and contempt of Medicines, when they are
applying their preservatives and restoratives to others; as it is storied of
Caius Julius a Chyrurgeon, who dressing a sore Eye, as he drew the Instrument
over it, was struck by an Instrument of death in the act and place where he did
it. Besides diseases, many by mischances are taken, as a bird with a bolt,
while he gazeth at the bow. Death is that King against whom there is no rising
up, which all men are sure to meet with whatever they miss of; but when, that is
unknown. Of Doomsday there are signs affirmative and negative, not so of death;
every day we yield something to him, our last day stands, the rest run. And how
should this put us all in mind to prepare for death, that he snatcheth us not
away at unawares. Whatsoever thou take in hand therefore, remember thine end,
(says the wise Man) and thou shall never do amiss. No thoughts so wholesome as
those of death, and none so profitable as those of our end. We read of Isaac
that he brought his new Bride Rebecca into his Mother Sarahs Tent, thereby to
moderate those Nuptial pleasures with the thoughts of her Memory, whose Corpse
but few days before were carried thence. And King Saul was no sooner anointed,
but Samuel sends him by Rachels Sepulcher, lest his new greatness of being a
King might puff him up and make him to forget that he was a man. We read of
many heathens who did so much contemplate on their mortality, as their
discourses, their houses, and their tables, should be constant Monitors of it.
The Egyptians were wont to carry about their Tables a Deaths head at their
greatest feasts; and the Emperors of Constantinople on their Coronation day,
had a Mason appointed to present unto them certain Marble-stones using these
words (or to this purpose,)

Choose mighty (Sir) under which of these Stones,
Your pleasure is ere long to lay your Bones.
And it is storied of Philip King of Macedon, that he caused a Lackey ever^
morning to awake him with that she Memento, of, Sir, remember that you ar^ a
man. Shall heathens be thus mindful (...) their dissolution, and shall we put
tho^^ thoughts far from us? surely no; but ^^ther cogitate of it, and make
every d^^ our last. Certainly, did we but consid^^ that we are Men, that all
our actio^^ stand upon record, and shall one day be impartially rewarded. We
should so demean our selves every day, as men that endeavored that no action
of any day should be such as should stand against us at the last. Young men
remember this, you that may promise your selves many days upon earth, let not
every day that is added to your life bring new sins with it; but let grace be
added to your days, that so your last days may be better then your first; and
your burial day better then your birth, (as the wise Man speaks.) Make God the
Alpha and Omega of all your actions, and remember him in your work, and he will
remember you in the reward; remember him as an Omniscient and Omnipotent God,
one that beholds all thy actions, and will reward them: remember him in thy
youth, and let him have thy best days as well as thy worst, the blossoms of
thy Youth as well as the leaves of thy Old age; and be sure that thou spend the
glory of thy years, as well as the dregs of thy age, in his service; so shall
thy life be prosperous, thy death happy, and thy resurrection glorious. On the
contrary, if thou forget him now, a day will come, when he will not remember
thee, but strangely excommunicate thee, with a depart from me, for I know you
not: therefore ever bear this wholesome lesson in mind and forget it not,
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth.

It may be some may think that Old Men come not within the verge of this
exhortation, and that Solomon had nothing to say to them when he directed his
speech to the Young Man. I answer, that Old Men are more concerned to take
notice of this then the Young man, and thus I prove it. Young Men, are but
newly come into the world, (and they must have some time to look about them.
Old Men are ready to leave the World (and it is not long ere they must render an
account to God for all their actions.) It Is but the dawning of the day with the
Young Man, but night begins to show it self (in its sable Robes) to the Old
Man. The Young Man's Sun is but newly risen, the Old Man's is ready to set; the
Young Man's glass is but newly turned up, the Old Man's sand is almost run out;
the Young Man is but newly come from the Grave of the Womb, the Old Man is
ready to go to the Womb of the Grave. But it will be objected, that the Young
Man often leaves the World as soon as come in it, only begins to breathe, and
so breathes his last; that many go away, as well at the dawning of the day as
at the approaches of the night; and at Cocks crowing, as in the afternoon; and
that the Young Man's Sun does often set when but newly risen; and his sand run
out, when his glass is but new turned up; and that the Womb oftentimes become
his Tomb. I grant all this, that Young Men may dye (by casualty or otherwise)
as manifold examples before our eyes do hourly manifest. Young Men may dye, but
Old men must dye, for nature is almost extinguished in them, and in all
probability they cannot hold out long. What are those gray Hairs but so many
Monitors of their approaching Mortallity? What are the shrinking of the Veins,
the coldness of the Blood the wasting of the Flesh, the wrinkles in the Skin,
the numness of the Joints, the stiffness of the Limbs, the weakness of the
Sinews, and the aches in the Bones, but so many harbengers of death, or
friendly Memento's, to mind them of their Graves, and that those days are now
come, in which they may truly say, They have no pleasure in them. And what a
time is this for repentance, when the tongue begins to faulter, deafness has
possessed the ears, dimness veiled the eyes, and the memory departed. I confess
it is good to call upon God at any time, (even on our deathbeds) but it is
better that we make our peace with God ere sickness attache us. Physicians
observe that grief in time of sickness is the greatest enemy of health, the
greatest hinderer of Physic, and the greatest hastner of death. Indeed we
should be ever prepared for that ere it comes, that when we come to lie upon
our sick beds, there may be no discontent at it, or disturbance in it; and
nothing to be done, but to lie down and dye. Late repentance is seldom good; I
will not say never true: The example of the Thief upon the Cross forbids me
that, whom we know repented at the last hour; he was saved at the last minute,
that none might despair; and but he, he had no fellow (though another dyed with
him) tha^ none might presume. I will say of late repentance, what a Father
(long since) said in another case, As their damnation is not certain, so their
salvation is doubtful. My conclusion shall be this, though you cannot remember
this discourse, be sure not to forget the Foundation on which it is built;
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth.

Sin the Cause of Sorrow, AND Death the Effect of Sin.
A Meditation on 2 Samuel 24.14.
MY Contemplations are now fallen amongst. David's troubles, and this I am now
to treat of not the least; he was a man that went through many afflictions, and
underwent many and great sufferings; but neither time or the narrow limits I am
confined to, will give me leave to descant upon all his Troubles: I shall
therefore only glance at some, and speak home to this (which may be termed the
greatest.)

But before I treat of the Troubles of this man, I shall speak something of
this Man of Troubles; give a short description of the Man, then of his
Sufferings.

The first mention we have of David's name is in the 1 Samuel 16.11. and there we
find him under a fourfold description: who he is, what he was, whence he was,
and when he lived.

First, for his Parentage or Pedigree, he was the son of Jesse, the son of
Obed, etc. of the Tribe of Judah, and the youngest son of his Father.

Secondly, for his Profession a Shepherd, (as most of his Fathers were before
him) but he soon relinquisht that kind of life; exchanged his Crook for a
Scepter, and his Sheepfold for a Throne; became a public Person, and grew so
famous, that all places sounded with his Praises. That 'twere now but time lost
to stand playing with his name, or to use much discourse upon it, for all that
hear him mentioned, know that he was a Prophet and a King; and all other
descriptions or definitions were altogether needless.

Thirdly, for his Country, he was of Bethlehem, a City situate in that
Country, which was the most renowned of the World; and in the various
dispensations of Gods Providence underwent several denominations. For (as an
eminent Author judiciously observes) it was first called the Land of Canaan,
from Canaan the son of Cham. Secondly, the Land of Promise, because the Lord
had promised it to Abraham and his seed. Thirdly, Israel, of the Israelites,
(so called from Jacob who was surnamed Israel. Fourthly, Judea, from the Jews,
or people of the Tribe of Judah. Fifthly, Palestine (quasi Philistim) the Land
of the Philistims, (a potent Nation that once inhabited it.) And now sixthly,
The Holy Land, because that herein was wrought the Work of our Redemption.

Now whether the Regality of the tribe of Judah was so predominant as to give a
Name to the whole Country, I determine not; but this is certain, that the
little City of Bethlehem, (the place of David's Nativity, and thence called the
City of David) belonged unto, and was a part of that Portion or Inheritance
denomited to that Tribe, when first this Country was conquered by the son of
Nun.

Fourthly, the time when he lived, it was in the days of King Saul, upon whose
disobedience, David is by Gods appointment and approbation anointed King, (but
not Saul's Competitor but Successor.) David did long shroud himself among the
sheep-cotes ere he came to the Kingdom; and for no short time (in an ambitious
eye) did he content himself with the garb of a shepherd (after he was anointed)
ere he was known to be a King, or the son-in-law to one: but the rays of his
fame did shine from under the mean veil of a shepherd, that he could not be
long concealed, but the world must be witness of his glory.

Saul's Reign was very troublesome, perpetual Wars betwixt him and the
Philistines all his days; and this shall make way for David's greatness. God
many times keeps the best men for the worst times, he loves to help at a dead
lift; and therefore David shall act for him at such a time, when Saul and all
Israel are at their wits ends; then forth comes David (armed with the power of
Jehovah) does wonders even to admiration; turns the Israelites Fears into
Triumphs, and their Enemies Brags into Lachryma's.

The manner, thus: The Philistines had invaded the Land, and put their Armies
in a posture of Battle; and King Saul having also assembled the Israelites to
give them the encounter, and set the battle in array against the Philistines.
And now both Armies facing each other on two neighboring Mountains, the host
going forth, and giving a shout to the Battle, there issued from the Camp of
the Philistines a Champion, (term him a man or a monster) his name Goliath; the
place of his nativity Gath; his stature six cubits and a span; (which according
to our English measure is about three yards and a quarter.) His armor, a helmet
of brass upon his head, a coat of mail on his back, greaves of brass upon his
legs, and a target of brass between his shoulders, a spear in his hand, the
staff to it like a weavers beam, (and one with a shield went before him.) His
Language, a Challenge to any one of the Servants of Saul to fight with him:
Concludes with a defiance to the host of Israel, and to the Lord of hosts.

David (being now sent by his father Jesse from his sheep in the wilderness to
his brethren in the camp, to enquire after their welfares, (for Jesse's three
eldest sons attended King Saul to the Battle) observing how Saul and all Israel
were amazed at his ghastly countenance and daring language, and what great
rewards were promised him that should fight with him, as to have the Kings
Daughter to wife, and his Fathers house free in Israel; encouraged by this, and
instigated by his impudent and blasphemous expressions, resolves to lay down
the success of that day on his encounter. And now both Armies full of
expectation of the event of the combat, the Combatants draw near; little David
only with his stone and sling, and Goliath with his massy armor; and now
Goliath belching forth his threats against David, and derision against the
Hebrews, David lets him know, that the God of Israel (whom he defied) was so
powerful, as by so weak an instrument as himself, and so slenderly armed, could
bring him and his brags to confusion. David to make quick work pulls forth a
stone, and that God who taught his hands to war and his fingers to fight, so
directed his aim to the mark, that he hit him betwixt the joints of his armor,
and down falls he to the earth with the Philistines victory. David takes his
own sword and decapits him, (attended with the acclamation of the Israelites)
presents it to Saul, who indeed makes good his promise to give him his
Daughter, but he must undergo more hazards to obtain her, that no Israelite
would undergo the danger, to purchase a Kings Daughter on such dear terms; give
for her dowry a hundred foreskins of the Philistines. But he that preserved
David from the Lion and the Bear, and from that uncircumcised Philistine, will
still crown him with victory to vanquish an host; so that instead of one
hundred he brings two, 1 Samuel 18.27. God was with David, and there is no talk of
over coming those whom he has determined shall be victorious: no weapon that is
formed against him shall prosper; Saul with all his subtle projects to send him
in haste to another world, shall come too short to ensnare him; for David shall
be safe in the greatest danger, and secure under the wings of an Enemy, (the
Philistines) even in the Court of their King, and City of that monster whom he
had slain. No stone shall touch him at Ziklag, or arrow at Gilboa. Abners
Insurrection shall come no nothing, Achitophels Counsel to foolishness,
Absolons Treason to the ruin of the traitor, and Sheba's Rebellion to the
miscreants destruction, whilst David is safely protected by that watchful
Keeper of Israel (who never slumbers) for greater things.

And thus you have now seen David past securely through all straits, past all
dangers, and his feet in a large room, having all his foes his footstool, peace
round about, and no enemy unsubdued but his own corruption; and now wanting
trials abroad, he sins at home; seems to distrust the Providence of that God
that had hitherto so miraculously preserved him with so many great and glorious
deliverances; as from the Lion, and the Bear, from Goliath; once from Achish,
several times from the Philistines, nine times from Saul; from stoning at
Ziklag, from death at Jerusalem, Absolons treason, and Sheba's rebellion: as if
that hand so long extended over him were now shortened, that it could not save
as it had done heretofore; and God not yesterday and to day the same for ever:
Confides in an arm of flesh, numbers his people, examines the strength of his
Kingdom, as if by them he could be preserved, and be secured from all dangers,
whereupon Gods anger is greatly kindled against him: and that David may be
sensible of his great folly and vain hopes, Gad the seer is dispatched with
three harsh proposals to him, and salutes him with this hard choice, either
seven years famine, or three months flying before the enemy, or three days
pestilence. To which we have David's answer returned in the words of the Text,
And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait.

Here is an answer, and no answer; or an answer to no purpose, as being no
resolution to the things proposed; choose the three things; I am in a great
strait; which seems to flow rather from a discontented and dejected spirit then
a premeditated consideration: as if he had expressed himself thus, I am at my
wits end, and know not what to do; you have here proposed three things to me, I
know not which to take, but would willingly decline them all; but since I must
take one that would not be troubled with either, I must take some time to study
for an answer as being not provided of one already; but take a sad preface till
I give the answer, and David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait. Where is
now that wonted courage that was in David? what? he that fought with beasts,
incountred a Giant, vanquished an Army, and was victorious in all his
undertakings, is he now so daunted at a Prophets expressions, that he seems to
be robbed both of his valor and eloquence, knows neither what to do or say for
himself.

Alas this wonder's lessened, and the question answered, if we seriously
consider, first the greatness of his sin, then of his punishment; David has
committed a great sin, and severe judgments are denounced against him for that
sin, which makes him sensible of both, and brings him to a Nonplus. When God
is pleased to give a man a sense of his sin, and presents him with terrifying
judgments, as the rewards of it, it is enough, to make the stoutest heart to
tremble, the stiffest joints to be loosed, the sturdiest limbs to quake, and
the strongest hands to shiver. No marvel then if David take the words of the
text as a Preface to his answer, And David said unto Gad, I am in a great
strait.

I shall not offer that violence to the words as to divide them, but preserve
them whole, and fix my contemplations upon one observation, I shall draw from
them, which is briefly this: That sin is the cause of sorrow; or that all the
miseries that ever happened unto mankind came by sin; which I shall clearly
demonstrate both by Scripture, Reason, and Experience, with such perspicuous
clearness, as none but a son of contention will contradict.

'Twas sin that excluded Adam out of Paradise, Genesis 3.24. Brought a deluge on
the old world, Genesis 7.12. Fire and Brimstone upon Sodom, Genesis 19* 24. Plagues
upon Egypt, Exodus 7.20. Destruction upon Pharaoh, Exodus 14.28. Ruin upon
Jericho, Josh. 6.24. And so many miseries upon* Eli and his family, that to
hear would make the ears of any Israelite to tingle, 1 Samuel 3.12. 'Twas sin
that made Saul lose two Crowns, the one on earth, the other in heaven. That
brings a catologue of plagues on the head of the sinner, Deuteronomy. 28.16. Makes the
whole creation groan, Romans 8.22. Made the Sun withdraw himself, the pale-fac't
Moon to hide her head, the twinkling Stars to disappear, the Rocks to rend, the
Graves to open, the vail of the Temple to part, a general darkness to take
place over the whole world; brought the whole fabric of heaven and earth out
of course, the Lord of Glory to a shameful end, and the Prince of Life to an
infamous death, Luke 23.46. In a word, I may truly say of sin, as Abner did of
war, Know thou not that it will bring bitterness in the latter end, 2 Samuel
2.26. God is so severe against sin, that he would not spare his own Son (when
he undertook for the sins of the world,) and is so just in his chastising of
sinners, that he gives plagues answerable to the offense, that (oftentimes) the
world may read the sin by the punishment. Instance, the Sodomites who burnt
with unnatural lust, man with man; therefore Hell comes from Heaven, Fire and
Brimstone out of Heaven upon Sodom, Genesis 19.24. Pharaoh orders all the Hebrew
males to be drowned, and he and his host are served so in the Red Sea, Exodus
14.21. Adonibezek in his wanton cruelty cut off the fingers and toes of seventy
Kings, and made them scramble for the crumbs of his Table; and in the manner
did God requite him; it is his own acknowledgement, Judge. 1.7. Abimelech kills
his seventy brethren upon one stone, and his own brains are dashed out with a
stone from the Tower of Thebes, thrown by a Woman, Judge. 9.53. Saul's sword slew
eighty five of the Lords Priests, and does the like courtesy for him, 1 Samuel
31.4. Ahab and Jezabel who conspired to fool Naboth at once both of his Life
and Vineyard, ere long the dogs lick their blood on the plat of ground they so
bloodily purchased, 1 Kings 22.38, etc. Zimri conspired against his master King
Elah, and put him to death for his Crown; reigned but seven days, but is
forced to be his own executioner, 1 Kings 16.15. Queen Athaliah slayes all the
blood Royal, and she her self is sent with violence into another world to
answer for her cruelty in this, 2 Kings 11.20. Haman makes a Gallows of fifty
Cubits high for Mordecai, and sues for a general Massacre of all the Jews;
himself meets with a violent and infamous death on the Gallows he had prepared
for Mordecai, Esth. 7.10. Those Persian presidents that conspired against
Daniel, to have him thrown into the den of Lions, are themselves cast in, and
tore in pieces ere they came to the ground, Dan. 6.24. Nebuchadnezzars pride
transported himself beyond himself, therefore Gods Justice brings him lower
then a man; makes him a beast by name, that before was one in nature, Dan.
4.33. Herod's pride made him forget he was a man, and therefore an Angel from
the Lord makes him know himself to be but a man, or rather a worm; and smites
one worm with many till he dies, Acts 12.23. 'Twas Jerusalems sin to stone the
Prophets, and her punishment was answerable; not to have one stone upon
another, Mat. 23.37. The Judge objects against those on the left hand, I was a
stranger, and ye took me not in; naked and ye clothed me not; sick and in
prison, and ye visited me not; and therefore their punishment is to find no
mercy themselves that would afford none to others, and are for ever excluded
the Judges presence and all happiness at once, Mat. 25.41. Thus just is God in
making the punishments so suitable to the sins.

But here is one Objection ready to be thrown into my way, which I must not
pass by without answering. Does God so severely punish sin, and he the author
of all? The Prophet Amos asks the question, Can there be evil in the city, and
God has not done it? Amos 3.6. And that word when it is put as an Interogatory
in the beginning either of a Verse or Sentence, it is the highest affirmation
and confirmation of a following Negative turth. Instance; Can a man take fire
in his bosom and his clothes not be burnt? Can a man that is old return a
second time into his mothers womb, and be born again? Can we bring a clean
thing out of an unclean; a pure Spring from a polluted Fountain? surely no. Can
there be evil in the city, and God has not done it? there cannot. And did God
move David to commit the sin of numbering the People, and does he yet punish
that sin of David's with the death of no less then seventy thousand men? Is he
so severe against that sin of which himself is the author?

I answer, It Is the greatest blasphemy imaginable, to make God the Author o^
sin. Let not any man when he is tempted say, I am tempted of God, for God
cannot b^ tempted of evil; neither tempts he any to evil, James 1.13. You are
to know that there are two sorts of evils, the evil of Sin, and the evil of
Punishment; the one proper to God, the other incident to man. We read of
several in Scripture that did evil in the sight of the Lord, there is the evil
of Sin: and then we read how God did inflict judgments upon them for those
sins, there was the evil of Punishment. The guilt of the one requires the
Justice of the other.

Again, God is said to be the Author of sin, because he swayes all the actions
of men; and were he pleased, he could take off the sinner in the heat and
height of his sin; and with a word (as he made the World of nothing) bring all
that is therein to nothing: no sin can be committed, or cruelty acted, without
his permission. And here by the way you are to take notice of a great Truth,
viz. That God permits many things to be done, which he does not approve of when
they are done; and to make this plain to the meanest capacities, I could heap
multitudes of Examples to confirm it. I am not ignorant that many have measured
the justness of a Cause by the success of it; and because God (for the sins of
a Nation, or other reasons best known to his Divine wisdom) oftentimes suffer
the best Cause to come by the worst on it; therefore they of the Triumphing
party have concluded, that God did own and approve both of them and their Cause
in giving them the Victory. But the greatness of their mistake in so doing I
shall manifest; in order to which I could produce manifold examples, and show
them that Virtue is sometimes a sufferer and Vice triumphant; Gods people
Captives, and his Enemies Conquerors. Salmanazar a heathen King drives the
Israelites (God own people) ten Tribes at once, out of their own Land, into an
everlasting captivity. And Nebuchadnezzar an insulting and profane Prince,
makes havoc in the holy Land, carries two Tribes into a seventy years
captivity, commits barbarous outrages, profanes the Temple, burns Jerusalem to
the ground, and destroys all before him with fire and sword. If Success
therefore be an Argument of a good Cause, the Turk were the best Saint, the
uncircumcised Philistine the truest son of Abraham: of all things I would never
be a Christian, for they of all men were most miserable.

For a conclusion to this point, of many instances I shall only make choice of
two; the one out of the Old Testament, the other out of the New. My first is
that of the King of Assyria, Isa. 10.6. whom God calls the rod of his anger,
and gives a permission and a commission to tread down the Israelites as the
mire in the streets: and this proud domineering Tyrant insults and triumphs,
and intends the utter destruction of Gods people; was not his cause the best,
that made him so victorious; but you shall find otherwise, for when God had
sufficiently scourged his people with this Rod, God had an end in it more then
he dreamt of; for whereas he looked not at all upon the hand of God in it, and
thought of nothing but destruction, God made the end to conduce to the good of
his people, and burnt this Rod in the fire, Isa. 10.12.

The second is, That of the Savior of the World, who when he was brought to
answer for his life before the Roman President, and many things objected
against him by the Scribes and Pharisees, Pilate asks him many things, but he
answers nothing; Pilate much offended hereat, argues the case with our Savior
in this manner, Know thou not the Eminency of my Person, the Dignity of my
Place, and the largeness of my Power, that I can crucify, or I can release
thee; but our Savior tells him, that that Power which he called his, was not
his own; For thou had no power over me, were it not given thee from above,
John 19.10. I am so far from being under thy power, that I can lay down my
life, and I can take it up; and did not I give thee a being, that am now a
Prisoner at the Bar, thou could never sit upon me as a Judge on the Bench.
The Scribes and Pharisees were so sottishly ignorant, as to think that if
Christ had been the Son of God, (as he said he was) they should never have been
suffered to have sent him with so much cruelty to his Grave; and because they
had their wills of him, they did therefore believe that God approved of that
bloody fact of theirs, and plainly demonstrated that he was a deceiver: these
were their conclusions concerning him, Matthew. 27.63. Pilate and the Jews were
but secondary causes of his death, they were but instruments in another hand;
for 'twas God that did deliver his Son to be crucified; he was that Lamb slain
(in Gods decree) before the foundations of the world were laid. And it is also
true, that Christ delivered himself to be crucified by his cheerful obedience
to the Will of his Father: yet this did in no way clear Judas that betrayed
him, the Scribes and Pharisees that blasphemed him, Pilate that condemned him,
the Soldiers that abused him, nor the Jews that crucified him, because of
their different aims and ends in it; for he was delivered by Judas for money,
by the Jews for envy, by Pilate for fear, by the Soldiers in wickedness, and
by God in love. Their design in crucifying Christ, was to hinder the Salvation
of Mankind, but God perfected Man's Salvation by their designs. And that God did
not approve of that sin of theirs (though he permitted it) appears by those
severe and remarkable judgments inflicted upon the actors thereof. And first
of Judas, who was foremost in the Treason, he also is the first in Punishment;
he brings his wages of iniquity back to the chief Priests, and hanged himself,
and so his Punishment is no less public then his Sin. And for Pilate (if
eminent Authors may be credited) he was by the Emperor Tiberias banished into
France, and dyed miserably. And as for the Scribes, Pharisees, Soldiers, and
the whole Rout of Jews, Josephus tells us, that those that were left of them,
were forty years after, all swept away by Famine, Sword, and Pestilence; and
the lofty City Jerusalem, with the glorious Temple therein, burnt to ashes, by
Titus son of Vespasian, Emperor of Rome. And it is most certain, that the guilt
of Christ's blood lies so heavy on the heads of the Posterity of those Jews,
that they are now a vagabond Nation, scattered over the face of the Earth;
hated of all, esteemed of none, and under hardness of heart unto this day. God
is of purer eyes then to behold the least sin with approbation; all manner of
impieties his soul abhors, and therefore does he render the Authors thereof
odious, and makes their Names stink to Posterity. Instance Cain, for that sin
of his in killing his Brother, has the mark of a Rogue clapped upon his Name,
which posterity shall never take off, A fugative and a vagabond shall thou be
in the earth, Genesis 4.14. Simeon and Levi, for that sin of theirs, in slaying
the Sechemites, under pretense of circumcising them; their Names are never
mentioned without the infamous addition, of brethren in iniquity, Genesis 49.5.
Jeroboam, for setting up Calves in Dan and Bethel, under pretense of saving the
Jews a labor of going up to Jerusalem to worship, his Name is never mentioned
without an infamous brand, never to be wiped off, Jeroboam that made Israel to
sin, 1 King. 16.19. Ahaz, for those many and grievous sins by him committed,
has a Name by himself, that he might be known to be the worst King that ever
reigned either in Israel or Judah, This is that King Ahaz!

This is the profane and idolatrous King, that cut in pieces the vessels of
the Lords House, abused the Priests of the Lord, shut up the doors of the
Temple, made Altars in every corner in Jerusalem, advanced the high places, put
down the worship of God, and put up that of Devils; and in the time of his
distress, did trespass yet more against the Lord, This is that King Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. Judas for that sin of his, in betraying the Savior of the World,
his Name is not any where mentioned, but there is an ignominious blur put upon
it, for posterity to read, Judas Iscariot, who also was the Traitor, Matthew.
10.4.

And God is so just that he will not act that himself, for which he so severely
punishes others for being guilty of.

But secondly, did God move David to number the people? and does he yet punish
that sin of David's with the death of no less then seventy thousand Men? Is he
so severe in punishing that sin of which himself is the Author? I answer, in
the 2 Samuel 24.1. it is said, That God moved David to number the people; and in
the 1 Chronicles. 21.1. it is said, That Satan tempted David to number the people:
For the reconciling of these Scriptures you are to take notice, that God is
said to move David to number the people, because he did for a little withdraw
the Arms of his Protection from him, left him to himself, and permitted Satan
to tempt him (who fraught with malice enough against David) proves successful
in his attempts, and brings David to commit this sin.

And for further confirmation of this Truth, I shall borrow an Arrow out of a
Learned Quiver, and demonstrate the several kinds of Tempters, with the
various natures of their Temptations; God, Satan, Man, the World, and the
Flesh, are all said to tempt. God temps Man to try his obedience. Satan temps
Man to draw him from obedience. Men tempt men to try what is in them; and Men
tempt God; by distrusting his Power. The World is a Tempter, to keep Man from
God, and the Flesh is a Tempter, to bring him to the Devil. So God tempted
Abraham in the offering of his Son; Satan tempted Job in the loss of his Goods;
A Queen tempted Solomon in trying his wisdom; The Israelites tempted God by
unbelief in the Desert; The World tempted Demas, when he forsook the Apostles
and the flesh tempted David when he fell by Adultery; and his own corruptions,
together with the instigation and solicitation of Satan, tempts him to commit
this sin, for which God was so highly displeased with him, that he sent such a
harsh summons to him, that instead of answering, he breaks out in the language
of the Text, And David said, etc.

And thus have I fairly removed this great block out of the way at which many
have stumbled, and many more might have fallen; what now remains, but that I
only in brief set down the sad effects of sin in general to all mankind, and
so I Will conclude.

But by the way, I must crave leave of my Readers to make a short digression,
briefly to show how glorious man was by Creation, how happy in his state of
Innocence, how great his fall, and how miserable the effects of it, and that
shall be my conclusion.

Man was created a glorious Creature, and heir to much happiness; put in a
state of innocence, seated in an earthly Paradise, and placed as a Monarch over
all the Creatures that God made (except those blessed Angels that are resident
in a higher Sphere) the Beasts of the Field, and the Fowls of the Air, the Fish
in the Sea, and all Creeping things did him homage, and he gave them their
Names; The place of his Residence, the Garden of Eden, (a fit Emblem of that
Celestial Paradise that is above) there being all the varieties that heart
could wish or desire to make a life happy, without either carking or caring,
moiling or toiling, sighing or sorrowing; and to make his happiness complete,
he was to continue without the limits of Threescore Years and Ten, or Fourscore
Years; his Body no less immortal then his Soul: Here was a happy life indeed,
where there was no Sickness to torment, no Death to affright, or Devil able to
hurt. And as a further addition to his Happiness, (that nothing might be
wanting that may any way conduce to his well being) a beloved companion is
given him (with such a body and such a soul as he had) for his perpetual
consort, to keep him from the dumps of melancholy, and be a constant sharer
with him in all his felicity. Adam thus happy, the fruit of every tree in that
glorious Eden (only one excepted) was for his use; and to eat of that one
tree, was death to himself and posterity. This tree stood in the midst of the
Garden, and served as a touchstone to try their obedience. The Devil (not long
before thrown from Heaven for his pride) perplexed not more at his own misery
then man's happiness; envying that Man (a creature inferior to him by creation)
should usurp his place, to fill up that room, or shine in that Orb whence
himself was cast; resolves to work his wits to bring Man as miserable as
himself; and thus he manages the design: he gets into the Serpent, so climbs
the tree, waits his opportunity, and sets upon the Woman; tells her the tree is
handsome, the fruit beautiful and the taste much more delightful; and finding
her not so tractable as he desired, further bespeaks her thus: Fear not the
threats or menaces of thy Creator, for no evil shall acrue to thee or thine, by
eating the lovely fruit of this fair tree. Do not make me believe a thing I
know to be false; tell not me of dying the death, it is no such matter; for when
you have once tasted, you shall be no longer servants of him that made you, but
Lords and Masters of your selves; and every way as great and as good as he that
made you. Were not trees made for fruit, and what was fruit made for but to
eat; then why not this, as well as others? And thus by the alluring speeches of
this subtle deceiver, the Woman is deluded, Adam perverted, the most high God
highly dishonored, and all mankind without an infinite mercy ruined; she
tastes, and gives her husband with her, and he did eat. And so man that was so
fearfully and wonderfully made, and in so happy and glorious condition, has
forfeited all by this one act of disobedience, is become a Map of perfect
misery; (so that as one wittily observes) man is shut out, of the doors of his
everlasting habitation for two pretty toys, an Apple and a Woman. And now the
judgments of God like a troop pursue him and his posterity; and all the
miseries and calamities of this life and that to come, follow close at his
heels, as the effect and reward of sin and brings him to such a Nonplus (being
loaded with so much gilt, and attended with so many judgments, and therefore
no wonder to see him cast down and dejected. Wherefore does a living man mourn,
or complain, was a Prophets question? and it is sadly answered by himself, A man
for the punishment of his sin, Lam. 3.39. I have sinned, and what shall I say
unto thee, O thou preserver of men, says Job. Woe unto us, for we have sinned,
cries the Church, Lament. 5.16. David cries, That his sins were gone over his
head, and become a burden too heavy for him to bear; and therefore after his
committing this sin, no wonder if he were so amazed at the proposal of those
terrors for it, that he breaks out into the discontented expressions of the
Text; And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait.

Had it not been for Sin, Death had never fetched his circuits through the
world. Neither Adam or any of his sons, had never come under his power. 'Twas
Sin that brought in those terrible Harbengers of Death; those various kinds of
sicknesses to afflict mankind. For as the shadow follows the body, so plagues
attend Sin: and had the cause been wanting, (which is Sin) the effects had
never been (which is Misery.) There had been no sweeping away of mankind by
Sword or Famine. Famine should never have conquered his thousands, or the Sword
his ten thousands. There should have been no wasting Consumption, no grievous
Gout, nor groaning Stone, or tormenting Colic; no burning Fever, or quaking
Ague, nor trembling Palsy, or loathsome Jaundies; nor a thousand other
Infirmities and Casualties which now attend frail man to his Grave. But this is
not all, for Death eternal also is the reward of Sin, which is the second
Death, Rev. 20.14. and may well be termed a death and no death; being a
privation from all that is good, or to a life desirable, and a constancy in
suffering that which is evil, even intolerable torments that shall never know
either end or measure, impossible for life to suffer, did not an infinite
Justice keep the tortured from dying; for there the best company shall be
Devils, and the best music Blasphemy. The ear shall be entertained with the
grievous screeches of parties condemned, and hideous howlings of woeful Devils;
the eye, with no better prospect then damned Ghosts; the taste with no greater
dainties then grievous hunger; the smell with no choiser odours then sulphurous
brimstone; and the feeling with those terrible extremes, of burning and
gnashing of Teeth. (In a word) it is a death, because they are excommunicated
from such glory as the wit of man is not able to express; and it is a life too,
(or rather a living death) because they are alive to endure such hellish
torments as the learned pen is not ab^e to delineate, nor the eloquentest
tongue to describe, the rarest wit to imagine, or the knowingest mortal to
define. Ever to be dying, yet never dye. This, this shall be the unrepentant
sinners portion, Matthew. 25.41. Rev 20 10.

To conclude, since the effects of sin, reach not only to heap plagues upon
the sinner here, but also everlasting torments upon soul and body hereafter,
that manner of persons ought we to he in all holy conversation? My advice is
that we shun that cause which brings such sad effects; avoid sin, that we never
partake of those plagues as the rewards of it. And in order hereunto, that we
set a narrow watch over our thoughts, words, and actions, that we give not way
to the least temptation, but kills this cockatrice in the egg, destroy sin in
the birth, get the mastery of every corruption, and bid defiance to the
destructive alurements of our immortal enemy: And because all of us brought
such a load of gilt with us into the world, as without an infinite mercy would
sink us into that place whence is no redemption; and being not of our selves
not able so much as to think a good thought; let us make our addresses to that
all sufficient Savior, who for our sakes wrought glorious salvation, conquered
Death, Sin, and Satan, foiled the powers of darkness, and led the devils in
Triumph as his Captives, Hos. 13.14. 1 Cor. 15.57.

Let Us endeavor to have an interest in him, that his merits may be imputed
unto us, and we may be clothed with the long white robes of his righteousness,
Rev. 4.4. That at the great day of Audit, we may hold up our heads with joy
before that bar, whence the wicked shall be sentenc't; and rejoice that all
straits are at an end, and all our miseries out of date: that our sins and
death are laid in one grave, ever to be forgotten and forgiven; and are now
ready to take livery and seizin of that glorious, incorruptible, and unfading
Inheritance, which the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, (the Captain of the Lords
host, and of our salvation) has purchased for us; and be ever enjoying that
glory which Moses so earnestly desired (only) to behold; and eternally chant
forth Halle lujahs to the Trinity in Unity and Unity in Trinity; to whom be
ascribed by Men and by Angels, (here and hereafter) all Honor and Glory,
Thanksgiving and Obedience, World without End.

Balaams happy Wish, AND Unhappy End.
A Meditation on Numb. 23.10.
Let me dye the death of the Righteous, and let my latter end be like hi^.
THese words were uttered by Balaam the son of Beor of Mesopotamia, the notedst
Conjuror of those times, whom Balak King of Moab sent for to curse Israel; and
being come for that purpose from the Mountains of the East to the high places
of Baal, beholds a glimpse of Heavens Glory and Isreal's happiness; discovers
better wages then Balak could give him, greater preferment then Balak could
exalt him to, and infinitely more honor then was at Balaks disposal. Balaam
being in an ecstasy, and (as it were) ravished with the glory which he sees,
turns his prophecy into a prayer, and his prayer is this: Let me dye the death
of the righteous, and let my latter end be like his.

Were these the words of a Sorcerer, a better mouth might have spoke it? we may
well admire that so sweet a saying should proceed from so foul a mouth; that
such a flower of Paradise should grow on such a Dunghill; that a stranger and an
enemy to the God of Israel and the People of Israel, should so excellently set
forth the glory of the one, and the happiness of the other; and that he should
have so much of heaven in so short a prayer, Let me dye, etc.

'Twas our Saviors question, Matthew. 7.16. Do men gather Grapes of Thorns, or
Figs of Thistles. Here Is a Thorn brings forth Grapes, an Inchanter with the
expressions of a Prophet. How can we sufsiciently admire the wisdom and power
of God, in making wicked men to sound forth his praises, even the Devil himself
to set forth the glory of the Father, and proclaim the divinity of the Son.
Hard hearted Pharaoh must confess his power, the Magicians his works; and
Balaam shall be sensible of his glory, witness his Petition, Let me dye, etc. A
foul breath may make a Trumpet sound sweetly, a cracked Bell may toll in others
to Church, a stinking carcass may have a honeycomb in it; and a Sorcerer may
speak good Divinity: I am sure Balaam did, and a prayer as excellent, Let me
dye the death of the righteous, and let my latter end be like his.

Hence observe, that we are not to judge of any man by his words or pass our
verdict by the outside; for many cry Templum Domini with their mouths, that
have the Devil in their hearts; and the Devil himself sometimes counterfeits an
Angel of light. Many make a fair profession of Christianity, that speak well,
hear much, and understand more; upon examination you will find by their
actions, that they have merely a form of godliness, but deny the power of it;
that at best will appear but like the Devil in Samuels Mantle. We use to say,
that all is not gold that glisters, and it is as true that all are not holy that
seem so; all not Saints that have demure looks and specious pretenses. Our
Savior has told us, that the tree is known by his fruit; and God that
searches the reins, knows the heart, and judges of the outward actions by it.
Balaams words bespeak him both a Prophet and a Saint; and he did as clearly
prophecy of Christ, as any Prophet of the Lord, either before or after him:
and it is thought by some, that his Prophecy of a Star to rise out of Jacob,
etc. drew those Persians King to attend the motion of that Star that appeared
at our Saviors Incarnation. It Is most certain that Balaam spoke so well, that
no man could speak better; yet he could speak so bad, that the Devil himself
could not speak worse; as when he advised the Moabites to send their Daughters
to commit whoredom with the Israelites, which occasioned the death of twenty
four thousand Hebrews. And so I pass from the Speakers description, to the
description of his Speech.

The speaker was Balaam, and his speech, or rather his prayer, was, Let me dye
the death of the righteous, and let my latter end be like his. Balaam is so
taken with the rays of that Glory he beholds at a distance, that he grows
impatient. No more of life, nothing in it so desirable. No more of this world,
he sees more glory in the next, and therefore courts death to convey him to
that glory which he so much longs for. Let me dye, etc. What, could he not dye
without asking leave? without much entreaty, death was ready to attend him; and
for want of help he might have been his own executioner, and (as King Saul did
a long time after) made his own sword to have given him his Mittimus to the
grave. No, Balaam (as bad as he was) would not lay violent hands on himself; he
knew that God would not entertain any runnagate or straggling sons that came
without his call. That God who infused a living Soul into our Bodies (when we
began to be) will not have that soul come forth till he require it. It Is
written Revel. 3.21. To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my
Throne; even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne.
To him that overcomes, not to him that runs away: to him that conquers, not him
that flies from his colors. We are now but on our way, not yet in our
country. In this world we must do our work, in that to come we must have our
wages. Here we must fight under the Banner, there we must receive (if we
deserve it) the Crown. This world is a Sea of trouble, that a Haven of rest;
and those who to avoid the troubles of this, rush themselves out, by laying
violent hands on themselves, shall never reach the happiness of that. For how
can God afford Mercy to those, who have none for themselves? Balaam would dye,
but how? There are (says one) three sorts of death; the death of Nature, the
death of Sin, and the death of Grace, (or rather a gracious death) or the death
of the Just. It Is only the last that Balaam sues for: Let me dye (says he)
but no death will serve his turn, but that of the Just; Let me dye the death of
the righteous, and let my latter end be like his. My latter end, he is not
altogether for himself, he has some care of his posterity after him; he knew
that God would be Abraham's exceeding great reward; and that he would be the
same to his seed that he was to him: be the God of his seed, and of his seeds
seed; and in them should all the Nations of the world be blessed. So Balaam
prays in respect of his own particular end, and for his posterity, those that
were come, or were to come out of his loins, Let my latter end be like his.

Now for the further amplifying of this Prayer of Balaams, I shall draw these
following Conclusions from it:

First, That the Righteous dye, etc. Secondly, That their death is happy, and
attended with glory. Thirdly, That none shall dye so, but those that live so;
or, that a holy Life is the only prologue to a happy Death. Lastly, I shall
present you with some short Directions, how to lead such a life, how to reach
such a Death, and this shall be my conclusion.
That Death is a debt of Nature, to be paid by all the sons of men, is so known
a truth, that it needs no further proof then common experience; the decree has
long since gone forth, that all men must once dye. So sure as death (says our
common Proverb) and that is so sure, that nothing more certain. For of all the
Privileges that Christ purchased for the sons of men, he never granted this;
for he himself tasted of death, and so must all those do that breathe upon this
earth, except those only that shall be found alive at the day of judgment,
which shall not dye but be changed. None are exempted from deaths rage, no
honey without this gall, no exaltation without this humiliation; all must pass
through his black Gates ere they can enter into glory.

And this brings me from the first conclusion to the second; from the certainty
of death to all mankind, to the Happiness of it to the righteous. Let my
latter end be like his.

I cannot blame Lalaam for making such wishes, and it had been well for him if
it had fallen so, he had then been eternally happy as now miserable. Indeed,
death to a righteous man, is but a sleep, (for so our Savior styles it;) it
puts an end to our miseries and a beginning to our joys; it cures all
diseases, the aching head and the fainting heart, Asa of his Gout, and
Mephibosheth of his lameness, Lazarus of his Sores, and Gehazi of his Leprosy;
finishes that life that was a kind of death (or a passage to it,) and gives
birth to another, not subject to mutation; and serves as a short bridge to
conduct the Pious soul to a spacious inheritance.

But it may here come within the verge of an inquiry, whether the righteous may
desire death; it is answered that it may de desired, not for it self, but for
what it brings.

First we may desire it, as it puts a period to sin: there is no offending of
God in the Grave, sin will be an inmate with the choicest of Gods Saints whilst
they are here, but is forced to leave them when they leave the world. For (as
one observes) sin was the Midwife (or rather the womb) that brought death into
the world, and death must be the Grave to bury sin (so the Mother is killed by
the Daughter.) Again, we may desire it, as it brings us home to our Fathers
house, near our Head and our elder Brother, so Saint Paul desired it, Phil.
5.23.

Secondly, That none shall dye so, but those that live so, etc. For as the
effect follows the cause, or the shadow the body; so happiness is the attendant
of holiness. Would Balaam dye the death of the Righteous, that was so far (as a
learned Author observes of him) from living the life of the Righteous, that he
gave Pestilent counsel against the lives of Gods Israel: and though here in a
fit of compunction, he seem a friend, yet he was after slain by the Sword of
Israel, whose happiness he admires and desires to share in. Carnal men care not
to seek that which they would gladly find; some faint desires and short-winded
wishes may be sometimes found in them, but their mistake is in breaking Gods
chain, to sunder Holiness from Happiness, Salvation from Sanctification, the
end from the means; they would dance with the Devil, and sup with Christ at
night. Live all their lives long in Dalilahs lap, and then go to Abraham's bosom
when they dye. The Romanists have a saying, that a man would desire to live in
Italy (a place of great pleasure) but to dye in Spain; because there the
Catholic Religion (as they call it) is so sincerely professed. And a Heathen
being asked whether he would rather be Socrates, a painful Philosopher, or
Craesus a wealthy King; answered, That for his life he would be Craesus, but
for the life to come, Socracrates. But stay, not here and hereafter too; you
know what Father Abraham said to Dives in flames; Son, Remember that thou in
thy life time receivedst thy good things, and therefore now, must look for
evil. That King Balaks proffers, were so liberal, that Balaam was loath to
forgo so fat a Morsel, his mouth watered, and his fingers itcht to be dealing
with Balak; (he will ask God again and again to gain such a prize) and his
heart again is ravished with Isreal's happiness: he would fain please Balak, if
he might not displease God in it, and partake of both; but as Balak had not his
will, so neither had Balaam either his wages or his wish. God oftentimes fools
wicked men of their expectations, that whilst they strive to gain the happiness
of both worlds at once, find neither: so here, I know not how fitter to
compare Balaam then to a stranger traveling a far Country, beholds the state
and magnificence of the Court, but no interest in the King; or to a surveyor of
Lands, that takes an exact compass of other men's Grounds, of which he shall
never enjoy a foot.

I shall see him (says Balaam) so shall every eye, and those also that pierced
him; but not as Abraham saw him and rejoiced; nor as Job, Chap. 19.25. The pure
in heart only see him to their comfort; when Balaam beholds him it shall be
with terror; and though when he made this prayer his soul danced on his lips,
ready to fly off, yet was he never nearer heaven then those Pisgah Hills; Had
Balaams works been answerable to his words, or his worth to his wishes, he
might have reached his desires. But as Saul who was once among the Prophets fell
after from God, so Balaam is not long in these raptures, and therefore for all
his devotion, though he were not so wicked as to kill himself, is nevertheless
so unfortunate, as to fall by the Sword of the Israelites, even among the
thickest of Gods Enemies, the Midianites; as you may read at large in the one
and thirtieth Chapter of this Book of Numbers, v. 8.

There is no man so much an enemy to himself, but would be happy if happiness
were to be gained with wishing for. Ask the wickedst man upon earth, if he does
not hope to dye well, he will tell you he does, and so he will, if a word upon
his deathbed will do it; A Lord have mercy upon me: but alas Heaven is not to
be attained on such easy terms. Cain may be distracted for his Murder, Balaam
and Saul may Prophecy, Ahab walk in Sackcloth, Judas Preach and do miracles,
and all to no purpose; 'twas not Esau's blubbered eyes that could recover
either his Birthright or his Fathers blessing. I cannot but reprehend their
folly that spend their days in sin and vanity, and at the point of death,
think to turn sudden penitents, as if that would do: how foully are they
mistaken that think so, for he that lives like a devil upon earth, (though
under an Angels vail) shall never be a Saint in Heaven?

So I have now done with the parts proposed: what remains, but that I in brief
give some short directions, how to lead this happy life, how to reach that
happy death, and so I Will conclude. For the certain and speedy attainment of
which be pleased seriously to weigh these following instructions.

First, be conversant in the Scriptures, make that your day and your night
studies, and take notice of the lives of all Gods Saints, and endeavors to
track them in those steps which brought them to glory. Make Abraham's faith, and
Jobs patience Eliahs zeal, and Hezekiahs Integrity, patterns of your
immitation. Let Joseph be an example of unconquered chastity, and Moses of
meekness and humility. Let David's troubles teach us to depend upon Gods
Providence, and Paul's perseverance, not to be weary of his Corrections.
Remember the Character which our Blessed Savior gave of the Baptist, That he
was a burning and a shining light. Indeed the Saints of God in all ages have
served as Beacons on hills to give light to a crooked and perverse generation.
Oh that we could but learn by their examples to adorn our profession, and we
shall be no losers in the end. What says David, Mark the upright man, and
behold the just, (indeed he is worth the noting) for the end of that man is
peace. He it is that may be truly said to leave this world like a Lamb, and
shall for ever be owned in a better for one of Christ's fold. But above all look
upon him that is the Author and finisher of your Faith; strive to immitate the
blessed steps of the holy Jesus, whose feet were ever running Gods
Commandments, whose hands were ever busied in works of Charity, his eyes ever
looking for Objects of Mercy, whose Soul was ever yerning with bowels of
Compassion, whose discourse was always gracious, and guile never found in his
lips. And that we may be the better fitted to write after such blessed copies,
let us set a narrow watch over our thoughts, words, and actions, that we offend
in neither; but remember that he is an Almighty and Omniscient God, with whom
we have to do, and all things naked and bare to his all-seeing eye; and that we
may make a happy progress in our Christian course, let us trample on the
vanities of this world and have our conversation in Heaven whilst we are on
Earth. Put a right value on the things of this world, and whilst we are in
this; make sure of a better, that when this fabric shall be on a flame, we may
find a place of refuge in those glorious and everlasting Habitations: and that
we by no means put off our Repentance from day to day, but take time by the
fore-top, for we know not what a day may bring forth. There are many now in
Hell yelling forth their too late Lamentations, that would have repented, had
they had a morrow; let us be ever contemplating of our last end, and of that
great account we must all one day make, and account every day as our last; that
when death comes we may be so prepared for his approach, as to entertain him as
a friend, not dread him as an enemy. 'Twas a good prayer of David's, Psalm. 9.20.
Let the Nations know themselves to be but men. Oh that we did but seriously
take this into our consideration, and rightly understand our frame whereof we
are made, and remember that we are but dust; and what is dust but the slave of
the beesom and the sport of the wind. That the luxurious person would consider
that he is the fouler dust, by so much as he is stained and (...)

have beheld before; never such a wonder in the world. The Child of a Virgin,
and God a child (says the Evangelical Prophecy) never such a Jubilee in the
World, as a Christ and a Savior, (says the Angellical History) what was
foretold by Isa's Pen is fulfilled in Gabriels Tongue; which speaks comfort not
to some Persons, but to all People; all, else Persons and People had been
eternally lost. To you he is born, to you men he is, to us Angels he is not.
[We that stood have not the need: they that fell have not the grace of
Salvation; nor shall any means be ever used for their restoration, as being
included under the eternal decree of Gods everlasting displeasure.] This day
(it seems then he had a day for his incarnation or Nativity, though this
profane age deny it him) by his birth made a blessed day. Proclaimed by one
Angel a joyful feast, observed by many for a feast of joy; By many Angels that
day, and by all Saints since in all ages, as the Birthday of no petty Prince,
but the great Sovereign and Savior of the World, who was anointed and
appointed for that purpose.

This is a true saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came
into the world to save sinners.

And now having a Savior (and such a Savior) for my subject, I shall bend my
inquiries after his Person, Names, and Offices, his Actions and Passions, the
end of both, Parallel his Divinity with his Humanity; his first, with his
second coming, and so conclude.

First, then for the object or person here spoken of, who it is, who is this
that comes says Isay? It Is he that was from eternity, before the Mountains
were brought forth, or the foundations of the world were laid, God from
everlasting and world without end. The second person of the glorious Trinity,
his Name Jesus, (because a Savior) and Christ the Lord, (because the anointed
of God) the one answering his Divinity, the other his Humanity, and both his
Office; designed he was of old for man's Redemption, promised and prophesied of
long before he came; as the Woman's Seed, Abraham's Son, David's Throne, Balaams
Scepter, Isay's Immanuel, Micahs Ruler, and Judahs Lion; whom Abraham saw afar
of, and Balaam beheld, but not nigh. In a word, he was the Light of the
Gentiles, (because to them he manifested himself by a star, (or rather by an
Angel, (as some think in a Pillar of fire) and the glory of his people Israel,
(because to them he was proclaime'd by Angels.) Thus you have now seen who it
is that is here spoken of, I now come to the act that he is here said to do.

He came, he bowed the heavens and came down, exchanged his Fathers Bosom for
the Virgins womb, and became Immanuel, God with us. The express Immage of his
Father takes the form of a Servant. He who in the beginning of time, made man
in his own image, is in the fullness of time, made after our likeness, the Word
flesh; the Ancient of Days, a little Child; the Highest Majesty clothed in
the lowest Misery; the most High God, a Servant; and the Lord of Glory, a Man
of Sorrows: Admire we may, but Apprehend we cannot, the matchless Humility and
unparalled Condescentions of our Blessed Savior, that he that was so great
that the Heavens could not contain him, should be so little as to be
circumscribed in the Womb of a Virgin. That he that was so rich that all the
Gold and the Silver was his, and the Cattle upon a thousand hills, should be so
poor as to be destitute of a penny to pay Caesar tribute, without being
beholding to a fishes mouth. That he that was so powerful as to command the
Devils to their Chains, should be so meek as to suffer himself to be led like a
Lamb to the slaughter. Yet thus he suffered it to be to fulfill all
Righteousness; and nothing did he think too much either to do or suffer for
man's Redemption.

Man had finn'd against an infinite Majesty; and satisfaction was to be made to
an offended Deity; and that satisfaction to be as infinite as the nature of the
transgression was, which satisfaction could be given no other way but by
suffering; that suffering no less then the utmost of an enraged and incensed
malice; that malice as general as men and devils; the punishment great, the
punishers many; Heaven, Earth, and Hell (an angry God, an incenst World, and an
enraged Hell) and he that was to endure all this to be innocent. No man so
pure, no angel so powerful to undergo all this, God could not dye, nor men or
Angels bear such a burden, therefore it must be a God-man, (a God and Man
united in one Person, the one to bear, the other to suffer; and such a one was
our Blessed Savior whose spotless innocence and unconquered Patience in in his
expresless pains, represents the refulgent Rays of a Divine Power that kept
frail Humanity from sinking to desperation under so great a pressure; all must
needs acknowledge that the miseries he endured were unspeakable, and his
patience infinitely beyond a president. If we take but a strict survey of the
means and miseries that attend his Birth, the inexpressable grievances of his
life, and the sadness of his death, we shall in each of these find him
demonstrated a man of Sufferings.

He was born in little obscure Bethlehem, not in great and glorious Jerusalem,
and not in a Palace there, (though the City of David) but an Inn, (a place of
common resort.) Not in the guest Chamber, or choicest Room in the Inn, but in
a Stable, a place of repose for Beasts, (far unfit for the King of kings
Bedchamber) the Lamb which all the shepherds left their flocks to find, is
laid in a Manger; his attendants but mean and not many, his reputed Father and
the Blessed Virgin; no sooner eight days old but the circumcising knife
(according to the Law) must pass upon him (that came to fulfill both the Law
and the Prophets) with the loss of his Blood, (as an earnest of that which
after in a more abundant manner flowed from him.) And before two years old, is
forced to fly for his Life when he could not go; his whole Life 'twas but a
continual supply of Crosses, from his Alpha in the Manger, to his Omega on
Mount Calvary, from his Cradle to his Crucifixion, and from his Womb to his
Tomb, he might truly be termed a man of Sorrows. When once he showed himself to
the world, how was he hunted like a Partridge upon the Mountains, in often
hazards of his Life ere his hour was come he should lay it down. He had not his
mean Birth for nothing, for as he was born under another man's roof, so all the
time of his Life had he no house of his own, (he that was Lord of all possessed
nothing.) He was poorer then the Foxes, and not so rich as the Fowls of the
Air, (for the one had holes, the other had nests) but he no place of his own
to rest in. (For a house he has not a hole, for Lands he has none, but what
he treads upon; for moneys, a fish brings him a piece to pay his Tribute with;
for pleasure, the Cross is his Cognizance; for Honor, Contempt is his common
Livery.) How much ignomy and contempt did he pass through, and how many
opprobrious words did he patiently receive from the foul-mouthed Multitude, who
were ever guilty of putting the worst glosses and constructions on his ^ctions.
If he works miracles they presently twit him with his Parentage; Is not this
the Carpenters son? and can good come out of Nazareth. If he converse with
sinners, he must be one himself, or at least a friend to them; and in that they
spoke truer then they were aware, (...) for he was the best friend that Sinners
or Publicans ever had. If he heals a Cripple, or do any other work of mercy on
the Sabbath day, he is presently censured for a profaner of the Sabbath. If he
cast out devils, he does it by Beelzebub; at last his Exit draws nigh, that all
the miseries of his life shall be infinitely transcended by a painful and
shameful death, as a sad preface to which (in order to the completing the work
of man's Redemption) begins his agony in the Garden, where indeed he received
the first relish of that bitter cup of his Fathers Indignation, which he was to
drink of. Here began the travel and anguish of his Soul, that produced those
drops of bloody sweat, which in so plentiful a manner flowed from him in a cold
Winters night. The conflict must needs be sharp that put him in such a heat in
so cool an Air, as doubtless it was, for the sins of the whole world lay upon
him. 'Twas thy sin, O man, caused this bloodshed: Thy guilt this sweat; that
was the Sword, this the fire which made this blood and sweat. Adam sinned in a
Garden, Christ there sweats for it; his day lust made this night sweat. Man's
spirit was distempered in Eden. Gods body therefore is thus bedewed in
Gethsemane; that we might not burn and fry in Hell, he thus sweats and bleeds
on earth; he suffers this horrid Agony for a time, that we should not endure a
hellish and worse extremity for ever; so he was Gods Holocaust, that we might
not be the Devils Burnt-offering. Besides Gethsemane's pains, Golgotha's was
upon him, those floods of blood foreseen made these drops trickle. The passion
then to be acted on his body was now imprinted in his mind; the rage of Hell,
the wrath of Heaven, the wretchedness of man, ungrateful man, for whose sake
all this was suffered, to save him from that wrath and Hell. Heaven, Earth, and
Hell, all in Union to afflict one (though God, and Man) must needs make a heavy
conflict, a bloody Agony. And that it might not be long ere he finish that on
Mount Calvary which he has so sadly begun here, (that the one might be but a
short and sharp preface to the other) he is betrayed; be that did eat at his
Table with him kicks up his heel against him, and traytor-like betrays him
with a kiss, and delivers him into the hands of his cruel enemies, who with an
unlimited rage do begin to abuse him, and is now tossed like a Ball from one
place to another, whils^ malice is inventing new tortures. He i^ first brought
to the house of Annas the high Priest, (who restrains not the enraged multitude
from venting their malice in revenge) thence is sent to Caiphas, (another of
the Devils Sanedrims) who had formerly in a council resolved he should dye, yet
now paliating the design with the scheme of a Tribunal. They seek out for
Witnesses, and the Witnesses are to seek out for allegations; and when they
find them, they are to seek for proof; and those proofs were to seek for unity
and consent; but all too short to reach his innocence: he is sent to Pilate,
who (understanding him to belong to Herod's Jurisdiction) sends him to Herod,
who sets him at naught, and his men of War abuse him, (what else to be expected
from rude Soldiers whose very sports are cruelty) then sent back again to
Pilate, attended with the hiddeous exclamations of the Rabble-rout, whose note
(as they pass along nothing but Crucify.) The Roman President (smelling malice
in the business, uses several arguments, of persuasion to appease the
multitude, and assuage their malice, in order to the saving of his life. The
first drawn from his Innocence, I find no fault in him; nor yet Herod, he is
an innocent Person; one so far from deserving death, and that I cannot find he
ever did any thing to merit a reproof; (malice it self cannot tax him of any
Crime except innocence be Criminal) here I bring him forth to you, that you may
know that he is clear from all objections, and nothing justly to be laid to his
charge; and no fault, no sentence. I that sit in the place of Judicature must
not commit so great a piece of injustice as the sentencing an Innocent to
death. But this not satisfying the multitude, he delivers him over to bloody
chastisements: so he is torn with Whips, crowned with Thorns, blind-folded,
derided, and buffeted, even to the wearying of his tormentors. Pilate (being
himself moved with pity at the sight) presents him in this forlorn and
dolorous condition to them; that his blood might become a mantle to him; that
if his innocence could not speak sufficiently for him, his sorrows might.
Behold the man, behold an Innocent afflicted, one without Crime miserably
chastised; who can behold him without pity, no heart (unless harder then
Adamant) but must needs melt into tears at such a sight, no malice (except
altogether implacable) but would be appeased with such sharp and so underserved
revenge. I appeal to you all whether he be not an object of pity rather then
further cruelty; and whether you have not greater reason to bewail his misery
then increase it: but this will not do. No sorrows which are not mortal; no
sufferings which are not deadly; no blood but the heart-blood can satisfy the
malicious; and therefore albeit crowned with Thorns, and flead with Whips, they
still cry Execution, Execution; Let him be crucified.

But Pilate (notwithstanding these obstinate repulses) again solicites them to
save his life, (and that his arguments might be crowned with success) he
changes his style from a man of sorrows, presents him as a king of sufferings;
that so his dignity might prevail where his miseries could not; and that the
majesty of the sufferer might aggravate his sufferings and their cruelty,
bespeaks them thus: Behold your King, behold a king deprived of his comforts,
spoiled of all his goods, sold by his brethren, apprehended by his subjects,
scourged as a villain, derided as a fool. Behold a King who has no other use
of majesty, but to aggravate his misery. Behold a King whose sufferings are as
transcendent as his person. Behold a King who has suffered things bitterer
then death. Behold a King (yea your King) how he has suffered every thing but
death, and shall that malice of yours pursue him even do death it self: shall I
crucify your King; will ye have me to bring innocent blood upon my own head as
well as yours, and be a sharer with you in so hateful a sin? For my part I Will
have no hand in it, and let me advise you to have none neither; wherefore let
me request you to desist from so bloody a design. And if ye have no regard
neither to his innocence, sufferings, nor majesty, look upon your own
reputations, which will suffer much for putting such a person to death. Do not
you know (I mean you that are the Doctors of the Law, and the Elders of the
People) that the name of a King is sacred, God owns it as one of his Titles,
and them as his Vicegerents that represent himself, who is the great Monarch of
Heaven and Earth; and their persons as sacred as their names, being subject to
no Tribunal but that of Heaven; no Judge but the highest: Wherefore to offer
violence to one that bears that Title, were a piece of such unparalled
cruelty, for which your selves could produce no example, nor the world a
president; all nations would cry shame at so horrid a fact, and your own
consciences would fly in your faces for committing so heinous a Crime. A way
then with so bloody a motion; you that pretend your selves such Zealots, stain
not your hands with such blood, nor your souls with the guilt of it, left ye
bring such an odium on your Nation, which your selves nor posterity shall be
ever able to take off. But all his rhetoric will not serve turn, for their
guilty consciences told them that they had already done more then they could
justify: Therefore the more he persuades, the more they exclaim, lest their
King might have outlived his wounds, recovered his losses, and turned his Reed
into a Scepter; they earnestly importune the Judge to dispatch him. Let him be
be Crucified. He is no King of ours: If he were, we should not thus prosecute
him: We have no King but Caesar, and thou art not Caesar's friend if thou let
him go. It Is not his innocence, nor his sorrows, nor his majesty which thou so
much plead'st for, shall satisfy us? it is his deserved death, which we sue
for, and naught but that shall excuse him. Take thou no care, if he dye
unjustly, the guilt shall lie on us, not thee. Wherefore act thou thy part,
perform thy office, and we will ours; as thou sit in judgment to do
justice, express it by thy condemnation of this man. Thou see the proofs are
clear, and evidence perspicuous. Therefore without any more delays, excuses,
or apologies, pronounce the sentence, we will see it executed.

Pilate finding all his reasons too short to convince unreasonable men, is now
brought to his last shift, and that is to make him a donative and freeman at the
Petition of the People; but they prefer Barrabbas, a Rebel, a Murderer, before
the Savior of the World; desire to have him Crucified, who raised the dead;
and to have the other released, who destroyed the living. Pilate now finding
that all his projects were frustrated, and no way left to save his life, calls
for water, and washes his hands before them as innocent of his Blood; but
(being a timorous Man) afraid of the Jews, lest they should mutiny or tell
tales to his Master, (whereby he might lose either his place or Caesar's favor
delivers up the most unspottedperson in the world into the hands of malice, to
glut it self with revenge in the exercising the most exquisite torments, and
expatiating them to the longest thread of misery; but as if all this did not
add enough to the sadness of his tragedy, he must (after all this) dye, and
the worst of deaths, [the Cross] only inflicted on most notorious offenders,
and betwixt two infamous Thieves (the worst sort of companions.) In order to
which, he is led forth of the holy (now the bloody) City Jerusalem to the place
of execution, bearing his own Cross, his head adorned with his Crown of Thorns,
which was not at all pulled off, (so it became the King of sufferings notto lay
aside his imperial thorns til they were changed into Diadems of glory) he
advances Mount Calvary, (a place difficult in the ascent, eminent and apt
forth publication of shame, a hill of death and dead bones) where he is stripped
naked, who clothes the field with flowers and all the world with robes, and the
whole Globe with the Canopy of Heaven. A gay spectacle to satisfy impious
eyes, who would not stay behind but attend the hangman to see the catastrophe
of this bloody tragedy; he is now fastened to his Cross, and heaven and earth
(all creatures in both) veiled in blacks to lament his obsequies, as if
terrified at his sufferings, whilst menand devils conspire to increase them,
that he might have no sense, but that of misery. How are all his senses at once
tormented in him; (and he in all of them) his eyes in seeing nothing but what
disconsolated and afflicted him; either his enemies rejoicing at his
sufferings, or his friends (those few poor friends he had) lamenting his
miseries. His ears played upon from every side with whole volleys of fearful
blasphemies; If thou be the King of Israel descend from the Cross, (cry the
Jews.) If thou be the Christ save thy self and us, (says one of his fellow
sufferers. For his smell, I Will not offend the nice and delicate with
commemorating the noisomness of the place, and the abominable stench he there
was sensible of. For his taste, he had nothing administered it, to sweeten the
bitterness of death, but Gall and Vinegar. For his feeling, we have spoken of
that before (if it were not altogether unspeakable what he felt.) In a word,
all heads are working, and all hands busied in lengthning his torments, and now
tormentors and tormented both weary, (the one in doing the other in suffering)
he yields up the ghost. But their malice does not terminate with him, though he
be dead, their malice still lives, which we shall see presently break forth;
for though Joseph of Arimathea (one of their council, but not against his life)
had begged the body of Pilate, they also go to Pilate fraught with malice
against his memory, (that had done their worst to his person, and bespeak
Pilate; Sir, This deceiver said whilst he was yet alive, that in three days he
should rise again; therefore let his Sepulcher be made sure with a guard, lest
his Disciples come and steal him away by night, and say he is risen. Pilate
grants their request, and now they triumph in their villainy, and think
perpetually to keep him there whom they had brought thither. Is this the
Savior of the world say they, that could not save himself? Where now are these
dreaming shepherds who spoke so big of a quire of Angels that should sing his
Nativity? Where those Angels that they come not to his Rescue? Where are those
besotted vulgar that robbed the trees of their branches, and themselves of their
garments, to strew his way to Jerusalem, and sang Hosanna's to him as the son
of David, a Savior of the world? have not we laid their Hosanna's in the dust?
and he whom they adored as a Deity, executed as a Malefactor? Is this he that
would deliver Israel that could not himself? We do not expect ever to be
delivered by so mean a hand, and so slender a retinue; we expect a glorious
Prince with a princely train of unconquered warriors, not a Carpenters son and
silly fishermen; God never gave us any promise or president of such a Savior.
We know that 'twas by a strong arm he delivered our Fathers out of Egypt, and
that he gave them Saviors afterward when they were in Canaan, such as by
force of arms broke the bonds of their oppressors; and are not we involved in
as miserable slavery and bondage as ever our fathers were? has not the
invincible Roman Eagle spread his wings over the greatest part of the world,
and seized many kingdoms with his ravenous talons, (making Kings his Prey, and
Scepters his Conquest) and who but a mighty Savior can deliver us and our
Country from so potent an adversary? If this be he that undertook to do it (or
were sent from God for the purpose) where is his power to make him so? where is
his redcoat Soldiers, whose very garments might speak nothing but blood and
death to our insulting foes? where is his Magazin and Money, his Swords and
Pistolls, his Granado's and Murderingpieces, his Captains and Officers to lead
his Army, that they did not perfect that happy work, but suffer their Lord and
Master thus to fall.

O fools and slow of heart to believe what the Prophets have spoken; ought not
Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory! was he not
long before prophesied of to come in the form of a servant, not in the gayish
magnificence of an earthly prince; that he should be a man of sorrows, and by
his sufferings should purchase freedom and happiness for inthral'd mankind.
How exactly does your Prophet Isay pourtray to the life both his person and
sufferings, and writes of him in the Present Tense not the Future, as a thing
then really acted, not after to be fulfilled; as more becoming an Evangelist
then a Prophet, in giving rather a History of his sufferings then a Prediction
of them: but lest ye should not think one witness enough, look upon all the
Prophets that have been since the world began, you will find, they did all
unanimously breathe with one mouth the mystery of his coming, and of that
redemption which by his death he was to accomplish. Was not his Birth long
before prophesied of, as to the time, manner, and place of it, his person,
names, and offices, his tribe and Family, his eternal Generation, the union of
his Godhead with his Humanity, his Humiliation upon earth, his perfect
obedience to his Father, his riding to Jerusalem in triumph, the childrens
Hosanna's, his Agony in the Garden, the manner of his delivery, the price he
was sold for, the flight of his Disciples, the parting his garments, the
piercing his hands and his feet, his revilings on the Cross, his companions in
death, his patience in suffering, his dying words for whom be should lay down
his life, and whom he should conquer; and what clearer proof could ye desire
then the mouths and attestations of so many witnesses: and could ye be so
blind as not to discover this to be he that was of old designed and foretold
to be the worlds Savior: did ye not behold a majesty in the sufferer? did not
the refulgent beams of his divinity shine through the greatest clouds of his
adversity? and did not Humility and Glory go hand in hand through the several
passages of his life and death, that by miracles as well as miseries he might
convince the world? That he should abase himself so low, as to be born of a
Virgin, that spoke his humility; but to have his incarnation published by an
heavenly host, and kings to rise to the brightness of his coming, this his
glory: to suffer himself to be baptized in the common river of Jordan, that
speaks his humility; but there to be proclaimed the only beloved Son and
Savior of the world, both by the testimony of the Father, and presence of the
Holy Ghost, this his glory: to receive the slanders of his Contrymen, that
he cast out devils by Beelzebub, that spoke his humility; but to make the devils
confess him to be the Son of the Highest, this his glory: to suffer death, even
the death of the Cross, that speaks his humility; but to make the foundations
of the world to shake, the Sun to vail it self in black, the moon to hide her
head, the rocks to rend, and the vail of the temple to part in sunder at his
yielding up of the ghost, this his glory: to be laid in another man's Sepulcher,
that shows his humility; but to make the Graves to open to receive him as their
Lord, and the dead to rise to attest his Divinity, this his glory: to suffer
himself to be sealed up in his Sepulcher with a guard of Soldiers to keep him
there, that was humility; but in that house of death to have the visits of
Angels, and to rise from thence by his own power, this his glory: to sojourn
forty days on that earth where he had been so cruelly handled speaks his
humility; but to have a convoy of Angels to fetch him away, and to ascend on
high with such a guard of attendants in view of so many witnesses, this his
glory. And thus did he evidence his mediatorship by the lowest humiliation of
his humanity, and exaltation of his divinity, by the glorious miracles; by the
one he did do, and the insufferable injuries in the other, he did undergo. How
many glorious miracles did he work, certainly if the mighty works which were
done in you had been done in Tire and Sidon, they had repented long ago in
sackcloth and ashes. Did he not seed your admiring multitudes 5000 of them at
one time with five barley loaves and two fishes, and twelve baskets of
fragments to spare? did he not turn water into wine, heal the sick, make the
lame to walk, the deaf to hear, the blind to see, and the dumb to sing? did he
not cleanse the Leper, cast out Devils, raise the dead, even a Lazarus that had
been a four days prisoner in the Grave? Many things of him were remarkable,
and suited with him as he was the Messiah, as to his Birth, Death, and Burial:
he was born under Augustus Caesar at such a time, when there was an universal
peace over the whole world; to show that he was the prince of peace, and came
to reconcile his Father to fallen man. In Bethlehem the house of bread, for him
that was the bread of life, and the life of the world. In an Inn, (a place of
common resort for all persons) to show that all persons should have free
admission to him, and that he was in public to manifest himself to the world.
He was Crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem, to show that he died for those
out of the pale of the Church; on Mount Calvary, a place of death, to show that
he came to destroy death; on a Cross, to show that that was the way to a Crown;
and by his sufferings on that tree of shame, he purchased for us diadems of
glory. He was buried in a Grave cut out of a Rock to show that he was the Stone
cut out of the Mountain; a Grave untoucht, for a body undefiled, in a Garden
where mankind was lost, for him by whom the world was saved. But this is not
all, he was a King, and such a one you looked for; but here is the difference,
you looked for one to come in outward pomp and splendour, he in meekness and
humility; (for the glory of his kingdom consists not in outward show, but
hidden splendour) you looked for a temporal Savior, he an eternal; you, to be
freed in bodies and estates, he to save your souls; (in comparison of which the
whole world is not worthy a name) you to be delivered from the Roman yoke, he
from the Devils tyranny. The weapons of his warfare were spiritual, and his
glory not temporal, witness his progress to the Royal City; for instead of
Chariots, and Steeds, and Trains of State, he has not a beast, but a borrowed
one, to ride upon, no Crown on his head, no Scepter in his hand, no Cloth of
State over him, no precious Furniture about him, no Tissue upon him, no
Caparisons of Gold under him. No rich Carpets and curious Tapestries before
him. No Heralds in robes. No Clarions. No Trumpets to proclaim him. And yet
Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like this Lilly of the Valleys. No
Coats of Arms like his Fisher-mens. No Laurels to the peoples Boughs. No vests
of beaten gold to their spread Clothes. No Troops of Nobles to his Trains. No
Grandees to his Disciples (which have even the Devils themselves for their
subjects) no Heralds to the Babes that bless him. No Salve's, no Jo's, no Ave's
to the Hosanna's and Benisons bestowed on him. He was a King (as he told
Pilate) but 'twas of another world: his Throne Heaven, the Angels his
Courtiers, and the whole Creation his Subjects; his Judicatory the Courts of
Conscience and Church Tribunals, and at Doomsday the Clouds. It was ordered by
Divine Providence that you should put him to death, else you should never have
had the power to have done it. Had he pleased he could have called Legions of
Angels to his rescue, (one of which armed with his permission able to destroy a
world. In testimony of which, did not the whole fabric of heaven and earth
acknowledge him, whom the devils themselves beheld with terror, and are you so
stupied as not to take notice of him, did not you see the rocks rend at his
Passion, and are you so senseless as to think that a stone shall bar his
Resurrection? did ye not hear of dead Saints walking up and down the City, and
do you think to hinder it in a dead Savior? Was not a whole band of you struck
down with a word of his Mouth, and can a watch keep him from rising up; though
your Soldiers be too strong for weak Disciples, are they able to contend with
Angels? 'Twas strange that he that was immortal should taste of death, but
impossible he should see corruption. Wherefore notwithstanding all your guards
he shall rise the third day; all the powers of hell shall be too weak to detain
him longer, or hinder his return to his Fathers Bosom, there to continue till
the last day: and then this Carpenters Son shall come in the Clouds with Power
and great Glory, and those silly Fishermen sit upon twelve Thorns, and judge
the twelve Tribes of Israel. Look therefore on him now with faith, whom else
you shall then behold with horror and amazement; and now mourn lest then too
late ye repent; strive to have an interest in his Blood as well as a hand in
his Death.

And now dear Christian, let me request thee seriously to look back, admire,
and make a right use of thy Saviors sufferings, behold his readiness to
suffer, his willingless to save, the unspeakableness of his pains, the
greatness of his patience, and the luster of his victory: how ready was he to
save, how did his bowels yearn for lost man; after the lost sheep of the house
of Israel was he come, and to save sinners was his errand? how ready was he to
lay down his life? when they came with Swords and Staves to apprehend him, did
he not betray himself by his so ready a confession, I am he. How did he hasten
that bitter cup, and how was he straightened till he did suffer? did he not forbid
Saint Peter the use of his Sword, though in so just a quarrel as his defense?
how ready was he to pardon, how meek and patient in his sufferings; was he not
the Lamb dumb before the shearers that opened not his mouth; who being reviled,
reviled not again, but prayed for his enemies whilst they blasphemed him; which
prayer of his was so prevalent with his father, that in fifty five days it
occasioned the conversion of eight thousand of his enemies at one time. Christ's
sufferings did as far transcend any other as his Person; but they were but for
a time (they did not last always) every Day has his Night, every Summer its
Winter, every Spring his Fall, and every Life his Death; and as some nights are
darker then other, some Autumns more unseasonable, some Winters more sharp, and
some Deaths more (yea much more) cruel then others be: some men fall like
fruit, others are cut down like trees; some cut up as the flower, others by the
root; some men dye only, others with torment, (which is two or more deaths in
one;) but among all deaths that ever were suffered; never any so strange, never
any so sad as our Saviors was; for in it both pain and patience met in their
extremities; pain did her worst to overcome patience, and patience her best to
overcome pain; and yet neither had pain the upper hand, though it killed, nor
patience lost, though Christ dyed; such was his passion, that the whole world
cannot sample it with its parallel; for Christ's pain was such, as never
creature felt, and his patience so great, as for all the forrow he felt on the
Cross, he is not said to have uttered a groan there; so that it may easily be
discerned, that patience had the victory, because pain could neither make her
leave the field till she list, nor bring her to any conditions but her own
(which were most honorable.) Though God be crucified, Life be dead, and
Righteousness suster, all effected, yet nothing done to advance the contrary
party. For through his body, Death slew it self, and Sin and Satan took their
deadly wounds; for now the flesh has lost her life, and sin in that, his
throne; and death with it, his sting; and the grave (with this) his power; and
hell with them, her keys; and the devil with all his victory, whilst he hangs
despicably on the tree of shame, the powers of hell are dragged captive after
the triumphant Chariot of his Cross.

Well might he therefore say, It Is finished; for the Satisfaction is full,
Salvation sure, Sin is nailed, Hell foiled, Satan chained, the World baffled,
the Flesh wounded, Death slain, the Grave buried, and every Adversary-power
conquered by Christ Triumphant over all; all is finished, man's redemption
completed, and that perfected he came about. This is a true saying and worthy
of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners.

But what is all this to us, what is it to know that Christ is a Savior if he
be not ours? what to know, that he came to save the world, if we are not one of
the world, he came to save; what to know, that his death is satisfactory, to
expiate the Justice of his Father, if we have no interest in it. I answer, that
as Christ has done his part so must we do ours, (if ever we hope to have part
in his sufferings) he never came to save any that had no mind of salvation,
(or to use those means which he has appointed for all those that shall inherit
eternal life) as he did both do and suffer for us, it is requisite we should
either do or suffer, something for him. His love to us, and sufferings for us
were unspeakable, and they justly challenge our deepest affection and
admiration, that he should purchase our happiness at so dear a rate as his own
Blood; that God should be in Gore, that man might be in Bliss; the Prince of
Life should dye, that the Child of Death might live; that he should suffer on
a Cross, that we might not in Hell. Did he sweat for our guilt, and shall not
we weep for our own, and dissolve into love and tears for our dying Lord. O my
soul show thy affection to him, that expressed so much to thee! love him above
thy life, to serve him think milstones light, to suffer for him make tortures
pleasures, hate sin more then death, the Crown of pride as his Throns, thy
hearts lust, as his spear; thy iron neck and evil works and ways, as his
nails, their habit, as his hammer which drives them home into his heart, and
his hands, and feet. Think not any thing enough thou suffer for his sake
(that suffered so much for thine.) Though violent Tongues were laid on our
Credit. Hands of Rapine on our Estates, of Bondage on our Persons, of Blood on
our Lives, be so far from shrinking at it, that had thou for one a thousand
souls, give all to his service; a thousand bodies, all to his suffering; a
thousand heads, all to his study; a thousand hearts, bate not one to thy
Savior; a thousand lives, lay out all to his honor. Had thou for two two
thousand hands, let them all do his business; two thousand feet, let them all
go his errands: if thou should not, thou were unworthy of such a Savior.

Now that we may know the cause (or causes) of Christ's coming, and understand
our own duty, (in order to the making it a happy coming to us) be pleased to
take notice of these following particulars.

There are (says one) four causes of man's salvation: The Efficient cause. The
Meritorious cause. The Instrumental cause. And the Final cause.

First, the Efficient cause, which is the love of God. 'Twas Gods love to the
world that caused him to send his Son into the world. Had he not loved the
world, he would not have permitted his Son to dye for the world. And he that
denied us not his Son, who is Heir of all things, will not deny us any thing
whereof he is heir.

Secondly, the Meritorious cause, That is Christ. 'Twas his Merits that
purchased our happiness: his Blood that gives us a right and title to that
glorious, undefiled, and unfading Inheritance, which he aforehand has taken
possession of.

Thirdly, the Instrumental cause, that is Faith. Christ is the only cure of
our leprous souls, Faith the hand to convey his merits to us. Suppose a
plaster of a sovereign nature were laid by a man dangerously wounded, be the
plaster never so excellent, he may dye of his wounds if it be not applied to
him, (for without an active hand to apply the plaster to the sore, the worth
of it is not at all available.) Christ (says one) may be compared to soap,
Faith to the hand of the Landress: though soap (in it self) be of a purifying
nature, yet without the hand of the Landress it does nothing. The Apostle tells
us, that we are saved by Faith; but that we may understand what that saving
Faith is which the Apostle speaks of, we are to present it first in the
Negative, what it is not; then in the Affirmative, what it is. Not an Historical
Faith only, for that the Devils and damned in hell have, (that shall never
receive any benefit at all by the death of Christ) they know that Christ came
into the world, and that he suffered, and that a day will come in which he
shall be revealed from heaven in flaming fire, when he shall take vengeance on
all the ungodly of the earth, and complete their torments. Not a Temporary
Faith: it is not to be a Saint for ones ends, and a Devil at ones pleasure; they
that make a profession of Christianity must persevere to the end, for none but
he that endures to the end, shall reach the end of Christ's coming, or his own
salvation. It must not be a Mental Faith neither: it is not the hearer, or the
speaker, but the doer that shall be blessed. Many that shall say, Lord, Lord,
shall be shut out of his Kingdom. It must be a true Faith, and to evidence it
to be such a one, it must work by love, breaking forth into practice, and
bringing forth fruit worthy of repentance, and amendment of life. A Faith
that is operative in the whole man, and shows it self in the life of the
believer, that all men may judge of the Cause by the Eff^cts.

Lastly, the Final cause is the glory of God: that the glory of his mercy might
as well be advanced in reducing a remnant (or small number) out of the mass of
mankind (under wrath) to chant forth his Praises to all eternity, as well as
to let his Justice manifest it self in the condemnation of others, he contrived
a way to save some (when all had otherwise been lost:) This, this was it that
was a motive to induce God to send a Savior to the world to dye for it.

This is a true saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came
into the world to save sinners.

And thus you have now seen the object of my discourse (and of all our faiths)
described; you have seen the act, what he did, that he came; the end he came
for, that it was to save; the means by which he did save, that it was by
suffering; those sufferings, that of death; what death, that of the Cross: the
signal victory he obtained by these his sufferings for mankind (over the
enemies of our salvation) and the benefits which accrue to mankind by those
sufferings.

But this is not all, for as sure as he came once, he shall come again, but not
in such obscurity, but with more resplendency: at his first coming he was only
visible to a part or corner of the world; at his second, he shall be manifest
to all, and every Eye shall see him. That Sun which then shined on the house of
Jacob, shall now extend its rays to all the families of the earth. He that
then came as a Lamb, (the Lamb of God, to take away the sins of the world)
shall now come as a Lion (the Lion of the tribe of Judah) to judge the world.
He that then came in the form of a Servant, shall now come in the equipage of a
Prince, in the head of a Royal Army of Saints and Angels. As he then came to
receive an unjust sentence, he shall now come to give right to all nations, and
to determine the controversy of mankind. And they that would not own him in
the Manger, shall dread him in his Majesty. They that despised him in the
Clouts, shall be afraid to behold him in the Clouds. They that denied him at
the Bar, shall be amazed to see him on the Bench. They that derided him on the
Cross, shall tremble to see him on the Throne. They that would not participate
of his Sufferings, shall never share in his Triumphs. And those that deny to
follow him in Grace, shall never reach him in Glory.

Now, to persuade our selves that we are of the number of those for whom our
Savior shed his blood, let us witness our interest in his first coming, by our
longing for his second: That as the old Character of Gods people was, to wait
for the consolation of Israel, (Christ's first coming) we may look and long for
his second, as the espoused Maid does after the Marriage, as the Apprentice for
his Freedom, the Captive for his Ransom, the Traveller for his Inn, the
Mariner for the Haven, we may look for and hasten the coming of that day of
God. And to this end, that we mispend not any of our precious; time, but redeem
it to our utmost advantage; and not be weary of well doing, but persevering in
our devoirs toward him, till we shall be translated from these transient and
short lived Troubles, to those transcendent, and unspeakable, and unchangeable
Glories. That when the trump, and all mankind stand to receive their doom, we
may behold the Judges face with joy.

In a word, let me one more request you to be constant and immovable, (not to
extol him to day and blaspheme him to morrow) sing Hosanna's to day and
Crucifige's the next. Though the fickle Rabble change, let us not alter; the
Hosanna's that was then, let us cry now. Cry it at the Cross with the Penitent
Thief, that we may sing it on the Throne with the glorified Apostles; and for
the Hosanna of the Saints, sing the Hallelujahs of the Angels; when we shall
receive with their gifts of Bliss, their tongues and songs of Glory. Amen.

Observations on the vanity and inconstancy of worldly Glory.
I Know that it has still bin the continual practice of the prince of darkness,
to infatuate the minds of men with an over high estimation of the things of
this life; and by putting out of their memories the thoughts of a better,
(teaching them to prefer present pleasures before future felicities) and so
greedily have men in all ages sucked in this poison, and suffered themselves to
be drawn away by the false delusions of this subtle deceiver, that he that
shall now go about to inveigh against worldly Glory, shall be sure to meet with
more admiring and deriding speculators, then credulous approbators; however,
since I have undertaken it, I shall endeavor to unvail this grand Impostour,
paint the World to the life, and her Favorites in their colors, show the
various infelicities that attend the several ages and degrees of men in it;
and from these humane miseries draw such wholesome conclusions, as may instruct
my Reader how to be fitted for a better life; where change shall never impair
our condition, nor want nip our joys, nor adversity cloud our happiness, nor
contention disturb our peace, nor misery eclipse our glory, (a life as truly
glorious and permanent, as this vain and fading.) In order to which I shall
present the world to view. First, whole and entire; then cut up and Anatomized,
taking the liberty in Method and Distribution, so to place my Divisions,
Subdivisions, Notions, as may best serve for brevity, perspicuity, my purpose,
and the Readers benefit.

The World for its frailty and inconstancy is by St. John compared to a sea of
glass, Revel. 4.6. For its frailty glass, for its inconstancy a sea: A sea
swelling with pride, blown with envy, boiling with anger, deep with avarice,
frothy with Luxury: It is a sea tempestuous with controversies, stormy with
afflictions, tumultuous with disorders, fraught with vexation and misery, and
all things in it sweeter in the ambition then fruition. The sea yields an
obedient conformity to the motions of the Moon, and swells highest in a joyful
imitation when she is in the Spring-tyde of her light, either toward the
heavens, (as in the change) or toward the earth, (as in the full;) and as she
does wax or wain, so does he either flow into a Pleuresie, or ebb into a
Consumption of his waters. And even thus is the World the Page of Fortune,
whose unconstant and ever changing motions do hurry about, like spokes in a
wheel, the condition of all Mortals. We have it confirmed to us by a more then
humane authority, (1 Cor. 7.31.) That the glory of this world passes away. An
Hour-glasse does change its posture every hour, and that part which was even
now above, is now below; that which was but now full, is now empty; nor can one
side be filled, but by emptying the other. Such is the world, every moment
turned upside down, and men are now full, now empty: Nor can they often fill
themselves without the ruin and prejudice of others; and although sometimes it
be at the full of glory, yet is it even then like her also mingled with the
spots of adversity, and subject to the change of every moment. And therefore
(as it is reported) at the Consecration of the Popes, the Master of the
Ceremonies going before carries in one hand a burning Taper, in the other a
stick with some flax tied on the top thereof; which he setting on fire, cries
with a loud voice, Pater sancte, Sic transit gloria mundi: Holy Father, so
passes away the glory of this world. The plenty of Histories in this kind
exceeds our Arithmetic. Every particular man's condition (almost) being a
volumn of the worlds fraily, and a constant witness of its inconstancy.
Adonibezek, who had been the Triumphant Victor over 70. Kings and in his wanton
cruelty had cut off their thumbs, etc. and made them pick up the crumbs under
his table, (enforcing the Act, and depriving them of th^^^ power, making them
do that which h^ had disenabled them to perform) was ere long in full measure
paid home for his cruel frolicks, which made him cry out, that he was justly
requited, Judges 1.7. Nabucadnezzars unparalled Metamorphosis (who knows
not) who from a man (and so great a King) became a beast in nature now, as he
was in practice before: (to show that when men sin against the light of nature,
they may sufferagainst the law of nature.)

It is reported of Dimetrius, (one of Alexander the Great's Captains) that in
the whole circle of his life (being sixty four years, after the measure of his
age had styled him a man) never continued three years in one condition. Of
Julius Caesar also (that great awer of the world and victorious Martialist) it
is doubted whether in the whole course of his life, fortune were an indifferent
Arbitrer to him of good and evil success; but in the sadness of his death (no
doubt) all his life's happiness was exceedingly over-b^lanced, who in the
Zenith and highest erection of his glory, with twenty three wounds, the deepest
whereof given him by his dearest Brutus, in the Senate House, yielded up his
life a sacrifice to the peoples liberty. The like unhappy change pursued the
ever renowned (and once highly advanced General) Bellizarius, who after he had
triumphed over the Persians, and reduced to the Roman obedience all Africa and
Italy, (so long possessed by the Goths and Vandalls) his wife (that was given him
for an help, became the only help to his destruction) whose insolent behavior
against the Empress, (like winds thrown upon the seas) raised such billows of
indignation in the Emperor, that this man's fortune was put to utter shipwreck,
not only to the loss of his goods, but of the means by which he might get
more, (his sight) and forced to beg his bread with a, Da Obolo Bellizario. Thus
he that had made Armies fly, Kingdoms quake, and Kings his Captives, is now an
humble Petitioner to the meanest for a bit of bread. It Is storied of Dyonisius
King of Syracusa, that he represented the brittle felicity of his Kingdom to
his Parasite Democles, (who had made his happiness to seem exceeding great,
through the multiplying-glass of his flattery) by seating him in a Royal Throne
at a sumptuous banquet with all the state and glory of the Kingdom about him;
but withal a naked sword hanging over his head only held by a horse-hair,
which every minute threatened his destruction. It was the custom of the ancient
Romans in their triumphs for a slave to ride behind in the Chariot with the
Triumpher, who did often whisper unto him to look behind him, (there being
likewise a Whip and a Bell tied to the Chariot) to admonish him, that
notwithstanding the present exaltation his honor, he might be brought to such
a degree of calamity, as to be scourged or put to death, of which the Bell was
the sign.

How has the world frowned on those she sometimes smiled, and made them that
seemed the happiest most miserable. Instance Pompey, that famous Warrior, (for
his eminency styled the Great) who after all his victories and triumphs put to
a violent death; and that head taken off by the hands of a Traitor that had so
often been adorned with victorious Laurels; and being dead denied a burying
place. Queen Cleopatra once so formidible, as to be rather feared then
contemned by her neighbor Princes, she drank Jewels desolv'd (a draught worth
a Kingdom) expired on a dunghill. Guillemer King of the Goths, who long reigned
in so much prosperity, but taken Prisoner by Bellizarius, was reduced to so
much misery, that he only begged these things of the Conqueror, Bread and
Water, (the one to keep him from famishing, the other from thirst) a sponge to
wipe his eyes, and a harp to tune his sorrows to. Andronicus Emperor of the
East, (a man of such large and vast Dominions, that his very name was terrible
to all Neighbour-Kings) all his glory is eclipst in one Battle, and he
delivered into the hands of those who think themselves happy in inventing and
inflicting new tortures; he is thrown into the common Goal, where the best
sents are the excrements of nature; taken thence, and derided and abused
through the streets of the City, put to open disgrace in the Marketplace: and
to the further grief of so great a spirit, the muddy brained Rabble, are both
his Judges and Executioners. Alexander the Great (who was said to conquer the
World) could not guard his own person from a violent and untimely death. He
that had vanquished a world, was himself overcome by an inferior person in it,
poisoned to death, and his corpse for thirty days denied a burying place; his
Conquests above ground gave him no title to a possession under ground. So our
William the Conqueror lay three days unburied, (he that had vanquished
Kingdoms living, is denied six foot of ground being dead.) Coriolanus (that
famous Grecian) who was once admired and feared of all, murdered openly in the
Marketplace at Antium, and none to pity him, or take his part. Philopoemen
forced to expire by a cup of poison from the hands of a Hangman. So Lucullus
Dions throat cut with a dagger by an Executioner. So Sertorius Phocian reduced
to so much misery in prison that he feed the Hangman to dispatch him. Cicero
(that famous man) murdered and decapited, his head and hands set up ore the
Pulpit in Rostra (where they made Orations.) Darius condemned to die as a
Malefactor, his throat cut in prison by the common Hangman. It Is lamentable
to recite what the Prophet Jeremy so mournfully delivers in those his
Lamentations, Chap. 4.5. They that did feed delicately are desolate in the
streets; and they that were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghills. We need
seek no further proof of this sad truth, then the age we live in: have we not
seen many princely and noble Families that not long ago were in so happy a
condition, as to afford much hospitality to others, now reduced to that misery,
as to live only upon the courtesy of others, and forced to post from place
to place for relief and safety; To show that the best of men are but Pilgrims
upon earth, and no permanency in the things of this life.

Worldly Glories (I conceive may be reduced to these three heads) viz. Honors,
Riches, Pleasures: I shall crave leave of my Readers to dilate upon each of
these, and in the close present you with the insufficiency and inconstancy of
Worldly Glory. First, Honors. Suppose a man were at the height of honors, his
Throne as high as Babels Tower, and all the Potentates of the earth prostrate
themselves at his footstool, and all persons of all ranks, qualities, degrees,
and conditions admire and adore him, had he ten thousand times as many titles,
as that cracking Spaniard attributed to his Master, and his territories as vast
as the universe; yet all these would be so far from giving true felicity, that
it would but load, him with cares and miseries. Crowns are but splendid
vanities, and vexation and mutation the ordinary attendants of Diadems. Crowns
are full of cares, and high places not without their fears, which made one King
cry out, (concerning his Diadem) Were it but known how many miseries and
molestations do attend thee, none would dare to take thee up lying at his feet.
Antonius the Philosopher said often, that the Empire was an ocean of mischiefs;
and one caused it to be written upon his Tomb, Happy had I been if I had never
reigned. They are much mistaken, who thinks to meet with happiness in
greatness. Ambition is ever attended with three Furies. Envy in the eye,
Jealousy in the ear, and Covetousness in the heart. Envy in the eye: It
grieves him more to see one above him, then ten thousand below him. Haman was
more distracted with Mordecai the Jew's sitting in the Kings gate with a
careless neglect, then he was delighted with all the reverence and adoration
which others gave him.

Secondly, Jealousy in the ear, always fearful of Competetours; he thinks
himself never secure; every thing he hears makes him suspicious of some
approaching danger; and if any but whisper in his presence, he is unsatisfied
till he understands it.

Thirdly, Covetousness in the heart. If (against his will) he empty some of his
bags in the progress of his ambition, he will not be himsef, till he has
refill'd them by extorted oppression; and when he possesses most, is least
satisfied when he has considered with how much toil and trouble he purchased it;
with how much care and fear he preserves it, and knows not how suddenly must
part from it; either it may be taken from him by violence, or he from it by
treachery; and so his enemies become Lords and Masters of his greatness, and
eat the fruit of his labors. Who would be in love with that which has such
Furies for its Attendants?

It Is seldom seen, that the greatest darlings of the world enjoy perfect
contentment, (be they never so well deserving) something they shall have to
complain of that shall give an unsavory verdure to their sweetest morsells, and
make their very felicity miserable. Multitude of business banish sleep from the
eyelids of Kings, and make the night troublesome; and fear many times keeps
them waking, (though in a Palace) lest some Achitophel should be projecting to
turn his silent slumbers into a sleep of death, whilst the rustic Swain
snores securely in his loomy Cottage. Bajazet Emperor of the Turks thought a
shepherd (whom he heard whistling on a hill) to be a happier man then himself;
and (if I mistake not) the event gives me sufficient cause to be of his
opinion, for he was shortly after taken Prisoner by Tamerlain the Scythian, who
loads him with golden fetters, and encloses him in an iron cage, and carried up
and down in triumph with the Conqueror, and in that strait prison expires by
being his own Executioner. High places are not only uneasy, but slippery;
(inconstancy as well as vexation attends the Thrones of Princes) a great man
stands very unsure, he had need to wear ice spurs, for he does rather glide
then go. If he begins to fall, he will fall to purpose: (as Zeresh unlucky told
Haman) If his feet begin to slip on the steep hill of honor, his own weight
will down with him to the bottom: once past noon with him, it is presently
night: there is but a step (said that mirror of men) 'twixt the prisons and
graves of Princes.

The Airy Chair, though it be conspicuous, is (you see) full of dangers. He
stands surest that has no ascent to fall from, the highest riser has ever the
lowest fall: few of the magnifices of this world ever left it with rejoicing,
or parted in peace, but hurried with violence to untimely graves. What did
Abimelech, Absalom, Zimri, Jezabel, and Athalia get by their greatness, but
miserable and infamous deaths. Those who have thought to have justled the stars
out of their places, and made their nests as high or higher, have had their
glory laid in the dust, and their honor in disgrace; and those who all men (in
their lives) have judged the happiest, have, ere they parted with the world,
lamentably declared the contrary. Earthly glories are (at best) but transient.
The greatest Favorite that ever the world had could never assure himself of one
minute of happiness, (but ever obnoxious to those lamentable hazards and
mutations incident to greatness.) How many are there that laughed yesterday,
that have cause enough to weep to day. He on whom prosperity yesterday did
smile, does to day adversity frown. He that yesterday was reputed the happiest
man in this world, is to day sent miserable to another. That which has a
Diadem for its aim, oftentimes meets with an ignominious death for its end. He
who in the morning has been an object of envy, has ere night been of misery
and contempt. He whom the morning sun has beheld in the height of honor
(Cappape) shining in all his glory, has the evening sun beheld cast down with
the greatest ignominy. The same su^^ that beheld Haman adored like some Deity
(in the Persian Court) and like some infamous Malefactor waving upon his
Gibbet. Honor it is built upon smoke, how can it keep from vanishing.

2. Riches: Suppose a man had all the Gold of Ophir at his own command, and
were Master of the Indian Shores, and had all the richest Gem^ that the world
affords in his own possession; if all the world were his own and all persons of
all ranks and degree were his slaves to enlarge his Exchequer were all heads
and hands working to improve his wealth; yet all would be so far from giving
him true felicity, that it would rather distract then content him. This
transitory trash could neither administer comfort, or prevent misery; as there
is no true happiness in them, so no constancy in enjoying them: for they are
subject to vanity and violence; and they would be so far from protecting him
from danger, that they would make him a mark for envy to shoot at, he should to
his sorrow find that there would be men found that would not startle at his
destruction, so they might by it attain their desires, deceive, betray, swear,
and forswear for such a purchase. Riches indeed were never true to those that
trusted them; They take themselves wings, and fly away, when there is most
occasion to use them. He that to day with Caligula could tumble in gold and
silver, may to morrow with Bellizarius stand and beg for an halfpenny.

3. Pleasures: Suppose the Elements did conspire to please the mind of man
with their choicest delicacies; suppose the eye were pleased with the loveliest
and most desired objects, the hearing with the sweetest and rarest harmony that
either art or nature could possibly produce. The tasting with the dearest and
choicest cates that the world affords, and the quintessence of all the
creatures artificially distilled into an invaluable Compendium, a bit more
worth then an Empire, and a draught then a Kingdom. The smelling with the most
odoriferous scents that either India or Arabia (art and nature) could produce.
The feeling tickled with the greatest delights that that sense were capable of,
all would be too short to entitle the enjoyer happy, one thing or other will be
still wanting, (the absence of which which will still discontent him) one drop
of gall will distaste a whole vessel of sweets.) Put the case all things were
procured that can be desired to satisfy the expectation, there would soon be a
glut, (plenty would breed satiety.) It may be said after enjoyment, as it was
of Amnon, (who was so extremely desirous of enjoying his sister Tamar) when he
had his desire, his loathing now, as great as his longing-before: So here, but
this is not all, as they are unsatisfying and insufficient, so not constant;
prosperity and adversity may show themselves in one moment. Belshazars frolicks
were both suddenly and sadly changed into terror and trembling, by the strange
appearance and motion of a hand that predicted his last. Jezabel (that painted
Strumpet, who studied nothing but to please her self, her will was her law, and
her desires accomplished, though never so bloody) how suddenly was she thrown
forth of her window at the command of an enemy, and trod under Horses heels,
and allowed no other grave then the hungry maws of ravenous curs; yet a Kings
Daughter. We may say of all Earthly Pleasures what Amasa said of War, that
bitterness is the common appendix in the latter end; they ever carry a sting
in the tail, like Joab to Amasa, whilst it kisseth us, it kills us. The
world that is so ready with her service, is as forward with her deceits: She
that but now smiled like a strumpet, frowns like a Tyrant. Worldly Pleasures
are like gilded Pills, which under their external beauty include bitterness; or
like unto fresh Rivers, that end their course in the sea, losing their sweet
relish in an Ocean of saltness, as will be sadly manifested by this following
ekample. Sejanus had as much of the worlds felicity as could be wished or
defir'd, (if the desire could be satisfied with having) for honors he had them
heapt upon him daily; for titles, he is more then Emperor; for his will gives
laws to his; his statues are erected in public passages, reverenc't in
Theaters, and carried in the front of the Legions; all persons do him homage,
all tongues sing his praises, and all knees bow to him: Never any man before
him recived greater honors, more universal, more unexpected, all the favors
and dignities which all the Kings of Europe could heap together to raise a man,
might not be compared to these; he made all men know (far and near) what he was
able to do: he sixteen years possessed the Sovereign Power of an Empire that
commanded the whole world, and which had the rising and setting Sun for limit.
Euphrates confined its Frontier toward the East, Mount Atlas the Cataracts of
Nylus, the Deserts of Africa toward the South, the Ocean in the West, Danubius
in the North; so that as far as the sun progressed, his commands went. What
Glory ever mounted so high, or sell so low, (as the conclusion will acquaint
you.)

For Riches he had seventy two milions of gold (at one time) at his command,
and more was at his service, if he commanded it. For Pleasures, Nature did
prostrate her self to serve him, and turned all things upside down to delight
him. All his enterprises were crowned with success; he saw his desire upon his
enemies, and was presented with the heads of those that hated him. He had his
setting dogs (as Seneca termed them) that were fitted to serve him in all
employments, which were only tractable and tame to himself, and barkt at all
others, and were maintained with the blood of his enemies. In this height,
adversity like a sudden gust overturns his fortunes, and those, who but now
attended him to the Senate House, conduct him to a Prison: Those who but now
bowed their kuees to adore him, now deridingly shake their heads at him,
(making a jest of him now whom they feared in earnest before) whilst he is
dragged from the Temple to the Goal, from the highest honor to the lowest
shame. There was so little space 'twixt his glory and his fall, that he was
as soon struck as threatened; 'twas his misery not to be fore-arm'd for such
calamities, nor wise till his fall made him so. ('It Is a madness for a man that
might descend the stairs of greatness with ease, to stay so long as to be
thrown down with violence.) He that in the morning was admired by the greatest,
is ere night dragged along the streets by the basest Roman; and not presently
executed, but with circumstances of cruelty, all sorts of outrag^s were done to
his miserable body: some through inhumanity, others for revenge, many for
example, and all to the end it might not be thought they had either loved or
known him; his miserable carkesse cut in fourteen pieces, (as many as the City
had Wards) and dragged three days together about the City; his eldest daughter
defloured near the Gallows by the Hangman, and then strangled, (with her
brother and sister) and their bodies fastened to the Gemonian stairs; all were
put to death that were related to him, or intimate with him; nor any suffered
to bewail him: Tears were accounted criminal, none durst sigh or grieve for
him, so much had fear dissolved commerce 'twixt nature and compassion.

But what speak I of Sejanus, one greater then he, (and one that knew more then
any man either before or after him, (I Will except none but the first and second
Adam) who for honors had more heapt upon him, then any Monarch in the world,
being admired for his wisdom, feared for his greatness, and envied for his
happiness, beloved of all his Neighbor Kings, who contended in courtesy who
should do him most service. For Riches, none had more; the Gold of Ophir was as
plentiful as the stones in the street, and the richest Gems that the world
afforded sent him from foreign coasts. For Pleasures, none ere had more, (or
since so much) or wisdom to improve them: he reigned forty years, (a sufficient
time to content his mind) in sumptuous buildings, (the most glorious that ever
the world beheld) in multitude of Horses, in all variety of Studies and
Sciences, and had traversed his spirits through all the secre^s of nature, even
from the cedar to the Hysop, all sorts of creatures (from the woman to the
meanest) did contribute to his delight; yet after all this he concludes, that
these sweets were confected with bitterness, and all vanity and vexation of
spirit.

To conclude, I hope it will not be thought either impertinent or improper to
this subject, to present my Reader with a brief survey of the various
infelicities that attend the several degrees, conditions, and ages of men, and
with an applicatory conclusion to finish my Discourse. We will begin with the
highest, (for it is easier to fall then rise) and conclude with the meanest: We
have already sufficiently discourst of the miseries of greatness, and
therefore we shall be now concise, only acquaint my Readers, that great men
are so far from being made happy by their greatness, that they are thereby
made capable of the greatest distractions and afrightments. I have read of some
that durst not go to bed till one had had lain down there before them; and of
others, that durst not take their repose, till their chambers have been
searched, lest some conspiratour should be there lurking for an opportunity to
put a sad exit to their mundane infelicities: Of others that durst not use a
Barber, lest in shaving their heads or beards they should cut their throats.
Nor is there now a Potentate in Christendom that dares taste a bit without a
taster. Nor is this their vigilance to be discommended, for we know that their
greatness makes them liable to many dangers, which renders the greatest
dignities miserable. Descend we to the Noble man: Suppose him in the height of
honor, (a favorite to the greatest Prince) yet even there is he far from
happiness; for he is ever fearful of falling, either to be crushed from above
by his superiors anger, or to be undermined from beneath by his inferiors
envy: can he be happy whom a Princes breath can in a moment divest him both of
his greatness and his life? Come we now to the Gentleman, whose education may
make him capable of serving the Commonwealth in those several professions into
which providence may cast him: Suppose him called to the Bar, what happiness
to be found in that life which is perpetually disturbed with discord, hears
nothing but the invective clamours of inveterate opposites; and his best music
the jarring harmony of disagreeing persons. If to the Pulpit, that is the
saddest life of all, (if seriously considered) into which being no sooner cast,
he finds himself in a Labyrinth of cares, (having so many souls under his
charge, the thoughts of which does perpetually afflict him) he must labor in
season and out of season, (and it may be for an ungrateful people that will
little respect ^im for his pains.) Do I call it a labor? surely it may well be
termed so, (for there is no work like that of the brain.) It is a life so full
of care, trouble and vexation, that the pen of a Jeremy or a Paul are fittest
to describe it. I confess there are many in this age who have made that
calling easier then ever God intended it (both in respect of the admission to
it and discharge of it) these admission to it and discharge of it) these break
not their brains with studying, nor shall St. Paul's accusation be fastened on
them, that much learning should make them mad; if they are mad, it is for want
of it, witness their Sermons (if they may be termed so) which are as dull and
as cold as their charity; and no wonder, for they endeavor not to be good
Preachers, but cunning Purchasers; not to be good Pastors to feed the ^^^ck,
but wolves in sheeps clothing to f^ed upon them; and mind fat Benefices more
then lean souls; who instead of being examples of piety, are presidents of
(long-lived) malice, covetousness, and cruelty; and some so ridiculous both in
their words and gestures, as to render the Gospel contemptible, and themselves
odious. But let them take their course, (as they will without my leave) and
feed themselves (like Porkets) with the fat things of the earth, they shall
notwithstanding (at one time or other) find both vanity and vexation in this
their supposed felicity, enough to render the greatest happiness upon earth
truly miserable. Come we to the Merchant, (who is the fittest Emblem of the
worlds vanity and inconstancy) continual cares do perpetually distract him,
which hinder his content by day, and repose by night, all that he has (and it
may be more then his own) lies at the mercy of the surging Billows, and the
boisterous waves, which in an instant can make him that was worth thousands not
master of a penny. Come to the Shopkeeper, whose head is ever full of cares,
how to steer his course, and manage his business with discretion to the best
improvement and advancement of his stock, and how to find out the various
dispositions of men, and to suit them accordingly (and so to demean himself
toward all as to gain the love of all) and oftentimes troubled at the slow
motion of backward Customers, whose promises are commonly more dexterous then
their purses: (not a few have been ruined by it.) Come to the Mechanic that
has no living, but what he fetches from his fingers ends; how must he work both
with head and hands to maintain himself and those about him? (who it may be
will ill reward him for his pains.) Come we now to the Country, (which some
think so pleasant) it is very toilsom. The Countryman is the most sensible of
all others of that doom of Adam, that with the sweat of his brows he should eat
his bread.

If we consider him as a landed man, then he is laden with cares, ever fearful
of bad servants and back doors, and it may be of one near to him, who also may
contribute to his ruin. If a Farmer, he moyls like a slave in a Galley, or a
Horse in a Mill, to bring both ends together to preserve his stock, and prepare
himself for an encounter with his Landlord; and all too little, if many years
of plenty come together, except some dear years interpose to requite him.

If a Cottager, one that has nothing but what he miserably earns, who by his
extraordinory labor gets him a stomach ere he has meat to suffice to it,
whilst his childrens note is like the Horse-leech in the Proverbs, crying for
meat, and (it may be) none to give it them. We have but one step lower to
descend, and that is to the Beggar: I know it will be here objected, that I
have not done well in putting the Beggar here to take a share of the
infelicities of the world, for he lives the happiest life of all, he fetches
his Pedigree from Cain the eldest son of Adam, (a man of a vaste estate) and
hence has the world for his inheritance, and is paid tribute from all sorts
and conditions of men in it; all heads and hands are busied to cloth and feed
him, whilst his only task is to walk from place to receive it; his merry
heart is neither distracted with cares, nor amazed with fears; he is as far
from danger as free from labor: none will conspire against his life, to
deprive him of his place. A pennilesse Traveller can sing before a Thief, and a
money less Beggar can walk securely, where a full fraught Passenger dares not
show himself. (Beggars you must note carry not much treasure about them, the
rich man is their Sumpter-Horse to carry it for them) I answer, It Is confessed
that the Beggar is freest from care, but not furthest from misery. It Is true we
seldom read of any plots that have been laid against the Beggars life. This one
happiness indeed he has, but he has so many miseries to overbalance it, (that
had he not some sunshine as well as so many storms, he were not able to live,
grief would dispatch him, and put a sad period to his miserable days) he has
a large walk, and is seldom out of his way. But by the way I must tell you,
that he lives a dogs life, hunger and ease; as for hunger he is acquainted with
that at most times, but for ease he has that but sometimes; the heat annoyes
him, the cold does pinch him, his belly wants supplies within, his back wants
defense without, both from the Summers sun, and the Winters storms; he walks
regardlesly by day, and is lodged as carelessly by night; and though he be no
fit object for ambition to work upon, yet is he often in danger to be surprised
either for the Stocks or Whipping post, notwithstanding his ten thousand about
him that never forsake him. The Premises considered, we may conclude that all
things are full of toil and trouble, molestation and misery meet us at every
turn, (whether we be high or low, rich or poor.) There is a singular vanity in
this splendid misery; one well compares it to a beautiful Picture drawn with
white and red colors on sackcloth, which afar off is very lovely, but near by
it is like the filthy matter of a sore or wound. No man ever yet found any
constant contentation in any state, yet may his outward appearance deceive
another, and another him. If we but seriously consider the various vexations
that attend the several ranks of men, we shall find that abundance is a
trouble, and want a misery, honor a burden, and baseness a scorn,
advancements dangerous, and disgrace odious: (he that climbs is in danger of
falling, and he that prostrates himself to be trod upon.) But leaving that, we
come to discourse of the several Ages, and draw to a conclusion.

Not to speak of his being nine months a close Prisoner in the womb, we will
come to his birth. When he comes into the world, how sadly he salutes it
weeping, (declaring his dislike by tears, because he wants words to express
it) either as a Prophet to foretell his miseries, or as a Penitent to bewail
them. We will pass his Infancy, (which all will acknowledge to be a life of
vanity) and come to his Adolency, where he is kept under the tyranny of parents
and masters, and terrified with those terrible engines of correction, the rod
and cudgel: (an estate, says one, not worth the description.) Come we now to
his Manhood, where the cares of the world (like a Troop) beset him. Does he
live single, that is uncomfortable? Is he married, that is troublesome. I have
read of one Diponares (who having tasled the martyrdom of marriage) (as a
French Author terms it) said, that there were but two good days which a
married man was capable of; the one his wedding day, on which much good cheer
was provided, and the Bride fresh and fair, (for of all pleasures the beginning
is most delectable.) The other when the woman died, the man being then free
from bondage. But I believe Diponares was in a more then ordinary measure
incenst (by the crosnesse of his own in particular) to inveigh against all in
general; (but such large conclusions are neither warrantable or commendable)
and therefore let my Readers know I am not of his opinion. Come we now to the
old man, (who is as weary of the world, as the world of him) his brain
troubled, his face withered, his body crook'd, his sight dimmed, his hairs fallen,
his teeth rotten, his comfort and content is gone, (all his happy days are
flown over) the day is troublesome, and the night tedious. In this condition he
is so far from being happy, that he is perfectly miserable, a burden to
himself and all about him, all his past felicities are so far from contributing
to his present felicity, that the very thoughts of them does distract him, when
he considers that he had a prime: but that was past, and that those pleasures
which were then green are now withered. If a rich man, then his children are
apt to blame the slownesse of his motion to another world, (for they have been
long weary of him in this.) If a poor man, then he is troublesome to one and to
another, his children (if he have any) shift him from one to another, every one
thinks he does too much for him, grudging him every bit he eats as robbed from
them and theirs; and if ever they beg any thing at Gods hands, it is to take him
away. Come we now to his conclusion, when he is ready to take his leave of the
world, his feet become cold, his face pale, his eyes hollow, his tongue waxes
black, his teeth close, and his breath fails, he has no sense left him, but
that of misery, his children and relation about him gaping for his long desired
last gasp, that so they may frollick with that wealth which was long kept from
them by one that was incapable of enjoying it; he leaves the world with groans,
as he saluted it at first with tears, (and now what is become of his glory) he
is brought to the grave, where all mankind are promiscuously blended together
without distinction or order. Here are no Heralds to blazon Coats of Arms, but
worms to disfigure those persons that did bear them. He that was long since
clad in silk, and shined with Diamonds, is assaulted with troops of vermin: And
he that had all the odoriferous perfumes of Arabia Felix, breaths forth as
noisome and intolerable scents as the loathsomest creature upon earth. All
earthly greatness returns here to its first Chaos, and the stateliest
monuments that the world could brag of mouldred into ashes; Gehazi's scull
cannot here be discerned from Absalons, and Irus his ashes are as transparent
as Alexanders: according to that of the Poet.

For here is the Conqueror with the Captive spread
On one bare Earth, as on the common Bed.
The all commanding General has no span
Of ground alow'd, more then the private man
Folly with wisdom has an equal share,
The soul and fair to like dust changed are.
This is of all Mortality the end,
Persites now with Nereus dare contend:
And with Achilles he has equal place,
That living durst not look him in the face.
The Servant with the Master, and the Maid
Stretched by her Mistress, both their Heads are laid
Upon and equal Pillow; Subjects keep
Court with Kings equals, and as soft they sleep.
Lodging their heads upon a turf of grass,
As they on Marble, or on figured Brass.
And thus have I (according to my slender abilities presented my Readers with a
serious and sad Portraiture of the Misery and Mutability of Worldly Glory,
which I have illustrated by the various dispensations of providence to her
greatest Favorites, by a through examination of the several ranks and degrees
of men, from the Monarch to the Beggar, and of the several Ages, from the Young
Man's Genesis to the Old Man's Exodus. What now remains, but that I only leave
my Readers some short advices, (in order to his making a right use of the
foregoing Discourse) in number four, which I shall dispatch in words almost as
few. The first to contemn the world. The second, to be content with our
condition. The third, to use moderation in the things of this world. And the
last, that we wisely improve them to be happy in a better.

First to contemn the World: Alas there is nothing in it worth the desiring,
all the glory, beauty, and pleasures of this world are as truly short as they
are seeming sweet; and though they may to some seem sweet in the enjoying, they
are certainly (to all) bitter in the conclusion. I have read of a Duke of
Venice, who dying, commanded this to be written upon his Tomb, Know (most noble
Venetians) that by mine example, it is the most Christian thing in the world to
trample this world under your feet. Plutarch tells us of a wise Heathen, who
speaking of the delights and pastimes of those times, said, I am much taken
that I am not more taken with these pleasures: And shall that which could not
please an Heathen satisfy a Christian? We are not Heathens but Christians,
(whose expectations reach further then ever Heathens did) and shall we lose
time in looking after fading toys, that should be curiously inquisitive after
unfading joys, and for transitory trash lose a Crown of glory.

2. That we content our selves with that condition into which Providence has
placed us, and endeavor with faithfulness to discharge those places into which
God has called us, and not to squint upon other men's professions, to invert
that order which God himself has made. Let not the Shoemaker go beyond his
last, let the Cobbler attend his boot, the Waterman his boat, the Fisherman his
bait, and the Scholar his books, a hammer is for the Smith, a Homer for the
School: God never intended, that bungling Mechanics should botch at his Altar,
or those that serve at his Altar should mind any thing else. The gift of
contentation is such a blessing as God affords to none but to his chosen, it is
that which renders the meanest condition amiable

3. To use a Moderation in the things of this world, we are not to glut our
selves with the pleasures of this world, but to be ravished with the
contemplations of a better; not like the Epicure, to place our felicity in out
throat, by making our senses (which God intended as Handmaids to our Reason)
sole Mistress of our Religion; we may make use of the pleasures of this world,
but not abuse them; they are to be used as Physic, not as food; a little may
delight us, much will destroy us; we are to use a mean and moderation in these
worldly things, and to use this world as though we used it not.

Lastly, that we make a right use and wise improvement of the things of this
world in order to our happiness in a better; and to this end that we make use
of those opportunities God has put in our hands, and of those estates
wherewith he has entrusted us, to his glory, and the good of his poor members,
that our gold and our silver may speak for us, not against us at the last day;
and by so judicious a distribution of our estates, we shall gain such friends
by this Mammon of unrighteousness, (when time shall be no more. and the world
with all its glory on a flame) we shall be re-received into those eternal
(never perishing) habitations in the new Jerusalem; to the innumerable company
of Angels, and the spirit of just men made perfect; where with those elders we
shall vail our crowns at his feet, who is worthy of Honor and Dominion, and
sing perpetual Anthems to the Sacred Trinity to all eternity.

Considerations on the Saint and Sinner, as to their disagreeing conditions and
dispositions here, their various entertainments of Death, and different rewards
after Death; reflecting on the Temporizing Professor; illustrated and
interlaced with Historical Examples of dying men.
I Am not ignorant, that there are many (and they such as follow the most, and
side with the strongest) who judge of causes and men by their success and
outward prosperity, but how far they are mistaken who judge of men's future
estates in another world by their conditions in this, will be easily
manifested; for these are things which we are not to pry into, or undertake to
determine here, but left to the righteous Judge of all the world to decide
hereafter. If prosperity and adversity were the infallible signs of a happy or
miserable man, who so happy as the Sinner, who so miserable as the Saint? Do
not we often see the guilty here go free, and the innocent bear the punishment,
virtue in fetters, and vice at liberty ranting it in pomp, the sentence pardons
Ravens, and lays hold on Doves; the poor innocent afflicted, whilst the
wicked holds up his head gloriously. If outward appearance therefore should be
the judge, woe were the portion of the Saints, happiness the Sinners: For (as a
late reverend Father of the Church of England observes) if we should judge
according to appearance, we should think basely of the Savior of the world
himself. Who that should see him sprawling in the Cratch, flying into Egypt,
chopping of chips at Nazareth, famished in the Desert, tempted of Satan,
attended by Fishermen, persecuted by his kindred, betrayed by one servant,
abjured by another, forsaken of all, apprehended, arraigned, condemned,
buffetted, spit upon, scourged to blood, sceptered with a reed, crowned with
thorns, nailed to the Cross, hanging naked between two Thieves, scorned of
beholders, sealed up in a borrowed grave? Who that should have seen his skin
all dew'd with pearls of bloody sweat, his back bleeding, his face blubbered
and besmeared, his forehead harrowed, his hands and his feet pierced, his side
gushing out, his head bowed down in death, and should have heard with all his
dying lips say, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, would not have said
he is despised and rejected of men, yea, in appearance of God himself? Yet even
in this while to the cutting off the sinnews of those stiff-necked Jews, the
Angels owned him for their Lord, the Sages adored him, the Star designed him,
the Prophets foreshew'd him, the Devils confessed him, his miracles evinc't him,
the earth shook, the rocks rent, the dead looked out, the sun looked in, answered
at the suffering of the God of nature? Even while he was despised of men, he
commanded the Devils to their chains; whilst base men shoot out their tongues
at him, principalities and powers bowed their knees to him; whilst he he
hanged despicably on the tree of shame, the powers of hell were dragged captive
after the triumphant chariot of his Cross; the appearance was not so
contemptible as the truth of his estate glorious, judge not therefore according
to appearance: should appearance be the rule, woe were Gods people, happy were
his enemies. Who that had seen Cain standing imperiously over the bleeding
carcass of Abel, Joseph in his bonds, his Mistress in her dress, Moses in the
flags, Pharaoh in the Palace, David sculking in the wilderness, Saul commanding
in the Court, Elijah fainting under a Juniper-tree, Jezabel painting in her
closet, Micaiah in the prison, Zedkijah in the presence, Jeremiah in the
dungeon, Zedekiah in the throne, Daniel trembling among the lions, the Median
Princes feasting in their bowers, John's head bleeding in a charger, Herod
smiling at the revels, Christ at the Bar, Pilate on the Bench, the Disciples
scourged, the Scribes and Elders insulting, would not have said, O happy Cain,
Potephars Wife, Pharaoh, Saul, Jezabel, Zedkijah, Zedekiah, Median Princes,
Pilate, Herod, Elders; miserable Abel, Joseph, Moses, David, Elijah, Micaiah,
Jeremiah, Daniel, John Baptist, Christ, the Disciples? Yet we know Cains
victory was as woeful as Abels Martyrdom; glorious Joseph's irons were more
precious then the golden tyres of his Mistress; Moses reeds were more sure then
Pharaohs Cedars; David's Cave in the Desert more safe then the Towers of Saul;
Elijahs Raven a more comfortable purveyour then all the Officers of Jezabel;
Micaiahs prison was the Guard-chamber of Angels, when Ahabs presence was the
Counsel-chamber of evil spirits; Jeremiahs Dungeon had more true light of
comfort, then the shining state of Zedekiah; Daniel was better guarded with the
Lions, then Darius and the Medean Princes with their Janissaries; John's head was
more rich with the crown of his Martyrdom, then Herod's with the Diadem of his
Tetrarch; Christ at the Bar gave life and being to Pilate on the Bench, gave
motion to those hands that struck him, to that tongue that condemned him, and
in the mean while gave sentence on the judge: the Disciples were better pleased
with their stripes, then the Jewish Elders with their proud Phylacteries. After
this, who that had seen the Primitive Christians, some broiled on Gridirons,
others boiled in lead, some roasted, others frozen to death, some flead, others
torn with horses, some crasht in pieces by the teeth of lions, others cast down
from high rocks to the stakes, some smiling on the wheel, others in the flame,
all wearying their Tormentours, and shaming their Tyrants with their patience,
would not have said, of all things I would not be a Christian?

Yet even this while were these poor torturing stocks higher then their
persecutours, dying victors, yea victors of death, never so glorious as when
they began not to be; in gasping crowned, in yielding up the ghost more then
conquerours. Judge not therefore according to appearance: Afflictions they are
the lot of Gods people here, their crown is hereafter, and by them are they
fitted for the crown. Iron is never cleaner, then when it comes out of the
furnace; nor brighter, then when it has been under the sharp teeth of the
file. The sun never shines clearer, then when it comes from under a cloud; no
coal more hot, then that which has been covered with ashes. Though innocence
be shaded in the obscurity of prisons, yet nevertheless she comes forth in
triumph, radeating with glory. God chastises every son whom he loves; the Son
of his love was perfected by afflictions, he bore his Cross before he wore his
Crown: The stones of the Temple were first hewn in the mountain before they
were set in the building: The sacrifices of the Law were first slain before
they were offered: The vessels of the Sanctuary were first to pass the fire
before they were put to any service; so must Gods lively stones, [1 Pet. 2.5.]
reasonable sacrifices, [ Romans 12.1.] vessels of honor, [2 Timothy 2 22.] pass the
hammer, the knife, and the fire of affliction, before they can be fit for the
masters use. God if in his divine wisdom he thought it best for us, could bring
his servants to glory without these trialls, but that after our troubles here
we shall be the better able to prize our rest hereafter: should we have a glut
of prosperity here, we should be so wedded to this world, that we should not
take pains to enquire after a better. Gods people never so devout, as when
exercised with afflictions. It is good for me that I have been in trouble
(says David) for thereby have I known thy statutes, Psalm 119.71. Adversity,
though it be more horrid in the view, yet prosperity is more dangerous in the
in the event. A Summers sunshine is the mother of more diseases then a winters
Frost; the one seeks to make a conquest on our Virtue by force, and that makes
us (like a besieged City) fortify our selves more strongly for a Resistance;
the other by the treaties of Peace, by the tribute of Gifts, seeks to bring our
minds into servitude, and this melts our souls (our too too easy souls) into
yelding. The fire burns hotter for being blown on by the cold wind, but the
sun shining on it well nigh puts it out: so Virtue flames more brightly being
blown on by the cold wind of adversity, but is extinguished by the sunshine of
prosperity, like lime which is set on fire with water, and (as some report) is
quenched with oil. That prosperity does draw more to ruin then adversity does
drive, the Prophet David intimates where he says, A thousand shall fall
besides thee, and ten thousand at thy right hand. There is ten to one whose
virtue the right hand of prosperity does choke more then the left hand of
adversity does starve. Afflictions are Gods troops (and he their Captain)
intended for the perdition of the wicked, for the purgation of the godly; he
will not lay any more on any of his servants then he shall enable them to bear;
alas, the miseries of this life are not worthy of the felicities of the next,
nor may these crosses stand in competition with that crown; nor are the
greatest torments that can here be inflicted, comparable to those endless and
insufferable tortures which the wicked shall be sensible of; the greatest that
a Saint can suffer here is but the malice of men and devils, the damned in hell
shall taste the wrath of the Almighty. The sufferings of the Saint and the
triumphs of the sinner, are but for a moment, but the reward of the one, and
the plagues of the other, are to eternity. Suppose our life here, spread with
roses, yet they are marcessible; and if with thor^s, yet they are dying. The
jewels of the Crown will receive a damp, and the terrors of the Cross will soon
be at an end. Groans and joys in this life are both expiring, our troubles and
our triumphs have both their setting. The distresses of the world are a short
and a sudden tempest, and the delights of it are a shedding flower. Now (as an
elegant Writer observes) who would not rather endure the Hell of a few days
miscries here, and enjoy the Heaven of eternal happiness hereafter, then enjoy
the Heaven of a few days pleasure here, and endure the eternal miseries of Hell
hereafter. Temporal pleasures are dearly bought with the loss of eternal, and
temporal sufferings are well requited with eternal pleasures. That is a
miserable happiness that must end in such miseries as must never end, and those
are happy miseries that shall soon end in endless happiness. This life is but a
journey toward death, and but a short one; and death is yet a shorter passage
to a longer and a better life. That life of joys is worth the wishing that
shall never have an end, and that end of our life is full as worthy of our
wishes that shall begin the joys of that endless life; and that end must be
ere long, for life is short. Man that is born of a woman is but of few days,
and full of trouble: He is of few days, that he might not live too long in
trouble; and his days are full of trouble, that he might not long for more of
them then a few. Man's days are full of trouble, that a few might serve his
turn, and make him weary of them; and his days of trouble are but few, that he
might not be too much wearied with them. If it be man's misery that his few
days are full of trouble, it is Gods mercy that man's days of trouble are but
few. The few days of man's life are full of trouble, that man might be daily
minded of his duty, in seeking after another, a better life: and man's days of
trouble are but few, that man may not be wearied so as to leave seeking for the
other life, before that this does leave him. What but the happiness and glory
of that better life held up the spirits of Gods afflicted servants in their
greatest sufferings in this? 'Twas the recompense of reward that Moses had
respect to, which made him spurn at the treasures of Egypt, and refused to be
called the son of Pharaohs daughter, and to slight all the discouragements and
afflictions which he here met with. Let the miseries therefore which accompany
mortality wean us from all fondness toward this life present, and the felity
of life eternal make us the more earnestly to long after that. The thoughts of
the Elizian happiness did so encourage a poor Grecian (a mere Pagan) at the
instant of his death, that he rejoiced much to think of going to Pythagoras and
other learned Philosophers: to Olympus and other skilful Musicians, to
Hecataeus; and other approved Historians, to Homer the prince of Poets, and
other famous Wits that were his followers; that Poetical Paradise the Elizian
Field could make a Pagan give his longum vale to this present world with
notable resolution, and shall not the real pleasures of the celestial Paradise,
the fullness of joy in the glorious presence of God, encourage a Christian at
his death to depart as comfortably as a faithless Grecian? Shall fantasy in
an Heathen be more powerful then faith in a Christian? Is not the company as
good which we believe to be at Gods right hand, as that which he imagined to be
in Elizio campo, and are not the joys as many and as great? Well therefore may
a Saint cheer up himself at his departure by thinking of his going to Saint
Peter, Saint Paul, Saint, James, Saint John, and to all that glorious company
of Apostles; and of his going to Elias, and Elisha, and Isaiah, and Ezekiel,
and to Daniel, and all that goodly fellowship of the Prophets; and of his going
to Saint Stephen the Proto Martyr, and to Ignatius, and to Justinus, and to our
Cranmer, and our Ridley, and our Hooper, and our Tailor, and all that noble
army of Martyrs; and of his going to that Reverend Patriarch Abraham, the
father of the faithful, and to Isaac, and to Jacob, and to all the holy
Patriarchs; and of his going to the holy Angels, and Archangels, and Thrones,
and Powers, and Principalities, and to the spirits of all just men made
perfect. Who can think of being thus transported, and not be transported with
the very thoughts of it. Surely it must needs be a very consolatory Viaticum to
the soul of a dying Saint, to think of exchanging Earth for Heaven, and the
sordid company of sinners for the sweet society of Saints. And this is it which
makes the Saint entertain death as a friend, whom the sinner fears as an enemy.
The Saints of God in all Ages have looked upon him as a friend, because by him
they have been wafted to glory. Moses sing when he was told his last. Elijah
had his Sufficit, he desired his God to take away his life. Old Simeon craved a
dismission, and St. Paul a discharge. In the times of Persecution how did the
Martyrs run in troops to the flames, even to the amazement and admiration of
their Persecutours, which made a mortal Enemy to Christianity in the days of
Queen Mary (who speaking of some of the Primitive Christians and of the
glorious Martyrs that then suffered) bade a vengeance on them, for he thought
they took delight in burning, and that they longed for death. I should swell
this Volumn too big, if I should here insert the last sayings of dying Saints,
who expressed as much willingness to be disrobed of their mortality, as ever
they did to put off their clothes to go to rest: And no marvel, for death to a
righteous man is but as a door to let him into glory, to such endless glory,
as I shall not here stand to insist of; for with a discourse of that
everlasting happiness I shall close the Book, and for the present leave it to
fall on a worse Subject.

We Will now come to the sinner, who (as we have seen already) seems by his
outward prosperity to be the only happy man, as having the world at will, and
all things in it at his command; but alas (notwithstanding all this) we shall
find that he and happiness are at a great distance, if we but seriously
consider the shortness of his joys, and the eternity of his miseries; that
this is all the heaven he is ever like to have, he has his portion in this
life, and these short pleasures to end in endless torments. This world, as it
is a School to the Saint, so a Stall to the Sinner; it fits the one for a
Fellowship in the New Jerusalem, and fats the other for an eternal slaughter:
here the Saint suffers a while to be eternally happy, and here the sinner
flourishes for a moment to be everla^^ingly miserable. What more woeful then a
sinners welfare It is for slaughter that the Ox is fatned, ease slayes the
simple, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them, they spend their days
in wealth, and end their days in woe; their merry dance determines in a
miserable downfall; the sinners cup of honey is mixed with dregs of gall. He
loves his belly well that with Esau will sell his birthright for Pottage. I
had rather beg my bread with Lazarus, then my water with Dives. In what
slippery places has God set wicked men? He that now thinks himself as high as
heaven, knows not how soon he shall be laid as low as hell; and he that is now
carouzing and quaffing with his dammy Blades, and pampering his guts with the
left hand blessings, knows not how suddenly he shall be placed at the left hand
of that Judge, who shall give to all their right, and send him and his crew to
yell out their late Lamentations in Tophet. Zophar (though none of the best men
himself) could tell Job, that the triumphing of the wicked is but short, and
the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment, like the thorns in the fire, the
bubble in the water, the flowers in the earth, or the clouds in the air, they
blaze and consume, they flourish and fade, they vanish and fly away. A candle
burns more brightly, when nearest the end, and the wicked are in greatest pomp,
when nearest their ruin; witness those sad examples of Absalon, Jezabel,
Haman, Herod, etc. so that his joys here are but like a fit of music before a
fearful execution, or a Sirens song before a dismal storm; and of the short
time he has here to frollick it, how often is he disquieted by Gods judgments
from without, and by his own conscience from within. First from without, God
oftentimes meets with the sinner here, to put him in mind of what he shall
feel hereafter; and that if he will not take warning by this, he shall be paid
to purpose in a worse place. As a Saint looks upon afflictions from God as the
gentle chastisements of a loving Father; the sinner looks upon them as the
severe punishments of an angry Judge, and as a sad presage or preface of those
insufferable miseries he shall find in hell. 2. From within his guilty
conscience oftentimes proves as a cord to strangle his joys, and to mar his
mirth. Did not Joseph's Brethren experiment this in Egypt, and Ahab in his house
of Ivory, and Belshazar amidst his sensualities; this is it that tells him of
his past offenses, and future miseries, which so much distracts him, that it
makes him afraid both of himself and others, ever fearful lest some just hand
should cut off his happiness with his life. Our Richard the Third after the
murder of his two innocent Nephews had fearful dreams, insomuch, that he did
often leap out of his bed in the dark, and catching his sword, (which always
naked stuck by his side) he would go distractedly about the chamber, every
where seeking out the cause of his own occasioned disquiet. And Charles the
Ninth of France, after the Parisian Masacre, was so inwardly terrified, that he
was every night laid to sleep, and wakened again with a set of Musicians. Alas
what happiness is it to have a house of Cedar adorned both within and without
with beaten gold, to have his chests lined with the Gold of Ophir, to have the
richest Robes that ere the sun shined on, the largest Wardrobe, the coicest
Cates, and the most desired delights, that his way were spread with Roses, and
paved with Diamonds, when his roof is open to the thunderbolt of Heaven, and
has a hell in his conscience, and God for his enemy. But put the case the
sinner were not troubled with these outward calamities nor inward afrightments,
yet he were (notwithstanding this) still miserable; for in the highest
exaltation of his mirth, the very name of death cools his courage, and strikes
him through with terrors; he would not (if he might have his will) ever part
with this world, (for he knows that there is nothing of happiness to be found
for them in the next) he could with all his heart accept of St. Peter's motion,
to build Tabernacles here, and live for ever; but alas that must not be, for
put the case he sees many go before him, his turn will come shortly after, old
age will soon seize upon him, when his feet will be full of gouts, his back
full of pain, his heart full of sorrow, and his soul full of sin, and now all
his happiness is blown over, as though it had never been; or if he could call
to mind his past felicities, the thoughts of them would be so far from
administering any comfort to him, that it would but distract him; and he does
now begin to wish he had never been born, or else a longer lease of his life.
It Is storied of Lewis the Eleventh King of France, that he was so wedded to
this life, that he prohibited the mention of the word Death in his Court; but
alas death regards not the threats of Princes, nor the tears of Peasants. The
stoutest man and greatest Monarch that ever was, has been forced to submit to
him and his messengers. The honorable Garter cannot cure the Gout, nor the
Chair of State ease the Choluck, nor a golden Diadem remove the headache. Nuga:
the Scythian despising the rich presents and ornaments that were sent unto him
by Michael Paleologus Emperor of Constantinople, asked whether those things
could drive away calamities, diseases, or death. No, this they cannot do, as
Henry Beauford (that rich and wretched Cardinal) found by woeful experience in
the days of Hen. 6. who perceiving death at hand, asked wherefore he should
dye, being so rich: if the whole Realm will save my life, I am able either by
policy to get it, or by riches to buy it; Fie (quoth he) will not death be
hired, will money do nothing. No, money in this case bears no mastery, death
(as the Jealous man) will not regard any ransom, neither will he rest content
though thou offer many gifts, [ Prove. 6.25.] 'Twas but a vain conceit of one
who when he heard that his sickness was deadly, and that he was for another
world, called for a bag of gold and laid to his heart, (as if that which had
solely swayed him in his life to the committing of many prepostrous actions,
should now do something for him) but he finding no ease by it, threw it away,
crying it would not do. Nor was he less ridiculous, who being ready to expire,
clapped a twenty shillings piece of gold in his mouth, saying, some wiser then
some, I Will take this with me howsoever: alas, he and his gold must now perish
together, death shows him a dismal change; for now Balaam and his Bribes,
Belshazzar and his Bowls, Dives and his Dishes, Herod and his Harlots, the
Usurer and his Bills, the Merchant and his Measures shall part assunder for
ever, which made one that was ready to breath his last call for his bags of
money, and sadly took his leave of them in these words; Ah! I must now leave
you, there is no remedy. I tremble to think in how sad a manner the wicked
leaves the world, to think what a sad fit of trembling does surprise him, when
the cruel Sergeants and merliless Officers of the King of Terrors do arrest him
(as it were) in the Devils name, when death shall come with a writh of Habeas
corpus, and the Devil with a writh of Habeas animam, when the cold Earth must
have his Body, and hot Hell hold his Soul; Reader, now tell me which is the
happiest man. Adrian the Emperor when his soul was ready to fly from his body,
bespake it thus, O animula, vagula, blandula, quae jam abibis in loca: Poor
forlorn soul, into what gloomy and dismal mansions art thou now departing; but
of those Mansions in my next discourse. I shall now with a few words (to the
Temporizing Professor, and my Readers in general) bring this to a conclusion.

First to the Temporizing Professor, you I mean that in all mutations will be
men of the Times, (be they never so bad) and call those Men and Times blessed
and glorious which make you gainers, that admire all men for their greatness,
and conclude those to be hated of God that are despised of men, and censure all
as Reprobates that are not of your spirit. You that pretend to such a
transcendent measure of perfection, to such high notions and revelations, as if
(with St. Paul) ye had been wrapped up into the third heaven, and understood more
then all your forefathers did, as if Christ had led his Church in ignorance and
blindness for 1600 years and upwards, till you came with your new Discoveries.
You that have prated Religion out of the Nation, as if it consisted in nothing
but words; and instead of practicing the Graces of the Spirit, as Faith,
Repentance, Humility, Charity, etc. studied nothing but needless and
unnecessary Questions, not at all tending to Edification but Vain glory, which
have enlarged the Breaches of the Church instead of closing them up; Remember
that God is just as well as merciful, and though he spares you long, will pay
you at last; and though you feed your selves like porkets with the fat things
of the world, a time will come when you shall cast it up again, and all your
hypocrisy shall be unmaskt and unvailed both to Angels and men: Humble your
selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, left for your pride God inflicts
on you the saddest Judgment that is mentioned in the Book of God, of being
delivered over to a Reprobate sense: Oh take heed that Satan cousen you not to
hell, and there twit you as he did Saul in Samuels mantle, when there is no
place for repentance. You know what a plausible speech he made in the mouths of
Ahabs Prophets, when he tic't that King to his ruin; have a care that ye are
not condemned one day for condemning others, and spued out of the Bridegrooms
mouth for your lukewarnnesse: think not me your enemy for telling you the
truth, be not Solomon's fools to hate instruction, better repent these things
here then in a worse place; consider seriously the foregoing Discourse, take
notice of the sad exit of wicked men, that the doleful sound of their sad and
too late Repentance, may seasonably caution you by their harms to beware. One
word more, think not without Repentance ever to arrive at Glory; there is no
going to heaven on beds of down, you have more cause to fear exchanging down
pillows for beds of flames: there is no leaping from Dives his diet to Lazarus
his crown, nor from Dalilahs lap to Abraham's bosom.

Lastly, To my Readers in general, Let me caution you to take notice of Gods
Omnipotency* Omnisciency, and Justice, and our own Mortallity, and these
severally and seriously considered, may be a motive to startle us from the very
thoughts of those sins that we commit with greediness.

First, his Omnisciency, Remember that he is an all-seeing God that discovers
all our actions and beholds all our ways, to whom the day and the night, the
darkness and the light are both alike. If we dare not commit our beastly sins
before the eyes of men, how dare we presome to commit them before him that is
able everlastingly to damn us, and throw our souls into Tophets endless flames.

Secondly, his Omnipotency, Let us adumbrageously fancy (as one has it) the
Firmament to be his face, the allseeing Sun his right eye, the Moon his left,
the* Winds the breath of his nostrils, the Lightning and Tempests the troubled
actions of his ire, the Frost and Snow his frowns, that Heaven is his throne,
the Earth his footstool that he is in all things, that his Omnipotency fills
all the vacuities of Heaven, Earth, and Sea; that by his power he can ungirdle
and let loose the seas impetuous waves to orewhelm and bury this lower Universe
in their vaste wombs in a moment; that he can let drop the Azure Canopy, (which
has nothing above it, whereto it is perpendicularly knit) or hurl thunderbolts
through the tumerous clouds, to pash us precipitate through the center into the
lowest dungeon of hell, and that all the creatures in their several ranges are
as so many Regiments of the great King, and that with the meanest of these he
can avenge himself on sinners, as he did on Pharaoh, Herod, etc.

In the next place let us acknowledge his Justice. Remember that he is a jealous
God, a perfect hater of sin, and will bring every work to judgment.

And last of all, that we take notice of our own Mortality, and let the
thoughts of that debar us from sinning; we know not whether we shall live to
see another day, and shall we be found sinning on our last. Let the uncertainty
of that which will certainly once come, put us in a posture of preparation for
its coming; and since that upon this moment depends our either everlasting woe
or welfare, let us lose no time: For as the Poet no less sweetly then discreetly
sung, who knows over night that he next morn shall breath. Therefore take
David's early in the morning, not the Devils stay till to morrow; think not to
be accepted in thy makers presence one day, if thou crammest the devil with thy
sap of strength and full, gorge him with the purest fruits of thy sinewy
virility, if at last (when thou art not able to do God or the devil service)
thou come limping on Times tottering Crutches to present unto him the offall
husks and morosity of thy doting decrept age. Think every day thy last, and
spend it as if it were so; for we know that God will bring us to judgment: yet
we know not when, nor in what year, nor in what month of the year, nor in what
week of the month, nor in what day of the week, nor in what hour of the day,
nor in what minute of the hour, nor in what moment of that minute; for he will
come like a thief in the night suddenly, before with a wink thou can lock up
thine eye, or within thy brain create the nimblest thought; the apprehension of
which must needs stir us up to live in Gods fear, so shall we dye in his
favor, and rest in his peace, and rise in his power, and reign (with him) in
his glory, world without end.

Godliness bearing its Rewards with it, both here and hereafter; and Sins
pursuit of the Sinner to the other World. Of the last Judgment, and those
succeeding Events that ensue thereupon.
A Meditation on 1 Timothy 4.8.
Happiness is the mark and center which every man aims at, the next thing that
is sought after being, is being happy; where David begins his Psalms, we all
hope to end (and that is with blessedness) and no way to reach that but
holiness. That holiness is the way to happiness, or that the godly man is the
truly happy man, I have already sufficiently manifested in my last Discourse,
and therefore shall be the more sparing here in my Allegations: (for I would
not take the pains over again to prove what is proved already) but happiness
is such a subject, that I could willingly dwell upon, and fill a large Volumn
with a discourse upon it, (desiring that my portion may rest here) but I am
confined to such narrow limits, both of time and paper, that I cannot insist
long on any one particular; I shall therefore briefly strike at that which is
here chiefly intended, and before I have worn my Readers patieence quite out,
shall draw to a conclusion. That the godly man is the happy (and only happy)
man will be further manifested in the end, (after the end of all things) but
first in this life we will prove him happy here, as well as hereafter, (in this
world as well as the world to come) though not so happy here as there. Neither
prosperity nor adversity can come amiss to him, though the times vary, his
happiness is still the same, (like his God that changes not) all things still
work together for good to him; and albeit he has no perogative above the
sinner from those two beds of mankind, (of sickness and the grave) his
privilege lies another way. No Kings (except such) has like perogative to the
Saints; God is their Father. Christ their Brother, the Holy Ghost their
Comforter, Angels their Guardians, Saints their Associates, Death their desire,
the Grave their rest, the Bar their joy, God their portion, the Trinity their
propriety, Heaven their home, Eternity their term; before death their
perogative is much, at it more, after it most; but from death and diseases
none, by death they have, from it not. Put the case that God permits wicked men
to ride over him, and men and devils to use their utmost extremity to him,
which is to put his days to a shameful and a painful period (for the shame
Christ has taken that away, and for the pain that will soon end in endless
pleasures,) what unhappiness in this, when all they do or can do, is but to
open the prison-doors of his body to let out his soul to fly to rest; from the
labor of the servant to the joy of the master, from the work to the reward,
and from the cross to the crown; there to solace it self in those rivers of
pleasures at Gods right hand, whilst his precious ashes are preserved as in a
safe storehouse, till the last trumpet shall shall alarm it, to give its
beloved companion the meeting to be made eternally happy together, never to
part more, (a Saint at his death is assured that a few moments will bring his
departing soul to endless happiness, and that Angels att^nd him to do their
office of wafting it into Abraham's bosom.) And now judge Reader, whether I may
not upon good consideration say, that godliness is gain. I know there are some
(and they such whose hopes extend not further then this life) that invert this
saying* and tell us that gain is godliness, and no happiness without gain,
(their sordid gain) and albeit it I have sufficiently exploded this error in
my last Discourse, I shall now notwithstanding more fully (if that may be) give
a confutation in this, as ye will the more clearly apprehend, if ye mind the
conclusion. The longest day with have a night, and the longest life will have
an end. Let the sinner live as long as he can, a miserable period will at last
be put to his sinful days, and that period will decide this controversy.
Those who in their life were the Diana's of the people, that seemed the most
high and happy, will at their death (but more clearly afterward) appear most
miserable, as they have spent their days in the unprofitable works of
darkness, so they shall find but an unprofitable reward for their works,
(they shall for their pains meet with such pains as shall never have a period.)
The Devil comes now to expect his due, (that as he was their slave for a time
upon earth, they may eternally be his vassals in a worse place) that as they
did the works of darkness, and workt for the Prince of darkness, now receive
their portion in utter darkness. There Is no denying or forswearing of
bargains, no talk of circumventing this experienced Politician; the richest
presents, nor the loudest cries, nor the saddest tears, nor the greatest
threats, nor the humblest entreaties shall not serve the turn. The usurers gold
cannot ransom him, nor the mighty man's honor privilege him; those that shut
up their bowels of compassion from others, shall find nothing but tyranny from
him. Here the luxurious Epicure, that through the five Senses (which are the
cinque ports, or rather the sinners ports of the soul) did gulp down delightful
sin like water, shall now find that those pleasant days are now blown over,
and that the end will prove them, like the Angels book, sweet in the mouth, but
bitter in the bowels, in that he must in few moments be wafted to remorselesse
flames. Here the gorbellied Mammonist that piled up huge masses of refulgent
earth, purchased by all unconscionable courses, shall have nothing left but a
coffin and winding sheet, and which is worst of all, a guilty conscience; now
all his fair pretenses and apologies will be but like characters drawn upon the
sands, or arrows shot up to heaven ward, they cannot release him from Satan's
inexpiable Servitude. Deaths warrants run very high, Non omittas propter ullum
libertatem, attache them where ever thou find them, there are no places in
the world free from the arrests of death, and when once this grim Sergeant
death has arrested their bodies, their souls must be presently sent to the bar
of judgment for particular sentences; then actum erit, (as one has it) the
matter will be past cure now, the day-book of their own consciences will be
produced as a thousand witnesses against them, for there the debt of sin is
scored up, and never to be crossed, till expunged by repentance, (which is now
too late to speak of) and now shall not the Judge of all the world do right?
Yes surely, and he will give the Devil his due; as the Devil bought their
souls, so he must now have them. The Devil is the Jaylour of Hell, and thither
the Judge commands them: Take them Jaylour, says the Judge, take them Devil,
and keep them till the general Judgment, that then their miseries may be
completed; and suffer in soul and body as they sinned in both.

The end comes when the earth shall tremble, and the foundations of the hills
shall be shaken; when the Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into
blood, to usher in the coming of that day; at which time, how will thou be
beleagur'd with anguish and horror, when thou shall behold with thy mortal eyes
the Cataracts of Heaven unsluced, and hushing showers of sulphrous fires
disperse themselves through all the corners of the Earth and Air, the whole
universe o're-canoped with a remorse less flame; when thou shall see the great
and glorious Judge appear triumphantly in the Skies, whilst mighty winged
clouds with devouring flames fly before him, as ushers to his powerful and
terrible Majesty, attended with innumerable multitudes of beautiful Angels,
golden winged Seraphims and Cherubims sounding their shrill alarms; whose
clamorous tongues shall affright the empty air, and call and awake the drouzie
Dead from their dark and duskie cabbins; when thou shall see the dissipated
bones of all Mortals since the creation (concatinate and knit in their proper
and peculiar form) amazedly start up, and in numberless troops flock together,
all turning up their wondering eyes to gaze upon their high and mighty Creator.
When thousand thousands shall minister unto him, and ten thousand times ten
thousand stand before him, the Thrones set for judgment, and the Books opened,
and nothing remain, but a fearful expectation and looking for of judgment, and
fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. Then will thy Conscience
recommemorate a fresh thy past committed sins, and with the coroding sting of
guilt stab through thy perplexed soul. Then indeed to be nothing were
something, but that will not be, for Justice must now exact to the utmost
farthing. 'Twill be too late to wish the mountains to fall upon thee, for they
themselves would (if possible) for fear shrink into their center. Alas, it
cannot then be available to woo the Waters to swallow thee, for they would be
glad to exclaim their liquid substance, and be reduced to a nullity. What will
it boot thee to entreat the Earth to entomb thee in her darkish womb, when she
her self will struggle to remove her local residence, and to fly from the
presence of the great Judge. The Air cannot muffle thee in her foggy vastity,
that will be clearly refined, there is celestial flames uncontaminated with
humane pollution, so that thou must be forced to appear before a most severe
Judge, carrying in thy own conscience thy Indictment ready written, and a
perfect Register of all thy misdeeds. When thou shall see him that was once a
Savior, now a Judge (whose Knowledge is infallible, whose Power is
infringible, and his Justice inflexible) of exceeding dreadful Majesty, clothed
in glorious apparel, and his body shining through it like sparkling diamonds,
his eyes like burning lamps, his face like flashing lightning, his arms and
legs like inflamed brass, his voice like the shout of a multitude (or of many
waters) prepared (for thy idle words, evil deeds, time misspent, and talent ill
governed) to pass the sentence upon thee, against whom thou have transgressed;
and he thy umpire, whom by many offenses thou have made thine enemy. And in
order to a full and clear accomplishment of Justice, a final separation shall
be made, (no hypocrite shall closely lurk here among the Saints (the Gold shall
be taken from the Dross, and the Silver from the Tin, the Tares from the Wheat,
and the Corn from the Chaff, the Sheep from the Goats, the Vile from the
Precious, and the Elect from the Reprobates, and placed on each side the Judge;
those on the left hand, to be doomed to everlasting punishment, and those on
the right, to life eternal. How will it then perplex thy afflicted soul, to see
those on the Judges right hand, whom thou contemnest as inferior to the dogs
of thy flock, who shall now be one of that Jury that shall confirm thy
condemnation, and applaud the sentence of the Judge: here shall be a general
Audit, the Widows tears, and the Orphans cries shall be here regarded; what
would thou now give for a good conscience, that were a jewel of price; then
Christian graces shall be more precious then natural gifts. There the foolish
and dumb may be more happy then the wise and eloquent; there the ignorant
Rustic may be preferred before the knowing Philosopher, and the mean Beggar
before the mighty Prince, and the simple and ignorant before the witty and
subtle. There simple obedience shall be found better then cunning hypocrisy, a
clear conscience more pleasant then profound Philosophy, zealous prayers of
more worth then fine tales, and good works more acceptable then sweet words;
then shall the poor and meek triumph, and the proud shake and tremble; then
shall the memory of misery be sweet, (because they are past) and the thoughts
of pleasure be sad, (because they are all blown over.) The godly shall rejoice,
and the reprobate howl; then shall base apparel be glorious, and proud attire
infamous; then shall all black and diabolical designs perpetrated in darkness
be made visible, and the most retiredst actions and transactions that ever were
huddled up in the world (with the greatest privacy) be exposed to the open view
both of men and Angels. Then if ever (as one ingeniously has it) naked breasts
and black spots shall be in fashion, when all things shall be naked and bare,
and the sinner appear like the Leopard full of spots.

Then shall it appear who have been the Idolaters, whose God was their belly,
and gold their hope, and flesh their arm, that with the French fool would not
have left their part in Paris for their part in Paradise.

Then shall it appear who have been the swearer and common perjut'd person, who
have set a brazen face on a bad matter, and gilded a falshoood with an oath of
sanctity, (though it proceeded from the father of lies, whither they are going.)

Then shall it appear who have been the Ahabs that have killed Naboth for his
vineyard, and who the Ishmaels (the make-bates) that hated their brethren with
a perfect hatred, (whose hand was against every man, and every man's hand
against them.)

Then shall it appear who have been the Machiavels that have neglected those
precious opportunities Providence put into their hands, to advance the glory of
God, and the good of Nations, for their own base interests, (raising themselves
out of the ruin of thousands.)

Then shall it appear who have lorded it over their brethren, (more righteous
then they) and maliciously persecuted, (for no other cause then filthy lucre
sake) to the temporal undoing both of them and their posterity. (If any that
read this Book (as it is possible some may, with prejudice against the Author)
are guilty of this, let them respect me for giving them this timely advice
aforehand.)

Then shall it appear who have been the nice Nonconformist, that not out of
tenderness of conscience, or zeal to Gods Glory, but for sedition sake and vain
glory would be of the singular number.

Then shall it appear who have under pretenses of zeal jugled their brethren
out of their estates, and termed those malignant, whom the righteous Judge
shall proclaim the contrary.

Then shall it appear who have been at the charge of clothing with silk and
gold the images of men, and let the poor go naked who is the image of God.

Then it shall appear who have worn a cross on the belly, while the belly was
an enemy to the Cross of Christ.

Then shall it appear who have slily slided into Brothel-houses in the dark to
commit their obscenities, and returned unseen (of men) and presently busied
with their Pater nosters, and who have maintained those Shambles of forbidden
flesh with their Pimps, Panders, etc. and other devilish and unquoth titles
which then shall be known.

Then shall it appear who have blinded the eye of Justice with bribes, and shut
their ears against the clamorous cries of the innocent; that made the Law a
nose of wax to turn and fashion to their own private ends, to the disparagement
of Justice, and lamentable subversion of many an honest and upright Cause:
their quirks, dilatory demurs, conveyances and connivances cannot quit them;
for now whether they will or no, they must be removed with a Writ into the
lowest and darkest dungeon of damnation. For no bribes shall be taken in this
Court, (here shall Justice be obtained without money) no relations shall take
place here, (for there shall be no respect of persons with this Judge) the
great Jehovah shall now judge the world in righteousness, [ Acts 17.31.]

Set now before thine eyes therefore that which thou must then set before them,
when thy self shall be set before so terrible a Tribunal; above thee an angry
Judge, before thee the Books of Indictments, at thy right hand the Devils
accusing and calling for sentence, (which Justice cannot deny) at thy left hand
the world of wicked ones howling, behind thee the Angels guarding and
presenting thee in Court, within thee thy conscience gnawing, without the world
flaming, beneath Hell yauning and gaping wide for thee as an eternal and
irrecoverable morsel; when to appear will be intolerable, to be hid shall be
impossible. O the horror of that day of that sentence, Go ye cursed (what doom
so great great as this* depart from peace, from life, from hope, from
possibility of being any other then eternally exquisitely miserable; it is pain
to mention these woes, it is more then death to fell them) into hell* take him
Devils, bind him hand and foot, cast him into utter darkness, where shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth for ever: shut on him, seal to him the eternal
impregnable doors of vengeance; Rouse up your selves hellish furies, horrors,
fears, agonies, madness, vexations, despisers, never dying worm, and the ever
burning fires. According to the several degrees of vanity, let several degrees
of tortures and torturers, devils and devilish plagues masacre and torment
them; let no eye pity them, and let their vain eyes be put out in obscure
darkness, see nothing but infernal visions; the vain ear hear nothing but
shrieks and derided cries of the tormented; let loathsome brimstone fill the
sent, and let the flesh (that before embracing and embraced vain wanton
touches) be food, stubble, fuel, to a never quenched fire, within, without,
every way, in body, soul, conscience; Let vanity kindle those flames which are
easeless, endless, remediless, Sit mors ipsa immortalis. (Had we now but a
glimpse of those miseries, and did but hear the uncessant groans of those dying
ones, and had but the least sense of those torments for a moment, we should
soon guess what it were to live with everlasting bur^; the thoughts of which
would (...) a divorce 'twixt us and our most beloved sins, which are hells fuel
(as one calls them) that like Samsons foxes carry fire in the tail of it.) O
forlorn and miserable wretch, to receive this fearful and irrecoverable
sentence, when not only Devils, but Saints and Angels shall plead against
thee, and thy self (maugre thy self) be thy sharpest appeacher! What will thou
do in these dreadful exigents, when thou shall see the ghastly dungeon and huge
gulf of Hell ( Aetna-like) breaking out with most fearful flames, (yet
perpetual darkness) when thou shall see the weeping and gnashing of teeth, the
rage of these hellish monsters, the horror of the place, the rigor of the pain,
the terror of the company, and the eternity of all these punishments: where the
fire is unquenchable, and the pains unsupportable; (our fires here may be
endured, that is intolerable; ours are for comfort, that for torment; ours
must be fed or will go out, that burns continually without feeding; ours gives
light, that none; ours consumes the matter and ^^ds the pain, that torments but
never con^^mes to make the pain perpetual.) There idle persons shall be pricked
with burning forks, gluttons tormented with grievous hunger, Epicures and
voluptuous persons boil in burning pitch and stinking brimstone; the proud
shall have shame, and the coverous miserable penuty; (then thou will be
convinced to believe (what before thou would never credit) that there is a
Hell for sinners, as well as an Earth for men, a Firmament for stars, a Heaven
for Saints, and a God in Heaven.) Then thou will wish (if wishing would do it)
that thou had been created a loathsome toad, that thy miseries might have
closed up with thy life, rather then to be dying perpetually and never dye; for
when thou have languisht in unexpressible agonies, tortures, gnashings, and
horrid howlings ten thousand millions of years, thou shall not reach a
conclusion. It Is a sad (but certain) truth, that the damned in hell, after ten
thousand thousand millions of ages they have suffered such torments, as none
but one of those miserable tortured wretches are able to express, shall be as
far from an end as they were at the beginning: That adjunct Eternal intimates
such infinitness, as neither thought can attract, or supposition apprehend.
(And further to amplify it with the words of a worthy Author) Though all the
men that ever have or shall be created, were Briarius-like, hundred handed, and
should all at once take pens in their hundred hands, and should do nothing else
in ten thousand millions of years but sum up in figures as many hundred
thousands as they could, yet never could they reduce to a total, or ^onfine
within number this tri-syllable word ETERNAL. The darkest Dungeon of Hell
shall be the Reprobates everlasting Goal; as the chains shall never be loosened
or filled off, so neither shall they change their doleful habitation, but the
same prison and wrack, the same place as well as degrees of torment shall
shackle them to all eternity, they shall not change their Tophet, nor alter
their bed of flames. The bodies of the damned (those deformed ^ages of more
deformed souls) shall never be blessed with a dissolution. Divine wrath shall
make the bodies of the Reprobate like those stones which Naturalists speak of,
that always burn; they shall be butts for the arrows of Gods displeasure
everlastingly to shoot at; the smoke of the lake shall not smother them, nor
the flames of hell consume them, nor the least member twined into ^^nders by
everlasting burnings. Their souls wax old, but never die, yet perpetually
dying, there they burn without consuming, there they mourn without compassion;
here are torments without end, and beyond imagination; here fearful Dives that
denied Lazarus a bit of bread, now begs a drop of water, (which is denied him)
when whole rivers are not sufficient to extinguish his heat. Mercy smiles not
on these dismal Mansions, the damned find there is a God to punish, (that will
see execution everlastingly performed) but none to pity or ease those
executions. O the misery of the damned, how intolerable, how incomprehensible,
how unmeasurable! Who can tell how hot Gods wrath is, when turned into a flame,
or can any weigh the torments of the damned, to say they rise to such a height?
As they are unsupportable, so they shall be innumerable and inconceiveable: God
will then draw his arrow to the head, and screw his wrath to an unconfined
degree. What shall limit or be a bank to the inundations of Gods everlasting
displeasure? Who knows how many drams of poison God will put into the cup of
trembling which the wicked must be drinking of for evermore. But not to
undertake to express those inexpressible miseries, or to be endless in this
endless Subject, I Will leave these tortured wretches in the embraces of eternal
flames, (wishing my self nor Readers may ever give a probatum est to those
torments) and return to the Bar, and observe the sentence, not of Malediction,
but Absolution; not a go, but come; not cursed but blessed, and possess the
Kingdom: and now those Saints which before saw but in part, and knew but in
part, shall see and know God, and be known of him, when faith shall be turned
into vision, and hope into fruition. Augustine wished he might have seen three
things before he died, Rome in its glory, Paul in the Pulpit, and Christ in the
flesh: the Saints shall see a better sight, they shall see not Rome, but Heaven
in its glory; they shall see not Paul in the Pulpit, but on the Throne, and
shall sit with him; they shall see Christ's flesh not veiled with disgrace, but
in its spiritual embroidery, (as one has it) not a crucified but a glorified
body: They shall see the King in his beauty, Isa 33.17. They shall know what
those unseen things are, what those fruitions of glory, which free grace has
stretched out to eternity, that unshaken and unshaking crown; what that
everlasting joy they shall there partake of, that unfading happiness they are
to flourish in to all eternity; that eternal house, for the security of it, [2
Cor. 5.1.] the eternal glory, for the renown of it, [2 Timothy 2.10.] that eternal
inheritance, for the riches of it, [ Heb. 9.15.] that eternal redemption, for
the love of it, [ Heb. 9.12.] that eternal salvation, for the seasonabless of
it, [ Heb. 5.9.] those glorious beatitudes which are reserved for believers
entertainment, which shall never receive either damp or death, those rivers of
pleasure that run at Gods right hand for evermore; they shall to their
everlasting comfort find that no sorrow or benight heaven, no grief shall
thrust into the Brides chamber, nor shall any trouble overshadow the
everlasting festival of the glorified ones; they shall weep no more (as one
excellently has it) unless it be for joy that they shall weep no more for
grief: all cause of grief is far removed from that presence, they that enjoy
it, enjoy with it an absolute enfranchizement from all encumbrances and
inconveniences. They are free from want, and free from war, and free from
death, and free from devils; they are free from want, they can want nothing
there, except it be want it self; they may find the want of evil, but never
feel the evil of want; evil is but the want of good, and the want of evil is
but the absence of want. God is good, and no want of good can be in God; and
what want can be endured in the presence of God where no evil is, but all good;
nor are they free from want only, but wars too, with all the mischiefs that
are concommitant, and all the miseries that are consequent. The Kingdom of
glory can never be turned into an Aceldama, no foreign enemy can invade it,
nor homebred enemy infest the happiness of it. Moses and Aaron shall never be
confronted there by any gainsaying Corahs, or mutinous Abirams, or complying
Dathans, or any of their confederates. King David shall there be free from the
pride of all ambitious Absolons, from the presumption of all seditious Sheba's,
and from the wicked counsels of all contriving Achitophels. No cursing
Shimei's, nor railing Rabshake's shall come there to belch infectious gorges
forth to poison the hearts of any subjects in that Kingdom of glory. No
Polubragmatical Michiavelians nor crafty Boutefews shall interrupt that
Kingdoms endless peace. No bold Sejanus can insinuate into that glorious
presence to corrupt it. No male-contented Cataline can lurk there, either to
traduce the glorious Majesty of the King of kings, or to seduce inferior
Officers. Nor is there any warlike Ammunition magazin'd there. No Civil
Warrings can destroy that glorious Kingdom; nor can any factious Jarrings
deface that glorious Church. No newfangled Athenians, nor schismatical
Corinthians can disturb the unity or destroy the uniformity of that Church. No
over-mastering Pope nor undermining Jesuit, no new Church-making Familist, nor
no Church-making Atheist can gain such favor or get such footing there, as to
eject the settled Saints and work the ruin of all the Church. No ravenous
Wolves in sheeps clothing can creep by any Postern-gates into that fold, to
flea or fleece the flock, and mistake, feeding on them for feeding of them.
Nothing that works any abomination can come there, and therefore every thing
that tends toward the grand abomination of desolation must needs be for ever
excluded thence; the glory of all there must last for ever, and all in that
glory must live for ever being free from sin, they shall be from death; from
death spiritual in it, from death temporal by it, and from death eternal for
it; that presence of the ever-living God does set them free from all for ever;
there is no dying, they that are there, are sure to live for ever; the
glorified Saints shall never be reduced to a nullity; those crowned personages
shall not be folded up in a confused Chaos, death has no power here, they are
free from the sting of death and from the stroke, free from all tendencies unto
death, and from all fears of dying. Now who would not gladly live in such a
priviledg'd place, where that boldest Sergeant, Death, cannot come to arrest.
Such is the sanctuary of Gods glorious presence, that is free from all kinds of
death, and free from unkind Devils too, from Devils infernal, and Devils
incarnate too.

No evil Angels can ascend from the bottomless pit into the presence, to tempt
any there to sin, nor hellish Furies to torment for sinning in times past No
Devil of the lower hell nor any of this wicked world above it, can find any
entrance thither. There is indeed free quarter for Saints, but none for
sinners; the Free men of that City, and all the Denizons of that Kingdom, are
always freed from all unwelcome troublesome intruders; the spirit of strife and
debate can never thrust the Devils mysterious cloven foot into that presence to
set Divisions, to cause Distractions, to bring Destruction. No carnal pride can
ever beget fond fashionists in the streets of that most holy City; nor
spiritual pride breed up fantastical Factionists in those Mansions. No hideous
blasphemies, nor filthy obscenities, nor thumping oaths, not hellish cursings,
nor peevish censurings, are used by any in that presence: all profane and
black-mouthed monsters of men are exiled for ever from that society of Saints;
and so are all insinuating Sycophants and false-hearted Pharisees: that place
shall be free from all evil, or tending to it; no evil company, no evil by
company no company of evil; no devils, not be devill'd men, no tempters, no
tormentors, nor any other infernals; no devils incarnate, either white or
black; no kind of death, either temporal or eternal; no kind of wars, no
kind of woes, no kind of sufferings: surely they must needs be happy that are
in such a case.

Yet let me tell you that it is not the absence of evil alone that can make a
man truly and fully happy, it may cause some joy, but not the fullness of joy,
till the affluence of all good things be enjoyed with it. Now in the glorious
presence of God, there is not only the absence of all evil, but the presence
of all good: All things that are desirable are there, and all things there are
desirable; there are profitable pleasures and pleasurable profits; things
inconsistent here, are all coincident there; those gifts that go not here
together, are all united there; those comforts which are divided here in
several streams, do meet all there as in their fountain (or rather in the
ocean.) No one here may look to enjoy all good things, but all there do ever so.

There are the precious Merchandices of all Cities, for that is the City of all
precious Merchandices; there are the true Delights of all Countries, for that is
the true Country of all Delights. There are all the real Honors of the the
Court that can never be lost, and that is the right Court of Honor that can
never be put down. There are all the true pleasures of Paradise, for that is the
true Paradise of all pleasures. What does any of your souls take most delight
in? what do you most of all desire? there you may have it in the fullest
measure, and there enjoy it in the finest manner.

There is to satisfy all desires; do you desire, or delight in Gold, or
precious Stones, or costly Gems, or stately Palaces, there is a City of pure
Gold, clear as crystal, walled, and gated, and garnished with Jaspers, and
Saphires, and all sorts of Pearls and precious stones, as St. John describes
it, Revel. 21.18. etc.

Or do you delight in glorious triumphs, and pompous shows; there are triumphs
everlasting, and the glory of all Nations shall flow into that City in
triumphant manner, Revel. 21.26. Or do you delight (as Massinissa and
Dioclesian did) in curious Gardens, in fruitful Orchards, in healthful Walks,
in pleasant Fountains; there is the Celestial Paradise, wherein the most
curious and nice, had he a hundred times as many eyes as Argus, might employ
them all at once with various curiosities, and transcendent rarities. All those
admired Gardens of Adonis, and Alcinous of Po. and Tantalus, and the Hesperides
could never boast (no not in any fiction of the Poets) of such a living
Fountain, as that which flows in the middle of this Garden of Heaven, and
affords the Water of life; nor yet of such a Tree as that of Life, which bears
twelve kinds of fruits, and brings forth every month, as Saint John expresses,
Revelations 22.1

Or do you delight in, or desire peace, there can you never want it; that new
Jerusalem is the true Jerusalem, the blissful vision of Peace, a City at Peace,
and unity in it self. There endless triumphs of peace are solemnized by all the
Citizens; that is the place of peace, there is the Prince of peace, the Author
of peace, the Maker, the Creator of it. There Is the full enjoyment of that
mother blessing, and all other blessings with it, the true God of peace is
there, and the true peace of God which passes all understanding. Or do you
desire truth with peace, there are both together; the God of peace is the God
of truth, and the truth of God is there revealed fully; the true worship of the
most holy God is there established, and the true God is worshipped there in the
beauty of holiness. Or do you delight in the melody of curious music, there
are soul-ravishing Anthems chanted and warbled by the sweetest of all the
heavenly Quire in that Mother Church, that glorious Temple, Christ's Church
Triumphant, Or do you delight in ease and rest from wearisome labors, there
the true Christian Sabbath is kept holy, whereof our Sunday Sabbath is but an
adumbration, or preparatory Eve. Jerusalem below has six days for working,
for one Sabbath day for rest; but Jerusalem above is free to sanctify an
endless Sabbath, as free from labor as from sin.

Or do you delight in the presence of great Personages, there is the mighty and
Almighty Monarch of Heaven and Earth, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and
there is his second self, his only begotten Son, the Son of his love, in whom
he is well pleased, his right hand Favorite, his Christ our Lord and Jesus in
the height of his honor invested with power to unlock the Exchequer of his
Fathers richest favors, with the key of his eternal merits, and to deal them
forth in glory to those that followed him in grace.

In a word, there are all sorts of rich delights; that endless fountain can
never be drawn dry, for there is all in all to draw them forth; there are
soul-ravishing joys, and soul-admiring felicities, everlasting joys, (without
any interrupted mutation) such are those divine Raptures, which shall flow from
that communion they enjoy in that glorious presence with unspotted Angels and
glorified Saints. I shall shut up all in the words of the Apostle, [1 Cor.
2.9.] Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, or is it possible for the mind of man
to conceive the glory that God has laid up for them that love him. It being
beyond the power of Mortals to imagine the glory of that Kingdom, the
brightness of that Diadem, and the splendor of that Crown, (which no hand of
treason shall be ever able to take off the Wearers head.) Having now brought
this happy Pilgrim to the New JERUSALEM, where I leave him to take his fill of
those everlasting pleasures: To which place (through the merits of that
all-sufficient and satisfactory Redemption) may I and my Readers in his good
time arrive.

FINIS.

