REASONS for passing a Bill in PARLIAMENT to Erect three Courts of Conscience,
in the three several Divisions hereafter Named, being within the Bills of
Mortality, and without the City of London, and the Liberties thereof; for
Relief of poor Debtors and Creditors, under the Value of Forty Shillings, to
prevent vexatious and chargeable Arrests and Suits at Law.
FIrst, the Division of the Borough of Southwark, with the Parishes in the
County of Surrey, mentioned in the Bills of Mortality.

Secondly, The Division of the Hamlets of the Tower Liberty, with the Parishes
in the Bills of Mortality, contained within the Hamlets of the Tower Liberty.

Thirdly, The Division called Holborn Division, consisting of the remaining
Parishes, and part of Parishes in Middlesex (not comprehending Westminster nor
the Liberties thereof) likewise mentioned in the Bills of Mortality.

THE Court of Conscience for the City of London, was first erected by an Act of
Common Council of the said City, in the Nineteenth Year of King- Henry the
Eighth.

The said Court being found to be good and Charitable, of great Ease and
Benefit both to the poor Debtors and Creditors, as also much tending to the
quiet and welfare of the City and Encouragement of Trade, was in the first and
Third years of King James the first, established by Parliament, still limiting
and confining the Jurisdiction of the said Court to the Citizens and Freemen
of the City of London, and other persons that inhabit or shall inhabit within
the said City or the Liberties thereof, being a Tradesman, Victualler, or
Labourer. Nor did the Jurisdiction of the said Court of Conscience ever yet
extend further than the City of London and the Liberties thereof.

That the Borough of Southwark, and the Out-Parishes within the Bills of
Mortality, are of late Years vastly increased in Buildings and Inhabitants, and
abound in poor Tradesmen, Artificers, Labors, Victuallers and others, far
exceeding the City of London and the Liberties thereof: who for want of the
like good Establishment of a Court or Courts of Conscience amongst them, are
exposed to many and great Inconveniences tending to the impoverishment and
ruin of themselves and Families. As,

Many vexatious Suits are daily commenced for inconsiderable Sums, and through
extremity of Poverty, usual Exactions, the Implacability of Adversaries,
frequent Imprisonments, and cost of Suit, etc. they are often put to six times
more Charges than the Debt was; whereby many Families are left to the Parish,
the Prisons filled with poor helpless Men and Women, Sicknesses contracted, and
Trade in a great measure hindered.

All which a Salutary Act for the Courts, of Conscience or Request, above
mentioned, might in a good part prevent, as has been experienced in the City
of London and Liberties thereof, during the long time the like Court has been
there holden, Which is humbly submitted to the Prudence of this present
Parliament.


