The last Joyful NEWS from IRELAND.

Being the Copies of two several Letters sent from Dublin the 28. of April,
1642: To a Noble person in this City.

Being the Relation of a Renowned Victory obtained against 12000 Rebels, under
the Command of the Lord Montgarret, and the Lords of the Pale, where diverse of
the Rebels were slain, and but 40. English.

This Victory was obtained by these Worthy Champions. The Earl of Ormond. Sir
Charles Coote. Captain Skoute. Captain Lucas.


Likewise the Names of the chief Commanders of the Rebels that were taken, and
lost their Heads. Colonel Arthur Cavenaugh. The Lord Montgarrets Son:
Colonel Sutton. Colonel Birne.


Also a true intelligence of an English Ship taken at Galway with 8. pieces of
Ordnance and other Munition, with the surprisall of the Lord Montgarrets
Wagons, with great store of Victual and Munition.

Whereunto is annexed an Order of the House of Commons for the providing for
Soldiers, employed in the Irish Wars.

Hen. Elsynge, Cleric. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed by T. Fawcet, 1642.

The Copy of two Letters sent to a Gentleman of worth here in London, from
Dublin by the last Post.
SIR,
YOur Letters the 29. of March, I received the 14. of April: I must tell you
of all is naught with us for want of money, here landed yesterday 400
Dragoners, and it is reported that 300 more goes to Tredaugh, yet I am not very
sure of it, our Soldiers have no shoes, so that they cannot travel
barefooted, and there is but 12000. l. landed, which will not pay the
Soldiers for a week.

The 12. of April the Earl of Ormond, Sir Charles Coote, and Sir Thomas Lucas
with others went forth with 4000 foot and 300 horse to go 40. miles compass
Southward and Southwest, and to do all the spoil they could, killing of man,
woman, and child, to burn all places with Corn and Hay, but whether they be
gone, we yet know not, it is said they went to Catherlo, Trim, and
Marronborough, from whom we have not heard these 14. days, neither can they
send, unless by a good Convoy, for the Rebels lie upon every passage, and they
that do most hurt, are the Churles who go to Plough all day, but in the night
they kill every body they can take, as we have good proof of, and when they
^^^t ^^ough if they see a lone man they fly to him, strip and kill him, you
wou^d wonder to see the Desolation there: All things is exceeding dear, Beese
at 40. s. the quarter, the Carcass of a Calfe at 34. s. Mutton at 6. s. the
quarter, Lamb at 3. s. the quarter, an Egg at 1. d. yet had we money we cared
not.

The Rebels are strong, and now they have store of ammunition and Arms; an
English Ship is put in at Galway laden with Salt, so the Townsmen went out to
buy it, but in conclusion took the Ship with 8. pieces of Ordnance, and 6.
Barrels of Powder, Mr. Darcy and Mr. Martin Lawyers, were the greatest Actors
in all this Treason: The Fort of Galway is in great distress for want of
Munition and Arms: The Justices have sent one of the Kings Ships that brought
us Victuals and Ammunition, to carry all necessaries unto them, but God knows
whether it will come to them in due time, for they must have many several
winds: We hear that a Ship is put into Limerick, and brought 300 Barrels of
Powder, with store of other provision, and one other small ship to Baltimore,
which this ship has taken, and lest it at Kinsale, but the Birds were flowne,
and there landed 40. Commanders, and Munition, another was landed at Dungarven,
and put a shore Commanders and Munition, and another at Waxford with men and
Munition.

The Lord Montgarret and the Earl of Ormonds Brother sent to our Army, that
they would fight with them before their return: Sir Henry Titchbourne is yet
at Dund^lke, and does great matters with a few men: The Lord Moore was at
Dublin the last week, but stayed not and went thither again, carried 100 horse
and 200 foot, but they had no shoes, so that they cannot do much good: We
hear not of any Scots yet landed in the North, Mr. Hill keeps Carrickfergus,
and has raised 500 horses, and done much good service, and now it is said he
must loose all his men and the charge he has been at in raising them.

The Lady Hoy, the Lady Davis, the Lady Loftus, their Children and many more
are newly landed from Chester: We cannot yet learn what is become of Colonel
Plunket.

The Earl of Clanrickard cannot do any thing, for he has not 40. men that
will stick to him, The Townsmen of Galway did offer to seize upon the Fort,
but when they did see 3. or 4. of their men fall, they all ran away, So fare
you well.

P. R.
From Dublin the 25. of April, 1642.
SIR,
YOu may remember, that on the 12. of April, the Earl of Ormond, Sir Charles,
Coote, and Sir Thomas Lucas, went forth with 4. thousand Foot, and three
hundred Horse, to go to relieve some Castles 40. or 50. Miles from Dublin, and
now it is fit I give you an account of what they have done, and I do not doubt
but if Henry Rolls, were torelate the businsse to the Lords in England, they
would give him a Pension: First, I must tell you our Army relieved Catherlew,
Mariborough, and Goshell, and brought the Ladies and Gentlewomen away, then the
Borr, where Master William Parsons lives who has defended the place very
bravely to his eternal Fame. From thence to Athy, relieved that, hanged the
Portriffe at his own door, and so in a manner we have done Mr. Grace, the
Portrive of Mariburow, for he is brought to Dublin to be hanged here: At Athy
the Earl of Ormond had notice, that the Lords of the Pale, and some of
Munster, with the Lord Mongaret, with about 12000. Horse and Foot intended to
fight with him, whereunto the Earl prepared to fight, and they sent him word
that they would fight with him, to which his Lordship returned answer that they
durst not, Sir Charles Coote went up and down whistling and Laughing, making
no great account of the Rebels cracks or brags, but in earnest they appeared
from behind a Hill, and spread the hill all over, with 6. great Bodies of men,
well armed and excellently well accommodated, Our men charged the first with
their shot, the Earl of Ormond led the Vautguard of the horse (Captain Skout)
after our men had fought a good ^oure, spying some advantage, brake in upon a
Body of their men, whom they found more like a Devil then a man, and took 2
Colors, which was brought home with him in Pomp, the Fight began much hotter,
but we had 6. Pieces of Ordnance, which when they played upon them, the shot did
so wonderfully affright them, that they threw away their Arms, and happy was
he that could run fastest, our Horse followed, and our Foot, and by report
there was of the Rebels slain 1200. or more as some say, we took 60. brave
horse, and many are run into the Boggs that cannot be got forth, the
slaughtered Rebels lie so thick in the field, that our men could not pass by
them, one said they lay like a sheet upon the ground, all stripped, and our
men by report have got 300. l. among the dead, bodies, our men have brought
home all the Lord Mongarets provision, hsi Wagon drawn with 8. Oxen, three
Barrells of Powder, with Bullets and match and many good things, 4. Colors, 4.
Heads (but never a Calves head) viz. Colonel Art. Cavenaugh, his head, the
Lord Mongarets Sons head, Colonel Suttons and Colonel Birnes heads, but not
the great Colonel Birne: The Earl of Ormonds Brother encountered the Earl,
and each discharged there Pistols but did no hurt, but the Earl changed his
horse and followed him, but the Troop brought the Earl back, who otherwise
might have bin intrapped, God by praised we have not lost an Officer, nor 40.
men

This Battle was fought on this side Athy, some 4. Miles, at a Place called
Balleshamgh, many of our Colors are shot twice or thrice, some Five times, and
as you have power, persuade your Friends to send us some more money, and
Shoes, without which the Soldiers cannot march or stand, and with speed. Sir
Charles Coote does intend to stay at the Naas, so does Serge^n^ Major Panet,
with half the Army, to do some Service in those parts, Our Army came back to
Dublin the 27. of April, 164^. So I rest.

Your Servant P. R.

Die Veneris, 29. April. 1642.
IT is this day declared, and ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, that
all such Persons as shall serve the King and the Common wealth, in the War as
Volunteers, and receive Wages, after they have received it, they are within the
words, and intention of the Law, that provide for the relief of maimed
Soldiers.

Hen. Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

