A RECORD IN RITHME, BEING An Essay toward the Reformation of the Law, offered
to the Consideration of the Committee appointed for that purpose.
Written by some men of Law, at a time when they had little else to do.
London, ss.
BE it remembered now that formerly,
To wit last Term of the holy Trinity,
Before the Keepers of the liberty
Of England, by the full authority
Of the long Parliament, at Westminster,
Priscilla Merecrave widow came, by her
Attorney M. B. and preferrs,
In The Court of upper bench, a bill of hers,
Against one Roger Pricklove, who does lie
A prisoner in the Marshalls Custody.
Et cetera, and it is upon a plea
Of trespass on the Case, Pledges there be
To prosecute the suit, to wit John Do
And Richard Ro^. And the said bill also
Does follow in these very words, to wit
In legal manner, London, Scilicet.
Declaration.
Priscilla Morecrave Widow does complain
of Roger Pricklove, who does now remain,
Prisoner to the Marshall of the Marshalsie,
Of the said Keepers of the Liberty,
Of England by authority and power,
Of Parliament, in the bench superior,
Before the same Keepers themselves that be,
For that (to wit) whereas the aforesaid she
Priscilla Morecrave, is a person just,
Honest, and faithful, one that never durst
Give the least cause for to be thought unchaste,
But has lived ever modest, and was graced,
With godly education, and demurely,
Behaved her self; and all her life most purely,
Has with the Zealous and precize consorted,
And free from all uncleanesse was reported,
Who never was amongst the well affected,
Stained with a Crime, or in the least suspected,
But with the pious people of this Nation,
Has had good fame, credit, and reputation;
By which good reputation, she has gained
Not only love, and favor, but obtained
A plentiful estate, by which most freely
She managed her Affairs; And that Ralph Seely
One of the Assembly late at Westminster,
A godly-Gospel-preaching-Minister,
Was earnest suitor in the way of Marriage,
To have her for his yoke fellow; his carriage,
And his most Saint like loving humble speeches,
Had her consent to all that he beseeches.
And she agreed to give him all content,
To wed him by the Act of Parliament.
Three times the Contract published, then their trust is
That all shall be completed by the Justice.
But this said Roger all aforesaid knowing,
Maliciously intending her undoeing,
To blast her reputation, and dishonor
Her unstained Chastity; to cast upon Her
Infamous obloquy, to disrepute Her,
And to deprive her of her foresaid Suitor;
By breaking of the marriage was intended;
To leave her to the world lost, and unfriended,
In month September, day of the same Eleven,
One Thousand six hundred fifty seven,
Of our Lords year, as by our computation,
Our Commonwealth reckons from the incarnation,
At London in the parish of St. Mary
Bow, in the ward of Cheap, he then contrary
To truth most falsely and maliciously
In hearing of right worthy Company,
And honorable persons, Noble Lords,
Did speak these false, and most reproachful words,
To and of her the Plantiff; that is to say,
You are a pockie Whore, and at this day
You have three Bastards living, which do dwell,
Two in Pick-hatch, and one in Clarkenwell.
By reason of which false malicious speaking
Of the said Roger, to her great-heart-breaking,
The godly-gospel minister, her Suitor,
Forbears his former suit, and for the future,
Did make profession he would never take her,
To be his Consort, but did quite forsake her;
And all her friends with whom she had repute,
Do now esteem her for a Prostitute;
Whereby she is the worse, and damnifi'd,
One thousand and five hundred pounds, beside.
And thereupon she does her suit produce,
In the Upper Bench because of this abuse.
Imparlance.
And now until this day, that is to say,
On Monday three weeks after Michaels day
In this same Term, which very day until
Roger had leave t'emparle unto that Bill,
And then to answer it; before the same
Keepers, as well the said Priscilla came,
In The Court of Upper Bench, at Westminster
By that Attorney named before, for her
As the aforesaid Roger who does come
By his Attorney, A. B.
And does defend the force and injury,
When, where et cetera. And says that she,
The said Priscilla, ought not maintain, nor
Have thereupon her Suit against him, for
Protesting, not acknowledging, that she
Is half so honest as shee'ld seem to be,
Nor is her body, or her life so clear,
Nor so unspotted, as she would appear;
Nor is she of so chaste a reputation,
As is pretended by her Declaration.
Protesting also that the said Ralph Seely
(Though often together did both he and she lie)
Nere meant to Marry her, but all his power
Of love was quenched in less than an half an hour.
Besides he would quite undo her, if he had,
His learning was so small his life so bad.
For Plea he says that at the time, wherein
She does suppose these slandrous words to have bin
Spoke by the aforesaid Roger, she the said
Priscilla was nor Widow, Wife, nor Maid,
And though she passed for an unbroken virgin,
She caught the aforesaid Presbyter in her gyn;
And with his wall-ey'd Saintship played the sinner,
Who b'ing inspired by a Thanksgiving dinner,
Did carnally her body know, to wit
The crime of Fornication did commit;
In the same Ward, and Parish, to his Honor,
He at on clap got 3 great Boys upon her.
All which for privacy were put to feeding,
At Bridewell and Pickbatch, to learn good breeding.
And she in recompense clapped him so sore,
With Anglice French- POX, it made him rore,
And put his Genitalls in such a pickle,
That all his Parish women did article,
And out him of his Benefices twain,
And into Scotland made him trot again.
Wherefore (as lawful 'twas) on this occasion,
He spoke the words laid in the Declaration.
And this he Iustifies, and judgment crave,
If she this suit ought to maintain or have.
Replication.
And she the said Priscilla does maintain her
Said Action, against all that's said to stain her,
And says this Court nor will nor can forejudge her
For ought that is pleaded by the foresaid Roger
But though by his said Plea; she is forced to tarry,
Her suit against him, yet she ought to carry;
Protesting therefore she is not such a liver,
Nor of such Fame, as the said Plea does give her
Out for to be, but that she has not varied,
One jott in life from what she has declared.
And on the said Ralphs part protesting farther,
That of the Kirk he was a Godly Father.
And of as pure and chaste a conversation,
As any Presbyter within the Nation.
And free from any lustful act committing,
With her, or any other deed unfitting.
For Replication says, she was not knowing,
Of the said Ralph but 3 years last foregoing.
During which time, and till the said words spoke were,
By the said Roger (that almost have broke her)
She lived a Matrons life, chaft, grave, and thrifty,
And came unto the Age of three and fifty;
And the said Ralph all the said time, by reason
Of his much preaching in and out of season,
And of his fasting long, and longer praying,
And from his peoples not their duties paying,
In the same Ward and Parish, grew so weakly,
That of his life he did despair weekly:
Which weakness had so very much out worn-him,
That in his bed he was not able turn him;
Till that a learned Doctor of the College
Who of his sickness had full perfect knowledge,
For gaining of his health did much exhort him,
To wedde an honest Matron to Comfort him.
Which the said Ralph well liking, and well knowing
The honor to the said Priscilla owing,
And thinking that delays might greatly Worse him,
With Zeal, did Court her for a wife to nurse him:
And She in pity to his weak Condition,
Did condescend to be his she Physician,
And for their joint desires better carrying,
A day by both appointed was for marrying.
But on the sudden off the same was broken
By the said Roger's words aforesaid spoken:
By means whereof, he the said Ralph, endure
Could not the said Priscilla for a Cure,
But of relief his expectations falling,
And his long sickness more and more prevailing,
In Month October, day thereof that first is,
In the Lords year that formerly expressed is,
At the said Ward, the said Ralph much in trouble,
Did dye, to's loss, possessed of living double:
And left the said Priscilla to bemoan her,
For that no other man would after own her;
And that she truly does reply and don't lie,
She prays may be inquired by the Country.
Rejoinder.
And the aforesaid Roger says the Plea
By her the said Priscilla formerly
Put in and pleaded by her Replication,
In the aforesaid manner, form, and fashion,
And the whole matter that is contained there
Are not sufficient in the law, for her
The said Priscilla, to maintain her foresaid
Suit against him, and there need be no more said:
Nor by the laws of England is it fit,
That he should make answer unto it,
This he to aver is ready. Whereupon
For want of better replication
In this behalf, he does a judgment pray,
And that she from having her action may
Be barred, for this against him; And for
The causes why he does in Law demurre
Upon that replication, he the said
Roger according to the Stature made,
And in such case provided, does declare
And show to the Court of Upper Bench that is here,
These causes following, to wit, that this
Said Replication insufficient is,
Negative, pregnant, and uncertain, nude,
Double, wants form, and does not conclude
Rightly, according to the legal way.
Joining in demurrer:
And she the said Priscilla here does say
That the said Plea which by reply has bin
Pleaded by her, and what is contained therein,
In point of Law, good, and sufficient be,
Her suit against him to maintain, And she
That Plea and matter, pleaded as above,
Is ready here both to maintain and prove,
As this Court shall consider, and think sit,
And 'cause he does not answer it, nor yet
Deny that Replication any way,
The said Priscilla (as before) does pray
Judgment, and damages, to be judged to her,
For all this injury which he did do her.
But cause this Court here not advised is
Of giving judgment of the premises,
A day's given to both parties to appear
In The Upper Bench, before the Keepers here
At Westminster, till Monday after eight
Days of St. Hillary, for the receipt,
And hearing of their Judgment upon it,
For that the Court is not advised as yet.
FINIS.

