A SERMON Lately delivered in the Cathedral Church OF CANTERBURY, CONCERNING
Church-Musick.

By JOHN READING, D. D. Prebend of the same Church.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Newcomb. 1663.

Imprimatur,

M. FRANCK. S. T. P. R. P. Ep. Land. a Sac. Dom.
Mar. 13. 1662/3.
A SERMON lately delivered in the Cathedral Church of Canterbury, concerning
Church-Musick.
2 KING. 3.15, 16. -- And it came to pass when the Minstrel played, that the
hand of the Lord came upon him; And he said --
I Come to you this day (as Jacob to Padan-Aram) to remove the Stone and Rock
of Offense taken at our Church-Musick, Genesis 29.3,etc.
that the Flock may be watered. My endeavor shall be (by Gods assistance, and
your wonted. patience) to show why we use it, and you should join with us
therein; and my desire is your serious attention, left the loss of one point
beget a misunderstanding in others.

God mercifully indulgeth to man's infirmity, omitting no means to save him,
Isa. 54.
as'tis written -- What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have
not done in it? Whereas therefore man's innate affections bear a great part in
good or evil, much byassing the Will and Understanding to either; God, not
willing to destroy, but to correct the Affections, that they may be necessary
handmaids to Virtue, faith not, Thou shall not hope, Psalm. 42 5. Deuteronomy. 6.13
Deuteronomy. 11 1. Psalm. 97.10, Psalm 37.4.
but, Hope thou in God: Neither, Thou shall not fear, but, Thou shall fear the
Lord thy God: so, -- Thou shall love the Lord thy God: and Ye that love the
Lord, hate evil: and Delight thy self also in the Lord, and he shall give thee
the desires of thy heart.

The Holy Ghost, seeing mankind hardly drawn to Virtue, Mr Hooker Eccles. Pol.
post Basil. delectatio ordinat animam. Augustine. de mus. l. 6. c. 11.
and that Righteousness is less esteemed, by reason of our Affections proneness
to that which delights; in his Wisdom, mingled Heavenly Mysteries with
pleasing Melody, that by the Ear he might secretly convey the Treasure of
Divine good into the Soul: To which purpose were those melodious Hymns and
Psalms appointed for us, in God's service, that we might at once be both
delighted, and profited.

To the words of the Text; It came so pass when the Minstrel played, Ar. Montan.
Et suit secundumm modulari modulantem: Thus it came to pass by Gods Providence
so appointing it. a (...) psallit, manu pulsavit fides. Shindl. pent.
The LXX, give the Hebrew (...) in the Greek, by (...), the Singer, or
Musician: The word is of that which signifies to sing or make music; and here
signifies any kind of Musician skillful in singing, or playing on Instruments,
Lute, Harp; Organ, or other like: the fence is, When the Prophet heard the
Music, the hand of the Lord came upon him, that is, a Divine motion, or
influence of Gods Spirit: and he said -- or spoke the words of the following
Prophecy. Here are two Causes of the Effect following.

The

1. Subordinate, or minus principalis -- it came to pass, when the Minstrel
played. 2. Principal, chief, and supreme, efficient, producing the effect; He
said, Thus faith the Lord.
I. That such a Cause as a little Music should open the Archives of Gods
secret counsel, concerning things to come, in matters so dubious and
unexpected, of such high consequence and concernment, as the saving of three
Kings, and the lives of all the Israelites, and much other auxiliar Forces
present; and by means so improbable to carnal wisdom, as filling that dry
valley with water, to relieve them and their cattle, when neither wind should
be perceived, nor rain seen; that such an occasion as Music should come within
the verge of Causes thereto subordinate, Note.
Could be by no other means, or others appointment but his, who by his
unlimited power produces the most difficult effects by what causes he
pleases. He created this Universe of nothing praeexistent; Dixit and facta
sunt. 2 Kin 5.14.
He appointed that Naamans leprosy should be cleansed by his washing
seventimes in Jordan; 2 Kin. 2 21.
and that Iericho's deathfull Waters should be cured by casting into them a new
cruse of salt; 2 Kin 4.4.
and that the Widows Oil should increase in the barrel, by pouring out so long
as there was a vessel to receive it; and that Israel should march into the Red
Sea, Exodus 14. 1 Cor. 10.2.
to be saved; that it might be to them a type of Baptism, wherein the water
touches the body, to cleanse body and soul from all sin, 1 Pet. 3.21. Augustine.
by the blood of Jesus Christ. 1 John 1.7. He commanded Moses to smite the Rock
at Horeb with his Rod, that the waters might flow, to relieve the numerous
Host of Israel, with their herds and flocks: J^h.2.
He, to supply the want of Wine at the Canamarriage, commanded the Waiters to
fill their water-pots with water to the brim. It were too long to pursue the
Examples of this kind, which demonstrate God the most free Agent, not bound to
the use of any second causes, but producing what he will, how he will. Fear not
whatever work or estate God assigns thee to; He is Almighty who provides for
his Agents: Fear not thy abilities; but remember that thou art in Gods service,
who by a sufficient measure will enable thee to that which he enjoyneth thee.
Were it thine own work, thou might reasonably require probable and apparent
means to warrant thy undertakings; but if God command thee, thy sufficiency
shall be of him; so that thou shall not need to say, with Gideon, Judge. 6 15.
-- O my Lord, wherewith shall I save Israel? Behold, my family is poor in
Manasseh, and I am the least in my fathers house: if God be with thee, who can
be against thee? Romans 8.31. Jer 37.1.
If there remained but wounded men, they should be enabled to do that which God
will have done. Exodus 4.10, 13.
Thou need not say, as Moses, Send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom
thou will send: While he looked not toward the power of God, but his own
abilities, diffident of the success, he said, -- O my Lord, Isa. 65.
I am not eloquent -- I am slow of speech: and Isaiah said, Woe is me, for I am
undone, because I am a man of polluted lips; Jer. 1 6.
and Jeremy -- Ah, Lord God, behold, I cannot speak, for I am a child: they
remembered not, at present, that God could touch their lips, to enable whom, and
to what he will. In Gods service, to forget his power is so dangerous, that
Jonah will rather be miching toward Tarshish, Jon. 1.3.
then obey Gods command at Nineve: And good Ananias willing to decline the
service, Act. 9.13.
will say, Lord, I have heard by many of this man, how much evil he has done
to thy Saints at Jerusalem.

But to come to the intended point, we must necessarily consider the coherence
of these words with the rest of this History. Moab, after the death of Ahab,
rebelled; Iehoram his Son implored aid against them, of Iehoshaphat King of
Judah; he consented; they agree to fetch a compass by the Desert of Edom; in
seven days march they are distressed by want of water; they are enforced to
consult the Lord by Elisha: they come to meet him; he sharply greeteth Iehoram;
What have I to do with thee? get thee to the Prophets of thy Father, and to the
Prophets of thy Mother. At his further presentation of their imminent
destruction, the Propher subjoyneth, As the Lord of Hosts lives, before whom I
stand, surely were it not that I regard the presence of Iehoshaphat the King of
Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee: But now bring me a minstrel;
and it came to pass, when the minstrel played, that the hand of the Lord came
upon him, and he said; that is, he prophesied.

It may here be demanded, Why Elisha, so great a Prophet of the Lord, being to
prophecy, to so serious and so grave a work, would seem to require so
youthful an expedient, as a minstrel, and music? Concerning which, here are
several probable Reasons assigned.

1. It was necessary to lift up and comfort his mind, at present perplexed and
troubled with bitterness of sudden passion, as indignation at the presence of
the idolatrous Iehoram, so also for sorrow and sympathy in the distress of good
Iehoshapat, and the people of Israel with him, in so evident a danger of
destruction by the Enemies of God.

2. To revive and cheer up his drooping spirit, that it might be enabled and
fitted to prophecy; as also the hearts of the people to attend unto the same.

Iunius in loc.
3. This Musician was probably a Levite, skillful in singing Psalms and Hymns
to Gods glory, and Services thereto appertinent, and playing them on Lute,
Harp, Organ, Viol, or other like Instrument. So had the people of God, in those
days, solemn Music at their Sacrifices, to quicken them up to prayer and
praises of God. So at that great Solemnity, 2 Chronicles. 7.6. performed by Solomon
-- The Priests waited on their offices, the Levites also with instruments of
music of the Lord, which David the king had made to praise the Lord, because
his mercy endures for ever; and the Priests sounded trumpets before them. So
Hezekiah set the Levites in the house of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 29.25, 27.
with Cymbals, with Psalteries and Harps, according to the commandment of
David -- for so was the commandment of the Lord by his Prophets. Now David
having excellent skill in Divine Poetry and solemn Music, knowing that both of
these were accommodate and necessary for the service and House of God, left
behind him many Psalms, and, as some learned Divines observe, was the Author of
joining Melody to Poesy in public Prayer, for the raising up of men's hearts
to attention (without which, he well knew, all our service would be but vain
and fruitless) and also by vocal and instrumental music, for the sweetning of
humane affections toward God, that men might delight in the Worship of God. So
the Church of Christ still reteineth these as an ornament in Gods service, and
for an help to Devotion.

4.Thus the Prophets used to have Music, when they were to prophecy. 1 Samuel
105.
So Saul, according to the word of Samuel, met a company of Prophets with a
Psaltery, and a Tabret, and a Pipe, and an Harp before them, and they
prophesied, and Saul also prophesied with them. From all which it may appear,
That

Music (where it can be conveniently had) is of excellent use in relation to
prophecy, D. 1.
and other parts of Gods service, public or private. Now Music is either
Instrumental, Vocal, or mixed of both. Concerning the First and Third of these,
some Schoolmen make scruple; Aquin.22^. q. 91. a. 1. 4
Whether Instruments with Voices, in the Churches, and Gods public service
under the Gospel, be lawful? Concerning vocal Music, or singing Psalms, no
sober Christian makes any question; we say, both Vocal and Instrumental are
here, respectively, both lawful and convenient: For which we offer these
following Reasons.

1. Music (whether vocal or mixed) is scientia been modulandi; Augustine. de
music. l. 1. c. 2.
or, of high and low sounds a due proportionable disposition: Therefore they
who acknowledge the one still necessary and lawful, ought to show cause, why
the other is not; or in what part of Holy Scripture, that which all know was
once commanded as necessary, is since forbidden, as no longer necessary, or
unlawful.

2. Mixed Music is as an ancient in Gods service as the Temple, or Tabernacle,
(whose Structure, Rites, and Services the Lord himself appointed) yea, before
the Ceremonial Law was given, Exodus 15.1, 22.
Moses and the people of God did sing unto him; and Miriam the Prophetess --
took a timbrel in her hand, and all the women went out after her with timbrels,
answering them -- Sing ye to the Lord. Mixed Music therefore, in Gods service
and praises, seems not a branch of the Ceremonial Law, that it should thence be
concluded abrogated, but, as subordinate to Gods service, and fitting men's
minds thereto, of the ever-binding Moral Law, Matthew. 4.10
which faith in the Gospel, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God; wherein are
comprehended all things thereto subordinate, and necessary for Gods service, as
is all that which conduces to edification in Christ.

3. As Music was appointed by God, to praise him in his Tabernacle and Temple,
to which Christ in the days of his flesh often resorted; so was it used by
Christ, as at his last Supper, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26.
and institution of that great Mystery appointed by him to represent and show
his death and passion till he come; wherein Christ sung his pare with his
Apostles, Matthew. 26.30. (...) Lyr. (...), and lauds dixerunt,and.
(for we may not think, that he sat by them only to keep time, or as an
Auditor.) Add hereto, that even under the Gospel, Music is expressly commanded,
for edification in Christ, and therefore must still be lawful and necessary:
of which the Apostle faith, Ephesians. 5.19, 20 -- Be filled with the spirit;
speaking to your selves in psalms and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and
making melody in your heart to the Lord: giving thanks always for all things
unto God, and the father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. So Colos. 3.16.
Let the word of Christ dwelt in you richly in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing one another, in psalm, and hymns, and spiritual songs: (this could
be no Jewish ceremony;) How is it then, 1 Cor. 14.26
brethren? when ye come together, every one of you has a psalm, has a
doctrine -- Let all things be done unto edifying.

4. Music has such natural proportion with the reasonable soul, Pythagoras,
and c.
that some defined the soul it self by harmony. It is remarkable, that Solomon,
the wisest of mere men, and the worlds greatest Philosopher, made a thousand
and five Songs, 1 Kin. 4.30, 31, 32.
wherein he excelled all the children of the East-countrey -- as in that Song
of Songs, Solomon in deep mysteries excelled Solomon. And David, the man after
Gods own heart, and sweet Singer of Israel, 2 Samuel 23. 1. Psalm. 60. and 61. and
62. and Psalm. 64.and 67.and 69, etc.
composed many Psalms to diverse musical Instruments, as may appear in the
Titles of many of his Psalms, which have ever been in use in the Church of
Christ, as to the matter and substance, though not always to the same manner
and circumstances, -- quod essent. soliti stato die ante lutem, ronvenire,
carmenque Christo quasi Deo dicere secum invitem etc. Plin. sec. ep.5.lib. 10.
which the Exigents and times of persecution could not at all times permit the
Christian Churches not then constituted, as may appear in Plinies Epistle unto
Trajan, reporting the custom of the Christians, then used to sing Hymnos
antelucanos Christo.

5. The Soul much depending on the temper of the Body, it must needs be, that
according to the right composure or distemper thereof, a man is more or less
apt to Divine Offices; which the subtle Adversary well knowing, that he may
hinder us from right performance of our Duties in the service of God, complieth
with all second Causes, to discompose us by sundry passions and perturbations
of mind, in whose storms we cannot steadily and duly perform our parts. Now
solemn Music, by reason of its native affinity with the Soul, excellently
accommodates it, by calming and appeasing the boisterous storms and distempers
thereof with a pleasing allay, gently drawing it to a sweet mediocrity,
carrying it up for a time above it self in an holy rapture and ecstasy, 2 Cor.
12.
as S. Paul into the third Heaven, to the contemplation of unutterable things:
It excellently composeth distempered minds, Basil ad Nepo tes de legend. l.
Gent.
which S. Basil and S. Ambrose seem to note, in Pythagoras commanding the
Musicians Dorion canere, Ambros.l.3.de Virg. (si sit ejus liber.)
which changing the mood, S. Ambrose interprets by molliora canere. It draws
out tears of Devotion, as Augustine confesses of himself, Confess.l. 1. c. 6.
-- I often wept in the hymns and songs of thy sweet-sounding Church; the
affections of piety thereby enflamed, my tears ran down. I could easily be
persuaded, that those monstrous vails of morals, not contemptible, related
hereto, concerning the strange effects of Terpander's Music, Plutarch. de
music.
so famous among the ancients; Cael. Rhod. lect. Antiq.l. 9. Srab. geogr. l. 13.
and Amphion's drawing stones together, to build the Walls of Thebes, by his
Music; and Orpheus, charming wild beasts and pale ghosts with his Harp; Arion
carried on a Dolphins back; Herodutus, etc. Doubtless melody does admirably
compose the distracted mind, which it forms to holy attention, as has been
seen in the sudden lucid intervals, and abundant tears of madmen, hearkening a
while to the Churches solemn Chores. Neither need this seem strange to any that
read Readiness History, 1 Samuel 16.23. Of which Josephus also writes, Antiq.
Iud.l. 6. c. 9. in fin.
-- When the evil spirit came upon Saul, David took an harp, and played with
his hand, and Saul was refreshed and eased, for the evil spirit departed from
him. Not that Music of it self has such virtue to drive away soul spirits;
but it came thus to pass then, by Gods providence, forelaying all the
consequences hereof relating to David: yet I doubt not, but that Satan (making
use of all advantages to destroy men, by hindering them in holy Duties (as
Preaching, Hearing, Praying, and Thanksgiving, and praising God) has less
power to hurt, by how much more the Body and Soul of Man are freed from
turbulent obstructions thereto. Nor can I wonder that solemn Music should put
moody Readiness Devil to flight, when. I consider,

1. That the same now drives so many Congregation-men from our Church.

2. That all that which tends to edification and praise of God, As 1 Cor.
14.25.
is destructive to Satan's Kingdom, whose Fottifications (like the Walls of the
beleaguered Jericho) fall down at the sounding of the sacred Trumpets, Isa.
58.1.
whereof he faith, Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and
show my people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins. Indeed
when Christ's seventy Disciples preached the Gospel, Luke 10.18
Satan like lightning fell from Heaven.

3. Considering the Tempters amusical disposition, whose usual descant is
impious discord, and setting division amongst Brethren, and his whole endeavor
to afflict man's soul, and to bar it from all comfortable help to devotion, and
assistance in the service of God; therefore although he has sometimes been
transformed into an Angel of Light, 2 Cor. 11.14.
yet we read not that he did ever sing, or play upon any musical Instrument,
except in the obscene lips of Catamites and impious Libertines; and once in the
Pope's Chore, when (as Cyprian de Valera, a grave Author, De vit. Pontif.
writes) he got into the Organ, and roared out so prodigious a Diapason, that
it made the earth tremble under them.

6. The Custom of God's Church (in S. Paul's Logic, thus disputing, 1 Cor.
11.16. -- We have no such custom, Ad quamcunque Ecclesiam veneri is, ejus
ino^em servate, si pati scandalum non vultis, aut facere.
neither the Churches of God) is very considerable. It was S. Ambrose Rule, To
whatsoever Church (of Christ) ye shall come, observe the Custom thereof, if you
will neither take, nor give offense. S. Augustine gives the Reason; Aug. epist.
Casulan. in fire. In his enim rebus quibus nihil certi statuit scriptura
divina, mos populi Dei, vel instituta majorum pro lege renenda sunt: -- utique
cavendum est, ne tem pestate contentionis, serenitas charitatis obnubiletur.
Augustine. ep. Casulano.
In those things concerning which Divine Scripture determines nothing certain,
the Custom of Gods people, or determinations of our Ancestors, are to be held
for a Law. Therefore, we must beware, lest by the storm of contention (about
matters less then Fundamental) the calm or serenity of Charity be clouded. Now
concerning the Custom of Gods Church herein, Psalm. 68 24, 25
David faith, They have seen thy goings, O God, even the goings of my God, my
King, in the sanctuary. or, in holiness. Hebr. (...).
The singers went before, the players on instruments followed after; among them
were the damsels playing with timbrels, bless ye God in the congregations.
Therefore did Moses write that Song, Deuteronomy. 31.19, 30. for Israel and their
posterities. And David composing many Psalms, appointed singers and players on
instruments in the sanctuary, to prophecy with harp, 1 Chro. 25.1.6, 7.
with psalteries, and with cymbals.

Whether the Heavenly Orbs (in their regular motions, the certain measures of
time) do make a melodious harmony, Macrob. etc.
I leave to others disputes; sure I am, that the Heavens declare the glory of
God, and the firmament shows his handiwork; Psalm. 19.1.
and that we read of heavenly Citharists and Harpers, and of holy Angels and
happy Spirits, (...), etc.
singing their Hallelujahs and praises to Christ, Rev. 5.8, etc. Rev. 14.2, 3.
and 15.2, 3. For the better understanding whereof, (...).
consider with me, what he, who had a divine rapt into heaven, faith, Hebr.
10.1. The Law had a shadow of good things to come. Now you know, that the
shadow holds a proportion to the body that casts it. And again he says,
Hebr. 8.5. that the Priests that offer gifts according to the Law, serve unto
the example and shadow of heavenly things, -- what things? it is presently
expressed -- as Moses was admonished of God, when he was about to make the
Tabernacle -- See, says he, that thou make all things according to the pattern
showed to thee in the mount.

These Reasons laid down, Use.
I hope will, in this controversy, satisfy the moderate: If we cannot gain
others to our party, who, like that Gadaren Herd, Matthew. 8.32.
are violently carried with spirits of contention unto that desperate precipice
of Schism, it shall not be my labor lost, Nostrostamen confirmabimus.
Lactant.l. 5. c. 1.
if it shall confirm our own: Could we bring an hundred Arguments more from
Heaven, yet some would dislike Church- Music.

1. Because, say they, we cannot edify by it, it is a scandal to us, irksom and
odious also. I answer, So does the Feverish Palate distaste sweet and wholesome
meats: where must the Cure be made? in some contrary season of those Meats,
Psalm. 19.10. 2 Cor. 2.16. Amara sunt vitiosis, ac male viventibus praecepta
justitiae. Lactant. l. 1. c. 4.
or the disaffected Palate? The sacred Word of God, (unto holy David, sweeter
then honey) is a favor of death to death unto the wicked; they find no comfort
in it, but are embittered thereby to the death of those who preach it to them.
Vid 1 Kin. 22. 8.
I hate him, said Ahab, he prophesies no good, (...).
but evil to me. That sweet Ointment should kill Vultures and Scarabes (which
delight in carrion and filthy stench) it must needs be in the indisposition of
the receivers; Clem Alexand. Poed.l. 2 5.8.
for good savours are very pleasant and comfortable to others

2. They are offended because we sing some Prayers. And are not many parts of
David's Psalms excellent Forms of Petitions to God? and did not he, and the
Church of God, with, and after him, in every Age since, sing the same? Was it
then lawful and expedient to sing holy Elegies, solemn Prayers, and Doxologies
to God? If so, how comes it since to be unlawful?

3. They say, they cannot understand what is sung. On whom is their not
understanding to be charged? Aquinas, ^2. q. 91. a. 1.5. Confess.l. 10. c. 33.
after S. Augustine, answers hereto -- All the affections of our souls, --
quorum occulta familiaritate excitantur: sic in auditoribus, in quibus etsi
aliqui non intelligunt quae cantantur, intelligunt tamen propter quid
cantantur. scil. laudem Dei; and hoc sufficit ad devotionem excitandam.
as they are diverse, have their proper Moods in the voice and singing, by whose
secret familiarity they are stirred up: so in hearers, among whom, though some
understand not those things which are sung (by others) yet they understand why
they are sung, to wit, to the praise of God; and this (faith he) is enough to
stir up devotion. Give me leave to doubt, whether if these pretenders to so
much knowledge were presently taken up into Paradise, as S. Paul was, and
admitted to hear those ineffable words there sounding, they would understand,
etc. though, etc. all to the praise of God, etc.

4. They say, Music is abused to superstition, and corruption of good manners.
I answer, so have the best things been; meat, drink, and the spiritual food of
souls, Gods holy Word and Sacraments not excepted. Can you reasonably think,
that impious abuse by some, concludes a necessary abolition of an holy use of
these, to all others? I say, of things so excellently serving to our necessary
use in the worship and praise of God, Rev 8.3, 4.
keying and tuning of holy Chores, so much approved by the Prophets, Apostles,
and Martyrs, the wisest and best of the sons of men; as also by the continual
practice of heavenly Chores of Saints and holy Angels; above all, by Jesus
Christ, daily hearing therewith their Prayers, and accepting the same as sweet
odours of incense? what, is this lawful in Heaven, but not in Christ's Church
on earth? May we not, in imitation of such patterns of sanctity, with sacred
music, heighten our dull minds to speak, hear, pray; and,in the praises of
God, as it were, tune at the door, until we be admitted into the full Chore in
the Church triumphant? Matthew 6.10.
Does not our Savior Christ teach us to say, and do we not accordingly say --
Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven? Must we pray to be enabled to do
that which (however enabled) we may not do? Let the most bitter-spirited
Antagonist ingenuously say, Is not the whole Book of Psalms (so often avowed,
cited, and used by Christ) Sepher-Tehillim, a Book of Praises, composed for the
Churches use unto the end of time? or think you that this so excellent a part
of Scripture was written, only to inform us what the Saints of God did before
us, but not what we also must do by their example? As for the abuse of Music,
we abominate it; but affirm, that holy melody is accommodate to every estate
and condition; the Apostle saying without exception, Jam. 5.13.
Is any merry? let him sing. There may here be a fault in defect: for some,
like those curious Solar instruments, make sweet music, and bless the Lord, so
long as the Sun of prosperity shines on them; but no sooner is that clouded,
but they are silent, and then Music is to them as -- the Lords Song in a
strange land: Psalm. 137.4.
But David, in his affliction, called to remembrance his song in the night:
Psalm. 77.6. Psalm. 42.8. Acts 16.25.
And Paul and Silas, laden with stripes, and in strict durance, did sing and
pray at midnight, with admirable effect, to their own comfort and others. It is
above all dispute, that we have as much need to have our minds and affections
calmed and lifted up from worldly thoughts, deviations, and distractions in
God's service now, as his Israel had of old time, when he prescribed them both
singing and instrumental Music, to prepare and fit them to his Worship; and
why we may not now use the means thereto expedient and formally commanded, I
challenge all gainsayers to show us any good Reason.

II.
So come I to the Principal Cause of the specified Effect, -- The hand of the
Lord came upon him; that is, the power and influence of Gods Spirit; which
Metonymical manner of speaking is frequent in Scripture: Iunius in loc. Ezekiel.
1.3. and 8.1. and 33.22. and 37.1.
as Ezekiel. 3.22. The hand of the Lord was there upon me. Judge. 6.34. The Spirit
of the Lord came upon Gideon. So on Iephtah; Judge. 11.29. Judge. 15.14. 2 Kin.
2.9.
so on Sampson: So Elisha said to Elijah, I pray thee, let a double portion of
thy spirit be upon me; that is, of Gods Spirit, wherewith thou have been
assisted. The sum of all amounts to thus much;

The Spirit of the Lord enableth his servants to prophecy: D, 2,
Holy men of God spoke, 2 Pet. 1.21.
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. His hand and power is still upon them in
their Ministration, 1 Cor. 14.32.
as it is written -- The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.
And our Savior Christ faith to his Apostles, Matt. 28.20. Luke 10.16.
-- I am with you always, even unto the end of the world: and -- He that
hears you, hears me.

And now the time admonishes me, that the remainder of this Discourse be like
a natural motion, swiftest near the end: I must tell you therefore, that the
Apostle makes our Application, 1 These. 5. 20. Despise not prophesyings. He gave
the reason before, 1 These. 4. 8. He that despises, despises not man, but God,
who has also given unto us his holy Spirit: and -- He that despises you,
despises me. Luke 10.16.


Let the Grecians, in their profane levity, account Preaching of the Gospel
foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.23. Luke 7.30.
and the Pharisees reject the counsel of God against themselves; they shall
once (though too late) know, who now neglect so great means of salvation,
undervaluing this Heavenly Treasure, because we have it in earthen vessels,
that it is the power of God to salvation, 2 Cor. 4.7. Romans 1.16.
to every one that believes.

Consider therefore, before it be too late, That he that despised Moses Law,
Heb. 10.28, 29.
died without mercy, under two or three witnesses; of how much sorer
punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot
the Son of God -- and has done despite to the Spirit of Grace? Which secure
sinners do, when they undervalue the Word and Ordinance of God. If thou so do,
there will be, in thine own Conscience, not only two or three, but a thousand
unavoidable Witnesses, which can neither be withdrawn by favor, nor silenced
by reward: If thou have been a careless or negligent Hearer, yet seriously
repent thee, and henceforth more diligently frequent holy Assemblies, and more
attentively hear the Word of God: It is as the Eastern Star, to lead Wisemen
to Christ; as it is also written -- Psalm. 107.43. Who so is wise, and will
observe those things, even they shall understand the loving kindness of the
Lord.

Rev. 3.7.
O Lord God, who have the Key of David, which opens, and none shuts, open
our Hearts and Affections; Psalm 24.7, 9.
lift up these everlasting doors, that the King of Glory may come in, and cause
us to understand thy loving kindness in Christ: breathe into our divided parts
the Spirit of Life and Peace, that we may live to Thee in this world, and live
with Thee in the world to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. AMEN.

FINIS.

