A GVIDE TO THE HOLY CITY. OR, Directions and Helps to an holy life: Containing
Rules of religious advice, with Prayers in sundry cases, and estates, necessary
for those who are not of heart so enlarged, as to advise themselves, or to
conceive comfortable prayers according to their present wants.

By JOHN READING B. D. and sometimes Student in Magdalen Hall in OXFORD.

Come ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

Psalm. 34. 11. If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God which gives to
all men liberally, and reproacheth no man; and it shall be given him.

Jam: 1. 5. OXFORD, Printed for THOM ROBINSON, and RICH: DAVIS. 1651.

THE PREFACE.
Good Reader,
MY purpose in publishing these Meditations, is, an hearty desire to
communicate that to others, wherewith the Lord (blessed forever) has comforted
me. If I may hereby contribute any assistance to them who have not better
advice, or hearts not so enlarged, as to conceive prayers according to their
several conditions and wants; I have my end. I cannot reasonably expect that
this Benom and issue of my afflictions, should be accepted of all; or (like the
Manna) (...) Sap. Sol. c. 16. v. 20.
fit every palate: specially in this censorious age wherein some like nothing
but the Minerva's of their own brain; I would I could not say many (like
Febri f^^um in palatio dicatum est^ and malae fortunae, etc. Plin. not: hist:
l. 2. c. 7. vid. and Aug. de. c. Dei. l. 2. c. 14. Cic. de leg: lib. 2.

Quid mirum ( inquit Lactan. l. 1. c. 20 de Graecia) (...) hac ge^e universa
flagitia manarunt, apud quam vitia ipsa religiosa sunt, eaque non modo non
vitantur v^rum (...) coluntur.


those foolish heathens) adore their own maladies: applauding themselves for
good and wi^e, in that they distaste all that is good and wholesome; which is
indeed a symptom of a disaffected palate: I am not ignorant that a speaker
ventureth within the reach of Censure, and that a writer tyeth himself to the
stake: yet in hope that some may reap good by my labors, I resolve, not to be
discouraged; if any shall be so injurious, as to render evil to my good
intentions; my labor is with the Lord; who appointed Bovem aut o^em qui
sacrficando par non esset-(...) Cyril. Alex. proem. com* in ^oh.
some cheap sacrifices that the poor might serve him as well as the rich; and
requiring principally Exodus 35. 5* 6. etc. (...) spontancum cor ejus Ar.
Montan. (...). 70. aut (...) Hutter.
willing hearts; he that had not jewels, gold, silver, silk, purple, or like
precious things, might bring skins, goatshaire, things of small vallew, and be
accepted: you who have a greater share of heavenly treasures, offer of your
fullness: God accepts the poor widows mites, where is no more: give me
then the use of Quisquis hac legit, ubi pariter ^^rtus est, pergat ^^cum: ubi
pariter haesitat, quarat ^^cum: ubi error^m suum cognoscit, redeat ad me: ubi
m^um, revocet me: ita ingrediamur simul charitatis viam, etc. August: de Trin.
l. 1. c. 3.
S. Augustines words; whosoever reads these things where he is equally
certain, let him go on with me: where he equally doubts let him enquire
with me: where he acknowledges his error, let him, return to me: where he
finds mine, let him recall me: let us all enter into that sacred way of
charity, which may bring us to Christ; in whose school I Non fratrum m^orum
voc^ri Magister aut Doctor affecto, quorum in veritate condiscipulus semper
esse desi^ero: quapropter hoc ab illo vero Domino ac Magistro nostro postulare
non desino; ut ea me, sive per eloquia scripturarum etc. doc^re dignetur quae
sic proponam sic asseram, ut in propositionibus atqu^ assertionibus meis,
veritati (quae nec fallit, nec fallitur) semper inhaeream, etc. Fulgent. de
praedest. l. 1.
desire to be a disciple: of whom I beg in my daily prayers, that whether ^
follow, or lead others in the way to heaven, I may understand and persevere in
that truth, which neither deceives, nor is deceived: in which (if my hearts
desire, and constant prayer to God through Jesus Christ, that we may all meet
in his kingdom of glory, merit any return of your charity (join with me and
for me, in your prayers: Act. 20. 32.
And now brethren, I commend you to the word of his grace, which is able to
build you further, and to give you an inheritance among all them tha^ are
sanctified: read happily: practice diligently: 2. Tim. 2 7.
consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

The Sum of the Guide, showing the 1 End of a Christians hope, and
endeavors, true happiness. 2 Means to attain it, true 1 Faith grounded on
Gods Word, and truth teaching us what we are to believe concerning. 1 God the
Father Almighty. 2 God the Son Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. 3 God the
Holy Ghost, our Comforter. 4 The Catholic Church. 5 The Communion of Saints. 6
The remission of sins. 7 The resurrection of the body. 8 Life everlasting.
2 Obedience in 1 General which is in our 1 Performance of duties to 1 God in
1 Love to him above all. 2 Prayer. 3 Hearing the Word. 4 Receiving the
Sacrament. 5 Sanctification of the Sabbath.
2 Man in love to our 1 Selves. 2 Neigh^bours 1 Friends in God. 2 Enemies for
Gods sake.


2 Being rightly guided in our 1 Soul, passions and perturbations of mind, as
in case of 1 Love, delight, etc. 2 Mirth, sorrow. 3 Anger, hatred, malice. 4
Envy. 5 Impatience, patience. 6 Discontent, content. 7 Hope. 8 Fear. 9 Cares.
10 Jealousy.
2 Outwardman, as in the 1 Tongue, 2 Actions.


2 Particular 1 Calling of 1 Masters and servants. 2 Man and wife. 3 Parents
and children.
2 Conditions which are either 1 Incide^t to some, which are either 1 Internal
as the wounded spirit and afflicted conscience 2 External as 1 Wealth,
poverty. 2 Imprisonment. 3 Banishment. 4 Old age. 5 Childbearing. 6 Sickness.

2 Common to all mankind* as death.






The CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. THe necessity of a Christians aim at a right end in all his actions.
page 1. The Prayer, page 3. 2. Of true religion: wherein it consists: of
faith, and those things which concern it, page: 4. A prayer for Faith. page 10.
3. What we are to believe concerning God: that there is but one God in essence
and Trinity of Persons: how we must labor to know him. page 12. A prayer page
23. 4 What we are to believe concerning Jesus Christ, Gods only Son, our Lord,
conceived by the Holy Ghost: borne of the Virgin Mary. p. 24. 5 What we are to
believe concerning Christ's suffering under Pontius Pilate: his crucifying,
death, burial, resurrection, asc^ntion, sitting at the right hand of God the
Father; and his coming again to judgment. p. 35. The Prayer, p. 47. 6
Concerning the Holy Ghost, what we are to believe: rules thereto belonging, p.
48. 7 Concerning the Catholic Church: conclusions belonging thereto, and rules
observable. p. 50. 8 What the Communion of Saints is? wherein consisting? rules
thereto appertaining. p. 54. 9 Concerning the necessity of sins remission: to
whom it belongs: it is the sum of the Gospel: rules thereto appertaining.
p. 59. A Prayer for repentance and remission of sins. p. 63. 10 Concerning
the resurrection of the dead: how the truth thereof may appear? what use we
are to make of the meditation thereon. page 64. 11 What life everlasting is?
wherein the happiness thereof consists? what rules of practice we are to
hold concerning the same? page 68. The Prayer p. 72. 12 Concerning Prayer:
what, and how necessary it is? conditions thereof: motives to the earnest
practice of this duty: r^les thereto belonging. page 73. A Prayer for the
spirit of Prayer. p. 87. 13 Of hearing Gods word: motives thereto: usual lets:
conditions requisite to profitable hearing. page 89. A Prayer before hearing
the Word. p. 104. 14 Of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: who receive the
grace thereby represented? how we ought to prepare for the right receiving
thereof? how to receive it? what we must do after we have received? page 108.
A private prayer before the receiving of the Lords Supper. p. 109. Another
private Prayer for one ready to receive the Lords Supper. page 111. A private
Prayer after re^eiving the Lords Supper. page 112. Another private Prayer
immediately after receiving the Lords Supper. page 113. 15 Of the Sabbath: the
name; institution; things considerable for the sanctification: the beginning
and ending: reasons of the institution: the change of the Lords day, now to be
observed of all Christians: how we must sanctify it. p. 114. A Prayer for the
Sabbath day morning. page 125. To the ordinary evening prayer may be added this
private prayer for the Sabbath. p. 128. 16 Of Love and Charity: what they are?
how they differ in their objects? love to God, considerable in the object, and
measure, several states, degrees, perpetuity, and opposition: signs thereof:
common lets: means on our part to be used, etc. motives to incite us thereto.
page 129. A prayer for love to God. page 14^. 17 Of love to our selves: kinds
thereof: love to our neighbor: the necessity and excellency thereof:
conditions and signs: of friendship: what and how excellent it is: the true
end and laws thereof: what choice we are to make of friends, and whom to
avoid* of love to our enemies: we ought to love them without any malice: and to
make a right use of them? p. 144. A Prayer for Love and Charity. p. 180. 18 Of
the soul, affections, mind, and thoughts in general: corruption of the heart:
danger: difficulty of the cure: necessity of a right ordering our thoughts:
rules of practice. page 181. 19 Of right ordering the thoughts in respect of
some particular passions, affections, and perturbations of the mind in their
distempers: of love, delight, joy, rejoicing, mirth, sorrow, anger, hatred,
malice, envy, impatience, discontent, a contented mind. page 201. The Prayer
for patience. page 226. 20 Of Hope, Fear, Cares, Iealousies. page 227. A
prayer for hope. p. 233. A Prayer against fear. p. 240. A Prayer against
cares. page 241. A Prayer for sanctification of the thoughts. page 250. 21
Guidance of the tongue: excellent use; abuse: evils of the tongue, concluding
the necessity of a right guidance thereof: motives thereto: rules by which it
may be done. page 252. A Prayer. page 265. 22 Of external actions in general:
whence the good are: how requisite: how regulated: rules concerning them. page
266. The Prayer page* 270. 23 Government of Families: duties of Masters and
Servants: motives to their duties. page 271. A short morning prayer with a
Family. p. 277. Another Morning Prayer for a Family page* 278. A short Evening
Prayer. p. 282. An Evening Prayer for a Family, more enlarged p. 283. 24 Of
Marriage, institution, end, and fruits thereof: of choice in general, and
particular: who are to be avoided. Duties of the married, mutual, and
peculiar: advice to widows. p. 287. the prayer. page: 299. 25 Duties of
Parents and Children: honor to parents: want of children: good parents of
evil children: duty of the parent; rules thereto belonging: duties of
children: rules thereof: motives there^to. p. 299. the parents Prayer. p. 310.
the childrens prayer. p. 315. 26 Of the wounded spirit, or afflicted
conscience, what it is: how great an affliction: what the conscience i^? How
comfortable the peace thereof: why God afflicts his? What things principally
wound the conscience? What they who are afflicted with the apprehension of Gods
wrath against their sins, must consider? What they must examine, and
practice, p. 316. the prayer, p. 336 27 Sense of spiritual wants afflicts;
but not so much endangereth the soul: what we are herein to consider, examine,
and practice, p: 337. the prayer, 344. 28 Of the conscience afflicted with
fear of tentations, and falling away: what we are herein to consider, examine,
and practice: page: 346: an ejaculation to be used as soon as thou awakest,
page: 354: another for thy last waking. page ib. the prayer of a wounded spirit
against temptations. p. 355. 29 Guidance of the mind in increase of wealth:
afflictions common: their fruit in good men: poverty a great trial: riches
great temptations: commonly mistaken: how to guide the mind in increase of
riches, or a full inheritance, page 357. the rich man's petition. page 364. 30
Poverty a great temptation, yet having a capacity of true happiness: what we
are to consider herein, and what to practice: page 365. the poor man's
petition. page: 373 31 Of liberty* and restraint, misplaced by an injurious
world. comforts for prisoners: rules hereto appertaining, p: 374: the prisoners
petition, page: 384. 32 Of Banishment, several kinds: general cause: what we
must do to be comforted herein? page 391. the banished man's petition. page
399. 33 Of old age: common evils thereof: the foundation must be happily laid
in youth: how the evils of age may be les^ed, or more patiently borne? by what
rules of practice it may be improved to comfort, page: 400. the old man's
supplication. page: 414. 34 Meditations for women near their travel: all
misery is from sin: sins pardoned in Christ, why the punishments are not taken
away? women's comforts therein: directions necessary thereto: p. 415 a prayer
for them in, or near their travail: page: 422. ^ thankesgiving: page: 425. 35
Directions for the sick: as all afflictions sanctified, so sickness is
profitable for Gods children many ways: how it may become so to us? duties of
those that visit the sick, page: 425. a prayer for the sick. page* 430.
thankesgiving for health recovered, page: 434. another, after the ceasing of the
plague: p. 435. 36 Meditations concerning death, seeing all must dye, how to
prepare, that death may not be terrible: means to comfort in death of dear
friends, comforts against death: page: 439: a prayer for him that is at the
point of death; or has received the sentence of death in himself: page: 454.
ERRATA.
Page 2. marg. read inven^rint. p. 4. m. r. placat. p. 5. m. sin. r. (...). p.
7. l. 2. our souls. p. 8. l. 3. r. Satan Subtle. p. 13. m. r. (...) p: 15. m.
r. hac mundi domo. ib. l. 32. r: he must therefore. p: 17 l. 28. the first
cause* 22. l. 18. holy ascentions. p. 24. l. pen^lt. r. marketh the Church. p.
25. l. 10. was reserved. 29. l. 35: by the power. p. 31. l: ult. so was
fulfilled: p. 32 l. 16. r. as the heir. ib. l. ult. changes. p. 37. l. 4. the
place. p. 38. l. ^3. increase thy --. p. 48. l. 9. r. in thee. ib. r.
Concerning the Holy Ghost. 1. what we are -- p. 51. l. 2. r. whereof, he. ^b.
l. 3. sheepfold. p. 52. l. 6. are but on^: p. 62. l. 2. there is entire. p. 64.
l. 3. what use we. p. 66. l. 16. bearing in life. p. 72. l. 21. bear all. p.
74. 19. the confidence. p. 78. l. 33. he looks on. 79. l. 11. his brethren.
93* l. 27. preserve thee. 95, l. 30. to the deaf. 98. l. 7. in their legends.
117: l. 14. to intimate. 137. l. 14. and have his. 146. l. 19. not so for it
and. 174. l. 4. feeding on thee. 179. l 11. had perished. 204. l. 8. strings of
musi^all, ib. l. 23. therefore 1 in every. ib. l. 26. ease of sorrows. 213. l.
1. have some remission. 216. l. 6. so Haman. 229. l. 12. in any creature may be
defeated. p. 246. l 4. who cannot give; 249. l. 24. his posterity ib. l. 29.
repair. 252. l. 11. the same: spe^ch, as reason, 259. l. 12. seasonable. 260.
l. 16. his by just means. 261. l. 31. themselves heirs thereof. 268. l 31.
for, or by any. 273. l. 16. see thee impious. 288. l. 19. there is compulsion.
295. l. 19. to foment discord. 296. l: 14. with discretion. 300. l. 18. did I
desire a son. 306. l. 33. or fatherly. 307. l. 6. is no easier.

The prudent Reader may be pleased to amend other light slips, and
mispointings, as the sense requires.

A GVIDE TO THE HOLY CITY, etc.
CHAP. 1.
Concerning the necessity of a Christians aiming at a right end in all his
actions.

1 THere is an Sicut omnis artis ^st aliquis ^inis (...) est vit^e nostrae
^inis quidam propter qu^m geruntur omnia quae geruntur in vita nostra, v^l
propter quem mundus ipse vel institutus est, vel constat: cujus finis etiam
Apostolus meminit, di^c^s, deinde finis, etc. Orig. in Ps. 38. ho 2.
end of every action and intention; which as the rudder of the ship, though it
come last, is first purposed, and guides ^he whole course.

2 By the instinct of Nature every thing works to some end (which Finis enim
indicat perfectionem rerum. ib in Romans 1. l. 8. c. 10. In non valet in (...)
suum.
shows and is) the perfection thereof; to which what ever is not conducing,
nihilum valet quod
is useless) especia^ly reasonable creatures, who have Will and Preelection
among them, they propose to themselves more divine and excellent ends of their
desires and actions, who understand the chief good to be attained (true and
^ternall blessedness in Christ) are regenerate and repaired by the holy
Spirit, and wisdom of God.

3 In every undertaking propose some certain end, and before thou enterprise,
examine that diligently* run not on at adventure, as children use, in some
unknown path, till they loose themselves; but carefully look to what end the
way thou take, ^eadeth thee, consider seriously what danger or profit is
therein: who knows not that the end of sin cannot be happy, because there
Finis eorum non ^st sinis. Bernard. sup. Cant. Ser. 9.
remains something after it? And that Psalm. 87. 37.
the end of the just man shall be peace at last? The cause why so many run the
Math. 7. 13.
broad way to destruction, and so few, the strait to eternal life; must
principally be want of a due forecasting what will be the end of that they do:
fixing Latam non quaerimus, nec inventione opus est: sponte se o^^ert: and
errantium via^st, ^ngustam vero, nec omnes inv^ni unt, nec qui invenirint,
statim ingre^iuntur per came -- rapti seculi voluptatibus, de medio in itinere
revertuntur: Hieronym. in Mat.
their hearts on the present evil which pleases them, they regard not the
misery which follows their tasting the forbidden fruit, but for its sake
wilfully shut their eyes against their dangers, or seeing (and thinking them
much less, or the recovery more easy) they desperately venture in Deuteronomy: 29.
19, 20.
vain hope of repentance and pardon: and on the other part being too sensible
of the difficulties Act. 14. 22.
which beset the way to heaven, they do not enough consider their future
blessedness, and therefore either faint in their trialls, their heart saying
with profane Gen 25. 32.
Esau, Lo I am almost dead, what is then this birthright to me? Or doting on
this world, resolve to settle their affections hereon: this is the Number. 32. 1,
2, 5.
Jazer and Gilead which they would were their portion.

4 The supreme and best end of all, is Rev. 4. 11. R. 5. 13.
Gods glory, into which ocean all desires and actions of the reasonable
creature must empty themselves: subordinate hereto is the true blessedness of
the elect in Psalm. 16. 11. and 17. 15.

1 These. 4. 17.

2 Cor. 5 6. 8.

Phil. 1. 23.


the fruition of God (the fountain of all good) in the life to come, which
natural men mistaking sought in pleasures, Epicurus summum bonum in voluptate
auimi ^sse censet. Aristippus in vol^ptate corpori^* Peripate^ici autemin bonis
animi, and corporis, and fortunae. Hevilli summ^m bonum est sci^^^ia* Lactan.
l. 3. c. 8. 9.
riches and such things, as the world adoreth; whereas indeed all those things,
if they could have met in one man, should have come as short of making him
truly happy, as the intended top Genes. 11. 4.
of Babel, would have been from landing the builders in heaven.

5 The way to this end is true holiness, that is faith ad obedience, the 1 Timothy 1. 5.
end of the Commandment: without faith apprehending Christ for our
justification, no works are more acceptable to God, then Genesis 4. 5.
Cains sacrifice, the Prove. 15. 8.

Romans 14. 2.


sacrifice of the wicked: Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. And without
obedience, there is no justifying faith. Jam. 2. 20.
Faith without works is dead: it says as Genesis 30. 1.
once barren Rahel, give me Children or I die,

6 That which we are to believe and obey, is the infallible truth of God (the
first and second truth, God and his oracles) and his will concerning our
salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15

Deuteronomy. 32. 47.


sufficient to make a man wise there to) revealed in his word, the word and
testimony of man may be the ground of opinion which is of things probable, but
faith can stand on nothing but the word of God, which is infallibly Unde abest
scientia id totii possidet opinatio. Scientia certi est opinatio incerti.
Lactan. l. 3. c. 3. Nec enim valet quicquam mortalis hominis auctoritas, sed
divinis, etc. ib l. 5. c. 20.
certain* and Cui falsum subesse non potest.
can have no falsehood in it, because he Tit. 1. 2.
cannot ly: this is contained in the books of the Old and New Testament: this
is a sure word 2. Pet. 1. 16. 19. for it was indicted by the Spirit of God, 2.
Tim: 3: 16. 2. Pet: 1: 21: the same is the rule of obedience: like the clowdie
Pillar leading Israel into their promised rest: Number: 14: 14: and the star to
lead the wise men to Christ: Math: 2: 9: whosoever will be saved must follow
this guide, he that walks without this, g^eth like those Israelites, Number: 14*
40: to the Mountain of the Canaanites to their own destruction, for the Lord
is not with him.

7 That which is the object of faith is comprehended in the Creed which is the
sum of the Gospel: our obedience to God is set down in the Law: the sum
whereof is love to God, and to our neighbors, Luk: 10: 27: 28:

The Prayer.
MOst gracious and most holy Lord God, who dwelling in unaccessible light of
Majesty and glory, have yet been pleased to manifest thy infinite power and
unsearchable wisdom in all thy creatures, especially those who thou have
created to thine own image, to praise and glorify thee in their eternal
participation of thy divine blessedness: Give us true wisdom to consider the
end for which thou have made us, make us truly understand that thy glory is
incomparably better then all the creatures, and our salvation then all the
world: Lord open our eyes that we sleep not in death: let not the transitory
dreams of this present life beguile us: let not the malicious temper so
prevail upon our infirmities, as ^o cause us s^curely to run on in the easy
way to destruction: but gracious Lord, as thou have appointed the end, our
eternal life, so be pleased to dispose the means which may lead us thereto:
Thou can as easily make us holy, as command us to be so: Lord therefore make
us such as thou have commanded us to be: make us faithful to believe in thee,
and obedient to serve and please thee, as thou have in thy great and tender
mercy given thy holy word to be a light and true guide unto us, so blessed Lord,
give us of the same spirit, by which it was endited, which may lead us into all
truth and holiness, and (these days of sin being ended) into that holy and
blessed inheritance, which thou have prepared for all those wh^m thou have
elected to eternal life and salvation, through JESUS CHRIST our only Savior
and Redeemer, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory
ascribed in heaven and earth henceforth and for ever, AMEN

CHAP: II.
Of Religion and Faith. 1 Of true Religion: wherein it consists: 2 Of Faith,
and those things which concern the same.

THere is no Cic. Tus^. q. l. 1.
nation so inhumane and barbarous but it pretends to some religion, and
worship divine: Satan cannot put out all the light of conscience (still there
is a slender remainder, which shows the Romans 1. 19.
very wicked that there is a God) therefore he has ever labored to beguile
men with false religions or corruptions of the true.

2 True Religion is the right worship of the true God in Vitam col^n^ium, D^us
proqualitate nominis sui formet quoniam religiosissimus cultus est imitatio,
Lact. l. 5. c. 10. Non profanus melius esset qua^ ^ic religiosus? quomodo Deum
^iolat qui hoc modo placatur. Min. Foel. Oct.
imitation of his holiness; all other worship not agreeing with his revealed
will, is profanation and irreligion: this is life eternal to know God, and
whom he has sent Jesus Christ. He that will with such knowledge come unto him
must believe that Heb. 11. 6.
he is: Joh. 1. 11.
no man has seen Gods essence: Hic nec videri potest visu clarior: nec
comprehendi tactu purior. nec estimari, sensibus major est, insinitus,
immensus, and soli sibi tantus quantus est notus, etc* ibid. Min. Fael* Oct.
that is greater then any finite apprehension, so that 2 Cor. 5. 7.
we walk by faith not sight: and therefore Christ, when he had assumed a
visible nature for the work of our redemption, would not long be conversant on
earth in his public ministry, that our salvation might not be in sense, but
believing: and Joh. 20. 29.
blessed are they which have not seen and have believed.

3 Concerning faith these things are considerable.

1. What it is? 2. Whence it is? 3. Whose it is? 4. How necessary it is? 5. How
excellent it is? 6. Of what measure it is? 7. What we must do concerning it?
8. What is the object thereof?
1 Faith is Hebr. 11. 1.
the evidence of things not seen: and the substance of that we hope for, it is
a grace and Ephesians. 2. 8. Sect. II.
gift of Gods spirit, whereby we assent to the word of God, and apply the
promises thereof to our selves: Neque enim quis cogi potest, sed invitatur quia
non extorquatur, sed suadetur. Ambrosi in Romans 4.
it cannot be forced: it is wrought in our mind by persuasion, not compulsion:
To. 10. 17.
faith is by hearing: this is the unchangeable rule thereof Regula quidem fidei
una omnino est, sola immobilis. Tertul. de virg. veland. ^. 1.
one and the same forever.

2 Faith is the work of Gods spirit in us, applying the promises, Romans 8. 16.
bearing witness with our spirit that we are the children of God, Act. 16 14.
opening the hearts of hearers to the word preached, and Sacraments
administered* 1 Cor. 3. 5, 6.
Paul may plant and Apollos water, but except God give the increase, who shall
believe their report? The 1 Cor. 2. 14. animalem dicit naturalem, etc.
Theophilact. in 1 Cor. 2.
natural man perceives not the things of the spirit, neither can he without a
spiritual eye, they shall seem foolishness to him: so that Paul and Apollos
are but the ministers by whom we believe as the Lord gives to every man.

3 2 These. 3. 2.
All have not faith: many talk of it and profess it, but as the (...) Ap. c. 24
heathens, among the multitude of their Gods, made Faith a Goddess and were
far from believing in God: faith here intended is the (...)* Occumen.
White stone with a new name written, which no man knows save he that
receives it: a peculiar of the elect: Act. 13. 48.
(as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed) the Ephesians. 1. 13. 14.
seal and 2 Cor. 1. 22.
earnest of the spirit of promise: therefore though we are taught to say, Cor.
5. 5. Math. 6. 9. (...), etc. Theophilact. ib.
our father -- give us -- forgive us -- yet in profession of our faith we say I
believe in God etc. we must pray one for another, but every man must believe
for himself.

4 The necessity of faith appears in that, 1 Gall. 3. 11.
the just shall live by it, Heb: 2. 4. 2. By faith only we are justified. Rom:
3. 28. 3. Heb. 11. 6.
Without Faith it is impossible to please God. To. 14. 23.
whatsoever is not of faith is sin. 4. God has appointed this means for us to
take hold on the merits of Christ Joh. 3. 16.
that we may be saved.

5 The excellency of faith is in that it apprehends; that is Christ, and in
him the unspeakable treasure of Gods mercy: Romans 5. 1.
peace of conscience, reconciliation with God, 1 John 1. 7.

Romans 4. 5, 6.


remission of our sins, Romans 8. 1.
indemnity from the guilt and punishment thereof, Romans 4. 24, 25.
justification, Act. 15. 9.
sanctification, in fine all things which concur to the accomplishment of an
happy man: it is the Mat. 16. 18.
rock against which the gates of hell shall not prevail: the Ephesians. 6. 16.

Romans 4. 11. 17. 18.


shield against the spiritual enemy: it Jam. 2. 23.
styled Abraham Gods friend, and us his sons: it is the 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7, 8, 18.

2 Timothy 1. 12.


sanctuary of a troubled spirit: the first fruits of the heavenly Paradise: the
effect and cause of illumination: the (...). Cytil. Catec. 5.
eye which enlightneth the conscience, if we believe we shall understand: Laudo
fidem quae ante credit obs^rvandii esse quam didicit, Tettul. de coron. mil.
commendable is that faith which believes that all the word of God is true,
and to be obeyed before it understands the particulars: faith Tertul. de
bapt. c. 20.
made Noah an Arc to preserve mankind in: gave Hebr. 11. 9, 10. -- 33, 34.
Abraham possession of Canaan, it has subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness,
obtained the promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of
fire, delivered from the sword, made men strong of weak and valiant in battle
-- it is the door keeper of heaven, it lets in the thee^e from the cross: the
Bathsheba which can have no repulse. Math. 21. 22.
Whatsoever ye ask if ye believe, ye shall receive it: it is in effect all
the world -- 1 Cor. 3. 21* 22, 23.
all things are yours (the world and life were (...). Oecumen.
made for the Saints) it is that one thing with which we have all things,
without which nothing, it (...). 3. 12.
gives us confident entrance to God, and 1 Pet. 1. 9.
salvation of our selves through Jesus Christ.

6 The Romans 12. 3. Ephesians. 4. 7.
measures of true faith are diverse yet sufficient to every one to salvation: as
it is Exodus 16. 18.

2 Cor. 8. 15.


written, he that gathered much had no superfluity, and he that gathered little
had no want. In all ages God gave some great and eminent measures of faith, as
to the Prophets, Apostles, and Marty^s, not that they should by their greater
faith obtain greater salvation then we who have received a far less
measure, but because God appointed them to encounter greater trials to his
honor, and that the example of their constancy might be helpful to our
infirmity: as in the body of man, there are veins, sinews, flesh, and bones,
to strenghthen all these: not that the bones have more life then these* so is
the mystical body of Christ: it is certain that Credo domine side sateor
imbeci^li, side tamen.
weak faith may lay sure hold on Christ, and therefore be a saving faith: yea
the power of God is perfected in man's 2 Cor. 12. 9.
infirmity: to conclude, it is not the merit of faith, but of Christ
apprehended by faith* which saves us: so God Vincentes coronat retributione
pietatis paternae, remunerans in nobis quicquid ipse praestit it, and honorans
quod ipse persicit. Cyprian. ad Mart. etc. ^p. 25. l. 3.
crowns his own gifts in us.

7 We must 1 Cor. 13. 5.
examine our faith. 2. Use the ordinance of God for the attaining it, as
hearing the word, and receiving the sacraments, praying, etc.

They best know what need we have of frequent examination of our selves herein,
who are deeply sensible of their own wants: to them who are deluded with false
lights and tentations of security, there appears no want, either of faith in
them selves, or examination of their faith.

That we may examine profitably, we must know there is a Math. 7. 22.

1 Cor. 13. 2.


common faith, which reprobates may have, and it is either historical such as
the devil has; Jam: 2. 19. or temporary Math. 13. 20. Act: 8. 13. and this is
either faith of miracles, or a temptation of security: for the devil himself
will persuade obstinate sinners that they believe, and are therefore sure of
salvation, that he may keep them without charity (which is the life Omnium
bonorum bona matter ^st charitas, Chrysostom. in Psalm. 118.
of religion, and that one thing without which faith is dead) and persuade them
to sin securely. And there is also a Act. 15. 9.
sanctifying, justifying, lively faith Joh. 1 12.
proper to the elect only: this purifyeth the heart, gives us the adoption of
sons, and ^ Joh. 5. 2. ^.
everlasting life: concerning this faith we enquire: and because Jer. 17. 9*
the heart is so deceitful, and Satan suitable to teach hypocrisy so nearly
to resemble true grace, it highly concerns every man seriously to examine
whether his faith be true or counterfeit: to which purpose take these rules.

Examine.

1 Whether the more thou art persuaded concerning the assurance of thy
salvation, the more thou love God for his own sake, and thy brethren for Gods
sake? Some vainly dream of justifying faith, though their conscience tells
them they love but some, for fashion sake, or their own ends; for Gods sake
few, if any; and God only as far as they hope he will bless them: that faith
only is available which works by love, Refrigesiente charitate side moritur,
sicut corpus anim ^ recedeute (...) vi^am in charitate constituit qui ^idem per
dilectionem, etc. Bern. de re^urrectione Dom Ser. 2. Gal. 5. 6.

Si non operatur mortua est, Ber. de dilect. Dei. Si enim quaedam anima fidei
ipsa devotio est; quid fides quae non^ operatur ex dilectione nisi cadaver
examime? Bern. sup. Cant. Ser. 25.


without which it is no more alive, then a man without heat.

2 Whether the more assurance of Gods mercies in Christ thou have, the more
thou desire to be further confirmed? Math. 5. 6.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst for righteousness for they shall be
satisfied.

3 Whether the more thou beleevest the more humble thou art? Jam. 4. 6.
God gives grace to the humble: when Paul was by Gods mercy brought out of his
ignorance and unbeleefe, he was not ashamed to acknowledge (that which being in
sin he would not have done) 1 Timothy 1. 15.
of sinners I am chief. True faith can no more be without humility, then an
house witohut a foundation: the proud hypocrite rests so securely upon his
fruitless faith, that he Luk: 18. 9 11.
contemns other men, as if none were holy but himself, and some few of his
society, which he vainly conceaveth have engrossed the infinite grace and
spirit of God, which Joh: 3. 8.
freely and secretly 1 Cor. 12. 6.
works where others cannot judge thereof.

4 Whether the greater persuasion thou have of thy believing the deeper sense
also thou have of thy sanctification: true faith is such a lively grace, that
it Rectas studeamus facere vias fi^ei nostri rectitudi^em rectis actibus
comprobames. Bern. sup. Cant. Ser. 24.
cannot be inactive: where the natuall life is, it will show it self by some
evident effects: and so must the life of Grace, to our consciences: therefore
the Apostle makes the quaere, 1* Co 1: 13 5.
know you not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be
reprobates: intimating, that the regenerate and true believers, do indeed
Fidei vitam opera attestan tur sicut enim corporis hujus vitam ex motu suo
dignoscimus ^ita and fidei vita^, Bern. de re^ur. Domini.
know, and feel, by comfortable effects, that the Spirit of Jesus is in Gal.
2. 20.
them: for as many as are Romans 8. 14.
led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God, which walk not after the
flesh: and if we walk in the spirit, we shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh: by which thou must examine thy faith.

5. Whether after many trials, fears and doubtings, does the Spirit of God
still return and comfort thee, Gal. 5. 16.
so that thy faith is Pec^ati conscientia and metus poenae religiosio rem
facit; and semper multo firmior est ^ides quam reponit poenitentia, Lactant. l.
5. c. 13. 2 Cor. 7. 11.
more assured after trials, then before? True faith, like the needle of a
compass, in the several boords, tacks, and agitations of the ship at sea,
never rests till it return to its own point, and fixes on the mercy of God
again; as it is written, Ps. 116. 6, 7. (...) exhaustus eram. Ave^nar. (...)
attenuatus sum. Ar. Montan.
I was in misery and he saved me, return unto thy rest O my soul.

6 Lastly, examine the conclusions suggested to thy mind with the hope of
salvation: men shall sometimes have a cheerful persuasion, that they are the
elect servants of God, and therefore shall be saved, but yet have 2. King. 5.
18.
Naamans exceptives frequent in their resolutions to sin, God pardon thy
servant in this: upon this abused promise of God Joh. 3. 16.
whosoever believes not shall perish -- not considering that it is no true
faith which impropriateth the gift of God to wantonness, Fides cum lege non
pugnat, etc. Chryl. in Romans ho. 7.
or any purpose to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; but a dangerous
tentation of security, a mere snare of Satan, persuading men that they have
certain interest in Gods promises, that he might keep them in some known
sin. But if thy heart say thus: I believe; seeing therefore God has showed
me this great mercy, working this comfortable persuasion in me, I will be more
and more careful of my ways, that I may not offend so good a God, and grieve
his holy Spirit, whereby he has sealed me up to redemption: I will 2. Pet. 1.
10, 11.
strive to make my calling and election sure, that an entrance into the
eternal Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ may be more abundantly administered
to me: I will heartily endeavor to follow the guidance of his good Spirit, who
has translated me from the kingdom of sin, and darkness of ignorance, into
light, and the kingdom of his dear Son, by some measure of sancti^ication;
that I may Phil. 2. 10.
make an end of my salvation with fear and trembling: such a resolution is an
undoubted adjunct of true faith purifying the heart: slesh and blood can never
give this persuasion or resolution, and Satan will not: for though he will be
contented to present some seeming good, if he may thereby persuade a secure man
to some real evil; yet it is far from his nature to move to good for any
good end, for this were to divide and ruin his own kingdom, and whole
design, which is to make all others Suis vitiis perditi sae^ium and
grassantur, ut p^rda^t, Lactant. l. 2. c. 17. ad solatium ca^amitatis suae n^n
des^^^m perditi ^am perdere, Min. Fell. O^^a^.
confederates in his rebellion, and as desperate castawaies as himself: It
remains therefore, that the Spirit of God (against whose work and purpose
the gates of hell can never prevail) must be the sole Author of this
persuasion and resolution: I believe, and therefore will do my uttermost
endeavor to be more holy then ever I have been.

7. Concerning the means to be used in the Word and Sacraments, for the
attaining of this faith, I shall speak in its own place.

8. The Object of faith is the truth of God revealed in holy Scripture,
teaching us his will concerning our salvation: the sum whereof, are the
Articles of our belief: of which in the following Chapters.

A Prayer for Faith.
O Lord God of the spirits of just men, Father of lights, from whose fullness
descends every good and perfect gift: We humbly acknowledge our own
miserable hardness of heart, wilful obstinacy and disobedience to thy holy
Word, has continually provoked thy justice, to give us over to strong
delusions and belief of lies, to our own destruction; that the veil should
be laid over our hearts when we read or hear the word of promise; that Satan
should be suffered to blind us, that the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ might not shine unto us, and that we might not be able to discover our
interest in thy promises, nor make any assured claim to the merits of thy
Son Jesus: thou have indeed said, Whosoever believes in him, shall not
perish, but have life everlasting: but faith is thy gift, who have also said,
Ask and ye shall have: As therefore in the sense of our own impotency, so in
assurance of thy truth, we humbly in^reat thee to take from us all hardness of
heart and unbelief, and to work in us a true saving faith in Christ Jesus:
establish the thing which thou have wrought in us: make us worthy of thy
calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of thy goodness toward us, and the
work of faith with power: It is thy mercy that we believe, help thou our
unbelief: Lord increase our faith: let the little grain thereof which thy
free spirit has sowed in our hearts, flourish into a tree of life, that our
troubled thoughts may build in the branches, and rest under the shadow thereof.
O Lord consider our weakness, the continual incounters and violent assaults
wherewith our souls enemy charge us: restrain his malice, beat back all
his ^iery darts, that they may never touch our hearts: holy Father, pu^ thou on
us thy whole armor, that we may be able to resist in the ^vill day; that
having finished all things, we may stand fast: above all, give us the shield of
faith, seeing we are to wrestle, not only against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, powers, worldly governors, the princes of darkness of this
world, and against spiritual wickedness, which are in the high places: Our
help stands only in thy name, O Lord, who have made heaven and earth,
forsake us not in our trials. O blessed Savior, who did once pray for Peter
that his faith might not fail him, look on our greater infirmities, intercede
for us, present these our prayers in the precious censer of thine own merits,
that we may continue grounded and established: build us on the rock, that
neither wind, storm or floods of trials may overthrow us, nor the gates of
hell prevail against us. O Lord thou have been pleased in our baptism to
engraft us into the mystical body of thy Son Jesus: let that sweet ointment
which dwell^th fully in him, descend upon ^s, even the comfortable grace of thy
holy Spirit, which may work in us a full assurance of our salvation: Lord
seal up thine own covenant, our redemption in our hearts and consciences, by
the sure and infallible testimony of the holy and sanctifying Spirit: say unto
our souls that thou art our salvation: let not our faith waver in any surges
of afflictions: try us not above that thou will make us able to bear
cheerfully and constantly: give us assurance of thy mercies in Christ Jesus,
unto our ends and in our ends, till our faith may be accomplished in the
salvation of our souls, and our souls fully satisfied in the seeing, and
living with, our blessed Savior, and eternal enjoying all that which we have
believed through him: O Lord incline thine ear, O Lord consider and do it,
for the same thy beloved Son our only Savior Jesus Christ his sake. AMEN.

CHAP. III.
What we are to believe concerning God.. 1. That there is a God.. 2. That there
is but one God.. 3. That he is one in essence and trinity of persons, the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost.. 4. How we must labor to know him.

1. THat which we are to believe concerning God, Sect. I.
is, first, that there is a God -- Hebr. 11. 6. (...), etc. Occumen. in Hebr. 6.
he that comes to God must believe that he is: where we must know, that it is
not enough to believe God to be such as a carnal heart may imagine him: never
any nation (as I noted) was so barbarous, but that they believed there was some
God; though when men forsook the true light of Gods Word, and followed their
own inventions, they quickly left the knowledge of the true God and his will:
hence came such varieties of superstition, and monstrous forms of idolatry
into the Heathen world, (for there is but one strait line of truth, but error
is manifold) men framing to themselves both God and religious worship, all
erred in a confused variety, making them Gods like unto themselves, in bodily
lineaments, complexion, habit, manners and affections: (...), etc. Clem.
Alexand^in. l. 7.
so the Aethiopians made them black, the Thracians yellow, the Barbarians
rusticke, the Grecians more court-like: the wisest well knowing they erred, but
knew not in the darkness of their minds how to find the right way; as many
appear by that one voice of the Heathen, Cicero apud Lactant. l. 2. c. 3.
^tinam ^am facil^ vera invenire possem, quam falsa con^in^ere*
I would (said he) I could as easily find out truth, as convince falsehood. We
must therefore believe God to be such as he has revealed himself in his holy
Word; for whatsoever else is imagined, is an idol of man's own heart, and not
God.

2. The Scripture has revealed, First, some things concerning Gods attributes.
Secondly, and some things concerning the persons of the sacred Trinity.
Concerning his attributes, these five conclusions are necessary to be known.

1. We can understand (...) etc. (...) Athanas. ad solit. vit. agent. ex. --
non est aliquid ^orum quae ab eo causantur, etc. Th. Aquin. 1. q. 12. a. 12. C.
what God is not, he is not a body, not gold, nor silver, nor any thing
material or obvious to humane sense or apprehension: whatever thou can
comprehend, know, that it is not God.

2. (...), Damaseen.
No attributes can fully and according to Gods incomprehensible being,
express to us the nature of God; because that which is finite can neither
express nor apprehend an infinite.

3. The attributes of God in holy Scripture do sufficiently express him to
us, and declare as much as concerns us to know of him: for the wisdom of
God can neither be limited, nor defective: (...)* etc. Greg. Naz. orat. 31.
though his essence be incomprehensible, and unspeakable, yet his Spirit in the
holy Scripture descended to our capacity, and in certain attributes described
by his own essence.

4. The attributes of God are either affirmative, or negative: they express
the perfection of God, as far as we can understand: as when he is called
Jehovah, wise, good, almighty, just, merciful, etc. these divide or separate
from him the imperfections of the creatures, and show his admirable
perfections, by a tacit comparing him with the imperfect; as when he is called
infinite, incorruptible, immortal.

5. The attributes of God are either proper, or ^igurative: the proper are
those which are properly spoken of God, in respect of that which they import,
though improper if we consider their Modum signi^icandi.
manner or measure of signifying. The ^igurative attributes are those which are
(...), Gr. Nazi^nz. o^a^. 37. Deus nos alloquitur tanquam (...), Cl. Alexandr.
Poed. l. 1*
borrowed from humane conditions, to bring things (of themselves ineffable)
nearer to our apprehensions: as when an eye, an hand, anger, jealousy, or the
like, are attributed to God; and we must know, that some of his proper
attributes are incommunicable to any creature, as Jehovah, infinite,
omniscient, omnipotent, etc and some are communicable, according to an analogy,
measure or degrees of subordination, as Lord, King, Wise, etc.

3. Concerning Gods essential properties, we must know, that there are not in
God many, or diverse properties, because he is one of a most simple, pure and
indivisible essence; but in respect of our understanding there are many:
Concerning which we must hold, First, That the essential properties of God are
all really the one essence of God: for Deus est idem quod sua essentia v^l
natura, cum Deus non sit composi^us ex mater^^ and form^ -- oporte^ quod Deus
sit sua deitas, sua vita and quicquid aliud sic de deo praedicatur, Aquin 1. q.
3. a. 3. C.
there is nothing in God which is not God: there is no accident in him: a man
has wisdom, power, justice, but not of himself, not ever; not infinitely
neither, as his essence; for the wisdom, power, justice, etc. of a man, are
not man: but whatever is in God, is of God, and his eternal essence, of
himself subsisting independently, inseparably: neither are they after his
essence, but coeternall, and coessentiall, though they have not always been
declared to the creatures: so his Prove. 8. 22.
wisdom and omnipotency was from all eternity, though they were not
manifested till that time he had appointed for the creation of the world,
wherein he made men and Angels witnesses thereof: the same is to be understood
of his other properties, mercy, justice, patience, etc. Secondly, That these
properties are not parts of Gods essence: for that which is infinite has no
parts, and that which has parts cannot be infinite: but every essential
property is the being of God, who is indivisible, and truly one. Thirdly, The
essential properties of the deity are inseparable and incommunicable; so that
no creature can become a deity, or have such an essence, as is infinite,
omnipotent, omnipresent, etc. Fourthly, Some things absolutely spoken of God
are in the abstract, to intimate his selfe-being; as when we say he is life,
wisdom, goodness, etc. Some things in the concrete, to import to us the
reallity of his existence: as when we say he is good, just, holy, etc. in both
we understand, that whatsoever is attributed to him herein, is the essence of
God. Fifthly, We are taught in Gods Word, that he is an Genesis 1. 1. Isai. 40.
28. etc.
uncreated Joh. 4. 24.
Spirit, of Act. 17. 24. 28.
selfe-being, Psalm. 147. 5.
infinite, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. 2. Sam. 22. 31. Job 37. 16. Math. 5. 48.
perfect, 1. Tim. 1. 17.
eternal, immense, Mal. 3. 6.
immutable, 1. Tim. 1 17.
everlasting, Joh. 5. 6. Joh. 11, 25.
life it self, infinitely 1. Tim. 1. 11. Romans 1. 25.
blessed, 1. Tim. 1. 17.
wise, Joh. 21. 17. Heb. 4. 13.
omniscient, Psa^. 25. 8.
good, Psalm. 111. 4.
gracious, Psalm. 17. 7.
loving, Exodus 34. 6
merciful, Isai. 45. 21.
just, Joh. 7. 28. Psalm. 31. 5.
true, Psalm. 99. 5.
holy, Genesis 17. 1.
omnipotent, Dan. 4. 34. 35
freely and by his own independent power, doing whatsoever he will in heaven
and in earth, and all creatures: of infinite Isai. 2. 10. Psalm. 8 1. Psalm. 24.
8. etc. Psalm. 145. 11. 12. etc.
glory and majesty.

4. The fool has said in his heart there is no God: none but the fool can
think so, considering

1. What we read in the book of Nature, where that which may be known of God
is manifest, Romans 1. 19. the admirable form, mass, making, preservation of
the world, with the diversities and perpetuities of motions, demonstrate a
present God: whence could all these things at first come? who set that
admirable order and constant laws? who reduced those vast and discordant seeds
of this great fabric of the world into the harmony which still preserves it?
can any man think of an effect without a cause? thou will say, how shall we
know that God made this, who saw him creating? why, if thou Quod si ingressus
aliquam domum, omnia ex^ulta disposita, ornata vidisses, utique praesse ei
crede^es do min^m, and illis bonis rebus multo esse meliorem: iia in hac mundo
domo Minuc. s^l. Oct.
see an house, thou can easily conclude, it had some builder, if none but
the builders were privy to it; and will thou not believe Gods work except thou
see him? that all see, Opera ipsius videntur oculis, quomodo autem illa fecerit
ne mente quidem videtur. Lactan. l. 2. c. 9.
this none can. Whatsoever thou can see is not God. Neither let this seem
strange that he is invisible: thou feel the stormy winds, thou believe
they are winds, without the testimony of thine eyes, thou know thou can
not see them: thou think, speak, movest, and live by thy soul: did
thou ever see it? if thou can not see the creatures, part of thy self,
would thou examine thy invisible Creator with carnal eyes? with what sense
can thou apprehend a spirit? The eye cannot see him except he be colored:
the ear cannot receive him except he be some sound: the feeling cannot
perceive him, except he be a body: he might therefore needs pass by thee (as
Job. 9. 11.
Job said) and thou not see him, being obvious to no sense, and above and more
pure then any created understanding. Thou will say all these things are by
nature such? And what is nature; but the ordinary power of God? Which, when he
pleases, he dispenses with, parting the red sea, smiting the rock, and
bringing the fountains thence: dividing Jordan, restraining the Babylonish
sier, and the like: that all may know that he only is Lord of the creaturs, who
but spoke and they were made, Ambros: H^xam. l. 2. c. 2. Voluntas ejus mensura
r^rum est: sermo ejus ^inis est operis.
whose will is his word, and his word his work: Thou see the heavens
incessantly and without any rest turning about, day and night in uniforme, and
unwearied motion: who could have set up and furnished those admirable stars
and planets with a never-failing light? who could move them thus but a God of
infinite power? thou see and treadest on this vast ball of earth, hanging in
the midst of heavens, which turn about it, who could substaine it but God?
thou see the sea ebbing and flowing, the wonders of the deep; on earth the
plants and flowers keeping the first law of their creation, preserved by a kind
of mortal immortality, dying and reviving, as it were, in a yearly
resurrection, who can do the least of these things amongst all the creatures?
where is he in heaven or earth can imitate these things, which can give life to
the poorest fly? when thou have considered all, thou shall know, that none but
a stupid fool Psalm. 14. 1.
can think there is no God.

2 If we consider the testimony of man's own conscience, trembling at the
apprehension of sudden dangers; storms, earthquakes, thunders (as Caligula
was wont) fear of death shows an Atheist the same, if there be nothing after
death, nor God to punish the wicked, what art thou afraid of?

3 If we consider the punishments of the wicked in this life so following
sins, that it appears no fortuitous hand, or chance that struck them, but
the all-seeing just God, so fitting his rods to men's sins, that the
punishment points out the crime, so in Deus voluit declarare judi^ium, quando
super impium populum Gehennam misit e ^^lo. Salv. de Gub. Dei. l. 1.
Sodoms unnaturally burning lust, punished with a supernatural Genesis 19. 24.
shower of fire and brimstone: so in Ex^d. 1. 22. and 14. 28. Psalm. 136. 15.
Pharoahs drowning Jud. 1. 6, 7.
Adonibezecks cruelty requited with the like: it were too long to recite all
the remarkable instances of this kind, wherein the consciences of wicked men
convincing them, they have confessed with those Exodus 8. 19.
Egyptian ^orcerers, this is the singer of God.

4 If we consider the constancy of the Martyrs suffering death; where
sometimes the casting one grain of incense upon an alter might have saved
their lives: they constantly resolving, Dan. 3. 18.
we will not serve your Gods, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us. When
they 2 Cor. 1. 6. 2 Timothy 2. 10. Colos. 1. 24. Phil. 1. 12, 13, 14.
endure such varieties of torments under the Cum videat vulgus dilacerari
homines variis tormentorum generibus, and interfatigatos carnifices invictam
tenere patientiam, existiment, nec consensum tam multotorum, nec perseverantiam
morientium vanam esse nec ipsam p^tientiam sine Deo, cruciatus (...) posse
superarare, Lactant. l. 5. c. 13.
wearied hands of tormenters, in hope of that which God has promised them who
suffer for his truth, we may certainly conclude, that neither the consent of so
many, nor the perseverance of dying men, would be vain or dis^embled, and that
patience it self could never have willingly endured such tortures without the
admirable assistance of God.

5 If we consider predictions of things to come, and their certain fulfilling
in the appointed time and manner; who but God could foretell what he meant to
do? For who has been his To. 11. 34.
counselor? Who could have named I^a. 44. 28.
Cyrus and foretold so cum scias mult^ antiquam nasoereris nomen tuum esse
praedictum. Hieron. in Esai.
many years before, that he should give command for the repair of Jerusalem
but God who alone had appointed it? Who could have foretold of a deluge of
waters to Genes. 6. 3. 17.
drown the whole world, and that an hundred and twenty years before, 1. Pet.
3. 20.
while the Arc was building? Who but only he? Who could have told of Genes.
15. 13. Act. 7. 6.
Abraham's oppression in Egypt, and inheriting the Land of Canaan by his
posterity but only God? It were too long to repeat the sundry particulars
hereto belonging, all conclude a certain providence, and prescience, and that,
a Godhead.

6 If we consider the order of causes* which cannot run into infinites, but
must quickly (...). Just Mart. dial. cum Try. Jud.
come, in the computation, to the cause, which is God.

7 If we consider the common assent of all Nations, in all ages acknowledging,
that there is a God* and to be adored: all which proceeds from the weak
unextinguished light of nature, the slender remainer of the knowledge of God,
left in the conscience of man after his fall.

8. Lastly, if we consider the excellency of man's soul and body: tell me
Atheist who made that soul of thine, by which thou live and have sense and
motion? who did kindle that divine spark and lamp of reason in thee? who made
thee capable of knowledge? could any but the God of wisdom? who enlightened
that eye of thine by which thou ^ow see? could any but he that created light?
who framed those admirable parts of thy body, so as that nothing is wanting,
nothing superfluous, nothing otherwise could be devised or framed so
convenient? do thou dream of a natural propagation? tell me then what is
nature, and who made the laws thereof? Is it not (as we said) the ordinary
power of God who thus appointed? Who made the first man? If he had power to
make himself, he might more easily have repaired himself, and why then do we
dye? By this and by innumerable demonstrations, it may appear, that there is a
God though unseen of any and unknown of all wicked unbeleevers.

(...). Clem. Alex. paed. l. 1. c. 9.
There is but one God, for

1 So the Scripture (the infallible word of truth) has revealed: Sect. II.
the Lord our God is Lord only, Deuteronomy: 6. 4. Exodus: 20. 2. 3. Deuteronomy: 5. 6, 7.
Psalm: 18 31. 2. Sam; 7. 22. Mal: 2. 10. Ephesians: 4. 5. 6 1. Tim: 2. 5. there is
no other God but one: for 1 Cor. 8. 45.
though there be many that be called Gods, whether in heaven or earth yet there
is Sicut, excepta una veritate, non est alia veritas: sic absque uno vero Deo,
non est alius verus Deus: ipsa enim una veritas est naturaliter una vera
divinitas. Fulgent. de f^orth.
but one God.

2 The wonders which he has done, as they are recorded in the old and new
Testament, declare his unity being such as could proceed from none but an
Almighty, and infinite power: and two almighties or infinites there cannot be:
therefore the Psalmist said, Psalm. 86. 8.
there is none that can do like thy works.

3 By reason it must be so: for Q^od dixit Alexander in: Dario, etc. Neque
Mundum posse duobus solibus regi, neque orbem summa duo regna salvo statu ^rbis
habere, Justin. hist. l. 11.
one Sun is able to enlighten the world, one soul to animate man: how much
more can one God, who alone created all of nothing, rule, govern, and
maintain his own work?

4 That which has selfe-being, can be but one: such is God.

5 God is most perfect, and there can be but one such, as but one omnipotent,
one eternal.

6 The government of the world admits but one God: for if we should suppose
it distributed into several dynasts (as Benadads servants dreamed, 1. King.
20. 23.) there must be confusion by the discord and contrariety, or at least
a limitation of each others power, determined to certain parts and places:
either of which suppositions were impious and absurd in reason: besides that
humane Quando nunquam regni societas aut cum side coepit, aut sine cruore
desiit -- tu in coelo s^mm^^am potestatem dividi credas, c^ scindi very i^lius
ac divini imperii totam potestatem? Minuc. Foel. Octav. rexunus apibus. ^ux
unus in gregibus, in armentis rector unus, ibid.
partnership in kingdoms, never began with fidelity or ended without blood,
in irrational polities nature brings all to order, and subordination to one:
there is one king to swarm the bees: one leader of the heard: in the
reasonable, necessity, God and nature have appointed the subjects and
superiors: to avoid confusion of opinions and practices ever dangerous to
public interests, which cannot subject without unity: there must be some one
general in the army to command in chief, and one Pilate at the helm; and
shall we think that the supreme celestial power can be divided? It Is
certain, that except the power of one do unite all, that this universe
consisting of parts so different and unreconcilably contrary in nature, as fire
and water, and the one prevailing over the other, must extinguish his enemy,
and so destroy the whole; neither could the contrary motions of bodies so vast,
continue, but by the Almighty power of one, to unite^, and contain them all
in subjection and order.

7 God is omnipresent, and Sphaerae intelligibili similis, cujus centri^ est
ubique and circumferentia nusquam, Al: Alensis, (ex Trismegist.) part. 3. q. 2.
m. 2. resolut.
every where, therefore one: for in every plurality there must be limitation,
and no infiniteness, one barring the other from being in all places.

8 Lastly, the wiser sort of heathens (though they knew not God aright)
confessed that he is only one. S. Paul citing (...).
Aratus his words, for we are his generation, Act: 17. 28. shows that he
spoke but of one. (...). Lactant^lib. 1.
Orpheus is express, saying, there is but one self being: and Sybilla of whom
Plato and Aristophanes speak, is more express, there is only one God: Thales,
Miletius, Pythagoras, Anaxagoras, Aristotle, Cicero, and many (...), Phocyl.
more of them knew that there could be but one true God. in so much that Varro,
who wrote of all the fabulous Pagan Gods, acknowledged that they worship the
true God who believe him to be the Governor of the universe: the Oracles of
the devil speaking in them, for his other advantages confessed one God. Thus
much I have spoken for their sakes who are infirm.

We must believe that there are three persons in one Godhead, Sect. III.
unity in trinity, and trini^^ in unity: this Christ taught Math. 28. 19.
commanding his disciples to baptize Math. 3. 17.
In the name of the Father, Sone, and Holy Ghost: and at the baptism of Christ
this appeared, the Father saying from heaven, This is my beloved Son in whom
I am well pleased: the son was baptized and the holy Ghost descended in the
likeness of a dove: and these three are one. 1. Joh: 5. 7. the same is
grounded in many places of Scripture Joh. 14. 16. 17. Gal: 4. 6. Cor: 13. 13.

For the better understanding hereof, we must know the difference between an
essence and a person: the essence of God, is (one eternal, spiritual, simple,
selfe-being, having being of, and in no other, but giving being to all things
created. To this belong all his essential attributes, of which we speak.
(...).
A Person is a subsistence or being in the essence or substance of God, and all
the sacred persons in the Godhead, have a mutual relation one to the other,
and are distinguished one from another, not in substance or Godhead (for they
are all one substance, and one Godhead) but by some property, not common to any
one with the other: as the father from all eternity is ingenitus, unbegotten:
the son from all eternity, is begotten, not made: sicut lumen de lumine,
verus Deus de vero Deo, light of light, God of God: the Holy Ghost proceeds
from the Father and the Son from all eternity.

We must labor to know God, Sect. IV.
Quid ergo quaeris, quae nec potes scir^, nec si scias beatior ^ias. Lactant.
l. 2. c. 9.
not by a curious and vain enquiry after his incomprehensible being, which we
can never know: but by a true faith and humbled soul, believing and
considering him as he has declared himself: Christian faith says in the
Apostles words, 1 Cor. 8. 6.
unto us there is but one God: but among the professors thereof how many are
the hearts, like those Athenian altars, (Act: 17. 23.) inscribed unto the
unknown God: ignorance of ^od is the mother of all impiety, unthankfulness,
repining, infidelity, security, presuming to sin, impenitencie: therefore the
wicked are said not to know ^od: and obedience to his commandments is a sure
mark 1 John 2. 3, 4.
that we know him: Paul therefore Gal. 4. 8, 9.
wondreth at the Galatians, that knowing God by the Scriptures, they could
turn back again to beggarly and impotent rudiments: at once showing what we
ought to know of God, and what use to make thereof praying tha^ ^he Colos. 1.
9, 10.
Colossians might be filled with the knowledge of Gods will in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding, that they might walk, worthy of the Lord, and please
him in all things, being fruitful in all good works, and increasing in the
knowledge of God: this knowledge of ^od, is more acceptable to him then
sacrifice, Hos: 6. 6. without this, a man can do nothing but err, had he
never so great a zeal of God: if we will serve and please him, we must know
what he delights in: ignorance of the truth, and unity of God, begat that
monstrous idolatry of many false Gods: had they known there is but one, they
would not have worshipped many: had they known him to be omnipotent,
spiritual, wise, merciful, just; they would not (instead of him have adored
any impotent Idol, which they knew could not help, nor deliver it self from
fire or violence: neither was sensible when it was making to avoid such
mischeivous errors, it is necessary that we should know the Lord, as he has
revealed himself (least we hear that which (...). Cyr. Cathech. 4.
Christ told the Samaritan, Joh: 4. 22. ye worship that ye know not) that
there is (...). Cyr. Cathech. 4.
but one God the Almighty creator and merciful preserver of all things, three
persons, but one deity* Say not, why should I vainly strive to know him who is
Inexcogitabilis ineffabilis. Lactant. I. 1. c. 8.
incomprehensible, and unspeakable? If Cyril. Hieros Catec. 6.
I cannot drink up the whole river shall I not taste to quench my thirst?
Because I cannot receive all the beams of the Sun, shall not I use a moderate
light thereof? If I were admitted into Paradise, because I cannot eat all the
fruit, should I not taste of the tree of life? I cannot know God as he is in his
incomprehensible being: I will endeavor to know him as he is good and
gracious to me: I will consider his power, providence, mercy, and benificence,
who has with so full an hand bestowed things temporal on man, that nothing
can be desired, but his blessing on them: nothing could be wanting, would not
man be wanting to himself, in the right use of Gods favors: in the book of
Grace I will consider his great and admirable favors, and his counsel for
our salvation in Christ To conclude observe these rules.

1 Take heed that thy extravagant thoughts carry thee not by Melius est aliquid
nescire secure, quam ^ii periculo discerc. Hieron. l. 2. ep. 19.
vain and curious speculations, to pry into the Arc, whereby thou may more
easily loose thy self, then find the truth, mark and follow the wisdom of
God for thy salvation: Cum aperiret homini veritatem Deus, ^a sol^ scirc nos
voluit, quae interfuit hominem scire ad vitam consequendam: quae vero a^
profanam and curiosam cupiditatem pertinebant reticuii: Lactant. l. 2. c. 9.
when God would open the truth and mysteries of eternal life to man, he
provided that we might know those things which were necessary to obtain
eternal life: but those things which are too curious and profane minds, he
spoke not: where the Scripture has not a tongue, have thou not an ear.

2 Measure not all things which thou can know, and believe by carnal reason;
for Ambros. de poen. l. 2. c. 11.
if he said to Moses, (desiring to come nigh and to discover that fiery
mystery, which burned and consumed not) loose thy shoes from thy feet, how
much more must we put off our (...). etc. Basil. advers. Eunom. l. 1.
carnal senses, when we draw nigh so glorious and holy a God, that we may
think on him, with pure and untroubled affections?

3 Be thou (...) etc. (...). Clem. Alex. ad Gent. admon.
not over long, or curious in the contemplation of the deity: but when thou
think thereof, cover thy face with the Cherubs wing, let thy thoughts be
full of humility, sobriety, and holy asc^^tions by zealous prayer. When (...)
etc. (...). Clem. Alex. ad Gent. admon.
Jacob saw a vision in the fields of Luz, waking he said, how fearful is this
place? How much should the presence of God aw us, when we do by our
meditations, as it were come into his presence, and view his dreadful holy and
glorious Majesty? Therefore as thou look but sparingly on the Sun, thou
gazest not long (though it be the Naz: orat. 43. and Orat: Solemn. (...).
days eye) of so great and comfortable use to thee: so meditate on God. It is
behoofull and comfortable for thee to remember that God is ever present with
thee; it will aw thee in thy behavior, and sustain thee in thy sufferings;
but it is not safe to fix thy thoughts in any searching meditation of him.

4 As he that will look upon the Sun, will find it under some thin clowd:
so thou must do here: Christ in his humanity Sol justitiae nubae carnis and
mortalitatis saero ^ulgorem suum and lucem temperans, etc. Bernard. de ascens
Domin. Sermon. 4
is as the sun in a cloud: the safest way to look on the Godhead is through
the veil of his flesh: and in him to consider what a one God has showed
himself to us: in him we see his wisdom, severity, and the unsearchable
riches of his mercy, all that which is necessary for us to know concerning him.

5 Labor for Math. 5. 1.
purity of heart: the more thou performest Gods will, the Joh. 14. 21. 23. Heb.
12. 14.
more thou shall know him. Yea and a Basil. hom^ in illud. attend^ tibi ipsi*
etc.
prudent consideration of thy self, shall advance thy knowledge of God, that
thou may believe in him, and forsaking thy self, rely only on him.

A Prayer.
O Most gracious Lord God, being of beeings, unaccessible light life of life,
father of the spirits of the just, infinite, incomprehensible, Lord God of
power, wisdom, mercy, justice, truth, who dwell in that unsearchable glory
and Majesty: to which none of all thy creatures can attain: Lord, God of
gods, King of Kings: slow to anger, of great goodness and compassion: who have
been pleased out of thine own eternal love to man: (even before he was) to
elect him, and in thy creating him to put thine own glorious image of light,
and knowledge upon him, to extend a gracious hand of providence over him, to
look down from the habitation of thy glory; to consider the things which are
done among the sons of men: look down, O blessed Lord God, upon me
wretched sinner, (by the malicious tempter, and mine own wilfulness) blinded,
and deprived of that excellent light of my creation, and despoyled of that
purity of heart, conformity of will and actions, wherein I had ability to serve
and please thee: Lord despise not (as I have justly deserved) thine own handy
work, but mercifully repair all my decays* it is indeed life everlasting to
know thee and thy Sone Jesus, but none can know thee, but those to whom thou
please to reveal thy self. Lord open mine eyes that I sleep not in death,
show the light of thy countenance upon me, make me to know thee in a
comfortable participation of thy grace, and communion of thy holy and
sanctifying spirit, that I may worship thee aright by serving thee sincerely:
take off the veil from my heart, in the reading and hearing thy holy word
which testefieth thee: give me a constant assurance of thy gracious favor
toward me, and a comfortable sense of thy presence ever with me, that in all my
thoughts, words and actions, I may ever set my self in thy holy presence, and
walk with thee in purity of heart, and sanctimony of life: assure me of my
interest in thee, that I may in life and death depend upon thy fatherly
providence that I may know that thou art my God, my Savior and merciful
preserver. Lord thou art near every one of us: in thee we live, move, and have
our being. Thou passest by us and we see thee not, thou art about all our
paths, know all our ways, the words we speak, what ever we do, and the
secrets of our hearts: specially thou art near unto them that call upon thee
in truth: thou will not conceal thy self from those who faithfully seek
thee, and thy saving health: which seeing none can do, except thou draw them,
Lord find us that we may seek thee, and seeking find thee: Draw us with thy
preventing grace, that we may follow thee and supply us with that strength,
that we may not seek thee in vain: good Lord manifest thy self and reveal
thy will to us, that doing it faithfully, we may at last, with all thy Saints
and holy Angels, enjoy thy blessed presence, wherein is the fullness of joy
for ever and ever, through thy only son our Savior JESUS CHRIST. AMEN.

CHAP. IV.
Of that which we are to believe concerning. 1. Jesus Christ Gods only son
our Lord.. 2. Conceived by the holy Ghost.. 3. Borne of the Virgin Mary.

THis is a sweet and comfortable part of our Creed and has excellent promises
annexed to it: Sect. I.
when Peter confessed Christ to be the son of the living God, Christ replied,
Math. 16. 18. (...).
upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it, that is, (...). Theoph. in Math. 16. Christus Petra, Aug.
in Math. Ser. 13. In solido fidei fu^damento stantes, quod significat Petra.
Aug. de Trin. l. 2. c. 17. Hanc Petram Dominum nostrum esse ambigere non
debemus, etc. Ambr. To. 4. de So^om. c. 3.
this confession shall be an unmoved foundation of them that believe: All that
believe in him shall receive remission of sins, Act: 10. 43. So Paul said to
the G^aler, Act: 16. 31. Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved,
and all thy household: and that upon excellent ground; for God dwells in true
believers, 1. Joh. 4. 15. and the confession hereof makes the Church of God,
as the Exodus 1^. 7. 13.
blood of Paschal Lamb did the doors of Israel, that the destroyer might not
enter: as the Josh. 2. 18. and 6. 22, 23.
red clew did Rahabs house, distinguishing it from the rest of perishing Jerico.

2 In the Articles of our faith we find four titles of our Savior, 1.
Jesus. 2. Christ. 3. God's only Son. 4. our Lord.

1 This name Jesus, in the Hebrew Jehoscua a Savior, which the Greeks rendered
(...) and other languages Jesus signifies his office, which was to Math. 1. 21.
save his people from sin and death eternal, it was pre^igured in the Sea
Exodus 23. 21. (...), etc. (...), etc. Just. Mart. dial. cum Try. Jud.
type which bare his name Joshua, to whom the leading of Israel into Canaan,
and the division of the inheritance, was received; Moses Deuteronomy. 34. 1. etc.
stood on Pisga and showed the people the holy land. But Josh. 1. 1.
Joshua led them in; the law showed us heaven, and the holy way to it; but it
brought nothing to perfection by reason of our infirmity. Rom: 8. 3. but Jesus
Christ condemned sin in the flesh that the righteousness of the law might be
fulfilled in us, and we be saved in him: so Act. 10. 43.
all the Prophets give testimony to him, that (as I noted) through his name,
all that believe in him shall receive remission of sins: for the chastisement
of our peace was, upon him, and 1 Pet. 2. 24.
with his stripes we are healed.

This name was given him by the father, (...) Heb. l. (...) Sir. Math. 1. 21.
22.
and brought from heaven by the Angel Gabriel, thou shall call his name Jesus;
he is the only Savior. Act. 4. 12.
Neither is there salvation in any other: for among men there is given none
other name under heaven whereby we must be saved -- Heb. 7. 25.
He only is able perfectly to save them that come unto God by him. So often
then as we hear of this sweet name Jesus, we must remember all the comforts
through him acrewing to us: that in no affliction nor death it self, we
despair, seeing that he bears not that name in vain.

2 The second title of the Son of God, is Christ, which signifies (...)
Christus interpret Su^d^, est (...) a (...) ungo.
anointed, as also the name (...) Dan. 9. 25. a (...) unxit olco. G^. (...).
Messiah does. The Law and custom was to ancient, Kings, Priests, and
Prophets, Exodus: 9. 7. and 30. 30. and 23. 24. and therefore is Christ eminently
and above all others, called the Lords Christ, or anointed Psalm: 45: 7. Isai:
6. 1. Luk: 4. 18. Act: 10. 38. Ungebantur Reges Sacerdotes, etc. per
excellentiam (...) praecipuus ille etc. M. Shindl. Pe^t.
Kings, and Priests thus annoited were types of Christ, the anointed: not with
bodily oil compounded of Mirrhe, Calamus, and Cassia, but with the spirit of
God, which he received Joh. 3. 34.
without measure, as a fountain Joh. 1. 16.
to derive graces to others: he was appointed of God to this triple office: to
be a King to govern and preserve his people: a Priest for ever (who was once
for our redemption, (...) etc. Epiph. l. 2. Her. 55.
the Priest, sacrifice, and altar, first to offer up Heb. 9. 28.
himself a sufficient sacrifice to expiate the sin of the world; Heb. 10 12.
^4. Joh. 1. 29.
and then to mediate and appear before God for us, as the great Master of
requests, to present our petitions; to get us audience by his never-dying
merit: as it is said Heb. 12. 24.
his blood speaks better things for us then the blood of Abel, that cried for
revenge this for pardon, and atonement. And las^^y he was appointed a Prophet
to Joh. 1. 18. (...), etc. (...). Theophi lact. in loc.
reveal and teach us his fathers will: for that kingly Priesthood, and holy
kingdom, in which consists our eternal peace and happiness was to be
established by the Scepter of his word, and virtue of his holy spirit with
which he was anointed: his anointing as a Prophet, imports that he who Joh.
1. 18.
is in the bosom of the father, eternal God, took on him an humane nature,
anointed with the fullness of the spirit, that he might reveal to us the will
of his father, concerning our redemption, and salvation, and thereby manifest
that great mystery which had been C^los. 1. 26. ut qu^ olim omnibus esset
ignota: a solo* autem Deo cognos^^retur, Theod in loc.
hid from the beginning of the world, in dark Heb. 10. 1.
shadows and representations, until the fullness of time: so preaching peace
to them a far off, and to them that were near: and that he might effectually
teach us by his holy spirit and ministry of the word and sacraments unto the
end of the world, Math. 28. 20.
assisting it with his own spirit, in the speakers and faithful hearers.

The subject of this anointing was the (...), etc. Athenas. contr: Arian.
orat. 2. (...), etc. ib.
manhood of Christ, made the full storehouse of Grace: The spiritual oil we
must understand, not of the essential properties of the Godhead (as
omnipresence, infinitude, uncircumscribednesse and the like) for these are
incommunicable in respect of the incapacity of the creature: but certain
created gifts and graces placed in the humane nature: The deity of Christ is
infinite and therefore nothing can be added thereto, neither was that nature
anointed by any such addition, though the person of Christ, consisting of two
natures, was anointed and eternally consigned to the office of a mediator: as
Athanasius proved against the Arians, which being laid down, it may appear
that however men confess Christ in word, yet they deny him in deeds, who 1.
say his humane nature is omnipresent. 2. Who attribute that kingly office,
which is peculiar to Christ to any other, pretended Vicar general* or the
like. 3. Who depend on any other, or pretend to any other Priesthood and Vide
Vasq in 3. part. Tho: disp. 221. q. 83. n. 31. Azor. instit. mor. l. 10. c. 22.
4. 9. Bellarmin. To. 3. de Missa. l. 2. c. 7. Council. Trident. Sess: 22. de
sacr: Miss: Can. 3. Si quis dixerit Missae sacrificium tantum esse laudis, etc.
non autem propitiatorium, neque pro vi^is and defunctis, etc. ^fferre debere,
Anathema sit.
proper expiatory sacrifice for the living, and dead, then the Priesthood, and
once sufficient expiatory sacrifice of Christ, for our redemption once offered.
4. Who obtrude traditions of men for his doctrine who ought to be our teacher,
in whose ipse dixit we must rest, equalling them with the word of God. 5. Who
appoint other mediators of intercession, contrary to his word. 1. Tim: 2. 5.
which says there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus. 6. Who join men's merits with the merits of Christ for their
salvations 7. Who walk not worthy of their high calling in Christ: but content
themselves with the bare names of Christians, whereas Ignat ad Magn. nomen sine
actu atque o^^icio suo nihil est. quid est? dignitas in indigno nisi ornamentum
in luto? Salv. de Gab. Dei. l. 4.
to be so, makes happy: if thou have indeed received the holy 1 John 2. 27.
anointing, thou shall be a spiritual king to rule over, and subdue thy
corrupt affections: a spiritual Priest to offer up sweet smelling sacrifices
to God; that will (like that box of precious ointment powered on Christ) fill
all the house with the savor thereof: all the faculties of body and soul
shall relish of Christ: it shall enlighten thy understanding: make sin
loathsome to thee, and comfort and cheer thee in all estates: this is the oil
of gladness (when Act. 8. 39.
the Eunuch had but a little touch thereof, he went rejoicing home) so constant
and solid, that it makes men Romans 5. 3.
rejoce in afflictions, and that they Act. 5. 41.
are counted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ.

3 The third title is, his only son. We are here to consider two things. 1,
That Christ is the son of God. 2. That he is the only Son.

1 We are in two relations to consider Christ, as he is a Son, he is of the
father, begotten not made, as the rays are of the Sun only we must take
heed, that we fix not on any finite thing further then it may serve to bring
home to our finite understanding, some notions of infinites: this mystery is
without, and above all comparison: as he is God, he is of himself, neither
begotten, nor proceeding: for as the essence of the Father, is its own
selfe-being, so is the Godhead of the Son, for they are not diverse Godheads,
or beings, but one and the same: but as he is the Son, he is of the Father;
as light of light, very God of very God:

2 The Son is of the same substance with the Father, and the deity of the
Father is not lessened by the same, nor is the Son divided from the Father:
the Father communicates his whole nature to the Son; not In illa trinita^is
natura, sic totum unum est; ut nihil ibi possit seperari vel dividi: sic totum
aequale est; ut nihil ibi majus a^t minus valeat inveniri. Fulgent. de ^ide
orth.
by division (for infinites have no parts, and therefore cannot be divided) but
by an incomprehensible, and unspeakable communication of the whole essence of
the Father to the Son, so, as that they are one and the same God, coequall,
coeternall: for before all time he was with the Father, Prove. 8. 2. and Joh: 1.
1. Phil: 2. 6. Joh: 16. 15.

3 He is the only Son by nature (...). Theoph. in Math. 16.
not adoption: we are Gods Sons, by adoption, not by nature, as he is,

4 The fourth title is, our Lord, so the Psalmist styles him Psalm: 110. 1. so
Math: 22. 44. Act: 2. 36. Let all the house of Israel know for a certainty,
that he is made of God Lord and Christ. This Jesus I say, whom ye have
crucified: So 1. Cor: 8. 6. We have one God -- one Lord Jesus Christ. See Rev:
1. 5. Phil: 2. 10. It is not unworthy our noting, that when this Lord of Lords
was come into the world, God's secret hand of providence, made the great Master
of the world, Augustus Caesar, veil bonnet, by a strict edict commanding that
no man should give or receive the title of Lord. Christ is our Lord, by right.
1. of creation, Joh: 1. 3. 2. Redemption, 1. Cor: 6. 20. 3. Preservation and
government, Ephesians: 5. 23 that we may obey him, trust in him, and acknowledge
him our Lord and God, as Joh. 20. 28.
Thomas did: that we may worship him in the unity of the sacred Trinity, and
finally commend our spirits into his hands, as the first Martyr did, Act. 7. 59.
Lord Jesus receave my spirit.

1 We are also to believe that Jesus Christ our Lord was conceived by the holy
Ghost: Sect. II.
as Luk: 1. 35, this is that great mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16
God manifested in the flesh: for though he was to be truly man consisting of
an humane body, and reasonable soul, of the seed and posterity of Abraham: yet
was he not conceived of humane propagation, but an extraordinary way. The first
Adam, in whom all dye, was not begotten by man, but framed and made by the
power of God: and so it became the second Adam by whom we are restored to life,
to become man by the immediate sanctifying power of God, whose word caused the
vast seeds of the world to conceive, and frame the several parts thereof, the
heavens, air, water, and earth, as now we see them. And so the spirit of God
was said to (...) motabat super, etc. Montan. Schindler. Penteg. incubuit:
metaphorice fovit, con^ovit, avium more movit, sicut alae avis quae movetur
super nido suo. So Deuteronomy. 32. 11.
move upon the face of the deep, Gen: 1. 2. which is spoken to express an
omnipotent and Chrysostom. says hereon, (...). etc. hom. 3. in Genes.
lively efficacy of the spirit and power of God, digesting, forming, and
framing the creatures according to his wisdom; so must we here understand
Christ's humane conception, to be by the power of Gods spirit so commanding, and
therefore so framing Christ of a sanctified mass, as that the deity, and
humanity of Christ, became one person; Neither may we think that the father,
and the eternal word and son of God, were here excluded, because the action
is attributed to the holy Ghost; but this is said, to intimate, that this was
so by the free gift and grace of God (for it is said the power of the most high
shall overshadow thee, Luk: 1. 35.) that the manhood of Christ being but a
creature, should be so anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows,
that it should become a part of the son of God, not by confusion of natures,
but union of the Godhead and manhood of Christ into one person; and because the
father and the son wrought this by the holy Ghost, proceeding of them both, the
whole sense is, as if it were said, the spirit of God caused him thus to be
conceived, after an extraordinary manner.

2. Three things are here consiberable.

1 That the body of Christ was of the body of the Virgin, that he might be,
according to Gods promise* of the seed of Abraham: his humane soul was infused
by a power of God into the sacred body prepared for it: both of them from the
moment of their being, having their subsistence in the person of the son of
God, Christ.

2. It was sanctified and made Luke 1. 35.
most holy: such it became him to be, who redeemed and saved us, free from all
corruption and sin: for he was to cleanse the first Adams sin de rived to
his posterity, and to overcome sin in our flesh, by taking on him our flesh
without sin: that he might by his suffering, satisfy Gods justice in the
same nature which had offended, and fulfill the whole Law of God to which we
were bound under pain of damnation, and that he might be able to mediateto God
for us, which none but the perfectly holy could do.

3 The two natures, the Godhead and the manhood of Christ, were so united in
his conceptions, as that they make but one person, very God and very man: there
is an union in nature, as the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one God: and an
union in person; as when two things in nature differing are so united as that
they make but one person: so the body and reasonable soul make the person of a
man: so the Deity and humanity of Christ, (one being a spiritual, infinite,
incomprehensible being, the other a bodily finite creature) are indivisibly
united into one sacred person Christ Jesus: so that his humanity is a nature,
but not a person, but in the deity, which uniteth it self most immediately to
the soul, and by it to the body of Christ: now (as has been said) though
these are indivisibly united, yet is there no confusion of natures, the Verbum
vero carn^m dicimus factum: non in mutando quod erat, sed suscipiendo quod non
erat. nostra auxit, sua non minuit Gregor. ep. Quir. l. 9. (...).
humanity becomes not a Deity: nor the Deity an humanity: neither do
either of them loose their essential properties by this union: as in the union
of Can^or in ferr^. Basil.
the fire with the iron: the iron becomes not fire, nor the fire iron: as in
the union of the soul with the body, the soul becomes not corporal, nor
the body spiritual: the manhood is unspeakeably anointed with grace and Psalm.
2. 9.
dignity above all creatures in heaven and earth, and received from the deity,
admirable Joh 6. 33. Joh 5. 24. 26.
power to quicken us: yet is it not become a deity.

They that labor under their natural corruption from the first Adam, must
here be comforted, we are sanctified in the second: for Hebr, 2. 11.
he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are of one: we are in our
regeneration as truly of his mystical body, as he was in his conception, of
our natural body, or we of Adam's, We were conceived and Ephesians. 2. 3:
borne in sin, the grievous Romans 7. 15. 24.
remaind's whereof we are eftsoone sensible of, now in our estate Gal. 5. 17.
of regeneration: yet here is our comfort, Christ our Lord and Savior was
conceived by the Holy Ghost: he was sanctified for us; and his anointing
runs down Psalm. 133: 2.
like that sacred ointment, to the skirts of his clothing, the poorest of all
his Saints.

1 We are next to believe concerning Christ, Sect. III.
that he was borne of the Virgin Mary: therefore said the Angel) Luke 1. 35.
that holy thing which shall be borne of thee shall be called the Son of God:
that he might be known to be very man, though he were miraculously conceived,
God would have him borne after the manner of men. That he was borne of Mat. 1.
18. Luke 2. 5. 6.
the Virgin, the holy Ghost shows clearly.

2 Though the first Adam were made, not borne, yet was it necessary that the
second should be borne, not made of new mold. 1. How else should sin have
been expiated in the same nature which had sinned? 2. That the woman 1. Tim.
2. 14.
first in the transgression might become an instrument of man's reparation, as
she had been of his ruin: hence is the seed of the woman mentioned in the
first promise, Genes. 3. 15. and Christ was Gal 4 4. Ille ex te assumet and
faciet virum, quiin principio ^e fecit and assumpsit ex viro. Pet, Chrysostom. ser.
142.
made of the woman.

3 Of Virginitate sponsa, faecunditate matter viri nescia, partus conscia. ib.
Chrysos. ser. 146.
a Virgin: as the (...). etc. Just. Martyr. dial cum Try: Jud.
first Adam was taken out of the virgin earth without the concurrence of man:
so was the second Adam of a virgin: 'twas long before promised, Isay, 7. 14.
behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and thou shall call his name
Immanuel: God with us: which the Evangelist shows fulfilled in Christ, Math.
1. 20, 21, 22, 23. she was affianced to an husband, yet a virgin: that Satan
might not know him, till he had tempted him, and found him invincible: that he
might have experience of all our miseries without sin: this was as that
eastern gate of the Temple, through which the Prince only might pass.

4 She was of the seed of Abraham Gal. 8.
in whom all the nations of the earth are blessed (that is, the believers of
all nations) of the lineage of David: so much fulfilled the prophecy, Isai. 9.
7. He shall sit upon the throne of David: and so was he truly styled the
son of David.

5 He was borne at Bethleem (as was foretold, Mich. 5. 2.) not at Jerusalem,
nor Nazaret, but at the town of David: the providence of God so ordering it,
Augustus Caesar (who dreamed of nothing less then a Savior then and there to
be borne) commanded in his general tax, Luke 2. 1. etc.
that every one should go to his own Tribe to be taxed: therefore Joseph and
Mary went accordingly from Nazaret to Bethleem: at the same season the Virgin
Mother's time was accomplished, and she brought forth Christ.

6 This was in the fullness of time foreordained of God: Gal. 4. 4.
there was a certain time when Israel, like Jud. 6. 37. 38
Gedeons fleece, had the dew of heaven, when the floor (the Figurare primum
populum Israel, ubi erant sancti cum gratia ^oelesti tanquam pluvi^ spirituali:
and post^a^ ^igurare ecclesiam toto orb diffusam, etc. Aug. q. sup. Jud. and
Irenae l. 3. c 19.
rest of the world) was dry: herein Israel was to be exercised under the
rudiments of the law; afterward to be made free, as heir out of his minority;
till their obstinacy came upon them, and they were to be rejected. Christ came
in the last days, Isai. 2. 2. toward the end of the 70. weeks spoken of by
the Prophet Daniel, which were to be reckned from the end of their Babylonish
captivity: about 3900 years after the creation: when the long prefixed mark
of his coming (the departure of the scepter from Judah) now appeared in the^
subjection to the Roman Empire, when Herod was Viceroy of Judea. Dan. 9.


7 The manner of Christ's birth was obscure and mean in the eyes of the world,
as besitted the state of humiliation into which he then entered. For 1. so it
was prophesied of him, Isai 53. 2. 2. He would thus exercise the faith of the
elect, and confound the carnal wisdom of worldly men, esteeming none good or
happy, but the prosperous, rich, mighty, and glorious. 3. Thus would he be
borne poor, to make us rich, to express his love to us. 4. Thus he would
teach us humility: how intolerable is the pride of sinful man, repining at
some wants, when the son of God was thus humbled for our sins? 5. He would
have this difference between his first and second coming: first he descended
like rain into the fleece, without noise; he came not then to make any
external political ^^changes in the kingdoms of the world, but only to
overthrow the spiritual kingdom of Satan: and to work, not the Jews
temporal redemption (as they dreamed) but their eternal salvation who believe
in him, both of Jews and Gentiles. And so the manifestation of Christ's birth,
was not to the kings or great Doctors of the Law, but to poor shepherds
first, Luke 2. 8, 9.
though not by men but glorious Angels.

Having considered these things we must learn.

1 To subject our reason to the word of God in assurance that all things are
possible to him which he will, and certainly true which he speaks. Thou will
say, but how shall I do that I may be assured thereof? I conceive these rules
very necessary here in. 1. That thou understand, this word is not discerned by
any light but by the same spirit which indicted it. Therefore said our Savior
when the spirit of truth is come, He will lead you into all truth. These things
seem foolish and improbable to our carnal man because he wants the spirit
of God, Joh. 16. 13. (...), etc.
whereby he might be able to discern, those things which are not otherwise
then spiritually discerned. 2. If thou read or hear the Gospel; be sure thou
bring a believing heart; resolved in this one principle at least; Gods word is
certainly true, though many particulars are above my apprehension: 1 Cor. 2.
14.
it is but lost labor for him to take the holy word of life into his hand, who
is resolved to believe no more, then that which he can bring within the reach
and dimension of his own carnal reason, which erreth grossly in many things
obvious to common sense. 3. In this, as many other matters necessary to be
believed, the only way being to apprehend by faith, do thou not attempt the
examination of all by reason, but rather renounce it as unable to measure these
things, as thou art to take up the vast ball of earth into thy hand, or measure
the orbs of heaven by the span: the rather in this because the holy Ghost has
told us, it is the great mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh. 4.
Lastly, remember when ever thou come to read or hear, Conceptum ^^r^ginis
noli discutere sed creed, P. Chrysol. Sermon. 141. 1 Timothy 3. 16.
of how high a consequence that is to which thou art come (it is no vain word
concerning thee, but thy life, and salvation if thou believe and obey: Deuteronomy.
32. 4^
or thy destruction on the contrary) and thou will easily be persuaded to
prepare thy self by earnest prayer to God for his assistance, and blessing,
who only has the key of* David which opens and no man can shut: the want of
this one duty is the cause of so much unbeleefe, and impiety, in so abundant a
light of the Gospel as we had long amongst us.

2 That thou know that Christ thus conceived, and borne has sanctified our
conception, and birth in sin: thus are the fountains of our natural
propagation healed: holy wedlock declared an undefiled bed, and sacred
virginity interressed in eternal attendance on Christ the Lamb of God.

3 To be contented in every estate; and comforted (though in a dejected)
considering to what Christ descended for thy sake.

4 To prepare and magni^ie the inestimable love of God Venit ad nos, non
quomo^o ipse poterat, sed quomodo illum nos vi ^ere poteramus^ ipse enim in sua
in^narrabili glori^ adnos ^^nire poterat, sed nos mag ^i^udinem glori^e su^e
portare non poteramus. and propter hoc quasi insantib^s l^^ nobis semetipsum
(...), quod er^ secundum hominem ejus ad^^n^us, ut quasi a mamilla carnis ^jus
enutriti and eum qui est ^^^ortalitatis panis -- in nobis ipsis ^um continere
possimus. Irenae. l. 4. c. 74 sinc.
showed us in Christ. Rev. 14 4.
So did the holy Angels, Luk: 1. 46. 47. Luk: 2. 14.

5 Where thou have the promises of God for thy assurance, not to fear, how
impossible, or improbable soever they seem to flesh and blood, they shall be
fulfilled in their appointed time and manner. How impossible did this promise
seem to carnal reason, a Virgin shall conceive and bear a son: the 'B.
Virgin her self was herewith posed, -- how can this be? Yet was it fulfilled
in the fullness of time, though many ages after the promise made. Though he
seem to delay yet expect it, that cannot fail which God promises: so also
think of the promises of thy resurrection and eternal life: what ever carnal
reason (witty to its own destruction) or the malicious tempter can object
against the word of truth, in due time it shall be fulfilled.

CHAP. V.
What we are to believe concerning.. 1. Christ's suffering under Pontius Pilat,
his crucifying, death and burial.. 2. His resurrection.. 3. Ascension.. 4.
Sitting at the right hand of God the Father.. 5. His coming to judge.

1 THe humiliation of Christ is considerable. 1. Sect. I.
In general comprehending all that he suffered in the Phil. 2. 7.
form of a servant: the whole curse of the Law; all kinds of a^^lictions both
of body and soul, quae a peccato sunt, non quae ad peccatum: all the effects
of sin without sin; as in his birth, circumcision, subjection to men,
temptations, blasphemous Heb. 12. 3.
contradictons, and contumelies; desertions of friends, and most injurious
malice of enemies: apprehension of his fathers wrath against sin, the pains
of death and torments of hell, all that which is incident and due to sinful
man, (sin only excepted) whereby he became the Isay 53. 3.
man of sorrows. 2. In particular that which he suffered under Pontius Pilat,
the then Roman deputy for that Province.

2 Concerning the general, we must observe.

1. That the divine nature (though personally united to the humane) suffered
not, but only the humane: yet the suffering is attributed to the person: and
sometimes to the deity, by reason of the communication of proprieties, Act. 20.
28.
and union of the two natures in one person, so God is said to have purchased
the Church with his own blood: because his blood who is truly God and man, was
shed for the redemption of his Church. As the Athenian Codrus disrobing
himself, Plutar^.
and falling into the enemies quarters in the habit of a poor man with a
burden on his back, that he might steal a death, to make his people
conquerers, according to the Oracle, which said, that people should overcome,
whose king should be slain in the battle. So Christ assumed the form of a
servant, and became of no repute, so bare he the Cross, that his own knew him
not, but slew the Lord of life, that in his death, who so loved us, we might
be more then Conquerers. He was impatible in his deity, Romans 8. 37.
therefore he assumed an humanity which could suffer that he might become a
ransom and sacrifice for our sins; that the dignity and merit of his
passion might be vallewed according to the dignity of the person suffering:
now because the worth of his passion was to be estimated from the united deity:
therefore his temporal and short suffering, was of infinite merit, to redeem
and free us from that which we should else have suffered to eternity.

2 That the suffering of Christ was neither accidental or casual, nor soly in
the power of man: for though there were many actors in his sufferings, Herod,
Pilat, Jews, Gentiles, Judas and the devil, Act. 2 23.
yet all these did only that, Act. 4. ^27, 28.
which the hand and counsel of God determined before to be done; Luke 24. 26.
who would never suffer evil to be done, but that his infinite wisdom can
dispose, and his goodness overcome evil, that he can draw good out of it.

3 This suffering of Christ for us, was fully and soly satisfactory to the
justice of God for all our sins: here in his passion differed from all
others: they may truly say as that happy Convert on the cross, Luke 23. 41.
we are indeed righteously here: but there was no sin in him. No passion of
man ever has been, or ever can be meritorious, and propitiatory, or
satisfactory for his own sins, much less for any others: but Christ's passion
was, 1 Jo^. 2. 2.
and is satisfactory, and propitiatory for the sins of all the elect: if all
men should have suffered the torments of Hell, for the redemption of one soul,
they could never have satisfied Gods justice for that one: but Christ's once
suffering therefore fully satisfied for all, because, it was of infinite value
and merit.

4 The end of Christ's suffering was our redemption of body and soul: for so
much he redeemed as he assumed to redeem: Jo^. 3. 16.
in the creation he showed his wisdom power, and providence: but here his
justice, in that he spared not his own son standing in the place of our
surety, and his mercy in that he spared us; which is a singular comfort, when
we consider that he dyed not in vain.

5 The limits of Christ's passion reached from his conception to his
resurrection: the more evident beginnings whereof were in his life, and the
co^summation then when he cried upon the cross it is finished.

6 The place where his last, and consummatory passion began, was a garden:
there sin invaded man, there his soul began to be heavy to the death. Math.
26. 38. while he sweat water and blood: neither is it to be wondered at why
Christ was so sorrowful herein, whereas some of his Martyrs have rejoiced in
their sufferings; for these were assured of their sins remission, by the
sufferings of their surety Christ; but he felt at once the weight of all the
sins of the elect: he was for a time left to the extremest sense of his
fathers anger, and the intensest torments of hell: but they in the midst of
their sufferings, had a comfortable sense of Gods gracious presence, assuring
them of their reconciliation with God, and remission of their sins by Christ:
now whereas we read that he freely laid down his life for his, and none could
else have taken from him (I say not Pilat, Jews or Gentiles, barred, if he had
pleased, by legions of Angels) but not age, Joh. 10. 15. 17.
not death it self, to which all others were subject by sin, but he was
therefore exempt because he had no sin: and again, that he did in the
bitterness of his passion deprecate, and pray the cup might pass away, we
must know that these flowed ex diversis principiis: though he deprecated the
wrath of God, and that death, as man subject to all our infirmities without
sin, yet had he therein relation to Gods will, and so, (...), Cyril. Hier.
Catech. 13.
willingly completed the work of our redemption: therefore foreseeing and
foretelling of his passion, he Math. 20. 18.
would yet go up to Jerusalem, as Jonahs crying, Tollite and mit^ite in mar^,
voluntariam Domini dicat passionem. P. Chrysol. Ser. 37.
take and cast me into the sea prefigured his voluntary passion: that he would
not die was of the infirmity of the slesh, which naturally and without sin
In quantum est quidam appetitus naturalis, refugiebat mortem. Thom. Aquin. in
Hebr. 5. -- and quan^um ad hoc orabat, ut ostenderet se verum homin^m, ib. Sed
voluntate ^onsequente rationem deliberatam, -- volebat mori. ib.
fears and shunneth death as destructive: that he would die, was the
promptitude of spirit, for that his death was necessary for man's salvation: so
said he, Math. 26. 41.
the spirit is willing but the flesh infirm; relating not only to his
disciples drouzinesse.

The circumstance of this passion were suchlike. The Jews consult to take him:
the conspiracy is hatched in the chief Priests house: they, the Scribes, and
Elders, though they knew he was no man of violence, send out an armed company
against him: (an evil conscience is never secure) they came to take him (as a
malefactor) into that place which he had chosen to pray in: that ought to have
been a sanctuary to him, and (as the horns of the Altar) free from pursuit:
Judas, a disciple, becomes their guide: his treason's signal is a kiss (as
many now honor him with their lips, whose hearts and lives crucify him
afresh, and under a fair profession betray his truth) they take him who with
his word could cast them down; he causes Peter to sheath his sword, and
heals one who came to destroy him: he will not have his cause maintained by
the sword, having otherwise appointed to destroy the kingdom of sin;
Pastores facti sumus non percussores: Greg. ^p.
we were assigned for pastors, not smiters: they Joh. 18. 12.
bind him and lead him away, to Annas first, and after to Caiphas: his
disciples sled, the Math. 26. 31. Zach. 13. 7.
shepherd smitten, the flock is scattered.

This sacred history affords us many good rules.

1 In thy places of pleasure, remember where Christ's passion, for thy sins,
began.

2. As sorrows increase, entreat thy fervency in prayer, so did Christ. Luk:
22. 14.

3 Despair not when God answers not thy prayers, with that which thou
desire: Christ was heard when he wept and Heb. 5. 7.
offered up strong cries, yet the cup did not pass from him: if God give us
something better then we ask (as he ever does, if not that thing we ask) we
are heard.

4 Submit to Gods will: so did Christ: not as I will, but as thou will, Mat.
26. 39. 42. Non sunt onero^a tolerantibus, sed ^ol^ra re nolentibus, ^ive e^im
gra^ia hae^, sive levia animus toleran^is facit. Salvian^ de gub. Dei lib. 1.
temporal a^^lictions never made any man unhappy, but the impatient and
wicked: it cannot be an unhappy state in which Christ is: neither the malice of
those who to the extreme danger of religion, seem and are not religious,
their conspiring against thee, their dealing disspightfully as with a
malefactor, bands, convention before magistrates, friends forsaking thee:
malicious accusations by false witnesses, no nor unjust condemnation to death,
can Eti^^ in c^^enis, atque suppl^^iis b^atum ^sse sapi^^^^m. ib. Salv.
make thee unhappy: all this Christ suffered, leaving us an example of patience.

7 The high Priest examined him: the officer Joh. 18. 22.
smote him: Annas sent him bound to Caiphas. Peter denied him: thence they lead
him to the judgment hall into which his hypocritical accusers, v. 28.
would not enter least they should be defiled: hypocrisy strains at gnats and
swallows Camels: they made a conscience of going in among the Heathens, being
to eat the Passover, but not of murdering the Lord of life: Pilat examined
him (sinful man fitteth to judge the just Judge of all men) offered to deliver
him, whom he knew delivered Math. 27. 18.
of envy: they Joh. 18. 40.
preferred Barabbas a Mark 15. 7.
murderer Joh. 12. 1, 2.
Pilat to please the people scourges Jesus: the soldiers plat a crown of
thorns and put it on his head, and a purple robe on him, they monk and smite
him: Pilat so present's him to the people in scorn and di^ision: the chief
Priests and Officers, lead the peoples suffrages, ringing out their, crucify
him, crucify him. Pilat startled, as by his dreaming wives admonition, so more
at their mentioning his being the son of God, goes again into the Pretory,
reexamineth him: seek^s to deliver him; yet for fear of complaint to Caesar
(so powerful an adversary to good conscience is the love of this world)
against his often acquitting him as innocent, he once for all condemns him,
us guilty; and delivers him to the popular rage to crucify him.

8 They lead him away bearing his Cross to Golgatha the place of skulls:
called also Calvarie, Vid August. Ser. de temp. 71 Epipham haer. 46.
where some think Adam was buried: Athanas. To. 2. quae^t. ad Antioch. Tertul.
adver. Ma^t. l. 2. Chrysostom. in joh. 19. 17. Theop. ib.
but others are of a contrary judgment. One thing is certain, it was the area
damnatorum, and Lev. 24. 14.
place of execution; and it is most likely that Gods providence so disposed,
that he should there be crucified, as there to set up the Trophe of his victory
on the Cross (in that where sin and the punishment thereof had abounded in
the execution of notorious malefactors, Hieronym. in Math. 27. etc. in Ephesians.
6. Rupertus and Bonoventur. in Luke 23. 13.
grace should manifest it self in his suffering there, and that most
ignominious kind of death) so also that he might take away the curse from the
elect so suffering, and that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
Prophet, he made his grave with the wicked, and was counted with
transgressors, Isai, 53. 9, 12. this place was without the city, having a
resemblance of that which was to come; that is that the maine benefit of his
passion, was Bonavent. in Luc.
not to be shut up in Jerusalem, but to be derived also to the Gentiles, who
were without: so he suffered in the place of sinners, that it might import his
suffering for sinners: other moralls the Apostle opens, as to Heb 13. 11, 12,
13.
teach us to go out of our carnal affections, and love of the world to
Christ: and so he showed himself the only satisfactory sacrifice prefigured in
all the legal sacrifices, whose bodies were burnt without the gates of
Jerusalem. Here they crucified him between two thieves, the one converting the
other dying in his obstinacy: having so done they parted his garments among
them, and cast lots for his seamelesse coat: thus was fulfilled that of the
Psalm: 22. 18. Jesus commended his mother to John; thirsting, they gave him
vinegre to drink, as was also foretold, Psalm: 69. 21. having received that, he
said, it is finished; that is all the types have their meaning accomplished,
and the justice of God is satisfied: so bowing his head he gave up the ghost.

9 The certainty of his death appeared when the Joh. 19. 33. 36.
^ouldiers coming to break the legs of the other two, finding him already
dead, Exodus 12. 46.
they spared him, Number: 9. 12.
(that the Psalm. 34. 20.
Scripture might be fulfilled, which says a bone of him shall not be broken)
but pierced his side with a spear, so that blood and water came out. At this
time the Sun was darkened so fearfully, that some are said to have concluded,
that Dionis. Aareop. (...).
either the Godhead suffered, or sympathized with that which did so. Math. 27.
51.
The veil of the Temple rent, to Ephesians. 2. 14.
show the way into the holiest made manifest: and that the stop or middle wall
of partition between Jews and Gentiles, is taken away. The stones clave in
sunder: the graves opened: the earth trembled. And after his resurrection, many
of the dead Saints arose, and were seen in the holy city: to show that in his
death, death was conquered, and that the virtue of his resurrection, should
shortly after declare it self in the Saints rising from the death of sin.
The Math. 27. 54.
Centurian seeing this, acknowledged him the Son of God: the Luke 23. 47, 48.
multitude smote their breasts and returned home.

10 Joseph of Arimathea, begg's the body of Jesus, takes it from the Cross: he
and Nicodemus imbalme it, put it into linen clothes, with the spices, and bury
it in a new Sepulcher in a garden nigh the place: the providence of God thus
disposing, to convince their malicious cavills, who might pretend that either
his resurrection was caused by the virtue of some other servant of God there
formerly buried; as one was 2. King. 13. 22. Theophyl. in Joh. 19.
at the touch of Elisha's bones: or that it was some other rose again not
Jesus. He was Ut officia tota mortis impleret, Chrysol. ut mors morte
moveretur. ib, Ser. 59.
buried according to the Scriptures, 1. Cor: 15. 4. Psalm: 16. 10. Non relinque^
(...) the 70. Chrystom. Oecumenius, etc. give it by (...) as we read Act. 2 31.
(...) etc. which may be taken for the whole man, as Romans 13. 1. So Genesis 1. 30.
Genes. 9. 4. Exodus 21. 23. Levit. 17. 14. and (...) though the Rhemists and
Jesuits of Deway translate that hell and in their margent Limbo patrum, yet
does it properly signify the grave, and sometimes cannot reasonably be
translated hell, as may appear Job. 17. 13. James 37. 35. where the same word
is used.
thou will not leave my life in grave. There were many witnesses thereof:
Joseph Nicodemus, the women, the Centurian with his band, the Jews sealing the
tomb: Thus he descended to the lowest step of his humiliation: that he might
follow death into the heart of his dominion, and conquer him in his imperial
seat, destroying, as it were with his own sword the Goliath, who had the power
of death: as it is written, O Hos. 13. 14.
death I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction, that he might
sanctify our house of rest, taking away the horror of the grave; the curse of
death being abolished, and the dead loosed from their bonds, as shall appear
in the appointed hour.

Sect. II.
We are next to believe the first degree of Christ's exaltation in that he rose
again from the dead the third day 1 Cor. 15. 4.
according to the Scriptures 1. Cor: 15. 4, reckning the later part of the
first day, the second entire, and the beginning of the third: ( Math. 16. 21.
So Christ told his Disciples, Mark. 9. 31. and 10. 34.
that he must go to Jerusalem, Luke 9. 31. and 18. 33.
suffer many things of the Elders and be killed and raised again the third
day: this was so publicly known before his death, Act. 10 40.
that his Math. 27. 62. etc.
enemies remembered and spoke of it; Math. 17. 23.
so that this was the reason why they sealed up, and set a guard upon the
Sepulcher: God so disposing that they should be made witnesses of the truth
thereof, who most opposed it, which had they not been, they might with less
impudency have said, his Disciples came by night and stole him away. The Angel
testifying his resurrection, Luke 24. 6, 7,
refers them to that he had told them before: the type also agrees, as
Math. 12. 40.
Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales belly, so shall the Son
of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth: so long he
would lie in grave, to manifest the truth of his death: but no longer, because
Act. 2 5. ^sal. 16. 9.
he was not to see corruption; and least the faith of his Disciples should by a
longer delay have been in hazard: and lastly, to fulfill his word concerning
the same, for the confirmation of our faith, seeing his word, concerning his
own death and resurrection, came truly to pass, why should we doubt of the
same word concerning our resurrection. In this three days the Deity was the
middle band between the body and the humane soul (that it might see
corruption proper to sinners) as before the humane soul was between the Deity
and body: in all he became a pledge of our incorruption and immortality in the
life to come: to consirme us herein, he manifested himself to many after his
resurrection, by the space of forty days. See 1. Cor: 15. 5. and Act: 1. 3.
Sect. III.


We are next to believe his ascension into heaven: the 2 Cor. 12.
third heaven where God manifests his glory to the Angels, Heb. 6. 20.
and blessed spirits: this was Act. 1. 2. 9, 10.
in the sight of his Disciples, when he had sufficiently instructed them, and
confirmed them by his often appearing to them, and conversing with them. He
ascended from Luke 24. 50. Act. 1. 9.
the Mount of Olives, near Bethanie: when he had lifted up his eyes and
blessed them, he went apart from his Disciples, and while they beheld was
taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight: to teach us no more to
seek him with carnal eyes. The ancient Prophecies Ephesians. 4. 8.
foretold this, Psalm: 68. 18. Thou have ascended up on high, thou have led
captivity captive. Heb. 9. 7.
The high Priest entering into the holy of holies prefigured it. It
demonstrateth the Justice of God fully satisfied, and our sins discharged,
Heb: 9. 12. If any one sin of the elect had been unexpiated, he had still
remained in death: but he not only rose again for our justification, but is
ascended into heaven the first fruits, Quemadmodii enim nobis arr^abonem
spiritus reliquit, it a and a nobis arrhabonem ^arnis accepit, and vexit in
^^lum pignus totius summaeillu^ qua^ ^oqu redigendae: securae estote caro and
sanguis, usur pastis enim and regnum Dei in Christo Tertul. de resur. carn. c.
51. Heb. 10. 19.
and earnest of our ascen^ion, carrying up with him a portion of our flesh and
blood, as it were to take livery and seison for us, as he gave us the earnest
of his Spirit, thereby to make us secure of inheriting the kingdom of God.

Thus he declared himself the very Son of God, who came from heaven,
ascending, who before had descended from thence, Ephesians: 4. 10. Thus became he our
faithful high Priest to appear before God for us; to open to us the way to
the holy of holies: to prepare us place, and give us confidence against all
Satan's machinations. Romans 8. 34.
Who shall condemn us? It is Christ who is dead for us, yea rather who is
raised again, who also sits at the right hand of God, and intercedeth for
us: which was prefigured in the high Priests, bearing the names of the people
engraven on the stones upon the shoulder, of the Ephod Exodus 28. 9.
for a m^moriall of the children of Israel, which he was to bear before the
Lord.

Next we must believe, Sect. IV.
that Christ now sits Hebr. 1. 3.
at the right hand of God the Father. So Mark: 16. 19. so was it foretold, Act.
5. 31.
Psalm: 110. 1. Math: 22. so the Scriptures evidently speak: yet must we not
with the foolish Vid. Socrat. Eccles: hist. l. 6. c. 7.
Anthropomorphites, dream that God is like man, that he has a right hand and
a left: this is a translatitious and borrowed manner of speaking sitted to our
understanding, God pleasing thus to descend to our infirmity. Men give honor
by setting others at their right hand, as Solomon set his mother, 1. King: 2.
19. but there is indeed Nihil erit in regno tuo sinis^rum. Hieron.
no le^t hand or inferior place between the Father and the Son: all is In
ho^ appare bit majestatis equalitas, sin^^ inferiorem patre, nec post^riorem
suspexeris. Bern. sup. Cant. Sermon 76.
equal he is neither less then the Father nor inferior to him. Sedet ad
dextr^m quia patris and filii una d^it^s, par potest^s, Ch^ysost. Ser. 6.
It is said at his right hand, Divinae virtutis ordine, non honor is humani.
ib. Sermon. 62. Deus loc^ nescit, divinit^ recipit nil si^istrum. ib. Ser. 75.
in respect of the order of divine power, Nazianz. orat. 37. (...) Supra modum
e^exit.
not humane honor. God is not circumscribed in place nor has the Deity any
left hand. ^importeth here a wonderful exaltation to power, authority, and
majesty: and so the Apostle expresses it; Phil: 2. 9 He has highly exalted
him, and given him a name above every name: as also. 1 Cor: 15. 25. He must
reign till he has put all his enemies under his fect. It imports an
entrance into, and full possession of his kingdom over all, as he says Luk:
24. 26. Ought not Christ to suffer these things, and so to enter into his
glory? So Act: 5. 31. This Jesus has God lifted up by his right hand to be a
^phes. 1. 20.
Prince and Savior: far above all principalities and power, and might, and
dominion, and every name that is named not only in this world, but also in that
which is to come, and has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be
the head over all things: the meaning is, that Christ does actually reign in
heaven with the Father in infinite glory and majesty. And this honor is thus
peculiar to him, that God the Father will govern all things by him: and that
because he only, and none other, is able thus to perform all parts of King
and Savior of his Church: yet must we know that in his several acts, the
Father, and holy Ghost unite and work by him.

All serves to terrify the enemies of Christ, and obstinate sinners by his
present power to destroy them* (could not malicious ^sther. 6. 13.
Haman prevail against Esther and her allies, because of her interest in the
kings favor, and shall the enemies of Christ and his, ever prevail against
them?) And to comfort the afflicted: could Joseph being exalted and set next
unto Pharaoh in the kingdom of Egypt provide for all his Fathers family, and
preserve them in the famine, and shall not Christ much more be able to save and
deliver us in all our necessities? when he was in his state of humiliation, and
form of a servant who ever came unto him for help and went away unrelieved?
sickness, lamenesse, deafness, blindness, wants, storms, devils, death, no
difficulty could intercept his mercy: and shall we fear he has less power or
will to help and succur us now he sitts at the right hand of God in heaven no,
no, make thy requests to him and fear not, he that has had Heb. 4* 15.
experience of our miseries, is both willing and able to succor us: it is he
that helps our infirmities, Romans 8. 26.
we know not what to pray us we ought: our best prayers are dull and inactive,
but he is our faithful high Priest to intercede for us. When 1. King. 2. 14.
17.
Adoniah knew he could not of himself prevail, he entreated Bathsheba to
speak for him, in assurance that the king would deny her nothing: how much
more may we be assured of attaining, seeing we have such an high Priest, Heb.
10. 21, 22.
if we draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith to the throne
of grace by this new and living way. Court friends, like Genes. 40. 23.
Pharaohs butler, eftsoone forget the afflictions of Joseph, but Christ can
never: he prayed Luke 22. 32.
that Peter's faith might not fail him, and professed Joh. 17. 23.
I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall believe in me
through thy word. I have many times feared that I have cried, and lifted up my
hands in vain and effectlesse votes, till I remember that my Savior ^itteth
at Gods right hand, able to help; how, and when he knows best. I want faith,
patience, and the spirit of prayer; but therefore he is ascended up on high,
that he may give these gifts unto men, and he will supply me: he will keep me
from evil. When he was in the form of a servant the devil could not enter
into the heard of Swine, before he gained leave; and shall all the powers of
hell be able to hurt me, while he now in the state of glory protecteth me, he
to whom all power in heaven and earth is given? Lord only give me a faithful
heart to depend on thee and thy saving health, and I shall not perish so long
as thou reignest over all.

Sect. ^.
The next is his coming to judge the quick and the dead: properly annexed to
the foregoing: because he so sits at God^s right hand, as that he both
exercises the patience of the elect under the cross, and long permits the
wicked enemies to insult over them: to comfort us herein, it is necessary to
believe, that Christ who now sits at God's right hand, will thence come to
judge all men: those whom he shall find surviving (who 1. Cor: 15. 51
shall be changed in a moment at the sound of the last trump and the dead
raised again: all, elect and reprobate, Dan. 12. 2.
some to eternal absolution from sin and death; and others to eternal shame
and destruction of bodies and souls. This judgment shall be of Eccl. 12. 14.
all our thoughts, Math. 12. 36.
words, 2. Cor. 5. 10. 1. Cor. 4. 5.
and actions: Rev. 20. 12.
the books shall be opened, and every secret thing manifested: the evidence of
every fact shall speak, as Genesis 4. 10.
Abels blood did. The time of this judgment, shall be at the second coming of
Christ: the particular year, or day, no creture knows; neither Math 24. 36.
Act. 1. 7.
the son of man himself here knew it in the state of humiliatio^: nor need it
seem strange, how being God and man in one person, the manhood could be ignorant
of any thing, the deity being omniscient, seeing he took on him all our
infirmities (sin excepted) amongst which, native ignorance was not a little
one. therefore it is said, that from his childhood Luke 2. 52.
he increased in wisdom which no infinite can do: and why shall I not as
easily believe that there was a veil of the slesh between the deity and
humane soul, intercepting some light of knowledge, as I certainly know there
was, intercepting the present sense of his fathers assistance and of the
comfort of the deity in his passion, when he cried out, Math 27. 46.
My God my God why have thou forsaken me?

The signs of this judgments approach, are 1. Math. 24. 14.
preaching the Gospel to all Nations. 2. 2 These. 2. 3.
revelation of the man of sin. 3. Luke 18. 8.
a general departing from the faith. 4. Universal corruption of manners. 2 Timothy 3. 1. 5. Math. 24. 6. 7.
wars and rumors of wars: 6. hardness of heart, so that no importunity of
the lowdest sons of Thunder can awake men out of sin, as it was in the
days of Noah: 7. Calling of the Jews: Romans 11. 25.

The sign which shall accompany the coming of Christ, shall be the sign of
the son of man in heaven, Math. 24. 30.

The Sum is, Christ shall come again to judge all men. Act. 17. 31. Math.
25. 31. Jud. 14. 14. 1 These. 4. 16. and Math. 24. 30. where he joyneth the
declaration of the judgment with the prediction of Jerusalems destruction; to
the end that men might be assured of the judgment to come, by that which they
saw or knew fulfilled in that City.

Concerning the place whether in the valley of Jehoshaphat, or the time and
lasting of this great Assizes, the manner of proceeding, and the like; it is
vain to enquire after that which God has not revealed; specially seeing his
word directs to make better use hereof.

1 2. Cor. 5. 11.
To deter men from sin, in respect of the inevitable terror of that day.

2 Not to judge one another, Rom: 14. 1 Cor: 4. 5.

3 To prepare because the day is near: fearing God, Eccles: 12. 14. Rev: 14.
7. keeping a good conscience, Act: 24. 15, 16. watching, that we may lift up
our heads at that day, Luk: 22. 28. 35, 36. Repenting, Act: 17. 30, 31. Without
delay. 2. Pet: 3. 2. Loving one another, 1. Joh: 3. 18. 19. That we may assure
our hearts before him, and have boldness in the day of judgment, 1. Joh: 4.
17. Comforting our selves in all our sufferings: our Savior shall be our
judge, and who shall condemn us, seeing he died to acquit us? He cannot but
Luk 18. 7.
avenge for us, though he suffer long: therefore we must be patient, expecting
his sentence, Math. 25. 34.
Come ye blessed of my father inherit the kingdom prepared for you.

A Prayer.
O Lord God of mercy and compassion, who in thy eternal and infinite love to
man gave thy only Son, to become man, to take experience of our miseries,
to be tempted in all things like us, sin only excepted, and to suffer the
severity of thy wrath against us sinners, by offering him up a living sacrifice
for us who were dead in trespasses and sins, the just for the unjust, that by
his stripes we might be healed: and have revealed unto us that great mystery of
godliness so much desired of the faithful from the beginning, the inestimable
riches of thy grace, and mercy, hid from all ages unto the fullness of time,
God manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up into
glory: make us truly thankful to thee for all thy unspeakeable favors: give
us true faith to apprehend and find our interest in him with assurance that he
is our God and Savior. O ever blessed Jesus whose name is as sweet ointment
powered forth, whom the Virgin souls therefore love, draw us that we may run
after thee: let the anointing which we have received of thee (whereby we have
the honor to be called* and to be Christians, and the happiness to be
enlightened with thy truth, and led in thy paths) abide in us and teach us all
things necessary for the advancement of thy glory and our salvation let it be
like that precious nard wherewith thou wast imbalmed against the day of thy
death, to fill our hearts and affections with that comfortable savor of life
unto life, Mark. 14. 3.
that thou may wholly season us, dwell in us, and be all in all with us: that
the merit of thy death and virtue of thy resurrection, may both mortify all our
sinful and corrupt affections, and raise us to the life of righteousness,
that dying to sin, governed here by thy power (to which all things are
committed in heaven and earth and hereafter acquitted by thy final sentence
(when thou shall come to judge the living and the dead) we may at last come to
the perfect union with thee, in a full view, and eternal enjoying of thee and
thy blessed presence, who have suffered all these things to redeem us, and to
purchase the kingdom prepared for us from eternity; that we may attain that
true blessedness in the which thy holy Gospel has preached unto us: Grant
this through thy mercies, O heavenly Father, thy merits O gracious Lord Jesus,
and thy assistance O holy Spirit, three persons, one only wise, omnipotent,
and immortal God, to whom belongs all honor glory, praise, might, Majesty,
and dominion, in heaven and earth, from this time forth, and to endless
eternity.

AMEN.
CHAP. VI.
. 1. What we are to believe.. 2. Rules thereto belonging.

1 ALL knowledge of God the Father and Son with man can attain to avails
him not, Sect: I.
except it be made good to him, by a blessed application thereof to himself,
wrought by the holy ^host, in illis propriae habitare sc dicit qui ejus gratia
perfruuntur, and qui mundum et praeparant cordis hospitium. Hieronym: in 2.
Cor. 6.
dwelling in him, and cleansing his heart to entertain him, as it is written,
ye are the temples of the living God. 2. Cor: 6. 16.

2 The holy Ghost proceeding of the Father and the Son, is truly God See Act:
5. 3, 4, 1. Cor: 3, 16. 1. Cor: 6. 19. 1. Cor: 12. 4, 5, 6. 2. Cor: 6. 16.
Isa^: 6. 19. Act: 28: 25. Therefore we are commanded to baptize in the name of
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Math: 28. 19. So the Apostle 2. Cor: 13. 13.
in his prayer uniteth the three persons: it appears that he is God by his
effectual 1. Cor. 12. 18 Act. 2. 4.
working: he regenerateth, Joh: 3. 6. sanctifies, teaches us all truth. Joh:
14. 21. 26. seals up our redemption, Ephesians: 1. 13. he gives utterance to his
speakers, Math: 10. 20. dictateth the holy Scriptures. 2. Pet. 1. 21. he
appoints overseers of the Church, Act: 20. 28. foretells things to come. 1.
Tim: 4. 1. Isai. 41. 23.
which is an evident argument of his Godhead.

3 The holy Ghost is essentially in God the Father and the Son, and so
proceeds of them, not as a part of them, for no infinite has parts, and he
is equally God with the Father and Son, nor as parting from them, nor as the
creatures are in God, which are not of his substance and being, though in him
they live, move, Act. 17. 28.
and have their being: but he is of the same eternity, substance, power, and
Majesty in the unity of the Deity. His proceeding is spoken of in Scripture,
Joh: 15. 26. Whether we speak of his essential and eternal proceeding; or of
that admirable effusion of his graces on men, in ordinary or extraordinary
gifts, Act: 2. 2. Gal: 4. 6. 1. Joh. 5. 7.
and these three are one.

4 Though the holy Ghost be one in the unity of the Godhead with the Father and
the Son, yet is he a distinct person from them both: for though the Father be
a spirit and the Son a spirit according to his Deity, and both are most holy,
yet neither are called the holy spirit, which is a peculiar name to the third
person of the blessed Trinity.

Sect. II.
1 Be not overcurious to search into the being of the holy Trinity: but examine
thy self whether the holy spirit dwell in thee or not? Whether thy heart be
purified from those unhallowed thoughts and desires of corrupt ^lesh and blood?
Whether thou have the love of God shead abroad in thy heart, as also true
charity to all men for God's sake? Whether the holy Ghost testify to thy
spirit that thou art a son of God (Rom: 8. 15. 16.) teach thee to cry abba
father, help thy infirmities and endite thy prayers.

2 Ipse spiritus dicitur contristari ab eis qui sic agunt ut eorum factis
contristentur sancti non ob aliud nisi quis spiritum sanctum habent. Beda ex
Augustine. l. 4. de Genad lit.
Grieve not the holy spirit with which thou art sealed up* to the day of
redempt o^, Ephesians: 4. 30. do not that which may make him depart from thee, hurt,
or greiue thy self, or the saints in whom he lives.

3 Be sure thou walk according to and by the guidance of the holy Ghost that
thou may be assured thou art in Christ, Sp. sanctus dicitur contristari, quum
contrista tur ille in quo est -- sicut Deus dicitur irasci, propter
similitudinem effectus, it^ etiam dicitur contristari, quia sicut quando
aliquis contristatur reced it a contristante ita Sp. sanctus a pe^^ante. --
Aquinas in Ephesians 4. 30.
Rom: 8. 1. that the spirit of him Romans 8. 11. 14.
who raised up Jesus from the dead dwells in thee and quickneth thy mortal
body to the life of grace That thou art led by that spirit, and art indeed a
son of God. A man that had seen those 1 Samuel 6. 12.
Palestine Kine going straight to Bethshemesh with the the Ark of God, would
have thought there must be some supernatural power therein: so when we see men
going the way of God contrary to the affections of ^lesh and blood, we may
certainly conclude that God's spirit rules there.

CHAP. VII,
. 1. Concerning the Catholic Church.. 2. Conclusions belonging hereto.. 3.
Rules observable.

1 AFter our meditation on the holy Trinity, Sect. I.
a due Rectus confessionis ordo poscebat, ut trinitati subjungeretur Ecclesia,
tanqua habitatori domus sua: August. Enchir. To. 3. c. 56.
order of confession requires that we should think of the Chuch as the
sacred Temple thereof, because his belief and confession is vain who is not
of this Church: Habere jam non potest Deum patrem qui Eccl^siam non habet
matre, Cyp. de simp prael. tract. 3.
nor can be possibly be a son of God, who is not of this Church. This is the
pillar and ground Evangeliii est columen fidei nostrae, non hominum authori^as.
Iren^us. l. 3. c. 1. etc.
of truth, 1. Tim. 3. 15. as bearing the light to direct men to salvation: the
Keeper of the Oracles of God, Rom: 3. 2. Rom: 9. 4. not that the truth of God
is subjected to the authority of men, but because it uses man's ministry: the
Gospel is not proved, but approved by the testimony and authority of the
Church: in which it not so much receives, as it gives the Church credit, and
a sure mark of distinction.

2 Though we are to believe in God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: we are to
believe the Church, not in the Church, as God: we (...), etc
believe an holy Catholic Church; we believe the chief pillars thereof the
Prophets, and Apostles, we believe not in them as we do in the foundation
Christ: we believe their words to be the infallible dictates of him in whom we
believe and look for salvation.

3 The Catholic Church is a peculiar company of men predestinate to eternal
life, Ecclesia ex v^catione appellata est. August. in Romans 1.
called, and incorporated into Christ their head wherefore she is the body,
Colos: 1. 18. Grex D^i^, ovil^ D^i, etc. ib.
the slock and shepherd of Christ: Area dominica. Augustine de doct. Christ. l.
3. c. 34.
the Lord's sloore which he came to purge, Math: 3. 12. his Vineyard and
pleasant plant, Isay 5. the Arc in which we are saved, 1. Pet: 3. 21. Sponsa
and conjux Christi. August. ib. l. 1. c 11.
the Spouse and sacred bride of Christ: the Temple of God, Fo^s veritatis
domicilium sidei, templum Dei. Lact. l. 4.
fountain of truth, house of faith, and the holy City.

4 This Church, as God elected and redeemed, by the blood of his holy son
Jesus, so he called her by his spirit working powerfully on the use of the word
preached, and Sacraments administered: he sanctifies her and governs her:
duly is she his: and therefore holy because his who makes her so. Holy by
Christ's imputed righteousness, and that which his spirit works in her:
however black yet comely, Cant: 1. 5. an holy nation, a chosen people, 1. Pet:
2. 9. this holiness is inchoative in this life: Genesis 30. 35. 39.
she is now throughs many infirmities like Jacobs ^lock at Padan Aram, all
spotted, Ephesians. 5 27.
she shall be without spot or wrinckle in the life to come.

5. This Church is Catholic, or universal, in respect of 1. Time she has
been in all ages, God has still, and will have his Church here, until the
number of the elect being finished, she shall be triumphant in heaven. 2.
Persons; in it are some of all sorts, conditions, and degrees, male and female,
rich and poor, honorable and obscure: Act. 10. 34.
God is no respecter of persons though he set in order, and appoint the
distinctions for, and with men. 3. She is Catholic in respect of place,
because she is (...) Athanas. To. 2. dict. and interp. q. 37. Populus Dei per
omnes gentes. Aug. de Catec. rud. c. 3. Si sit ejus liber.
spread over all the world, and gathered from all parts, under the Gospel. 4.
Lastly, it is called Catholic, to distinguish it from particular
congregations, or Churches of one denomination, as the Church of Jerusalem,
Antioch, Corinth, England, France, etc.

For the better understanding hereof consider these conclusions.

1. The Church of God in respect of her extent, is either Catholic or
particular: Sect. 2.
and every particular in every time and place, make the universal or
Catholic, which in respect of the truth of doctrine by her held, is the house
of God; but what ever part of any time falls from this (in things
fundamental and simply necessary to salvation) it cease to be any true
member of the Catholic Church: In respect of notes she is visibe, or
invisible according to her several states: in respect of time, she has
denomination of the Church of the Old and New Testament, both which 1 Cor. 10.
1, 2. Ephesians. 2. 14. 15. 16. 20. 21. 1 Cor. 3. 11.
agreeing in one foundation of faith and truth, and but one Church under
several disciplines and covenants; in respect of state or place, she is either
militant or triumphant, in that, under the cross, desiring to be removed, and
to be with Christ: which we must not understand of the whole body of the
Church, but only of that part which is on earth, which must in conformity to
Christ be crucified to the world, and Act. 14 22. Luk, 9. 23, 24.
through many afflictions enter into his glory: so was she pre^igured in that
Exodus 3. 2.
Horeb bush ^iered but not consumed: and Israel in the wilderness beset with
many difficulties, and hard encounters in the way to her promised rest. The
second state shall be triumphant in heaven, the devil, sin, and death being
absolutely conquered; and we in Rev. 7. 9. 11.
long white robes, and palms in token of victory, praising God eternally.

2. Christ is the sole head of the Catholic Church: Christians are all Ephesians.
2. 20.
fellow citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, the Church is
Ephesians. 5. 30. Colos. 1. 18.
Christ^s body, and has no head but him.

3. The Catholic Church here intended, consists of elect only: particular
congregations consist of elect and hypocrites mixed, as the Math. 13. 30.
wheat and tares in one field; as the clean and unclean beasts in Noah's Ark: but that which is the house of God, living stones, are the elect only,
prepared as the 1 King. 6. 7.
materials of the Temple, by the Gospel, the noise whereof shall 1 Cor. 13. 8.
not be heard in the life to come.

4. The elect are not ever actually members of this Church, though potentially
they are: when Ananias replied, Act. 9. 13.
Lord I have heard of this man how much evil he has done -- God said, he is a
chosen vessel unto me --. Those that crucified Christ, though they were of
the visible Church, yet were they not actually united thereto, till Act. 2. 36.
41.
hearing Peter's sermon 3000. souls were added to the Church, concerning whom
he said, they had crucified Christ.

5. There is but one Catholic Church, though there are many parts thereof: as
the Ocean is but one, though the parts thereof have several denominations,
according to the several shores they wash, so is the Church: whether called
English, French, German, etc. all make but one Church -- Cant. 6. 8.
my dove is alone -- my undefiled she is the only daughter of her mother, as
there is only Ephesians. 4 4, 5, etc.
one God, one Christ, one truth, one faith, one baptism; so one body of Christ
united, and quickened, by one spirit, and in one head Christ.

6. Out of the Catholic Church Hoc templum Dei quod si quis no intraverit, vel
a quo si quis exiverit, ^ spe vitae, ac salutis ater^ae alienus est, Lact. l.
4. c. ult.
there is no salvation, because out of the true Church, which is Christ his
body, Christ the head thereof cannot be, and therefore no faith to apprehend
him there to salvation: it was prefigured in Foris enim non esse ecclesiam
manifestat Scripturae divinae sides, cum de sacramento paschae and agni, qui
agnus Christum designabat, seriptum sit, in domo una comedeturquod item circa
Raab, quae ipsa quoque typum portabat Ecclesiaeomnis qui exierit estium domus
tuae soras, reus crit sibi: quo sacramento declaratur, in unam domum solam id
est in ecclesiam victuros, and ab interitu mundi colligi oportere, etc.
Rahabs house, Josh. 2. 19. Whosoever shall go out of thy house into the
street, his blood shall be upon his head: and in the Paschall lamb to be eaten
in one house, none thereof might be carried out of the Church to any aliant:
The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved, Act. 2. 42.

7. A particular Church of any one denomination, may fail in some points of
doctrine and manners, and yet continue a living member of the true Church if it
fail not in fundamentalls, and things simply necessary to salvation: for the
light of truth has its degrees with men, and so has saving grace its
intentions and remissions. The Moon in the waine is the same which we
sometimes see in the full. The Church of Ephesus, lost her first love, Rev: 2.
4. The Church of Galatia was transported by false Apostles into some dangerous
opinions, Gal: 1. etc. The Church of Israel in Eliahs time had in a great part
forsaken the very covenants of God, 1. King: 19. 14. yet were there some names
left, 7000. knees which had not bent to Baal. Now though no particular Church
is exempt from the censure of the Catholic, yet a Church is not presently to
be forsaken, by particular members thereof for some fowl blemishes, nor many
wicked men therein, though we must know, that God sometimes for such things
removes the candlestick from certain places, as from those seven famous
Churches of Asia. It Is not the place, but the Saints which make the Church.

8. Faith, Hope, and Charity, Cypr. l. 1. ep. 6.
the Gospel truly preached, and the Sacraments rightly administered, are the
best marks of a true Church.

Lastly, let us observe these following rules.

1. Take heed of separating from the body of Christ, Sect. III.
under any pretense however specious: Si quisquam ab Ec^lesia exi^ril reum sibi
suturum, id est, ipsum sibi quod percat imputa^urum. ib. Cyp. quo supr.
needs must he perish who Hanc Ecclesiae unitatem qui non tenet, ten^re se
sidem credit? qui Ecclesi^ renilitur and resistit, in ecclesia se esse
considit? Cyp. de simp. praelat. ^^act. 3.
divides from the head: divided members cannot live. Sipotuit evadere qui
extra ar came Noe suit, and qui extra ecclesiam foris sucrit ^vadit ib.
They could not in the deluge escape perishing, who were out of Noah's Arc,
which was a type of the Church therein.

2. Take heed of spiritual pride and faction, these will cause thee to speak
ill of those who are in authority, and at last to despise the sacred ordinances
of the Church it self: these are the common breaths which blow the chafe out
of the sloore.

3. Beware of contemning others: this same, Stand from me, I am holyer then
thou, has lost the Church many a child in miserable schisms: humility is
truly a secure virtue, wherein he that is well acquainted with himself, thinks
no man worse then himself, and will not easily separate: it is pride (the
devils sin and dangerous in^luence) which makes divisions in the Church.

4. Learn to be holy thou that professest thy self a member of the Catholic
Church; lest thou prove a cursed Cham in the arc; or appear like the ghest
without the wedding garment, like Job 1. 6.
the devil among Gods Children: The holy have a singular comfort what ever
they now suffer, they shall finally be joined to the triumphant Church of
Christ in heaven.

CHAP. VIII.
. 1. What the communion of Saints is, whereon it consists.. 2. Rules thereto
appertaining.

WE have considered the proprieties of God's Church: Sect. I.
now we must take notice of her prerogatives, in the 1. communion of Saints, 2,
Forgiveness of sins. 3. Resurrection of the body, 4. and life everlasting.

1. The communion of Saints is a participation of those goods in which all and
only the Saints have interest.

2. This is either the communion they have with God, or which they have one
with another. For the first he says, 1. Joh. 1. 3. 6.
truly our communion is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.

This communion of the Saints with the Father, is in that, through Christ by
the holy spirit, they are united unto him, and he dwells in them. Their
communion with the Son, is in that they are Romans 8. 17.
united to him, Ephesians. 5. 30.
become his members, Gal. 2. 20. Joh. 6. 53. 56. Rev. 3. 20. 1. Cor. 1. 9.
Ephesians. 3. 12.
he lives in them, guides, governs, protecteth, and comfort them. He
communicates to them all the benefits of his merits and passion, so that they
become as surely theirs for their justification as they are his: as it is
written, we are made partakers of Christ, Heb: 3. 14. hereby we become coheires
with him Rom: 8. 17. This belongs only to the Saints and true believers who
walk as children of the light. 1. Job: 1. 6, 7. Heb. 5. 9.
who hearken to him, and persevere unto the end. Heb: 3. 14. but Christ has 2.
Cor. 6. 15.
no communion with Infidels, Christ's communion with us, is 1. in nature, by his
becoming ^lesh of our ^lesh. 2. by grace, and assumption of our persons, in a
mystical union with him, answering to God for us, and so making us partakers
of the divine nature. 2. Pet: 1. 4. 3. The perfection hereof shall be the
translation of us into his glory; so certain as the truth of God; which is the
reason why the Apostle pronounces thereof as of a thing already past, Christ
received ^ us to the glory of God, Rom: 15. 7. The first of these states
relates to the second, and the second to the last: as nature is subordinate to
grace, and grace to glory: the first union causes the following: we cannot
have communion with him in his future glory if we have not in his present
grace; nor could we ever have been united to him by grace, had not he first
united himself to our nature, whereby he fulfilled the law* satisfied God's
justice for us, and so the divine unction sloweth from the head to all the
body. The holy Ghost works this union, by giving us faith and sanctification.
This union is the most arct, and indivisible: he took on him our nature, into
an hypostaticall union with the deity: he joyneth us to his mystical body,
whereof he is the head, by the holy Ghost, he that is joined to the Lord, is
one spirit with him, 1. Cor: 6. 17. 1. Cor: 12. 13. 1. Joh: 3, 24. 1. Joh: 4.
13. Rom: 8. 11. Ephesians: 4. 4. Hereby we are really sanctified in that measure
which he appoints every man to salvation: whereby he changes our vile body,
that it may be like unto his own glorious body, Phil: 3. 21. and even now Romans
8. 17. 18.
suffers with us, reckning all that is done unto us, Math. 25 35.
as done unto himself: 1. Cor. 1. 30.
He becomes wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption unto us.
He freeth us Romans 8. 1.
from condemnation: 1 John 1. 6.
purges us from all sin: makes us walk according to his good spirit
mortifying the works of the flesh.

The communion of the holy Ghost, is a participation of his grace, by which he
Romans 8. 9. 1 Cor. 6. 11. 19.
uniteth us to him, regenerateth, governs, teaches, Ephesians. 3. 16.
leads, comfort us, witnesses with our spirits, that we are the sons of
God, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14
helps our infirmities, intercedeth for us with unutterable groans, seals
us up to the day of redemption, and uniteth us one with another.

3. Our communion one with another imports. 1. an external communion and
society of the Saints called and united in the body of the visible Church, by
the ministry of the word and use of the Sacraments. 2. an internal
conjunction, in which those whom God has united in an external communion, are
also by the holy Ghost united unto God, and one to another. By which they have
mutually, and jointly. 1. The same right to adoption and sonship in God. 2. The
same interest in Christ and all his merits. 3. The same faith and grace of
justification. 4. The same right to salvation, life, and eternal glory. This
communion is either of the living with the living, or of the living with the
deceased Saints, present, or that which shall be in the life to come in the
Church triumphant, which shall be the most complete and excellent part thereof.
This is the first prerogative which the God of unity bestows on his Church,
that her true members hold an happy unity in Christ, and a sweet and
comfortable fellowship one with another: for we being many, 1 Cor. 10. 17. 1
Cor. 12. 11, 12, etc.
are partakers of one bread, and one body, by one Spirit: we are all baptized
into one body, here is our happiness in unity, without which there is neither
happiness, nor life: the most excellent part, Si perseverat in corpore -- ^vul
sus^ corpor^, nec sibi videt. Chrysostom, ser. 132.
the eye divided from the body cannot see: communion must needs be happy where
God uniteth* we have now in that spirit which uniteth us, a communion with the
souls in heaven, and Phil. 3. 21.
have our conversation there, though but imperfectly, but when we also are
perfect, it shall be a most excellent state: the more holy and wise we are, the
more divine is our fellowship, which is only between the good and wise, when
Peter, James, and John, saw Moses and Elias, (but two glorified Saints) in our
Saviors transfiguration, ravished in spirit they cried out, it is Math. 17. 4.
good for us to be here, let us build here: why said they not so before, being
with Christ? Alas there appeared in him before this only the form of a
servant, and Isay 53. 3.
man of sorrows -- no beauty that we should desire in him: but now some beams
of his glory brake through the clowd of his humanity. When Moses and Elias
lived on earth, they were of no such esteem: there is not that poor despised
Saint, whose presence now seems irksome to the worldly prosperous man, but he
shall be most aimiable in our perfect communion in the li^e to come. Society
of man is excellent, what were the world to a man alone? But he that said, it is
not good for man (in the state of innocence) to be alone, reserved the best
society to the state of glory, the best life: excellent is that communion which
we now have in this imperfect state for as much as we are united in one spirit,
faith and doctrine, we have Act. 4. 32. Gal. 6. 10.
like affections, love each other, assist each other, as in things external,
so specially by Act. 12. 5.
mutual prayers: yea the Angels of heaven rejoice at a sinners conversion,
because they hold communion with us under one head: and no wonder; for if the
humane soul, which is but a ^inite creature; can give so much unity and sense
to every member of the body, as to make them have a mutual sympathy, care, and
love; how much more shall the spirit of an infinite God, give these to all
those which he uniteth in Christ? But if so excellent be this communion to us
now in this mortal life and state of imperfection, what think ye, shall it
be when thi^ 1. Cor. 15. 5.
corruptible has puton iucorruption, and God shall be all in all? And
believing this why should I doubt of our knowing one another in the world to
come?

To him that believes this comfortable Article of Faith, Sect. II.
these following rules are necessary.

1 Love all men for Gods sake: If there be Phil. 2. 1, 2.
any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellows^ip of the
spirit (says the Apostle) fulfill my joy, that ye be like minded, having the
same love, being of one accord of one mind; let nothing be done through
strife: If ye have any part in the communion of Saints Ephesians. 4. 3. 4.
hold the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: if there be envy, malice,
contentions, schisms, factions, and discords, it is an ill sign of your
interest in this holy communion: God's sons are peaceable, all that are
guided by his spirit, who is Love, love and care for each other, as the members
of the body mutually defend, and hide the blemishes of their fellows.

2. Be compassionate: if one member suffer, all grieve, because they are
animated by one soul: and is it possible that any man should make himself
believe that the spirit of Jesus has quickened him, who not only remembers
not, but maliciously promoteth the affliction of Joseph.

3 Heb. 10. 25.
Forsake not holy assemblies, where Gods word sounds, and his honor
dwells. It Is a delusion of Satan, who advances his throne most in our
divisions, which makes men prefer Solitarias preces venerandae congregationi
aentferri. Pet. Chrysolq. s.
private prayers, and exercises, before the venerable public.

4 Unite to holy societies, and with draw from evil company, it is very
dangerous to have society with the wicked: 2 Chronicles. 19. 2.
Jehoshaphat found it so: what make thou in the way to Egypt, said the
Prophet. The wisest Solomon's hazards were from evil company* have Ephesians. 5. 7.
no fellowship with them, says the Apostle. In the society of the holy there
is good, even to the wicked sometimes for their sakes: Genes. 39. 3.
Potiphers house prospered, for one good Joseph's* sake: the Act. 27. 24.
ships company were saved for one Paul: how much more are the Saints advantaged
by their holy communion? Begin thy heaven on earth, having society and
communion with the Saints here, or thou shall never have the happiness thereof
hereafter.

5 Be thou holy, if thou will be of this society: you know in worldly leagues,
it is parity of manners which begeteeth amity; like loves his like, get on the
wedding garment if thou will rejoice with the invited: 1 John 1. 6.
If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we ly, and do
not know the truth. Saul among the Prophets became a proverb of a prodigy. The
Ezra. 2. 59.
Nethanims joined themselves to Israel, but when they returned they could not
find their pedegrees, and therefore were diffranchised, as hypocrites shall be
from the elect: there is no admission of Rev. 21. 27.
any thing unclean into heaven: no wealth can purchase entrance, but only
sanctity: if Simon had the Indies to morgage he could not enter.

6. Let it comfort thee in thy sufferings: fear not: they are more with thee
then against thee: in every distress thou partakest of the Rev. 8. 3. 4.
sweet odours ascending up into Gods holy presence, the prayers of the Saints:
if one Moses by standing in the gap could divert the plague raging among the
people, what shall not many thousands do for one afflicted man? We will go
with you (said they in the prophecy) Zach. 8. 23.
for we have heard that God is with you: Genes. 21. 22.
God is with thee in all that thou do, said Abimelech and Phicol to Abraham:
therefore they thought themselves happy to have a covenant with him: what ever
thou suffer, they share with thee, and intercede for thee.

CHAP. IX.
Concerning Remission of Sins.. 1. Of the necessity hereof, to whom it
belongs, it is the sum of the Gospel.. 2. Rules hereto appertaining.

THE second benefit which God bestows on his Church is remission of sins:
which is a free pardon of all their transgressions, Sect. I.
so that God will never impute them, remember, or charge them upon any of those
who are justified by faith in Christ. This is an article of great necessity, to
be believed, for what could communion avail us, if a free remission of our
sins did not acquit us of a due condemnation? Without this what could we be
but a wretched condemned society? What ever we else believe concerning Christ
the Savior, without this we were no better then excluded Virgins with
oylelesse lamps, then Judas amongst the Apostles, sons of perdition.

This remission is when God forgiveth faults and punishments, neither imputing
the one, nor executing the other: not only some sins, but all; as it is
written, Ma^h. 7. 19
Thou will cast all their sins into the depth of the sea. and Psalm. 103. 3.
Who forgiveth all thy iniquities, who heals all thy diseases. It Is true that
sometimes the chastisement lasts longer then the imputation of the fault: so
when the Prophet had said to David repenting 2 Samuel 12. 13.
the Lord has put away thy sin: yet he could not prevail for the life of
his child, neither did the sword depart from his house: v. 10.
but this was a fatherly correction, an healing, not a punishment, and David
confessed as much, Psalm. 119. 71.
it is good for me that I have been in trouble: and it stands good by
reason, that God remitteth all sins if any: for seeing he that breaks any
one commandment, is Jam. 2. 10.
guilty of all, if God retained any one sin unremitted, the whole debt must
be charged upon the sinner. This was that which Christ declared to Simon in the
parable of the two Luke 7. 41.
debtors, one owed 50. the other 500. pence, and when neither had to pay the
creditor equally forgave both.

2. This benefit is peculiar to the elect, the Church: Isai. 33. 24.
the people that dwell therein, shall have their iniquities forgiven: they
only are Isay 62. 12.
the redeemed of the Lord: all others out of Christ are in the gall of
bitterness, having no part nor fellowship herein: Act. 4. 12.
there is no other name under heavenby which we can be saved: Romans 4. 25.
he was delivered for our offenses: 1. Pet. 1. 18.
by his blood we are redeemed, the Paschall lamb belongs only to this
house: herein however the grace of God is given in diverse measures, remission
of sins is (...) Cyr. Catech. 1.
equally bestowed on all the Saints.

3. This great benefit is the sum of the Gospel, Luke 1. 77.
proclaimed by John Baptist; Luke 24 47. Act. 13. 38.
given in charge to be preached to all; for this cause, God sent his only
Son into the world, Act. 5. 31.
to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance and remission of sins: in
him we have redemption through his blood the forgiveness of sins. Sect. II.


To this point appertain these rules.

1. That we despair not in respect of the greatness of our sins: how great
soever it be, it is far less then the infinite merit of Jesus Christ, 1.
Joh. 1. 6.
whose blood cleanses us from all sins: though your sins be as scarlet
(twice dyed in original and actual transgression,) Esaias 1. 18.
they shall be white as snow: there were many who went out of Christ's presence
very happy, some restored to sight, some to hearing, some to health, some
dispossessed of unclean spirits, some restored to life: 'twas true of him what
was said of Caesar, Neminem tristem dimisit.
he sent none away sad (the young Math. 19. 22.
rich man's own fault, dismissed him so) but none more happy then her that
heard, Luke 7. 48. 50.
go in peace thy sins are forgiven thee: let the spirit of truth say only
this to my soul, and in spite of death, I will sing my nune dimittis, Luke 2.
29.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, securely may he dare Death
and Hell (Death 1. Cor. 15. 55. 57.
where is thy sting, Hell where is thy victory) who can indeed say, Thanks be
unto God which gives us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Confess and repent thee of all thy sins, that is, forsake them and thou
shall find mercy: if thou Prove. 28. 13. 1. Joh. 1. 8, 9. Jer. 2. 35.
hidest them under any pretense of merit, or pleading not guilty, thou can
not prosper. Non dicit familia tua, Sana sum, sed, Sana me Domine. Ambr. de.
poen. l. 1. c. 6.
God's family says not I am whole, but heal me O Lord, and I shall be whole,
repentance is the second table after the shipwreck of our souls: we read
that Peter after his fall repented: Lego quod slevit, non lego quod satisfecit.
we read he wept, we read not that he satisfied: repentance is no cause,
Act 3. 19. Mark. 1. 15.
but a condition of our pardon, Luke 24. 47. Luke 13. 3. 5.
without which it cannot be obtained: because Nehem. 9. 33.
God is just as well Exodus 34. 6.
as merciful: if God should forgive before we repent, it were approbation of
the fact rather then mercy, nor could it stand with his justice. This
repentance is 1. in Lam. 3. 40.
knowledge of our sin Jerem. 26. 13.
without which we cannot repent: therefore David prays Psalm. 13. 4.
Lord open mine eyes that I sheep not in death: it is a fearful Iraest Dei no^
intelligere delicta ne sequatur p^enitentia. primus felicitatis gralus est no^
delinquere: secundus delicta cognoscere: illic currit innocentia integra, and
illibata quae servet: hic succedit medela quae sanct. Cypr. l. 1. ep. 1.
judgment of God not to know our sins that we may repent. The first degree
of happiness, is not to sin; the second, to know our sins, there in
entire innocence to save, here follows the medicine to heal. 2. In hearty
sorrow for all our sins, without which we do not repent. 3. In a constant
Dicitur (...) non ex delicti confessione, sed ex animi de mutatione. Tertul.
adv. Marc. l. 2. c. 42.
change of the mind, purpose to sin no more, and Penit^ntia ergo non verbis
agenda est, sed actu Ambr. ad cor. virg. c. 8. (Si sit ejus.)
forsaking our evil ways, it is not only in saying God be merciful to me, but
in turning to him, that he may show mercy, who had not had any Saint, had he
not pardoned sinners; therefore the Prophet bids us search and try our ways
and turn again unto the Lord.

3. Apply the word of God home to thy conscience that thou may understand thy
sin and misery coming on thee, and be touched at heart, as Peter's hearers
were, Act: 2. 37.

4. Pray earnestly to God to take away the stony heart, Lam. 3. 40.
which hinders thy repentance and the comfortable effects thereof; Genes. 29.
8.
this lies like the cover on the wells mouth at Padan Aram till it be roled
away, the flocks cannot be watered: the rocks at Horeb could not yield a drop
of water, till the rod of God smote it: nor can man's harder heart, one tear of
faithful repentance, until God touch it.

5. Beware of living in, or relapsing into any known sin, least the 2 Pet.
2. 20.
end be worse then the beginning: in such case it had been better for thee,
not to have known the way of righteousness, then after the knowledge thereof,
to returue with the dog to the vomit.

6. Be sure thou forgive: it is the Math. 6. 14. 15.
condition of remission of thy sin, which Christ annexeth to thy petition for
forgiveness (as we forgive them that trespass against us) and repeateth it,
to teach us the necessity thereof: for if we forgive them their trespasses,
your heavenly father will also forgive you: but if ye forgive not ^neither
will your father forgive your trespasses: malice is strange fire which never
came from heaven; no sacrifice of prayer can be acceptable therewith be
resolved then (seeing thy daily infirmities put thee upon a daily asking mercy)
to show it, that thou may find it: that thou be not with the evil servant
(who would receive but Math. 18. 28. 34.
show no pity) delivered to the tormentors for the exaction of that which thou
can never satisfy.

A Prayer for repentance and remission of sins.
O Lord God of mercy and compassion, slow to anger, and more ready to forgive,
then we can be to beg pardon: forgive us all our sins which we have at any
time committed, in thought, word, or action: give us hearts to consent and
obey, that thou may be pleased, (according to thine own gracious promise)
to make our scarlet sins, white as snow: to take away those filthy habits
where with we are naturally clothed, and to put us on the robe of Christ's
innocence: give us hearty and unfeigned repentance of all our sins, that we may
abandon all our evil, vain, and unprofitable ways, whereby we have provoked
thy wrath against our own souls. Seal up our pardon by the certain
testemonie of thy spirit of truth which cannot deceave, in a comfortable peace
of conscience, and assurance of our reconciliation by the merits of our Lord
Jesus. Give us security on the second table of repentance, who have unhappily
let go the first of innocence: As thou have in the precious blood of thy dear
son Jesus, cancelled the hand writing of ordinances which was against us,
fastening them on his cross; so accomplish thine own mercy, cancelling them to
the sense of our consciences, by a certain assurance of our salvation: that
the stings of death may not afflict us, nor the gates of hell ever prevail
against us: but that our sins being covered, and no more imputed to us, we
may cheerfully, thankfully, and holily, live before thee, to thy glory, the
good example of of others and the assurance of our own hearts before thee,
that tho^^ (who have in some measure sanctified) have also freely and fully
pardoned us: Lord answer unto our souls with good and comfortable words,
through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior.

AMEN.
CHAP. X.
. 1. Of the resurrection from the dead.. 2. How the truth thereof may appear..
3. What we are to make of the meditation hereof.

1 THe third benefit of the Church shall be the Resurrection from the dead: in
the first Adam all dye, Sect. I.
in the second all live: hope of a joyful resurrection is the (...) Cyril.
catech. 18.
root of all good works, Act: 24. 15. 16. Act: 26. 6, 7.

2. It is necessary that sin which brought death into the world like a
viperous brood, eating through its mothers bowels) should be destroyed by
death: and as necessary, that sins kingdom so ended, all should rise again,
that they may come to judgment.

3. Resurrection is of the dead body of man: for first, death is not only a
bare negation, but a privation of life (so dead, and livelesse differ) that
only which had life, and after died, rises again. Secondly there are two
sorts of dead bodies: the first sine potentia ad vitam, without possibilitae of
rising again so beasts dye, never to live again: or in potentia ad vitam, in
ability once to rise again, by the power of God so determining it: so man
dies and shall assuredly rise again: all men, elect, and reprobates, shall
come from death, as Genesis 40. 20.
Pharaohs two servants from their prison, one to honor, the other to
execution: some to the joys of heaven, eternal blessedness of body and
soul: the other to endless Dan. 12. 2. Joh. 5 29.
shame, and unspeakable torments in hell sire, with the Devil and his Angels.

4. The same Pessimus Saturninus dixit, animae salutem esse, etc. Irenae.
body which dies, shall be raised again: the same substance 1. Cor. 15. 38
as the grain of corn: as God gives every seed his own body: so Job says,
Joh 19. 26. 27.
he shall see his Redeemer with the same eyes: so they shall see Christ come
to judge, who Rev. 1. 7. Phil. 3. 20.
peir^ed him, only the Saint shall change for glory and immortality.

5. In the resurrection God will send out Math. 13. 41.
his Angels, his harvesters to gather the elect from all parts. The last trump
shall blow, the graves open, and sea and land give up their dead: it was showed
in the Prophets vision, Ezekiel: 47. 2. 3. etc. the dry bones lay scattered up and
down the fields, when the power of the Almighty breathed on them, the sinews
and flesh came upon them, the skin covered them, and they lived: so shall it
be in the resurrection of the dead. The power of God who made us all of dust,
and infused a living soul into every one of us, will then 1 These. 4. 14.
bring back every soul into his own body: and so Christ who is the
resurrection and the life will convent them, and set them before him in
judgment who now sleep in death. Romans 8. 11.
He that raised Jesus from the dead, shall also quicken our mortal bodies.

The truth hereof may appear. 1. From the word of God evidently testifying the
same, Job: 19. 20. Isai: 26. 19. Dan: 12. 2. 1. Cor: 15. 1. These: 4. Joh: 5.
28. 29. The Apostle proves it from diverse grounds, as the preaching of the
Gospel and our believing, which otherwise were vain: but so great and
powerful an evidence of God's spirit cannot be vain. From the communion we
have with Christ who is Per etc. salvatoris nostri Christi resurrectionem.
(...) Just. Mart. q. and resp. ad Gr.
risen (for we are indeed his members, Ephesians. 5. 30.
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone: he is the first fruits of the dead.
Now in his manhood is our slesh and blood glorified: where he lives we live;
as he has begun we shall follow) from the comparision of the first and second
Adam -- 1. Cor, 15. 21. 22.
as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made alive: from the power
of Christ Phil. 3. 21. (...)
able to subdue all things: -- from the earnest of the spirit dwelling in us
Rom: 8. 11. If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in
you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall quicken your mortal bodies
by the spirit that dwells in you: by the universality of Christ's kingdom, to
which all must be subdued. Ephesians: 1. 14. The same is proved from the
blessedness of the dead, Rev: 14. 13. as also from that Christ says, God is
the God of the living, not of the dead, Math: 22. 31. 32.

2. The truth hereof may appear from the consents even of the prudent Vid.
Virg. Aeneid. lib. 6. H ^ omnes ubi mill rotam volvere per annes, Laetheum a^
sluvium deus ^vocat agmin^ magno and incipiant in corpora velle ^reverti.
veniet iterum qui nos in lu^^m reponet dies. Senec. ep. 36.
heathen: much more of all the Saints seeking another city, Heb: 11.

3. From the wisdom of God* which cannot be frustrate: now in vain had he
made man in his own image had it been to perish with so shore a life.

4. From the justice of God: if the body should not rise again then that which
had sinned with the soul, should not also Philosophi etc. illi quidem qui
di^unt any (...) esse: non sa^is mulcere me (...) sunt cum exparte me redimunt.
nam quae potest esse gratia, ubi non totus evasi. quae vita si in me opus Dei
occidat. quae justitia si nature finis mors sit err^nti, and justo vitae
communis. Ambros. de sid resur. c. 31.
suffer with it: the blasphemous mouth, which has so highly dishonored ^^od;
the raylers tongue, which has wounded the innocent; the lying lips; the
theevish and murderous hands, the mischievous head which has been a full
storehouse of pernicious inventions, for here^ies, sch^smes, seditions, ravage
and oppression should escape the power of justice, and eternally sleep in the
dust, without any sense of evil, as securely as if they had never been
stained with confederacy in sin: a thought so vain, as that the conscience
of an heathen could not admit it, and can we think that the poor afflicted,
and tortured bodies of the Martyrs, bearing life and death the Gal. 6. 17.
marks of the Lord Jesus, shall never live again and see a time of
refreshing? Certainly justice must needs put great difference between the
wicked and the just, and it must be true which God says, 2. Cor. 5. 10.
We must all appear before the tribunal of Christ, that every man may receive
(...) 21.
in his body, according to that which he has done whether good or evil.

5. From the power of God with whom Romans 4. 7. Luke 18. 2
all things are possible: he that made all of nothing, cannot he raise the
dead? He that created cannot he change creatures? He made the dust of the earth
of nothing, and man out of that dust, Idoncus est reficere qui fecit. Tertul
and is his arm shortened, so that he cannot repair who made of noth^ng:
Considera authorem, and tollc dubitation^m.
consider the agent and take away all doubting. Some instances (as praeludiums
of the general resur^ection) Christ made, to assure us, that he that raised
the Rulers daughter, the widows son, Lazarus, and others appearing at his
own resurrection, could, and would according to his promise, raise us also. He
gave the Apostles (themselves then subject to mortality) power to raise the
dead, Act. 9. 40.
Tabitha and Act. 20. 10.
Eutichus were examples, and shall not he who gave others this power, be able
himself to do the same? He made Aarons withered rod, as it were, rise again
from the dead, and (...)? Cyril. Catec. 18.
shall not he raise Aaron himself.

6. From the common course of nature, which is God's ordinary power: the seed
is sowed, lies long under winter clouds, except it corrupt it remains alone,
but by a kind of yearly death and resurrection, every seed bringing forth its
own body; that, which without such changes, could have lasted but few years,
continues to the use of man, since the creation unto this present.

7. Lastly, from the consciences of the most obstinate unbelievers, tell me,
Atheist, if there be nothing after death, why art thou so afraid to die?

Of these things we are to make these uses.

1. It must teach us to be afraid to sin, Sect. III.
death cannot conceal thee, thou must rise again: Cain, Judas, Dives would
think themselves happy, if with a thousand thousand deaths, they could but once
die to live no more: it is a great part of the reprobates torment, that he
cannot die, but must be raised to an eternal torment of body and soul.

2 To be comforted against all pressures and calamities of this life,
persecutions, imprisonments, sickness, sorrow, contempt, death: it shall not
be long (be an impious, and ungrateful world nover so malicious) before a
joyful resurrection shall assert, and acquit thee from all these grievances.

3. To use the deceased Saints bodies with humane and holy reverence; not to
handle them despicably, whom God will once glorify.

4. To make death familiar to us by frequent meditation on our resurrection
from the dead: fear not death, seeing thou shall certainly rise again: there
shall be incorruption, glory, and immortality. See Psalm. 16. 9, 10. 2 Cor. 5. 1.

5. Not 1. These. 4. 13.
to sorrow as men without hope for them that sleep in Christ: remember they
shall rise again: Joh. 11. 25. 26.
This was the very argument wherewith Christ (who showed his sympathy at
Lazarus grave, weeping with the living, if not for the dead) allayed the sorrow
of Mary and Martha, and comforted them in their tears -- I am the
resurrection, and the life: he that believes in me, if he were dead, shall
live --

CHAP. XI.
Concerning life everlasting.. 1. What life everlasting is.. 2. Wherein the
happiness thereof consists.. 3. What rules of practice we are to hold
concerning the same.

1 WE are in the last place to believe that which is the end of faith the
salvation of our souls, Sect. I.
life everlasting: necessarily inserted, as the Coronis, and finishing the
articles of our belief: why else should we believe our resurrection or any
other article, but that in believing all the Gospel, we shall have eternal
life?

2. The life of man, is that act of body and soul united, whereby he lives:
life in general is either uncreated, (which is the Godhead, living of, and by
himself, and giving life to all living) this is incommunicable to any
creature, created life is that which is in, and by another power, as it is
written, Act. 17 28.
in him we live, move, and have our being: the life of man is either natural;
in this world sustained by such means as God has thereto appointed: or
spiritual which is our union with Christ, inchoate here, to be perfected in
the world to come, where we shall have Rev. 21. 23. Rev. 22. 5.
no more need of any of the creatures to sustain us: we have need for the
present of the word and Sacraments to support our life of grace, but there 1
Cor. 15.
God will be all in all: all good, all happiness, 1 King. 6. 7.
no noise of hammer was heard in Solomon's Temple when it was raising, all was
prepared before: so here shall be no noise of prophecy, or preachching, that
shall 1 Cor. 13. 8.
cease: God will be our illumination, preservation, joy, and life, Rev: 21. 22.
and in this life desire is never satis^ied, but there is the Rev. 22. 2.
tree of life, Christ Jesus, in the midst of the heavenly Paradise giving life
to all, and silling all with such absolute blessedness, that if all the joys
on earth, and an abstract thereof were present, we could no more desire them,
then a prudent man could childrens rattles, Paul regenerate counted Phil. 3.
all things vile and worthless in respect of Christ; how much more shall the
glori^ied? As the Sun eclipseth or obscureth all inferior light, so do the
heavenly, all secular joys, which like 2 King. 2. 19.
Eliahs mantle fall off, in our ascension to the things which are above.

Our blessedness in this eternal life shall consist in

1. An absolute freedom from all wants spiritual and bodily. There shall be
no ignorance of that we should know, no unbeleefe, Sect. II.
no diffidence in the mercy of God, no servile fear, no envy, anger, lust,
corrupt affection: no sickness, pain, want, violence, oppression, injury, no
sin, sorrow, or effect of sin.

2. Perfect knowledge of God: Moses could see only his back parts: we see the
effects of his wisdom, power, and goodness, the effence it self is
incomprehensible: we see now Cor. 13. 12.
but in part; there we shall see face to face, 1 John 3. 2.
as he is: that is, as much as we can be capeable of.

3. Perfect love of God, for his own sake; without measure, because we shall
know him as he is most amiable.

4. An absolute and perpetual Heb. 4. 9.
Sabbath: we keep one now every seventh day, and at best we fail in our
sanctification thereof: but there shall be all holy, souls and bodies; yet
shall not our life be merely contemplative, and inactive, nor servile, but
eternally spent in the service of God, without lassitude, or irksomenesse,
which was prefigured in Math. 12. 5.
Priests officiating on the Sabbath without violation of the holy rest.

5. Phil. 3. 21.
Glory of bodies and souls reunited: incorruption, immortality, spiritual and
divine life shall Dan. 12. 2. 3.
shine on us, as on Christ Math. 17.
in his transfiguration; all corruptible qualities being put off: and if the
now visible parts of the heavens are free from corruption; how much more shall
man in his glorious liberty, seeing heaven and earth were made for him? When
Christ ascended, no corporal weight hindered him: when Elias began to be
changed, 2 King. 2. 11.
He ascended into a Chariot of fire, no elementary gravity hindered him: so
shall our bodies be freed from the burden of first and second qualities, and
all seeds of natural corruption, and made active to move in Gods service,
without let.

6. Unspeakable Psalm. 16. 11.
joy in the presence of God, and union with Christ: whatsoever we here enjoy,
or rejoice in, is but imperfect and transitory; there is ever some evil (...).
Synes. Eam quippe vitam aeternam dicimus, ubi est sieve fine felicitas. Aug. de
Civit. De 1. l. 6. c. 12.
mixed with our present good; some fear of loosing, or unexpected bitterness
in possessing; but there shall be perfect, and absolute joy without any mixture
of evil to blast it. Eternal life is Tota simul and jucundissima posscssie,
etc. Aquin. 1. q. 10. 1. ex Boet. 5. de Conf
an entire and most pleasant possession of all good: an unchangeable, eternal,
real, true, perfect blessedresse, which after millions of years expired,
shall be as far from ending as at the first: if we think of more millions of
ages then there have been minutes since time began; yet if they were ever to
end, the expectation of a long deferred end, must leave joy less absolute:
time wastes what ere we suffer, enjoy, or do: Hoc ipsum quoth dicto quod seri
bitur, quod religo de vita mea tollitur: quot puncta Notarii tot mcorum dam na
sunt temporum Hieron. l. 2. ep. nlt. Heliod.
this which I write, dictate, or peruse, is taken from my life: but eternity
is infinite, and therefore -- Solidum existimandum est cui uihil decedere, i. l
perfectum cui nihil possit accedere. Lactan. l. 1. c. 3.
nothing can be added, or taken from it, it being perfect: when Paul was taken
up into heaven, he heard and saw, but things unutterable, 1. Cor 12. 4. eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, nor can the heart of man apprehend for present,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him, 1. Cor: 2. 9. Isai:
64. 4. it is easier to say what heaven is not, then what it is: it is not like
this wretched world: the most secure and best condition of this life, is far
short of the least joy therein: there shall be no more evil to embitter or
discompose our happy souls. God shall wipe all tears from our eyes: there
shall be no more fear of death, nor bitter parting of dear friends* no
privation of any good, nor sense of evil: Unde nemo exit amicus, quo nemo
admittitur inimicus. Aug. in Psalm. 67.
hither no enemy is admitted, hence no friend departs.

The Rules we are here to practice, are,

1. Sect. III.
Labor for true faith apprehending Christ, he only is the way; none can come
to the Father, but through him: Joh 11. 26.
Whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh:
3. 16.

2. Be holy if ever thou meanest to arive here: no unclean thing can enter,
Rev: 21. 27. Heb: 12. 14. 1. Cor: 6. 9. 10. Math. 5. 8. when the rich man asked
Christ, Math. 19. 16.
what good thing shall I do, that I may eternally live? He replied -- keep
the commandments* holiness is Via regni non causa regnandi. Bernard.
the way to eternally life.

3. Endure afflictions patiently: our 2. Cor. 4. 17.
momentary afflictions shall cause a far more happy weight of eternal glory in
the life to come.

4. Colos 3. 1.
Set thy affections on things above, and learn an holy contempt of this world,
the fashion whereof continually changes: that is true life which is
unchangeably blessed: the most pleasant temporal life compared herewith is not
to be reckned life.

5. Here take comfort in all present distresses: joy shall come: when Joseph
had made himself known to his brethren, the joy was so great that it pleased
Pharaoh and all his servants, Genes: 45. 16. how Debes prae amore hujus ver^
vitae, etiam desolatam te putare in hoc seculo inquanta libet cjus felicitate
verseris: nam sicut est illa vera vita in cujus comparatione utique ista quae
multum amatur, quamlibet jucunda, atque producta sit, nec vita dicenda est.
Aug. ep. 121. c 2 Intt.
great shall the joy be when all the Saints that ever have been, shall meet
together in the court of the king of glory, and Christ shall manifest himself
unto us? If John Baptist not seeing Christ, with his bodily eyes, did yet Lu.
1. 41.
spring in his mothers womb at the salutation of the blessed Virgin; how shall
we rejoice, when we come, not only to see him face to face, but to be fully and
eternally united, to him? 1. King. ^. 40.
At Solomon's coronation there was such joy as that the earth range with the
sound of them: but how unspeakeable shall our rejoicing be, when Christ, our
peace, shall appear in his kingdom of glory, of which shall be no end?
Certainly no wise and considering man looks on any worldly joy, otherwise
then on a dream, and soon vanishing vision: but here shall be an interminable
joy, which no sorrow shall ever interrupt, no time or age end: As the Psalmist
says of Psalm. 87. 8.
Jerusalem, many excellent things are spoken of thee, O city of God: yet as the
Queen of Sheba said of Solomon's magnificence, I may of this life -- 1. King.
10. 7
half was not told me. Comfort thy self in all pressures of life and death:
what ever thou now can suffer, can be but short, but the happiness of the
life to come shall be eternal.

The Prayer.
O Lord God Almighty, the resurrection and life of all them that believe in
thee, strengthen our faith, and comfort us in all our present sorrows and
decays, with a lively and full assurance, that in the ruin and dissolution of
these earthly tabernacles, thou will repair us to eternal incorruption and
glory, by the same power of thy quickening spirit, which raised up our Lord
Jesus, the first fruits of the dead. Give us a part in the first resurrection
from the death of sin, unto the life of righteousness, that the second death
may have no power over us. Give us grace to evercome all the messengers of
Satan, and the sinful corruptions of flesh and blood, which fight in us
against our own souls that we may triumph and rest secure in the victory of
our faith, that the gates of hell, and powers of death shall never prevail
against us, give us that purity of heart and sanctity of life, wherewith thou
here preparest all those, whom thou will hereafter perfect with glory and
eternal salvation: Give us firm hope for the Anchor of our soul, which in
the fiercest rages that afflict our present life, may lay sure and steadfast
hold on the land of the living, entering into that which is within the veil,
whither the forerunner Christ Jesus is for us entered: Give us patience to
^eare all our present wants and greivances with that cheerfulness, which
becomes those who are confident, that thou who have laid up the crown of
life for them, wilt never fail them nor forsake them: let it be a sure and
never fading comfort to us, a strong consolation for us (who have fied for
refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us by thy own word the Gospel)
when the sorrows and terrors of death arest us, and at our last gasp, that
our Lord Jesus dyed and rose again to abolish death, and bring life and
immortality to light, to purchase eternal glory for us; and that our death is
but a short passage to blessedness, the gates of everlasting life, and the
sorrows thereof but an entrance into eternal joys, and true, endless, and
unspeakable happiness, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

AMEN.
CHAP. XII.
Concerning Prayer.. 1. What, and how necessary it is.. 2. The conditions
thereof.. 3. Motive to the earnest practice hereof.. 4. Rules hereto belonging.

1 WE have considered those things which we are to believe, Sect. I.
that we may be saved; we are next to consider those things which we must do
to Gods honor, our consolation, and assurance that our faith is sound: seeing
that not not every one that says Lord Lord shall be saved, but Math. 7. 21.
he that does the will of God.

2. The things which we must do are comprehended in the Law, the first table
whereof cencerneth our duty to God, the second, our duty to man: Among our
duties to God, prayer is one of the chief.

3. Prayer is a divine worship, wherein we speak to God, in true humility and
devotion of the heart, according to his will, in true faith, fervency of the
spirit, through the merit and mediation of Christ (...). Basil. in mort. Julit.
begging the things we want, deprecating that we fear, Ephesians. 6. 18.
interceding for others, or 1 Timothy 2. 1.
giving thanks for that we or others have received. It is a August. in Ps. 85.
Oration iua est locutio ad Deum: quando legis, Deus ^ibi loquitur, etc. Oration
est colloqui^em ^um Deo. Chrysostom. in Gen, 30. homil.
colloquie of the soul with its Creator: when we read or hear his oracles,
the holy Scriptures, he speaks to us: when we pray we speak to him. It Is a
kind of re^luous grace, which he only gives, who gives the spirit of prayer,
helping Romans 8.
our infirmities, who know not what to pray as we ought: it is a Postilion for
heaven passing between God and man; ariving in the moment it is sent out: nay
Isay 65. 24.
before we speak he will answer, and while we are speaking, hear, who knows
all our wants before we ask: it is the Dove of the souls Arc, going and
returning till it bring assurance of peace: it is the Quam multi eum sonant
voce and cord multi su^^ Aug. in Psalm. 119.
ascension of the mind to God, without which, bended knees, out spread hands,
and eyes lifted up, the most decent and devout gestures with the most excellent
compture and composure of words, are but worthless shells of religion, and
vain drawing near to God with our lips, the heart being far from him.
Oration cordis est non labiorii.
The fervent intention of mind, the silent language of the heart, God hears
without any voice uttered: Exodus 14. 15. (...), etc. Er. Naz. Orat. 15.
when Moses was in an exigent at the red sea, we read of no vocal prayer, yet
God said -- wherefore cryest thou unto me? It Is better pray in silence, then
in attention of mind. God hears the heart: what can loud words avail where
that is mute?

4. He that will walk with God, must often pray, and hear* prayer like Jacobs
ladder, lands thee in heaven, and sets thee in Gods presence: and the foot
thereof is in humility. Sicut enim superbi a omnium sons malorum est, ita
humilitas cunctarum origo virtutum. Chrysostom. in Math. hom. 15. -- humilitate
supposita, tutissim^ cuncta alia superponit aedificans^ hac vero subducta,
etiamsi ad ipsum usque coelum conversationis sublimitate^ pervenias, simul
omnino -- in finem pessimum relabuntur. ib.
The foundation of all virtue, without which, whatsoever, and how high soever
is built, is but magnificent confusion: Pride cast the apostate Angels from
heav^^; how easily shall it keep the presuming Pharisee thence? The Publican
going home justified, only as a self condemning sinner, not worthy, nor daring
to lift up his eyes to heaven, but crying God be merciful to me a sinner,
shows humility to be a safe virtue.

5. God's spirit inditeth and gives audience to our prayers. This is
confidence we have in him, 1 John 5. 14.
if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us: prayer is a divine
antidote and remedy against the venom of sin; grounded on Gods promises;
extracted and gathered out of the Eden of his word, whence we must collect both
laws to form, and matter to furnish our prayers, if we will be heard: some
think it is enough to say the words, but therein may be the sacrifice of
fools, and vain babbling of hypocrites. The more excellent the work is, the
more prudently it ought to be performed: here is great fruit or danger: let us
therefore seriously mark the conditions of prayer, which must be,

Sect. II.
1. In true faith without doubting: Mark. 11. 24. Luke 11. 9.
Whatsoever ye ask in prayer believing ye shall receave it: which he that
doubts cannot, Jam: 1. 6. 7. Jam. 5. 15.
the prayer of faith shall save the sick.

2. In fervency of spirit: Romans 12. 11.
it is a spiritual incense, and must have the heavenly fire of zeal, to make
it an ascending, sweet savor to God as was shadowed out in the Leviticall
incense, and the whole burnt offerings which they called (...) Sacrificium quod
totum combur^batur, as in altum ascendebat. Pagn. The saurex Kimchi.
ascensions which could not be offered without fire, nor might with any but
that which came from heaven, the fervency of Gods own spirit in us. Jam. 5. 16.
The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much. But he that
asks, drowsily fearfully, and diffidently, cannot obtain, because he
distrusteth Gods power, mercy, or truth: and let me tell the secure man here,
he that is cold and negligent to perform this duty in health, peace, and
prosperity, shall hardly be confident of audience in sickness and affliction.

3. In the spirit. 1 Cor. 14. 15. See there v. 2. 3. 4. 5. 9. 14.
I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also: that
is with hearty and intent devotion to God, who looks on my thoughts, and
hears the petitions which his own spirit dictated: I will pray to my own and
others understanding who join with me in prayer: without this we offer the
sacrifice of fools, not knowing, or intending what we say: nor can the present
conception, or saying prayers by roat of heart, make them spiritual, if the
spirit and inward man pray not: and with this inward sense and intention of the
mind set forms of prayers may also be praying in the spirit: we read Genesis
24. 60. Ruth. 4. 11. Numb. 6. 23. etc.
many forms in the holy Scripture. Aaron and his sons were prescribed a
form of blessing the people -- The Lord bless thee and keep thee, the Lord
make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord lift up
his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. And doubtless Aaron and his
sons did as often as occasion served, pray the same prayer in the spirit, and
intention of mind, and were heard of God: in the solemn fasts, the Prophet
says -- Joel. 2. 17.
let the Priests the ministers of the Lord -- say, spare thy people, O Lord,
and give not thine heritage to reproach -- and I doubt not but the Priests
using those very words (as we now may) did pray effectually and in the spirit.
The Psalms are many of them set forms of prayers, and thankesgivings, endited
on several occasions and appointed for the Churches use: and surely as David
and others used them (though set forms) to God's glory, and sang them in the
spirit and so do we: and why shall I not believe that Paul did sing these same
Psalms, (as he says, I 1 Cor. 14. 15.
will sing with the spirit, and will sing with the understanding also) and
intimate the singing of the same by us Colos. 3. 16. Ephesians. 5. 19.
with grace in our hearts to the Lord? I find no precept for singing or
praiing ex tempore: I find many prayers of the Saints recorded in holy writ;
for what? Except to teach us imitation? Above all is that sacred form, which
Christ (entreated to teach his disciples to pray) taught them and us: we have
no Scripture obliging us to conceaved prayers intimating them only to be
spiritual; or prohibiting set forms, as not spiritual: we have express
Scripture for set forms. The most spiritual prayer is that which is so
indicted, and by the Spirit helping our infirmities, so uttered, that therein
our hearts and minds be attentive to God's holy presence, and that which we
pray, this may be in the heart without words uttering it, or in words
conceived, written and red: for the spirit of God as well works in writing as
speaking: as appears in his dictating the Scriptures: nor is the writing of
prayer to be read, any more a restraining the Holy Ghost, or straitning it,
then the writing of the Scriptures to be read. Nor can any man reasonably
think that Gods will is to endite holy prayers by the inspiration of his
Spirit, which might not be as well read, as spoken; or which 'twas lawful
once, or sometimes to use, but no more, or not always on occasion; seeing
Christ three times together, prayed Math. 26. 44.
the same words, and said, Luke 11. 2. Math. 6.
When ye pray say, Our Father which art in heaven, etc. on two several
occasions prescribing the same form: it skilleth not if we pray in spirit
whether the eye by reading, the memory by exhibiting spiritual habits and
impresses of the soul, or the inventio^ do furnish the tongue with praior:
though herein man's frailty be very considerable; whose industry in studying to
pray, as well as to preach for the peoples edification (I shall believe) God
equally blesses by the assistance of his spirit: infirmities all men are
conscious of: who is sufficient for these things? he that prays, may have
some failings, now the more solicitous he is of words, and form (for their
sakes who hear him pray) probably the less attentive his thoughts are to God:
so that he may endanger, the life, vigor and efficacy, or substance of
prayer, by reaching after a circumstance, without which it might be a truly
spiritual and acceptable prayer: for who can deny but that the Lords prayer or
any other set form in holy Scripture or elsewhere, endited by the spirit of God,
assisted by the same, and faithfully said, in the silent language of the heart,
or in words pronounced before men, is a spiritual prayer? who can reasonably
affirm, that without the attention of the mind, or in case of deviation and
wandering thereof, any conceived prayer can be spiritual, either to him that
hears and says amen, or to the speaker: so that, if a set form of prayer, be
endited by the assistance of God's spirit (which is to be exam^ned and tried by
its consent with the holy Scripture) and repeated by the assistance of the same
spirit, and (...) ^^dersta^ding and intention of the soul, it is to God, a
spiritual^ prayer: and to our sense it must be so, except we will examine
prayers by the eye: for who, behind a curtain could discern the difference
between a new prayer conceived ex tempore, or penned and read?

4. With a sincere heart: they who pray to Math. 6.
be heard of men have their reward; they who under color of long prayers
Match. 23. 14.
devouer widows houses, shall have it among hypocrites. The Emblem of prayer
was, Pier. l. 34.
an heart upon an alter: a broken heart is a sacrifice to God: but it must be
sincere: prayer is the souls incense, Rev: 8. 4. which was to be made pure
and holy Exodus: 30. 35. Psalm. 17. 1.
attend unto my prayer that goes not out of feigned lips.

5. With expectation (God sometimes long exercises the patience of his
children, Amat enim Christus diu requiri. Amb. de virg. l. 3. (si sit ejus
liber.)
deferring that which he means to give) and subjection to Gods holy will, who
without error sees what is best, so cannot we: without fainting and giving
over (as Christ declared in the parable Luke 18. 1. 1 These. 3. 10. 1 These. 5.
17.
of the widow whose importunity moved the unrighteous judge to do her justice
because God will exercise our faith and patience: and this was figured out in
the perpetual incense, Exodus: 3. 8. so must it be also without vain bablings,
Math. 6. 7.
tautologies, and repetitions, as if one should be heard for his much speaking*
no sacrifice could be accepted Levit 8. 13. Mark. 9. 49.
without salt: the meaning was God loves not the unsavory sacrifice of fools:
therefore Eccles. 5. 1.
be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing
before God: for God is in heaven and thou upon earth, therefore Non
multiloquio, sed conscientia, etc. Hilar. Can. 5.
let thy words be few, a fools voice is known by the multitude of words.
Herein has that saying of the Apostle place, 1 Cor. 14. 19
I had rather speak five words with my understanding: Math. 6. 7, 8.
Christ forbad as vain repetitions in prayers, so by the instance of the
heathens, all thought of being heard for much speaking -- Be ye therefore not
like unto them: it is Christianos in Egypto crebras quidem orationes habere,
sed eas brevissimas. Aug. -- ne tva vigilanter erecta quae oranti plurimum
necessaria est, per productiores moras ^vmescat atque (...) tetur intentio: ac
per hoc (...) ipsi satis ostendunt, hanc intentionem sicut non est obtundenda
se perdurare non potest, ita si perduraverit, non cito esse rumpendam^a ^sit
enim ab oratione multa loqu^tio, sed non desit multa precatio si fervens
perseverat in tentio: nam multum loqui, est in orando, rem necessariam
superfluis ager^ verbis: multum autem precari, est ad eum quem precamur
diuturna and piacordis exercitatione pulsare: nam plerumque hoc negotium plus
g^mi^ibus quam sermonibus agitur, plus fl^tu quam a^^atu. August. Probae ep.
121. c. 10.
noted of the ancient Christians in Egypt, that they used frequent but very
short prayers: probably lest they should by any deviation of the mind, profane
instead of praying. Our Church in her public Liturgy, used not any long, but
almost all short forms of prayers, Minister and people by often concluding in
the name of Christ, and saying amen, might be stirred up to attention, which is
the life of prayer, it being not so easy to loose ones self in a short
attention as in a long, in which some incogitancie or spirit of slumber is too
apt to obrepe and come upon Act. 20. 9
Eutychus^; yea Christ found the Math. 26. 40, 41.
best Apostles slumbring some times, though the spirit were willing: therefore
he, who out of the infinitude of spirit Colos. 2 9.
which dwelt in him bodily, used by himself alone, to Luke 6. 12.
spend whole nights in prayer, when he Luke 11. 2. etc.
taught his disciples to pray, considered, and complied with their infirmities,
and prescribed them so short a form, that even childrens memories serve them
to repeat it: there is, as in the body, so in the mind, a definite strength and
ability to perform their several offices, to^ which that which we undertake
is discreetly to be proportioned: and here, we may not so long pray as to dull
the attention of the mind, in which is (as I said) the life of prayer, nor
cease where the spirit of God, by giving us fresh, and unwearied vigor,
inviteth us to a continuation in our prayer, Aliud est sermo multus, aliud
diuturnus affectus, nam and de ipso domino scriptum est, quod p^rnoclavit in
orando, and quod prolixius orave rit. ib Aug
all long prayer is not much babbling: all is to be valued by the affection, not
the words: words are necessary in respect of our selves, and others praying
with us, that they may know how to join in petition with us, Nobis ergo verba
necessaria sunt -- non quibus dominum, seu docendum, seu flectendum esse
credamus. ib. Aug. c. 11. init.
not that we can thereby inform God: it is the heart that looks on, the faith
presenting him the merit of Christ for which he hears us, and the intention
of a serious mind sensible of its own wants, and depending on his help,
without which he will not hear us.

6. In charity with all men, enemies not excepted. Math: 5. 44. malice is
strange fire, Levit. 9. 24.
which came not down from heaven, Levit: 10. 1. Jam: 3. 14, 15. 17. whosoever
offers therewith shall be Levit 10. 1. etc. 1 King. 18. 38. 2. Chron. 7. 1.
cut off from Israel. Charity is that heavenly fire on the Altar which must
never go out, Levit: 6. 13. 1. Cor: 13. 8. Therefore Math. 5 23. 24.
if thou bring thy gift to the altar and remembrest that thy brother has ought
against thee: leave there thy gift before the altar, Math. 6. 14.
and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, Genes. 43. 3.
and then come and offer thy gift: for says Christ, if ye forgive not --
neither will your father forgive you: upon the matter he says unto us, as
Joseph once to his brother (...) ye shall not see my face, except your brother
be with you.

7. It must be Math. 16. 41. Colos. 4. 2. Ephesians. 6. 18. Vigilat hostis dormis
tu? Aug. in Psalm 65.
with watching. The subtle enemy watches to lead away thy thoughts, by
suggesting something contrary, or impertinent to thy prayers; so depriving thee
of the fruit thereof. Prayer must be with great intention of the mind to God,
which cannot be, except we exclude all other busy thoughts, as Christ did the
tumultuous multitude at Jairus house: we must, when we are to offer this
spiritual sacrifice, leave all other business, as Abraham did his servants at
the hill foot, to wait for his return to them again: we must incessantly
drive away all suggestions of other thoughts, by perpetual ejaculations,
Genes. 22. 5.
as Genes. 15. 11.
he did the fowls which fell upon his sacrifice: for then only, we cry withal
our heart to God, when Quando aliunde non cogitatur. Aug. in Psalm. 118.
we think of nothing else: that prayer appeaseth not, but provokes Gods
anger, wherein we Quando aliud cogitat aliud loquitur --
speak one thing, and think another, the heathens by the twilight of nature,
so much abhorred perturbation, or distraction in their false worship, that
Ambros. de. virg. l. 3. Alexandro sacrificante puerulum barbarum qui ei lumen
accenderet, excepisse (...) ignem brachio: atque ad^isto corpore (...)
immobilem tanta in puero barbare (...) sciplina revorentie.
Alexanders page, holding a torch therein a spark falling on his naked arm,
he rather suffered the pain of burning, then the least disturbance of that
service: we must come to prayer with the most calmed affections: in smooth
waters, you may behold the heaven, and glorious lights thereof, but in the
troubled, all appears wreathed and confused: it is so here: any extreme
passion discomposeth the soul, and renders unapt for prayer.

8. Chiefly our petitions must be presented by the great Master of requests,
Christ, Joh. 14. 13. Joh 1^. ^3.
Whatsoever ye ask in my name that will I do: he presents our prayers, the
Rev. 8.
much sweet odours in the golden Censer, his own unvaluable merit. Joh. 16. 26.
He prays the Father for us: he is the faithful high Priest over the house
of God for ever, to Exodus 28. 29. 30.
bear our names and remembrance on his breast plate: there is but this one
mediator between. God and man, they that go to others follow lying vanities,
and forsake their mercy: 1. Tim* 2. 5.
Jacob obtained the blessing in his elder brothers garment, so must we in the
merit and mediation of Christ.

9. Our prayers must be for that which concerns God's glory, and our
salvation, absolutely: for things temporal conditionally, as these are in
subordination and relation to them: so far as may stand with God's honor,
and our sou^es health: so taught he us by precept Math. 6.
and example, to say, Math. 26. 39.
thy will be done: we many times pray for that which God denies in mercy: it
were not good for us to obtain it: it made some sober Non quae volo sed quae
sunt utilia E^ertere domos totas optantibus ipsis dii faciles, etc. Iuvenal.
Sat. 10
heathens pray in general for that which was good, and leave the choice to
God: we must pray not to inform an omniscient God, but to perform the parts
of dutiful children, ever with subscription to his will, who best knows what
is good for us: Sic vive cum nominibus, tanquam Deus videat, sic loquere cum
Deo tanquam homines audiant, Senec. ep. 10. f.
ask nothing of God, but that thou may pray for before all men.

There are many motives to incite us to fervent prayers.

Sect. III.
1. Our own necessities and others: necessity cries to thee as that master
of the Jona 1. 6.
Joppa ship to Jona in the storm -- What meanest thou O sleeper? arise call
upon thy God that we perish not: Charity bids thee pray for others, though God
have no need of our prayers, we have of his mercy and blessings, which we will
give when we in faithful prayer acknowledge his power to give, and his mercy
to grant; which is our dependence on him: without his help and blessing, no
creature can help 2 King. 6. 27.
(if the Lord do not help thee, Whence should I help thee? Said the King of
Israel) no not the bread which thou have in thy hand can nourish thee:
therefore he taught rich and poor to say, Math. 6.
give us this day our daily bread^ he gr^^th it, and power to nourish.

2. Admirable is the power Vide^t qui valt. ^pist. Merci ^^per^ad (...)
testatur Christianos victoriae Romanorum causam suisse. Justin. Mart. Apol. 2.
of prayer: it calmeth the surges of a troubled spirit. Takes men up to heaven
in holyrapts. it inclines heaven to earth: shuts the lions mouths: Act. 12. 5.
opens the prison doors: Amal^ch precibus d^bellatur Origin.
beats the fiercest enemies: while Moses hand was held up Israel prevailed:
David armed herewith, beat the overgrowne champion of Gath: Joshua hereby
fetched Armaturam e coe lo. Moses co^tra Amal^ch non gl^dio, sed oration^
pugnavit. Hieron. ^. 2. ep. 24.
ammunition from heaven, and the Lord cast down hailestones from heaven to
destroy the enemies: the Sun and Moon stood still: the Stars in their
order fought against Sicera. It was the answer Pri^s votis hosts quam ar^is
vincendos, Just. hist ^ 20.
of the Oracle to the Cretians, that their enemies must be conquered with
prayers, before they could with arms. Prayer is the key of heaven: Eliah
hereby shutt, and opened it for rain; it Mark. 9. 29. Math. 17. 21.
casts out devils which can no otherwise but by fasting and prayer, be cast
out. Prayer is a sacrifice to God, a relief to the supplyant, a scourage to
the devil: it is the Bathsheba of heaven, which can receive no repulse, Genesis
20. 17.
Abraham interceeded for the impious Sodomites, and Abraham gave over asking,
before God gave over granting, and condescending: when Moses prayed, God said,
Exodus 32. 10.
Let me alone, that I may destroy them, Quando dicit dimi^te m^, oste^dit s^
ten^ri posse ne faciat quod minatus est: Dei e^i^ potentiam servi preces
impedi^bant. Hieron. lib. 2. ep 18.
as if he had laid violent hands of God's judgments, and by prayers arrested
his justice. His mercy like that oil. 2 King. 4. cease not increasing, while
there is any vessel to receive it: if Luke 18.
the widows importunity could incline an impious judge to justice: how much
more shall ours, a righteous God, to mercy? If we who are evil will give our
children good things, how much more will God, who cannot err in giving? prayer
obtains the spirit of sanctification. Luke 11. 13. wisdom, Jam. 1. 5.
deliverance from troubles, Psalm. 50. 15. for our selves and others Act. 12.
Jam. 5. 15. health in sickness: blessing in health, remission of sins: it
must needs be so, seeing he inviteth us to pray, and promises to hear our
prayer: he is Psalm. 144. 18.
nigh unto all them that call upon him in truth. Christ inter^edeth for us.
Cicero. A^t. 7. in Verre^.
when Aquilius breast was opened before the Roman Judges, and he but showed the
wounds received in their service; it inclined them to mercy, and recovered the
almost forlorn cause: what shall not the merits of Christ's wounds persuade
with God? O that he would say to my soul, as he did once to Peter, before his
temptation Luke 22. 32.
I have prayed for th^e that thy faith fail thee not. Let the Lions yell, and
the powers of hell muster up against me, if Christ pray for me, I pass not
who is against me. My address is to him, and my dependence on him, Emil. Prob.
no man might come to the Persian King, but he must first solicit the second in
the Kingdom, but Christ says, Math. 11.
Come unto me: thou shall need no other mediator: fervent prayer never
returns empty; it brings us either that we ask, or something better in the
fervencie of spirit it ascends like the Judge. 13. 20.
Angel in the ^lame of Manoahs sacrifice, and does wonderfully: it says as
wrestling Genesis 32 26. (...) Sept.
Jacob, I will not let thee go except thou bless me. It was a motive to 1
King. 20. 31.
Benhadad to sue for quarter, we have heard that the Kings of Israel are
merciful Kings, therefore he sent and obtained, we have heard, and certainly
known, that God is abundant in mercy; why are we silent? when Exodus 34. 35.
Moses came down from talking with God, his face shined: never stay we with
God in the mount by hearty prayer, but our souls bring away some divine
luster, and heavenly beauty on them: some secret joy, assurance of obtaining,
and confidence to persevere.

But some may say, Object. 1.
I have long prayed, and yet obtain not. I answer, the rule is, that he will
speedily answer, and grant according to his promise: Isay 65. 24.
Before they call I will answer, and whiles they are yet speaking I will hear:
nor will he delay, except in case that,

1. The obstruction be in our selves: as when we continue in sin, and repent
not: when our faith and patience is not thoroughly exercised: and then it
concerns us to amend, and learn patience, considering that God has
Nonnullis quippe impati^ntibus Domi^nus Deus, quo^ petebant conces^ic iratus.
Number. 11. 33. Aug. ep. 121. c. 14.
sometimes granted the requests of impatient men in his anger; and that it is
best which God will, not that we: and Si aliquid contraqua^ oramus acciderit,
pati^nter ferendo, and in omnibus gratias agendo, hoc potius oportuisse, quod
Dei, non quod nostra voluntas habuit m^uime dabitare debemus. ib. Aug.
when any thing happens contrary to our desires, to bear it meekly and give
thanks.

2. That he deferreth to our greater advantage, meaning to recompense that
delay, by multiplying the blessing* so was it with the poor Math. 15. 22. etc.
Canaanite, whose importunity would receive no denial, I am not sent but to
the lost sheep of the horse of Israel, then a reproach: it is not meet to take
the childrens bread, and give it to dogs, Cum aliquando tardius dat, co^mendat
dona non negat, diu desiderata dulcius obtine^tur, cito autem ^ata vileseunt
Aug. de verb. Domini in Math. 5. Obj. 2.
yet at last to her praise, as long as that Gospel shall sound in the Church of
God, and to^her confirmation to eternity she heard, O woman great is thy faith,
be it unto thee as thou desire.

Some urge, I have many times, and long prayed, and find no fruit, nor
success, but rather things contrary.

I answer, there may be many causes hereof: 1. It may be you perform not the
conditions of prayer: your Cla^orem potius cordis oportere esse, non vocis,
etc. Hilar. in Psalm. 118.
mind wandreth: you waver or wax faint in prayer: if Moses but let down his
hands Amalecke prevails: you pray not in spirit, your heart is not upright:
Vere tunc tibi attendit, (...) ipsum qu^ris, non quando per ips^^ aliud
quaeris, August in Psalm. 76.
you seek God only for the worlds sake: you want charity, you pray not in
faith: See Number. 20. 12. 2. It may be you ask somethings, which obtained would
hurt you, as children cry for knives or fire. Et mis^ricorditer auditur, et
mis^ricorditer non auditur, exauditur diabolus et nonexaud^tur Apostolus (Job.
1. 2. Cor. 12.) exaudivit cum quem dispo^^bat damnare, and non exaulivit cum
que^ volebat Sanare: nam aeger petit multa a medico non d^^ medicus, etc. Aug.
in Ps. 8^.
He both mercifully hears us, and mercifully denies: the Physician better
knows what is good for the patient: we have all begged mischiefs, if God had
not denied in mercy, we had long since perished by our own des^res: you that
are so impatient, because God grants not what you desire; come to the
Scriptures you shall find, the devil was in some case heard, and the Apostle
not heard, God heard him whom he had damned, and heard him not, whom he would
heal and save.

3. It may be you ask something good to an evil end: you ask and receave
not, because you ask amiss, Non t^ ^x^udit al voluntatem, sed exaudit ad
salutem. ib. exp. in Joh. ep. tr. 6. Ideo non dat, ^e obsit quod dat. Aug. in
Psalm. 144.
that ye may consume it on your pleasures: Jam: 4. 3. 4. It may be you are
deaf or careless to the word of God: if you continue in me (says Christ)
and my words in you ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto
you, Job: 15. 7. the Ps. 34.
just cried and he delivered them, it is the prayer of the righteous which
avails much, Jam: 5, 16. therefore says the Apostle, let every 2 Timothy 2. 19.
one that calls on the name of Jesus depart from iniquity, and, I will that
men pray every where, lifting up holy hands. Sanctity, like that Exodus 17. 12.
stone which Aaron and Hur put under Moses fainting hands, supporteth our
prayers with assurance of obtaining: his prayer is Validior op^ris quam oris
vox Bern^. Cant Ser. 59.
powerful whose cause, tongue, action, and life speak for him: the Orators
rule is, ^^anus loquitur.
the hand speake's; and injuries cry for revenge (such a voice had Genes. 4 7.
Abels blood, so alms deeds for mercy; Act. 10. 4.
Cor^^lius beneficence did so, thy prayers and thy alms are come up for a
memorial before God: prayer flies up to God with Cherub's wings; faith and
fervency: but must have hands under those wings: Se^ ut a^ au^res Dei via^
precibus facia^is: vigilantius studendum est ut voces actibus adjuventur: nam
majus sit oration, ubi pra^^ est actio, G^eg. in ep. 44. ^. 9.
be thou holy and attentive to Gods word, and thou may be confident of
audience with him: otherwise he will say, when you make long prayers, I will
not hear you: prayer is the souls sovereign balm, but cannot cure where any
splinter remains in that wound: where any intention is to continue in sin, no
prayers are heard. Levit. 13. 45. See Prove. 10. 5. 11.
The Lepers mouth, by the Law was to be covered: sin thy souls leprosy Quid
justius? non au^ivimus, non respeximus, non respi^imur. Salv. de gub. Dei. l. 3.
stops thy mouth and therein, thou but awakest Gods justice to punish thee: it
made (...). Bias. apud Laert. l. 1. c. 56.
the heathen in the storm say to some debauched fellows when they prayed,
hold your peace, least God should know such wicked fellows sailed here. Psalm.
50.
To the ungodly, God said, what have thou to do, to take my covenant into thy
mouth seeing thou hate to be reformed? 5. It may be God denies what you
ask, that he may give you something better. It is indeed a bitter trial to
pray and have no sense of being heard: I conceave that Psalm. 22. 1.
made David expostulate with God, as if he were forsaken: but let a man
consider what God has done to his dearest servants: O that Ismael might live
in thy sight, cried faithful Abraham: God gives him an Isaak, a blessed seed:
Moses prayer could not obtain his entrance into Canaan, it obtained his
present entrance into heaven: he many times denies our wills, that he may
accomplish his in our salvation: Si vere Deum invocasti, certus esto, quia id
forte quod ^ol^bas temporaliter ideo non delit, quia non ^ibi pro^crat:
aedificetur in hoc cor vestrum etc. ne incipiatis tristes facti, veluti
fraudati desideriis ve^stris, ire indignation^m contra Deum. Aug. in Psalm. 85.
non exaudit a^ voluntatem ut exau^iat ad sanitatem qui talla peccatorious lat
quid cum putas servare ^idelibus suis? -- Servat non ^rtam sed ^xlum -- scipsum
qui fecit coelum. ib.
he denies temporal things that profit not, that he may bestow eternal. Be
not dejected, not ^illed with indignation: but consider how God gives lands,
fruits, health, children, plenty, and the like to them that daily blaspheame
him: he that gives such things to sinners, what th^nkst thou he reserveth for
his children? Certainly not earth but heaven; I say he means to give himself
to thee; if he removes the lets, that he may so do, art thou impatient?

Again some will say, as Moses, Exodus 4. 10.
I am not eloquent; to form a prayer. I answer, there are many formed already
for thee: but can thou say less then the poor Publican: God be merciful to
me a sinner: say that, as he did, and it shall be enough for thee to go home
justified: what was the meaning of that caution in the Law, Luke 18 13.
that he might, Le^it. 5. 6. 7.
offer a pair of turtles, who had not a sheep; but that God will accept, if we
offer the best we can, be it never so little. If thou have no more, offer a
contrite heart. I shall never believe him destitute of happy audience with God,
who looking on the merits of Christ interceding for him, can but weep; those
tears have strong cries: why else does David mention Psalm. 6. 8.
the voice of his tears? Powerful prayer, is more in the groans of the
spirit, then rhetorical elegancies, more in weeping then speaking.

There are certain rules of practice hereto nece^^ary.

1. Before Prayer: 1. Meditate on the gracious promises of God: Isti duo
dicipossunt oration and meditatio, etc. Bern. de duob^discip. Luke 24. 13.
meditation and prayer are like the two Disciples going to Emaus, wh^le they
are conferring, Christ joyneth himself to them, and like 1 King. 18. 43. etc.
Eliah and his servant on Carmel, one obtains, the other discovers the
blessing coming.

2. Forgive all thine enim^es: give those that w^nt thy help: forgive those
that offend thee: put out all bitterness, and desire of revenge out of thy
soul: count it the most divine victory to overcome thine adversary with virtue
and goodness.

3. Set thy self in the presence of God: remembering thine own vileness and
guiltiness. Think of the dreadful Majesty of God before whom thou art to
appear: before whom are thousand thousand glorious Angels, those unseene
messengers of his, who see and hear thee.

4. Disburden thy mind of all cares and thoughts of this world, prepare thy
heart to think only of heavenly things.

5. Humbly and heartely beg pardon for all those sins which have
interc^pted his grace, and made thee less apt to pray, and thy former prayers
less fruitful.

6. Compose thy body to that humble gesture, which may best serve to express
thy high reverence of body and soul, and to stir up the greater devotion in
thy self and others.

7. Entreat Gods assistance and the evidence of his spirit to help thy
infirmities, and to prepare thee to pray faithfully.

2. In prayer. 1. Lift up thy soul to God: call upon him with thy heart; See
^ose. 7. 14.
fix thy thoughts in heaven: and as much as humane infirmity can attain to,
turn thee to look upon the throne of God through the merits of Christ, at the
right hand of God, receaving and presenting thy requests to him.

2. Watch over thy thoughts, and diligently fetch them in from their
extravagancies, and wanderings out, forcing them into an ardent attention.

3. As often as Satan distracteth, Christ will have us when we pray sh^^ the
door: Math. 6. 6. but I think (says Bern de not. Dom. Ser. 3.) that he who
shut the heaven by his prayer, could not shut out distracting thoughts from his
prayer. Facilius est coelum obsera^e quam animum. ib. Psalm. 85. 8.
in a brief ejaculation and quick flight of a thought, desire the Lord to
reprove and restrain him, and to assist and help thee.

3. After Prayer, let thy heart

1. Thank the Lord for his gracious assistance.

2. In an ejaculation, pray God to pass by, and forgive all thy failings.

3. Resolve to wait Gods leisure (and to subject all thy desires to his holy
will) for the time and manner of his grant.

4. Attend what answer God gives either 1. More confidence of obtaining, 2.
Cheerfulness of spirit, and resolution to trust in him, what ever he pleases
to do with thee. 3. More fervently to persevere in prayer. 4. A constant
resolution carefully to examine thy ways, in case thou art sensible of some
obstruction and let to thy obtaining. 5. Granting thy requests, that thou may
acknowledge his mercy and glorify him, and thence gather future assurance of
being heard in the like or other necessities.


Thus informed and prepared loose not the comfortable suits of daily prayers,
by foreslowing thy opportunity of calling on God while he is nigh: every hour
will serve hereto: but be sure thou set apart some: specially the first and the
last: every place has served God's children in necessity: the lions den, the
prison, the belly of the Whale, the Babylonish furnace, the midst of the sea.
So may the way thou travellest on; the bed thou lie on: but if it be in thy
choice, take that place which is freest from distractions, most decent, private
and accommodate, whether thou prayest alone, or with thy family: it is never
importune to any state or condition: it will make thy prosperity secure, and
thy afflictions tolerable: only, when ever thou prayest, do it, as with
deepest sense, so with greatest humility and reverence of body and soul; in
as^urance of God's mercy. He that dares speak to thee (said the soldier to
Caesar) knows not thy Majesty: he that dares not, thy Clemency: He knows not
the dreadful Majesty of God who dares any way be profane or irreverend in
prayer: and he is ignorant of Gods mercy, who will not be confident to pray
unto him.

A Prayer for the spirit of Prayer.
O Lord God of truth, and father of mercy and compassion, who art clothed with
Majesty* and glory, and yet so regardest man (man vile dust and earth, yet
that work of thy hands which bears thine own image) as that thou framest
his heart, and enclinest thine ear to his petitions: hear us now calling on
thy holy name, and let thine ear be open to our requests: Lord we humbly
acknowledge that we are less then the lest of all thy mercies spiritual and
secular, and their continuation, as in respect of our manifold sins whereby
we have provoked thy justice, so also for our undervalewing thy inestimable
favors offered us, in the most easy and gracious conditions of mercy which
thou have proposed unto us concerning remission of sins, deliverance from
judgments, and all blessings of this life, and that which is to come, whereof
thou say, but ask and have, we have yet so much neglected the means of our
being happy, that we have, amongst many other sins of omission, either
forgotten, and neglected to pray, or formally, drowzily, and carelessely
performed the same so many have our failings herein been, that whenever we
have prayed for blessings, or forgiveness, we had need again to pray, that
thou would forgive the sins of those prayers, lest they should awake thy
justice, instead of pacifying it, and imploring mercy. And now O Lord, seeing
thou art a God of pure eyes, dreadful Ma^^stie and asearcher of hearts, as we
are a people of unhallow thoughts, and polluted lips, wherewith all shall we
come and bow our selves before the most high? thou have indeed showed us what
is good, and what acceptable, but we have not done justly, loved mercy, nor in
that humility we ought, walked with thee: when thou would instruct us, we
have hardened our hearts, and refused to obey: when thy chastning have been
upon us, we have not powered out our prayer, nor in our trouble visited thee, as
appears this day: now when thine arm is streched out over us with dreadful
judgments, threatening utter ruin and desolation of this whole nation, so
stupid is our security and hardness of heart, such a spirit of slumber is
fallen upon us, that yet we cannot, or will not understand those things which
concern our peace and atonement with thee: now when the Tents of Israel are
beset with destroyers so much worse then Amalekites coming against us, by how
much more dwelling amongst us we cannot yet repent and cry for mercy: in our
prayers we soon let fall cur fainting hands, for want of those supports of
faith, fervency, and resolution never to hold our peace day nor night, nor to
give thee rest until thou establish us, and restore our religion and peace:
now when the hour of darkness is at hand, the dispersion of thy little flock,
to be feared, and dangerous tentations by seducers, able, if it were possible,
to beguile the very elect: now when the great day of of the Lord draws near,
and hastes on us; when the sound thereof, in wars and rumors of wars
affrighteth us on every side, a day of wrath, trouble, distress, and
desolation, a day of darkness and gloominesse, a day of trumpet and alarm, so
senseless a security has taken away our hearts, that we still go on in our
sins, corrupting our ways, and so wounding our own consciences, that we are
not only become loathsome in thy sight, miserable in our present condition, and
helpless in our selves; but also heartlesse to fly to the Sanctuary of thy
mercy and saving health, our own consciences deterring us, because we cannot
but know that we deserve thy justice, who so long centemned thy mercies, and
that thou may most justly stop thine ears to our prayers, as we have ours to
thy precepts, and leave us comfortless in our distress, who have so many
years been fruitless in our abundance of peace and prosperity: yet O Lord
our God, in assurance that thou art true and faithful, who have promised,
saying, ask and ye shall have, and trusting in his merit and mediation, who
has said, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laded, and I will give
you rest, we come unto thee, humbly praying thee to be reconciled unto us, to
open our eyes that we sleep not in death, to pardon all our sins, our
neglects and defects in prayer; to frame our hearts and tongues thereto, to
help our infirmities, who know not what to pray as we ought, to assist us with
the powerful evidence of that spirit of Christ Jesus which enditeth all those
prayers to which thou have made the promise of obtaining, to send down that
heavenly fire, fervency of spirit, which may direct and make this spiritual
incense ascend up holy and acceptable in thy sight through his mediation who
now sits at thy right hand to make requests for us; so that we may have a
cheerful assurance of being heard: Lord restrain the vigilant malice of the
tempter: take from us all hardness of heart, unbeleefe, doubting, wandering
thoughts, drouzinesse, and deadness of spirit, and whatsoever else has
hitherto made us unapt to pray, and less successeful in our prayers: give us
true humility, holy reverence of body and soul, and that wisdom to behave
our selves in thy dreadful presence, that thou may be pleased graciously to
accept our petitions, that we may carry back a comfortable answer to the
assurance of our hearts and consciences before thee and further encouragement
to continue our supplications unto thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only
Savior

AMEN.
CHAP. XIII.
. 1. Of hearing Gods word.. 2. Motives thereto.. 3. The usual lets.. 4.
Conditions requisite to profitable hearing.. 5. Rules of practice thereto
appertaining.

1 Sin (to Gods dishonor, Sect. I.
and man's misery) invaded the soul principally by the ear: and it is Gods
pleasure to beat it out again by the same door: that as in our first parents,
we heard Satan's seducements to our ruin; so for our repair, we should hear
the voice of Christ, Deuteronomy. 32. 47.
which is our life -- Deuteronomy. 4. 6.
our wisdom, and blessedness if we keep it.

2. No word can bind and stay the conscience, direct to salvation, comfort the
soul, and make a man truly wise, but only that Cui falsum subess^ non potest.
which cannot be false: that only is the ground of faith; whatsoever is less,
is but opinion at most: this infallible certainty is only in the word of God
Tit. 1. 2. Hebr. 6. 18.
who cannot lie. Let others magnify traditions of men, I will learn my
religion Non Deus a li^nis ass^rtiori^bus, sed suis aestimandus vocibus est.
Ambr. de poenit. l. 1. c. 4.
here, Coeli mystcri^ doccat m^ Deus ipse qui condi^dit, etc. cui magis de Deo,
quam Deo cr^dam? ib. ad Valent. ep. 31.
who but God could teach me Gods will, and the mystery of salvation? If the
Orator did justly reprove him that learned Greek at Lilybaeum not at Athens:
and Latin at Cilicia not at Rome, how much more culpable are they, who
neglecting Gods word will elsewhere learn religion? hoc intelligere quis
hominum dabit homini? quis Angelus Angl^o, quis Angelus homini, etc. August.
Cons. l. 13. c. 30.


3. Hebr. 11.
God has spoken at sundry times, and in diverse manners by the Prophets and
Apostles, whose writings the same his infallible spirit endited, to reveal his
will concerning the duty and salvation of man; and for a constant and
unchangeable rule of faith and manners, leading to the same: As when he had
showed the Israelites his power and providence to feed them with Manna from
heaven, Exodus 16. 33.
he commanded that a part thereof should be laid up for posterity in the
golden urne: so Quid ^st autem Scriptura sacra, nisi quaedam epistola
omnipotentis Dei a^ creaturam suam? Disce cor Dei in verbis Dei Greg. ep. 40.
l. 4.
when those divine clouds (the Prophets and Apostles) had showred down their
heavenly food of souls, the commission was to them all, which was to some,
write this for a memorial in a book, Exodus: 17. 14. write the vision, and make
it plain upon tables, Habac: 2. 2. what thou see write in a book, Rev: 1.
11. write, for these words are true and faithful Rev: 21. 5. This is that
Manna which was accommodate to every Palate: it was milk to the child, and
strong meat to the man: the Scripture is for all estates, ages, and conditions.

4. Though the Scriptures are the only infallible 2 Pet. 1.
dictate of the holy Ghost, appointed to be the rule by which to try all
doctrines; yet the preaching of the same word; expounding, and applying it by
the Ministers of Christ, is likewise the ordinance of the same God, assisted by
a sufficient measure of his spirit, to the edifying and salvation of the
hearers, so is it the ( Romans I. 16.
power of God to salvation to every one that believes: he has said, it Math.
10. 20.
is not you that speak, but the spirit of your father which speaks in you:
and, ^ Tim. 4. 16.
take heed unto thy self and unto the doctrine -- for in doing this, thou
shall both save thy self and them that hear thee.

5. As Christ was the Prophet Deuteronomy. 18. 15. Act. 3. 22, 23.
which God promised to raise up, which every soul must hear which will be
saved; so was, and is, his spirit now speaking in the Preachers of the Gospel:
See Luke 10. 16. and as salvation is by faith only, so is faith Romans 10.
by hearing, and that by the Word of God: and how shall they learn without a
teacher? or preach except they be sent, and furnished of God? when he sent the
Angel Act. 10.
to Cornelius, he could by the same, have instructed him concerning his will;
but he remitted him to the Ministry of Peter: so when Christ appeared to Act 9.
Saul on the way he could as easily have told him what he should do, as send
him bl^nd to Ananias, to restore him at once a double light: but he would thus
teach men a reverend esteem and dependence on the ministry, by which his
purpose was, ordinarily to bring men to faith and salvation.

To incite us to this duty of hearing, let us consider, that

Sect. II.
1. As Exodus 28. 35.
Aaron must be heard when he went into the holy place: and the Ezekiel. 33. 7.
Prophet must hear the Word at Gods mouth, and warn the people thereof upon
pain of death, Tintinabu^a quae sonabant in v^ste pontificiali sonum
significant praedicationis. Hug. de Sanct. Victor. all. in lev. Sic etiam
interpretatur Just. Mart. dial. cum Triphon. Jud.
so if they will not hear, and be warned, they wilfully perish.

2. The Word is Gods Scepter of his Kingdom: it is his great mercy to give the
light of the Gospel to a people, as a star to lead them to Christ, when he
Rev. 2 5.
removes the Candlestick from others, by nature as good as they. 1 King. 10.
8.
The Queen of Saba said, that Solomon's servants were happy in that they might
stand and hear his wisdom: how much more happy are they, who may in the
Gospel, hear the wisdom of Christ, and be sensible of his Romans 1. 16.
saving power therein?

3. This word, as God owneth it for the Math. 10. 20. Luke 1^.
dictate of his spirit, and his ordinance, so does he indeed make it effectual
to Psalm. 19. 7.
convert the soul, to make the simple 2 Timothy 3. 15. 17.
wise unto salvation, and the wise perfect, and thoroughly furnished to all good
works.

4. Hereby Satan's Captives may be brought to repentance, acknowledge the truth,
and recover themselves out of his snare. 2. Tim: ^. 24. to whom they must else
(like those Exodus 21. 5. 6. Deuteronomy. 15. 17.
care-bored servants) be in vassalage for ever.

5. The word of truth is Veritas odium parit tutius auditur veritas qu^m
praed^catur, Aug. de doct. Christ. nunquam sine querela aegra tanguntu^. Sen.
de ira^ 3. c. 10.
safely heard, though not always so preached: Veritas odium parit tutius
auditur veritas qu^m praedicatur, Aug. de doct. Christ. nunquam sin^ querela
aegra tanguntur. Sen, de ira^ 3. c. 10.
truth begets malice, and so creates danger to the speaker, where itching
ears will not endure sound doctrine, 2. Tim: 4. 3.

6. It is the word of reconciliation, 2. Cor: 5. 19. the embassy of God, to
entreat us to be reconciled to him in Christ: it profereth peace if we will
embrace it: if we hearken unto it Judge. 9. 7.
as Jothan said) God will hearken unto us: it is the (...).
gladsome tidings of salvation, Act. 10. 36.
the Gospel of peace, Rom: 10. 15. the savor of life to them who receave it;
as of death to them that reject it or neglect it: every sermon sets before
us Deuteronomy. 30. 15. 19.
life and death, blessing and cursing, that we may choose: as Iloc ego in sinu
bellum pacemque, porto u^rum eligitis? ^. Flor. l. 2. c. 6.
Fabius said to the Carthaginians, when he shook his robes, In this bosom, I
bring you war and peace, choose which you will.

7. The dangers are unavoidable to the refuser to hear this word:

1. It is a desperate condition to be deaf to the ordinary remedy appointed by
God to cure us: read 2. Chron: 36. 15. etc. The Lord God of their fathers sent
unto them by his Messengers Jer. 7. 13. 14. Jer. 11. 7, 8.
rising early and sending, because he had compassion on his people and on his
dwelling place: but they mocked the Messengers of God, despised his words and
misused his Prophets, until the wrath of God arose against the people, and
there was no remedy. Therefore brought he up them the King of the Chaldeans,
who slew their young men with the sword, etc. See Jer. 19. 15. Jer. 29. 18, 19.
Jer: 25. 8. 9. etc. Levit. 26. 18. etc. Deuteronomy. 21. 13. 15. Jer. 30. 5.
Therefore did we hear a voice of trembling, and fear, and not of peace:
Hippocr.
therefore a voice is heard in Ramah, lamentation and bitter weeping: for
indeed hereby men desperately prevoke God. Heb. 3. 16. It is the height of
rebellion against him, wherein they will admit of not treaty, Deuteronomy. 1. 43. Isay
30. 9. the Physicians say, deafness in a sharp fever is a sign of madness:
it is nothing less here: God will give them over 2. These. 2.
to strong delusions to believe lies, and be damned, who will not receive the
love of truth that they may be saved: Isai. 66. 4.
I will choose their delusions (says the Lord) and bring their fears upon
them, because when I called, none would answer, When I spoke they did not
hear* the best that a contemner, or neglecter of Gods Word, can expect, is to
be severely afflicted, that at last he may hearken and learn to acknowledge
with David, Psalm. 119.
before I was troubled I went wrong, but now have I learned thy testimonies, as
Elihu said, Job 36. 15. he opens their ears in oppression.

2. God will cut him off. Act. 3. 23. Jer. 7. 13. 15. Deuteronomy, 30. 17. 18. they
are Joh. 10. 3. 27.
none of Christ's sheep who will not hear his voice; they Math. 10. 15.
despise Christ, Luke 10. 16. whose word it is, Math. 16. 20. therefore shall
it be Mark, 6 11.
more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment then for them.

3. God will Ezekiel. 8. 18.
not hear them when they cry unto him in distress: Though they cry in mine
ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them: and again he says, Prove.
1. 24. Prove. ^8. 9.
as I cried and they would not hear, so they cried and I would not hear says
the Lord, Zach: 7. 13. 8.

8. The fruits of hearing are very necessary and most comfortable. The Tempter
labors to keep us from Church, by presenting us many lets, pleasures,
profits, and the like, whose loss he pretends, if we spend an hour to
hear; but upon a due account it will appear, that never any faithful hearer,
lost by performing this duty for

1. Faith is by hearing, Rom: 10. 17. faith apprehending all the riches of Gods
mercy in Christ.

2. Hereby thou shall Prove. 2. 1. 5. 6, 7.
understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God, sound
wisdom and understanding to prese^^^ thee, and deliver thee from the way of
the evil man.

3. Hereby thou shall abide in Christ's love, and live: as it is written, Isai
55. 3.
incline your ear -- hear, and your soul shall live, and I will make an
everlasting covenant with you: see Joh: 15. 10. Rev: 3. 20.

4. It is the better part, that one necessary thing, which shall never be
taken away, Luk: 10, 39. what ever else, with expense of precious time we get,
shall puickly be taken from us, but the treasure we gain in hearing Gods
word, shall go with us to eternity.

5. The holy Ghost accompanies his own ordinance, though ^ot always in
visible effects, as Act. 10. 44. etc. yet in that which is better to the
hearers, justification by faith, whereby Christ becomes ours, to his Ephesians.
1. 13.
sealing with the spirit of promise, and being Colos. 1. 6.
made fruitful to all good works: all which is better then faith of miracles,
which a man may have, and yet be a reprobate, Math. 7. 22. 23.

6. They are Deuteronomy. 28. 1, ^. etc. Isai 48. 18. Deuteronomy. 13. 17. 18.
blessed who hear the word of God, and keep it: blessed with health and
plenty, peace, wisdom (an attentive care makes a prudent heart: Prove. 12. 15.
He that hearkneth unto Council is wise) and which is best, confidence Ephesians.
1. 14.
in Christ who never fails trust.

7. Their prayers shall be heard, Joh. 15. 7.
If ye abide in me and my word in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it
shall be done unto you: it was the answer of God to 2 Chronicles. 34. 27.
Josias by the Prophetess Huldah, because thy heart was tender and thou did
humble thy self before God when thou heard'st his Words against this place, --
I ^ave even heard thee also, says the Lord -- lay up his words on thy heart
(says Eliphaz, Job: 22. 22. 27.) -- thou shall make thy prayer unto him and he
shall hear thee --

The lets unto the right performing this duty are

1. Hardness of heart: as it is written, they refused to hearken -- and stopped
their cares, that they should not hear, yea they made their hearts as an
adamant stone, least they should hear the law -- and again, Math. 13. 14.
this peoples heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing -- and
again, Heb. 3. 7, 8.
if ye Will hear his voice harden not your hearts. Miserable is the state of
those deaf adders who refuse to be charmed: who is so deaf as he that will
not hear? The deaf heart is incomparably worse then the deaf ear: this is
an affliction, that a sin: this a bodily infirmity, that a spiritual and
fearful curse: there may be true comfort in this, there can be none in that:
The deaf man is secure from the dangerous voices of railers and slatterers:
and though he be deaf to man, may listen and freely speak to God, have his
comfortable soliloquies, wherein he may confer with his own soul: as by
writing he may speak to others, and by reading hear others speak: nor can I
more doubt concerning the inward comfort of the naturally deaf, then of the
infant, who though he cannot understand the outward; ordinary means, yet is
capeable of the spirit of sanctification; and consequently of salvation, Jer.
1. 5.
as may appear in Jeremie sanctified from the womb, Luke 1. 15. 44.
and John Baptist in the womb. As it is in not receiving the sacraments (which
represent Christ to the other senses) so in not hearing the word: it is not the
privation, but the contempt which condemns: Where God denies either means,
or capacity, he can save by some other way of applying Christ to the elect,
then he has revealed to us, whom it concerns not; we being made capable of
the word preached therefore unexcusable if we will not hearken and obey, that
we may be saved.

2. Unbeleefe: if we believe not Gods threatenings and promises, neither the law
nor Gospel Heb. 4. ^.
can profit us. The faithful Minister prepares to give (amongst others) to
unbeleevers also, 1 Pet. 2. 2.
the sincere milk of the word, that they might grow thereby, but as 1 King. 3.
21.
the true mother to the dead child: when I rose in the morning to give my child
suck, behold it was dead, said she.

3. Want of discerning spirit, and true wisdom: the word of God is a Jer. 6.
10.
reproach to the uncircumcised ear: 1 Cor. 2. 14.
the carnal apprehended it not: he that is of God hears his words: Joh. 8.
47.
therefore ye hear them not (says Christ) because ye are not of God 1 John
4. 6.
he that is not of God, hears us not: hereby know we the spirit of truth, and
the spirit of error, Joh 18. 37.
every one that is of the truth hears Christ's voice. When for men's obstinacy
God gives them over, Isay 6. 9. 10.
hearing they shall not understand.

4. Corruption of a carnal heart, ever resisting the holy spirit: we are
naturally deaf to Gods word, till Christ say to our spirits, as to Mark. 7. 34.
deaf man, Ephphata, be opened: a natural Jud. 12. 5. 6.
Gileadite has taken the passages of the soul, and nothing can enter which
speaks not it; Shibboleth; which pronounces not according to its custom and
affection: 2 Timothy 4. 3.
the itching ear cannot endure wholesome doctrine. Herod cannot endure to hear
his incest reproved, nor Ahab his murder, the Pharisees their hypocrisy, nor
Demetrius his artifice of silver shrines: 1 Cor. 1. 2^.
the Grecians must have wisdom, the Jews signs and wonders; the nice
compture of the words, witty and pleasing things (because they bring only a
carnal ear) the Atheniaus some Act. 17. 21.
news the Gospel to Act. 18. 15.
Gallio, is but contention of words and questions of names: Jer. 26. 11. 21
Jeremies preaching truth, to the wicked Princes and Priests, is treason
against the City, Act 26. 34.
Paul's madness Act. 24 5.
to Festus; moving of sedition and heresy: to Tertullus, and Act 6. 11. 13
blasphemy to the Jews.

5. Pride: as it is written, Nehem. 9. 29
they dealt proudly, and he^rkned not unto thy commandments: they who (in the
height of a carnal heart) resolve not to change their resolutions, cannot
abide to hear any thing dissenting: the proud heart cannot endure any
contradiction.

6. Love of the world: the tares thereof Math. 13. 22.
choke up the good seed, so that it cannot find room in the heart to
fructify: this makes the negotiators excuse their not coming to the spiritual
feast, they must prove their Oxen, and survey their new purchases: the married
think they owe no excuse: Act. 24. 25.
this makes Felix put off hearing the Gospel to some convenient time, when
Satan and the world will: this makes the formal hypocrite (who will seem a
great servant and lover of the word) go Math. 19. 22.
away heavy, if it bid him sell and give to the poor, or secretly murmur, if
it touch his fraud of falls weights: resolving to follow the word no further
then it will comply with his gains: the Prophet describes such -- Ezec. 33.
31. 32.
they hear thy words, but they will not do them: with their mouth they show
much love, but their heart goes after their covetousness; etc.

7. Satan's subtilty distracting their thoughts, so that they attend not, and
Math. 13. 19.
catching away that which is sowed in their heart, perverting the sense,
embittering wholesome doctrine, with some dislike, distaste, irksomenesse of the
hearer, or suggesting some impertinent thoughts, so to sill and busy the mind,
that it cannot attend to, nor receive the word: the mind of a good hearer must
be like the In illa nihil aliud fuit nisi ^abulae testam. Hieron. l. 2. ep. 19.
arc of the testimony in which was only the tables of the Law.

Sect. IV.
The conditions necessary to profitable hearing, are that we take heed. 1 Whom.
2. What. 3. and how we hear.

1. Christ's sheep will not hearken to a stranger, Joh. 10. 5. and God says of
seducers, Deuteronomy. 13. 3. 8 Jer. 27. 9.
Thou shall not hearken to the voice of that Prophet.

2. We must take heed what we hear, Mark. 4. 24. 1 Cor. 15.
Evil Words corrupt good manners.

3. We must he cautious constatis ^^rum in auribus constata ^st imago
sacrilegii. qui enim male audit constre sacrilegium solet. Ambros. Romans ul. ep.
56. l. 7.
how we hear, Luk: 8. 18. The gate of life and death had need be guarded with
all diligence: while Eve left it open to the Serpent, she quickly perished.
The conditions of hearing are that we must hear.

1. Faithfully: without which the word profits not: the learner Oportct
disce^cm eredere*
must believe, specially in Gods school: we must not perversely affect to
bring Gods assertions to the touchstone of our sense or carnal ^eason, to make
the Laws of our own faith Joh 20.
with Thomas, I will not believe except I see, -- or to require demonstration
and proof of Gods truth, Nec enim decebat, ut quum Deus ad homine ^oqueretur,
argumentis asserere^ suas voces, tanquam aliter sides ei non haberetur, sed ut
oportuit, est locutus, quasi rerum omnium m^ximus judex, ^ujus non est
argumentari, sed pronunciare verum. Lactant. l. 3. c. 1.
whose part it is to pronounce, not to prove: because he is the only
competent witness to himself: all the creatures can add no credit to his
assertions: it is enough to conclude a thing true, if we can prove that God
said it: because he is essentially truth: whatsoever is not true, is neither
God, nor of God. It is impossible for him to lie; as it is impossible for him
not to be, or to change his being true: now because we are not capable of the
infinite counsel and truth of God, he complieth with our capacity, and
speaks Ad humanam inte^ligentiam hu^anarum rerum significationibus loquens^
Salvian. de guber. Deil. 2.
after the manner of men: by little and little Deuteronomy. 32. 2.
destilling that dew of heaven on our understandings, which may not overwhelme
and drown them, but make them fruitful: not pouring out his depths of
knowledge on us, as he can speak, but as we can apprehend. Therefore we must
adore those mysteries, which we cannot examine, and believe every syllable of
Gods word to be infallibly true, though our reason come infinitely short of
sounding the depth thereof.

2. Attentively: we must come to a sermon, not for fear or fashion, but with
an hearty desire to be edified, and therein shake off all oscitancie, careless
drouzinesse, and wandering thoughts, which will else render all our work
fruitless: the Auditors thirst to hear, is the speakers supply: when they
attend, the spirit powers out abundantly; as 2 King. 4.
the widows oil increased, while there were vessels to receive it: be thou
present in mind, indeed to receive the word, or else a bodily presence, will
no more profit thee, then did Satan's appearance among Job 1.
the Saints, advantage him: bring me an heart free from all worldly
distractions, Chrysostom. in Math.
said Chrysostom: hearing is the port of wisdom, the sense of descipline,
admirable is the power of the tongue, which the good God gave, to be the souls
interpreter, that the spirits of men (otherwise close prisoners in those hou^es
of clay) might convay a mutual intelligence, and communicate their secret
senses to each other through the ear: the heathens intimated (...) their
legends of Amphion building the walls of Thebes, and Orpheus charming the ear
with notes so sweet, that he made brutes attentive, and brought some from the
dead: we better know the moral in the admirable power of speaking, able to
unite men in civil societies, and an holy communion, to edify, and (by the
power of Gods spirit working therein) to raise the dead in sin, to newness
of life: but all this must be done with an attentive ear, (...) Prove. 20. 12.
auris audic^s. Deuteronomy. 29 4. we real. (...)
the hearing ear, so the Hebrews put (...) cor audiens for an understanding
heart. 1 King. 3. 9. without whose attention it cannot be.

3. Prudently which is

1. By resolving to obey Gods word in every part: this is the end of our
hearing: Romans 2. 13.
not the hearers but the doers of the Law shall be justified -- Jam. 1. 21. etc.
be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.
Happy are they who hear and do thereafter: too many are all for hearing, and
nothing for practice, like those Fancsiorum nu^a alioquim corpora praegrandes
ipsorum aures to^^ contegunt. Plin. not. hist. l. 4. c. 13.
monstrous Fanetii, who had ears disproportionably great for the body. 1. Cor.
13. 17.
if the whole were hearing, where were the smelling: it is the symtome of a
Senec.
queazie stomach, to desire to taste many things, and to be able to digest
nothing. The word of God is Hebr. 4. 12.
quick and active: like the Isay 55. 10.
snow and rain, it does not in vain descend but does his will who sent it,
making the good grow up to the blessing, and the evil, like foul weeds, more
rank for the fire: it is as the Arc 2 Samuel 6. 11.
at Obed, Edoms house a blessing, at 1. Sam. 5. 7.
Ash^od a curse: we must not think 'twill lie dead, it makes the disobedient
like the first sinner Genesis 3.
sly, and strive to hide from God* it leaves him excuselesse, Luke 12. 47.
to the more stripes, by how much more, he knew his masters will, and would not
do it: read Deuteronomy: ^9. 19, 20, 21. we many times wonder why the Lord
afflicts us; we may easily know it is for the contempt, and neglect of his
word: we hear, but obey not, Neque vero little te seducat ^rror qui ex arbitrio
suo cligunt, quae potissimum^ Dei mandata contemnant quaeve quasi vilia ac
parva despicia^t. Hieron. 2. ep. 22.
except where we please; which is indeed to idol our own affections, not to
serve God: we at our Nulli servorum licet ex his quae dominus suus imperat
eligere pro arbitrio quid velit facere, quid nolit, and insoleniissim^ abusionc
quod placuerit assumere, quod displacuerit repudiare -- jam non dominicam
volunt^^em implet, sed suam. Salvian. l. 3.
pleasure, make free choice which of Gods laws we will obey, and which we will
dispense withal: so Herod would obey Mark. 6. 20. The Athenians listened till
Paul spoke of the resurrection, then some mocked, Act: 17. 3^. and the Jews
heard him, till he mentioned his mission to the Gentiles Act. 22. 21. 22.
they gave him audience unto this word, then they lifted up their voices and
said away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not fit that he should
live: if we hear and resolve to obey all we shall be Math. 7. 24.
prudent builders: and the word shall be a savor of life unto life to us: if
not all, a savor of death unto death: our own consent to the good word (in
that we hear, and whereof in effect we say as 1. King. 2. 42.
Sheimei to Solomon, the word that I have heard is good) shall pronounce to us
(as to him it did) our own doom when we keep not the commandment wherewith
we were charged; when men will be making their own rules, choice, and
dispensations, they easily err: then Jehoiakim burns the Prophets roll,
Jer: 36. 23. then the rich man departs from Math 19. 22.
Christ in discontent, and the Act. 28. 29.
Jews from Paul.

2. Opportunely, in the accepted time: while he speaks: Hebr. 3. 7.
today if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: you know not how
soon Rev. 2. 5.
the Candlestick may be removed, how soon you may be taken hence, and whether
you that neglect one sermon shall live ^o hear another: there was no noise (as
has been noted) of the 1 King. 6. 7.
hammer in the rearing up of Solomon's Temple: neither shall there be any noise
in the heavenly Jerusalem of the word of prophecy, Jer. 23. 29.
which like an hammer and fire, here fashioneth the living materials of the
spiritual temple. There all shall cease, 1. Cor: 13. 8. as when the Children
of Israel had Jo^h: 5. 12.
tasted the fruit of Canaam, the Manna ceased: so shall this food of souls
when we come to our promised rest.

3. Hearing it as the word of God, not as the word of men knowing that whether
1 Cor. 3.
Paul plant or Apollos water, God only gives the increase: when auditors fail
of this rule, they Jer. 44. 16.
securely contemn the word, which they durst not do, were they indeed assured
that the contempt thereof reflected on God himself, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
whose Word and Ordinance it is.

4. Having not the Word in Jam. 2. 1.
respect of men's persons, as the vulgar use: Eccles 9. 16.
The poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words not heard. The prudent man
will value this heavenly treasure, though God send it him 2 Cor. 4. 7.
in earthen vessels: to beat down that vain affection of man, which too much
looks on second causes, God chose not the learned, rich, wise, or eloquent,
to preach the Gospel, but the ignorant, poor, and despised, yea 1 Cor. 1. 26.
the foolish things of the world to confound the wise: the weak to confound
the mighty: that no flesh might glory in his presence, and that 1 Cor. 2. 5.
our faith might not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.

5. Hearing diligently: for what know thou when God will call thee
effectually, comfort, and confirm thee? Joh. 20.
Thomas was but once away from the company of the Apostles, and in that one
neglect, he once lost, (and for ought he knew, might finally) the opportunity of
seeing Christ risen from the dead: and therefore, till Christ in mercy came
again to show himself, continued in his unbelief: some come too late to
Church: either laziness, or Luke 10.
Martha's many encumbrances keep them long at home: they Exodus 16. 21. 24.
who stayed too long before they sought for manna found none: and seldom do
slow comers to Church find comfort in that they carelessly hear: all the
people came early in the morning to hear Christ in the temple, Luke 21. 38.
the wise merchant will part from all, ease, sleep, worldly pleasures and
emoluments to purchase this treasure: make it (as David did) thy hearts delight
and treasure, and thou will be sure to loose nothing of it.

6. Hearing with an heart desirous rather of things profitable then pleasing
thy curiosity. it is better to be made good, then witty; to be wise then to be
reputed learned: he is learned indeed who is good, but he is not always good
that is learned: the Nemo malus nisi slultus, si enim saperet bonus esse mallet
exue nequ^iam si vis habere sapic^tiam, Salvian de gub. Dei. l. 5. f.
wicked is truly foolish, and the foolish wicked: for he says in his heart
there is no God, Psalm: 14. 1.

7. Being not a captious hearer; some bring itching, some treacherous ears to
Church, as Jer. 20. 10.
Jeremies enemies did, who watched for his halting, that they might prevail
against him. This is but a Witty folly at best; concluding rather a dainty,
then a wise hearer, a censurer then a scholar: one that comes to Church to
teach, not to hear: nothing but curiosities please them: but the truly
thirsty are not so solicitous to drink in gold or Corinthian vessels, as to
quench their thirst with that which is wholesome: there are some Philoxene's, so
full of censorious acrimonie, that they had rather be condemned twice to the
mines, then once to forbear their rigid censure: a prudent hearer will be
advantaged both by that which is delivered with much politure and elegancy, and
that which is roughly: even the speakers errors shall add to his knowledge:
the ancient Heathens wont to place the Graces by the statue of Mercury, to
signify with what candor, auditors ought to pass by some slips of speakers.

The Rules of practice are either 1. before. 2. in. 3. or after hearing the
word.

1. Before thou come into the house of God.

1. Eccles. 5.
Look to thy foot, whether thou stand right before God by a 2 Cor. 13. 5.
through examination of thy state, whether thou art in the faith: repent thee
of all thy sins, Jer. 4. 3.
break up your fallow ground and sow not among thorns: without this what hope
can we receive of any fruit? One maine reason why we do often hear, and so
little profit, is the neglect of this duty; how can we hope that Gods word will
do us good, when we continue in impenitency and resolution to sin.

2. Pray God for a blessing, that he would assist the speaker with an enlarged
heart, faithful memory, a door of utterance, and that evidence of his spirit,
which may make his ministry powerful to convert and comfort. 2 Cor. 1. 11.
If Paul had need of such assistance, how much more have we? Pray that God
would be preased to take from thee all spiritual blindness, hardness of
heart, prejudicate opinion, wandering* thoughts, and profanation: that he
would restrain the busy malice of the Tempter* that he would give thee a
discerning spirit; that he would open thy heart and ears, Act. 16.
as he did Lydia's, that thou may attend, and lay up his words in thy heart:
that thou may understand, believe, and bring forth fruits to life eternal.

2. In hearing 1. Attend without distraction, that thou ma^st mind,
understand, and loose no part, least thou mistake the rest.

2. In case of distractions, send up breife and frequent ejaculation^, for Gods
gracious assistance, thus must we build like an Nehem. 4. 17.
I^ raelite, among our enem^es, with a weapon in one hand, and a building
instrument in the other, that we may at once desend and edi^ie.

3. Compose thy body to such a reverend posture, in respect of Gods presence,
and the testimony of men and Angels, who behold thee, that thou may thereby
contribute to the Minister and hearers, the assistance of thy devout gesture,
attention, countenance, and voice, as occasion serves to say, Amen.

3. After hearing. 1. Lay up the seed in a faithful memory, Math. 13.
least the evil one come, take it away, and leave thee fruitless, that thou
may be Jam. 1. 25.
a doer of good works, and not a forgetful hearer, and so be blessed indeed:
as it is written Deuteronomy. 6. 3.
Hear therefore O Isra^l, observe to do it, that it may be well with thee:
lay that to heart which thou hear, thoroughly applying it to thy self, as if
God picked thee out of all the congregation, to speak to thee, that he might
draw thee to repentance, and salvation: thus must thou Job. 22. 22.
lay up his words in thine heart, and Rev. 3. 3*
hald fast that thou have received: thou learnest only so much as thou
remembrest: excuse not thy self upon a bad memory: thou seldom forgettest
where thou seriously love* where is that old man that has forgotten where he
has laid his gold? Use the best means* by repeating, writing, calling to
memory some things at least, when thou come home: thou shall in this
constant practice, ^inde thy memory amend.

2. Meditate, and examine how thou have profited by hearing: in case thou find
hardness of heart, and ba^rennesse in thy soul, be not discouraged, God has
his times: Moses smote the rock at Horeb Number. 20. 11
twice, before it would yield, at last it sent out abundant streams of living
waters. God speaks once, and twice, and man perceives not: line must be unto
line, and precept unto precept: happy he who once resenteth; give it not over,
still practice: the beast Levit. 11. 3. etc.
which ruminateth not, was reputed unclean: the moral is, they are wicked,
who call not often to mind, that which they have heard. Be constant in
examination of thy self after every sermon thou hear: to dress our selves
we are contented often to consult our glass, how well and decently it is done;
how few do it after hearing? If thou will do thy self right herein, thou
shall at last feel the power of Gods word in thy soul.

Does any enquire; how shall I know when I hear the word as I ought? The
signs are. 1. Joy of the holy Ghost: so Luke 2. 20.
went the shepherds home, so the Act. 8.
Eunuch, so Act. 13.
many of the faithful.

2. Desire to hear more, as those happy converts, Act: 13. Act: 17. 32. the
spiritual Eccles. 1. 8.
ear is not satiate with hearing: when good 2 King: 22. 3
Josiah had heard the Law read, he gave present charge, go and enquire the
Lord for us.

3. Profitting by the 1 Pet. 2. 2.
sincere milk of the word, and growing thereby from strength to strength, from
grace to grace.

4. Faithful resolution to do all that which thou have learned (as Deuteronomy. 5.
27.
Israel once professed) otherwise, it had 2 Pet. 2. 21.
been better, never to have known the holy commandment: it being Quia minor
is crimi^is reatus est, legem n^scire, quam spernere. Salvian. de gub Dei. l.
4. f. ^minor reatus cst sancta non legere, quam lecta violare, ib. l. 5.
Ignosci aliquatenus ignorantiae potest, contemptus veniam non meretur. ib.
Salvian. l. 5.
less sin to be ignorant of Gods word, then to despise it known: Herod did
many things but his dispensation with one sin, overthrew all the rest.

5. Hearty and unfeigned repentance, such as we read of in the Jews at Peter's
sermon, Act: 2. 37. such as is commanded, Rev: 3. 3.

6. Filial fear of God; this is the end of speaking and hearing: Eccles 12. 14.
to fear God and keep his commandments, is the whole duty of man.

7. Readiness to impart to others what we have learned -- that they may teach
their children, said Moses, Deuteronomy: 4. 10. so did holy Abraham his family.

3. Lastly, again commend thy soul to God, that he may send thee the former
and later rain upon the seed sowed in thine ears, to enable thee to bring
forth happy fruitsthereof: to make it powerful, and comfortable to thee in
life and death.

A Prayer before hearing the word:
O Lord God eternal, who have laid the foundation of the earth, and formest
the spirit of man within him, who art the father of light, and causest the
Sun of righteousness to shine unto people sitting in darkness, in the
region and shadow of death, that the glorious light of the Gospel might
appear to them, that they may therein know thee, believe, see thy saving
health, and be fruitful in good works, to thy glory and the assurance of
their own hearts before thee: we humbly acknowledge that we we are most
unworthy of the least of all thy mercies, specially of that light of truth,
which thou have abundantly, and long bestowed upon us, seeing we have not yet
brought forth fruits worthy amendment of life, but have walked every man in the
stubbornness, vanity, and security of his own heart, as if we had not known
thy will: thou have allured us with promises, and deterred us from our wicked
ways with threatenings and sore afflictions accordingly sent upon us. but we
have answered all with contempt, security, adding transgressions to
transgressions, till they have been multiplied over our heads, ascended up
into thy presence, and thence with wilful hearts and violent hands, pulled
down thy severe judgments upon-our selves, as appears this day: so that in
our own conscienc^s, we do deserve to hear that sentence on the barren tree,
cut it down and cast it into the fire, why keeps it the ground barren? That
thou should give us over to our own vile affections, and destruction of body
and soul, by taking away the comfort of thy word from this sinful nation, by
permitting those sons of confusion (who of our selves have risen up speaking
perverse things) still to prevail against the unity of this Church and State:
that thou should send us strong delusions, who would not receive the love of
the truth, that thou should suffer a fearful darkness again to cover this
land, that night should be to us for a vision, and darkness for divination,
that the Sun should go down upon our Prophets (whose words and ministry we
have so much sleghted and contemned) and that the day should prove darkness
over them; that thy word should become a savor of death to us, and every
prophecy we hear rise in judgment against us: O Lord we cannot be ignorant,
that our obstinary is such, as that thou who art an holy and just God, can
have no pleasure in us: we have so often stopped our ears to thy law, that we
may well expect, that thou will not accept our offerings, and incense of
prayers in our distress, who have wearied thee with our words, and drawn
near to thee with ^eigned lips, b^t our hearts have been far from thee: we
are become the border of wickedness, and thou have been sore displeased with
us, because we have not hearkened to thy Prophets, who cried to us to turn from
our wicked ways; we have indeed not laid their messages to heart, but refused
to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, we made our hearts as Adamant stone;
least we should hear thy law, and the words which thou sentest in thy spirit
by the former Prophets; therofore came this great wrath from thee: the Priests
have offered polluted bread on thy altar, with the strange ^ire of their own
inventions: the oppressing Cities obeyed not thy voice, nor received
correction, they trusted not in thee, neither drew near unto their God: their
Princes within them were roaring Lions, and their Judges evening Woolves, yea
their Prophets were light and treacherous persons, their Priests have polluted
thy sanctuary, and done violence to thy Law: we have itching ears for heaps
of teachers which preach pleasing things, crying to us, peace, peace, even when
misery and destruction is upon us, because we would not abide wholesome
doctrine: we have not feared thee, nor received instruction, but corrupted all
our ways, therefore are we to this day consumed by the fire of thy jealousy,
we are become an a^^licted poor people, and we deserve that thou should
still be terrible unto us, and power upon us thy indignation, bring distress
upon us, and that our blood should be powered out like water, on the bosom of
this good land, which we have stained with cruelty, murder, rapine, oppression,
uncleanesse, and that fullness of sins, which is scarce heard of among those
who have not heard thy law to teach them better. But O Lord our God there is
none holy, whom thou have not made such, nor any so wicked, but thou can make
him holy; Lord we are in thy gracious hands, we humbly pray thee to frame our
hearts according to thine own will, and make us such as thou would have us
to be: O God of mercy have compassion on them who would not swerve from thee:
make us a people of circumcised hearts, and pure language, that we may all* yet
once again, serve thee with one consent: convert us that thou may turn unto
us, and establish thy covenant of life and peace amongst us: O Lord in the
amazing fears and bitter a^^lictions of our souls, answer with good and
comfortable words: return unto Jerusalem with mercies, comfort Zion (be still
our God, and let us be thy people in truth and righteousness) be thou a wall
of fire round about her, the glory in the midst of her: dwell thou in her that
she may again be called a city of truth: the mountain of the Lord of hoasts,
the holy mountain. Cut of the remnant of Baal from this place, and the name of
the Chemarims with their Priests, who turned back from thee unto vanity and
superstition: show us thy ways, O Lord, and teach us thy statutes, lead us in
thy truth, O God of our salvation: set thy fear in our hearts, that thy secret
may be with us: open our eyes that we sleep not in death: show us our sins,
and the way to avoid them by the knowledge of thy law, and the spirit of
sanctification: assure us of our interest in Christ, by the comfortable
testimony of thy holy spirit, applying the promises of the Gospel to our
wounded consciences: continue forth the light of thy word to us, and the purity
of religion and thy holy worship amongst us: put thy holy spirit the spirit of
prayer and prophecy abundantly upon the Ministry: assist them with enlightened
understandings, sound knowledge of all the mysteries of eternal life and
salvation, enlarged hearts, holy affections, faithful memories, and has^owed
lips, for the powerful delivery of thy holy word unto us: forgive us all our
disobedience, barrenn^sse and unfruitfulnesse, give us true and hearty
repentance for all our sins past, with a steadfast purpose and faithfully
resolution never to commit the like again: take from us all spiritual
blindness, hardness of heart, unbeleefe, prejudicate opinion, wandering and
profane thoughts, and what ever else has hitherto hindered the fruit bearing of
thy holy word: resist the vigilant malice of the tempter, that he may not
distract us, nor take away the seed of thy word out of our hearts. Give us
sanctified thoughts, and holy reverence toward thine ordinance, an hearkening
ear, and attentive heart: O God who have the key of David, which opens and
none can shut, who said unto the deaf ears be opened, and they presently
were so: say it unto our hearts and ears: so sanctify our affections, and
prepare us to hear and receive thy word, that we may attend unto it as thy
word, and not the word of man, that it may prove a savor of life to us; that
we may bring forth better fruits then ever we have done: that leading us in thy
way it may bring us to Christ, the truth* the way, and the life, the end of the
law to every one that believes, and the fruits of our hopes and endeavors,
the salvation of our bodies and souls, through thy son our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

AMEN.
A Prayer to be used after hearing the word.
O Lord our God, we humbly present unto thee the fruits of our hearts and lips,
praise and thankesgiving, as for all thy gracious mercies and favors
spiritual and temporal, so specially for the light of truth in thy holy word
preached unto us, whereby thou please to reveal thy will concerning our duty
toward thee, and our salvation in Christ Jesus. More particularly we thank
thee for that portion thereof now bestowed upon us: we humbly pray thee to
pardon our unholy, and unreverend hearing, our profanesse of heart and mind,
inattention, wandering of thoughts, and drouzinesse of spirit. And now holy
father prosper thine own ordinance, send down the former and the latter
rain, the dew of grace, to mollify our hard and stony hearts, that the seed
now sowed in our outward ears, may be fixed in our memory, and take deep root
in our hearts and affections, that the fruits of our faith and entire obedience
may appear in our lives and conversations, to thy glory, and our comfort and
salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

AMEN.
CHAP. XIV.
. 2. Of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.. 2. Who receive the grace thereby
represented?. 3. How we ought to prepare for the right receiving thereof, how
to receive it: and what to do after receiving.

1 Sect. I.
OUr Savior Christ has left us under the Gospel Pauca pro multis, cademque
sactu facillima.
only two Sacraments, Baptism the Sacrament of initiation, and the Lords
Supper, the sacrament of confirmation: that admits us into Christ's visible
body the Church, Baptismi sa^ramentum, and ^lchratio corporis and sanguinis
Dom. August. de doct. Chri. l. 3. c. 9.
this feeds and strengthens in the same.

2. A Sacramentum est and signum rememoratioum ejus quod precess^ scil.
passionis Christi, etc. Aquin. part. 3. q. 60. a. 4.
Sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible grace, an holy seal ordained of
God to strengthen our faith in his promises in Jesus Christ for the free
remission of our sins: which God therefore annexed to his word to confirm
us, by representing the suffering of Christ to our sight and tasting, as the
Gospel preaches it to our ears.

3. This Sacrament is called the Lords Supper, because Math 26. 26. 1 Cor. 11.
23.
Christ ordained it at his last supper, wherein, to fulfill the law, he eat
the Pascall Lamb; and to show the determination and Hebr. 7. 11. 12.
change of the Leviticall Law, and Priesthood, he ordained for this Jer. 31. 31.
new covenant of grace a new Sacrament and seal thereof: that it succeeding
the Passover, might declare him to be the Joh. 1. 29. 1 Cor 5. 7.
only Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world: to 1 Cor. 11. 26.
show and represent his death until his coming again: to leave his Church a
badge of distinction from insidells, and a parting token and pledge of his love
assuring the faithful of his continual love toward them.

4. The visible signs herein, are Math 26. 26. 1 Cor 11. 24, 25.
Bread and Wine: the thing signified is the participation of the body and blood
of Christ, the benefits of whose death and passion being apprehended by faith
accrue to us, as our 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17.
mystical union with Christ, our incorporation into him, our reconciliation
with God, and the nourishment of our souls to Joh. 6. 33. 35. 48. 51. 53. etc.
eternal life.

5. These signs do not barely represent the body and blood of Christ unto us,
but do also truly exhibit the same; so that Christ is truly there; and we do
by faith truly eat his flesh, and drink his blood, but spiritually and
mystically, not carnally and bodily: for neither is the bread converted into
the body of Christ, nor is that with, or under the species thereof: for if
there be not visible signs distinct from that which is thereby signified, it
can be no Sacrament: we do Joh. 6. 54. etc.
indeed eat his body and drink his blood, as we 1 Cor. 10. 16.
who are many, are yet indeed, and truly one body, in, and with Christ, that is
mystically and spiritually, 1. Cor: 6. 17. To eat the body and drink the
blood of Christ, is Ut quid paras dentes and ventrem, creed and manducasti.
August. in Joh. 6. tract 25.
by a true faith (in these outward signs bread and wine, in the Sacrament)
inwardly to apprehend all the benefits of his passion, and thereby to become
partakers of his body so, as that we are made flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5. 30.
and bone of his bone, Joh. 6. 56.
he dwelling in us and we in him: The faithful now eat and drink 1. Cor. 10.
1. etc. 1 Cor. 5. 7.
the same in this sacrament, which the faithful did before the incarnation of
Christ in the Pascall Lamb; and out of the rock that followed them, that was
Christ: but they did not in the Passover, or out of the rock, eat and drink
the body and blood of Christ carnally, but spiritually and sacramentally; for
how could they otherwise eat his body, wh^^ as yet he had not taken any humane
body on him: so that whereas Christ said, take eat, Math. 26. 26.
this is my body; we must remember that it was (...). Chrysostom. ib. Math. 26. 27.
a sacrament he then instituted, (and therefore used a sacramental phrase and
manner of speaking) wherein sometimes the sign is put for the thing signified,
as 1. Cor: 11. 25. this cup is the new Testament: sometimes the thing
signified, is put for the sign thereof, Exodus: 12. 11. it is the Lords
Passover: so they used to say eat the Passover; meaning the lamb the sign
thereof: so here, this is my body, that is a sacrament or sign thereof.

1. The reprobate and elect communicate sometimes together in the elements and
outward signs, Sect. II.
but the reprobate has no part nor fellowship in the inward grace: which was
signified in that Exodus 12. 45. 46. 48.
no part of the Pascall lamb Cyprian. de simpl. praelat.
might be carried out of the house, nor any uncircumcised person eat of it.

2. The elect here receives that spiritual refection which nourishes his
soul to eternal life, but the reprobate eats and drinks his own
damnation, 2 Cor. 11. 29.
not discerning the Lords body, but taking it as a thing of common use, not
sacred: if the elect come unworthily, he shall be punished with some temporal
punishment: for this cause many are weak and sick among you and many sleep: so
the red sea was a defense to Isra^l, and destruction to the Egyptians.

3. They receive unworthily, who not understanding the end and institution, or
duty in this holy and dreadful mystery required will yet presume (for fear of
humane censure, fashion, or company) to venture on it, without due reverence or
preparation: also unbelievers, hypocrites, malicious people, and they who
purpose to continue in any known sin.

4. They may be said to be fit, or worthy ghests for the Lords table, which
understanding, and well considering, the institution, end and due reverence
herein required, have the eye of faith fixed on Christ, and on his merits for
their redemption; who out of a deep and inward sense of their own
unworthiness, judge and condemn themselves to 1 Cor. 11. 31.
prevent God's judgments: who rest on the sole merits of Christ for their
salvation: who with all their hearts desire to forsake all their sins, that
they may serve God sincerely: who are in 1 John 4. 7.
charity with all men: who with humble and reverend hearts, receive this
sacrament, with all thankfulness, showing their dependence on Christ's sacred
ordinance, Luke 22. 19.
obedience to his holy will, and their expectation, of his making good all his
promises therein.

Seeing this is a matter of so high concernment, Sect. III.
it imports every Christian. 1. to consider how he ought to prepare for his
receiving it: 2. how to receive it. 3. what to do after receiving.

1. For thy preparation.

1. 1 Cor. 11. 28.
Examine thy self before thou presume to come, whether thou do understand the
institution, meaning and end of this Sacrament, and if not, learn of them that
are able to instruct thee herein.

2. Examine whether thou have true faith assuring thee, that Christ dyed for
thee; and with his eye of mercy and omniscience, in his passion, as well looked
on thee as those believers, who stood by his cross: then, though thy faith be
weak, if thou hunger and thirst for righteousness, come to this table that
thou may be strengthened: The woman was cured, who said in her heart Math. 9.
21.
If I may but touch the hem of his garment; if thou believe, in touching and
tasting these signs and seals which he has appointed to derive virtue to thy
soul, thou shall be healed.

3. Examine whether 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Christ dwell in thee by his holy spirit, daily mortifying thy corrupt
affections, and quickening thee to the life of grace, which will show it self
in sanctified desires, thoughts, words and actions: at lest in sincere
intention of the heart, and some ability to keep Gods holy laws without any
the least purpose to yield indulgence to the breach of any of them. The soul
cannot be in the body but it shall be discovered by some acts of life and
motion: the being of the 2 Samuel 6. 11.
Arc at Obed Edoms house, appeared in his thriving, how much more shall the
presence of Christ.

4. Examine whether thou do heartily repent thee of every sin which thou have
committed: if so then though remorse of conscience create thee fears and
doubtings; come to the Lords table who Math. 11. 28.
inviteth the heavy laden, to comfort them: Joh. 3.
the brazen serpent was a type of Christ, that had the form of a serpent
without venom, and Christ the Phil. 2. 7.
form and nature of man, Heb. 4. 15. 1 Pet. 2. 22.
without sin: he that was stung with fiery serpents, Number. 21. 9.
by looking up to the brazen serpent, was presently cured: and he that is
bitten with hels fiery serpents (all other ways uncurable) by looking upon
Christ with the eye of faith, shall be saved: therefore in case thou find any
stupid impenitencie in thy stony heart, be thou the more attentive in hearing
the word, and more serious in applying it to thy conscience, more fervent in
prayer, and more frequent in receiving this holy Sacrament, thou shall at last
find an happy effect hereof.

5. Examine whether thou be in charity with all men: as he that presumed to
offer with any other fire then that which came from heaven, was cut off from
Isra^l: so shall it be with those who offer this spiritual sacrifice in
malice: if he that touched the Arc with unconsecrated hands, was smitten
dead, what shall become of them who dare come to the Lords table with bloody
hands, and malicious hearts? if thou be not in charity, Math. 5. 24^.
leave thy gift before the altar go first and be recenciled. neither may thou
think thy self excused from communicating by thy malice: God bids thee be
reconciled and then come and offer: neither may thou think to lay down thy
malice (as they speak of the serpent, while she drinks) for a time only, to
resume it again: in a wilful abstinence, there is a contempt of the Sacrament
which shall condemn a man: and in coming to Christ Exodus 12. 19. 1 Cor. 5. 7.
8.
our Passover with the leven of maliciousness, is the same danger: there is
no safe way, but in reconciliation, that thou may receive worthily.

2. The second point is, how we must receive? we must do it with hearts lifted
up to God in holy meditations of Christ's passion, frequent ejaculations
imploring Gods gracious assistance, obsignation and sealing up of our
salvation, with hallowed thoughts, minds sequestered from all worldly things,
and the most attentive and holy reverence of soul and body: for so ought we
to appear before God in his worship Psalm. 95. 6, 7. Secondly, the riches of
Gods grace, all the merits of Christ are here offered and held out to us, by
the hand and ordinance of Christ: Thirdly, it is administered and received with a
prayer, for which no gesture can be too humble: lastly, when Moses rehearsed
the mercy of God to Israel in the institution of the Exodus 12. 17. (...) est
humiliari: and in Hiphael significat proprie corporis prostrationem, Grace
(...). a^dorare, etc. Pagnin. Thesaur. l. Sacr.
Passover, then the people bowed down and prostraited themselve: the same
reason have we to express a reverend and humble thankfulness for Christ our
Passover.

3. After receiving.

1. Give thanks to God for these seals of thy redemption in Christ.

2. Be careful to perform all thy promises, vows, and holy resolutions,
conceived and made in thy preparation to receive, and live every day of this
life, as if thou did therein communicate.

3. Keep a careful watch over thy body and thy soul, least the evil one
repossesse himself of the swept and garnished room, and bring with him seven
worse spirits then himself. Lest thou relapsing to 2 P^t. 2. 20.
the filthy vomit of thy old sins, thy end prove worse then the beginning. I
have Cant. 5 3.
washed my feet (said the Spouse of Christ) how shall I defile them?

4. Pray the Lord to make good his own ordinance unto thee effectually sealing
thee up unto the day of redemption.

5 Examine thy self whether thy soul be nourished, and strengthened by
receiving, which will appear, if after it, thou art more cheerful in greater
assurance of thy salvation, remission of sins, peace of conscience, and joy
in the holy Ghost: if thou art more quick, active, and able to all holy duties:
if receiving breed in thee a spiritual appetite to receive again, that thou
may more be confirmed in Christ; if it beget a fervent love to God, and thy
neighbors amendment of life, and more hearty loathing thy sins, inward sense
of the life of Jesus dwelling in thee, an holy contempt of this world, with a
longing desire, and constant hope of a better life to come, causing thee to set
thy affections on things celestial, to walk with God in holiness, and to
have thy conversation in heaven: if these things are in thee, blessed art thou,
he has sealed thee with his holy spirit who will Ezekiel. 9. 6.
know thee for his own, and so protect thee with his providence, that the
destroying Angel shall not touch thee. To conclude, when the diseased woeman
(of whom] spoke) but touched the hemme of Christ's garment she presently felt
the powerful effect thereof, in her healing, though Christ had made her no
such promise: and if we have received his body and blood according to his
command, his promise must be fulfilled, and we shall be strengthened, and
healed, we shall feel the same power nourishing us to eternal life.

A private Prayer before the receiving of the Lords Supper.
MOst gracious Lord God, Father of mercy and truth, Who dwell in that light
which none can attain unto, yet vouchsafest to prepare the hearts of thy
servants here on earth, to help their infirmities, and to hear their
petitions: prepare my heart, teach me to pray, incline thine ear unto me,
and have mercy upon me: O Lord thou art a just, and a severe Judge; how shall
I then (vile and unworthy wretch) appear this day before thee in the courts of
thine house? I came into this world a child of wrath and disobedience, naked
and destitute of all goodness; but thou O Lord my Redeemer* have bestowed the
seal of thy righteousness upon me in my Baptism, thou have called me to
the knowledge of thy gospel, thou have given me the earnest of my redemption,
by the spirit of regeneration: Lord establish now the thing which thou have
freely wrought in me: and as thou have this day invited me to thy table, and
the communion of the body and blood of thy holy Son Jesus Christ, so Lord
bestow the wedding garment on me, that I may appear before thee clothed in
his righteousness, whom thou made an offering for sin, that in him we
might become righteous before thee.

Lord what is man that thou so regardest him? and who among the sons of men,
has more cause to praise thy mercies then wretched I? thy mercy has long
spared me, thou have taken me out of the power of darkness, and kingdom of
Satan: thou have given me the glorious freedom of the children of light what
shall I render the Lord for all his benefitts toward me? I will call upon the
name of the Lord; I will declare his mercies, I will take the cup of salvation,
and pay my vows: all is to little which I have to give thee: O Lord thou have
in my creation given me my self in my redemption thou have restored me to my
self: therefore now accept again thine own gift: Lord let me be wholly thine:
And being now to appear before thee whith a sacrifice of praise I pray thee
for Jesus Christ his sake, prepare the alter, purge me with Hysope, create a
clean heart within me, renew a right spirit: sprinkle the door of my soul
with the blood of the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world,
that the destroyer may not enter: send into my soul that heavenly fire of love
to thy sacred Majesty and charity to all men, which may assure me of thy
acceptance of me, and my sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving: clens out of me
all the old leaven of sin and maliciousness: open my understanding, increase
my faith, that I may see and know the assurance of my sins remission in the
seal of eternal life which by thy mercies I am now to receive.

Thou have taught me O Lord, that my blessed Savior, in the night that he was
betrayed, made this holy testament: wherein as he took flesh and blood of us,
that he might dye for us, so he bequeathed his body and blood to us, that we
might live in him, and left this Sacrament, as a faithful pledge of his love,
to remember us of his dying for us till he come again: O Lord I know thou art
the life, and truth, and would not leave thy Church any effectlesse earnest
of their salvation: Lord Jesus therefore be present with my spirit, work
powerfully on thine own ordinance, that it may indeed seal up my salvation in
my soul, with that conconstant assurance, that the gates of hell may never
prevail against it* that no terror of conscience, nor any delusions of Satan
may be able to overthrow it: but that I may with a lively faith, lay hold on
all thy merits: that I may find therein an inward peace, in confidence of my
sins remission, reconciliation with my God, sound joy in the Holy Ghost my
comforter, sanctified will and affections, purity of life, and holy obedience,
which has the testimony of a good conscience, to be a sweet comfort both in
life and death, assuring me that I have fought a good fight with entire faith,
and therefore shall enjoy the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge, shall at that day give to all them, that love his appearing:
Grant this, O Lord, and whatever else thou know to be needful for me, for
Jesus Christ his sake: who with thee and the holy spirit, lives and reigns,
ever one God, world without end.

AMEN.
An other private Prayer for one ready to receive the Lords Supper.
HOly Lord I humbly beseech thee for Christ Jesus sake (whose sacred body and
blood are here represented) forgive me all my sins, and give me a steadfast,
hearty, and constant resolution never to commit the like again: give me a
lively faith, that through these signs (which my Savior has appointed to be
received in remembrance of his death and passion until his coming again) I
may really apprehend the spiritual relish of the bread of life, and to be
assured that Christ's body was given for me, and his most precious blood shed
for my redemption: Lord lift up my soul above all worldly thoughts, that I
may, by a steady and confident application of all the benefits of his death and
passion, see Christ Jesus sitting at thy right hand, feed on him by a
justifying faith, and thereby be nourished to eternal life: Holy Father, hear
and assist, direct and guide me according to thine own will: Lord Jesus who
gave thy self to death for my salvation) deny not the requests of my feeble
soul, longing for the assurance of thy saving health, hungring and thirsting
for thee and thy righteousness: O holy Ghost the sanctifier of all the elect,
thoroughly cleanse me from all the old leaven of sin: prepare me body and soul,
to an holy, reverend, and effectual receiving these sacred mysteries, that my
soul and conscience may thereby be sealed up to redemption, and salvation
through Jesus Christ my Lord and blessed Savior.

AMEN.
A private Prayer after receiving the Lords Supper.
MOst gracious God and merciful Father, who of thine own free love, and good
pleasure, have elected, created, redeemed regenerated, reconciled, justified,
and preserved me unto this present; who have also bestowed ^on me (unworthy of
the least of thy mercies) the peaceable use of thy holy word and sacraments; I
humbly thank thee as for all other thy favors, so for this present comfort
which I have now received: Lord accept this sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving through Jesus Christ, whose oblation of himself once offered for
a full and perfect price of our redemption, and satisfaction for all our sins,
we have hereby according to his own ordinance remembered: Lord perfect the
work which thou have begun in me, make good thine own institution unto my
soul, seal me up unto the day of redemption: work in me a full assurance of
my sins remission, and my reconciliation to thee by the death and merit of
thy holy son Jesus: give me a lively sense of my union with him, and his
living in me, so guiding me by his holy spirit, that his life may appear in
all my thoughts, words, and actions; that I may henceforth live no more to
sin, but being freed from the power and laws thereof, may have my fruit unto
holiness and eternal life: Lord make me every day more and more able to do
thy will, and to abandon mine own corrupt desires: let me now feel in my
soul and conscience the real benefit of thy word and sacraments, which thou
have promised to all those that truly seek thee: give me that longing desire
of right cousnesse, which is by thy grace secured from despair, and preserved
from vain glory and presumption: satisfy me with that measure of grace, which
thy wisdom knows sufficient for me: Lord make me know assuredly that I have
not now received this holy sacrament in vain: nourish me hereby to eternal
life: give me a greater strength to walk righteously before thee, with sound
faith, cheerfulness of mind, firm and comfortable peace of conscience, and
that joy of the holy Ghost, which may ascertaine me that thy kingdom is
established in me: Give me a zealous love of thy glory, ready obedience to thy
law, fear to displease thee, innocence of life, and that holy charity toward
all men which may give me boldness in the great and terrible day of the Lord
Jesus: order thou my conversation so that it may be unblamable toward all men,
and holy before thee, to thy glory and the good example of those with whom I
live: assist me with such a measure of thy sanctifying spirit, that I may
indeed perform all those vows which I have made before thee; that every day
of my life, may be to me, as this Sabbath an holy rest from sin. Lord who
powerfully command all thy creatures, prevent the mischievous subtlety of
the tempter: let thy holy spirit keep me body and soul: give me an holy
contempt of this present world, and affections set on high, where my blessed
Savior sits at thy right hand, who shall in the appointed time appear in
judgment, and gather his elect unto him.

These things and whatsoever else thou know needful for me or any part of
thy whole Church militant, I beg at thy gracious hands, who have commanded us
to ask, and promised to give: Lord give therefore a gracious answer through
Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee O Father of mercy, and the holy Spirit
the Comforter, be all honor and glory in heaven and earth to all eternity.

AMEN.
Another private Prayer immediately after receiving the Lords Supper.
LOrd make us thankful for all thy mercies: especially for the knowledge of
thy son, our ever blessed Redeemer: and for these seals of our salvation now
received: Holy Jesus (who even now from the right hand of the father, hear,
and beholdest what we have done according to thine own institution in
remembrance of thy death and passion) forgive us all our failings and
imperfections, accept our wills to obey thee more perfectly; and as thy self
gave the signs, so give thou (who only can) the powerful effects thereof,
that every one of us may evidently feel the vigor and strength of this
spiritual refection in our souls and consciences, more and more to a full
assurance of our interest in thee, peace of conscience through thee, sanctified
wills and affections by thee, and that candor of manners, holiness of words
and actions which may clearly shine in our conversations before all men, to
thy glory and our comfort in life and death: Lord hear and help us: Lord
incline thy merciful ear unto us, and do it, for his merit who now
intercedeth for us, thy son, our holy Savior Jesus Christ.

AMEN.
CHAP. XV.
. 1. Of the Sabbath. the name: institution: things considerable for the
sanctification: the beginning and ending: reasons of Gods institution thereof..
2. Of the change to the Lords day: now to be observed of Christians.. 3. How we
must now sanctify it?

1 Sect. I.
SAbbath signifies, (...) Sabbatum of (...) to cease or rest, etc.
a rest, from motion or work: hence this day set a part for holy conventions,
and the public service of God, is called a Sabbath, thereto sanctified and
hallowed by Gods appointment: for every rest, or cessation from work is not
the Sabbath of the Lord. Genesis 2 23.


2. The Lord having perfected the work of creation, rested on the Seventh day
(that is, Genesis 2. 2. 3.
ceased from creation) blessed it, and sanctified, or appointed it to be kept
holy by man, as is repeated and interpreted in the moral law given by the
ministry of Moses. Exodus 20.


3. In this praecept are considerable those things which are

1. Moral and Natural. 2. Positive and ceremonial. 1. The Moral part is
that a seventh day be set apart and kept holy for divine worship and rest from
servill works: and this (as all moral precepts, having their ground in the
law of nature) concerns and binds all men in all ages, whose reason tells
them that there must be a time for the public service of God.

2. The Positive and Ceremonial part is that which bound all men to the
observation of the seventh day from the creation, Hebr. 7. 12. 18.
until it was changed (as all the Leviticall ceremonies^ for a seventh day to
begin from Christ's resurrection from the dead and also that which bound the
Jews to the observation of certain ceremonial rests and solemnities thereon,
until the substance of those shadows were come: so we read of their several
Sabbaths, Sabbatum magnum (...).
as first their great Sabbath, which was that on which concurred a double
solemnity, Joh 19. 31. Observa^t ubi festa mero pede sabbata reges, and vetus
indulget senibus clementia' porcis. Juv. Sat. 6.
as the last day of the Pasover, and the seventh day Sabbath: secondly their
holidaies, (...) cessationes, fetiae. etc. Pagn: Hiero. reddit. Sabbata: sit
Ar. Montan.
or solemn feast days, wherein they were to feast and rejoice before the
Lord: see Levit: 23* 24. etc. Deuteronomy. 16. 14. and these were also to them
Sabbaths, Lam: 1. 7. the adversaries saw her and did mock at her Sabbaths.
Thirdly their Sabbath of the earth, every seventh year to rest. Exodus: 23. 11.
Levit: 25. 4. Numb: 28. 10. Fourthly, Sabbaths of years, seven times seven
years, 49. after which the trumpet was to ^ound the Jubilee. Levit: 25. 8, 9.
Fitly their Sabbath of weeks, see Levit. 23. 15, 16. Deu^. 16. 9, 10. these
were ceremonial appertaining to the Levitie all law, and therefore determined
and ended with the rest of those ceremonies: so Paul arrangeth them, and would
have no man judge Christians in respect of any such Sabbath. Colos: 2. 16. yea
he counts it returning to weak and beggarly elements, to observe days,
etc. Galat. 4. 10.

4. The seventh day Sabbath began at Evening, and so ended the next day
Evening, according to the beginning and ending of natural days from the
Creation (as it is said, the evening and the morning made the first day) from
Even unto Even shall you celebrate your Sabbath: but our Lords day begins in
the morning from the resurrection of Christ on the morning of the third day*
Genesis 1.
and that is not without a mystery, that the Legal sabbath began with
darkness, Levit. 23. ^2.
and the Evangelicall began with light.

5. God appointed the observation of the Sabbath for many reasons.

1. That it might be a day for Gods public service, as it was and is observed,
that men might come together to hear the Law, pray, receave the holy
Sacraments, etc. Luk: 4. 16. Act: 20. 7. 1. Cor: 16. 2.

2. To keep in memory the work of creation. Exodus: 20. 10, 11.

3. In the giving of the law was added that which concerned Isreal's deliverance
from their Egyptian servitude (a type of our freedom from the bondage of sin
and Satan) remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt -- therefore
the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep this Sabbath day. Deuteronomy. 5. 14, 15.


4. That it might be a sign between God and his people, that they might know
that he is the Lord that sanctifies them; and a sign of the eternal rest in
the life to come, Exodus 31. 13.
as it is said, Hebr. 4. 9.
there remains therefore (...), a Sabbath keepping to the people of God.

5. To move masters to be just and equal to their servants and beasts in
remembrance of their own condition: on the seventh day thou shall rest, that
thy Ox and thy Ass may rest, and the son of thy handmaid, and the stranger
may be refreshed, Exodus: 23. 12. that thy manservant and thy maidservant may
rest as well as thou, Deuteronomy. 5. 14, 15.
and remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, etc.

6. That God and his laws may be remembered, that in case, any forgetfulness
of him should fall on man (most apt to forget God) the very solemnity of the
day might remember him.

6. Sanctification of the Sabbath, on Gods part, was his appointment to keep
it holy; on man's, the setting it apart from common use and ordinary works, to
spend it in holy exercises according to God's commandment: profanation of the
Sabbath, was, and is, by doing those works which God prohibited to be done on
that day, as servile works, or on any day, as sin, or any thing hindering
his workship on that day to be performed, as humane, servile, or ordinary
works of ourcallings: all works are not prohibited on the Sabbath, the
Priests by the law did sacrifice thereon; this as other like were divine, or
such as appertained to the sanctification of the Sabbath; so are meditation on
Gods works, wisdom, power, benificence, providence, etc. hearing, reading,
preaching, praying, administration, and receaving the sacraments, works of
mercy and necessity, etc

1. This Sabbath so far as it was ceremonial, Sect. II.
was changed for the full and true moral part thereof to be performed on the
Lords day, which is a Christians sabbath, or holy rest, for and to the public
service of God, still religiously to be kept; because 1. It is the Key of
religion and that which being duly observed enableth us to the performance of
all the rest; for therein we are to learn our duty to God and man.

2. This law God twice wrote with his own hand in tables of stone, to ^^itate
the perpetuity thereof, as far as it is moral.

3. If there were no fixed time for the public service of God; how should men
agree to meet therein? One would have a farm, another Oxen, or some other
secular business to distract them one from another. Moreover if there were no
fixed day, it is much to be feared, the men of this world, for their present
emoluments, would often adjourne Gods service, as Felix did Paul's discourse of
righteous^esse, temperance and future judgment, with a, go thy way for this
time, Act. 24. 25.
and when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee.

4. The same reasons for the keeping holy a Sabbath, remain to Christians,
which for substance, God gave for the performance thereof before the Gospel;
we, and our servants have need of rest, need to remember God, to learn his
will, to pray and join in his public worship.

5. Christ came not to repeal or dissolve the moral law in any one jot or
title, Matthew. 5.
nor indeed is it changeable or dispensable, nor may any part of Gods worship
therein commanded, be taken away, though we are not now to keep so rigid a rest
as was ceremonial to the Jews, Exodus 35. 3.
to remember them of something peculiar to them in their minority and
subjection to those ceremonies which were their schoolmaster to Christ. Exodus
16. 23.


6. The Church of Christ has constantly, Deuteronomy. 5. 6.
since the Apostles time kept this day which we now celebrate as an holy Galat.
3. 24.
rest: to conclude, it is the worlds birth day, wherein it first saw light; the
Queen of days: the praeludium of the Saints resurrection, Math: Council.
Foroiliens. cap. 13. Diem autem Domin. etc. vid. council. To. 6.
27. 53. the type of the eternal rest and Sabbath to come, Isai 66. 23. which
yet remains for the people of God, Heb: 4. 9.

2. For the better understanding of these things, we must first consider,
Justyn. Martyr. Apol. 2.
that though we read no particular precept for the transposition of the Sabbath
from the seventh to that which we now celebrate (which is the first of the
week, Orig. hom. 7. Sup. Exodus 1. Aug. epist. 86. 118, 119. c. 13. and de
temp. ser. 251. and ib. 154.
Mat: 28. 1. Mark; 16. 1. 2. 6. Luk: 24. 1. 3. Joh: 20. 1. 1 Cor: 16. 2. Rev:
1. 10.) yet is it most likely, that Christ the Lord of the Sabbath, Ignat. ad
Mag. vocat -- (...) etc.
prescribed the change, and that, as he was with Moses forty days in the
mount, to teach him the law and government of the Church under the same, (not
leaving his people to any, the least point of will worship and voluntary
religion, as may appear in his strict limiting them to the pattern showed
Moses to the very snu^^ers, ashpans, basins, and pinnes of the sanctuary) so
also when he was before his ascension forty days with his disciples, teaching
them what to preach, and how to govern the Church, though he would not again
relade and burden them with antiquated ceremonies, as touch not, taste not,
handle not, yet neither would he leave them to any will worship, but prescribe
them what they should do concerning so maine a point as the transposition and
change of the Sabbath: neither needed he otherwise to confirm a law natural
and moral, then by showing himself Lord of the Sabbath, by taking that away
from it which was ceremonial, and transporting it to another day: so that as
from Christ's own appointment of the sacrament it was called the Lords Supper,
so also from his own appointment, this which we now keep Sabbath, was called
the Lords day. For who may presume to appoint such a thing but the Lord of the
Sabbath? Or who may call any thing the Lords; or ordain any thing in his holy
worship, which his self has not appointed? And it is worthy our noting, that
Paul appointing collections for the poor on that day, 1. Cor: 16. 1, 2. says
also, 1 Cor: 11. 23. 1 Cor: 15. 3. that he delivered them that only, which he
had received of the Lord: and that there speaking of that day, he spoke as of a
thing then in use and custom (for holy conventions, preaching, praying,
receaving the Sacraments) among Christians. See Act: 20. 7. 1 Cor. 11. 23. 34.
et 14. 36. 37 Tit. 1. 5.
so that Christ commanded and instructed them, and they only ordered the
Churches accordingly: Act. 15. 6. 24.
without all dispute, it is sufficient for us to be followers of the Apostles
as they were of Christ, considering that they were assisted by an infallibility
of spirit in these things.

Secondly we must consider why Christ changed it, which was because

1. The ceremonial part thereof was changable by the Lord of the Sabbath; he
took it not away because the morality is indispensable and unchangable, as
having it is ground in the law of nature, not withstanding that which some
object to the contrary, Genes. 2. 2.
that there is no principle thereof leading a mere natural man to the
observation of a seventh day sabbath for

1. In the very creation God sanctified the Sabbath and hallawed it by his own
rest thereon, Exodus 19.
as afterward by his absteining to give them Manna on that day: Exodus 20.
and before Moses received the law on Sina written on tables of stone, Exodus 31.
he said unto the people, Deuteronomy. 9. 9, 10.
Exodus: 16. 29. -- The Lord has given you the Sabbath.

2. The natural man's principles before the fall* and after the fall in the
state of corruption, differ in many things and degrees, as light and darkness.
The natural man in this existence neither does receive, nor can know the
things of Gods spirit: so that he wants illumination, and consequently the
use of diverse principles necessary to lead and guide him in the way of
sanctity, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
which in his pure essence and state of innocence, he had as a complete and
perfect law of nature.

3. The darkness of mind which fell on man by sin, was so general that it
left him only some such obscure knowledge of a Deity to be worshipped, and a
conscience which served rather to check their failings therein, then to inform
them: as that it left them without all excuse: thus they that had not the
written law, Romans 2. 14.
were a law to themselves: the prudent among them acknowledging that there was
no nation so immane, and barbarous, but it believed there was a God, yet
condemning their own ignorance, as much in the manner of his worship, as their
apprehension of him: knowing like blind men out of the way, Act. 17. 37.
that they erred, they groaped after him, but could not find the way to him,
nor understand how they ought to serve him: which when they attempted by
idol-worship and the vain forgeries of man's inventions, they knew it was but
the foolish and frivolous dreams of selfe-beguil^ng authors, and the blind
assent of a seduced multitude (the great and tyrannical mistress of errous)
which swaied them.

4. That remainder of the law of natures light after man's fall was such, as
rather, or more immediately concerned the preservation of the natural man in
this present life, then for the complete instruction of the spiritual, for
eternal life; and so to be reckoned among those common gifts of God bestowed
equally on elect and reprobates: of this kind was the admirable prudence,
temperance, equity, constancy and ^idelity of some mere heathens: wherein the
conscience had these principles that intemperance, injury, murder, theft,
perjury, lying, stealing, rapine, adultery, false testimony, etc. were odious
crimes: for all these and the like were^ immediately serving to the preservation
of humane society, which the God of order, and omnipotent parent of this
universe will conserve unto the end of time: therefore causes he his sun to
shine and his rain to fall indifferently on the just and unjust: and therefore
these principles of the Law of nature were left more undeniably clear, Matt. 5.
and less obscured and obliterated, on the tables of man's heart in his fall,
then those which more immediately concern the worship of God in the first table
of the moral law, and the spiritual man's relation thereto: God constantly
resolving in his unsearchable wisdom and justice, to preserve the life of
nature respectively to all men, for the appointed times; but the life of grace,
to eternal salvation, only to his elect in Christ: upon the tables of whose
hearts, he writes his laws in their regeneration. So that though there be no
principle, 2 Cor. 3. 3.
to lead and direct a mere natural man, after his e^cecation in his fall, to
the worship due to one only God, yet none can more reasonably deny, that a man
in the state of innocence had a perfect knowledge of all the law of God, and
principles in the law of nature to lead him to the observation of every precept
thereof, then that the light of the eye is not natural to a man accidentally
blind, and so having no sight to direct him in the way he should walk in: Man
had in his state of innocence a sufficient knowledge of the whole law of God,
and therefore as that principle which led him to the true worship of one only
God; so also to the keeping of the Sabbath, which is a part thereof; because
all the moral law and every precept thereof, has its ground in the law of
nature uncorrupted, clearly appearing, though in the corrupt state, it be
obscure, and in some branches thereof more, in some less obliterated; and the
written moral law is indeed no more then a repetition and second writing,
Exodus 34. 1.
or supply thereof, figured in God's duplicate and writing again the same
laws on the second tables, Exodus 32. 19.
after the first were broken.

5. The fourth commandment in the morality (that is sanctification of a
seventh day Sabbath) is a law of nature as having its ground therein, and
therefore binds all men, of all times and ages; and conditions, to the end of
time, as well as those laws which say, Honor thy father and thy mother, thou
shall not kill, commit adultery, or steal: but that which was ceremonial
therein, (as the observation of a seventh from the creation) was positive, and
therefore alterable: it being the nature of a positive law, to bind either
certain persons only (as Adam and Eve by the precept of not eating the
forbidden fruit) or to a certain time, as the ceremonial law bound Israel
until the fulfilling of all by Christ; and as all before, and under the law,
were bound to observe the seventh day Sabbath from the creation, until it
should be changed for the Lords day, in whose power the alteration thereof was,
as he was the creator, appointer, and sanctifier of the first Sabbath, and was,
and is the Lord of the same now changed for that which we celebrate in
remembrance of his resurrection.

2. Christ changed the day to remember us of his resting from all the works of
his humiliation in his resurrection, the creation of a new spiritual world,
Isay 65. 17.
as it were new heavens and new earth, which shall remain, Isay 66. 2. 3. 2
Cor. 5. 17.
that from one Sabbath to another all flesh may come and worship before him: of
which he says, old things are past away, behold all things are become new:
and this day that heavenly light, the day star and sun of righteousness
arose, therefore (as has been noted) we begin not this Sabbath from the
evening darkness, as the old world (until the fullness of time to be
exercised under the shadows of the law^ but from the morning light, a type of
that which the Apostle says, the night is past the day is at hand, Rom: 13. 12.

3. To be a figure of that eternal Sabbath and rest specified Heb: 4. 9. Rev.
4.
by Christ's accomplishing the work of our redemption, and justification by his
resurrection.

4. That believers might therein have a perpetual pledge of the new covenant
of grace and salvation, their deliverance from the servitude and curse of the
law.

5. Lastly that it might be a mark of distinction between Christians and
Jews and Mahumetans, who obstinatly adhere to antiquated ceremonies, or
ordinances of men.

It remains that we consider how we must sanctify this Sabbath, Sect. III.
which that we may do, it is necessary to observe. 1. the due preparations for
it. 2. practices in it. 3. duties after it.

Concerning the first, these rules are necessary



2. So consider it before it come, that thou may be sure to set apart all
businesses and distractions which might hinder the performance of thy duty.

3. Rise up so early that thou want no convenience to fit thy self for Gods
public and private worship, which when men do not, they come both unprepared
to Church, and neglect their private duty for preparation, which often renders
the public unfruitful: this discovers an admirable hypocrisy in men, who
will to rise that they may have time, to wash and dress the outward man, for
the sight of men; least any thing should be uncomely to outward view: but for
the inward man, obvious to the severe eye of an heart-searching God, they are
little or nothing so^icitous.

4. Renew thy repentance before thou come to hear the law of Go* lest thou
appear there like the ghest without the wedding garment, untrimmed and foul
in a sacred solemnity: lest the seed of Gods word fall unprofitably among
thorns, and the venomous weeds of thy old sins; and so become a ^avour of
death unto thee.

5. Consider the sanctity of God, into whose presence thou art entering, as
Moses into the clowd to hear his voice wherein are the issues of life and
death, remember that the time is holy by Gods own institution: that the place
is consecrated and set apart for Gods public worship, and let that come into
thy mind which God said unto Moses approaching toward him, loose thy shoes
from thy feet: for the place thou stand on is holy ground: to thy self thus
appliable, put off all thy carnal affections, resign thy self body and
soul, unto the guidance of Gods holy word and spirit: Christ said not in
vain, my house shall be called an house of prayer to all nations; Matthew: 11.
20.
and where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them.

6. Pray privately, that God would forgive thee thy sins, give thee such a
measure of his spirit to enable thee to serve him, as may make thee therein
acceptable to him, bless his own ordinance unto thee, sanctify thee body and
soul to his service, that thou may sanctify his Sabbath, with that zeal,
care, and fervency of spirit, which may please him: that he would assist the
Ministers of his word, and thy self, and the whole congregation, so that the
word may profit you, to the amendment of life, and building you up to the
assurance of salvation in Christ.

In the Sabbath if thou will perform thy duty well, thou

1. Begin with delight in it and all the service of God therein to be
performed: this was God's condition of prospering Israel that they should call
the Sabbath a delight: the carnal man for fear of humane law or censure,
rests from his ordinary works, goes to Church, joyneth with the
Congregation in prayer, Isay 58. 13, 14.
hearing, etc. but it is irksome to him, he thinks the time long, because he
delights not in the Lord and his Sabbath: but he that through delight
therein, keeps it not as in help to sanctification; keeps it no better then
a beast.

2. Glorify God therein: In hearing, praying, receiving the holy Sacrament,
singing praises, etc. thou shall honor him, not doing thine own ways (any
servile work.) Those things may be done which are subordinate to the
sanctification of a Sabbath: as the Priests labored in sacrificing, Isay 58.
13.
the Ministers now do in preaching and officiating, without breach of this
precept. Works of necessity or mercy, to man or beast are to be done: the Ox
fallen into a pit must be releived: the Physician, Apothecary, Surgeon, or
others in case of necessity, may and must respectively help, though it be the
ordinary work of their calling, because it is a work of mercy: so to do is
to honor God: as on the contrary it were to his dishonor, as if his law bound
any man from doing all the good he can, or showing mercy to the distressed;
whereas indeed he is a God of mercy, and loves the same in all those who bear
his image: but thou must not for gain do that which might equally be omitted;
as bargaining, bearing burdens, or other servile work, or labor of thy
calling, or traveling, except in case of necessity, or subordination to a
Sabbath days works: it is certainly an ungrateful sacrilege to rob God of
his own days service, appointed for no necessity of his, but only for our
own good and salvation, and to entrench on that which he has reserved to
himself, whereas he has allowed men six days to do their works, and take
their lawful delights therein: Therefore he says, as we must not on the
Sabbath do our own ways, so must not we find our own pleasures, nor speak
our own words: it is an hateful robbery of God to use pastimes on that day,
though lawful on others: much worse those which are never lawful, whereby the
Devil is more served on that day, then any other. The many fearful
judgments of God on offenders herein (and that which usually befalls them,
in that God seldom prospers the most probable industries of such) is enough
to deter all considering men from profanation of the Lords day.

3. Do what good thou can; to thy self in that which concerns thy soul
or thy body, health and preservation, in case of necessity; or to others in
the like; at convenient times, when the public or private worship of God
require not thy attendance: walk in the fields, or gardens, that thou may
contemplate on Gods creatures, and his benificence, power, providence and
wisdom therein: visit the sick and imprisoned, if thou have ability and
convenience of releiving or comforting them.

4. Abstain from immoderate drinking, feeding, sleeping, and whatsoever else
may render thee less apt for the sanctification of this day.

5. As all thy life thou must rest from sin, so specially on this day,
wherein the very sanctity of the time violated doubleth the offenses committed
there, when God specially requires the sanctimony, and endeavors to learn
his will; and do not think it enough to rest from labor; as God rests not
in an inactive contemplation, and as the glorified Saints in the life to come
in their rest and refreshing, shall yet continually sing their Halleluiahs, and
do those things which shall be to the eternal glory of God in them, so do
thou now compose thy self to have thy present conversation in heaven, and to
begin thy rest and Sabbath here, which shall never end.

When the Sabbath is ended; if thou can, write down some principal heads for
directions or of comforts heard that day, and by often perusing them, commit
all to memory. However repeat to thy self, if single; or with thy family, the
sums of that thou have heard: praise God for the same; sing Psalms: meditate
of the eternal rest, whereof this is a type: frame thy whole life for the
attaining thereto: beg pardon of God for thy several failings and defects: and
pray for the assistance of his good spirit, and that his ordinance may be
powerful in thee and thine, to life eternal.

A Prayer for the Sabbath day morning.
O Lord our God, holy and mer^^^^, W^^umbly pray thee for Jesus Christ sake, to
forgive (...) our sins, to cleanse us bodies and souls, from all those
corruptions which make us less able to serve thee as we ought and unworthy to
appear before thee: O our God be pleased to send the Comforter to enlighten
us, and to open our understandings, that being now sequested from all worldly
cares affections and thoughts, we may lift up our hearts to thee, serving thee
in fervency of spirit and tru^th, that we may this day begin our heaven on
earth, in doing thy will here, as it is there done. And because they are
unworthy of new blessings who are unmyndfull of those they have received: we
here desire to render thee the fruits of our hearts and lips, praise and
thanksgiving for all thy mercies and favors eternal and temporal: for thy
unspeakable love in electing us to salvation: for thy infinite goodness in
creating us after thine own glorious image, to a capacity of light and
understanding (that we might be able in some measure to know thee who art the
fountain of life) of holiness (that we might be like thee, whose being is
an independent selfe-happinesse) and immortality (that we might in thy presence
enjoy thy favor eternally:) for thy gracious providence (which in thy rest
from creation, is ever active in our preservation:) for that, as it was thy
pleasure to form all creatures on earth, in the air, and those unseene paths
of the deeps, for our sakes; so by the power of the same word, which at first
said, let them be made, and they were so, thou still preservest them in their
several kinds, for our use, releife and comfort: nor is thy goodness less
considerable in those remoter lights of heaven, the greater and the less,
which thou have made to distinguish and measure times and seasons to rule the
day, and comfort the unked shades of night: O Lord, the heavens declare thy
glory, and the firmament shows thy handy work, in wisdom and great power
have thou created all things: the unseene multitude of those glorious Angels
(which thou have made ministering spirits, and sent them out to pith their tents
about us night and day for out defense and preservation) are the work of thy
hands, they and we live, move, and have our being in thee, who art the
incomprehensible being of beeings. Above all thy works is thy mercy, and
above all instances thereof, is that, for which we are this day to praise and
glorify thy holy name, the accomplishment of the greatest work, our
redemption, by the resurrection of thy Son Jesus from the dead: our creation
had not profited us, if our redemption had not repaired us when we were fallen:
in our creation thou gave us our selves, and be^ings; but in our redemption,
thou not only restoredst us to our selves, but gave, us thy self in Christ
the some of thine eternal love: Lord what is man that thou so regardest him,
or the son of man that thou so visitest him? Who is able to declare thy
goodness; and to set forth that praise which is worthy of thee? Thou have also
made the Sabbath for man (for whom thou made this universe) thou have
sanctified it, and given it to be a time of rest, and a sign between thee and
us, Ezekiel. 20. 13.
that we might know that thou art he who sanctifies us; that we might herein
meet together in thy public worship, to learn thy holy will; for our
salvation, to present our supplications and several necessities before thy
throne of grace and mercy, ^^ffer up the incense of our prayers and
thankesgiving; that we may rest from sin, and our daily labors, and being
disburdened of all the cares and distractions of this world may approach near
unto thy sacred Majesty with pure hearts and hands. But O Lord our God, who
among the corrupted sons of men, is worthy to appear in thy holy presence,
who art the searcher of hearts, and a God of pure eyes? O Lord we humbly
acknowledge our vileness and unworthiness, beseeching thee for thy son
Christ Jesus sake, to forgive us all our sins, and thoroughly to purge us from
the old levin of our iniquities; give us such a measure of thy grace and
sanctifiing spirit, that we may rest assured of our calling and election to
eternal life: repair thy decayed image in us every day more and more enabling
us to serve thee in true holiness, mortifying and subduing all our carnal
affections which resist the motions of thy good spirit in us; make us
comfortably sensible of the virtue of Christ's resurrection in us, quickening us
to newness of life, in a perfect and entire obedience to all thy holy
commandments: that in assurance of our sins remission in Christ our peace,
we may enjoy a comfortable rest in true peace of conscience, and our
reconciliation to thee by a justifying faith in him. To this end, we humbly
pray thee to bless thine own ordinance to us this day: Lord give thy spirit
of prayer and prophecy unto thy messengers, therein appointed to entreat a
blessing for us, and to declare thy will unto us: distill the dew of heaven
into their hearts and tongues, that they may minister faithful directions, for
the recalling those that err, confirmation of those that stand, and sound
comfort to the afflicted consciences of those that mourn in Zion: Lord who
bountifully find seed to thy sowers, grant that they may find the hearts
and affections of thy people, not stony or thorny, but fruitful ground: be
thou present with us by thy sanctifying spirit this day, that thy Sabbath may
be our delight, and thy word our souls food, comfort and refreshing, that
this, and all our days we may walk worthy of our high calling in Christ and
have our conversations in heaven, where he sits at thy right hand: that
this Sabbath, as it is a representation of that which shall be an eternal rest
from all our sorrows, cares and labors, may also be a means to direct and
bring us to the same even to the end of our hopes, the salvation of our bodies
and souls, the fullness of joy, and eternity of true happiness in thy
presence, through the merits of thy son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; to
whom with thee, O Father of mercy, and the holy Ghost the comforter of the
elect, be ascribed all honor, praise, dominion, and glory, this day and
evermore.

AMEN.
To the ordinary evening Prayer may be added this private prayer for the
Sabbath.
O Lord God of mercy and compassion we render all humble and hearty thanks to
thy gracious Majesty for all thy mercies and favors, as in our whole lives,
so specially this day bestowed upon us: for our peace, health, and opportunity
to serve thee; that in thy tender mercy sparing us, thou have not according to
our deservings (by our neglects of thy holy ordinance, and sundry profanations
of thy Sabbath) made this day unto us (as unto many others) a day of dread and
terror, of trouble and flight; but a day of comfort, an holy rest, and
refreshing to our bodies and souls, in a peaceable and plentiful use of thy
holy word and ordinance: O good Lord continue thy goodness to us herein: give
us true repentance and reformation of all our lives: forgive us our many
sins, and sundry ^ailings in our duties: so sanctify our memories that we
may receive, and our affections that we may readily obey thee, according to thy
holy will now declared in those portions of thy holy word, which have this day
been opened unto us: Lord who only give the increase to the planting and
watring of those who faithfully labor in thy vineyard: bless that which we
have heard, so that we may walk in the strength thereof; and give us a settled
resolution to obey the same, to submit our selves wholly to thy will and word;
to have our conversation so ordered thereby, that sin may dye in us, and the
life of grace show it self in an holy and sincere obedience of our thoughts,
words, and ictions, until we come to the eternal rest in thy kingdom of
glory through the merits and mediation of thy only son our Savior Jesus
Christ,

AMEN.
CHAP. XVI.
. 1. Of Love and Charity, what they are, and how they differ in their objects..
2. Of love to God: considerable in its object, end, measure, several states,
degrees, perpetuity, and opposition.. 3. Signs of our love to God.. 4. common
obstructions and lets thereto.. 5. Means on our part to be used for the
enslaming our love to God. 6. Motives to incite us thereto.

1. Love is the Qveene of vertue^, Sect. I.
mother of sanctity, Virtutum matter est charitas etc. Greg. ep. 40 l. 4.
Gods lively image in man: a reflex of his goodness, 1. Joh. 4. 8.
who is love; the life of faith, without which it is neither Gal. 5. 6.
active nor Jam. 2. 17.
lively: the comfort of this life, 1 John 3. 14. 19.
security in death, and proeludium of heavenly life, wherein it shall be
completed in the vision of God, and the full communion of Saints united to
their head Christ Jesus* what were life without love, better then an hell
inchoate? such must that be where God is not, Bernard.
who not only has love, but is the same. Amor, dicitur illud quod est
principium, quo appetitus ic^dit ad sinem, id est in bonum amatu^ and v^catur
dilectio in quantit liber^ electione disc^ruitur, quid sit amandum. Rainet.
panth.
Love is a voluntary affection and desire to enjoy that which is good: it is a
dilection, because we do in a free choice discern what to love. loves limits
are ample, when it has a fiinite object; when it is toward God, it has no
bounds, save only in the subject, which can but finitely love an infinite,
though with all the soul, and all the might. Love is subjectively in some
desire, objectively in some good (or that which seems such) so that their
varieties, cause as many varieties of love: love of God the supreme good, is
incomparably the best: love of that which God loves is next, and next that
which bears his image: so love we our selves, and men and Angels, we love
men, either as we receive good from them, or do good to them: the first our
language calls Love, the second Charity: that has something amiable and
desirable for it object, this something miserable and to be pitied or releived.

2. Love to God, is a virtue wherein the reasonable creature adhereth and is
united to, delights and rests in God as his chief good: And it is
considerable. 1. As natural; such as was in Adam in his innocence, for without
it, he could not have had Gods image on him. 2. As infused in our regeneration,
which is a repair of Gods image, decayed in us by sin: this is the Ipse^ ut
di ligeretur de^it, qui non deli^tos diligit: displi^entes ama^i sumus ut
fieret in nobis unde placcr^mus Council, Arau^ sican. alt.
mere gift of God. 1. Joh: 4. 7. Love comes of God, and the D^pendet ^x sol^
gratia sp. san^^i eum insundentis. 22. c. q. 24. a. 3. c.
fruit of the spirit is love. Gal: 5. 22. we love him because he first loved
us, 1. Joh: 4. 19.

3. The supreme end of our love to God, Charit as attingi^ ipsum Deum, ut in
ipso sistat, n^n ^rex co aliquitl nobis (...). Aq. 22 ^. ^. 23. a. 6. c
is God: for though we love any creature for some other end then is terminative
in that creature, so beloved, yet we must love God only for his own sake:
though we may not therefore only love God that he may do us good; (for that
were to make our love me^cenary, not ^iliall, not truly to love God above all,
but him for the rewards sake; that were a contract rather then a free love,
self love, not love of God for his own sake, and as a sufficient reward to
those that love him) yet may we be assured that we cannot, love him truly
without a sufficient and certain reward: and we may expect the same seeing he
is Heb. 6. 10.
not unrighteous that he should forget our work and labor of love, which we
have showed toward his name. In whatsoever creature we instance, men, or
Angels, or any thing subordinate to their love, there is still some better
object of our love: as if we love riches for charity sake, we love charity for
our indigent brothers sake, and him for Gods sake: But in God only all our
desires and affections. Hae^ est igitur ^era cordis nostri requies cum in amore
Deiper desiderium sigitur, nec ultra quicquam appctit. Sed in co quod (...),
quadam felici securitate detectatur H. de sanct. Vict. l. 1. Miscellan.
rest and Ezekiel. 1. 25.
let down the wings (like those creatures, in Ezeki^ls vision, when they heard
the voice of God above their heads) and we love God only for his own sake, as
the most excellent, most amiable, and desirable, the sole fountain of true
good, and blessedness, out of whom there can be nothing good or happy: and
indeed Bernard. de amor. D. c 3.
he that seeks any thing above or beyond God, seeks nothing; because there
is nothing better then he, nothing in heaven or earth so good. The subordinate
end of loving God, is that we may love others in, and for him, as it is written,
1. Joh. 4. 21.
we have this commandment from him, that he that loves God should love his
brother also: nor can any man wisely and truly love himself any otherwise
then for God's sake: not wisely; for 'twere folly for a man to set his
affections at any lower level then true happiness, which can never be in any
thing humane or temporal; but it is to be found and attained only in God, and
our union with him: to love our selves for beauty, strength, honor, riches,
plesures, or present life, is to beguile our souls with vain dreams:
happiness can be in nothing which can change for worse, or must unavoidably
end: nor can we truly love our selves for any thing less then the image of
God in us: he loves not himself in truth, but See Prove. 29. 24.
hates his own soul, who loves himself a sinner (for thereby he makes
himself unhappy) or in respect of any temporal pleasure or gain, therein, or
thence taken: the sinner hates and destroys his own soul, See Isay. 3. 9.
doing himself more harm therein, then the devil and all the powers of hell
could otherways do him: for as they cannot make him sin against his will,
so neither can they make him truly unhappy without his consent to sin.
Neither is it truly to love our selves, to provide momentany pleasures, and
beguiling shows of happiness with the loss of the eternal and true: the
gain of a world cannot compensate the loss of a soul: nor does he truly love
himself who betrayeth himself herein, loving short and evil pleasures, more
then the chief good, eternal happiness, and salvation of his own soul.

3. The measure of our loving God, is to love him M^dus sin^ mo. do dilig^rc.
Ber.
without measure: things finite have measure, and therefore must be loved in
measure and subordination: Thou must love thy Parents, wife, children, friends;
but as thy self, Licet parvulus ex collo pen^eat nepos: licet sparso crine and
scis sis vestibus, ubera quibus te ^tricrat mat^^ ostendat; licet in limine
pai^r jac^at, per calrati^ perg^ pa^rem, siccis o^ulis and vexilluni crucis
ovola^ solum pictatis genus est, in ha^re esse crudelem Hieronym, l. 2. ep. 6
Heliodor.
not in the place of God (to honor them before him as Eli did. 1. Sam: 2. 29.)
but in subordination to his love, and as may be consistent there with:
otherwise he that hates not father, mother, wife, children, and his own life
(...) Christ, cannot be his disciple L^k: 14. 26. that is where the love of
these or any of them is not subordinate to the love of God, or where a man
loves any of these more then God, Math: 10. 37. Thou must love God with all
thy heart, (according to thy capacity) with all thy soul, (thy will,
affections, and desires) thy mind and intellectual faculties (for love of God
cannot be without knowledge of him, there is no desire of that we know not)
with ^ll thy might, as much as thou can, every part must serve to Gods love,
that we may love God, not only giving us, but also severely correcting us, and
denying us that which we ask, and think best for us, in assurance that he is
most just, wise and merciful to dispose all for the best, as may be seen in
Christ, and the Martyrs, whom nor life, nor death, nor any pressure could
separate from the love of God.

4. Though the love of God in man's state of innocence was lost by sin, yet
that which is infused in our regeneration shall never fall away: because it
depends on Gods immutable love to us, who not only gives grace but also
perseverance there in: it was Charitas quae des^ripotest u^quam suit vera
August. Tom. 4. de falut. do^ct. c. 7.
never true love of God which ever fails: if it be true, it knows no end,
being Corruptionis nescia semper invicta. Prosper l. 3. de vit. cant. c. 13.
ever invincible: for the gifts and graces of God are without repentance. Romans
11. 29. faith operative by love cannot be lost, neither can true love: it may
be remitted, not lost, clouded, not extinguished: that which in the reprobate
seems the love of God, shall be lost; the true which is in the elect, can
never; because though men may be deceived concerning their election, Donum
perseverantiae computatur inter beneficia^ Dei quibus certissime libe rantur,
quicunque liberan^^tur. Aq. 22. ^q. 24. a 11. ex August. de bono persev. c. 14.
Tom. 7.
God cannot.

5. This love of God is never perfect in the best in this life: here it may
still receive Charitas viae potest augeri. 22ae. q. 24. a. 4. c.
increases, and does, as the Apostle Phil. 1. 9. (...), yet more and more in
knowledge. We love according to our knowledge, which being but in part, no more
is this: our whole regeneration is yet imperfect in degrees, and so is our love
to God.

6. Love of God shall remain, and be perfect in the life to come: when riches,
honors, pleasures, dear friends; nay when those excellent gifts of learning
and prophecy shall leave us, when faith shall end in enjoying, this one
treasure shall be secure, and increase to eternity.

7. As he that hates God, is herein more excusable then all other sinners,
because hate of God is more apparently impious, then failing in attaining it,
or falling from it by infirmity (for here may be a will to do good, but there
cannot) so also herein, that having but one extreme to fall into, the
malicious will fall there: all other sins may be in excess, and in defect;
because every other virtue, this love excepted, has two bastard sisters: as
valor has in excess, temerity, and in defect timidity; justice has on the
right hand, too much severity, on the left, too much mildness and indulgence
to sin: so is it in the rest: only this most amiable virtue has nothing but
defect to oppose it: no creature can love God too much, because none can love
him enough, or infinitely. This also aggravateth the sin, that there can be
no cause in God of any hatred toward him, because the only chief and true good
cannot be the proper object of hatred: nor could the most wicked hate him, but
that they have sins which his justice must punish, because he is good; and they
have set up their impious desires and lusts, after pleasures and reveuge in his
place; and therefore hate all that oppose them: so is the Romans 8. 7.
wisdom of the flesh enmity with God; because it is not subject to the law of
God; which the signs and effects thereof declare, such as are despair,
servile fear of God's presence, fleeing from him (as Adam would have done)
audacious liberty of sinning etc, yet are there degrees herein: the formal
hypocrite does not professedly, and out of destinate malice, hate God, nor
truly love him: he professes love, but prefers the world before God: and
if any man so love the world, Sect. III,
the love of God is not in him. 1 John: 2. 15.

Now whereas all pretend love (as obedience) to God, yea when they do no less
then rebel against him, and would, if it were possible, unthrone him; it is
necessary to consider some marks and signs of this love, which are these, and
the like: we love God.

1. If in our hearts desire we choose him for our chief good, and prefer
him before all loves; as the spouse says -- Cant. 1. 1.
thy love is beter then wine: if we fix our Isai. 2. 6. 9.
hearts and affections on God, we love him: if Psalm. 37. 4. Psalm. 40. 8. Psalm.
116. 1.
we delight in him and his Psalm: 1. 2. Psalm. 94. 19. Psalm. 119. 16. 24. 35. 47.
70. 77. 174.
law, and desire to know more of him: for as one says of Magdalens looking
again into Christ's sepulcher, Vis amor is intentionem multiplicat
inquisstionis G^egor. him. 25. in Joh 20.
the power of love multiplieth the intention of inquisition: if we rejoice at
the gain of his favor, above all gains requirable in heaven or earth, if we
delight in his presence, ordinances, and the places where his honor dwells
in his public worship (as that man after Gods heart, whose very name signified
love my soul thirsts after the living God; when shall I come and appear
before God? Psalm: 42. 2.) If we desire and delight to hear those who bring
his messages to us, as Psalm: 119. 162. if we often think of him (where our
love is our thoughts will be) if we love to speak of him, and to him, in
fervent and frequent prayers: if we have a secret joy of heart at the
apprehension of his presence and gracious assistance of us in any thing which
may please him, at attentive hearing his word, zealous prayer, secret giving
for his sake, or for the inward testimony of his spirit Romans 8. 16.
assuring us that we are his children, because we hold him most dear. 2. if we
be heartly sorry when God is dishonored* so David mourned because men kept not
his word: certainly no man can without grief of heart remember, or behold his
own or others sins, whereby God is displeased, if he love God: they are but
hollow friends that can be pleased and make themselves merry with that which
they know, hurts or greiveth those to whom they profess love: therefore
David, Peter, and all those that truly love God, weep and mourn for their
sins: it is grief of soul to them that they cannot serve him as they ought
without all sin: therefore David frequent, and Peter abundant in tears for
their sins, P^^^. 116. 1.
professed that they loved the Lord; this with better confidence then before
(when he professed he would lay down his life for Christ, (said Joh. 21. 17.
Lord thou know all things, thou know that I love thee.

3. If we keep his commandments, which sign his self gives Joh: 14. 15. 23.
as also the^ beloved Disciple 1 John 2. 5. this is indeed to walk with him: it
is an impudent falsehood, to say we love God Qui Dei prae^cepta contem nit, D^um
non diligit^neque ^nim reg^m deligin^us, si o^lio ^jus ^g^s habemus. ^^odor.
while we contemn his laws, as it is to affirm 1. Joh. 4. 20.
we love him and hate our brother.

4. If we love those that love him, and are beloved of him, as David did Psalm:
16. 3. Sec 1. Ioh: 5. 1. if we love God whose spirit regenerateth, we shall
love the regenerate for his sake, whose image they bear.

5. If we hate that which is evil, and delight in that only which is pleasing
to God. Among lovers there must be idem velle and idem nolle: 1 John 2. 6.
he that says he abides in him, ought himself also, to walk, even as he
walked: and the Psalmists precept is, Psalm. 97. 10.
ye that love the Lord, hate evil: See Psalm: 101. 3. Psalm. 119. 104. 128.
163. Psalm: 139. 22. we all sin, but he that does not truly hate sin
cannot love God.

6. If our love to the world (pleasures, and all desirable secular things, as
also our cares concerning them) decline and lessen in us: divided streams
^unne shallower: the more we love Minus Domine te amat, qui aliquid tecum
amat, quo^ propter te non amat. Aug. conf.
with God, the less we love him; the more we love him the less we love all
things else, except in subordination to him: when Mary had chosen the better
part (the love of God) she sat at Jesus feet careless of the other
entertainment: look how those glowormes shining in the dark, and the stars
themselves vanish at the appearance of the Sun, so does the love of things
secular, at the arising of the love of God on our hearts.

7. If we set not dear by any thing else, riches, pleasures, liberty, life it
self, for ^ods sake, Phil. 2. 25. 30.
as Paul speaks for his fellow soldier. he for the work of Christ regards
not his life, and of himself who for the same counted it not dear. Act: 20.
24. it was a great love to God which Abraham showed, when for his sake he
would be content to Genesis 22.
sacrifice his beloved only son Isaak; God (who would honor him with the high
title of his Jam. 2. ^3.
friend and Romans 4. 11.
father of the faithful; and would have heaven it self take a livery from
him, and be called Luke 16. 22.
Abraham's bosom) would in that example of himself, teach him as much as man
could apprehend of Gods infinite love) what it was to give his only son Jesus
to death to save us.

8. If in no difficulty of affair spiritual or secular, we attempt any thing
inconsulti, but go to the Oracles of his world for advise, beg his assistance
and blessing, in, and upon all our works: how can thou say, Jud. 16. 15.
I love thee, when thy heart is not with me? Said Delilah: how much more may
God say so, when we will not trust him? It is a chief advantage of love, that
we have a prudent heart, and a faithful ear, wherein to unload our cares and
doubts, and that we are sure we shall carry away none but infallible counsel:
friends that may err, as men, are yet deservedly trusted, if they would not.

9. If we believe in him and put our confidence in him for life and death: love
is the fairest issue of faith, which so uniteth us to God, that we can securely
cast our selves, and all our cares on him, and his good providence, believing
and being Romans 4. 21.
fully persuaded that what he has promised, he is able also to perform: and
that whatsoever he does with us, or for us, is best, even when in Psalm. 119. 75.
faithfulness he afflicts us. Every one seems to love God prospering, and
giving, but the trial is, whether we love God afflicting us, showing us no
countenance when he seems to forsake us and not to hear or regard our
prayers, when we are ready to perish; in such case to resolve with Job Job. 13.
15.
though he kill me, I will trust in him; this is indeed a certain argument of
that love which shall assure our hearts before him: if we could but thus Mal.
3. 10. 11
prove the Lord with confidence in him, and holy subjection of our selves to
him, he would open us the windows of heaven, and power us out blessings; he
would rebuke the destroyer for our sakes. Sect. II*


The common obstructions and lets to the love of God are.

1. Ignorance of God; we cannot love that whose excellency we know not. Exodus
5. 7.
Pharaoh asked who was the Lord that he should obey him? So say the
spiritually blind, who is he that we should love him? They are haters of God,
because their Romans 1, 21. 30
foolish hearts were full of darkness.

2. Unbelief, if we could indeed believe Gods word describing his wisdom,
mercy, verity, benificence, power, and Providence, and that there is true and
eternal happiness only in our union with him, we should easily be persuaded
to set our hearts on him; as it is written, 1. Pet. 1. 8.
whom having not seen ye love: in whom though now ye see him not, yet
believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable.

3. Love of this world and the present distracting cares thereof, wherein
catching at deluding shadows, we loose the substance: if 1. Joh. 2. 15.
any man love it, the love of the father is not in him; as I noted. We cannot
with one eye, see heaven and earth together, nor Math. 6. 24.
love God and Mammon with one unchanged heart, whose dangerous perverseness
and corruption herein appears; God is only good but the whole world lies in
wickedness; it loves nothing good; it is bitter Ecce mundus turbat and
amatur; quid si tranquillus esset? August.
and troublesome unto us, yet we unhappily dote on it to our destruction, and
suffer it to steal away our hearts from Gods love, wherein we should otherwise
be happy, (...) etc. Greg. Na, orat. 16.
what would we do if the world were neither bitter nor troublesome? We are
loath to part with the vain amenity of this world, as Lots wife was from the
pleasant fields of Sodom, no not when the Angels pull us by the hands, would we
go out from ruin and destruction Number, 32.
when the Reubenites and Gadites saw the fruitful Jazer and the pleasant
Gilead, they petioned Moses, that they might have the lot of their possession
there, and go no further; they desired not the promised rest: it is so with
many a worldly man: he would feign sit down here, and have his heaven on earth.

4. Guilt of conscience cannot be without fear of Gods severity: now love and
servile fear are incompatible: he that fears Gods justice because he loves
his own liberty of sinning, ease, and indemnity, cannot love God: as this fear
excludes perfect love, so this casts out fear: there 1. Joh. (...). 18.
is no fear in love, nor love in base fear.

5. Pleasures of sin which only are contrary to Gods love: no man can love
unreconcilable contraries: he that loves and delights in any sin, thereby
loses all capacity of Gods love who cannot but punish the same.

The means on our part to be used for the enflaming our love to God, are, that
we,

1. Study to know God, to acquaint our selves with him in Christ, and his holy
word which reveileth him unto us. He is the most amiable of all that is in
heaven or earth, and therefore the most desirable: as it is written, Can^. 5.
16.
he is altogether lovely. It is our spiritual blindness and ignorance of God,
which causes our not loving him as we ought: if we knew him, we could not but
love him so, as that the love and care of all creatures, however dear, would
decline in us: Math. 17. 4.
when Peter on the mount, had but a taste of his goodness, and glimps of his
majesty, as forgetful of all below, he cried, it is good for us to be here --
let us make 3 tabernacles -- Satan oftimes sets such a mischievous distance
between man and man, that mistaking, or not rightly knowing one another, he
easily fomenteth jealousies, and contentions between them, thereby making 1
Cor. 13. 1. etc.
void all other excellent virtues in them, for want of love, which is the life
of true religion, and the infallible mark Joh. 13. 35.
of Christ's disciples: much more does he labor to keep us ignorant of God,
that we may be so unhappy as not to love him: his first assault of man, was by
his suggesting jealousy between man and his creator, by that pestilent
cloud, to veil the goodness of God toward man (in a due consideration
whereof, he could not but have loved, and adheared to him) and to make man
suspect and disbeleeve the truth of God Genes. 3. 1. etc.
yea (said he) has God said ye shall not eat --? ye shall not die -- for
God does know that in the day ye eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and
ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil.

2. Remember what he has done and continually does for us. love follows
love, if we can but be thoroughly persuaded, that he loves us, we cannot but
love him: Consider what great love he has showed us, electing, creating,
redeeming, and preserving us: when Christ but shed some tears at Joh. 11.
Lazarus grave, the Jews said, Behold how he loved him; what would they have
said if they had known, that he came to shed his heart blood for them?
consider what he does in our preservation: who blesses us with increase? who
makes the earth bring forth? who makes the clouds drop fatness; and crowns
the years with plenty? who keeps us when we sleep from the powers of
darkness, never wanting power nor will, but only commission to destroy us;
who can and will keep us when we are breathing out our souls: we love our
dear friends who then cannot keep us, because they would: consider, I say not
if there be not reason, but necessity that we love him that only can, and
certainly will preserve us then.

3. Learn a due estimate of secular things, and to alienate thy affections
from them, that they may be taken up with things Colos. 3. 1.
^ on high: the more thou emptiest thy soul of those, Anxii enim semper and ad
ipsa l^etitiae vota suspensi quodam fluctuamus incerto sperantes dubia poo
certis, incommoda pro^ecundis: caduca pro solidis, etc. Ambros. de fide resur.
c. 3.
the more capable it will be of these vain loves, cares, delights, and desires
bewitch the greatest part of the world, transporting men in a fantisticke
dream of happiness, and prosperity, when here is nothing constant but
inconstancy, nothing Heb. 13. 14.
permanent and perpetual, but perpetual, and sudden changes; Joh: 13. 1.
Isai 54. 7. 8.
: in Gods love only there is constancy: every thing else (yea this world and
the fashion thereof) changes: men's loves are fickle as the wind: they admire
and presently loath the same: they curse and bless (like Michaes mother) at a
breath, in the sense of their loss or gain: Judge. 17. 2.
a little seeming injury blasteth their love: yea the change of the external
estate, changes their affections, who by the mercenary balance of present
profit, weith amity with God and men: these wethercocks turn with every shift
of the wind: these shadows appear only in prosperity (wherein they follow
and will not be beaten off with Ruth. 1. 16.
Ruths importunity) that nere so little clouded they vanish. But Gods love is
constant and unchangeable: he will know thy soul in adversity: if any
unkindnesse, real injuries, dishonours, and rebellions could change him; who
had not long since perished? 'Twas said of that Turkish Emperor, Mahomet the
great v. Knowls. Turk. histor. p. 433.
in his favor was no constancy, and in his least disfavour death: but God is
of infinite patience and mercy, though he be every day provoked, and in his
favor is eternal life.

4. Pray him to give thee an heart to know and love him: to draw thee that thou
may follow him: to show thee his mavelous loving kindness, to acquaint
thee with his goodness. Moses desired to see Gods face, not to satisfy his
curiosity, but to fill his affection with Gods love. As the Spouse cried Cant,
1. 7. Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves) where thou feedest, where thou
make thy flocks to rest at noone --

The motives to incite us to love God, are infinite, Sect. VI.
as is his goodness, the more obvious to us are.

1. The great and admirable promises, according to which he shows mercy unto
them that love and obey him. See Ex. 20. 6. Luk: 10. 27. 28. 1 Cor: 2. 9. Jam:
1. 12.

2. Love of God is that same balance of the sanctuary, by which all duties
must be weighed: it is that same salt of the covenant, without which no
sacrifice can be savory and acceptable: it is that holy fire which came from
heaven, we may offer no sacrifice without it (the devil is obedient, but not
for love, but fear and compulsion it is the Math. 22. 39.
sum of the first table of the law. it is the Deuteronomy. 10. 12. 15.
maine which God requires of us, Deuteronomy 4. 40. Deuteronomy. 12. 28. Deuteronomy. 5. 33. Deuteronomy.
6. 3. 5.
for our good because he has a delight in us: (...) Gel. 17, 19.
Epictetus sum of philosophy was in two words, sustain, and abstain: the
sum of Gods law is in this Breve praeceptum ^ma. Aug.
one, love and thou have fullfilled the law: no wonder that he says Math. 11.
30.
my yoke is easy and my burden light: what burden more light and easy, then
that love which makes men happy; then that which parity, makes such, by his
free mercy, who says, Joh: 13. 14.
ye are my friends? What less would we do, if we were left to our own
disposing, then love so good a God?

3. It is a certain demonstration of Gods love to us (none can love him but
those whom he loves first: we 1. Joh. 4. 19.
love him because he loved us first: therefore he Romans 5. 5.
sheddeth abroad his love in our hearts) and it is a certain token of our
adoption and remission of sins: as our Savior said, Luke 7. 47.
many sins are forgiven her, for she loved much; where (...) for, imports
not a cause, but a consequence, and certain sign of her sins remission:
Prove. 10. 12.
love covers the multitude of sins, whether we instance in Gods love to
us, or ours to him, it proceeds wholly from him: as the Ecceles: 1. 7.
waters come through the subterraneous, unseene passages from the sea, which
seem first to contribute their constant streams to the filling up of her vast
channels; so it is with our loves, which are none other but a mere restu^nce
of Gods love, iufused into our hearts by his holy spirit, for 1, Joh. 4. 7. 8.
love is of God, and God is love.

4. Not to love God, is the height of the most wretched ingratitude: all
unthankfulness concludes a man inhumane, and wicked, but this, makes him
most impious and unhappy: he loves us first, 1. Cor. 2. 7. 2. Tim. 1. 9.
Ephesians. 1. 3. 4.
before we were, and so elected us to eternal salvation: he gave us all that
we have, and are: he gave us his own image in our creation, his own Son in our
redemption: he feeds, protecteth, preserves, hears us, forgiveth our
sins, gives us all good things, to make us happy, if we did not make an ill
use of all: seeing then, (he Tantus tantii, gratis, tantillos, and tales. Bern.
de dil. Dei.
being so great and excellent) loved us first, so much, freely (we being such,
and so unconsiderable) we ought, and cannot without greatest ingratitude but
love him: he is too hard-hearted, who (though he cannot first love) will not
requite.

5. Love Amor unit a^m^ntes.
uniteth, and likneth lovers: with men parity of manners conciliateth love: but
Gods love creates our likeness to him: hence is it, that the most excellent
creatures love him most, whereby they are made such: some think that Isai. 6.
6. (...) urere.
ardency of love denominateth those Angels which stand in Gods presence,
Seraphim: certain it is, such are we as is our love: our manners are not
estimable by that which we know, but by that we love: Nec faciunt (...) vel
malos (...), nisi boni, (...) sint (...). Aug. ep^d Ma^^d. duas (...) duo
sa^iunt amor^^. Jerusalem suit amor Dei; Babyloniam facit amor, seculi:
i^t^rroget igitur se u^usquisque quid am^t, and inveniet ubi sit ci^is. Aug.
sup. Psalm. 64.
good or evil love, makes us such: if we love God, we are godly: if the world
worldly: if sin sinfulf: all men, the best of all, do sin: but the wicked
only love sin: look how the glasses species are, as is the posture thereof
(if you turn it to heaven, you see only heaven in it, if to the earth, only
earth) so is it in our love, the souls looking-glass, wherein we may see and
judge of our selves.

6. Without this love, there can be no true happiness for the wrath of God and
the severity of his justice remains for those who hate him) give him all that
a sinful soul can desire; make him times minion, the worlds favorite, you can
make him nothing better then a devil. But with the love of God, Romans 8. 28.
Christianus miser vi^eri potest, non potest in^enir^. Minu^. Fell: O^tav.
though a man may possibly seem, or be said unhappy, he cannot be so: for all
things work together for good to them that love God: prosperity, adversity,
life, death, all things shall finally advantage them: he that seeks the love
of God, must look for many enemies; but contrary to their intentions, they
shall do him good: the love of the world is sweet at first, but bitterness in
the end: and the love of God has many sharp trialls at first, but in the end
shall be most comfortable. This love is that divine Elixer, which makes the
vile precious; an indeficient treasure which whosoever has, can Psalm 34. 10.
Psalm. 84. 11.
never lack that which is good: he that has it not, can never be the better
for all he has: what good, or salvation can he expect, who is so unhappy, as
not to love the fountain of all blessedness, what can he reasonably fear,
who loves an omniscient and Hebr. 6. 10.
righteous God, who is a pleanteous rewarder of those that love him? Though we
cannot be saved for any desert of Love to God (for it is his mercy, not our
merit) we cannot be saved without it: if any man love not the Lord Jesus, let
him be anathema maranatha. 1. Cor: 16. 22.

7. So excellent is this one possession, that Phil. 3. 8. 9.
Paul counted all but mere loss for it: dying Josh. 24. 15.
Joshua left this, as the chief legacy to his friends and family, concerning
whom he resolved, as for me, and my house, we will serve the Lord -- Josh 23.
11.
take good heed therefore unto your selves that ye love the Lord your God:
Quia summ^ and (...) rum bonum Deus est: solus ille teliciter amat, qui Deum
amai: and tanto faelicius, quanto amplius. Hugo de sanct. Vict. Miscel^an. l.
1. Tit. 170.
he need no more: it is better to love God, then to be heir of the world: if
thou can not know this living, thou shall when thou art dying: let my
children faithfully love God, I wish them no greater blessing, who with my
soul pray, they may be truly blessed.

A Prayer for love to God.
O Lord God Almighty great and glorious, who art clothed with Majesty, the
beauty of holiness, and perfection of beauty: who has filled heaven and earth
with the gracious effects of love and goodness: I thy poor creature
prostrating my self before thy mercy seat, humbly acknowledge; the many sins
which render me utterly unworthy ever to appear before thee, specially that
great ingratitude which makes me ashamed to speak unto thee who art the
searcher of all hearts: yet in assurance of my acceptance in the son of thy
love, who now sitting at thy right hand, makes requests for me, I am bold to
pray thee to fill my heart with thy love, which is better then all things, that
with my soul I may desire thee in the night, and with my spirit within me
seek thee early: O Lord, though the remainder of sin in me create me many
distractions, though frail flesh and blood starteth at the apprehension and
fear of thy just judgments; or murmur at the bitterness of thy present
corrections* yet thou know all things, thou know that I love thee, though
with a frail, yet with a sincere heart, and love with thine own spirit
infused into me: O Lord my soul thirsts after thee and thy holy presence, in
my sanctification and full assurance of thy mercy. Therefore, according to
thine own promise, who can not deceive, sanctify me herein, that I may love
thee more and more: cleanse me from all my sins, create that purity of heart
in me, which may assure me of a capacity to behold thy goodness in the land of
the living: fill my lips with grace diffusive of it self to thy glory, and the
ministration of grace to the hearers: guide me in the whole course of my life,
in that holiness which may please thee: disburden my conscience of all that
guilt which leaves me in any fear of that way, by which thou have appointed
me to come unto thee, and thy kingdom of glory; that no afflictions, pains,
fea^es, or terrors of life or death, may be able to separate me from thy love
in Christ Jesus: Blessed Lord, only assure me of thy love, and let thy holy
will be done with me: I am thine; thou made me to thine own image, thou
redeemedst and repairedst the same by thy free spirit, when I was dead in
trespasses and sins: thou neither made, redeem^dst, nor sanctifiedst me for
my self* therefore when thou do that with me, which shall best please thee
in the advancement of thy glory in my salvation, thou make me happy in the
end of my creation, redemption, and sanctification: Lord it was thine own free
love, which by revealing thy self, and the inestimable riches of thy mercy to
me, made me know what I had to love in thee: neither did thou find in me
any thing worthy of thee, but the effects of thine own love, which in my
election before I was, determined to make me an object of thy mercy; therefore
thou who art Love, did set thine own image on me: thou best know, that I
am of my self but worthless dust and earth, and by my sins a mass of
corruption, such as only can displease thee, and deserve thine anger; but O
Lord God of mercy, who foundest me a child of wrath, and made me a son; an
enemy, and reconciledst me by the death of thy holy son Jesus, accomplish the
work of thine own mercy in me, and love me still, give me an heart to love
thee so, above all, with all my soul, mind, and might: love that which thou
have wrought in my heart, cherish thine own graces in me: though my love be
full of imperfections, yet thy work is perfect: in thee is no shadow of
change, Lord for thine own loves sake, now make me such as thou may love me
to eternity through the merits of thy son Jesus Christ, my Lord and blessed
Savior.

AMEN.
CHAP. XVII.
. 1. Of love to our selves; of the kinds thereof.. 2. Of Love to our
neighbor, the necessity and excellency thereof: the conditions, and signs of
it.. 3. Of friendship: what it is; of what excellent fruits, of the true end,
and laws thereof: what choice we are to make of friends, and whom to avoid..
4. Of love to enemies; how we ought to love; without any malice; and to make a
right use of them.

1 LOve toward that which God loves, is, love of all that which is good, and
that which bears his image; as the rationable creatures, Angels and men;
this is either to our selves, neighbors, or enemies.

2. Love to our selves either is, such as is

1. Common to all men, In concuss^ naturae lege. Aug. de doct Christ. To. 3. c.
30. etc.
who by the instinct of nature desire to preserve themselves, though blinded by
sin, they eftsoone mistake the means, and end; or overmastered by some
malignant power (to which they have dangerously yielded themselves) Quid enim
prodest, si amantes nosm^tipsos relinquamus proximos? ve^ quid rursum pro^est,
si amantes proximos, relinquamus nosm^tipso^? Greg. hom. 17.
they do somethings to the contra^y: the Epicure thinks the means to make
him happy, is to indulge to sensuality and pleasures taken up at any rate;
because he takes them to be his chief good, and end to which he lives: he
believes himself to be only that external man whom he endeavors to
preserve, by a brutish pleasing himself: so Unde non recte cognoscentes
s^ipsos, non vere diligunt s^ipsos. etc. Aquin zzae q. 25. a. 7. c.
that indeed he loves not himself.

2. Ille autem vere se diligit, qui pure diligit auctorem, ib. Greg. q s. hom
17.
Proper, to the good, who justly love the inward man, the image of God in
themselves, whom they strive to preserve in his integrity; they wish spiritual
good to him, and carefully use Gods ordinances thereto: in him they delight; as
in present good thoughts, memory of good past, and 2 Cor. 5. 1. etc.
hope of future: for this they mainely care, this they defend, though with
loss of things external and secular: for this they beat down the 1 Cor. 9.
27.
body with fastings, watchings, and prosecution of holy duties. Philauti^
proper to evil men, is that Cae^us amor sui. Hor. 1. Car. 18.
blind and Stultus and (...) hic amor est. ib. se^. 3.
foolish self-love; which measures all love and friendship by (that most
ignoble scale of the vulgar) some temporal advantage to the selfe-lover a
crewing, who therefore truly loves no man, because neither in nor for God,
but for his own sake: such do Nescio enim quo inexplicabili modo quisquis
scipsum, non Deum amat, non se amat. August. exp. in ^o. tract. 123. qui
scipsum non amat, alium amare non potest: se autem non diligit, qui ^urpe
aliquid. Aug. de amic. c. 28. si sit ejus.
not truly love themselves, but being selfe-deluded, hate their own souls,
because they love sin, the souls distemper, sickness, and destruction: this
commonly goes with a vain complacency, admiring the Minerva's of their own
brain, and liking themselves in those things which they readily condemn in
others (as Judah did Gen: 38. 24.) the selfe-lovers hieroglyphick, may be,
Synes. ep. 1.
the Ape easily taken, while she sits admiring the beauty of her
hard-favoured young: this vice is an uncharitable living to our selves, our own
ease and pleasures, as if we were borne only for our selves, or that our
country, neighbors, friends, natural affections, or God himself had no part
in us: 1 Samuel 25.
so Nabal loved himself. That we must love our selves in God, is more then
evident, by reason Nemo tam proximus, quem post Dominum diligas. Tertul. de
resur. carn. ^. ult.
(who so near us as our selves?) and Scripture, which says, thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self: thy self first (charity begins at home) and
truly; that thy love may be a rule and and measure unto others. He that Qui
sibi malignus est, cui bonus erit? Aug. de C. Dei. l. 21. c. 27.
will be evil to himself, to whom will he be good? Thou would not have thy
servant drunken, nor thy son an adulterer, least they perish eternally; and
will thou be such thy self? For shame love not thy self less then others:
and do not think it less necessary, for God to have good servants, then that
thy self have such: We are the Temples of Gods spirit, the image of God, the
purchase of Christ Jesus, for whom he gave no less then himself to death: it
were desperate impiety to undervallew that which cost more then a thousand
worlds were worth, with profane Esau to set so poor a rate as a portion of
meat, or a little temporal pleasure upon an immortal soul: if we love God
we shall love our selves for him, which must be only in that true sanctity
which pleases him, we shall not love our selves more then him; that were an
inordinate self love, concerning which it is said, Joh. 12, 25.
he that loves his life shall loose it. Sect. II.


1. Love to our neighbor, is charity to him that needs our help, to whom we
are holily and constantly united in God. Proximus est vel (...) nobis
praebendum est, vel a quo nobis praebendum est officium misericordiae. Aug. de
doct. Christ, To. 3. c. 30.
he is our neighbor to whom we can administer, or of who^ we may receive help.
This love has for its object, all men respectively, without exception of
enemies: neither is it as some vainly dream, an arbitrary affection (for if we
love, 1 John 4. 12.
God is in us; but if not, 1 John 3. 10. 14. 15.
against us) but that which is simply necessary to the essence and being of
true religion; without which it can no more be, then fire without heat, then a
man without a soul: some therefore call it the Forma virtutii. Aquin. 22^^ q.
23. a. 8. c.
form of virtue, giving it name and being. There can be no religion without
wisdom, nor any acts thereof better then the unsavory sacrifice of fools
with which the all-wise God can never be pleased: Mar. 9. 49.
wisdom is that same salt of the covenant with which every oblation must be
seasoned: nor can there be any more true wisdom without charity, then that
which is in the devil, who is as malicious as subtle: if any thing be
contrary to love, Jam. 3. 15.
that wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual and
devilish: without 1. Cor. 13. 1.
charity speaking with tongues of men or angels is but as a sounding brass
and tinkling cymball, prophecy faith, alms, martyrdom, and whatever else
seems, or is externally excellent without this, is worth nothing: Nulla ^^ra
vir^us esse potest sine Chart (...) 22. q. 23. a. 7. c. Nulla igitur est
excusatio, quia charitatem illos non habuisse ma (...) constat, sine qu^ nullum
vel nominari potest, vel esse martyrium: sine qu^ maxima and imperiosa virtus
car^t effectu, sine qua nihil valet omnium scientia linguarum: sine qua^ nihil
potesi etiam societas Angelorii. Op. tat. contr: Parmen. Donatist. l. 3.
there can be no sanctimony without love. Love is the sum Romans 13. 10.
and fullfilling of the law* the 1 Timothy 1. 5. ^c. 12.. 2. 6. z ea quae sunt ad
finem non dicuntur bona nisi in ordine ad finem. 22^ q. 27. a. 7. c. vid. and
Aug. l. 4. c. 3. contr. Julian. Qui diligit Deum, non potest contemnere
praecipientem ut diligat proximum. Aug. sup. Hoc mandatum do vobis, etc.
end of the commandment, and nothing is good which is not for it end, but
rather a false image, a counterfeit of virtue: as the covetous man's wisdom to
devise means of gain, is noe true virtue: neither his seeming justice,
wherein he absteineth from oppression and extortion, for fear of some greater
loss to himself; nor his temperance for love of money forbearing all costly
luxury: nor his valor venturing sea and land to get riches: so neither is the
malicious man's alms any good work to himself, he not doing it for Gods sake:
did he then for the same love, he should love his enemies also: his prayers are
no obedience to God, who commands in case of enmity, to leave the gift before
the altar, and first endeavor reconciliation: Christ in effect says (as we
have formerly noted) herein, as Joseph to his brethren. Genes. 43. 3. ye shall
not see my face except your brother be with you. let men join in heareing Gods
word, and say Amen at the Churches prayers, let them be baptized, receive the
Lords supper, be called Christians, seem the most strict men in religion, yet
is it Non dis^^rnuntur filii Dei, a fillis Diaboli nisi charitate. Aug. de
laud. charit.
only charity which distinguishes between the sons of God and reprobates: 1 John 3. 10.
in this the children of God are manifest and the children of the devil,
whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God, neither he that loves not his
brother. nor can there be love of God without it, 1 John 4. 20.
if any man say he loves God, and hates his brother, he is a liar. there can
be noe salvation without it, it being, as I said, Vita corporis est anima,
fidei vero charitas, quia per illam operatur. Bernar. in temp. resur. Sermon. 2.
the life of faith. Love like the heart in the body sends out the heat of
life through all the parts to make them active: it is the primum mobile, which
carries about all the orb's in the spear of religion. This affection has
comfortable effects: it is the preserver (...) Greg. Naz.
of peace and concord, while it prudently concealeth many offenses, bringing
them under candid and favorable interpretations, and the best constructious
which can be made of them, which otherwise might prove the fuel of
contention, and matter of quarrel. it is sins 1 Pet. 4. 8.
coverture: the tessera and certain pledge of our translation from death to
life. 1. Joh. 3. 14. of our imitation of Christ. Joh. 15. 12. Ephesians. 5. 2.
adoption in him. 1. Joh. 3. 1. the assurance of our consciences before him. 1.
Joh. 3. 19. the confidence of our audience. 1. Joh. 3. 22. Prove. 10. 12. Dis
juncta conjungit unita custodit. Greg. ep. 32. l. 7.
the bond of perfection. Colos. 3. 14. the sign of our regeneration. 1. Joh.
4. 7. the fruit of the spirit. Gal. 5. 22. the assurance of God his being in
us. 1. Joh. 4. 12. 13. and our being in him: the repaired image of God in us.
1. Joh, 4. 17. the expeller of fear. 1. Joh. 4. 8. the certain argument of
our love to God. 1. Joh. 5. 1. and his love to us. 1. Joh. 4. 12. it is the
f^ire Magistra bonorum omnium: Greg. ib. ep. 112.
mistress of all good. it is the heavenly Bethsheba which can Act. 10. 4.
attain any thing, yea Act. 9. 39 etc.
life for the dead: it shall be part of the saints accoumpt, at the day of
judgment. Math. 25. 34. 35.

2. This love must be regulated with certain laws or conditions:

1. It* must be subordinate to Gods love, such as gives God the first and
chief place, not as 1 Samuel 2. 29.
Elies, who honored his children above God: nor as many now love, so that they
will rather displease Charitas aute^ vera est and amicum diligere in Deo: and
inimicum diligere propter Deum. Greg. hom. 9.
God, then those they love: true charity can be in nothing which displeases
God,

2. it must be subject to order in respect of the object, first regarding those
who are nearest in nature or necessitude: I am bound to show what effects of
love and charity I can; but first to mine own family respectively; and to do
good, specially to the howsehold of faith: first to my neighbors, and then to
others.

3. It must be for Gods sake, and in good: when we love for temporal
advantages, and such mutual offices, as unite worldly men, for such reasons as
Genesis 34. 21.
Hamor and Shechem used for enfranchising Jacobs family ( these men are
peaceably with us, and therefore let them dwell in the land and trade therein,
-- shall not their cattle and their substance, and every beast of theirs be
ours?) that cause failing, charity vanishes many times into mischievous
contentions; by which readiness to dissolve the sacred bond of Charity for
every trivial occasion, and the many bitter discords, it too evidently
appears how few love for God's sake, how many for their own: when holy
Abraham had occasion of quarrel presented him, he declined it by reciding
from his right, Genesis 13. 8.
let there be no strife I pray thee, between me and thee. --

4. It must be Romans 12. 9.
without dissimulation: 1 Samuel 18. 15. 17.
Saul jealous of David, and afraid of him because of his wisdom and goodness
Regibus boni quam mali suspectiores sunt: semp^rque his ^li ^na virtus, for
midolosa^st. Salust. Catilin. ideo Jovianus Malarichum enim sit ut and dux
meriti c^lsi^ris id^oque suspectu^ abir^t e medio, etc. Am. Marcellin. l. 25.
(as Princes usually are more jealous of the good, then the foolish and
dissolute; ever others virtue is formidable to them) he courteth him with great
favors but all to destroy him: there is no such venomous malice out of hell, as
that which comes up with a Judas kiss, veiled with a show of amity,, with a
Scorpions embrace the deeper to strike in the sting: the Devils proffered
courtesies, the world, riches, and honors, the design being to cast thee down
headlong, and to make thy ruin the more irreparable by thine own consent.

5. It must be constant; as they wont to say ad aras, to death, that which can
be lost was never true: had it been grounded on the unchangeable God, it must
ever have had the same immutable cause, and consequently have been
unchangeable,

The signs of charity are

1. Long 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5.
suffering: it is not captious, nor easily provoked: it bears and endures all
things: personal injuries cannot disband it: if we love men for our own
sakes, we shall indeed hate them, when they hurt us: but if for Gods sake, we
shall use brotherly Math. 18. 15.
correction so, as to make them understand their faults, and repair us again;
and where they err, love their persons whose sins we ought to hate, and pray
for them when they curse, and speak evil of us.

2. It is kind, in communicating to the necessities of those that want: they
that have no bowels of compassion, how dwells the love of God in them?

3. It envieth not, neither is discontented at others prosperity Invidia est
tristitia de ali^nis bonis. Dam: l. 2. tit: Aquin. 22ae. q. 36. a. 1.
envy is Invidia fortunae comes: Invidia gloriae comes. Emi: Prob: vit:
Chabriae.
fortunes companion: the black shadow of honor; ambitious kanker,
mischievously biting into the bud of merit: few like Null^ habu^t invidiam
magnaeque fuit gloriae. ib. Aemil. Prob:
Thrasibulus enjoy great glory without envy; because few have the happiness in
their honor to be acquainted with godly love which envieth not, but rejoices
at others good.

4. It vanteth not it self, in boasting, or exprobration of good done, nor in
rash effusions; but makes a deliberate choice of its object, without being
proud of its act.

5. It is not puffed up: the proud can be no man's friend, no not his own:
Pride is unconsistent with any Sola superbia destruit omnia si comitetur.
virtues: it is as the worm at the root of Jonahs gourd which eats up the
life of virtue and religion: the mischief which precipitated glorious Angels
from heaven: it is amities paralysis, societies enemy, nurse of impatience,
which will neither suffer Caesar to endure a superior, nor Pompey an equal:
it is the issue of an empty brain; none truly wise can be proud; and the
influence of Lucifer upon graceless hearts, whom God resists. charity is the
daughter of humility.

6. It behaveth not it self unseemly, as sin (which is an alaxie and disorder
in action, a deformity in the inward man) but as the most lovely of all
virtues, bearing the lively image of God, the beauty of holiness, and stooping
to nothing uncomely, or unjustifiable before God, and man.

7. It seeks not her own, as does self-love, but the good of others; it
being more divine and honorable to do good, then to receive it.

8. It thinks no evil, because it intends none: commonly men measure
others by their own shadows, which is the cause, that the worst are most
jealous of others: charity does, as it would suffer; and thinks the best,
where there is not apparent evidence of worse.

9. It rejoices not in evil, nor in iniquity: there are that would seem
charitable, and to have abandoned that pernicious appetite of revenge, and yet
secretly (...) affectus est ex odio and gaudio mixtus cum odio impulsi, leta
mur vel gaudemus in aliorum calamitatibus. Jo. Magir. Phy. l. 6. c. 16.
rejoice at any evil which befalls their enemy. This is a proper affection
of devils, not men: expressly forbidden, Prove: 24. 17. 18. Rejoice not when
thine enemy falls: and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth; l^ast
the Lord see it and it displease him. David mourned when his enemies were sick:
There are that can please themselves in that Pseudocharity, which displeases
God; which is indeed but conspiracy in evil.

10. Lastly,. III.
it believes and hops all things: it is hard to possess it of any evil
opinion: and in case of evident failings, it will give men some hope of the
offenders amendment.

We are next to consider love, as it falls under the peculiarity of
friendship. The bond of charity uniteth all; but friendship some few.

1. True friendship among men is loves (...), flower and vigor: affections
jewel; amities quintessence, societies perfection* and (...). Aristot. D. Lae.
t.
sympathy of holy souls: it is a Ami^us est qui nobis usu vitae similis pio,
ac fideli jungi^^r.
mutual love and good will between two, or more, endeavoring each others
good and safety, expressed in performance of all lawful offices so uniting
friends in mutual communications, and similitude of affections, as that some
have styled a friend, (...) Clem. Al. l. 2. Stromat.
anotherselfe: such was between 1. Sam. 18. 1.
Jonathan and David: David and 2. Sam. 15. 37
Hushai the Archite: a friend is he Ama^ and reamatur. Arist. l. 2. Rhet. Ci^.
de Amicitia cit. Aug. ep. 45.
who loves and is beloved. The Philosopher said, friendship is of all things,
divine, and humane, a supreme consent, in love and good will: next after
wisdom the chief gift of God, to man, said the Orator it is the rich man's
security, the poor man's riches: the banished man's native soil, the in^irme
man's strength, Physic for the sick, counsel for the irresolute* and
doubtful; prosperities counselor, and adversities comforter, the solace of
company, and relief of solitude Amicitia rerii omnium est vin^ulum. Ambr. de
sid rer. inv^^.
the bond of society, and life of life: a friend is a jewel long sought, Diu
qua ritur ^ix in^^nitur, (...) s^r vatur Hieron. ad ^uffin l. 2. ^p. 11.
rarely found, and hardly kept: Nullius boni sine socio, jucunda possessio est.
Sen. ep.
there is no pleasant possession of any thing without a partner: The best, most
pleasant, commodious, and secure possession of all the earth, was Paradise; and
yet there, God (who best knew man) said it is not good that the man should be
alone, (Gen: 2. 18.) man then in his happy innocence. Wisdom is beyond all
earthly goods; but what were it to me more then a burden, if I should receave
it on this condition that I could not communicate it, but must for ever keep
it shut up, in mine own mind? I would not be troubled with that good which
none might share with me: Ego ne in coelo solus.
I would not be in heaven alone: heaven it self is happy for its company: the
most blessed being which made heaven and earth subsisteth in an
incomprehensible society, which said in the beginning Genesis 1. 26.
let us make man in our image, after Socialis est hominis ac benefica natura,
quo solo cognationem habet ^um Deo. Lactant. l. 5. c. 18.
our likeness, who made him a sociable creature, insomuch as that without
friends, all thoughts are tedious, every work, a toil, every land a
peregrination, every life a torment, a death. Friendship is a divine content of
men, the necessity of whose near conjunction, and indissoluble unity, that
God might declare; he made all of one flesh, and appointed their propagation,
by united two. Friendship is the comfort of this life; if you take it away, you
should seem to take the sun from heaven: a friend is an Alexandrum. M. ub^
haberet the sauros interrogatum, apud amicos respondisse. Am. Marcel. l. 25.
excellent riches (what were all the treasures in the world to me, if there
were none with whom I might communicate them? Ecclus 6. 15. Amiciti^^ and
prosperas res dul^iores facit: and advers^s (...) munion^m temperat, and
levi^res reddit. I sid^l. 3. de sum. bono.
Nothing does countervaile a faithful friend, and his excellency is
unvalewable: I wonder not at the rate which the great Monarch Darius set on his
Zopyrus, whose free wish could pitch upon nothing in the world like many such
friends.

Many and excellent are the fruits of freindship, as St Albans Essays. A^^st.
Ethic. l. 9. c. 11. Cic de amicit.
some have noted for the easing Solatium hujns vitae est, ut hab^as cui pectus
tuum aperias, cui arcana communices, cui se^reta tui pectoris committas. A^br.
de off. l. 3.
and unlading our minds, multiplying our joys, extenuation of sorrows, by
that sympathy of affections which is among true friends, sharing in every
estate. Our prosperity is the more comfortable to us, by how much more it is
communicable to friends who rejoice in our good, as we also do in their
rejoicing: our adversity is made lighter by dividing the burden. We ease our
hearts when we impart our grief to a faithful and prudent friend of whom we
may receive counsel and assistance: the advantage hereof our Savior
intimated to his Disciples, when to comfort them against the sad apprehension
of his approaching passion, he said -- Joh: 15. 11. 14. 15.
I have called you friends: -- besides, or above that love, wherewith he loved
all his, he had some more peculiar relation among the elect to his Disciples,
and among them, to a favorite, or more intimate friend, Joh^ ^1. 20.
the beloved disciple: Prove. 27. 9.
Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart, so does the sweetness of a man's
friend, by hearty counsel, says Solomon: a faithful friend is a strong
defense: he that has found such a one, Eccles: 6. 14.
has found a treasure, Eccles: 4. 9. 10.
better are two then one, if they fall, one will lift up the other, but woe to
him that is alone: By a true friend we are solaced in presence, and comforted
in absence: Di^^^di locis charitas non potest nam etsi corpore long di
stinguimur, men^^ tamen indivisibiles sumus. G^eg: l: 8. ep. 42. puto me
victurum, non cu^ illis, sed per illos. S^n: ep: 79.
no distance of place separateth the mind which loves: our thoughts are with
our absent friends, and ther^in we confer with them: they are the joy of our
health and comfort of our sickness: (...) (...)
me think's (said the Philosopher) I dye not, while I leave them safe: I live
by them, though not with them.

2. Now because on the one side, the best things corrupted, become worst, and
the most dangerous vailes of treachery are shows of love and freindship;
because there is no comfort of this present life which Satan more endeavors
to poison and embitter, then this, while envying us the blessing, he striveth
to pervert, and make it a curse by impropriating and abusing it to his own
service, in working his design thereby; making man a tempter, and
deputie-devill to man in those things which he could never effect, but under
the shows and sacred name of friendship) it behooves us to beware of the
serpent which lurketh under the sweet flowers. And because on the other part,
if suspect of all men, or neglect of seeking or gaining it, deprive us of so
admirable an advantage, as is herein to be enjoyed; we thereby loose the
comfort of this life; of which, without the use of friendship, we may not only
doubt whether it be humane, but whether vital: he lives not, who lives only to
himself, or but a brutish life: only acquaintance, and familiarity with some,
without tasting the diviner fruits of freindship, renders the Churlish Nabals
no better then beasts, which seem affected with something analogicall to
amity, (...) (...)
in that after familiarity, and much using together, they will hardly obey
their masters will to part them: it: behooveth us therefore seriously to
consider what is herein to be done, that we may neither loose, nor abuse so
great a blessing of God, for want of providence to find it, or wisdom to use
it: that we may neither be deprived of the good, nor deceaved by the evil;
that which is necessarily to be considered is. 1. What is the center of this
friendship, least we err in the proposition of the end? 2. What are the
Laws thereof; least we abuse it, or be abused by it? 3. What choice we ought
to make of friends? 4. Whom we are therein to avoid?

1. The Center of true freindship, and all the offices thereof, is the glory of
God, our maker: subordinate to which, is our comfort, and salvation, for
therein only, can be an happy and eternal union and communion; whatsoever is
excentric hereto, is unhappy; Nemo malus felix. Juv: Sat:
no wicked man is blessed: it is impossible to be happy in any thing which is
not good; because there is but one and the same fountain of happiness and
goodness that is God: if any dream of impious pleasure delude men with some
appearance of solid happiness therein, waking they must know, that it is not
true, because transitory, and unhappy in the end. Happiness cannot be in any
thing less then eternal: they that knew not God, would have no man called
happy before his end: and though some of them called Unus hominum etc. felicis
sibi cognomen asseruit L. Syll^. quod pros^ribere tot millia civium ac
trucidare potuisset. O prava interpretatio, and futuro tempore infelix: non
melioris sortis tunc fu^re pereumes etc. age, non exitus vitae ejus --
crudelior fuit etc Plin: not: hist: l: 7. cap: 43.
Sylla (as Craesus thought himself) happy in prosperity; yet their end
pronounced them apparently unhappy: and what freindship shall we call that,
Amicitia qu^e desinere potuit nunquam fuit vera. Amb: off: l. 3.
which must end? or what happiness therein taken, which must change for bitter
torments, society in damnation, and eternal cursing each other, as the mutual
causes of each others misery. The freindshippe I speak of, is in the communion
of Saints, which death shall refine, not at all dissolve: time shall not end
it, but eternity perfect it in our resurrection from the dead: sleep (...)
H^siod: (...)
deaths elder brother) ends not temporal love, nor shall deaths sleep the
eternal: it is but begun here to be completed in heaven: 1 Cor: 13. 8.
Love never falls away: we know that when he shall appear: We shall be
like him. (1. Joh: 3. 2.) Who is love, 1. Joh: 4 8. There is now some
imperfection in, and some oblique ends of men's love, which shall then
absolutely be taken away in our perfection, wherein the love of God (in his
own essence Inexcogitabili^, ineffabilis, etc. Lactant. l. 1. c. 8.
incomprehensible) shall shine and be seen, in the creature, bearing his own
image, as the light of the sun on the other stars: where we shall not be
confined (as now under many limitations, of time, place, knowledge, and
necessities, to the communion with one, or few friends) but enjoy a most
comfortable and perfect society with all the saints. Certainly all knowledge,
and joy of that which is good in this life, shall be so far from ceasing in
the future, that it shall be their full, which is here but imperfect, there
complete which is here but inchoate: of this kind we must reckon friendship,
God concluding it good, in saying, it is Genesis 2. 18.
not good that the man should be alone: more perfect knowledge shall we have in
our future glory, then we have in our present state of grace, or had in the
state of innocence: in that, Math. 17.
Peter knew Moses and Elias (whom he never saw before, as also they who saw
diverse of the Math. 27. 52. 53.
deceased Saints, which came out of their graves into the holy city, after the
resurrection of Christ, all which doubtless were of a most amiable and
desirable presence) in the other* Adam said (when God presented him his new
created helper, the youngest bride; which neither he nor the worlds great eye,
had ever seen before that day Genesis 2. 23.
this is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh; -- Ad eam vitam esse
venturos, ubi nobis ^runt quamo no^ieres, tanto utique chariores, and sine
timore ullius dissentionis amabiles. Aug. ^p. 6. (aliae opiae habent
discessionis.)
much more must we know and rejoice in our friends in the state of glorious
perfection to come wherein we cannot reasonably imagine, that there shall
either remain any imperfection, in loves object, or subject, to embitter it
(as sometimes it does here) or want any capacity of complete and eternal
blessedness; as there must, if either we should not know our dearest friends,
with whom we have served God, and walked with him in this life; or knowing, not
enjoy, their glorious and more lovely society in the life to come.

2. The laws of true friendship are

1. That we neither ask, nor grant any thing unjust or evil: neither of which
can be consistent with the friendship I spoke of, which (...) etc. Theogn.
amicitia in malo esse non potest Aug. ad Cons.
cannot be in evil: Pericles would not lie for his friend's sake; contrary to
that which some think, who count that friendship which denies nothing; and
that he is no true friend who will not (like Achates, or Theseus in the fables)
go to hell with them for company: but consent in sin is conspiracy, not
friendship: he is a good friend who requires no evil office: and he is a wise
man, Ut sit dilectio Sancta non condescendat proximo in aliquo malo. vid. 22^
q. 44. a. 7. c.
who will consent to none; true friendship is only between the good and wise.

2. That we hold nothing too dear for our friends sake, which may be justly
desired and granted; he can be no true friend who in self-love holds a secret
distance, and has his reservations against this law of friendship; as, not
only in case of this worlds goods (which if we communicate not with them that
want, 1 John 3. 17.
we love not God, and therefore can be no true friends to men) but even in life
it self, which we must, if need be, lay down for the brethren; this is to be
understood where it is justly desired in either: that is, where thou may part
with life or goods for a greater good, such as is the glory of God, or the
salvation of souls: there are sundry cases, wherein neither of these are
justly desired or granted: a friend requires thee to venture thy life in a
duel, for the maintenance of that which he falsely calls his honor; that is
not better then thy life, therefore not justly required. An acquaintance
desires thee to engage thy self and thy liberty, for his: (except some other
circumstance conclude it) the law of friendship binds thee not, where thou
can not more advantage thy friend, then hurt thy self. Again it may be thou
art not absolutely thine own, but thy wife, children, or parents have (in their
necessary dep^ndance on thee) a just share in thee, so that their interest
cannot admit of the engagement, or giving to their damage, there thou can
not justly give or engage for no bonds of friendship by thy self contracted,
may hold against that which the law of God and nature, have imposed on thee, in
loving and relieving thy parents, children and wife, Genesis 2. 24.
who is thine own flesh, whose rights must ever, respectively, be saved in all
that which the laws of friendship require.

3. Qual^m expetis e^to.
Be thou to thy friend such as thou would have him be to thee; that is
without all fraud, faithful in every trust: Tu primum exhibet. bonum, and
quaere al erum simile^^ tibi. Sen.
be thou good, and seek a friend like thy self; thou would have thy friend
faithful to thee; be thou such to him.

4. Think all accidents of thy friend thine own, so that thou may Rom: 12.
15.
rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep: and endeavor
in either state, as for thy self. This sympathy must needs be, where there is
brotherly affection: (...).
the prosperity of thy friend, shall be thy joy of heart, and his affliction as
deep a grief.

5. Bear no ignomy of thy absent friend, without just defense, or otherwise
then thou would, or ought thine own: Eccles: 22: 25.
I will not be ashamed to defend a friend, neither will I hide my self from
him.

6. Suspect not thy friend; unjust suspicion overthrows freindships
fundamental laws: if Fidelem si putaveris, ^aci^s: Sen: ^p. 3.
thou count thy friend faithful thou shall thereby make him such. Nor is this
against the rule of wisdom which bids thee keep the power of that which may
nourish freindship in thine own hand. ^^quem etiam sim^tuimus, jus officii
laedimus. Cicer. orat. pro Roscio. Amer.
Give not (says the wise Ecclus. 33. 19.
man) thy son and wife, thy brother, and friend power over thee, while thou
live give not thy self over unto any. Yet no man loves those whom he
cannot believe, nor believe those he cannot love: as hatred and suspect, so
love and confidence are indivisibly united.

7. Be constant to thy friend in every estate, prosperous and adverse, Delicata
est amicitia quae amicorum sequitur f^licitatem. Hieron:
in presence Obsecro te ne amicum^pariter cum oculis men's amittat. Hieron. l 2.
ep: 13 f. (...) Theogn: (...) ib:
and absence: Thine Prove. 27. 10
own friend and thy fathers friend forsake not: levity and inconstancy of mind,
is inconsistent with friendship. That the prosperous man may Prove. 14. 20.
Prove. 19. 4. Prove: 17 17. Ecclus 22. 25.
reckon many friends, the afflicted but few: shows that among many
acquaintance: there are but very few friends that many love thy fortune, not
thee: freindship which can change with external estate, was never true: a
friend loves at all times, and a brother is borne for adversity: in prosperity
it is hard to judge whether the person, or estate be loved: prosperity finds
friends but adversity tries them: a true friend therefore, is neither known
in prosperity, nor hid in adversity. Like the star of a clear heaven,
neither seen in the day, nor concealed in the darkest shades of night: as the
wise man says: Prove: 18. 24.
there is a friend that sticks closer then a brother: a false friend like
Job. 6. 15. etc: Cavendi sunt etiam instabiles and suspi^ iosi: quia cum
fructus amicitiae. sit securitas, quomodo te credis and committis amico qui
omni circumfertur vento, etc. Aug. de Amic. c. 14. (si sit liber Augustini^)
Jobs brook in the winter, when we have no need of him, overfloweth with
tenders of his service, and shows of kindness; but when it is hot, they are
consumed out of their place -- the troops of Tema looked, the companies of
Sheba waited for them -- and were ashamed: as are they who find contempt and
neglect, where they looked for the love of a constant friend there are shadows
of friends which will go with you in all your actions, you cannot shake them
off: which yet vanish so soon as your prosperity comes under the clowd:
there are some vain ^iphers, whom place only brings to some account, whose
honors so much change their manners, that they cannot look so low as an old
friend; which concludes levity, and weakness of mind, self-love, foolish
pride, and ignorance of the rules of wisdom, piety and true honor, which
knows a faithful compliance in every estate; and like the sun to shine with
the same unchanged (though more perfect) light, in his exaltation or height,
and in his rising, on the mole-banke, and on the mountain: on the smooth, and
on the troubled waters: it was a rare piety in Ruth. 1. 16
Ruth to resolve, concerning the afflicted Naomi -- entreat me not to leave
thee -- for whether thou go, I will go -- where thou dyest, I will dye, and
there will I be buried: the Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but
death depart thee and me: and it was a pattern of the most noble freindship
which was between 2 Samuel 1. 16.
Jonathan and David, there was a nexus animarum (more then the love of women) 1 Samuel: 18. ^
the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David -- he loved him as his
own soul, which he demonstrated in his constant fidelity to him on all
occasions.

8. Bear with the seeming injuries, which proceed from thy friends weakness;
considering that we yet converse not with Angels of heaven, but imperfect men;
and that our selves must have the same favor of candid interpretations, in
many of our actions wherein we may be misunderstood, or possibly, Nec enim
Herculi Deianira nocere voluit, etc. Cic. de n^^. De l. 3.
besides our intentions, hurt our friend: it is wisdom to pass by offenses;
love, to cover faults, and piety to bear each others burden, where all are
infirm: without this, we can hold no amity with men; but shall be foolish
friends, overcaptio^s, querulous, or like Jobs miserable comforters,
injuriously and Objurgandus est amicus si etc. sed monitio acerbitate
objurgatio contumelia car^at. Aug. de amicit: c. ^7.
bitterly censorious: ever finding fault, displeased withal; of bitter
spirits, like contentious Ismael (our hand against every man and every man's
against us) or rugged Nabal living to none, but himself: this vanity of
impatience, drove that humane monster, the times prodigy, nature's paradox,
man-hating man, the dogged Timon, from the society of men.

9. Reveal no secret of thy friend: Prove. 11. 13.
he that is of a faithful spirit concealeth the matter: Ecclus 19. 7. 10.
rehearse not unto another that which is told unto thee -- if thou have heard a
word, let it die with thee, Amicorum rev^lare Secr^ta, Sa^rilegium est, quo
fides amittitur, etc. Aug: de amicit: c. 13. (si sit ^jus.)
and be told it will not hurt thee: a fool travaileth with a word -- his mind
who uses to tell news, is like the breaches in water banks, you shall hardly
make it hold: but Ecclus 27. 16. 17. 21.
who sodiscovereth a secret, loses his credit: and shall never find a friend
to his mind: love thy friend and be faithful unto him: but if thou bewraiest
his secrets, follow no more after him: a wound may be bound up, and after
reviling, there may be reconcilement, but he that bewraieth secrets is without
hope.

10. Conceal not thy friends virtues, (if by speaking thou may encourage him
therein; or wherein thou may laudando praecipere, teach him by praising him)
neither his faults (if thou may by detection amend or better him) least thy
silence Amici vitia si seris, tua facis. Senec.
make them thine: Levit. 19. 17. qui non corrigit res^canda committit. Greg:
ep. 6. l. 7.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, thou shall rebuke him, and not
suffer sin upon him; or, that thou bear not sin for him: he loves not
who had rather venture his friends soul, then his favor, in case he should
distaste a reproof: every one that spares is not a friend, nor every one that
smites, an enemy: it is better to Melius est cii (...) diligere, quam cum
lenitate, (...) Aug. coses 9.
love with severitie* then to deceive with lenity: the wounds of a lover are
faithful: but flattery in evil is treason against the soul of thy friend, by
so much worse then any other, but how much greater heaven is then earth, and
eternity then time, a wise man will be glad to Ab omnibus corripi, ab omnibus
em^^dari paratus sum: and hunc solum mihi ^micum aestimo, per eujus liugua^
(...) apparitione^ districti judici^ (...) maculas (...) ^. Greg^l. 2. ep. 37.
be reprooved and amended by any: and take him to be a friend, by whose tongue
he may cleanse the spots of his soul, before the appearance of the strict
judge. A faithful friend like a true glass will show thee to thy self as
thou art: how many men are unhappy only in the want hereof; who having in them
many excellent parts and imitable qualities, mixed (as it is with men) with some
apparent blemishes, taking much off from the opinion of their worth, were
easily mended (because wise) had they but a prudent friend to discover their
failings to them? I believe hence was the complaint of the Philosopher so
frequent in his mouth, O (...) Arist apud La^rt. l. 5.
friends there is none to friend: we easily discover others faults, but our
own, hardly: with inconvenience we owe to our native self-love: herein we
ought to help one another, not fearing how that will be taken* which is our
friends advantage, and our duty. Certainly if thou rebuke a wise man, he will
love thee for it, seeing thy sincerity: which if he be not, he is better lost
then found: he that is impatient of thy touching his faults, will be
unfaithful in curing thine: I have ever thought it a chief unhappiness of
great men, that they (whose faults are most conspicuous, and dangerous, in the
guilt to themselves, and in example to others) do usually Haec autem and
similia licenter ideo altiore fa^^u quidam Principes agu^t, quod amicis
emendamdi secus cogitata vel gesta, copiam negant: inimicos loqui terrent
amplitudine potestatis. Nulla vaeat quaestio pravitatum apud eos, qui quod
volunt ipsi, maximas putant esse virtutes. Am: Marel. l. 27. de Valentiniano,
Cae^are.
want ture friends in this one office, in that their greatness makes men
afraid of being faithful, least truth should beget dislike, and that hazard
their favor: their love of being slattered creates them this evil; which a
wise man will as easily prevent, by discountenancing Sycophants, as give
commission of discovering his faults, to a prudent and faithful friend, who by
the laws of modesty and discreation, may happily execute that, which he could
not reasonably assume to himself.

11. Beware of the foolish spirit of contradiction. Do not among friends, use
thy self to paradoxes? Dissent not in that which truth and a good conscience
permit: it is true magis amica veritas: but it is unexcusable folly to be too hot
and passionate in any such argument: truth is better defended with temperance:
wisdom will teach thee, in those things which fall under dispute, sometimes,
dissentire sine odio: to dissent without hatred.

3. We are next to consider what choice we are to make of friends: it is the
manifest error, and lossefull folly of the world (over-industrious and curious
in the gain or choice of other things to be careless in getting a true
friend; without whom there is neither happy, nor secure possession of any
worldly thing: we will not buy plate or jewels, without due examination to
secure us from being deceaved: But for a friend (the most precious jewel which
among the sons of men, heaven or earth can show, if true; the most
pernicious, out of hell, if false) we easily entertain, or carelessly omit
without choice: certainly among the studies of the prudent, to study men is
one of the chief, least we be deceived with false freindship (which is Pejor
est falsus amor quam verii odium.
worse then true hatred, it being (...) Theognid: Socium vero cavere qui
poss^mus? Cre: O^: pro Ros: Amerm.
harder to deceive an enemy, but a friend, easy) or loose our advantage of
gaining the true, by passing by these jewels unknown, Friends are like
Pictures, some drawn for a great distance, at which they are very sweet and
lively, but if you come too near them they appear rough, and much unlike that
they seemed before: some are excellent, only when your acquaintance sets you
at a nearer posture: some seem good friends and are not: some are good and
seem not of any such capacity, until you thoroughly know them: the maine is
to make a right choice wherein we may observe these rules.

1. Adhere thou faithfully to God, that he may direct thy freindship. Ecclus 6.
16, 17.
A faithful friend is the medicine of life: and they that fear the Lord shall
find him. Who so fears the Lord, shall direct his freindship aright, for as
he is, so shall his neighbor be also. For as when man's ways please the Lord,
he will make Prove: 16. 7.
even his enemies to be at peace with him: so doubtless he will guide him in
this maine interest: and if he will make a covenant for his servants, Hos: 2.
18.
with the beasts of the field, with the fowls, and reptiles; he will not
disert them in their league with men.

2. Look for friendship Vive tibi and long nomia mag^a fuge. Ovid: trist: 1.
Dulcis inexpervis cultura potetis antici: exper^us metui^. Hor. 1. ^p: 18.
among them who bear pari jugo, least stooping, thou take up only a burden; or
aspiring too high, thou make thy self a servant to troublesome greatness:
freindship either finds or makes equals: it is commonly lame which goes on
supports of unequal height, and greatness (which the vulgar idol) dangerous
in its vicinity to that power* from which thou can not dissent, without
distructive enmity, nor adhere to it, and serve it with safety and good
conscience. Firmissima in^er par^s amicitia* Q. Curr: l 2
The firmest friendship is among equals.

3. Have many acquaintance but (...) Theog.
few counsailers the Philosopher said, unus mihi pro populo ^rit, and populus
pro uuo. Senec: ep:
one shall be to me instead of a multitude (one friend is berter then a
numerous people) and many instead of one: I will love all but have intimacy
with few: it is Omnes ami^^s habere operosum est: satis inimicos non habere. Sen
ep.
troublesome to have that with many, and impossible to hold it with all: he
that is every ones friend, shall be none of mine.

4. Try before you trust: the saying is, you must eat a bushel of salt with a
man, before you trust him as a friend: Ecclus 6 7, 8, 8. 13.
if thou would get a friend, prove him first, and be not hasty to credit
him: for some man is a friend for his own occasion, and will not abide in the
day of thy trouble: separate thy self from thine enemies: and take heed of thy
friends. Antigonus was wont to pray that he might be kept from his false
friends. Wise men will first try their vessels, before they trust them with any
thing precious: it is folly to be Diu deliberatos ami^os elige. Bias D. Laert.
l: 1. (...) Sole^. Diog Laert. l. 1 Cavendum est in ipsa electione vel
dilectione, ne nimis cito diligamus, maxim indignos, Aug: de amic. c. 15.
suddenly engaged, in any intimacy, and dangerous to love that which thou must
learn to hate: Try thy friend Nervi euim sunt and quidam artus sapientiae, non
temere credere. Am. Constant. ep. 44.
before thou too much trustest him, and being experienced trust him; Tu omnia
cum amico delibera sed de ipso prius Senec. de benif l. 6. c. 34.
deliberate all things with thy friend, but of him first.

5. In choosing a friend, let the maine bond be the love and (...). Theogn.
fear of God: that only will be permanent: if the vulgar balance, profit, or
pleasure, make the respects, that changing, actum est de amicitia: in the
society of sinners, thou must either become odious in dissenting, impious in
dissembling, or unhappy in imitating: as much therefore as thou can converse
with those Senec. ep. 7.
who will better thee, or be bettered by thee: Morum dissimilitudo dissociat
amicos. Arist. Cec. l. 1. c. 4
dissimilitude in manners makes a painful dissolution in the joints of
friendship: whether good, or bad, Castigare vid^tur quicunque dissentit,
Lactant, l. 1. c. 9.
he seems to chastise, who dissenteth: they think it strange that you run
not with them, to the same excess of riot: speaking evil of you: (...) Synes.
de insomn.
like loves his like: Hoc fere s^itis omnes, quantum vim habeat ad conjung^ndas
amicitias studiorum ac naturae similitudo, Cic. pro Cluent, Inter dispares
mores, firma non potest esse amicitia, Aug de am. c^ 14.
similitude of manners, both conciliateth, and continues freindship: it is a
very probable judgment which may be given of a man by his friends: though I
deny not, but that a good and wise man, may as well have variety of
acquaintance (which the vulgar calls friends) as vessels; not all for
secrecy, or one use: there is a place where he lays up his treasure only:
there is a place for merry acquaintance, where the mind. Long, and seriously
intent, wants some relaxation to repair its strength: and a place for a more
grave and severe, for the souls health and comfort: a place for him who can
advantage thy estate: among thy utensills thou have a sive or cullender, whose
office is, to run out: and there may he use of an Athenian novellist, though
there must be extraordinary caution, least he either bring, or carry from thee,
matter of danger or contention: a news merchant will be sure to get some
fraught back again. but the friendship here spoken of, can be Vera amicitia
tantum inter bonos oritur, inter bonos prosuit, inter ^ptimos consummatur*
Cassiodor. S. Psalm.
only between the good and wise: between others it is seldom durable, and
never safe, nor true: therefore choose not any man for thy intimate friend,
whose qualities thou would not learn, or can not safely imitate: among
friends there must be Secularis quoque sententia est: calem velle and ealem
nolle, ea demum firma amicitia est. Hieron. Demet l. 2. ep. 20.
idem velle and nolle: let no man be thy friend who is not God's; least thou
hear Jehoshaphats reproof from Jehu the Seer: 2 Chronicles. 19 2. Amicos sequere,
quos, non pudea^ elegisse. Bias apud Diog. Laert. l. 1.
should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? Therefore
is wrath upon thee from before the Lord.

4. Lastly we are to consider whom to avoid, as not accommodate to true
friendship.

1. The Parasite, Antisthenes dicebat praestare (...) D. Laert. l. 6.
or flatterer: he must be a very wise and good man, who can safely hear his
own praises: they beat me (said Ignatius the Martyr) who praise me: what
praises do to the foolish I observe not: how they affect the prudent, may
appear in Qui illos Susurro delect arise licebat aquam fer^ntis mulierculae
insusurrantis altera, hic est ille Demosthenes. Cic. Tus^. q. l. 5.
Demosthenes taken with the whisper of a silly woman, saying, as he passed by,
this is that Demosthenes: if they (said Augustine) with whom thou live well,
commend thee not, they are in fault: but if they do, thou art in danger.
Between Pride and self-love, too vain credulity of a man's own worth, on the
one part, and inactive, and fruitless dejection of mind, on the other; the
soul is in danger of the rock in one extreme: the safest use of praises, is
a Co^tristor aliquando lau libus meis, etc. Aug: confess: l. 10. c. 37.
serious calculation of that sum of merit which we owe to opinion, Non est
vera amicitia, ubi est fallax adulatio. Amb. oss: l. 3.
if false, or to God, if true; that we may strive to be such, as we are
reported, though perhaps falsely. The Philosopher said of all wild beasts the
railer is most dangerous; of tame the flatterer: that can be no true
friendship, where there is deceitful flattery: when he speaks fair believe
him not, for there are seven abominations in his heart, Prove: 26. 25.

2. The Absentem qui rodit amicum -- hic niger est, hunc tu Roman ca^eto, Hor.
s. c. 4.
Backbiter: he that will secretly rail at others absent, is of an ill kind;
and if thou displease him, will not spare thee: it is their nature to bite;
beware of such: trust them not with any interests of freindship: Ecclus. 27:
23. 24. Detrahere amico venenum amicitiae putamus. Aug: de amic. c. 13.
when thou art present he will speak sweetly, and will admire thy words, but
at last he will alter his speech, and slander thy sayings: I have hated many
things, but nothing like him; for the Lord will hate him. To this classis may
be referred, they who be of bitter spirits; and so, by reason of that gall
overflowing the tongue, distasteful acrimony of censuring all men, and rugged
morosity, are rather company for bears, then men: such was churlish Nabal, so
wicked, 1 Samuel 25. 14. 17.
that a man could not speak to him: David sent a civil message to him, and he
railed on the messengers.

3. The Proud man; Amicitia superbiam nescit. Ambros. l. 3.
can never be a true friend who overvalueth himself, and despises others: he
is apt to conceive indignity, quarrel, or some secret bitterness, on every
occasion.

4. The Sed nec verbosum arbitror eligendum. August. de amicit. c. 14. Multum
loqui stultitia est -- tollit amicos, multiplicat inimicos, movet rixas,
seminat discordi^^, etc. Bernard. de int^dom. c. 50.
Talkative man; can be no good friend, because he cannot keep counsel: there
be some men of such unguarded lips, then rather then not tell some secrets,
they will reveile their own: never think they will conceal thine.

5. Neither the man of a treacherous nature: if thou would ingratiate with a
serpent, feed him, warm him in thy bosom, thou shall never make him better
then a serpent: he will sometimes make use of his venom: it is so wtih a
treacherous friend.

6. Neither the contentious, froward, factious, or seditious man: Prove. 22. 24.
make no freindship with the angry; with a furious man thou shall not go:
Prove. 24. 21.
meddle not with them that are seditious, or given to change.

7. Neither the (...) etc: Hesiod: op: ^. l. 3.
wicked: Prove: 1. 15.
my son walk not thou in the way with them: refrain thy foot from their
path: they are Psalm. 1. 1.
blessed who walk not in their counsel: as Gen: 49. 6.
Jacob said of Simeon and Levi, O my soul, come not thou into their secret:
unto their assembly mine honor be not thou united. Take heed of any
familiarity with those, who must render thee suspected, and of that which any
ways may: Cave omnes suspiciones: and quicquid probabiliter singi potest, ne
singatur ante de vita Hier. l. 2. ep. 14. ib: ep: 45. sine.
whatsoever may be probably feigned of thee, prevent it that it may not be:
which rule of his own if Jerome had practiced, he had avoided that malicious
censure, and calumny of some, concerning his familiarity with Eustachium and
others.

8. Lastly, take heed of him that loves no man, but for his own ends: 'twas
noted of Plutarch. vit. Alexandr. M.
Alexander's two friends Craterus and Hephestion, he loved the King, but this
Alexander there are table-freinds, which like those domestic vermin, daily on
thee, will be sure to leave thee when thy house is falling: the wise man noted
it Ecclus. 6. 10. etc.

So come we to speak of love toward men considerable in the last branch
thereof, Sect. IV.
how it ought to be even to our enemies. There is no good man lives without
some enemies, who lives by men: which of the Prophets have they not
persecuted? There Is nothing so sacred with that sad Erynnis, malice will not
^ly at: no wonder that kings (the greatest of men) Solomon (the wisest of
kings) and David (the best of wise men) had enemies: Christ Jesus, the king of
kings; had no fault, but yet many enemies: and (to show us the bitterness of
the enmity he suffered for us) those, the seeming holiest of that age, the
austere Scribes and Pharisees: the reason is, because there is a malicious
devil, who being truly hateful, by the enmity set between man and him,
cease not to infuse the bitterness of his own cursed spirit into men, that
they may be like him, hating one another. The maine business therefore is, not
so much to strive that we may have enemies, as to make a right use of them,
which may be if we can 1. Bear no malice. 2. Love them. 3. Better our selves,
by their wickedness.


1. Malice is inveterate anger, Mat 5.
unadvised anger, is murder of the heart, but if deliberate wilful. Ephesians. 4.
26.
Let not the sun go down on thy wrath. What shall they do at the day of
judgment, Quid agemus nos in dic judicii, super qu^rii iram non unius diei,
sed tantorum annorum sol testis ^ccubuit Hieronym. l. 1. ep: 39.
on whose anger, many years sons go down witnesses? The parents of anger
are, opinion of injury, and vain elation and pride of mind, making men
think none so good as themselves. God forbids this bitterness of soul:
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, Levit: 19. 17. it makes men
homicides, and like 1 John: 3 12. 14
Cain murderers of their brethren, subject to eternal death: it is that which
separateth a man from the love and 1. Joh: 4. 8. 20
knowledge of God: it is Prove. 10 12,
the mother of contention, Jam: 3. 15,
a devilish influence on the souls of men, and Satan's lively image in the
wicked (as love is of God in the regenerate) whom he labors to destroy by
each others hands; at whose contentions and actions of hostility he stands, and
secretly rejoices; while he who hates all, can set them one upon another, to
their mutual destruction: so he engaged Paul, with unreasonable men, not only
with 1. Cor. 15. 32
beasts at Ephesus, but sundry other places. The heathens seemed to know this
venom of society, in the fable of the Serpents teeth sowed by Cadmas, of which
sprang up those earth-borne brethren, who with intestine discord and war,
presently destroyed each other. The Apostle warned hereof, Gal. 5. 15.
If ye bite and devouer one another, take he^d ye be not consumed one of
another. Serpents live quietly with Serpents, what a shame is it for pretenders
ot Christianity to be worse then serpents? A man that hates his brother
sometimes carries in his breast a V^na est sine viribus i^a.
vain anger impotent to revenge, with desiring, though without effect, he
makes his soul guilty thereof: But suppose thou had received a true
injury, and had power to retaliate: first thou make God a party against
thee, who declares that vengeance is his peculiar, and prohibiteth thee from
attempting or desiring it; so that in the execution of thy malice, thou do
but wound thy self through thine enemies garment: again in reason when thou
feel the sting of injury; I demand; is it good? Why do thou blame thine
enemy? Is it evil why would thou imitate him? If one must be evil of the
two, the doer or the receaver of injury, let Apud christianos n^n qui patitur
sed qui facit contumelia^ miser est.
mine enemy be evil if he will needs, let me be good* what ever I suffer: let
me bear no malice what ever I bear, no enemy can hurt me so much as that.

2. We must love our enemies, Beatus qui amat te, and amicum in ^e, and
inimi^um propter te, August. confess. l. 4. c. 9. Hoc est vere ^os ex charitate
diligere propter De^m 22. ae. q. 25. a 6. Math: 5. 44. 48.
for Gods sake, who without exception so commands: who reconciled us when we
were enemies, by the death of his only son Christ Rom: 5. 10.
died for us when we were wicked* he went about doing good, healing their
infirmities, who sought his life: he healed Malchus ear, who came to apprehend
him; he prayed for his persecutors: so Joseph forgave his brethren: so Act. 7.
Stephen interceeded for his murderers: this is a sign of the sons of God:
this Prove. 25. 21, 22. Rom: 12. 20.
he apeth coals of fire on the enemies head, if when he hunger thou feed him;
either to kindle a love of reconciliation with thee; or Gods anger and revenge
against him: and herein the excellency of Gods children, beyond any of the
children of this world appears; these love their friends only; they both
friends and enemies; patient of injuries and ready to forgive: how Quomodo in
quotidian ^ prece d^ximus unqua^, dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut and nos
etc. animo discordanie cum verbis; ora^ion^ dissiden^e cu^ factis? Hier: l. 1.
ep: 39. sine.
should they else say in their daily prayer, forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us; with a mind disagreeing with their
words, and a prayer dissenting from their deeds; by that Nam ex conditionis
ratione, si non pers^cte dimittunt, ipsi se sua oratione magis constringunt,
Hug: de Sanct: Victor. Miscello lan^ l. 1. Tit. 169. -- die in precibus,
dimitte mihi quonia^ and ego dimitto: sed si dicis, (...): quid enim ^acturus
es, quo ituru^ ^s, si mentitus ^ue eris in precibus? Non quomodo dic^tur in
soro, Car^bis benesi cio reseripti, sed nec e scriptum impetrabis. Juris enim
forensis est, ut qui in precibus mentitus fu^rit, non illi prosit quod
impetravit. Aug. tract. 7. in Jo. 1.
covenant, making themselves incapable of pardon, if they forgive not.

3. Lastly, that we may make a right use of enemies (which is to better our
selves by their exercising our patience, and obedience to God) we must observe
these rules following.

1. If thou love thy self entertain no malice in thy heart under any
pretense: a loathsome toad-cage, is incomparably better then a malicious heart;
where likely not Magdalens seven devils but whole legions quarter: the most
ougly serpents, whom all hate and wish destroyed, are, in their kind, good,
and so, better then a malicious hater of his own flesh.

2. Love thine enemies nature, and person whose faults thou must hate: our
anger and censure must go between these: so David Psalm. 139. 21.
hated the haters of God; it is the precept; Amos 5. 15.
hate the evil, and love the good.

3. Be just toward thine enemy: charge no more upon him then that of which he
is truly and certainly guilty: and be thou modest not saying the worst; least
thy censure re^lect upon thy self, who art guilty of many sins, if not the
same thou blamest in another: consider whether that which were but just for
thine enemy to hear, will become thee to speak: and Gal. 6. 1.
beware, least for thy uncharitable and rigid severity, thou be permitted to
the same, or some more grievous temptation; from which if thou have been kept;
I know it was not thy merit, but Gods free mercy* who put the difference between
the judge, and the convented malefactor: for malice or revenge, or without a
lawful calling before a Judge or Magistrate, to divulge the faults of thine
enemy, though certainly known to thee; is a breach of the same law which
says, there shall not bear false witness.

4. Look equally on thine enemies virtues as on his vices: be not like the
troublesome flies which are commonly settling on the soars, passing over the
sound parts, malice has false eyes ever lessening other men's merits, and
multiplying their faults, which is the reason why the malicious ever judge them
evil whom they hate; as impious Ahab confessed in his opinion ^f good 1 King.
2^.
Michaiah: it is thine honor and sincerity to give thine Virtus laud^tur in
host.
enemy his due commendation.

5. Let not thy heart rejoice in thine enemies evil: it is but a vain
pretense to charity, if thou can be glad for any evil befalling thine
enemy: it is certain thou can not be hid from God.

6. Be thou neither foolish nor ignoble in thy desire of revenge; as they are
who hurt themselves, rather then spare their enemy; as indeed all do, who
affect revenge (hereby taking their cause out of Gods hand) who would justly
execute it for them: so do they who disclose secrets entrusted to them with in
the verge of former freindship; and they who by any other base office serve
their own malice.

7. Make no man thine enemy whom thou can justly keep to friend: to loose a
friend rather then a fancy of mirth or anger, is a symptom of great levity*
to Senec. de ir^* l. 2. c. 34. Cum pare contendere anceps est, cum superiore
furiosum, cum inferiore sordidum.
contend with an equal is dangerous; with a superior madness, and with an
inferior sordid: therefore, as much as in thee is, provoke no man, but have
peace with all. The Injurias accipiendo, and gratias agendo. ib^. Sen. c. 33.
old courtier being demanded how he attained to that rarest thing in Courts,
old age, replied, by receiving injuries, and giving thanks. It Is great
wisdom to pass offenses: he that takes notice of every injury shall find
no quiet in this world.

8. Strive to overcome thine enemy with goodness: I will fight and contend
with thee (said Plutarch: vit, Alexand.
Alexander to king Taxiles) in honesty and courtesy, because thou shall not
exceed me in bounty and liberality. It is an happy use of enmity, to emulate
the virtues of a noble enemy: and nobly to entertain the charges of the base:
which may best be done by putting the whole contention on this issue, who shall
be more holy and virtuous? It is the most divine victory to overcome malice
with love and mercy: The beast may overcome with strength the serpent with
subtlety, the devil with revenge and malice; but virtue is the Saints
victory: malice is the mother of witchcrafts, and nurse of male^ices; but
clemency and virtue is the shame and confusion of an ignoble enemy; the envy
or emulation of the truly noble, more foiling him then policy or violence could
do: the holy may be over-matcht, and die. Yet are they not properly overcome,
who by dying become more honorable and happy, then those by whom they suffer.
He that is excelled in virtue (as was noted of some of Caesar's enemies) must
yield, faist thou, he is wicked, has offended me, I shall not only invite new
injuries by bearing the old, but suffer in my reputation, as if I durst not
revenge when I might? Yet first consider thy self in how many things, and how
often have thou offended God: what does Christ daily forgive thee, or thou must
perish: not to say how vain and worthless that reputation is which is built
upon the opinion of the unwise and wicked, do but consider that wise men look
most to the end that they have rightly proposed to themselves, which if they
attain, their work is done; whether by force or counsel they pass not; they
look to the end through just means. Suppose thine end is to overcome thine
enemy: if thou might make free choice of the means; tell me, would thou
overcome him by good, or evil, by virtue, or violence, by excelling him in
goodness, or equalling him in evil? It Is an epidemick madness, to think
there is no victory but in violence, and requiting evil with evil, becoming
as damnable as their enemies.

9. Lastly, resolve that every injury shall better thee, does thine enemy
hurt thee? Let it occasion thee to pray for him; and to enter into a serious
examination of thine own heart, whether thou have not injured him, or some
other, upon discovery of injury done by thee, repent, and give satisfaction,
that God may give thee thy quietus est; so will he in his good time judge for
thee: ever look to the hand that smites thee: Isay 10. 5*
Assyria is but the rod of Gods anger: God raised up enemies to Solomon. It may
be that God bad Sheimei curse: be not like the foolish dog to bite the stone
cast at him, but look to the cause, which being removed the effect shall
cease. There are, who bend their tongues to shoot out bitter words, which God
permits to admonish his servants of some unrepented sins, which being
discovered and repented of, they prove ike Jonathans arrows, shot to warn,
not to wound. Thy friends may possibly not see, or seeing, dissemble thy
faults: Antisthenes dicebat (...). Illust: vit: Phylos.
mark well what thine enemies say of thee, and Sicut amici adulatores
pervertunt, sic inimici litigantes plerumque corrigunt. August. conf: 9. c. 8.
let their vigilant malice (apt to accuse thee) make thee more carefully watch
over thy ways, least thy failings, advantage them, or give them just occasions
of reviling thee: and as Ne ausam praeberent hostibus, Plut.
Theseus is said to have cut off his comely locks least his enemies should
find advantage by catching* hold of them* so do thou all occasions of
calumny: how many men ha^^ perished in their sins unseene had not the malice
of enemies awaked and admonished them? And (like Nec prodesse Phaereo Jasoni,
is qui gladio vomicam ejus experuit quem sanare medici non poterant: multi enim
etiam, cum abesse vellent, profucrunt, etc. Cic* de not. De* lib. 3* and
Plutarch.
Jason Phereus enemy) cured them by wounding them? Self-love is ever blind,
and true friendship sometimes, but malice has a thousand eyes; this Serpent is
quick sighted to find out others faults: seeing I cannot but be faulty, and
would not be so; I had rather want many acquaintance, then some enemies, who
may amend me, though for ill will: I owe much to many good friends for other
offices; but most to mine enemies for this; who yet (through Gods mercy) never
hurt me, but to the greater advantage of my soul, I hope they who never could,
never shall.

A Prayer for Love and Charity.
O Lord God of mercy and compassion, we humbly acknowledge that so many and
continual have our rebellions been against thee, that we deserve thine anger,
and that tho^^ should arm all the host of heaven, and the creatures under
heaven against us: but we humbly pray thee to pardon us, for Jesus Christ his
sake: give us hearts to repent before the consummation of thy feirce wrath, and
the day of thine anger come upon us; to agree with our adversary quickly, while
we are yet in the way: to seek righteousness, that we may be hid in the day
of thine anger: Lord our hope is in thee, make us not a reproach to them that
hate us; withold not thy tender mercy from us, let thy loving kindness and thy
truth preserve us: Thou who art the God of love and unity, set thine own image
again upon us: and as thou have loved and redeemed us, in the son of thy love
Christ Jesus, so give us hearts to love one another, that thereby all men may
know that we are his Disciples. Lord deliver us not to the will of our enemies
and oppressors; but forgive us all that wherein we have any ways injured or
justly offended our brethren: make our ways so pleasing in thy sight that thou
may be pleased to make our enemies at peace with us. Turn their hearts and
mischievous intentions, as thou did revengefull Esau's: give them a true
sight and sorrow for their sins, that they may repent and be saved. Prevent
and divert their malice, that it may not proceed further to hurt themselves, or
us: restrain the tempter that he may no more be able to set variance, and his
own bitter influence (malice and enmity) between those, whom tho^ have united
by their adoption in Christ: Thou have promised the blessing on brethren who
live together in unity, give us that spirit that we may hold the sacred band
thereof in peace, that we may not bring a scandal on thy truth, that our
prayers be not hindered, that our souls may be delivered from the snares of
death, in which the malicious are holden: that we may all meet cheerfully
before thy tribunal, in the holy communion of Saints and blessed unity of the
body of Christ; to whom, with thee O Father of love, God of peace, and the holy
Ghost the comforter, be rendered all honor, glory, praise, and dominion in
heaven and earth, for ever and ever.

AMEN.
CHAP. XVIII.
. 1. Of the soul, faculties thereof, affections, mind, and thoughts in
general.. 2. Of the corruptions of the heart, the danger and difficulty of
the cure.. 3. Of the necessity of right ordering our thoughts.. 4. Rules of
practice.

1 THere are many things, Sect. I.
of whose being we know, whose quality we know not: all confess we have a
soul, which commands, and restrains in us: what a one it is, none can
tell: hence are those many disputes about its essence, seat, and subject, with
the subordinate faculties of it: no man has thoroughly been acquainted with
this secret governor in man: some have defined it an Aristoxenus. Cic.
Tusculan. quaest. l. 5. Zeno Zenocrates.
harmony: some a divine virtue, a particle of the deity: some the most exile,
and slender air; some a blood, some heat, or fire: some number: so innate is
error, that we most err concerning our own selves: more rightly do they
say, who call it an immortal spirit, an incorporeall substance, created by
infusion, and infused in its creation: made to the Though now as Am:
Marcellinus said of Isauria ^olim subvers^ut rebellatrix interneciv^ vestigia,
claritudinis pristinae monstrat adm^dum pauca. lib. 14.
image of the Creator, capable of the light of understanding, wisdom,
holiness, blessedness, and eternity: so that in its conjunction with the
body, it So Arist. c 1. de anim* says, it is (...), perfectio, and actus
primus corporis organici, etc*
ammateth gives life, action, and motion (wherein it differs from an Angel)
and in its separation from the body for a time (until it shall be reunited in
the resurrection) it subsisteth, as do the Angels, and then has its proper
acts and apprehensions, as they: Now, as the eye, sees the eye in a glas^e, so
the soul knows it self, by a kind of ^reflex. The soul is a divine ghest
sent from heaven, into these earthly Tabernacles, to give them life and govern
them: yet is it Cic: C^t: Maur.
neither seen coming, nor departing: it is an Si^ habeto ^eno^ esse mortalem,
sed corpus hoc. Cic: Some. Scip.
immortal form of mo^tall man: the body decays: the soul does not, being
neither subject to time nor age: the Animi motus sempiterni.
motions thereof are eternal: it apprehends things present, absent, past,
and future: it deliberateth, forms, directs, discourses, judges,
doubts, concludes, so excellent is it, that (...); off; l, 3.
the Orator said God has not given any thing so divine to man and that there
are certain lb. de fin. l. 3.
lineaments thereof, more beautiful then of the body: the body is adorned by
the soul; without which beauty it self becomes ghastly; and good Genesis 23. 4,
Abraham says -- give me a possession of a burying place -- that I may bury my
dead out of my sight: the soul cannot be deformed by any unevenness,
discomposure, or disproportion of the body which it animateth: as a beautiful
feature is the same in a poor cottage, and in a magnificent palace: so is it
in the beauty of the soul, which is virtue; with which could we but see the
soul of a Saint, there is no embellishment on earth so glorious, no created
beauty here of so divine a luster, The soul though now shut up in his dark
prison (having only some diviner breathings, in the rapts and heavenly
contemplations, which sometimes call it up, like Moses, to the mount, or like a
Jacobs ladder, landeth it in God's presence) has some knowledge of its
original, by grace, and unspeakable 1. Pet. 1. 8.
joy in the apprehension thereof, which arresteth the desire as appeared in
Math. 17.
Peter seeing Christ transfigured, Phil. 1,
and Paul wishing to be dissolved, it being a great sign of our interest in
heaven, that we fear not to part hence: he knows whether he shall go who
remembers whence he came: but what shall be the beauty of an holy soul in
its separation, when it shall be restored to its native heaven, when it shall
be Cum totum di^m admiscrit*
all light, and God shall be all in all? Mark 9. 3.
Christ's raiment on the mount became shining white as snow, so as no Fuller on
earth could white them: ^. Cor. 3. 13.
Moses face (he having talked with God) became so glorious that Israel could
not behold it without a veil, what shall our glory be when 1. Joh. 3. 2.
we shall be like Christ?

2. The faculties of the soul, are the (...). Clem. Alexan. Paed. l. 1.
understanding, will, memory, affections, and senses internal and external.
My purpose being not to enter the lists with Philosophers, but to direct
Christians, I shall not further consider these, then as some of them do very
much concern the practical part, and right ordering the thoughts of the heart
and mind, to the service of God, and our mortification, whereby we may be
accommodated thereto.

3. The heart, in scripture often taken for the principal seat of the
rational soul, imparteth any faculty hereof: the mind is the inward act, the
result and proceed of its reason, and discourse, the thoughts: as they say
Isidor. l. 11. c. 1. Orig.
animus consilii est, anima vitae: the mind is the fountain of counsel, the
soul of life: and again Animus est quo sapimus, anima qua vivimus
we understand by the mind, and live by the soul. This mind of man is
sometimes Nostra omnes vis in animo and corpere sita est. Animi impori^,
corporis srvitio magis utimur. Salust. lat.
a sovereign, to govern in virtue and sanctimonie it self and the body:
sometimes a tyrant and indulging to vice (which like the worm bred in the
wood, destroys its own original) misled by tumultuous passions, lusts, vain
desires, and other perturbations of a discomposed mind, which having unthroned
reason, dangerously usurp the command: a prudent man (whose Cic. Acad. q. 4.
cogitare is his vivere, in the light, height, and use thereof, differing him
not only from the brutes, but ignorant men) does principally enjoy himself in
his mind and inward man. There is indeed in humane possessions, nothing great
and excellent, but a great and good mind; contemning external greatness, or
supposed excellencies (as power, strength, riches, beauty) obvious to sense, in
respect of tha^ which is within, apprehensible by the enlightened understanding:
and certainly the all-wise God, w^o created the affections, ordained them to
none but some excellent end use in the soul, as handmaides to devotion and
religion: neither would he in our regeneration, kill, but Nos affectus and
perturbatones, quamdi^ i^ tabernaculo corporis hujus habitamus, and fragili
carne ciro^^damur modera^ and regere possumus. ampu^^^^ non possumus. Hieron,
Demetriad. ep 20. l. 2.
correct them, by moderating them, where they grew extreme; and retrenching
them into their own channels, where they overflow their banks, like over rank
water sources, becoming muddy and troubled with that which they fetch in from
without: or reducing them where they ar^ exorbitant. All extremes are foolish
and dangerous: a Stoicall Sicut aqua semper jacens and quieta, in salubris and
magis turbida est: sic animus immotus ac torpens, inutilis est ettam sibi, etc.
Lact. l. 6. c. 17.
apathie, is incompatible with a well composed mind, and violent passion with
a prudent: the dead calm corrupts air and water, and violent blasts disturb
them; the Philosophorum quoque, sententia est -- (...) moderatus esse virtutes
excedentes modum -- inter vitiae deputari. Hieron. l. 2. ep. 20.
moderate more safely purify: the (...). Theogn.
mean is best. Affections are (as they said of Ut non immerito sit dictum: nec
servum meliorem nec deteriorem dominum fuisse. Sueton. ^. Cael. Calig.
Caligula, there is no better servant, nor worse master) good commanded,
mischievous reigning; like fire and water; there necessary, here destructive:
without love there can be no acceptable service; without anger, no zeal:
without fear no coercive power in the soul: without hope, no comfort: which
brings us to a necessary consideration of the hearts corruption; vanity and
exorbitancy of the thoughts; and the necessity of their regulation, by some
rules of practice.

1. The Corruptions of the heart, Sect. II.
are Gen: 6. 5.
all, only evil, continually: the heart is the fountain of sin: hence are,
adulteries, murders, thefts, rapine, Math: 15. 19.
rebellions, all the sins of man: all iniquity is here forged; as it is
written, Isai: 32. 6. his heart will work iniquity: hence words Mark. 7. 21.
Psalm. 58. 2. Isai 59. 13.
of falsehood are conceived and uttered: here is the Psalm. 55. 21. Psalm. 140. 2.
root of war, and Prove. 6. 18.
mischief; here error, Psalm. 95. 10.
frowardness, and that hardness which excludes all capacity of hearing, and
understanding Gods word and judgments (that they may repent and Prove. 11. 20.
Prove: 17. 20. Psalm. 95. 8. Prove. 28. 14. Isai 6. 9. Ib: 44. 20. Ib: 47. 7.
be healed) is hatched. The heart is deceitful above all things; who can know
it? Jer: 17. 9. Here lodges hypocrisy. Jer 3. 10. Here secret sins, like
that unseene multitude, which rangeth through the paths of the deeps (such is
counsel in man's heart, Prove: 20. 5.) Nor is this the condition of some few,
but the secret corruption of all natural men: nor are the Gal: 5. 17. Prove:
20. 9.
regenerate absolutely freed from these pollutions; being yet partly flesh.

2. The dangers hereof hence appear* first in that these are the seeds of
every sin, and fomenters thereof: yea that which barreth from remedy, faith and
repentance. Secondly, as the Physicians say, if there be a fault in the first
concoction, there will follow the like in the rest; so is it here: the hearts
faults are derived to the tongue, and all the actions of man: it is a people
(said the Lord) that do Psalm. 95. 10.
err in their hearts: and they have not known my ways. As the eye is
deceaved through a falls medium: so is the mind through the cloud of false
opinion: and the very Prove: 24. 9.
thought of foolishness is sin; into which they must needs run, who set
not their Psalm. 78. 8. 37.
heart aright, and whose spirit is not steadfast with God. Thirdly, God 1 King.
8. 39. Job 42. 2. Heb: 4. 12 1 Cor: 4. 5.
fearcheth the secrets of all hearts, and will once make all the thoughts
thereof manifest. Fourthly, he requires the heart, Prove: 23. 26. If a man
regard iniquity there, he cannot be heard, Psalm: 66. 16. The thoughts of the
wicked are an abomination to the Lord. Prove: 16. 5. Fifthly, they who have
wicked thoughts, Isay 59. 7.
run swiftly to iniquity; and destruction is in their paths. Sixthly, in the
corruption of the heart, the very fibrae and remainders of sins reviving root,
(...) Ignat. ep. ad Ephesians.
Satan's venom remains. The Hydra's ever-grow^ng heads, which (when
occasions, and ability so fail, that the impious Cum non semper diabolum
sequimur in opere, valde tameu se illi ob iga^t in cogitatione. G^eg^mo. l. 14.
cannot serve the devil in external actions) will show its venom, in their
Etiamsi minora mala faciunt, quia minus poss^ut: non minus tamen mali sunt,
quia nollent min^is esse si possent. Salv. de gub: D: l. 6.
will to sin: Lastly, it is a very difficult thing rightly to compose the
thoughts, in respect of the hearts unsounded deceitfulness, and the mind's
unlimited agility; in these depths of quick-shifting thoughts, sin easily
hides it self: external sins in words or works, are (like the plague of
leprosy Levit: 13. 12. 13.
broken out abroad and covering all the skin) nearer the cure, and by so much
the more easily amended, or overcome, by how much more evident they are, not
only to others, but also to our selves: the sins of the heart are by so much
more hardly cured, and avoided, by how much more secretly and invisibly they
are committed: the thoughts are more securely extravagant, careless, and
presuming, by how much less they are obvious, to any reprover or censurer
without: And where the heart is smitten with some aufull fear of God; and
resolution to repent, makes inquest after sin, that which is in word, or
action is more easily and frequently found: but the sin of the mind like
Jonathan and Ahimaaz at Bahurim, is let down into the depth of the heart,
whose secret enemies, are (like those Major aliqua^ to labor erat invenire qua^
vincerc. L Flor. l 2. c. 3.
Ligurian mountainers, whom the Romans chased) more hardly found then
vanquished. Moreover, man's innate self-love; and natural complacency, make
him unapt, and loath to condemn himself, in any thing, wherein he knows
others cannot. And lastly, the restless machination of Satan is to suggest
selfe-delusions, as he does temptations to sin, whereby his baits may be
swallowed: his policy is to keep the heart for his retreat: and if any reproof
happily chase away, profaneness, bitter anger, obscenity, or calumny out of
the tongue, or adultery, theft, murder, or the like from the outward man* yet
if he can but cherish, and maintain any of these, in the uncleansed heart; he
will find opportunity and means to make them break out again: or if not, he
knows, that where he has the heart, (be the words and actions never so
saint-like) God has no part there: and this brings us to our third
consideration.

There is great necessity of regulation of our thoughts, Sect. III.
and heart, without which it is but Isay 29. 13.
vain to draw near God with our lips. The right ordering of the affections
and thoughts, is of two branches* that we compose them, first to wisdom;
secondly to integrity.

I. Wisdom; is as a Quem admodum samuli ac ancillae in domibus tumultuantes --
ubi derepente ipsis hera comparuit, consternati conquiescunt Sic relic in
anima cupiditates (visa s^pienti^) Hippocrat. ep. Philop.
mistres to tumultuous servants, at whose presence the most disorderly, are
suddenly composed and silenced: an understanding heart is the inward light of
the soul, which God looks on; without which, all external shows, and
appearances of sanctity make formal hypocrites no better then Egyptian
Temples, which (outwardly grave, decent, and venerable) were ridiculous with
their Apes, Serpents, Cats, and Crocadiles, set up for Gods within, 1. King. 3.
5. 9. 12.
Solomon (who had granted him free choice of any thing that he would a^ke of
God) desired, an understanding heart, above riches, or life. He whom God made
the wisest of mere men, of all the holy penmen, gave most precepts concerning
the heart, and mind; our direction herein must be sought for in Gods word
(which only is 2. Tim 3. 16.
able to make us wife to salvation) and begged of him, who Jam. 1. 5.
gives all men liberally, and upbraideth none. He that Prove. 28. 26.
trusts his own heart is a fool: for the heart Eccles. 9. 3.
of the sons of men, is full of evil, and madness is in their heart while
they live. Unhappy is he who goes on frowardly in the way of his own heart,
or that which the wisdom of corrupt man can teach him; seeing all that is x.
Cor. 3. 9.
foolishness with God.

2. Secondly, we must so compose our hearts, that they may be upright and
sincere before God: without this, our best actions, prayer, hearing,
repentance, alms, and what ever else we do, is worth nothing. O Jerusalem
(says the Lord) Jer: 4. 14.
wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved: how long shall thy
vain thoughts lodge in thee? It is but folly to labor the cure in the outward
part, while the contagion, and venom of sin invadeth the secure heart; or to
wash the eyes with floods of tears, where the sin of Judah is written with a
Jer: 17. 1.
pen of iron, and graven with the point of a diamond upon the table of the
heart: Psalm. 8. 4. 5.
Blessed are they in whose heart are the ways of God: he is Psalm: 73. 1.
good unto them that are of a clean heart: they shall find him who seek him
Je^: 29. 13.
with all their heart: they that Isai. 51. 7.
know righteousness; have the law of God in their heart: their Psalm. ^7. 31.
steps shall not slide: they Psalm: 40 8.
delight to do Gods will: Psalm: 119. 11. l Prove: 2. 10.
they hide up the law of God in their heart, that they may not sin against
him: tho knowledge of God is pleasant unto their soul and shall give them
Prove: 3. 1.
length of days and peace: when they Prove: 6. 21. 22 ^^.
go it shall lead them, when they sleep it shall keep them, when they wake,
it shall talk with them: it is a lamp, and light to direct them in the ways
of life: Prove: 7. 2. 5.
to keep them from sin. Now however Prove. 16. 2.
the ways of an hypocrite may seem clean in his own eyes; yet seeing the
God of justice weighs the spirits; it highly concerns every man to look to
the ordering of this inward house, that it may be a clean temple, for Gods
spirit to dwell in, (without whose guidance, man can do no other then run to
destruction of body and soul) by ordering our thoughts aright: so we have our
conversation in heaven, we walk with God: and in our many dangerous
sicknesses of mind, sundry distempers, and perturbations, of fluctuant
thoughts; the wearied soul shall ever have recourse unto this Arc for rest.
There are troublesome errors of sick minds, which see Fa^sa pro veris. Sen.
false comforts instead of true: there is anxietie, impatience, and grief
which Moerores qui animos exedunt Cic. de fin l. 1
eats the heart: there is the fire of anger to inflame, envy, and malice to
transport, vain hopes and fears, whose vicissitudes do miserably afflict the
disquiet mind: there are many parturbations, which if not prudently managed,
will master reason, and violently Animas perturbatas and irritatus nec
chohibere se potest, nec quo vult (...) confistere. Ci^* Tu^ q. l. 4.
carry men into the most dangerous precipices (whence they cannot when they
would, stay themselves) all which to a wise and good man, shall be but
exercises to make his victory over his own passions more glorious* Non enim
fortior putandus est, qui leon^m, quam qui viosentiam, and in scipso inclusam
^^ram superat iracundia^. I. act l. 1. c. 9.
nor is he less honorable who overcommeth himself, then he that conquereth
others. The great conquerers of kingdoms, have been overcome of their own
affections; thereby foolishly eclypsing all the glory of their victories: the
strong may overcome others, but only the good can overcome themselves. I had
rather overcome mine own mind, then all mine enemies: I would I were secure of
my self: all the powers of hell cannot overcome me, nor make me unhappy if
mine own affections betray me not: let us therefore next advise how to secure
our selves herein.

For the right composure of mind and thoughts, Sect. IV.
it is very necessary to consider; first those rules of practice which concern
the same in general, and then that which appertains to some particular
passions of the mind.

1. Have a care of thy soul as thy greatest interest, and that which is
incomparably better then all the world; and of thy mind, which (if well
composed) admirably makes good, or prudently bears every estate; without
whose right temper nothing can be good or comfortable: what is strength?
sickness may anticipate, but age must make the strongest bow: what beauty?
Beside that these flowers quickly fade, they many times become the snare and
destruction of foolish and unhappy owners: what are honors? Where there wants
a mind to manage them, those Phaetons* precipitate themselves, and set the
world on fire. What are riches without a mind to use them well; but snares,
and easy ways to hell? Truly to a prudent mind which can limit it self
within the desire of necessaries, a little is enough; to an ambitious, nothing:
Alexander had an overgrowne mind when he was troubled that there was Unus
Pellaeo juveni non su^ficit orbis. Juv. Sat. 10.
but one world for him to conquer. It Is the mind which makes truly rich or
poor; that, contented in every estate, abounds in its own happiness,
discontented, can be blessed in none. The way to make one rich, is not so much
by adding to his estate, as by taking from his mind that foolish desire of
having superfluity beyond use: worldly riches, are but a burden to him who has
truly set his affections on heaven, where there is Math. 6.
nor moth nor thief, nor fear of loosing that which we lay up: that which
must once be lost (beyond our use) is nothing worth: which consideration
possibly made Plutarch. in Demetrio.
Stilpo answer like a Philosopher, who (when Demetrius had taken Megera, and
out of a noble care to give him protection from from plundering, asked him if
the soldiers had taken ought from him) answered no: for (said he) I saw no
man that would take any knowledge, or learning from me. The mind is Animus
quide^ ipse sacer and aeternus est, and cui non potest injici manus Sen.
consol. ad. Hell. c. 11.
sacred and out of the reach of violent hands. So that to make thee happy,
which is the scope of a prudent desire; the way is not to labor so much, and
disquiet thy self in things external, but to compose thy mind aright, to get
true wisdom and understanding (to vallew and make a good use of them thou
have) and well ordered affections, quietly to bear want, or enjoy plenty: in
which there is not only an admirable skill and strength of mind requisite, but
also an holy habit: no precepts can suddenly make a man practically wise or
good: which must make us resolve quickly to study this divine Philosophy: and
truly, experience here discovers a marvelous stupor, and incogitancy of most
men: in any bodily disaffection, we speedily consult the Physician: but in our
souls distempers, we not only delay our seeking help, but are too often
impatient of offered remedies: that which thou meanest to do well, speedily
put in practice.

2. Prove. 4. 23.
Keep thine heart with all diligence: for out of it are the issues of life.
Many think it enough to keep their tongues (few come so far) and their
hands: but it highly concerns Christians to keep their hearts from Satan's
snares: there he begins all his stratagems which afterward break out into
words and actions: it is true, that ba^e suggestions without any delight, or
consent of ours, are no more our sins, then the robbery or murder without our
consent or knowledge committed in our field, is ours: but except we watch over
our thoughts, and carefully guard them, Satan's mischievous influences will
beget a delight, consent, and yielding to them: therefore the wise man says,
Prove. 7. 25*
let not thine heart decline to her ways, go not astray in her paths.

3. Resist the beginnings of sin in thy thoughts: use them King 6. 33.
roughly at the door, is not the sound of their Masters feet behind them? We
must there chiefly mark and extinguish sin, where it is borne; and quench the
sparks thereof before they break out into masterlesse flames: we must crush
the Cockatrice in the egg, before it become a fiery flying Serpent: we
neglect not the biting of a serpent, but presently seek remedy to keep the
^venome from the heart: with how much more care and diligence should we look
to the biting lbi maxim oportet observare poccatum ubi ^asci solet restinguere
dum adhuc est in cogitatione Hier: ad Demetriad: ep. Rev. 12. 9.
of the old Dragon, able (if a little neglected) to kill body and soul? (...).
Gr* Naz: orat: 38.
Of evil seeds, come evil plants: murder from revenge in the heart: adultery
from lust unextinguished there: and God Merito autem malus punitur affectus,
etiam ^ui non succedit effectus Aug: de C. Dei. l. 16. c. 4. Quantam enim ad
(...) rationem pertinet, no^uit qui nocere disposuit. Hyer. l. 2. ep. 12.
justly punishes evil intentions, though they do not always break out into
actions.

4. Keep a good conscience, and be holy: the wicked meditate on evil: Isai 59.
7.
their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity: wasting and destruction are in their
paths: as our actions follow our thoughts, so do they leave impressions in
them, which prove occasions of their further working: the Prove: 22. 5.
thoughts of the righteous are right. The wicked care not what they think.

5. Love good thoughts and thou shall be furnished with them: sicut de gemmis
flores, ita de bonis cogitatio nibus nascuntur bonae voluntates. Chrysostom. in Math.
as flowers spring out of buds, so good desires from holy thoughts: we often
think of that we love, and are ambitious of acquaintance therewith: love of
God will cause thee to loath all thoughts of evil, as the approaches of the
old malicious serpent to thy heart.

6. Fix thoughts on something certain: The heart is a spiritual Labyrinth in
whose perplexed turnings we often loose our selves, and the best fruits of idle
and extravagant fancies, are but cogitat ionum quisquiliae, ac minutiae. Ut
oculi qui huc illuc ^erun ^ur, intent nihil vident, sic men^ quae (...). ^ip:
l. 4. de mil. Rom*
As the eyes continually rolling up and down, seeing, see nothing intentively;
so the the wandering mind. It is a sign of a composed mind if it can stay it
self a while, with it self; and not run out into those vain evagations; and
wandering thoughts, whence waking, as out of some feverish dream; after much
thinking, we can give our selves no good account what the mind busied it self
about, but that it long thinking we thought of nothing to the purpose. The
mind is man's most active faculty, in a moment, with the flight of a thought,
it mounts from earth to heaven, and back again, from age to age, from present
to future, or long past: like lightning it moves from east to west, vanishing
in the appearance. It is not a little skill to arrest it so, as that we may say
with David, my heart is fixed, O God my heart is fixed -- without this, we can
neither hear nor pray otherwise then profane hypocrites, provoking Gods anger
by drawing near him with their lips, when their hearts are far from thinking
on him.

7 Seek thy peace with God through faith in Christ: the true composure and
happy rest of the mind is herein: there is Isay 57. 21.
no peace to the wicked, no true rest out of Christ: sin is the distemper and
unrest of the soul: until that Joh. 1. 15.
Jonah be cast overboord, we can never appease the surges of a troubled mind:
this must thou seek through hearty Usus doloris ablegat luxuria^ criminis --
ita dum dolemus admissa, admittenda excludimus: and ^it quaedam de
condemnatione culpae disciplina innocentiae. Amb. de paen. l. 2. c. 10.
sorrow for thy sins; this restringent acrimonie shall heal the fountains,
that death and barrenness may no more flow from the mind into thy words and
actions, it is a good sign of recovery, when the disease changes place; so when
we are pleased with repentance, who wont to please our selves in sin, it is a
token that sin declineth in us. Secondly by committing thy works unto the
Lord, Prove. 16. 3.
so thy thoughts shall be established: and lastly by filling thy soul with
such happy thoughts, as constant meditation on Gods word will furnish thee
with: as it is said Ecclus. 6. 37.
let thy mind be upon the ordinances of the Lord, and meditate continually on
his commandments, he shall establish thine heart, and give thee wisdom at
thine own desire.

8 Si tu animum vicisti potius quam animus ^e, est quod gaudeas, Plaut. Tri
Overcome thine own mind, and in every thing as much as possibly thou can,
subject it to right reason, let not affection or passion master it.

9 Set thy mind ever upon some good, to prevent the rising of evil thoughts,
that the tempter may Facito aliquid operis, ut te semper diabolus inveniat
occupatum. Hieron. l. 2. ep. 15
never find thee at leisure to entertain him. The mind is Nature ^gills est,
and pronus ad motus. S^cec.
naturally active, and prone to thoughts: yea when thou sleep it has its
motions: give it some business, it cannot be inactive: as the earth neglected,
for want of culture, brings forth noisome weeds; so will the mind evil and
vain extravagancies of thoughts, if thou busy it not in good: yea the light
of reason is eclypsed by the mischievous interposition of vicious thoughts: yet
Da^da est animis remissio etc. cito enim exhauriet illos nunquam intermissa
foecunditas: ita animorum impetus assiduus labor frangit. Senec. de tranq.
anim. c. 15.
tire not thy mind with too much, or too weighty affairs: proportion thy
undertakings to thy strength; the mind requires some intermissions, and rest,
which otherwise like the fields, with perpetual bearing will grow fruitless:
the unbalasted ship is easily overset with every gust of wind: and too much
loading sinketh her. There is an Arc of Gods secret counsel, into which thy
thoughts may not look: there are also admirable mysteries, out of which God
calls, as out of that ^iery bush, Exodus 3 2. 5.
come not nigh hither, put off thy shoes from off thy feet -- resign thy
thoughts to Gods immensity: it is enough to believe his truth, though thou
can not examine his incomprehensible secrets: if thou will play with these
flames, thou shall burn thy wings: God has revealed enough to make thee happy;
ambition of knowing more, destroyed mankind. Psalm. 4.
Commune with thine own heart concerning that which may better thee, Psalm. 77.
6. and make thee happy: divine soliloquies are a kind of rapt to heaven and
prepossession of that blessedness; use thy heart to think of good and
heavenly things; and such will thy thoughts, words and actions be: the heart of
the wise Prove. 16. 23.
teaches his mouth: Custom is a second nature: therefore also the wiseman
says, Prove. 14. 33.
Wisdom rests in the heart of him that has understanding: if the wicked
(the worst of fools) have any notion thereof, it no more rests with him,
then lightning in the air.

10 Set God ever befor^^^ee as Jer 17. 10.
a searcher of hearts, and Quicquid pudet dicere, pude at, and cogitare.
that which thou woulde^t be ashamed to speak before others, be ashamed to
think with thy self. Thoughts are Psalm. 15. 2. and 44. 21.
the word of the heart, which God hears: who therefore says, Math. 12. 25.
Hebr. 4. 12. Math. 9. 4.
wherefore think ye evil in your hearts? And, Eccles. 10. 20.
curse not the King, no not in thy thought -- Esto totus purus non aliud
loquaris, and aliud in cord habeas: nec appetas ultra videri quam es: ut
possis ultra esse quam videris. G^eg: l. 4. ep. 14.
be thou pure in heart if ever thou meanest to see God: let not thy heart
dissent from thy tongue, neither desire to seem more holy then there thou art,
if thou intend to please him; for he is omniscient.

11. Pray the Lord Psalm. 51. 10.
to create a clean heart, and to renew a right spirit within thee: to Psalm.
119. 36. 8^.
incline thy heart unto his testimonies: to Jer. 24. 7.
give thee an heart to know him: to prepare thy heart that thou may truly
fear him, meditate on him, and love him above all: and that he who cast out
the tumultuous rabble from Jairus house, would also be pleased to cast out of
thy soul and mind, all those thoughts which offend him, or hinder the riasing
up thy soul to the life of grace.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the thoughts, and ordering thereof.

. 1. Concerning the right ordering the thoughts in respect of some particular
passions, affections, and perturbations, of mind, in their distempers: of love
and delight.. 2. Of joy, rejoicing, mirth and sorrow.. 3. Of (...), hatred,
malice, envy.. 4. Of impatience, patience, discontent, and a contented mind.

FOR the right ordering the thoughts arising from some particular affections or
passions which usually discompose,. I.
and render the mind less apt for the service of God, and less comfortable to
our selves: we must ever have in mind the general rule before laid down, that
extreme and violent passions of any kind are distempers of the soul, which at
best, befoole a man, if not (as Ego arbitro^ etiam a^imae mor^os -- omnes
vehementes esse (...) etc. Ep. ad (...). Ab^rit.
^yp^crates thinks) make him mad: they are like a deluge, which rather
overflow and drown, then refresh the mind* they are like an enraged Sea full of
hazard: they distu^be the intellectuals, and distract the will: look how all
things in troubled waters, seem wreathed and disordered, which in the still
are clearly seen; so is it here: the calm af^ections, are more accommodate
for Gods service, and our use to come to some pa^ticulars: Love and delight are
great (...) in this present life: every man has some love and delight: there
is none that lives without these: The skill is, 1. Of Love and Delight.
That we set them on right ob^ects; as God. Psalm. 37. and C^los 3. ^.
heavenly things; so they cannot fall into excess; and goodness, so shall
they make us good and happy.

2. That we pervert not the order: we must no^ love, or delight in any thing,
before God: let him be our (...) and chief love and delight, and we shall be
happy in all that is subordinate.

3. That no inferior love or delight draw as away from Gods love: there is a
time, place, and measure, for secular delights, so far as they are subordinate
to God, make us more fit for his service, and administer occasion and matter of
thankfulness to him: if otherwise (if God love us) he will take that away from
us, which else would take us from him, a necessary rule for them to consider,
who too impatiently bear the loss of that they much loved or delighted in.

4. That we neither love nor delight in any worldly thing, otherwise then to
hold it with a loose hand, contented to part with it when God pleases to take
it back again: it was Jobs resolution, Job. 1. 21.
the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, and blessed be the name of the
Lord.

Concerning joy,. 11. Of Joy etc.
rejoicing and mirth, the rules are, that 1. God would not have us
disconsolate, but Psalm. 5. 11.
to rejoice and be cheerful in him evermore. Psalm. 13. 5
Dedolency, Psalm. 32. 11.
melancholy, Psalm. 3^. 1.
dejectedness, Psalm. 68. 3.
worldly sorrow, Psalm. 105. 3. Romans 12. ^5.
bitterness of spirit, Phil. 3. 1.
and secret repining against Gods providence: Phil. 4 4. ^.
are dangerous symtomes These. 5 16
of unbeleefe: for if being Romans 5. 1. Romans 14. 17.
justified by faith, we have peace of conscience, and cheerful access to God
through Christ, there will be joy in the holy Ghost: we shall rejoice in hope,
I and glory in our tribulations, being confident of a blessed issue thereof.

2. Joy and rejoicing in God, and things divine and spiritual is secure and
happy: the end of worldly rejoicing, is many times in sudden and unexpected
sorrow: such was Dan 5. 1. etc. 5. 6.
Belshazzars Feast with a thousand of his Princes, within the achme of joy,
changed into sudaine astonishment, at the sight of that dreadful hand, writing
his doom upon the Palace Wall: secular joy entertaineth deluded men, as that
old 1. King. 13. 11. etc. 22.
lying Prophet of Bethel did the man of God, first feeding, then aff^icting
with the sad intimation of ensuing destruction. Acquaint thy self with true
good, that thou may rejoice securely. Temporalibus gaudent, qui bona aeterna
non norunt de siderare. Aug. in ^ s. 52.
They most delight in secular things, who least know eternal.

3. Let not thy heart be too much carried away with any secular joy, they that
are over merry and joyful in prosperity, are too much broken and dejected in
adversity: for both extremes proceeds from impotency of mind, to manage the
end, and bear the other.

4. In every rejoicing look with a Ex. 15. 2, Iud. 5. 1. 2. 2. Chron. 20. 27 28.
thankful heart on the Lord that gave it, and with a prudent, on that which
may quickly (once must certainly) take all this merry Scene away: taste thy joy
as the Israelites did their Passe-over, 12. 8. (...) super amaritudines Ar.
Montan. (...) Chal.
with sour herbs, and prepared to be gone. Let the thought of sorrow season
all thy mirth, le^t a sudden surprisall astonish and overcome thee: foreseen
dangers least hurt the wise.

5. Keep innocence and a good Conscience: these shall comfort thee (as Genesis 5.
29.
Lamech said of his Noah) concerning thy labor and sorrow: Prove 15. 15.
all the days of the afflicted are evil, but he that is of a merry heart
(that is a good conscience) has a continual feast.

6. Wicked mirth, Sardonick laughter, and foolish jesting, as they demonstrate
much levity, so do they dangerous uncomposednesse, vanity and weakness of
mind; in such laughing the heart is Prove. 14. 13.
sorrowful; and the end of that mir^h is heaviness -- Eccl. 2. 1.
^. hold this also is vanity says Solomon: The heart of the wise is in Eccl.
7. 6.
the house of mourning: but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth: we
read of Luke 19. 41. Ioh. 11. 35. Heb. 5. 7.
Christ's weeping often, never of his laughter: it is a rare government of the
mind to be merry and wise; wherein a prudent cheerfulness commends mirth
well regulated in an holy thankful use of that we enjoy, as Eccl. 8. 15.
the best of things merely secular. To imitate the austerity of Cato, or the
sullen Crassus (who is said to have laughed but M. Crassum semel in vit^ and
risisse scribi^ Lucil (...) Hieron l ^. ep. 20. Demetriadi.
once in his life) to be an ever-weeping Heraclite, or a Democritus ever
laughing, is to run into vain and unsafe extremes: of the two, tears better
become: much laughter is a symtome of folly in the heart and forgetfulness, or
ignorance of the state of this changable life: and indeed vain pleasure is the
(...) (...). ad baptis ib. Basil.
devils hook drawing to destruction: the mother of sin; the nurse of the
never dying worm: and therefore as they say oil kills the insecta, but
vinegre restores them again* so joy and pleasure destroy incautious sinners;
whom sharp afflictions bring to themselves again, ^o that they do at last
understand that it is Psalm 119.
good for them that they have been in trouble; and healing sorrow.

7. Never make another man's sorrow thy joy: this is odious to God (who
req^ireth holy Romans 12. 15.
sympathy in his sons) and seldom escapes such revenge as points out the
sin.

8. It is a point of wisdom to mark thy joy: it is an excellent gage of thy
heart, otherwise Ier. (...)
very deceitful an ^ ^ard to be known: if thou re^oyce in evil, certainly thy
heart is such: if in good, then a secret power and spirit of sancti^y rules
there. Look how the things of Musical Instruments untouched, do move and
sound at the striking of other like strings sounding true unison with them: so
do the heart strings, at that external thing, with which it inwardly
consents the carnal heart rejoices at the obscenity, which vexes the
righteous Lot, the holy are cheerful and rejoyee, (like the Math 1^. (...)
wise Merchant) when they find the treasure of God^ inestimable mercy opened
to them in the Gospel, and go away thence rejoicing with that happy Conver^.
Act. 8. 39. while he that has no interest therein, (...) numbering the minutes,
thinks every Sermon long, goes away either a^ Ahab, (...)
with indignation, or with the ^ Young rich man with sorrow.

9. In sorrows are also dangerous perturbations of the mind, and there is as
much use of prudent rules herein, as of a ^^der in the sorme thereof. 1. In
every sorrow search in thy heart for the cause. Lam 39. 40. 4^.
werefore is the living man sorrowful? man suffers for his sin. Let us
search and by our ways, and turn^ again unto the lord -- it is vain to seek
any case of sorrows without this: all other lenitives, are as draughts of cold
water in a Hectic ^itt; more enflaming: like r^ Sam. 16. 23. 1. Sam. 18. 10.
11.
David's Harp to a moody Saul, the vexing spirit returns (...) greater
violence.

2. Set thy sorrow on a right object, that is sin: it is (...) common error
and danger of secular men; they can be sorry for the loss which indeed cannot
hurt them, but delighted in sin which wounded the soul, and makes them
unhappy. We many times greive for that, at which we should rejoice: her^in
consider, first the word of God which says -- Romans ^. 28.
all things work together for good unto them that love God, and Heb. 1^. 6.
(...).
whom the Lord loves he chasteneth -- Secondly consider the work of God
chastening -- it brings the quiet Heb. 12. 11.
fruit of righteousness, unto them which are there^y exercised -- we are
impatient and cry as men under the Chirurgians hands, when he uses the Lanc^t,
or Cauterie to cure us David said, Psalm. 38 8.
I roared for the very grief of my heart: yet in the issue con^essed. Psalm.
119. 71* ib. v. 6. ^.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted -- before I was afflicted, I went
astray: but now I keep thy word.

3. Give not over thy heart to excessive sorrow: there is a 2. Cor. 7. ^0
worldly sorrow to death: and a sorrow to repentance not to be repented of:
that like the immoderate overflowings of Si duodec^^^ cubita non ex^cessit*
sames certo est. nec minus si, is ^x superavit etc Plin. not. hist l. 18. ^. 1^
Mystae prohibent veso^ Cord, doce^tes nonoporte^e animum mordere and exedere
socordia and dolor Clem. Alex and strom. l. 5. (...) i. e. animan angoribus
non excruciandam laert. l. 8. Pith^g.
Nilus is a forerunner of dangerous sterility.

4. Prepare thy self for sad encounters: Ships are built to endure storms and
grown Seas; and prudent minds are composed to endure, and make good use of
sorrows.

5. Let every sorrow awaken thy mind to fly to Go^ through Christ: and
afflictions shall be but like a rain which fell on the Ar^e: the more it
powered down, the more this was listed up: or like Exodus 14. 21. 22.
Moses rodd, to open a way through the brinie floods to our promised rest.

1. Anger, Malice, and Envy, do marvelously discompose the mind. Anger is an
appetite of punishing, for injury received, or conceived: the proceed of anger
is malice,. III.
which is inveterate anger: the fruit Ipsam iram nihil aliudesse quam
ulcis^^ndi libidinem, vetere^ desin^erunt etc.
revenge, at least a desire thereof, when being strengthlesse it becomes vain:
the adjuncts are hatred (which is a kind of loathing that which we dislike, as
we do all with which we are angry) and envy: for we think every thing which
has the least show of good, August de C. De^l, 14, c, 15,
too much for them whom our anger presents unto us as evil.

2. Anger is an amarulency, embitt^ring the soul: a turbulent passion in it,
usurped power, (...) the sovereignty of right reason: mother of revenge, nurse
of mischeife: all-dest^oying discords bellows: the souls tyrant, councels
enemy: seed of malice: abettour of tumults, rebellions ravages and slaughters,
spiritual fire kindled in hell; in it rage, a prodromus of wast, ruin, and
desolation: companions of misery and the souls precipice. This affection is of
so high concernment, that some Basil. hom. de Ira, Tom 1
good and Seneca, etc Plutarch, and^,
prudent men have bestowed whole Tracts hereon: I being resolved for present,
only to consider the government of the mind and thoughts in relation to God's
service, shall content my self to propose, first two conclusions necessary to
be known, and then certain rules of practice for the better ordering the mind
herein.

3. There is an impious and foolish anger; Conclus. 1.
whereof Christ said, Mat^h, 5, 22*
Whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the
Judgment: and the Apostle, Coloss. 3. 8. But now put off all these, anger,
wrath, malice, etc. It is indeed a Galat. 5, 20
fruit of the flesh: cruel and heavy: Pro. 27. 3, 4
A stone is heavy and the sand weighty, but a fools wrath is heavier then them
both: wrath is cruel, and anger outrageous; it appeared so in Genesis 4, 5
Cain: An Pr^. 29, 22
angry man (says Solomon) stirs up strife, and a furious man abounds in
transgression: and, as Job 5. 7.
Eliphaz said, Wrath kills the foolish man: it is the souls calenture, and
great distemper, as we shall see more in it is place.

There is a good anger; Conclus. 2.
such as was in Exo. 16. 20
Moses, Number. 25. 7. Number. 16. 15
Thinees, Nehem 5. 6
Nehemiah, and Christ himself: without this (as I n^ted) there can be no zeal:
Stoicall apathie agrees not with true religion: look what a Be is without a
sting, such a d^one is a man Mentem non habere, qui non habet ^ra^, l. lemn. de
occult.
which cannot or will not be angry. Some anger there must be, the holy Ghost
saying, Ephesians 4 ^^aque. ha^^ ^psam iram fomi^em dicunt esse vir^utis -- Lact.
l. 6. c. 19. na^ si omnino prohiberet ira^ sci^ipse quodamodo (...) opificii
sui fuisset, etc. ib* Lactan, de ^ra Dei cap. 21.
Be angry, but s^nne not. There is such use of this souls fire, that the
inward house cannot subsist without it: the skill is to use it well. It must be
as the fire wherewith the sacrifice was to be offered, only that which comes
from heaven, which we may know by these three marks; first, it is incensed
only against sin, and that which any way displeases God, and hinders his
service. Secondly, it breaks out on certain known causes, and occasions
only: so is it not unadvised. Thirdly, it goes (like that burning lamp between
the pieces of Genesis 15. 17.
Abraham's divided sacrifice) Sic culpam tuam insequor, ut te diligam: sic
personam diligo, ut culp^^ vitium non amplectar, Greg. Venantio, ep. 33 lib. 1.
between the person and the offense, distinguishing them so, as that we love
the one and hate the other. So being without bitterness, it must be good which
opposes evil: but it is sin, not to be angry with sin. This affection is
an excellent servant to the mind, making the faculties thereof active. It is
Fortitudes incentive, and zeal's natural heat: modestie's centinell, and
temperances guardian, by an excellent allay of beguiling pleasure, contracting
the dilated heart and mind (exposed thereby to dangerous temptations) with
some unpleasing but profitable austeritie.

4. The rules hereto appertaining are

1. In every apprehension of injury, look up to God: as David said, 2 Samuel 16.
1^
Let him curse, for (happily) the Lord has bidden him: consider if thou have
not offended him, so that he stirs thee up enemies; and first make thy peace
with him.

2. Think not thy self competent for greater matters, or others inferior to
thee: that pride is Basil. de Ira
like tinder in the heart, of every spark apt to foment indignation, and
kindle angers fire.

3. Be ever composed rather to Accipere, qu^m facere praestat iniuriam, Cic.
Tuse q. l. 5
bear injury, then to do or retaliate it: it is grievous to suffer; but very
dangerous to do injury, or to requite it: seeing God says, Deuteronomy. 32. ^5
Vengeance is mine.

4. Make a right use of all injuries, let them be so many (...). Basil. de. lra
exercises to thy wisdom, meekness and patience: and thine enemy shall do
thee good: so that thou may say that truly, which Plutarch^. Demost^^.
Demosthenes affirmed but ironically (when they caused him to be banished) Thou
have so courteous enemies, that it is hard for thee to ^inde any where so good
friends.

5. Set it upon sin, be angry with evil: Exodus 32. 19
Moses, the meekest man, was so angry with the Idolaters, that he put many of
them to the sword. Basil* q. supr. (...) etc.
Basil compares this anger to a dog which will bark at strangers, and chase
away wolves and other such evils, but fawn on his master.

6. Let not anger continue lest it become malice: Ephesians. 4 2^.
Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to the devil:
as he does who sleeps with his anger, which is the devils anvill on which he
forgeth many mischiefs: when we compose our selves to rest, we will secure
our tire, but more careless of our precious souls, we trust this fire of hell
into our bosoms, yet know not whether once clos^ing our eyes, we shall ever
open them in this world again, or have any time to agree with our adversary,
before we appear before the Judge.

7. Act Di^^er tempus furoris* cum tran^uilla men^ fuerit, quod place^
^vindica, Greg Tip, 51 l ^^
nothing in furious anger: first master thy self: as thou would not p^t to
sea in a storm but expect fairer weather: so in anger, Temp^^ moram
per^urba^ioni animi inijcit, and cunctationem quae motum mitiget -- ut per
nebulam corpora, sic (...) ^ram res videntur miaores, Plutarch. de Ira coh^b.
expect calmed affecions: a hasty man can never want woe: Be not hasty in thy
spirit to be angry, Eccles. 7. 9. A fools wrath is presently known, Prove. 12.
16. He^ that is slow to anger appeaseth strife, Prove* 15. 18. therefore the
Apostle advises, that we should be slow to speak, slow to wrath, James 1. 19.
It was that advice which the Philosopher gave Caesar, When you are angry,
answer not, until you have first repeated the letters of the Alphabet: so the
choler being a little digested, his judgment, might be recollected, whose
sudden excussion out of it is seat by passion, leaves a man an incompetent
judge; because it is natural to think them evil whom we hate. Therefore the
women appealed from Caesar angry, to Caesar appeased. Cic. Tus^, ^. l. 4.
Pythagoras (...)* D. (...) lib. 8.
Architas considered this, when he said to his offending servan^, It Is well for
you that I am angry: and Socrates, who in like case said, I would beat thee but
that I am angry. Other passions, in extremes, discompose the mind, but anger
(...)
precipitateth it: to be a master of other a^^ections shows him very
moderate, but to overcome his anger, wise: in no passion do we more loose our
friends, our advantages, our judgment, our selves; nor more advantage enemies,
then in anger. He is a fool that can be angry at nothing; and he wise who
will not at every thing: It is no less virtue to overcome thy self, then the
fiercest lion: I had rather be meek Moses, then strong Sampson. He that has
overcome his anger, has conquered a dangerous enemy.

8. Allay and Quotient ira animum invadi^, mentem edoma: vince ^eipsum -- ira
enim in vindicta malorum sequ^ debetrationem animi, non praeire: and quasi
ancilla ^ustitiae, post te^gum veniat. Et non lasciva ante faciem prorumpat.
Greg. ep 51. l. 8. Ira quippe etiam cum delinquentium culpas exequitur, non
debet menti quasi dominae praeire: sed post rationis tergum velu^ ancilla
famulari. ib. l, 7. ep. 126. Nech.
overcome thine anger with reason, that following it in due revenge, it may be
Justice handmaid, not it is mistress. Consider the dangerous effects thereof: it
is (...) -- Basil ^ sup. hom. de Ira. Quid est enim al^ud irasci qu^m insanire?
Arnob. adveis. Gent. l.^.
a short madness, differing from it little more then in time. It distorts the
countenance, precipitates the mind, and so disturbeth reason, that, for the
time, it turns man to beast: hence the unguarded mouths, unbridled tongues,
reproaches, calumnies, contumelies, conflicts, all fruits of fury spring: this
whets the sword, breaks the sacred bands of Nature and Religion, making men
butchers of men. Look how some sudden deluge over-^unnes the verdant ^ields,
overthrowing the husbandmans most flourishing hopes, -- sata laeta, ^oumque
labores: so rusheth the impetuous flood of anger into the mind, covering
dangerously for the time, if not drowning, the fairest plants of virtue,
wisdom and temperance, under that bitterness of mind, and breathing of
revenge, leaving neither venerable age, tender youth, alliance, nor any thing
sacred or unspared. It depriveth thee of counsel, renders thee troublesome to
thy friends, exposes thee to thine enemies, and makes* thee a fruitless
teacher, when patience and mildness wonld leave better impression and root
then the best Precepts sowed in storms: it makes thee an unjust Judge, who
correctest thy child, or servants fault with a greater fault of thine own
intemperance: Salust. Jug. Cupidine atque ira pessimis consultoribus.
desire and anger are the worst counselors: it not only distrubeth the soul,
but deformeth the outword man: could the angry man but see himself, what change
that passion works in his countenance (as much altered from it is native
beauty, as is the face of the thundering sky, from the lovely serene, or the
enraged sea from the calm) he could not possibly like that distemper: therefore
P^ato adhortatus est ira^os ut sese in specu^o identide^ spect ^^nt l. ^v.
Lemn. de occult. not* miracl. l. 2.
Plato advised his Scholars, when they were angry to look into a glass: if
ever the odious spirit of Satan look out of the windows of man's face: it is in
his exorbitant anger: what deformity works it in the divine soul, obvious to
the eyes of God? what disadvantage? as those dogs of the profane -- Iusse^unt
Eucharistiam ^ani^us sundi, non sine signo divini Iudicii: na^ iidem ca^res
accensi rabie, ipsos dominos suos quasi l^^^rones, sancti corporis veos, dente
vindice, ^anquamign^^ ^os and inimi^os laniave: runt, Optatus advers. Parm. l.
2.
Donatists, (whom they fed with the bread of the holy Eucharist) not without an
evident sign of God's justice, enflamed with raging madness fell upon their
own masters, as strangers and enemies, and did tear them with revenging
teeth: so comes it often to pass, that impious anger Ira in^umeros pere^it
antequam ulciscerentur, Plutar, de Ira cohib.
, destroys the angry. He that can by right reason bridle his anger, has
great advantage, First, in point of paci^ication: Prove. 15. 1* Vt ignem
extinguit quum materiam ei non suggerit, ita itam* etc. Plut. de ^ra cohibend^
Prove. 25: 15.
A soft answer turns away wrath: secondly, in respect of victory; for the
patient man en^lineth the prudent witnesses to his party: so that thou shall
more foil the violent with meekness, then retaliation of injuries and
contumelies: in which sense it is true, a soft tongue breaks the bone: next
thy Iratus adversum servos ^ui, tanquam impunitate deteriores ^uturos: vero
tamen -- perspexi, quod praestaret eos indulgentia peiores feri quam saevitia
and furore ali^rum corrigendoram causa meipsum perverti. Plut. q. sup^.
counsel better recovereth it seat by thy forbearance, and thou loosest
nothing of thy interest, by delaying that which thou must once say, or do: to
conclude in thy most just causes of anger, remember what God bears with thee:
be not like that evil servant, who having found much mercy would show none,
lest thy judgment be like his. Matthew. 18. 34.

5. Malice, is the venom of the old dragon, Satan's bitter influence on the
wicked, and his lively imag^ in them. The fire of hell breaking out on the men
of this world: mother of revenge and malefices: symptom of an unregenerate
heart, Tit. 3. 3. affection of a reprobate mind, Romans 1. 29. he devill's
leaven (which must be 1 Cor 5 8. 1 Cor. 14. 20. Mat. 18. 3. 1 Pet. 2. 1.
purged out of all those who will communicate with Christ our Passover) fuel
of God's anger, Colos. 3. 6, 8. and obstruction to his free mercy* who cannot
justify the malicious, because he is just and true who said, Mat. 6. 15.
If ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your father forgive you
-- and because it is wholly 1 John 4. 20
incompatible with the love of God, so that it is impossible at once to love
God, and malice thy brother. Concerning it I need set down none other rule but
this: if malice be in thy heart, leave all pretenses, and presently cast it
out, if ever thou meanest to enter into the kingdom of the God of love.

6. Envy: is a Parum ^licui est, ^i ipse sit felix, nisi alter fuerit in felix,
Salv. de Gub. Dei l. 5. Invidia est dolor de proximi prosperitate, Basil. hom.
de Invid.
grief for others prosperity or good: an evil and perturbation of the mind,
so odious, that to bring it to view, is motive sufficient to make us loath and
shun it: it is a (...), etc. Basil. ibid. vide supra c 17.. 2, 3, 4.
tare of the wicked ones sowing; earnest of divine ultion and punishment,
impediment to piety, way to hell, and bar to the kingdom of heaven: it is a
pernicious attendant to prosperity: a vanity and vexation of spirit, Eccles. 4.
4. a fruit of unregeneration, Romans 1. 29. daughter of self-love and pride,
result of 1 Cor 3. 3.
carnal minds, Gal* 5. 21.
work of the flesh, Tit. 3 3.
obstruction of edification and 1 Pet ^ 1, 2.
growth by the sincere milk of God's word: blashemous censure of the most
high, whose judgment it disalloweth, secretly taxing and repining at his
providence, who Dan 4.
disposes of all things in heaven and in earth, setting up and pulling down,
distributing to every one according to his good pleasure. It is a Jam. 3. 14,
15. ib. ver 16.
devilish wisdom, companion of confusion and every evil work: the
mischievous canker which biteth the fairest buds of virtue, attempting either
to cloud them with (...), Greg. Naz. Orat. 19.
incredulity, because the envious cannot attain thereto, or laboring to blast
them with impious calumnies: I need not hereto cite the example of Plutarch.
Eumen* ib. vit. Ara^i.
Antigenes and Teutamus (conspiring against the truly noble Eumenes) of Philips
Sycophants, against Aratus: nor of Domitians envying Agricola his worth: nor
Saul's envying David, Cain Abel, Rachel her sister, the Patriarchs Joseph;
seeing it is manifest that Christ* Jesus, in whom were all perfections, was
envied. There Is nothing so little but stimulateth it: nothing so sacred or
high, but this hellish fury will fly at it. Joseph'^ parti-colored coat
awakeneth it, and it stays not till it strike at holy Jesus: the natalls
hereof were in Lucifer, envying God his monarchy, and ambitious to share in
his Sovereignty. The natural historians tell of some Gens Marsorum serpentibus
illaesa, Sol. Polyhist cap. 8. Plut. Hannib.
countries free from Serpents, but who can tell me of any free from envy? it is
the common plague which haunts the court, like those croping plagues of Egypt,
not sparing Pharoah's own bed; and it fills the country with false eyes,
making our ^ertilior seges est alieni^, etc.
neighbors fields seem more fruitful then our own: it is a monster (God made
it not) born of other affections depravation, as anger, fear, jealousy,
self-love, which causes indignation if another attain any good; envy thinks
all the would too little for it one mouth -- Ester 5. 13*
all this avails me nothing, so long as Isee Mordecai the Jew sitting at the
Kings gate -- said* ambitious Haman in his envy. And again, Ester 6. 6.
To whom would the King delight to do honor more then to my self?

If any want arguments to diswade him from envy, let him consider

1. That envy hurts the envious most. There is no Invidia Siculi non
inven^;re tyrann^
worse torment invented by tyrants: nothing more unjust, nothing more just: the
serpents poison hurts not himself: but envy is Tormentum maius -- Horat. O
invidia primum mord^x tui, Hier, lib. 1. ^p. ^ 5.
worst to the envious: as the Chrysostom. ut tinea corrodit vestimentum, sic
invidia eum qui zelatur.
moth ^ateth the garment that breeds it; and as the (...), Basil. Hom. de
Invid.
rust of iron, so envy the mind that has it. It is more miserable then any
other; for it is afflicted not only with it own sorrow, but also for others
joy: what ever is good to others is a torment to him: another man's store is the
envions man's want: another man's health his sickness: another praises his
reputed* dishonor.

2. Other Ira defer. vescit -- odium finem habet, invidia nunquam quiescit,
Card. lib. 2. de sap. citat Burt. Ano^. of m^l* part 1. l* 2*
sins had some remission, anger will spend it self in time, hatred has some
end; but envy never cease; Leones obs^quio tractabiles siunt, etc. Basil. q.
supr. ib. Basil.
fierce lions are tamed and become tractable, but the envious grow worse and
worse. The more good Christ did the Jews, curing their sick, healing their
infirm, and bestowing the word of life on them, the more destructively did
they envy him.

3. It is the canker that blasteth friendship: (...), etc. Clem. Alex. Strom.
l. 5.
the corruption of life, plague of nature: the devill's incentive to rebellion,
who because he could not in his malice hurt God, assailed man: it instigated
Cain to murder Abel; and the Jews to crucify the Savior of the world.

4. It has irrational effects: it would stop up the fountains and veil the
sunne-beames: it regards neither bonds of nature, civility or religion:
Rachel envied her sister (Genesis 30. 1.) Jacobs sons their brother Joseph (Genesis
37. 11.) the Jews the very preaching and hearing the Gosp^l (Acts 13. 45.) It
is the rottenness of the bones (Prove. 14 30.) it slaieth the silly (Job. 5.
2.) it excludes from heaven. (what should envy do where there is nothing but
love and rejoicing in each others happiness?)

5. It is a perverse distemper of a sick mind, making the envious look on any
good of others as it were with In^itum mortalibus a natura recentem felicitatem
aegris oc^^* (...) intueri. Tacit. l. 2. hist.
sore eyes, grieved with seeing. It delights immens miseries, as the flies
feed themselves on others sores; so the envious please themselves with
discoursing of other men's faults See Prove. 17. 5.
or afflictions: to the setting out whereof they will sometimes personate the
merciful, as if they spoke thereof only in pity, when it is to vent their
malice; sometimes the just, then will they seem zealous of Laws, and due
punishment of delinquents, when indeed they but turn judgment into wormwood,
and kill or rob by laws, who durst no^ with the sword or open violence:
sometimes they will assume the most holy protenoes, appearing like that Endor
de^ill in the holy Prophets mantle, doing some things externally good, that
they may thereby achieve some greater evil: so the false Apostles preached
Christ of mere envy to Paul, that they might thereby Phil. 1. 15, 16.
add more affliction to his bands.

6. It is at best but a fruit of the flesh, Gal. 5. 21. mere folly, Tit. 3. 3.
devilish, sensual, earthly, Jam. 3. 14, 15. a dangerous sign of a reprobate
mind Sicut nos Deo iungit charitas: a Deo invidia sic seiungit, Pet. Chrysol.
sermon. 4.
given up to destruction, Romans 1. 28, 29. the most that envy can do toward it
own satisfaction, is but to grieve where others joy, and possibly to hurt
temporally, with it own eternal destruction of body and soul: it is no better
then oestrum impuri spiritus, Nazian. Invidia aliena est a Deo, Ir^. l. 5. c. 3.
the spirit of Satan in the envious.

7. This mischief sometimes obrepeth on the incautious good men: Number. 11. 28,
29.
Joshua envied for Moses sake. David confesses, My ^eet (says he) were almost
gone -- for I was envious at the foolish, Psalm. 37. 2.
when I saw the prosperity of the wicked, etc. Ier. 12. 1*
Jeremie and Hab. 1. 13.
Habakkuk were a little infected with this contagion, which the Scripture
remembers, to admonish the best of men to beware of this mischief which
endangered such men.

8. The acts thereof are unconsistent with right reason, if we respect the
supreme giver of that which stimulateth envy; (for how irrational a
presumption is it in man to control the providence of God? Genesis 48. 10, 17, 19.
If Jacob dim-eyed for age, would not permit his dear Joseph to change the
imposition of his hands, or to transpose the blessing at his pleasure, how much
less will the all-seeing God permit the envious man to alter his hands?) if
we respect the quality of the envied, (for, is he evil whom thou enviest? it
were good reason thou should pity him, because his sin makes him more
wretched then all the world could do; is he good? how evil must thou be, who
caunt envy the happiness of any good man?) or if we respect the effect of
envy, which is hurtful only to the envious, as I have noted.

For Antidotes against this venom:

1. Put on Christ, and be sure thou shall put off envy: it is the Apostle's
rule, Rule.
Romans 13. 13, 14.
Let us walk honestly as in the day -- not in strife and envying, but put ye
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the
lusts thereof: put on Christ by an holy imitation of him: he Mat. 11. 29.
was meek and lowly in heart, and therefore envied no man; (the meek Number. 11.
Moses was so free from ambition and pride, that he reproved those that envied
for his sake, and wished that all God's people could prophecy, and that the
Lord would put his Spirit upon them) Christ loved all respectively: love 1 Cor.
13. 4.
envieth not. If we love for God's sake, we shall never be grieved for any
blessings, which he bestows, but wish them greater; we shall neither
undervalue others, nor over-rate our selves, as the envious do.

2. Learn in God's school; there is the best cure of envy: it was a thing
which troubled David to understand it, Psalm. 73. 16, 17.
Until (says he) I went into the Sanctuary of God. Here thou art taught not
to value secular things too much; to consider his hand which sets up and
pulls down; to refer all thy desires to the advance of his glory: to
acknowledge the favors which he has conferred on thee by Christ, better then
a thousand worlds; which thoughts can leave no place for envy.

3. Consider the end of those thou enviest: David found in the Sanctuary that
his enemies were not to be envied: Surely (said he) Psalm 73. 1^.
thou did set them in slippery places: thou castedst them down into
destruction -- remember how God mixeth bitter and sweet to all men in this
life: this man has great riches? but neither child to enjoy it, nor heart to
use it; this man is healthy in body, with a sick soul: this man thrives, and
lays up wealth, but with such a conscience, as that the poorest saint is
incomparably more happy: another man rises in honors? it may be only to
greaten his fall: another is many ways prosperous to the world-ward? but as
the moon is then most dark toward heaven, when she is most light toward the
earth, and contrariwise, so is it commonly with men: the more gloriously they
shine to us, the more despicable they are to God, who lays up such terrible
judgments for them, that Luke 16. 15
a soul in hell is as proper an object of envy, as these glittering epuloe's
who are hasting thither.

4. Ever remember that we are brethren: members of one body whereof Christ is
the head: therefore we must withal meekness Ephesians. 4. 2, 3
support one another through love, and mutually rejoice at each others good,
and so cast away the works of darkness, strife, and envy.

7. Impatience, is a sickness of the mind proceeding from several causes,
indignation, anger, envy, (so Caine to Hamon were impatient) sorrow,
apprehension of injuries, affliction, deluded hopes, and the like. as the
diseased body can neither endure heat nor cold, so neither can an impatient and
discontented mind comply with prosperity or adversity: every present estate
disliketh it, because it cannot make good use of any: it is not only a sin,
but a punishment of the sin of ingratitude to God. therefore God threatened to
send them trembling hearts, sorrow of mind, pendulous thoughts, and fear;
Deuteronomy. 28. 65, 66.
In the morning thou shall say, would God it were even: and at even thou shall
say, would God it were morning. sick of this wayward distemper was he, who
being at Romae Tybur amo, etc.
Rome liked Tybur best, at Tybur Rome. The sick man changes rooms and beds,
as the wounded Heart goes from brake, to brake, but cannot find ease in any,
because he carries that messenger of death, the fatal Arrow in his side: so
do impatient malcontents change, between dislike of present, and vain hopes
of future: but Caelum non ani^ium, etc.
he changes the air not his mind, who only goes beyond Sea: where ever thou
go thou find thy self, in whom as the evil is (not in the external
condition) so must it be cured, so must the remedy be* as small matters
distemper not a man in good health, Vt aegrum corpus quassari etiam levibus
solet of^ensis, ita^ animus eius angustus etc. Am. Marcellin. l. 14. de
Constantio. Phil 4. 11.
the least thing will, the sick: he will rest any where: but the sick in a bed
of Gold or Wood, in the Palace, o^ cottage, is alike restless: so is it here:
a sound mind will rest contented in any estate: I have learned (said Paul) in
whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. and that very mind, is health
to the sick, enlargment to the Prisoner, and better then a Kingdom to the
possessour. the sick mind is troubled, and discomposed with every trifle. Io^^
4. 9.
I do well (said pettish Jonah) to be angry even unto death. 'twas but for, a
poor Gourd, when many a thousand lives at stake troubled him not.

The way to cure, is not by change of any thing external, but by clearing the
mende, of the malignant perturbations which disaffect it, and to strengthen it
by a right information of the understanding, and rectifying the distempered
affections, until the mind enjoy a calm of patience.

Patience is afflictions cordial, despares antidote, Daughter and Romans 8. 25.
Romans 15* 4.
Nurse of hope: the Rev. 1. 9. Rev. 2. 2. 3. Rev 3 10.
Saints share with Christ. the way to the inheritance, and Heb. 12. 1. The
proceed of confidence. Jam. 1. 3. Heb. 6. 12. The operatory of perfection. Jam.
1. 4. The seal of salvation. 2. Pet. 1. 10. Symptom of Faith and Hope in
Christ. 1. These. 1. 3. 2. These. 1. 4. Patience is an Patient a est malorum,
qu^e aut inferuntur, a^t accidunt, c^m aequa^imitate perlati^. Lactant l. 5. c.
2. 3.
equanimity in bearing adversity: and a fruit of charity, as it is written. the
fruit of the spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering -- Gal. 5. 22. and --
patientia est charitatis effectu^. etc.
Charity Quae sustentatio sui recte patientia nominatur, quae vna v^rtus
omnibus est opposita vitis and affectibus: haec perturbatam ac fluctuantem
animam, ad tranqui^^itatem suam revocat: haec mitigat, haec hominem sibi
reddit. Lactant. lib. 6* cap* 18.
suffers long. 1 Cor. 13. 4.

Impatience is a perturbation of the mind, a selfe-fretting, tormenting
bitterness of the Soul, proceeding of impotency, or levity of mind: a secret
contest with and repining at the providence of God. the shame of Rich men and
vexation of the poor: the Mother of despair, sad fury, and Asmodeus of the
inward house; every room and recesse whereof, it disturbeth with hideous
cries, like Isai. 13. 21.
Ziim and Ohim, doleful beasts, in the desolations of Babylon: it is a folly
and sober madness, wherein the sick mind rejects all remedy, strikes at
the Physician, recrudeth, and teareth open it own wounds; an heart-eating
canker, the inward man's wolf which devoureth that which feeds it, the worm
which biteth the Soul, which Prometheus-like, feeds the vulture which
afflicts it, delighted in that which grieves it: nor is this sickness
peculiar to the wicked: the best men have some fitts. Psalm. 43. 5.
David's expostulation with himself (why art thou so sad o my soul, and why
art thou so disquieted within me) declares it: yea Christ who bare all our
sorrows without sin, in the sense of his fathers wrath, acknowledged, that
his soul was heavy to the death: and wrestling with that most sad passion, he
cried on the Cross, my God* my God, why have thou forsaken me? he could no
otherwise feel the torments of Hell (due to us) in his humane soul, then by
loosing the present sense of the Dei^ies assistance, which wheresoere it is,
makes Heaven: he lost in that agony a present sense, not an indeficient
interest: for even then he called God his God; which shows a vast distance
between the impatience, of desperate unrecoverable sinners, and the estate of
the soule-sick holy men, who (though like the Israelites marching with the
Egyptians into the same waters) have there a way opened to their promised rest,
where the enemy is drowned. Concerning this evil, we must know it grows on
by degrees, first in unadvised anger mixed with sorrow (which are the seeds of
impatience) next to a dislike of every accident and estate, then to an inward
murmuring: so like a Gangren it invadeth the Souls vitalls, hope, content, and
cheerful dependence on Gods providence, creeping on to violent despare: so
that it concerns a man highly, to prevent this evil by staying its
beginnings; learning to make a prudent use of every affliction, and to expel
all those discomposed thoughts which any way feed it; to practice in the whole
course of life, that Saint like patience and moderation, which becomes those,
who depend on the providence of God: which that thou may do, consider these
like motives to Patience and contentedness.

1. God commands it. Romans 12. 12. 1 These. 5. 18. 1 Timothy 6. 8. Heb. 13. 5.
Psalm. 37. 7. etc. 2. Consider the disadvantages of Impatience, and the
advantages of Patience, Senec. ep. 9.
no man can be happy who does not think himself so: what matter is it what thy
condition is if tho^ think it evil? the patient man is happy in every
estate; because God will hear him. Psalm. 40. 1. Psalm. 37. 7. The patient is
better then the proud in spirit. Eccles. 7. 8. The Lord will give him eternal
life. Romans 2. 7. By patience a man poss^sseth his own soul. Luke 21. 19. All
affliction to him is but Et asperum poculum libenter accipitur quod inte^tione
saluti soffertur. Greg. l 7. ep. 25.
bitter Physic, which he willingly swalloweth, because it is given to cure him,
and to bring him the quiet fruits of righteousness. Heb. 32. Herewith
Godliness is great gain. I Tim. 6. 6. Patience Novit enim patientia levigare
quod grave est, and constantia superare quod saevit. ib. ep. 25.
makes a burden lighter, and therein defeateth the malicious adversary,
Fructus laedentis est in dolor laesi. Tertul.
the fruit of whose injury is the grief and impatience of the injured. when
Job bare patiently, the Devil was beaten at his own weapon. as the Balas, if
it be solodged that it cannot move or shoot, brings the Sailing ship to
rights, but otherwise foundreth her, so is it with Patience in the soul. it
was a blessed victory obtained at Job's first encounter (at which the Angels
of heaven could do no less then give a plaudite) when Satan had charged him
with all his machinations, and Job received all those fierce blows on his
shield of patience; the Lord (said he) gave, and the Lord has taken away,
blessed be the name of the Lord: the Holy Ghost thus testifies, lob* 1. 22.
in all this Job sinned not. Happy Job to come off with that honor. and happy
they who imitate that invincible patience in their sufferings. Now God hears
not the impatient; they are evil: they are by every condition made worse,
being authors of their own misery, for as much as they make their own burdens
intolerable, by striving under that which no violence can cast off: they
become Satan's captives, serving in their fr^tfull impatience only to adorn his
triumphs; and scorns to men, who can no less then deride, if not loath, that
morosity, and peevish waywardness which causes the impatient malecontent
neither to enjoy friends, nor himself. an example whereof we have in that
mirror of impatience Diogenes surnamed the Cynick or dogged, as in many of his
actions and words, so in his reply to Alexander the Great, who graciously
asking him, if he lacked any thing, received this answer, Plut. vit. Alexand* M.
yea I do, stand out of my light. and in that (whether to profess himself a
devoted servant to his own passions, or to make claim to an equal capacity,
and right of contemning his friends greatness, as much as he slighted his
poverty) he would rather dwell in a Tubbe then expect the delayed benific^nce
of him that promised to build him an House: certainly his impatience therein
disadvantaged him.

3. Consider that secular a^^lictions cannot be long: if all the world, Men and
Devils conspired to vex and in^ure thee, they could not long make thee an
object of their fury and malice: as it was said, when Caesar had shut up Cato
by Land and Sea, Senec.
yet habet qua exeat Cato: he meant by death: on much better ground stands
the Saints comfort who hears, (...). b. 10. 37.
ye have ne^d of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might
receive the promise: for yet a very little while, and he that shall come will
come, and will not ^arry. blessed are they who with meekness and patient
confidence expect him. be therefore patient Iam* 5 8.
stablish your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. heaviness may
endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning: however the longest day must
have an end, and the most tedious misery of the patient Saint shall have an
happy one.

4. Consider the extent of that thou suffer: thou art hated without cause?
thou owe Gratias ago De^ meo quod dignus sim quem mundus o ^erit. Hieronym.
l. 1 ep. 45.
thanks to God for that Malesicum quidam me ga^riunt. (...) ^idei servus
agnosco, etc lb.
conformity to his dear Son. thou art oppressed, plundered, imprisoned,
banished? but yet thou have not resisted unto blood: thou are an enrowled
Soldier under the banner of Christ (in whom believing and patiently bearing
trial, thou can not miscarry) and do thou startle at those charges,
wherein thy life is not yet endangered? what if the heavenly General chose
thee out for one of the Forlorn hope of Martyrdom, and the fiery trial?
would thou decline the service? or complain of danger?

5. Consider that nothing is befallen you but that which Is humane, and a
condition common to many: Plutarch. vit. P. Aemil
Paulus Aemilius well observed in his sudden victory over Perseus, tha^ there
is nothing constant in this world: do thou in the loss of some secular
comfort, cry with that afflicted Church, ^am. 1. 12.
behold, and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow -- if it be any
comfort to have partners in woe; consider well what thousands of others suffer:
as he said, who, to comfort an embittered friend (as they beheld a populous
City from the house top) how many sad hearts, and weeping eyes, are now under
these roofes? thou art not alone in suffering.

6. Consider that many of Gods dearest children, far better then thou, suffer
more then thou: lam 5. 11.
ye have heard of the patience of Job: and therein the issue of patience: God
delivered him to Satan: Job 2. 6.
Behold he is in thine hand -- yet all that the Diabolus ipse ^it praedae suae
custos, etc Ambros. de poen l. 1 c. 13.
Devil could do against him, made him more happy whom God pronounced
righteous: God knows the strength of his who gives it. If 1 Samuel ^7. 33
Saul would not have permitted David to an unequal conflict, shall we think
the Lord of hosts will give any of his dear children to adversaries or
hazzards, beyond certainty of conquest? that he will venture thee into the
lists, may assure thee, that he who cannot be deceived, knows thee invincible
through his grace arming thee: he looks on thy trialls with delight, because
thereto he will proportion the reward, who loves thee. Be not deceived, they
are not wretched who suffer most; it is (...), lgnat. ep. ad Poly.
honor to conquer with wounds: these flowers grow among sharp difficulties:
skarrs are Honors characters written in the face and breast of the valiaut.

7. Consider what thou deservest, and thou shall find good cause to Ago
omnipotenti Deo gratias, quo^ minus a^^ligor vald^ quam mereor, Greg. lib. 4.
ep. 40.
bless the Lord that afflicts thee no more: consider what caused the evil of
which thou art impatient, -- indigna^ris te mal^ ess^ subiectum, quasi quicquam
merear^^ boni, Lact l. 3. cap. 18.
as if thou deservedst no good: no man is so miserable as wicked.

8. Consider the issue of afflictions, and the end why God afflicts thee: the
Physician gives not bitter pills, nor does the Chirurgian use the lancet and
cauterie to hurt, but to cure the disaffected; much less does God delight in
thy grief: he makes thee weep now to prevent eternal weeping: he loves
not thy misery, but thy health: that he prescribes Neque enim electis suis in
hac vita promisit gaudi^ delectationis: sed ama^itudianem tribulationis, ut
medicinae more per a^arum po^ulum* ad dulcedin^m ae^ernae salutis redeant Greg.
l. 9 ep. 39.
such bitter things, that so long; thy disease requires it: if more gentle
Physic would have cured thee, he would not have been so grievous to thee; if
less, he would sooner ease thee; he will not put in one dram or scruple
more then he knows necessary: be patient therefore, and expect the issue.
What do not patients endure Vides quanta homines^ patiantur sub medicorum
ma^ibus spem incertam homini promi^tentium -- subdit membra, l^gati se patitur,
etc. cui promisit Deus a^iquid and s^fe^lit? August. in Psalm. 85.
under Physicians hands, promising uncertain help? how much rather ought we to
subject our selves to God? when did he fail of his promise? I but, say
thou, I cry to him for help, and he hears not. It is Gods mercy Aegrotum non
exaudi vit medicu^ ad voluntatem, qui exaudi vit ad so utem, Aug. in Ps. 90
not to hear thee according to thy will, that he may do that which is for thy
salvation: so good Physicians deal with their patients: seeing then Calamitas
saepius dis^iplina virtutis fuit, Minuc. Fell. Octav. Nauseabit ad ^ntido^um qui
hiavit ad venenum, Tert. de Pat.
calamity is often the discipline of virtue: shall he be queazy stomacht to the
antidote who greedily swallowed the poison?

9. All impatience has it natals in the devil, who labors by all means to
embitter the soul of man, and to pl^nge him into despair, and to make him
murmur at the taste of these Marahs of affliction: because he envieth the
image of God in him, and his favors to him: strive therefore to calm thy
mind in every affliction: which that thou may the better do, observe these
rules:

1. Love God above all, and thou shall not be discon^ented with any thing he
does: 1 Samuel 3. 18
It is the Lord (said Eli) let him do what seems him good. When we love God
aright, we will know that all his judgments are just, and what ever he lays
on us, fatherly corrections, the effects of his love and wisdom for our
amendment, who therefore corrects every son, because he would have none
perish. He that loves his pleasure, profit, ease, more then God, must needs be
impatient of the loss of any of these. And love thy neighbor as thy self; and
a little injury shall not make thee impatient.

2. Be content with necessaries: 1 Timothy 6. 6
having food and raiment, let us be therewith content: what can -- nil Divitiae
pote^unt ^egales addere maius. Horat.
the treasures of Princes give them more? It was a prudent speech of that
Plutarch. vir. Alexand,
Indian King Taxiles to the invading Alexander, what should we need (said he)
to fight, and make war one with another* if thou come not to take away our
water, and our necessaries by which we must live -- as for other goods if I be
richer then thou; I am ready to give thee of mine: and if I have less, I will
not think scorn to thank thee, if thou will give me some of thine. How happy
were the societies of men, if all were so composed?

3. Often and thankfully recount what God has done, and does for thee: foolish
men, by their impatience, causing them to oversee their own happy estates, make
something nothing, and blessings curses to themselves: Ins^pientis est potius
dolere de amissis, quam gaudere de relictis.
it is the part of a fool, rather to mourn for that he loses, then to rejoice
for that is left him: because therein joy is better then sorrow: such mark what
they have not, not what they have beyond many thousands better then they,
because wiser, and more thankful. They think they must be humoured with all
sweet, but nothing bitter: Job. 2 10.
Thou speak as one of the foolish women (said Job to his wife tempting him)
what shall we receive good at the hands of God, and shall we not receive
evil?

4. In all discontents, look up to Heb. 12. 2.
Jesus the author and finisher of our faith: considering what, and why he
suffered: he suffered that which thou could not: not for himself (he had no
sin) but to save thee: if thou can through faith in him, have peace with
God, thou shall not only bear, but Rom* 5. 3.
rejoice in tribulation, knowing that it works patience: if thou will keep
innocence and a good conscience, therein thou shall have admirable peace in thy
mind, which shall quiet it amidst tumults of things external: but as a city
in sedition, or house in discord of the owners, cannot be happy; so -- animus a
seipso dissi^ens, secumque dis^ordans. Cic. de fin. l. 1.
neither can the mind at discord with it self.

5. Keep thee within the verge of thy calling, undertake not, neither propose
to thy self things too great for thy mannaging. Overgriping thy hand,
enervateth it and puteth it to fruitless pain: aiming at too ambitious leaps,
breaks many an heart, where they fall short of their vain propositions.

6. Resolve, as to use fullness (if God please to give it) to his glory; so (in
case he restrains) to lessen thy mind, to live within the shell of thine own
fortune, to necessity not opinion: to that a little is sufficient, to this
nothing: when the Philosopher in his journey drank water with his hand, he
cried, With how few u^encills is nature content? Many are selfetormenters,
authors of their own sad discontents, by their proposing such strange fabrics
of their Babels, building castles in the air, and towers to heaven; adding
house to house, and land to land, province to province, and kingdom to
kingdom; seeking their chief good, in the dangerous proceeds of doubtful
adventurers, greatness, and a^^luence of riches: they go far about to find
that, which is safely and only to be found at home, in our selves in a mind
contented with that it has. It was noted of Pyr^hus that active Epirot, that
Fortune made him happy enough, with good means to live peaceably at home,
without any trouble, if he could have contented himself, only with the
sovereignty over his own subjects: but his insatiable avarice (which neither
the sea, mountains, unhabitable deserts, nor the confines which separate Asia
from Europe, Plutarch* vit, Pyr^h.
could limit) instigated him perpetually to seek new matter of trouble to
himself and others: which his faithful friend Cineas did once prudently,
though without effect, intimate to him; when upon new overtures of honorable
and profitable undertakings for the Tarentines, occasioned by Cineas Sir Walter
Raleigh men^ioneth this story l. 4. c. 7. Sect. 2*
quaeres, Pyrrhus had said, when we have overcome the Romans, there can neither
Gre^ian nor Barbarous city in all the country withstand us, but we shall
conquer all the rest of Italy with ease -- and what shall we do then (said
Cineas) Pyrrhus tells him of conquering of commodious Sicily: again he
demanded; that being wone, shall our wars end? Pyrrhus says, the way were then
broad open to attain great conquests; who would not afterward go into Africa
and so to Carthage? -- but when we have all in our hands (said Cineas) what
shall we do in the end? we will then (good Cineas said he) be quiet and take
our ease, make feasts every day, and be as merry one with another, as we can
possibly: Cineas having brought him to that point, said to him, My Lord, what
letteh us now to be quiet and merry together, since we enjoy that presently
without farther travel and trouble, which we will now go seek for abroad with
such sheeding of blood and so manifest danger? and we know not whether we ever
shall attain unto it, after we have both suffered and caused others to suffer
infinite sorrows and troubles.

7. Learn a faithful dependence on Gods providence: this ground of content
the holy Ghost proposes, Heb. 13. 5.
Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such
things as ye have, for he has said, I will never leave thee nor for sake
thee: when men too much depend on second causes they are impatient at every
cross: they would impiously prescribe God in the time, as Jehoram would 2
King. 6. 33. and rebellious Israel, Exodus 32. 1. or in the means, as Naman, 2
King. 5. 11. but in assurance that God will never fail us, we patiently
expect his help. In every affliction remember that God beholds thee, and that
his providence will give the issue with the trial.

8. Often call to mind, in case of discontent for thy wants, what thou
brought into the world, and what thou shall carry hence: thou have not such
possessions, houses, riches, apparel, as some have: yet no man Nemo tam
pauper ^ivi^, quam natu^ est.
lives so poor as he was born: this was it which that Exemplar of patience
said in all his losses, Job 1.
Naked came I into this world, and naked shall I return: so Paul makes it a
ground of his exhortation to contentedness, 1 Timothy 6. 7.
We brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we shall carry nothing
hence. Kings and Princes are cast out naked in the day of their nativity,
weeping little masters of the world. The great Suos commonefecit, ut sibi
mortuo, lineam inter^lam hastili a^ pensam praeferrent, vociferante praecone,
Saladinum Asiae Domitorem, ex tantis opibus nihil aliud secum far* Dub^av. l.
14.
Saladine will tell you what they carry hence; who willed* that at his
funerals, one carrying a shirt or winding sheet on the point of an advanced
lance, should go before the hearse and proclaim thus, Saladine, the conqueror
of the East, carries hence with him only this of all that he has gotten.

9. Feed not the bitter humor of discontents, for the groweths thereof are sad
and dangerous: Eccl. 30. 21. (...). See Pro. 12. 25. and 15. 13. and 17. 22.
Give not over thy mind to heaviness, and afflict not thy self in thine own
counsel: the gladness of the heart is the life of a man, and prolongeth his
days: Some minds are like the sea, which instantly turns sweet showers into
it own bitterness; because they indulge to impa^^ence, pleasing themselves
with that which tormenteth them: but the wise in every affliction lift up their
souls to God, seeking comfort in him, and to the consideration of the life to
come, where shall be Rev. 22. 3*
no more curse 3 no more discontent, but every heart shall be filled with joy.

A Prayer against Impatience and discontent.
O Lord God, gracious and merciful, I humbly acknowledge thy fatherly
goodness, in measuring to me those corrections which my sins, daily
provoking thy justice, most justly deserve: and thy abundant mercy in sparing
me, whom in thy severity, thou might not only have made the most miserable
of all men living, but also of those afflicted souls which now suffer in the
flames of hell. Lord, as thou have in Christ showed me this mercy, so for his
sake forgive me all my sins, and lay no more upon me, then thou will make me
able to bear cheerfully, neither suffer me frail dust and earth, for any
trials to fall from thee; but give a blessed issue out of every trial: Good
Father, correct me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure, lest I perish in thy fierce wrath: let thy corrections breed in
me a true sight and loathing of all my sins; a filial fear to offend thee;
a fixed resolution to love and serve thee more carefully: to this end I humbly
pray thee, give me assurance of my justification by Christ's righteousness,
my atonement with thee, and such peace of conscience, as the world can neither
give nor take from me, that I may love thee above all, and be truly thankeful
to thee for all thy mercies temporal and eternal: proposing to my self and
having ever in my heart the example of my Savior, assuring me, that he that
suffered such things for me, will not suffer me to fail in any trial: Lord
sanctify me by his good Spirit, and all my afflictions to me by him: cast
out of my soul all those sins and corruptions for which thou fillest me with
bitterness: let the sum and height of all my ambition be, only to be thine:
give me a prudent and contented heart in every estate and condition, a
faithful dependence on thy good providence, in assurance that thou who have
promised wilt never fail me nor forsake me: that in every affliction I may
expect thy gracious deliverance: give me patience and meekness of spirit, that
I may in the midst of all my troubles, find rest to my soul in thee: let not
my heart be fixed on any worldly desires, but on things which are above, where
Christ my peace sits at thy right hand: take from me all impatience,
bitterness of spirit, diffidence, and the secret murmuring of flesh and blood:
let thy good spirit, the comforter, dwell in me to keep and counsel me in the
greatest and in the least affairs and interests, spiritual and secular, with
his joyful presence, so to sweeten all those Marahs of afflictions, which thy
providence shall set in my way to the promised rest, as that I may ever rejoice
in thee, and in every estate live cheerfully before thee, until thou please to
bring me unto the fullness of eternal joies in thy blessed presence, where
thou will wipe all tears out of mine eyes, make me glad with the light of thy
countenance, and unite me to that triumphant society of Saints and Angels which
sing their Halleluiahs to thee eternally, through Jesus Christ my Lord and
blessed Savior.

Amen.
CHAP. XX.
. 1. Of Hope.. 2. Of Fear.. 3. Of Cares.. 4. Of Jealousy.

1.. I.
He lives not who has no hope: the child hops to be a man: the old man to
live one year more: the poor man hopes for wealth, the sick man for health:
the imprisoned for liberty: the afflicted that it may be better to morrow: Hope
makes the husbandman sow, the weary Palmer endure his tedious ways; the
swimmer to spread his tired arms upon the death-threatning waves: thus hoping
and suffering takes up the whole life of man.

2. But there is great difference in hopes: there is an humane, vain hope; then
which there is none more dangerous delusion in this world: such hope is but
Spes incerit boninomen est Senecep.
the name of an uncer^aine good: it is a treacherous guide, leading to desperate
precipices; the minde's ignis fatuus, dream of waking men: it was the tempters
artifice first to assail man's innocence, with vain hope, grounded on a lying
promise: without this he could do nothing against us. First, he shows the
forbidden fruit; then says, Genesis 3, 5.
in the day ye eat thereof -- ye shall be as Gods -- the vain hope took
unhappy man: so he assailed the second Adam, when he Matthew. 4.
showed him the Kingdoms and Glory of the world: so still he shows us false
heavens, to precipitate us into a true hell; suggesting vain hopes that he
might bereave us of the true: Who sins without some vain hope? whethe^ the
instance be in Cain's murder, Amnon's lust, Juda's treason, or Achitophel's
despair; the sinner hoped for some other proceed of his resolutions, then he
found in his acted sin. The worst hope for some good; but all in vain: the
hope of the wicked must fail, because God's Justice cannot. We must expect,
because reason is provident: and till Time's glass be run, there must be
something future, all which seems good (save what we see through fear and
doubting) so Adeo blanda est unicui^ que de se sperandi libertas.
flattering a liberty of hoping for himself, has every man, specially young
men, who having least acquaintance with the falsehood, and constant inconstancy
of the world, relying Memoriae minimum tribuit quisque, spei plurimun, Seneca.
much on hope, and little on memory, promise themselves great things: but when
the wicked sing requiems to their souls, sudden destruction is upon them by so
much more terrible, by how much less suspected. Job 8. 13. Prove 10. 28. Prove.
11. ^.
The hypocrite^ hope shall perish -- their hope shall be sorrow of mind, Job
11. ver. 20. Pro. 25. 19*
Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble, is like a broken tooth,
and a sliding foot. And truly such is confidence in an evil conscience:
however it may seem to have made thee a Isa. 28. 15.
covenant with death, and an agreement with hell, it will deceive thee. However
it promise long life and strength in an arm of flesh and the vain counsels of
men, raising thy hopes to high ^lights, they are but dreams of deluded men,
breaking in the midst of their course, giving thy mind dangerous strapadoes,
by carrying it up to cast it down from such height to make the fall more
desperate: How often do despairing wretches wish they had never hoped, when the
vain shows thereof, like Ex. 14. 25.
Pharoahs chariot wheels, there fall off, where they are most deeply engaged
between floods of returning miseries.

3. There is an hope (...), lust (...)* ad Graec. cohor. ex Plat. de Repub l. 1.
of the righteous, which fails not: this is a prudent expectation of future
good; the fulfilling of all God's promises in Christ for this life and that to
come. This is a virtue infused into our hearts by the holy Ghost: this is in
God who cannot deceive: as it is written, Psalm. 31. 24.
Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in
the Lord. God's Psalm. 33. 18.
eye is upon them: and they Psalm. 39. 7. Psalm 71 5. Psalm. 42. 5.
trust in him who will certainly perform his promise: and Psalm. 146. 5. Isai.
30. 18.
happy are they: the Lord Psalm. 147. 11
takes pleasure in them: their expectation shall be gladness. Prove. 10. 28.
they have hope in death* Prove. 14. 32. they are saved hereby. Romans 8. 24. hopes
in any creature, but hope in God makes not ashamed, because he Lam. 3. 24* 25.
is good to all them that trust in him: this hope is not humane or
conjecturall, such as may be deceived, but divine, grounded on the infallible
Psalm. 119. 81. Psalm. 130. 5. Romans 15. 4.
Word of God, who is our hope. The object of this hope is all that which God
has promised; remission of sins, grace, glory, all things necessary for this
present life, and the life to come: the isntrumental cause hereof, is
justifying faith, whence it springs, as it is written, Heb. 1^. 1.
Faith is the substance of those things which are hoped for: the supreme end,
God's glory; the subordinate, our salvation, and present comfort, and that
which serves hereto: the effect, gratitude to God, who 1 Pet. 1. 3.
begets us again to a lively hope in Christ; sanctimony. 1 John 3. 3.
expulsion of servile fear; Psalm 56 4, 5
dependence on God, Psalm 43. 5.
casting all our care on him: fortitude in bearing afflictions; Romans 12. 12
joy in adversity. The subject the saint of God only: faith and hope accord in
the cause: Ephe^. 2. 8.
God's Spirit gives both: and in the certainty: as we believe, so we hope:
they differ, First in that faith begets hope, and so in the order of nature
is before hope: Secondly, faith looks on the truth of Gods promises; hope on
the goodness thereof: as faith can have nothing but infallible truth for it
object, so hope can have nothing but good: faith apprehends the truth, hope
patiently expects the fulfilling thereof: the object of this hope has four
conditions*

Bonum futurum arduum possibile. ^ ^ ae. q. 4. a. 10.
It must be 1. Good. 2. Future. 3. Difficult. 4. Possible.


1. Good: whatsoever is not such may be an object of fear, it cannot be of
this hope: now whereas there is a true good; the object hereof; so is there an
appearing or seeming good, which being not true causes a vain, or impious
hope: as if a man hope for ease, pleasure, riches, honors; these are not true
goods, nor of themselves good, but in their use; the hope thereof therefore may
be vain and failing: if a man hope for revenge on his enemy; satisfaction of
his lusts, or the like: this hope is impious, and cannot but fail, or make a
man unhappy in the end. but if we hope for Gods glory, our souls health, our
comfort, or what else is truly good, it is true hope Spe^ eius aeterna est, qui
in creatore (...) -- considit. Hilar. 145
and shall attain, even where it seems to the world to fail: as when we
pray for some temporal thing, which God sees not good to grant (as when
Christ prayed, that the cupp might pass from him; when Moses hoped to go into
Canaan) he was heard, and Moses not defeated of his hope; because in both, God
did that which was best, and that is ever consistent with true hope; which
prescribes not God; but confidently expects, either that which it hops, or
something better.

2. Future. Romans 8. 24, 25. joy is of things present, or so presented; as when
we rejoice in hope. Romans 12. 12. hope makes that present, by a prepossession
of that which is to come: for hope cannot be of that which is present.

3. Diff^cult: such are all things excellent. it may be that deluded hope
makes it an easy step to heaven, and salvation: but they that do indeed go
that way, shall find it narrow, and set with a world of difficulties: that
which in truth is hard, design and vain hope feign easy: but nothing truly
good is such.

4. Possible: that which is impossible to carnal reason may be hoped for,
because it is possible to God: therefore Rom 4. 18* (...), etc. (...) Sir in non
spe: Interp. reddit absque spe.
Abraham believed above hope: and we look for the resurrection of the dead: and
some things which sinful men think possible, are impossible. all things are
possible to God which he will do; and he will do all that he has promised:
but some things God will not do; and so are impossible: God will not Tit. 1. 2.
(...) Sir. Interp. Deus verax.
lie, nor be unjust: for that imports impotency which is in any measure
evil, in it declining from God: so that, to hope that those things which God
has said concerning secure sinners, shall not come to pass, is a vain hope:
for it is impossible for God to be untrue. To resolve to sin, and yet to hope
for pardon, is a vain hope, because it is impossible for God to be unjust: a
severe document for presumptuous sinners, who will enjoy their lusts and
pleasures, glut themselves with revenge, and yet hope when this life's scene is
done, the few petitions of our epilogue shall purchase favor: no, no; thou
that with purpose to sin prayest God to be merciful, do in effect pray God
to be unjust, and indulgent to an impenitent sinner, which being impossible, it
concerns thee to arise from sleep, and shake off all deluding and vain
hopes, that thou may lay hold on the true and never failing; which is the
anchor of the soul, Q^emadmodu^^ de navi quae in anchoris est, recte dicimus
quod iam in terr^ sit, adhuc tamen stuctuat, etc. sic contr^ tentationes huius
peregrinationis nostrae spes nostra fundata in illa civitate Jerusalem, facit
nos non abripi i^ saxa, Aug. in Psalm 64.
laying hold on the land of the living: entering in within the veil; ease of
sorrow, griefs asswager, afflictions comforter, despaires antidote: 1 These. 5.
8.
helmet of salvation: 2 Thessal 2. 16, 17.
bond of breaking hearts, Faith's perspective: the souls attorney, sent
before to take livery and seisen of our heavenly inheritance: the Neho where we
take a view of the promised rest: the faithful spy to discover the holy land,
bringing us the tastes from Escoll the fruits of the spirit, the possession
which they have, who have no more and yet are rich.

4. Concerning hope, these rules must be held:

1. Prepare thy self hereto with the 1 Pet. 1. 13.
loins of your mind, girded with resolution and sobriety: with purity of
life: 1 John 3. 3.
For every one that has this hope, purges himself as he is pure. True hope,
and resolution to live in any known sin, are incompatible: the holy man's hope
never fails finally: the Heathen could say, Seneca.
Fortune has often deserted the innocent, but good hope never.

2. 1 Pet. 1. 13.
Hope to the end, or perfectly: the perfection of hope is perseverance: we must
wait Romans 8. 28.
for the adoption the redemption of our body: though deferred hope Prove. 13. 12.
make the heart sick. H^b. 2. 3.
though it tarry, wait, for it shall surely come. what ever the trial be,
resolve with Job. 13. 15.
Job, though he kill me I will wait on him. we are Christ's Heb. 3. 6.
if we hold fast the confidence and rejoicing unto the end. though through
humane frailty thou sometimes fear, yet be confident: Psalm. 56. 3.
When I was afraid, I trusted in thee. fear and hope may dwell together,
specially where fear of God takes not away faiths confidence, but the
security of the flesh.

3. Lay up the promises of God: therefore were they Romans 15. 4.
written, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope.

4. Set not up thy rest in this world, neither trust in any thing thereof: it
is but like a staff of reed, a loose rope at Sea, a false friend forsaking in
adversity: the quicksands, on which foolish builders lay their foundation: as
Deuteronomy. 12. 9.
Moses told Israel, ye are not come to your rest. all (...). Greg Naz. Orat.
16.
Worldly things change continually: here can be no constancy among the sons
of Men, prosperity is but like a fair morning quickly overcast with hideous
storms: like the morning dew soon vanishing, like a fair flower, a Jonah's
gourd, such is all Worldly joy: there is no sure hope, but in the living God,
who changes not, neither deceives trust.

5. Take heed of vain hopes, specially those which are against right reason
(lest thou tempt God) they deceive men: such is their trust who contemn the
ordinary means in expectation of miracles: and they who do things against the
express word of God, in vain hope of pardon.

6. Propose not too great things to thy self: we are often the evident authors
of our own sorrows; when we promise peace, health, and prosperity to our
selves: this high-flying ambition sometimes loses it feathers, and we fall
into bitterness, when we come short of that which we vainly promised our
selves. 'Twere better never climb, then rise to fall.

7. Pray to the God of hope and consolation, to infuse a sure hope and
confidence into thy soul.

A Prayer for Hope.
O Lord God my earnest expectation and my hope, my fortress helper and
deliverer; though my numberless sins have deserved thy wrath, so that thou
may justly cast me off into hopeless despair and final destruction, yet
look upon me in mercy through thy Christ, in whom thou have commanded me to
believe, and promised remission of my sins and eternal life: for his sake
assure me thereof, that there may be hope in my end. Though thou now fill my
wounded spirit with bitterness, removing me from peace and comfort, so that
forgetting prosperity, I go mourning all the day long: though thou humblest my
dejected soul with grievous weights of sorrows, and make my eyes fountains
of tears, driving me to solitude and silence with them that mourn in Zion yet
art thou good to them that wait for thee, and to the soul that seeks thee.
thy mercies are renewed every morning, thy compassions ^aile not. thou have
opened unto me the riches of thy mercies in Christ, (...) caused me to trust in
thee, thou have, according to thine abundant (...), begotten me again to a
lively hope, by the resurrection of Christ ^om the dead, of an inheritance
incorruptible; therefore my soul has ^id, thou art my portion, therefore will
I trust in thee. Truth it is, o Lord, that the hopes of the hills are vain, so
is all confidence in man: unhappy is that hope which is not in thee: but, in
spite of Satan's malice, blessed must he be, whose hope thou art: he shall be
like a tree planted by the waters of life, which cannot fail, because thou
can not deceive trust: o God of all consolation, therefore now at last speak
peace to my afflicted soul, let me not be disappointed of my hope: though thou
please to weane me from the love of an unkind and trustlesse World, by
permitting me to such grief and sorrow, yet (seeing thou art my trust, from my
youth) let me not be ashamed of my confidence: let thy mercy be still my hope,
and thy grace my strength: amidst all the storms, and surges of afflictions,
fasten my souls Anchor on the land of the living, my rock who is entered within
the veil, to make requests for me. give me patience to bear until the time
of comfort and refreshing shall come from thy gracious presence: give me the
helmet of salvation, assurance of all that which thou have promised in thy
word, and laid up for me in heaven, let the experience of thy former goodness
in many deliverances, give me a door of hope for the future, that I may more
and more trust in thee. Thou who art the God of hope, fill me with joy and
peace in believing, that I may abound in hope, through the power of thy holy
spirit. Give me strong consolation and full assurance of thy mercy, that
continuing grounded and established in a steadfast hope of my resurrection to a
life of glory, at the appointed hour, my flesh may rest in hope, and my soul
be cheerfully rendered into thy gracious hands, to rest with thee, through Jesus
Christ my ever-blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

1. Fear is a pensive and sorrowful expectation of some evil to come,. II.
Timor est metus mali impendentis, Cic. Tus* q. l. 4.

Est expectatio mali. Arist. Eth. l. c. 4.

Timor est hu^^anae imbecillitatis trepidatio, metuentis id perpeti, quod sibi
nollet accidere: existit autem and commovetur in nobis, de reatus consciantia,
de iure potioris, de impetu fortioris, etc. Hilar. in Psalm. 127.


imminent, or so supposed: we fear any thing which is evil, real or
apparent, many times that which is not: fear is opposite to fortitude, as one
extreme of participation; and as it allayeth too much daring, limits it, and so
is good; but as it exceeds in it extreme, pernicious. There can be no virtue
where there is no fortitude: he can never be holy toward God, or honest toward
men, who dares not to be so: because Satan will be sure to work upon the
timorous, putting before him continual (though (...) and vain) fears (like
hunters Suells to put the fearful (...) from the safe ways) so driving
through pusillanimity (...) timidity, that he makes them evil for fear of
men, whom the true fear of God cannot make good.

2. To omit many acceptations of the word: 1. There is a natural fear, and
that of two sorts, in respect of the object, first, concerning the avoidance of
sin, for the love of God: so Adam in his innocence (having heard the
threatening) feared to sin, because he would not offend God whom he loved above
all: for however Adam in the temptation lost this fear, and so sinned, yet in
the rectitude of his mind, he had it before the temptation prevailed upon him:
and secondly concerning the avoidance of sorrow in apprehension of God's anger
against sin committed: so Christ feared, Matthew. 26. 38. Heb. 5. 7. both
without sin: nearest to this comes the filial fear of the regenerate, who,
though through infirmity, they often sin, and fear to displease God by any
offense; as it is said, Pro* 8. 13.
The ^ear of the Lord is to hate evil: This is the beginning of wisdom, and
it is principally in four things: 1. That we set God ever before our eyes,
living as in his sight and presence. 2. That we know and acknowledge him, as the
omniscient witness and just Judge of all our thoughts, words and actions. 3.
That we fear not creatures in respect of him. 4. That we ever do that which
is just and acceptable to him, though none other can witness against us (so
did good Gen 39. 9.
Joseph) and who ever is offended with us for the same: so did Dan. 6. ^^*
Daniel and those Dan. 3. 18.
other servants of God.

2. There is a fear of unbeleefe in them that love the sin, but fear the
punishment thereof: this is that Ti^or servilis, ut nota^ Cl. Alex. paed. l. 1.
(...).
servile fear which affects the wicked; which though it sometimes restrain
them from the external acts of sin, yet is it not N^n diuturni magister
officii, Cicer. Phil. 2.
master of any constant duty: so soon as their fear is over, they are as
Antiquum obtinent.
bad, or worse then ever; as we see in Pharaoh. This fear becomes not the
children of God (because it is ever with a guilty conscience, unbeleefe, and
expectation of God's just judgment on their sins, without hope in Christ)
Psalm. 49. 5.
wherefore should I fear in the days of evil --? said the Psalmist: for God
is with them: Psalm. 23. 4.
I will fear none evil, for thou art with me. Psalm. 27. 1. Psalm. 3. 7.
The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom shall I fear? the Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? the wicked fear, where no
fear is: they fear not God for love of God, but for self-love, and fear of
punishment (as Graecia coleb^t De^s, etc ^lio^ u^ prosint: alio^ ne noceant,
Lact. l. 1. c. 20.
the Grecians worshipped their false gods: and poor men the great Lords) which
is a symptom of Degeneret animos timor arguit.

Deuteronomy. 28. 66, 67.

Rev. 21. 8.


a base and impious mind, prohibited to the children of God, to whom it is
said, Pro. 3. 25* 26.
Be not afraid of sudden fear -- for the Lord shall be thy confidence, and
shall keep thee from being taken. Isai. 41. 10.
Fear thou not (says the Lord) for I am with thee: be not dismayed, for I am
thy God, I will strengthen thee and I will help thee -- Isai 43. 1, 2.
Fear not for I have redeemed thee. All which Precepts are to be understood of
servile fear; which is to despair of God's mercy, rendering men desperate, not
provident to avoid danger, neither more earnest to fly to God for help: The
first may appear in 2 King. 6.
Jehoram's message; Behold (said that wreeth) this evil comes of the Lord,
should I any longer wait on the Lord? and in that precipitate counsel, Job 2.
9. Curse God and die. The second effect we read in Jacob, in danger of his
life, instantly praying, and sending presents to appease his revengefull
brother: not to be afraid of God's judgments on sin, is carnal security, and
stupid carelessness of 1 Timothy 4 2.
feared consciences: not to fear imminent dangers is improvident torpor of
mind: not to fear the dreadful presence of God, must needs be (in sinful
man) ignorance of God, and a man's own self; Moses and Daniel ^eared this. On
the other part, to be a timorous Plutar vit. P^ri^.
Antemon, for fear keeping home continually with his two servants ever
guarding his head, with a brass shield held over it, is not only an Pi^^ ergo
timor est, ^um quae non timenda sunt, time^tur, and quae timenda sunt, non
timentur, H^a^. in Psalm. 52.
impious but a ridiculous fear. To fear men more then God (as Saul did, 1 Samuel
15. 24.) is the fear of Hypocrites: to fear without confidence in God, for
the diversion of evil (as Dan 5 6.
Belshazzar, when seeing the hand writing upon the wall, his knees trembled,
and the joints of his loins were loosed; or as 1 Samuel 28. 20.
Saul at Endor) is the fear of those who fear not God aright. This fear is the
perpetual torment of the wicked conscience: R^s est im^^^iosa timor. (...).
xen.(...). l. 3.
an imperious mischief: an anticipation of evil not yet come, making a man
unhappy, not only with present evils, but with future, which, but for ^ear,
could no way reach him: as that fear of inevitable death, which makes men
continually die, for fear of dying once. But to fear God with a filial
fear, proceeding of love to him, is as the fountain of wisdom so of true
happiness: God Isai. 68. 2.
regards such: he Psalm. ^ 4 5. 19.
will deliver them, and fulfill their desire: he Psalm. 25 12.
will teach them the way of righteousness: Psalm. 34. 10.
they shall want nothing that is good: when they seem most to lack, they shall
have supply of that, or something better: it shall be Prove. 3. 8.
health and strength to them. Psalm ^ 11 10 Prove. 1 7.
Understanding, Psalm 128* etc.
temporal blessings, and eternal, and a mind to do good and deal uprightly
with men; as appeared in Obadiah, 1 King. 18. 3, 12, 13. and Joseph, Psalm. 115.
13.
Genesis 42. 10. This fear makes Pro. 15. 26.
every little, more then great riches to the wicked: it is the Animae cu^^os,
etc. Cre.
souls Angel-guardian, Si^ tantum timor in nobis innocentiae custos -- ne
Innocencies keeper, accepta fe^uritas indiligentiam pariat, and verus denuo
hostis obrepat, Cypr l. 2. ep. 2.
Securities antidote, the minds sentinel to awaken it, and give the alarm
against the assaults of the subtle enemy. This gives a man ^^ue and
un^ailing confidence: it is the sum of that which God requires of us, Deuteronomy.
10. 12. the whole duty of a man, (...). 12. 14. of this only is that saying
true; Matrem timidi fl^re non solere, Ae^^l. Pro^.
the mother o^ the fearful uses not to cry: because such are truly blessed.

3. Now because we are men, not yet perfect in love, and so subject to many
fears, and subject to many sins, failings, and hazzards, and therein to some
dangerous groavings of servile fear (by God's mercy turned, in the issue, to
our good; for if we are so prone to sin under so much fear, -- cum Cleanthi
probro. reaetur quod esset timidus, inquit, (...), Diog. Lasrt. l. 7. Cleanth.
-- (...), Cl. Alex. Paed, l. 1
what would we be, if we were secure from all?) these like rules are
necessary to the ordering of our thoughts in fears:

1. For God's glory and thy salvation, contemn any danger: It was Christ's
precept, Fear them not who are able to destroy the body only; for they cannot
make thee unhappy, they may add to thy blessedness if thou bear injuries
well. These objects are only terrible (like that Cumane ass in the Lions
skin) to those that know them not (or the Terribilis in fugaces, fugax contra
insequentes, Plin. not. hist. l. 8. cap. 25.
Crocodile, fierce against the fearful, fearful of the daring) or to the
impatient, who cannot stoop to take up the cross, which like Moses rod, thrown
down, became a dreadful serpent; but at God's command, resumed, an harmless
rod, to divide the bitter floods, and open a way into the promised rest: many
men great ^n their own fears, deluding fancy making that monstrous, which
right reason would discover, hurtlesse, in a constant and prudent resolution to
meet with difficulties.

2. Fear God, and Josh. ^. 9.
be not ^aint-hearted: endeavor to set thy mind upon such a stay of
moderation, that thy resolution neither rise to temerity, nor fall to timidity,
neither to dare, nor to be afraid of all things, nor of nothing; but between
both, bear such a temper, as that wisdom may have place to sit at the helm
witho^t the interruption of either extreme. Isai. 8. 13.
Sanctify the Lord of hosts, and let him be your fear, and your dread, and
he shall be your Sanctuary: but fear not their fear who say, a confederacy.
The Timor praesens securitatem generat a ternam, etc. Aug^in Psalm.
present fear of God creates us an eternal security: fear him and thou shall
not be afraid of man: though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death, I
will fear none evil, for thou art with me, Psalm 23. 4. Psalm. 118. 6.
The Lord is on my side, I will not fear, etc. Psalm. 71. 1. The fear of the
Lord (like Moses serpent, devoureth all the inchanters serpents) swalloweth up
all other fears.

3. In every danger lay to heart the omnipotency of God, and learn to trust in
him: he that so does, Prove. 29. 25
shall be safe: when the fiery furnace was threatened Dan. 3. 1^*
Shadrah, Meshach, and Abednego, they answered the incensed King, Our God whom
we serve is able to deliver us: Psalm. 34. 7.
his Angels pitch round about his, to deliver them; and when we seem most
overmatcht, 2 King. 6. 16
they are more with us then can be against us, as that fearful servant saw at
last. It made David so confident, Psalm. 11. 1.
In the Lord put I my trust, how say ye then to my soul, Flee, as a bird to
your mountain? all confidence in men, their counsels, or an arm of flesh, is
unhappy, and must fail, (being Ier. 17. 5.
under the curse) God cannot, si fractus illabatur orbis: therefore Psalm. 46. 2.
will we not fear, though the earth be removed: and though the mountains be
carried into the midst of the sea.

4. Hearken unto the Word of God: Pro. 1. 33.
whosoever hearkneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of
evil -- Pro. 3. 21, 24
thou shall walk in the way safely -- when thou lie down thou shall not be
afraid herein thou shall know God's power, truth, providence, mercy and
justice; and so trust in him, as it is written, Psalm. 9. 10.
They that know thy name, will put their trust in thee, for thou, Lord, have
not forsaken them that seek thee.

5. Love the Lord sincerely: the more thou love him, the more thou will rest
assured of his love and protection: the more perfect thy love is, the 1 John 4.
18.
more it casts out fear.

6. See lob 22, 23, etc, Pro. 3. 7.
Depart from evil: as 1 Samuel 29. 4
the Princes of the Philistines said of David, Let him not go down with us to
the battle, le^t in the battle he be an adversary to us. Set thy self to seek
the Lord, as 2 Chr. 20. 3.
Jehoshaphat did, when many enemies were upon the march against him, and
atcheived a glorious victory against them. Keep a good conscience, it shall be
a wall of brass unto thee: when that is safe, a man is bold Prove. 28. 1.
as a lion: but if we see the smoke of hell ascend there, we must needs faint,
like the men of Josh. 8. 20.
Ai, when they saw their City on fire. Sin in the conscience makes men
cowardly: they may possibly speak glorious words, who have timorous
consciences, but as one said, of the fearful dog, Q. Curt. I.^
vehementius latrat quam mordet: he must needs fear, who has no peace in
himself.

7. Consider the Psalm. 37. 37.
end of the ^aints sufferings which has ever been happy, in that they are the
more Rom 8. 17. 2 Cor. 1. 7.
partakers of Christ's glory, by how much more of his sufferings: consider how
long they have suffered, or thou can: fear none of those things which thou
shall suffer, Rev. 2. 10.
Behold the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried --
be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the Pericula despicit
qui tendit ad regnum: victoriae cupidus, nescit timere, Petr. Chrysol. sermon. 22.
crown of life. It is true flesh and blood must have it allowance for its
infirmity, but the more we can lay to heart the end of the saints, (so happy
that Number. 23. 10
even the wicked affect it) and the quiet fruits of Heb. 12. 11*
righteousness, to them that are exercised; the less we must needs fear the
malice of any creature.

8. Labor for peace with God: give him no rest till he speak it to thy
conscience: resolve not to let him go until he bless thee, and assure thee of
thy remission in Christ. What has he to fear whose sins are forgiven? the 1
Cor. 15. 56*
sting of death p^lled out, who would not dare it? therefore the Apostle did,
because he could say, Thanks be unto God who gives us victory through Jesus
Christ: this is 1 Ioh. 5. 4.
Faith's victory over the world.

9. In thy greatest fears pray more fervently: Luke 22. 44.
so did our Savior being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly: so did Genesis
32. 9.
Jacob in fear of his brothers long-studied revenge: pray that God would open
thine eyes to see his saving health. God many times terrifieth, to awaken our
drouzie souls, and open our mouths to earnest prayer, which in prosperity are
too prone to the spirit of slumber and coldness: fear has many tongues, and
can open the mouth of the dumb. Even Jonah 1. 6.
Jonah's mariners, in their fear will pray, and instigate others thereto: that
one example of In vocem erupit vi timoris, etc. Solm. Polyh. cap. 7.
Croesus son, Athis (before dumb) crying out, O Cyrus spare my father, and by
our misfortunes learn that thou also art but a man; shows what the violence
of fear can do.

A Prayer against Fear.
O Lord God almighty, dreadful in thy wrath and indignation against sinners, I
humbly acknowledge, that there is not one of thy judgments which I may not
reasonably fear, who have deserved them all; the miseries of this life, terrors
of death, and future condemnation: But, O Lord God of consolation, assure me
of my sins remission, and my peace with thee for Christ Jesus sake: fill my
heart and affections with that measure of thy love which may exclude all
servile fear: give me the testimony of a good conscience to comfort me
against all vain fears of the wicked: lift up the light of thy countenance upon
me, and assure me that thou (who rulest in heaven and earth, from the Angel to
the worm) art my defense and help at hand. Thou art omnipotent, and can do
what thou will; Lord, let it be thy will to deliver me from the affliction
which I fear, that I may live to praise the, and declare thy goodness toward
me: if it be possible let this cup pass from me; if otherwise, thy holy will
be done: Lord suffer me not for any trials to fail from thee: consider my
weakness, remember whereof thou have made me, that I am but dust and earth,
soon passing away: give me patience to endure thy fatherly hand, and full
assurance that all things shall work together for the best: give me fervency of
spirit to pray more earnestly, give me that ^aith to which thou, who can not
deceive, have made the promise of audience, and granting our petitions. Give
me an invincible resolution, not to let thee go until thou blessest me with
some happy issue, through Jesus Christ my Lord and only Savior.

Amen.
Of Cares.
CAre is the child of Providence: some say, III. Cares.
the souls apparitor to summon all it is faculties to it is Senate, or In
comitium cogitationum
Committee: it is rather counsels president, determining what to pursue, and
what to decline; the weight which moves all it is wheels; that taken off, or
quite run down, all the nerves of providence are loosed, and the souls
faculties become inactive, and resty; so as we neither affect the good, nor
fear the evil. Care is the sentinel which gives the alarm to awaken wisdom
to it is offices; the steward of the inward house: the Palinurus and pilot which
sits at the helm, to steer and direct the course; lest industry be wanting
to prudent decrees, and resolutions or success to industry: so necessary is
this vigilance of the soul, that without it, we can neither be profitable to
our selves, or others, in things divine or humane: though salvation shall
neither be in his care who Romans 9. 16.
wills, nor his that runs, but in him that shows mercy; yet if thou care
not to lay hold on his promises, and to believe and obey: thou shall find,
that he that made thee without thy care, will not save thee without it: because
he has made thee a voluntary agent, endued with reason, that thou might use
his ordinance for thy good: though it is neither in him that 1 Cor. 3. 7.
planteth, nor in him that waters, but in God who gives the increase; yet if
the dispensation be committed to thee, woe be to thee if thou preach not the
Gospel: and cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently: though,
if the Lord keep not the city, and Psalm. 127. 1.
build the house, the watchman waketh but in vain, and the builder shall work
to confusion; yet if thou be a careless man of Judges 18. 7
Laish; if thou watch not, or in necessity build not, thou temptest God: it is
the power of that divine and omnipotent word, which said at the first, Genesis 1.
11.
Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree
yielding fruit after his kind, which to this day causes these things so to
do; but ^xcept thou plant and sow, thou shall not eat: neither has God set
this care in our hearts for our selves only, but also for them to whom he has
given dependence on us: so that if any man 2 These. 3. 10
will not work, let him not eat; and 1 Timothy 5. 8.
if he provide not for his own, he has denied the faith, and is worse then an
infidel. It is an admirable care which God has implanted in the hearts of
mothers, for the preservation of their children, in which 1. Tim 2. 15
they shall be saved, if they continue in the faith and charity. Neither is
there any calling or person, among the sons of men, exempt from care: Kings, as
the honored parents of Republics, have care of the largest size, like those
Ex. 8. 3, etc.
Egyptian plagues, not forbearing their sacred beds: they must care for their
sub^ects weal: it is a mark of shame and dishonor which the holy Ghost set
on Gallio -- Act. 18. 17*
but Gallio cared for none of these things: Ioh 19. 2.
Christ suffering for us, bare their emblem in his crown of thorns: nor can
the bruites subsist without their care: God has given them a mavelous
instinct, and natural sagacity, to build, lay up and provide for themselves
and their young: so that Pro. 6. 6.
the sluggard may well be sent to school to the industrious ant, laboring in
summer against the winter; and the careless daughters (who think they were
born to live at ease) to the Pro. 3. 25. provident
be, Isa. 32. 9, etc.
and other creatures prudent in their kinds.

2. There must be care; and there is, in the best: but the malicious enemy (as
in the most necessary faculties and affections of the soul) striveth to
pervert it to man's destruction, making some so drunken with desire of ease,
that they sleep careless: and where he meets with a more active and
industrious nature, he labors to obtrude some vain or impious object of
cares: in both, distracting from that which should make them happy. The misery
of beguiled men is, ^hen their cares (like the river Jordan) empty their sweet
streams into a dead sea of unprofitable desires and acquests. There is no sin
which has not some unhappy cares to compass and foment it: commonly more then
salvation requires. Impious cares are revenge's brokers, lust's panders,
avarice's vassals, errour's nurces, mothers of sin, vice's handmaids, in all
which they but fight for a destructive Helena, a mischievous gain: how happy
might adulterers, murderers, and robbers be, with so much adventure, vigilance,
charge, and care bestowed on God's service, as they place in their sins:
taking more care and pains to go to hell, then, by God's mercy, would bring
them to heaven.

3. Therefore for the ordering the thoughts concerning cares, these like rules
must necessarily be held:

1. Matthew. 6. 35
Seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, that all things
necessary may be administered unto thee: let thy main care be for God's glory
and thy salvation; to gain that one Luke 10. (...).
necessary thing, which once had, shall never be taken away or lost. Martha's
many incumberances must be subordinate hereto: this is treasure in heaven,
neither in danger of thieves or moth. That same -- virtus post nummos.
hysteron proteron wherein worldly desires come like those unmanerly imps in 1 Samuel 2. 6.
Elies discomposed time, claiming to be served before God; must come to naught;
and it proves but lost Psalm. 127. 2.
labor to rise early, late take rest, and eat the bread of carfulness: see
Hag. 1. 4, etc. That Manna which was Exodus 16. 20, 24.
kept all night, except only for the sabbath, corrupted: all our labor to lay
up, except for salvation Heb 4. 9.
the eternal sabbath) is but lost: first therefore John 6. 27.
labor for the meat which endures unto everlasting life.

2. Colos. 3. 2.
Set your affections on things above: and learn an holy Incuria solicitudinis
relaxatae* non negligentiae, sed fidei est, Hill. in Matthew.
contempt of this world: it is love which makes us care: where that is, there
our cares and our minds will be fixed. It Is an high wisdom to cut off vain
cares, that our better placed care may be more fruitful: and to thrust out
worldly thoughts: (as Christ did the tumultuous company at Mark 5. 40.
Jairus house) which otherwise like those guests at Luke 2. 7.
Bethleem would leave him no room: as the superfluity of branches prunyd off,
the vine is recompensed in the fruit: so is the cutting off vain cares; the
more thou take from them, the more fruitful shall thy soul be of better
things: as when 2 King. 2* 1^
Eliah was taken up to heaven, his mantle fell off; so does the care of this
world, when our hearts are taken up to heavenly things. How may childish
things, like dead leaves, near the fruitful autumn, fall off our minds, when
we write men? and when that which is perfect is come, how easily do our worldly
cares wither and fall away; or like glowwormes beguiling luster, vanish at the
appearing of a cl^erer light?

3. Psalm 37 5.
Trust in the Lord, and commit thy way to him, and he will bring it to pass. 1
Pet. 5 7.
Cast thy care upon him, he cares for thee, and has promised Hell ^ 13 5.
he will not fail thee nor forsake thee: Jer. 17 7. quam securus dormit --
quam nes^it curas -- quam deponit angores -- qui sua patri servanda committit,
Pet Chrysol. s. 7.
Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is: for
he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and shall not be careful in the
year of drought. God's providence watching over his, can neither err, nor be
defeated: he that gave us life will not fail to give meat and clothing.
Matthew. 6. 26
He that feeds the fowls of the air, and clothes the fading-flowers, with
such varieties of beauty, will not ^aile to ^eed and cloth man, for whom he
made all those things. Matthew 6. 8.
He knows whereof we have need before we ask: all our car cannot add one
cubit to our stature: riches and honors for which men take such care, come
neither from the East, nor from the West: it is God which gives and takes
away: some grow rich sleeping and waking; others with unwearied industry grow
poor: do thy endeavor cheer^ully, and Matthew. 6. 25, 26, etc.
commit the issue to God: Luke 21. 34
avoid all diffidence and distracting care.

4. In Phil 4. 11.
whatsoever state thou art, learn therewith to be content: discontent and
covetous desire set the heart upon the sharp tenters of care: if a man can be
content with little, he will not care for much: cares follow riches, and
Crescentem sequitur cura pecuniam, Horat. 3. ca^. 6
increase with their increases.

5. Watch over thy soul; otherwise Mat. 13. 22.
cares will choke up the holy seed of God's word, so that it shall never profit
thee. It will dim the light of heavenly knowledge: it will surcharge the
heart, and creep on like an Ephial^, which having seized us, we groan under it,
and can neither shake it off, nor awake to an holy expectation of the coming of
Christ.

6. Often call to mind thy mortality, frailty of life, and vanity of all these
things: what are riches and magnificence in this world? like (...).
Aristophanes.
bubbles filled with air, which vanish in their breaking; such are we, like
dreams, or like a scene, wherein our parts once acted, we must back into
natures tyring house, never to return: it is uncertain what hour shall be our
last; certainly one near at hand must: it may be this night the sentence may
come forth, and a writ of alienation on thy store laid up for many years: Luke
12. 20.
Thou fool, this night they shall take away thy soul, then whose shall all
these things be? When the over-full hives warn the masters of their admirable
republic, that they need a deduction of a colony, they swarm, and fly: but
if you cast a little dust among them, they presently settle: the only way to
settle our swarms of busy cares, is the thought of that word, Genesis 3 19.
Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return: that, (if any thing) will make
ambition and vain cares let fall their wings.

7. The Apostle's rule is: Phil. 4. 6*
Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and supplication -- let
your requests be made known unto God: happy wants and cares which drive us to
him. Depend on him and hope; he is a secure Sen. ep. 12.
possessour of himself, who without care expects to morrow.

The Prayer.
O Most gracious and merciful Lord God; who feedest the young ravens, clothest
the lilies, fillest all things with thy goodness, governest in heaven and in
earth, giving to every creature subsistence and preservation in its kind: I
humbly acknowledge thy goodness toward me, even from my mothers womb unto
this present, preserving me and providing for me, when I neither knew what
humane necessities were, nor which way to relieve them: when I slept thou
preservedst me; when I foresaw not evils coming, thou divertedst them: when I
knew not what I had need of, thy mercies prevented me with blessings and
provisions: when I was lost, thou foundst me: when dead in trespasses and
sins, thou did quicken me by thy grace* when I knew nothing of the way to
life, thou enformedst me, and did lead me in the way therein: yea, before I
was, thou gave thy son Christ, the inestimable price of my redemption. Lord,
I am less then the least of thy mercies, what shall I render thee? what can I
for all thy mercies? Thou have, not once, like the good Samaritane, but many
times, as a God of infinite mercy, bound up my souls wounds, and taken care of
me: what shall I render thee? Lord, I have nothing but a thank^full heart, nor
that, except thou had given it: Lord, let me render, who can give? accept
thine own gifts, and make me more and more thankful to thee: the lions
want, Ezekiel. 39. 6. Zeph* 2* 15.
the mighty suffer hunger: thou have sent a fire among them that live at ease,
and carelessly, even into the proud and rejoicing cities; and what am I, O Lord,
that thou please to spare me: that thou do not still ^eed me with th
bread of affliction, and bitter carfulness, neither make me drink the waters
of astonishment: Lord fix my hopes on thy providence: give me assurance that
thy mercy shall never fail me: I humbly cast my cares on thee, who art a
protector of thy children: prosper thou my labors, whose providence
descends to the preservation of the poorest and meanest of all thy creatures:
feed me with bread of my stature, let me never want that which thou know
needful for me: thou who did increase the Sareptan's oil and meal, so
that it failed not in all the famine, bless that portion which thy providence
has measured out to me and mine* let thy blessing be upon it, whether it be
much or little, that finding a sufficiency therein, I may in a thankful holy
and prudent use thereof, glorify thy holy name, and live contentedly and
cheerfully before thee: give me in every estate, prosperous and adverse, a
faithful dependence on thy gracious providence, which never fails them that
trust in thee: thou best know, O Lord, what I have need of, before I ask;
let no cares of this life distract me from thy service, neither make my
confidence in thee decline to any distrust of thy goodness, love of the
present world, or secure placing my heart thereon: thou have given thy holy son
Jesus, assure me by his infallible spirit, that with him thou thy wilt also
give me all things: give me an heart to rest in thee, to put all my trust and
confidence in thy mercy; to seek thy kingdom and the righteousness thereof,
before all things which this world can give or take away: so that thou who
providest for me, may be pleased to administer to me all those things, which
thou will bless unto me, for the relief of this life's present necessities,
until, having passed through this world of cares, and veil of miseries, I may
come to that blessed life, thy kingdom of glory, through Jesus Christ, our
Lord and only Savior. Amen.

1. Among those thoughts which discompose the mind,. IV.
the jealous Jealousy.
are not the least: Prove. 6. 34.
Jealousy is the rage of a man; and that which commonly exasperates to
implacable anger. He will not regard any ransom, neither will he rest content,
though thou give many gifts.

^. I speak not here of jealousy, as it is attributed to God, and sometimes
imports anger, Ezekiel. 8. 3. Ezekiel. 16. 42. sometimes execution of Justice,
Deuteronomy. 29. 20. sometimes indignation Ezekiel. 39. 25 Zelotypid laborant erga vos,
Sir. Int.
at that which hurts those he loves, Zack. 1. 14. or pity to his people,
Joel 2. 18, 19. nor as in man, signifying only envy and emulation, as Romans 10.
19. Romans 11. 11. or fear of danger to those we love, as 2 Cor. 11. 2. or
ambition to exclude corri^als for sinister ends, such as Paul charged on the
false (...), Gal. 4. 17.
Apostles among the Galati^ns: nor of suspicion, which is an opinion or fear
of some evil, sprung from light signs, which sometimes sets friends at a
great distance, and embittereth the societies of men: but of that concerning
which God gave a law to Israel, Numb. 5. 14, etc. This is a perturbation of
mind, compounded of fear, Th. Aquin. 12. q. ^8. a. 4. ^.
love, indignation, and suspect; a bitter electuary of ingredients, by
themselves so good in their several uses: this Jealousy is the male^ice of
unhappy love; the gall of Wedlock: the sad Asmodeus, which makes the most
flourishing Families loathsome, if not desolate: the dark apparition of
disturbed thoughts, restless in the inquest after that which they most hate,
and fear to find: the souls absynthium, and overflowing bitterness: the
scourge and torture of afflicted minds; really tormenting, sometimes with
imaginary evils, ever with vain: the devils masterpiece, and quintessence of
his enyy, to make the honorable, and (otherwise) happy estate of matrimony,
which God appointed to be the greatest worldly comfort, the most odious and
unhappy. Possibly therefore it may be called Number. 5. 30
the spirit of Jealousy, a worse never vexed mortal man.

3. Now whereas the Drama in this unhappy scene is of two persons at least, the
rules of advice in this case, must at least have a double address: first to
the jealous, man or woman*

1. Make not another sin thine, by a foolish and impious connivance at the
basest sin. He that 1 Cor. 7. 12
inhibiteth divorce in any other cause Mat. 19 9.
permits it in the cause of adultery: and the Law said (when the jealous
man shall have set his wife before the Lord, and justice shall be executed upon
her) Number 5. 31.
then shall the man be guiltless from iniquity, and the woman shall bear her
iniquity.

2. Be not rash, least thou be injurious to the innocent; It is an innate
corruption to intend others faults, rather then their virtues, and to think
that evil is, which may be done: hence comes it, that they who are Omnis homo
ex se aestimat alterum^ Ch^y. S. Matthew.
evil themselves, are commonly most jealous of others: he that looks through
a yellow glass, thinks all the world of that color: Consider well if it be
not thine own guiltiness which is the false medium, casting that complexion
on others, which is indeed in thy self, not in them.

3. Give not place to the devil: his malice is like those envious Philistims,
to cast dirt into the pure fountains of humane propagation: to make man and
wife jealous of each other, that by this venom he may cause dislike and
loathing there, where God has appointed the most strict and comfortable unity
in the world. Sometimes he will aggravate the least suspicions to make the man
or wife mad with reason: rather then fail, he will suggest some dream of that
which never was: sometimes he will tempt the woman or man to meetings,
whisperings, or some such ^ame behavior and familiarity with others, as may
unhappily create suspicion in the good and prudent: neither shall he want the
service of others mischievous tongues, to foment and feed this malignant humor:
he that said matrimony might be happy if the wife were blind, and the man
deaf; either did or might mean, if the wife had not wandering ^ies, nor the
husband open ears to malicious reports.

4. Consider the vanity of this evil: be wise, and know that all self-vexing
is folly; Omnis stu^titia labor at fast^^io sui, Sen. ep. 9.
as all folly is self-vexing. If with all thy care thou could do any more
then torment thy self, there were some color for thy vexing thy self
herewith: but none nec custo^ire ni velit ulla p^test.
can be chaste, except she will: the Heathens knew this: Argus hundred eyes
cannot keep her safe who will be lost.

5. If thy jealousy be causeless, what have thou more to fear or vex at,
except the levity and vanity of thine own mind? if just, what have thou to
hate or malice? assure thy self the adulteress is unhappy enough: there is no
creature on ear^h more despicable and odious; nor is there any sin in this
life followed with so many varieties of plagues and judgments: so that they
are great objects of pity, if all this, a wounded conscience, the devil's
^arnest to the impenitent, and assurance of hell and damnation, can make them
so.

The second address must be to them who are suspected.

1. Consider the odiousness of ad^ltery, out of all measure sinful in the
man, who thereby sins against his own body, defiles 1 Cor. 6. 18, 19.
the temple of the holy Ghost, strikes through his Pro. 7. 23.
own bowels, with a dart of rottenness, and that which shall make him mourn in
his end. Beyond all this, in case of impenitency, (which the wilful presumer
may justly suspect) it is that whereby he barreth himself 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10.
from the kingdom of heaven; there are yet some aggravations in the adulteress
crime; hereby robbing her husband of his prosperity, obtruding a base and
adulterous issue, and so stealing away his estate and inheritance, by giving it
to a stranger; setting on an indelible character of dishonor and bastardy upon
her child, who but for her impotent and ungoverned lust, might have been
noble; an injury which she can never expiate, nor impair to the innocuous
son, with rivers of tears, and streams of her infected blood: this multiplied
sin is sometimes concealed from men, but never from an all-seeing God, who is
a severe revenger of all injury. Other sins are grievous, yet neither lying,
stealing, idolatry, murder, nor witchcraft, can of it self dissolve the
sacred bond of wedlock; that, only adultery does: therefore no cause of (...)
is admitted by Christ, but it And it is to be noted, that when God would set
out the loathsomeness of idolatry, which most di^pleaseth him, he calls it
whoredom, and him^el^ a jealous ^od. And certainly though there be not now in
use the Nam. 5. 18, etc.
bitter water, can (...) the curse and rotting of the thigh with swelling,
ensuing that antiquated ceremony, yet the bitter moral and substance is still
the same.

2. Avoid all that which you know has created you suspicion: otherwise you are
guilty, if not of adultery, yet of a just cause of jealousy. Lysander punished
one of his soldiers for going out of his quarter, resolving that he would
have none of his look, or go out like a plunderer. Genesis 34. 1. 2, etc
^inah's idle visits, proved her dishonor, effusion of guiltless blood, her
fathers trouble, and her ^en* 49. 7
brothers curse. The wisest of men records it as the mark of an harlot, P ^.
7. 11, etc.
her feet abide not in the house: now she is without, now in the streets,
lying in wait at every corner. It was an Italian severity in Sulpitius, (and a
disposition to part with his wife) who divorced her for going out of doors
bare-headed: the Law (said he) confined thee to mine eyes, and approbation,
not to please others. Habes spectare quod Cecina Sev^rus graviter Senatui
impressit, Matrona sincstola in publico, denique. ^. entuli* etc. pro stupro
erat poena etc. T^rt. de pall. cap 4. ^ 17 3* 4, 7.
The Roman Law noted any, going out unvailed, with the odious brand of
adultery: so careful were they to avoid all occasions of that sin, or
suspicion thereof: however foolishly strict they were, I am sure Jerome's rule,
fore-noted, is good: whatsoever (says he) may probably be feigned, be thou
cautious that it may not be feigned: thou owe this to thy husbands love,
thine own indemnity and honor, and the right and credit of thy children.

A Prayer for the sanctification of our Thoughts.
O Eternal and almighty God, Father of lights, and of the firstborn which are
written in heaven, the spirits of just and perfect men; searcher of hearts and
reins, to whose allseeing eye every creature is manifest, every thought of the
heart naked and open: we humbly pray thee to take from us our stony hearts,
and to give us hearts of flesh; to subdue in us by thy omnipotent spirit, the
miserable remainders of the first Adam, that native inclination to sin, which
continually carries us away captive to the laws thereof, to that evil which
we would not do, which we loath, abhor, and in bitterness of soul repent
us of. Lord, create clean hearts in us, renew right spirits, enlighten our
understandings with a sound knowledge of all the mysteries of eternal life and
salvation: sanctify our wills and affections, and according to thine own
gracious promise, put thy Law in our inward parts, and write it in our hearts,
that we may know thee, from the least to the greatest: forgive our iniquity,
and remember our sin no more. O Lord, who did by thy Word, so heal the
fountains, so that death and barrenness was no more therein; heal, we
humbly entreat thee, the wretched corruptions of our hearts, cleanse and
sanctify all the thoughts thereof by the sweet and blessed influence of thy
holy Spirit, so guiding, governing and directing us in the way which thou
would have us walk in, as that we may in all our thoughts, words, and
actions be acceptable to thee: mortify and subdue all our evil desires and
thoughts, subject them all to thy holy will and pleasure, that we may
constantly resist all temptations to sin and wickedness. Keep us and
counsel us in all our affairs spiritual and temporal, that we may be filled
with the holy fruits of the spirit of sanctification, appearing in new and
hollowed thoughts of words and actions, to thy glory, and our further assurance
before thee: so that in our bodies and in our spirits, we may be kept
blameless in this sinful and miserable world, unto the appearing of our Lord
Jesus Christ: To him with thee, O Father of mercy, and the holy Spirit, the
Comforter of the Elect, be ^rendred all hon^r and glory, in heaven and in
earth, from this time forth and to all eternity.

Amen.
CHAP. XXI.
Concerning the guidance of the Tongue.. 1. Of the excellent use, al use, and
evils of the Tongue, concluding the necessity of a right guidance thereof.. 2.
Motives thereto.. 3. Rules by which it may be done.

1. THe use of the Tongue, and speaking,. I.
is a singular gift of God to man, whom he furnished herewith, that he might
communicate that inward and secret light of reason which he created in the
soul, and the divine motions, which by his holy Spirit he infuseth into the
same speech, as reason, is peculiar to man of all earthly creatures: It is the
Imago animisermo, etc.
souls image, and (...) Clem. Alex. Paed. l. 2 ^. 5.
interpreter; neither could one soul, shut up within the houses of clay, other
ways convey its notions into another soul, or enterchange thoughts with
another: hereby we declare the counsel of God for our salvation in Christ:
hereby we bless God, comfort and edify one another: hereby we instruct,
direct, ask and give counsel: it were too long to reckon all.

2. As Satan has been malicious to poison the fountain of words, and actions
(the heart) so has he to corrupt the speech: perverting, that to God's
dishonor, overthrow of religion and sanctity, and embittering of humane
society, by that which God ordained for the advancement of that, and comfort of
this: God appointed the tongue for a main agent for his Kingdom; but the enemy
usurpeth it, for the building up of his: nor is there any ^acultie of man,
spiritual or corporeal, by which he more effects it: there is no sin which
he promoteth not hereby: the evil tongue is lusts bawd, heresies disperser,
(...) factor, impostures agent, sins soliciter general, ready to advance
(...), Basil in Psalm. 33.
any mischief. Art thou angry? thy tongue (...), Ibid.
runs to Prima enim sen^er (...) tela, maledicta sunt: and quicquid non
possumus imbecilli, optamus irati. Salv. de Gub. Dei, l. 3.
usher in murder, calumny, slander, pro^anations: what mischief can we think
of (turp^^oquie, per^ury, blasphemy, lying, any sin) wherein the tongue is
not a ready advocate and procurer.

3. The holy Ghost intimat^th the variable mischiefs of the tongue; under the
several characters wherewith he brandeth the Psalm 5. 9. Prove. 26 28.
flattering tongue, the Psalm. 10. 7. Psalm 50. 19. and 52. 2, 4 Job. 20. 12.
Micah 6, 1^.
deceitful, the 1 Timothy 38.
double, the Psalm 73. 9. Job 19 2. Ier 9. 3. 8.
censuring, vexing, Psalm. 140. 3.
bitter, Psalm. 15 3. Psalm. 109 2.
backbiting, railing, slandering, lying, Pro. 17 20. and 10. 31.
perverse, Ho^. 7. 16.
raging, Iam 3. 6* etc.
scandalous, busy, obscene, and profane tongues: these are the devils organs,
lusts bellows, adulteries brokers, the troublesome mischief of humane
societies, going through the world, meddling with and censuring every man: this
is the Epidemick evil, so bitter, as that none can well avoid it, nor
patiently endure it. It is a fire, a world of iniquity; it defiles the whole
body, and sets on fire the whole course of nature, being it self set on
fi^e of hell: it is a little but unruly* untamed member, full of deadly poison.

4. These being the diseases of the sinne-infected tongue, followed with many
severe judgments; the necessity of a better and more holy guidance thereof
appears: which being neglected, is the cause of all that evil, which these
worst times complain of. What mischief is done, which is not begun and
fomented by the evil tongue? as it is written: Psalm. 41. 6.
his heart gathers iniquity to it self, when he goes abroad he tells
it. So one Psalm. 64. 5.
encourages another, or tempts to a mischievous consent in that which is
dishonor to God, disadvantage to humane society, and destruction to themselves.

That therefore every one may address himself to some means of a through
reformation herein;. II.
it is behovefull that we seriously weigh these ensuing motives to a matter of
r^high conc^^^ment.

1. Pro 21 23.
Who so keeps his mouth and his tongue, keeps his soul from troubles. The
inconsiderate man is Pro 6 2.
snared and taken with the words of his own mouth. He that 1 Pet. 3. 10. Psalm.
34. 12, 13.
loves life, and would see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil,
and his lips that they speak no guile. Eccl. 28 18.
Many (says the wise man) have fallen by the edge of the sword, but not so
many as have fallen by the tongue. How happy had it been for many a man to have
been dumb? some think it a glorious liberty to speak what they list, to
exercise their Caninam facundiam, etc. Lact. l. 6 c. 18.
dogged eloquence; barking at all that passes by them, snapping at every
thing: but so shall they make Psalm. 64 8.
their own tongues to fall upon themselves: therefore the wise man says,
Eccl. 22. 27.
Who shall set a watch before my mouth, and a seal of wisdom upon my lips,
that I fall not suddenly by them, and that my tongue destroy me not? for Eccl.
10. 12.
the lips of a fool will swallow up himself: Pro 18. 21.
death and life are in the power of the tongue. For (says our Savior) Mat.
12. 37.
by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned.

2. If a man Iam. 3. 2.
offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able to bridle the whole
body: but if any among you Iam. 1. 26.
seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own
heart, this man's religion is vain.

3. Men shall give an Mat. 12. 36.
account at the day of judgment of every idle word, how much more of malicious
and impious words? there is not a word in thy tongue, but God hears it.

Therefore for the better guidance of thy tongue, observe these and the like
rules.

1. Strive to have an holy and sanctified heart:. III.
out of the abundance thereof the mouth speaks: if that fountain be healed,
death and barrenness shall be no more in the sources of our tongues: if there
be truth, peace, charity, wisdom, temperance, modesty, patience, chastity,
and sanctity there, such will thy discourses be: if the word of God dwell
plentifully there, and the holy spirit have his temple there, accordingly shall
thy discourses be. The reason why we hear so many evil words is, because (what
ever men profess to the contrary) their hearts are unhallowed, atheistical
and corrupt.

2. Use thy self to holy speeches, and let thy words be of the uprightness of
thy heart. The thoughts of the Prove. 15. 26.
wicked are an abomination to the Lord, but the words of the pure are pleasant
words. There are vain and evil thoughts in the best men, eftsoon ari^ing from
the noisome remainder of the old Adam in us, or suggested by the malicoius
tempter, even such as we loath and startle at; but good and wise men smother
and suppress them within, setting, a strong guard upon them, as Jehu did on
Baals Priests, lest any of them should escape out alive to corrupt others:
according to the precept, Ephesians 4 29.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good
to the use of edifying -- Col. 4 6. Nullum ex (...) verbum quod revo^a^e velis
proferas. Amb. de virg. l 3.
seasoned with wisdom and sanctity: Psalm. 35. 28. Psalm 71 24.
My tongue shall speak of righteousness, and of thy praise all the day long,
said holy David: and the Psalm 37. 30* ^sal. 119 172
mouth of the righteous speak^th wisdom -- the law of God is in his heart.

3. Weigh thy words in thy heart, before thou speak, let not thy (...).
tongue out-runne thy mind; that thou may not Diu ante considera quid
loquendum sit, and adhuc ^acens provide, ne quid dixisse poeniteat: verba ^ua
ponderet cogitatio, and linguae ofsicium animae libra dispenset, Hier. 1. 2.
ep. 22.
speak any thing of which thou must repent thee. Let the balance of thy mind
weigh out and give thy tongue his task. A fools aim is only to speak
something, not caring what; as taking silence to be a mark of some impotency of
mind: but he that considers only what he has spoken, not what he ought to
speak, is like him that first shoots, and then takes aim.

The word is in thy power before thou utter it, but once spoken irrevocable:
therefore take heed before thou speak. Sa^iens priusquam loquitur --
considerat, quid dicat, cui dicat, in quo loco and tempore, Amb. (...). l 1.
1. to whom. 2. of whom. 3. what thou speak. Thou must take heed, and set a
watch before the doors of thy lips: foolish men are weak in understanding, and
precipitate in speech: but the hearer must first be considered. Prove. 23. 9.
Speak not in the ears of a fool, said Solomon; no, nor in the ears of a
knave; for as the one will despise, so the other will pervert thy words: David's
rule is necessary, Psalm. 39. 1.
I will keep my mouth with a bridle while the wicked is before me: they lay
wait to entrap thee in thy words: it is therefore an argument of high
indiscretion and folly to open thy mind to any stranger, because thou know
not to whom thou speak. a When thou speak of others, consider their
persons and qualities: speak ill of no man, of whom thou can justly speak
well: God has said, Eccl 10. 20.
Curse not the King -- and Ex. 22. 27.
thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people. The God of order has
set a distance between man and man: it is not only unmannerly but impious, to
speak of Kings, Governers, Parents, Ministers, Masters, or Superiors, as thou
would of thy equal or inferior: and when thou speak of others, it is
wisdom to be careful whom thou commendest, least his faults reflect on thee;
and whom thou censurest, least thou become an accession to injurious
slanderers, and wound thy repute with thine own censure of men better then thy
self. Justice is to give every man his due: there may be something good in the
worst man, (as something evil in the best) some virtue shining in a vicious
life, which we may value as the jewel in the serpents head. It is wisdom to
distinguish in thy praises: as de coniurat. Cati^n. Init.
Salust judged of Aurelia Oristella, of whom (says he) no good man ever
praised any thing, but her beauty. And to Congerere maledicta non crimina,
scurrarumest, etc. Hier. l. ^. ep. 4.
speak much evil of any without eviction of the least crime, demonstrateth thee
a railer, not him guilty whom thou accusest. 3. To weigh thy words well, thou
must lastly consider what thou say; speak not crudities, but let thy mind
well digest what thou would say; speak premeditated things, and thereof only
a discreet choice: it is no small part of wisdom not to speak foolishly: study
to speak aptly; not so much to affected curiosity, as prudently: not as if thou
were to dictate to the press and put all thy words in print; but as resolved
to be wise and honest, and so to express thy self. Eccl. ^ 8* ^ 5.
A fools heart is in his tongue: but a wise man's tongue in his heart. Weigh
thy words in a balance, and make a door and a baire for thy mouth. It is not
in vain that nature (God's ordinary power) has so fenced the tongue, and
(...)* B. ^sil. hom 9.
guarded it with a double set of teeth: a strong fortification, if we can
understand and make use of the moral.

4. Be not hasty to speak: Pro. 29. 20.
See thou a man that is hasty in his words? there is more hope of a fool
then of him. Let a man be J^m 1, 19.
swi^t to hear, and slow to speak: deliberation gives maturity to that thou
would speak: and it is much advantage which a little time to bethink a man's
self, affords him: because the second thoughts are commonly wiser: the errors
of the former appearing by a more prudent examination: therefore the
Philosopher resolved, that to be hasty in speech was (...) -- Bias apud Diog.
La^it. l. ^
indicium insaniae.

5. Either be silent, or be sure to bring forth something better then silence,
specially in passion, that reason may recover it seat again: out of which the
agitations of vehement affections do commonly pr^cipitate it: as Silentli sunt
tuta sidi praemia, Plut. ap.
Caesar said to Athenodorus, there are safe rewards of faithful silence. In a
prudent silence thou concealest thine own infirmities, and better discoverest
other men's: There are some strange volubilities of tongues, whose fountains run
mirth and fancy, rather pretty then prudent: such elegancies are like those red
and blew flowers among the wheat, rather pleasant then profitable: it is no
little skill nor small commendation, to know when to be silent, (Archidamas
rule was good: Plu^. Lycur.
he who can speak well, knows also when to speak) and wherein, certainly it
must be a great advantage to the wise, which makes Pro. 17. 28.
the fool seem wise, and the wise man deep: Therefore whereas other schools of
literature, taught their pupils to speak, discipuli ciu^ (...). Di. La^rt. l.
8. Pythag.
Pythagoras enjoined his scholars silence for a certain time after their
admission, that they might learn what to speak within themselves, before they
made others witnesses of their thoughts: he that knows not how to be silent
(which few Nemo s^ultus tacere potest.
fools do) Tacere qui nescit, nescit loqui.
knows not how to speak. It seems the prudent Zeno took it to be no small
honor to know when to be silent, who (sitting silent at supper with a Kings
Ambassadors, they asking him, but what shall we report of thee to our King?)
replied, Say there is a man in Athens, who can hold his peace at supper. It Is
true, a wide ear, and a close mouth belong unto the wise; though callings and
occasions are herein very considerable; if a pastor fear to warn his auditors
of sin, he becomes Ezekiel. 3. 18. Pastori etenim recta timuisse dicere, qu
dest aliud quam terga ta^endo praebuisse? Greg l. 1, ep. 28.
guilty of their blood who perish therein: their rule is to be Vt and discretus
sit silentio: and utilis in verbo: ne aut tacenda p^^erat, aut proferenda
reticescat: nam sicut incau^a locu io in errorem perirabit, ita indiseretum
silent^^m hos qu^ eruditi po^erant in errore derelinquit, Ibid.
discreet in silence, and profitable in word, that they neither speak things to
be concealed, nor conceal that which should be spoken. Incautious speech
leads men into error, and indiscreet silence leaves them therein. I speak
here of private interests, wherein three things excellently become a man,
wisdom in the mind, modesty in the countenance, and silence in the tongue: it
is a safe abstinence: How often do we (or ought we) to repent of our words; how
seldom of our silence? In passion we are too apt to speak, grief has many
tongues, and it is not easy therein, with ^evit, 10. 3.
A^ron, to hold our peace though very advantageous, which the heathens seemed
to intimate, in placing the image of Angeronia with the mo^th bound up,
Masurius simula^hrum dicit Angeroniae, ore ob^igato atque signato in ara
Volupiae propterea colloca^um, quod quisuos dolores an^ietatesque dissimulant*
perveniant patientiae ^enesicio ad maximam voluptatem, Lud. Viv. com. in Aug de
civit. Dei, l. 4 c 7.
on the altar of Volupia, to show, that they who do prudently conceal their
sorrows and anxieties, by patience, shall attain comfort: it is great wisdom,
neither to take notice of every injury, nor to publish every grief.

6. Let thy words be few and opportune: not as a fools, who -- Ne^ considerat
quid, sed quantum d^cat, Hier. l. ^. ^p. 4*
cares not what, but how much he speaks: speak only that which thou
certainly know, and thereof that which is necessary, and no more. To hear
much, and Non inepte Rhodius ille ad lectorem Praetoris Romani clamantem and
^erotie^tem, Non curo (inquit) tu quid clames, sed is^e quid taceat, Pl. de
ira* coh.
say little, gives credit and weight to that which thou speak, whereas no
man much regards a man prodigal of words: when a long winded Orator had
delivered a tedious embassy to Agis, and demanded what answer he should carry
back, Tell them (said he) that I was as long silent, as you speaking: seldom
does the hearers attention and patience hold out in long discourses: it is
often with them, as with the Philosopher, who said to a railer (insultingly
crying after his tedious reviling him, have I sufficiently curried you, Sir?)
truly no; (...), A^ apud (...). l. 5
for I marked nothing of that you said. It was the wise man's observation, Eccl.
5. 3.
A ^ooles voice is known by multitude of words: and, Pro. 10. 19.
in the multitude of words there wants not sin -- he that Pro, 17. 17.
has knowledge, spares his words. The empty cask sounds lowdest, and he
that worst can, will speak most: certainly because they love to hear
themselves: they cannot reasonably think, that any man willingly yields his
ears to be afflicted with their braying; he that speaks much, lets slip
some things foolishly: a wise man never speaks too much, nor a fool too
little. It were to long too reckon up the several evil proceeds of
talkativenesse: how many mischievous discoveries of secrets come form hence?
How many schisms, factions, contentions? Charila^s, Plut. Lycurg.
One gave it for a reason why Lycurgus gave enough yet but few laws to the
Lacedaemonians, because few laws are sufficient for them who speak little. A
necessary point of consideration in these sad times, wherein most men's ears
have run out into tongues, and that impious liberty has set the world on
fire.

As thy words must be few, so let them be Lest thou hear that which Leonil^s
said to an unseasonable speaker, friend thou speak many good words, but to
little purpose, Plut. Lycurg.
reasonable: that may be well spoken at some time, in some place, on some
occasion, to, or before some persons, or by some man, which wanting these
seasons, becomes unsavory, odious, and dangerous: a word spoken in Prove. 15.
23.
due season, how good is it? It is ever a shame to speak foolishly, and many
times mischievous to speak that which (if seasonably) might be wisely said.
Antonii gladios potuit contemnere si sie omnia dixisset, Juven.
Cicero might have contemned bloody Antonie's sword, had he spoken always as
foolishly as once he did. Let eminent men be ever cautious what they say: the
obscure idiot may with little hazard say any thing: the Autors name stampeth a
deep impresse of good or evil: a Nurnquam Causidici maduerunt nostra pusi^^i
Sanguin^^ Ib.
puny orator seldom stains his desk with blood.

7. Let thy speech be, for matter, modest, not impudent, true and peaceable,
not offensive and giving matter of con^ention and quarrel; savouring of
meekness and humility, not Oration pressa non audax. Sen. ep. 40.
insolent; religious, not profane.

The speech is the minds index, out of whose abundance it flows: and so
obscenity not only bewrays an evil heart, but 1 Cor. 15.
corrupts the hearer; howsoever some are so desperately infected with this
sin, that they have no sense of danger, but count it good wit* and immodest
behavior good breeding, and that it is a shame not to be impudent; yet the
Spirit of God, which cannot err, arrangeth Ephesians. 5. 3, etc
foolish talking and undecent jesting with fornication, and that, with
privation of the kingdom of heaven.

Secondly, let thy words be true: (...). Psalm. 109. a. ^er. 9. 5 ^sai. 59. 3.
the wicked are of lying tongues: now whether it be a pernicious lie, against
faith, charity, or good manners, which advantageth one and hurts others: or a
jesting lie, which is told sola mentiendi libidine, out of a pleasure in lying,
or out of an habitual lability and sliperinesse of tongue, or unfaithfulness
of a bold memory, or a vain ambition to please the hearer: or an officious
lie, which whether it hurt none, or advantage some, to keep, or get money, to
preserve life, or any thing else of a friend; all lying is sin, and hurtful
to the liar at least, who therein is a John 8. 14.
child and imitator of Satan: it is Prove. 6. 7.
one of the things which God hates: the pernicious lic is indeed most
devilish, but sinful is the most excusable of all lies: for we may not do
evil that good may come, nor distrust the Providence of God, as if he could
not provide for his just means: Not only impious, but vain is the lying which
so many think lawful, because gainf^ll: Pro. 21. 6.
for the getting of treasures by a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro
of them that seek death. All lying is condemned by the God of truth, who will
shut liars out of heaven, Psalm. 5. 6. Hos. 4. 2. Exodus 20. 16. Acts 5. 3, 4*
Col. 3 9. ^am. 3 14.
Revel. 21. 15. therefore it behooves thee

1. To have truth in thy inward parts; to set the heart-searching God ever
before thee, and a watch before thy lips; to say nothing before thou have
thoroughly examined the truth thereof: to consider Hos. 4. 2.
God's justice on lya^s, for whose sake he has a controversy with the land:
so that seldom do liars unto the second generation thrive upon the face of the
earth: all the liar says is a building upon quick-sand, and cannot Hac est
vera dementia non cogitare necscire quod ^endacia non diu fallant. Cypr. ep. 3.
long stand to deceive: that it is an odious brand of dishonor, Mendaces faciunt
ut nec vera dicentib^s credatur. Hier. Julian. l. 1. ^p. 2.
insomuch as when he speaks truth, he is not believed, but truth it self
is suspected for his sake.

2. To pray to the God of truth with Agur, Prove. 30. 8. to remove far from
thee vanities and lies.

3. To depend on Gods providence and truth, so, as not to lie for thine own
or any man's sake.

4. To avoid that Athenian fancy of telling news, specially evil, strange, or
incredible.

5. To be no talebearer, Pro. 18. 8. Levit. 19. 16. Pro. 26. 20. Ezekiel. 29. 2.
Pro. 30. 10.

Thirdly, let thy words be peaceable, charitable, not injurious, scurrilous, or
biting: of the absent and the dead speak no evil: the peacemakers are God's
sons, and blessed; what are they who exercise their dogged eloquence, in
railing, backbiting, calumniating, s^andering, defaming, jeering, and abusive
words, to foment sedition and inflame quarrels? Pro. 15. 4.
A wholesome tongue is a tree of life: the Pro 30. 26.
law of kindness is in the tongue of the prudent, and sweetness in the
tongue of the holy, Cant. 4. 11. but a flux of gall is in the froward lips, and
Psalm. 64. 3^ Job 20. 12.
they shoot out bitter words, and venomous speeches. It is extreme folly to
seek revenge by injuring any man, (because herein thou Neque enim qui audit, sed
qui facit convitium miser est: ^um ^ocentes innocentibus in^uriam faciunt: illi
patiu^^ur in^uriam qui facere se eredunt, Cypr. ^p. 3.
most hurtest thy self, thou becoming guilty, and God a party against thee) or
victory, or pacification by foul language: for first, if thou do overcome,
it is but the devils victory, and therefore thy overthrow: and secondly,
besides that, it is the most honorable and divine conquest, which is
accomplished in virtue and sanctity; it is also the soft tongue which breaks
the bone, Prove. 25. 15. and more certainly appeaseth anger and contention, then
the most rough language and sting^e speeches: a provoking tongue cost many a
man his life, as appears in the example of Plutar. vit. Alexand.
Clitus and the like. Where there is lam. 3.
bitter envying and strife, the spirit is earthly, sensual, and devilish: the
heavenly wisdom is peaceable and gentle, and so full of grace, winning comity,
and affability. They that are Gods Children will 1 Pet. 3. 9.
not render evil for evil, or railing for railing, but blessing, being
themselves thereof. Satan's children speak Iud. 8. 9.
evil of all that are good, they spare not sacred dignities. And why do you
rail at any? Say you with Ananias -- Acts 9. 13.
I have heard by many of this man, how much evil he has done -- Why know you
not how Multum in utranique partem crebrd fama montitur, ac tam de bonis mala,
quam de malis bona, ^a'sorumore cencelebrat. Hier. l. 1. ep. 9.
false fanie often is on both sides, condemning the good and justifying the
evil? or you think he is evil whom you revile? First, I say, it belongs to
God alone to judge who is wicked: next, say, look home before thou pronounce,
lest thou condemn thy self: how impious a presumption is it, to intrude Dei
est, n^sse reum, illius far sententiam: ^ace ^mus omnes homines. Optat. cont.
Patmen l. 4.
into Gods tribunal, and to condemn others, thy self being guilty? what an
hazard do thou run in censuring, who Cesset humans suspicio -- quis sit
peccator solus iudicet Deus, ibid -- quid in potestatem alienam irruis? quid
temerarius Dei tribunal ascendis? and cum ipse sis reus, in alterum audes far
sententiam? ib. lib 2.
for ought thou can know, censurest the elect, whom Christ has acquitted?
Suppose they are culpable, who doubts but that the devil was so, yet the Iud.
8. 9.
Archangel durst not charge him with any railing accusation; but only said,
The Lord rebuke thee. A necessary document for these injurious times, wherein
(as the old persecutors used) they put on us the skins of wolves, bears, and
other hateful beasts, that their dogs may be easily incited to fall upon us:
they make us monstrous, that the people may not only wonder at us, but destroy
us. I only say, Pro. 10. 18.
he that utters slander is a fool, which, if thou (that art guilty hereof)
art not too much

1. Seriously consider, with what company God arrangeth thee, 1 Cor. 6. 10. 1
Cor. 5. 11.

2. Think whether thou would be a persecutor or not. Railing at the elect is
such, Gal. 4. 29. Genesis 21. 9. and what difference whether thou Jer. 18. 18.
quid interest an gladio ferias, an lingua percutias? Optat. ^supr l. 2.
smite with the sword, or a killing tongue?

3. Consider thou that revilest another, whether thou could patiently bear
the echo of thine own words: if not, if thou art indeed a Christian, do not
that to another which thou would not have him do to thee, Matthew. 7. 12.

4. Take ^avene aut linguam aut aures habes prurientes, i e. ne aut ipse ali^^
detrah^s, aut alios audias detrahentes, Hieron. l. 2. ep. 14. Nepotiano.
heed of itching tongues or ears; that is, have no pleasure in slandering, or
hearing slanders.

5. Avoid that senseless error of the vulgar; who think Number meapeccata virtutes
tuae sunt? Ibid ep. 3. Sabiniano.
other men's vices are their virtues: and that their reviling others, speaks
them just and holy, though in Nulli detrahas, nec in eo te sanctum pute^, si
caeteros laceres: accusamus saepe quod facimus* and contra nosmeti^sos (...) in
nostr^ (...) invehimur, ibid, ep. 15.
censuring, they commonly inveigh against themselves, and are eloquent against
their own faults; laying their own sins (as the false mother her dead child)
in another bosom.

To those who are exercised under the strife of tongues, I offer these rules:

1. It is a principal artifice of Satan to scandal the saints, that he may
thereby discourage others from imitation of their holiness: specially those
that bear the ark of the covenant, the ministers of Christ, that thereby he
may, through their persons, wound their doctrine: but be not discouraged; this
is thy Quod signum maioris gloriae est? omnes haeretici detestantur, and me
pa^i persequuntur odio, ut qu^s gladiis nequeunt, voto interficiant. Ibid. l.
1. ep. 57
honor and conformity to the Prophets, and Christ whom the wicked persecuted.

2. Look not only on second causes, but consider God's justice: it may be he
bad Shimei curse: have thou not injured others, in unjust suspicions or
censures? have thou been tender of other reputations? if not, know by suffering
the evil thou did, that thou may repent, and repair the injured what
possibly thou can.

3. Make a good use of the railers tongue: live more charily, and avoid all
just occasions of suspicion: the best antidote against Scorpions is made of
Scorpions: the best defense against railing tongues, is for fear of them to
keep innocence, and live uprightly, Vivendum recte, tum propter plurima, tum
his praecipue causis, ut linguas mancipiorum contemnas, Juv.
that thou may contemn base tongues.

4. In every calumny have Ad cor semper proprium recurrendum: ut nullius nos
ibi lingua implicet, ubi conscientia non accusat: quem enim conscientia
defendit, and inter accusationem liber est, Greg* l. 6. ep. 14. and l. 8. ep
95. and l. 9 ep. 39.
recourse to thine own heart: let that be thy sanctuary: in spite of the
devils malice, and all the impious tongues which his spirit moves; he is a
free and happy man whose conscience accuses him not: God will once clear thine
innocence: mean time fear not unjust calumnies: the railer is hated of all men,
and at last his tongue becomes no slander.

Fourthly let thy speech savor of meekness and humility: these are safe
virtues and symptoms of wisdom: the proud insolent boaster is ever odious to
prudent hearers; if not ridiculous: but meekness gains upon the affections,
and so finds rest to our souls. In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of
pride, but the lips of the wise shall preserve them, Prove. 14. 3.

Fifthly, let thy speech be religious and not profane: so shall thy tongue
glorify its creator, and render him the tribute of so excellent a gift
bestowed on thee. I say not that thou should always speak of religion:
there is an holy and religious negotiating, and acting the things of this
world: there is a religious rejoicing and mirth: the holy Patriarchs, Prophets,
and Apostles, did not always speak of God and religion; they had business
also with men, and must necessarily speak thereof* but they did so speak of
those things, as in the presence of God; and so their lives were as a
continual preaching; according to that pattern of Candor and sanctity which we
read in their words and imitable actions: so frame thy life, and words, that
they may be harmless, simple, and holy; habitually, not affected, sincere,
saint-like, not dissembled: Bew^re of profane disputes, vain questions, and
dangerous paradoxes (which any ways endanger the foundation of religion) abuse
of God's sacred Word to jestings, and taking his name in vain; remember him
who says, he will not hold such guiltless. The habit of profane swearing (to
many unhappy tongues) is like a diabeticall passion, wherein oaths fall from
them while they think not on the^: Cursing is the language of reprobates, the
bitterness of a malevolent heart overflowing the tongue: these vices as they
are fearful sins, so dangerous symptoms of an impious soul: loathsome habits,
such as could not become an heathen Mahumetan, why any Christian should think
them grateful, I could never understand.

8. Let thy study be in Gods word, acquaint thee with his oracles, and make
their language familiar to thee; so shall thou find an holy savor in them
beyond all excellency of the tongues of men: and if thou give thine heart
sincerely to obey them, the holy Ghost will derive thence a sweet influence
into thy tongue; and so season thy heart, that all the tempters suggestions
shall be bitter to thee.

9. Lastly, because Prove. 16. 1.
even the answer of the tongue is from the Lord -- Exodus 4. 11.
who made the mouth, pray him to heal thy natural corruptions, to sanctify
thy heart and tongue, and watch thou over thy self, according to all these and
the like rules.

A Prayer.
O Lord God, my helper and guide of my soul, to thee are all the fruits of my
heart and lips, praise and thanksgiving most due: touch thou my tongue with a
coal from thine altar, purge my sins, and take away mine iniquity: thou have
the key of David, which opens, and none can shut; open my lips that my mouth
may show forth thy praise: remove far from me vanities and lies, a deceitful
tongue, bitterness, reviling, injurious, unpeaceable, profane, uncharitable,
and all unhallowed speeches, which may any ways displease thy holy Majesty, or
hurt my neighbor: heal the corrupt fountains of my soul: season them with
true wisdom, and sanctity: cause thy word to dwell ^ le^tifully in me: set a
watch before the doors of my lips, that no corrupt communication may proceed
thence, but that only which may relish of thy good spirit, administer grace
unto the hearers, and give good example unto my brethren, to the advancement of
thy kingdom, and the comfortable assurance of my conscience before thee,
through Jesus Christ, our blessed Lord and Savior.

Amen.
CHAP. XXII.
Of external actions in general.. 1. Whence good Actions are: How requisite:
How regulated?. 2. Rules concerning them.

1. THe Actions of men are the proceed and fruit of their thoughts:. I.
as we owe sanctimony to God, and our consciences within, so do we good
example to our neighbor in things external: as Christ says, Mat. 5. 16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your father which is in heaven.

2. Good actions proceed from sound faith, without which they cannot be good,
nor pleasing to God: for Heb. 11. 6.
whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: faith apprehending Christ to the
justification of our person, makes our works acceptable to him, so far as
they are fruits of regeneration: and uniting us to Christ gives us a capacity
of his spirit sanctifying, and enabling us in some measure to overcome sin,
and do that which is holy in his sight: therefore the Scripture says, Iam. 2.
Show me thy faith by thy works; which yet says also, a man is Rom 3. 28.
Gal. 3. 9, 11.
justified by faith only, without the works of the Law.

3. Though the best of our works cannot justify us before God, (because they
are imperfect) yet are they never severed from true faith: and they are the Via
regninon causa regnandi, Bern.
way to Gods kingdom, though they cannot be the cause of our arrival there:
therefore to the young man's quaere who would be justified by works, Christ
answers, Mat. 19 16.
Keep the Commandments. (thus he convinced him who had not yet learned the
righteousness of faith, which says, Believe, and thou shall be saved) Thereby
showing, that yet he wanted something, who excelled many men in most things,
and therefore must seek salvation in something else; that is, by faith: as also
that the way to heaven is only by sanctity: this is a condition, not the cause
of our salvation: we can never be saved for it, (because our best is
imperfect) nor without it; because we owe our best endeavors to Gods honor.

4. It is not enough to intend, or speak good: Satan is contented either that
men should draw near unto God with their lips, if their hearts he far off; or
that they speak well, if they will do evil. Words at best are but feminine
virtues, works are masculine: of these the spiritual Pharaoh gives charge, to
smother them: but we Cupimus verba in oper^ convertere, and non diceresancta
sed facere. Hi^ron. l. 1. ^p. 34.
desire to convert our words into actions, and Non eloquimur magna sed vivimus.
Minuc. Fell Octav. (...) Just. Mart. ad Graec. cohortat.
not only to speak, but to do holy things.

5. Actions humane, natural, or civil, are no otherways here concerned, then
as they are in order to the moral, and so regulated by the Law, and holy Word
of God, in the affirmative or negative precepts, which is the only rule of all
our moral actions toward God or man: neither example of others, prescription,
universality of consent, nor commands of men, may carry us against the express
word of God: these have place only in those things which Gods law allows,
commands, or leaves arbitrary.

Concerning thy actions in general, these Rules are to be held:

1. Neither propose, nor do any thing evil or unjust,. II.
for any worldly gains, honors, or pleasures: because it is an undeniable
loss, Mat. 16. 26.
to get the world with the loss of thy soul: what can secular honors
advantage thee, when God condemns thee? when all the world cries thee up,
when opinion of the multitude canonizeth thee for a Saint, or applaude thy
actions ( Acts 12. 22, 23.
as the people Herod's speech) for more then humane: Gods Angel may smite thee,
and the worms destroy thee. What are pleasures? in their birth they look
toward a precipitate end; and the change of this scene serves only to
aggravate the misery: Dives heard in hell, Luke 16. 25.
Son remember thou receivedst good things: present remembrances of pleasures
past embittereth the torments.

2. Make God's Law thy counselors in all things: weigh all thy purposes
hereby, before thou ^ut any thing in execution, resolving to do nothing but
that, which is there permitted or agrees thereto. David could not enterprise
before he had consulted God's oracles: not the very ^eathens but would send for
the doubtful Effataes of their priests. When the word of God is our rule, we
will not set up strange gods in our hearts, as they do, who adore their own
inventions, in will worship, and voluntary religion; wherein all, even the most
zealous and painful actions, as pilgrimages, superstitious fasts, foolish
penance, and idolatrous oblations, or costly dedications, shall be rejected,
with a Isai. 1.
Who required this at your hands? The Lord will not be pleased with thousands
of rams, or ten thousand rivers of oil: for (says the Prophet) Mich. 6, 7, 8
he has showed thee O man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee.
In religious acts (as we have noted) God left not Israel to their own wills
in the least things, but commanded, Heb. 8. 5.
See thou make all things according to the pattern showed thee in the mount.
Also when God's word is our rule, we will neither lay snares upon our own
consciences, placing religion in those things which God has left indifferent,
(as they who 1 Timothy 4. 3.
prohibited certain meats, or marriage --) nor will we dispense with that
word in any one point; for, by any humane authority pretended, or pressed to
the contrary.

3. In all thy actions and designs before thou enterprise, CHAP I.. 1.
duly and seriously consider the end thereof; that is, (as we have noted)
like the rudder in the ship, though i^ come last, it directs Proram puppimque.
first and last: look before thee, and consider what must be the end: Deuteronomy 32.
29
O that they were wise (says the Lord) that they understood this, that they
would consider their later end: so shall thou at once and ever conclude of all
sinful actions with the Apostle -- Rom 6. 21.
The end of those things is death.

4. In all thy actions set thy self ever in the presence of God: so did David
profess, Psalm. 16. 8. ever remember that thou art in his sight, and that
nothing thou do or think can be hid from him: neither solitude nor
darkness can veil thee, Psalm. 139. 11, etc.

5. In all that thou do, be sure to hold the rule of charity: for that Romans
13. 10
is the fulfilling of the Law: this is Gal. 5. 22.
the fruit of God's Spirit: 1 Cor. 16. 14.
let all things be done in charity: there can be nothing acceptable to God
which does not hold this.

6. In all religious well designed acts, be what thou seem: the hypocrite
does but personate, act and counterfeit the saint: he seems good, but is
doubly impious: as the Orator said of the Similes non iidem fori^ non cognosce^
bantur, at domi: non ab alienis at ab suis, Cic. Aca. q l 4.
Servilii, which were very like, but not the same: so like, that they were not
distinguished abroad, at home they were: not of strangers, by their own they
were. When the hypocrite has deceived other men, he never can beguile his own
conscience: be thou therefore just and sincere in thy deportment before God and
man.

7. Do nothing to others, which thou would not have done to thee: it is
Christ's rule, and Mat. 7. 12.
the sum of the law and the Prophets, concerning our duty in the second
Table.

8. Do nothing whereof thou must (at best) bitterly repent thee: when the
Philosopher had a great price of folly set him, he answered, I will not buy
repentance so dear.

9. Do nothing against thy conscience for fear or favor of men: esteem a good
testimony thereof before all treasure: in some things we sin all, but blessed
are they that Romans 14. 22.
condemn not themselves in those things they know.

10. In every undertaking, pray God to direct, counsel, and bless thee: Phil.
4. 6.
in every thing by prayer and supplication let your requests be made known
unto God: he is unworthy to be blessed in his works, who will not acknowledge
God's providence in asking the same.

A Prayer for direction in all our actions.
MOst merciful Father, who have promised that if the wicked turn from his sins
that he has committed, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall live,
and his transgressions shall not be mentioned unto him; in humble
acknowledgment of our many sins, the equity of thy judgments to give us over
to our own unhappy ways, who have so long refused to be guided by thy holy
word, and our own helpless impotency to stay our selves, turn unto thee, or
set our selves in any good way to serve and please thee; we pray thee for
Christ Jesus sake to pardon all our misdeeds, and to vouchsafe to lead us in
thy paths, and the way thou would have us to walk in: we have long gone
astray, like lost sheep; and thou best know, O our God, how dangerous
Satan's snares are to us, how many the distractions of a beguiling world? how
frail and infirm sinful flesh and blood? and how many our errors? But, O
Lord, thy wisdom cannot err; therefore renouncing our own guidance, we
render our selves into thy gracious hands, humbly beseeching thee, who freely
give wisdom to all that ask, and upbraidest no man; hold thou up our goings
in thy paths, that we fail not, direct all our ways that we neither decline
to the right hand nor to the lest to offend thee: Give us the shield of our
salvation, and let thy right hand uphold us: O thou that hear the prayers of
them that call upon thee, hear us, for our souls wait on thee: direct and
guide us, keep us and counsel us in all our actions, that we may neither do
nor design any thing, but that which is pleasing to thee, and which thou will
bless unto us: that we may walk unblamably and prudently toward all men, and
holily before thee: that in all our actions we may glorify thee: that we may
adorn the Gospel of Christ by our holy conversations, give good example to our
neighbors, and stop the mouths of all malicious adversaries; so that when
these days of sin are ended, we shall rest from our labors, we may enter into
that promised rest which remains for thy people, where shall be no more sin,
error, nor curse: hear us, O Lord, in these and all other things necessary for
our bodies or souls, for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
CHAP. XXIII.
Of the government of Families, the duties of Masters and Servants, Husbands
and Wives, Parents and Children.. 1. Of a Family.. 2. Duties of Masters.. 3.
Duties of a Servant.. 4. Motives to their duty.

1. We have spoken of actions in general, and come now to the particular;
falling under domestic relations of Master and Servant, Man and Wife, Parents
and Children: Duties of Public Persons are without the verge of my present
purpose.

2. A Family is an epitomy and sum of a Commonwealth, A City is no other then
an assembly of many houshold^ and houses together, Plut. Ar. and Cato.
which consists of several families, as the ocean of drops: therefore he
meriteth well of the state, who well administreth his own family, as he
deserves punishment who does the contrary. A good Patriot equally solicitous
for the state, and family, is a rare jewel; but more rare (though of less
worth) is an Aristides, blameworthy in this; that in his justice and care for
the Republic, he was so unjust to, and careless for his own family, that
leaving them to the public charity, he P^upertate sua iustitiam quoque
infamem fecit. vid. Plue q supr. Psalm. 1^8.
dishonored virtue with his poverty, and herein his policy was lame.

3. Some have distributed the family into three parts: the first commands as
Master: the second commands, but not in chief; as the good vine, not on the
top, but sides of the house: the third are auxiliar; only obeying, as children
and servants.

4. Now though this be the order, and order so necessa^y, that without it no
society of man can subsist; yet must it be with that sanctity and equity, that
the God of order may be known to govern, though man administer; and with that
lenity, and candor of command, and willing reverence in obeying, that all may
seem managed with love, not fear; familiarity rather then rigid and imperious
severity; for which I suppose the ancient Latins comprised all three orders
under the name of Familiares.

5. God in his abundant mercy, as he has not been sparing to reveal his will
for our salvation; so neither in any thing which concerns our present comfort
and well being: his word is a full storehouse of spiritual consolations, and
directions of the outward man; 2 Timothy 3.
able to make him wise to salvation. There is no condition of man, no state of
life, which has not directions here laid down: from the King to the poor
Master of the cottage, from imperial Potentates, to poor Vassals; here are
precepts and counsels, which being religiously observed, will make a man happy
in any estate.

The duty of a Master of a Family is reducible to these heads:

1. That he care and provide for his family:. II.
otherwise he denies the faith, and is 1 Timothy 5. 8.
worse then an infidel. Carelessness and sloth are the mother and nurse of
misery and confusion. See Pro. 20. 4. Pro 2. 24, 27. Pro 18. 9. Pro 21. 25.
Eccles 10. 18. Pro. 24. 30, 31, 34. Destruction of many noble families has
been through prodigality, vain profusion in diet, apparel, building, Pro. 20.
16. Pro. 27. 13.
suretiship, and the like.

2. That he instruct his family in the fear God, and exercises of true
religion; as Genesis 18. 19
Abraham did: as those who call them together to prayer, reading and hearing
some portion of holy Scripture, singing Psalms, repetition, and giving an
account what they have learned from the public ministry of God's Word:
catechizing and instructing them at all convenient times at home, and seeing
them presented to the public ministry. Psalm. 101. 6, 7.
Mine eyes (said David) shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may
dwell with me: he that walks in a perfect way shall serve me; he that
works deceit shall not dwell in mine house: he that tells lies shall not
tarry in my sight. Reason it self easily concludes, that thou should (...).
l. 2.
teach thy servants to serve God first, that they may conscionably serve thee.
But can thou think that he will be faithful to thee, who is perfidious to
God? It was Quomodo fidem Imporatori praestabunt inviolaram, qui D^osunt
persidi? Eusebius
Constantines rule, when (as by Jehu's stratagem) he informed himself which
of his courtiers were God's servants, and which idolaters; that he might banish
these, and encourage the other. Can thou think that thou oughtst to have
better servants then God? Know this, that sin is a cursed lepro^ie in an
house, bringing God's anger and many plagues upon it. Now whereas example is
indeed the most powerful Rhetoric, the only way to teach, is to do that
which thou would have another learn; be sure that thou who art a master of a
family, give no ill example in thy house: if thy servants see the impious,
profane, profuse, drunken, or lazy, they will imitate thee: as thou servest
God, so will they thee. If thy servant knows any evil of thee, he can keep
thee in awe, and so thy worst enemies may be they of thine own house, therefore
the wise man says, Eccl. 32. 22
Beware of thine own children.

3. That Ephesians. 6. 9.
he do unto his servants that which is equal; considering the impartiality of
God's judgment, moderately commanding; not over-burdening them with labors;
remembering that they are men, not beasts, (to whom men ought to be merciful, as
their fellow creatures) not threatening or afflicting them with cruelty,
beating, maiming, or wounding. God cautioned that the Hebrew servant Exodus 21.
2, 26, 27.
should after six years service be manumissed and set free: and so in case of
maiming. It is folly to create contempt by too much familiarity: and it is
impiety to contemn him that is Christ's freeman, bought with the sameprice,
and heir of the same kingdom of heaven with thee* and what know thou but
that God has appointed thy servant to save thy life (as 2 King. 5.
a captive maid did for Naaman) or thy soul? When Antigonus saw his son
cruelly entreating a servant, he said, know not thou, O Son, that our
kingdom is but a glorious servitude? And Demonax in like case said, Leave
beating him, lest thou become like thy servant: such are humane conditions:
slaves have become masters, and great Lords servants; (but to serve passion, is
the worst slavery) hereof Croesus, Darius, Sampson, Adonibezek, Manasses, and
many others have been examples. Be thou not therefore Eccl. 4. 30.
as a lion in thine own house, nor frantic among thy servants: let them love
thee rather then fear thee.

4. Lev. 19. 13.
Let not thy hirelings wages remain with thee: neither be thou rash upon every
frivolous occasion to change servants: remember that a faithful servant is a
jewel, not always to be purchased: nor may we be too impatient of some
failings, who each day beg Gods pardon for ours, Mat. 6. 12.
with condition of forgiving others: be not fond to keep a fugitive Onesimus,
or any servant against his will: Diogenes was so far right, when they
persuaded him to pursue his Manes, 'Twere a shame (said he) that Manes should
be able to live without Diogenes, and that Diogenes should not be able to live
without Manes. If a true servant be not willing to go from thee, leave him not
destitute: Eccl ^. 21.
let thy soul love a good servant, and desraud him not of liberty.

The duty of a Servant may be understood in these and the like rules.

1. Ephesians 6. 5. Col. 3. 22.
Servants be obedient to them that are your Masters -- with fear and
trembling,. III.
in singleness of heart, as unto Christ -- in all things, which are
subordinate to God's commands; otherwise God must be obeyed and not man: ( 1 Samuel 28 7.
Readiness servants who sought him a witch, and 1 Samuel 22. 18
killed the Priests at his command, sinned: so did 2 Samuel 11. 4 15,and.
David's, who fetched him Bathsheba; and Joab, who betrayed Vriah to the enemy;
so did those 1 King. 21.
Elders, who obeyed Jezabel against Naboth; so did 2 King. 16. 11.
Vriah the Priest, in making an altar according to the pattern from Damaseus;
so did Mark 16. 17.
Herod's servants, in beheading John) the good servant must not obey only with
Col 3. 22.
eie-service, as men-pleasers, but in singienesse of heart, fearing God: to a
good man, God is ever, and every where a present law. Genesis 39. 9.
How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? said conscientious
Joseph. To this rule appertains that which the Apostle says, Tit. 2. 9.
Exhort servants to be obedient -- not purloining, but showing good fidelity --
to do according to their trust; as Genesis 24. 10, 12.
Abraham's servant did: as Gen 39. 8.
Joseph, and as 2 Samuel 15. 15.
David's servants: as also that they may not be given to prating, and divulging
the secrets of their Masters family: nor for fear or favor concealing their
Masters dangers, injuries, or disadvantages from them.

2. 1 Timothy 6. 1.
Let servants count their Masters worthy of all honor, that they despise them
not: and this subjection must be given not only to the good and gentle, but
also to the froward, 1 Pet. 2. 18. To this appertains that they be neither
flatterers nor backbiters of their Masters: that they forget not their duty,
but keep that distance which may preserve a due reverence; which is indeed a
servants honor, contrary to that rustic procacity, which speaks them base
and unmannerly.

3. That servants be true, hating lying, lest Gehazie's curse fall on them.
Psalm. 101.
David would entertain no liar in his family.

4. That they be docible and ingenious, modest, willing in meekness to learn
and obey their Masters wills: an ignorant servant is troublesome, but a proud
and immorigerous intolerable.

5. That they be not slothful and negligent.

6. That they be not q^arrelsom, or contentious, or unjust accusers of their
fellows.

7. That they be not murmurers, or querulous persons, or rude answerers again.
Tit. 2. 2.

8. That they be not hearkners after their Masters counsels, too full of eyes,
or busy inquisitors into those things which are above the sphere of their
duty: it is many times a servants wisdom, not to know, what he knows.

9. That they be not given to drunkenness, riot, intemperance, luxury, or
subject to passion: he that will be a good servant to others, must first be his
own master.

The Motives hereto are:

1. God's express command,. IV.
Colos. 3. 22. Ephesians. 6. 5, etc. where that moves not, I know not what can.
Obedience to thy Master is showing thy self a servant of Christ, and doing the
will of God, Ephesians. 6. 6.

2. This adorneth the doctrine of God, Tit. 2. 10.

3. Therefore the grace of God has appeared to all men, bond and free, Tit. 2.
11.

4. If servants be faithful they shall receive the reward of the Lord, Col. 3.
24.

5. He that does wrong to his Master, shall receive the like, God will revenge
it, Col. 3. 25.

6. A false and treacherous servant is odious to God and man, commonly branded
with an indelible note of infamy, as an unthankful deceiver of trust.

7. The name of God and his doctrine are blasphemed by that servant, who,
professing to be a Christian, is false, injurious, or unprofitable to his
Master; because that sacred profession is not to him a spur to duty, but a
cloak of hypocrisy.

After reading some of the Psalms, and a Chapter of the Old or New Testament
to thy Family, use this or the like Prayer.
A short Morning Prayer with a Family.
O Almighty God, and most merciful Father, we render thee all humble and
hearty thanks, as for all thy mercies and favors temporal and eternal, from
time to time bestowed upon us: so particularly for thy gracious preservation of
us this night past, beseeching thee to give us also a prudent and holy use of
this favor, to thy glory, the good example of our brethren, and the assurance
of our consciences before thee.

And as thou have been pleased to bring us safe to the beginning of this ^lay,
so we pray thee, holy Father to continue thy providence and thy merry to us
therein: keep us safe in bodies, souls, and all that thou have given us:
bless us in our several labors and endeavors: let thy blessing be upon all
that which thou have given us for our use and comfort: make thy creatures good
and successeful to us: direct us in that way wherein thou would have us
walk, that being counseled and guided by thy good spirit which cannot err,
we may in all that which we speak or d^, keep the testimony of a good
conscience, doing and saying that only which is pleasing in thy sight, and
walking prudently and unblameably toward all men, and holily and sincerely
before thee our all-seeing God. Let not our hearts decline to any evil ways,
but give us grace ever, and in every undertaking to remember our ends, wherein
we must give a strict account of all our actions, words, and thoughts; and
seriously to consider, that for ought we know, this day may be our last: so
framing our lives and conversations, that at our last hour which thy
providence has set every one of us, we may be found busied in a faithful
watch, as careful servants continually expecting the coming of our Lord: that
we may with our Lord Jesus, on whom we have believed, enter into that joy
which thou have prepared for all them who love and lo^ke for his coming.
These, and all other things which thou know more needful for ^s, we beg at
thy merciful hands for Jesus Christ his sake, in that holy and perfect form,
which himself has taught us, saying.

Our Father which art in heaven: hallowed be thy name, etc.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God the Father, and the most
comfortable fellowship of God the holy Ghost be with us all, to direct, guide,
and keep us this day, and evermore.

Amen.
Another Morning Prayer for a Family.
O Lord God, merciful, long-suffering, abundant in goodness and truth,
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving transgression and sin, unto the
penitent, but not acquitting the guilty and obstinate sinner: we thy poor
servants through thy mercy sparing us, this day appearing before thee; humbly
acknowledge our selves to be most vile and loathsome in thy sight, not only in
respect of our original corruption which we have brought into the world with
us, but also for our actual sins* which we have multiplied beyond all weight
and number: thou art a God of pure eyes and inviolable justice; how shall we
appear before thee, who cannot stand in the judgment of our own consciences?
Lord, what have we more then the hearty acknowledgment of our own unworthiness
to present thee? How can we hope to prevent the curse which goes forth over
the face of the earth, to cut off on this side and that, (...) afflict families
and nations with sorrows and destructions, but only by condemning our selves,
and flying from thy justice to thy mercy? our sin^ are great and grievous; but,
O merciful God, where sin and misery abound, thy grace does more abound: and
where none are able to satisfy thy justice, the greatness of the debt can
make no difference, whether 500 or 50, when neither has to pay, thy mercy
equally closes an unequal account, in a free forgiveness of both. Seeing the^
for this end thou have opened the treasures of thy mercy in Christ Jesus coming
into the world to save sinners, we humbly and confidently acknowledge, that of
those sinners we are chief: Lord, thou know there is salvation in none
other, look not therefore on that which we have done, or can perform, but on
that which he has done and suffered for us: we are indeed subject to the
curse, for that we many ways transgress thy holy laws, but therefore was thy
holy Jesus made a curse for us, that he might redeem us from the curse of the
Law, that the blessing might come on us through him in our being made heirs
thereof, and receiving the promise of the spirit, the earnest and seal of our
redemption through faith. We condemn our selves, that Christ may justify us,
that we may be found in him, not appearing in our own righteousness, which is
at best, but as a soon vanishing morning cloud, and in the severity of thy
judgment, as a silthy polluted garment, in which we could expect no other
sentence, then, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire: therefore we renounce
our selves, that we may be clothed with his righteousness, which is by faith
in him; that we may know him, and feel in our souls and consciences the
comfortable power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings,
being made conformable unto his death, in the mortification of all those
corrupt and sinful affections, which continually resist the working of thy
regenerating spirit in us. O Lord our God, being deeply sensible of our own
disability to save or help our selves, we ^ast all our care and confidence of
present protection, preservation, and future salvation on the merits of thy son
Christ Jesus, in assurance that thou art faithful who have promised, as by him
to save us, so through him to hear and help us in all our wants and distresses:
O Lord God of truth and mercy, who have commanded us to ask, and promised to
grant; accept our obedience and confidence in asking, and according to thy
truth grant our requests in forgiving all our sins, and giving us all those
blessings which thou know needful for us, that we may serve thee
cheerfully: sanctify our bodies and souls to thy service, that in them both
we may cleave to thee, please thee, and rest assured by the testimony of thy
holy spirit, and the powerful working thereof in us, that thou have sanctified,
called, and elected us to life everlasting: Lord give us experience of thy
truth which never failed; give us lively and justifying faith, to apprehend
Christ Jesus and all his merits: give us perseverance therein, that no trials
of life or death may ever separate us from thy love, nor any powers of hell be
able to overthrow our confidence therein.

And now, O Lord our God, who make the outgoings of the morning and evening
to praise thee; we humbly thank thee, as for all thy mercies and favors
spiritual and temporal continually poured out upon us, in our election,
creation, redemption, calling from the kingdom of darkness* our sanctification
and preservation from daiely imminent dangers of body and soul, our liberty,
peace, health, and all those temporal necessaries, for the comfort and
sustenance of us and ours, which thy fatherly providence has bestowed upon us,
so also for that it has pleased thee to preserve us this night past from the
powers of darkness, terrors of night, and all the ovils thereof: Lord continue
thy mercy to us safely brought to the beginning of this day: the day is thine,
the night also is thine* thou have prepared the light and the sunn^: O Lord our
refuge, let no evil befall us this day: let not any plague come near our
dwelling: give thine Angels charge over us to keep us in all our ways, that
we may in nothing displease thee: as thou have put away the late darkness
which covered the face of the earth and waters, by the comfortable appearance
of this great light which thou made to govern the day, that men may follow
their several labors therein, so blessed Father of lights, cause the sun of
righteousness Christ Jesus to arise on every one of our hearts, thence to
chase away the remainders of ignorance, darkness of mind and unbelief, to
open our eyes that we sleep not in death: to enlighten us with a sound
knowledge of all the mysteries of eternal life and salvation, that we may
arise* and shake off the dangerous security in sin, and conscionably walk
with thee, who have called us to thy kingdom, that we may please thee, being
fruitful in every good work, increasing in the knowledge of thee, strengthened
to all patience and long suffering, with joyfulnesse and thankfulness, for
that thou have made us partakers of the inheritance of thy saints in light:
that we may walk worthy of the vocation wherewith we are called, with all
holiness and meekness, love and charity toward all men, endeavoring to keep
the unity of the spirit in the b^nd of peace: so laboring in our several
callings, as being ever careful first to seek thy kingdom and the
righteousness thereof, in assurance that so all temporal necessaries shall be*
administered unto us, in all our endeavors expecting the blessing from thee,
without which, it is but lost labor to rise early, late take rest, eat the
bread of carfulness, and deprive our souls of ease. Bless all the creatures
to us this day, make them good and prosperous unto us: direct us so, in all our
thoughts, words, and actions, that we may glorify thee, preserve a good
conscience, and give an example of holiness to those with whom we converse,
that in nothing the truth of religion with which thou have blessed us, be evil
spoken of through our failings; but that we may by our integrity stop the
mouths of all adversaries, and adorn the Gospel by walking unblameably toward
all men, and sincerely before thee; ever remembering, that of all our thoughts,
words, and actions, we must give a strict and inevitable account at the
dreadful day of judgment, now kept from the knowledge of all men, that they may
every day live as if it were their last, keeping a constant and careful watch
in exspectation of that hour which shall come like a thief in the night,
wherein thou will assuredly bring to light things hid in darkness, and make
the counsels of all hearts manifest, judging every man according to his works.

Neither pray we for our selves only, but we also beseech thee for thy whole
Church, and all thy distressed servants, whether their afflictions be in body,
mind, or estate: comfort now, and in thy good time enlarge all prisoners and
captives, which suffer for, or with the testimony of a good conscience: Lord
God of all consolation, assure them that when thy will and work is done in
them, thou will show thy self their gracious deliverer and comforter.

Lastly, we pray thee, O Father of mercy, bless this family, wherein by thy
providence we are: bless us all from the first to the last, with all those
whom thou have made near unto us: prosper us, O Lord, and our endeavors upon
us: feed us with bread of our stature, that which thou know necessary and
convenient for us: give us a faithful dependence upon thy fatherly hand, which
never leaves them destitute who trust in thee: give us a prudent, holy, and
thankful use of all those good things which thou have bestowed upon us, that
thou may be pleased to continue thy mercy and providence over us: give us
contented minds, free from covetousness and distracting cares, in assurance
that thou will never forsake us: and, good Lord, as thou art pleased to add
this day to our transitory lives, so add that grace to this day, which may
direct and guide every one of us in our bodies and souls, that we may spend it,
and the remainder of our days, to thy glory and the comfortable assurance of
our consciences before thee; so that having our present conversation in heaven,
and walking with thee in sincerity of heart, when these fleeting days are
ended, we may live with thee in thy kingdom of glory, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.
A Short Evening Prayer*
O Lord God, we humbly pray thee for Christ Jesus sake, to pardon all our sins
and failings in our duties this day: strengthen our faiths, unto our ends, and
in our ends: Suffer us not for any trials to fall from thee, neither lay thou
more upon us then thou will make us able to bear cheerfully: create clean
hearts in us, renew right spirits: mortify all our corrupt affections, subdue
and subject them all to thy holy will and pleasure: enable us daily more
carefully and holily to serve thee: so that the nearer we draw unto our deaths,
the more con^idently we may rest assured of immortality, and eternal life in
the world to come: assist us with a measure of thy grace proportionable to our
trials, so that at our last hour, against all the fears and terrors, pains
and sorrows of death, we may be enabled to render up our souls into thy
gracious hands, in full assurance of thy mercy and our redemption and salvation
in Jesus Christ. Bless the universal Church, specially that part thereof in
Great Britan and Ireland: let thy blessing and mercy rest on this family, from
the first to the last. Keep us bodies and souls: forgive all our sins: let our
sleep be refreshing and comfortable this night: grant us grace to plant all our
confidence in thee, that we may love thee, fear thee, and rest in thee,
assured of thy gracious protection, whose providence sleeps not: into thy
hands, O Lord, we commend, and commit our selves, bodies and souls, all that
we have, and are, sleeping, waking, living, and dying, let us be ever thine,
through Jesus Christ our Lord and blessed Savior.

AMEN.
An Evening Prayer for a Family, more enlarged.
O Lord God, great and glorious, who have made the heavens thy throne, and the
earth thy footstool, God of justice and mercy: terrible in thy wrath against
obstinate sinners, but long-suffering and of great mercy to them who with
sincere hearts can seek thee and thy saving health: our miseries compel us,
and thine own gracious mercy inviteth us wretched creatures to call upon thee
in the day of trouble: But, O Lord, thou art a God of pure eyes and can not
behold iniquity and wickedness, in which, as we are conceived and born the
children of wrath and disobedience, so have we continually walked therein: and
wherewithal shall we now come before our Lord, and how our selves before the
high God? a thousand burnt-offerings, and ten thousand rivers of oil cannot
satisfy an infinite justice for the sin of one soul: and we are a sinful
nation, a people laden with iniquity; we have forsaken the covenants of our
God, and provoked the holy one of Israel to anger: we have gone backward and
revolted more and more: from the sole of the foot unto the head there is no
soundness in us, but dangerous wounds, bruises, and putrefying sores, ripe for
the lancet of thy judgments: so that we deserve to have this good land laid
waste, that we who have forsaken thee, should as thou have threatened, be
consumed with the sword, famine and pestilence, until this numerous people be
le^t as a cottage in vineyard, a besieged city, like Sodom and Gomorrha, sad
monuments of the fire of thine indignation: that thou should take no delight
in us* when we tread in thy courts, and appear before thee with petitions for
mercy; but that our oblations of praise and incense of prayers should be
abomination, and our solemn assemblies a t^ouble and weariness unto thee;
that when we spread forth our hands, and make many prayers with strong cries,
thou should hide away thy face from our miseries, and stop thine ears to our
cries, as we have done ours to those gracious conditions of mercy which thou
have continually offered us by thy Prophets, whom thou sentest to warn us, that
we might retur from our vain and unprofitable ways, and not die: we humbly
acknowledge, that such are we, that the severest curses of the law, and all the
judgments sealed up therein, are due to us: confusion and helpless destruction
in this present wo^^d, and unspeakable torments in hell fire in the eternity to
come.

And now whereas we must all appear before thy judgment seat, what shall we
plead before thee, O thou great and just Judge of all the world? what can we,
but guilty? what shall we say unto thee, O merciful preserver of men? what can
we more, then be merciful unto us, for our Lord Jesus sake? We know, O Lord,
that we neither do, nor can deserve any favor at thy gracious hands, whom
we have so often and so wilfully provoked to show thy justice on our sins:
but therefore did thou give thy son Christ Jesus, that his merits might
satisfy for us: we condemn our selves that thou may spare us for his sake,
who dyed not in vain. O Lord, though our iniquities testify against us, deal
with us according to thy name: we have sinned against thee, O thou hope of
Israel, and the savior thereof in the time of trouble: we acknowledge our
sins are for greatness, unmeasurable, and for multitude innumerable; but (as
is the price of our redemption) so are thy mercies infinite: abhor us not for
thine own mercy sake: thou art our strength and refuge in the day of
affliction; correct us not in thine anger, chasten us not in thy heavy
displeasure; but heal us, that we may be saved: Lord, though we have many
ways failed, yet thou know all things, thou know that the desire of our
soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee: through thine own grace
giving us that desire, we would, above all things in the world, become so holy,
that we might no more displease thee: O our God, who only can, make us holy
and unblameable: give us ability to do that which thou have given us grace to
desire: thou have caused us to put our confidence in thee, O God, who can not
deceive trust, let us not be disappointed of our hope: restrain not from us thy
zeal, thy strength, and the multitude of thy mercies and compassions: O Lord
our God, if thou will, thou can make us clean: cleanse us from all our
iniquities, that we may put away the wickedness of our doings from before thine
eyes, that we may indeed cease to do evil, and learn to do well, that thou
may make our scarlet sins (twice died, in original and actual guilt) white
as snow in Salmon; that we may consent and obey, and so enjoy the good things
of this land, and not be devoured by the sword, as we are this day for our
transgressions. Though we deserve that the fire of thine anger should consume
us as the stubble, that our root should be as rottenness, and that our
blossom, when we hope, should go up as the dust, until our cities become
desolate, and our houses without a man, because we have cast away the law of
the Lord of hosts: yet, O Lord, unto thee belongs mercy, and the issues from
death, though thou have been terrible in thy works, laid afflictions upon our
loins, and broken our land, yet heal the breaches thereof: though thou have
caused us to drink of the wine of astonishment in thy sore displeasure, and
made us examples of thy just judgments, yet turn again unto us, and make us
instances of thy mercy, that sinners may in our story read that which may make
them afraid to sin, and confident of thy mercy, in their unfeigned repentance:
remember thy mercy which has been ever of old: before all times thou electedst
us; at the beginning of time thou createdst us to thine own holy image: in the
fullness of time, thou gave thy holy son Jesus to death for our redemption:
Lord cast not that away, which thou have purchased at so dear a rate: we know
thy mercy fails not, thou art ever the same, not like man, that thou should
repent thee, as mistaken in thy choice, or defeated in thy counsels: O Lord our
God, accomplish thine own election in us: thou have given us thy son Jesus,
how should thou not also with him, give us al things needful for us? thou
have for his sake acquitted us from eternal condemnation, how should thou not
also spare us and deliver us in the temporal? It Is little, O bountiful God,
which we beg at thy merciful hands for our present releife, to that which thou
freely gave us, before we could ask: nor is it because we have none to
stand up in the gap for us, that thy wrath is not yet appeased, seeing thy
Christ, our faithful high Priest, sits at thy right hand, making
intercession for us: O Lord, for his sake be reconciled to us, deny not our
requests, hear and help us: establish thy free covenant and mercy with us:
strengthen, O God, that which thou have wrought for us, and our fathers, when
thou deliveredst us from the powers of darkness, and taking us to be thy
people, did translate us into the kingdom of thy dear son: establish the
truth, sincerity of religion, unity of hearts, and abundance of peace, which
thou then gave us: forgive the sins of thy people, turn our hearts unto thee,
from the first unto the last, give us unfeigned repentance, and humiliation
under thy mighty hand, that thou may spare us; and grace to forsake all our
evil ways, that thine anger may cease from us: give us patience to bear thy
fatherly corrections, who have with so much patience born with our iniquities.
Bless thy Church universal with truth and unity, show thy mercy on her
distressed: thou have hid thy face from us and consumed us, because of our
jniquities; but, Lord, remember them not for ever: appoint now unto them that
mourn in Sion: give them beauty for ashes: the oil of joy for mourning, and
the garment of prais^ for the spirit of heaviness: comfort her waste places,
make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the Lord:
give her joy and gladness, and let the voice of thanksgiving and melody be
heard in her again.

Bless that part thereof which thy right hand has planted in great Britan and
Ireland; bless this family and every part thereof: forgive us all our sins,
sanctify our bodies and souls to thy service: give us that blessed peace of
conscience which the world can neither give nor take away; give us assurance of
our justification in Christ Jesus: fill us with fruits of righteousness, that
we may not foolishly slee^e without oil in our lamps, because we know not
whether the day now spent shall be our last: when we sleep, let thy
providence which watches over all thine, preserve us from the powers of
darkness, perplexing fantasies, and troublesome dreams; that (...) may rest
in thee, and being refreshed, rise again to glorify thee in our several
places and callings, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior.

Amen.
CHAP. XXIV.
Of Marriage; and the duties thereof.. 1. Of Marriage; the institution, end
and fruits thereof.. 2. Of choice in general, and particular; who are to be
avoided.. 3. Duties of the Married, mutual and peculiar.. 4. Advice to the
widow.

1. MArriage is the conjunction of one man with one woman, according to the
laws of God and man, in the holy indissoluble band of Wedlock, whereby they
become one flesh: I say of one man with one woman: for so God made them at
first, and so appointed from the beginning. See Matthew. 19. 4, etc. so that
plurality of wives or husbands at once, is adultery; though when either party
dies, the surviver Romans 7. 2, 3.
is free to marry, in the Lord; according to the laws of God, who says, 1
Cor. 7 2.
Let every man have his own wife, and every woman her own husband -- and the
Romans 7. 2.
wife is bound by the law to her husband, so long as he lives. Heb. 13 4.
Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled: forbidding to marry is
the doctrine of devils, who labor to pervert the order and institution of God,
to corrupt and dishonor the fountain of humane propagation, with impure and
wandering lusts. And also according to the laws of man; which being grounded on
God's law, necessarily bind all men thereto subject, as cautioning against
emergent inconveniences, with relation to times, places, and persons; as where
they bind to publish the sponsals or contracts, to prevent marriage without
consent of parents and governers: or where they limit to certain hours in the
face of the congregation, etc. to avoid clandestine marriages, or incontinent
living, under pretense of marriage: next I say, it is an holy and indissoluble
band: holy; for whatsoever is not so, in respect of the persons capacity and
fitness, the end and use thereof is neither lawful before God nor man: and I
say indissoluble: for Ephesians. 5. 31. 1 Cor. 6. 16.
they two become one flesh, partners of one condition in weal and woe: whence
they call it conjugium, as a communi iugo; and for this cause Mat. 19 5. Genesis
2. 24.
shall a man leave father and mother, and remain with his wife: which is not
simply, but comparatively to be understood; as if he said, Thou shall more
constantly keep with her, or rather leave father and mother, then thy wi^e: and
the word of Christ is clear, Mat. 19. 6, 9
what God has joined together, let no man put asunder: whosoever shall put
away his wife, except it be for fornication, and shall marry another,
commits adultery -- now in case of adultery Non enim homo separat, quos
poena damnat.
man separateth not, but a just punishment (as death) discharges the party
innocent: he is cruelly impious who puts away a chaste wife, and he
impiously foolish who keeps an adulterous or dead one by him. Neither may we
conceive that God joineth all them together, that are married before men: there
is a just age fit to give consent required; freedom in consent, and where these
are not, it is no lawful marriage. If there be deceit, as where the man is an
Eunuch, where there is fraud or error, as where a Leah is substituted for a
Rachel; where there is a lawful pre^ontract of either party with some other,
where either party is before married to some other living person, where degrees
of consanguinity or affinity hinder; where there is no consent of parents,
where there is no compulsion, by violence, fear, or importune commands of
superiors; in fine, where the marriage is not lawful, God joined not, and
therefore it is no sin for man justly to separate, where man unjustly joined.

2. Marriage was ordained by God in Paradise, in the state of man's innocence:
wherein he (who best knew his own work in man; and not only what he then was,
but also what he would be) pronounced, Genesis ^. ^8.
It is not good that the man should be alone: and to show their near
conjunction, he made the woman of the man, that the propagation of all
mankind might be of united two, one flesh: and the eternal God having taken on
him humane nature (that being truly God and man, he might be the only mediator
between God and man) John 2^
honored and adorned marriage with his own sacred presence, and first miracle
which he wrought in Cana of Galile: how much more necessary now is an helper
in the present state of sin and misery, wherein the holy Ghost pronounces, 1
Cor. 7. 9.
it is better to marry then to burn? wherein sin has subjected man to many
afflictions and infirmities, so that the wisest of mere men said, Eccl. 4. 10.
woe to him that is alone.

3. The end and fruits of holy matrimony are

1. An holy obedience to God's ordinance; who severely charge all, that have
not the gift of continency to observe the laws of chaste matrimony; and
thereby to keep themselves undefiled members of Christ's mystical Col. 1 18.
Ephesians. 5. ^0.
body the Church, and 1 Cor. 6. 15.
not to give the members thereof to an harlot.

2. That for the increase of Christ's kingdom, mankind may be pure, legally
and orderly propagated.

3. That men and women might avoid fornication, and the punishments following
the same, exclusion from the kingdom of God, and more varieties of temporal
punishments (in estate, reputation, horror of conscience, and sundry bodily
diseases) then are visibly inflicted on any other sin.

4. That man might have a helper in his domestical affairs (bringing up of
his children, and ordering his family) a companion in prosperity, and a partner
and comforter in affliction.

5. That the mutual love of man and wife might teach us Ephesians. 5.
the admirable love of Christ to his Church, and his individible unity with
her, care for her, and providence over her. In this great mystery, not only the
Apostle, but Solomon in his Song of Songs expresses Christ's love, and the
Churches happiness.

Concerning the choice to be made, I would give my children this counsel:

1. In general: 1 Cor. 10. 31.
What ever you do,. II.
aim principal^y at the honor of God, and study to please him in your choice:
which rule when too many neglect, their principal care being to please their
carnal parents, or themselves, by some great portion or estate, honor and
gain of powerful allies, beauty, qualities, and amiable features of those
with whom they match, not caring how God is pleased or displeased) his fearful
judgments follow them so, as that which they chose for their delight and
comfort, proves their most bitter affliction, and the ruin of their family:
be sure therefore to consult the Lord in thy choice, desiring that he would
guide thee, as in all thy affairs and interests, spiritual and secular, so
specially in this, of these the greatest, and that which shall render thee
either most happy or unhappy: therein advise with his oracles for thy
direction; which in the precept command thee to obey thy parents in all things,
and to have their consent: and in the example of the holy, not to engage thy
self without their consent, who will be faithful counsell^rs to thee, and
have much more experience of the world then thou can have.

2. In particular: (as the same word says) 2 Cor 6* 14.
Be not unequally yoked together with unbeleevers: for what fellowship has
righteousness with unrightcousnesse, what communion has light with darkness
-- what part has he that believes with an Infidel? what agreement has the
temple of God with Idols? In such an unhallowed union they cannot with the same
mind and spirit serve God together in prayers and holy exercises of religion;
nor In tan^^ ^^orum discordia, quae potest esse ^oncordia? Hier. Nepo^i. lib. 2
ep. 14.
be united in holy peace, who are not in God: nor bring up their children with
mutual care in the fear of God: nor can the many bitter dissentions hence
arising be avoided, nor the calamities which usually follow such divisions; God
having so expressly forbidden such marriages: See Exodus 34. 1 2. Deuteronomy. 7. 3.
Genesis 6. 1, 2. 1 King. 16. 31. 1 King. 21. 25. 2 King 8. 18, 27. 2 King. 11. 1.
2 Chronicles. 22. 10. I may conclude of such as Iud. 14* 3.
Sampson's father and mother said, Is there never a woman among the daughters
of thy brethren, or among all my people, that thou go to take a wife of the
uncircumcised Philistines?

3. Reason will advise thee not to be ambitious of matching in a family, or to
a person too unequal in fortunes or condition: if thou marry too low, thou
call thy judgment or integrity into a difficult question; if too high, thou
have taken up an Dixit Cleobulus, Diog. Laert. lib. 1. (...).
honorable burden: ^ari iugo, dulci^ tr^ct^^.
the equal yoke is best.

4. Choose neither for, nor without an estate, and such a beauty as may please
thee: riches and beauty are very considerable to him that would live, and love;
but virtue is incomparably better then both: it is hard to feed a poor wife,
or to endure the usual Quae viro^ subservire postulant, (...) ^retae ^cro^es.
P^aut. M^naec. Act. 5. Scen. 2.
insolences of the rich; to love the ill-favored, or to be secure of the
beautiful: it is a misery wilfully incurred, for wealths sake to condemn ones
self to a loathed bed: and it is an undoubted madness to aspire to the
enjoying that beauty, -- rara est concordia sormae^ Atque pudicitiae* --
wherewith chastity seldom dwells, which may please many, and displease, and
make thee unhappy. God has showed his admirable power and wisdom, as in all
the creatures, so in the countenances of men and women, in that within little
more then the compass of an hands breadth, he has made such variety, as that
among millions of millions, there are none either much unlike, or Eadem ^igara
omnibus, sed quaedam unicuique lineamenta de^lexa, sic and similes universi
videmur, and interse singuli dissimiles in venimur. M^^uc. Fell. Octav.
absolutely like in all lineaments: yet had he not made as much, or more
variety in the minds and affections; some one beauty (for proportion, color,
feature, and genius) must have been the adored (and therein unhappy) Hel^na the
Cynosure of most men's loves, the admired piece of nature and breeding, the
lodestone, drawing all affection into a turbulent and restless center of
corrival-ship: but his providence is also seen in the variety of love and
liking: some like the black, as to them most beautiful; therefore the Cle^
Alex. supr. cil. l. 7. strom.
Moors made their Gods black and flat-nosed: and the Barbarians made theirs
yellow; both showing what they esteemed beauty: for seeing their complexion,
proportion, and lineaments were in their power, who made that which they would
foolishly, and did impiously adore; no doubt they would strive to give them the
greatest perfections of beauty and lovely proportion; (as the painter did, when
he borrowed all the perfections of beauty he possibly could to furnish his
pourtraict of Venus) so that these nations made them of such proportion and
color, as they thought most beautiful: which shows, that beauty is not in
white and red, or so much in any sixed standart, as to be weighed by his
affection who likes and loves: whence it comes to pass, that affection being
Clarke of the Market, making, or at least determining the true value and price
of beauty, yea beauty it self; there is almost no face, but some can like and
love it best: I might say therefore if beauty were not so much in opinion, yet
is it fading: flowers are the emblemes thereof: Pro. 31. 30.
Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain, but a woman that fears the Lord
she shall be praised: love which only beauty enflames, is like fire in
stubble, soon going out, except it find some more solid fuel to preserve it:
The ancient Heathens, in their fable of Pygmalion (falling in love with the
image which he made, and obteining a metamorphosis thereof into a woman and his
wife, quickly disliked) under a false Non ergo res ipsas gestas ^inxerunt
poetae -- sed rebus gestis addiderunt ^uendam colorem -- vera sunt ergo quae
loquuntur poctae, sed obtentu aliquo speci^que velo^^. Lact. l. 1. c. 11. ^^c.

veil (as often they did) understood this moral truth, That such is the
mutability of man's mind, that if he might be permitted according to his desire
to make himself a fortune, he would not long like his own option and ^igment,
specially that which is grounded on so frail a good as beauty, every day
subject to change by the power of sickness, if no worse corruption. Regard
riches and beauty in thy choice, that thou may subsist and love, but choose
not for either, or both, but principally for virtue, not subject to the laws
of time or age.

5. If thou art under parents or governers, match not without their consent.

6. Lastly, so far as by diligent enquiry thou can discern, take heed of

1. An impious Athaliah, or false Delilah, likewise of a tempter: he or she
who will not be good toward so good a God, what hope is there they will or can
be good to thee? what mischief, what curse may thou not reasonably expect
from such company as God hates, and will finally destroy?

2. A proud and expensive Jezabel: such must needs prove thy families calamity:
pride goes before ruin: the spendthrift is more devouring then the sea: that
is sometimes long devouring a patrimony, this quickly swalloweth up all: there
may be some defense found against that, but if Solomon himself were tutor to
this fool, his instruction should find no capacity in him.

3. A cursed and intractable nature: a provoking Miriam, a sullen Vashti, a
jeering Nichol, a scolding Zipporah, a stingie Peninnah, and a revengeful
Herodias: why any one should be in love with a bear, it must seem strange to
us, but some are of an affection so paradoxical that they can; because they are
of the like ungentle and rough disposition (for parity of manners begeteth
liking) but if thou love comity, affability, and that sweetness of behavior
which becomes the people of God, avoid a churlish Nabal, and a X^ntippe quam
in Socratem prius convitia and maledicta ingessisset* post vero and sordidis
aquis per^udisset, inquit, Nonne dicebam Xantippem tonantem, quandoque
pluituram? Laert. l. ^. Socrat.
shrill Xantippe, whose thunder will not only startle thee by day, but like an
importune gnat, she will be singing about thy ears when thou would ^leep:
whose impudent barbarismes will render thee ridiculous to thy acquaintance, and
pitied of thy friends: whose spirit of contradiction will embitter all that
which should sweeten an happy society: neither let some calmes deceive thee:
the sea is lovely when no breath of wind moves it to rage: the fiercest are
kind in their times of love: consider well what men and women are when they
are angry: and how thou can change, bridle, or bear that nature: he that
keeps salvage beasts, may render up his charge when he will, but the unhappy
married, covenant, till death us depart. Take heed of objects too great for thy
power, or patience.

4. An intemperate, luxurious, or drunken mate. Pascitur ^ibido conviviis,
nutritur deliciis, etc. Amb. de poen. l. 1. cap. 14.
Lust is fed at full tables; which beggary and misery attend to take away: the
intemperate and drunken is the devils anvile, on which he can forge any sin:
when Satan with large promises tempted the young man to kill his father, he
abhorred the suggestion: likewise when he proposed in the second place, that
he should commit adultery, he refused it: when he brought him into company,
and exhorted him to do as others did, drinking he became drunken, and in that
madness slew his father, and committed adultery: drunkenness is broker to any
sin.

5. A bold and familiar behavior in women, is a dangerous symptom of
immodesty. Lascivious gesture, impudent discourse and affectation of strange
attire, are but the bush to show what is vendible within: take heed of a
gadding Dinah, and a tame woman: I deny not but such may be chaste, but it
seems hardly probable that they would be such. Of all domestic miseries, the
adulterous wi^e is incomparably worst: and most (of all such calamities) to be
abhorred of those that are to choose, and to be pitied in all that have made
such choice: except in those that have made them, or suspected them before to
be such; Pro. 6* 25, 26.
lust not after her beauty in thine heart: neither let her take thee with her
eie-lids; for by means of a whorish woman, a man is brought to a morsel of
bread: and the adulteress will hunt for the precious life: Prove. 5. 8.
Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door of her house.

6. Take heed of matching into an infamous family: it is true, God can call,
and so does, Luke 7.
some infamous sinners home to wash the feet of Christ with tears of
repentance: he can and does take some out of the most sinful families to make
them instances of his mercy: but commonly partus ventrem sequitur: an
adulterous Herodias has a dancing daughter, easily infected with her mothers
sickness: it is a desperate adventure to choose there.

Concerning the mutual Duties of the married these duties are observable:

1. That they serve God together with one heart and consent:. III.
so Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebecca, Zachary and Elisabeth; so all the
children of God in that state do.

2. That both hold the bond of conjugal love, entire, pure, and unpolluted:
while Solomon charge the man -- Prove. 5. 18, etc.
rejoice with the wife of thy youth -- let her breasts satisfy thee at all
times -- he enjoineth the woman the same duty: let both ever remember the
covenant they have made before God, and that dreadful word, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Be
not deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers -- shall
inherit the kingdom of God.

3. That they live together in love, peace, and amity: that they give not
scandal to others, nor create mutual bitterness to themselves: Mutual love is
gods blessing on thy family, a praeludium of heaven, in thy house, a
comfortable pattern to thy children: like the sunbeams on thy possession: as
the dew of heaven on thy fields, which makes all look cheerfully, and be
fruitful: a state that comes nearest up to that blessed Paradise-oeconomy of
Adam innocent: a blessing which makes every estate such; without which no
store is blessed. Pro. 15. 17
Better is a dinner of herbs, where love is, then a stalled ox and hatred
therewith. Pro. 17. 1.
Better is a dry morsel, and quietness therewith, then an housefull of
sacrifices with strife.

4. That they do cheerfully and willingly communicate in all that which God
has given them; in prosperity advising, in adversity comforting each other
with such sympathy in joy and sorrow, as is in them who are truly one flesh.

5. That they bear each others infirmities, never taking things spoken or done
in the worst sense; nor making every trivial matter an occasion of quarrel, or
alienation of affection, but passing by them so, as that they may seem rather
covered in love, then excused in judgment, or approved in stupidity: in which
practice Satan may be beaten with his own weapon; while that every occasion
(which he administered in hope to former discord) being prudently used to
demonstrate the invincible love of the party suffering, and willing rather to
put up injury, then to admit the least breach of amity by retaliation, more
endeareth them to each other.

6. That they join hands and hearts, to assist each other in the way to heaven;
See 1 Cor. 7. 16. 1 Pet. 3. 7.

7. That they mutually defend each other: so Michol preserved David, when Saul
sought his life: so prudent Abigail endeavored Nabal's preservation: they must
not be false Delilahs, to con^ederate against the lives or estates of their
husbands.

8. That they neither unjustly take, nor justly give occasion of jealousy,
which ever embittereth, the (otherways) most happy families. Jerome's rule is
here to be commended to women: Etsi negagata non feceris, tamen deforme putes
testimonium si rogeris, Hier* ep. 2l 9*
though thou yield not, being asked; yet think it an odious testimony to be
asked: he comes to near, who comes to be denied.

The Duties proper to the Husband may appear in these following Rules:

1. Let the 1 Pet. 3. 7.
husband dwell with his wife according to knowledge, giving honor to her as the
weaker vessel, as being co-heires of the grace of life, that their prayers be
not hindered: where there needs reproof, let it neither be rough, odious,
injurious, public, clamorous, nor disgraceful; but allayed with such
wisdom, and opportune persuasions, as may not only reform but endeare: in the
most happy wedlock there may be some matter of just dislike, and therefore due
cause of reproof: it much concerns thee to know thy wives faults, but not to
hate her for them: let the rule be either, bear thy wives faults (if
tolerable) with patience, or amend them with direction, if they are
intolerable, in this thou make her better, in that, thy self.

2. Let a man love Ephesians. 5. 33.
his wife as himself; esteeming nothing too good or dear for her good: as
Christ loved his Church; which concludes nothing for them who impiously and
cruelly afflict their wives with stripes, or otherwise: for God says, Col 3*
19.
Husbands love your wives, and be not bitter against them: it is uncertain
whether they have evil wives, but certain that they deserve such, who can no
otherwise govern then by blows. Neither does this bind any man to an
indiscreet (much less an impious and dangerous) indulgence to his wife;
wherein she desires that which needs must, or probably may hurt her self, her
husband or family: it is love and wisdom to deny her that.

3. Let a man maintain his wife in clothes and necessaries according to his
estate, so as she may live cheerfully with him, not as servant, but as a
partner in his estate.

4. Let the husband use all comity, holy, gracious, prudent, and peaceable
language, as a pattern to all his family, so specially as a pledge of love to
his wife: neither like rugged Nabal, nor fond and vain, which commonly
changes into fits of extreme bitterness; for who can like such inksome levity?

5. Let the man hear the wife's advice, but never be transported beyond better
reason, nor carried thereby against the holy will of God; as Adam, whose
dreadful sentence bare this cause in the front, Genesis 3. 17.
because thou have hearkened to the voice of thy wife -- as 1 King. 21. 25.
Ahab hearkened to the voice of Jeza^el: as 1 King. 11 3
Solomon, whom his wives most fearfully corrupted. Anil^e mihi liber videatur,
cui mulier imperat, cui leges imponit, praescribit* iubet, vetat qui nihil
impera^^i negare potest, nihil recusare audet^^ ego vero is^um non modo servum,
sed n^quissimum servum, etiamsi in amplissima ^amilta natus sit, appellandum
puto. Cic. pared. omnes sapientes liberos esse, etc.
The Orator could say of a man so awed by his wife; I do think that he ought
to be called not only a slave, but truly the worst of such.

Concerning the proper duties of Wives, I sinde these three principle rules:

1. Let the wife be Ephesians. 5. 22. Col 3. 18.
subject to her husband, as unto the Lord in every thing; for the man is the
wife's head: 1 Timothy ^. 9, 12.
she was made for man: God permits not the woman to usurp authority over
the man: this duty comprehends love, Ephesians. 5. 32.
reverence, ai^ and assistance, doing her husband good, endeavoring to
content, please, and comfort him. See Pro. 31. 11. contrary to which is the
imperious command of the domineering wife, unreverend speech or action, neglect
of her charge, through pride, sloth, or riotous wasting her husbands estate.

2. Let her be chaste, modest, and silent: the Scripture expresses this by 1
Pet. 3. 5, 6 1 Pet. 3 1, etc. 1 Timothy ^. 9, 10
chaste conversation coupled with fear (impudency and chastity are rarely
compatible) and modest apparreling -- which becomes women professing
godliness, and^let the women learn with all subjection^ a me^k and a quiet
spirit are of high esteem in Gods sight: this is God's rule; by what law they
live who think it religion and good policy, by their loud and quarrelsom
tongues, bitter spirits of contradiction, and otherwise, to master their
husbands, and cantonize themselves, I know not; it is certain these are heavy
crosses, and no better then the sad furies possessing, and so restlesly
haunting the house of a wretched man, that he may well take up that old
bemoaning, Hei mihi nec sine te, nec tecum vivere possum.
Woe is me, that I can neither live well with thee, nor without thee. Such
dishonors of the lovely sex, disgraces of woman-hood, caused some wise men,
besides the over-wived Interr^gatus utrum melius esset uxorem ducere, ne^ne?
inquit, (...) -- D. Laert. l. 1. Socrat l. 2. Psalm. 128.
Socrates, to judge that there is matter of repentance both in wedlock and
single life: but the good woman opens her mouth with wisdom, and her tongue
is the law of kindness. Prove. 31. 26.

3. Let her Tit. 2. 5.
keep at home, like the fruitful vine upon the walls of the house; breeding
up her children and providing for them: it is that which God enjoineth, that
they be discreet, chaste, keepers at home: it is the harlots character. Prove.
7. 11. She is loud and stubborn, her feet abide not in her house: now she is
without, now in the streets, and lies in wait at every corner.

Thus much of the duty of the married: to the Widow I have to say, she is free
to marry again; but advise her to take heed, that

1. She marry not to low, least suspicion brand her with the obloquie of some
former familiarity.

2. That she marry not too soon, least she that can so quickly abolere
Sichaeum, be thought for want of love to make such short exequies. Valeria
being demanded why she married not again, could say, My Servius is dead to
others, not to me.

3. That she sell not her children to want, and her self to misery, by an
ungodly concourse of lust and avarice.

4. That she consider well, that which deterred Martia, Cato's daughter, from
second marriage: I cannot easily (said she) find* that man which loves me
so much, as my estate.

A Prayer for the married.
O Lord God, who did create man and woman, join them in marriage, sanctify
and bless us whom thy providence has joined together: Lord give us one heart
to love thee, and one another in thee, that we may be heirs together of the
promise: that thy blessings of heaven above and earth beneath, the blessings of
peace, unity and plenty, may be upon us, and all that thou give us. Lord
Jesus who did furnish the wants at the Cana marriage with a bountiful supply,
supply all our necessities, with those things which thou know necessary for
us, that in every estate we may find a cheerful sufficiency: Keep us bodies,
and souls from all the snares of Satan, the distractions of the world,
corruptions of flesh and blood, and the power of sin: that we may live
unblameably toward all men, and holily before thee, to the good examples of
sanctity and sobriety to our families, and mutual comforts, and blessings to
each other, through Jesus Christ our Lord

Amen.
CHAP. XXV.
Concerning the duties of Parents and Children.. 1. What honor to Parents: want
of Children: good Parents of evil Children.. 2. Duty of the Parent. Rules
thereto belonging.. 3. Duties of Children. Rules thereof. Motives thereto.

1. Exodus 20. 12.
Honor thy father and thy mother,. I.
says the Lord. Under this name are comprehended all superiors and governers,
parents by nature, order, or institution: as under the name of children, all
inferiors, sons, daughters, subjects, pupills, servants, etc. and honor
imports all duties, respectively to be performed.

2. Want of Children, is a great affliction to some: therefore 1 Samuel 1. 10
Hannah wept, and prayed, in bitterness of soul: it was then a reproach and
affliction to the just, and a Lev. 20. 20, 21.
curse on the wicked. When God said unto Genesis 15 1, 2
Abraham, Fear not I am thy shield and exceeding great reward: he replied,
Lord God, what will thou give me, seeing I go childlesse? Gen 35. 18
Give me children, or I die, said impatient Rachel. She knew not then what
'twas to have a Benoni, a son of sorrow. Psalm. 127. 3
Children are an heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his
reward: he makes Psalm 113. 9.
the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of children: as the
Psalm. 128. 3.
fruitful vine on the sides of the house, with children like olive branches,
God makes the just man's wife: Great blessings if good, or greatest
afflictions, if otherwise: certain cares, uncertain comforts: a lovely
possession, but ever bringing the most happy possessor many cares, fears, and
troubles; to some most bitter sorrows: if God give thee no children, he has
given thee the less care and occasion of sorrows, which in their loss sits
heavily, even on the hearts of those mourning parents, who may say as that
Shunamite -- 2 King 4. 28
Did'I not des^re a son of my Lord? did I not say, do not decceve me? Be
thankful for that which God has given thee: no man has all happiness, some
thou have; the greatest, if he has given thee Christ, thy Redeemer and
Savior; how justly may he say that of Elkanah, 1 Samuel, 1. 8.
Why is thy heart grieved? am not I better to thee then ten sons?

3. That good parents have sometimes evil children, appears, in Genesis 9.
Noah's Cham, 1 Samuel 2* 12 25.
Elie's, and 1 Samuel 8 3
Samuel's sons: David's Amnon and Absalom, 2 Chronicles.21 4, 6.
Jehoshaphat's Jehoram, Hezekiah's Manasse, and the like. Thus God pleases
either to punish their neglects in breeding them, or to exercise their patience
and humble them: so likewise to manifest to the world* that sanctity is by no
natural propagation, but free grace. Sometimes wicked parents have holy sons,
as appears in 2 Chronicles. 33 22, 25. ^ Chr. 34. 2.
Josiah, son of Amon, and many others* that none may despair of whatsoever
family he come.

1. The duty of a Parent toward his children,. II.
is to nourish and breed them up, providing necessaries for them: to teach them
the fear of the Lord; (1 Timothy 5. 1. Tit. 2. 4. Genesis 18. 19. Exodus 12. 27.
Exodus 13. 8, 14. Deuteronomy. 4. 10. Deuteronomy. 6. 7, 20. Deuteronomy. 11. 19. Deuteronomy. 32. 46. Josh.
4. 6, 7, 21, 22. Josh. 22. 24. Psalm. 74. 4. Isai. 38. 19. Joel 1. 3. Ephesians. 6.
4.) to reprove their ^innes (1 Samuel* 3. 13. Prove. 13. 24. Prove. 29. 17. Hebr.
12. 9. Genesis 34. 30.) to pray for them (2 Samuel 12. 16. Job. 1. 5.) to lay up
for^them (2 Cor. 12. 14. Genesis 24. 36. 2 Chronicles. 21. 3.) to bestow them in
marriage (Genesis 24. 2, 3. Genesis 21. 21. Genesis 28. 1. Judge. 14. 3, 5.) Therefore
these following rules are necessary for parents concerning the same:

1. Study thy family, that thou may not be a stranger at home: first, it is
necessary for thee to proportion the expenses thereof, and the breeding of thy
children according to thy estate, lest thou build higher then thy foundation
will bear: it has been the evident ruin of many families, that parents have
bred their children in so great an height, as that the means they were able to
leave them, could not maintain them. It is not a little wisdom to live within
thy fortunes, and to use thy children to a condition rather much too low, then
the least little above thy estate: the mind will easily greaten, and rise with
the fortunes, but very hardly lessen or descend: it is an evident danger to
bear a sail too great for the bottom; far more safe is it, to enjoy a
concealed estate, then to o^tent, and exceed a broken one. Secondly, it is
necessary to know the qualities of thy family: Solemus mala domus nostrae s^ire
novissimi, etc. Hieron. Sab. ep. 3 l. ^.
we are many times the last that hear of the exorbitances of our houses: the
neighbors whisper, and children sing our reproaches in the streets, before we
so much as suspect them: something there is in affection, which eft soon
blinds the wise, with too secure opinion of their childrens good nature and
discretion to deport themselves: so Augustus Caesar was deceived in his Julia
(whom he believed chaste, though he was not ignorant of that dangerous symptom
of immodesty, her over-daring audacity) until in her incurable infamy, he knew,
that pleasures, liberty, luxury, and vain compture were precipices to
whoredom: something also there is in parents giving their children too much
power to follow their own Genius, led away with the fancy of that blinde-mans
parents, Joh. 9. 21. he is of age -- he shall speak for himself; as if in
their wilful neglect of duty, they should not be responsible to God for their
children. 1 Samuel 2 23, 31, 32.
Elie's 1 Samuel 3. 13, 14.
inexpiable sin, in too mild a reproof of his debauched sons, is a sad
document to all careless and indulgent parents. If thou do not thy uttermost
endeavor, to stay thy children from sin, if they perish, God will require
their blood at thy hands; if thou do (though without success) thou have
delivered thy soul from that guilt.

2. Another duty of parents is to do a constant and holy endeavor to provide,
and lay up for their children: idleness, carelessnesse, luxury, and vain
expenses of parents, impiously betray their children, and expose them to the
mercy of a pitilesse world, to beggary and misery. It is pity that this
republic, among many good laws, wants the censorian law of the Romans, to
punish negligent and unthrifty men; and to sequester so much of their estates
as might secure the wife and children from want. The Apostle marketh the idle
with the black line 2 These 3.
of inordinate walking, interdicting him food, who will not labor: and the
improvident he counts, a 1 Timothy 5. 8.
denier of the faith, worse then an infidel. Some are foolishly kind to
strangers, and unnaturally careless of their own: like the Qui alienigenis
benificus, suos negligit, similis est ^luvio X^lon, qui oritur in Castella, and
irrigat Aragoniam.
river Xalon, which they say rises in Castle, and bestows his streams in
watering Aragon. Worse are they then bruits, who by a natural ins^inct with
restless industry find meat for their young: Ore volat pleno matter ieiuno --
Juvenal.
the hungry bird flies with her mouth full to them. Do thy endeavor, and
commit the success to God, who cares for all those that trust in him: but let
it be an holy endeavor, he that labors by fraud, oppression, rapine,
lying, robbery, or any unjust way, ventureth his soul to leave his children
rather rich, then vert^ous; therein less charitable to himself, then Luke 16.
27 In^elicissime omnium cogi^a^ quam been alii post ^e vivant, non cogitas quam
male ipse moriaris. Tim. ad Eccles. l. 3.
Dives in hell seemed to his brethren; he would have a preacher sent them from
the dead to warn them, that they might not come thither. Nor is this the way
to leave them rich: God usually Hag. 1. 9.
blows upon such an estate, and it comes to naught; whereas a little which
the righteous has, is better then great riches of the ungodly. It was David's
experience: Psalm. 37, 25.
I have been young, and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken,
nor his seed begging bread: that which is unjustly gotten, is but a Eccl. 10. 1.
cantarides in the sweet box, it corrupts the whole store; or as gravel in
thy bread, a mischievous accession: such was poor Naboths vineyard to Ahab,
that little spot carried away a kingdom from his posterity: a wise man will not
put up one ill-gotten penny into his treasure: he must needs bring a curse upon
his children, who will make them rich by sin. Experience has often preached
this to us, in the sudden ruin of great families, which, like lonah 4. 7.
the Prophets gourd, soon rose, and in their acme, as quickly withered away;
because there was a mischievous worm at the root. Sin ever carries a curse
with it, except in case of repentance, which in this case cannot be without
disgorging and restitution of all that which wrong or fraud had swallowed of
other men's. Among parents just provision for children, matching them well is a
principal: we read of it in Abraham, and see it in all the prudent: herein
respect thou most their souls health, compel not, but advise the best,
committing the main to God, by whose providence if thou find a good match,
thou have gained a son or daughter, if otherwise, thou have lost a child.

3. Count godliness (as truly it is) the greatest gain, and accordingly let
thy chief care be to bring up thy children in true wisdom and instruction of
the Lord, if thou will be happy, and Nihil magis praestare filii s po^es, qua^
si hoc bonum per te habeant, quod nunquam penitus amittant. Tim. ad Eccl. l 1.
Ephesians. 6. 4. See Pro. 19 13 Prove. 17 25. Prove. 10. 1. and 15. 20.
have thy children so: and begin betimes: the new Recent testa diu retinet,
and saporem, and odorem q^o primum imbuta est. Hier l. 2. ep. 17.
vessel will hold his first seasoning long: how happy are those young
Timothies, who have an 2 Timothy 1. 5. 2 Timothy 3. 15.
holy Lois, and a religious Eunice, to make them know the Scriptures from their
childe-hood, to enure them daily to the exercises of religion, prayer,
catechizing in the doctrine of faith and sanctimony; reading, hearing and
repeating by heart some sentences of holy Scripture, that the word of God may
dwell plentifully in them, and that all religious habits may grow up in them:
that they may know Christ, and remember their creator in their youth; in an
happy childe-hood singing Hosanna^s to him: the bloody Dionysius Dionis inimici
filium. Sic iussit educari, ut i^dulgendo turpissimis imbueretur cupiditatibus:
Scorta adducebantur, vino ep^lisque o^ruebatur, etc. Aem. Prob. vit Dionys.
Dionysius did nothing more cruel, then when he commanded his enemies son to
be brought up in liberty of sin, and indulgence to all, which the unbridled
affections of youth could lead him to: how impious are those parents whose
neglects or wilful connivance betray their childrens souls to hell and
damnation? while they delay to plant sanctity in their minds, the busy
tempter takes advantage on a corrupt nature, to sow his tares, and make them
habitually wicked from the cradle: if thy child were fallen, or wounded
dangerously, thou would not say, It will be time enough to help him
hereafter; for shame be not less careful for an eternal soul, then a soon
decaying-body. As Soon as they are capable, teach them the fear of the Lord:
thou know not how soon God will take thee from them, or them from thee:
(herein there is much discretion to be used, in preparing 1 Cor. 3.
milk, not strong meats for babes, lest thou rather stupifie then instruct) the
Aegre reprehendas quod sinas consu^scere, di^^^^ulter eraditur, quod rudes
animi perbi^erunt Lanarom c^nchylia, quis in pristi^um ^euocet? Hier. l. 2. ep.
17.
longer thou delayest, the harder the cure will be: it is not an easy task,
to unteach children evil habits: nor can thou reasonably think religion to be
a l^nah 4.
child of one night, like the fruit which Aarons rod did bear, Number. 17. 8. it
is long coming to maturity: we quickly learn evil, but slowly good: present thy
young Samuel to the Lord, that he may bless them and thee.

4. Set thy children in some calling: breed them not only to useless
ceremonies. There are some things in breeding children to comity and good
behavior, which we not unaptly call com^lements: for indeed, sweet, comely,
discreet and winning behavior is an excellent ornament and finishing of
virtue; not only setting off, but much advantaging and commending sanctimony it
self; which is often loved and entertained by those that are without, for that
external comeliness with which it is clothed; admired of them who being yet
but carnal, understand no more. The men of Nazareth admired the Luke 4. 22.
gracious words which proceeded out of Christ's mouth, concerning whom it was
prophesied, Psalm. 45.
full of grace are thy lips -- and the Apostle says, Col. 46.
let your speech be always with grace, seasoned so as that it may administer
grace to the hearers, by a gaining affability: and St Peter says, Pet. 3. 8.
be courteous. God's wisdom ruling in his children, is Iam. 3. 17.
gentle: they are deceived who think good breeding and comity conduces nothing
to religion, yea it very much adorneth it, and commends the professors
thereof. The rugged Ismaels, rustic Esaus, and unformed Nabals, are company
more fit for bears then men: But, on the other side, to be all complement
without substance or good meaning, speaks a man, a ridiculous super^icies, an
Italian bubble, an outside and empty statue of a man. He is an unprofitable
burden of the earth, who is neither good for war nor peace, things secular nor
divine. Commendable is the care of honorable parents, to breed up their
children in Schools, Universities, Innes of court, or travel into forain parts,
to fit them thereby to serve the state: though the abuses thereof too often
discommend the improvident, who are not improved; the negligent, who are not
bettered; and the libertine, who is made worse hereby: how many travelers have
not only like 1 King 10. 22.
Solomon's Tharshish merchants, among their precious lading, brought home apes
and peacocks, vain imitation and pride; but Asia primum devicta luxuriam misit
in Italiam -- pariterque lux^ria nata est, and Carthago sublata: ita -- ut
liberet a^p ecti viti^. and ^ucre^ pe^^are Plin. not hist. l. 33. c. 11.
with Scipio, luxury and the vices of other nations, and with Ahaz, the
idolatry? 2 King. 16. 10, 11. It is observable that some of the world's great
Princes have learned manufactures, and therein labored every day sometime. The
sole master of the world had his opus, to till the ground: idleness is the
sepulcher of living men: it is good to know how to subsist, if some unexpected
pressure should straiten a man; and therefore necessary to breed thy child so,
as that he may have some calling.

5. Love thy children tenderly, but in the Lord: love them best which are Quid
enim rectius, quid magis iustum, quam ut qu^ melio^es sunt, iidem etiam
honoratiores essent? Tim. ad Eccl. l. 3.
most like their heavenly father in sanctity: what can be more just, then to
honor the best most? Love them so as not Ita i^os diligite, ne vos odiss^
videamini: in consultus namque and stustus amor est alteriis memor and sui
immemor. Ibid.
to hurt and hate thy self: it is an inconsiderate love, and foolish, to
remember others, and forget our selves: hold that distance which may secure a
parents authority from contempt: use such compliance with their age, as may
show thee not rigidly austere, but loving and affable to them, though this seem
inconvenient to those who have no experience of parents affection, because, no
children: which Plutar. vit. Agesil.
Agesilaus knew, when (by a friend suddenly coming in, he was found riding with
his children on a reed) he prayed him not to report it, till he had children
of his own: Non solum amandos dicimus ^ilios, sed praecipue ac super omn^a
amandos, nec quicquam his -- anteponendum, nisi Deum solum. Tim. ad Eccl. lib 1.
love them next Christ, not above him; suffer them not to dishonor him: neither
give them liberty or opportunity to any evil. ^inah's idle visits, brought home
shame, danger, and dishonor to her fathers family.

6. Be Ephesians. 6. 4.
not bitter to them, lest thou discourage them: Col 3. 21.
provoke them not to anger, lest it break out to some desperate disobedience:
use thy children to do well Sua sponte potius, quam alieno metu. Ter. Adelph.
^ 1. S. 1.
rather for love, then fear, of their own accord, rather then others fear or
compulsion: he that is inured to obey for love, will not be afraid to
communicate his counsels, and to be advised by his parents, without which he
may unhappily follow his own, or others, to destruction.

7. Correct thy children in love and wisdom, so that it may appear that thou
art angry with their faults, not them. Pro. 13. 21.
He that spares his (...), hates his son; but he that loves him,
chastenoth him betimes -- Pro. 23. 14.
Thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from hell --
Pro. ^2. 15.
Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child, but the rod of correction
shall drive it far from him. An horse not broken becomes headstrong, and
Eccl. 30. 8.
a child left to himself will be wilful: all extremes are dangerous: there
may be an unnatural severity in correction, if it exceed in measure. Seleucus
is famous for his justice on his adulterous son, but more for his love, in
putting out one of his own eyes to satisfy the law, that he might thereby
spare one of his sons eyes. Junius Brutus punishing his sons ambition with
death, put Exuit patremut cons^lem ageret. Live. l. 2. Plutarch. vit. F^bii.
off the natural affection of a father, that he might act the Consul. It was
nothing less then impious severity of Quasi plus in imperio esset quam
victoria L. Flor. lib. 1. c 14.
Manlius Torquatus taking away his sons life, therein more valuing the
Majesty of empire, then the laws of nature, nor fatherly piety: most
detestable was Herod's cruelty, who (enraged by suspicion) murdered his sons,
Aristobulus and Alexander, with others. Augustus censured so far well; I had
rather be (said he) Herod's hog then his son: such prodigies perhaps might
now be found, but for fear of humane laws: I deny not but that sons may
give cause of disinheriting; but an implacable anger of the parent (perhaps
like 1 Samuel 14.
Readiness with Jonathan) for transgression of some foolish ordinance of his own,
not regarding God's law, nor his ordinance and assignment of the right of
primogeniture, is a dangerous sign of astorgie, and want of natural affection,
(which mediating) there is an easier work in the world, then reconciliation of
an exorbitant son to an offended father: which that prudent Tekoite found in
her mediating between 2 Samuel 14. 21. Cito adnuunt qui suo ipsi amore
superantur. Salvia. ep. Upatio, etc. -- etiamsi i^stas succensen. di causas
parents habeant, nihil contingere eis felicius, nihil optabilius potest, qu^m
ut si^^is pro reatu filii satisfaciant, ne ne^esse habeant vindi^are ib. Salv.
David and Absalom. The other extreme is, that which some mothers are guilty
of; when they hide, or excuse their childrens sins, and therein are --
adiutrices in peccato.
abetters, when they express delight in, or consent to their childrens vices;
they do but with those impious -- bla^^ditiis, and osculo comprimente vagitum,
ne ^lebilis hostia immolaretur. Min. F^l Octa.
mothers, (who wont to sacrifice their children to the devil) sing lullabies,
as they cast them into the fire, that they might not offer a weeping sacrifice.
The sum is, spare not thy childrens faults, but love their persons: in
correcting, balance anger with wisdom, that thou may correct, not make
them worse.

8. Keep power in thy hands to restrain thy children, and hold them in
obedience, as the wise man counsels; Eccl. 39. 19, etc.
Give not thy son power over thee while thou live -- better is it that thy
children should seek to thee, then that thou should stand to their courtesy.
Love commonly descends, but rarely ascends. It has been the ruin of many
a child, that he had an estate made over to him without wisdom to manage it,
or himself: when those young Phaetons rule the day, destruction comes before
night.

9. Let not thy child see any evil example in thee: a thousand good precepts
teach not so much as one evil example: Velocius and citius nos corrumpunt
vitiorum exempla domestica, magnis cum su^eunt animos auctoritus. Juv.
domestic examples are the most pernicious perswaders to vice, and soonest
corrupt; specially when children have such authors as they love and hold
sacred: and how can thou correct thy children for imitating thee, Cum facias
peiora senex? p^oclivis est enim malorum aemulatio; quorum virtutes assequi
nequeas, cito imitaris vitia Hiero. lib. 2. epist. 17*
when thou do worst in teaching by example? When they learn cursing,
swearing, profanation, intemperance, rude and foul language (which has cost
many a life) obscence and ^ilthy talk, irreligion, and neglect of all good
duties, from parents, they think themselves justified by their sins. Hence
usually is hatched, (...)
an evil egg of a bad bird; a corrupt and cursed seed. Hincest quod pene omnes
parentib (...) su^ filii non magis in patrimonia quam in vitia succedunt.
Hence comes it to pass that children do not more commonly inherit their
fathers patrimonies, then their vices, Ante ^orum incipiunt nequitiam, quam
substantiam p^ssi^ere. bona enim parentum non nisi m^rtuis eis possident,
^iventibus autem adhuc and valentibus mo^es ^ac sic priusquam in dominio suo
habere incipiant res paternas: habent in animo ipsos patres: ac antequam
habeant illa quae fal^o dicuntur bona, ante habent il'a quae vere probantur
mala Tim 9. supr. l. 1.
and sooner are they possessed of these, then them: those come to them after
their fathers death, these in their life: so have they descended to them true
vices, before those things which are but falsely called good. Woe worth such
parents, and miserable are their children, beyond those, who by their parents
impious superstition, passed through those Moloch flames, wherein a soon dying
body perished; but here is the danger of body and soul eternally perishing in
hells unquenchable fire. The heathen would have taught these seeming Christians
better, Nil dictu foedum, factuve haec limina tangat, Intra quae puer est. --
nihil in ^e and in patre (...) videat, quod si fecerit peccet -- memento vos
parents -- magis exemplis doceri posse, quam vo^e. Hieronym. lib. 2. epist. 17.
Let nothing (said he) uncomely to be spoken or done, so much as touch these
doors within which there is a child. If any evil in thy family happen to be
done, it ought with much discretion to be drawn to a present example of
detestation of that sin: as Clem. Alexandt.
the Spartans wont to show their drunken servants to their children, that by
their discomposed deportments, and loathsome deformity, they might learn to
detest drunkenness.

10. Pray continually for thy children: O that Ismael might live in thy sight,
(cried Abraham) Genesis 17. 18. Job rose up early every day to sacrifice for his
sons, lest they should bear some inexpiated sins, Job 1. 5. Thine own
experience of the folly and frailty of youth, their ignorance, pronenesse to
error and sin, their many dangerous temptations, should stir up thy natural
affections to this duty: unexcusable before God are they that neglect it; and
damnable they, who instead of praying for them, curse them, on inconsiderable
and less grounds then that which instigated Micha's mother thereto, Jud. 17.
2. No wonder (said the heathen) that so many children prove impious, seeing
Inter parentum execrationes. Seneca.
they grow up among their parents curses. It is true, Prove. 26. 2.
the causeless curse shall not come: and that God can turn a Deuteronomy 23. 5.
Balaam's curse into a blessing: yet J^^g 9. 57.
Jotham's curse fell on the wicked Shechemites, and heavily fell good Gen 9. 15.
Noah's, on Cham and Josh 9 21, 23. Jsh. 17 13, etc.
his posterity: yea impious parents commonly see the fruits of their rash
curses in their childrens ruin.

11. Look on thy children as the blessings which God has given thee: we are
all the sons of Time, which devoureth all it own brood: we have here Heb 13.
^o continuing city; we must all part again, until we meet in eternity: when
God took away Job's dear children, he said, Job 1.
The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord:
It is no little bitterness to flesh and blood to loose hopeful children: but
we must in such case consider how much more happy they, who rest in Christ, are
then we who survive to mourn for them. It is one of the most incongruous acts
of a reasonable soul, to bewail those, whom we believe blessed. Next we must
consider God's justice afflicting us for loving things humane too much: and his
mercy in taking them away from evils to come, disburdening us of the care he
entrusted to us for a time: nor can any say, what a child may prove: there are
1 King 1. 5
Adoniahs, and 2 Samuel 15. 10.
Absoloms still, sweet children, but rebellious men: there are Genesis 34. 2.
lovely Dinahs, and fair 2 Samuel 31. 1
Tamars, pleasant children, but in their maturity, bitter break-hearts. 1 There
4.
Neither may we sorrow as men without hope: Praemisimus, non amisimus* vide
August, epist 6.
we have not lost them, but their company for a time. David, who bewailed an
impious son bitterly, comforted himself in the death of his harmless infant,
I shall go to him, he shall not return to me. Do not deceive thy self, God has
given thee a short use, not any lasting propriety in things secular: when they
told a Anaxagorae ac Telamonis semper laudata sententia, Sciebam me genuisse
mortalem Hieron, l, 2. ep. 24. Heliodor. (...). Anax. D La^^t
prudent heathen of his dear sons death, he replied, I knew I had begotten a
mortal son. Thou can not want examples of mortality in thine own family,
wherein thou missest many of thy Ancestors and friends: let nothing seem
unsufferable or strange to thee, which is both common and inevitable: be sure
thou want not the true use thereof, which is a due value of all things present,
and making haste to provide thy self and children for a better life: in the
want of a good child, Nec doleas quod talem ^miseris, sed gaudea^ quod talem
ha^ueris Hier. q. supr.
rather rejoice that thou had such an one, then lament that he is gone into
God's kingdom of glory before thee: while thou enjoyest their company,
remember to instruct them for eternity: he said true, Fugitiva iucunditas pater
senex. -- Petrarch.
An aged father is a fugitive pleasure, and so are young children: thou know
not when they go out of thy sight, whether ever thou shall see them again,
till thou meet them in the kingdom of heaven: there all tears shall be wiped
from thine eyes: there shall be no more sin, sorrow, curse, nor fear of
deaths parting dear friends: there shall be blessedness without measure or
end.

A Parents prayer for his Children.
O Lord God everlasting, father of mercy (of whom is named the whole family in
heaven and earth) abundant in goodness and truth, showing mercy unto
thousands of them that love thee and keep thy commandments: Give me grace to
be upright and holy before thee, that it may (according to thy promise, who
can not deceive) go well with me and my children after me. Thou who art the
God of my fathers, and have preserved me from my mothers womb, who have
blessings in store, for all that fear thee, for their generations who depend on
thee: plant thy fear in every one of their hearts, and sanctify them bodies
and souls, whom thou have given me; so that in whatsoever state and condition
thy providence shall set them, it may be my comfort and assurance, that they
are thy faithful and elect servants, that thou may be pleased to dispose of
them as thine own, to their several places and callings, to which thy fatherly
providence has assigned them. Lord season their tender years with grace and
truth: help them and bless them with blessings of heaven above, and the earth
beneath: and let my blessings prevail above the blessings of my fathers: give
them assurance of their adoption in Christ Jesus: keep them and order their
steps, in the way which thou would have them walk in: let thy faithfulness
and mercy be with them, all the days of their lives: be thou a father and rock
of salvation unto them: keep them by thy sanctifying spirit, holy and sincere
before thee: uphold them that their footsteps slip not: be thou the guide of
their youth; keep their tender years from sin and shame: take not thy mercy
and thy truth from them: preserve them from the hour of tentation, in life
and death, from the power of sin, the snares of Satan, the world, and the
flesh: hear the voice of their prayers when they cry unto thee: help them
against all their enemies: bless their substance, and accept the work of
their hands: be thou ever their refuge, and save them: Thou who dividest the
earth among the sons of men; whose providence descends unto the feeding and
preserving the poorest of thy creatures; feed them with bread of their stature:
thou who encreasedst the oil and the meal, so that it failed not in all the
famine (whether it be much or little which thou shall be pleased to give them)
let thy blessing be with it; that in every estate they may faithfully depend on
thy gracious providence, which never fails them that trust in thee; and find
such a sufficiency therein, that they may live cheerfully and contentedly, that
they may never want that which thou know necessary and comfortable for their
bodies and souls: Lord give them hearts faithfully to seek thy kingdom and
the righteousness thereof, that all these things may be administered unto them.
O Lord God, who have promised to be a father of the fatherless, who have
planted thine own image of love and compassion in the hearts of parents
toward their children; hear the prayers of a poor father for his children,
and deny not the requests of my lips, when thou shall be pleased to take me
from them; leave them not destitute, show thy self their keeper, directer and
counselor, that they may never swerve from thy commandments: as thou have
showed me mercy and compassion all my days, so holy father let not thy mercy
depart from them, but keep them in thy faith, fear, and love; that as thy
providence has brought us together in this family, so when this mortal life
shall be ended, we may by thy mercy all happily meet in the eternal communion
of Saints in thy kingdom of glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only
Savior.

AMEN.

1. The crown of the aged is children:. III.
and the duty of children toward their parents, is, honor, reverence, fear,
obedience, gratitude, ch^erishing them in their age, love, and patience; all
this is comprehended in the fifth precept of Gods law, honor thy father and
thy mother: who are comprehended under these titles, I have Cap. praeced.
already showed: I have here to speak of duty to parents.

2. These rules of practice are hereto observable for the guidance of those
children which fear the Lord, and expect the promise their made to the
obedient.

1. Honor thy father and mother: it is Gods express command, and (...). Them.
La^rt. l. 5. Exodus 20. 12. Matthew. 15 4. Matthew. 19. 19. Mark 7. 10. Luke 18. 20.
Ephesians. 6 2.
a dictate of nata^e: this imports reverence in thy bodily gesture before
them: (as King 1 King. 2. 19
Solomon rose upto meet his mother Bath-sheba, and bowed himself unto her: as
Exodus 18. 7.
Moses went out to meet his father in law, and did obeisance) reverence in thy
speech toward them, and thy behavior before them, that it be not rude, and
such as becomes not the presence of those whom God will have honored as his
vicegerents in the family. So says the Apostle, Hebr. 12. 9.
We have had fathers of the flesh, and we gave them reverence: none but a Gen
9. 22, 23.
cursed Cham will behave himself unreverently before his father or mother, or
any ways tell or discover their failings, to discredit, or dishonor them; but
will go with blessed Shem and Japhet with the veil of discreet piety to
conceal them. Eccl. 3. 10, 11.
Glory not in the dishonor of thy father, (says the son of Sirach) for thy
fathers dishonor is no glory unto thee; for the glory of a man is from the
honor of his father: and a mother in dishonor is a reproach to the children.
When God commanded Israel to be holy, he thus begins, Lev. 19. 20.
Ye shall fear every man his mother and father; here indeed religion begins
(toward those whom God has set in his own room on earth, to nourish and give
laws to them, and to receive their first tribute of obedience due to him by
them) there is little hope of it when it here blasteth in the bud; the breach
of this law carrying a fearful curse with it, as being a sin against God
and nature: therefore the heathen Decius, when he was offered the imperial
crown, refused it, saying, Valor. Max. lib. 4.
I fear lest being made an Emperor, I should forget to be a son: I had
rather be a dutiful son then an Emperor: let my father rule, my Empire is to
obey.

2. Obey thy parents in all things not prohibited by God: Pro. 22. 23.
Hearken unto thy father that begat thee -- Pro. 1. 8. Pro. 6. 20.
Forsake not the law of thy mother -- Col. 3. 20.
Children obey your parents in all things.

3. Patiently bear their infirmities, where age makes them pettish: where
they err, not gainsaying, or answering again: contend not irreverently with
them, (...) Pittac. See Eccl. 3 13.
though thou art in the right: when they are angry with thee, overcome that
anger with patience.

4. Be such to thy parents, as thou would have thy children to thee: commonly
it will be so: an evil son seldom proves an happy father: Eccl. 3. 5.
Whosoever honoreth his father, shall have joy of his own children: but as God
rewards the duty of children according to his promise, so will he their
impiety and disobedience, according to his justice, because he is true in
both: all sins have their severe punishments following them; and when God's
justice is most slow, it is most sure: but there are some sins which are more
destructive to humane society, which God, the preserver thereof, usually
punishes in this life, that he may deter men from committing them: so it is
observable, that cruelty, oppression, and murder, seldom go unpunished here,
but most closely acted, sometimes they are discovered by extraordinary means:
and disobedience to parents, may hence appear odious to God and man, that it
is commonly punished by the like deportments of their children: an example
thereof is commonly found in every family of the disobedient. O Son (cried
the father beaten, and dragged out of doors by the hair of the head) draw me
no further, for thus far I drew my father.

5. Love thy parents tenderly, though the reflexes of this love are not so
strong, yet do them all the good thou can: love them Debeo affectum parenti:
sed magis obsequium debeo salutu auctori. Ambr. orat. fam. de ob. valent.
next Amandus est genitor, sed praeponendus est creator. August.
after Christ: Matthew. 10. 37.
above him thou may not. Arist. Eth. l. 9. Init.
No man can requite his parents, and teachers; yet show thy love and gratitude
to them if they want, nourish them: so did good Genesis 47.
Joseph: so tender ought thy care to be of them, that it should be thy grief,
if thou do any ways grieve them: Eccl. ^.
My son, help thy father in his age, and grieve him not as long as he lives.
Thou must be cheerful to them, and not violate this piety, so much as Ne vu^tu
laedenda est pietas parentum.
with an ill look. A necessary document for those prodigals which will not be
warned from riot and lewd company, until they bring their parents hoary head
with sorrow to the grave, and necessity bring them home in rags: as also to the
profane Esaus, whose impious matches are Genesis 16. 35
a grief of mind unto Isaac, and make Rebecca cry, Genesis 27. 46.
I am weary of my life, because of the daughters of Heth.

Now though it be true, he that doubts whether he ought to worship God, and
honor his parents, rather Non indiget ratione, sed poena. Arist. 8. Top.
wants stripes then arguments: yet seeing the corrupt nature of man is prone
to all impiety, I will hereto add some motives to this duty.

1. It is the Ephesians. 6. 2. Exodus 20.
only commandment with promise of reward, Honor thy father and thy mother,
that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee --
Deuteronomy. 5. 16.
that it may go well with thee -- the Eccl 3. 8, 9 Genesis 27. 27. Deuteronomy 33. 1.
son of Sirach says, Honor thy father and thy mother -- that a blessing may
come upon thee from them.

2. This is Ephel. 6 1.
just before God and Col. 3 20.
pleasing to him: releeving thy father shall not be forgotten -- Eccl. 3. 14,
15.
in the day of thy affliction it shall be remembered.

3. A third motive may be taken from the contrary curse to him that any way
dishonoreth father or mother.

1. Deuteronomy. 27. 16.
Cursed is he that sets light by his father or his mother: there is Ez^k. 22
7.
no more evident sign of an impious mind, then contempt of parents.

2. Pro. 19. 26.
He that wastes his father, and chaseth away his mother, is a son that causes
shame: and whosoever Pro. 28. 24.
robs father or mother, and says it is no transgression, the same is the
companion of a destroyer.

3. Pro. 30. 17.
The eye that mocketh at his father, and despises to obey his mother, the
ravens of the valley shall pick it out.

4. Pro. 20. ^0.
Whosoever curses his father or his mother, his lamp shall be put out in obscure
darkness: L^v. ^0. 9.
every one that curses his father or his mother, shall surely be put to death
-- his blood shall be upon him: so Exodus 21. 15
he that smites father or mother: there is no less punishment severe enough
for such an unnatural prodigy as a parricide, or he that retributeth injury,
where he owes highest gratitude.

5. Lastly, I wish all disobedient children to read Deuteronomy. 21. 18, etc. If a man
have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not obey the voice of his
father, or the voice of his mother, and that when they have chastened him, will
not hearken unto them; then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him,
and bring him unto the Elders of his city, etc. and the men of the city shall
stone him with stones that he dye: so shall thou put away evil from among you.

A Prayer for children to use.
O Lord God, who have ordained strength in the mouths of babes and sucklings,
sanctifying them from the womb, open our lips, that we may show forth thy
praise: holy Lord Jesus, who taking up children into thy sacred arms,
declaredst, that unto such belongs the kingdom of God, who for our
redemption becamest an infant, and for our instruction obedient to humane
parents, who art the eternal son of God, have mercy on us, sanctify us bodies
and souls unto thy kingdom and service: keep us in our tender years by thy
holy spirit, from all the errors, sins, and pollutions of youth: make us
sincerely obedient to our God, that in him we may honor and obey our parents
in all things, in reverence and thankfulness for their tender care over us:
bless their endeavors to provide for us: spare them that they may live to
bring us up in thy faith, fear, and love, that thy great name may be
glorified, and they comforted in us, and we with them preserved unto thine
everlasting kingdom, through Jesus Christ, our ever blessed Lord and Savior.

AMEN.
CHAP. XXVI.
Of the wounded spirit, or conscience afflicted by the apprehension of Gods
wrath against some great sins, spiritual wants, or fear of tentations.. 1.
What a wounded spirit is, how great an affliction: what the conscience is; how
comfortable the peace thereof; why God afflicts his.. 2. What things
principally wound the conscience.. 3. What they (who are afflicted with the
apprehension of Gods wrath against them) must consider.. 4. What they must
examine.. 5. What they must practice.

1. I Have spoken concerning the guidance of the Thoughts, Words, and Actions
in general: and in some particular relations to external duties: I shall now
endeavor to give directions suitable to some conditions, first of the inward
man, and next of the outward.

The Pro. 18. 14. (...) Page percussum. Ariaes M. contritum spiritum^ a (...)
percussit, ut Psalm. 29. 67. Cant. 5. 7. etc.
spirit of man will bear his infirmity, but a wounded spirit who can bear?
says Solomon. The word signifies a smitten, contrite, or broken spirit. It is
a manner of speaking borrowed from bodily afflictions by stripes, contusions,
bruises, or wounds, wherein by cutting or hurting the sinews and veins, the
body weakened and endangered (without cure) to death, disabled so that it
cannot support it self, is apt to inflammations and distempers; every light
touch hurts it: it depriveth a man of rest, so that he is impatient of this
present posture, and more grieved at the change: To express the intense sorrow
of the soul, weak confidence, and enfeebled life of the spirit, God calls it
a wounded spirit.

2. This affliction is so great, as it Nullus enim mayor est dolor, quam is qui
peccat^ muerone vulnerat conscientiam: neque ullum graviu^ est onus quam
peceatorum sarcina and pondus flagitiorum: deprimit animam, curvat usque (...)
terram, ne se erigere possit^ gravia, fili, gravia delictorum pondera. Amb^.
Horentiano ep. 18.
exceeds all other temporal sorrows: and is such, as none can truly judge
of, but they who have with David, seen confinia inferni, as he says, Psalm.
116. 3. The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell gat hold
upon me* or found me. Other sorrows may be eased, by giving the afflicted
something equivalent to that whose loss grieveth him; as where one treasure is
lost, and another found: or by some compensation and repair; as Job had a
second brood and increase of wealth: Elkanah intimated such a medium
consolationis, when he said to afflicted Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 8.
Am not I better to thee then ten sons? but so can this never be: if you give
a man of an afflicted spirit riches, company of dearest friends, or that which
might relieve, refresh, or delight some others; you do no more ease him, then
you could the broken bones, by putting on some purple or rich robes: no, no,
the grief is within, and there must be cured: nothing external can do it: in
other griefs, time will mitigate; sunt verba and voces, excellent lenitives of
sorrow: in some other kinds, wine, merry company, music, or the like means,
may have some part, as the wise man says, Pro. 31. 6.
Give strong drink to him that is ready to perish, and wine to those that be of
heavy hearts: let him drink and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no
more. So David's harp could (for the time) refresh Saul, and charm the evil
spirit: but this grief admits of no efficacy in such comforts. In other
pressures we may be eased, or conveyed away from the evil, as Act 23. 31.
Paul was from the Jews conspiracy: as 1 Samuel 19. 12.
David from Saul; but there is no flight from a wounded spirit. Whither ever we
go we carry our affliction with us, our secret tormenter in us. In fine, as it
is, in sense of a separation from God (the reality whereof is the second death)
so no creature in heaven or earth can cure it: there can be no sanctuary for a
troubled soul, but only Gods favorable presence: till he return and comfort,
nothing can. So terrible, in the mean time, is this affliction, that the
desperate Judas took death for his sanctuary, against that, which to him was
more tolerable then death: how (...), etc. Cyrll. Alexand. in Ioh l. 11.
heavily it sits upon the hearts of Gods elect may appear in the words of
Job and others -- Job 3. 20, etc.
Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto the bitter in
soul? Ea vitae conditio est. ut mori plerumque etiam optimi portus sit. Plin
not hist. l. 25. c. 8.
which long for death, but it comes not, and dig for it more then for hid
treasures, which rejoice exceedingly and are glad when they can find the
grave? See Jer. 20. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. 1 King. 19. 4. Jonah 4. 8.

3. The conscience is the knowledge of the heart, knowing that which God
knows with it: it is a divine light in us, which we cannot extinguish, if we
would; a supreme court in us, above us; a silent register of all we do or say;
a thousand witnesses, accusing, or excusing; Sibi ipsum unusquisque animum suum
severum sui iudicem: ultorem sceleris se habet, etc. Ambr Constable. ep. 44. l. 7.
Romans 2. 15.
an impartial Judge which cannot be bribed to justify the wicked, or condemn
the just; Prima est haec ultio quod se iudice, nemo nocens absolvitur. Juven.
the first revenge of impiety, wherein none guilty can be absolved, though
there were none other Judge.

4. In true peace of conscience the heart is cheerful in every estate, and
condition, Romans 5. 1. 3. Bona conscientia nu^^ius oculos fugit.^ Hier. l. ^.
ep. 9.
it fears no judge nor witness: it is a continual feast, the souls Eden,
the minds fair haven; an unvalueable possession, which makes every owner
happy; a riches which shall never be taken away; Rom 8. 23.
the first fruits of heaven, an immovable comfort: as no wind can move or
shake the sun beams, so can neither life nor death, prosperity or adversity
this: as long as this is safe, though men receive many sharp charges, as did
the Josh. 7.
citizens of Ai, yet are they confident to resist; they can resolve with Job,
Job 13 15.
though he kill me, yet will I trust in him; but if that fail, and the I^sh.
8. 20.
smoke arise thence, their hearts fail them.

5. God Deuteronomy 32. 39 Job. 5. 18.
wounds and heals; it is his justice and mercy: Prove. 6. 32, 33.
we wound our selves by sin: and God heals us by afflictions, as Putridae
carne^ ferro curantur and cauterio. Hier. l. 2. ep. 9. Psalm. 69. 26. Isai 1. 6.
Chirurgions do with the lancet and cautery: Sins are the thieves which spoil
us, and leave us wounded by the way, till the good Luke 10. 34
Samaritan come with his wine and oil, to cleanse, supple, and bind up our
wounds: he smites the conscience with sense of his anger, danger, and bitter
smart, to make us sensible of our sins, and bring us to a loathing of them;
this he does sometimes by external afflictions: sometimes by the word of the
Spirit, the word preached wounding the heart, terrifying the conscience, and
then Act 2. 37.
Peter's hearers cry out, Men and brethren what shall we do? sometimes by
smiting the conscience with an inward sense and apprehension of his fierce
wrath and severe judgments imminent, in which an Psalm. 55. 4, 5
horrible fear overtaketh them (like the 1 King. 19. 11, 12.
earthquake at Hore^ preceding the still voice of mercy) in sense of a
spiritual disertion, while he hides away his face; spiritual wants, or
permission to some grievous tentation, cold fits of despair, and 2 Cor. 12.
buffeting by the messengers of Satan, in all which, though there be means of
comfort appointed, yet none can prevail, till the spirit of God the comforter,
return and heal: the same hand gives vulnus opemque, the wound and plaster:
as it was said, the Hos. 5 1^.
Assyrians and Jareb could not heal Judah and Ephraim of their wound, so no
creature can the wounded spirit, till he who Jer. 30. 11, etc.
corrects in measure, comes and binds up: he, Psalm. 14. 7. 3.
only he, heals the broken hearts, and binds up their wounds: even he
who Isa. 53. 5.
was wounded for our sins, and bruised for our iniquities -- 1 Pet. ^. 24.
by whose stripes we are healed.

1. There are some things principally wounding and afflicting the conscience,.
II.
coming up like those 1 Samuel 13. 17.
Philistim spoilers, in three companies, to destroy, and drive men into
despair: first apprehension of Gods wrath for some grievous sins committed: so
Genesis 4. 13.
^ain, having murdered his brother, cried, My sin or punishment is greater
then I can bear: Judas, having betrayed Christ, durst not come to him to beg
mercy, because he apprehended an implacable anger in Christ: it is true, that
the Ephesians 5. 6.
wrath of God comes on Col. 3. 6.
the children of disobedience for their sins: that his Romans 1. 18.
wrath is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men: that the impenitent by their hardness of heart, treasure up to themselves
wrath against the day of wrath: that there Romans 2. 5. 8, 9.
shall be indignation and wrath to them that obey not the truth: but when thou
who art of a wounded spirit, and broken heart, have well considered; it may be
thou shall find that these things concern thee not, but those who live in
sin, and so would do.

2. The second thing wounding the conscience, is sense of spiritual wants, as
of hope, faith, assurance of salvation, the spirit of sanctification, prayer,
etc. which being Gods grace and the presence of his holy Spirit in the
regenerate, may yet, for the time, be an hidden treasure, an immortal seed
under the frozen clods, without any appearance of life: and the saints may weep
and complain like Joh. 20.
Magdalen in the garden, of the loss of Christ when he is with them, speaks
to them, and they know him not.

3. The third is fear of some strong tentations and trials, in which the
afflicted and affrighted conscience startleth (as the Disciples when Mat. 8.
24, 25.
Jesus slept in the storm, their ship filled with waves, and ready to founder
in the sea; or like Peter Mat. 14. 30.
on the water, when he saw the rough billows coming) and cries out, Save
Master, we perish; when it is sure enough, they cannot perish who are with
Christ.

Now concerning him that will receive any solid comfort in any of these cases,.
III.
it is very necessary that he, 1. Well consider that state in which he seems
to be. 2. Examine his conscience thoroughly. 3. Practice some rules proper for
any of these estates.

Concerning the conscience afflicted with the apprehension of Gods anger
against his sins, let him consider that

1. As God is just, so is he merciful: he is no inexorable Radamanth, he is
easy to be entreated: concerning whom we have a word more sure then any
testimony of man; God ( La^t l 1. ^. 8.
sufficiently known to himself only) has thus proclaimed himself, Exodus 34.
6. The Lord God merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth -- keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and
transgression -- Now if that which others said of the Kings of Israel (that 1
King 20. 31.
they were merciful Kings) could persuade them to seek mercy, and desire
quarter, that they might be saved; how much more, should that which God who
Tit. 1. 2.
cannot lie, (as fame can, and commonly does) has declared of himself; move
the afflicted soul to submit and beg mercy of him, more ready to grant it,
then we are, or can be to entreat it; for ask it we never could, except his
preventing grace moved us thereto.

2. Ezekiel. 18.
God delights not in the death of sinners, but in their conversion: and (as
experience teaches) if we may know, who is welcome to the master of a family,
by the countenance and deportments of the servants and attendants, then we may
know how welcome a penitent sinner is to God, by this, that the Luke 15 7. 10.
Angels of heaven do much rejoice at it.

3. If he would have destroyed thee, how often might he have taken thee away in
thy sins? but now that he gives thee this time, it is to lead thee to
repentance (that Sec^nda post n^usragium miseris tabula. Hier l. 2 ep. 2.
Demet^iad.
second table of ship-wrackt souls) and to salvation. Romans 2. 4. 2 Cor. 7. 10.
Ezekiel. 18. 21, 30. Nulla poenitentia sera est* si sit seria.
Repentance is never too late, if serious.

4. He terrifieth with present sense of his anger against sin, that men may
be stirred up to repentance, and forsaking their sin, wherein they shall be
more assured of the mercy of God and their salvation; Nunquam est sera
poenitentia Hier. Sabinian. ep. 3. l. 2.
as the storms often shaking the trees, do thereby more fasten them, and give
them better root; so is it here: as the winds purify the air and water by
their agitation, so does God the minds of his saints by afflictions, fear of
his judgments, and sorrows. 2 Cor. 7. 11. Psalm. 119. 67, 71. It is Gods mercy
to terrify thee now, that thou may repent and be saved: the Ira est Dei non
intelligere delicta, n^ sequatur poenitentia, etc. Cypr. ep. 3.
most unhappy condition of the sinner is, when God concealeth Magna ir^ est Dei
quando peccantibus non irascitur De^^. Hier. ep. 38. lib. 1. Castrat.
his anger to the last, and gives the impenitent over, as incorrigible, Isai.
1. 5. so that if thou had no remorse of conscience, thy case were desperate:
but this conflict in the soul, concludes another power in thee, resisting
finne, whence thou may be assured of thy regeneration: because, however
weakly the spirit of God does yet express it self to thee, yet it is certain
he can never be overcome.

5. Romans 3. 2^, 23, 24.
All men have sinned, come short of the glory of God, and are justified freely
by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. It is not
therefore any man's own righteousness, that must, or can save him. Psalm. 32.
Romans 4. 7.
Blessed is the man whose sins are covered, and to whom the Lord imputes no
sin: not, who has no sin: for on those terms none could be blessed. It is
not in the geatnesse or smalnesse of the debt, where Luke 7.
50. or 500. are equally forgiven: and where an infinite Majesty if offended
in the least. Never any of the Saints were saved, because they had less sins
then thou (who fear Gods wrath, because thine are great, and appear so to
thy conscience) because some they had, and he that breaks one commandment is
Jam. 2. 10, 11.
guilty of all, and subject to the curse of the law, which is to those that
continue not in all things written in the law to do them. A little wound to the
heart, will as surely kill, as the deepest, and of the greatest orifice: a
shelfe of little sands will as surely bilge the ship, as the greatest rocks: a
Quid prodest ^uncta muniisse, si per ^^um locum perniciosus ho^^i praebeatur
access^^. Greg. ^p ^ 10. l. 7.
little postern gate unguarded will let in the enemy: the smallest sins (if
not covered by faith, and cured by repentance) will destroy the soul. When we
consider Noah's drunkenness, David's murder and adultery, Solomon's idolatry,
Manasses murder, witchcraft, and idolatry, Paul's persecution, Peter's denial
of Christ, it may appear, that these fell into the acts of some more gross
sins, then thou can charge thy conscience withal; and that if Gods justice
should proceed according to the rigor of his law, no Psalm 143. Rom 3. ^0.
flesh living could be saved: therefore is Romans 10. 4.
Christ the end of the law to every one that believes; as he was to Abraham,
David, Peter, Paul, and all those that are saved: when we lay hold on him and
his merits, by Gods own covenant of grace, the rigor and curse of the law is
suspended: he therefore gave us Christ with this condition, Ioh 3. 16.
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life:
therefore Romans 5. 1.
being justified by faith, we have peace with God: and there is Romans 8. 1.
no condemnation to them that are in Christ: for if God justify, who shall
condemn?

6. No sin is so great, as God's mercy, and Christ's merit: all actions of
the creature are finite; but his mercy, and Christ's merit are infinite: a drop
holds some proportion with the sea, because both are finite: but finites with
infinites hold none. Fear not then if thou can repent and believe: there is
balm in Gilead, a plaster incomparably bigger then the wound: So^um
desperationis crimen est, quod mederi nequeat. Hier. Sabin. ^p. 3. l. ^.
only despair condemns.

7. Humility is the foundation of religion: God gives grace to the humble, but
resists the proud: when the subtle tempter Saepe namque malignus spiritus ut
bo^a destruat, quibus prius adversari non valuit: ad operantis mentem post
peractam operat onem venit, eamque tacitis cogitationibu^ in quibusdam suis
laudibus excutit: ita ut decepta men's admiretur ipsa quam si^t magna quae
fecit: quae, dum -- apud seipsam extollitur, eius, qui donum tribuit, grati^
privatur. Greg. l 7. ep 126 Necar.
cannot prevail in his persuasions to evil, he insinuates himself into the
mind of them who have done some good, by his mischievous suggestions lifting
it up to a secret admiration of the same, until it be deprived of grace and
the fruit thereof. The poor publican in his humility not daring to lift up an
eye toward that heavenly Majesty he had so grievously offended, having nothing
to say, but only, God be merciful to me a sinner, went home justified rather
then the proud Pharisee, who boasted of much sanctity. Humility is the securest
virtue; Maxima quippe accusatrix hominum noxiorum est a surpatrix innocentiae
arrogantia: inter multos siquidem eorundem criminum ^eos, nullus est
crimin^f^ior, quam qui se non putat criminosum: itaque and vis haer so^um malis
nostris addere possumus, ut noe innoxios iudicemus. Salvian, de Gubernat. Dei.
lib. 4.
pride, the worm at the root of religion, eating up the very life thereof: now
because it is a very hard thing for corrupt man to have any thing better then
ordinary, and not to be lifted up in mind above his opinion of others, for the
same; therefore God justly permits his dear children sometimes to their own
strength (like a tender nurse, a little withdrawing her hand from the child,
to make it feel it own weakness, thereby to check a more dangerous
presuming) so that falling into some broad and disgraceful sin, they may
learn in humility safely to distrust their own strength, and depend upon God:
better was Peter weeping, then presuming to lay down his life for Christ's sake:
then he fell, but now he rose again. If the considerations of thy sins do
thoroughly humble thee, thou have attained a good effect of a bad cause.

8. God would have the great failings, and grievous sins of some of his elect
to stand upon record, that we might conclude from these instances, (as well as
God's promises) that if we can repent of sins as purple as they, we also
shall find mercy: But this is here deeply considerable, that we never think
of any of these to presumption, but to move us to repentance, and faith in him
who freely forgiveth the penitent, not the obstinate presumptuous sinner: and
is Nihil ita ^ffendit Deum, quam desper^tione meliorum, haerere peioribus --
ipsa desperatio incredulita^i^ indicium. Hier. Rustico. ep. 10. l. 2.
with nothing more offended, then despair of his mercy (which is a secret
questioning the truth of his promises) and impenitency which is the undoubted
issue of unbelief: indeed there is Nihil ita repugnat Deo, quam cor
impenitens, solum crimen est quod veniam consequi non potest, ibid. Hier.
Sabin. ep. 3. l. 2.
no greater injury to God's mercy, then in despair thereof, to continue in
sin; seeing his truth is engaged for our pardon, if we believe and repent:
he has not said in vain, Isai. 1. 18. Though your sins be as scarlet, they
shall be as white as snow.

9. Consider, why he sent Christ into the world? because he so loved it, Joh.
3. 16. he sent him 1 Timothy 1. 15
to save sinners; not only them who had broken some of his commandments, or
in some small and inobservable measures; but (as Paul says) he came into the
world to save sinners, 0. 1 timothy 1. 15 of whom I am chief. He came to call (as
himself professes) Matthew. 9. 13. Mark 2. 17.
not the righteous, but sinners to repentance. He called Mat. 11.
the heavy laden, not fallaciously, but indeed to ease and disburden them of
their sins: he did save Publicans and notorious sinners, and to notify the
same, in spite of Pharisaical calumnies, conversed with them.

10. Consider that God who commands us to forgive, Mat. 18. 22. Luke 17 4.
not only 70. times, but toties quoties, would not enjoin us that which his
self could not, or would not do: he is essentially, and so, infinitely
gracious: his mercy is more then a thousand thousand oceons, which can never be
exhaust: man has but a poor stock, a finite mercy at the best, and such as
may be lessened and overcome by injuries: he that enjoineth man to forgive
without exception^ could not in his justice command and require man to forgive
more then his self could or would. Deus ergo qui etiam minimis animan. tibus
hunc affectum (...) operis inseruit, se tantummodo creaturarum suarum amore
privavit? praesertim cum omnis in nos rerum bonarum amor, ex illius bono amore
descen derit: ipse est enim f^^s, etc. Solv l. 4 de Gub. Dei -- ex hoc quoque
affectu, quo amare nos fecit pignora nostra, intelligere nos voluit, quantum
ipse amare^ pignora (...) Ibid.
Add hereto a consideration of his love: he has planted love, yea a tender
love and care, not only in parents for their children, but (lest we should
suppose it rather habitual then natural, taught by precept or example, rather
then implanted by God in their natures) in the very bruits and birds for the
preservation of their young: all this love in the creature, is but a slender
accident: but in God it is essential, and so, infinite and unchangeable. Now
consider, did God give man (suppose David) so much love and mercy, as that upon
the mediation of the Tekoite, he could presently be reconciled to a rebellious
Absalom; has he given thee bowels of compassion, to zeal thy childrens good
and safety, to mourn for their faults, and to be ready, upon the least
appearance or signs of amendment, to be reconciled unto them, and can thou
conceive that God will not be much more ready to pardon thee, if thou can
repent, and beg pardon, through Christ the son of his love, in whom he has
said from heaven, Mat. 3. 17.
he is well pleased? The custom among the Plut. vit. Themist.
Molossians was, that the Petitioner should take up the Kings son in his
arms, and so kneeling before the altar, nothing might be denied for his
protection and safety who supplicated: (so Themistocles found favor with King
A^m^tus) so the Lord hears our petitions, if we present him in the arms of
faith, Christ Jesus and his merits.

11. A wounded spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, is an Psalm. 51. 19
acceptable sacrifice to God, that which he will not despise: thou can not
reasonably think thy case evil for that which God likes and loves in thee,
and has so mercifully cheerished in those he dearly loved: the man after Gods
own heart, See Psalm. 38 5, 6. Psalm. 116. 3. Psalm. 143. 7.
David felt this which thou art afraid of, My heart says he is wounded within
me -- Psalm. 109. 22.

12. Consider seriously, that a quiet conscience is not always a good
conscience, nor an unquiet always evil: there is a lethargy, torpor, and
stupidity of an evil conscience in a carnal security: Tranquillitas ista
tempestas est. Hi^r. Heliod ep. 6. l. 2. Ho^ plango quod teipse no^ pl^ngi^,
quod (...) non sentis mortuum. Hier Sabin. ep. 3. l. ^.
this calm is a fearful storm, wherein the soul^ (like the men of Laish) is
quiet and secure, until some spiritual Danites awake it; and the sinner goes
on like Agag, thinking surely that the bitterness of death is past: as some
heart-sick man, in whom the strength of nature is so decayed, that he feels
not the undiscovered approaches of death now imminent; such is the calmed
conscience of a secure ^inner. Again, the conscience of a righteous man, in
case of some sin unrepented of, if it be not quiet, it is the better: if it be
like the ship in which Jonah fled, followed with storms till he be cast out;
who sees not, that it is the more happy? The danger is when the mind can be
quiet and untroubled in guiltiness and impenitency: if we feel not our
wounds, it is a mortal sign: as pain is of sense, and sense of life: so that
the main skill is to know, whether thy peace or unquietness and horror of
conscience be good or not?

To this a serious examination is requisite;. IV.
wherein I shall lay down

1. Some reasons why we must seriously examine our consciences.

2. The main lets intercident thereto.

3. Certain rules by which we may thoroughly examine.

4. Interrogatories to be proposed to the afflicted conscience.

5. Some conclusions necessary to be known herein.

1 We ought to examine our selves; for certainly God has not so often
commanded it in vain. Lam. 3. 40. Psalm. 4. 4. 1 Cor. 11. 28. 2 Cor. 13. 5.

2. Without this, we cannot know our sins, and so not repent, nor have any
solid comfort in impenitency: we are extreme apt to mistake our selves: which
if we do, we can have no sound comfort in the testimony of a good
conscience, which presupposes faith and illumination.

3. Without this, we cannot possibly know which way we are going, the Mat 7.
broad way to destruction, or the narrow to salvation; which were very
necessary to comfort us, if we go right, or to recall and rectify us, if
wrong.

4. Without this, we can never make a right use of God's corrections, nor
find any comfortable way out of them: neither can we understand his works of
mercy in us, when he humbles us to raise us more.



1. An ill conscience, which being peceata quasi quaed^ sunt ^ulnera
anie^oarum. Hug. de s. Victor. ^^iscell. l. 1.
wounded by fearful guiltiness, cannot endure any searching.

2. Native hypocrisy, misreporting us to our selves, calling us godly (when we
are nothing less) counting it injury not to be counted so.

3. Distracting cares of this life, and carnal security, which say with those
Jews, Hag. 1. 2. the time is not come -- these make men put off all to the
hazard of the last hour.

The rules which thou must herein observe, are

1. Endeavor to find out and abandon all thy known sins.

2. Rest not in outward shows, but let down the light of Gods word into the
secret and dark recesses of thy heart: Luke 15.
the woman first ligted, then swept the room.

3. Judge thy self as impartially as thou would do an enemy: limmers use to
set their work at some distance from them, that they may be able to judge, and
amend their errors. Place thy actions upon the person of some other man; David
could not see his sin in himself, till 2 Samuel 12.
Nathan showed it him in another: I need not instance in Genesis 38.
Judah and 1 King, 20. 4.
Ahab.

4. Begin timely, and be constant in this duty: if thy thoughts, after some
slender pursuit, return as those Josh, 2, 22.
men of Jericho, with a non est inventus, know that thou have more need of
greater diligence to examine again and ^gaine.

5. Examine thy self by the whole law of God: concerning time past; and what
thou art in opportunity to sin: few wicked men but are content to observe
some of Gods laws (if thou will grant them ^ King 5. 18.
Naaman's plea, only God be merciful to thy servant herein) and sometimes
Herod, Ahab, Pharaoh will have certain fits of seeming devotion and
repentance: the frozen serpent will not sting: then men's corruptions appear,
when opportunity gives them birth.

The Interrogatories to be propounded to thy conscience, are

1. Does sin reign in thee, so that thou yeeldest a willing obedience
thereto? or does it tyrannize over thee? there is an immense difference between
these: all men sin, but sin reigns only in the unregenerate; ( Romans 6.
12.
let not sin reign in your mortal body) the regenerate sin, but, Romans 7. 15,
19.
that which I do, I allow not: for what I would, that I do not, but what I
hate, that I do -- the evil which I would not, that I do: ask thy conscience
therefore, whether thou would have done the evil which now wounds it? if
not, it is no more thou, but sin that dwells in thee.

2. Do thou loath all sin, because it is contrary to God's holy will? and
rather because thou Nemo autem potest desperare, qui diligi^, Beda in Joh. 15.
love God, then because thou fear his judgments? do thou not only
grieve for every sin which thou have committed, but also for the pravity and
corruption of thy will, and the infirmities of flesh and blood disabling thee
to the purer service of God: fear not, in Gods esteem thou art not what thou
loathest, and would not be: neither will God ever condemn thee for that,
which he has given thee grace to loath and condemn in thy self: for if we
would judge our selves, we should not be judged. 1 Cor. 11. 31.
The unregenerate man loves sin, however he fear and hate the punishment
thereof; the regenerate hates it, therefore God will not judge him for it, as
our Savior said to the penitent sinner, Joh. 8. 11. neither do I condemn thee:
go and sin no more.

3. Would thou fain be holy, Liberandus enim a Deo ipso omnino non er^^mist
te ^pse damnaveris.
and is it thy hearts desire to serve God sincerely? Salv. de Gub. Dei l* 5.
^ine.
so that thou can say with the Church, Isai. 26. 8. The desire of our soul
is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee? Do thou Mat. 5.
hunger and thirst after rigteousnesse? be assured thou shall be satisfied:
Do thou in the inward man consent to the law of God? be confident, a true
desire to be holy, speaks a man such in Gods esteem: our present best
perfection is, not that we are holy, but that we would be such.

4. Have thou respect Psalm. 119. 6.
to all Gods commandments, so that thou do not in thy heart dispense with
any of them for pleasures, profits, or any secular advantage sake, but would
fain keep them all? be comforted, however Satan's delusions beguile thee, and
thine own corruptions sometimes betray thee; yet, a little to serve God without
exception, or dispensation to any sin, concludes a man regenerate, the
denomination following the better part, as appears in Paul's expression of
himself in the same case. Romans 7. 25. With the mind I my self serve the law
of God; but with the flesh the law of sin: that is groaning under the tyranny
thereof, not dispensing with its reign.

5. Do thou resolve to do thy uttermost endeavor to avoid sin? God
accepts 2 Cor. 8. 1^
the will for the deed: David Psalm. 119. 8, 57, 106.
said, I will keep thy statutes, and I have sworn, and I will perform it, that
I will keep thy righteous Judgments 2 Samuel 12. ^.
: it is evident he did not so, but certain that he would have done so.

6. Do thou conscionably and diligently use the means to know thy sins;
as by an home-applying* the word to thy conscience: for Romans 77.
by the law is knowledge of sin? Do thou carefully avoid all occasions and
incentives, moving thee, and leading thee thereunto? He hates drunkenness in
vain, who will not refrain from the company that led him thereto: if thou
hate adultery, look not on the lascivious: let her not take thee with her
eie-lids: the Oculus meretricis est laqueus amatoris, Ambr. de poen* l. 1.
harlots eye, is the adulterers snare: Mat. 5. 28.
Whosoever looks on a woman, to lust after her, has committed adultery with
her already in his heart: (...).
either looking love not, or loving look not, says Isidore. Isidor, op. 173
Come not near the door of her house, Prove. 5. 8. Occasion is lusts pander.

7. Ask thy conscience, whether it can presume to sin wittingly and willingly?
and whether it can be quiet in any known and unrepented sin? if it be unquiet,
fear not; this very unrest of conscience, which so much affrighteth thee, is a
principal mark of a good conscience: it is true (as the women sang of Saul and
David, 1 Samuel 18. 7^
Saul has slain his thousand, but David his ten thousand, so) despair has
cast away some, but presumption many thousands more.

8. Has not thy conscience at some times, in some good measure been comforted
by a sweet assurance of thy interest in Christ, resolution to leave all thy
sins, peace with God, and salvation by the merits of Christ, we must not
always judge of our state by present sense: there are certain Rev. 3. 10.
hours of tentation, wherein the light of grace is fearfully eclipsed to our
sense, and the stupid, or afflicted conscience feels no present comfort of
Gods spirit, which yet in due time shall return, and compensate our trials with
greater advantage of assurance then we had before.

9. Lastly examine thy conscience, whether that after thy fearful trials (and
esteem in the midst of them) thy refuge be not to God in earnest and hearty
prayer to have mercy on thee, comfort and confirm thee, yea sometimes when he
has not for a long season showed thee any countenance, and seemed to reject
and not regard thy earnest supplications, thou have resolved not to give over
crying unto him, but with Jacob thy soul has said, Gen 32.
I will not let thee go until thou bless me? Happy man! he that gave thee
that spirit of prayer and perseverance, Luke 18. 7, 8.
will assuredly hear thee, as he did the Cunanitish woman, Mat. 15. 2^ 28.
and accomplish his work in thy salvation.



1. God's judgments are ever just, I, when flesh and blood, say with Ioh. 3 9.
Nicodemus, How can these things be? when thee too curious inquests after them
are to be stayed with a, Romans 9. 20.
Nay but, O man, who art thou that reply against God? and so also his
mercies are as the unsounded deepes, beyond all apprehension of carnal reason;
often curing, by wounding and afllicting the guilty conscience; comforting, by
terrifying; bringing to glory and immortality through corruption; killing sin
in the flesh by death, the fruit of sin, and bringing to heaven (as I may
say) by the gates of hell, and fear of damnation.

2. The most grievous sins committed in ignorance and unbelief, after
repentance, are no arguments to despair: 1 Cor 6. 9, 10, etc.
Neither fornicators, idolaters -- thieves, covetous, drunkards, revilers, nor
extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of heaven; and such were some of you:
but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God: Paul 1 Timothy 1.
was a blasphemer, persecuter, and injurious man, but obtained mercy; for as
much as he did it ignorantly, and in unbeleefe, in his conversion these sins
were taken off, as his Act. 28. 3, 5, 6.
Melita viper, without more danger to his life: so God pronounces of the
convert, Ezekiel. 18. 12
all his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be mentioned
unto him.

3. Great and grievous sins of the regenerate, through violent perturbations of
mind, or tentations overtaking them, are not to be reckoned among symptoms of
reprobation or apostasy: such was Peter's denial, and David's adultery and
murder: therefore the Apostle says, Gal. 6. 1.
If any man be overtaken in any fault, ye that are spiritual restore such a
one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be
tempted; and Christ teaches us, without distinction of great and little
sins, to say daily, Forgive us our trespasses: this life is a spiritual
combat, a trucelesse war Ephesians 6.
against the powers of darkness, wherein the strongest may be, and often are
carried away captive, and yet be healed and recovered; their Captivus abducitur
sed in vitus, qu^ in alienas terras necessitate contendat: intimo tamen non
migret affectu: patriam secum animo vehat: quaerat copia^ quemadmodum
revertatur -- Amb. de paen. l. 1. c. 3.
captivity concludes not their not being true Israelites, who would fain
return.

4. Every sin against knowledge does not presently conclude a reprobate
mind: the best and most knowing are sometimes taken in Satan's snares; Peter
(though forewarned) denied Christ through sudden apprehension of fear: not out
of malice, but infirmity: we (nay the best of men) are but partly flesh, and
partly spirit, so that we can neither do the good we would, nor avoid the evil
which we see and hate: Romans 7.
Paul, and all the regenerate knowing, and allowing the law of God, yet
sometimes feel another lawless law carrying them away captive to sin.

5. Though every sin against conscience be very dangerous, and every
perseverance therein, the very suburbs of hell, yet every such failing
concludes not against repentance and remission: because sin not only
allureth, but sometimes exercises the rage of a tyrant, and captivateth us
against our will: there may also be a lethargy or epilepse of the soul: there
is such mischievous subtilty in Satan, that his snares (though seen) are not
always avoided; whose messengers (though felt with grief of soul) are not
always overcome; yet he^ that gave waters to the ^^x. 17. 6, 7.
Horeb rock, can smite our harder heartr, and make the waters of life slow
plentifully, to repentance never to be repented of.

6. Though every relapse into sin be very dangerous, yet if a man be not 2 Pet.
2. 20, etc.
entangled and overcome therein, it concludes not against repair by
repentance: the most holy Pro. 24, 16.
fall seven times a day. Satan does not always present new scenes, but
sometimes dresseth up his old artifices, therewith to beguile.

7. Though our infirmities be many, Gods power is made ^ Cor. 12.
manifest therein, sustaining us, that though we fall, we shall not fall away:
though Satan's power, subtilty, and restless malice be very great, yet he and
his messengers cannot go beyond their chain, wherewith they are limited, no not
so much as into an Mat. 8.
herd of swine without God's leave, who will not try us 1 Cor. 10. 13.
above that he will make us able: so that we may resolve, Romans 8.
that neither life, nor death, nor any creature shall be able to separate us
from the love of God in Christ Jesus.

The rules of practice hereto belonging, are. V.


1. Do thy utmost endeavor to keep the testimony of a good conscience, which
thou can by no means do, but by watching over thy soul, and with unyeelding
constancy resisting temptations: every sin, the least, wounds the soul
afresh: be not secure of little sins, let a good conscience be most precious
unto thee: part not from it for any pleasures, honors, or riches of this
world; rather part from thy life: have a tender conscience: a 1 Timothy 4. 3. Tit.
1. 15.
seared one, like callous flesh, is hardly sensible of that which touches it:
to this, Consuetudo peceandi, toslit sensam pecc^ti.
custom brings a man, taking away the sense of sin.

2. Approve thy self in every action 1 Pet. 3. 15. 10.
to God, setting thy self ever in his presence, who see all thou do o^
think; and care not who ever else blame thee when he approves thee: 2 Cor.
1. 12.
walk not according to the wisdom of the flesh, but by God's grace which
shall at last be thy rejoicing.

3. Be sure sin reign not in thee; which cannot be, except thou sell thy self
thereto, by consenting to thine own captivity; as the Ex. 21, 5* 6.
eare-bored servants, who professed love to their masters; and so would not be
manu-missed and freed from them: hate sin, and none shall hurt thee: no sin is
so pernicious, as that which pleases most; specially take heed of presumptuous
sins, that they get not dominion over thee. Psalm. 19. 13. Numb. 15. ver. 30,
31. Deuteron. 17. verse. 12.

4. Look on Gods justice and mercy together, part them not in thy thoughts: if
thou look on his justice only, thou must needs despair in the sight of thy
sins: if thou look on his mercy only, thou will easily presume, when thou
shall see the admirable immensity thereof, so ready to pardon sins: the old
seamen noted the ignis lambens sitting sometimes on the yards of their ships,
for a good, or a mischievous presage: if they saw but one flame, they called it
an unlucky Helena: if two, they took it for Castor and Pollux, good abodements
of fair and prosperous weather: it is much like here: to consider either
mercy, to presumption; or justice, to despair; is destructive: it is happy to
find them thus together, that thou neither in thy security presume to sin,
nor despair for the greatness of any sin in thy repentance.

5. Labor for true faith in Christ, who is the 1 John ^, 2.
propitiation for our sins, 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
whose blood cleanses us from all: 1 Timothy 1. 19.
holding faith and a good conscience, that we may 1 Timothy 3. 9.
not be wrackt. There was no cure for a wounded Israelite, against the venom
of fiery serpents, but to look up to the brazen Ioh. 3.
Serpent, which prefigured Christ apprehensible by faith; the only cure of
sinne-wounded consciences.

6. Let but this very sense and apprehension of God's wrath which now
terrifieth thee, cause thee the more heartily to loath all sin; and thou
shall thereby be assured, that God has wounded thee, only to heal the.

7. Remember that Romans 3. 19.
what the law says, it says it only to them who are under the law, not under
grace: they are under the law who plead not guilty, and stand upon their
justification by works of the law: we are under grace, who seeing our sin
and misery by the law; flee wholly to him for mercy, who Romans 3. 24.
freely justifies the sinner: the curses and threatenings of the law are not to
break the Mat. 1^, 20.
bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax (the penitent soul trembling at
God's word, grieving for his sins, the man of a wounded spirit, Christ came
to call and save such) but to beat down the heart lifted up with opinion of
self-merit, safety in, and presuming to sin.

8. Repent thee Agenda est enim poenitentia, non solum solicit, sed etiam
matur^, etc. Ambr de poen l. 2. c. 1.
quickly: let not sin get r^ot in thy heart: let not the wound grow blew
before thou apply the medicine: high thee quickly to the throne of Grace to
implore mercy, before wrath come out against thee: catch hold quickly on this
second table, repentance, who have lost the first of innocence: condemn thy
self, and Christ will justify thee: he only Novit omnia Deus, sed expectat
vocem ^uam: non ut puniat, sed ut ignoscat -- praeveni accusatorem tuum: si
teipsum accusaver^s, accusatorem nullum timebi^, etc. Ambr. de poen. l. 2. c. 7.
expects thy voice: when thou say, I have sinned, he says, I forgive
thee. Do but mark how quickly the pardon followed 2 Samuel 12* 13.
David's confession: no sooner had he said, I have sinned against the Lord,
but the Lord said by the Prophet, the Lord also has put away thy sin: Peter
quickly repented, and as quickly found mercy: Heb. 12. 17.
Esau stayed too long, and so found no place for repentance, though he sought
it carefully with tears. If the grando fiered, be suddenly cast back again,
it proves only the assailants harm or danher: such shall Satan's fireworks
prove, if thou presently cast out his tentations, and heartily repent thee
where any of his darts touch thee.

9. Give not thy self over to pensive dedolency, worldly sorrow, and
fruitless solitariness: that will but feed the bitterness of spirit: think
not too much of thy afflictions, but sweeten them with the frequent remembrance
of God's mercy toward thee: take heed of 2 Cor. 7. 10.
worldly sorrow, that is unto death: cheer up thy self in God, as David did,
Psalm. 43.
Why art thou so sad, O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me?
trust in God, for I shall yet praise him -- Pro. 17* 22.
a merry heart does good like a medicine: but a broken spirit dries the bones.
A merry heart Prove. 15. 13
makes a cheerful countenance, but by the sorrow of the heart the spirit is
broken.

10. Hearken diligently to the word of God: he is the God of all consolation,
and the word is Scripturae sacrae oraculum, Deimens est, Salvian de Gub. Dei.
l. 3.
his mind and revealed will for our good: that is a full storehouse: there is
no affliction incident to man, which may not there find a proper cure: here
thou shall find rules to guide thee, and keep thee from sin: here thou shall
find the sweet mercy of God in Christ Jesus, to wash away the guilt of all thy
transgressions: but be thou not only a hearer, but a constant doer of the word,
and lay the gracious promises up in thine heart; so shall thou in due season
feel the work of God's spirit distilling the former and the later rain upon
the seed, to make it take root and be fruitful.

11. Hereto add zealous and frequent prayer, as the Psalm. 6. 2. Psalm. 41. 4.
Psalm. 51. 8. Psalm. 109. 107
Saints have done in all their distresses: and be assured that he will not
leave thee comfortless, but at last coming with great assurance of thy
salvation, will abundantly recompense thy patience in suffering, and
perseverance in praying for pardon. Satan is never more foiled, and fooled in
his own work, then when he gets leave to wound the hearts of the elect; for
(as Romanus the martyr told the tormenter) look how many wounds he gives them,
so many mouths he sets open for them, to cry to God for help; and indeed
these jewels cannot come to their glorious luster, without hard grinding by
afflictions.

A Prayer for them who are of a wounded spirit, in respect of their grievous
sins.
O Lord God, gracious and merciful; rebuke not in thine anger, neither chasten
me in thy hot displeasure: my soul is sore vexed: and Lord how long? Have
mercy on me for I am weak: Lord heal my soul and deliver it: O save me for
thy mercy sake: I am weary of my groaning, mine eye is consumed with grief:
Lord hear my supplications, receive my prayer. I am sorely afflicted, Lord
quicken me according to thy word: in thy loving kindness, and multitude of
thy tender mercies; blot out my transgressions, wash me thoroughly from my
sins, cleanse me from all mine iniquities, the greatness and number whereof
is such, as that I am ashamed and afraid of thy blessed presence: I acknowledge
my self unworthy to look up to heaven, to appear before thee with petition
for mercy, who have so uncessantly provoked thy justice: the filthy leprosy of
my sins stop mine own mouth: my heart answers, that I am unworthy that ever
thou should incline thy gracious ear unto so wretched a sinner. These
terrors of conscience wherewith thou have now afflicted my soul, are thy just
judgments: the fears of hell and eternal condemnation, wherewith thou have
wounded me, are incomparably less then my sins: but Lord remember them not,
who can not forget the sufferings of thy holy son Jesus for them all. I am
not able to answer thee one of a thousand, nor can thy justice require that of
me, for which my Savior and redeemer has satisfied: therefore I renounce my
self, that I may be found in thy Christ, not having on our own righteousness,
according to the condemning letter of the law, but that I may be clothed in his
righteousness, who has long since cancelled the handwriting of ordinances
that were against me, and paid the debt for me: Lord, for his sake, I humbly
entreat thee to turn this judgment under which I now labor, into mercy: let
it beget in my soul a true loathing of all sin, a steadfast purpose to
forsake all my evil ways; a comfortable experience of thy mercy pronouncing
pardon to my afflicted conscience, by the infallible evidence of thy holy
spirit, and assurance of peace with thee: make me to hear of joy and
gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice in thee: cast me
not away from thy presence, take not the holy Spirit the comforter from me:
but restore me to the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free
spirit, despise not a broken and contrite heart, but heal my wounded spirit:
then will I teach transgressors thy way, that they may fear thee (who art so
terrible in thy justice) and convert unto thee, who art so abun^amt in thy
mercy. Lord hear me, Lord incline thine ear to a poor distressed soul:
Lord consider and do it, for thy only son our Savior Jesus Christ his sake,
to whom with thee, O heavenly father, and the holy spirit, be all honor and
glory, in heaven and earth, from this time forth and for ever.

Amen.
CHAP. XXVII.
. 1. Sense of spiritual wants afflicts, but not so much endangereth the
soul.. 2. What we are herein to consider.. 3. How we must examine the
conscience.. 4. Rules of practice hereto necessary.

THe second thing wounding and afflicting the conscience,. I.
is sense of defects, and spiritual wants: as, want of faith, hope, assurance
of salvation: want of sanctification, purity of heart, the spirit of prayer,
and hearing, want of ability rightly to perform other holy duties. In these
the spirit is stupefied and fearfully darkened in the saint for a time: a man
sometimes feels dullness to, and want of fervency in prayer, and want of
comfortable assurance that God hears or regards it, because he does not
presently answer, or not at all grant that which we ask: sometimes he
feels a deviation of his mind, and discomposure of thoughts, in attention,
and unbeleef in hearing the word, or reading the same: sometimes want of
patience, want of love to God, and charity to men; in fine, such a general
debility, or distemper of the inward man, Romans 7. 18, 19. 24.
that he readily concludes with Paul, I know that in me (that is in my flesh)
dwells no good thing: for to will is present with me: but how to perform
that which is good, I find not: for the good that I would, I do not: but the
evil which I would not, that I do -- O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? These are great maladies of the soul,
and wounds of the spirit: but the sense hereof (as I said) is a good sign of a
bad cause: where these are, and the sinner is not sensible thereof, they are
desperate Symptoms.

For comfort herein,. II.
let us (as was proposed in case of the precedent distress) consider

1. That the very same measure of grace, which to the present sense of a
regenerate man, seems incompetent, may yet be a sufficient measure to save
him: and he is then strong (by the power of Christ resting upon him, and
showing it perfection in man's weakness) when crying out for God's assistance,
he is most weak in his own sense: 2 Cor. 12, 8, etc.
so in Paul's distress, the Lord thus answered his petitions, My grace is
sufficient for thee: he says not, it shall be, (as relating to a greater
supply) but it is sufficient, (...).
as speaking of the present measure of grace, which then he had, when he
seemed to himself, weakest.

2. That the saints present measure of assurance is such, as that they must not
only give diligence to make their calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10, 18.
that so an entrance may be administered to them abundantly, into the
everlasting kingdom of Christ, Phil. 2. 12.
but (though it be God which works in them both to will and to do) they must
also work out their own salvation with fear and trembling.

3. All unbeleefe concludes not a reprobate sense: there is an unbeleefe in
the elect before, and a perplexing remainder thereof, after their calling; yea
in their best estate here: Luke 17. 5. Mark 16. 14.
why else did the Apostles pray, Increase our faith, and why did our Savior
upbraid them with unbeleefe?

4. That saving faith differs in degrees: so that there is a stronger and a
weaker faith, yet both true, and justifying: so do all other graces: one has a
greater and more excellent measure of the spirit of prayer then another: one
has a more discerning and attentive spirit of hearing then another, and yet in
either instance, the least may be true, and sufficient: for to every man is
given according to the measure of Christ: one has ten talents, Ephesians. 4 7.
another but two: yea in one and the same man's faith, there is sometimes a
greater, sometimes a lesser measure of confidence and assurance: and so we
must judge of other gifts: sometimes there is more fervency in prayer,
sometimes less: the sunbeams fall not on us at all times alike, neither does
the light of grace.

5. That a true saving faith may be very weak, and the believer may have very
little sense thereof for the time, and yet the gates of hell shall never
prevail against it, as may appear in Peter's example.

6. That there are doubtings and failings in the best on earth: Gal. 5.
because we are here but partly spirit: Phil. 3.
we are not yet come to perfection: Romans 1. 17.
faith here must receive contintuall increases, and be subject to trials: 1
Pet. 1. 6.
so must all other graces.

7. That true faith can never, never shall finally fall away, or utterly fail,
though it be subject to intension and remission: Luke 22. 31.
because Christ intercedeth for us, as he said to Peter, Romans 11. 29.
Behold, Satan has desired that he may sift you as wheat: Act. 13. 48.
but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: Remitti potest, non
amitti: secundum gradum, non secundum habitum.
because his grace by which we are called, and stand, is immutable, in the
counsel and decree of God: and because hereto we are scaled up by the holy
spirit of promise: and the like we are to judge of all the fruits of
sanctification, 2 Cor. 1. 21, 22.
which being the gifts and graces of God, are (...), such as God repents not
of, neither finally with-draweth.

We must here again examine the conscience: I have spoken something
concerning the examination of faith in the 2. Chap. but intend here only those
things which concern this present Argument of comforting the afflicted soul:
ask thy conscience therefore, whether

1. Thou have indeed a true sense of thy spiritual wants, and grievest at thy
corruptions of heart, which on every occasion break out into acts of sin
against God; is this a grievous burden unto thee? be comforted, thy sin is out
of it proper place, a stranger unto thee: for nothing in it own place is
heavy. The danger is want of sense, and taking pleasure in unrighteousness: if
a man feel not when he is wounded, he is either dead, or in some dangerous
ectasie. No part has sense but the living: though it were for the present more
comfortable to be whole, yet sense of smart in thy wounds, Romans 8.
concludes life, and indeed, in God's cures (who makes all things work for
the best to them that love him) a better state (in respect of the quiet fruits
of righteousness, accrewing to them that are thereby exercised, and the
ulcerous corruptions of our souls, often necessitating our wounding that we may
be healed) then the secure prosperity of sinners: Psalm 119.
it is good at the last for the saint that he has been troubled. When thou
hear or read the Scriptures, do thou feel the want of says,
assurance, sanctification, the spirit and fervency of prayer? be comforted: as
the suns eclipse, and failing of light toward us, can be discerned by no
light but it own; so neither can the want of grace be possibly discerned by any
thing but grace.

2. Have thou an hearty desire to have these wants of grace supplied? fear
not, that very desire of grace is grace; without which thou could not desire
it. Man. 5. 6.
Blessed are they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they
shall be filled. God will never famish that soul which desires him and his
saving health: none can hunger but the living; none hunger for grace, but he
that lives thereby: but thy desire of grace must be hearty, not languid: such
as cannot rest unsatisfied with any thing else in the world: there may be a
feeble or oblique appeti^e of salvation in Balaam (for fear of damnation) but
he more loved the wages of unrighteousness: the most happy thirst for the
waters of life is that which afflicts the soul, till it be obtained; which
can never rest or joy in any thing without it: so that indeed this very
condition which so much afflicts and affrighteth thee, is the most secure and
happy; and thou shall once know, that which he said in the happy event of his
unhappy shipwreck, O ^ueri periissemus, nisi sic periissemus.
We had perished, if we had not thus perished. And when thou have received
the spirit of God in such a measure, as thereby to know the things that are
freely given thee of God; 1 Cor. 2. 12. Psalm. 94. 1^.
thou shall find, that Blessed is the man whom the Lord chasteneth and
teaches in his law, that he may give him rest from his days of adversity.

3. In sense of spiritual wants, ask thy soul whether ever thou had that
whereof thou now feel the want? if thou had, be assured it shall revive
again, and finally overcome; as it is written, 1 Ioh. 4. 5.
Whosoever is born of God overcomes the world: and this is the victory that
overcomes -- our faith. And this sense and sorrow is a certain token of thy
recovery and souls health, as that seven times neesing of the Shunamites
son, before he opened his death-closed eyes, was, of his life's returning. If
thou never yet had the grace, whereof thou now beginnest to feel the want,
it appears by this sense, that now thou shall have it: and this trouble of
thy soul, Ioh. 5.
is but as the moving of Bethesda waters, a certain sign of an healing power
descended thereinto.

4. Ask thy conscience, Ier. 2. 17.
as the Prophet says, Have thou not procured this unto thy self? this of
which thou complainest of? have thou not neglected the appointed means?
Suppose want of faith perplexe thee; have thou not carelessly heard the Gospel?
have thou laid it up in a careful heart? have thou valued it, and begged it
fervently and frequently of God, above all things in the world? Thou
complainest of want of the spirit of prayer; have thou not neglected this duty
in times past? do thou duly prepare thyself thereto? do thou use that
vigilance which Christ enjoined, Watch and pray; by re-calling thy profane and
wandering thoughts from their extravagancies, and in all attention of spirit
fixing them on Jesus Christ? thou feel the want of sanctification in thy
heart, tongue, and actions? Ask thy conscience, if thou have not heretofore
buried the checks thereof, for some vain pleasure or profit's sake? If thou
would have the effect cease, remove the cause. God will have his ordinances
duly observed, wherein they shall never want their promised effect.

5. Ask thy conscience whether thou do not live in some grievous sin? It
is but folly to cry out of the heat and still cast oil on the fire: if it be an
Achan's wedge hidden, search for the cursed thing, 1 King. 8. 38.
and the plague in thine own heart, in the cure whereof thou shall be
comforted; if it be a sleeping Jonah, Job. 22. 23.
cast him overboard: as Eliphaz said, If thou return to the Almighty, thou
shall be built up: thou shall put iniquity far from thy tabernacles -- the
Almighty shall be thy defense -- then shall thou have delight in the Almighty,
and shall lift up thy face unto God: thou shall make thy prayer unto him, and
he shall hear thee -- The rules of practice are,. IV.


1. Hear God's word preparedly, that is, (as has been said) renew thy
repentance, and pray for a blessing thereon: hear it reverendly, and
attentively: faith is by hearing; so is sanctification, Gods spirit working
upon his own ordinance to make it active thereto. The very cause why so many
hear, so often, and so few, so seldom practice, and receive true comfort
thereby, is because they prepare not, but are like men that sow among thorns.

2. Let faith (and all other graces) be precious to thee, for his sake whom it
apprehends: God will never bestow his inestimable gifts on men who slight
and undervalue them: how few set a right estimate on precious faith, the spirit
of prayer, or memory of good things, till it be too late? things of this world
are rated high enough: but where is the man that rises early, late takes rest,
eats the bread of carfulness, ventureth sea and land, to get faith and
sanctity? do but thou so value and desire these best gifts, and God will not
withold them from thee, Joh. 7. 38, 39. Venture interior^ homini^, conscientia
cordis eius -- i^sa etiam fons orit. Beda in loci Genesis 29. 2.
Psalm. 84. 11.

3. Jesus said, He that believes in me, out of his belly shall flow rivers
of living waters; that is the abundant graces of the holy Ghost: labor for
this faith; but if thou will attain it, endeavor to remove all lets and
obstructions thereto: resolution to continue in any known sin, and true faith
are inconsistent, Hardness of heart is like the great stone on the mouth of
the well at Padan-Aram, which keep men from the refreshing waters: these must
first be removed: sin in the affections is like a venomous toad in the mouth of
the fountain, stopping up the waters of life.

4. Consider God's work in thee, by comparing thy condition with others: thou
art possibly not heard in thy prayers? not to say, Do thou ask according to
his will? I say, mark Gods work, which is to save thee and make thee eternally
blessed: if he do that by a means which he knows best; 2 King. 5.
Will thou be impatient, with Naaman, if thou art not healed and helped
according to thy way which thou proposest? Is it not enough that he will do
that which is best for thee, and can thou judge so well of that, as God? nay
but subject to God's good will and infallible wisdom: thou may err in
asking, (who has not?) but he cannot in giving for the best: it may be he
sees best to try thy perseverance and patience, whereof I confess I know no
harder object, then opinion of his not hearing our prayers. It was no small
trial when David cried out, Psalm. 22. 1^
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from helping
me, and from the words of my crying? Mat, 27 46.
It was the greatest when our Savior repeated the same. Moses was denied
entrance into Canaan, but received into heaven: Heb. 5. 7.
the cup did not pass away from Christ, but Gods will was done in the work of
man's redemption; and so he was heard. Thy faith bears many sharp charges of
the tempter? mark Gods work therein: Does he not even by this means more
confirm it? Is not every temptation as the shaking of the trees, which loosning
the ground makes them take the deeper root? thou feel great defects of
sanctification, and thence many dubious conflicts between the spirit and the
flesh, Genesis 25. 22,
making thy soul cry with Rebecca perplexed with her wrestling twins, why am I
thus? despair not, but consider Gods work: thus he forces thee often to fly to
him, and to consult his oracles: thus he exercises thee to humility, without
which the most excellent graces could not save thee. He that prayed for Peter
fallen, could have kept him from falling into that sin: but thus he kept him
from presumption, and fitted him to confirm his brethren.

5. Beg holiness of God, who has said, Ask and ye shall have: it is a
vehement motive hereto, to consider that God is holiness; and certainly he
cannot choose but love his own image in us, and give us that which he loves:
it pleased God that Solomon (before riches, revenge, and life it self) begged
of him Wisdom; 1* King 3. 10, 11.
so that he did not only grant his request, but over and above gave him riches
and honors: and undoubtedly it does so much please God, Ephesians 3. 20. Pl^s Deum
tribuere quam rogatur, etc.
that a man does in sense of his wants, from his heart, and before all things,
beg grace and sanctity of him, that he will not deny him: H^^r l. 2. ep. 11.
Russino
but add to his grant more then we are able to ask or think of.

A Prayer for comfort and supply, in case of spiritual wants.
O Lord God, abundant in mercy and truth, who delightest not in the
destruction of wretched creatures, nor despisest the groans of a troubled
spirit, I poor afflicted man, in bitterness of soul, acknowledge my vileness
and want of grace, the corruption of my sinful nature, the misery which I have
procured my self by my wilful disobedience to thy holy laws and my impotency
to any thing that is good: I am as that wretched traveller wounded and cast
down, only sensible of my wonnds, utterly unable to move or help my self: the
Priest and Levite pass by and help me not; no creature can: yea thy holy law
(which says, Do this, and live) is so far from helping or releeving me,
that now, by reason of my infirmity, it becomes to me a killing letter; at
best but like the Prophets staff sent before by the ministry of the servant,
not able to give life, only showing me my sins, and rendering me guilty, as
before thy dreadful tribunal; so at the bar of mine own conscience: Lord let
the good Samaritan, the Prophet himself, Christ Jesus, my Savior, naw come to
me: he only can bind up my wounded soul, and heal it. Thou have wounded me
by an heavy apprehension of thy justice; now heal me by the assurance of thy
mercy: strengthen my faith in Christ, who freely justifies sinners: as thou
have in thine eternal love, given him to death for my redemption, so give me an
infallible assurance that he is my Jesus and Savior: that according to thine
own gracious promise in him, I may live with thee. Blessed Savior, who
sentest the holy Ghost the comforter of all thine elect, to thy afflicted
Disciples to strengthen them, send him to my more feeble and wretched soul: it
is neither of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of thine own
goodness, showing mercy: thou workest both the will and the deed of thy good
pleasure: be graciously pleased to sanctify my corrupted will and affections:
as thou have given me a will, and an hearts desire to serve and please thee,
that I might be saved, so perfect thine own work in me, establish that thing
which thou have begun: will thou, that I will not in vain: thou have nothing
the less by communicating thy goodness to others, Lord give me true
holiness, repair thine own image in me, that thou may own me for thine:
manifest thine own work in me, unto me. Let not the good spirit which
dwells in me, be any longer hidden from me: Lord Jesus manifest thy self
unto my soul: let the light of thy spirit break out in full assurance of
faith, that I may no more doubt of thy mercies: give me an evident victory
over sin and despair, by the manifest presence of the comforter; Lord my
afflicted soul knows no sanctuary but thy mercy: unto thee it gaspeth, as a
thirsty land: O shower down that abundant dew of grace which may refresh my
wearied spirit, and fill me with the fruits of righteousness, which may
appear in my life and conversation, to thy glory, and the assurance of my
election, calling, sanctification, perseverance, and salvation in thy beloved
son my blessed Savior Jesus Christ: to whom with Thee and the holy Spirit,
three Persons, one immortal, incomprehensible, omnipotent, only wise God, be
rendered all honor and glory, in heaven and earth, now and to all eternity.

AMEN.
CHAP. XXVIII.
. 1, Of the conscience afflicted with fear of tentations, and falling away:
What we are herein to consider.. 2. How we must examine the conscience
herein.. 3. What we must practice.

We are next to consider the wounded spirit,. I.
or conscience afflicted with fear of tentations and falling away through
them, enclining it to despair of grace sufficient to resist them; hereby the
soul is in heaviness 1 Pet. 1. 6.
through manifold tentations: in which case it is necessary to consider, that

1. A Tentatio est experimenti sumptio de eo quo l tentatur, etc. T. Aquin, 2^.
q. 97. a. 10.
tentation is a trial, or taking an experiment of some thing: the Devil who
Suggerere potest, ^ogere non potest. Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hoc tantum potest,
quod egit in principio, seducere and abstrahere mentem, etc. Irenae. l. 5. c. 3.
cannot compel, tries men whether he can allure them to sin: and this is
tentation.

2. There is a temptation of trial: see 1 Cor. 10. 13. Act. 20. 19. Rev. 3. 10.
and so James says, My brethren, Jam. 1. 2, 12.
count it all joy when ye fall into diverse tentations -- for when he is tried
he shall receive the crown of life: and blessed is the man that so does. God,
who is said to tempt no man (that is, to evil: because Sicut ergo peccatum in
^o non est: ita peccatum ex eo non est. Fulg. de praedest* ad Monim l. 1.
as there is no sin in him, so neither is there any of him) yet tried Abraham,
(to make him known to others and himself: Nec sibi qu^squam innotescit, nisi
rentatus. Aug. in Psalm. 60.
for no man untryed knows himself) which is called tempting or proving: as
Deuteronomy. 13. 3. Ex. 15. 25. Ex. 16. 4. Deuteronomy. 8. 16. Psalm. 26. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 6. And
there is a temptation of seducement, which is a solicitation to defection and
falling from God by sinning, and doing evil. 1 Timothy 6. 9. 1 These. 3. 5. so that
Tentat Deus ut doceat, tentat Diabo^us ut perdat.
God tempts that he may teach us, but the Devil that he may destroy us.

3. Some temptations arise from the corruption and sin inherent in the flesh.
Jam. 1. 14. Every man is tempted when he is (...) his own lusts, such as are
mentioned Galat. 5. 19, 20. Some are suggested by the tempter, who being a
spirit, has power to in^^^uate and convey Tentat in nos conserre quae sua
sunt. Minuc. Fell. Octav.
his impious notions into our minds: suggestion between spirits, being as
contiguity and touching of bodies: now, whereas he cannot know the unuttered
secrets of the heart, (it 1 Chro^ 28. 9.
being Gods peculiar to search that) he marketh men's natural inclinations, and
their habits, by their words and actions, and so prepares baits for them
accordingly, sishing in these depths, the secrets whereof he knows not, till
he perceive his suggestions are swallowed, and the sinner taken: therefore he
presents such thoughts, as he con^ectureth will take, by that which is
obvious to the senses of men: as, he sits an opportunity of treason to
impious Judas, by the malice of the high Priests: of lust to Amnon; of
venturing on the cursed thing to Achan; of revenge to Cain; of idolatry to 2
King. 16. 10, etc.
Ahaz, by the altar of Damascus.

4. There are four degrees of tentations, by which it comes to full maturity:
1. Suggestion. 2. Delight therein. 3. Consent to. 4. Acting the same; as James
1. 14, 15. Man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lusts, and e^iced;
thenwhen lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when it is
finished, brings sorth death: the first of these (a bare suggestion) is not
our sin, if there be no delight therein, or consent thereto: for Christ Mat 4
1. Luke 4. 2.
was tempted, Hebr. 2. 1^.
in all points like as we are, yet Hebr. 4. 15. Luke 22. 28.
without sin. The devils sin it is, when ever he suggesteth evil. The
second (as the third and fourth) is sin in its degree; for every delight in
evil speaks a man's will such: declining from good, and inclined to consent,
and act evil.

5. Tentation of trial to the saint, is but as fire to gold; it purifieth and
makes more precious in Gods esteem: as it is written, Psalm. 116. 15. Precious
in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints; and 1 Pet. 1. 7.
that the trial of your faith being much more precious then of gold which
perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, etc. so
says that mirror of patience; Job 23. 10,
When he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold: tentation only burns out
the dross; it is as a winnowing wind: so Satan by a temptation winnowed
Peter: now consider with thy self, Can the refiner of gold so provide, that he
will not loose it in the furnace? can the husbandman so use the wind, that
he will not loose the corn, but thereby cleanse it from the chasse? and can
thou think that God will loose thee, by permitting thee to temptations? Assure
thy self he cannot err: he measures all, is faithful, and 1 Cor. 10. 13.
will not suffer thee to be tried above that thou art able. He knows 2. Pet.
2. 9.
how to deliver his out of tentations: therefore he bids them not to Rev.
2. 10.
fear any of these things which they should suffer, whom Satan should cast
into prison.

6. There can be Nullum sine host certamen Leo. sermon. 25. Nemo praemium
percipit ante exper^^^cutum, M^n. ^el.
no victory without an enemy, nor crown without a conflict: no faith without
troubles; nor conflict without some adversary: when God permits thee to
trials, he stands, and beholds how thou entertainest the enemy, how thou
receivest his charges, he supplieth thee with fresh aids, as necessity
requires; and in the mean time prepares the crown: many by long and secure
peace grow impotent; and for want of experience, unable to resist an enemy when
he invadeth: perhaps their own pride (born out of self-ignorance) overcomes
them; or fullness debancheth them; whereas exercise makes them strong, and
temptations humble: least I should be exalted above measure, says Paul --
there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messengers of Satan to busset
me -- truly Peccati conscientia, and met^s poenaere ligio si^rom f^cit, and
semner mult^ firmior est sides qu^m reponit poenitentia, Lact. l 5. c. 13.
conscience of sin and fear of punishment, make the regenerate more religious;
and so it is much the firmer faith which repentance storeth up -- that ye
sorrowed after a godly sort, what carfulness it wrought in you.

7. The spiritual Pharaoh most eagerly pursues those who are going out of his
kingdom: Tanquam captivos and victos praeterit hos pergit l^cessere in quibus
Christum vidit habita^e. Cypr.
he passes by his own, as captives: he chaseth those in whom he perceives
Christ lives: when he must be cast out, then he teareth most furiously. Luke
9. 42. so that his rage against thee is no argument of despair, but rather of
great confidence, that the devil himself finds that thou must be none of his:
were he secure of thee, he would Eos pulsare negligit, quos quieto iure se
poss^^ere senlit. Gregor. hom. 2.
let thee go untroubled to destruction, and never disquiet thee: least any
agitation should bring thee to repentance, and him to loss. This our Savior
taught, Luke 11. 21
When a strong man armed keeps his palace, his goods are in peace.

8. Consider well that the best have been, and the best that live are tempted:
2. Sam. 5. 6.
the Jebusite was left in Jerusalem, for an exercise of virtue: the man 2 Cor.
12
rapt up into the third heaven was buffeted by the messenger of Satan: once for
all, Christ Heb. 4. 15.
in whom was no sin, was tempted: that thou art tempted, is no argument of
despair: I know not how, heaven and earth are here so mixed together, we being
Gal. 5. 17.
partly spirit, and partly flesh, that we cannot be as we would: we find an
irksom law in our selves, against our selves: our repair is something, and
supernatural, but so short of that which shall be, that our selves (like the
Ezra 3. 13
Israelites in Ezra's time) sound a discordious concord of sharpes and flats,
joy and sorrow; we must look for perfection in heaven: our Nec t^m desivi a
vitiis, quam coepi vesle desinere. Hier. l. 1. ep. 40.
present freedom from sin, is rather a desire to be free, then our being so.

9. Lastly consider that Gods grace (who at his pleasure Rev. 20. 1, 2, 3.
chaineth up the tempter) is 2 Cor. 12. 9
sufficient for thee. He restrains him so much, that he cannot be a lying
spirit in the mouths of Ahab's Prophets, until he have leave (to tempt him
out to his destruction) from him who justly permits to strong delusions,
that they should perish in believing lies, who receive not the love of the
truth, that they might be saved: God knows best how far he will suffer
thee to be tempted, and accordingly measures out the sufficiency of grace to
all the regenerate. Why he suffered David so dangerously to fall, why Peter,
why Paul, I know not, except to humble them, and leave us motives to
repentance: I am sure his judgments are ever just.

Secondly,. II.
we are again (for comfort in this case) to examine

1. Whether art thou delighted in the temptation, or no? if thou neither
delight in, nor consent to it, but rather startlest at it, as a thing which thy
soul loathes and abhorrs, it shall not hurt thee.

2. Whether the temptation which commonly afflicts thee, be such as probably
arises from the corruption of thine own heart, which is usually inferred by
the thoughts discourse from one thing to another, by direct or natural
mediums: but if it be a temptation of Satan's, cast into thy soul, it is
commonly abrupt, and such as thou did not think of, incongruous, sudden,
unnatural sometimes, and such as thou tremblest at, as blasphemous, bloody, or
desperate: though in some temptations he makes use of that we see or hear,
joining himself with our natural inclination to sin: so are those 2 Cor. 12.
Gal, 5. 20.
stimuli carnis, his messengers, like traitors corrupted by some foraigne
State, against their native soil: if a temptation arise of corrupted nature,
the cure must be by beating down carnal reason and the affections of flesh: if
of Satan, the very discovery is enough to make thee hate it, and that to
overcome it; seeing if we yield not he is overcome.

3. When thou art moved to any thing, whether within thee, as by suggestion, or
without thee, as by persuasions of men 1 Ioh. 5. 1.
examine the spirits, whether they are of God, or no: thou may not believe
all: because many false prophets are gone out into the world; and God hereby
Deuteronomy. 13. 3.
proves you, to know whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart:
and the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11. 19
there must be heresies (or sects) among you: examine therefore whether they
bring any propositions against faith, (the substance of the Gospel) sanctimony
commanded in Gods law, peace, order, charity, and unity: to the end that if we
find any thing in men's persuasions, or any inward suggestions, contrary
hereto, we may conclude them carnal, earthly, sensual, and devilish, and so
take course to resist them; which may be by the practice of these following
rules.

1. Every day dedicate thy first and thy last waking thoughts to God in earnest
and hearty prayer,. III.
to preserve thee from temptations, and to guide all thy thoughts, words, and
actions, so that waking thou may walk sincerely in his presence, and
sleeping rest confidently in his protection.

2. Prepare and arm thy self against these encounters of tentations with the
whole Ephesians. 6. 1^.
armor of God: look before hand for trials: thou have to resist, flesh and
blood, principalities and spiritual wickednesses: it is a conflict by so much
more terrible, by how much more hidden, and with an unseen, puissant,
unwearied, and restless enemy, with whom thou can have no safe truce:
therefore cast beforehand, like the wise builder, to lay the foundation upon
the rock; against which Matthew. 7.
no winds, storms, or floods can prevail. The seaman does not contrive his
ship for calmes only, but also against furious storms and rough seas:
prepare thee good ground-tackle, the Hebr. 6.
anchor of the soul, hope to lay hold on Christ (who therefore suffered, and
was tempted, that he might deliver thee from, and in temptations:) get the
ballast of patience, and all things necessary for trials which thou must, in
reason, look for before thou can make thy port. It were great incogitancy to
think that Satan, who could not abstain from tempting Christ (in whom he
found no sin) Mat. 26. 41.
will ever give thee rest from temptations, in whom he conceives some hopes of
prevailing (because some sins) to foil and grieve thee, though not to make
thee finally his.

3. Watch least ye enter into temptation: 1 Pet. 5. 8.
your adversary continually watches to destroy you: be not less vigilant for
your own salvation. Many a man, not marking whether a mischievous temptation
carries him, has been surprised and led into some desperate sins, which
waking he abhorred and trembled at: look for more and more assaults: Satan
leaves men sometimes, to return with Luk 11. 26.
seven worse spirits, that security may destroy them, whom nothing else could.

4. Be not precipitated into any sudden undertaking, but consult with God's
Oracles first, and resolve to be directed thereby. Let them be as the cloudy
pillar to Israel, where that designeth thy stations, or marches, there rest, or
thence advance.

5. Jam* 4. 7
Resist the devil and he will flee: if thou yeeldest, or give him the least
ground, he is tyrannous: 2 Timothy 2. 22
flee from thy lusts; they are like serpents, there is no safe debate with them,
except by fasting and prayer: the best way is flight; stop thine ears to the
enchanting Sirens; make a Job 31. 1.
covenant with thine eyes, Pro. 6 25. As Pericles told Sopbocles, a Governor
must not only have his hands but also his eyes clean. Plutar Per.
not to see, that which thou may not desire in thine heart. Take heed of all
incentives and occasions thereto: beware of Tamar's ways, and Delilah's
embraces: the Pro. 7, 14.
curtisans invitations, and presented opportunities: suspected company,
lascivious entertainments, betraying gifts, and whatsoever may lead thee to the
paths of death.

6. As the subtle enemy sets his snares according as he finds men
inclinable to be taken therewith; (as has been said) so be thou careful most
to fortify thy self, where thou find him placing his main batteries: there
most carefully watch over thy self, where he most frequently assaileth thee:
and be constant herein; because he is so in his malice to destroy thee: he
sometimes changes his artifices; now he comes like a mischievous fruiterer,
with his destructive commentaries on the forbidden fruit; sometimes like an
holy prophet, with lying visions, to bewitch the foolish and unstable;
sometimes like a beguiling courtier, with large promises of worlds of honor and
wealth; sometimes he plays the pander, showing a naked Bathsheba; sometimes
the secret conspirator, and puts into Judas heart to betray the King of Kings,
and presently the executioner, presenting the desperate traitor, an halter to
make away himself; the rule therefore is, be careful and search again and again
into his gifts, Quicquid id est metus Danaos, and dona ferentes.
whatever they are, fear the enemy; as Saul said of David, 1 Samuel 23. 22.
See his place where his haunt is -- for -- he deals very subtilely; he
never offers any good, but for some mischievous end; he is a great studier
of men; where he finds a gentle nature, he tempts to luxury; where an
ambitious, to some high and impious designs; where an angry, to revenge: be
thou as cautious, learn thy self well, and where thou art most weak, most
fortify thy self against him.

7. Take heed of idleness, that lazy mother of all evil; Chap. 18. 4: 9.
ever set thy self about something which is good, that the tempter (as I said)
may never find thee at leisure to entertain him. What fearful advantages
found he on David, in his few hours vacancy to stain so glorious a life?

8. Dally not with temptations; happy shall be he who dasheth them young: as
Elisha said of 2 King. 6. 32.
Jehoram's messenger, Look when he comes, shut the door, and hold him fast
there: is not the sound of his masters feet behind him? So must we do with
Satan's messengers, sent to take away our lives; we must destroy the
cockatrice eggs, least breaking out into a fiery serpent, we cannot overcome
it, but say too late, as the Turk of Scanderbeg, this enemy should have been
subdued in his minority: a tentation is nourished that hour it is not mastered.

9. Pray constantly and fervently; lead us not into temptation: oft-times
these are a divine revenge on some precedent unrepented sin: against which
the Saints Psalm. 27 9. Psalm. 119* 10.
usually pray; and if, as often as Satan assaileth, we could betake our selves
to hearty prayers, we should beat him at his own weapon, and he should give
us frequent alarms to awaken us to a stronger guard, and occasions of fleeing
to the shadow of God's wings. The first enemy that assailed Israel in his way
to Canaan, was overcome by prayer: when Exodus 17.
Moses held up his hands, Israel prevailed: the greatest of our enemies shall
so be repulsed. Mat. 17. 21.

An ejaculation fit to be used as Primitias vigiliarum ^uarum ^hristo dicato:
primitias octuum tuorum Christo immola. Ambros. de Virg. l. 3.
son as thou wakest.
LOrd be merciful unto us: blessed be thy name, as for all thy mercies, so for
thy gracious preservation of us this night: continue thy goodness to us this
day: keep us from sin and shame: preserve us bodies, souls, and estates: let
no evil come near our dwellings: let not the mischievous tempter gain any
advantage upon us, or ours this day: but direct thou all our thoughts, words,
and actions, by the continual presence of thy holy spirit, that we may wholly
spend this day to thy glory, and our comfort. Preserve the Church, this family,
and all those whom thou have stirred up to show thy goodness to us, or
appointed to receive it of us: bless us all, and keep us this day, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

AMEN.
After thou have strictly examined thy conscience, what good duties thou have
omitted, or what evil thou have done in the day, and have heartily repented of
the sin: compose thy last waking thoughts with such an ejaculation.
LOrd forgive us all our sins and failings this day: seal up our redemption
by thy good spirit the comforter of thine elect: give us that peace of
conscience which may cause us to rest securely on thy mercies: let our sleep be
re^reshing and comfortable unto us: restrain the enemy that he may neither
perplexe nor disturb it: Lord, whose providence sleepth not, preserve us, and
ours, sleeping, waking, living and dying, that in every estate it may appear
we are thine, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

AMEN.
The prayer of a wounded spirit against temptations.
O Lord God Almighty, all-seeing examiner of the heart and reins, who know
before we ask; what we have need of; who by thy holy spirit helpest our
infirmities, who know not what to pray as we ought, and thereby make
requests for us according to thy will with nnutterable groans which thou only
understandest: help my infirmities, endite my prayers, and restrain the busy
malice of the tempter. Direct my prayers as incense in thy sight; let them come
into thy presence through Jesus Christ our only redeemer and advocate. Truth
it is, O Lord, that all things shall work together for the best to them that
love thee, and are called according to thy purpose, for thou have said it; and
that it shall be good for me which thou do to me: I am confident, O my
God, that it shall once appear that it is happy for me that I have been in
trouble, when after the trial of my faith, and exercise of my patience, thou
shall give me the quiet fruits of righteousness. I believe that they shall
not finally miscarry who trust in thy mercy: this is the voice of my faith in
thee, whom I believe and know to be the God of truth: but, O Lord, thou best
know, that I am also frail flesh and blood, full of infirmities, fears,
doubtings, and failings, because mine iniquities have taken such hold on me,
that I cannot look up: they are more in number then the hairs of my head, so
that my heart fails me: neither have I to deal with flesh and blood only:
Lord thou know those unseen powers of darkness, which with restless
encounters assault my soul to destroy it: O Lord God of my salvation, be not
thou far from me: show thy power, and deli^iver me from the messengers of
Satan, which are too mighty for me: rescue me, bridle their insolent malice;
bind the st^ong man, and deliver thy vessel from his usurping tyranny, that I
may in every faculty of my soul serve and please thee: pardon all my sins
for thy holy son Jesus sake who died for me: heal my wounded soul, which
has (to the present sorrow of my heart) so often sinned against thee: hide not
thy face from me in the time of my trouble: forget not my bitter affliction
which makes me go mourning all the day long, while the insulting enemy
oppresses me: thou art my King, command deliverances: I am poor and needy,
destitute of help and strength to resist Satan's fiery darts: put thy whole
armor upon me, that I may be able to stand: arise for my help, O thou
Preserver of men: redeem me from the devouring lions mouth: for for thy mercy
sake think upon me: make haste to help me; make no long tarrying, O my God:
suffer me not for any trials to fall from thee: lay no more upon me, then
thou will give me strength, patience, and perseverance to bear cheerfully:
confirm me unto my end, that I may be blameless unto the day of our Lord
Christ: give me a blessed effect of, and issue out of every trial; that the
more thou permittest me hereto, the more certain experience I may have of thy
mercy, and the greater assurance that thou will never fail me, nor forsake
me, that I may (through him who has by suffering vanquished death, hell, and
him who had the power of death) overcome all these spiritual wickednesses,
which fight against my soul. I have trusted only in thy mercy, holy Father,
who have ordained strength in the mouths of babes and in^^^s, strengthen me
unto the end, that my heart may rejoice in the salvation: spare me that I may
recover my strength: put thou a new song into my mouth, that I may praise thee
for my deliverance, and declare unto afflicted sinners, what thou have done for
my soul. Lord hear me, and have mercy upon me; Lord who art ever more ready
to give, then we can be to ask, deny not the requests of a poor sinful
soul, crying unto thee for Jesus Christ his sake our only Lord and Savior.

AMEN.
CHAP. XXIX.
Concerning the guidance of the mind in the increase of wealth.. 1.
Afflictions common: their fruit in good men. Poverty a great trial: riches
great temptations: commonly mistaken.. 2. How to guide thy self in the
increase of riches, or a full inheritance.

1. TEmporal afflictions are common to the just and wicked:. I.
we are here like the clean and unclean in Noah's ark, shut up in one
condition: into afflictions we go like Israel and the Egyptians into the
red sea, to events most contrary, deliverance, or destruction: to the saint
they are but as the rain to the arc, the more it fell, the more that was
lifted up. Being sanctified they give understanding, and are (though
rough-handed) yet excellent masters of virtue: like Sic semina messium gel^
cooperta fertilius germi^ant Greg. l 6. ep. 27.
biting frosts to the trees, restraining the luxuriant sap, and rendering them
more fruitful.

2. Among other afflictions in this life, want and poverty (as among
temptations wealth) is not the least. These are commonly the minds Scylla and
Charybdis, the two great and ancient diseases of Republics, Families, and
incautious souls: there being great hazard in either; concludes a necessity
of a right guidance of the mind herein; so great, as that the Pro. 30. 8.
wise man deprecated both extremes: Give me not poverty, nor riches -- Having
spoken of those things which appertain to man, are in man, or incident to him
within, it is requisite that we consider him in the discomposures which
proceed from things external, as poverty, imprisonment, banishment, old age,
sickness, and death. In these first estates which I proposed, my purpose is to
lay down some rules, directing how happily to -- Archytas in his Book (...),
could say -- (...) --
use the one, and bear the other.

3. Because riches are great temptations, and men are commonly deceived in
judging of them: too much admiring and affecting these, (and as much impatient
of poverty) whereas indeed they are ^he Stoics said riches are not goods, for
(...). Xeno. Laert l. 7.
neither absolutely good, nor always signs of an happy owner, but Haec
perinde sunt u^ illius animus, qui ea possidet, qui uti scit ei bona: Illi qui
non utitur recte mala. Ter. Heaut. Act. 1. Scen. 2. Talibus bonis non fiunt
homines boni, sed aliunde boni facti, been utendo faciunt ut ipsa sint bona.
Aug. ep 121. c. 2.
good or evil, according to their use: and therefore are they commonly evil,
because, as Plut. Aristid.
Aristides said, Many use riches ill, few can well: therefore it highly
concerns those who enjoy increase, or great riches, to mark and practice
these and the like rules.

1. If riches increase, set not your heart thereon,. II.
Psalm 62. 10. where they have the heart, there is no place for faith, charity,
humility, equity, modesty, or honesty: He says not, Get not riches, but, set
not your heart upon them: for so they carry it away from God; many of the
Saints have been rich, but their rule was, 1 Timothy 6. Job 31. 25.
not to trust in uncertain riches: all earthly possessions often change their
owners, often desert and leave them to wants. The heathen Plut. Sol.
Solon told Croesus as much, though he could not believe him, until, fast bound
to the gibbet to be put over the fire, he cried out, O Solon, Solon ^! Riches
cannot deliver from death, nor Zeph 1. 18. Ezekiel 7. 19. Pro. 11. 4.
in the day of the day of the Lords wrath: and how vainly do we call them
goods, in whose abundance the owner may perish with hunger?

2. Set not thy soul at stake for any worldly price: (what shall it profit a
man. Mar. 3. 18.
if he shall gain the whole world, and loose his own soul?) especially at
so poor a one that usually Quotus enim quisque est^quem secunda non mutent, cui
non crescat cum prosperitate vitiositas Salv. de gub. l. 7.
hurts the possessor. Sicut de vestimento tine^, etc. ita de divitiis
avaritia P. Crysol. ^. 7*
I appeal herein to any thriving man: do but remember the change of thine
own mind, so soon as thy estate increased, or descended to thee: how quickly
had thou learned an unstudied pride and elation of mind? Estates and the
owners minds commonly rise together, like those beasts and wheels in the
Prophets vision, Ezekiel. 1. 19.
When the creatures were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up;
this makes it so hard Mat 19. 23.
for a rich man to be saved, because it is very hard to be rich, and not proud,
or not to trust in riches. Add hereto, that unjust gain, makes thee not a
proprieter, but an usurper and robber, and he that Job 20. 15.
swallowed down riches, shall vomit them up again: either he must restore
them, or perish with them; whether they were seized into his hands by violence,
or Mich. 6. 10. 1^.
by wicked balances, or the bag of deceitful weights: Pro. 10. 2.
treasures of wickedness profit nothing: moreover, at the best, thou can
have but a short use of any worldly thing: 1 Timothy 6.
we brought nothing into the world, and it is certain we shall carry nothing
away: and is it not therefore an admirable madness to loose eternal
happiness, for temporal riches? the soul for the bodies supplies? The time
shall come (and it is as sure, and near as death) when the body shall have no
use of riches, (the soul never had) why do men tire themselves for vain
shadows? too great possessions have commonly debauched the unhappy owners: as
may appear in the Roman conquests Asia primum devicta luxuriam misit in
Italiam, etc. Plin. not. hist. l. 33 c. 11. Asia domita multo ^tiam gravius
afflixit mores, etc. ibid.
of Asia, -- invictum Alp b^e, indomitum ar^i^ Companiae -- solae, and tepentes
fontibus Bai^, subegerunt. L. Flor. l. 2. c. 6. Bell. Pun. ^.
Hannibal's of Italy, Alexander's of Persia, and the like; wherein it was
doubtful whether they more conquered those nations, or those nations them.
Their riches were to them, but as Plut Demet. Among those spoils was also taken
that famous cur^is^n Lamia, etc.
Demetrius Lamia taken in the Egyptian spoils, aurea mala, golden mischiefs;
and as Seneca said of prosperity, viscata beneficia, limed baits; gifts to take
men with; and so desperately besotting their lovers, that they pass not for
any wickedness to gain them, save that only which may bring them into future
danger of loosing them. It was not said amiss; Sen. ep. 7.
Were Justice as free as once it shall be, all our goales could not hold our
rich men. This mischief wealth adds to the rest, that it now freeth the
wicked from punishment, that they may recive it hereafter. No wonder that our
Savior pronounced a Luke 6. 24* lam. 1. 10.
woe to the rich (who usually bless themselves, as the only wise and good men)
riches so seldom being good to the owners. Why set thou thine heart on that
which is neither truly good, nor truly thine? if they are truly good, let
them make thee good and blessed: if truly thine, carry them with thee in
death. What can be more unworthy of a wise man, then the love of false and
transitory goods? or of a Christian, then to sell a soul, whose redemption cost
more then all the world was worth, (the precious blood of Christ) for that
which is neither truly good, truly thine, nor (beyond necessity) of Iam 5. 1,
2, 3, 4.
safe use, or possession? If thou use them, thou art near luxury; if thou spare
them, to a dangerous parsimony: on the one side is the nures of idleness (the
mother of all mischief) on the other, the gulf of insatiable avarice.

3. Let thy riches serve thee: there is no little necessity of the use of this
rule: for as Arist. apud Plut. vit. Pelopid.
the Philosopher said: Most rich men do not use their goods for extreme
covetousness; others abuse them to pleasures: so rich men Nimia felicitas non
tam animo parere solet, quam imperare. Archyt. do bono viro, etc.
become slaves all their life time; some to pleasure, others to profit: but
beyond all that the Philosophers could know, the Scripture shows, that if Mat
6. 24,
we serve riches, we cannot serve God: he that keeps riches to himself, is
a servant to them; and he the worst of all servants, (a fool and a knave) who
grown rich with an ill conscience, can be contented to live poor, only that
he may die rich. And he that prodigally spends them is little better: this
may be sure his riches cannot serve him long, the others do never. Yet thus
parsimonious are some, Ar. ap. Laert. (...) lib. 5. ^Non enim ipsae per se
divitiae noxiae, sed mentes male uten sium criminosae, etc Tim, ad Eccles
Cathol. ^* ^* inter op. Salvian.
as they should live ever; and others as lavish, as if they should presently
die. It Is vain to deprive they soul of rest, only to possess, and not to use
riches: in truth such have not riches, their riches have them, buried in the
foolish monument of their avarice. It is ^
no sin to be rich, if justly; it is, to be uncharitable (to thy self or
others) 1 John 3. 17.
How dwells the love of God in him? God weighs men's hearts, not their
chests; and in his esteem (who cannot be deceived) he only is master of his
wealth (not who keeps it close, but he) who bestows it well: Ask thy
conscience how thou possessest and usest riches, and thou shall know whether
God has given them for a blessing, or a curse. Eccl. 13. 19. ottherwi^e, ill
used wealth is as Cl Alexan* Paed l. 2. says, (...), etc.
There is a sore evil which I have seen under the sun (says Solomon) riches
kept for the owners thereof, to their hurt: It is a blessing to know how to use
them well -- every man also to whom God has given riches and wealth, and has
given him power to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to rejoice in his
labor, this is the gift of God.

4. Heb. 13. 5.
Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with those
things that you have. Let our meat satisfy hunger, our drink thirst, and our
decent garments keep our bodies warm; let our houses be to defend us from wet
and cold: a wise and good man is so contented with himself; not that he would
not Seneca.
gladly have friends, and goods to entertain them; but because he can patiently
bear the want of either: riches are more safely had them desired. They that 1 Timothy 6. 9.
will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction: an inheritance may be gotten
hastily -- Pro 20 21.
but the end thereof shall not be blessed. Pro. 28. 22.
A man with a wicked eye hastes to riches, and knows not that poverty shall
come upon him. He that Job 27. 16, 17.
heapeth up treasure as the dust, Psalm. 4^. 10, 12.
knows not who shall spend it: in the mean time no man wants more, then
Avaro tam deest quod habet, quam quod non habet. Hier. ep. 2. l. 2. Pau^in.
he that coveteth most: he lacks not only that which he has not, but that
also which he has: so that the covetous man's wealth leaves him guiltiness,
and takes away the comfortable use of that which he has; it being a kind of
drunken thirst, increasing by having more. Great Alexander was not contented
with one world: -- Mors sola fatetur, Quantula sint hominum corpuscula. luv.
Death only confesses how little room will serve us: Tu, inquiens, virum
capies, quem totus orbi^ terrarum capere nunquam potuit. Dion. ^ice. and
Ziphilinus in eius vita.
as Alexander Severus said (taking up his urne) thou shall limit him whom the
world could not. The rich man would fain lay house to house, and land to land,
and still he thinks he has too little: but within a while as little earth
as Naaman begged of the prophet, 2 King. 5. 17. (two mules load) shall serve to
cover and stop his mouth. Many a man disquieteth himself in vain, seeking
happiness far abroad, when it is to be found at home in an holy and contented
mind.

5. Follow the guidance of God's hand to riches or poverty: carefully mark his
providence in all things: when the Lord appeared to Isaac at Genesis 26. 24, 25.
Beersheba, and promised to bless him, there he pitched his tent, and set
down: it is a blessed thing to mark how God leads thee, and how, or where he
disposes thee, thereto rest confidently and contentedly.

6. If thou have not wealth, seek it not by any unjust means: if thou have,
But do it quickly, vid. Gal. 6. 10. Alms is a tewel (only which we may carry
to heaven with us) but as Solinus says of the Dracontias, not except,
derrahatur viventibus
lay it up (at least some good part thereof) in heaven, r where neither moth
nor thief can hurt it. That is true riches, which once had, can never be lost:
every poor man's hand is a bill of exchange for heaven, to be paid at sight, not
only for so much here given to the poor on God account; but a thousand for
one, upon the surest negoti^^ or the world can draw upon. Say not, Charity is
usually abused, the wicked most importunately beg; I doubt not but thou have
many of Christ's poor by thee; but if thou sometimes mistake the object of thy
charity, thou have to say with the Philosopher, (...). Arist. ap. Laert. l. 5.
I gave not to the man, but to humanity. As thy state increases, increase thy
charity; and ever remember, that there is a portion in thy hands, which is not
thine, but the poor man's, whom God has set by thee to try thee: and not only
his, who has liberty to come to thy gates, but the prisoners, which shall come
on account at the last, as well as the other: when not only thieves, (those
enemies of the Commonwealth, as Severissimus iudex contra fures, appel. lan^
e^sdem -- solos hosts Reipub. etc. Aeli. Lamprid. Al. Sever.
Alexander Severus called them) oppressors, and extortioners, who take away
from the poor, but they that relieve them not, shall hear their -- Matthew. 25.
go ye cursed -- that only, of all thy estate, is saved, which thou bestowest
on the poor: this is a good 1 Timothy 6.
foundation.

7. Be not deceived, but seek true riches: the Sen. ep 9.
Heathen could say, that it is no absolute good which can be taken away:
temporal riches are often evil masters, and sometimes treacherous servants; but
godliness is great gain: Ioh 6.
labor for that bread which perishes not: the Genesis 27. 39. Non ergo honor,
non divitiae quaerendae sunt, quae dimi^^untur: sed si bona quaerimus, illa
diligamus quae sine ^ine habebimus Greg l. 6. ^* 26
fat of earth, the dew of heaven, victory, etc. were Esau's blessings, and are
often given to the profane and wicked: but faith and sanctity, peace of
conscience, and such like, are the riches of God in Christ, given only to the
blessed. Seek these first, and the other shall find thee: it is a great
madness to toil and care night and day to fill thy house with transitory
riches, and in the mean time to neglect a poor and empty soul. It is thy
shame if thy goods have an ill master, and more, if thou provest so much worse,
by how much more God gives thee, and is good unto thee: if thou have not God,
thou have nothing but unhappiness in thy other gains. Therefore set thy
affections on things above, and there will follow an holy contempt of this
world, and thy vain care and love thereof (which is enmity with God) in thy
hearts ascension, shall fall off.

8. Increase in humility, with sanctity, benificence, goodness, and
thankfulness to God, as thou encreasest in estate: if thou can find any
unjust gotten penny in thy estate, Luke 19.
make present restitution (as Zache did) otherwise it will bring a curse on
thee and thy posterity. A rich man humble is spiritually poor, and so blessed:
and a poor man proud, covetous, or unjust, sets his heart on riches, though
they increase not, and so is doubly unhappy.

9. Let thy increases make thee more diligent, as in all holy duties, so
specially in prayer: the rich man is most obnoxious to Satan's snares, I Tim.
6. 9. 10.
and like Sisera, fastened to the earth: it is high time to cry to God when
thou art thus beset, lost, as the moon is eclipsed in her full; so thou become
most destitute of grace in thy fullness, most unhappy in thy wealth.

The rich man's Petition.
O Lord God of mercy, incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not unto
covetousness: the vigilant tempter has his snares in every estate, in
poverty, worldly sorrow, and affectation of unjust supplies: in riches, pride,
luxury, love of the world, distracting cares, neglect of thy holy ordinance,
and forgetfulness of thee: but, O Lord, make good thine own gifts to me: give
me such an heart to use the blessings, which thou have bestowed upon me, that
it may be eternally good for my soul, that I had them for this time. It is not,
O Lord, for man to add any thing to his estate; thy hand makes rich, thou
raisest the poor out of the dust, and set him with the Princes of the
people: riches come of thee; not from the West or East: my condition in my
birth was no better then the poorest man's: naked came I into this world: I was
cast upon thee from the womb: and what am I, O Lord, that thou have given me
this abundance? All that is in heaven and earth is thine: both riches and
honor come of thee: and in thine hand it is, to make rich and great: I am but
a stranger before thee, as all my fathers were. All this store wherewith thou
have blessed me and mine, is of thine hand, and thine own: that thou have put
this abundance into mine hand, it is to try me hereby: now therefore prepare my
heart nnto thee: give me true thankfulness, and those riches which shall
never be taken away: keep my heart that I may never forget thee in the
abundance which by thy merry I enjoy. As thou have made me a steward of much,
so make me proportionably faithful in managing this estate; that I may soberly
and prudently enjoy these blessings: cheerfully relieve those, who by thy
providence have dependence on me; hold all with a loose hand, willing to leave
them, and ready ever to give a faithful account, when thou shall (...) pleased
to exchange these temporal riches for the eternal and inestimable treasures of
thy glorious kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

AMEN.
CHAP. XXX.
. 1. Poverty a great temptation: yet having a capacity of true happiness.. 2.
What we are to consider herein.. 3. What we must practice.

IT is true,. I.
that Poverty is a great affliction and dangerous temptation, in this life
exposed to so many necessities; especially in this last and most uncharitable
age: where there is the unhappy concurrence of spiritual wants, it is no less
then Pro. 10. 15.
the destruction of the poor: to the saints it is a 2 Cor. 8. 2.
great trial of affliction: Rev. 2. 9.
a tribulation, but yet such, as there may be made an happy use thereof; seeing
to be poor and good, is (as they say) the Aurea paupertas spiritus.
golden poverty of spirit. Not to insist on those fruits hereof which relate to
temporal advantages (as, it will show thee who are thy true friends, which
riches can hardly do: here is no flattery to beguile and carry vain minds to
greaten their ruin: here is the school of humility, which any but a desperate
soul will learn, and thereby to be more secure) I say a poor man may be
truly happy, which may appear in that, 1. God takes care, and Ex. 22. 25.
often catitioneth for them, Exodus 23. 11.
charging that which is given them (as a father for his children) upon his own
account. Lev. 19. 10.

Lev. 23. 22.

Lev. 35. 39. 47.

Deuteronomy. 15. 7. 11.

Deuteronomy. 24. 12, 15.

Pro. 19. 17.

Pro 22. 22.


2. Iam 2. 5.
He has chosen them to be rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which
he has promised to them that love him. 3. Not only many of the dear saints
of God (of Heb. 11. 37.
whom the world was not worthy) have wandered, destitute and afflicted, but also
our Savior Christ (blessed for ever) became poor for our sakes, that we 2
Cor. 8. 9.
through his poverty might be rich; insomuch that the Lord of all (having for
our redemption taken on him Phil. 2.
the form of a servant) possessed not so much as Mat. 8 20.
whereon to rest his head.

For the more easy and comfortable bearing this burden,. II.
it is necessary to consider.

1. That it is sometimes Labor, iei^nium, and paupertas -- non omnibus (...)
onerosa tol^ranti^us, sed tolerate no^entibus: sive enim gravia haec, sive
levia, animus t^lerantis facit, etc Salv. de Gub. Dei. l. 1.
a defect in the mind, which thou take to be a want in thy outward estate;
and the cure must be in the ease of the malady. A feverish place makes every
thing bitter; the cure must be of the disaffected sensory, not so much in the
change of diet; so here.

2. Consider what state any man has, or can have in this world, where is Ita
omnium rerum semper quasi naturali lege mutatio est. Aeli, Spart. Sever. Imper.
etenim quae fecit magna gaudia nisi ex mal^? aut quae mala immensa, nisi ex
ingentibus gaudiis? Plin. not. hist. l. 7. cap. 42.
perpetual change, as it were by a natural law* I am a stranger here, said King
Psalm. 119. 19.
David: We have Hebr. 13.
here no continuing city, says the Apostle: Job 14 1, 2.
Man is of few days, and full of trouble, he comes up like a flower, and is
cut down, says Job: Pro 27. 24.
Riches are not for ever: and does the crown endure to every generation? says
Solomon. Our present habendum and tenendum can make no certain state to our
selves or heirs; Eccl. 5. 14, 15. 1. Tim 6. 7.
but he begets a son, and there is nothing in his hand, as he came forth
of his mothers womb, naked shall he return -- and Nemo est dives, qui quod
habet, secum hinc auferre non potest. Ambr. epist. 10.
shall take nothing of his labor, which he shall carry away in his hand:
there is no man lives so poor as he was born: be contented with thy
something, though it be not so much.

3. Consider Gods promises: he has said, he will not fail thee nor forsake
thee: the whole world has no such assurance of constant supplies. If all the
Kings of the earth should enter into league and bind themselves by oath, and
under their broad seals, never to forsake thee, but to supply thee with all
necessaries, yet they might fail: all power and will of the creatures is
subject to obstructions and lets: but God can neither be untrue, nor defeated
in his counsels: though heaven and earth pass away, his word shall not fail.
The poor man's security that he shall never want that which is best for him, is
in Gods hands, and he has Gods promise for it: now let him that is impatient
of poverty, but seriously consider, first whether, if he had riches in his own
keeping (as rich men have) had he better security by his own keeping them, then
in Gods promise to supply and keep him and them? But some may say, I desire
that God would keep them in my possession. What can thy possession add to thy
security of having and enjoying them, where God keeps them? What can finites
add to infinites? I but (say thou) if I had an estate in mine own
possession, I could live more confidently, and comfortably: the reason of that
is, not a greater certainty in thy estate (for that is surest in Gods hands)
but a less faith in thee, then becomes those who have the infallible truth
of God for their assurance: and because thou reply more on thy senses, then
on God's Oracles; and the creatures, then the Creator himself. Thou say, But
yet for all the promises, my want is a great bitterness to my soul: yet if
God sees it good to cure that sick mind with bitter pills (such as poverty is
confessed) and so to save thee; which would thou choose (if God should refer
it to thee) that which thou think best for thee, or that which God knows
to be so; to perish with riches, or to be saved by poverty? Unhappy sure were
we, and must often perish, if God would not in mercy deny us our choice, and
choose for us.

4. Consider how Gods dearest children have wanted, and so do still. See Job
30. 3, 9. Hebr. 11. 37, 38. 1 Cor. 4. 11. 2 Cor. 11. 27. Art thou better then
those of whom the world was not worthy? I need not Subsidiis amicorum mariti
inops cum liberi^ uxor alitur Reguli: dotatur ex (...) rario filia Scipionis,
etc. Am, Macellin. lib 14. Cleanthes dicebatur (...), quia inopia cogenie,
noctu in hortis hauriret aquas. Laert. l. 7.
tell you of Curious, Socrates, Fabritius, or the just Aristides poverty; we
have examples enough of the Saints wants: it is a doctrine abundantly
exemplified in these our calamitous days.

5. Consider that he is a poor man, who is so In animo ^on in saculo. Aug. in
Psalm. 31. -- inopia mentis, non possessionis.
in mind, not in purse: he only may be ashamed of his poverty (said Plut
Aristid.
Aristides) who is poor against his will, there is no such wretched poverty as
that which makes a man impatient, or Nemo Deo pauper est, nisi qui iustitia
indiget: nemo dives, nisi qu^ virtutibus plenus est. Lactan^. l. s c. 15.
unjust. There Is no man poor to Godward but the wicked: (as none rich but the
holy) they that seem poor, are herein Et qui ^auperes videntur, eo tamen
div^tes sunt, quia non egent, and nihil concupiscunt. ib. cap. 16.
rich, if they want not, and covet not more. He cannot be unhappily poor, who
has Gods promise and care to provide for him: we do not think rich men's
children poor, (though they possess nothing) because others who are more wise
and able, provide for them: and can we think the children of God indigent, for
whom the Almighty provideth?

6. Consider how God has 1 King, 17, 16.
supplied the wants of his: how the oil and meal lasted all the famine: how
he fed Israel 40. years in the wilderness with Manna: how all that time their
Deuteronomy. 29. 5.
clothes waxed not old upon them; nor their shoe on their foot: how he made
the 1 King. 17 6 2 King 4.
ravens Eliah's purviours to bring him bread and flesh morning and evening; how
he made the oil increase for the widow of the prophet and her children. Do
but remember how he has all thy life long provided for thee; and I may say
with Joshuah; Josh. 23. 14.
Ye know in all your hearts, and in all your souls, that not one thing has
failed, of all the good things which the Lord your God spoke concerning you --
and will thou now distrust him who never failed thee? remember that he says
Pro. 10 3.
he will not famish the soul of the righteous.

7. Consider that God has not spared his own holy son Jesus for our sakes:
Romans 8. 32.
How should he not with him give us all things necessary for us? has he
bought thee body and soul, not with corruptible things, but 1 Pet. 1. 18.
with the precious blood of Christ, and can thou think that for want of a
little meat, drink, and clothes, he will loose thee? It is not a small thing
that he so valueth thy present life, that he gives thee the lives of thy
fellow creatures, (good for meat) to preserve it: Psalm. 8. 4.
Lord, what is man? cried the Psalmist: all is nothing to this, he gave thee
the life of his son Jesus to save thy life eternally; and can thou be
affected with such a feverish dream, as to fear that he will let thee perish
for want of a little food and raiment?

8. Consider Man. 6. 28.
how the lilies grow: how he feeds the ravens: shall he not much more feed
and cloth you, upon whom he has put his own image? the life is better ^hen
meat, or the body then raiment: he that gave the one, will not fail to supply
the other: his providence descends to the preservation of the poorest and
meanest creature; will he neglect thee? he M^t. 6. 8.
knows before you ask, what ye have need of: add not evil to the day, by
distracting cares (which cannot add one cubit to thy stature) but 1 Pet. 5. 7.
cast thy care on him, who cares for thee.

9. Consider well what thy fear or impatience can bring thee: certainly it can
only make thy burden heavier: indeed he only is truly poor who would feign
be rich: an holy meekness Ista nos premunt, illa nos ad inseros apunt, quae
o^culi avit atque demersit* illa qua non nascuntur -- quam innocens quam beata
-- esset vita, si nihil aliud quam supra terras concupisceret, breviterque nis^
quod secum est? etc. Plin. not. hist. lib 33. Pro^em.
and contentedness, is not only the best worldly riches, but such as that
without them, no estate can be enough.

10. Consider from how many evils poverty delivers thee: pride, security,
intemperance, and envy, (not the least of those black shadows which attend
riches and greatness) with many noisome desires, which drown men in sin and
destruction: Ae^^^l. Prob. vit. Thrasit.
Pittacus the wise, when the Mitylens offered him many thousand acres of land
for a gratuity, said: Give me not that which many envy, and more desire: and
(says my author) he accepted only an hundred: he that gives thee riches,
gives thee cares: wretched is the custody of great wealth.

For rules of practice herein,. III.
it is necessary that,

1. We first Mat. 6 33.
seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and then all these things,
which we want, shall be administered unto us: a Psalm. 37. 16.
little with righteousness, is better then the riches of the wicked: they that
Psalm. 34. 10.
seek the Lord shall not want any good thing: better is Pro. 15. 16.
a little with the fe^re of the Lord, then great treasure, and trouble
therewith: many a man laboreth, and cares enough to be rich, yet cannot thrive
(as it is said, Pro. 11. 24.
there is that withholds more then is meet, but it tends to poverty)
because they seek not the Lord, nor his will, but some sinister ends of their
own. If we neglect Gods part, he Hag. 1. 4* 5.
will blast all our labors. If there be some hidden sacrilege, our poverty
may be comfortless, until we Mal. 3. 10*
prove the Lord with new obedience: then will he open the windows of heaven,
and pour out an abundant blessing: then he will rebuke the destroyer: or if
he see it best for us, still to exercise the outward man with wants, yet he
will abundantly recompense that with inward comfort in Christ, with which the
saint Aff^tim dives est, qui cum Christo pauper est. Hier* ep 6. l ^. Heliodoro.
is happily rich.

2. Endeavor in some lawful calling, and be industrious: Pro, 20, 13.
Love not sleep lest thou come to poverty: open thine cies, and thou shall be
satisfied with bread: Be frugal: Pro 23. 21.
the drunkard and glutton shall come to poverty; and drowsiness shall cloth a
man with rags: but he that Pro. 28. 19.
tilleth his land, shall have plenty of bread: he that follows after vain
persons shall have poverty enough. Here is no patronage for them that incur a
voluntary poverty, following ambition in a perverse way: God requires that we
should live a better life then the vulgar worldly man, not in all things, a
contrary.

3. Do thy uttermost endeavor to suppress that turbulent Philisti^, (...).
Clem. Alex. Paed. l. 2. c. 3.
covetous love of the world, which will still be casting earth into thy
fountain of living water: disturbing an holy content with vain desire of having
more then necessaries. It is an hard, but most fruitful lesson, which Paul had
learned, in every estate Phil. 4. 11. (...). C* Alex. Paed. 2
to be content. If thou will live to necessity, a little is enough; if to
opinion, nothing: when the Cynick saw men drinking water in their hands, he
said, With how few utencils is nature content? Opinion makes many a man poor,
content rich: he is so, Cui cum paupertate been convenit, dives est. Sen. ep*
2.
who can well agree with poverty. What skils it, whether a man have much or
little in the chest, barn, fields, and pastures, if he reckon not on that he
has, but that which he would have? It was a prudent resolution: Sires mihi
non sufficient, at ego ipsis.
If my estate will not be enough for me, I will be for it. If thou can not
justly greaten thy estate, prudently lessen thy mind: the poor man wants
something, the covetous all things: he least wants, who desires least: he
wants, who has not enough; he most, to whom nothing can be enough: fullness
costeth much, but temperance little: and poverty is not so heavy a burden to
them that cheerfully submit to Gods providence, as to them who would not, or
have Indocilis pauporiem pa^i.
not learned how to bear it wisely: so that, though there be two measures of
wealth; first, to have necessaries: secondly, to have enough, or more then
simply necessary; and though there be much difference between a Inter res
exigua^, and angust^.
small estate, and a strait or incompetent one; yet in all, the mind bears a
great part; making a poor estate more light or heavy: and indeed, he is Sen.
ep 2.
not so much poor, who has little, as he that desires more, what ere he
has. How happy must it therefore be, to learn an holy moderation, submitting
to Gods good providence in all conditions, assured that it is best which he
does for thee, in giving, or taking away; ^ Cor. 6. 10.
as having nothing, and possessing all things: how happy were our first
parents, when they had no use of any housholdstuffe? no not so much as clothes?
how fully did they after live, before Cain Gen, 4. 17. 21. 23.
built a city, Adah invented tents, Jubal musical instruments, or Tubal-Kain
wrought in brass and iron? It is opinion and curiosity which has invented
varieties: and other men's superfluities make the envious and emulous seem
poor, if they have not as much: whereas that which natural necessity
requires, is Parabile est quod natura desiderat, and expositum ad manum est,
quod sat^s est. S^n. ^p. 4.
obtained without much difficulty: the first external want I find man sensible
of, was of clothing: wherein, if thou will not live to others opinion, but thy
necessity, a small charge will supply thee: if thou fashion not to the fickle
world; possibly it will despise thee; what loss is that, if God love and like
thee; if he put on thee that best robe, Christ's right cousnesse, which all
the riches in the world cannot purchase? and for food, either a little labor
of thine, or others charity will supply thee; or thou shall in a very little
time, have no need of it. Once, I am resolved, it is more happy to be the
poorest Luke 16.
Lazarus, then, not only the rich epulo, but the worlds minion. Wants occasion
many a man's return unto God, as it was with great Dan. 4.
Nebuchadnezzar, who through the dark shadows of affliction (as men at noon day
see stars out of some deep well) could at last look up to heaven, and find
the glorious omnipotency of God, and his sovereignty, ruling over all, which
the Dan. 4.
glittering light of his prosperity did before hide from him. To conclude, when
a man has duly weighed, what this world is, how unconstant all things
thereof, how short a time he can enjoy abundance, or bear wants: he shall find
no just canue, either to be proud of external riches, or dejected in want.

4. Aspire to a better world, riches which perish not, food and raiment which
shall not fail, nor decay: how O quanta apud Deum merces, si unusquisque in
praesenti pretium non spera^et. Hier. l. 2. ep. 14. Nep.
great should our reward be with our heavenly father, if we would not affect
our reward here?

5. Learn to depend on Gods providence: ask of him Mat. 6.
daily bread: Pro. 30.
bread of thy stature; that which he knows convenient for thee: food,
raiment, and protection, as Genesis 28.
Jacob did: or as 1 Chr. 4. 10.
Iabez, who called on the God of Israel, saying, O that thou would bless me
indeed, and enlarge my coast, and that thy hand might be with me, and that
thou would keep me from evil, that it may not grieve me: and God granted
him that which he requested. Psalm. 37. 25.
I have been young (says David) and now am old, and yet saw I never the
righteous forsaken, and his seed begging bread: though possibly in extreme
wants, yet never forsaken.

6. Seek happiness within thy self; such is the brevity of this life, such
the variable inconstancy of all external estates, so many accidents, like
storms from diverse quarters, lie upon this sea of glass, that in the
possessions thereof, they leave no place for true happiness, Seculi huius quem
non decipit prosperitas, non frangit adversitas. Vid. Aug. de verb. Dom. Ioh.
ser. 42.
which is in that, whereof the least measure is enough, and the greatest secure
from loss. The best ornaments, and truest riches, are those which are laid up
in a good conscience; where no violent hand can reach them. Be not deceived by
the false luster of secular prosperity, and thou shall not be broken with
adversity.

The poor man's Petition.
O Lord God, great and glorious, severe in thy judgments, and abundant in
mercy: the earth is thine, and thy providence divides it among the sons of
men: thou bring down to the grave, and raisest up again: thou make rich
and poor: thou bring low, and liftest up the needy out of the dust, that
he may glorify thee: thou savest the poor from the hand of the mighty,
redeemest from death, and in famine give hope: thou art the Savior and
deliverer of the fatherless, and him that has no helper: the needy shall not
always be forgotten, nor their exspectation perish for ever, because thou will
preserve thine own work: when they cry thou will arise and deliver them from
their troubles, who have of thy goodness prepared to satisfy them: Lord
behold my necessities, who despisest not the needy: though thou thus afflict
me, yet strenghten me so, that my wants may never cast me down to despair of
thy favor, nor endeavor their supply by any thing which offends thee: what
ever I want, let me never want the comfortable assurance of thy love and
mercy: what ever else thou please to take from me, take not thy holy spirit,
thy mercy, thy self from me. Be my strength in distress, a refuge from the
storm, a shadow from the heat. I am weak and my heart is wounded in me: Lord
assure me that thou carest for me. Thou have said, blessed Jesus, that first
seeking the kingdom of God and his righteousness, all bodily necessaries
shall be administered unto us: Lord give me an heart so to do: sanctify those
wants to me, that thou may comfort me, make me rich in faith, and those
spiritual treasures, which once had, shall never be lost again: Lord Jesus,
who becamest poor to make us rich, pour out the riches of thy grace into my
poor soul: Thou best know, before I ask, what I have need of; who feedest
the sowles of the air, and clothest the lilies of the field: Lord famish not
the afflicted soul of thy servant: man lives not by bread only, but by the
power of thy word blessing it: O God, who made the Sarephtan's little store
sufficient; what ever thy providence shall allot me, let thy blessing be upon
it, that I may find a sufficiency therein: that I may serve thee contentedly
and cheerfully, depending confidently on thy fatherly providence, which never
fails them which trust in thee: O Lord, who art a refuge in trouble, who
never forsakest them that truly seek thee; supply all my necessities, hear
me and make speed to relieve me; forsake me not, O my God, open the high
places, and the fount^ines in the midst of the valleys for the thirsty soul:
let thy hand relieve me, until thou shall be pleased to bring me into thy
blessed presence, where is fullness of joy, without want, measure, or end:
Grant me these things, O merciful God, and what ever else thou know
necessary for me, for thy dear son, my ev^r blessed Lord, and Savior Jesus
Christ his sake.

AMEN.
CHAP. XXXI.
. 1. Liberty and restraint misplaced by an injurious world.. 2. Comforts for
Prisoners.. 3. Rules thereto appertaining.

1. LIberty is the natural inheritance of every good man: I.
but what does not the malice of the world (which hates them) and the impiety
thereof pervert? to the same merit this unjust judge (swayed by affection,
seldom led by reason or equity) adjudgeth contrary rewards: for the like sin
Ille crucem sceleris poenam tulit, hic diadema. luvenal.
one is crowned, and another crucified: it vexes the innocent dove, and
dismisseth the bloody raven: the wicked Pilate sits judge, where holy Jesus
is arraigned as guilty: he is condemned, and Barrabbas acquitted by their
proclamation, who cried but now Hosanna to Christ, and now deliver us
Barrabbas. If they do this in Luke 23. 31.
the green tree, what will they do in the dry? Why the supreme judge admits
such surrogates; or permits Satan to govern such judges (as it is written
Rev. 2* 10.
Satan shall cast some of you into prison -- whosoever is the delatour or
sergeant to imprison the saints, Satan makes the mittimus, they but do him
service) we know not: we know it is for the more heavy damnation of the one,
and the greater glory of the other in his conformity to Christ's sufferings; 2.
Cor. 1. 5.
which as they abound in us, so our consolation shall, in him: if so be that
we suffer with him, that we may be Romans 8. 17.
also glorified together.

2. Among external afflictions, we may reckon imprisonment and captivity: yet
have these a capacity of comfort for the Saint, whose peculiar advantage it is,
that Romans 8. ^8.
all things work for good to him.

3. Among the comforts of the Prisoner, these have I learned (as Quem cum
pingeret, traditur madidis lupin^^ vixisse: quoniam simul fam^m sustinerent and
sitim. Plin. n. hist. l. 35. cap. 10.
Protogenes the true pourtraict of meagered Ialysus, by being dyeted himself
with pulse) wherein 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4.
blessed be God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of
mercies, and the God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation,
that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort
wherewith we our selves are comforted of God.

. 2.
1. That Gods dearest servants have been imprisoned Heb. 11. 26, etc.
others had trials of cruel mockings and scourgings -- of bonds and
imprisonment -- being destitute, afflicted, tormented: of whom the world was
not worthy. Erras frater, erras, siputas unquam christianum persecutionem non
pati. Hier. Heliod. Ep. 6. l* 2.
True Christians must suffer persecution) in this kind Ier. 37. 15.
Jeremy, Genesis 39.
Joseph, 1 King. 22, 27.
Michaiah, Mar^: 6* 17.
John Baptist, and the Apostles might be cited for examples, but that we have
so many modern, and now sighing in their bonds. Act 5. 18.


2. The Carcer esse non potest ubi Socrates est, Seneca.
Heathen boldly affirmed, that O beatum carcerem quem illustravit v^stra
praesentia, Cypr. l. 4. ^p. 1.
it could not be a prison, in which Socrates was: I am certain it can be no
less then an happy place, and condition, in which Christ is; as he was Act 7
9. Psalm. 105. 18.
with Joseph in prison, so he is still with his: and he gives them favor
oft-times with men, as he did to Genesis 39. 21, 22.
Joseph, Ierem. 38. 10, 11, 12, 13.
Jeremy, Act 16.
Paul and Silas: sometimes deliverance, as he sent his Angel to Peter, with an
habeas corpus, and enlarged him: the word and power of God cannot be bound,
neither can thou any more imprison an holy mind, or shut out Christ from it,
then bind up the sunbeams: Christ is imprisoned with his servants, as he
says, Matthew. 25.
When I was in prison, ye visited me; the prison cannot shut out thy prayers
from heaven, nor Christ from thee, and therefore is it thine Ornamenta sunt
ista, non vineula* Cypr. l. 3. ep. 25.
honor, not thy unhappiness.

3. No man knows the value of liberty, who never wanted it, nor commonly the
true use of it: we best know Gods blessings by wanting them for a time; and so
Libertas intermissa (...) vata.
intermitted liberty is sweeter then continued.

4. There has no tentation overtaken you, but such as Christ foretold should
come for the trial of his: Luke 21. 12. so Rev. 2. 10.
They shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the
Synagogues, and into prison -- the time comes (says he) Ioh. 16. 2.
that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service: this he
foretold, that we might not be scandaled; and that we might be assured, that
he, whose providence lays these things on us, is faithful, and 1 Cor. 10.
13.
will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able: but will with the
temptation also make a way to escape, so that we may be able to bear it.

5. Better is an injurious prison, then an impious liberty: the prison has
been a Sanctuary to some, whose liberty was beset with dangers, so that
experience made them sorry that their imprisonment was no longer; which before
they esteemed too long: all enlargement is not alike successful, as the
examples of Genesis 40. 21, 22.
Pharoah's servants show: the worst prison is to be shut up within the command
of our own sinful affections: Vbi animus semel se cupiditate (...) ^it mala,
Ter. Heaut. A^ S. 1
sin is the worst bond: they are not stone-walls, locks, bolts, chains,
geives, fetters, or manacles, which make the worst prison. Manasses was most
dangerously bound, when he had most liberty to commit those purple-faced
sins, and so most free, when he was in bondage, chains, and captivity: the
minds pure freedom is the best: he is the most wretched vassal who is taken
captive at Satan's will, or subjected to his own: the guilty conscience
followed (as the impious Cito me (inqui) ultrix ^ognate caedis ^ustisia
prosequitur: quam diu O corpus improbum fratri matrique, etc. loseph. de bell.
Iud l 1. c. 2
Aristobulus, or bloody Terrebatur al h^ec evidentibus portentis somn^orum --
o^, ^isd demum ma^^e, vidit per quietem trahique se ab Octav^a uxore etc. Suet.
Ne^^: flens a^ singula atque identidem d^ctitans, qualis artifex p^reo? ib.
Nero) with the Caesar Gallus -- per iuducias naturae conquiescentis
sauciabantur eius sensus circumstridentium terrore larvarum interfectorum
calervae, Domitiano and (...) praeviis corr^ptum cum, ut existimabat, in somnis
uncis furia ibus obiectabant, Am. Marcel. l, ^^.
memory of horrid acts, is more straightened then the prisoner, whose bodies
consinement, impeacheth not, but sometimes advances the blessed liberty of his
mind. The rich Libertine is the basest captive; it is not happiness to Quod
prescribere tot millia hominum, a^ trucidare potuisset -- Syllam nemo non
oderit* Plin. n. hist l. 7 c. 43.
have power over other men's lives and liberties (of which that odious L. Sylla
gloried, that he could proscribe, and kill so many thousand citizens) but over
a man's own: he whose wealth is a snare to him, furnishing him with means and
opportunity to sin, is the most wretched captive, bound Darius-like, with
golden chains, Aethiopes auro vincula faciunt, Solin.
as heavy and restraining as the most vulgar, in the minds captivity, by so
much more heavy and destructive, by how much more of value an immortal soul is
then the body. Cl^m. Alex.
The old prosecuters wont to bind a dead body to Reddidit Etiam Mezentii
supplicium, quod ille vivos mortuis illigahat, and ad mortem cogebat longa
tabe: consectot, etc. ^ul. cap. Opil. Macr.
a living Christian, so that it might be not only his burden, but his perpetual
torment to death: a thousand-fold worse is the burden which sin lays on a
captivated soul: Romans 7.
Wretched man that I am (cried Paul) who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? External bonds and imprisonment can make a man unhappy (if so much)
but a little while: Sin (if not here discharged) will to eternity. Bonds and
prisons to the servant of Christ, are but exercises, increasing their minds
more happy liberty, and resolution: I had rather he any man's captive, then mine
own.

6. If thou make a good use of thy imprisonment, thou may find many
considerable advantages therein: it will teach thee, which are thy fast
friends: it enlarges a well resolved mind: it brings to mind the error
and abuse of former liberty, that thou may thereby be disposed to repentance
for the same: it acquainteth thee with exercises of patience: fixes in thee
holy resolutions: guards the ear from many turbulent clamours which torment
the more free ear: it restrains the roving eyes from seeing that vanity of
the world, which made Democritus laugh, and Heraclite continually weep: it
restrains many from destructive liberty: it is a riged and unpleasing, but
profitable school of temperance and patience. It is the glass that more truly
shows a man himself, then liberty ever can; not to deject the mind to
despair and worldly sorrow, but to raise it to a due consideration of the
causes of Gods judgments, which being ever just, must bring a good man to the
deep consideration of the end of his suffering, and prove an happy stimulus to
repentance, as 2 Chronicles 33. 13.
it did to Manasses, who found his best liberty in prison and captivity. It may
be God permits it, to Heb. 11. 36. Psalm. 105. 19.
try thee; then it must raise and comfort thy mind, to a ready meeting with
Gods will therein. It may be for the testimony of the Lord Jesus and his
truth: then it must highthen thy resolution to an unmoved constancy to be
ready, Act. 21. 13.
not to be bound only, but also to dye for the name of the Lord Jesus. Great
and good minds cannot be subject to servile captivity: either they will in
their strength, and invincible resolution (grounded on the Heb. 12. 2
reward they look upon, and assured on them by the truth of God) endure the
cross, and despise the shame and sufferings which are not worthy to be
compared Romans 8. 18.
to the glory which shall be revealed in them: or make such use of God's
fatherly corrections, as shall render them no less then happy in the quiet
Heb. 12 11.
fruits of righteousness: lastly it will teach a man how subject this vain
world is to perpetual changes, and wean him from the pernicious love thereof.

7. The Prison is the con^ines of death in health, and so must teach a wise man
to prepare there, before the evil days, and restless pains (death's
importunate harbingers) come and leave no room for good counsel and
resolution. Here thou may find some liberty to serve God, as Paul and Silas
did; to pray and sing Psalms at least: and who can say, that God did not
therefore confine thee, seeing thee too attentive to the world, and careless
of holy duties, that the prison might teach thee devotion, which thy liberty
could not? There are many things which may befall thee for thy good: and there
are unexspected revolutions, both in prosperity and adversity -- Eccl 4. 14.
out of the prison he comes to reign, whereas also he that is borne in his
kingdom, becomes poor: Thou may securely exspect that which God knows
best for thee; it may be, there is but one door into the prison, there are
many out: either mercy, or violence, innocence, reward, favor of men, or the
Angel of God; either man, or death, (which has a key to open every door)
shall set thee free; if nothing else enlarge thee, that will not fail thee at
the appointed hour: and variable are the conditions to which the prison
renders men; as I. Caesar to an Empire, Marius to a consul-ship, Regulus and
S^crates to death. I need not these who read of Pharoah's servants, James,
Peter, Joseph, John Baptist: the prison sends some to heaven, some to
destruction: sooner, or later; one way or other it renders all. I only note
that the most infamous temporal end it renders men unto, can be no obstruction
and hindrance to their eternal happiness in Christ, who therefore submitted
himself to the then most infamous death, that he might Gal. 3. 13. Deuteronomy. 21.
23.
take away the curse of the law, which says, cursed is every one which hangs
on a tree. The main skill therefore is, and the only certain comfort against
imprisonment or death, to gain assurance that thou ar^ in Christ, in every
place and condition doing those things which may further thy certainty thereof:
to which observe such like rules:

1. Keep innocence,. III.
that if thou suffer, it may be wrongfully: 1 Pet. 2. 19, 20*
for this is thank worthy, if a man for conscience toward God, endures
grief, suffering wrongfully -- if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye
take it patiently, this is acceptable to God. And if thou have lost the first
parts of innocence, despair not, but lay hold on the second table of
repentance: the penitent thief on the cross, who confessed he justly
suffered, yet heard of Christ, Luke 23. 41 43.
this day thou shall be with me in Paradise.

2. Search thy heart diligently, least some secret sin causes this affliction,
in case it appear not that thou justly suffer of men. See Isai. 42. 22, 23,
24.

3. Think how long these imperious masters can hold thee there, and fear not
them who only can imprison and destroy the body, but fear and trust in him, who
can cast body and soul into hell, and save thee from thy oppressors: prepare
thee to entertain death cheerfully: he shall once come like the Act 3. 18.
Angel to Peter, and take thee out in spite of the most rigid keepers: Job 3.
16.
there the prisoners rest together; that shall free thy body from a loathed
prison, and thy soul from an afflicted body.

4. Improve thy time to some good: some birds sing sweetest in the cage: that
excellent monument which bears the title of the first part of the worlds
general history is an example hereof.

5. Keep thy mind free from all reigning sin, and in spite of all geives and
fetters, and the bespattering of black and unhallowed mouths, thou shall have a
more happy freedom in prison, then thy persecuters have in their liberty:
besides that their account with the eternal justice of God, is to come and yet
not closed: nothing but sins can miserably enthral: we may well say to them,
as Sampson to the men of Judah, Judge. 15 12
Swear to me that you will not fall upon me: I fear none other bonds: he is
a freeman whose conscience accuses him not: God's service in every state is
the best freedom.

6. Subject thy mind to inevitable necessity, by patient bearing; the way to
make bonds more heavy and intolerable, is vainly to struggle with them: if thy
mind were to stay within, thy confinement were no prison: it were a punishment
to command thee out: if thy mind be reluctant, thou straitnest thy self, a ne
exeat regnum may make some man think England a prison: the old man who had
never gone out of the city gates, receiving, a warrant from the Prince,
prohibiting his going out, could not rest till he had stolen out: it was his
city before, but the restraint made it a prison to an impatient mind: if thy
mind having a willing compliance, thy prison becomes no prison to thee: an
impatient wearisome mind, makes a kingdom no more.

7. Be thou meek in affliction, and thou shall be temperate in thy liberty, if
God restore it; so this shall not corrupt thee more then that break thee:
however, if thou can but learn this one lesson, as thou have the best tutor
that ever suffered, so shall thou find the best fruit, Mat. 11. 28, 29.
rest to thy soul.

8. To conclude, let the prison make thee more zealous in Gods service, more
fervent in prayer, more attentive in hearing, more charitable and pitiful to
others that suffer, and more fruitful in all good works, and thou shall owe
thanks to thy persecuters and oppressors, more then thy friends deserved of
thee: it skilleth not much who bettereth thee, if thou be indeed made better;
for whosoever be the instrument, it is Gods favor to thee. He is never wanting
to them that call upon him faithfully; but surely he is nearest them that are
in greatest troubles: he heard Jonah out of the whales belly; Daniel out of
the lions den; the three Israelites out of the fiery furnace; the Disciples
in the storm; Joseph, Jeremy, Paul, Silas, all his servants in prison: the
Act. 12. 5.
Churches prayers brought an Angel from heaven to deliver Peter. No wards can
shut up thy prayers; remember you that are free, what you owe to Christ's
prisoners: little comfort will he afford them who cannot his earnest prayers:
remember you that are in bonds, what you owe your selves: it is in you to make
the prison evil or good to you: be you holy, and it shall make you happy: pray
instantly, God has promised to hear and help you.

The prisoners Petition.
O Holy and merciful Lord God, who have made heaven and earth, the sea and all
that therein is: which keep truth for ever; which excusest judgment for
the oppressed, give food to the hungry, raisest them that are down, and
loosest thy prisoners: though thou afflict and try thy children, thou will not
cast them off for ever; though thou causest grief, yet thou will show
compassion, according to thy mercies: thou afflictest not willingly, nor
grievest the children of men to crush under foot the prisoners of the earth, to
turn aside their right, and subvert them in their cause: our sins have
provoked thy justice, and put this rod into thy fatherly hand: thou would not
the sinners death but his conversion: Lord convert my soul, remove my sins:
frame my heart, affections, and life, according to thine own will: thou who
hear the poor, and despisest not the wretched captive, visit all that are
bound: Lord our redeemer hear them in an acceptable time, and help them in the
day of salvation: preserve the oppressed and despised of men: say unto the
prisoners, Go forth, and to them that are in darkness, Show your selves;
bind up the broken hearted, proclaim liberty to the captives, and opening the
prison to them that are shut up: comfort them that mourn, let their deep
sighing come before thee: according to the greatness of thy power, preserve
thou them that are appointed to dye. Lord lift thou up my head: enlarge my
feet, bring me out of bondage, that I may live to serve and praise thee in the
assemblies of thy servants: however thou please to dispose of me, let all my
sufferings redound to thy glory, and my salvation: give me patience to endure,
constancy to depend on thee, firm faith to apprehend thy promises, and hope to
expect thy saving health: Consider my weakness, and lay no more upon me, then
thou will enable me to bear cheerfully: sanctify my afflictions, and make
them good to me in the fruits of righteousness, which thou have laid up for
all those who rest on thee. Hear me, O Lord, let my cry come unto thee, and
have mercy upon me, through Jesus Christ our Lord and blessed Savior.

AMEN.
A Morning Prayer for prisoners.
O Eternal and Almighty God, Creator, Preserver, and Governer of all things in
heaven and earth; before whom the Thrones and Dominions, Powers, Cherubims and
Seraphims veil their faces with their wings, not able to behold the
brightness of thy Majesty, nor to comprehend thy being, known to none but
thine own infinite wisdom. At the blasting of the breath of thy displeasure,
the earth is moved, and the pillars of heaven do tremble: yet in thy
unspeakable mercy thou vouchsafest to look down from thy throne of glory, and
to take care for man, yea the poorest and most despised among the sons of
men; and not only to bow down a gracious ear to their petitions, but to
command them to call upon thee, that thou may relieve and deliver them: to
this end have thou made so many instances of that word of thine, The fervent
prayer of the righteous avails much. Such prayers have divided the Seas, and
made their swelling waves stand on heaps, beat down the armies of aliants:
stopped the mouths of lions, restrained the devouring flames, opened and shut
heaven, made the Sun and Moon stand still, converted the revengeful malice
of enemies into pity and compassion, broken the heavy yokes of bondage, shaken
off the chains, opened the prison doors, and delivered those that were
appointed to death: so that thou have not in ^ain said, Call upon me in the
day of thy trouble, so will I hear thee, and thou shall glorify me; Lord,
thy mercy is not changed, thine arm shortened, nor thine ear heavy, only our
sins have separated between thee and us: this is that filthy leprosy
over-spreading every part and faculty of our bodies and souls, which has
covered our mouths, and hindered our prays from thy graecious presence, turning
away thy merciful ears; so that as we have not hearkened when thou spakest
unto us by thy Prophets to warn us from the ways of death and destruction, so
thou may justly refuse to hear our cries. But, O Lord God, if thy mercy
could have been hindered by man's sin, thou had never elected him to salvation,
for thou fore-sawest all things from eternity to all times to come. If any evil
could have overcome thy goodness, thou had never redeemed us with so great a
price, as the blood of thy son Jesus, for thou fore-knewest that they to whom
thou sentest him as a redeemer, would crucify the Lord of life: if the
iniquity of an impious world could intercept thy bounty, this sun should not
shine, nor thy rain descend upon the wicked: neither would thou have
preserved us this night past, that we might now meet to call upon thee for
mercy and delivera^ce, if thy justice had not given place to mercy: we
therefore humbly acknowledge thy goodness, and our own vileness and
unworthiness, and for thy mercy sake beseech thee, to pardon and put all our
sins out of thy remembrance, that they may no more appear to provoke thine
anger to our destruction. O Lord, we know not what, or how to pray as we
ought, help thou our infirmities, by thy holy Spirit who makes intercession
for us, according to thy will with groanings inuterable: it is the same spirit
of thine which indicted the prayers of thy Prophets and Apostles, by which they
obtained such mavelous things, which now also moves in, and for thy poor
afflicted children crying unto thee: Good Father, give us that lively faith,
fervency, and evidence of spirit, to which thou (who art the God of truth, and
can not deceive) have made the promise of audience and attaining. Lord show
us the effects of that good word which says, Ask, and you shall have: Now give
unto us that ask: forgive us all our sins, and give us an happy deliverance
out of the pressures which lie so heavily upon us. Give us peace with thee in
the testimony of a good conscience: and if it be thy holy will, peace with all
men: as thou have passed by us with fire, storm, and earth-shaking
indignation; so now speak unto us in the still voice of thy mercy and
compassion. Lord, if it be possible, let this cup of anger pass from us; if
not, thy will be done. Give us patience and perseverance: give the blessed
issue, who give the bitter trial: consider whereof thou have made frail man.
Remember that we are but poor dust and earth, and as the grass soon
withering away: deal with us so here, that we may not fail of living, to
thee in this life, and with thee in that eternal life to come: And now, O Lord,
who causest the outgoings of the morning and evening to praise thee, we bless
thy holy name for thy gracious providence preserving of us this night past, and
giving us this present opportunity of presenting our supplications unto thee:
Good Father, continue thy mercy to us and ours this day: sanctify us unto thy
service, direct all our thoughts, words, and actions, so as that in the several
ways of our callings, they may all tend to the glory of thy holy name, the
good example of our brethren, and the further assurance of our consciences
before thee. Lord bless thy holy Church in all nations, specially that which
thy right hand has planted in this. Bless, Lord, our several families, let
our innocence appear as the light, lift up our heads from these bonds, and in
thy good time restore us to them again: hear their prayers for us, and ours
for them, and both for thy son Jesus* sake. O Lord, who art the God of all
true consolation (who defendest the fatherless and widows) leave them not
comfortless: be thou their guider and protector: though thou please to take
us from them, take not thy grace and holy spirit from us nor them, and so thy
will be done. Bless all those who any where suffer in the like durance with
us, bless us all here present: grant that we may make a right use of our
present afflictions, that they may better us: give us hearts to trust in thee,
what ever thou do to us, cheerfully to discern thy mercies, in the midst of
our corrections; and ever to bless thy holy name, for that thou have
corrected, and not given us over to final destruction. Lord incline thine ear
and hear, Lord help us, Lord consider in mercy and do it, for Jesus Christ his
sake, in whose ever blessed name, we conclude our petitions in that absolute
form of prayer, which he has taught us in his Gospel, saying,

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

AMEN.
An Evening prayer for the same.
O Most gracious and glorious Lord God, we do not here appear before thee with
any confidence in our own merits, being such in respect of our unhallowed
thoughts, corrupt words, and sinful actions, as that if there were neither in
earth or heaven, among men, or Angels, any witness of our iniquities, our own
consciences would accuse and convict us; and if there were no other judge, our
own hearts could not but condemn us: and thou art greater then our hearts, and
nothing can be hid from thee, the just and all-seeing judge of the living, and
the dead, who must all stand before thy tribunal: we therefore in all humility
of souls, appeal from thy justice (in which we can look for nothing less
then death and destruction, the due wages of sin) unto the sanctuary of thy
mercy, there laying hold on that altar, on which thy son Christ Jesus was
offered up, a living sacrifice for us who were dead in trespasses and sins:
he is that lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world: and that
great Angel of the Covenant, who in the precious censer of his merits, offers
the prayers of the Saints, as Sweet odors, holy and acceptable to thee: for his
s^ke ^arden all our sins, which have rendered us not only less then the
least of thy mercies, but also worthy of thy severest judgments temporal and
eternal: for his sake let our complaints come before thee: and from thy mercy
seat (...) thou our supplications which come not out of feigned (...), but from
the depth of our afflicted souls: Truth it is, O Lord, we have procured all
these miseries unto our selves, and the bitterness wherewith thou have filled
us, is none other but the fruit of our own inventions, who have obstinately
followed our own vain and unprofitable ways, refusing the guidance of thy
good spirit and holy word recalling us to the paths of eternal life. But, O
Lord, God of mercy, thou desire not the death of sinners, but that they may
be converted and live: thou art the sole fountain of holiness, every good and
perfect giving descends from thee who art the father of light: enlighten thou
our understandings, open our eyes that we sleep not in death: sanctify our
depraved wills, rectify our sinful affections, and subject them all to thine
own holy will and pleasure: frame every faculty of our souls and bodies to a
new and sincere obedience to thy law, that we may neither decline to the right
hand nor to the left, but may henceforth make strait steps to our salvation
through Jesus Christ our Lord. In his name we continue our supplications to
thee in the behalf of thy Church universal: Lord gather daily to her such as
thou have elected to salvation: enlighten those who have not yet known thy
name: take off the veil from the hearts of thy ancient people the Jews, that
now, near the fullness of time, they may see unto Christ, the end of the law to
every one that believes both of Jews and Gentiles: show more and more mercy
in the confirmation of us, whom thou have called, until our fullness be come in.
Discover and confound the man of sin, daily abolishing the mystery of
iniquity, by the brightness of thy coming, the sword of the spirit and evident
preaching the Gospel to all nations; until thou shall at thy second coming
manifest thy self our Savior and Redeemer, and wipe all tears from our eyes:
even so come Lord Jesus. And now, O Lord, who look with a tender eye upon
the pressures of thy servants, let the sighing of the Prisoners come before
thee, and according to the greatness of thy power preserve thou those that are
appointed to die: be merciful to us here present before thee: we have indeed at
thy hands (against whom we have sinned) deserved this rod: but, O our God,
correct us in mercy, not in thine anger; for what are we in thy hands, and who
can stand before thee, when thou art angry? We have not rendered unto thee
according to thy goodness: we have surfeited on the sweet blessings of peace,
and abused our liberties, not valuing the benefit thereof, but vainly reckoning
it among our hereditary possessions, as if it might never be taken from us,
when we had freedom to go into the assemblies of thy children, the places
where thine honor dwells, to hear thy word and present our supplications
unto thee; Lord how often have vain pleasures or worldly profits detained us?
or coming before thee? how seldom have we returned with any fruits of
amendment? therefore do thou now teach us by wanting these comforts, their
estimate, which we would not know, while we enjoyed them. But, O good God,
seeing thy fatherly corrections are not to destroy, but to amend us, give us
now good understanding by these chastisements: give us discerning spirits, that
through these afflictions, we may look up to the hand that smites us, and by
our corrections gain a true loathing and detestation of all the sins for which
thou art displeased with us: Lord, if it may stand with thine honor; enlarge
and deliver us in mercy, restore every man to his own family, to the mutual
comfort of us and ours, that with them we may praise thy holy name, and better
serve thee then ever we have done: if otherwise, Lord proportion our patience
to our trials: forsake us not in our sad distresses: be thou ever present with
us, that we may rest assured of thy mercies: give us peace of conscience, and a
blessed freedom from the bondage of sin, that we may therein know, that
neither stone walls, nor armed guards can shut thy holy spirit the comforter
from us, nor bar our prayers from ascending up to thee. Lord, as our trials
increase, increase our comforts in thee; so that as the more it rained, the
more the arc was listed up, in which thou had enclosed those whom thou did
thereby save in a perishing world, so the more our afflictions are showred down
upon us, the more let our souls be lifted up unto thee, and to those things
which are above with thee, that we being weaned from the vain love of this
world, may have our conversation in heaven, and be willing to be dissolved,
that we may live with our Lord Jesus eternally. And now being by thy
appointment to take our bodily rest, we pray thee to assure us of our peace
with thee, through the merits of thy holy son Jesus: let our beds put us in
remembrance of our graves to which we are descending, that we may keep a
faithful watch to the coming of Christ Jesus for our deliverance out of these
earthly tabernacles: let thy providence keep us and all ours from the powers of
darkness, and all dangers of body and soul: sleeping, waking, living, dying,
have us ever in thy keeping: that our waking may also remember us of our
resurrection from the dead, unto the life of glory. These and all other things
necessary for our bodies or souls, we beg of thee for Jesus Christ his sake,
in his name and words concluding our petitions in that form of prayer which he
has taught us, saying,

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

AMEN.
CHAP. XXXII.
. 1. Of Banishment, several kinds: general cause ther^of.. 2. What we must do
to be comforted herein.

1. MAny are the afflictions of the righteous: so that I may say of their
sanctity,. I.
as it was once of Aem^l. Prob,*
Agisilaus, deformed and lame, ignoti faciem ejus cum in^uerentur,
contemnebant, etc. they who knew him not, when they saw his face, despised him;
but they who knew his virtue, could not enough admire him. Among the Saints
impropriated evils may Banishment be numbered; as also the consolation thereof
among the fruits of Sanctity.

2. There are three kinds of Banishment to which the Romans were wont to
condemn: 1. Confinement to some one foreigne place. 2. Inderdiction of the
native soil only. 3. Limitation of men's approaches to some certain Province
or City.

3. The general cause of Exile is sin: for which our first parents (and we in
them) suffered an ejectionem firmi, being cast out of the pleasant and
commodious Eden, to labor and sorrow; in that attainder, forfeiting our
interest in all the good creatures, until they are restored us again by
Christ; in whom we have a divine right to them all, (as it is written, 1 Cor.
321.
for all things are yours --) as also (by the municipal laws of that
Republic, whereof we are a part) we have a civil right to some of them: now
though depriving hereof by God, is ever just (because no man lives, and
sins not; and thereby often forfeiteth life, liberty, and all to his
justice) yet this punishment inflicted by men, against a divine and civil
right, may make the Judges extremely guilty, though it can never make the
proscribed Saint unhappy: Psalm. 37 33.
for the Lord will not leave them in their hand, nor condemn them when they
are judged.

For comfort then to those that suffe^ any kind of Banishment;. 2.
I advise

1. That thou be more careful for the heavenly inheritance whence no violence
shall remove thee: and the more thou art barred earthly comforts, the more set
thy affections on things which are above. As the seamen loosing sight of the
land, look up to fetch their directions from the star^es of heaven: it was a
great comfort to him who could say, Habeo inius^i exilii com^^em Christum.
I have Christ a partner of my unjust banishment: it were wretched indeed, if
men's enemies Si aliquo duci po^uerunt, ubi Deum suum non invenirent, Aug. de C.
D l. 1. c. 11.
could confine them to some place, where they could not find their God; but lb
Aug. ^p. 122.
he never deserteth his captives, if he know his own: so that if thou be
driven from all humane society, yet can thou not be comfortless or Sol^^ non
est, cui Christ^s in suga comes est. Cypr. I. 4. ep. 6.
alone, if Christ be with thee, if thou art justly banished; let that
affliction amend thee, and it shall make thee happy: if unjustly, fear not,
that is thy enemies sin, not thy misery. Solus non e^^. etc* ubicunque
saerit, sine Deo non est: and s^. fugientem in solitudine ac montibus latro
^^presserit, (...) invas^^ it, fames ac sitis aut frigus afflixerit, vel per
maria praecipiti navigatione properantem tem pellas -- aut procella
submerserit, expe^t^t mi^i^em suum C^ristus ubicunque pug^antem, Cyprian.
It is not banishment, but guiltiness that makes a man unhappy: nothing can
make a man truly wretched, but his own sin: if by any means he can leave
that, though his place know him no more, he is happy enough, who cannot be
unhappy. First then learn to walk with God, living to him, and with him, ever
setting thy self in his presence, meditating on him, praying to him, and asking
counsel of him and his oracles; being so acquainted with spiritual company, as
that neither thy necessary society with man may hinder thy conversation in
heaven, nor this make thee neglectful of Gods ordinance in that, who has
appointed thee, both comfort in humane society, and witnesses therein of thy
conversation, that in the sight of thy good works God Matthew. 5. 16.
may be glorified; therefore cleave sted fastly to Christ, let no condition
pull away thy heart from him: though thou be sequestered from all else; Christ
is incomparably better then all the creatures. Secondly, keep a good
conscience; he cannot be unhappy in any place, who (having the comfort of
innocence) is not so in himself; miserable are they, where er^ they are, who
carry with them that portable hell, a guilty conscience, which in the midst af
all secular prosperity, makes a man truly unhappy: such a one (like the
wounded dear) carries deaths messenger, the killing arrow, sin, sticking in
the heart; and cannot out-runne his misery: a man's ^nemies are they of his own
house; among them his self is the worst: Nemo leditur nisi a se^ipso, Ch^ysost,
no man can be hurt but by himself: the powers of hell (malicious as they are)
cannot hurt thee, if thou have not an hand in it thy self: there is no terror
in the world like that of a guilty conscience: only Gods anger makes a man
unhappy, none other can: if Christ be with thee, every place shall be thy
heaven.

2. Know thy happiness, where ever God shows thee favor, and leads thee:
so did Abraham, when he was a stranger in Can^an: and Jose^h by Act. 7. 9.
his brothers envy sold into Egypt: but God was with him, and delivered him,
giving him wisdom and favor in the sight of Pharaoh: that mind is too much
straightened in it self, which confineth desire and content to one place, as if
the world had no more: the heavens are as cheerful a covering abroad, as at
home: the sun shines as comfortably on other nations, as on that which we
call ours: the same providence of God rules in all the world: that place which
thou countest foreign, and thy place of exile, is a native soil to some, who
in thy house would have as much cause to think themselves banished; as Dio.
hist. Romans I 37.
Philiscus urged for a comfort to the Orator. All this world is as much our
country, as any part thereof (if we reckon right) within which, if any man make
himself an exile, he is straightened in mind, rather then in place: had such
opinion limited all men, how many great parts of the world, had been to this
day unpeopled, undiscovered: our Ancesters, who first inhabited this land, were
strangers here: wise men think themselves Socrates -- cum rogar^tur cuiatem se
esse, dicere^, (...) danum, inquit, etc.
citizens of the world: and well resolved natural men, take that to be home,
Patria est, ubicu^que est been, Cic. Tu^. q. I. 5.
where ever they are well: (...) and the Sanctis ubique patria, and nu^^bi,
Greg. Naz.
Saints country is every where, and no where on earth; We have here no
continuing city: Heb. 13.
we are here but pilgrims; and while we are here, 2 Cor. 5.
from home. It is not then so much in the change of place, as company, which
embittereth exile: and certainly company is either a great good, or a
pernicious evil: to be banished from ill company is an happiness, and from
good company we can be banished but for a short time; (ma^ger the malice of
the world) and therein not so much as the world thinks; seeing in the
communion of Saints, however dispersed, we are united by the Spirit of our Lord
Jesus.

3. Consider well how many have been advantaged by their banishment: I might
instance in Plutarch. vit. Themist.
Themistocles, honored and enriched in the Persian court, where keeping an
honorable table, he said, O children, we should have been undone, if we had not
been undone: in (...), D. Laert. Zeno. l. 7. (...). ibid.
Zeno, who in a foreign land could say, Then I had fair winds, when I was
cast away; because thereby he was brought to the study of philosophy: in some
others so improved, that they seemed sent out to the School of Wisdom, not
to banishment: but our Henry 7. is a nearer example, whose exile gained him
powerful friends, and us a good King, and deliverer from an usurping tyrant:
whereas then (as I began to say) nothing is more dangerous then evil company,
which disgracing virtue, brings sin into fashion, (such a tyrannical
usurpation of right has custom and company gotten, that it is sometimes judged
madness not to be mad for company) and the Saints sometimes share in temporal
judgments, for their ill company: (as it befell Lot; Genes. 14. 12. Genes. 19.
15.) 2 Cor. 6. 17.
sequestration from such, is a blessing, and Rev. 184.
means of safety: and to all Gods children the worst of this kind of
affliction (as any other) is but as grinding to the jewel, setting the fairer
luster on them, and making their value better known, as it was with Joseph.

4. When it must be so, go willingly, and bear it so: then shall it be a
peregrination, not an exile: a willing mind preventeth compulsion; impatience
only can make it wretched: patience conquereth violence, whose own weight
breaks it, falling on the willing: how many strangers (for trade or gain)
live among us? how many of ours, for the same cause, are contented to live in
foreign parts, and therefore are not banished, because they live willingly
there? how few live where they were borne? how many willingly purchase
experience, and knowledge of other states with many years absence from their
own? how many have gone into a voluntary exile, as Plut. Ly^^r. Sol. ib. (...)
Scipio Ae^^ll. Prob.
Lycurgus (that his laws might be kept inviolable) Chabrias, Conion,
Iphicrates, Chares, Pythagoras, Solon, Scipio, and others: If thy mind be
willing (as a wise man's ought to be) to make the best of that thou can not
avoid, it is a liberty, not a restraint: if thou were confined to that one
place, whence thou art banished, thou were banished from a greater part of the
world: so that upon the matter, Bias Laert, lib. 1. (...) --
the mind only makes the material difference between absence and banishment,
except you will conceive a difference between him that goes free, and him that
goes freely: that being in the power of others, this in our own. To conclude,
that can be no absolute evil, which our mind can remedy or ease: and he is of
a weak understanding, or an ungoverned affection, who will make that heavier
which he must bear.

5. Make a good and prudent use of thy travels; so that it may appear that thy
country was rather unworthy of thee, then thou of it: that it has lost thee,
not thou it. Aristides being demanded why he so much took his banishment to
heart, replied, because of Propter ignominiam patriae. Stobae Ser. 36*
my countries dishonor. A nation can no ways more dishonor and make it self
infamous to foreign parts, and future ages, then by banishment and
imprisonment of good men: for what ever popular rage, drunken with its own fury
dreameth; however they idol their own suffrages; what sober man will not
conclude them Quanti v^ro ista civitas aestimanda est ex qua boni sapientesque
pelluntur? Cic. Tuse. quaest. l 51.
impious, who cannot endure and comply with good men? In fine, some men's
banishment Quid T. Albutiu^? nonne animo aequissimo Athenis exul
philosophabatur? cui tamen illud ipsum non ac^idisse^, si i^ repub. quies^ens,
Epicuri legibus paruisset. Cic. Tuse. q. l. 5.
has made them wise, and some good: it had been unhappy for them not to have
been banished: while the most precious jewels lie concealed in their native
place, the sea, or rocks, they have neither beauty, value, nor use: taking them
out brings them to these: so shall it be to thee, if thou will make a right
use of thy banishment.

6. A man does but perversely grieve at that which makes him more happy: not to
say, that exile is a singular master of ^rugality: a profitable worme-wood
laid to the breast to wean thee from the pernicious love of the world: a
School of humility, temperance, and pati^nce, I say only, that in thy exile,
others do that for thee by violence, which thou should have done for thy
self in discretion, that is, they withdraw thee from the injurious and wicked:
thou would not count it any loss to thee to be taken away from serpents, or
to be drawn out of a perishing Sodom, as Lot was: why should thou think it
any loss to be taken away from men worse then serpents, (they are good in
their kind) men that have the poison of aspes under their lips?

But thou may say, the grief is, to leave my goods, livelihood, dear friends,
wife and children: Truly this is the affliction of the parted, and the curse
of the parters: the pleasant possessions made Lot's wife look back; but yet
consider, 1. That he that kept thee at home, can provide for thee abroad, and
if thou trust in him, will: he can restore thee to those dear jewels he gave
thee: however thy prayers for them, are as near heaven in exile, as at home:
count them not lost, no not dying: they but go before thee: wherein if thou
can satisfy thy afflicted mind; what other great emolument can thou loose
by changing place? If thou have the same judgment, dexterity* fortitude,
wisdom, justice, health, strength, means to get necessaries, all which may
there be found, where thou think thy self lost: hereto add, that God by
this means takes men away from destruction, rather then their country, as he
did Lot.

2. Consider whether all those things, whose loss thou lamentest, be truly
goods: perhaps they hurt thee, or are not thine: it is certain thou could be
but a tenant at will: they only are thy goods which cannot be taken from thee
in life or death: reckon like a wise man, and in the testimony of a good
conscience, thou may also say, all that is mine, I carry with me, and so not
have a dangerous eye back again. 3. Consider well the difference between
acquaintance and friends: how many friends thou have left, may best appear in
thy trials? how many of these shadows follow thee now thou art clouded? do
they not fear thy mine? does not that set a strange distance between you? are
these thy friends, or such acquaintance as thou may every where find?
Again; how many malicious enemies have thou left behind, who have often so
embittered thy soul, that thou have cried out, Woe is me that I sojourne in
Meshech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar: my soul has long dwelt with him
that hates peace? so that upon a just account, thou art not so much banished
thy country, as taken from impious enemies. 4. Lastly, be confident that what
ever is good, we shall meet withal again in the immutable happiness of
heaven: what ever cannot come thither, is not worth our lamenting here, it
being truly rather a gain to loose it, then to recover it.

7. Consider how popular inconstancy usually retributeth evil to best deserts;
as Aristidesnonne ob eam causam expulsus est patria, quod prae^er modum justus
esset. Cic. Tus. q. l. 5.
Aristides the just, Aemil. Prob.
Alcibiades, Ingrata patria ne ossa quidem mea habes.
as Scip. Aff^ic.
he also whose epitaph said to posterity, Ungrateful native soil, thou have
not so much as my bones, had experience of it. We have examples in holy writ,
of those Heb. 11. 37, 38.
who wandered in deserts and mountains, of whom the world was not worthy. All
is little to that one example of Christ, persecuted from his infancy, carried
into Egypt to avoid Herod's tyrannous fury, and all his life made Isai. 53. 3.
a man of sorrows, by them he came to save. That condition to which Christ is
a pattern, can make no man unhappy: he John 1. 11.
came amongst his own, and they received him not: he did only good to them:
their own testimony was, Mark 7. 37.
he has done all things well: yet they crucified him: remember his words;
Mat. 10. 24.
The disciple is not greater then his master: and do thou think much, that
being innocent, thou art banished thy native soil? few good men live where
they first drew breath, or best deserve.

8. Learn the good which God does for thee; who best knows how to make all
things work for the best: as in thy exile, thy security from thine adversaries;
whose restles malice is as trucelesse as the Devils which rules in the
enemies of Gods children: that he has set thee by better neighbors (or less
pernicious) who can not have worse then thou have lost: however thou value
this, the Prophet fervently wishes for it: Ier. 9. 2. 3.
O that I had in the Wilderness, a Cottage of a Wayfaring man, that I might
leave my People and go from them: for they be all -- an assembly of
treacherous men: they bend their tongues, like their bow, for lies. --

9. Learn to seek happiness and content in thy self, in peace of conscience,
purity of heart, sanctified will and affections, faith, patience, meekness,
temperance, humility, and the like; and no loss of these outward things shall
much trouble thee, who have set thy affections on heaven: and to a man assured,
that he must ere long change this life for an eternal, what matter is it, from
what point of the earth, his soul takes her flight? whether from Pisga with
Moses: from the banks of Jordan with Eliah; from the Prison with John Baptist;
from the field, mill, or bed; or from the mount of Olives whence Christ
ascended into Heaven? it is not much considerable whence thou come; thy
happiness in spite of secular afflictions, and active malice, shall be, once
to arrive at heaven, where all shall be* securely, unchangeably, and eternally
happy.

The Banished man's Petition.
O Lord God, holy and merciful, whose providence rules over all: the earth is
thine, and thou assignest the parts thereof to the children of men: thou
broug^st a Vine out of Egypt, and plantedst it, thou madst the branches thereof
to fill the land, and spread themselves from the river to the flood; but in thy
displeasure thou did cast them out of the inheritance which thou had given
them: Thou art the Lord of Mountains and valleys, land and sea, and the God of
the exiled and outcast: Thou do with much patience behold o^^ression and
wrong, until the measures of iniquity be filled up: o Lord behold the
pressures of me, thy poor despised and dejected servant: thy mercy and
gracious audience of the afflicted, is neither limited to Jerusalem nor this
mountain, every place is equally near heaven, where ever men lift up pure
hands and hearts, worshipping thee in spirit and truth, thou art there present
to hear and help them. Gracious Father though thou see good to permit me to
the power of men to exercise me, yet can they not shut thy merciful ear
against me: O let my complaint therefore come before thee: let thy word be as
the clowdy Pillar to lead me in thy way: let thy good spirit direct me: cast me
not from thy presence: take not thy mercies from me: give me grace to forsake
all those sins for which thy chastisement is now upon me, that I may happily
profit by thy Fatherly corrections: and if it be thy holy will restore me to
these blessings, and comforts, which thou gave me for my support: if
otherwise* yet good Lord, give me assurance of thy mercy, and patience to
expect thy saving health: leave me not destitute and comfortless in my
afflictions: be my guide and helper in this earthly pilgrimage, and valley of
tears, unto, and in the hour in which thou have appointed to take me hence,
into the incorruptible and undefiled inheritance, (by thy power reserved in
heaven for all that believe in thee) to which no hand of the oppressor shall
reach: where shall be no curse, no sin, nor fear of forfeiture: into which
no enemy shall be admitted: from which no inhabitant shall ever be cast out:
Lord hear and help me: Lord have mercy on me and grant me that which I ask
according to thy will, and that which I should ask, which thou know best
for me, through the infinite merits of the Son of thy Love; the author and
finisher of our Salvation, and eternal happiness, Christ Jesus the righteous.

AMEN.
CHAP. XXXIII.
Of old Age: directions, counsels, and comforts therein.. 1. Age: common evils
thereof.. 2. How the foundation of an happy Age must be laid in youth.. 3. How
the evils of Age may be lessened.. 4. Or more patiently borne.. 5. By what
Rules of practice it may be improved to the comfort of the Aged.

1.. 1.
OLd Age is our times Occasus vitae mortis primitiae.
sunset; the last of this life, and first fruits of death: that ^is omnis
gravis est aetas, qui omnia bona a seipsis petunt, etc. quam ut adipiscantur,
omnes optant, eandem accusant adepti, tanta est stultitia, etc. Cic. de Senect.
which all desire, and but few like, or patiently bear: so ungrateful are men
to God, that they would be young again: so waiward does sin make them, that
they like no present state, of so discomposed and foolish a mind, are those
aged children, whose desires look to the Sodom, whose dangerous ^lame they had
escaped.

2. It is the condition of Omnia orta occidu^t, aucta senescunt. Sal. Iug and
IIier. epist.
all that grows in time to decay. Time is the devourer of his children: here
is nothing but perpetual changes: Nec quod fuimusve sumusve, cras erimus, etc.
we shall not be to morrow, what we were yesterday, or are to day: precipitate
hours, by their succeding moments, pass with, the flight of a thought, quickly
changing us from secure youth, to solicitous age, which steals on with so
sly a foot, that like the remoter lights of heaven, in their vast orbs, the
speed of their motion, is Dies allabitur dum ignoras. Hier. ep. 9. l 2. (...)
sens^m sine sensu ae^as senesei. Cic. de Senect.
not so much perceived passing, as passed away: and so we become old before
we have well composed our youth, or thought of age: Vita enim nos^ra navig^nti
est simili^* is vamque -- stat s^det, iacet, vadit -- ita and nos sumus: qui
sive vigilantes, sive dormientes, sive tacentes, ^oquentes -- per momenta
temporum quotidie ad sinem tendimus. Greg. l. 6. ep. 26. Hos. 7. 9.
like men sailing, we make our port, sleeping, and waking, as the Prophet said
of Ephraim, Strangers have devoured his strength, and he `Nescit quod
senescit, Greg. mor. in Job. 25.
knows it not: yea gray hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knows
not. Truly the age of man is but of a (...).
short date; Job 14. 1. Apud Hypanni fluvium -- bestiolas quasdam nasci, quae
unum diem vivant.
as the flowers beauty; of few hours continuance: will we, nill we, we grow
old; and that which David once said, 1 Samuel 20. (there is but a step between me
and death) the strongest in every age may truly. There is Confer no. stram
longissimam aetatem cum aeternitate in eadem propemodum brevita^e --
reperiem^r. C. Tus^. quoest. l. 1. Velimus, no^tmus senescimus, Hier. l. 2. ep.
21. Quis est tam s^u^tus (quamvis sit adolescen^) cui sit exploratum, se ad
ves^eram esse victurum? Cic. de Senect.
some little difference between the young and the old, which as little time will
take away: the old decrepid man was a flourishing youth not long since: and the
young man must quickly be old: the end evens all: Si nongentos vitae
excederemus annos -- and Methusalem nobis tempora donarentur, tamen nihil esset
praeterita longitudo, quae esse desiisset: etenim inter eum qui december vixit
annos, and eum qui mill post quam, idem vitae finis advenerit, and
irrecusabilis mortis necessitas, transactum omne ta^undem est, etc. Hieron. ep.
24. l. 2. Heliodoro.
whether the last year of Methusalah's long-spun life, or of the dying infant,
which like those water sourses rising near the sea, and by a short and speedy
course, rendering themselves into the bitter depths again: whether the long
lasting Patriarcks before the flood, or the now epitomized lives of men, in
this worlds senio, which like Winter's suns, but rise, show themselves above
the horizon, creep a low course, and quickly set again, exchanging the short
day for a long-some night; all comes to one invariable conclusion at last, he
dyed. Vain and frail life of man, on which we set so high a rate: Quid est in
homin^s vita diu? -- mihi ne diuturnum quidem quicquam videtur in quo est
aliquid extremum, cum enim id advenerit, tunc illud quod praeteriit, effluxit.
Cic. de Senect. and hoc quod senectus vocatur, pauci sum circuitus annarum. Sen
consolat. ad Marci.
there is nothing long in the longest life of man: nothing lasting in which there
is something last, which being come, that which was, is eternally past: that
which we call old age, is but the circuites of a few years, surrendering to
death.

3. Death has three messengers, to arrest and Sub poena up to that high court,
whence there is no appeal, chance, or accident, infirmity, and old age. The
first tells of doubtful things: the second of grievous: the last of certain.
No man is secure of one hour to come: death comes to the young man, like
Recha^ and Baana to Ishbosheth, about the heat of the day, to slay him,
insidiis; but to the old man, aperto mart: there by ambush, here with
displayed banners and flying colou^s: so that it concerns all the living to
be prudent, in not sleeping without oil in their lamps, least the Bridegroom
coming in an hour they dream not of, while they endeavor too late a
preparation, the door be shut, and they knock in vain.

Being here to lay down some directions and comforts against the sorrows and
evils of age, I shall consider 1. What must be done for prevention, or where
the foundation of an happy age must be laid? 2. How the evils of age may be
lessened? 3. Or how more patiently born? 4. How they may be used to the good of
the aged?


1. For the prevention of evils incident to age,. II.
we must lay the foundation Paret sibivi^ticum, quod longo it ineri
necessarium est. Hieron. l 2. ep 21. Eam me laudare senectutem quae fun
damentis adolescentiae constituta sit -- Cic. de Senect. Est enim quiet, pure
ac eleganter actae ae tatis placida ac lenis senectus. ib. (...). D. Laert. l.
1. Cleobul. Divitiae senum non sunt canities capitis, sed industriae
juventutis. o -- ista ipsa defectio virium adolescentiae vitiis efficitur
saepius quam senectutis, libidinosaetenim and intemperans adolescentiae,
effoetum corpus tradit senectuti. Cic. de senect.
in youth: it is a good rule, in thy youth study to live well, and in thy age
to dye well. The vices and distempers of youth deliver up a surfeited body to
age, whereby they not only incommodate, but dishonor it with the faults of
youth: making it, not only hear evil, (as, wretched, unhappy: and
contemptible, a burden, continual disease, Morte magis metuenda senectus.
and worse then death) but also to be so in respect of the Senectus ipsa est
morbus -- metue senectam, (...)
decays, pains, and aches, and specially the conscience of an ill-spent life.
but for these, age Potest igitur exercitatio and temperantia etiam in senectute
conjervare a liquid prist ini robor is. Cic. de Senect.
has often a capacity of health, sufficiency of strength, and solidity of
comfort, as appears not only in Moses whose eye was not dim, nor his natural
force abated, at the age of 120 years ( Deuteronomy. 34. 7.) but also Joshuah's
defectlesse strength ( Josh. 14. 10, 11.) at 85. and in the cheerful health
of diverse modern examples of temperance. wherein it is a more happy part of
life then youth, which at best, is not far from if not in danger of mischievous
incentives to sin: for what good man ever doubted, but that an holy reformed
age, is incomparably better then a vicious youth? and who sees not the way in
consideration hereof, to make the age which greiveth them, more blessed then
that which did vainly delight them?

2. Psalm. 16. 8.
Set the Lord ever before thee and Ecclel, 12. r.
remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth: then reckon that thou may
quickly provide for it: by the studies of young men you may probably
conjecture, what fruits they will bear in age, if they be not blasted. they
that would make their provision by gathering Manna Exodus 16. 21.
went out betimes, the scorching sun once rising, all was gone. happy are
they (as I noted) that have a grave 2 Timothy 1. 5.
Lois and an holy Eunice to season their tender years with knowledge of God,
before the heat of corrupted youth, which Temeritas est slorentis aetatis,
prudentia senectuti^. Cic. de Senect.
permits not the dew of heaven to lie upon the heart.

3. Suspect thine own judgment: many had been happily wise, had they not by
too early an opinion thereof anticipated that fruit, and thought themselves
such, before they were so. youth is the age of folly and precipitate error:
which few discover until they are past it: it is the age of vain hopes and
overgrown confidence, so dangerous that it has not only subverted some persons
and families, but Temeraria pubes praecipites juvenum dementia subruit u^bes --
States and Kingdoms, as Israel found in Rehoboams young Counselors: (...)
^raeceps fertur ad omnia.
The Hebrews express a young man by a word which in the root imports an
^eadlong falli^g into any thing: the opinion of self ability, and daring
ambition to rule the day, has too Quod si le gere and au lire volet is externa
maximas respub ab adole scentulis labe ^actatris, a senibus sustentatas, and
restitutas repenetis, etc. Cic. de Senect.
often set the World on fire.

4. Be thou as circumspect, as a man considering the dangers he is to pass, or
perish in them. the Prodigal had many dangerous companions: power of himself:
his estate in his hand: company of enticing harlots: place far from his
fathers sight: none but trustlesse strangers to advise him: but the worst of
all was his youth: without which all the rest could not have hurt him: Vicina
lapsib^^ adolescentia, Ambrde. vid. l. 1. (si ^it liber crus.)
youth is near dangerous falls: easy to be transported with Architas
Tarentinus dixit -- (...) capitaliorem pestem, quam corporis vol^ptatem -- hinc
patriae proditiones, hinc* r^rumpub. eversiones -- nullum deni* scelas, vullum
magnum facinus esse, ad quod suscipiendum non libido voluptatis impelleret --
nec in voluptatis regno virtutem posse consistere -- d Omne animi lumen
extingueret. Cic. de Senect.
pleasures, then which there are no more dangerous Sirens, or capital
mischiefs: they are Lusts panders, Treasons brokers, universal incentives of
all impiety, which could never be hatched, did they not bewitch the unhappy
actors with some pleasure: pleasures are unconsistent with virtues monarchy:
they Quo facilius vincipossent, cum se vol^pta^ibus dedissent. ib*
blind reason and pervert the will: they are counsels enemies, and the
affections corrupters; no wonder that Eccles. 11. 9. etc.
M. Curious wished that the Samnites, and their enemy Pyrrhus could have been
given to pleasures, that they might the easier have been overcome. how
pernicious a dream is it of those who think young men may securely indulge to
their genius, Psalm. 119. 9. Disce cor Dei in verbis Dei. Gregor. l. 4. ep. 4^.
Theodor.
walk in the way of their hearts, and do that which seems good to them; no,
no, childhood and youth are vanity, and God will bring all into a severe
judgment, how soon thou can not be certain; therefore be thou most
careful where thy greatest danger is.

5. Let the word of God be the compass by which to steer thy course
(wherewith all shall a young man cleanse his way? by taki^g heed according to
thy word) and hearken thereto that thou may learn Gods will; hearken also to
good counsel of thy superiors, with reverend subjection and modest silence.
impudency is commonly talkative, but ingenuity silent and studious to learn of
others: it is a symptom of folly in them who should learn to let their ears
run out into tongue, and to be impatient of hearing. young men were too happy
could they but believe the prudent, and learn without their loss.

6. Learn an holy humility: when the 1. Pet. 5. 5.
Apostle had commanded juniors to submit unto their elders, he presently
infers, be clothed Nihil habeas humilitate praestautius, nihil amabilius
haec est enim praecipua conservatrix and quasi custos quaedam oranium virtutum,
etc. Hieron l. 2. ep. 22. Celantiae.
with humility: the innate pride of youth causes them to think themselves too
wise to be advised.

7. Learn to follow right reason, not affection, as that thou may ever weigh
thy actions by wisdom, not will. That thou may in all things be discreet
and sober minded: three virtues they say; are prime ornaments of youth,
V^ri^undia, taciturnitas, and obedientiae.
Modesty, Silence, and Obedience: to which add fear of God, obedience to
Parents, Levit. 19. 32.
reverence to elders, chastity, temperance, and frugality, and thou shall have
a character of an accomplished young man. all which may be had can they but
hold inviolably this one principle: in every action resolve to be discreet and
wise, rather then affectionate. as will appear in that precipice of youth,
concerning which the 2 Timothy 2. 22.
Apostle warns, fly youthful lusts ('it is a deathfull serpent, the best
defense is flight) and Solomon, Prove. 5. 8.
come not near the doors of her house: let her not take thee with her eye
lids: lust like the Basilisk kills by the eye, not seen, but seeing.

8. Choose thee some good acquaintance: take heed of that company whose
qualities thou may be ashamed to imitate: the society which first seasoneth
young men marres or makes them, virtue is more easily learned by their example
whom we love, then by their precepts whose wisdom we admire: on the other part
there is no such Devil in the World, as man to man: seeing all men are
naturally sociable apt to imitation, and to receive the (all most indelible)
impressions of manners, from those with whom they converse. which concludes
that it highly concerns the young to be cautious what company they fall into

9. Be thou not so much ambitious of pleasures, as true profits, nor of long
life, as good; they that wish to live long; desire but long infirmity: be thou
frugall of thy time to improve every day to some provisions for age: could the
Appelli fuit perpetua consuetudo, nunquam tam occupatam diem ^gendi, ut non
lineam ducendo exerceret artem. etc. Plin. n. ^^. l 35. c. 10.
heathen resolve to pass no day without the draught of one line, when the
height of his ambition could be but excellency in his art; and shall not we
much more be careful of our time who know we have an eternal life to come?
the blind hearted Pythagoreoru^^ more -- quid quoque die dixerim, audiverim,
egerim, commemoro vesperi. Cic. q^s. vide and D. L^e^t vit. Pythag l. 8.
Pythagoreans would not sleep, before they had examined themselves what they
had every day heard, said, done, or left undone; how much more cause have we to
do so? it is less unhappiness to loose Quanto me mitius O austera more,
privares vitae usu quam ^^uctu. Bern.
the use then fruit of life. The young man looking forward, thinks fifty or
sixty years (which perhaps he may live) so large a time, that he may rationally
be prodigal of his store: but the old man looking back reckons with Jacob.
Genesis 47. 9. few and evil have the days of the years of my life been. when the
Philosopher reckoned at night, that he had learned nothing that day, he cried,
o sirs, O socii diem perdidimus,
we have lost a day. crested pictures present you coming on, some lovely
feature, but going off an ugly Devil: such are the vain delights which young
men so much adore, as a due privilege of youth, that they think themselves
thereto borne, and that it is an injury to bar them of those things which in
their birth hasten to a precipitate end, leaving them loathing, or a sad memory
of that which is irrevocably past. study thou to be holy, and delight in that
which time and age shall not deprive thee of, but rather invest thee in; that
which shall not fear age but bless it with the invincible comfort of a clear
conscience: a misspent youth is the sorest burden of old age.

10. Defer not thy repentance and conversion to God unto thy age: thou art
not sure of a future time, or an heart to repent therein: make thy peace with
him now, that age may not find thee unprovided: it has troubles enough of its
own, for pity oppress it not with the folly of youth also; he were an
unadvised traveller who though forewarned, would take up the heaviest, and most
unnecessary loading in the fowlest way: so do they who defer their
repentance to age, and load themselves with sin against the evil days come.

The evils and inconveniences i^^ident to age,. III.
may be amended and lessened, not by external medicines (commonly vain
artifices to assail the depravations of unconquered nature) but most by true
wisdom, declared in, and groundded on the oracles of God. some have reckoned
them principally four. 1. Qued avoc^t a rebus ^^rendis -- quod corpus faciat
insirmum -- quod privet omnibus ^^re voluptatibus, quo^ haud procu^ absit a
morte. Cic. de Sen.
In that it makes men less fit for employment. 2. In that it brings with it
bodily infirmity. 3. In that it deriveth of pleasures. 4. In that it is near
death. which though I follow not in their order, I shall speak to in due place.

1. First whereas the present life of man is subject to many evils, it is of
great concernment to our purpose to distinguish those which are common to our
whole life, from those that are peculiar to age: there are losses, poverty,
want; what age of man is exempt from these? though as these are most heavy in
age, so to be borne but a short way; there is injury, slander, infamy,
oppression, banishment, imprisonment? what age is secure from these? there is
loss of friends, and that which embittereth old age, contempt: but fall not
these on any age also? what is Quid enim mai^re chachinno excipitur vulgi quam
pa^per Apici^^^ luv.
more contemned then the poor man? there are bodily evils, and infirmities,
maiming, blindness, deafness, lamenesse, sickness, weakness: but these
also Multi sunt imbecilli senes -- at id qui^em non pro^^^um scnectutis est
vitium, sed commune valetu^inis -- quid mirum -- si in^^rmi sunt aliquando, cum
ne idquidem adolescentes, essugere possint* Cic. q^ s^ -- Malti
valetudinar^iadole scentes, multirobusti senes inveniuntar. Plut. an sem sit
ger. respub.
are incident to any age; as also death; with this difference, the young man
may dye; the old man must dye: the aged dying by degrees, and his motus
^repidationis admonishing him, prepare him for death; the young are more
suddenly arrested: as for the evils of mind, Senectus est natura loquacior.
Cato apud Cic. de sen.
as loquacity, covetousness, morosity, Senes difficiles and qu^^ruli sunt,
Senec. de ira l. 2. c. 19.
querulousnesse, pettishnesse and the like, who knows not that these Sua
vitia insipientes and suam culpam in senectutem conferunt. Cic. qo s.
are incident to other ages also? but if these, or any other faults, dishonor
and incommodate age, reviving in the death of other vices; not to say, that
some of these were best mended in others obsequious and due respect to the
aged; I say these are the faults Sed haec morum vitia sunt non senectutis ib.
quae vitia sunt non senectutis sedinertis, ignavae, somniculosae senectutis. ib
-- ista senilis stultitia (quae delira^lio appellari solet) senum levium est,
non omnium. ib. -- sed omnium istiusmodi quaerela^^^ in moribus est culpa non
in aetate: moderati enim and nec difficil^s senes, nec inhumani ^olerabilem
agunt senectutem, importunitas autem, and inhumanitas omni aeta ^i molestaest
(...)*
of manners, not of age, which being separated by beter counsel and habit,
may leave that age a clear and evident capacity of being most happy, as
nearest to our state of blessedness, the life to come, does avarice or
morosity then make age evil? a prudent mastering thy self, and resolved
patience, will amend this, and true repentance that this take away that evil
into which thine own will bears a principal part, and thou shall find, that
as thou can not be evil except thou consentest; so, not unhappy in age: and
if thou will not forbear the evil which afflicts thee, thou make thine
age evil, not thy age thee.

2. Bodily infirmities and decays, are but the Angels sent to pull thee out
of Sodom (not as Lot, by the hands only) by warning thee of approaching death,
that thou may prepare to entertain it, and not be destroyed with a perishing
world.

3. Prepare for death: that which leads age with irksome sorrow, is vain
love of the World, and unwillingnesse to dye: there is not an old man, but
thinks he may live one year more: if thy life were entire, it is so short a
sum, that it cannot bear any long hopes: and it is Hoc habet stultitia
proprium semper incipit vivere Senec. ep. 13. Quid est autem turpius, quam
senex vivere incipiens? ib.
great folly, ever to be beginning to live; to lay new foundations, and hopes
near our exit. what is more incongruous then for an old man (in vain hope and
desire) to begin to live, when indeed, he is near death? he only shall
easily bear the inconveniences of age, who is ever resolved, and willing to
dye and be with Christ.

4. Learn to make a prudent use of the time which admits no return:
Conscientia been actae vitae, multorum been factorum recordatio, iucundissi ma
est. Cic. q^ s. But as Caesar said Miserum esse instrumentum sen^ctuti
recordationem crudelitatis. Am. Marcel. l. 29.
the conscience of a well spent life, and remembrance of many good works is
very comfortable: the fool loves nothing but that which is past, and vainly
troubles his soul with desire of much more time, nothing solicitous to
account to God for that he has already given him: at thy last day it shall not
much concern thee, how long thou have lived, but how well: it is not long
life, but Neque enim in tempore utiliter vivitur, nisi^ad comparandum meritum
quo in aeternitate vivatur. August, ep. 121 c. 7.
good, which shall render a man eternally happy: neither is there any true
profit of living here, but in gaining that, by which we shall live to eternity.

The evils of Age may be cheerfully borne,. 4.
if we can truly weigh the conveniences with the inconveniences thereof. For

1. It is true, that Senecti^ multa secum and bona affert and mala: bona qua
nos ab impudentissimis dominis liberat voluptatibus. -- libidinis frangit
impetus: auget sapientiam, dat maturiora consitia. H^eron. ep. 30. l. 1.
Pamach, -- id aufcrt a nobis quod est in adolesscenti^ vitiosisstmum. C^e. q^
s. -- magnam hebendam senectut^ gratiam, que effecerit, ut (...) non liberet,
quod non oporteret. ib. From which Sophocles said he had fled away. tanquam a
fero and rabioso domino. Plut. an sen. sit ger. respub. and Cic. de sen. summa
laus senectutis est, quod ea voluptates nullas magnopere desiderat. ib.
Age brings with it many good things, as it does many evils: it is good,
that it freeth from pleasures, those impudent masters of misrule, gives
wisdom and maturer counsels; as the Egyptian Sicut Ibin ^iunt cum vetus est
facta exhalatis virosis and turbidis partibus odoratiorem habere aromaticam
virtutem. Pl^t. q^. s.
Ibis, feeding in her youth on Serpents, when age has consumed those venomous
humors, has an aromaticall and sweeter breath: so has it been observed of
some, that after an ill dieted and misspent youth, (time having digested and
evaporated that venom) their age has Qui grandes natu, ^ygneum nescio quid,
and solito dulcius, vicin^ morte cecinerunt. Hieron. ep. 14. l. 2. Nepotiano.
breathed divine things, and more sweet then usual to the secular man, life
like Wine, how ever pleasing it was young, in age it grows sharp and dull,
to the Saints it is not so: age is their Suburbs of heaven, praeludium of
eternity, the gate of glory where aged Simeon sang his requiem: Lord now
let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation
-- Luke 2. 29.

2. The old man Nullo gene^e homines mollius moriuntur, sed nec diutius. Sen.
ep. 30.
dies more easily then the young (a great advantage seeing all must dye) none
dye more gently, then they that dye insensibly: like a Lamp the oil consumed,
quietly going out: Adolescentes mori sic mihi videntur, ut eum aquae
multitudine vis flammae opprimitur: senes autem sicut sua sponte nulla adhibit^
vi, consumptus ignis extinguitur -- quae mihi quidem tam jucunda est, ut quo
propius ad mortem accedam, eo citius quasi terram videar videre, aliquand^que
in portum ex longa navigatione esse venturus. Cic. q^ s.
young men dye more painefully, as Lamps overflowed with Water: violence
kills the young, maturity the old: there is a wrack; here a quiet departing
from the Inn: so pleasing to the good, that it seems to them as the sight of
the port they are to make after a wearisome voyage: that aged Barzillai could
not so exactly taste, or hear the voices of singers (2. Sam. 19. 35.) was not
so much a loss as security against temptations which oftentimes ensnare youth.

3. It is the age of wisdom: the spring has pleasures, but the Autumn
profits: the fruits of age are much better then the flowers of youth: a little
time is long enough to live well, but if thou art gone much farther, Sia
processeris long^us, non magis dolendum est, quam agricola dolent, praeterita
verni tempovi^ suavitate, aestatem, autumnumque venisse. ib.
thou have no more cause to sorrow then the Husbandman, that the pleasant
spring is past, and the profitable autumn come, except thou art Dixisse
sertur, dolere se quod tuno egrederetur e vita quando sapere coepis set.
Hieron. Nepotiano. ep. 14. l. 2.
of Themistocles mind, who said it grieved him to dye, when he began to be
wise.

4. It is not so much esteemed the end of this life as the beginning of
eternity: and the haven after a cursed sea: now as the traveller endures the
rough and bad ways near home, for rest's sake, and for the comfort which he
expects there; so must we the troubles of age: which we shall easily do if
we gain a certain assurance of eternal blessedness in the life to come.

5. We have here comfort and confidence in temporal calamities: they cannot
now be long: it Hocest illud quo^ Pisis^rato ^^ranno a Solone respon sum est,
quum illi querenti qua tandem spe fretus, sibi tan audacter obsisteret,
respondisse dicitur senectute. Cic. q^ s.
was Solon's answer to the tyrant Pisistratus, when he demanded on what ground
of hope he durst resist him: I am confident because old. When Jacob saw the
chariots which Joseph sent to bring him into Egypt, his drooping spirit
revived, and certainly they who desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ,
are so far from being grieved at their age, that their souls are comforted,
to think they are going to him.

In the last place we are to know what rules of practice are observable to the
improvement of old age to our good and comfort,. V.
for it is certain Foelix and omni dignus beatitudine, quem senectus Christo
o^cupat servientem, quem extrema dies salvatori invenerit militanti, Hieron. l.
2, ep. 23. Julian.
that happy is he whom old age seizes in the service of Christ.

1. Be sure to attemperate and proportion thy mind to thy age, that it be not
said of thee as of Vulpem pilum mutare non mores. Suer. Trang. l. F. Vespat.
Vespastans covetousness; the fox has changed his hair but not his manners.
lay down thy youthful mind with youth: be Severitatem in senecture probo,
sed eam -- modicam, acerbitatem (...) modo probo. Cic. q^ s.
grave not bitter, it is an Peius est quod auctoritatem habemus senum vitia
puerorum. Sen. ep. 4.
impious incongruity to bear the authority and port of an old man, and the
vices of the young: to be youthful in age is great folly; and greater, to wish
to be young again: like some brainesick traveller, who after a dangerous and
wearisome journey; would go back again for a little pleasant way sake: though
it (...). Pyrrho. Illust. de Philos. Origin. in Ezekiel. ^^o. 13.
be very hard to put off that which we are borne, yet the happy way to be
renewed, is (as much as we can attain to) to put off the old man, corrupt with
his affections, and to put on the new man, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. this is the
way to pass a ruga ad juventutem, from old age to youth: while man (like the
heavenly orbs inferior to the first mover) goes in body to the West of age,
but in his soul toward the east, and rising sun of righteousness: the
inward man renewing in the outward man's decay: so becoming part of that lovely
spouse, which in her perfection shall be without spot or sin in her
innocence, or wrinkle of age in her eternity: in the mean, if thou art wise,
thou will rejoice that thou have past over a tempestuous sea, and Se ^
libidinum vinculi^ laxatos esse non moleste ^errent, Cic. q^ s.
art delivered from so many unjust and pernicious tyrants, in that Vitiorum
ministeria senuerunt. Sen. ep. 26.
the incentives of sin, are grown inactive in age.

2. Study to be wise: it is great misery to be old and not wise* it was too
much to be guided by the affections of youth: if that be past, remember that
(...).
age is wisdoms flower, or fruitful autumn rather; Senectus venerabilis non
est numero annorum, sed magis merito morum computata. Bernard ep.
venerable not for number of years, but merit: if thou increase in this
strength of mind, thou shall so much the more recompense the decay of bodily
strength, as the soul is more excellent then these walls of clay, or man then
beast. this wisdom is Nec sapientiam canos reputes, sed canos sapienti^.
Hieron. l. 2. ep. 16. Paulino vid. and Ambros. l. 8 ep. 60.
not in gray hairs, but in such a guidance of the mind, as that the aged be
Tit. 2. 2. 3.
sober, grave, temperate, sound in faith, charity, and patience. and that Women
be in behavior such as becomes holiness -- teachers of good things, that the
younger may by them learn to be wise, to love their Husbands and their
Children, to be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to their
Husbands, that the word of God be not blaspheamed. some extremely err,
thinking it the only wisdom of age, to be attent to worldly gains: some
^^aritia (...) quid (...) velit non intelligo; pote^l enim q^i quam esse
absurdius, qa^m quae minus viae restat eo plus viatici que rere? Cic. de Sen.
heathens could say, what can be more absurd, then the less way we have to
go, the more solicitous to be to get viands? and that (...) -- Solon qui se
quotidie aliquid addiscentem senem sieri dicit. ut ego fe^i, qui Graecas
literas senex didici. Cato a^pud Cic. de Sen.
they grew old every day learning something: how much more studious ought we to
be true wisdom, which Gods word teaches?

3. Be holy: the fear of God is the old man's glory, whereof the Eccles. 25 6
hoary head is the crown, Prove 16 31.
if it be found in the way of righteousness: such shall flourish like the
Palm tree, and Cedar in Lebanon, bringing Psalm. 92. 12. etc.
forth fruit in age, those I say, that are planted in the house of the Lord. as
they that gathered Exodus 16. 22.
Manna on the Sabbath eve, gathered twice as much as for an other day: so they
that are holy lay up a double store in age for their eternal rest at hand.
their increasing sanctity (like shadows of the setting sun) is then
multiplied. They As ^^^ring Lucian did who called the old man (...). a kind of
living sepulcher. Terpsion and Plut.
injure age who casting their faults on it, entertain it as some unwelcome
guest, some evil: it is their error which makes it so: it can never be well
with the sinner; but every age is good to the just; as evil to the sinner is
that most, which is nearest his judgment.

4. Live to God and thine own eternal blessedness, if thou will live to men,
in temporal relations, these gray hairs, wrinkles, and ruins of youth,
strength, and beauty, may create thee some contempt. but if the center of thy
desires be the chief good; that must best please thee which makes thee best:
and so these sorrows of thy aged brow (fraitfull of counsel, gravity,
temperance, holy contempt of the world, and preparation for a passage to a
better life) as thy hoary head (wisdoms banners) shall be welcome to thee:
make use therefore of time for eternity: and provide for that state, to which
this decaying earthly tabernacle shall again be so repaired, that the glory of
the second house, shall be greater then that of the first: so shall thy life
seem long enough, if in an age, long, or short, thou can reckon but few
misspent days: so shall thy bodily defects, not be so grievous (a little
strength will be enough, to lift up the hands to God, where the heart is right)
neither those of the mind; as decay of Nec ve^^ quen ^uam s^^ nem audivi
oblitum, quo loco thesaurum obruisset: omnia quae curant meninerunt. etc. Cic.
de Sen.
memory and the like: old men can remember that they most care for: and age
has a capacity of amendment in those evils, which blemish it; as
talkativenesse, anger, frowardness and such like; which removed, it shall be
more lovely, winning, by a mild gravity, and of more authority with men.
however God takes no advantages on our weakness; so shall this age appear
most happy: he lived not unprofitably, who dies happily.

5. Consider the vanity and frailty of this present life, and learn to live,
which few do, (though they number many years) none truly do, who live not to
God, the end of their creation and living: Tim. 5. 6.
she that lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives: living to God shall
make that age more happy which brings thee near, as that most happy which
brings thee to him.

The Old Man's supplication.
O Lord God of my salvation, I humbly desire to render thee all due and hearty
thanks for thy abundant mercies and favors spiritual and temporal, thy
gracious preservation of me from my youth up unto my hoary hairs: that thou
sparedst me in thy fatherly mercy, when thy justice might often have destroyed
me: Lord as thou have given me place for repentance, reserving me to age, who
might justly have cut off the days of a misspent youth, so now accomplish
thine own work, give me an heart faithfully to turn unto thee, that I may
constantly endeavor to redeem the vain errors of my time past, by becoming
a pattern of faith and obedience, to all those with whom I converse. Lord fill
me with thy holy spirit, that I may bear more fruit in my age. Forsake me not
now I am old and gray headed: Remember not the sins and follies of my youth:
let thy power appear in my weakness, and the work of thy spirit in the
decaies and ruins of this earthly tabernacle, by the evident repair of thine
own image in me, mortifying the remaindes of sin, and assuring me of my
election and calling in Christ Jesus* and now o Lord that the time of my
departure draws nigh, give me a watchful spirit, that I may be ready when
thou call: seeing there are but few steps, between me and this worlds end,
Lord strengthen me, give me a lively faith invincible and constant perseverance
in this race, the few and evil days of this earthly pilgrimage, that by thy
merciful assistance (who workest both the will and the deed, and show mercy
where thou please) I may so run, that I may obtain: that when thou
please to give me rest from my labors, and gather me to my Fathers, I may
against all the pains and sorrows of death, willingly and cheerfully, yield
up my soul into thy gracious hands, in full assurance of my redemption, and
salvation through Jesus Christ our Lord.

AMEN.
CHAP. XXXIV.
Meditations for Women near their Travail.. 1. All misery proceeds from
sin.. 2. Our sins pardoned in Christ, Why the punishments are not taken
away? Woemens* comfort therein.. 3. Directions necessary hereunto.

1. ALL misery is the undoubted issue of sin:. I.
man was happy in his pure naturalls, and creation to the Image of God (the
only fountain of blessedness) until sin defacing the same, subjected him
to the curse: The first sinner heard the terrible sentence, of the almighty,
peculiar to her sex: Genesis 3. 16.
I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy Conception -- in sorrow shall thou
bring forth Children. these pains in travail are the first fruits of misery
appearing in that Sex; 1 Timothy 2. 15.
which was first in the transgression: so dangerous is it to be leaders into
sin: the Woman was of the man without pain (because innocent) but now the
man is of the woman, with her sorrow (because she has sinned) a sorrow so
intense, and embittered with fear and anguish, that the Holy Ghost Psalm. 43.
5. Isai 13. 8. Ier. 48. 41. Hos. 13. 13. Ioh 16. 21. 1 These. 5. 3. Isai 26. 17.
Isai. 4^. 14. Ier. 4. 31. Mich. 4. 9. etc.
hereby expresses the condition of the fainting, afflicted, and dejected
spirit, in sudden fears of the affrighted conscience, expecting an inevitable
judgment. The hour of birth and death, the entrance and exit of this World,
being solely in Gods hand, and secret counsel; none else knowing the time,
nor being able to dispose thereof, reason more then apparent, urges the
necessity of address to him.

2. Some are the sepulchers of their Children, gone out of ere they came into
this World: exiled before they saw a native soil; advanced from a short
imprisonment in the womb, to the glorious liberty of the sons of God, to the
blessed Kingdom of Heaven, before they touched this cursebearing earth: some
see their Benoni, and thence have passage into eternal life, where the
sentence of death began: some live to taste their sorrows allay, in ^he
sweetest temper of divine mercy with justice, becoming rejoicing mothers: all
is disposed by the all-guiding providence, and unlessened power of Gods word,
who at the beginning, but spoke and it was done.

It has much troubled some to think,. II.
why if our sins be pardoned in Christ are not the punishments thereof also
taken away? as here, why the elect, and reprobate, the chaste matron, and filthy
adultresse, should in this sentence, share and suffer alike? for satisfaction
herein, let the servant of God consider^

1. That whereas all sin, (though not in the same kind, measure, or degrees)
there remaining the same cause, there must remain the same effect, in all that
bring forth.

2. This life is the stadium or race which we have (through the variable
distractions, and trials of seducing pleasures, and dejecting pains) so to
run, that we may obtain: here all are a like: the Math. 13. 30.
Wheat and the tares must grow up together unto the harvest: the difference
shall appear in the binding up, which shall sufficiently 2 Cor. 5 10.
crown or punish.

3. Gods final sentence is adjourned to the Worlds great Assizes, the day in
which he has Act. 17. 31.
appointed to judge in righteousness: if he should by present rewards, or
punishments, distinguish between good and evil, the matter of Religion would
seem acted by self-love (fear awing, and gain alluring servile minds, to
secure and serve themselves, not God) rather then the love of God, which is the
sum and ground of all true obedience: nor should men according to the
merciful ordinance of God, live by Faith, but sense, the lives of beasts
rather then of men. Et pecora verbere domantur. Se. nec. de con. sap. c. 12
they are drawn to obsequie by rewards held out to them, or compelled to duty
by stripes; but these by Faith in the promises of God, even when there
appears (in things external) See Psalm. 73. 12. etc.
no difference between the wicked and the just: nor indeed should God otherwise
leave a due place, for faiths reward (which is not slitely tried, by our
present sharing in secular evils with the wicked) nor so just and great a
punishment of sin, by permitting the disobedient to run on in their own
ways, storing up wrath against the day of wrath, and greatning their own
damnation.

4. Though there is much difference in the issue, between the temporal
afflictions, common to elect and reprobate (they being the beginning of
destruction to these, and a fatherly correction to the other, that they might
not be condemned with the World) yet he continues them to his dearest children
in this life, that they may make them thoroughly sensible of the odiousness of
sin, by the bitter effects thereof, of Gods immutable, and inviolable justice
(the same now which it was, when this doleful sentence was first pronounced)
of the corrupted state of man's depraved nature, conceived in sin, and
therefore coming into, living in, and going out of the World, with sorrow: and
lastly of the necessity of our repair by faith, and continual renewing our
repentance.

5. As all other afflictions, are not only mitigated, but made good to the
Saints and Romans 8.
co^perative for the best to them that love God, so is this: for through this
temporal Childbearing, they 1 Timothy 2. 15.
shall be saved if they continue in Faith and Charity, with holiness and
sobriety, and in the mean time they are not without their peculiar comforts.

1. Our Savior noted it -- John 16. 21.
So soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more the anguish,
for joy that a man is borne into the World. Doubtless as it was, and is an
Genes. 15. 2. Levit* 20* 20, 21. 1 Samuel, 1. 5. etc. Ier. 15. 7. Ier. 22. 30.
affliction to be childlesse, so it cannot but be a comfort (to her that by an
holy progeny, increases the Kingdom of God) to be her Husbands blessing,
Psalm. 128.
a fruitful Vine upon the walls of his house: God promising the fruit of the
womb, and the sweet Olive branches round about the table, for a blessing to
them that fear him, and walk in his ways.

2. It must be a comfort to consider how God not only (in Christ, in whom Gal.
3. 28.
male and female have equal interest) has taken off the curse from this sex
(made coe-heires with us of the same grace) (but also the dishonor and
bitterness of their sentence by some peculiar favors, and consolations: as
first, that he sent forth his Gal. 4. 4.
Son, made of a Woman, without man: so that he made her mother of Christ
according to the flesh: that she might (by the power of the most high)
conceive her Savior: that as she was the unhappy In Paradis^ mulier viro
propinavit mortem: a sepulchro mulier viris annunciavit vitam: and dicta sui
vivisicatoris narrat: quae mortiferi serpentis verba narra^ verat. ac si humano
generinon verbis Dominus sed re^us dicat de qua manus vobis illatus est potus
mortis: de ips^ suscipite poculum vitae* Gregor. hom. 25.
door to let in sorrows and pains (deaths terrible harbingers) and
destruction on all her posterity, so she might be, to let in Christ, the peace,
happiness, redeemer and life, of all the elect. Secondly that God made her
seed to break the serpents head: 3. That he made a Woman the first witness of
the accomplishment thereof in his resurrection from the dead: that the sex
that first heard and felt the sentence on sin, should first see and believe
the ransom of our sin, there accomplished where death was absolutely
vanquished.

3. In the sweet object of their affection: they most tenderly love who suffer
the most bitter sorrow for Children. God sometimes expresses the constancy of
his love, by a mothers -- Isai 45. 15.
can a Mother forget --? could a greater among the children of men, have been
found, his infinite love and compassion toward man, should have been weighed
by it.

4. In their Husbands greater love: as Leah said, Genes. 29. 32.
now therefore my Husband will love me: none but the unnatural, but will have
compassion, and the more tender love to her, by whose sorrows God has made
him glad, by the comfort of dear Children, pledges of his posterity.

5. In their Childrens love and duty, who Prove. 6. 20. Prove. 1. 8.
forsake not the law of their mother (as fools who are their living sorrows)
only the wicked forget their Mothers pains, and care for them: the Prove. 30.
17.
ravens of the valleys are too mild executioners for them who despise their
Mother when she is old; who looks not on her with honor, tender love, and
duty: nothing can fully recompense the ingratitude of this generation of Vipers
(their Mothers sorrow and destruction) but hell. Gods children love and honor
his Ordinance in their parents.

For direction and comfort before their Travail, let Women.

1. Spend the time of their expectation as they would do the hours of their
last day,. III.
in hearty repentance for all their sins. making their peace with God:
laboring to strengthen their faiths, by recounting the comfortable promises of
God in Christ Jesus: rendering themselves with patience, meekness and
confidence into his merciful hands, who alone can keep them, strengthen and
comfort them in their pains, and make them joyful Mothers.

2. Consult with God in all their fears and sorrows, as Genes. 25. 22.
Rebecca did, by the holy scriptures which are his Oracles, giving certain and
infallible answers: conference with the prudent Saints, meditations and
ascensions of the afflicted soul into Gods gracious presence.

3. Reconcile themselves to all those whom they have injured, by repairing them
what they can: for it is a condition of their salvation in childbearing, that
they 1 Timothy 2. 15.
continue in Faith and Charity: and if all must Math. 5.
quickly agree with their adversaries while they are in the way, then they
specially who (as they say of Seamen) may be reckoned between the living and
the dead, and in hazard of a sudden convention at the bar, by the end of
this life.

4. It must be a grave document (as to all, so specially to married Women) of
modesty and chastity: I know not what comfort the adultresse can have, who
brings forth her Husbands irreparable injury, her own shame ( Hos. 1. 2, Hos.
2. 4.
Children of Whoredoms) the indelible stain of their blood, and their
posterities dishonor, all this with pain and horror, or more dangerous
stupidity of a sinful conscience: whereas the good conscience of the chaste, is
the souls rest, bed of perfumes, Garden of spices: sorrows lenitive, griefs
fair havens, the souls Paradise, and afflictions sanctuary: with which though
they have external sorrows, yet are they blessed: happy is the way (however
rough and fearful) by which they come to eternal life, as the external
prosperity of the wicked, can never make their ways better then Romans 3. 16.
destructive and unhappy: So neither can any afflictions, sorrows, fears, or
pains of the elect, make them less then truly blessed: because all these are
but as the stepps in Genes. 28. 12. Act. 14. 22.
Jacobs ladder, whose last shall land them in the presence of God, as it is
written -- we must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God.

5. Let them pray frequently and fervently, that God would be pleased to
measure their sufferings by that assistance which he will give them, strengthen
them to their labor, mitigate their pains, grant them a speedy and safe
deliverance: that they may enjoy the blessing of propagation, to the increase
of his Kingdom, the glory of his holy name, and their eternal rejoicing after
their temporal sorrows which he has appointed them.

A prayer for Women, in, or near their Travail.
MOst glorious and holy Lord God, almighty creator and merciful preserver of
all thy creatures: who have commanded the weary and heavy laden to come to
thee, and promised by the son of thy love and truth Christ Jesus, to ease
them: we prostrate our selves before thy throne of mercy, with bended knees and
trembling hearts, yet with assurance of thy faithfulness to perform, who have
freely promised: Truth it is, O Lord, when we consider our own deservings, we
can look for nothing but the severity of thy justice, and rejection from thy
gracious presence; that thou should take no delight in us when we come
before thee, but that the spreadi^g out of our hands in Prayer should be a
trouble, and weariness unto thee. we confess that destruction of body and
soul (by all those judgments which thou have denounced against the first
sinners) is due unto us, if thou enter into judgment with us. we accuse and
condemn our selves as most vile, and utterly unable to stand in judgment
before thee (the searcher of the heart and reins) and most unworthy of the
least of those favors, which our necessities compel us to beg at thy
merciful hands, in confidence that thou will not break the bruised reed,
reject the penitent, nor condemn them who condemn themselves: we renounce our
selves that we may be found in the righteousness of our Lord Jesus: It was he,
o blessed Father, who being the eternal Word; Wisdom and Power, by whom the
World was created, and is still sustained, yet to save us miserable sinners,
(and so his enemies) was made flesh for us: became man to set us free: took on
him the form of a Servant: to sanctify, and redeem us from sin (begun in
our conception, and increasing from our birth) vouchsafed to be conceived in
the Virgins womb by the Holy Ghost, and to be borne the man of sorrows, to
suffer the severity of thy wrath against sinners: 'twas he that dyed for our
sins, and rose again for our justification, that thereby he might pull out
the sting of death, and change the judgments into fatherly corrections: 'twas
he that became a curse for us to redeem us from the curse of the law, that by
his stripes we might be healed, that the blessing (the promise of the spirit
the comforter) might come on us, through faith in him: for his sake, holy
Father, be reconciled to us: for his sake incline thy gracious cares to our
prayers, now, according to thine own appointment, calling on thee. Thou have
indeed threatened the first sinner, to multiply her sorrows in her travailes:
and that sentence (as the sin in which we fell) is become hereditary, in
pains, sorrow, fear, and anguish: in these bitter effects of sin, we
acknowledge thy just judgments: but, Lord, correct us not in thine anger:
consider the frailty and infirmity of this poor^ dust and earth, wherewith thou
have clothed us: consider not what we have done, but what thy holy Son Jesus
(in that sacred flesh indivisibly united to the Godhead) has suffered for us:
accept his obedience who has done and suffered all things, which thy
determinate counsel had before all worlds appointed, for the work of our
redemption. We are unworthy to be heard, but, Lord, hear him ascended into
heaven to take possession thereof for us, and now sitting at thy right hand, a
faithful mediator for us, and bearing the remembrance of us before thee; he is
truly God able to hear and help all them that call upon him faithfully; and
truly man, who has had experience, and can be touched with a sense of humane
miseries: for his sake hear us speaking the same things to thee here on earth,
which his own spirit (helping our infirmities) both dictateth to us from
heaven, and presents to thee for us in heaven: Lord, for his sake help us:
give us true and hearty repentance: assure us of our sins remission, and our
discharge from the curse and rigor of the law: strengthen our Faith, give us
assurance of thy favor and mercy toward us: shed abroad thy love in our
hearts, that all things, even our sorrows, may work together for the best to
us: in mercy assuage the sorrows of this thy servant, with the comfortable
assurance of an happy issue: give her patience to bear, and ability to
overcome her trials. it was the word of justice which appointed this
affliction; but, Lord, whose mercy is over all thy works, allay the rigor of
that sentence: mitigate her pains, speak comfort to her soul, give a
powerful assistance to her weakness. O gracious father by the power of whose
word, man is thus brought into the World, give her a speedy and safe
deliverance: now that the child is come to the birth, give her strength to
bring forth: to the increase of thy Kingdom, through the new birth by water
and the holy Ghost: to the comfort of thy now afflicted servant, the Fathers
joy and the praise of thy holy name; through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior:
Lord hear and grant these our Petitions, and what ever else thou know more
needful for us, through his merits in whom thou have promised to hear us, in
whose mediation and words we present and conclude our petitions saying.

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

A thanksgiving for a Woman after her Deliverance.
O Lord God of our salvation, who mercifully enclinedst thine ear unto us in
our fear and distress: who appointedst in thy Law that she should bring a
pair of mourning Turtles, who had not a spotless Lamb for a sacrifice of
thanksgiving: it is the same thy clemency, who wilt now accept their
repentance, who have not that unblemished innocence which can abide the trial
of thy severe justice, and their hearty desire to be truly thankful, who have
nothing worthy thy acceptance to render unto thee: Lord therefore accept what
thy self have given us to bring before thee, an humble and hearty desire to
return thee the fruits of our hearts and lips, the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, as for all thy fatherly mercies, so particularly for that thou
have assuaged the sorrows of this thy servant, with a comfortable Issue: that
thou have given her patience to bear, ability to overcome her trials, and
strength to bring forth: that by thy mercy mitigating her pains, thou have
allayed the rigor of thy sentence, which thy justice pronounced: we
acknowledge thee to be the only Lord, in whose hands are the Issues of life and
death, the God of our health and salvation.

And now o Lord perfect thine own work: as thou have delivered thy servant
from her fear and sorrow, so give her an heart ever to trust and rejoice in
thee: as thou have given her this fruit of the womb, so make him an accession
to the increase of thy Kingdom, by the spirit of regeneration: sanctify him
and keep him in his tender years from sin and all the malicious assaults of
the enemy; give thy holy Angels charge over him to keep him in all his ways,
that he may grow up in thy faith, fear, and love: so that in what ever
condition thy good providence shall set him, his interest and assurance may be
of his election and salvation in Christ Jesus.

Lord accomplish thy work of mercy to thy servant: repair her health and
strength: give her a faithful heart, carefully to employ the same in thy
service, and the holy education of those thou have given her: assist her in the
whole remainder of her life; that she may pay all her vows made to thee in her
fear and trouble: let the taste of these bitter fruits of sin give her a more
fervent love to thy mercy pardoning it, and a greater hate to all that which
offends thee: lead her in thy ways: teach her so to number her days, that
she may apply her heart unto wisdom: make her more and more fruitful in all
good works, and zealous of thy laws; so that her life may appear, not only
restored, but also improoved and made more happy, to the glory of thy great
name, the good example of others, who shall see, as thy work of mercy on her,
so the effects of that work, the fruits of sanctity in her, to the further
assurance of her conscience before thee, confirmed by the experience of thy
mercy in her deliverance and preservation, and to the salvation of her body and
soul to all eternity, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior.

AMEN.
Directions for the Sick.
CHAP. XXXV,
. 1. As all afflictions sanctified, so sickness profitable for Gods children
many ways., 2. How it may become so to us.. 3. Duties of them that visit the
sick.

1 THere is nothing constant in this world, but inconstancy and change of all
things. Moriendi condition nascimur. Greg.
We are borne with a condition of dying: Nasci hic in corpore mortali, incipere
aegrotare est. Aug. in Psalm. 102.
mortality begins with life; ^our sickness with our health: we bring it
from the womb, as derived to us from our first parents, from the hour of
whose transgression, death took date, and in the commencement of sickness, he
began to dye, according Genes. 2. 17.
to the sentence, from which he became mortal: and now Isay 40. 6. 7. 1 Pet.
1. 24.
all flesh is grass: and all the goodlinesse thereof as the flower of the
field: the grass withers, and the flower fades, quickly, and certainly,
though insensibly: we perceive it soon withered, though we cannot mark by what
degrees it changes: so age and infirmity steals on.

2 The good God as he is severe, so is he merciful: Aug. in Psalm. 100. nec in
bonitate miscric^rdi ^perdit judicii severit^^^^ nec in judic^^^do, etc.
neither loosing mercy in his justice, nor his justice in his mercy* There is
nothing which befalls the elect, but it has some good in it, Psalm. 119.
or by it to them accrewing. Concerning afflictions David says, it is good for
me that I have been in trouble. The very death of the Saints (bitter as it is
to flesh and blood) is mercy to them Rev. 14* 13.
blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord --) not only that they rest from
their labors, but also in that it is to them the death of sin and passage to
eternal life: and so our Ips^n aegr^tudin^m quam nos ut tetram ac imma^^m
belluam fugiendam esse etc. non sin^ magna utilitat^ a natura (...)
constitutam, ut homines (...), etc. (...) in delicto dolcrent. Cic. Tusc. q. l.
4.
sickness is profitable; though it be the rod of an almighty Father, it shall
like Moses rod (sometimes in the dreadful shape of a serpent) serve to divide
the bitter waves and open us a passage to our eternal rest: and so the decays
of these earthly tabernacles shall daily bring us nearer to the repair of our
eternal building in heaven: therefore God sends sickness upon his dearest
children, whom he could as easily have rescued from death, by a translation, as
he did Enoch and Eliah: but he makes their sickness many ways pro^itable
unto them: as by preparing them unto death, by repentance, and calling upon the
Lord: by weaning them from the love of this life, by teaching them patience and
subjection to the hand of God, whereas impatience, like the sea, turns all
that which falls into it (even the otherwise sweet and comfortable blessings
of God) into its own bitter relish: and humility: not to be proud of beauty,
youth, strength, subject to so many diseases, as pose art it self, and
overcome the old remedies, with accession of new sicknesses: so that it is
true, -- Et verum est: imb^^illi^^ ^^nim carnis, mentis vigore mexacuit, and
affectis artubus, v^res corporum in virtutes trans feruntur animo rum: and mihi
genus quoddam sanitatis esse videatur, hominem interdum non esse sanum --
quanto imbecillior corpore, tanto purior sensu* vincentibus carnem tuam morbis,
mente vicisti. etc. Salvian. ep. 5.
Bodily infirmities stir up the vigor of the mind and transmit the strength of
body into it -- so that it is a kind of health sometimes to be unhealthy:
diseases overcomming the body: the soul overcommeth sin, sickness, is an
harbinger or quartermaster to death, the monitor of our ends approaching, and
that which takes off the bewitching love of this world: the historians tell us
of a kind of fire, which rages the more, by how much more water thou castest
on; Nec alio sopitur quam jactu pulveris. Solin. Maltha -- aquis ^tiam
accenditur terra tantum restingui docuere experimenta. Plin. n. h. l. 2. 104
ibid. 106.
it is quenched only by casting on of dust; it may be true in the moral: for
such a kind of heat is there in the love of the world: the more thou give it
the more thou in^lamest it: it is quenched only with the dust of the grave, and
that which brings thereto. The life of man is like a lovely rivers stream,
near the rising set with flowrie bancks, plants, houses, pleasant walks,
gardens, sweet meddowes, and delightful seats: but if you follow it toward the
end, you shall ^inde it more and more troublesome, stormy, deep, dangerous,
and so engul^ing into bitterness: as the Lord permitted Israel to bitter
pressures in Egypt, that they might more willingly depart thence toward the
promised rest, so is it here: the healthy and prosperous say in their hearts as
the Reubenites and Gadites. Numb. 32. 5. when they saw the pleasant Jazer,
Aquisque conspersa acriores ^x^itat aestus incendiorum nec remedio ullo qua^
superiacto pulvere consopitur Am. Mar^^ll. l. 23.
and the fruitful Gilead -- if we have found grace in thy sight, let this land
be given unto thy servants for a possession -- they would not go hence: now
God though he give us sweet comforts in the first fruits of his spirit (like
clusters from Escol. Deuteronomy. 1. 24. 25.) yet he embittereth our worldly delights:
our places of pleasure are touched with some grief: our beds of rest become
places of sickness and death. Eden was the theater for man's first tragoedie;
Christ began his passion in a garden: the eastern people made their sepulchers
in gardens, to teach them what may, and must come of their pleasures. Sickness
makes the prudent loath sin in the sense of the bitter effects thereof: the
victories of sin are destructive (if they are 2. Pet 2. 20.
again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them then
the beginning) as it was said in the name of those white sacrifices which (...)
-- Am. Marcel. l. 25.
Marcus Caesar used to offer in his triumphs, if thou overcommest we perish; we
truly may say of sin: happy affliction therefore, which makes us out of love
with that, which cannot destroy except it overcome, nor overcome except we love
it. Sickness awaketh us from security, except we are like those Nec uuln^ribus
excitari possunt. Solin. c. 29.
sleepy bears, which cannot be awaked, no not with wounds, and stirs them
up to seek the Lord, as he says Hos. 5. 15.
in their affliction they will seek me early. Though wicked 2. Chr. 16. 12.
Asa in his great sickness, sought not to the Lord -- Yet to the Saints,
sickness is a sweet enditer of prayers: as it is written Psalm. 86. 7.
in the day of my trouble I will call upon thee -- for thou will hear me. How
many men for bodily sickness were brought to Christ, and had their souls
cured; who being in health lived in unbeleefe before? Terror of conscience,
oppression, poverty, and sickness are profitable for the elect, in that they
serve (like those four bearers of the Mark. 2^ 3.
paralyticall man) to bring them to Christ.

That thou may therefore make a right use of thy sickness, observe these
rules.. II.


1. Search thy heart, and turn unto the Lord in serious repentance: make thy
peace with him quickly: considering the cause of thy sickness thy sins: 1.
Cor. 11. 30
judge and condemn thy self for them, that God may acquit thee and render
unto the Lord Ideo parcit ut corrigaris* non us in malignitate per maneas.
August, in Psalm. 100.
that for which he delivers thee, if thou recover.

2 Isai. 38. 1.
Set thy house in order and dispose of thy estate which God has given thee, if
thou have not before done it.

3 Use the help of the learned Physician: but rely on God for the blessing on
the means: there are diverse pernicious errors in this case to be avoided:
some to their loss neglect all means: these betray their own lives,
undervallew Gods favors, and despise his ordinance in the good creatures made
for the relief and recovery of the sick, and the Ecclus 38. 1. etc.
Physician who is to be honored: some trust too much to second causes,
neglecting the first: so did 2 King. 20. 7.
Asa: some seek to evil and unlawful means Witches, Charmers, etc. so 2
Cing. 1. 2.
Ahaziah sent to Baal-zebub, the idol of Ekron: some as f^olish, if not so
wicked, seek to the unskilful and ignorant: trusting a precious life into the
hands of those, who without learning or calling, are many times venterous
murderers, as if God were not the God of wisdom: and what wonder; seeing upon
the like hazard, they venture their immortal soul.

4 Math. 25. 41.
Watch and pray, as in all estates, so specially in this, that as God has
given thee this warning to prepare thee to meet him, so, that he would sit thee
for himself, and so sanctify thy trialls, that they may better thee, and make
thee ready for his kingdom: that he would restore thy health, and give thee an
heart to make a more thankful, prudent, and holy use thereof then thou have
formerly door: to give thee patience, masure thy trials in mercy, proportion
thy strength to the affliction, and to keep thee in life and death as one of
his.

5 Endeavor, what humane infirmity will permit to bear patiently, not
stupidly, but in confidence of Gods mercy: For 1. Impatience is but an
accession to thy grief, so much worse then the disease, as the soul is better
then the body; and the distempers thereof more dangerous, then the bodily. 2.
All that we now can suffer, comes in^initely short of that we shall enjoy in
Christ. 3. God can (if he see it best) deliver us from the greatest dangers. 4.
He will lay no more upon us, then he will make us able to bear, and give and
Cor. 10. 13.
issue out of every trial. 5. Our sufferings (if with patience) are to his
glory, as Joh. 9. 3. Joh. 11. 4.
Christ said of some. 6. We must Acts 14. 22.
through many trials enter into glory. 7. Hebr. 4. 15.
Christ is touched with a feeling of our misery. 8. These afflictions are but
trialls, and exercises of our faith and patience. 9. Christ suffered in^initely
more for thee. 10. Many of the Saints have Luke 8. 43. Luke 13. 11. Joh. 5. 5.
Act. 14. 8. Act. 9. 33.
suffered long infirmities. 11. As this earthly house of this tabernacle must,
by little, and little, be destroyed, so must our afflictions therein have an
end: so that they cannot last long: it is of excellent use to patience or
moderation, to consider well in all temporal interest, how long we can suffer
or enjoy. 12. Sickness is the souls physic: nothing will amend him whom
sickness cannot we endure hard things patiently for the cure of the body: and
what is the health thereof without the souls health? Of what certainty or
continuance is it at our best strength? Are the flowers or bubles more frail?
If we are wise we will not quarrel the bitterness of the medicine so that we
may be recovered. 13. Hereby we learn what we owed to God for health, and in
recovery, what use to make thereof, which is, that we be truly thankful;
that we more holily employ the same, knowing, that God restored us not to sin:
that we account it lent us for a time, to prove us: ever remembering that we
must again be sick and dye: that we betray not the good health (which God
has restored us, that we might serve him and be blessed) to death, and
selfe-destruction, by surfeiting, drinking, gluttony, lust; this is no better
then selfe-murder: that we learn in summer to provide for winter, in the
calm against the storm, in health against sickness. 14. Medicus si
cessaverit curare, desperate libenter, nun^ tormenta patiar, ut futura mihi
gloria reservetur. Castrut. ep. 38.
God does herein that which he knows best for us, though flesh and blood be
impatient: health hurts many: how much more happily had the thief, murderer,
adulterer been upon his sick bed, then laying wait to sin? Innocentius
aegrotaret scelerate sanus: this good is in sickness, it keeps men more
innocent. 15. The hand that smites us should make us patient, as 1 Samuel 3. 18.
Eli said, it is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: it cannot but be
best which he does to his children: he cannot err; who corrects those he
loves: it is lb. Hieron. q. 5.
great anger when he smites not: where sin abounds without any apparent
judgment: as it was 1 Samuel 2. 25.
with Elies sons, who hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the
Lord would slay them.

6 Fix thy soul and affections on the life to come, meditate on the
resurrection of the dead, and eternal life, Rev. 22. 33.
where shall be no more sin, death, curse, sickness, old age, or infirmity:
where the tree of life Christ Jesus, is in the midest, to give eternal
perpetuity of happiness: so shall thou be more willing to leave this miserable,
inconstant world for heaven* if God restore thee health, thou will pay thy
vows, and spend the remainder of thy life, more cheerfully in his service.

The duties of them that visit the sick are. III.


1. To remember them of the state of all men in sin, and what need they have
of the grace in Christ: thereby to move them to repentance, an repair of all
injuries by them done to any.

2 To recount to them the promises of God in Christ, endeavoring to apply them
to them: and to exhort them to a cheerful confession of the faith, to their
own and others comfort, and confirmation.

3. To be instant with them, that they be reconciled to all, with whom they
have had any enmity, or contention.

4. To dispose of their estates for the prevention of future controversies.

5. To comfort them against the fear of death, by those scriptures which have
Gods promises for assistance in trials; and and a serious pressing of the
resurrection of the dead, and state of future glory.

6. To pray with them, and for them.

7. To moove them faithfully to vow (if God restore them) to live more holily
and carefully: or patiently to bear their trials, and to expect constantly,
the salvation and deliverance of the Lord.

A prayer for the sick.
MOst holy, just, and merciful Lord God; we thy unworthy servants (according
to thine own gracious command, and promise to hear us calling on thee in the
day of our trouble) now appearing before thee, humbly acknowledge thy fatherly
hand smiting us with sickness: thy corrections are just and so allayed with
mercy, that thy chastisements are few to our numberless sins: thou might
suddenly have smitten us with death (the wages of sin) and given us no more
warning, after our many contempts of thy law threatening, and thy gospel
promising, but have permitted us to a sudden perishing in our sins, whom thy
long suffering, could not lead home to repentance: now therefore in thy
judgment remember mercy: correct us not in thine anger, chasten us not in thy
heavy displeasure: Thy holy son Jesus has taught us to call thee Father: O
let his spirit assure us that our afflictions are but fatherly chastisments,
smiting that thou may heal our souls, let them be occasions to make us
judge our selves that we may not be condemned with an impenitent world: our
souls have surfetted on the sweet blessings of health, and it is but just that
thou now smitest us, with want thereof: it is mercy, by these stripes, to show
us our sins, and bring us to thy mercy seat, to beg pardon and obtain
remission, thou have with in^inite and invincible patience, expected our
repentance, and amendment: thou have allured us with every days favors powered
out upon us: when that prevailed not, thou do with greater mercy show thy
justice, and compel us by thy chastisements to come unto thee: we come now,
gracious Father, as out-worne prodigalls driven home by necessity: but it is
because when thou saw us far off in our sins and miseries, thou made
have to meet us with thy preventing grace, and embraced'st us with thy fatherly
mercy: and what can we now say more, then that we have sinned against heaven
and against thee, and are no more worthy to be called thy sons: have mercy on
us; turn thy face from our sins blot out all our iniquities heal our
souls, cloth us with the best robe of thy righteousness: make us as the
meanest in thy kingdom: do thy will with us in health or sickness, life or
death, only let us be thine.

It was thy eternal counsel to redeem sinful man, by thy son Christ
Jesus by his righteousness to kill sins in the flesh: to give us eternal
life by his death: and thou have accomplished it in the appointed time: it
remains only that thou will be pleased to apply the assurance thereof to our
consciences, that after our afflictions, we may enjoy the quiet fruits of
righteousness, the end of our faith, salvation of bodies and souls: O Lord we
could look for nothing but rejection from thy gracious presence for ever, if
we were to appear before thee in our deservings; but now that we come in the
spotless robe of thy son Christ his righteousness, we are confident of the
blessing; because thou art faithful in thy promises: for his sake cover our
sins, let thy justice be satisfied in his merit, seal up the assurance of
our pardon, by the spirit of truth which cannot deceave us make us fruitful in
all those works which may give a comfortable testimony to our consciences,
that we are thine: give us strength to fight the good fight, finish our course,
and keep the faith against the fallacies of Satan, corruptions of flesh and
blood, and seducements of an evil worldt: o continue grounded, and
established, that we may be certain, that for us is laid up that immortal
crown of Righteousness, which thou will give at the last day to all that love
thy appearing: mean time make us patient, cheerfully to endure our trialls;
give us hearts rightly composed to wait all the days of our lives, till our
changing come.

And now, O gracious Father, though we are most unworthy to speak unto thee
for our selves; yet seeing thou have commanded us to call upon thee one for
another, with promise that the prayers for the righteous shall be available if
they be fervent; so that they shall save the sick; that thou will raise them
up, and if they have committed sins, they shall be forgiven them: we humbly
pray thee for this our sick brother, Lord assure him of his sins remission by
the merits of Christ Jesus, give him that peace of conscience and inward
comfort of thy holy spirit, which may manifest thy favor and mercy to him.
There is nothing impossible to thee which thou will do, hear therefore and
have mercy on him: only speak the word and bless the means, that he may be
healed: if otherwise thou have determined, thy holy will be done: Lord who
can make all things happy to thy children, give him patience meekely to bear
thy fatherly hand: remember whereof thou have made frail man: consider his
infirmity, measure out his trials with that tender hand which best knows how
to proportion the affliction, to that strength which thy self have given him:
O Lord God of all comfort, leave him not comfortless, but as the outward man
decays strengthen the inward, suffer not the malicious tempter to cast down,
or shake his confidence in Christ Jesus: let not the son of violence come
near him: as thou have all his life time, from his mothers womb unto this
present, given thine angels charge over him, to pitch their tents about him;
so be pleased in this time of trial to open to him the eye of faith, whereby
he may clearly perceive that they are more and stronger with him, then can be
against him. send the holy spirit, the comforter to his afflicted soul, to
bring to memory, and apply all these gracious promises which thou have made
thine elect. Blessed Jesus, who have therefore taken our frail nature on thee,
that thou might have experience of our miseries, who best know what it is
to die, having in thine own death and bitterest passion overcome death and him
that had the power thereof, to deliver us from sin, and destruction the
bitter fruit and effect thereof: now appear his comforter, assuring him of his
interest in thy sufferings: give him such a sense of thy mercy, that the gates
of hell may never prevail against it: such experience of the life of thy
spirit, and power by which thou did rise again from the dead, that he may
certainly know that his Redeemer lives, and shall at last show the same power
in his resurrection, in which he shall, with the rest of thine elect, at the
voice of the last trumpet, be raised from the dust of the earth, to meet thee
in the clouds of heaven, to see thee with those now languishing eyes, which
must at and to the appointed time, be cloased to sleep in thee, that he may
rest from his labors. And now O Lord who have hid from us the hour of our
dissolution, that we might always expect thee; let thy good spirit, which
sleeps not, set a careful watch over every one of our souls, that we may
never sleep without oil in our lamps, but be ready at thy appearance to enter
with thee into thy kingdom, where all sorrow shall cease in the fulness of joy,
faith in the fruition of thy promises, and this state of misery and corruption
in a never ending life of glory and immortality. Lord hear and help us, Lord
grant us these requests, and whatsoever else thou know more needful, what
thou have promised, or we should ask, for thy Son Christ Jesus sake, in
whose words and mediation we conclude our imperfect prayers:

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

Thanksgi^ing for health recovered.
O Lord God gracious and merciful, abundant in goodness and truth, heaven
and earth sound out thy praise, all thy creatures tasting of thy providence,
and preservation, praise thee: and what have I more to present thee with them,
what can I less then my humble and hearty thanks for thy tender mercy toward
me, whom thou have therefore delivered from sickness and sorrows of death,
that I might yet live to glorify thy name among the living; and for the
comfort of others, to declare what thou have done for my poor soul: how thou
have raised me by casting me down, and healed me, by wounding an afflicted
conscience with a terrible sense of thy severe judgments: how thou did
sanctify my sickness, by giving me an heart to look up to thy fatherly hand
which smote me, to acknowledge my sins, for which thou correctedest me; to
repent me of the same, assured of thy mercy in Christ Jesus; to resolve and vow
to forsake all my sinful ways; to do a more holy and faithful endeavor to
serve and please thee.

And now O Lord, I humbly pray thee enlarge my heart and tongue to praise and
glorify thy holy and great name: all things are of thee, and what can any
creature give thee, but of thine own hand? Lord give me that sacrifice of
praise and thankesgiving, which may be acceptable to thee, that I may
henceforth, not only speak, but live thankefully and holily before thee: that
I may pay my vows which I made in my distress and fear; so that it may be
good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may in all temperance, and
godliness make a right use of health restored me, and of the days which thou
addest to my life; to thy glory and the comfortable assurance of my conscience,
both in life and death. That thou who have begun to show mercy, may be
pleased to continue the same in thy gracious preservation of me; so that at my
last hour which thou have appointed me; the former experience of thy mercy may
give me a sound hope and full assurance, that thou will keep me unto, and in
my end: that when this house of clay shall be dissolved, I shall rest with my
Savior Jesus Christ, until the time determined, to raise the dead in him, to
the life of glory, in which our Forerunner now sits at thy right hand: to
whom with thee, (O Father of mercy, and God of all consolation) and the holy
spirit, be rendered all honor, praise, and glory, in Heaven and on Earth, for
ever and ever.

AMEN.
A Prayer for the sick of the Plague.
O Allmighty God great and terrjble in thy judgments, yet of infinite mercy and
compassion to those who truly seek thee: we humbly acknowledge that not only
this plague wherein thou now afflictest this land, is due unto our sins; but
also allother thy severe judgments to our destruction and desolation, and to
whom shall we seek for help, but to the, whom we have so continually
provoked by our sins. O Lord, thou art a God of mercy, and would not
destroy but the importunity of our sins, has put this heavy rod into thy
hands: and our iniquities have so much d^faced thy glorious Image in us, that
thou may justly hide away thy face from our miseries, and no more own us for
thy Children: but, O Lord, our only hope is in the merit and mediation of thy
son Jesus Christ, whom thou gave to death for us: it is he, O Lord, who
bears all our names in his secret breast plate it is he that appears hefore
thee for us* let our petitions ascend to thy throne of mercy like sweet incense
from the precious censer of his merits: it is he who stands between the
living and the dead. O let this plague which now consumes us be stayed: Lord
look not on our sins, but his merits in whom thou art well pleased: for his
sake, in whom we believe, and whose holy name we bear, say unto the
destroying angel it is enough; cause him to sheath the sword again, and let
this plague cease.

Lord God of all consolation comfort all those whom thou have smitten with the
infection: heal them that they may recover, and praise thy glorious name:
however thou shall be pleased to deal with their mortal bodies speak peace
to their souls and save them, give them full assurance of thy mercy and their
redemption in Christ Jesus: let thy holy spirit the comforter ever remain with
them, to pr^serue them against all the malicious assaults of the adversary
(that he may never make his advantages, on their surrowes, infirmities, or the
distracting and astonishing violence of their disease: comfort them at the last
gasp, and breathing out their affl^cted souls, with present sense and
assurance of the eternal joys in thy Kingdom, free from death, sickness,
sorrow, fear, and all the wretched effects of sin: preserve those whom thou
have hitherto spared let no plague come nigh their dwelling, and make them in
their preservation understand, that thou only have kept them to serve thee more
carefully and thankefully; and to show mercy to those who are visited and shut
up. Lord hear and help us: Lord spare thy people and restore us health, that
we may glorify thy name through Jesus Christ our Lord.

AMEN.
A Thanksgiving at the ceasing of the plague.
Gracious God and merciful Father; we are come before thee with an humble and
hearty desire to present an acceptable sacrifice, of praise and thanksgiving
unto thy holy Majesty for all thy gracious mercies spiritual and temporal
bestowed upon us unworthy of the least of them: it was thy free mercy not our
merit, that electedst us when we were not, that thou createdst us to thine own
holy image: that thou redeemest us; that thou did sanctify and justify us:
that thou have preserved us, sparing us, when now thy fierce wrath came our
against us in a noisome and devouring pestilence; that thou was pleased to
regard our tears, and accept our unworthy humiliation: all this was thy free
mercy: had we suffered as we have all deserved, not one of the multitude
apearing before thee this day, had been left alive to have praised thee. And
now, O thou Savior of Israel in the time of trouble, and the blessed preserver
of man, whose mercies are as the unsounded deeps and can never be drawn dry,
give us sanctified bodies and souls, that we may render them (which thou have
redeemed from death) a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto thee. Lord
who have the key of David (who sang thy praises) opening so, that none can
shut; open our lips, that our mouths may show forth thy praise, that we may now
pay all our vows, in our distress and fear made unto thee. As thou have put a
new song of thansgiving into our mouths; so give us new hearts, new obedience,
new lives and conversations: renew thy covenant with us and with our children,
to be our God, and protector, until thou shall be pleased to translate us to
that Kingdom of thy Son; where shall be joy secure from fear of loosing,
health without sickness, life without death, blessedness without all measure
or end: where we, whose hearts and souls this day praise thee, shall with thy
holy angels sing eternal Hallelu-jahs to the glory of thy great name, through
the merits of thy holy Son Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom with thee O Father of
mercy, and the Holy Ghost the Comforter, be rendered all honor, praise,
thanksgiving, and glory, in heaven and earth this day, and to all eternity.

AMEN.
Another form of thanksgiving on the like occasion.
O Lord God, Father of mercy and compassion, we humbly acknowledge that our
sins have been so great and grievous, that when thy wrath went out against
us in thy late dreadful visitation by the pl^gue of pestilence, it might
justly have consumed us, the aged with the infant, the mother with the child,
until thou had laid our habitations wast, and our cities without
inhabitants: but seeing thou have been pleased to remember mercy in the midst
of thy judgments, and to spare our lives from destruction, we can do no less
(nor more) then present our humble and hearty thanks unto thee in the
congregation of thy people: what shall we give thee for all thy mercies? what
can we, seeing our goods are nothing unto thee? we have nothing but thanks to
return thee; nor could we that, except thou gave us hearts and tongues so to
do: Lord make us thankful: give us that we may give thee again, and be
acceptable unto thee: fill our hearts with thy fear and love, and our mouths
with thy praise, let it come up into thy presence, as the sweet incense from
the Censer of the great Angel of thy covenant Christ Jesus. Be thou pleased
through his mediation, to smell a favor of rest, that thy severe judgments
may be turned to mercies, and fatherly corrections for our amendment, that we
may truly profit thereby: that we may fear and reverence thy just judgments,
and praise thee for thy elemency and mercy which thou have showed unto us in
this deliverance.

Particularly we bless thy holy name, for these thy servants, who now appear
before thee, with their sacrifice of praise end thonkesgiving, for that thou
have spared and delivered them, from the grave and destruction, which was come
up into their houses. Lord now grant them true thankfulness, with holy and
constant resolutions, to spend the remainder of their days, to the glory of
thy great name and good example of their brethren. And seeing thou have given
us all the same argument of thankesgiving, whom thou have preserved and kept
further off from the noisome contagion; we pray thee also to accept our
oblation of praise: set our hearts to meditate, and our tongues to sound out
those praises to thy holy name, which we shall through thy mercy in Christ,
sing to thee for ever, in the sacred Quieres of Saints and Angels in thy
kingdom of glory: which grant us O good Lord for the same thy son our
Savior Jesus Christ his sake who with thee and the holy spirit, lives and
reigns, one glorious God for ever and ever.

AMEN.
CHAP. XXXVI.
Meditations concerning death.. 1. Seeing all must dye; how to prepare that
death may not be terrible?. 2. Means to comfort in the death of dear
friends.. 3. Comforts against death.

THat needs no proof whereof all are examples to themselves: such is that
easiest, and hardest lesson, that Cui nasci contigit restat mori -- Prima q^ae
vitam dedit hora, carpsit Sen. Herc. Fur.
All must dye; that death is the undoubted issue of sin: that it is a
separation of the soul from the body for a time* But because it Motu quodam
continuo (...) properamus (...), Basil. in Psalm. 1. quotidi^ morimur quotidie
commutamur etc. Hi^ron. Heliodor. l. 2. ep. 24. Quetidie morimur, quotidie enim
demitur aliqua pars vitae, and tunc quoque c^^ crescimus vita decrescit. Sen.
ep. 24. (...). Theophrast. apud Lae^t. l. 5.
steals on (as they that sleep in a ship undersaile, arrive at their port.
while they think not of going: so go we with a restless pace to that same
terra incognita, the unknown limit of our present life consuming while we are
not sensible thereof) and because it is terrible to flesh and blood, the maine
care must be to know,

1 What preparation we are to make, that neither life may be tedious, nor death
terrible?

2 How to comfort our selves against it, in case of sorrow for others?

3 How we must be comforted against fear of death?

We must prepare for death, because -- Hccles. 11. 3.
in the place where the tree falls, there it shall be: as death leaves us,
judgment shall find us; now as the passage to the promised rest (which was a
type of heaven to the Israel of God) was (...).
terrible; so is this to heaven: we are presently ripe (though not ready) for
death: all are subject to this pale prince, to whom we are going every moment:
this day we now live we divide with death; that which is past thereof being
unrecoverably gone, the hour is (...). Deuteronomy. 1. 19. 2. Pet. 3. 10.
uncertain; but they are certainly Luke 12. 37.
happy who are then provided, thou would watch against the coming of
thieves, who can take nothing from thee but only that which a little time must;
what a stupid security is it, not to watch and provide against death which thou
know will certainly and quickly come, and take away, body, soul, heaven and
all, to eternity from the secure sinner? Think thou of youth and strength?
Alas how many young and strong men have died before thee? Do thou in others
funerals, think (as the Pharise said) I am L^k. 18. 11.
not as other men? What privilege have thou? Let not Satan delude thee, but
prepare for the day, that it may be thy happiest.

To prepare so that thou may not fear death; it is necessary that thou,

1 Put thy house in order, so that when the hour is come, that thou shall be
taken hence, all secular cares falling off like Eliahs mantle, thou may
quietly fix thy mind on those things which are above, to which thou art going.

2. That thou always keep innocence: for so thy end shall be peace: Psalm. 37.
37. The sting of death is sin (1. Cor. 15. 56. and (...) Chrysostom in. 1. Cor.
15.
more grievous then it) into which when our first parents fell, they became
mortal: and so Romans 5. 12.
death went over all, for as much as all have sinned: so, that which was
Pro^^ag ^itudi ne qui^^. culpae illius n^tur^ da^natio (...) in peius: (...)
quod (...) sit in pecc^ntibus ^^^inibus primis (...) nuturaliter sequeretur in
nasientibus caeteris. August de. ^ De^. 13. ^. 3.
their punishment, became natural to all borne of them. The best preparation
against death, is as much as we can to avoid the cause thereof; but for which,
as it Fui^s^t (...) Occumen in Cor 1. 15.
could never have prevailed, so neither can it now be terrible: what is the
serpent when his venomous teeth are broken, or his sting pulled out? and what
is death to those who are fully assured of their sins remission? death where
is thy sting, cried Paul Propheta ex persona justorum l^quitur insulta^ium
morti. Hicron. in 1. Cor. 15. Ambros. ib.
certain of victory in Christ; and insulting over death: otherwise even Laert.
l. 2.
Aristippus (how excellently soever disputing of the contempt of death) will
look pale in the storm at sea: yea where some remaindes of the first Adam
appear, and therein some degrees of unbeleefe, the saints think of death, as
Genesis 28. 17.
Jacob said of his Luz, how dreadful is this place -- this is the gate of
heaven for the guilt of sin presents the conscience with apprehension and
fear of Gods anger, as faith does with confidence of atonement in Christ:
hence is the conflict in the soul (desiring to be with Christ) and flesh and
blood naturally fearing its own destruction look how Moses assured that the
rod turned into a serpent should not sting him, yet fled it, and with a kind of
fearful willingness took it up: so is it here: the guilt of sin afflicting
the conscience is the only terror of death: therefore 1 Samuel 29. 4.
as the Philistines said of David, we may say of it, let him not go down into
the battle with us, lest he be an enemy to us, sin is the mother of unbelief
fear and doubting: it leaves the conscience wounded and affrighted with fear
of judgment; whereof death is but the execution, most embittred with present
sorrow and apprehension of the future, which Mala mors putanda non est, quam
bona vita praecesserit: neque enim facit malam mortem, nisi quod sequitur
mortem. Aug. de C. Dei. l. 1. c. 11.
makes death evil, Antithen: apud D. La^rt.
that can be no evil death whith ends a good life the heathen could say that
they that will be immortal, must live holily and justly; if thou fear death
so. But why (may some say is not death the punishment of sin, taken away from
those who by the grace of regeneration are acquitted from the guilt of sin?
We must know Adhuc relinqui anima^ experimentum s^parationis a cappore, quamvis
oblato ^am criminis nexu: quoniam si regenerationis Sacramentum continuo
equeretur immortalitas corporis, ipsa fides enervaretur, quae tunc est fides,
quando expectatur in spe. qnod in re nondum videtur, fid^i autem r^bore atque
certamine, in majoribus duntaxat aetatibus, etiam mortis fu^rat superandus
timor, quod in sanctis martyribus maxim emieuit: cujus profecto certaminis
nulla esset victoria, nulla gloria, quia nec ipsum omnino posset esse certamen,
si post lava^rum regenerationis jam sancti non possent mortem perpeti
corporal^m -- nunc vero majore ac mirabiliore gratia salvatoris, in usum
justitiae pecc^ti poena conversa est: tunc enim dictum est homini: morieris si
p^^caveris: nunc dicitur martyri: morcre ne p^^^cs -- Aug. de C. Dei l. 13. c.
4.
that if the bodies immortality should ever presently follow the sacrament of
regeneration, faith it self should be enervated, which then has being when it
expects that in hope, which is not yet actually seen: also the fear of death
must be overcome, by the strength and conflict of faith in men of ripe years,
as it appeared in the Martyrs; wherein there could be neither victory nor
glory, if no conflict, as there could not be, if the Saints had present
immunity from bodily death, who would not then run to the grace of Christ
with infants to be baptized, that they might not dye? And so should faith not
be tried by an invisible reward; nor indeed by faith, in that, it now sought
and obtained reward. But now by a greater and more admirable grace of our
Savicur the punishment of sin is converted to the use of righteousness: for
then it was said to man: if thou sin thou shall dye: but now it is said to
the martyr, dye that thou may not sin -- so by the unspeakable mercy of God
the very punishment of sin became the armor of virtue: and so death which
ends this mortal and sinful life becomes a passage to the eternal, in
which shall be no sin: and so the punishment is turned into mercy; (...) etc;
Ita paena ipsa in misericordiam cessit. G. Nazian. orat 42.
and death become again; by which, sin and misery are cut off, lest the
evil should be immortal.

3 It is necessary that thou strive (...) Antist apud Laeit.
to live an heavenly life in all godliness to Colos 3. 1.
set thy affections on things above: to reckon that thou art here but a Psalm.
119. 19.
pilgrim and stranger, not having in this world any Hebr. 13. 14. Mich. 2. 10.
continuing city: that thou art a Ephesians. 2. 19.
fellow citizen with the Saints, and of the household of God: that being here in
this 2 Cor 5. 6.
earthly tabernacle, thou art absent from the Lord: thus resolved, thou shall
be willing to be dissolved, that thou may live with Christ; Math. 17. 4.
Petrus aspiciens-Dominicae resurrectionis gloriam nolebat descendere, etc.
Ambros. Irenae ep. 11.
when Peter saw only a glimpse of the future glory in Christ's transfiguration
on the mount, he cried out, it is good for us to be here -- let us make here
three tabernacles: he shall easily contemn death, whose love and desires are
fixed on heaven: so travelers regard not dangerous and rough ways, that they
may come home: death is Mors corporalis dum quia quae quis possidet cum amore,
non relinquit sinc dolor. Hug. de Sanct. Victor. Miscel. l. 2. c. 26
grievous to the lovers of the world.

4 Consider the advantages that death shall bring thee: it shall quit thee from
all sickness, sorrow, fear of dying, and all those temporal calamities,
which flesh and blood now groaneth under: instead of earth and these transitory
things (which at best serve but to necessity, and perish in their use) it
shall invest thee in the heavenly, 1 Cor. 2. 9.
which excel all present thoughts of man: it shall set thee free from sin,
(...). Chrysostom.
and make thee a perfect servant of God The husbandman is content to cast his
precious grain into the earth, where he knows it must perish, because he
is assured it shall rise again with increase and advantage to him. Whereas
Joh. 12. 24.
if it dye not it abides alone: how much more should the gain of heaven make
us willing to part with this vain and evil world: therefore Just. Martyr.
Apol. 1.
Lucius the martyr thanked Vrbicius, because bydeath, freeing him from wicked
masters, he sent him to God the father.

5 It is necessary that thou Vive memor Iethi, etc.
often think on death, Velimus, nolimus, abesse lo^gius non potest. Hieron. l.
2. ep. 24.
which will we, nill we cannot be far off. Facile contemnit omnia quise
semper cogitat moriturum, ib. Paulino l. 2. ep. 2.
Easily shall he contemn all secular things who always thinks he must dye.
Effice morttem tibi cogitatione familiarem Sen.
Make death familiar to thee Ut mortem nunquam ^im^as, s^mper cogita. ib. ep.
30. f.
by often thinking of it: the tempter once said, ye shall not dye at all; he
knows it were a folly to say so now, experience teaching the contrary: yet
now he does what he possibly can, to put death out of the sinners memory; now
he persuades them, they shall not dye these many years: hereby he first
leads into security of sinning, and at last into despair by sudden terrors
of unexpected death. But when God gave Israel Manna, he had them gather only as
much as would suf^ice for a day, because he would have them to expect death,
that they might not provide for the morrow. So taught he us to pray for daily
bread Math 6. 11. (...). Theoph, in Math 6.
to take away care for the morrow. Truly the Platonis sententia est, omnem
sapientium vitam meditationem esse mortis. H^eron. Heliod. ep. 24. l. 2.
whole life of a wise man, should be a meditation of death.

6 Because the hour is hidden from thee, watch for it. Horam vero ultimam
dominus ^ oster i^circo voluit nobis esse incognitam, ut semper possit esse
suspecta, ut dum illam praevidere non possumus, ad illam sine imtermissione
praeparemur. Gregor. Hom. 13. in Luke 12.
God has not revealed it, that we might expect it every hour. And he calls
men of all ages that Ut pendulae expectatio^is incerto, semper eum ereda^ esse
venturum, quem ignorant quando ventures sit. Hieron. in Math. 24. 44.
none might be secure: it is Incertum est quo te loco mors expectat: itaque tu
illam omni loco expecta. Senec. ep. 26.
uncertain where death expects thee, therefore look for it every where: it
is as uncertain when: therefore Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum. Hor.
1. ep.
live every day as if it were thy last. When thou go to sleep reckon (as
Pa^uvi^s wont) that thou (t) have lived thy time: if God give more days make
good use of them: he is the most secure, and happy possessour of himself, who
without solicitousnesse expects the morrow. He that says he has lived
rises every day to a new gain. It is a chief part of deaths bitterness,
that it comes suddenly upon him who promised himself a longer life: the best
way to make it tolerable, is to render thy mind to a present expectation of it.

7 Patiently subject to that which must be: and use thy best skill that it may
be well with thee. The Bla^diente aura navim regit ultimus naut^, in confusione
ventorum, primi quaeritur ars magistri. Pet. Chrysostom. Sermon. 20.
goodness of the Pilot is seen in the storm, and the wisdom of a man in the
greatest trial. Meekly submit to that to which all the world is liable: Zerx^s
is reported to have wept, when he saw his numerous army; remembering that in a
little time, they must be all dead: (...) possemus in (...) dear speculam, de
qu^ nu^^rsam terram sub nostris pedibus ^crneremus (...) tibi ostender^m totius
Orbis ruinas: gentes gentibus, and regnis regna collisa: alios torqueri, alios
necari, alios absorberi ^iuctibus, etc. totius mundi homines qui nunc vivunt in
brevi spatio de suturos. Hieron. Heliodor* ep. 24. l. 2.
if we could view all the world at once, what calamities and destructions
should we see? Nation against nation, kingdom clashing against kingdom: some
gasping under cruel tormenters hands: some swallowing up of the deaf sea:
some in their birth: some breathing their last; all ere long peperishing: as
all the stars, greater and lesser, in larger and smaler orbs, do finish
their courses, and set in their appointed times* so men of all conditions dye:
death Mors aequalis est onmib^s, etc. Ambros. de de ^id. resur. c. 2. aequo
pede pull sat pauperum tabernus regumque turres, etc. Hor.
equally knocks at the cottage, and palace door; sparing no estate (it is so
appointed Heb. 9. 27.
appointed all must dye) it pittieth not the poor, nor spares the rich: it
regards neither Eccles. 2. 15. 16. fatua sit virgo, prndcns sit virgo, somnum
mortis omnes pati^^tur. Augustine, de verb. Dei, Ser. 22.
wisdom valor, excellency: Nam qui id quod vitari non potest, metuit, is
vivere animo quieto nullo modo potest: sed qui non modo quia necesse est mori,
verum etiam quia nihil habet mors quod sit horrendum; mor^em non timet, magnum
is sibi praesidium ad beatam vitam comparat: Cic: Tusc. q. l. 2.
it is folly to have for exemption from its rigid, and inevitable law, which
has past on Quod a^tem omnibus necesse est; idne miserum esse uni potest. ib.
l. 1. f.
all thy fathers before thee, thy friends besides thee, and shall take away all
thou leavest behind thee. Toward death thou go every moment, and can not
stay till thou fall to the earth: now too much fear of death depriveth, not
only of the comfort, but also of the fruits of life, and vain struggling under
the burden (which thou can neither cast off by any impatience, nor
comfortably bear without a cheerful subjection to necessity) makes it more
heavy, know thy condition, and that thou have not only many, but all men
partners therein. When they told Anaxagoras of the sentence of death pronounced
against him; he replied it is the same which nature long since pronounced on
them and me.

8 Strive for sound ^aith: the only cure for an Number. 21. 8.
Israelite stung with a fiery serpent was, looking up to the brazen serpent:
the moral is, that the only remedy against the sting of death, is to look up
Joh. 3. 14. 15.
to Christ, the resurrection of life, who by dying has conquered death, and
the tyrant that had the power of death: so that they that (...). -- Athanas. de
incarn. verb. Dei. Act. 28. 5. 6. Exodus 7. 12. Exodus 14. 16. 21. 22.
naturally fear it, believing in Christ, look on it as children use to gaze
upon some fierce enemy vanquished, and led in chains: to the believer, death
is but like the Melita viper, more fear then danger: like Moses serpent,
terrible, but eating up the worlds enchanters serpent, and becoming a key to
let us into our rest: certainly if there be any evil in death, it is only to
the evil, and unbeliever: be thou good and faithful, and it cannot hurt thee,
it must benefit thee; the faithful think of their deaths 2 Timothy 4. 7. Ideo
sibi de morte ipsa gratulatus, quia sit veluti studii sui meta. Calvin. in loc.
as of their journeyes end.

9 Look for thy conforts against death in Gods Word, which only is infallible:
the Legimus Crantorem, cujus volumen ad con^ovendum dolorem suum sequutus est
Cieero: Platonis, Diogenis, clitomachi, Carneadis, Possidoni^, ad sedandos
luctus etc. Hieron. Heliodor. l. 2. ep. 24.
Heathens had many false and unsound comforts against death; as assiming it to
be but a sleep, or Mortem esse absolutam refrigerationem^ Aristot. apud
Plu^arc. de placit. Philosoph. l. 5. c. 25.
refreshing, an haven, and refuge to which they desired to come; a Portum
paratum nobis, and perfugium putemus, quo utinam velis passis perv^hi liceat:
sin res^antibus ventis rejiciemur, tamen ^od^m paulo tardius referamur necesse
est. Tusc. q. l. 1. fin^.
pleasant journey, after which there Quam illud iter jucundum esse debet, quo
confecto, nulla reliqua ^nra, nulla sollicitudo futura sit. ib.
shall be no more care, and discoursing confidently of the ^oules immortality,
all which served possibly to appease a beguiled soul, ready to be cast into
hell fire; not much unlike those African Minuc: Fell. Octav.
mothers lullabies who (as we noted) use to still their weeping babes which
they offered to Molocke, with songs and kisses, that they might not cast a
crying sacrifice into those flames* no better Aug. de Civ: Dei: l, 1. c. 22.
Cic: Tus^: q: l. 1.
was Plato his admired discourse of the souls eternity to Cleombrotus, which
when he had read, he cast himself into the sea: what ever other speculations
they had; with Moriturus pronunciavit hos versus, etc. animula, vagula,
blandula, hospes, comesque corporis: quae nunc abi^is in locam^ spallidula,
rigida, nudula, etc; Ae^^ Spartian: Hadrian: Caesar:
Adrian Caesar's uncertainty, what should become of the soul after death; there
could be no solid and true comfort in it: nor can any thing be so infallible as
to comfort an afflicted soul in death, but that only which God says: where
that pronounces, Rev: 14. 13.
blessed are the dead: their spirits ^ Thessalonians. 4. 14.
rest in Christ, they Joh: 12. 23.
shall rise again and see God in Job. 19. 26. 27.
the same flesh; we may rest assured of those comforts: Math: 5. 18. Luke 16:
17.
heaven and earth shall pass away, but no tittle of Gods Word shall fail.

10 Repent and turn unto the Lord quickly: defer not with the Math: 25. 11.
12.
foolish virgins, until the bridegroom come: it will be too late to knock
when the door of mercy is shut up: remember that profane Heb: 12. 16. 17.
Esau sought the blessing too late: Qui poenitenti veniam spospondit, peccanti
diem crastinum non promisit: si fugere vis venturam iram: fuge dum sanus es:
quia in morte fuga est gravis, post mortem vero non est omnino possibilis: mala
enim quae in vita fugere voluisti, post mortem etiamsi volueris, declinare non
poteris: sequentur enim illic retributione, quae hic delectatione committuntur.
Hugo de Sanct: Victor: Miscel: 1: r. tit: 78.
he that has promised mercy to the penitent, has not promised thee to morrow:
nor to give thee an heart to repent then. Fly youthful lusts, 2 Timothy 2. 22.
but as the Angel said to Lot going out of Sodom, Genes. 19. 22.) Have thee:
now while thou art in health fly from the wrath to come: in death thy slight
will be heavy: after death impossible: the evil thou will not now fly; thou
can not then; those things which thou here committest with delight, shall
there follow thee with revenge. Semper ergo extremum diem debemus metuero, quem
nunquam possumus praevidere: Greg: hom: 12.
Ever fear least this day may be the last; because thou art not sure thou
shall live to morrow: how many seeming healthful, how many young and strong,
have thou known suddenly taken away? If thy youth be past in sin, yet amend
thy age: Beatus plane qui vel in Senectute correxit errorem: beatus qui vel sub
ictu mortis animum convertit a vitiis: Ambros: orat funeb: de obit: Valent
Happy shall he be who under the stroke of death, can with the penitent thief
turn unto the Lord.

11 So ever behave thy self toward men, that thou need not be ashamed to
live longer, and so make thy peace with God, that thou may not fear to dye*
(As dying Moriturus ad circumstantes Sacerdotes dixit: non sic vixi, ac me
pudcat inter vo^ vivere, nec mori tim^o, qui bonum habemus dominum. Possidonius
de vita Augustini.
Ambrose said) because we have a good God. Non sic vixi. etc: hoc enim, dixerat
ad illud quod homines nosce poterant. -- Scie ns examen aequitatis divinae, de
bono Domino se dicit magis, quam de meritis suis confidere: ib: Possid:
Knowing the strict examination of Gods justice; he says he trusted in the
good God, not in any merits of his own; though men knew nothing of him, whereof
he might be ashamed. It is an happy temper of the mind, wherein we neither
Mortem optare malum, timere pejus. Senec. Oedip.
wish, nor fear to dye. The misery of the unbeleever is, that being weary of
life, he is yet afraid of death. Only assurance of thy sins remission, and
eternal salvation in Christ, can give thee comfort against, and in death seek
thy peace with God through him.

To comfort our selves in our dear friends death, Sect. II
the rule is, 1 These: 4. 13.
that we sorrow not as men without hope: Est enim ptis affectibus quaedam etiam
flendi voluptas: and plerumque gravis evaporat dolor. Ambros. orat: funeb: de
obitu Valent.
sorrow we may, that is, Humanum est humanis cas^bus ingemescere. Herodian.
humane sorrow has its place in man, Joh: 11. 35.
and justification in Christ's tears at Lazarus grave: but it must hold a mean:
the Saints have mourned for the dead; but moderatly and not without the
resolution which David expressed. 2. Sam. 12. 23. I shall go to him, but he
shall not return to me: least too Ubertim fluentes lacrymas reprime, ne
grandis pietas in nepotem, apud incredulas mentes, desperatio putetur in Deum
desiderandus est tibi: quasi absens, non quasi mortuus, ut illum expectare, non
amisisse videaris. Hieron: l. 2. ep: 24. H^liodor.
much affection should be mistaken; Quorum alter amissit duobus filiis,
coronatus in concione disseruit, etc. ib: Hieron.
and piety toward the dead, misconstrued by unbeleevers, for despair in God.
The apathie of (Pericles, Zenophon, and others in their sons deaths, are not
examples for us

The means to comfort herein, is

1 To consider and firmly believe, that they are but gone before us, they are
not lost: that the living body, which thou now sowest with tears shall rise
again with joy, a glorified creature: that we shall meet in heaven and never
part again, and that with greater advantage of love and perfection: the most
perfect secular amity has some bitterness, because the best have some
imperfection: but there shall be nothing in friends to grieve and discontent
each other, because no sin, nor imperfection. Now Cum constet de
resurrectione mortuorum, vocat dolor mentis: (...) impa^entia doloris: cur enim
doleas si peri^sse non credis? cur impatienter feras subductum interim, quem
credis reversurum? profectio est quam pu^as mortem cur enim immoderate feras
abiisse, quem mox subsequeris? Tertul de patient: c. 9.
if we are indeed confident of such a resurrection why should we bewail the
dead? Why too much, if we believe they are not lost? Why should we impatiently
take it that they are withdrawn for a time, whom we believe returning to
eternity? Why should we immoderatly grieve that our friends go before us,
seeing we must quickly follow them?

2 To consider that thou lamentest Desiderium absentiae ejus far non
possumus: non illius sed nostram vicem dolentes: quanto ille felictor etc.
Hieronym: q: S.
thine own loss, not thy good friends: wherein, as I said thou should
rationally rejoice, rather that thou had such a one, then mourn that he is
gone to God: could the deceased Saint for whom thou grievest, but hear and
speak from heaven to thee, what would he else say, then that which our blessed
Savior (going to overcome death by dying) said to the daughters of Jerusalem,
weep not for me, but weep for your selves Illa vero cum jam co venerit ubi
nullus est dolori locus: nihil nostro opus habet dolor. Plutar: cons: ad
uxorem.
They need not ever sorrow, who are arrived there, where there can be no sorrow.

3 To consider what state we have in any thing secular; and for what term?
what can thou so call thine, as being certain thou shall enjoy it one day
more? and shall, we, for want of wisdom (to hold these temporal blessings
with a loose hand, ready to let go when God will resume) make them bitter to
us also? did our dear friends qualities therefore delight us when they lived
with us; that their memory might afflict us when they are deceased? (...)
Telamon and Anaxagoras knew but they had mortal children; and shall not we
know that our immortality is not here, but in the world to come? It is a shame
to Christians if their Si non praestet (des, quod exhibuit infideli^as. Hieron.
q. S.
faith come short of others infidelity: ^^nnius apud Ci^: de senect. Non esse
lugendam mortem censct. quam immortalitas consequitur.
Heathens could say that we ought not to bewail that death which immortality
follows: that Ego nostros par^ntes -- vivere arbitror, and eam quidem vitam
quae est sola vita nominanda. ib.
the deceased lived a more happy life, that the soul is divine and heavenly:
how unexcusable is it for us to think, the Saints were made for earth only,
and to be imprisoned in these houses of clay for ever? Condonamus dilectioni
liber^rum desiderium honorem, and memorium de^unctorum; sed lug^^i (...)
cupiditas, ab lametationes pl^^ctusque provehens; non minus turpis est quam in
temperantia voluptatum. Plut^ co^sol. ad uxore^.
They condemned immoderate sorrow for the dead: how do we bewray our carnal
dissidence, or perverse affections in our excess when we grieve for them who
are incomparably more happy then we? They stand on the blessed shore, expecting
our arrival from this sea of glass mingled with ^ire. And who can say that
those new inhabitants of the heavenly Jerusalem, do not daily look for us
among the happy souls, as Joseph and Mary sought Christ at the earthly? The
old Massilians buried their dead without mourning. The Eastern people with
Math. 9. 23. (In funere Paulae, inquit Hieron.) Hebraeo, Graeco, Latino,
Syroque Scri^one, Psalmi in ordine personabant, non solum triduo. etc. Hier.
To. 1. ad ^ustoc: Epit. Paulae. and in Epitaph Fabiolae, ad Oceanum, inquit,
sanabant Psalmi, and aurata temploru^ resonans in sublimi quatiebat alleluiah.
music: Fuisse etiam quidam serunt -- qui ortus hominum lugerent, obitusque
celebrar^^t: nec impruden^^r: eos enim qui in hoc vitae salum venissent
moerendos putabant: cos vero qui ex istius mundi procellis and fluctibus
emersissen^, non injusto ga^dio persequendos arbitrabantur, Nos quoque ipsi
natales dies defunctorum oblivis^^mur, and eum quo obierint diem, celebri
solemnitate renovamus. Ambros. de f. resur. cap. 2. Hesiodus natales hominum
plangens gaudet in funere. Hieron Heliodor ep. 24. l. 2.
some bewailed their births, and rejoiced in their funerals: others crowned
their dead, Plin. l. 21. c. 3.
as then victorious: it is enough to comfort us concerning them (did not flesh
and blood bear too great a part) that God Rev. 14. 13.
pronounces them blessed. There are three things which are counted sorrows
lenitives: Time, Reason, and Religion: the first will prevail to assuage
sorrow even in bruits. The first and second in carnal men; and why then do
thou immoderately mourn, who have the help of religion, the comfort of
knowledge, and Gods oracles to allay thy grief? Cur enim maestitiam tu^am, non
ratio potius quam dies leniat? nam quod obliteratura est temporis series,
melius prudentia mitigabit, Ambros. de f. resur. c. 2.
Why should not rather sanctified reason, then time assuage thy sorrow?

To conclude, remember these three things. 1. That it is no Quanto insolentius
est, quod non praeter modum acciderit, ultra modum dolere? ib. c. 9.
extraordinary thing to loose a dear frrend; and why then should thou
immoderately lament it? 2. Remember that this loss Certe brevis vitae usus,
nec illi multum videtur cripuisse qui aute praecessit; nec to differ diutius
qui r^^anscris. (...) ib. Ambros. c. 3.
neither took much time of life from him who went before thee: nor left thee
much to come, who must ere long follow him. 3. Remember Gods graces, the sweet
and certain effects whereof thou saw in thy now deceased friend. undoubtedly
they were not bestowed on him in vain; but that in his translation, God might
perfect the work of grace with glory, and crown his ow^e gifts in him: David,
as we noted, bewailed David paricidam mortuum flevit, qui non flevit
innocentem fletur secleratus, non fletur dilectus. Ib: Amb. c. 4.
his impious son; but he mourned for the innocent, no longer then he lay
sick.

To comfort our selves against the fears and sorrows of death let us ever
remember;

1 Our Manet ergo eorum vita, quos manet resurrectio. Amb^os. de obitu Valen.
orat. suneb.
resurrection and immortality in the life to come is assured us by the
infallible word of God. Sect. III.
1. Cor: 15. 1. 2. 4. 20. 54. etc. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14. 15. 18. Dan: 12. 2. 3. 13.
Joh: 5. 28. 29. Joh: 11. 23. 25. Rom: 6. 23. This we are therefore sure of. In
consolationem damnationis suae. Hieron. Heliod. ep. 24. l. 2.
Democritus believed it not: Socrates disputed of the souls immortality.
Pythagoras dreamed of it, but, as feverish men of things uncertain and
inconsistent: the eternity we believe, is that to which God created us by his
Genes. 1. 26. 27.
own image impressed on us: unto which we are repaired, in our baptism and
regeneration, by that virtue Romans 6. 3, 4, 5.
which raised Jesus from the dead: Phil. 3. 21.
who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body Ipse enim corpus nostrum a corruptione and interitu liberatum,
immortalitate exornabit -- Illud autem, transfigurabit, p^suit, non pro
mutatione figurae, sed pro liberatione ab int^ritu, and corruptione. Theodor:
in Phil. 3.
that is in immortality and deliverance from death and corruption. In that
state Ibi namque omnes dies non veniendo and transeundo fiunt omnes, nec
initium alterius est finis alterius, omnes sine fine simul sunt, ubi nec ipsa
vita habet finem, cujus illi dies sunt, Aug. ep. 121. c. 8.
our days shall not come and go, as in this world they do: Intelligit autem
similitudinem animi, non corporis, quae consistit in immortalitate, in
innocenti^ and justitia, etc. F. Vatablus in ^oc.
neither shall the beginning of one be the end of another: all shall be to
gather termelesse, where life it self shall have no end.

2 That death is but Joh. 11. 11. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14. 1. Cor. 15. 51. 1 Cor. 7. 39.
Romans 7. 2. Quid tam mortis simile quam dormientis affectus P. Chrysostom. Sermon.
24. init.
a sleep: none fear that: it is a separation of the soul, and intermission
of life and the acts thereof, for a time, Scimus tamen quod corpori supervivat,
and eajam depositis propriis sensus repagulis expedita libero cernat obtutu,
quae ante sita in corpore non videbat; quod exemplo dormientium possumus
aestimare Ambros. de si. resur. c. 3.
which it ends not, because the immortal soul ever lives in it is Simors
non aliud determinatur, quam dissunctio corporis animaeque Tertul. de anim. c.
27.
separation from the mortal body, which shall be raised again to immortality,
which shall be the -- ae rumuarum omnium malorumque perfugium est: and fida
statio securitatis, a^portus quietis. Ambros. q. S. c. 4.
souls sanctuary, and haven of rest. This is a truth so certain that Gods
word abounds with proofs; and so confessed, that the prudent Non posse eam
naturam esse mortalem, etc. Ci^ de S^^ect. -- mihi quidem nunquam persuaderi
potuit, animos -- cum exissent ex its ^mori. ib
heathens (as I have noted) constantly asserted it

That the fear of death is much worse then death: it is Qui mortem reformidat
quomodo no^ servus^ Servit profecto, and miseram quidem s^rvitut^m, nihil enim
sic animam ad omnem servitutem dejicit, quomodo formido mortis: quomodo enim so
errigat abjectus and vilis sensus, atque ignobilis demersus in omnem
infirmitatis voraginem, vitae hujus cupiditate. ib. l. 2. ep. 7. ad Simplic.
Amb.
a servile and a miserable condition to fear that which cannot be avoided:
fear may be long but death or the sense thereof can be but short. That which
is a sick or miserable life, is not to be put on account to death, which
ends all secular griefs: death were to be feared if it could stay with thee,
as pain and sickness may: but neither it comes not when thou fear it, or
it must quickly dispatch and pass from thee, leaving thee free from fear and
sorrow, if thou dye in Christ. This is Magna ^^ec res est, and diu discenda,
cum adventat hora illa inevitabilis, aequo animo abire. Senec. ep. 30.
a lesson long learning, that when that inevitable hour comes thou may
willingly depart: which because it is a Moriendum enim certum est, and id
incertum, an co ipso die. Cic. q. S.
certain uncertainety, a condition Sensi -- om^i aetati mortem esse communem.
ib.
common Uniuersi per singulos interimus. Lactant. l. 2. c. 11.
to all men, of every age; seeing the longest life must have one last hour
which brings up the rere; it shall be thy wisdom (as has been said) ever to
expect it, and to live so, as that a guilty conscience do not then terrify
thee when thou shall most want comfort: the only way to be willing to die, and
cheerful in dying, is to live well and to fix thy confidence in Jesus Christ:
wretched is he who for want hereof is afraid of death.

4 Remember that Christ dying for thee, has pulled out the sting of death, and
destroyed the in Math. 8. 28. in it. Chrysol. Sermon. 16. in monumentis sedem
fec^rant mortis authors: ostendate quae saevitia-doemonum erga humanum genus:
quamvis breve tempus hominum far non possu^^: contenti non sunt mori homines:
sed vivos gestiunt sepelire: se sepulchris mandant, ut homines redigant in
s^pulchra -- Hebr. 2. 14.
malicious enemy that had the power thereof: Christ is the Joh. 11. 25.
resurrection and the life: he that believes in him, though he were dead yet
shall he live: the only Antidote against death is a lively faith in Christ; let
thy maine care and hearts desire be upon it: give God no rest, importune him
with earnest and constant prayers to strengthen thy faith: he cannot deceive
who has promised herein, Math. 5. 6.
to satiate the thirsty Math. 11. 28. 29. Jerem. 31. 14. 25.
and weary soul.

5 Consider the power of God to save from death, and in death: what greater
evidence could he have given to men in desperate hazards, then he did in Jonah
(buried but not dead; whose living sepulcher carried him as it were to a second
birth) the Lord spoke unto the fish and it Jonah 2. 10.
cast out Jonah upon the dry land -- he can deliver in death, so does he all
the elect: he can raise this dying flesh again, who says he will: who made
this universe of nothing: Hoc enim de Enoch legimus aut Eliah: sed and tu
r^pieris in spiritu: c^^e ^ur rus Eliae; c^^e ignes: e^si non videntur parantur
u^ justus as^cudat, innocens ^rans seratur: and i^a vita mori nescit. Ambros;
de f^resur. co 21. sine.
he translated Enoch, and Eliah: certainly those chariots of God are thousand,
thousands, which though not seen by mortal eyes, are ever pressed, to carry
up the souls of the just in their departure, into the presence of God, a
blessed and endless life.

6 Consider that death is that physician, who can at once cure all diseases,
and is to the deceased Saints, Ubi cognoscat mort^m haenc non hominis fin^m
esse, sed culpae. ib. orat. funib. de exit. etc. Theodo^. Imp*
the end of sin and misery, not of them: the medicine of all griefs: Naturae
debit^m, Tertul de anim. c. 50. non ^^im a principio Deus mortem iustituit, sed
proremedio de lit. Ambr^de fid. resur. c. 9. init. (...) por^^ coeli (...)
significat etiam locum judicii quod in portu ex^r^^batur. Deuteronomy. 25. 7. etc.
the debt of corrupted nature: the sanctuary against all secular fears: the
port of a fluctuant and troublesome world: the gate of eternal life, as Jacob
said of Luz Gen: 28 17.(b) This is the ga^e of heaven: opened that the
righteous nation which keeps truth, may enter. Now whereas there are diverse
ways to death: some rough, some smooth; some short, some long, it is just that
thou patiently submit to the providence of God, who can and will best dispose
of thee: let me add this to them that are impatient or fearful of death.
Quis in infirmitate tam constans, ut non optet mori se potius: quam debilem
vivere? quis in moerore tam sortis, ut non desideret, ^o se vel moriendo
defungi? quod si ipsi in nobis dum vivimus displicemus, ^um vivendi sinem
praestitum esse noverimus, quanto amplius vitae nos taederet istius, si sine
^ine faturos nobis labores hujus corporis cerneremus? aut quid gravius
immortalitate miserabili? Amb: q. S. c. 30. init.
Who is there so constant in infirmity, that he would not rather wish to dye,
then still live weak? Who is so hardy in sorrow, that he would not rather
desire that death might once end it, then life continue it still? If we are
displeased with life when yet we know there is a determined end near us, how
much more impatient should we be, if we knew there were no end of our
miseries, and labors? What is more intolerable then miserable immortality?
Quid est autem diu viver^, nisi diu torqueri? quid est aliud diu vivere, nisi
quam malos dies malis di^bus addere. August: de verb: Dom: Math: Sermon: 17.
And what is long life better then long torment?

7 Lay up the promises of God concerning Christ's suffering and rising again,
comforting and assisting his, in life and death, etc. Join here to Vere novit
recte viver^, qui recte novit orar^. Aug. hom. 4. (si sit ejus)
fervent and constant prayer, that God would be pleased so to direct thee in
thy whole life, and to strengthen thee in thy death: that thou may be willing
to die; not for fear of this life's miseries (for they, that for that cause
only, are willing to dye, would possibly be glad rather to live to pleasures
then sanctity) but for love of Gods presence, and the assurance of his truth.
That he would proportion his grace to thy trialls: the more thou art cast down
and helpless in thy self, that he would the more lift thee up, and let thee
feel his gracious hand susteining thee: so he that in mercy has borne with
thy many failings, and taken no advantages to judge and cast thee away in thy
daily sins: will like a tender father pity thee when thou art not able to
pray: he will remember what thou have prayed, yea what Christ Jesus, sitting at
his right hand then speaks for thee, when thou have most need of a mediator,
when stupefied with pains of approaching death, thou can not utter one word
for thy self, then he will open the heavens to thee, and give thee a clear
sight of those joys (as he did Act. 7.
S. Stephen) then will he give his holy Angels charge over thee, to receive
thy soul breathed out of thy gasping body, to convey it to his gracious and
ever blessed presence. This world is full of labor, sorrow, misery: there is no
rest here: heaven is the arc to which the tired dove, the holy soul,
returns for rest: the moral men seemed to know it, who placed their Quietem
etc. aede^ haberet extra portam collinam. Aug: de C. Dei. l: 4. c. 16. ego
conjectura ducor, Quietem hanc ad mortuo^ pertinuisse -- i^co extra urbem Quies
est culta. Fanum Quietis crat via^ Labica na. Live l. 4. cit. L: Vives.
Temple of rest without the gate of Agony. How much more must we, who believe
that we shall live eternally with Christ, who shall come to save and give us
life in death, Even so come Lord Jesus AMEN.

A Prayer for him who has recieved the sentence of death in himself.
O Lord God almighty preserver of man: father of the spirits of the just; God
of all true consolation, the hope of Israel, and deliverer thereof in the day
of trouble: who give a gracious ear to the afflicted faithfully calling on
thee through him whom thou have appointed to be the only mediator between thee
and Wretched man, Christ Jesus the righteous. I humbly acknowledge that I have
nothing of my self to present unto thy Majesty, but confession of mine own
vileness, nothing in my sinful flesh but corruption; matter of severe
judgment to thee (who art a God of pure eyes) and argument of terror and
despair to my self most impure: in sin was I conceived and borne a child of
wrath and disobedience: my whole life has abounded with that which brings
forth fruit only unto death: I have not done the good which thy sanctifying
spirit made me willing to do; the evil that I would not, I have done: I have
not rendered unto thee according to thy goodness: when I would sum up my
sins, they so much exceed all numbers, that my heart fails me: my conscience
tells me of my wilful neglects of thy service and disobedience to thy word,
concluding my whole life no better then sinful: but how many ways I have
offended thee when I observed not thou only know: how many are the failings
which, though I through spiritual blindness and carnal security: have not
observed that I might judge and condemn my self for them, thereby to prevent
thy severe judgment, shall yet by no means escape thy strict examination: and
now, O Lord, what can I more do then humbly beg thy pardon; condemn my self,
renounce all confidence in the world and plead only thy mercy, and the merits
of thy son Jesus for my justification? Lord look upon me through him, in
whom thou art well pleased, Nothing can be past or future to thy eternal
wisdom* look, therefore on his bleeding wounds who did not in vain dye for
me: let thy justice be satisfied in his obedience and suffering for all my
sins. And now, O Lord, seeing (according to thy sentence on all mankind) the
time of my departure hence draws high. I humbly acknowledge this frail
condition to be the due wages of sin which brought mortality into the world,
but thou who did put thine own image on me have not made me for so short a
life only, as thou give unto the beasts which perish: thou have no need of my
misery, nor advantage in my destruction, nor could so inestimable a price of
my redemption, as the blood of thy holy son Jesus, be given for that which
thou would have perish eternally. He must surely live for whom the
resurrection and the life of Christ Jesus died: Lord therefore seal up my
redemption in my afflicted heart now that the Bride is near, send those holy
comforters, faith and assurance of thy mercy to adorn his own temple: to lift
up the everlasting doors of my soul, that the king of glory and Lord of life
may come in, and change my vain love of the world, to love of heaven who will
change my vile body, that it may be like his own glorious body; let me hence
forth live his life, no more mine own, assured thereby of the repair of mine
inward man to a joyful resurrection and life of glory: that he may be to me in
life and death advantage: that in full confidence of my union with, and
interest in him, I may be willing to be dissolved that I may be with him. O
holy Savior, who have through death abolished death and him that had the power
thereof, take from me all carnal fear by bringing life and immortality to
light unto my conscience: thou that have in thy hands the keys of death and
hell, restrain the tempters malice and mischievous charges of my sinne-wounded
soul: make me faithful unto the death and assure me of the crown of
righteousness laid up for all that love thy appearing. Raise me now to the
life of grace, that the second death may not touch me. And though thou bring
this frail flesh to the dust of the earth; yet let not death have dominion
over me. Though it must (to the appointed time) separate my soul from this
decaying tabernacle of clay; let neither life nor death, things present nor
future, separate my soul from thee and thy Christ. I acknowledge thy mercy who
justly might have taken me away in my sins, by some sudden and untimely
death; or set me (who am by sin a son of death) in the condition of those
who in horror of a restless conscience and bitterness of spirit, seek death
and cannot find it: but O good God, whose eye is upon them that fear thee to
deliver their souls from death, in whose hands are the issues thereof; seeing
thou have thus long spared me, now accomplish thy mercy in me: be thou my God
for ever, and my guide unto my end, and comfort in my end: now when my heart
trembles in me, and the terrors of death are fallne upon me give me the long
expected fruits of my hopes proposed to me in thy word* O blessed Jesus, who
art the death of death, now show thy self my Savior: take from my afflicted
soul the sting of death; assure me of victory: loose the pains, allay the
fear and sorrows, and sweeten the bitterness of death, until in my enjoying
thy presence it be swallowed up in victory. O holy Savior who have had
experience of all our miseries for sin, without sin, and have admitted us to be
baptized into the similitude of thy death and resurrection: let me now feel in
my languishing soul, the power thereof: O Christ, whose humane soul (in thy
passion for my redemption) was heavy to the death, now mercifully consider my
infirmity who am going the way of all flesh: now give me an invincible faith
in thee, against which the gates of hell may never prevail, now speak peace
and comfort to my poor soul. Thou who powredst out thy soul to death for me,
receive my wearied spirit to eternal life: let not this fearful passage be
too bitter to me: be thou ever present with me in all my sufferings: O holy
Ghost the comforter of all the elect, leave me not comfortless; let me be
gathered to my fathers in peace: bring me to that life wherein thou have
promised to wipe away all tears from our eyes. where shall be no more death,
sorrow, pain, nor any bitter effects of sin: Lord hear me: Lord who
despisest not a broken and contrite heart have mercy upon me: Lord receive my
petitions: and in the appointed hour, come Lord Jesus my Savior and Redeemer,
deliver me from this bondage of corruption: O Lord consider and do it: Lord
come quickly: even so come LORD JESUS. AMEN.

1. TIM. 1. 17: Now unto the king eternal, imortall, invisible, the only wise
God, he honor and glory for ever and ever^

AMEN.
FINIS.
MARCH 23. 1649
In the perusing of this Treatise (entitled a Guide to the Holy City) I have
found it every way so learned and judicious, sound and solid, pious, and
profitable, that I approve it well worthy to be printed and published. John
Downame.


