The Rebels ELEGY.
REbels Goodnight: Would any Man have thought,
That They who durst Rebel, durst not have fought?
But Rebels loose their Courage, while their Swords
Drop from their Hands, like Fool's unwary Words.
Rebels, and having spoke that Hated Name,
No wonder Rebels were so quickly tame.
Fitter to Hang then Fight: Immortal Fellows,
Cowards in the Field, but Valiant at the Gallows.
They scorned to dye in Honors Truckle-Bed;
The Gallows, Curtain'd with the Multitude,
And fairly Canopy'd with Azure Sky,
Was that which raised their Thoughts and Heads so high.
Used to soft Beds, for Gibbets they took care;
For n'ere was Down so soft as is the Air.
Thus Meteors dye, and thus false Lights expire;
Pendant awhile, down drops Fanatic Fire;
An End it seems in which they All delight.
But They were Men would still be opposite
To all the World; 'cause all the World beside
Applauded Monarchy; not so, They cried;
We'll have a Commonwealth; and then because
The Heathenish Poets, giving high Applause
To luckless Valor, still maintained, that They
Who in the Field of Battle prostrate lay,
A Banquet for the Hungry Fowl beside,
Yet in the Noble Bed of Honor died.
Believe those Rogues! Believe the Devil sooner;
They cried, the Gallows is the Bed of Honor.
Well -- Let 'em have it; the Favors not worth speaking,
To let 'em dye in Beds of their own making.
In Holland tho, Bell-swaggers, Sons of Mars,
Godfreys of Bologn, All for Holy Wars.
Three Kingdoms in a Minute must be won
With Caesar's Motto, Come and see; Not One,
But had a Killing Face, a Gorgon's Head,
At once to look a Thousand Read-Coats Dead.
Nay more; They called the Giants heartless Elves,
That suffered a Repulse from Gods themselves.
And by the Cup that bold Cethegus filled,
They swore, or All to Kill, or All be Killed.
But after all -- alack and well a day,
For when They should have fought, they run away:
And only some poor Bumpkins, They stood to it,
That neither knew for Whom, nor Why they fought.
What then remains, but as in Forest Game,
The Law in Warlike Chase should be the same:
And therefore fearing to debauch his Cry,
The Huntsman ought to hang the Curs that lie.
But strange to tell! when to the Gallows led,
Their Hearts revive at sight of Hnours Bed.
They that feared Death, when they might well avoid it,
Because they cannot help it, now deride it.
Noises of Battle both amaze and stun,
When he that's Hanged has time to Kiss him Son.
Katch never meets these Men of Paradoxes
With dismal Guns and frightful Battel-Axes.
A silent Rope, that makes no Noise at all,
Gives 'em both time to Pray and time to Bawl.
For that is an Honor too, to make a Speech,
For Printers Profit, then to wipe your Breech.
And all your Actors still desire a full-Pit,
Which They still have, who Preach in Deaths own Pulpit.
Like Sampsons Arms, they think those Engines proof,
The massy Columns of Heavens Vaulted Roof
To bow, and bring Celestial Vengeance down,
To expiate the Crimes which they disown.
As if the Words of Dying Men, and Noise
Of Men adjudg'd to Dye, had equal poise.
For Truth attends on Dying Men's last Breath;
Which he can never speak that dies in Wrath.
For who asks Pardon, yet by scorn of Death,
And passive Mummery of Great and Brave
Upholds his Crime, is but a Dying Knave.
And tho he seemingly forgive, could Eat
The just Inflicters, were they never so Great.
Forgive! it is Nonsense: No man can forgive
But he must Injured first believe.
So Truth to tell, they are only words designed,
As dying Serpents leave their poisonous Breath behind.
But there is another Honor yet to come,
The Honor, what do you called, of Martyrdom.
For strait the Party; oh the Party, They
His Funeral Rites in mournful Claret pay.
Meet and Condole; and Oh! how like a Hero!
And then another Drinks, and whispers -- Nero.
The Judge was Cruel; Witnesses Forsworn;
But He the Victor, He the Man of Scorn
That Death Contemned; made Innocence appear
And gave the Court a cursed Box of the Ear
And now, quo they, that this is truly hinted,
You Will see, they will never let his Speech be Printed.
Ill Read in Men and Human Morals too,
To give to Stubborn Passion, Virtues due:
For Resolute, Constant, change their Glorious Names
In Breasts of Traitors; as in Hell the Extremes
Of Heaven's Perfections Angel turned to Devil,
There Is no such Thing as Virtue in a Rebel;
The Crime of Heaven, ere Man knew how to sin,
That Chaos'd all his Little World again
Men thus mistaken are by Folly swayd,
Or else by Vanity more vicious lead.
For Fortitude does only in Just appear;
It Is Ostentation else dissembles Fear.
They utter falsehood, when they cry, They come
To pay Dame Natures Debt, by fatal doom:
For why? we know they 're hanged; and so, it is true,
They pay the Bond; but it is before it is due.
And they that suffering, a fair Story tell
Are nere a whit the farther off from Hell.
Bad Resolution is but bad Despair;
False Constancy, Self-love, surmounting Fear;
While they that seem so well resolved to dye,
Make but a Virtue of Necessity.
A Bravery, Story yet did never name
But with Dishonor and the Brand of Shame.
Thus what can Felton or Jocundus glory?
They live, it is true, but putrifyd in Story.
For Fame, like Coin, is either true or base,
The one goes current, the other we deface,
Dye Rebels then, like Rebels, while we sings,
So perish All that Rise to hurt my Lord the KING.
This may be Printed,

R. L. S.
Nov. 6. 1685.
Printed for JOHN WELD, at the Crown in Fleetstreet, 1685.


