THE RECANTATION Of the Prelate of CANTERBURY: Being his last Advice to his
Brethren the Bishops of ENGLAND: To consider his Fall, observe the Times,
forsake their Ways, and to join in this good work of REFORMATION.

Remember that ye magnify this great work which men behold, The Nations that
knew not God, shall rejoice at it, The noise thereof shall go to the ends of
the world, Psalm.

London, Printed, 1641.

To his ever much esteemed, and most deserving Friend, the Author of this
Palinodia.
WHilst thou un-mytr'st Prelates, lo! we bow
To gather gracious Garlands for thy brow.
And' cause thou wound'st them with so sweet a grace,
They cannot grudge, but smiling on thy face,
Must humbly kiss the Rod: So, make thy way
Through glories air, until the vulgar eye
Forget thee, and aethereall thou appear
Unto the sons of wisdom, like a clear
And select Star, which cannot deigne to bow,
And court the empty vapors here below.
P. A.

Palinodia Cantuariensis.
THough the wicked has settled his habitation with the Eagle among the
Stars, and say in his mind, I shall not be changed, I shall not taste of
affliction, neither shall the days of Adversity lay hold on me, yet there is
an appointed time for all things, And the Almighty who has disposed the whole
world, and has charge over the Earth, will not pervert Judgment, His Eyes are
upon the ways of Man, He sees all his goings, There is no darkness, nor
shadow of Death where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves, but in end
the fullness of destruction will come upon them, as the wide breaking in of
Waters: Terrors will pursue their souls as the Wind, and their welfair shall
pass away as a Cloud.

To these great Verities do I now humble my self, and in the sense of that
convincing power (my reverend Brethren, who should be to your times the Beauty
of Integrity) that shakes my mind as an Earthquake, do I pronounce the
children of Wisdom blessed, and that no State is so good, so sure, so happy,
as the State of a good conscience. But alas, the immoderate desire of a foolish
glory, and the passion to raise my condition to an height as unlawful as
unbeseeming, and the want of an humble affection to truth, and hatred of error,
has now produced me an example to after ages, and a beaken to preserve you
from Ship wrack, since therefore my angry Stars, will that I forfeit my
reputation to shame, and my life t^ Justice; Suffer me (ye that have had a
Communion of Fortune with me, and on whom the door of Favor is not, yet
altogether shat) Suffer me to pour further my Soul in the bosom of your
compassion: Resign all your tears to me, that I may weep for this day, this
day of indignation, which has swallowed me up as a prey, and wherein
destruction has come upon me like an armed man, Receive these my words, my
last words, I bequeath to you the Counsels of Truth, which if ye treasure up in
your mind, will be a Cordial to make you live, and not die, for now I am upon
the borders of Time, The Vail is removed, and I must enter Eternity, It Is no
more time to dally with the Gospel, and the World.

Ye have been my Fellow Laborers in a strange Work, which we must now
confess, is not of God, and therefore wonder not, if it tumble down. We have
miserably prostituted our souls to the Imagination of a Miter, whose Glory
cannot save us in the day of shame, And all our endeavors have been to erect
an Hierarchy, upon the Ruins of Religion and Commonwealths. O consider this,
ye that sigure to your self a happiness, where there is none, and look what
pleasure I have of those things, whereof I am now ashamed, No nothing but the
comfortless stings of a restless remembrance, of by gone unanswerable deeds,
w^^ I speak with horror, and profess with a bleeding heart. I have embraced
that Shadow which ye so hotly court; I have been lift up to the Pinnacle of the
Temple, whereat ye so zealously aspire, and was gazed upon as a Star, which
gave life, and motion to you all; I have trod these same paths wherein ye
contend, and liberally tasted these empty pleasures of preferments. And of all
my labors, have reaped nothing, but hatred, and ruin to my self, misery, and
reproach to the Church.

And it is in vain to put the day of evil, and Justice far from me, for it He
that lately did swim in his Princes smiles, on whom Nature had bestowed her
great abilities with a liberal hand, and Fortune had bountifully opened her
Breast, could find no eloquence to be with the sword of Justice, nor to
mollify the cruelty of the times, but behoved to drink the unavoidable Cup
presented to him, What can I expect when the Appetite of revenge is set on
edge? And if Wrath has so easily traveled over Mountains, how shall it not
strike flat the Molehils: If the angry thunder made the noble Cedars shrink,
how shall not the silly shrubs, lately crept from the mud of the Valleys be
drowned in their Primitive baseness? I will not harbor the least hopes of
escape, or think that my Surplice stained with the adulterous spots, of the
great whore, can plead favor, when the purple richly died with the rays of
His Majesty's Countenance, could not meet with pardon.

Though I have hitherto decked my self with a kind of Majesty, and Grace, in my
Prelaticall pride arrayed with Splendour, and taught the gazing times to hide my
faults, giving my Plots good Fortune, yet behold, an ungratious light (sudden
as a Tempest at Sea) has discovered my nakedness, and published my shame; I am
vile, and abased, trod down, and hid in the dust; Judgment and Justice take
hold on me, and cast abroad the rage of their wrath, which will certainly
extend their terrors to you, and grind you to powder, if ye forsake not these
ways, whose going down are to the chambers of death. And therefore while my
Oil is yet lasting, and my Taper weakly burning, I will disclose the true
causes of this great misery, and help you with an upright confession of my
ways, as a Sacrifice for my self (if it were possible to expiat the stain of
my dishonor, and appease the Worlds displeasure, Universal as the
Sunne-Beams, and hot consuming flames) and a Testimony against you (O children
of defection) in the day of your account.

That I might appear a great Churchman of vast desires, and designs, being
radically resolved to set up a Tyrannical Power in the Persons of Prelates,
over the worship of God, over the consciences, liberties, and goods of the
People, It cannot be denied, but I have negotiated most eagerly, and strained
all Possibilities, and Stratagems of State, to erect an Hierarchy, forgetting
the directions of the Gospel, and the bonds of Monarchy, and the cries of the
oppressed, leaving nothing undone to promote my intentions, and atchieve my
ends, to which I had emancipated all thepowers of my mind, with so strong a
Passion, as if I had been sent into the world for no other purpose, or as if
the glory of God had been interessed, the honor of the King wounded, and all
Religion had consisted in Episcopacy.

This I thought to effectuate two manner of ways, especially, first by
establishing my self at home in England, in the power of Sole and universal
Jurisdiction, and that I might attain to be a Patriarch, for which ye know I
have not stuck to plead contentiously. 2. By bringing the neighbor Nations of
His Majesty's Dominions, but most particularly that Kingdom of Scotland (to me
so fatal) under my verge, and to the obedience of these novations, and
alternations, wherein my Grandeur, and this change did essentially consist;
With what excrbitancy of overdaring pride, and what insolency I have swayed all
in the Church of England. How impudently I laid by the pastoral duty, and a
care to approve my self to the eternal and secular Powers; how I have
neglected all fear of Laws, of censure and shame, since I obtained the chair of
Canterbury, and begun my Antichristian reign, imposing absolute Tyranny on the
souls and wills of people, shall the afterage be hardly induced to believe. O
b^t behold your poor Primitive mother, the distressed Church of this Island, (if
you be the children concerned in her bleeding miseries) and look how woefully
she is torn, how we have opened her tender sides, pulled her Crown from her
head, and trod her under foot, Nay she lies breathlesses, all covered with
wounds, with sores all defiled, And those glorious twins, Religion and Peace,
who loved to triumph here, sweetly kissing each other, spreading over us the
beauty of their halcyonian days, how have we alas so shreudly, so undeservedly
banished, and given place to the unquiet furies of ugly error, and bloody
war, so that whiles she lies laboring, like a disgraced Virgin under the
throws of her thick coming sorrows, in all the corners of the land, may it
justly, be complained.

Postquam interna furor discerpere viscera caepit,
Omnia membra labant, soluto and defecta vigore,
Tabescunt, tota penitus compage soluta
A capite ad calcem vestigia nulla salutis
Quippe ubi cor languct, vitalia cuncta laborant.
Quis miserae queat Ecclesiae memorare dolores,
Vulnera deflere lachrimis? mala dicere verbis?
Nec mihi si centum linguae, totidem ora sonarent,
Nec si Mconii Vatis torrente redundem,
Nec si mell^fl^i contingat Musa Maronis
Haec satis enumerem, subsint aut verba volenti.
But now her cries have peirced the Clouds, and he that said he would come,
does come full of vengeance, with phials of wrath in his hand to pour upon
those who have so sore oppressed her. I did voluntary forego her woe, and
Sacrificing to the lusts of my own mind, I lul'd the world a sleep, that the
throne which I was building, for the greatness of my name, might rise more
safely, I had erected a kind of Inquisition through the whole Land, and none
dared so much to look stern upon the face of Episcopacy, (though they had been
most eminent in all the graces of the Spirit) but presently behoved to be
crushed; I had so cunningly interlaced the Image of the Beast, with His
Majesty's Pourtrait, that none durst inveyagainst the one, but presently
behoved to injure the other (thus caught within the compass of Treason,) by a
strange Divinity, assuring the world, that the Crown could not flourish on the
Kings head, without the Fellowship of a Miter; All my pretentions were deeply
gilded with the Beams of Authority, which through Inadvertencie, and fashion
of Times, I made Usher in such strangers, as deflored the Church, abused the
State, and dishonored the whole Dominion.

When the seeds of Arminianisme, Superstition, and Popery, (by my Episcopal
law more tendering the honor of Hierarchy, then the Gospels integrity)
simplicity had been very Luxuriant, and overrun the whole Vineyard, I knew
that as Rome was now filled with joy, for the fair hopes of our return to her,
so was England, and all the Churches reformed choakt with fear and sorrow; For
alas, even as the Earth looks sad, and sullen, at the Suns departure, and
every Tree, every flower puts forth a tear when he renews his comfort, Why do
not we conceive the lovers of the Spirit of truth, must be dismayed, wounded in
heart, and clothed in sorrow when truth is banished from out the face of the
Earth. Yet would I never make scruple (out of zeal to that Spiritual Monarchy)
to tread down all those who were bold to speak against the calamities of Times,
iniquities of the Times, and the injuiries done to the Gospel, though we must
all confess the Spirit of Truth, did powerfully dwell in them. I suppressed
them, removed them, and send them in banishment beyond Sea, thereby depriving
Church and Commonwealth of their Christian help, both in Religion, and Policy;
But my own Creatures, willing Instruments to promote my Counsels, and
Projects, were most solemnly advanced to the places in Church and State. Thus
We went on, kept our correspondence, and ordored our game by such a strange
cunning, and violence, that there remains a black History for our deeds, which
will hardly meet with belief in other Churches.

By the whole Current of my carriage, by my practices, ways, motions, and
intelligence ye knew, alas, that I was about that great work of the Whore of
Rome, (in such sort that some of the Pasquils of the time have Charactered me
Her laborious Pander) to make the possession of World Hers, and derogate from
the glory of the Gospel, and honor of Kings. O be ashamed for so miserably
prostituting your selves, and your souls to the domineering pride of my humor,
in fomenting my Popish intentions, constantly followed by you, as if we had
jointly conspired to the overthrow of Truth and Religion.

And because the Printers Press did often speak the times, and tell the world
the mystery of my Episcopising, therefore did I arrogate to my self the keys
thereof, and making the power of Printing depend on me, did shut and open the
same at my pleasure. Neither durst any book though never so richly embellisht
with the treasures of piety and wisdom once appear, until by a supercillious
license my Canonicke Secretaries had first found it relish deeply of the Romish
and Arminian poison. And as I was the rule of doctrine, intending and remitting
the qualities of Sermons, as the conditions of times required, So were many
Pulpits profaned with Heresies, Revilings, and Scurrilous reproaches; Nay,
wherein have I restrained my insolent, and unbridled mind in the pursuit of my
superstitious follies? What Statute Civil or Ecclesiastical cannot rise up
against me, and argue guilty? To show how I have framed new Constitutions,
Ceremonies without number, which infest the world daily more and more, Canons,
and Articles, and Oaths, printed, published, and forced upon the people? How
we have dared to grant Licenses, and make presumptuous Dispensations? How we
have kept Courts, made all our Processes, Summons, Citations, and Censures in
our own name, and style, it would make a History as long as tedious to the
World, as shameful to my abhorred self: They are written with the point of a
Diamond on all the Church windows, every letter whereof to me is a nigrum
Theta; for it must be confessed, that I and my furious faction so ordered all,
until all was put out of frame, making the Kingdom the object of pity,
lacerate with many miseries and distresses, and my self of too just an hate,
thereby giving occasion to the Enemies of the Gospel, to sing Te Deum, and to
the Church of England to cry Ichabod. And never more justly then now might it
be said, Men groan from out of the City, and the souls of the wounded cry out.

But I forbear to enlarge my self, and afflict you with the sad relation of
these conveyances wherein ye had a great hand, and to which ye are privy,
only let me confound my self, before the World in this Declaration concerning
my tyranny in the Scottish affairs, because it is the most eminent, and funest
act of the Tragedy, and has proved most effectual to my perdition, and from
thence unde dolor and lachrymae, put forth a Prophecy to you of these evils,
which will certainly come upon you likewayes, break you asunder, and shake you
to pieces, if you stop your ears, and still hate to be reformed, when He that
is the confidence of all the ends of the earth, has now revealed himself so
powerfully, and answered the expectation of the upright creature by terrible
things, in Righteousness; for I know the end of your hopes, and gave expansion
to my soul to seek the things of this world, and not of God, but now, behold,
I stand upon the stage of mortality like an accursed tree, the miserable object
of this age, groan under the hatred of three Kingdoms, able to crush all the
Miters in England, ready to be teared by the wrath of mine Enemies, who sharp
their eyes against me.

Not content with that absolute Power which the error and consuetude of Times,
and the indulgence of Princes (importuned with restless ambition) suffered to
fall upon me here in the English Church, I would needs dilate my self like
a swollen cloud of infection, to obscure the light, to poison the air, and to
trouble the calm, and serenity of other Kingdoms; I could not endure that
other Churches should look grievously, and a squint upon our manner of
government. For I must confess, my intentions were deep and large, against
all the reformed Churches, and Reformation of Religion, which through his
Majesty's Dominions I had wounded to the very soul, so that it lay grovelling,
and panting on the ground ready to expire, if I had not been removed, and our
plots detected to the glory of God, to the honor of King and Parliament, to
the terror of the wicked, and comfort of all those who have bin laboring
after the beauty of these times, and would have bought these acceptable days
with many thousands.

For this purpose, I made the first assault on the weakness of Scotland, (as
in my light estimation I conceived, but was destitute of the Spirit of
Prophecy) and caused to be compiled a Service book for their devotion,
obtruding the same upon their Church, which I knew the tenderness of their
conscience could no ways endure; yet by my own counsel I was cast down; for
though I knew well it was nothing else but a strange Rhapsody of all unclean
things and unsavory, which once received in the bowels of Church or State, could
never give rest, till like a virulent poison it had begotten intestine war in
the body Ecclesiastic and Civil. I knew likewayes it overturned from the
foundation the order of their Church, making a large entry to all Novations to
come, being repugnant to the Doctrine, Discipline, and order of their
Reformation, to their Confession of Faith, Constitutions of their General
Assemblies, and Acts of their Parliament establishing true Religion; yet would
I needs enforce that book upon a Nation, which sooner would have welcomed the
Plague, the Famine, and the Sword. Hence did spring this terrible combustion,
(which I fear shall no other ways be quenched, then by the blood of that
faction which caused the same) now threatening with open mouth, and implacable
fury to devour us all; When the Scots affrighted with such an unknown Monster
had in most humble manner prostrate themselves to authority, and craved a
dispensation, from that imprestable obedience, not able to drink that poison
which I had so imperiously presented to them, as if Supreme Majesty had been
violated, Monarchy affronted, and a Royal Prerogative many ways injured, I
armed Authority against them, and made such strange pretenses, dissembling a
Zeal to the honor of the Crown (which mean while I was trampling
under-foote) that any thing behoved to be done, all the Treasures of Revenge
were to be wasted, before his Majesty's command did not meet with full
obedience; but the suggestions and motions were ever mine, most palpably to
blow up all, and involve all in conflagration.

All the Supplications (both pious and frequent) the Declarations,
Informations, and Reformations (to which none of us could ever reply) of that
afflicted Nation, I caused to be suppressed most diligently (not able to stand
before such a Light, and fearing they should work the overthrow of our cause)
and procured them to be answered, with terrible Proclamations. And when they
were constrained to use the remedy of protestation, without any scruple or
trial of the business, (like an undistinguishing fire that delights to feed it
self by embracing all Objects) I caused them be declared and published, in all
the Churches of England, Traitors, and Rebels; And lastly when they were
seeking to possess their Religion against my strange devices, and Novations, I
Kindled the fatal war, and rather then I should fall from my counsels, and
have any of my intentions cast back on my face, I chosed to cover the whole
Island with blood.

And therefore having once espoused the Roman quarrel, I caused display an
open banner and mustered my forces, called forth my Squadrons (as if religion,
and the honor Royal had been lying at the stake) and set forth an Episcopal
Expedition for defense of the Mitre, which in end will be covered with ashes in
despite of all created powers. But o ye of little providence, for what all
this fury? Where were your souls? And why did none of us foresee the black
success of such destructive, distempers, and unmercifull extremities? But this
was our hour, our very hour, wherein we were wise to our own destruction.

Thus when by our working the Land was divided in two Armies, advanced and
brought in view of each other, yet not so much as a Dog to offend; When all
matters were sweetly composed, and by a Pacification as undesired as unexpected
of us both Nations had comforted themselves with the hopes of peace and
quietness, then like an angry wind that lays bare the very ocean, or like
fire imprisoned, I burst forth and spread my self with greater violence, and
could not give rest to my mind, till a new war was kindled, and all things for
their destruction with a fresher resolution then before prepared against them.
How I bestirred by self both at the Counsel Table, and privy Juncto, to
reproach all his Majesty's Royal intentions of peace with his Subjects, and
that Pacification as dishonorable, and fit to be broken, ye can all bear me
record. I controlled the judgment of the whole Kingdom and Parliament. And
though they found no just reason and emergencie for war, yet because I
apprehended our Kingdom was like to make a fatal end, and our Babel was
trembling, ready to tumble down about our ears, and that there was no safety
left but to build upon the ruins of their confusion, Therefore in politic
probability I thought it most fit to shake all, and put all in divisions and
disorders, that so we might work our own safety, and the redemption of
Hierarchy from the public reproach, fishing in troubled waters: Thus in my
graceless fagacity, I concluded it good counsel to bring both Kingdoms
nearer to ruin, that being made poor and passive, they might be ruled with
the more ease.

It is not unknown to you all how impudently, and blasphemously I railed
against that Covenant of Scotland, (which like a terrible Spear in the hand of
the mighty has stricke^ us through the very soul, and must triu^ph through the
world, to the abolishing of that great Bishop, if we observe the indeniable
finger of a Providence) though it was most true that the same did contain
nothing but the marrow of Religion, was approved by National Assemblies,
subscribed by his Majesty's Commissioners, and by the Lords of his Majesty's
Counsel, and by them commanded to be subscribed by all the Subjects of that
Kingdom, as a testimony of their duty to God and the King. Though the
beautiful face of Religion which did shine there most gloriously, and all these
warrants in a moral way could have justified them, and taught me better
manners, yet I would break through all considerations, and make good my
mistake, using that power whereof I was in possession to the effectual
embracements of my own wishes. As they used all means to approve themselves to
God and Man, and deliver unto their Posterity the true Religion in her purity
and majesty, So I profess my study was to render them odious, charging with
unquestioned guilt these Subjects that endeavored to gain his Majesty's favor
and were most faithful to his Crown, and dignity.

When the Parliament could not be induced to descend into war against a
Nation, maintaining their Religion, and Liberties, I did impede their
procedings, and stop their Resolutions, as if they had met for no other
purpose, then to give up their Judgments to me, and evidence their devotion
to my corrupt ends. And not only did I advise the breaking up of that high and
honorable Court of Parliament, (on which all the Eyes of Europe were fastened,
and whence the reformed Churches expected refreshment) but did like-ways sit
still in the Convocation house, making Canons and Constitutions: Ordaining
under all highest pains, that hereafter the Clergy should preach four times
in the year such Doctrines as were contrary not only to the Scottish
proceedings, but to the Doctrines and proceedings of other Churches, to the
Judgment of all sound Divines, and Politiques, and tending to the utter
slavery, and ruining of all Estates, and Kingdoms, and to the dishonor of
Kings, and Monarchs. Not content herewith, I procured six Subsidies to be
levied of the Clergy, under pain of deprivation to al who should refuse for
this great exigency, and Holy war. And as if all these had not been sufficient
(O hide your faces, and blush for shame) I caused frame and print a Prayer, and
sent through all the parishes of England, to be said in time of divine Service,
against that Nation by the name of traitorous Subjects having cast off all
obedience to their anointed Sovereign, and coming in a rebellious manner to
invade England, that shame might cover their faces, as enemies to God and the
King. Here let horror and wonder sease your soul, and all Religion and C^dor
be ashamed; if these alas be the fruits of the spirit of truth, and peace, or
the words of charity or the ways of the Gospel God and the World will judge.

Many strange oaths I invented pressing them upon the pain of imprisonment and
huge pecuniall mulets. And in that sacred Synod (as we called it, but God is
not mocked) was that love-lock of Antichrist forged, that prodigious that
bottomless and unlimited oath coined, which was provided most prudently as
bonds and chains to ty the laity from invading our liberties which we
conceived to be powerfully fortified with our imperiors Canons as a Rampard: So
that if the wisdom of the State, in the great counsel and supreme Senate of
the Kingdom, should think fit to alter any thing hereafter in the government
of the Church, we gloried in this as a Masterpiece of providence, to
anticipate and forestall their judgment by making them swear before hand to
damnable heresies (for why should I now dissemble) That the government of
Archbishops, Bishops, Deacons, etc. (A strange mishap in Monster with a Dragons
tail, not sprung from Scripture,) is jure divino, and that they should never
give consent to any alteration. This was a heavy yoke, and strong fetters cast
upon Christian liberty. Ye all know what means we used in that our Conclave
to make all sure against the storm that threatened us: for the motive of our
meeting was not the peace and purity of the Church, (nay, we threw oil in the
flame) nor the extirping of heresies, (for day after day they set up their
abominable heads, and came forth as Locusts out of the pit) and establishing
the truth, in the power of doctrine and discipline; but to assure our
Episcopacie, and exalt Hierarchy, which was now fainting and languishing under
the weight of so many reproaches ready to expire. If we dare not for the
illegality of these Canons, appear before that powerful Sun-beame (the
Estates of Parliament) which does melt us like Snow, and make us ashamed like
Bats and Owls, where shall we stand for their impiety in the great day of our
reckoning.

These, o these be the trophies of my triumph, these be the garlands adorning
my Mitre, which are now desperately blasted with the angriest thunder that ever
fell upon an ambitious hea^, which shall be likeways shortly turned to Cypress
at my unlamented funerals. The black cloud of dishonor hangs over me, and I am
drowned in shame; I am now the despised prey of the world, the noisome
spectacle of this age, example of justice to all those who dare crucify the
harmless truth, disgrace the beauty of the glorious light, resist the graces
of the Gospel, stifle the rays of Majesty with impure smoke, and drink with
open throat the intoxicate cup of accursed preferment, which taints the
judgment, and poisons the heart: And therefore on the bended knees of my soul
let me entreat you, to cast your eyes upon me, not for pity and wonder only,
but to hate those things which have plunged me in this depth of misery. Go
measure the height of your hopes, examine the very life and strength of my
happiness, and compare it with that weight of anguish, that mighty trouble of
mind, those heavy disappointments, the loss of reputation, that bitter hatred
(one dram of which evils, drowns the memory of all my forsaken follies, and
deceitful policies) and let this sad and serious remonstrance beget in you a
perfect hatred of my ways, opinions and practices, and bring forth in your
melting souls, a tender love to the peace of the Church: as you would embrace
your own eternal weal.

For behold I had lately established my self upon the tops of the Mountains,
and thought I could not be removed, and flourishing like a Bay tree, the
terror of three Nations, feared at home, reverenced abroad, (in such sort that
the Romish Church thought her self meritoriously acquit, when she made eminent
mention of me in her prayers, as of the Rulers of Kingdoms, and Princes of
the earth, that God would bless so worthy a Prelate, and the great work in
his hands) But now I pass away, and my memory stinketh, Lo, there are no more
eyes in the 3 Kingdoms, nay, in all the Neighbor Churches almost, then are
bent against me, and setting me up as a mark, do shoot their anger at me, and
gaze at me with outstretched necks: Consider this, and look a little how
abject I am now, and how they have pestred me, every mouth is filled with
railings, and I remain the subject and recreation of the more frolic pens.
The World has consulted with my fate, and found nothing but tyranny contained
in the leaf of my destiny, which they have picked out in the anatomy of my name,
as if I had been a man set apart for the abuse of Churches and Kingdoms,
while one does persecute me with this Anagram,

WILLIAM LAUD. Anagram. I made will Law.

SP'rit of Delusion, Church and State
Have found this wrapped in thy black fate:
Thou rearedst forth the Canon law,
And trembling madst them stand in aw,
And both the Scepters swaya'st, but now
Thy Mitre tumbles from thy brow,
Thy mask is torn, and we do see
The flames of thine adulterate eye,
'Twas from the North was heard the voice
Making all England to rejoice,
Which first betrayed thee to thy shame,
And did display thy stinking fame:
With tyrant Laws, and Iron rod,
Thou made the prouder Mountains nod
And Caedars reel, Thence thou would try
The Artick Pole, and reach the Sky,
But thence great terrors, lightnings, thunder
Did tear thy throne, thy self asunder,
And drowned thee in eternal night
Proud and counterfeited light.
It Is reason scurvy Mitres fall,
Before base Statesmoles sink us all.
If this be the world's estimation, how is my Garland now humbled, and laid in
the dust? where is that honor, that usurped power by which I knew well how to
muzzell the times, and correct the petulancy of the bolder pens? but now they
are filled with the venom of Asps, and cast forth floods of gall upon me. Lo
here another monument of my fame, for I thought good to show you with what
honorable Elegies they resolve to attend my Hearse, that ye may be acquainted
with your Panegyricks before they be engraven on your Tomb, no kind recompense
they will allow you nor such as this.

LIke to a blazing Comet in the North
Drowning the Neighbor Stars, and casting forth
A flood of fire, that poisoned all the air,
And darkn'd the light, thou did ere-while appear,
Sulphurous Meteor, dangling in thy sky,
Thou thoughtst thou could the Sun with beauty die,
And Soveraignly presumedst to dispense
On everything thy usurped influence.
Base, putrid vapor, which some gentle rays,
When Phoebus smiling on the Center plays,
Has lately but exhaled, and with his beams
Has so so deeply gilded, that it seems
Thou art a Star indeed, 'Cause thou did mock
The Moon and heavenly bodies, and provoke,
Climbing with jealousy as to a crown,
Like Lucifer thou dyest, and art thrown down.
Here is likeways the lash of another unmercifull pen; It is my glory to abhor
my self, and I must present these little flourishes to you who like Camelions
feed on the air of popularity, that in them as in a mirror, ye may discover
the mind of the people, and their propension to hate you as Vipers and
Serpents, enemies to mankind.

Laud tibi Laudis nomen malefacta dedere,
Vt sine Laud praeis, sic sine Laud peris,
Perniciem in patriae natus, Regisque ruinam es,
Nequam es consiliis, alter and Achitophel:
Hic natum in Patrem docuit fera bella movere,
Tu natum in Matrem bella ciere doces.
Vt tibi perfidiis fuit ille exemplar iniquis,
Sic tibi sit mortis unica norm atuae
I morere ut meritus, laqueoque averte laborem
Carnificis, Patriae carnificina tuae.
A comfortless comparison and sad sentence: but what will not a provoked
people (alas too justly provoked) say in the heat of their rage? all language
is too narrow. If you will have more evidences of the universal distaste, and
know how perfectly odious I am, cast your eyes upon this following Satyr,
where they have stretched themselves to the furthest extent of language, and
made me as well a Devil, as a Tyrant, resolving my name thus,

WILLIAM LADE. Anagram. I am a Devil.

THen like a fury poast to Tartarus,
Ungentle Monster, and depart from us,
Sink to the brazen-gated deep Abyss,
And there iriumph, Quaff Stygian Nonacris.
Now, now the Tale-tell God displays his light,
To show the world the horror of thy night;
At whose approach perfuming all the Air
With Spicie vapors, Spirits must disappeare.
Hence, hence, on sorrow and revenge to feed,
Go pulla Viper from Alectoe's head;
Like angry winds go whip the Stygian Lake,
And Rodomanthoes Iron throne make shake;
Go swallow Lightnings, dart thy prouder thunder,
Fill hell, as earth, with horrors, fear, and wonder.
We make more heavenly Music at thy fall,
Then all the Spheres that dance about the ball.
Here comes forth another full of spite as the Grape ready to burst, and
shoots his arrows against me, whose poison does make my spirit to smart.

To the memory of the true Labourer in the Roman Cause, the Prelate of
Canterbury.
LAborious Pander to the Whore of Rome,
Thou Have acted bravely, and deserve a room
Above all those who could divide, confound,
And raze a Church, and Kingdom to the ground.
Thou sprung'st most proudly with aspiring vole
Which could not stoop but to the Capitole.
The Church, the State, lay panting under neath
Thy pestring foot, and durst not once but breath
A sigh, or groan, nay, though the times we sie
Were bleeding forth their soul, yet durst not cry.
Thou pick'st the Diamonds from the Diadem
TO adorn the Mitre, and t'exalt the name
Of Prelacy'bove power Secular,
Which shines beside your Moon, but like a Star.
Dread Prelat Lambethan, thou shall be known
Where ere the Roman Eagle yet has flown:
Nor Becket, Wolsey, nor the hot-braind Crew,
Who did the harmless Truth so sore pursue,
Gregorian Calendar have beautified,
So nobly as thou in Rubricks deified.
It Is true enraged times may sacrifice
Thee for thy zeal, laugh forth thine Elegies,
And make thee a Proverb, yet the Lady of lands
Which does embrace the World, amazed stands
And weeps thy loss, the Consistoriall train,
His Holiness himself, do much complain,
And swear they have loosed the Arch-feather of their wings
By which they used to soar above the Kings:
Therefore about each Altar shall they Bays
Throng most solemnly, incense of thy praise
Shall stream through every grieved Cathedral,
While all the bells tole forth thy funeral.
Thus am I tossed and made the scorn of time, they hold it good service to the
present age, and posterity, to limne me in an hideous hue, and contend whose
pen shall be most pungent, and victorious in the Pasquill: These same Palms are
springing and ripening for you, if ye continue to incense the impetuous
people, now in a dangerous agitation, which though oftentimes undistinguishing,
yet nothing mistaken in me.

I desire therefore to entreat you, and conjure you all, in the power of
passion, to be no more heirs of my institutions and designs, but rather be
astonished, putting on wonder, and pity: for I must tell you, some think that
Prophecy (thirteen Revel. at the last) about the beast coming out of the
earth, which spoke as a Dragon, even now to be fulfilled, and the mystery
thereof revealed in my name, the numerall letters whereof being thus written
WILL. LAVD make directly the number of the Beast.

I am the Beast count it that can,
This is the number, I am the Man.
If this co^mentary be not accurate, yet sure the envy is exact, which should
beget remorse and fear in me, and wisdom in you, for it will not forbear you
when your cup shall be full. O the revolution of times, o the hopes of man! How
happy is he who is prepared for all the turnings of the World? I must be
shortly dissolved, brethren, and have faithfully (as becomes one in the last
Article of his tim^) cast open to you the inner cabinet of my heart, where you
may see the very fountain and root of all my woes, and learn to correct the
perverseness of your own souls, and come out of Babell, as you would fly from a
falling Tower. Let my words be precious to you, my condition terrible, and this
my lamentation, which I have

Bathed in dearest tears of bitter grief,
That ever sought to language for relief.
Unmaske your eyes, and reclaim you from that spiritual adultery, whereby ye
have so grievously profaned the chastity of Religion, and given offense to the
Reformed Churches. O with what exact humility would I cast my self in the
bosom of that truth which I have wounded, if I thought my return would be
gracious to the World. I know of what spirit ye be, and in the days of my
labor did swell with that happiness which ye all promise to your selves. But
take knowledge from me who has bought it at so dear a rate, and assure your
selves that the hopes of the Righteous shall be gladness, when the expectation of
the wicked shall perish. Truth must triumph.

What shall I do to enforce this great Resolution which concerns you as the
life of your souls? Even to quit that your darling which you have hugged so
dearly; To lay by your Rochets, renounce your Episcopacie, which has ever been
the very root of all these Ceremonies which this day do infest the world, and
have of old produced the mystery of iniquity: Once begin to entertain this
thought that you are fighting against the heavens, and forsake those things
which do so evidently soment the combustions of the Christian world.

How many Rites, and Orders, and Ceremonies, and Comic follies, and novations
(which are not confined to number, but still springing up after the vanity of
the imagination of the heart of man) do attend that Antichristian Prelacie, as
the tail of the Comet does follow the imperfect mistion of the evanishing body,
which must all be drowned in the clouds of shame, when the Sun comes forth in
Majesty like a valiant Champion, to chase ungracious darkness from the face of
heaven and earth? O be ashamed, for all that is dear to you in heaven or in
earth be ashamed, for the peace of your mind, for the worlds reputation, and
the welfare of your dear Primitive Mother the Church, be ashamed of these
Lordly dignities, that abhorred pre-eminence. No wonder we have so long
troubled the calm of Church and Commonwealth, because being lift up to the
unnatural places of preferment, we are out of our Element, and so cannot give
rest to our selves, nor the world. It Is no time to stand out any more,
multitude of days may teach you wisdom; God is thundering from above, and in a
vein of working miracles. The mystery of inquity is now perfectly revealed,
and the world begins to be weary of that tyranny and Iron rod, which so cruelly
has bruised the powers of the earth, and twiched with repentance, shall shortly
swell with the spirit of revenge; Join therefore cheerfully hand in hand to
this Reformation: Behold, the voice of the Turtle is heard in the Land. Night
is gone, the day is come, even the day of his power, the beauty of his
holiness; for now he will make known the strength of his Kingdom, and his
Subjects shall be multiplied as the dew from the womb of the morning. Can ye
restrain the influence of his will? Or make his eternal purpose of no effect?
O remember that ye magnify this great work which men behold, The Nations
that knew no God shall rejoice at it, The noise thereof shall go to the ends
of the World. Enquire of the days of old, and ask the Generations past, since
this Island was blessed with the prerogative of the Gospel (whereat the rest
of the World may stand jealous, and amazed) if ever the Revelation of the Glory
of God, was working more powerfully. Nay, certainly, it must be confessed, if
we believe the Scriptures, that as the great Bishop of Bishops, That Man of
Sin, that has so long deluded the Kings of the Earth, making them worship vain
imaginations, must be swept out of the Church, and be destroyed, So now, even
now the disenchanted World thrusts at his very soul through our sides. And
those who are more inward with the Spirit of discerning, and observe the
advancing of the Prophesies, and long after the riches of the Gospel to be
powered forth upon the fullness of Nations, have joyfully found; in these times
a very strange revolution, and that the powers of heaven are shaken, as if it
had been mystically foretold in the 111 Psalm, Verse 3. (...) 400 4 40 70
(...) 6 400 100 4 90 6 (...) 6 30 70 80 (...) 200 4 5 6 (...) 46. 5 (...) 4 70
30
whose numerall Letters produce directly the strange year, even the year
1640, wherein by the dread Covenant of Scotland most especially, and ever since
by the deportments of the children of peace and terror, the God of Truth
seemed to make a vow against us. This computation does hold in English, As in
the Hebrew, HIs Work Is Honorable, anD Glorious, anD hIs Righteousness
enDVrech for eVer, Which cannot be but strange, and joined with the consonancy
of times abroad and at home, and the congruity of spirits and humors of men,
might charge you with this sad acknowledgment, and beget in you a curiosity to
observe what God is doing.

We must indeed be forced to acknowledge from the sense of our losses, from the
daily decreasing of our glory, and the advancements of our enemies, since that
great year 1640 (which by after ages shall be observed as the times of
Babylonish confusion) That the Lord has been with them wonderfully, that we
have been deserted in every particular, and tumbling from a precipice day by
day, so that it were madness to think we shall recover our game, or attain
to the tops of the Mountains from whence we are fallen: This assistance, and
the very time of the beginning of this reformation is observed by the more
curious to have been promised, as it were, and intimated in the 2 Chronicles. 15. 2.
in these. The LorD Is with You WhILe ye be WIth hIM, whose numerall letters,
fulfill the same year. But howsoever those curiosities hold, prophesies are no
more mysteries, when mysteries are unvailed, and become Histories, for we have
found those times, the beginnings of a revolution, which tend to great and
effectual alterations, which have given such a swing to the whole fabric of
our Kingdom, that the ligatures thereof are shaken. Nay, though we should use
all nature and art to cement the same, it shall not avail, it shall not
prosper, because the finger of God is against us.

We need not strain arguments afar, to bring this home to your indocile
souls, and possess you with this assurance, that there is a great work begun
which shall be consummate with glory, to the joy of the friends of the Gospel,
and utter confusion of the enemies of Peace and Truth; and that in the Church
of England likewayes, there is certainly a Reformation to be looked for, as in
the Church of Scotland, which has (to the great emulation of the dis-heartned
people here, in this hour of hope, promising to themselves a certain relief)
so restored Religion and Truth to their splendor and purity (through the
particular finger of God) that this day it is the measure of the desires, and
the height of the wishes, of all distressed Churches to be established in the
comforts of such a Reformation as they now enjoy.

If the purpose of God by the condition of these times, and this strange
working, be not manifested to you, advise with Politic probability (ye that
are Jesuited Statists) and behold how every thing strugles for our confusion.
The winds are let loose from all the corners of the earth, and spread
themselves furiously: All men's affections decay almost, and are loosed to the
Leaders of that great cause, for which we have poured out our souls (but
unprofitably as waters spilt on the ground). For though to the gloriation of
Papists (which they have openly, and insolently declared in print) the face of
our Church was changed, and the language thereof altered, yet now consider the
temper of men's minds, the strength of their wishes, and power of their
affection. Nothing but universal detestation, and averseness from us, and our
ways, nothing but an inclination well followed, with the maturity of times, to
the contrary in all points. For the people, like a field of standing corn
moved by a stiff gale, do all bow their heads one way, or like a strong tide
chased by the wind do all make but one current.

There is likeways a certain quickening, and agitation, and expectation in the
spirits of men, to believe, and hope for the beauty of Reformation, and our
utter removal, according as they have been (no question) effectually praying,
and of late in an extraordinary manner, reporting the comfort of a sure
confidence. Now tell me if ye conceive it possible, that so great a work, so
eminently assisted by him who holds the ends of the world in his hands, can be
deserted, but that it shall be crowned with the Copestone, else they had losed
their prayers, and the strength of their wit, by which we confess they
prevail, for He that is the God of their Covenant marches on like a man of
war, and will notstay, till the Antichrist be pulled down, and his Enemies be made
his footstool, and the Jews and Gentiles called in. We have seen the goings
of God the King in the Sanctuary. This is the day, and the work of the Lord
terrible in our eyes, wherein the Judgment of the great Whore that sits over
many waters shall be shown.

Moreover, the fautors and instruments of this great work, have p^inted their
truth, and their actions with a Sunbeam, and so strongly seized the judgments
of the World, that now every soul is warmed, filled with wonder, and rests
sweetly convinced. With us and our faction, nothing but a benumbed sullenness,
and a profound silence; We are all given over to the spirit of slumber; Our
pens are plagued with a lethargy, Though your Prelacie be now lying gasping,
yet there is none almost that dare own it, not any to encounter those papers
which come forth in Squadrons, displaying the Banner of Truth, to captivate
every understanding, and will, to the obedience thereof. Lay your hands on your
mouth: for we are not all able to restore that Monster to its wonted dignity,
and height of power, nor fetch its pedigree from Heaven, or show how the same
ought to be welcomed in the World, or can be useful, and expedient in a
Christian Republike: no we should fail, though we concentrat our wits, and
alambique our spirits. There is one, indeed, who has afflicted his
understanding, and wearied his pen in the defense thereof, and now of late,
with a new assault, tendered his Remonstrance to the Parliament, humbly
entreating the Honorable Court, to let the poor, miserable, torn thing, breath
a while, but alas, think not that noble Senate (to whose wisdom all Europe
do pay their tributary gazes) will any longer nourish such Snakes, and keep
Serpents in their bosom, for it cannot be but they must resent their smarts,
and think we have sting'd them with a dangerous poison, which has mortally
defiled all the veins of the Politic and Ecclesiasticke body. How ready man's
corruption is to any thing, which can give warrant, or colored pretense to his
ambition, may well appear by his livelesse Apology, wherein his Arguments are
not so much Christian, as wrested from Antiquity. Yet ye that are the Fathers
of the Church might well know, it was not so from the beginning, Truth did
precede erroar, and drive the point home to the Source, it shall be clear.
Antiquity is no patrociny for error, and prescription no prejudice to Truth,
his reasons do as much befriend the Romish Hierarchy as militate for the
English Episcopacie, and much more easy it is to answer them, then to find
them out.

But I pray you why do not we follow the safest way, most free of Ceremonies
and offenses? Which among us can reproach all this while the Government of the
Scottish Church? And dare we deny but it is most agreeable to the simplicity
of the Gospel? And a surer Rampard against the prevalencie of Herefies?
whether of the governments, their Presbyteriall, or our splendide, and
magnifick Orders are more co^sonant to the Apostolic and Primitive, and least
approaching to the Romish? What Office-bearers among them, which ye find not in
the Scriptures? Or any pre-eminence, and relation, of a Minister to a Minister,
being both of one degree? Nay, give over the game which must be lost, ye know
if the Antichrist must fall that we can hardly stand; If the Ocean be dried up,
whence shall the Rivers come?

It cannot be denied, but'wee have moved swiftly and boldly. And to say we
have nothing advanced to Rome, and forsaken the clear waters of the Gospel,
evaporated, and dispirited the powers of Religion, it were an impudence beyond
wonder, which all the Reformed Churches would cast back on our faces with
shame. Nay, we have dethroned Truth, and builded Altars to Error and
Superstition, chasing Christ out of the Church, and making an holy place for
Antichrist; from Kings likewayes have we wrested Authority, torn the Crown,
and adorned the Mitre, in such sort that the God of all the World may well say,
We have reigned, but not by him, We have made our selves Princes, but he knew
it not. If it be not so, what then means the lowing of the Oxen, and the
bleating of the Sheep? Whence the huge number of Ceremonies? The continual
increase of Novations? The authorizing of Id^l^^^^ by Church Canons? Whence the
communion of words, and practices, with Romanists? For it is very unbeseeming
the people of God to symbolize with Idolaters, and the Enemies of God, (whether
in their manner of worship or government) where there is no necessity. The Jews
would not speak though it were but half the speech of Ashod. And when the world
cries out against us, charging our profession with these great dishonours done
to the Name of God, we have no other hole to creep in, nor any better answer
to return, then the Papists have for avoiding the stain of that abomination,
which this day cuts the hearts of the Jews, and Reformed Churches. Now, to
think that the Truth shall ever be born down, and not once set up his
victorious head, Nay, in this same Article of Time, wherein it has received
such strength, and power, and Majesty, and has dispersed the clouds, which we
of a long while have been diligently assembling, were egregiously to be
infatuate, and if ye continue to let these hopes smile upon you ye are
certainly finally demented, and fitted to perdition, examples and forerunners
of that great wrath, appointed for those who had their eyes upon our returns,
and expected the propagation of their Kingdom from us.

But if all other things should hold their peace (ye that are witnesses to this
great reformation, and upon whom these happy days have fallen) hear how this
late Covenant does cry aloud; even this great Covenant, sworn, and sealed so
solemnly. Do not ye see how they hold out their arms to embrace it, and think
they have found a Sovereigne balm for all the wounds in Church and State, if
happily applied? Have they not hereby as it were taken the Sacrament for our
destruction? What less things can be expected then from the Covenant of
Scotland, which as it has filled the earth with the noise thereof, and made
the Altars of Rome to tremble for fear, so now likewayes has proved a dangerous
precedent, and a strange leading case for our complete rain? Of what strange
productions can this be the forerunner? Are all these motions, these
solemnities of new resolutions, to which the people have so willingly espoused
themselves, to no purpose? Can all this be for the upholding of our Kingdom?
Or do not ye rather perceive a streaming Banner displayed against you? Have
not they combined themselves with immovable thoughts, to extirpate all
unnecessary follies, and novations which are the very soul of our glory, and
the beams of our splendor? Have they not cut our hairs wherein our strength
does lie, made us bald, and discovered our shame, and who may not invade us
securely? No, no, do not disdain these great appearances; from the root of this
Covenant shall spring a Tree whose top shall reach the Heaven, and under the
branches thereof shall the Nations of the earth hide themselves; it shall
increase and flourish as the goodly Cedars of Lebanon, but our contemptible
plant, which the heavenly Father has not planted, shall be pulled up, and die.
Tell me, ye that can discern the face of the weather, and pretend to know the
times and seasons, does not every day look more black and ugly? What
kindness have we found of God, or what conquest of friends have we made
amongst men, since the times began to be shaken? Does not every day pull a
feather from our wings, by which we used to work so high, till the vapors of
the earth could not reach us? Quae nos dementia coepit to think we shall ever
recover of these wounds already inflicted, since the arrows are daily
multiplied, and fall on us in showers from all hands; We have strained our
moyen at the Courts of Princes, but they be now justly wearied of us: And he
is reputed neither good Christian, nor understanding Countreyman, neither
pious, nor politic, that dare open his mouth for us. And if we shall lift up
our eyes to Heaven, behold, We cannot say there be more for us, then against
us, We can meet with no consolation, but a devouring sword drawn against the
children of Pride. What Giant plots we have set afoot, and how inseasonably
they are discovered, to our eternal shame, it is now spread like the Suns
light. And though hitherto there were some hopes left, yet now they are all
blasted, and we begin to stink in the eyes of our bosom friends. Our purposes
are unvailed, our intentions, black as darkness, are now made known, and
howbeit we could have joyed before in some of the peoples good graces, yet
these horrible designs, of advocating strange assistance, of soliciting and
covenanting with Papists, of forcing and besieging the very Houses of
Parliament, and doing violence to the whole Kingdom, for upholding our
Grandours, for keeping our venerable Garlands upon our heads, are indeed Acts
able to draw the insupportable weight of public hate upon us, and which might
as deservedly procure us to be cast out of the Church and State, as ever the
Jesuits were turned out of France, and are to this day banished from the
Venetian Republike.

Nor let us any more evanish in this deceit, to think we can move Authority to
lend us a gracious hand, and keep us from sinking: for though the favors we
have found be great, and a merciful Majesty has done much, yet now (it is to
be feared) he will relinquish us, and not undo his State Civil, for
upholding the Ecclesiastic in Accidentals. And when Heaven and Earth combine
against us, and the present estate of affairs deny help, and refuse hope,
Whether shall we fly? There is no balm in Gilead now; Take heed, The winds
are blowing, the floods are coming, and our thunder-stricken building must
down, because not of God.

We have already received sentence from the Honorable House of Commons; their
wisdom and justice have pronounced the peoples mind, and denounced the
Kingdoms pleasure; And though the influence of some frolic faction (now
fugitive as our hopes are) should yet a little prolong the life of our
expectation, and entertain us with a possibility of wrestling through, Tell me
if ever any person did thrive being once condemned by them? It is certainly a
great loss, not to have the Parliaments affection, and very hard (as they say)
to fit in Rome, and strive against the Pope. No, no, Nature and Grace, Time and
Fortune, have taken such a good course to destroy us, that it is impossible we
can be saved without a miracle.

Far, far be it from us to think our contracted, and long accustomed boldness,
and impudency, can any more enveigle the eyes of the World, with that Idol of
Jealousy, which by the corruption of times, through the ambition of man's
unlimited heart, is now exalted to such exorbitancie of height, that become
topheavy, it falls with its own weight. O then forsake, In the bowels of mercy
depart from that willingly, which as you are now deserted of men, will once
make you rejected of God. What is it (alas) to be covered with a Princes wings,
to be warmed with the beams of his favor, to be set up as it were on a
Pyramide, and made the object of wonder, to have such sway, that with the one
foot ye may tread on the Church, with the other crush the State, and so to
monopolize all power, that without you there is nothing but simulachrum
potestatis? What is it I say, all this? Is God mocked? Can ye elude the
thunderbolts of his anger? Can ye be lift up beyond the stroke of revenge?
Can ye give laws to the Spirit of the most high, to mould the times in what
fashion pleases you? Be there not certain fatal periods, as of Houses,
Families, and Co^mon-weals, so likeways a vicissitude of governments? In many
other places has Episcopacie been cast out, neither ever could the face of
Church or Commonwealth look calm, till that Jonas was thrown in the Sea. And
in this disposition of time, when all things smile on them, but frown upon us,
nothing more easy, nothing more absurd, than to flatter our selves with
contrary expectations.

O that I knew what way to induce you powerfully, to contemn that, which is
unwarranted of God, hateful to men, odious to the times, hurtful to the
Church, and in the end will bring a dire destruction upon your selves. Would ye
have signs from Heaven? Remember how all the inventions of our sublimated
policies, assisted by the powers of the time, have failed us very wonderfully,
in every particular, and turned upon our own pates; Look to the continual
progress of our affairs, how all the machinations which we conceived were
sufficiently able, to ripen and produce our designs, have proved steps to
advance our enemies (The great chastisers of the times) and that we have reaped
nothing of all our pains and expenses, but sad disappointments to our selves,
and confusion to our cause.

Put off therefore these vain and unprofitable desires, which are of the World,
and die with the world. The foolish Grandour of your Lordly dignities, is but a
dream and toy of some few decrepit years, which flowne over, will make all the
veins of your heart to shake, It Is but a shadow, in the morning with you, at
night behind you, past and gone.

But now the inexorable messenger of death approaches furiously, and charges
me to remove, The impatient world chaseth me away, and I must be gone: I take
therefore Heaven and Earth to witness against you, that I have not hid my
offenses from you, but spread my self open, and given your discerning eyes a
liberal view of my errors, which have so truly deserved the heaviest censure
which can f^ll from the sword of Justice, advising you as ye would eschew the
wrath to come, and be delivered from the worlds anger, no longer to resist the
Spirit, which prompts the times so powerfully, to solicit the embracements of
the Whore, and by the continual increase of miseries, to expose the Church and
Kingdom, to be a spectacle of pity and laughter to Neighbor Churches, and
Common-weals. And if ye will not forsake your ways, lay down your
Antichristian Offices at the foot of the Church, which ye have so miserably
torn, If you will not divorce your selves, from the lusts of that abominable
pre-eminence, and be strongly devoted to the advancements of this happy
Reformation, which moves so sweetly toward the end of Prophesies, for the
preservation of the glorious light of salvation, and encouragement of Gods
people, I declare in audience of the World, that wrath shall come and fall upon
your necks as Thunder from the Clouds, ye shall die and none lament it.

Thus have I acquit my self: for the spirit within me constrained me. I must
depart, and resign my chair, never to be filled again. Have pity upon me my
friends, for the hand of the Lord is upon me.

FINIS.

