ENGLANDS PETITION TO THE TWO HOUSES Assembled in PARLIAMENT.

OR, An humble Petition of the distressed and almost destroyed Subjects of
England To the TWO HOUSES.

Containing (in the Judgment of the wise) the very sense of all the true
hearted of the Kingdom; but because the way to their Highness ear is stopped,
it was sent to OXFORD, and there Printed, and afterward presented to the
HOUSES,

By N. R.

Know ye not yet that our Canaan is destroyed?

Exodus 10.7. Printed at London, and Reprinted at Oxford. M.DC.XLIII.

TO THE TWO HOUSES ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition of the
distressed and almost destroyed Subjects of the Kingdom of England.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
IT is a double grief to our souls, that we should be contrained to beg for
our lives at Your (our fellow Subjects) hands, who are bound by the Law of God
and nature, and by the Oaths and Protestations that you have taken, to
preserve them; and that we should be forced to entreat you to spare our estates
(which you have nothing to do withal) Liberties and blood, whose honor and
strength depends so much on these our enjoyments: But extremity prevails, and
drives us to You (the grand Court of England) and casts us here prostrate at
your feet; and let not your Greatness be offended, if we speak more plainly
then usually becomes us, for necessity has no Law: It is for our lives and
more, and therefore blame us not to speak, our Friends, our Wives, our
Children, our wants, our dangers, our Country, our blood, do all pierce our
ears and hearts with their daily and doleful cries: O that our requests could
find as quick access to yours!

Surely, it is impossible that you (being so many) should All be ignorant of
the doleful condition His Majesty's two Kingdoms are in: Do ye not know that
our houses are plundered, and the fruit of our long labor taken from us? That
men who have heretofore relieved hundreds of the poor, have not left them a
Bed to lie on, food to sustain them, or a house (except it be a Jail) to put
their heads in? And the poor they were wont to relieve, are become Soldiers,
and rob us (even at noone day) by Your authority? Know you not how many
thousand distressed souls cry to God day and night in their anguish and
misery, while they see you (who have undertaken to relieve them) having no
compassion on them? Oh, where are now those Heroic and renowned Spirits that
have formerly sat in your Seat? They were wont to beat down Heresy and
Schism, to relieve the oppressed, to settle Peace, to suppress Vice, and to
endeavor a general Reformation both in Church and State; but now you foster
Heretics and Schismatics in your bosom, You send Knaves to oppress us and
rob us of all we have, and then imprison our bodies, where many thousand able
and Religious men are ready to starve for want of sustenance. You break the
Peace and beget Rebellion and Confusion in all places. You countenance Vice and
Sin (how ever you would make the gul'd people believe that you are mighty
religious, whilst you zealously pull down Cross^s, and Pharisaically debar
men from works of charity, yea, necessity upon the Lords day, which is to
strain at Gnats and swallow Camells: You have brought in a general
Deformation over the whole Kingdom. They were wont to take order for the
relief of poor oppressed Prisoners at home, and Galley-slaves abroad, but now
the loathsome Prisons of London, Lambeth, Cambridge, Norwi^h, Ipswich,
Yarmouth, Colchester and other places, are filled with their miserable,
starved, diseased bodies, who (some of them) would think themselves half
freemen, were they Turkish Gally-slaves, such is their cruel usage.

Know you not how our Lands lie untilled, whilst your Soldiers take away our
Horses, and tolerate our servants to run from us? And what can follow this
but extreme Famine? Know you not how much precious blood is spilt, and the
dead bodies of the Kings Subjects, yea, many of his Nobles scattered as dung
upon the face of the earth? Have not many of your eyes seen it, and your ears
heard the groans of the wounded gasping for life? Is all this nothing in your
eyes? To whom should we go but unto You, who have taken upon you to relieve us
in our distresses? You have disabled His Majesty from relieving of Himself;
You have bewitched (or by force kept back) his Subjects every where from
coming to His help; we have tried all other known means, and profess in
the sight of God, we know none but you, that can deliver us without more blood
and desolation; and the World knows you may do it if you will, and do it
easily, and do it with increase of your Honor, of your Loyalty, of your
Honesty, of your and the whole Kingdoms safety and happiness. What if it were
to part with some thing of your own wills, and quietly to yield up the bodies
of some few Delinquents and known Traitors to His Majesty, and enemies to the
Peace, to save all the rest of the Kingdom?

Dread Senators, We beseech you consider, what has His Sacred Majesty done
that deserves this from you? Is it because He has relieved you from oppressing
Courts (a Grace beyond president) and biting Taxations? Is it because He has
condescended to the calling of a Trienniall Parliament (a thing never heard of
in former ages) and granted His Royal Assent to the continuance of this as
long as you please? Ought we not all of us for these singular, and unheard of
Acts of Grace, to lay down our lives at His feet? Is it because He has ever
yielded to the punishment of those that are called Delinquents (though it may
be his best friends) and supposed enemies to the Kingdom? If you were a Court
of Justice, as you are the Highest Court, you would do the like to those among
you, that have deserved it But can those be friends to you and worth the
defending, that are enemies to the King and Kingdom? And for His Forts and
Navy which you have taken from him, were they not most of them bought with His
own money? And yet were they not always employed for the Kingdoms good? And
are not you the Kingdom Representative (yet not so as if there were but two --
Wise men in a County and all the rest Fools?) And will you wrong that Trust
that we have reposed in you? It Is true, His Majesty cannot possibly manage all
in His own Person but by His Ministers, and those chosen by Council, and it
has been always judged that none have been more able, impartial, and
faithful to advise Him then His Parliament: but what? shall we call you a
Parliament, when your Head and most of your best Members have deserted you? He
offered not to stir from you till absolute necessity constrained Him, till He
saw Ireland in Rebellion, the Rebels threatening England, the same Spirits as
malignant and active at home, White Hall.
even at His own house, where His own life (we tremble to think of it) was
in present apparent jeopardy, and your consent (since His constrained departure
from you) to all His most gracious Messages denied. We cannot but see the same
Counsels among you setting you on against His Majesty now, which have caused
His so long discontinuance from you, (that they in the mean time might work
their own ends) that caused the Ship-mony and other illegal (though not so
known to His Majesty) Taxations, which caused the late innovations in Church
and State, which caused the war with Scotland, which broke up the last
Parliament, and have caused so many invective Declarations against His Majesty
in the very language of the present times. We cannot possibly conceive what His
Majesty can do now to remedy any of these miseries: We patiently abide your
long sitting in vain; the offenders among you Legally proceeded against, are
defended from His Majesty, yea, those that your selves (if you durst (for fear
of one another) speak your minds) do know to be such: that is denied His
Majesty which is yielded to every Subject in every lowest Court of Justice,
viz: to have a fair trial. We persuade our selves (by those many promises,
and deep Protestations His Majesty has made, that He desires nothing more (if
it might be done with His safety) then to be present with you, and concur
with you, and if your minds had not been so haughty, and your thoughts so
soaring as we find they are, there would not have been so long a distance.
Neither is there any visible means left, but either give up our States,
Liberties, Lives and Religion to the dispose of your too long tried secret
Counsels and Close Commitees, and make your mere Will the only Law (as you
have done ever since the King left you) and so prove disloyal to our
Sovereign, betray our Country and the Trust committed to you (which God
forbid) of else defend our selves (as you do) by the Sword.

And for us the Kings Liege people what have we done that we are made a common
spoil? Would you have us perfidiously to betray His Majesty into your Lauds?
Would you have us prove disloyal unto Him, who has always been so faith
full unto us? to endanger Him, whom God has appointed to save us? Should we be
such unnatural members as to offer violence to our Head? Then should we be the
disgrace of the English Nation, the reproach of posterity, the very shame of
nature, and should presently expect some strange judgment of God according to
the strangeness of our offense.

It Is true we are forced (and it is high time too) to look about us, and (if we
can) to save our throats from the violence of some desperate persons among you,
but we beseech you call not this a bearing Arms against the Parliament, it is
against our wills (God knows) as it is against His Majesty's. But if any of
your party be so respective of His Majesty's Royal authority established by
Law, so truly tender of His Person and Honor, so heartily desirous of a happy
Reformation as we, then let not God prosper our proceedings, but cause us to
fall before you, and give us up into your hands: We are fallen upon by the
cruel, and because we will not give the Nineteenth (according to His Majesty's
Presage) with the Twentieth part of our estates, and break our Oath of
Allegiance, and go contrary to our Protestation, and turn Rebels to His
Majesty, and so damn our souls, we are counted Traitors to the State and
Enemies to the Commonwealth. We beseech you consider in the presence of God
(if you have not forgot that there is a God) if any one of the Lords should run
upon any of you of the Commons with his drawn sword, whether would you suffer
death without resistance, or take the sword pro tempore out of his hand, and
yet neither be averse to his honor and person (if you can possibly think any
of them more Honorable then your selves) or his propriety in his weapon? And
may not the King much more seck to defend Himself against you His Subjects
that have taken up Arms against Him? Does not nature teach us the preservation
of our selves? will not the eye wink without deliberation, and the smallest
worm turn back if you tread upon it? Yet the argument is stronger, for He is
not a mere man, one of your fellows; but a King, the Lords Anointed against
whom there is no rising up, Pro. 30.31. Be He never so ill conditioned (as we
are sure you cannot say ours is) it is damnation to resist Him being offended
by him, Romans 13.2. But against these Precepts some are wont to bring examples
of Rebellion, and so argue a facto ad jus, and say in effect, that it is
lawful for the Subject to rise up against their Sovereign because they find
some have so done: Pray mark it; We are peremptorily commanded in holy
Scripture not to Touch the Lords Anointed, or to resist Him being offended by
Him, we find that some Rebels have transgressed these commands, and have
unnaturally risen up against their Sovereign, therefore we will do so too;
which conclusion I leave to your understandings to judge how fair it is, for
you are -- wise. But you war not you will say against His Majesty, you Honor and
love His Person and labor to make Him Great, your only aim is against His
wicked Counselors and cursed Cavaliers: Truly (let them be what they will be)
but if you should come to one of us, and protest so much, that you love us
deerly and wish us well, and in the mean time Plunder our house, drive away
our wife, keep our children from us, imprison our servants, and undo all that
take our part; We think so well of our selves as to think that there are
very few of us (except some fools that will let you cut their throats if you
please) that durst believe you.

But if all this were nothing, what an unmatched Act of Grace was it in His
Matie to call a Parliament first, and then to assent to the continuance of it
during your pleasure? (yet not so as if He then resigned all his Power into
your hands, giving you leave to do what you will, for He is still your Head:
and has his negative voice, and can affirm or deny whatsoever is voted by you)
and will you be so unnaturally, so unmannerly ungrateful, (et si ingratum
dixeris omnia dices) as to restrain His Power, who has given unto you yours?
He has given you one end of the staff into your hand, and will you now pluck
the other out of His? He has made you Men, will you make no body now of Him?
You could do nothing without Him before, and will you do all things without
him now?

-- Pudeat haec opprobria vobis,
Et dici potuisse and non potuisse refelli.
But it is confessed on all sides, that the Major part has the authority of the
whole; and if so, pray tell us, has not the Head (the King) the Soldiers (the
Nobles, most of them) the Heart (the Learned and Religious Clergy) the Arms
and Hands (the valiant and well skilled Soldiers) have not most of these
deserted you? And we are sure if this be not the Major part, it is the Melior,
and that is better. And for the Common inferior parts, we would fain know how
many are agents in your Cause; are not all things done by ten or twelve
Sticklers, whilst all the rest (more for fear of the rod, then for love to
the Cause (God knows) sit with their finger in their mouths, and say and do
just nothing?

I, but there are a world of Papists and other Malignants in His Majesty's
Army, and 'twere a wonder if they should sight for the Protestant Religion: It
were indeed, but no wonder at all that they should seek to defend themselves
being persecuted, this nature teaches Papists as well as Protestants; as for
the Protestant Religion, we never yet heard it called into question, His
Majesty has with so many Promises, Protestations and Execrations upon Himself
and Children vowed the preservation of It, that we do not so much as fear any
alteration of It. But whilst you fear the bringing in of Popery, blame us not
we beseech you, to fear likewise (whilst we see no contradiction appear to
Prins, Burtons, with innumerable other anonomicall, Seditious, Traiterous, and
Blaspheamous Pamphlets, sold openly and read and sung under your very Noses)
the introduction of Atheism, Rebellion, and all kind of Profaneness.

Nobles and Gentlemen, many of both your Houses did sit a long time with you
after the King had left you, but after they descried your ways and discovered
your Plots (your plots are then discovered as well as others) and took notice
of your Close proceedings, How you delude the People with vain hopes; How you
hire men with large rewards to come posting in (when you mean to go a begging
for another sum) all besmeared with dirt and mire from such and such places,
I pray Sa^
with such news as will please the people, when as they have never stirred
foot out of Town, when they descerned how you transported the Wealth of the
Land whilst your Soldiers starve; How you aim altogether at your own ends,
not caring for the Distraction and Destruction of the Kingdom; How whilst (to
please the people) you pretend to beat down Popery, you set up Profaneness and
open a door to Libertinisme and Licentiousness; How Loose and Luxurious, how
Blaspheamous and Atheistical many of your selves are, they then thought it
high time to look about them, and to come out of Babell, least they should be
consumed with you in all your sins: Oh, that the Lord would make it your
Case, and glorify His mercy on you and us, in making known to you the things
concerning our Peace, and not His justice in hardening you to destruction! That
it may be never read in our Chronicle by the Generations to come, that England
had a (...) that sought the desolation of the King and Kingdom. But although
you will not suffer His Majesty to be your King, yet know there is a King and a
Judge above yo^^ before whom you must very shortly stand, and give an account
of that trust which we have reposed in you. We desire you in the presence of
God, to think and think seriously, and think again and again, how sad it will
be to have all this blood changed upon your souls. Can you think of this with
comfort when you are dying (...) those few stickling Counselors which have put
you on, then bring you as safely o^ Your Greatness may despise what we say,
and cast a way our Petition, and i^p^ison us who had a hand in it (if you can
catch us) and count us your Enemies because we are the Kings friends, and tell
you the truth, and speak as dying men in the sorrow of our souls; but you
cannot so put by Divine Justice nor quiet conscience at the last. As true as
the Lord lives before whom you stand, you will one day know that Blasphemers,
Whoremasters, Schismatics and Traitors are not Gods friends, nor do they
fight His cause, but plain dealers, who do assure you the way you take tends to
the utter ruin and desolation of your selves and Kingdom. And can your Hearts
(...) can your Hands be strong in the day the Lord will reckon with you for
this (...). People, whose charge you have taken out of His Majesty's Hands? Oh,
suppos^ that you heard the blood of this People, already spilt, crying in your
ears, and saw the many thousands yet living a life worse then death, lying in
their sorrows at your feet crying for Pity, Help, Oh Help, or we loose our
Liberties, Laws, (...) and Religion, Help that your selves, who have in this
time horded up men (...) Estates, come not to want and Beggary; help as ever
you would have God help you in the day of Death and Judgment, when your selves
shall cry for help and pity; help that Redemption come not some other way,
that we be not all destroy^d by some Foreign Nation. The Lord God of our
hopes, who has for our sinne^ most justly afflicted us in You, give you all
discerning eyes, holy and tender hea^^, to yield to the Petition of His
Majesty's distressed Subjects, to concur with His Majesty, and the rest of
your Assembly, that God and man may forget your Mistakings* that His Majesty
may be once again a Blessed Prince. yea the blessedest (...) reigned in our
Land, the Terror of all His real Enemies, the joy of His (...), and the Glory
of Posterity: Such shall be the Daily and hearty Prayer of,

Your Fellow Subjects throughout the whole Kingdom.


