REASONS FOR CONFORMITY Tenderly offered to all the Sober Dissenters of London,
BY SOME Laodicean Conforming Ministers.
Dear Brethren,
Whereas several eminent Divines have lately set forth in Print many Arguments
as Motives to persuade you to Conformity, and the Success of their Labors has
not ^swered their Expectations and Wishes; And whereas the Government (for its
own Preservation and Defense) has thought fit to compel you to Conformity, by
putting the penal Laws against Dissenters in Execution; Know ye therefore, That
out of Our wonted Grace and Compassion, WE have consulted all WE could for the
Ease ad Satisfaction of your Tender Consciences; And, By these PRESENTS do give
and grant unto you these following REASONS for CON^ORMITY.

First, That WE shall frankly and joyfully receive your return, Though your
Conformity be no more but seeming, external, and not from your hearts.

Secondly, If you will but confess, that some of our Sermons or Writings were
the means of bringing you over to the Church, we will then proclaim and publish
to all the World, That you are the most Pious Holy Men WE know, and far more
excellent Converts than ever were made by St. Paul; for Truth is, WE count none
Good, as they should be, unless they admire US and our Labors.

Thirdly, If you will conform, that is, Come and Hear US, WE will cry you up
for the sober Godly partly of the Nation.

Fourthyly, If you fall into any Jeopardy for not frequenting your own
Parish Church, WE will be ready at all times to appear in any Court, to vouch
and attest upon Oath, That you are as High and Strict Churchmen as our selves,
or any Others we have familiar acquaintance with.

Fifthly, If you will be our Auditors, and help to fill our Churches, WE do
promise you all manner of Indulgence, and to salve all Doubts and Scruples of
Conscience according to your own Wills and Humors.

Sixthly, If you sit in Church all the Service while on your Breech, or Talk or
Sleep whilst its reading, and never stand up at the Creeds, though WE see and
know it, yet WE will wink at it, and never reprove you for it; for truth is, WE
can do the same our selves.

Seventhly, WE will use all powerful means to save and defend you from being
Presented and Prosecuted for deserting your own Parish Church and Minister.

Eighthly, Whatever are scandalous, notorious and damnable Sins in others, WE
will endeavor to prove but small, venial, natural and unavoidable infirmities
in you.

Ninthly, If you design and cannot effect an Alteration in the Government upon
pretense of bettering it, WE will throw the Odium of it upon the Papists, for
our saying it was They that murdered Charles the first has made it pass for a
^urrent Truth.

Tenthly, If you will receive with US the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
either sitting, lying, leaning, lolling or standing, WE will give you our
Certificates that you received it according to the usage of the Church of
England.

Eleventhly, If you would have your Chrildren Christened or not Christened, with
Godfathers and the sign of the Cross or without them, WE are ready to do
either; for truth is, WE judge such indifferent things left to yours and our
discretion and pleasure.

Twenfthly, WE will always earnestly Expose, Rebuke and Condemn all those for
Rash, Imprudent and Unlearned Preachers, that shall offer to revile you for
former Faults, or rip up the old stories of Schism, Faction and Rebellion in
the LATE BAD TIMES.

Thirteenthly, If your Wives shall present us with Cloth, Silks, Plate, Money,
Wine and Sugar-loaves, as they formerly did to their Pastors, WE do promise
upon our sacred words, That WE will not accept and receive them without your
leave and consent first had and obtained; for WE value our selves upon such
Scruples and Criticisms of Honesty.

Lastly, WE do vow and protest that whereas you formerly gave One, Two, Three
or Four Pounds a Year to a Conventicling Teacher, WE would be glad to have you
our Auditors for Ten Shillings a Year,

And thank you too.

By this you may see our Moderation.

NOW consider what is here offered to you. First, here is Liberty of Conscience
as much as you can desire; Secondly, Credit and Reputation as far as WE can
promote it; Thirdly, Indulgence and Ease to the most Tender Consciences;
Fourthly, Security against Persecuting Churchwardens and Bishop's Officials;
Fifthly, Compliance to Administer Sacraments which way you will; Sixthly, To
extenuate the greatest Sins you can commit upon the score of Reformation;
Seventhly, To reprove and condemn all them that shall speak any manner of ill
against you; Lastly, to preserve your Goods, and save you some Pounds in the
Year, which is for your Interest.

If such Considerations and Arguments as these cannot prevail with you to
Conform to the CHURCH of ENGLAND, or at least to US in Our public
Congregations, according to Our PROPOSALS, WE then in Great Grief of Heart,
must fear that you are in a Reprobate State.

And the Lord have Mercy on your Souls.
LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationer's Hall.


