ENGLAND'S BEAUTY In seeing KING CHARLES the SECOND Restored to MAJESTY.

Preached by THO. REEVE. D. D. in the Parish Church of Waltham-Abbey in the
County of Essex.

I have broken the bonds of your yoke, and made you go upright.

Levit. 26.13. In that day will I raise up the Tabernacle of David, that is
fallen, and close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up the ruins
thereof, and will build it as in the days of old.

Amos 9.11. Sursum versus sacrorum fluminum feruntur fontes.

Euripid. LONDON, Printed by I. R. for the Author, 1661

To the most Potent, and Puissant MONARCH CHARLES the II. KING of GREAT
BRITAIN, etc.
DREAD SOVEREIGN,
GOD has given us a Sight, the Sight of your Self. How many aching eyes where
there once to see You? how many ravished eyes may there be now to behold You?
Every one could not present such a Sight; no, He in Heaven,

Restituit Patriis Androgeona focis, Has restored You to your Fathers Throne
to be looked upon as a glorious Spectacle. Propert. l. 1.
We saw for many years nothing but the horrid faces of strange Rulers, and now
we have your Face of true Majesty to bless our eyes with,

-- forma tum vertitur oris
Antiquum in Buten, Virg. Ae. neid. 9.
--
Oh that we had good eyes in our heads to discern the difference of Objects;
what a change is this, that whereas we saw nothing but Usurpers in their
Barbarousnesse, Our eyes do now see a King in his Beauty? Your absence was the
Bane, Your presence is the Beauty of the Nation. To apply all this Beauty to
Your Self, perhaps would be judged flattery, therefore have I endeavored to
show Your three Kingdoms, that there is a derivative Beauty in You, namely
that your Majesty is our Beauty. For how is a Nation obscured if it has not
a King in it? and how is it illustred, if it has a King reigning in Royal
Splendor and Imperial dignity? I wish that there be (...) Judges of Beauty in
the Land, and that there be none which are ready to strike at the face of
Beauty. It does grieve me, that when you have brought delight to the eyes of
Millions, and put peace into all hands, yet that there should be left amongst
us some glaring eyes, and menacing hands, The Jesuit to such may resign his
malicious eyes, and mischievous hands. What need those King-vexers and
Gad-flyes of Monarchs plot treasons, and kindle dissentions, when we have
Incendiaries, and Statetroublers of our own?

Ab pudeat, certe pudeat. Propert l. 2.
-- For is it not an infamy that a Reformed Church should agree with the Church
of Rome in the Gun-room? that men should cast out Popery at the portal, and
take it in at the posterne? Which of these are the better Subject?

Arcades ambo, Horat.
Both of them can level at Kings. For the honor of religion then these must
ever hereafter lay aside dissentions, and lay down arms against Kings, or else
there will not only be the treacherous and fatal Jesuit, but the odious and
omirous Protestant. For conscience sake therefore I trust a King shall not need
to fear a frighting or a fighting Protestant. For must a face of Majesty smile
upon all Designers, or Beauty espouse it self to every Corrival, or else shall
there be weapons drawn to force favor and affection? this is bad morality, and
worse divinity. For where did they learn this? sure I am not in Scripture, for
that says Fear God, and honor the King, and I advertise thee to take heed to
the Kings Commandment, and that in respect of the Oath of God. Therefore men
must seem to have no reverence to Gods laws, nor dread of perjury, or else
their brains must leave plotting, and their hands leave braining. They may find
these grounds of conspiracy in old Achitophel, or new Mariana, but confident I
am, that they cannot in the Old Testament, or the new. Except then they would
burn their Bibles, and make Humor their Holy writ they must consume to ashes
such principles and practices. We have been shamed enough far and nigh for
such paradoxes and stratagemes, and cursed be they which do renew the next
scandal. The honor of the Church, and the Beauty of the Kingdom are then
gone. Have Protestants against Papists sheathed up their swords, and shall
Protestants against Protestants unsheath theirs? what against their fellow
Professors? what against their natural King? oh inexorable, oh incorrigible
King-haters? Men have been mad, and some distempers we have lately found, but
surely this phrenzy will not always last. Let them look your Majesty through,
and what occasion can they find in you of disgust, distaste, or so much as
discontent? So far as I can perceive your Majesty does but seek your Native
Right, the established Religion, the fundamental Laws, the Honor of the
Highest, the freedom of the meanest, the welfare of the Nation, the Peace of
the Kingdom, and they may see as well as I that your graces are conspicuous,
your qualifications eminent, your carriage affable, your Government mild, your
counsels prudent, your actions Heroical, your life spotless, and your
conscience sincere, except therefore they would have an Angel to reign over
them, where can they have in flesh and blood a more desired man? what heart
then can have a rancorous thought against such a King? No, I hope to see all
your Enemies blush at their causeless anger, and senseless spite; yea to fall
down at your Royal Feet, and repent that they have been so inconsiderate, and
weep that they have been so unkind. Bear but with their former failings, and
pardon that which is past (as what cannot that Royal Heart of Yours that is the
living spring of clemency wash out of your remembrance?) and me think your
Majesty should have felt the last of animosities, and triumphs; people will not
always kick against the pricks, and run upon the spears spoint of divine
laws, but do that which God has obliged them to, even honor your Person,
acknowledge your Authority, submit to your Edicts, admire your Perfections, and
be knit to you in the adamantine chains of Fidelity and Loyalty, that this
wasted Country may once again become a flourishing Nation, and the Kingdom of
Triumphs. Thus in all Humility prostrating my Self at your Majesty's Royal
Feet, and Praying for your long Life, your increase of Princely Honors, your
lasting Peace, and everlasting Bliss, submissively I take leave, and rest

Your Majesty's Devoted Subject in all unstained, and inviolable Loyalty THO.
REEVE.

ENGLAND'S BEAUTY.
Esaias 33.17. Thine eyes shall see the King in his Beauty.


HEre is Senacherib in a fury, and Hezekiah in a fray; Senacherib was guilty of
much rapine, and he would authorize his robberies under Gods broad seal; for
thus says his Commissioner General, Am I now come up without the Lord against
this place to destroy it? the Lord said to me, Go up against this Land, and
destroy it. 2 Kings 18.25. so that, prey is piety, and rapacity is religion,
the Lords name must be the Patent to the most injurious courses in the world.
The Lords cause, and the Lords Commission, the Lords banners, and booties must
be cried up in the most savage depredations. Senacherib's host is consecrated
by Rabshakeh to be an Army of Saints, this same hallowing of Camps (where
soldiers diverse times are little better then Scorpions) is but an old
Paradoxe of Rabshakchs military Divinity; that as the old Sequestratours, or
Seisers upon Delinquents estates, cast men out of their houses, and said, Let
God be glorified Es. 66.5; So these in the fear of God, and by the impulse of
the Spirit change governments, behead Kings, plunder Countries, and cut
throats. Did not the Lord set them on work? Did they any thing but by a call
from Heaven? every sharking Trooper can say,

-- mihi Phoebus Apollo Virg. 3. Aeneid.

Praedixit,
I am taught from above to act as I do. What cause had Sanacherib to invade, or
infest Jury? cause? Highway-mans provocation; he had a mind to take a purse,
and this was all the offense which he could pretend. He harrassed an innocent
Nation without the least grievance, for Woe be to thee which spoyledst, and were
not spoiled, and dealst treacherously, when thou were not dealt treacherously
with; v. 1. But the sword is drawn, what shall sheath it up? shall parley? no,
oppression is too venomous a Cockatrice to be thus charmed; Senacherib is deaf
to all Accommodation, he must be his own Arbitratour, or else no pacification
will be consented to. Messengers are sent, but they might have stayed at home,
Ambassadors are dispatched, but

-- rapiunt conamina venti, Stat. 6. Theb.
They do but pour their treaties into the air, they do return not with
articles of agreement in their hands, but with brinish tears in their eyes.
Behold the Messengers shall cry without, the Ambassadors shall weep bitterly.
v. 7. And what then are the consequents of this fruitless mediation? what but
woeful skars? Resolve such an implacable enemy,

Venturum excidio Lybiae, -- To come to the utter destruction of the Land. Then
have at Travelers, Merchants, Nobles, Monuments, Kings Palaces, Kings Parks,
Kings Woods, neither highwayes, streets, fields, forests are free from danger.
There is nothing to be seen all the Country over, but the rufullest face of
misery, that man's eye could behold. Rabshakeh said, that he did come from God,
but if all the Eumenides had made him Captain General, could he have been the
Author of more dismal outrages? No place, right, calling, covenant, matter, or
man were regarded; for The highways lay wast, the wayfaring man cease, he
has broken the Covenant, he has despised Cities, he regards no man, and the
earth mourns, and languisheth, Lebanon is ashamed and hewn down, Sharon is
like a wilderness, and Bashan, and Carmel shake off their fruits. v. 8.9.
Calamity enough, but is this misery endless? No, God whose name had been
abused, his covenant violated and his people oppressed, at last does look down
upon their ruthes, and rise up for their redress, Now will I rise says the
Lord, now will I be exalted, now will I lift up myself. V. 10. Though a long
time their contrivements had been succesfull, yet at last their policies should
be snares, and their designs fetters, yea, they should but kindle a fire to
burn their selves to ashes, for ye shall conceive chafe, and bring forth
stubble, your breath as fire shall devour you. The people shall be as the
burning of lime, as thorns cut up shall they be burns in the fire. V. 11.12.
yea the judgment shall be so terrible, that it shall be the bruit of the earth,

Rumor it, and magnum sermonibus occupat orbem, Ovid. 6. Met.
For Hear ye that are far off, what I have done, and ye that are near
acknowledge my might. V. 13. It Is true, Temporizers and Neuters had sad
apprehensions, as if this doleful stare could never be altered, they cry out,

Funditus occidimus, nec habet fortuna regressum. Virg. 11. Aeneid.
We are utterly undone, and the prosperity of the Nation can never have a
return; the fire is kindled, and all will be consumed in this wasting flame.
The sinners in Sion shall be afraid, fearfulness has surprised the
hypocrites. Who amongst us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who amongst us
shall dwell with the everlasting burnings? V. 14. But shall there be no more
auspicious thing to be expected by the righteous? yes, they that have not
wavered in this time of trial, but have done, and spoken that which do become
true Patriots, and sincere Professouts, which neither were dismayed with
accidents, nor have followed the hurse in State, not lurched any thing out of
the common casualty, nor brained men with the pole-axe of the age, but had
lived like steady, invariable, and incorrupt persons, not skilled in the
pinching, and bribing arts of the times, but tender over men's estates, and
blood, these men shall have ample, and stable felicity, for He that walks
righteously, and has spoken uprightly, he that despises the gain of
oppression, and has shaken his hands from taking of bribes, that stops his
cares from hearing of blond, and shuts his eyes from seeing of evil, He
shall dwell on high, his place shall be the munition of rocks, bread shall be
given him, and his waters shall be sure. V. 15.16. Well, here are pledges for
the peoples happiness, but what news for the King? What must he always live
in streights? no, his enemies shall be dispersed strangely, and he in a
miraculous manner restored. Senacherib came in upon the spur, but he shall be
drawn back with a hook. Senacherib shall vanish, and Hezekiah shall appear; He
shall be looked upon as a King, and as a King in pomp and splendor, the age
shall be ravished to see his Majestic estate, and be in a trance to see a
depressed Prince raised up to the height of sublime dignity, for they shall not
only see him a King, but a King in his Beauty. Thine eyes shall see the King in
his Beauty.

In the Text consider with me, 1. The opening of a Cabinet, or a clear
manifestation, Thine eyes shall see 2. The Gemme presented, The King 3. The
luster of the same, In his Beauty.


First, for the opening of the Cabinet, or the clear manifestation, Thine eyes
shall see. Gods Cabinet had been shut, but he would unlock it, people had lived
in the dark, and though they might hope for much, yet for the present they
discerned nothing, but this black sky should not always last, there should
come a time of light and sight, though thy eyes do not see, yet thine eyes
shall see. Thine eyes shall see. From hence observe, that the sweetness of a
blessing is in the actual fruition of the same, not to have it promised, but
presented, not hoped for, but enjoyed.

-- long a mora est nobis, Ovid.
quae gaudia differt, Retarding, which does delay a blessing, is very irksome
to us,

-- (...), Homer. Iliad. 2.
(...), To expect long, and at last to return empty is tedious, and vexations.
Petrarch. dial. 110.
Nunquam expectatio tranquillitasque simul cohabitant. Long waiting, and
satisfaction do never dwell together. The hope that is deferred does afflict
the soul. The breasts of consolation yield us no sweetness, till we milk out,
and be delighted with the abundance of glory. Es. 66.11. Espousals do not
satisfy a bride, but actual wedding. The Israelites had many a sad groan till
they entered the Land of Canaan, and Noah till the Arc rested upon the
Mountains of Ararat. Better is the sight of the eyes, then the wandering of the
desire. Eccles. 6.9. The wandering of the desires is pain, and grief, but the
seeing with the eyes is contentment, therefore David praised God that he set
one upon his Throne, his eyes seeing it. 1 Kings 1.48. And God did comfort up
his dear people, Mal. 1.5.
that their eyes should see, that God would be magnified from the border of
Israel. Sensible comforts are most satisfactory, not those which have their
prediction, but their production, such as are come to an accomplishment, and
are brought to eyesight. Thine eyes shall see.

1. This does show first that God is the God of sights, Appl.
the thing that is hid he can bring forth to light. Job 28.11. He can show
wonders in the Heavens, and the Earth. Joel 2.28. yea so delight our ears, and
affect our eyes, that we shall stand in a kind of amazement, and say, Who has
heard such a thing? and who has seen such things. Es. 66.8. How great are his
signs? how mighty are his wonders? Dan. 4.3. oh then we that are all for rare
things, and strange sights, why do we not cleave close to God? is there any
which can so dazzle our eyes? Is not he the God of objects? yes, he is the great
(...), Wonder-worker, Naz. Hugo de Operat. trium dierum.
dedit oculis, quod vix comprehendere potest oculus. He has given so much to
the eye, that the eye cannot comprehend it. If we would be Spectatours of
bright things, then we should never separate our selves from him who does make
every thing to shine with radiant beams, no, we should frui Deo, sicut luce
oculus, enjoy God, Aug. l. 2. de Civit. Dei c. 3.
as the eye does the light. If we provoke the eyes of his glory, he will vex
our eyes with sad sights, but if we do that which is acceptable in his eyes, he
will do that, which shall be delectable to our eyes. We are enemies to the joy
of our lives, and not worth the eyes in our heads, which do incense God; for
this is that which do hinder us from many glorious things, which we might
behold. Does God usually transport the wicked? no, they scarce see an admirable
thing in their lifetime; the extasying sights are for the righteous, they are
the pure eyes which see ravishments, God does reserve his prime Objects for his
Hidden Ones, for them that are unto him as the apple of his eye, or cleansed
eyes, let us then be the pleasure of his eyes, because he is the God of our
Objects; it is he that says, I will delight thy senses, it is he that says,
Thine eyes shall see.

the eyes of all things look upon thee, and they may, for he is the God of the
eyes, and has the curious, and mavelous sights for them. The pictures with
orient colors do hang in his gallery, the exquisite, polished, elaborate
masterpieces are to be seen in his Providence. Totus manus est, He is all
hand. Aug.
Deus in una existentia omnia praehabet. Dionys. de Div. nom. l. 5. c. 2.
Aquin. 1. a. q. 4. a. 2. Roet.
God in his one existency has the anticipation of all things which can be
shown. Totam perfectionem essendi in se continet. He does include the
perfection of every being in himself. For other things it may be said that
unumquodque est bonum suo bono, Every thing is good by his own proper and
particular good, but God has goodness in him not by way of limitation,
determination, order, species, or measure; but by indivision, eminency, and
excess, he being the Abstract of all the concrete excellencies in the world,
Dionys. de Divin. nom. l. 5. c. 3. Hilar. l. 8. de Tria. Aug. in Enchir. c. 10.
hom. 3.
for he is not hoc, aut hoc, sed omnia, this, or that, but all things. He is
immensae virtutis vivens, and potens, The living, and powerful thing of an
unlimited virtue. There is in God universitatis admirabilis pulchritudo, the
admirable beauty of the whole universe, therefore those things which come from
him are not only good, but valde bona, very good. God then can show us better
things, and greater things, and brighter things, then ever we yet beheld. If
potent man (as thou think) can make thee see strange things, what can the
Omnipotent God? he can present to thee terrible things (that is, admirable
things) which thou lookedst not for, even fill thy eyes with Wonders; that thou
shall say, whence come these Objects? who ever thought to have seen such
things? oh the mysteries of Divine Providence! oh the splendor of Gods
actings! The like was never seen in Israel. Mat. 9.33. they were all amazed,
and glorified God, saying, we never saw it on this sort. Mark 2.12. Who is like
unto thee oh Lord amongst the Gods? who is like unto thee, glorious in
holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders? Exodus 15.11. As if there were
not in the whole world tongues loud enough to sing out Gods praises, or eyes
bright enough to see the admiration which shine in his works. When thou see
nothing but tears, God can make thee see triumphs; when thou see nothing but
Chains, God can make thee see Crowns; when thou see nothing but Wounds, God
can make thee see Wonders. He is not only Jehovah-Shalom, the Lord our Peace.
Judge. 6.24. or Jehovah-Nissi, the Lord our Banner, but Jehovah-Jireh, our
seeing God, or the God that will foresee for us, for the Lord sees, or will
see for us. What shall thou not see, if the Lord will but say, Thine eyes shall
see? Thou shall see a change of all thy miseries, an end of all thy trials, all
thy old disasters are gone, God will create all things new things. Is. 43.19.
and call thee by a new name. Is. 62.2. and build new gates to the House of the
Lord. Jer. 26.10. and unto the Jews shall arise a new light, and joy, and
gladness, and honor. Ester. 8.16. let not the faces of thy present enemies
too much daunt thee, for the Egyptians whom thou have seen to day, thou shall
see no more hereafter. Exodus 14.13. Let not the afflicted condition of
profession too much perplexe thee, for thou shall see Jehoshuah put off his
filthy garments, and behold a fair Diadem set upon his head, and rich garments
put upon his back. Zach. 3.4.5. Let not the scattered stones of Sion too much
trouble thee, for thou shall see Sion have her stones laid with Carbuncles, and
her foundations with Saphirs, her very windows shall be made of Emeralds, and
all her gates of shining stones. Is. 54.11.12. thou shall see Jerusalem a quiet
habitation, the City of solemnities, and set up as the praise of Nations. Talk
not too much of the blood, and hunger, and flavery which have been endured in
the Nation, for ye shall not see the sword, and famine, and yoke any more; be
not so much dejected to see the lamp of religion even extinguished, for what
see thou? and I said I looked, and behold, a Candlestick all of gold, and a
bowl upon the top of it, and seven lamps, and seven pipes to the lamps, and
two olive trees, the one on the right side of the bowl, and the other on the
left side of the bowl to empty themselves into the pipes. Zach. 4.2.3. After a
grievous desolation, there may be a glorious restoration; after thou have seen
as sad sights as man's eyes can look upon, thou may see as chearing,
delightful sights as man's eyes can behold; thou may see a new face, a new
fashion, a new form, a new frame, a new Church, a new State, God may bring
forth the first Dominion, raise up the Tabernacle of David that is fallen,
close up breaches, and build it as in the days of old. Amos 9.11. she that was
called Desolate, Forsaken, may be called Hephzibah, Beulah, my Delight is in
her, or my amiable spouse. Is. 62.4. she that has been quenched to the last
spark may prove a firebrand in the sheaf. Zach. 12.6. she that has been
drunken with miseries may turn to be a cup of poison to all them that are round
about her. Zach. 12.2. she that have lain amongst the pots may have silver
wings given her, and feathers like gold. Ps. 68.13. Sion that has been beaten
with instruments of iron may arise and thresh. Micah 4.13. Jerusalem that lay
in the dust may have her old old wast places repaired, and foundations laid for
many generations. Es. 58.12. When the Sun of a Churches prosperity has past
the Meridian line, and it is even about to set, yet God can make the shadows
to return back many degrees, as he did upon the Dyal of Ahaz; when a grievous
drought has remained many years amongst the Saints, God can make a little
cloud to appear, and though at first it be no bigger then a man's hand, yet in
time it may overspread the whole heavens, and there may follow after it a great
rain, as it happened in the days of Achab; we have never seen our last of
favors, if God pleases not to restrain his Providence: for when our hand is
past working, can Gods hand effect nothing? yes, Arise, arise, put on strength
oh Arm of the Lord, arise as in the old time, as in the generations that are
past. Art not thou the same that cut in pieces Rahab? and wounded the Dragon?
Is. 51.9. God cannot be mastered with the greatest difficulty, all
State-tricks, and politic designs are to him but as rotten cords, and spiders
webs. Know thou not me, says the Lord? The Lord is a man of war, his name
is Jehovah. Exodus 15.3. Oh he, which measure the waters in-his fist, span the
heavens, comprehend the dust of the earth in a measure, weigh the mountains in
scales, and the hills in a balance, which does dry up rivers, cleave the rocks,
break the heads of the Dragons, which does account all the Inhabitants of the
earth but as grasshoppers to him, and does but look upon the earth, and he
makes it to tremble, what can resist his will? or oppose his power? no, after
thou have spent out a life in groans and tears, he can adom thee with tabrets;
after thou have been wasted with wars, and thine own dewlling place has cast
thee out, he can lead thee into thine own house, and make thee sit under thine
own vine, and thine own fig tree in peace. Rely upon this God then, and
expect Wonders from him; when thy eye-bals have aked to behold any thing that
is comfortable, and nothing thou could discern, though thy eyes were ready to
fall out. Deuteronomy. 28.65. yet then he may tell thee that happy sights are at hand,
yea say unto thee, Thine eyes shall see.

God is to have the honor of all rich blessings. Does this appertain to man? 2 Samuel 7.19. to man to gratify the world with sights? no, it is God only that
says, thine eyes shall see. Oh then that we are apt to turn our eyes the wrong
way, even to fix them upon man, rather then God! For man we see, and think
that by him we only see, that none presents objects to our eyes, but this
Inferior Deity. Thus we commit Idolatry with these petty-gods, and sacrifice
to these earthly Numens; as if we would bury all the honor of happy things in
dust-heaps, or make the Sun-glasse more excellent then the Sun it self. This
has been man's dim sight ever to see nothing but the face before us, or to
magnify the stream in stead of the Springhead, so that whereas we should adore
God, we have men's persons in admiration. Jude 11. and for giving him in Heaven
the just glory of all his free favors we bestow upon men flattering titles.
Job 32.22. whereby in stead of ascribing praise to the true Author of our
felicity, we deify the Creature; this has always been man's vanity, or rather
impiety to worship at the wrong Altar, or sacrifice to our own nets, and to
burn incense to our own yame, just as Hellespontius who would needs have Xerxes
to be Jupiter in the shape of a Persian, or the Athenians, Herod. l. 7.
who because Demetrius Poliorcetes won Munychia from Cassander, whereby they
were freed from the Macedonian tyranny, Sabell. l. 7. Ennead. 4. Cuspinian.
would needs have him received into the number of the gods, and appointed a
particular Priest to sacrifice to him, saying, that he was the only god to
them that was awaken, and all the rest of the gods were asleep; and Tribonian,
who because Justinian had been very succesfull in all his enterprises called
him an immortal creature, promising him that he should never dye, but carry his
flesh with him into heaven. But when man has played the Parasite never so long
with his fellow creature, is it man that is the principal Agent? no, God knows,
he cannot of himself make one hair white, or black. Ier. 10.16. Calv. in 2.
Hos. Bern. Socrates.
God is such an absolute former of all things, that ne pluviae gutta e coelo
cadat nisi suo nutu, not a drop of rain can fall out of the clouds, but by his
appointment; therefore of all blessings Deus auctor, and fautor, God is the
Founder, and Fosterer. What then? shall man be worshipped? no Thus diis,
Incense both belong to God, it is the good will of him that dwelt in the bush.
Deuteronomy. 33.16. which does make every thing prosperous to us. Set aside Gods
assistance; what can the feeble arm of man do? no, He has wrought all our
works for us. Is. 26.12. I will magnify my self (says the Lord) and Sanctify
my self, and will be known in all Nations. Ezech. 28.23. In thine hand is power
and strength, and in thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto
all. 1 Chronicles. 29.12. Can we see any thing of our selves, till God hold a
blessing to our eyes? no, When God shall bring again Sion, then shall they see
eye to eye, Is. 52.8. Then, and not till then. Here then is your
Architectonical Agent, therefore we ought to ascribe greatness to him. Deuteronomy.
32.3. and speak of the glorious honor of his Majesty, and his wondrous works.
Ps. 145.5. For will God ever endure any to sit in his Throne, and wear his
Crown? no, he made Nebuchadnezzar to go graze amongst the beasts for this, and
for this he threw Lucifer out of Heaven. Away then with the cries, and
ingeminated praises that are given to men, let not these be so much as spoken
of, till God has had the first song, the new song, and his song of degrees;
praise not man at all, till ye have praised God in the Highest; no, let God
have his Hymns before Man has his Panegyricks; And thus indeed, when God has
had his worship, man may have his honor, for man is Gods Substitute, or
Delegate, whereby Blessings are conveyed, therefore we may bless these in God,
or under God; we are not to make them Gods, but we may make them Gods
serviceable Deputies; howsoever we must remember to give the prime and
principal reverence, veneration and adoration to God, because man cannot show
us a sight, nor bring to our view (of himself) the least thing, which can
delight and affect the eyesight, no, it is God only, that does say, and can
say, Thine eyes shall see.

Thine eyes shall see. God observes his own moments for blessings, his hand of
bounty must not be wrested, nor his bowels of compassion wrung; Per. Ser. 9.
super Qui habitat. Greg. hom. 35. in Evang. cum audieritis. p^alia.
are favors to be compelled? or gratuities constrained? no, this is immodesty,
a passion upon compassion. Quicquid tolerandum, quicquid operandum, pondus
diei, and aestus sustinenda sunt. Every thing is to be endured, every thing
waited for, we must undergo the heat, and burden of the day before we catch at
a blessing. A steady Professor, if he cannot have his desires instantly
satisfied, non proruat ad excessum murmurationis, must not break out into the
excess of murmuring. Accelerating desires are ill guides said Socrates, rash
desires are as bad as rash soldiers, Live. 3, Decad. l. 2.
Festinatio improvida est and caeca. Too much speed is both improvident, and
blind; therefore says the faithful, We haved waited for the in the way of thy
judgments. Is. 26.8. that is they were not too eager to have the judgment
over till God thought it fit. As the husbandman does wait for the precious
fruits of the earth, so should we for Gods precious favors. We must not rip up
the dugge for milk, not force the child out of the womb till the hour of
deliverance be come, not launch forth till the tide be come in, not desire to
taste of fruits till Gods Sunbeams have ripened them; a fair hand must be
written leisurely, a curious picture is long in the drawing; it is the torment
of religion to be too passionate upon blessings, they are sick Christians which
are wishing for light before the day star do appear. True Saints hatch
mercies, and do not desire to hear the bird chirping, till the shell be broken;
and they endure their winter-agues patiently, till the running of the blood at
springtide. None entertain favors with more fervor, nor expect them with
more faith. And this is according to the rule, for He that believes shall not
make haste. Is. 28.16. It is a tumult against Heaven to wish to be happy before
Gods time, these unseasonable desires are both irrational, and irreligious.
Such importunate suitors are troubled with Rachels impatience, who must have
children at her own call, or else she is ready to dye. These are those which
would drink wine out of the green clusters, or be espoused to Gods favors
before the Virgins are marriageable: But can God endure such a rape upon his
blessings? or that men should break open the doors upon him for an alms? These
are sturdy Beggars indeed, and fitter to be carried to the whipping-post, then
to receive Boones. The still child does deserve two breads, but the clamorous
child does scarcely deserve to be fed at all. Wrestle as much as ye will for
blessings, but do not seek to get them with chiding and raving; that is a bad
tongue which is stridulent against God, which would make him a Debtour rather
then a Donour. Thou must endure to have thy faith to be tried, as well as
desire to have thy wants supplied; thou must live with expectation, till Gods
time of exhibition come; for the Vision is yet for an appointed time, though it
tarry, wait. Habbac. 2.3. It is a sin to limit the Holy one of Israel. Ps.
78.41. to confine God to our own seasons, or punctilioes. As if God must feed
us according to our own appetites, or else we are starved, or he must deliver
us when we call for freedom, or else he does put a sword into our enemies
hands to slay us. Exodus 5.21. Is not this the general cry, we are not helped,
we shall not be helped; we do not see, we shall not see? yes, then the case is
remediless, all is given over, as lost. Oh what ado had we not long since to
quiet the pensive! and to silence the discontented! Our enemies persecution was
not worse then our friends impatience; nor the despite of the one, then the
despair of the other. Oh our slavery has thus long continued, we are a lost
people, This is of the Lord, why should we wait upon the Lord any longer? 2
Kings 6.33. What do our Statesmen comfort us? do our pulpits bid us hope for
better times? both of us seemed but as Impostours to them; Sure I am, for our
selves, that if we preached unto them, that upon true repentance they might yet
expect a redemption out of all miseries, they were ready to deride us, and defy
us, and to count us seditious, yea to call us Temple-Lunaticks, and infatuated,
and intoxicated Royalists. But has not God shamed this incredulous generation?
yes, and taught them confidence in the midst of exigents. Assiance is the best
Diet-bread to live upon in tribulation.

(...) Euripid.
Hopes feeds the exiled. Whatsoever sad Prognostics there be for the present,
yet

Coelum adhuc volvitur, Theocrit.
Heaven is yet turning about. The Poles stand not more firmly, then Gods
decrees; the access of the Sun to the Tropicks is not more certain, then the
motion of Gods unchangeable purposes. Can God for ever forsake the true members
of the Church? no Hellgates shall not prevail against them. This is unto me as
the waters of Noah. Is. 54.9. The promises of God are yea, and Amen. That which
is not now apparent may afterward be manifested, that which is not now seen
may in a short time be seen, Thine eyes shall see.

Thine eyes shall see, and do thine eyes see? then where are thine eyes? have
thou the desire of thy eyes, and is there not the delight of thine eyes? oh
yes, the light of the eyes rejoices the heart. Prove. 15.30. For wherefore has
God made the seeing eye, but that when it does see, what it would see, it
should see it with a transportment? then the eyes should be lift up to Heaven,
and they should look upon the Author with an exultation; then there should be
the magnifying tongue for the seeing eye, and a thankful heart for the joyful
sight; then there should be praise for the fruit of Divine Providence, and
blessing for a blessing. For does God visit us, and are we not sensible of his
presence? does he put an Object to our eyes, and know we not what it is to be
Eyewitnesses of his goodness, and kindness? what stupid Spectatours are we?
how blind are our eyes? then we deserve not such a present, nor to have seen
such a mercy. Contempt, penury, thraldom had been fitter for us to have looked
upon, then peace, safety, prosperity. Do ye thus requite the Lord oh foolish
people? thus, for breaking your yoke, ridding you from hard bondage, and
setting your feet in a large place? Has he filled your land with songs, and
can ye not hear? has he replenished the Nation with astonishable sights, and
can ye not see? Is this your entertainment of blessings? is this your glee upon
mercies? I find more sparkles, and glowing incentives then these in the breasts
of Heathens; the Aeginets when they returned from Troy, their kindred which
never thought to have seen them again (so many of their fellows being
destroyed, with the wars, Plut. Graecan. quaest.
and tempests) opened their doors to them, and well-comed them home with
solemn Feasts, and sacrificed sixteen days to Neptune with dances. The
Grecians which had been a long time in the wars of Cyrus, Diod. l. 14. Biblioth.
when they had liberty to return home to their own Country, they no sooner came
to the sight of the Euxine Sea, but they shouted as if they would have shaken
down the woods. Flaminius by the sound of Trumpet proclaiming liberty to the
Corinthians, Plut. in Flamin.
Euboians Phocenses, Locrenses, Achaians, and the greatest part of Greece, when
they expected nothing but bondage, their acclamations were so loud that they
were heard from the Isthmian games to the Seashore; and have we neither
heart strings, nor tongue-strings to make melody upon such occasions? where
then is our grace? where is our zeal? know we not what it is to come out of a
Correction-house? know we not what it is to lay aside fetters? oh that God
should deliver such a people, as understand not the worth of liberty! or bless
such a people as have not eyes to see the blessing! what? senseless in what we
do feel? and blind in what we do see? can there be more flinty hearts? and
atrofied eyes? But thus it is, we are sick for many things when we want them,
and surfeted when we do enjoy them; we would give millions for them when they
are absent, but scarcely a gale of praises for them, when they are present; as
sweet things perish with the taste, so happy things with the sight; we look on
them once, and never cast an eye toward them after. We are much the better for
Gods favors, but what is he the better for our interest in them? Who would
think, that this were the Land, where God had shot out his arrow of
deliverance, brought people out of horrible slavery, broken the staff of the
wicked, has given the answer of peace, commanded the bloody sword into the
scabbard, raised up a hill of blessings, lighted up his candle, made a wast
ground to flourish again as the rose? What honor has God for all these large
mercies? what but a few smiles and frolicks, rantings and chantings, feastings
and plumings, a little good language, and a little good studying of old
principles? are there fewer riots, oaths, bribes, frauds in the Nation then
formerly? what consciences are renewed, or hearts changed by the sense of all
these blessings? what? are the Church, or the Universities, or the captives, or
the poor the better for the change of the times? Do every one now emulate who
shall be the nobler Benefactour? or excel most in pious works? where are the
Characters of our thankfulness? or the monuments that we have raised up to
Gods blessings? Are there many of these hallowed portions offered up to Heaven?
are there many of these religious Dedications? no, I am afraid that in stead of
the fruit of the Blessing, there is nothing but the benefit and advantage of it
minded, to lay hold on rich offices, and to fall to trading with a kind of
eagerness, and to build Banquetting-houses for Libertines to recreate
themselves together; but there is not a trowel yet provided for God, nor a
Carver spoken to set up a graven piece to Heaven. Where then is our eying of
Gods blessing? no, we did see it, but we did but desire a glance of it, we have
viewed it enough, we are weary with looking on it. But if we be no better
Observers of Objects, is there not a defect in our eyesight? yes, there is
either a distemper in the Conjunctive of the eye, or some tubercle in our
eyelid, or some obstruction in the prunal, there is either a phthisis, or
Strabismus, or Hippos, whereby an Ophthalmy, Aegilops, Pisthia, Mydriasis, or
Cataract is gotten into the eye, for we cannot see what we did see, we cannot
see, what is yet plainly to be seen. Oh therefore let us betake our selves to
some good Oculist, that we may recover our sight, for it is a shame to be so
bad-sighted in discerning blessings. There are many which malign us this
happiness, their eyes roll to the corners that they might not look upon it,
there is this Oculus nequam in the head of every Sectary, or Phanatick; now
though there be lithiasis, or epiphora in our Adversaries, so that they seem
like goggle-eyed, or squint-eyed persons looking with a distortion upon our
prosperous condition, yet shall there be emphisma, or myopia in us that we
should be dark-eyed, or narrow-eyed in seeing our own felicity? no, that which
we desired to see with so much vehemence, let us now look upon it intensively;
oh let us embrace that Rachel with all manner of affection, for which we
endured so many years of hardship to obtain her. Oh that our God went at a
great price with us, that we would weigh him out a National gratitude according
to the value of his favors, that our apprehension were as signal as his
goodness! We can never Arithmetically requite him, let us give him some
Geometrical proportion. Let us conspire together to send him a bountiful
present, yea say, here Lord take a freewill-offering for the benefit of our
liberties, lives, consciences. Thou have given us a Kingdom-redemption, accept
of a Kingdom-retribution. Oh that we knew how to retaliate! to weigh out God a
recompense according to the shekel of the Sanctuary! that every one of us would
strive who should have the most devout heart, or the most thankful hand. Will
we be sparing to such a munificent God? can there ever be enough given for such
Halcyon-dayes? What have ye gained by them? shall God rise up a looser? no, let
the extension of our commemoration, and remuneration answer the latitude of
Gods benevolence and benediction. It becomes well the just to be thankful,
then what degree of thankfulness do we owe to God Almighty? ye that are strict
in your engagements, and desire to satisfy every man to a Deneere, remember
your obligation to Heaven, and pay God his debt, his preservation-debt. The
felicity of the Nation is manifest, the piety of the Nation is tried; We are
the happyest people upon earth, let us be the holiest people upon earth;
wheresoever God has his spiritual race, let the Englishman be the Saint; Let
every one of the Reformed Church, be a transformed Protestant. It is a shame,
that here should be a Libertine, or that any Sectary, or Papist should excel
us in purity. Gods mercies require more innocence at our hands, the brightness
of his favors oblige us to brightness of sanctity, yea that the Kingdom all
over should shine in the radiancy of grace. Oh therefore let us enamel our
blessings, and as we have reigning mercies amongst us, so let us set a Crown
upon the head of them. Let here be the new creatures, the children of light,
the lively stones, the seed of the blessed, the trees of righteousness, the
people that are partakers of the divine nature, that have a lot amongst them
which are sanctified, that are bought from men, men that this world is not
worthy of, yea let the whole Land be turned into a Kingdom of Priests. We ought
to do this for our very sights sake, our Objects do require us to be such
Ornaments, and our mercies such Mirrours. What should be seen in us, when so
much is seen by us? We see that which we did not see, we see that, which we
were once afraid we should never have seen; Though we be now in fruition, and
our eyes do see, yet let us remember how remote this happiness was, at what a
distance the Object was placed from us, we had it but in expectation, or our
greatest propinquity to it was in a promise, the sight reserved to the future,
Thine eyes shall see.

2 Part. The King.

I have done with the opening of the Cabinet, I now come to take out the Gemme.
Seeing there is a sight I would fain see what it is; Is it the best of the
Nation? then I wipe mine eyes to look upon him. Has he been hid in a cloud?
then it will be pleasure to see him, when God does present him. Has he not for
many years been seen, and is now the seeing time come? then I can no longer
withold mine eyes from him, no I passionately desire to see the King. Thine
eyes shall see the King. The King. From hence observe, that A King is the
perfection of all earthly Objects. Of all desirable and delectable Sights that
this world can afford, a King is the splendor of them. Thine eyes shall see
the King. He is publici decoris lampas, the lamp of public brightness;
Cassiod. Seneca in Hecuba. Matthias Agrittius. Lud. Vives ad Henr. 8. Homer.
Greg. in Pastorali. Agap. diae. de off. reg. Philo Iud. de Charit. Aug. de 12.
abus. grad. 6. Procop. in Genes. 2. Naz. Tertull. Chrysostom.
Coelitum egregius labor, the Masterpiece of the divine Artisan; Excubitor
communis salutis, The Watchman, or Sentinel of the common safety; magnum regni
columen, the great pillar of the Kingdom; (...), the heavenly dew to water a
Nation; Caput quod ab alto providet, The head which from above does provide for
multitudes; Oculus innatus corpori, the eye set in the head to look for the
general good; Peritus Gubernator, the skillful Mariner which does preserve the
whole bark from perishing; Paxillus reipublicae, the stay, or supporter, upon
which hang the weight of a whole Commonwealth; Ignis qui urit, and lucem
praebet, The fire which does burn up all the wicked, and does give light to all
the Godly. Yea, the Ancients knowing the high benefit of such a supreme
Governor know not how to bestow Elogies, and Encomiasticks enough upon him;
And does not Scripture concur with these, and set out a King with as great
luster? yes, I have said ye are Gods, Ps. 82.6. As if a King were (...), the
Medal, wherein Gods own Image is represented, Alter Deus in terris, another God
upon earth. For (me think) I see in a King a semblance of Gods infinite being,
his quickening spirit, his outstretched arm, and his glorious Majesty. He is
not the Divinity, but a Synopsis of the Divinity, (...), a God exemplified, or
effigiated. Why are Kings so promised to Abraham, Kings shall come out of thy
loins, and so prophesied of by Jacob, Judah shall have a Scepter, and so
passionately desired by the people, Give us a King, and so confirmed by God
Almighty, by an Institution, an Oath, and by the holy oil, yea, why is God
himself called the great King, the King of glory, and the King of Kings, if
there were any thing upon earth more eminent then a King? As it is the greatest
curse upon earth to want a King; For many days shall pass in Israel without a
King. Hos. 3.4. and because we feared not the Lord, therefore we have no King.
Hos. 10.3. So it is the greatest blessing to have a King, for the shout of a
King is amongst them. Number. 23.21. and the Lord has given you a King. 1 Samuel
12.13. and, Why do thou cry out? Is there not a King in thee? Micah 4.9. as
if a King were there, all were well. When I read of so much reverence, and
awful subjection enjoined to Kings, that we must submit to them for the Lords
sake, and not resist them for fear of damnation, that we must not provoke them
to wrath, not stand in an evil thing against them, not curse them in our
bed-chambers; how do I think that Kings are pricelessely tendered by God
Almighty, and that they are his chief Favorites! yea, wherefore does he
command so many prayers and supplications to be made for them, and that with a
(...), especially, as if he would have the lips of a whole Nation to sacrifice
for their safety and welfare, if Kings were not the principal persons, which
God had under his protection, and tutelage? Well then if either Gods love, or
his laws, his titles, or his privileges, his mission, or commission, his
consecration, or conservation, his impresse, or his Image, his watchful
providence, or his irefull vengeance concerning Kings be to be regarded, we
cannot imagine any persons more conspicuous or precious, excellent or eminent
then Kings. No, man's eyes can see no more exquisite, and magnificent Creature
upon earth then a King, for Thine eyes shall see the King.

1. This serves first to show us the high sins of this Nation, Applic.
which for many years deprived us of this happy sight. Did we not provoke the
eyes of Gods glory? yes, we may discern it by the judgment upon our eyes, We
saw not a King. God is deeply incensed, when he does take away the Diadem.
Ezech. 21.26. and people have been Transgressors to purpose, when it may be
said to them, Where is thy King that should help thee in all thy Cities? Hos.
13.10. yea, when the Crown is fallen from their head, they may cry woe unto us
we have sinned. Lament. 5.16. Have they not broken Gods Laws grievously, when
the breakor shall come up before them, and lay hold upon him that sits in
the Throne, so that the King shall go out before them, and the Lord shall be
upon their heads? Micah. 2.13. oh God is ready to disannull the Covenant, which
he made with his people, when he does break this staff of Beauty. Zach. 11.10.
would to God then, that we were as sensible of our Sins as our Sufferings, and
our wickedness, as our wretchedness. We lost the sight of a King for our
guilty eyes, and have we not gained the sight of him again with the some
criminal eyes? have we so minded and mortified, revieved and renounced our
known corruptions, that we welcomed the King into a cleansed Land? were there
none but Penitents, which fetched him in? It is true, that though there be
corruption in the wound, yet there is health in the medicine, but do not we
carry our old ulcers about us, insomuch that though we have been wounded, In
vulnere samies in medicina purgatio.
yet we refuse to apply a plaster for cure, so that our former botches
remaining, we have but brought home the King to a Lazer house? Oh that we had
had as much desire to renew our consciences, as to renew our State, and to take
away the cords of our iniquity, Chrysostom. de pun. s. 3. Nos, qui vulnerati sumus,
obligari poenitentia erubescimur. Bern. Sermon. de circumcis.
as to take off our fetters, and to see the face of Christ, as to see the face
of the King; but I doubt, that there have been few of these desires, or few of
these eyes; we had eyes to look only to our deliverance, not to our duties, to
the change of our miseries, not of our manners, n="*" Laert. l. 5.
Lyc(...)n the scholar of Straton could speak so eloquently that he was called
Glycon, sweet speech, but he wrote so harshly, that no man would read what he
penned; So we are curious Rhetoricians to speak of good things, but the worst
Scribes in the world to write out accurately in our conversations, what we have
delivered elegantly with our tongues. What we were at the beginning of our
miseries the same we are still, and have gotten no more mortification by
passing through variety of calamities, then fishes do get into them any salt
taste by swimming a long time in brackish Seawaters, Apollon. de Hist. mirabil.
or then Eunomus did get any purging from his corrupt humors, by taking two
and twenty potions of Hollebore. Oh inflexible hearts oh fruitless judgments!
It were well therefore, that we would disperse that cloud that kept the light
of the Sun so long from us; do we suffer these thieves to range up, and down at
liberty, till they have robbed us once more of our Gemme? This had need to be
the contrite Land, when our impenitency has done us so much mischief. Oh let
us know the trespass by the punishment; our sins stripped us of much honor, and
left the Land naked, when they plucked the Robe of Majesty from the back of it.
Let us know at last that our Sins are old Chasers, when they drove a King out
of the Land, it is a judgment to be deprived of a King, when it is an
happiness to see a King. Thine eyes shall see the King.

the want of a King is the Iulet of all infelicity. For how can that Land be
happy, where the eyes do not see a King? no, then servants ride on horseback.
10. Eccles. 7. The people shall be oppressed every one of another, and every
one of his neighbor, the children shall presume against the ancient, and the
vile against the honorable. Is. 3.5. for when the Kings are fallen, Hos. 7.7.
all welfare fall with them, then presently they are mixed with strange worships,
strangers devour their strength, and gray hairs are here and there upon them,
Hos. 7.8.9. yea, when Princes are hanged up by the hand, then the young are
taken to grind, and the children fall under the wood, the Elders cease from the
gate, and the young men from their songs, the joy of their heart is gone, and
their dance is turned into mourning. Lament. 5.12, 13, 14, 15. nay God does no
sooner remove the Crown, but the Kingdom is no more the same it was, then
presently God overturn, overturn, overturn. Ezech. 21.26.27. when the true
Shepherd is removed, then there is nothing to be seen in the Nation, but the
instruments of a foolish Shepherd, of such a Shepherd, which will not look
for the thing that is lost, nor seek the tender Lambs, nor heal that which is
hurt, nor feed that which stands up, but he shall eat the flesh of the fat,
and tear their claws in pieces. Zach. 11.15.16. Take away such a Shepherd,
and the poor flock goes to woeful desolation, for Arise oh Sword upon my
Shepherd, and upon the man that is my fellow, that is, Gods immediate
Vicegerent, and what then? and the sheep are scattered, and God turn his hand
upon the little ones, And in all the Land says the Lord two parts therein
shall be cut off, and dye. Zach. 13.7.8. So that where a King is wanting, what
but disorder, distraction, devastation, and desolation is to be expected? And
have not we had experience of it? yes, so soon as a King was gone, how did
every one wear the Crown, and sit in the Chair of State? peasants were Princes,
and Mechanics Monarchs, never such a spawne of new Lords, nor a litter of
upstart Rulers seen, paradoxes were principles, and Sanctity was little better
then South-saying, the Temple was a kind of Tiring-room, liberty was leaguing,
free trade was purchasing Delinquents Estates, and allegiance was conspiracy.
Were there ever so many fundamental Laws overthrown, so many families ruined,
so many millions spent, so many bowels torn out in five hundred years within
this Realm, as there were in this short space of King-routing? alas
consciences, estates, privileges, speeches, looks, affections, labors, laws,
lives were all subject to the will of the insulting Conqueror. So that as
Pyrrhus said of Sicily in respect of the Romans, Sabell. l. 9. E^. 4.
and Carthaginians, so might it be said of this Land in respect of our factious
Rulers, it was but the Stage where mad men played their prizes; and as Ate is
said to be cause of all the labors of Hercules, so our ejecting a King was the
Original of all the miseries of the Nation. In those days when there was no
King in Israel, every man did that, which was good in his own eyes. Judge. 17.6.
and we found it, for humor was then order, power was law, and divination was
the Divinity of the times. The Fox-burrow of Triers took away men's gifts, the
Cutpurse-hall of a Committee of Indemnity took away men's rights, and the bloody
Shambles of an High Court of Justice took away men's heads. Oh sad age of
arbitrary commands! oh dismal Reign! oh miserable Realm without a King! will
ye ever engage again to be ruled without King, or House of Lords? will ye ever
be ready to take an oath of Abjuration again against a single Person? Then be
ye for my part single, and singular, desperate, and wilful Bondmen. For it is
to make the whole Nation a slave to be destitute of a King, the presence of a
King being the preservation of a Kingdom, for Thine eyes shall see the King.



Virg.
-- visum mirabile Cunctis. It is a sight that the eyes of a whole Nation might
behold with admiration. Do ye not bless your eyes then, that ye are seeing
that, which ye have been so long seeking for? Do ye not know what ye could not
see, what ye would have seen, what ye do see? Do the delight of a Kingdom
grieve you? does the desire of your eyes offend you? Have ye not what can be
seen? can ye see a better? If thine eye then offend thee pluck it out, pluck
out that evil glaucome out of thine eye. The eye is the light of the body. Have
as clear an eye, as can be to see so bright an Object. Is there a diseased eye
here? oh cure the malady. Are there any moles here? away with such Blinkards;
are there any Bats here? away with such unlucky birds; Did the sight of
Ostriches offend you, and shall not the sigh: of a Phoenix please you? Quivis
delectatur cum lumen videat. Demosth. Ficinus.
Every man is delighted when he does see the light, and what is a King, but the
Light of our eyes? The eye does receive the beams of the Sun in a spiritual
manner, and so do ye the sight of a King, that glorious Sun. Was Jacob so
delighted when he heard that his Son Joseph was alive, that his heart failed
him, and his spirit revived? Genesis 25.27.28. Were the Israelites so affected
when they heard that the Arc (which had a long time been kept captive amongst
the Philistines) was returning, that they left their wheat-harvest to look upon
the Arc? 1. Sam. 6.13. were the Jews in Shushan so transported that Hamans
bloody decree was reversed, that it caused joy and gladness amongst them, and
they kept a Feast, and a good day? 9. Ester 22. then what great melody and
festivity may it be to us that we have our Joseph to look upon, our Arc gilded
within and without to behold, and a day of Purim to keep for a deliverance from
the savagest decree, that the malice of man could invent? Oh that we have
opportunity to commemorate these things, that we have the happiness with our
eyes freely to see them! was it a joyful thing once to hear of a King, and
shall it not be much more joyful to see a King? yes, the sense of sight is
much more perfect then that of hearing. Sensus visus perfectior est auditu.
Plotinus.
If your eyes then should not take pleasure in that which was once so
comfortable to your ears, your eyes are wonderfully distant from your ears,
as Thales said. Oh then that all the hearts of the Kingdom should not spring
with joy, that all the feet of the Kingdom should not leap with Triumph, that
all the eyes of the Kingdom should not gaze with pleasure to see such a
solacing, satisfying, triumphant Object presented to the sight! Ye have not now
a King living, or honored beyond Sea, or counted worthy of a Crown by very
strangers which conversed with him, but the faces of his own people are blessed
with the sight of him; he is come toward you, he is come near you, he is come
home to you. And what went ye out to see? nay what is brought into your Throne
to see? Can there be a more bright, amiable, delectable, splendid, illustrious,
supereminent, matchless, majestical sight for the eyes of a whole Realm to
look upon then a King? no, Thine eyes shall see the King.

to make a King Royal. And how Royal? but in being your selves Loyal? How is he
a King without Royalty? and how are ye Subjects without Loyalty? The Hebrews
have a Proverb; that a man should fly out of that Kingdom, where a King is not
obeyed. And doubtless no Nation shaken with a Quag-mire, or tossed with an
Earthquake is more dangerous to stand upon. Rebellions are the burning fevers
of Realms, the Deluges of States, the Eclipses of Nations, the Hericanoes of
Kingdoms. Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, Sam. 15.23. for then all the
Magicians are at work, and using all the prestigiatory inventions of their
black Art. Simon Magus, Balaam, Jannes and Jambres had not more pernicious
rules, and practices, then these State-witches, they are like the Bythiae in
Scythia, which had four apples of the eye in their heads, Plin. l. 7. c. 2.
and killed all which they looked upon with their angry eyes. Traitors upon
earth are but the disciples of Judas, or the State-students of Achitophel, or
the Spirits that learn their aspiring Art of Lucifer. Goodly pedagogues that
they are trained under, if I would have an Academy of Hell set up, I would have
Traitors there commence, and become Graduates. The Law taught no such
principles. No, The Fathers children must bow down before him that is in chief
authority. Genesis 49.8. Who can lay his hand upon the Lords anointed, and be
guiltless? 1. Sam. 26.9. and against a King there is no rising up. Prove.
30.31. The Gospel has no such Maxims. No, let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, for there is no power, but of God, and the powers that be are
ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the power resists the
Ordinance of God, and they which resist shall receive to themselves damnation.
Romans 13.1.2. Put them in remembrance that they be subject to principalities,
and powers, and that they be obedient. Tit. 3.1. Submit your selves unto every
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme. 1
Pet. 2.13. Woe be to them, that walk in the gainsaying of Corah. Jude 11.
Seditions are works of the flesh. Gal. 5.20. Despisers of Government, and those
which speak evil of dignities are called Drea^ers, which defile the flesh. Jude
8. Traitors, heady highminded men are put amongst the wickedest people of the
most perilous times. 2. Tim. 3.4. Oh then that men live under a King fomenting
sedition, gendring treason, yea that count it a part of their Divinity to cast
firebrands, and fire Beacons, and strike up drums, and display colors, and
shoot off warning pieces against their Sovereigns, that if they have not a
pliable King, they will fright him into Accommodation, if they have not a King
according to their own mind, they will fight him into their bent, this is
Pole-axe-religion, Gunpowder-Divinity. How can these profess the name of God?
take a Bible into their hands? preach the Gospel of peace? be ghostly Fathers
at the hour of dissolution? or prepare men for Gods judgment seat? They which
should teach all the Land obedience, do they teach nothing but mutinies,
insurrections, tumults, factions, defections, conspiracy, disloyalty? Thou
which say thou know Gods will, and allowest of the things that are
excellent, and perswadest thy self, that thou art a guide of the blind, and a
light to them that are in darkness, an instructor of them that lack
discretion, a teacher of the unlearned, which have the form of knowledge, and
of the truth in the Law. Thou which teach another, teach thou not thy
self? Romans 2.18, 19, 20, 21. If thou thy self be a Wolf, how will thou get
Lambs? Christ never sent his Messengers to be Muster-masters, or
Master-Gunners. A Preacher of all others should be the great Physician,
Breach-closer, Peacemaker upon earth; Christ's patience, the Martyrs ashes, the
counsel of peace in his lips, and the blessed Sacraments in his hands should
teach him this. As he is a Watchman he should not be a Match-man, as he is a
Master Builder, he should not be a Master-pioner, as he is an Angel of the
Churches, he should not be an Angel of the bottomless pit. Is rebellion any of
the sincere milk which should be sucked out of his breasts? any of the pure oil
which should burn in his lamp? any of the fat things, and fined things at his
sumptuous Feast? any of the fragrant smells amongst his sweet odours? Is this
for Christ to be the Star, the Vine, the Shepherd, to ride upon a white Horse,
and to hold the four winds in his hand? Is this for Christ to eat butter, and
honey, not to cry, nor cause his voice to be heard in the streets, to wear a
seamelesse coat, and to be led dumb before the shearers? where is Christ's
innocence, meekness, his rebuking his Disciples for calling for fire from
Heaven, his commanding St. Peter to put up his sword in any of these things? If
the weapons of our warfare be not carnal, 2 Cor. 10.4. then why are spiritual
men so active in a carnal warfare? these may prophesy in Christ's name, but it
is to be doubted whether they shall not be turned off with a Nescio vos, I know
you not. In it is vain to talk of the profound mysteries of Christ, when these
depths of Satan are amongst them. All the drugs in their shop are suspected by
this one box of Aconite. These may have Christ's Cross often in their mouths,
but did they ever lay it upon their shoulders? they may have drunk of his new
wine, but can they drink his sponge full of vinegar? they may hold his keys in
their hands, but can they endure to put his yoke about their necks? they have
preached things upon the housetop, but can they put their mouths in the dust?
they can show their confident faces to Congregations, but can they give their
backs to the smiters, and their cheeks to the nippers, and not hide their faces
from shame and spitting? no, they may be men of very great parts, but I doubt
not of very great patience. God is so tender of the peace of the Church, that
he does charge the daughters of Jerusalem by the roes, and hinds, that they
stir not up, nor waken his love until she please. Cantic. 3.5. but please,
or not please upon the least discontent they care not to waken and fright her
too; if she will not awake of her self they will blow trumpets in her ears, and
make her open her eyes with a peale of Ordnance. So that they seem not to be
Preachers of pacification, but Lecturers, under the slag of defiance, and
Chaplains of the Gun-roome. Now what sanctity can there be, where there is
sedition? what conscience where there is conspiracy? they which care not to
violate a manifest precept, what laws of God can they be thought truly to
dread? this is a sin so odious that the very Heathens have abhorred it. When
the n="*" Quomodo convenit, Oh Ephori tot juvenes ei credere, qui suam ipsius
patriam prodidit (...) Plut. in Lacon. Ista manu non proditurus es aliam
civitatem, Eras. l. 5. c. 6. Plut. Herod. l. 6. Suidas. Diod. l. 19. Alex. ab.
Alex. l. 2. c. 13. Pausaniay in Phocicis.
Ephori would have committed the strength of their Country into the hands of a
rebellious Leader, says Agis, Why do ye trust him with any thing; who has
betrayed his own Country? When Cilicon had betrayed the Priennenses as he
stretched to receive his meat, Theagenes cut off his hand, saying, thou shall
not have a right hand to betray another City. When Archidamus would have
enticed Nicostratus to betray his Country, oh says he, boast no more of thy
high pedigree, for thou seem not to be of the stock of Hercules, because
thou do tempt me to so base a thing. How sharply did Artaphernes reprove
Histiaeus for making the shoe of rebellion for the Ionians, that Aristagoras
might put it on. Xerxes because Aribarzanes rebelled against him, he took him,
and crucified him. Apollonides because the Stymphalians rebelled against
Cassander, he subduing them burnt them all to ashes. Aemilius after he had
conquered Perseus taking many Romans which had been Rebels against their own
Country, he caused them to be trampled to death by Elephants. The Amphyctions
after the battle with Xerxes taking the Phocenses who had sided with the enemy
against the Crecians, and robbed the Temple of Apollo, they slew many of them,
rased three of their prime Cities, causing them to dwell afterward in
villages, and laid a tax of threescore talents yearly for the repairing the
Temple. Oh then that that sin which has been held a horrid crime amongst
Heathens should be accounted a prime virtue amongst Christians! is it not a
shame that the light of Nature should shine brightlier then the light of the
Gospel? is it not a scandal that God should provoke such Professors to
jealousy by a foolish Nation? Shall Gentiles teach Christians Divinity? how
will these justify their selves at the last day, when the Heathens shall rise
up in judgment against them? If ye are then to look upon a King, as a King,
beware of Salomons winking eye. When ye have not faithful eyes to look upon a
King, Chrysostom. hom. 55. in Johan.
ye will soon have treacherous feet, yea amissis oculis frustra sunt pedes, if
your eyes have lost their reverence to a King, your feet will soon have lost
their obedience to him. I trust our King has none about him, which are
troubled in their eyesight, if he should, then those which have bad eyes, will
soon have bad hearts. I wish them all to have good optic nerves, good
Crystalline humors, good visory spirits. Pity it is, that there should be any
vermin at Court, any spiders hanging upon the Kings rafters, that there should
be any bad tongues nigh to the Kings ears, any bad eyes nigh to the Kings
face; no, though there may be some distempered sights in the Kingdom, yet it
were shame and horror, if there should be a Polyphemus, and a Cyclops,
howsoever a Tiresias and a Hypsea. What they which eat the Kings bread, and are
sworn to preserve the Kings person, not clear-sighted to see his honor? then
they deserve neither the eyes in their heads, nor the necks on their shoulders.
The Furcifer is the fittest Oculist to cure such bloud-shotten eyes. And as I
would take all bad eyes out of the Court, so my desire is to free the Kingdom
from such bad-sighted people. Rebellion is an high defect in the eye of
Subjection, therefore let all beware how they comply with the sand-blind,
stark-blind generation, for If the blind lead the blind both will fall into the
ditch. Therefore if there be a King, then amongst you give him the reverence
and right of his Name, that is, be ye Loyal to him. Do ye all then make a
Covenant with your eyes not to look upon a maid, that beautiful Damosel of
disloyalty; if she with her fair speech can make you to yield, and with her
flattering lips entice you to step in to her, ye go like an ox to the
slaughter, and like a fool to the stocks of correction, till a dart does strike
through your liver, or ye be as a bird, which hasteneth to the snare, not
knowing that it is for your life. Beware therefore that ye do not commit
fornication with that noted prostitute, she will bring you to a morsel of
bread, and hunt for your precious life; howsoever a wound, and dishonor ye
shall get, and your reproach shall never be wiped away. Keep therefore a chaste
heart to your own Bridegroom, and seek not after strange flesh. If ye do commit
uncleanness, ye may thank your wandering eyes, and your eyes full of adultery,
Monarchy is that Government, which ye ought to be espoused to. Look therefore
where ye should look, and see whom ye should see, and that is a King; See him
to be a King, and see him, as a King; for that duty is that which must complete
the delight of my Text, Thine eyes shall see the King.

Fifthly, this does serve to reprove them, which would quite take a King out of
the world, which would not have one King for any eye to look upon; these are
the right Basiliskes to sting to death the Basilic calling. (...) a King shall
be so far from being (...), the foundation of a Commonwealth, that he shall
be (...) the mischief, and destruction of a Commonwealth. Good Commonwealth-men
they are in the mean while, which take away the honor and Ornament of a
Commonwealth. For a King in a Commonwealth is like the heart in the body, the
root in the tree, the Spring in the stream, the Eagle in the sky, the Sun in
the firmament, and these pink-eyed people look upon a King not only with
disdain, but defiance. Neque mel, neque apes; Tryphon
They like not the honey of Government, nor the Be that should afford it them.
This wild colt that he might not be backed at all neigheth up and down in the
world against the Rider, and says, Aristoph.
Toll calcar take away the very Spur. To such a King is an heart-gripe, an
eyesore, yea they can look upon their Fawnes, and Satyrs, Anakims, and
Zanzummims, Arbahs, and Ashbibenobs with more delight then upon a King. What
need have we of a King? what does a King amongst us? They have cried themselves
so long to be the freeborn people of England, that they would not only be
free in respect of liberty, but free in respect of Sovereignty. Oh this same
Monarchy (say they) is the great bondage of the world! King-ship, and
Gospel-ship cannot stand together. Virgil.
Cur non Mopse? why not brother of Christ? How can Christ be a King here, when
he says, that his Kingdom is not of this world? doubtless these persons make
themselves Angels which expect Christ to Reign over them? Why may not Kings
here exercise authority, when Christ suffered them? He paid tribute to Caesar,
and wished all men to give unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's. Why do he
himself often compare himself to a King, and call himself the King of Kings, if
there should be no such thing as a King? Was is not prophesied, that Kings
should be noursing Fathers to the Church? yes, and in the time of the Gospel,
it is said, that Kings shall hate the Whore, and eat her flesh, and burn her
with fire. Rev. 17.16. and that not only the people which are saved should
walk in the light of the new Jerusalem, but that the Kings of the earth should
bring glory, and honor to it. Rev. 21.24. In what one place of the whole
Scripture is it said that there shall be no Kings? no, I find it not in Holy
writ, but in holy fancy, in the Acts of the Pragmatical. I believe the religion
of the business is rapine, that such might share amongst them the Crown-Land,
and every Mechanic might sit in a Chair of State; goodly Domination we should
have under such Kings, their free Monarchy would be as good as their free
Ministry. But let them leave fulminating against Kings, for I do not find in
the whole Bible one thunderbolt cast at the calling. If Scripture be their
Rule, I do not see there but that Kings may as well enjoy their Robes, as they
their unlaced Jackets. The Gospel does take away from none propriety, nor from
Kings Prerogative. Christ knew that Kings would be the best Guardians to his
Church, for from whom has Christianity received more suffrage and Patronage,
favor and furtherance, promotion and propagation then from Kings? who were
greater Foster-fathers to Religion, then Constantine, Theodosius, Justinian,
Gratian, Tiberius the second, Theophilus, and many others? oh these were the
great Pillars to support the building, the Torch-bearers of faith, the high
Stewards in Christ Court, and the high Chamberlains to the spouse of Christ
Jesus. The Church had never more Sovereignty, then by these pious Princes
wearing the Cross upon their Crowns. When Kings had the command of the Churches
mint, there was coin truly stamped, we had since little else but Alchyn^y;
when these Fathers begat Children to God Almighty we had a lovely Progeny, we
have had since too many Harmaphrodites. Aliud sceptrum, aliud plectrum. It is
one thing to be a good Monarch, another thing to be a good Minstrel, vulgar
spirits are not fit for public Government. Quid caeco cum speculo? What should
a blind man do with a glass? so what should an ignorant Plebeian do with the
glass of Magistracy? Feli crocoton? shall the Mousecatcher wear the Robe of
honor? Alia Menecles, alia Porcellus. The Tradesman does speak of one thing,
and the Prince of another. What then? is not every man fit to be a Prince, and
yet are there men apt to pull down Princes, that Kings being stripped,
Canvas-coat might wear the Robe? Alas, e squila non nascitur rosa, there must
be an indoles for Government. What then? shall we have Prince blown away with a
whirlwind? no, Christ cannot spare them; He which does give laws for Princes
to be reverenced does not make them Out-lawes, Christ will not lose his chief,
and best servant out of his Family. Christ does find Princes so beneficial to
him, that his Kingdom, and their Kingdom shall fall together. And yet these
Larves of profession, Hob-goblins of Christianity, Zanies of the Gospel,
Decoyes of faith, and Cacodaemons of a Church, what a clamor do they raise in
the world to pull down all Princes. But they which are Arch-Dissemble is in
other things, which say they are all spirit, and yet we find them rank flesh;
which say they must not fight, and yet they are ever with a sword in their
hands; which say they must turn the other cheek also, and yet are ever anon
fisting our cheeks; which say that they desire nothing but liberty of
conscience, and yet their practice has been to inslave all them which are not
of their own conscience; which say that they would possess the earth as the
incek, and yet have possessed the earth as the furious; these men as they have
been equivocal in all other things, so much more in this of Government, for
they would have no Kings, that Beggars might be Kings, not to carry the name,
but to exercise the power of Kings to the height. To get the Scepter into their
hand how turbulent, and truculent have they been? Germany has felt enough of
them by the uproars which were raised by Thomas Muntzer, John Buckhold, David
Georg, Bernard Knipperdoling; etc. but the saddest Tragedy has been reserved
to be acted upon our Stage. Who have refled houses, and steyned the land with
blood more then the Anabaptists, Levellers and fifth Monarchy-men? In all the
wars who were more forward and fierce then these? whose voices were louder?
whose swords were sharper? who have shown more rage against the Kingdom, and
more rancour against Kings? Are not these the men, which chased away our Dread
Sovereign Charles the first of blessed memory from his Court? which fought
against him to the last stroke? which when they had taken him prisoner carried
him up and down the Land in Triumph? plucked him to prison, when he was ready
to be restored to his Throne, which set up an High Court of Justice against
him, arraigned him, cried out for Justice against him, condemned him, and the
saddest word which ever was spoken in Christendom, beheaded him? Are not these
the men which did vote that our Dread Sovereign Charles the second of blessed
presence should never return to his Throne, and when to astonishment he was
voted in, was there not their great Champion with his Myrmidons at his heels at
Edgehill, what in him and his lay, to keep him out? and when by Miracle he was
brought into the Nation, were not these the men which have been continually
murmuring, and mutining and breaking out into bloody attempts, threatening at
one time that they would destroy the King, and all the Royal race, and
assayling at another time to have blunderbussed both King and Kingdom? Yet is
it not to be feared, that the wild beast of the Forest shall be let loose to
range again? shall we hardly believe the Tiger to be cruel, till he has gorged
himself with a general slaughter? Are such to be won with kindness? or
reclaimed with clemency? No, I am afraid that they are Cockatrices, that will
never be charmed. And yet some mortified man, or other will be pleading for
these self-denying brethren, saying this will be the last of their practices,
and therefore pardon that which is past. Pardon? what till they dash out our
brains with a pardon in their hands? Is it pity to spare vermin, Leopards,
Crocodiles? Beware of Saul's pity in sparing Agag till the Kingdom be rent away
for him, or of Ahabs pity in sparing Benhadad, till life go for life. 1 Kings
20.42. Such prodigious malcontents are ominous, and if they be not timely and
severely punished, they threaten a bloody fate to the whole Nation, that the
King shall be made a Sacrifice, and the Kingdom a whole Burnt-offering. What
the last wind-up of such a connivence will be, Plut.
mox sciemus melius vate, In a short time we may know better, then if any
Prophet foretold it. Post rem devoratam ratio? When all is devoured, Seneca.
shall we then consult how to preserve our selves? Is not the hazard at this
time great? yes, men cannot eat with comfort, nor trade with safety, nor walk
with confidence, nor sleep with quiet so long as the Canaanite is in the Land.
The Kingdom cannot have peace till the head of Sheba be cast over the walls.
Let us not trust their soft speeches, till they have made us speechless, nor
their pale faces, till they have made us look with grisly faces I read of
Mahometane Hermits which lived in woods as men dead to the world, till they had
gotten disciples enough about them, and they set upon the King of Fez, and
Marocco, Knolles in his Turkish History.
and deprived him both of Crown and life. So this critical, hypocritical
generation will so long infatuate us with their tender consciences till they
cut in pieces our tender heart strings. Robes, and Rochets, Stars, and Collars
of S. S. look to your selves, if they give but one twitch more at you, they
will do their best to pluck them quite off, and then deride you for your
Indulgence. Look not to their pretenses, but to their Paradoxes, not to their
Magical charms, but to their bloody Maxims. Shall we never know their tenets
till we have learned them with shivered skuls, nor understand their principles
till they be printed upon the Countries dead carcasses? They which want good
manners we shall find little morality from them; they which will not stir their
hats to us, they are striking at our heads; they which have nothing but Thou in
their mouths, they do count us base, and tell us by that scorning word, that
they are ready to show themselves barbarous. A little of their savage nature is
made apparent, but they have seven abominations in their hearts, which were
never yet discovered to the world. Thus much we may evidently, and
experimentally conclude concerning them, that they would destroy all Lawyers,
gibbet all Nobles, crucify all Bishops, and decoll all Kings, and for a fair
tails sake shall we suffer these Panthers to go scotfree? shall they cut our
throats with aenigmaes? and wring off our necks with Hieroglyphics? Ah this
same new Monarchy does threaten to root out all old Monarchies! and these same
Anabaptists will hazard to rebaptize the Land in her own blood. What do they
dream of, and what may we dread but a general Massacre? Are our wounds then
sarce healed, and shall we tender such stabbers? Is common bloodshed daily
punished with death, and shall we spare such incorrigible Murderers? If they
could but repent, I would tear the heart out of my bosom if it should want
mercy toward them. If Saul would become Paul, I would then embrace him as a
convert, as a Saint; all the havocks which have been made in the Church, and
the cruel outrages for me should be forgotten, and forgiven; but when their
principles are no King, no laws, no Ministry, no superiority, no propriety, I
cannot count these tender consciences, nor carry a tender conscience toward
them. Till they renounce their opinions, I do renounce them, and cannot think
but all their fair words do but prepare, and fore-run (what in them ly) a foul
day. They may make themselves instantly secure, if they please, they would have
made us abjure all Kingly Government to be lawful, if they will but abjure
that as an execrable opinion, and give real assurances, that they abhor it,
then all anger, and fear is at end, but if they persist in this Tragical tenet,
I know not how to pity them, which pity none but themselves; till this be done
all their Declarations are but Incantations,

Fistula dulce canit -- The pipe indeed does play sweetly, but it is at the
Fowlers lips, and let the Birds look to their necks. If they will give us no
pledges of their conversion, and fidelity, I know not why we should put any
confidence, or affiance in them; for the question then is only this, whether
the security of Conspiratours, or the security of the Nation be more requisite;
whether it were better to preserve the lives of lawless Malcontents, or the
life of a lawful King; if the Sages of the Nation can save themselves, let
them save them; but if all true-hearted Subjects live in daily fright of them,
it were better that they should groan under justice, then that we should groan
our last. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the hearts of the children of men are fully set to do evil. Eccles.
8.11. Unto the horse belongs a whip, and to the ass a bridle, and a rod to
the fools back. Prove. 26.3. If the wicked be worthy to be beaten, the Judge
shall cause him to ly down, and to be beaten before his face. Deuteronomy. 25.2. Well,
if for all this these must live, and live with this cancer in their breasts, or
rather with this steeletto in their consciences, yet let them go live where
they may do no mischief, and may not be a continual Dread. Seeing they are so
ready to fight against their own Countrymen, send them to fight against the
great Turk; or they which are so set upon killing, let them be conveyed into
some Island, where they may turn Huntsmen to kill wild beasts, for according to
their present principles, they are fitter to go live amongst Savages, and
Wolves then amongst men of morality, and Christianity. Or yet further if the
mercy of the Land must be the misery of the Land, that here they must continue
if not to our death (perhaps) yet to our terror, then let all beware how they
do consort with them, or in the least manner comply with them, for they are the
pests of States, and prodigees of Nations, they approve of no Government, they
reject all Kings. And can there be greater Monsters in humane society, then
such swordmen against authority, and Headsmen to Kings? no, these are the
worst eyes that can be in the head of a Nation, because the best eyes do
delight in the presence of a King, and count it an happinsse to see a King, for
Thine eyes shall see the King.

3. Part. In his Beauty.

Now let us come to the luster of the Gemme, the Beauty of the King, Thine eyes
shall see the King in his Beauty. From hence observe, that the glorious King is
the King shining in the splendor of his Royalties; not only when an excellent
title, but excellent Majesty is added to him. Dan. 4.36. not only when the
Land is the Land of his inheritance, but the Land of his Dominion. 2 Chronicles.
8.6. not only when he has the chief place amongst men, but when he has the
chief power amongst men, when he does rule over men. 2 Samuel 23.3. It is not the
Crown, but the Crown-right, which does make a King, otherwise Kingship is but
nobilis servitus, a noble kind of servitude. Petrus Greg. l. 8. c. 3. de rep.
Erasm. in Apoph. Sueton. in Vespas. c. 7.
Nihil beatum sine liberate. Nothing can be called blessed without liberty.
Magnificence without just power is but a golden chain. When the title is with
one, and the command with others, this is rather to look upon Kings, then to
live a King. Therefore was it said of Vespasian, that when news was brought
him concerning the accidents which had happened to Vitellius, that a certain
Majesty arose in his countenance, which was never seen before, which did
foretell, that ere long he should be Emperor. The Majesty of a King then is
the true Inauguration of a King, for what is Majesty, but Major potestas, the
greater power? Deprive a King then of his Royal power, and men had as good
pluck the Crown from his Head, this is truly Crimen laesae Majestatis, that
though men never-touch the Kings Person, yet they touch his Majesty, and this
haughtiness of it self is high treason. If I be a Father where is my honor?
So if there be a King, where is his Royalty? Those things, which do immediately
pertain to a King should have an inherent dignity in them, yea, Valor. M. l. 3.
c. 1.
it is not fitting reliquias Regis jacere inhonoratas, that the very Relics
of a King should remain without honor, as Val. Maximus says concerning
Perses. Traseas, though a great Priest in Rome was accused, because he was not
present in the beginning of the year to take the solemn Oath to the Emperor,
Tacit. l. 16.
nor did appear at the publication of the public vows for his health. So any
thing which tends to the diminution of a Kings honor is reprehensibile, and
criminal. Cicero pleading for Deiotarus a King, says, Semper in hac civitate
regium nomen sanctum fuit. Tull. orat. pro Deiotaro.
The name of a King was ever holy in this City. So that is the best City and
Country, where the name of a King is most Sacred, and the person of a King most
reverenced. Wherefore does the Scripture say, Fear God, and honor the King, 1
Pet. 2.17. but that God would have a King to be honored, as well as himself to
be feared? There was a custom in Lacedemonia that men should rise up to none
but the King, Neraclides in Lacedem. rap.
and the Ephori, and doubtless a distinct veneration do belong to Kings. He
that does take away from a King his prepotency and Supremacy had as good steal
the Crown Jewels. The Voon, that is the King of Japonia had a poniard lying on
the one side of his Throne, and a bow and arrows on the other side of his
Throne, to show that they which did wound the Kings honor were fit to be
dispatched out of the world, Ioh. M^tellus.
and I think that our Kings have a Scepter, and a Sword for the same end.
Facilem se praebeat Princeps, Callistrat. l. 5. coguit., 1.
sed contemni non patiatur. Let a Prince show himself affable to the people,
but let him not suffer himself to be contemned. For if he has lost his
dignity, he is a King, but without Royalty. An arrogant Courtier, or an
insolent Statesman that is too bold with the Kings power is next to a Rebel,
which does fight against him with an armed hand. A wise counsel is requisite
for a King, but counsel had need have in it two grains of modesty to one of
direction. If it troubled David so much that he had cut off the lap of Saul's
garment, then how may it trouble them which cut off half of the Robe of
Majesty, Tacit. l. 1. annal.
Auctoritas Principis nata est ex metu and admiratione. The authority of a
Prince is begotten of fear, and admiration. When a King then has lost his
dread and reverence he is but a painted Sun. Vulgus facile insolescit. Q. Curt.
l. 8.
The vulgar is apt to grow insolent, but this audaciousnesse is to be
repressed. Arist. l. 5. polit. c. 11. Dio. Cass. l. 52. hist.
Therefore Aristotle would not have too much honors given to Subjects, lest
they should hold themselves Compeers with their Prince. Periculosum semper est
nomen privati hominis supra principis attolli, It is ever perilous for the
name of any private man to be equalled, or preferred before the Prince.
Majestas in Principe est velut anima regni. Seneca l. 1. de Clem. Dio Cass. l.
41. histor.
Majesty in a Prince is as it were the soul of the Kingdom. Quam tuta navigatio
est, ubi nautae gubernatori non pareant? what safe sailing is there where the
Mariners do not obey the Ship-Master? Contempt is as great a seeds-man of
rebellion as hatred, for the one is begotten of ambition as well as the other
of discontent. It was contempt which raised up Arsaces against Sardanapalus,
Dion against Dionysius, Cyrus against Astyages, and Senthes against Amadocus,
oh it is an heavy thing when,

-- subversa jacebit
Pristina Majestas soliorum, Plut. in Romans Apoph. O Remp. brevi perituram, in
qua viri principes Consultant. populus autem, and imperitae plebeculae
decernit. P. Crinit. l. 1. de honest. discipline. c. 4.
--
When the Majesty of Thrones come to be subverted. Coturnix a Quayle says
Hesychius does come of (...), and (...), both which words do signify a bird, as
if a Quayle were the bird of birds, now one of these Quayles fighting with many
birds remaining Conqueror over all, Erotheus the Procuratour of Egypt bought,
and thinking that it was as good in taste, as in fighting, he killed it, and eat
it, which Augustus Caesar hearing of, he sent for Erotheus and nailed him to a
shipmast, because for his appetite he had destroyed a Victorious Bird. If he
were so severely punished which abused a Royal Bird, then what may they
deserve, which abase, and vilipend Royal Dignity? Petrus Crinitus has a
notable discourse, that when Anacharsis came to Athens, and saw the Princes but
only giving counsel for things to be done, and the people decreeing all, he
cried out, Oh Commonwealth in a short time coming to ruin, where the Princes
propound things, and the people determine them! So if a Prince be not Superior
in command it is to take in pieces the joints of a Throne, and to bring down a
King that should order all to the wills of Inferiors* Let as much honor as
can be be given to faithful Counsel, but still let the Prerogative be
inviolable. It is good advise, if well listened to, which is given in the 8. of
Eccles. 2. I advertise thee to take heed to the Kings Commandment, and that in
respect of the Oath of God, because God has precepted, and swore a whole
Kingdom to the Commandment of a King. For wherefore is he a King, if he should
stand by to see his Commands vilified, and neglected? would a master of the
anvile, or the awle, or the frippery wares be thus used? Let every one then
have his right, honor to whom honor belongs, Royalty to whom Royalty
belongs. If a King does want his just authority he is but an appellative
King. For what is it to see a King wear Robes, sit in a Throne, hold a
Scepter, if he does want his Sovereignty? this is but to see a King in his
Bravery, and not a King in his Beauty. In beauty there must be no skarre, so in
the Government no restraint of just authority. He is never a complete King,
till there be inconcussa libertas, Amb. Petrarch.
unshaken liberty in governing. Leo ubicunque est, Leo est, A Lion wheresoever
he be, he is a Lion; so a King whersoever he be he must be reigning. The King
must give the word to the whole Nation, all must incline to follow him. Judge.
9.3. they must be at his bidding. 1 Samuel 22.14. At his word they must go out,
and at his word they must come in. Number. 27.21. They must move forward, and
backward, as he does give the charge A resplendent King is he which is
Imperial, which is powerful in having his Mandates observed, This is a King in
his beauty. Thine eyes shall see the King in his Beauty.

First, Applic.
that the trial of Blessings is in the beauty of them; not the enjoyment of a
thing, but the qualification of a thing is that which makes it comfortable;
many things are possessed, but the heart tastes not the true sweetness of them,
for they come maimed, or defective. Tully does call that Decorum, Cic. l. 1.
off.
a comely thing, which has in it that which is naturae consentaneum, agreeable
to the nature of it, for if there be not (...), that which is convenient, there
cannot be (...), that which is beautiful; the Hebricians do derive beauty
from congruity, Kischron a Gascher.
so that which do come short of the just aptitudes does suffer an high
diminution in the nature and honor of a blessing. And how many of these
half-faced blessings are there? as God gives a man wit, and no discretion;
birth, and no generosity of spirit; gifts, and no faith; zeal, and no
conscience; do not the Scripture speak of such unhappy blessings? yes, of
houses without a man, 9. Is. 6. of a womb, but barren, 9. Hos. 14. of sheep
without a shepherd. Number. 27.17. of a man to whom God has given riches,
treasures, and honor, and he wants nothing for his soul of all that it
desires, but God gives him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger eat it
up. Eccles. 6.2. how then can these be proper blessings? no, they have a
blemish; and quod est deforme nihil ornare potest, That which is deformed
nothing (in the state that it is in) can adorn it. Search thy blessings then,
whether they be true blessings; thou may enjoy some things, that may be
sicknesses to thee, yea cockatrices eggs hatched to sting thee to death; a
fire not blown may consume thee in the possession of them. Job 20.26. God may
cast abominable filth upon thee by them. Nahum. 3.6. ye may be able to feast
richly, and your Tables may be made a snare, and your prosperity a ruin. Ps.
69.22. ye may be heirs to plentiful estates, which your progenitors have
gotten by usury, bribery, extortion, sacrilege, and God may lay the sorrow of
the Fathers upon the children. Job 21.19. ye may have fortified your selves in
wicked courses, and drawn in the strength of the Land to defend you in damnable
designs, and yet ye may be cast down in the midst, Micah 6.14. and though ye
have had never so many Hectors on your side, yet your puissant Stabbers may
become pusillanimous, for the stout-hearted are spoiled, they have slept their
sleep, and all the men of might have not found their hands. Ps. 76.5. ye may
have raised up false worships in the Nation, and have had notable success in
beguiling unstable souls, but your sorceresse Jezabel may be cast out at the
window; For they shall prevail no longer, but their madness shall be made
manifest to all men. 2 Timothy 3.9. The thorn, and the thistle may come upon your
Altars. Hos. 10.8. Bless not your selves then in every thing, which does carry
the appearance of a blessing, for I do read that God does turn many blessings
into curses. Mal. 2.2.

Euripid. Trag. 8.
(...),
(...).
To a man that is now called shiningly happy there may instantly come sad
changes. Alexander wrote letters in the height of his fortunes to Antipater by a
Messenger called Athlius, Diogenes standing by when the letters were delivered,
what says he, does Alexander send letters by Athlius? Bruson l. 6.
this does show that he will be unfortunate, for Athlius ad Athlium per
Athlium, He which will be unfortunate does sent letters to him that may be
unfortunate, by him, that is named Unfortunate. So a man's welfare that wants
the complexion of Gods blessing in the face of it, let him commend it to one of
his dearest Accomplices, yet Athlius carries the message, and there is nothing
but unfortunate to be expected to the man, or his Adherents. Suspect thy
blessings then, till thou have examined the visages of them, and thou find
them by God to be made truly amiable; else they may be too hot for thy hands,
thou may drink poison in a sweet draught, thou may swallow down a hook with
the bait, the moth may be got into them, the line of confusion may be stretched
over them; as great heaps as thou have gathered together God may fan in the
gate of the Land; as fair locks as thou have, God may bring his rasour upon thy
head; as boisterous as thou have been, God may run upon thee like a Giant; he
may blow upon all that thou have, make thy heels bare, and send thee to go seek
thy bread out of desolate places. It is not the blessing then, but the Beauty
of the blessing which does make it truly happy; a misshapen blessing is like
Moah, a vessel wherein there is no pleasure. Jer. 48.38. God does not always
promote men to afford them true felicity, no, he raises up men for a while at
last to make their image despised. Psalm. 73.20. and to draw them from their
ceiled parlours, where they have been beaking their selves by their bright, and
sparkling fires, to a cold, dark place, where there shall be neither coals to
warm them, nor light to sit by. Is. 47.14. See then how a curse may pursue you
after all the prosperity that ye have enjoyed; if ye want the comeliness of a
blessing, ye want the comfort of it, as here it was not enough for God to
present as a blessing to his dearest people, that they should have liberty with
their eyes to see a King, but they should see the King in his Beauty. Thine
eyes shall see the King in his Beauty.

Secondly, this does show unto us, that God can give us beautiful blessings,
Oh how plenteous is the goodness that thou have laid up in store for them that
fear thee! yea, quam pulchra tabernacula, O Jacob! How beautiful, or goodly
are thy tents oh Jacob! and thy habitations oh Israel! The spark of the wicked
shall not shine. Job. 18.5. but the righteous shall be a shining people. Light
is sown for the righteous, Ps. 97.11. Arise oh Jerusalem and be bright, Is.
60.1. for Gods face do shine upon his servants, and his candle do so shine upon
their heads that their very paths do shine, the beauty of the Lord their God
is upon them. Ps. 90.17. yea their name is spread among the heathen, for their
beauty, and they are made perfect through his beauty. Ezech. 16.14. Gods
blessings give them a fair neck. Hos. 10.11. make their faces purer then snow,
whiter then milk, more ruddy then Rubies, or the polished Saphir. Lam. 4.7. yea
they are so adorned, and decked, as if they had a beautiful Crown upon their
heads. Ezech. 16.12. oh then that we would serve God in the beauty of
holiness; what amiable blessings might we enjoy under him? for, How great is
his goodness! and how great is his beauty! Zach. 9.17. that is, the goodness
of his mercies, and the beauty of his benefits; his favor is splendor, his
bounty is beauty, Oh that we would be good we should find God goodness it
self. The hand of the Lord is upon all them that seek him in goodness. Ezra
8.22. they which seek the Lord want nothing that is good. Ps. 34.10. He gives
to all men liberally, and reproacheth no man. James 1.5. He loadeth us with
benefits. Ps. 68.19. he will pour out blessings till there shall be no room to
receive them. Mal. 3.10. They which diligently obey the voice of the Lord, and
observe, and do all his Commandments, all these blessings shall come upon them,
and overtake them. Deuteronomy. 28.1, 2. yea where, and in what shall they not be
blessed? They shall be blessed in the City, and in the field, in the fruit of
their body, and in the fruit of their ground, in their basket, and in their
dough, and in their storehouses, and in all that they set their hand unto;
their enemies that rise up against them shall fall before them, they shall come
out against them one way, and flee from them seven ways, they shall be the
head, and not the tail, above, and not beneath, be able to lend, and not to
borrow, yea their God will open his good treasure, and leave such
characterising marks of his bounty, that all the people of the earth shall see
that the name of the Lord is called upon by them, and they shall be afraid of
them, Deuteronomy. 28.10. or as it in Is. 61.9. Their seed shall be known amongst the
Gentiles, and their buds amongst the people. All that see them, shall know
them, that they are the seed, which the Lord has blessed. Is. 61.9. yea, it is
Gods goodness which makes him so appetible, goodness is the proper object of
his will, as if he had not a will in him, but to communicate the effluxes of
his kindness, and favor to his dear ones; by that he is not only a free
Agent, and so does nothing out of necessity, but a liberal Agent, because he
does act good with an eminency. God is love, John 1.4. because he has nothing
but love in him, there is praeceptum, Consilium, and operatio boni in Deo, Tho.
Aq. 1^. q. 19. a. 12.
Precept, counsel, and operation of good in God. Yea, whereas many other
affections are but in God interpretatively, according to the similitude of the
effect, love is God properly, and essentially, for it is the first motion of
his will; yea, joy and delight, desire and hope are not so properly in God as
love, because all these are but emanations of it, they having love for their
spring, or root. It is such a sweet property, that wheresoever it does affect
it cannot but be dispersing, Tho. Aq. 1^. q. 20. a. 2. Assidet Deo, and magna
est cum ipso necessitudine conjuncta. Nyss. in ^rat. de pauper. am. and benig.
omp Beneficiorum Dei memoria sufficiens est ad virtutum laborem. Chrysostom. hom.
67. in Genesis Sunt ut divitum filii qui ornaius gratia aueum monile gestant, and
nunquam deponunt, veluti nobilitat is signum circumferentes, and ostenintes.
Chrysostom hom. 1. ad Philippenses.
and exhibiting, for amare nihil est, nisivelle bonum alicui, to love is
nothing but to will good to another. Therefore love is implanted into God, and
has a necessary connection with him, for so long as he is a God, he cannot but
be a beneficent God; the effects of this love are so numerous and conspicuous,
that the memory of Gods favors, is work enough for all the virtues. Find me
out Gods true Favorites, and I will soon show you their rich Largesses, like
Noble-mens children they never walk abroad, but they carry their Jewel of
honor about their necks. Cleomenes, and Ptolomaeus, which had the sirnames of
Euergetae, were never comparable to our benign God, for he does exceeding
abundantly above all that we can ask, or think, there is no end of his
goodness. As Plutarch reports of Timoleon that he rejoiced tam immensam mult it
udinem hominum vitam agere beatam sua opera, that such a multitude of men lived
an happy life by his means; so it is Gods delight that he has such a multitude
of Courtiers which are sustained by his pensions. Oh then that ye would serve
God, what might ye not receive of his bounty? ye might mount upon the high
places of the earth, the Crowns might then be to Helem. The golden phial with
rich treasure which Aemilius bestowed upon Tubero for his service in the war
against Perseus; Plut. in Paulo ^^mili^ Cromer. l. 5. Sabell. l. 5. En. 3.
Diodor. Sic. l. 17. Sab. l. 2. En. 3.
the golden hand which Boleslaus the third of Hungary gave unto Zelislaus for a
hand which he had lost in a fight against the Moravians; the golden bullock,
which Lucius Minutius received for destroying Sp. Melius; the high privileges,
and presents which Cyrus sent to the Arimaspi for their relieving him at an
exigent; the infinite gifts which Xerxes bestowed upon Pythius the Phrygian for
entertaining his whole Army, were never like to the Donatives, and Benevolences
which we might receive from God. But here is our baseness, that we look for
every thing that is beautiful, but will do nothing which is beautiful, where
is our beautiful repentance, innocence, devotion, watchfulness, meditation?
alas no, the Apostle may say, If any things be comely, seek after those things,
but we are not for these venust, and specious things, whereby we might affect
Gods eyes, or inflame his desires toward us; we are very prompt at filthy
things, filthy speech, filthy lusts, filthy vomits, filthy lucre (our
consciences are defiled, and our conversations disteined) but for doing any
thing which might be acceptable and amiable, which might please Gods sight, and
ingratiate us into his favor, we have no skill in it. So that ye see what it
is that does diminish your felicity, and make you walk up and down with your
semi-prosperity, namely, because ye will not be eminently Godly. There is not a
more auspicious thing in the world then Religion. Oh ye must fetch welfare into
the Nation with your watery eyes, and bended knees, and mortified breasts, and
cleansed consciences, and regenerate fruits; your zeal in your Churches, and
closets, and bedchambers would do more good, then all counsel-chambers. A few
penitents, and Saints would be better Patriots then all the Statesmen in the
Land. If ye would forsake your brutish lives, and sensual courses, your
hypocrisy, and faction, your Church-spleen, and Liturgy-spight, restore your
ill-gotten goods, and sacrilegious possessions, build Hospitals, erect
Colleges, found Churches, free your shops from fraud, and your Tribunals from
bribery, have less pride, and more charity amongst you, what a glorious Kingdom
might ye here have? Is not the Kingdom so happy as ye could wish it to be? then
leave accusing of Governors, and prescribing of rules, and prosecuting your
seditious bents, and settle the Nation upon the first foundation stone upon
which it was called a Reformed Church. I believe those blessed Martyis had in
them more purity, then all the Saints that have come after them, it is no good
manners to say that the Forefathers wanted a little of the childrens wit, or
integrity. Had men past through their flames, I would think they might equal
them in fervor and sincerity, but I cannot endure whole skins to rectify that
which their Ancestors bequeathed to after-ages with such a flaming sacrifice.
Those Martyrs stakes are more precious to me, then all the holocausts of zeal
which I have seen upon the Altar since. I would wish no other Heaven then they
do enjoy, nor desire any purer Religion, then they preached to succession out
of that flagrant pulpit; give me Elias mantle, which he left behind him, when
he was carried a way in the fiery Chariot. I would think to see a prime
Kingdom, if I could see the primitive Protestant. There were never such fervent
Preachers since, neither can we find such Zelots. Away then with the language
of Ashdod, and let us speak the true language of Canaan; away with passion
against innocent Ceremonies, and let us double this indignation against branded
hypocrisy, and cursed impiety. Let us renew the Martyrs sanctity, and this Land
may be the joy of the whole earth. Virtue would adorn the Nation, grace would
beautify it, let us be beautiful Saints, and God has beautiful blessings for
us, even a King in his beauty. Thine eyes shall see the King in his Beauty,

there is no Governor amiable, which does want Beauty. There is no ill face
like to an ill Governor, there is no deformed Morian, or Monster like unto a
wicked Ruler, When the wicked are in authority the people sigh. Prove. 29.2. oh
it is a woeful thing when Princes are rebellions, and companions of thieves.
Is. 1.23. for then They hunt every man his brother with a net. Micah. 7.2. and
The wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous then himself. Hab. 1.13.
They pant after the dust of the earth over the head of the poor, and turn aside
the way of the meek. Amos 2.7. They drink up the deep waters, and foul the
rest with their feet. Ezech. 34.18. In their skirts is found the Blood of the
souls of poor Innocents. Jer. 2.34. When wicked men rise up men hide
themselves. Prove. 28.28. There is a lamentation upon the house-tops. Jer.
48.38. All faces gather blackness. Jocl 2.8. They eat their bread with quaking,
and drink their water with trembling. Ezekiel. 12.28. Their nights of pleasure are
turned into fear. Is. 21.4. and well may they, for not man seems then to be
the Ruler, but some savage Beast, a Leopard watches over the Cities. Jer. 5.6.
A Lion teareth in pieces for his whelps, and strangleth for his Lioness, and
fills his holes with prey, and his dens with ravine. Nah. 2.12. Then nihil
absurdum, quod utile, nothing is absurd, Thucyd. l. 6. Polyb. hist. l. 8.
Appian. l. 2. de bell. civ. Iornand. de red. Get. Herod. l. 3. Xiphil. in vit.
Ant. Carac. Plutarch. Val. M. l. 9. c. 2. Sueton. in Vitel.
that is profitable, and inimicissimi sunp qui libertati patrocinantur, They
are counted most spightfull against authority which do defend their liberty.
Satellites sunt commune maleficium, The soldiery are then a common bane. Such a
Ruler ambitum suum brachio metitur, does measure his ambition by his arm, if he
does not want force, he will want neither title nor treasure. Optimis invidet,
deterrimis delectatur, He is ever envious against the worthyes and delighted
most with Miscreants. Then with Caracalla their sword is their Rent-gatherer,
and with Simonides they had rather want friends then money; then they sprinkle
(with Mithridates their hospital gods) with blood, and with Vitellius they
think no odor upon earth so sweet as the smell of an enemies carcass. Have
not we had trial sufficient of this? yes, men which stroked us till they got
upon our backs, and then gave us enough of the spur; which cried up the Gospel,
and made Tradesmen Preachers; which talked much of the purity of faith, and
brought in blasphemy; which would set up Christianity by pulling down Churches,
and fill the Nation with wisdom by destroying the Universities; which would
help the people to freedom by free quarter, and administer justice by taking
away the laws; which would take Tyranny out of the Land by multiplying Taxes,
and confirm inheritances by sequestration; which would convert men without a
conference, and draw people out of darkness by a light within them; which a
horred coremonies, and brought in imaginations, and reformed a Church, by
plucking out her heart; which would settle us in peace by laying us in prison,
and send us to Heaven, by climing Gibbets. Now is thereany Beauty in this
Government? as much as there is in a viper, and a Crocodilt, Whenever ye have
such Usurpers enter your houses look to have your keys wrung out of your
hands, whenever such Executioners come expect nothing but the loss of your
necks. Oh meddle not with them then that are given to change, be not
Confederates with them, which would set up an unlawful Governor, for ye had
as good bring into the Nation a Tormentour, or an Headsman; an unjust Ruler can
never be amiable, no, the true Beauty is in the legitimate Magistrate, the
King. Thine eyes shall see the King in his Beauty.

that a right King is a rare Beauty. For can the eye of man behold a more
choice Object upon earth, then a lawful and righteous King? no, when the
righteous are in authority the people rejoice, Prove. 29.2. for such an one is
the Minister of God for good. Romans 13.4. when a King does reign in justice, and
Princes rule in judgment, that man shall be an hiding place from the wind, and
a refuge from the tempest, as rivers of water in a dry place, and as the shadow
of a rock in a weary Land, the eyes of the seeing shall not be shut, and the
ears of them that hear shall hearken, the heart of the foolish shall
understand knowledge, and the tongue of the stutterers shall speak distinctly,
Is. 32.1, 2, 3, 4. yea, and it follows in the 16, 17, 18. v. of that chapter,
that in such a Kings days judgment shall dwell in the desert, and justice
shall remain in the fruitful field, the work of justice shall be peace, even
the work of justice, and quietness, and assurance, for ever, yea the people
shall dwell in the tabernacle of peace and in sure dwellings, and safe
resting-places. Now these words though they be spoken mystically of Christ, yet
literally they are meant of any good King; for a good King how beneficial is
he? A King by judgment maintains the Country. Pro. 29.4. for he knows
that he is therefore constituted King, that he might do equity, and
righteousness 1. Kings. 10.9. and therefore is a Copy of the Law put into his
hand, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and keep all the words of
the Law, and the Ordinances. Deuteronomy. 17.19. Such a King will be like David, who
fed Jacob his people and Jsrael his inheritance, with a faithful and true
heart, and ruled them prudently with all his power. Ps. 78.72.73. Or like Asah
who made a covenant with his people to seek the Lord God of his Fathers, with
all their heart, and with all their soul, insomuch that he that would not seek
the Lord God of Israel should be slain, whether he be small, or great, man, or
woman. 2. Chron. 15.12.13. or like Jehosaphat who walked in the first ways of
his Father David, Melius est civitatem regi a viro optimo, quam a lege optima.
Arist. politic. l. 1. Pictor insignis qui non tantum oculos, and faciem, verum
totam imaginem varietate colorum honestat. Franc patr. Sen. de instit. regis l.
2. tit. 1. Sedente in se immortali Iudite p. Aemil l. 5. Regum oculis efficacia
supra humanam vim inest. P. Iovius hist. l. 2. Herodot. l. 2. Diodor. l. 12.
Ced. Rhod. l. 19. c. 29. Sigon. l. 20. occid. Imp. Evagr. l. 5. c. 13. Alex. ab
Alex. l. 5. c. 9. Herodot. l. 6.
and sought the Lord God of his Fathers, and walked in his Commandments, and
not after the trade of Israel. 2 Chronicles. 17.3, 4. A good King does chiefly look
to have his Throne established by righteousness. Prove. 25.5. and that his
people under him may lead a peaceable, and a quiet life in all godliness, and
honesty. I. Tim. 2.2. This is a good King, and indeed his worth, and value is
scarcely known; A good King is like a good Spring, a good mine, a good
cornerstone, a good Magazine, a good Angel, which made Aristotle to say, that
it were better for a City to be governed by the best man, then by the best law,
because his life is a Law, and there need no other precept, but his precedent.
He is the rare Painter which makes his whole Kingdom a picture drawn out with
Orient Colors. He is so transformed into God, that (as Ludovicus Crassus
wished his son) the people may see the immortal Judge sitting in him. Which
made Paulus Jovius to say that Kings had distinct eyes from other men, because
they look out with their Princely eyes minding only the general benefit. Such
a Prince does remedy the errors of former Governments, as Micerinus did the
high enormities of Cheops, and Chephren which reigned before him in Egypt. In
such an ones Government people leave groaning, and there are nothing but laeta
and fausta, pleasant and delightful things to be seen, at it was said of
Sitalces; or all grievances being removed, the Nation lives (...), without
fear, or perplexity, as it was said of the reign of Alcimus. That wise
Governor does make it his principal art to restore the ancient glory of a
Nation, as Justinian the great did, or like that famous Tiberius the second, he
has no other Princely ambition in his breast, but that none of his
predecessors might exceed him in piety or felicity. That Prince is so honored
by the people, that like another L. Pifo because he had done all things for the
welfare of the Nation he shall be surnamed Frugi, the Profitable, yea, there
are prayers made by the whole Land, that such an one may not dye childlesse,
lest such a renowned family should perish (as it is said of Ariston the King of
Lacedemonia) and if God send an heir, for the Fathers virtues they are willing
to have the child's name called Demarathus, the peoples Darling; And well may it
be so, for a good King does take his Crown out of Gods hand, and does wear it
for his honor; his heart is in Heaven, and his eye is upon the Church; he does
first seek for the purity of religion, and is careful that sacrifices without
blemish be brought to the Altar; he does look to conquer rather with his bended
knees, then his armed hand; he does love his Nobles, and not despise his
Commons; he does prefer a penitent before a Peer, and a just liver before an
high-borne Grandee; he does desire to have his Priests undefiled, and his
Judges incorrupt; he does want no Majesty, and yet does abound in humanity; his
speech is gentle, and his hand is soft; he is passionate against incorrigible
sinners, and yet compassionate to remorse-full enemies; he grieveth at
intemperance, and hates blasphemy; he likes neither the laughing Projectour,
nor the weeping Sectary; he would have his Sanctuary without indevotion, and
his treasury without injury; his watchful conscience is the Squire of his
body, and his deprecatory petitions his best Lifeguard; his innocent life is
his engraven Image, and his pious examples his richest Medals; he does shine
like a Sun himself, and does wish to have none but bright Stars about him; next
to his own pure heart he does endeavor to have a pure Court; he does stand
upon his own prerogative, but catch at none of his people liberties; he had
rather gild a Kingdom, then his Exchequer; his Crown-land does satisfy him
better then breaking an Enclosure; he can see a Vineyard out of his
Palace-Window without proclaiming himself Owner of it by an Ahabs evidence; he
would have the liberal Arts to flourish, and make (if it were possible) every
Mechenick a Lord of a Manor; he gives all furtherances for free Trade, and
quick Merchandise; he hoth affect none but the generous, and scorn none but the
proud; he does commiserate the wants of the poor, and he would have the rich to
build them Almshouses; he is wise, and not vain glorious, valiant, and yet
would never fight, chaste, and yet not an Hermit, sober, and yet no
water-drinker, liberal, and yet not profuse; he is oftenest at his Chapel, and
often at his Council Table; he has a listening ear to just petitions, but not to
pragmatical motions; his heart is set upon nothing more then repairing decayed
places, and erecting Monuments; he would leave behind him a glorious Church,
and a settled Kingdom; he does govern for God upon earth, that he may Reign with
God in Heaven. Now is not the presence of such a King an Heavenly present? has
the rich hand of God a dearer pledge of favor to bestow upon his Bosom
friends? are all the splendid Spectacles of a Kingdom like to the face of such
a Prince? no, doubtless he does surpass them all as far as light does excel
darkness; oh then how may all his Subjects have delight under his shadow, and
clap their hands together that they sive to see such happy days, his name may
be pleasure, his Reign Triumph, for when their eyes see such a King, they see a
King in his Beauty. Thine eyes shall see the King in his Beauty.

the blind rage of a Conspiratour in opposing such a King, he does strike at
the Beauty of the Land. For is there a King in his Beauty? then why do such an
one endeavor to pluck away from the eyes of a Nation the most glorious sight
that can be beheld? What would such people have? when will they be contented?
wherein shall they find satisfaction? is there any thing upon earth, which can
keep them long quiet? for except they would have their own wills, be Lords of
all Titles, Procuratours for all general affairs, Dictatours to rule all by
themselves, hold the helm of States in their hands, order Gods Providence, hold
no Crown fit to be worn, but that which their well-guiding hands shall set on,
be Supreme, and Kings themselves, can they desire to be more happy? Do they
contest with God, because he has made a people so blessed? may not God say to
them, as he does in the Gospel? Is thine eye evil, because mine is good? For if
they had not evil eyes, and evil heads, and evil hearts, and evil hands, they
would never thus quarrel with Gods will, and wisdom, and goodness. What? are
they weary of a Banquet? does a calm offend them? is Sunshine grievous to
them? is a gemme troublesome to them to enjoy? is a King in his Beauty
vexations to them to see? alas poor sick eyes, and litigious, refractary
spirits, it is pity that ye were not all Secretaries of State, and that God did
not send his Decrees to you to have your pregnant approbation. But this is man's
turbulent, murmuring nature, that the best things are diverse times the greatest
grievances, and that they which cannot govern themselves must be continually
querulous against Rulers. Ye take too much upon you said Corah and his
accomplices. Number. 16.3. Why have served us thus? said the men of Ephraim to
Gideon, and they chode with him sharply. Judges 8.1. How shall he save us? and
they despised him, and brought him no presents. 1 Samuel 10.27. See thy matters
are good and righteous, but there is no man deputed of the King to hear thee,
oh that I were made a Judge in the Land, that every man which has any matter,
or controversy might come to me, and I might do him Justice, said Absalon of
David's Government, 2. Sam. 15.3, 4. So that there is no Government, or
Governor will please many men. Plut. in Apoph.
Thus Aristodemus liked not the Government of Antigonus King of Macedonia,
because he was too liberal, and the Court of Lysimachus must be found fault
with, because there were none but disyllabic, men with two syllables in their
names (as Bythes, Athen. l. 14. c. 3.
Paris, etc.) which had all the authority under him. Augustus Caesar, because
he would never call the Praetorian bands fellow soldiers, but soldiers (he
never desiring to make use of them, but when he was constrained) and because he
was so liberal to the Citizens, Macrob. l. 2. c. 5.
and respective to the Senators, and delighted much in singing, he was by
Timagenes, Labeo, and Pollio and some others not thought fit to govern. So we
have a generation of men still left amongst us that are apt to asperse the most
meriting Prince, and not only to stretch out their slanderous tongues, but
their barbarous hands to pull him down; what savage wars have we had in this
Nation waged in a blind rage, and not only till the Land has been sprinkled
with the blood of her Natives, but the Scaffold died with the Blood of a most
Innocent King? and this King-killing will be a Trade, if God from Heaven do not
strike an horror, and dread of such an impious act into their hearts. Oh ye
wild Furies then consider what ye have done, consider what ye are about to do;
Christians ye are not, are ye men? what ye live in a Country, to appal a
Country? to trouble her peace? wast her treasure? to deprive her of the light
of her eyes? what is a family without a Master? what is a Kingdom without a
King? Repent then for what ye have done, and do not think that a pardon is
easily gotten; an Act of Indemnity may save your necks, but it must be an high
expiatory Act that must save your souls; If David wept so bitterly for the
murder of one Uriah, ye had need have David's penitential tears, and his
penitential Psalm for the thousands that ye have slain, and especially for the
murder of that one King that was worth ten thousand of us. Ye have immodest
cheeks if they have no shame, ye have flinty hearts if they have no remorse,
as stupidly as ye pass over such a guilt, it is well if eighteen years
repentance, nay a strict penance of your whole lives can procure you a
reconciliation in Heaven; there is a great difference between a dispensation of
your partial Prophets, and justification at the white Throne of the Judge of
quick and dead. What then? have ye still dry eyes? and will ye shed no tears?
yes, springs might gush out of the rocks, hearts of adamant might cleave
asunder. Ahab might go softly, and Judas out of horror of conscience might cry
out I have sinned in betraying Innocent Blood. If ye have not Ahabs
consternations, and Judas' s cries, ye will have frights, and stings, and
yelles enough in Hell. There is yet a means of atonement, an opportunity of
healing, if ye be not of the number of them, which have hearts that cannot
repent. Romans 2.5. try what Suppliants, and penitents ye can be, ye had need go
water every Camp, where ye have fought your bloody Battles, and to moisten the
ground of that Scaffold where that execrable murder was committed with showers
of salt water. And if ye can work out your peace raise not another war in your
consciences, if ye can be made whole sin no more. Your swords are sheathed,
draw them not again; ye are sent home quietly, hang not out a new flag of
defiance. What have ye to do to be Statesmen? follow your callings, and look
to take the enormities out of your own lives, what are ye to meddle with
errors of Government? no, leave politics to others, neither ye, nor your
great Masters have any thing to do with a Kings actions, except it be by way
of humble advise. For, Where the word of a King is there is power, and who
shall say to him, what do thou? Eccles. 8.3. What have Subjects then to
descant upon a Kings Government, as if they were his Supra-visours, and
Guardians? The Laws of God allow no such authority, and it is but a State
enchantment to say that the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom have empowered
any to call a King to a violent account. He has only God for his Judge, and
all the people under him as Liege-men. Beware therefore of those puling
groans, oh here is a sick State, come along with us to administer physic, if
the King will not frame up such a Government as we desire, we will teach him
how to rule by the edge of our swords. These are not Physicians, but
cutthroats. God has allowed no such Paracelsians in a Kingdom to cure a Kings
distempers. For if a King may not be provoked to wrath, he may not be so far
provoked as to fight for his life; if he may not be spoken evil of, or cursed,
his maladies are not to be remedied by cutting off his head. This is rather to
be Executioners, then State-Doctours; I never yet read, that there could be a
Lictor, or a Spiculator, or a Carnisex for a King. Let the greatest Subjects
then busy themselves in preparing Laws for the Commonwealth, and not in
prescribing rules to a King; in remedying the grievances of the Country, and
not in avenging grievances, which may be suspected by a King; in binding the
people to obedience, and not in bringing a King to account; For they are but
Subjects, and they cannot add to themselves one cubit above their stature. If
ye comply with such politicians, ye do but please a company of seditious
persons, and incense the Nation in general, for ye cannot do a greater injury
to your Country, nor offer a greater indignity, and violence to true Patriots,
then to disturb the peace of the Land, and to strike at a King. For the Kings
safety is the Kingdoms Triumph, The Nation has no greater joy then to see the
King in his Beauty. Thine eyes shall set the King in his Beauty.

to exhort all good Subjects not to disfigure the face of Majesty, for if the
Beauty of a King be the brightest thing, that a Nations eyes can be fixed upon,
then what a dark Kingdom is there when a King does not shine out in Royal
Splendor? If every one would have his right, that the Cotrager, and Commoner
would not lose his Country tenure, nor the man of noble blood, and honorable
family would not lose his peerage, then why should not the King have his Jura
regalia, his Crown-rights? I confess the Propriety of the Subject, and plead
for it, but I find likewise, and am an Advocate, that there may be Hammelech
Melech, The Right of a King, 1 Samuel 8.11. it is a Right of great antiquity, no
fundamental Law can vy Seniority with it; no, multorum festorum Jovis glandes
comedit, it does derive the pedigree 4. Nannaso, there are antiquiores
dipththerae to be brought for it, indeed it is as ancient as the Institution,
now the word do naturally signify Right, and it is but Metaphorically
translated Manner, as Buxtorfius, and Pagnine declare, if it be a Right then it
must continue, as long as the original Hebrew hold. The Text will not perish,
nor the Title. It is the Kings Right, but it is Gods Designation, and Charter
for the Crown. I do not say the King should have all, I know to the contrary,
but I say that the King should have his own, none ought to say to the contrary,
especially, when it is Jus divinum, a Gods-right. The Kings Right being settled
upon Scripture it is firmer, then if it were bottomed upon the best
State-groundsel. Some say, that this is only meant, when God does give a King
in his wrath, but I say then that they are in wrath, for there is a great
distance of time between Samuel, and Hosee, and between Saul, and Jeroboam.
Kingdoms may have their particular Constitutions in accidental things which do
belong to a King, but not in the essence of a King, especially not against the
essence of a divine Institution. Let all the just reverence that may be be
given to humane Laws, but still let Scripture be sacred, and inviolable, or
else what have we left that is stable, and infallible? The handmaid must not
rule the Lady, or the star outshine the Sun, all the Sages of a Land must not
be wiser, then the Oracles of God.

Virg. 3. Aeneid.
-- Parcius istis.
Cedamus Phoebo and moniti meliora sequamur.
A Prophet that has understanding in the visions of God is not to be believed
in this, no, If an Angel from Heaven should come, and preach otherwise let him
be accursed. Galath. 1.8. Well then, what is the Beauty of a King? what but his
power? Take a King without power, and what is he, but a Ghost without life, a
mere Phantasme, and Apparition? How can he do any thing that is Kingly, either
in settling Religion, protecting the Church, administering justice, making
leagues, drawing his people to Humiliation for their sins, in maintaining the
liberties of his people at home, or propulsing the violences, and affronts of
Adversaries abroad? no, he must sit by with tears in his eyes, and deplore all
exorbitancies, and sad accidents, but not be able to remedy them; he has a
sympathy, but he has no Sovereignty; he has a will, but he has no power; he
has a face but he has no Beauty in it. A Kings authority then is the true
Majesty of a King, till he can command like a King, he does but personate a
King. Oh then that the policy of many men is but to design against the power,
that their chiefest drift is not in honoring and obeying a King, but in
restraining and regulating a King, that when their purses are empty, then they
fill them by a Crown-quarrel; that when their high parts are not considered,
then they will be observed to be Master-wits in seeking to master authority;
and to silence such a Mutiner, a Challenger by many a good King must be
preferred, when many a loyal Champion of as good endowments and better worth
must stand upon low ground, and this popular Eare-wig creep to his desired
height. But away with these new dogmatizing principles of State-magick, whereby
Kings are conjured into politicians Circles, or confined to their august
limits. This may be a Science, but I am sure it is none of the liberal
Sciences. It is a pitiful thing, when a King come to be tutoured under such
Pedagogues, he is then rather a Disciple, a pupil then a King, for he must do
nothing, but what is prescribed him, nor order any thing but according to
commensurations. And this is rather Geometry, then Monarchy, or to make a
Mathematical, rather then a Majestical King. Let the people have their
birthrights, Liberties, Privileges, but let not liberty eat up Royalty, nor
birthright, Crown-right, nor privilege Prerogative, for then the judgment in
Egypt is fallen upon the Land, that the lean kine have eaten up the fat, and
what then but a famine can be expected? The people may be amiable, but the King
has no Beauty, or the soul of the Kings power is defunct, and by a Pythagorean
transmigration is past into the body of the people. And how will Natives then
disregard such a King? and how will Foreigners insult over him? he shall be
able to act nothing neither at home, nor abroad. The thick smoke in the form of
a cloud which was raised by one burning of beans might more terrify Charles
the fifth, Iovius l. 37. hist. Plut. in Alexandro.
and Francis the first at Villafrank, they thinking that a Navy of the Turks
had been coming, and the very dead statue of Alexander at the Temple of Apollo
at Delphos might make Cassander sooner tremble then the presence of a King will
beget awe or reverence in such a Nation. But some will say that Kings ought to
have Counselors, and he must be guided by them. Ought, and must are high
words. It is convenient I confess that Kings should have Counselors, for in
the multitude of Counselors there is health ( Solomon the wise was not without
them) but then these Counselors must not be Compellers, the King must be the
Head of the Counsel, a King must not be subjected to their excentrical humors
(if any such things should happen) or to their self-willed, and self-ended
aims, for these should then be rather projectours then Counselors, or
Dictatours, then Directours; all the Beauty should then be in the Counselors
cheeks, and not in the Kings-face. Let there be as many Counselors then as ye
will, but still let the King have the liberty of election, to accept, or reject
what in his Princely wisdom he thinks fitting, for constraining advise belongs
rather to headstrong, surly Subjects, then to true Counselors. A King no
doubt may as well refuse ill counsel, as ill meat, ill weather, ill lodging.
Bad company is dangerous, and so likewise is bad counsel. Is a King bound to
walk in the dark? to take receipts of all Empiricks? to sail with all winds? to
go out of the way, if his guides mislead him? no, (...), Lucian: in Asin. Plut.
in Themistoc.
It were better to run back in the middle of the way, then to run wrong. That
Counsel may be followed there must be sancta penetralia justitiae, the holy
inwards of justice. How is a King at liberty if his judgment be not free? his
captived person were something like to his captived reason. Non per regulas
juris communis tenetur sequi eorum consilium, Pet. Greg. de rep. l. 24. c. 8.
quos adhibet consilio, The King is not tied by the rules of common justice to
follow their Counsel, whom he does admit to Counsel, no ordinary Client is
limited to this. How is it the Kings honor to search out a thing. Prove. 25.2.
if the Kings heart must ly in other men's breasts? why do David say, Give thy
judgments to the King. Ps. 72.1. if all the judgments of a Land lay in
Counselors lips, or the King has no commands of himself, but by deputation?
No good King will refuse Counsel, no wise King will yoke himself to Counsel.
The King might then make himself a slave, the Church a vassal, and the Kingdom
a Bondsman. Then the Land has lost her Liberty, and he himself may lose his
Crown. For though noble Counselors disdain to give any Counsel but according
to honor and conscience, yet there are a company of pragmatical Sages, that
will be Balaams, Jonadabs, old Achitophels, or young Rehoboams Counselors. If
the King then be necessitated to the wits, or wills of all Counselors, where
is his Scepter, and Broad Seal? Let there be then Majesty in Kings, moderation
in Counselors; Sovereignty in Kings, sobriety in Counselors; dominion in
Kings, devoir in Counselors. For if the King be to sit in the Throne, and he
is the Lawgiver of the Nation, and people be to seek the Kings face, and to
listen to the Divine sentence that is to come out of his lips, if he be to sit
as chief, and to dwell like a King in an Army, if he be to send forth the
Decrees, and Nations be to bow down before him, if young men ought to hide
themselves from him, and old men ought to arise, and stand up, if the voices of
Princes ought to be stayed in his presence, and after his words they ought not
to reply, if all the Land ought to wait for him as for the rain, and to open
their mouths for him as for the latter rain, then surely the best Council,
the great Council of a Kingdom is not circumscriptive to a King. No, good
Counselors know better fealty, and bad Counselors ought to leave off this
exiliency. Let Magna Charta then be preserved, and the petition of Right have
all the right that is in it, but let the Maxima Charta, and the prescription of
Kings Right be thought on with them, and above them; for it is the Elder
Brother, and of the Blood Royal, and ought to wear the Crown before all
others. If then the honor of God, or the fear of his Laws, the Image of God
in a Kings forehead, or the Scepter of God in his Hand, a Kings Royal
Ornaments, or a Kings Royal Office, the advancement of Religion, or the
protection of the innocent, the obedience of Subjects at home, or the dread of
Forraigners abroad, the duty that ye require from your children, or the
reverence that ye expect from Inferiors, the peace of the Kingdom, or the
prosperity of the Kingdom carry any authority with you, let the last word be
spoken, that may tend to the disparagement of the Kings dignity, and the last
arrow be shot that may be levelled to the diminution of his power, let us fill
his Coffers with Gold, and his heart with confidence, let us end all enmity in
unanimity, and change all fierceness into fidelity, let us fight no more
against Kings, but fold our arms in subjection, let us all fall at the Kings
feet, and vow never again to strike at his head, let us join no more battles,
but join hands, weep that we have been such enemies, and smile that we are
become such friends; let us rejoice that we have gotten at home the Father of
our Country, and be glad that we are coming home to our Mother Church; let it
comfort us that the King has brought Bishops along with him to restore us to
our first Faith, and Judges to settle us in our old inheritances; oh let it
delight us that we are come to our wits, and begin to remember that we are
Countrymen, and that the malignity of the Church-fever is spent, and that we
begin to look upon one another as Fellow-Professours. Let us say we will go
together to the Kings Court, and go together to the Kings Chapel, that we will
join together in allegiance, and join together in worship; adore the same God,
and knit our hearts to the same King. All this is for the Kings honor, and if
we will have a King let us grudge him no honor. Let it be our ambition to
strive, that we may be the most devoted people to a King, to be the Nation of
Loyalty, the Island that will set up a magnificent King, that no Subjects upon
earth shall pay such Homage to a Sovereign, as the English Protestant. Oh let
us adorn the Protestant, and grandize the King! For to make the King great, it
is to make our selves happy, and honorable, for there is no greater delight
and dignity to a Country then to have a King exalted, the blessing and Beauty
of a Kingdom is to see a King in his Beauty, for Thine eyes shall see the King
in his Beauty.

Well in conclusion let me bring home the joy of the Text to our own hearts,
and present the sight in the Text to our own eyes; The prophesy was first
fulfilled upon Jerusalem, and we have had it in as memorable, and miraculous a
way seconded, and doubled upon us. We have been Spectatours of Wonders, Fathers
to their children may relate them, whatsoever dolorous things for a while
afflicted our eyes, yet these sad Objects are removed, and we have beheld those
things which are pleasant to the eyes, Our eyes have seen the King in his
Beauty. Had not our King as fierce enemies, as Hezekiah? yes Senacherib ranged
over this Country, and made all the Land to tremble, that hammer of the earth
dashed all in pieces, for he, and his Rabshakehs, and Rabsarisses, and Tartans
made a Land that was like the Garden of Eden like a desolate wilderness,
neither highways, nor high Rulers, fields nor Forests, Cities nor Castles
were secure, but our wards and our woods, our heritages and our honors, our
labors and our laws, our reputations and our religion, our beasts and our
beds, our tillage and our Tables, our Tabernacles and our Temples, our backs
and our necks were subject to the fury of our Adversaries, for what were we but
an harrassed Land, a plundered Nation, a sequestered people? Our enemies ruled
over us with rigor, and made our lives bitter unto us, Cities were turned into
heaps, and the houses of Ivory perished, the shield of the mighty was vilely
cast away, and nothing amongst us but wastes and groans, chains and gibbets,
all the mirth of the Land was gone, and the very Songs of the Temple were
turned into howlings, we even stood amazed under our disasters, and even
despaired ever to see better days. Many a cord was let down to pluck us out of
misery, but Hic funis nihil attraxit, This rope drew nothing, many means used
to preserve us in the storm, but Deus praevertit anchorae jactum, God prevented
the casting forth of the Anchour, so that

-- absumpta salus, nec spes jam restat Iuli, All safety seemed to be taken
from us, and there was no hope appearing to repair our broken fortunes, our
hearts even failed us, and we were ready to ly down in our confusion, for when
any gave us comfortable words to expect yet happier, we accounted them.

-- velut aegri somnia vana, As sick men's dreams, and gave no other but a kind
of diffident answer. Alas who shall live when God does these things! Number.
24.23. Yet how has God cleared the Land of Senacherib? and saved us by a
mighty deliverance? Senacherib is vanished, and Hezekiah, desired Hezekiah,
admired Hezekiah, Hezekiah the King of high preservations, Hezekiah the King of
conspicuous qualifications does appear, we may carve the whole Text, graven in
capital Letters, golden Characters, and celestial impresses upon our hearts,
for, We have seen, and we have seen a King, and We have seen a King in his
Beauty. Oh Heaven has presented to us this sight, this is the Object of
Miracles. We may draw nigh, and see this great sight. Exodus 3.2. Has this been
done before, or in the days of your Fathers? Joel 1.2. no there has not been
the like, neither shall there to many generations, we may count it as one of
the chief of the ways of God; for a King that could not enter the Land, nor
safely set his foot upon any corner of the Nation, now with Hezekiah, he may
see the Land afar off, and walk upon the length and breadth of the Land. Who
has heard such a thing? who has seen such things? Is. 66.8. doubtless that
in Number. 23.23. may be applied to us, According to this time it shall be said of
Jacob, and Israel, what has God wrought? what? an incredible, an ineffable,
and an invaluable thing. Blessed be the Omnipotent God, and blessed be his
potent Champion, which has made the Land happy in the sight of a King, and in
the sight of such a King; I say of such a King, who comes to us with a right
Title; one Usurper more would have quite broke the heart strings of the Nation;
and with the right Religion; a Papist, or a Phanatick would have after so many
factions and fractions shivered the Church into nothing but sherds; and with
the right Princely endowments, who has in him a treasury of moralities, and
may be a pattern to all the Princes of his time for true virtue. An Hereditary
King, an Orthodoxe King, a Complete King, what can the eye of the Nation look
upon with more satisfaction? no, Our eyes do see a King in his Beauty; we do
see him so in his personal Beauty, and God forbid but we should give him all
the National Beauty that may be. Confess his right, and give him his right,
welcome him home with melody, and bestow Majesty upon him; make him as great,
as he does desire to make us mighty; we were never happy before he came, we are
unhappy, if we know not how happy we are since his coming, he has redeemed us
out of error, out of bondage, out of despair. O Redeeming King! Let us not
serve him now as the Israelites served Moses, who were ever groaning till they
had a Deliverer, and ever murmuring after they had a Deliverer. No, let our joy
in him be answerable to the comforts he has brought along with him; and our
peerlesse esteem of him be answerable to his prizelesse worth; Consider his
devout Heart, and his divine Lips, what zeal he does bear to the truth, and
what hatred he does carry to an Oath, how he has preserved his Religion
amongst the Jesuits, and is come to his Subjects to tell them what a Protestant
he is; consider his chaste eye, and his sober Palate, his soft bowels and his
just hand; how he is fragrant with almsdeeds, and does shine in wisdom; how he
was patient under afflictions, and is humble in prosperity; how he has
forgiven his enemies, and is daily preferring his Friends; how the whole Land
does not exceed him in Candor, nor the whole earth in valor; consider what he
has done for your consciences, what for your liberties, what for your Laws,
what for learning, what for a flourishing trade, and what for a settled peace;
consider if he be not the prime man that could have comforted you, if he be not
the only man which could have made you happy, and will ye open your eyes, and
not open your lips? give him your acclamations, and not give him your
affections? shall Englishmen have the best King, and be the worst Subjects? be
the ferventest Desirers of a King, and the ficklest Reverencers of a King? what
still squint-eyed, rank-breathed, half-hearted? still Censurers, Malcontents,
Mutiners? Send for Senacherib then again, if Hezekiah do not please you. Oh the
variable, and unstable spirits of men! what Scepticks are we in politics? what
Critics in Government? we do but desire to enjoy a Blessing, and then
complaint of wants; we do but desire to see a King, and then spy faults; we are
glutted with a taste, and heavy-eyed with a sight; take a gust, and shut up our
lips; stare a little, and then turn away our eyes; please our fancies, and
affect no longer; delight our selves with a gaze and then disdain. But oh
beloved were we sick for a King, and are any now weary of him? no, very Esau me
think should fall upon the neck of such a Jacob, and weep at the meeting; very
Shimeis mouth should leave foming, and he should fall down at the feet of such
a David, and ask pardon when he sees him returning; the most heart-brent
enemies that ever the King had methink should give over all their spleen and
rancour, and admire his clemency and magnify his graces. If these should hold
their peace the stones would speak, so if these will not prize such a King,
very Infidels would honor him. Oh therefore let every Subject in the Realm
know their own King, their lawful King, and give him cordial respect,
faithful obedience, and an eminency of affection. Let Noblemen love him, for
as he is the Fountain of their honors, so he has restored their honors to
them; let Clergymen love him, for he is a Sanctuary to the Sanctuary; let
Judges love him, for he has put life into the Laws, and given them a
resurrection; let Merchants love him, for they which were ready to turn
Bank-rupts, may yet again turn Bankers; let all the Land love him, for there is
not a corner of the Nation, but he has filled it with joy, and replenished it
with blessings. Well let us all gather together, and weep for joy that after so
many miseries we live to see such Halcyon days, and sing for joy, that after
so many dismal sights, we have eyes in our heads to see this one sight, this
only sight, this reviving, ravishing sight, even to see the King in his
Beauty. Thine eyes shall see the King in his Beauty.

And as we have seen the sight, so let us not lose the sight, that after we
have seen the King in his Beauty, we should see a King in Blood; no, if the
Laws of God, and the Mercy of the King cannot quench Firebrarnds, but there
should happen to be new flames, new wars, let all faithful Subjects be
dismembered rather then one Member of his Sacred Person should be wounded, and
let every loyal Hand in the three Nations be cut off, rather then the
traitorous hand should touch his Royal Head. For if we should be deprived again
of the King in his Beauty, the Beauty of the Land is gone, and the misery of
the Land will renew, we shall have old plundring, and rifling, and sequestring,
and imprisoning, and braining, and gibbetting again; if the King suffer, let
not us think to escape scot-free; if the King dye, let not us think to live long
after him, no, let us resolve of a general Massacre, and a Funeral of the whole
Nation. Now that King and Kingdom may be secure, let us make sure of him that
is the Keeper of Israel, oh how safe might we be under his everlasting Arms!
He would be the shield of our help, and the sword of our excellencies. Oh
therefore let us not provoke the eyes of his glory, and he will watch for our
defense, let us not break his Laws, and not a bone of us shall be broken, let
us weep out our former corruptions with tears, and show our selves to be alive
from the dead by our regenerate faces; let every Royalist turn the greatest
Penitent and truest Saint; as we account our selves the most Orthodox
Professors, so let us declare it by our mortified lives, and pure consciences;
So may we defy all the enemies in the Nation, for in despite of all their fury
and maugre all their malice, Jerusalem shall be a quiet habitation, a
Tabernacle that cannot be removed, her stakes shall not be taken away, but we
shall here long see a King in his Beauty, and hereafter see a King in his
Glory, which that we may do, the Lord grant for his mercies sake, Amen.

FINIS.

