GOD'S PLEA FOR NINEVEH: OR, London's Precedent for Mercy. Delivered in certain
SERMONS, within the City of LONDON.

By Thomas Reeve, B. in Divinity.

JER. 13.27. Woe unto thee, oh Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean? when
shall it once be?

CANT. 6.13. Return, return, oh Shulamite: Return, return, that we may look
upon thee.

LUKE 13.7, 8, 9. Then said he to the dresser of the Vineyard, Behold, these
three years I come seeking for fruit on this figtree, and find none; cut it
down, why cumbreth it the ground? And he answering, said unto him, Lord, let it
alone this year also, till I shall dig about it, and dung it; And if it bear
fruit, well; and if not, then thou shall after that cut it down.

LAMENT. 3.40.41. Let us search, and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord.
Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto God in the heavens.

Noli negligere, quod vos prius Dominus peccantes sustinet; quia quanto diutius
exspectat, ut emenderis, tanto gravius judicabit si neglexeris. Aug. de util.
Paen. ag. Quot habuit in se oblectamenta, tot habuit holocausta; convertit in
numerum virtutum, numerum criminum.

Jeron. hom. 33. in Evang. LONDON, Printed by William Wilson, for Thomas Reeve,
living at the Bunch of Grapes in Chancery Lane, near Lincolns-Inne, 1657.

To his Honored Friend, a very eminent Citisen of LONDON, THOMAS RICH, Esquire
Honored Sir,
I Have ventured upon a great work, I do need a Patron; I beseech you, be you
mine, and the Citie's. The Subject, I know, cannot displease you; it is about a
penitent City, and Gods pleading for it, to have it spared. Would it not be
your comfort, to see your City thus qualified? Would it not be your joy, to
behold it thus secured? Yes; your virtue, I know, does desire the repentance of
it; and your zeal, the safety of it. Who knows, but the motion may take place?
God, of Stones, can raise up Children to Abraham; the Womb of the Barren may be
fruitful. This City, which has learned little by Pulpits, may learn much by a
Pattern.

I have prepared the Piece, and altered and amplified it much, since the first
drawing or preaching of it; that I might make it as exact, as mine Art would
attain to. I desire to present it, by your fair and spotless hand, to your
City; The innocence and piety of such a tried Citizen, may do much, to promove
my intention, and to sanctify the Work. Bless but my endeavors with your
Name, and the success shall be left to God Almighty. Sir, I know you;
therefore I am sparing in my exhortation. I seek about for others of your
fellow-Citisens, to them I shall enlarge my advice. Gods blessing light upon
your Person, this Drift, and the City, that it may have Niniveh's graces, and
Niniveh's felicity. Thus leaving my request to your charitable construction,
and my suit at the Throne of God, with my humble service presented to You,
submissively, I take leave, and rest.

SIR Your very faithful Servant, and the Cities fervent Sollicitour THO. REEVE.

To the rest of the Religious Citizens of London which are sensible of the
Sins, and do supplicate for the safety of their City.
Honored Sirs, and Citizens of a famous City, etc.
I Do call you out to a new Merchandise; Many of you have been negotiating in
most of the known Cities of the world; but did ever any of you yet trade at
Nineveh? This is that which I desire may be your Empory, that ye would buy up h
r commodities, and set up an Exchange of her Wares: let others call upon you to
mind your Traffic elsewhere, I direct you to this City. Some of Nineveh's
ashes, sackcloth, beasts in new skins, men with new lips, feet, and hands,
would be more useful to you, than all the precious Rarities which the richest
Marts upon earth can afford you. Nineveh is the place, the way is beaten out
for you, I have chosen you out a good Leader, (a Gentleman of intemerate fame,
and unblemished reputation); be not unwilling, nor ashamed to follow him. My
intimacy has been most with him, and I have been very privy to his worth,
therefore let it be no man's displeasure, or regret, that I (according to my
acquaintance and affection,) do single out him to stand in the front of this
new Company to be erected. Though I love and honor him, yet I have an high
opinion of many of you; therefore I have made bold to summon forth Him, and
You, to try if ye can by your joint inquiry find out the place, and strike up a
bargain for that memorable merchandise; be not offended to go together like
Pilgrims, ye shall never repent you of the journey, for ye go to visit a
renowned place, in whose ruins ye may find treasure enough to redeem you out
of present hazards, and to prevent future miseries: Indeed I lay your Sandals
before you, yet be not discouraged, ye shall go but like Merchant-Adventurers;
and if ye be industrious, and employ your time well, ye may drive a very
advantageable trade; if ye can but find out the place, and come home laden with
the riches of the same, your City was never so happy as ye shall make it;
linger not in the journey, but set forth speedily, and make a quick return, and
millions shall bless you. Only do not quarrel as ye go along, fall not out
by the way, who shall go first, or who shall come after, but walk on peaceably,
and God Almighty prosper you. Abraham when he went up to Moriah to sacrifice,
he left the beasts at the bottom of the Mountain; so do ye, all envy and
emulation, when ye are going upon this noble design. Ye have more to think on,
than the frivolous and superfluous cavils of nature. Apply your selves to the
right work, and fall to right-down Christianity. Let him be the best man, which
can be most virtuous and zealous in this religious service. It is an hard thing
to build an City; and it will be as hard a thing to preserve it. When a City is
grown crazy with sins, they must be Master-workmen which can repair the decays
of it, or keep it from a downfall: if ye be never so well prepared, yet ye have
a task which does require almost an Angelical purity and perfection to
discharge it. Eye your duty, and look upon nothing else, and see what a great
measure of remorse and reformation is expedient to keep a tottering City from
an imminent casualty. Oh go not to Nineveh only to look upon the City, for
then this motion will take no impression upon you, and ye will never take off
the charge of my impression, but these Books must go seek for entertainment in
the Country, which will neither be for your honor, nor for my advantage; but
come ye home full fraught with Ninevehs qualifications, and I shall be happy,
and ye blessed. Consider what ye are to do, to wring a spear out of the hand
of the Almighty, to turn back an host of judgments upon their March; appear in
your complete harness, and quit your selves like men. But by what Citizens
shall this be performed? by them which are truly religious, and are sensible of
the sins, and do supplicate for the safety of the City. There are many which
are called Citizens, and many that seem to be Religious; but I must have such
as have a sense, and can supplicate, which have the sins of the City smarting
in their hearts, and the safety of the City ecchoing in their lips. Alex. ab
Alex. l. 4. c. 17. Quam pulchras manus, and pulchra crura habes; ventrem vero
non habes! Plut. in Philopaem.
As of old, they which would honor the Altars of the Gods, did burn not
frankincense, but Cedar and Citrine; so, for this sacrifice, there must not be
the vulgar Citizens, but those of the sweetest odor. Titus Quintius, derided
Philopaemenes, because he had rare hands, and singular thighs, but no belly;
so, they are not the Citizens to be prized, which have only hands to catch, or
thighs to walk up and down in trading; but such as have the Belly, the
conscience to nourish the whole body. They which have narrow brains, that can
consult only about their private interests, Suidas.
are like Philocles the Comaedian, who was said to have a sharp head like a
Lapwing. I take little pleasure in the hearing of any persons commended for
particular excellencies, which are but outward, as that Alsus Son of Sigarus,
Saxo Gram. l. 7. Sucton.
King of Denmark, was praised for hair which glistered like silver; and
Tiberius, who had eyes so bright, that he could see in the night; and Anthony
Benzus, who at 34 years of age, had such plenty of milk in his breasts, Cardan
de subtle. l. 1. de nost. hom. Pliny l. 11. c. 37. Strabo. l. 15.
that he was able to give suck to an Infant; and Zancles the Samothracian, who
had new teeth grew in his head at the age of 104 years; and Darius Longimanus,
who had hand which could reach down to his knees; and the Carmelitane Monk who
so often, as he stirred his cowl about his head, Cardan de reb. var. l. 8. e.
48. Petrarch ex Treb. Saxo Gram. l. 8. Dan. hist.
his hair was seen to sparkle like fire; and Zenobia, Queen of the Palmirenes,
who had teeth like bright gems; and Suavilda, who was so incomparably fair,
that when she was adjudged to be trampled to death under the horses feet, the
bruit beasts started back, and by no violence could be compelled to injury her
beautiful body; No more do I take delight to hear Citizens commended only for
exterior things, as that they dwell in the most gorgeous structures, wear the
costliest array, have the largest warehouses, have Factours trading in every
port of Italy, nay, in the bottom of the Streights, and in the furthest part of
the Indies; that they have so many leases in the City, so many purchases in the
Country, and have matched their Children into the noblest families of the
Nation; that they sit upon the Bench, and shine in the Magistrates Robes; no, I
can hear an Elephant thus praised for his great Bosce, or a fat Bull of Basan
for his well fleshed stanks: but they are the perfections of the mind, and
eminent virtues, which I chiefly magnify in Citizens. Such are the conspicuous
persons, which are perspicuous in graces, and the eyes that see them bless
them for their piety, whose chief mart is in Heaven, and trade for such riches
as exceed all the treasures of Egypt, whose hearts are knit to the City, and
whose tongues are soliciting for it, which weep over the sins of the City, and
would even sacrifice themselves in expiatory duties to prevent judgments from
it. Pardon me therefore, if I do not judge the City by Furs, and gold Chains,
birth and bruit, port and portalls, means and merchandise; no, not by wit and
worship, sermons and services; but by soft breasts, sound vitalls, pure and
operative spirits. Potency, priority, principality, presidency, here have no
place, but only the feeling conscience, and the fervent Soul. For those which
are only politic, or pragmaticall, or busied about their own ambitious
designs, as they have no leisure to mind this subject, so they have no
propensions to be intent upon this solemn work. I may send them to Biccius, and
Malchiattus, who traded at Florence only to learn Philip the fair how to
adulterate metal, or to those Merchants which were so buried in their
Warehouses, that they were called Sectores, Joh. villan. l. 8. c. 55. Sectores,
aut s^quuto res, quia sequebantur suum. Asconius.
because they followed only plots how to enhaunse their estates, or to those
Egyptian Traffikers, who were steined with so many blemishes in their
callings, that they were commanded to give over their merchandisings by the
space of ten years before they could be admitted to any office, of place of
authority; or to the Family of the Clodii in Rome, Alex. ab Alex. l. 4. c. 6
Suct in Tiber.
who were all of them (except P. Clodius) so given to factions and seditions,
to raise their own interests and Parties, that they were accounted the common
Boutefeaus of the City, or to C. M. Coriolanus, who in the greatest necessity
never tendered the welfare of the Inferiors, but looked only to provide for
his own greatness, and his great Ones; and held the poorer Citizens to sad
sufferings, lest being supplied with what they wanted, D. Halicarn. 1. 7.
they might be enabled to call him, and the rest, to account for their
injuries. Now what should I do with such Citizens! they do but only live within
the City, or live upon the City, they will not be drawn from their shops, and
Countinghouses to venture a knee, or a tongue, that they might preserve the
City at the greatest exigent. Send back therefore those soldiers, which how
down upon their knees to lap water, they are not fit to he employed in Gedeons
Army; so, set apart those Citizens, which stoop down, and are even grovelong in
their worldly contrivements, and projects, they are not fit to be called forth
to seek for the Cities safety; Having taken upon me then a kind of dolorous
service, to whom should I rather apply my self, then to the true Mourners in
Jerusalem? Yes, there are sins in the City, and these sins do threaten
judgment; all ye then which do face the one, and fear the other, let me
entreat you to sigh, and sacrifice with me, that the City being penitent,
neither the peril, nor perishing of the City may be dreaded. To obtain this
blessing, I confess I have (as I can) sanctified my self with some solemn
resolutions; I desire you to enter into the Vow with me, not to desert the City
with your repentance, and devotions, till a discharge may be brought out of
Heaven, and the City settled in a condition to be Spared. I hear a loud speech,
What is not this City able to do? I wish it may be able to examine, and to
extricate her self. I cannot but love your City for her breast, that she proved
such a kind Nourse to them, which had neither milk nor maintenance, when upon
the death of their Mother they were as exposed children. All the gratitude
which I can express, is to piety this Nourse upon her sick-Couch, and if I
can, preserve her alive upon her bed of anguishing; till there may be some
signs of her recovery I shall not cease to visit her, and, (if she will admit
me) he as a ghostly Father to her, that she may confess her inward disease,
and apply that spiritual remedy which will certainly, and can only work her
proper cure. I thought once to have called in all the Nobility, and Gentry of
the Nation to join in this work; for the Heralds office is in the City; and why
should not they which are comparable to fine gold, cast in their talent for the
advance of this pious design? Yes, they are too high, if they do not humble
themselves to the earth for her, which all this while with a trusty hand has
kept their Pedegrees. I would have invited the Reverendest of the Clergy, to
have assisted in this religious service, for Sancta Maria de Arcubus is in the
City, and why should not they deprecate judgments from her, which has
retained for them a place, where they have received their first Consecration;
Aaron does carry upon his breast plate the names of the Tribes of Israel, the
Priests must not be absent from the Sacrifi^e, these must weep between the
Porch and Altar: I would have drawn in all the Civil and common Lawyers to
plead in Heaven for this City, for they having been so often retained in her
Counsel, and learned all their honored skill, here (the Inns of Court being
nigh to the body of the City, and Doctors Commons within the bowels of the
City); why should not they solicit the highest Court for a release from her
extremities? I would have summoned-in all the Physicians to administer a
sovereign potion to this City; for their College being within her walls, and
they having raised vast estates out of their City practice, why should not they
prepare an Elixir for her out of their suppled eyes, rent-heartstrings
extracted consciences, to preserve her at an exigent? yea, I thought once to
have sent down to all the Cities in the Kingdom, to have repaired hither their
selves, or to have sent their faithful substitute, Proxey, their conversion,
to officiate for the City in her greatest peril. For seeing this is the
Metropolis, why should not all the Daughters do their duty to their Mother, and
wait upon her with their prayers, and tears, and humiliation, and
mortification? yes, they here vending all their commodities, and buying here
all their principal wares, it is convenient that they should bless her with
their repentance, which has blessed them with revenue. But because the most
proper cure is that which is personal (people being able to prepare their
Antidote) therefore ye knowing both the malady, and the medicine, what need I
trouble others, when ye are able (if ye will) to do the work your selves, and
to be your own Physicians: And now that I have left you in your own hands,
setting Life and Death before you, oh that I could speak to the City in
general, that as all Nineveh so all your City would be unaninous to unite
their repentance to keep off a judgment. But I see such a complicated disease
of bad opinions and such a cakexy of evil life amongst you, some only
magnfying the virtues of the City, others going on in an insensibility of any
thing, that it is either sin or danger, that I despair to find the generality
apprehensive, either of disease or cure. Acron could only paint the Cypress
tree; so there are some amongst you, Erasm.
which can only draw the picture of their own self-grounds, and selfe-ends; why
then should these men's pensils be desired to delineate this piece? no, I
remember that Calcedon was called The Town of the blind, because they would not
suffer an experienced Workman to build their houses; Pliny. l. 5. c. ult.
And so, such a blind City shall I leave you, if I set on work half-sighted
Architects, which can neither see errors, nor foresee hazards. Therefore I
set, by all the humourous and vicious amongst you, and apply my self only to
those which are truly religious, which have the most conscience to discover
sin, and the most remorse to reconcile an offended God. It is a singular work,
and there must be singular Agents engaged in it. It is that great City, and it
must be that Great, or good Party, which must invert the state, and avert the
judgment of the City. All ye then which are of mine own Religion, and
repentance, be ye my Patrones out of affection, the Cities out of relation;
deny not your own City, nor me, for your Cities sake; this shall be my
engagement, and I hope not the Cities envy; that I should desire you to do that
for the City, which the City will not do for it self. I cannot expect you to
be absolute Saints; I my self am not innocent, but I desire to be penitent,
and I besceech you let us both center together in this qualification. Make this
subject, if ye can, your Altar, where ye may work an atonement; or your
Sanctuary, where ye may find refuge, howsoever make it your Crucifix, or
Sepulcher, even to dye in mortifying exercises, to procure the Cities release,
and rescue; Ye have been often at the Pulpit, and learned much perhaps for
information; but one Sermon practiced, is better then a thousand heard; if ye
have any Christianity in you, let the abridgement of it be found in repentance;
neither your souls nor your City, can be blessed by you with a virtue more
beneficial; If ye had the understanding of Joseph, the knowledge of Daniel,
the wisdom of Solomon, or the insight into all those secrets which were
revealed unto St Paul in the third heavens, ye these were but glimmering
speculations without repentance. To have the loins girt up, and the lamps
burning, is more then to divide the waters of Jordan, to fetch water out of the
Rock, to command the Sun to stand still in the midst of heaven, to remove
mountains, or to raise the dead The Lady Capell of Oxted lay speechless a long
time, and by fervent prayer was restored to speech, and dyed in a most
ravishing manner. Mr. Gale in S. John's street distracted, and despairing, by
prayer recovered his senses, and dyed calmly, peaceablely, and Christianly. A
Gentleman in Bishops Court in Grayes-Inn-lane, visited and assaulted by the
Devil, by prayer within the space of three days was delivered from that
Obsession Mr. Barmes in Fountain Alley in Holborn, having for half a year
almost starch (sometime hot, sometimes cold) rained through his tiled house into
his Kitchen, and nothing seen in the upper rooms or Planchers, but only in the
lower rooms, and that diverse times under Pots, and other Vessels, where it was
impossible in man's apprehension, that any thing should come, for the outsides
were untouched, which caused an high affrightment in the Householders, that he
and his family were ready to leave the house; yet by prayer, in a short time
this strange and unheard of accident ceased.
I know a man which has wrought some miracles in the world, but yet his
conscience does more rejoice in his repentance, then in all the testimonies of
Gods power, yea then in the finger of divine Omnipotency lent unto him to make
him instrumental in admired events. Whatsoever your gifts, and endownments,
characteristicall, or charismaticall privileges be, yet feel it as your chief
consolation, and write it down as your prime prerogative, that God has caused
the lips of them that were asleep to speak, that the eyes of the blind do see
out of obscurity, that ye stand up from the dead, and have sorrowed to
repentance. Rejoice not in these things, but rejoice that your names are
written in heaven. Let others look to be Scient, but look ye to be Penitent.
Lord, who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth
the children of Israel out of Egypt? Exodus 3.11. So, who am I, that I should
summon a whole City to repentance, and bring such vast numbers out of the
bondage of their corruptions and destruction? yet God has given the motion,
and he may by such a stammering tongue, make his message effectual. Who knows,
but that this Cake of barley bread may overthrow the tent of the Midianites?
that this lump of dry figs may heal the sore? that this clay and spittle by the
blessing of God, may open the eyes of the blind? I venture therefore upon the
work, and call forth you as my Assistants in the enterprise; Bring forth your
repentance, and what may not such an Hester appearing do to reverse a Decree?
God is not so offended with the City, but Repentance can yet end the distaste.
To assure you of this, I set before you Nineveh, not half so glorious in being
a Potent, as in being a poenitent people; they are poenitent, and God is
instantly assuaged. Will ye observe the sum of the passage, if I do but lead
you into the City? there are very delectable things at the entrance, even
between the Prophet and God. Do ye love a Prophet truly? then here is Jonah
active in his pertinent duty, a weighty errand? Do ye honor God faithful?
then here is God busied about his proper work, a work of mercy. What more
consonant to the Prophet, then to impart his Masters mind? What more congruous
to God, then to interpret his own meaning? Jonah does denounce a judgment, God
does pronounce a pardon, the Prophet must not spare and yet God does spare. The
Prophet had threatened them into repentance, then God does not threaten, but
comfort; not adjudge, and accurse, but accept and acquit. Repentance has
renewed the people, and revoked the sentence. It is true, the Prophet was very
opposite to it, but God does bring in very apposite reasons to satisfy his
contradicting spirit. God does plead for the City, and does plead against his
own Prophet. He does show him how the Prophet cannot be justified, without
menacing an overthrow, and how God cannot be justified, without hindering this
overthrow. This is the Dilemma how the Prophecy may stand, and the City may
stand. The Prophecy is obeyed, and therefore there could be no overthrow;
there was repentance, and therefore there cannot be rejection, and revenge;
this is the middle way, which God does make use of to answer the Dilemma. God
will not approve of his Prophets, if they do not proclaim judgment: God will
not listen to his Prophets, if they do declaim against repentance. Though the
Prophets must thunder, yet God does keep the thunderbolt in his own hand. A
sinful people must be warned, a penitent people must not be destroyed. No,
this is one of the Riddles of Gods mercy, which Jonah not being able to unfold,
God does expound it; yea, the whole debate is about the resolving of this
difficult demur. God does show to Jonah how he could prophecy no less, and
yet how he himself could spare no less. Should not thou thus cry? Should not
they thus reform? Should not I thus spare? God had taught Jonah many things,
and now he does reveal to him the aenigma of his merciful justice; how justice
and mercy can meet together in the same subject without violation to either:
The Prophet at first was in a great blindness concerning this secret, and the
City had like to have paid dearly for his want of understanding. But God has
satisfied the doubt; and saved the City. Nineveh has repented, and Pergameae
jam fas est parcere genti: It is requisite now that Nineveh should be spared.
So that I trust neither Jonahs cry, nor Gods plea, the courage of the one, nor
the compassion of the other, the message, nor the mercy, the Prophets scruple,
or Gods scrutiny, the Prophets dark eye, or Gods bright mouth, Nineveh's
sacrifice, or Nineveh's safety, Nineveh's repentance, or Nineveh's remedy; the
change of the City, or the change of the sentence, the compunction, or
compassion, the threatening, or the sparing shall be displeasing subjects to
you. No, be ye Patrones to this Riddle, the contestation of Jonah, the
replication of God, the explication of the Problem. Oh that we could see such a
Riddle in your City, and thus explained. Jonah does cry, but is God believed?
the overthrow is proclaimed, but do men fly from is? the City is warned, but is
it humbled? it is threatened, bu^ shall it be spared? Oh that the wilful
impenitency of the City, after millions of cries, should not be a greater
riddle, how it can be spared; than Gods inclination to mercy after serious
repentance, is a Riddle fully expounded before, and half expounded now, that
the City may be spared. As intelligent as this City does seem to be, I wish it
could answer one question. Is it Nineveh? Is there expression? or almost
expectation of such humbling and cleansing? For this end is this cry sent
forth, and oh that the Prophet might only cry, or the Prophet so cry, that he
might cry up a Nineveh! Be ye not deaf, and open the cares of others; that ye
may not be my Patrones only, but of the City; not of her sins, but of her
repentance. If ye fail in this work, the City is past remedy. Be ye your felves
therefore as penitent as ye can, and diffuse your repentance to others; have ye
burdened consciences, and draw others to feel the weight of those guilts which
may sink them into ruin. The City is in peril, what is the preservative?
Policy may invent many expedients for security, but I do know none but that of
repentance. To prevent a general overthrow, shall we ever see a general
conversion? What will men leave their seats of honor, and apply their selves
to sackcloth, ashes, fasting, mighty cries, turning from their evil ways,
and from the violence of their hands? Oh that we could see such a beautiful
City to honor our Nation, and bless it self. But I am afraid that this is
but a City of desires, and that it is not harder to build up Jerusalem again
in her first glory, than to raise up such a City amongst us; every stone in
this City may sooner be altered, and new laid, rather than men's minds and
consciences. I doubt whether penitent duties were ever truly intended amongst
us, and I am very jealous whether ever or no we shall see them really
expressed. Men can rather shoot the gulf, climb the Alps, go a pilgrimage
over the whole earth, than repent. Well, as it is my drift to propose, impose,
and dispose, so let it be yours to explore at homt, and excite abroad; Oh to
incline God to plead with his judgments, saying, Should not I spare this great
City, wherein are more then sixscore thousand persons, which cannot discern
between their right hand, and their left hand, and also much cattle? That the
Citizens could first plead with their consciences, saying, Should not we turn
to that great God, who has invited us by more then sixscore thousand warnings,
which cannot discern between pity and forgiveness, and also much forbearance?
Ye see now what a great task ye are to undertake, and that ye had need to lay
to your whole strength to bring forth a right City. Is it an easy matter for
your selves to speak this language, and to feel these brest-motions? howsoever,
is it so to open other men's lips, and to set omens hearts on working? All the
difficulties which ye ever met withal upon earth, are not like unto this
straight. Yet to what end do ye wait upon the Lord, if ye will not do him this
service? Why are ye trees of righteousness, if ye will not bring forth this
fruit? I hope ye are alive to God your selves, (yea, that there are some of the
regenerate race, which do stir quick in this City) but how many dead carcasses
do ye walk amongst? I trust that ye have brought iniquity to remembrance; but
are there not too too many that need their Monitours and Remembrancers, as if
they had forgotten their selves, and their sins? In what forwardness is the
great work? is not the first stone for the generality yet to be laid? yes, it
would astonish a man, that amongst so many celestial shows, there should be
so little heaven; and that the Devil should be lurking under so many
Angelical transformations. I confess, here does appear to be much Religion in
the City, but what Repentance is there? or if Repentance, is it that of
Nineveh? No, here are sins enough in the City to have it overthrown, but is
there repentance enough in it to have it spared? What people are, they may find
out by examination, what they should be, they may find out by the Example. The
earth never saw greater provocations but when shall it be said, that the
heavens never saw greater propitiation? People are much for patterns, but not
for imitation; wise men may devise forms, but where are the virtuous men,
which will conform to them? No, as a beast neighed to Alexanders horse which
was painted, but the spectators expressed no such respect to Alexanders Image
it self whereupon Apelles said, That he had painted the Horse better then the
Prince. Equus (oh Rex) melius expressus est, quam Tu. Erasm. in Apoph.
So Brutes will be more affectionate to those things which do resemble their
nature, then we to those things which should direct our manners. Xenophon wrote
a rare Book, called Cyrus; but where was there ever such a prince? Plato set
forth a singular Treatise, de Republica; but when was there ever such a
Commonwealth? No, it is an easy matter to describe, but it is an hard
mat^erto exhibit the like. Here is a choice Picture, Nineveh limmed out with
tears and graces, and a frame made for it, even this record in holy Scripture;
but when shall we behold the parallel? Oh Citizens, and Religious, though ye
may have some skill in painting, yet can ye draw Nineveh to the life, in Orient
colors amongst you? No, were it to preserve the City from fire, and sword, yet
will ye readily be thus abased, and changed? ye may be, but it will be with a
great difficulty. For the present, what signs are there of such prostration,
consternation, renovation? No, they which have committed horrible sins, may
rather have forms of seeking God to confirm themselves in their wickedness,
than many here which are liable to imminent dangers, have any evident
expressions to fall to the earth, or to look up to heaven to avert vengeance.
Can these bones live? O Lord, thou know, Ezech. 37.3. It were a miracle
almost to see these dry and scattered pieces, though prophesied upon, to have a
noise, and a shaking amongst them, and bone to come together to bone, and
flesh, and sinews, and skin, to grow upon them, and the spirit of life to
enter into them. There is nothing impessible to God, but this is almost
incredible to the present view. For I do not see that men have learned
Nineveh's initiating, much less then her completing graces: They are not yet
come to her dejections, trepidations, perculsions, astonishments,
humi-cubations, macerations, syncopes of grief, paroxisms of conflicts,
gravitoned accents of prayer. No, people nourish the flesh, catch at the world,
follow modes, temporise with changes, and leave perils to the venture, and
judgments to the chance: Happen what will, they have not so much as a wrimpled
brow, or a trembling breast. A Stork will fly faster from a cold Country, or a
beast from a naked sword, then these from plagues and punishments, Then, if
they be not come to the disfigured face of repentance, how will they ever come
to her transfigured spirit? When shall we see the two essential parts of
repentance amongst them, The turning from their evil waids, and from the
violence of their hands?

First, Their evil ways do seem to have a mist upon them, they have not eyes
clear enough to see them, or hearts tender enough to lament them: Though they
have strayed far enough from the prescript rule of obedience, and they find
never a precept warranting their lawless paths; yet, they do tread on, and
consider not whither their feet do carry them; the Ignis erraticus has led
them aside, and they do not lay to heart over what ditches, rocks, cliffs, and
precipices they do pass: It is enough that they are in motion, but whether in
regular, or erroneous courses, they do not apprehend. Oh that there should be
such declinations, under the directing Ordinances; or such foot-prints, amongst
instructed Christians! No man says, What have I done? Many a man says, What
may I not do? but, No man says, What have I done? People do look upon their
faces, but seldom upon their consciences; this clasped book has not been
opened, to view every leaf; nor this deep well searched to the bottom, these
many years. Oh! how much hypocrisy, apostasy, bribery, flattery, blood,
blasphemy, south-saying, sacrilege, have been past over without the least
check, or fret? Men's proper rights they can consider, but not their proper
sins: no, If any sins come under their discovery, or disquisition, they are the
sins of the age, or the sins which malignity have doomed sins, or the sins of
Rome or Turkey: but they have neither eyes, nor tongues, nor hearts, to spy
out, speak out, or reflect upon their proper sins; though they be as bitter as
gall, as red as scarlet, as venomous as the poison of the Aspes, as black as
Satan, coming forth with a steam out of the smoke of the bottomless pit;
yet, there is neither sensiblenesse, nor conscientiousnesse of them: they are
their proper sins, and as they have given them conception and birth, so they
will bestow upon them education and maintenance: They may have a street-cry, or
a Pulpitnoise (sometimes of them) but the sound of them is gone, so soon as it
is received: they deny them, conceal them, extenuate them, and justify them;
yea, some are so impudent, as to deride them. Fools make a mock of sin, though
it be to dance before a Cafe of their melting, or to triumph over a captivated
Sampson, or to quaffe in the Bowls of the Sanctuary, or to present John
Baptist's head in a platter, or to cry Hail to the King of the Jews, when he
(...) leading away to be crucified. These, and the like, are the expressions,
which they do make to their sins, rather then to look aghast upon them, loath
them, bleed under them. How many sinners have ye yet seen, that though they
have done things contrary to the Torch-light of Nature, the Sun-light of
Scripture, the tenor of their own oaths, and the terror of a Catholic Church
condemning them, that have yet blushed, or sobbed, or wrung an hand, or bended
a knee for them? No, they have done them, and they stand up in the defense of
them; after production, they do bestow upon them protection: there is either
silence or senslesnesse, speechlessenesse or remorslesnesse. Now if people will
not discern their sins, how will they ever disclaim them? if they will not look
upon their evil ways, how will they ever turn from their evil ways? What
little likelihood, what small hopes of conversion and reformation?

Secondly, The turning from the violence of the hands, is a thing as
improhable; for, are there any gentler, or juster times to be expected? Will
men pare their nails, soften their harsh palms? No, I do not see so much as a
sense of injury, or a shame of oppression; not so much as an Adonibezek's
remorse for cruelty, to confess, Threescore and ten Kings, having their thumbs
and toes cut off, gathered meat under my table, Judge. 1.7. Nor an Ahab's fright
upon a bloody fact, to be confounded so, that persons should rend their
clothes, put on sackcloth, and go softly, 1 King. 21.27. People do not so much
as question their Estates, which they have gotten by forged cavillation, or ask
forgivness for their wrongs, or make restitution for their ill gotten goods;
much less will they then desist from their damnifying courses. Tyranny does
flow in with an high rage, The earth is covered with violence, as it was in the
days of Noah, Genesis 6. 9. A man would think, that Aegypt's iron furnace, or
Babylon's iron yoke were amongst us. Here is digging of pits, taking up all
with the Angle, swallowing people alive as the grave, eating fruits without
money, breaking the arms of the fatherless, afflicting God's heritage, the
Rulers being as roaring Lions, (as the Scripture says) and the Judges as the
Woolves of the evening, devouring with such fury, that they leave not the bones
tiil the morrow. Some groping for bribes, with Felix; some requiring men's right
eyes, to condescend to a peace, with Naash; some pronounting sentence of death,
upon a framed information, with Jezabel's Judges; yea, some not being ashamed,
to run greedily after the error of Balaam for reward. How many houses are
built with crying stones, and cemented with bloody mortar? The Times are full
of much fraud and force, invention and circumvention, domination and
conculcation: Men enjoying preyes with as much inward satisfaction, as
birthrights, and possessing rifles with as quiet a conscience, as just
earnings. Oh! when will the whip depart out of this City? when will the wild
beast's teeth fall out of their heads? when will the hammers leave beating, or
the millstones leave grinding? when will repentance so reduce the City to
equity, that there need neither Tribunal to rectify injuries, or Pulpit, to
touch conscience for extortion? People in general will scarce take notice of
their cruelty, much less will they take away the crime; they will scarce feel
their rough hands, much less will they turn from the violence of their hands.

Thus then ye see, how your City is in a dangerous, deplorable state, full of
stupendous sins, and yet full of stupid impenitency; a professing City, and
yet far from Evangelicall purity; a corrupt City, and yet far from contrite
Nineveh. How then may your City walls shake, and every Citisens heart be
daunted, expecting some unexemplified judgment, for these enormous
transgressions? Will God ever be dared with challenging trespasses, or mocked
with phanatick formalities? Will the noise of your Sermon-bells, or the sound
of your Gospellising tongues, be able to pacify an incensed God? No, he may
seize upon you in your streets, where ye are defying him in your full strength;
or take you at Church, where ye are deluding him (perhaps) with Templechedis.
Will a few superficial specious pretenses, satisfy the strict Examiner, the
God of pure eyes? No: He has showed thee, O man; what is good, and what the
Lord requires of thee; not burn offerings, or calves of a year old, not
thousands of rams; or ten thousand rivers of oil, not thy firstborn for thy
transgression, or the fruit of thy body for the sin of thy soul; all these are
but outward, they come no nearer to thee than thy cattle, thy stock, or thy
progeny: thou must therefore be the burnt offering, the calf of a year old, the
ram, the jar of oil, the firstborn, and the expiating fruit of the body; God
must have thy self, thy self humbled or hated, thy self renewed or rejected.
There is nothing will appease Joseph, but the bringing of Benjamin; there is
nothing will atone God, but repentance, all by-contrivments are but sinister
drifts and bents. Ye see how Nineveh was spared, and so must ye be freed. Oh!
that ye can think to stand an age in remorslesnesse, or to be secure one year
in impenitency. No, the twigs are gathering, to make the sharper rod, or the
rasour whetting, to shave with the keener edge. Who ever resisted the Lord, and
prospered? Shall thou reign, because thou dwell in Cedar? Does not the Lord
remember thee, and came it not into his mind? Can two walk together, except
they be agreed? Can a snare be taken from the earth, and nothing be caught? Is
not destruction to the ungodly, and a strange punishment to the workers of
iniquity? Who can dwell with the devouring fires? Is there any hiding place
from the Lords fury? No: though thou should dig into hell, thence would he
take thee; though thou should climb up into heaven, thence would he fetch
thee down; though thou should hide thy self in the top of Carmell, he would
search thee out there; though thou should lie in the bottom of the Sea, yet
there would he command the Serpent to bite thee. God may send the flood, when
thou art in the midst of thy quaffings and dalliances; fire may come down from
heaven, when the Sun is shining brightly in thy streets; a great cry may be
heard in the midst of the City at midnight, when thou art suspecting neither
the slaughter of the first, or firstborn; the avenger of blood may pursue
thee, and pluck thee out of the Cities of refuge; yea, God may slay thee,
whilst thou art laying hold on the horns of the Altar. Has not God destroyed
as mighty a people as you? Yes: the Amorites were potent, yet, when their sins
were full, they were emptied out of their Nation. Rabbah was a strong City, the
City of waters, yet it was taken, and the Citisens put under sawes, and
harrowes, and axes of iron, 2 Samuel 12.31. Has not God ruined as religious
places as yours? Yes: Go ye now to my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my
name at the first, and see what I did to it, for the wickedness of my people
Israel. Jer. 7.12. Yea, go ye to Jerusalem, how was that fortress of the earth
demolished? yea, that City of oblations made a sacrifice to the justice of a
provoked God; yea, left such a relick of misery, that a book of Lamentations
was written, to bewail the rufull desolations of it. Oh therefore, be not
confident, neither upon your prowess, nor profession; for it is neither your
formidable Chivaldry, nor formal Religion which will privilege you, or
protect you; but it is your Repentance which must shield you, and shelter you.
See then what must save you, and what is your only preservative. There are a
great company amongst you, famed for parts, and magnified for piety; to you I
write, you I summon, entreating you, by all the worth that your names are
embellished with; and adjuring you, by all the Orthodox truth, which ye seem to
have reserved, out of the defection, and declension of the times, that ye would
first go a Circuit through your own consciences, and then that ye would walk
the streets, and go from the one end of the City to the other, and observe the
face and face of the City; that ye would take notice of the maladies and ulcers
of the City, and consider what prognosticating symptoms there are of an
emigration, and exanimation. Oh feel the weak pulse of the City, touch her cold
lips, and behold her grisly cheeks. Look upon the present dangers and
dysasters, apprehend what a Flag of defiance is hung out upon earth, and what a
sword is bathed in heaven. Can such sins, and the Cities safety, such
impenitency and the Cities impunity, long stand together? Fear ye not some
plague? some general massacre? some coal, blown with the breath of the
Almighty, that may sparkle, and kindle, and burn you to such cinders, that not
a wall or pillar may be left, to testify the remembrance of a City? They whose
judgment was not to drink of the cup, have assuredly drunk it off; and shall
thou altogether go unpunished? Jer. 49.12. May not the vial of red wine be
reserved for the lips of this City? Is here more sin, and shall there be less
justice? Has this City been often at her wits end, and may not her brains at
last be crased, with an inevitable, and an inextricable judgment? Vengeance
deserred is not recalled; a forbearing-God, may double his dismaying and
confounding strokes. Oh therefore, mark the bad Crasis, and the sad Crisis of
the City. Help at an exigent; repent, when there is nothing but repentance lest
for an antidote. Repent truly, lest your repentance prove a scandal and a
curse; repent thoroughly, lest one unmortified sin, frustrate the virtue of an
humiliation; repent timely, lest not knowing the time of your visitation, the
blessings ye wish for be hid from your eyes.

1. Repent for your selves. For, as the pure minds had need to be warned, so
the pure consciences have need to be cleansed. The best of you, I fear, have not
past through the puddle, without some filth sticking upon your skins. Ye have
not lived in such an age of Epidemicall diseases, but ye have catched some
contagion: Therefore search out your own spots, and leave not a stain, to be an
eye-fore to heaven. Weep out all your contaminations, pray away all your
pollutions, purge away all your defilements. Have an hour in the day, a day in
the year, for strict and solemn repentance.

2. Repent, to teach others repentance: When thou art converted, confirm thy
brethren. When ye are quickened your selves with Repentance unto life,
propagate it (if it be possible) unto midtitudes, that it may be said, Behold,
here am I, and my children. Let your believing God, beget faith in others; your
standing up from your seats, excite others to rise; your empty bowels, provoke
others to fast; your stripped backs, cloth others in sackcloth; your squallid
demeanours, seat others upon the ash-heap; your making your beasts partners in
the pacifying act, raise up a strange penance in the streets; your moist eyes,
set others on weeping; your confessing lips, stir those tongues in men's heads,
which have been silent these many years; your making reparation for errors,
cause others to deface the memory of foul facts, with opposite virtues; your
mighty cries fill the City with echoes of devotion; your turning from your
evil ways, change the steps of others from exorbitances; your purging your
hands from violence, procure oppression to ache in the joints of other men's
fingers. Do your closet work well, and be exact in your street-work. Repent,
and make a whole City propense to repentance.

To some I might say, Have ye not heard of repentance? Do ye not know how to
repent? Do ye not understand the effects of repentance? Have ye not seen the
fruits of repentance? can ye not repent? will ye not repent? Where did ye ever
yet repent? when will ye at last repent? Oh that there were repentance! that ye
were as eminent in repentance as Nineveh? that in stead of your Buildings and
Bulwarks, Walls and Halls, Works and Wonders, Statues and State-houses,
Pillars and Pearls, hoords of Provision, and heaps of Treasure in the City,
that there were but Repentance; yea, that instead of your Scriptures and
Scribes, numerous Lectures and curious language, Sanctuaries and Sacraments,
Privileges and Prayers, Meditations and Mysteries, Revelations and Raptures,
and the City, that there were but Repentance; that your Congregations were so
purified, and your Temples so sanctified, that they might afford you such
Professors, which were such Saints, that they might be able to bless a
Church, and save a City, by Repentance. Some Penitents there are amongst you,
but how many Ninivites? Well, ye that have the highest opinions of your selves,
and in the greatest repute for Religion; know, that ye are but as the sounding
brass, and tinckling cymballs, without repentance. Oh that ye could be rid of
the libertines and hypocrites amongst you, and that there were none but
penitents in the City! Oh that ye stood upon equal numbers, that ye were but
the third, the twentieth, the fiftieth, the hundred part of the City; that
there were but a common Hall of you, that ye did but equal the number of the
Officers, or Watches in the City; that there were but enough to take the
frowns out of God's forehead, the menaces out of Gods cheeks, to retard Gods
feet, to bind his hands, to put audience into his ears, compassion into his
eyes, reconciliation into his breast, pardon into his lips; to keep his
Trumpeters from the gates of the City, or his ^roopers out of the streets of
the City. Oh! religious Citizens, try the compleatnesse of your numbers, and
the perfection of your gifts. Be not blind under so many grievances, deaf under
so many warnings, sleepy under so many judgments. Believe not your Politicians,
if they tell you, that your City is in no danger; believe not your Pulpits, if
they preach you up to be pure enough, against God's examining justice; believe
not your own Consciences, if they persuade you, that ye are prepared
sufficiently against all accidents. Consider, in what a talking age ye do live,
how Religion is little more then argument^, and profession then discourse. How
many are wit-foundred with humors, which stare upon themselves, as if Heaven
must look upon them with an enamored eye? How hard a thing it is, to get
people to confess, that there is a guilty Nation, or a sinful City?
howsoever, that they are the peccant people, or that God should visit a place
for their impieties. Oh behold, how many things there are to tempt you to
security, to cauterise you in sin, and to slupifie you to repentance. And as
ever ye would seem to have rifled your own hearts, to have dissected your own
consciences, to have sent the Intelligencer into the City, to have heard the
cries of your abominations at Gods judgment seat, to have seen the Armies
which are raised in heaven, to assault you: Oh think upon the City with
dismayed hearts, look down upon the City with weeping eyes, turn aside to
bemoan apparent perlils, and fall upon your knees, to mitigate deserved
vengeance. Oh! bring forth all the water in your heads, to extinguish wrath;
kindle all the fire in your lips, to put an heat into congealed pity; stretch
out all the manacles in your hands, to chain such an Adversary. Think, that ye
have read Scriptures with recklesse eyes, if ye have not found out curses
against such sins; that ye have frequented Sanctuaries like fruitless hearers,
if they have not taught you repentance for such sins; that ye have searched
your consciences with partiality, if the sense of such trespasses do not drive
you into passions; that ye were never terrified with your own exigents, if it
does not perplex you, to see a City at such a dysaster. Make an experiment of
your own con^rition, try how ye can humble your selves, to keep your City from
confusion and curse; cut off your own fore-skins, and do your best to
circumcise others; rend your own hearts, and make a wound in your brethren's
breasts, till the blood come. If there be but one remedy, leave all other
medicinal applications, and fall to repentance; or, use all other exercises,
but as ingredients, to be infused into that Catholicon. Repent heartily, repent
eminently, that Angels may rejoice over your conversion, and God himself may
look out at his Court-gate, and say, Behold another Niniveh. Oh! think not of
the world, think upon judgment; mind not too much preferment, mind
atonement; look not upon the splendor of the City, look upon the horror of
the City; eye not your Guardians, eye your Enemy. Carry the threatenings of
God's Laws in your ears, and the perils of the City in your breasts; let your
hearts ache, and your lips quiver. The Lion has roared, who will not fear? the
Lord God has spoken, who can but prophecy? So long as people are settled upon
their lees, think, that there is some emptying of the vessel at hand. When ye
are laid in your beds, suppose, that a punishing God may awaken you; when ye
are at your feasts, that vengeance may bring in the Voyder; when ye are selling
your wares, that your last bargains are even making; when ye are telling over
your thousands, that ye are but pursing up for the new Receiver; when ye are
looking out at your doors, that ye are ready to be plucked over your
thresholds; when ye are coming from your Sermons, that the time is at hand,
when your Temple doors shall be locked up. Expect every hour when your Bells
should ring awke, when a shriek Trumpet should be blown in the streets, when
nothing should be heard amongst you, but tumult, distraction, wailing, and
crying, Alas, alas. Would ye shun this? can ye prevent it? then know, that ye
must not only remember the City in the morning, nor mention it at night, but
consider, how low ye must stoop, what abjects ye must turn, what mediations ye
must use, what castigations ye must endure, what strange backs and bowels,
loathings and lamentings, debatings and debasings, clensing of consciences, and
clensing of estates, transformings and translatings, there must be, before the
breach can be repaired. This is your work, act like expert Artists,
Master-workmen. Religious Citisens, fly from all pleasures, contemn all
honors, be strangers for a time to your own Chaires, Cook-rooms, Wardrobes,
Cellers, Porches, Galleries, Counting-houses, and Cattle, and converse rather
with Ash-heaps then Thrones, Sackcloth then Tissues, biting Hunger then
sumptuous Banquets, bitter Cries then musical Instruments, dumb Beasts then
reasonable Men, till ye have dispatched that service, which may secure your
goods, your blood, your City. Oh! they must be prime penitents, which are to be
employed in this peerlesse duty, they must have Nineveh's plaster, to heal
this festring wound; they must have Nineveh's Solicitour, to procure peace in
this Court; they must polish their Diamond with Niniveh's File, to make it give
the true luster: They must write out their repentance in Niniveh's capi^all
letters, to have it legible in Gods eyes. Some men may prescribe unto you
several forms of repentance, and swell them with Scholasticall intricacies,
and lecturall disquisitions; but at last there may be in them more anxiety than
satisfaction, or haesitation than resolution: the clear and infallible pattern
is to be setched from Nineveh, for that repentance was efficacious and
acceptable. Oh ye Citisens then, gather together, and see how many Penitents
there are amongst you; or, let the Penitents stand apart, and mark what
qualifications they have. They Penitents are the best Citisens, and the best
Penitents are the true Ninevites. If there be a number amongst you which have
Nineveh's art, they may have Nineveh's success, they may bury all fears in the
ash-heap; and shift off all miseries in the sackcloth; they may fast away all
perils, and pray away all judgments. God will not turn upon the City with
fury, if these turn from their evil ways, nor stretch out his avenging hand,
if these forsake the violence of their hands. Who can tell if God will turn,
and repent, and turn away from his fierce wrath, that we perish not? These
Penitents may send word to heaven, that God may forbear smiting, for they have
smitten themselves with repentance: they may convey news to all their enemies
upon earth, that they may stay at home, for Repentance has reared them up
Walls, higher than the clouds, which no scaling Ladders can reach, and mounted
Ordinance for them upon their Towers and Fortresses, which will shoot
Assaylants to death, further then the Spires of their Steeples can be seen;
yea, dispatch away messengers to all plagues and judgments, that they are not
to come nigh to the City, for Repentance has gotten a Warrant of Remove, to
carry them out of the Land, and to convey them beyond the Seas. Do ye thus
repent, and ye are as safe as Nineveh; God will be your Pleader, and against
all your Adversaries (were it Jonah himself) multiply reasons for your
preservation: He will draw pity toward you from the most flinty heart,
howsoever his own breast shall flow with compassion; ye shall be precious in
his eye, he will forget nothing that may be an incentive for sparing, not the
greatness of your City, nor the multitude of your Persons, nor the plenty of
your Cattle: Should not I spare Nineveh that great City, wherein are more then
six score thousand persons, which cannot discern between the right hand and the
left hand, and also much cattle. I have now shown you the right way to safety,
walk in it, and ye are gone beyond danger; ye are the City to be spared.

Thus leaving my Motion to your Consciences, the Practice of it to your Virtue,
and the Success of it to the Blessing of HIM in Heaven, I commend you to the
Grace of CHRIST, and rest;

The serious Monitour of your Repentance, and the earnest Petitioner for your
Safety, THO. REEVE.

GODS PLEA FOR NINEVEH.
JONAH 4.11. And should not I spare Nineveh, that great City, wherein are more
than sixscore thousand persons, that cannot discern between their right hand,
and their left hand; and also much Cattle?


WE have here God and his Prophet, in earnest dispute; Jonah is raging, and God
is reasoning; Jonah is full of passion, and God full of compassion; Jonah had
denounced judgment, and he would have God to execute the judgment; Jonah had
retired out of the City, and he would have God to raze the City: Thus as once,
Mulciber in Troiam, pro Troia stabat Apollo. the two Deities could not agree
about Troy; so God, and his Prophet, could not here agree about Nineveh. Virg.
2. Aenead.
But quae tanta insania? Why so much heat? What put the Prophet into such a
mood? Jonah, thy name does signify a Dove; but is there in thee (contrary to
nature) so much gall? Boni viri lachrimabiles, Good men should be ready to melt
at judgments. Prophets should carry about them the softest sympathising
bowels. But is the Prophet become a Spoiler? the Dove a Vultur? Show some
reason of thy displeasure, lay forth the grounds of thy sad wishes against
Nineveh; Has Jonah any motives to prompt him on to such dismal conclusions?
Yes, he was a Prophet, and he saw not the event of his Prophecy; God had
punished him for flying to Tharsis, and now he does shame him for repairing to
Nineveh. God does employ a Prophet, and he will not justify his Prophet. For,
says Jonah, I have said, Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed; the
forty days are even expiring, and Nineveh yet stands. Were Seers wont to be
thus deluded? No -- Sagax quondam ventura videre Fatidicus vates -- The Prophet
of old did seem certainly to presage future things. Ovid. 5. Met.
For who so intimate with God, as his Prophet? Prophetia est, divina inspiratio
futura immobili veritate enuntians. Prophecy is a divine inspiration
foretelling future things with unchangeable truth. Cassiod.
Thomas Aq. says, that propheta dicitur quasi procul fans, vel procul videns.
Aq. 3. p. 7. art. 8.
A Prophet is said to be one which speaks, or sees afar off, things to come;
the light of Prophecy is little inferior to the Angelical light; the Angel
is a Spirit above, and the Prophet a kind of Spirit beneath: But, says Jonah,
where is my light? what shall become of my prediction? Shall not I be esteemed
a strange Spirit? a mad Prophet? Yes! the Oracles of the Heathen, and the most
southsaying wizard, shall have more reputation than I. It is no marvel God
forced me hither, and that he was so eager to hale and drive me forth upon such
an errand, I thought what a comfortable message I should have of it; yea I
presaged at home, how I should be disgraced abroad; For was not this my saying,
when I was yet in my own Country? Oh that Nineveh does maintain her state,
Jonah 4.2.
and I cannot maintain my credit; that that continues a flourishing City, and
I shall be accounted a foolish Prophet. If that does not lay in ashes, I shall
lay in ignominy: Oh God, deface it, demolish it, let me see it laid wast, and
let not an after-age be able to tell, where it had Turret or Stone; or else it
shall repent me that ever I entered the City, or opened my mouth against the
City; I am ashamed to be styled Prophet, yea I am weary of my being; do what
thou will with me, if thou will do nothing to that; if Nineveh do not see her
last day, let Jonah see his last day; if thou will not make an end of that,
make an end of me. Take away my life, Jonah 4.3.
it is better for me to die then to live. Thus we have seen Jonas in his rage,
and the bitter motions of his disturbed spirit. This it is in fermento jacere,
to lie sowring in the leaven of discontent, and (...), to cast darts at hazard;
into such ravings, Plautus Lucian.
and phrensies do we fall, when we are left to our selves, and rankle under our
exulcerated imaginations; we quarrel with Heaven, and other men's welfare is
our vexation; if we be disappointed, or fail in our desired drifts, we live
with no pleasure, and would even dye in indignation. But, says God to Jonah,
would thou fain be dead? what die in distaste against Nineveh? in discontent
against thy God? Oh what will become of such a froward, malicious Soul? Thou
had need to beg for life, till thou be better tempered; for if thou do
thus take thy leave of the World, will thou not be more unhappy, then thou
can wish Niniveh to be? I found thee unfaithful before, and now I find thee
impatient; thou did flee to Tharshish rather then thou would go to Niniveh;
and now thou would flee out of the World, rather then thou would have
Niniveh looked upon; Thou have been brought up under the knowledge of God, have
thou no more feeling of humanity? Thou art a Prophet, is it for thy honor to
be thus unkind? Jonah 4.4.
Do thou well to be angry? What angry at an act of preservation? angry
because thy God is merciful? Is thine eye evil because mine is good? Art thou
angry because thou see not such a stately City all in a bright flame? Art
angry, because thou hear not the ghastly shrieks of so many perishing Souls?
thou art full of humor* but do thou well to be angry? No, then as before I
called thee my fugitive Prophet, so now I shall call thee my furious Prophet;
as before I punished thee for being faint-hearted, so now I shall punish thee
for being hard-hearted; What thy God gentle, and thou cruel? thy God patient,
and thou passionate? either I do ill to be gracious, or thou do ill to be
angry. Thou art a Prophet, I am a God, what shall there be improbitas muscae?
the waywardness of my servant to direct me, correct me, expostulate with me,
exprobrate me? No, abate in thy heat, cool these rash flames; Do thou well to
be angry? was there ever Prophet before, which would judge his God? that would
be angry with his God, because he was pitiful? Thou art in an error, be
sensible of thy guilt: thou art angry, Do thou well to be angry? It is true,
I sent thee upon the message, I wished thee to limit the time for the
destruction of Niniveh, but they have repented in the time, and so have
prevented the destruction; I cannot fulfill the prophecy, unless I should
deny their humiliation; I cannot destroy the City, unless I should destroy
their repentance. For out of conditional threatenings no Categoricall judgment
can ensue; the Pacification being wrought, Justice has no place: no, there is
debitae poenae remissio, Greg.
a discharge from deserved Judgment: Though God can fight with his Enemies:
yet can he with them that sue for peace? No, he has no sword for the yielding,
but the obstinate: Aug. de Eccles. dog. c. 48.
paenitentia aboleri peccata indubitanter credimus. Sins are utterly abolished
by the virtue of repentance. Why then should Jonah urge the destruction of
them, whose conversion he has beheld? No, is it not honor for thee enough
that thou have seen them penitent, and that in after-ages thou shall be called
that eminent Prophet, that did draw such a famous City to such a matchless
remorse? shall not the renovation of so many thousand Souls, be the everlasting
Monument of thy never-dying praise? Can thou desire sweeter fruit of
prophesying so short a time? How many Prophets have not been so successful in
forty years, as thou have been in less then forty days? Wish not then the end
of the City, for I have mine end of the Prophecy; If thou take offense, I
have no grievance, I am pracified, and Do thou well to be angry? I never
intended the ruin, but the repentance of the City; thou had my public
Prophecy, but not my secret Reservation, if Niniveh had not submitted, it had
been subverted, but it has been humbled, and it cannot be hurt. Would it not
grieve thee to see that City in ashes, which thou have seen in sackeloth? to
see such a King, and such a People murdered, whom thou have seen mortified; to
see them never eat, and drink again, whom thou have seen imposing upon
themselves, such a rigorous fast? to see the least living creature amongst them
in hazard, which have made their very Beasts do penance? that they should
wallow in blood, which have been drowned in a Flood of tears? that they should
cry rufully in a sad desolation, which have cried mightily unto their God? that
they should be separated unto evil, which have turned every one from the evil
of their way? that they should feel the violence of avenging Justice, which
have forsaken the violence of their hands? that they should suffer the utmost
of my fierce anger, and quite perish, which have prostrated themselves to the
Earth merely upon this confidence, that Reconciliation would redress all sad
exigents, for Who can tell if the Lord will turn, and repent, and turn away
from his fierce wrath, that we perish not. Art still bent upon spoil, Ovid 9.
Metam.
and wast? Nullaque res potuit crudelis flectere mentis Consilium? And is there
nothing to mollify that truculent spirit of thine? then let thy skin be
savage, and thy name barbarous. Consider, who would ever lament sin, seek God,
depend upon favor, if so much compunction, devotion, reformation, and faith
should be despised? I must raze my Covenant, abrogate my promises, deny my
properties, name, and essence, if I should not accept of such a City of
Mourners: Jonah, look upon the qualifications of the people; oh stir that
prophetical eye of thine in thy head, and if thou have any of my inspiration
left in thee, let every heart-string in thy bosom tremble at the downfall of
such a people; behold them squallidos, and pulverulentos, all bemired, and
besmeared in anguish for sin, and let their conflicts trouble thee, their
contrition incline thee rather to be a Solicitor, a Petitioner for them, than
an Informer, a Crime-urger, a Vengeance-forcer. Will Jonah leave them in tears?
scorn their plaints? despise their sackcloth? doom their reparation of guilts?
where is the Prophets mediation, intercession, his standing up in the gaps, and
lifting up a prayer for them? what, nothing but dismal plagues, and direful
curses, calling for the sharp scourge to sting upon their backs, and crying
out for the Cup of astonishment to be thrust to their lips, that the line of
confusion might be drawn over the City, that the stones of emptiness might be
found in the streets, that they might be made as Admah, and set as Zehoim; that
head, and tail, branch, and rush might be cut off in one day, that instead of
living men to inhabit the City, there might be none but wild beasts to dwell
there, or that it might be a possession for the Bittern, Scritchowl, Zijms, and
Jijms, that they might be smote till none be left remaining, that their name
might be blotted out from under Heaven, that not so much as a Palace Wall, or
the ruins of a Porch might be seen, but breeding of nettles, and saltpits, and
a perpetual desolation, that Nineveh might be made a burying place, a
Dunghill, a Shambles; yea, that the City might be made an heap, that the days
of their slaughter, and dispersions might be accomplished; yea, that the
consumption decreed might overflow them? Ah Jonah, are these thy pensive
thoughts? thy bloody expectations? then I might have sent a Butcher, a
Swordman, an Executioner, and Headsman to the City, as well a Prophet. But if
thou be thus inflexible, should I be so inexorable? No, never since the
Foundations of the Earth did I see such repentance; therefore, since I first
created Light, will I cause such compassion to shine forth here as never did:
their bringing iniquity to remembrance has made me forget indignation, their
knowing every one the plague of his own heart, has removed from my heart the
sense of all grievances, their taking to them words has caused me to be silent
for vengeance, their thoroughly amending their ways and doings, has procured
me to reverse my sentence, their loathing their selves in their abominations
has inclined me no longer to loath them; they are troubled, and my bowels are
troubled within me, their hearts are renewed, and my heart is turned within me,
their repentings do sparkle, and my repentings are kindled: how can my wrath
burn, when they have taken away all the fuel? how can I hew down such a tree,
in which I find so much sap, on which so much fruit? their fasting does show,
that they had rather never eat food more, then remain under my displeasure;
their sackcloth does declare, that they have no contentment to put on a seemly
vesture till I be reconciled unto them; the cladding their beasts in such a
mournful manner does testify, that they acknowledge they have forfeited all
their estates, till I re-instate them into a new possession of them; their
crying mightily unto God does witness, that they would cry themselves
speechless to appease mine incensed spirit; their turning every one from his
evil way, and from the violence that is in their hands, does import, that they
would part with their most pleasing and profitable sins, to be secured from
my threatened ire; their looking up to Heaven with an eye of faith, saying, Who
can tell, if the Lord will turn and repent, yea turn from his fierce wrath,
that we perish not, does intimate, that if I do not repent, it is to no purpose
for men to entreat the face of God; that if I do power out my fierce wrath, it
is in vain to use means of pacification; that if they perish, no man will sue
or supplicate, purge or cleanse, reform or renew to be preserved; therefore I am
challenged upon mine honor; if I do deny them mercy, I must disclaim my
Deity. Jonah therefore have better thoughts, lay to heart such a piercing
cause, they do well to be penitent, I shall do well to be merciful, Do thou
well to be angry? no leave this anger, and turn thy spite into kindness, thy
passion into pity. Thou were not long since such a Malecontent, such a
Malevolent; thou had a tender heart in thy bosom, thou were a soft-breasted
Prophet, Jonah the Dove; thou could pity. Pity? what? Oh do not remember
Jonah, how I created a Gourd for thee, to preserve thee from the scorching
beams of the Sun; and I sent a worm to smite the Gourd, that not only the
stalk decayed, but the root dried up: were thou then so cruel? then so
merciless? No, how did it grieve the to see that fresh shading plant wither?
thou were glad of the Gourd for the enjoying of it, thou were sad at the Gourd
for being deprived of it; it was but a Gourd, and yet what a breast? what
bowels had thou then? Jonah 4.10.
Thou had pity on the Gourd. What, pity on the Gourd, and not pity on
Nineveh? the Gourd to perish, and not Nineveh to perish? where is thy former
compassion? art thou, or can thou not be the same Jonah? Consider, I made
that Gourd thy Text, out of which thou should learn mercy; for if the loss
of a Gourd was so heavy to thee, what should the loss of Nineveh be? Alas, the
Gourd was not much useful, but there is much profit to be had by Nineveh; thou
did not labor for the Gourd, nor make it grow, but thou have labored for
Nineveh, traveled a tedious journey, seeded it with Doctrins, watered it with
exhortations, that it might sprout up with a lively sense of sin, and grow in a
holy change: that Gourd came up in a night, and perished in a night; but
Nineveh has been long in the building, and without some heavy judgment from
Heaven may stand for many generations: the Gourd was but a little shrub, but
Nineveh is a great City; the Gourd had but a few senseless branches, but
Nineveh has in it sensible and rational persons, that must make a reckoning
at Gods Throne, even more then sixscore thousand persons; the Gourd had every
thing in it grown up to the full perfection, which being at the height, what
matter if it were taken away? but Nineveh has those in it which hang upon the
breasts, are not come to the full growth, even Infants, which have not yet lived
to the years of maturity, which cannot discern between the right hand and
their lest; the Gourd had not a living creature upon it or under it, to perish
with it; but Nineveh has droves and herds, even much cattle. Therefore because
thou had pity, let me spare; because thou had pity on the small Gourd,
let me spare Nineveh the great City; because thou had pity on the Gourd
which perished alone, let me spare Nineveh that must perish with above sixscore
thousand persons; because thou had pity on the Gourd which was come to
compleatnesse, let me spare Nineveh which has in it waxing persons, which are
not yet come to years of discretion, even such as cannot discern betwixt the
right hand and the left; because thou had pity on the Gourd which perished
without the loss of a fly with it, let me spare Nineveh which cannot perish
without infinite damage, even the destruction of much cattle: Had thou pity,
and should not I spare? had thou pity on the Gourd, for which thou have not
labored nor made it to grow, which came up in a night and perished in a night,
and should not I spare Nineveh that great City, wherein are more then sixscore
thousand persons which cannot discern between their right hand and left, and
also much cattle.

In the Text consider with me these particulars.

1. A digging for water, And should not. 2. A Springhead, I. 3. The stream
which should flow from it, spare. 4. The Channel in which it should run,
Nineveh that great City, wherein are more then sixscore thousand persons which
cannot discern between their right hand, and their left hand; and also much
cattle.
First, for the digging of water; And should not? These words are put
questionatively, and include a serious arguing; for the case is not barely
propounded, but pressed, and enforced with high reason; let the adversary, if
he can, turn Respondent to such an Opponent, it is urged forceably against him,
And should not? From hence observe, That God is a Pleader for his Saints. Their
case can never be dry; no, God will dig for water for them. I mean, he will
debate things, not suffer matters to be carried precipitately, and
peremptorily; but he will try how congruous and consonant the discourse is, he
will drive men to a demonstration, or to search all their Topical heads; for
the (...), the point in question shall be discussed, and God will interrogate
upon it, Should not? God will not remain dumb in the case of his Saints, but he
will be a consulting and a conferring God; both give reason, and have reason
for them. He will plead with Cain for Abels blood, with Abimelech for taking
away Sarah from Abraham, with Achab for wresting away Naboths Vineyard; yea,
how has God brought all the earth adscrutinium, to a solemn scrutiny? that
when men have thought that things have been voyced, and voted sufficiently on
their sides, yet he will have the business scanned over again. The wicked shall
not roast that which they took in hunting, no more shall they go away
Conquerors with that, which they averred in their first assertions; no, stay
till God does come to expostulate, and to bring in his should not? As the faith
full have the arrow of his deliverance, 2 King. 13.17. so they have the
argument of his justification. God will awaken for his Saints, Job 8.6. All the
wits of the world shall not put God to bed, or make him to sleep, vanquished in
dispute; he will be vigilant, and vigorous in what he has undertaken to
verify; his eyes shall be open, and his mouth shall be open. Jacach, which
does signify to judge, or prepare, does signify also to argue; as if God
judged by reasoning, for us, or his assisting preparations, were clear
enarrations, and absolute evictions. Guanah for God to hear, does signify
also for God to answer, as if God never heard effectually, till he answered
distinctly. Ribbah to plead, does come of Roubh, litigavit litem, to try out a
case by contest, and indeed God is our Jurisperitus, Defendit omnes, qui sub
cliemela sunt Jacob, Spiegel. lexic. Jurid.
one of the long Robe which does act all things in open Court for us. He does
defend all which are his proper Clyents: Yea he does press things so home,
that his opposites do cover their lips, the mouth of all wickedness is stopped.
Heman, and his Counselors are in a distraction, the wisdom of Achitophel is
turned into foolishness: when God has spoken, men turn their backs, and dare
not ask a word, as the Scripture says, Oh rare Pleader! there is not such a
Barre-man to be found. How did he silence Apion for his wretched slander
against the Jews, J^seph lib. 2. Contra Apion.
that they kept their Sabbath from Sabbou, as the Egyptians call it, a base
disease (as he said) which they got in their groynes by their hasty march into
Palestine? How did he confound Paulus, the great Contriver under Constantius,
who for his subtle design against the Orthodox Christians, was called the
fettering Chain? Vocatus fuit Catena, Amin. l. 14. Theodor.
How did he nonplus Acacius for his false aspersion cast upon Saint Cyril, that
he had sold to a Stage Player the precious Vesture, which Constantine the Great
had given to the Church of Jerusalem? How did he confute the Heathens, August.
l. 26. de Civitate dei c. 52.
who when they saw that no practices would prevail to draw the Christians to
Idolatry, they caused certain Greek Verses to be scattered up, and down the
World, wherein they maintained that Saint Peter had set up the name of Christ
by enchantment, and that his worship should continue but for 345 years?
Socrates. lib. 1. c. 27.
How did he strike dumb the Adversaries of Saint Athanasius, when they accused
him of lust, and Necromancy? These have been Gods famous arguings, and
memorable pleadings for his chosen in all ages; he has reproved even Kings
for their sake, nay, pleaded with the whole Earth in their behalf. The maligner
of the Church may abound in talk, but he shall never have the last word, no,
after all criminating, (...), Polychronius.
God will have a refutation in open Court. When a Soldier desired Augustus
Caesar that he would be pleased as his gracious Emperor to act for him at the
Bar, he said, No, but he would allow him an Orator; I thank thee not for this,
says the Soldier, for at the Battle of Actium I fought for thee with mine
own hands, and not by my Deputy, and why now would thou turn me off to an
Orator? At which Augustus blushing, rose up from his Imperial Seat, and
earnestly opened the Soldiers case, and freed him. So God will not leave us to
Substitutes, but will be heard for us in his own person. Was not David
confident of this? does he not express words of affiance for it? yes, Let not
thine ear be deaf to me. Psalm. 28.1. Hide not thy self from my supplication.
Ps. 55.1. Keep not silence, cease not oh God. Psalm. 83.1. Defend my Cause.
Psalm. 43.1. Have we not sufficient trial, and manifest experience of this
here? Yes, we have a president before our eyes, Niniveh was in great danger,
Jonah had done what he could to bring down Judgment, and force vengeance. Well
the Prophet has spoken, and had God shut up his lips? No, he is refelling
Jonah, and showing him his high mistake; thou would have me (says God) to do
no good to this people, but may not this thing be done? Can it be otherwise,
Should not?

Application.
This serves to show that the Saints case is never desperate, God is their
Pleader. If the Emperor said to the Mariner, being ready to be shipwracked,
Sueton.
Thou can not be drowned, for thou carriest Caesar; then thon can not be
cast, for God will appear at the Bar for thee. What can all the Politicians and
Craftmasters of the World do against thee, if the Only wise God will but lend
thee an argument? or problem for thee? Is there any speaking after God? can
any Sophistry prevail, or Paradoxes take place if he come to sift propositions?
No, he will strike all mute with one question; there is no answer to his should
not? How forcible are right words? Job 6.25. Where is the Wise? where is the
Scribe? where is the Disputer? He scatters the devices of the crafty, Job
5.12. The spark of their fire shall not shine. Job 18.15. Clisthenes the
Athenian was banished by his own Ostracisin which he devised. Zoroastes the
Astrologer was burnt with the sparks of fire which came from his own
counterfeited stars; Coelius Rhod. lib. 25. c. 43. Anton. tom. 1. tit. 2. c. 1.
Wicked men perish by their own inventions. How many men lie buried in the
ashes of their own mischievous contrivements? God is a sore disputant, he does
bring killing arguments. Haman was crafty, but at last he does hang upon the
Gibbet, which he provided for Mordecai; the Babylonians were subtle, but in
conclusion, they are torn in pieces with the Lions which they had dieted for
Daniel. Did you ever see the ungodly Victors? or Superiors in dispute? No, as
Tully said of Coelius, that he had a good right hand, but a bad left hand; so
these are dexterous only in traducing, but sinister in defending what they
have objected: One reply drives them out of their art, one question puts them
by all intricacies. Though an Accuser be a Challenger, Accusator quasi
adcausator. Isiod
yet this Challenger seldom does come off with Triumph: No, he is beaten with
his own weapons, the charge that he has given in against another does recoyl
upon himself. For as Cato Major was forty and six times convented, and as often
cleared; So the righteous are as often acquitted, as accused.

Ye righteous Saints, though ye be born to the contention of the People, and
contradiction of tongues, though ye be taken up in the lips of talkers, Ezech.
36.3. and your names be cast out as evil. Luke 6.22. though the contempt of
Families terrify you. Job 31.34. and ye be a Proverb, and byword amongst all
people. 2 Kings 19.22. though they shoot out the lip, and shake the head at
you. Ps. 22.7. Yea, make a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue. Ps. 57.4. both
at their sitting down, and rising up, ye being their music. Lam. 3.63. ye
being set forth as gazing stocks by afflictions, and reproaches. Heb. 10.33.
even made a spectacle to the World, Angels, and Men, 1 Cor. 4.7. being
accounted a people, which have lost their graces, and lost their wits; yet what
matter for all these bitter calumnies, so long as ye have Gods confutation; No,
let them detract, denigrate, so long as God does plead. And as all injured, and
infamed Christians may such sweetly at these breasts of consolation, so
especially they of mine own tribe, and tribulation; how is the Ministry the
scoff, and the Clergy the taunt of the Age? He is a man of no courage, and
zeal, (as the times think) which has not belched with the mouth against us,
and left his spittle upon our faces. The Prophet (say they) is a fool, the
spiritual man is mad, being fit neither to stand up in the gapps, nor to stand
above ground; not to break bread, nor eat bread; not to be eyes to the people,
nor to enjoy the eyes in his head; not to hold the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven in his hands, nor to have a key to unlock a door for himself; not to be
a breast to the hungry children, nor to have a breast to nourse up himself. No,
away with these carnal Teachers which have some art in their brains, but no
integrity in their hearts, which can make a noise with their humane learning,
but they have not the gift of application, and soul-searching, they can speak
nothing to the conscience; therefore what should we do with such tinckling
Cymbals? This Academical pottage? Let us Order them out of their livings, drive
them by droves out of their Cures, lock up all Pulpit doors against them? let
them go graze in the Deserts, or like the City of Nob, wallow in their own
goare. But, oh dear Brethren, when we are made the Contempts of the Earth,
despised, despiphted, and disputed against; when men have abased our gifts,
steined our reputation, consulted against our safety, and perhaps conspired
against our blood: Yet will this Oratory hold? this Elench take place? may we
not wipe off this soil? may we not take out these spots? may not our innocence
appear like the morning light? may not our righteousness shine forth like the
noontide brightness? Yes, Wisdom is justified of her Children, our
profession, parts, endowments, and graces may be acknowledged. Therefore let us
be quiet under this clamor, and not dismayed with this strife of tongues. When
Tertullus the Orator does argue and aggravate against us ye a when Jonah the
Prophet perhaps does bring in his Bill, and urge for sentence against us; yet
like the Eastern Christians in the midst of their extremity, Let us fly to the
justice of God. Adeamus justitiam Dei.
And let us not fear to wander when God is our Guide, nor despair of our case,
when God is our Pleader. Niniveh here by Jonah is delivered up to vengeance,
Why should such a wicked City stand a day longer? But does God stand silent at
the condemning sentence? No, he does save herby argument, plead-her out of the
flames; he does not only defend her, but does show reason for her preservation,
free her by a question, should not?

Secondly, this does show that as God does plead, so we should plead; for
there is nothing more natural to man than sympathy, nor glorious than
protection. Oh happy is he which does mingle tears with mourners, which does
help to fence off dismal blows; which dothsearch out the perishing in prison,
and does defend them at the Bar; which is the Shield of the distressed, nay,
the Orator of the afflicted. Oh how does it grieve me, and shame me to see
Ruben pleading for the life of Joseph, Jonathan interceding for David; the wise
woeman from the wall interposing for the City Abel; Yea, many Heathens
passionately seeking the preservation of just persons, and that we rather
supplant than support, destroy than defend, plot than plead? We leave innocent
men to their chance, or gaze upon their exigents, or hasten on their sorrows,
rather then lend them a face, or open a mouth for them. That which perishes,
let it perish; So let these perish in their callings, and their liberties lay
in chains, or lay with broken neeks, rather then we will oppose, or interpose,
make a motion, or use a mediation, suffer a check, or endure a frown for their
redress; we carry all our members about our selves, we are not incorporated
into our brethren; our pity does but reach to our own skins, we have not an
heart-string stirring to others; In stead of rescuing the afflicted, we are
like the Edomites, standing in the crosse-waies to interrupt them; or like Doeg
animating them which are enraged already do to mischief; or like Saul, we
consent to the death of Stephen. I read of Brennus when he was sacking of Rome,
and Sulpitius pleaded to him the breach of Articles, that he gave him no other
comfortable expression but to eat a naked sword, and the standers by were so
far from righting the injustice, that they relieved the oppressed only with
this doleful cry of exprobration, Vae victis: Sabellic, lib. 1. Ennead. 4.
Woe to the vanquished; And that when Demaratus had lost his Kingdom, sending to
Leutalchides for aid, he returned him only this taunting message, What manner
of Government do thou expect after thy Kingdom taken from thee? Qualis
praefectura, post regnum amissum? Herodot. lib. 6. Joseph. Antiq. Jud. lib. 6.
And that Mariamne the famous wife of Herod, when she was most unjustly
condemned to death, her own Mother Alexandra afforded her no other compassion,
but called her ungracious Strumpet, and was ready to fly in her face, and pluck
out her eyes. And these are the comforts that we usually reach forth to the
desolate, and disconsolate. We are readier to break their heart, than to bind
them up, and to make their dewy eyes to gush, rather than to staunch a tear;
howsoever we stretch not forth a hand to succor them, or stir not a tongue
to plead for them. Oh how many in the day of adversity are there, that are
fitter for an Invective, then an Apology, for instigation, and increpation,
then for interpellation? What, can they strain their wits, or engage their
friends, hazard their estates, venture their credits, or turn pleaders for
them? No, like men, they know how to keep themselves out of danger; like wicked
men, they have a feat how to plunge them into further perils; they will rather
be Opposites than Parties; in stead of holding out a Target, they will thrust
with a Spear; in stead of building to Tower, they will dig a Pit for their
friend, Job 6.27. in stead of studying out terms for preservation, they lay in
wait as they that set snares, Jer. 5.26. Oh where is the just man's Guardian?
where is the good Angel which does attend upon the distressed? No, misery has
no Champion, innocence no Advocate. He that is falling, is like the Lamp
despised, in the thought of him that is at ease, Job 12.5. Behold the tears of
such as were oppressed, and none comfort them, Eccle. 4.1. When the foot of
pride has trampled with tyranny the needy turned aside from judgment, and
the wine of the condemned drunk in the house of God; Who has there bin to eye
their sorrows, or to plead for their safety? Oh stupid commiseration! oh
speechless vindication! Is this your zeal of justice to the oppressed? is this
to be tutelar Numens to the afflicted? How ill do such deserve a protecting
God? or a justifying Redeemer? Who shall sweeten your sorrows? or plead for you
at Gods Throne? Oh therefore help the arm that has no strength, declare your
selves eyes to the blind, feet to the lame; open your mouths in the case of the
dumb, be as those which comfort the mourners. God has taught you this Oratory,
enjoined you by president to take upon you this pleaders office. For when Jonah
had impleaded Nineveh, God does demur upon the point, or bring in his
Rejoinder; what Jonah does say, God does gainsay; though Jonah has nothing
but destruction in his lips, yet the sound of Gods voice is nothing but
deliverance; he does for the preservation of the City perorate and interrogate,
Should not?

Thirdly, This serves to show that just things are not easily submitted to: for
is God enforced thus to reason, argue, controvert, and plead, then are we quick
of apprehension? prone to yield to meet propositions? ready to incline to what
is intimated and represented? No, the contrary will appear in two particulars.
First, That the distemper of sin is not easily cured. Secondly, nor the
Malady of error remedied easily.

1. The distemper of sin is not easily cured, men will multiply allegations
before they will acknowledge a trespass, and cavil long before they will be
conscious of an irregularity. It is a difficulty to be weaned from the sweet
breasts, where sin has a long time sucked; or to be divorced from those
criminal courses, to which a man has once espoused his affections. Vi^ia
mores fiunt. Greg.
Vices become usages, a practiced sinner is even incorrigible. How long shall
evil thoughts remain within thee? Jer. 4.14. Will thou not be made clean?
When shall it once be? Ezekiel. 13.27. Sampsons strength can scarce break these
cords, the Apostles can scarce cast out this Devil, which has gotten long
possession; he will not be gone at Christ's command without much renting and
tearing. Nero that had given himself to grinding courses, he grew at last so
shameless in his bribery and extortion, that he could not pass an Office, but
he must be well paid for it, before the seal was gotten; with impudence he was
wont to cry out, Scis quibus mihi sit opus Suet. Non hominem, sed amphoram
esse. Vopise.
Thou know what I have need of. Bonosus in his younger days, being addicted
to intemperance, he grew at last to be so sottish, that he was called not a
Man, but a Pitcher. Rhemnius Palaemon, a Grammarian, being touched inwardly
with his Grammatical skill, Secum natas esse literas, and morituras. Crinitus.
l. 1.
waxed at last so vain glorious, that he thought Letters were born with him,
and should die with him Salmoneus being delighted with new inventions in stead
of giving over his desperate devices, Erasm.
at last he proceeded so far, that he counterfeited thunder to be esteemed a
God. Helio gabalus being infinitely given over to excess, there was no
reclaiming him from his prodigality; no at last he must have six hundred
Ostriches in a Dish, to eat none but the brains of them, his Dining room
strewed with Saffron, an Euripus of Wine, his Fish Ponds filled with
Rose Water, Lamprid.
pure balm burning in his Candlesticks, and a Dish filled with gold to give
away to his Guests. Oh therefore beware how thou do open thy door to sin,
for thou will hardly be rid at last of this guest; if thou be but a little
conversant with it, all the wise men in the Country, all the Counselors in the
Temple, shall scarce be able to speak reason enough to thee to renounce it;
once a runaway, and never look on thy Masters face again; once a Renegado, and
never mind again thine own Country: they must be pregnant arguments which
must confute an habituated sinner. Remember Jonah, how he must be disputed, and
argued out of his angry passion; God is enforced not only to demonstrate, but
to interrogate: Should not?

2. The malady of error is not easily remedied, we need much information and
confirmation; we must be led along with deductions, disputed into confession,
before there will be concession. The Marbles may sooner be graven upon, then
man's judgment receive impressions; yea, thou may sooner draw out Leviathan
with a hook, or bind the Unicorn with a band to plow in the furrow, then
captivate the understanding. Reasonable man is very unreasonable, and
perspicatious man very tenacious when he is mounted lofty in opinion; if his
brain be but liquored with false conceptions, there is no instilling into him
other principles; when he is once sowred with error, there is no seasoning of
him with another taste. A pertinacious person is an old holder, Pertin^x, quasi
valde tenax. Isiod. Hazkanim.
though he hold that which he should let slip. The word in the Hebrew for
obstinate, does signify a man settled, and obsirmed: for indeed these are the
men which are deceived, and decoyed with the show of truth; Specie recti
decepti: August. Perversaratione persistit, Aq. 2da q. 115. a. 1. Millies
moriturum quam (...) de suscepta sententia discessurum Sigon l. 2 Reg. Ital.
a Frenzy or Delirium may be easilier cured than such delusions: Aquinas
says truly, That man at last does grow wilful, and does persist in his
perverse reason. Macarius, Patriarch of Antioch, being turned Monothelite, all
the Fathers in the 6th general Council of Constantinople, could not reclaim
him; no, he cried out, that he had rather dye a thousand deaths, then recede
from what he had maintained; though the black cobwebs fell from the top of the
house at the time of his condemnation, yet it wrought nothing upon him. And
Polychronius his scholar was as desperate, for when he had written out his
faith, Nihilominus in errore suo perstitit, inquiens, se cum Macario Episcopo.
Antiocheno errare malle, quamcum aliis recte sentire, Id ibid.
and said that the Paper of his confession was able to raise the dead, which in
his sight being proved to be false, yet the man was so inflexible, that he said
he had rather err with Macarius, then think rightly with others. Cyrola, an
Arian Bishop, having corrupted a man with fifty Crowns to counterfeit himself
blind, that he might seem by miracle to work a cure upon him, though he saw by
the touch of his hands, that the man which before did see, did indeed become
blind, and his eyes (till he confessed the underhand practice) did so ache,
Secundum fidem, qua recte in Deum credimus, aperiantur oculi tui. Greg. Turon:
l. 2.
that they were ready to start out of his head; and though he called out often,
According to the faith by which we believe rightly in God, let thine eyes be
opened; and nothing availed to help, or ease the extremity of pain, yet he
remained obstinate. The Rugians being addicted to their Idol Suavitovitus,
though Otho 2. in some measure converted them to Christianity; yet their old
Idolatry did so cleave to them, that they could never entertain a guest, make
war, pray for deliverance from the pestilence; but they were calling upon
their old Deity, and ingeminating Vitei, Vitei. Vitei, vitei ingeminam. Dutr.
l. 1.
So then a crippled Drunkard, a withered Harlot, a pilloured Forger, a
thrice-branded Thief, a gray-bearded Usurer, a sunkeyed, writhen-faced Witch,
way sooner be converted than an erroneous Schismatic, or Heretic. Beware of
this root of bitterness growing, of this Gangrene spreading; there had need be
some Earthquake, or cleaving Rocks in sunder, to make such acknowledge the
truth of Christ, which have once with more then Jewish rage crucified his
faith. Here are many strange opinions amongst us, men have left the living
Spring, and sipped at the broken Cisterns; they have cast away the tried Gold,
and filled their purses with nothing but Alchimy; they have forsaken the chaste
Spouse, and gone to bed with Concubines; they are full of nothing but
fictitious Doctrines, and commentitious; every Quack salver can here sell his
Balsomes, and every Merchant of conceptions has vent for his sophisticated
Wares. These petty Chapmen do swarm up and down in the streets, this Epidemical
disease has dispersed it self far and nigh in the Nation. According to the
number of thy Cities, are the number of thy Gods. Every Corporation has a new
Brotherhood of Believers, every Pulpit new coin coming hot out of the Mint,
every secret meeting a secret rule of faith, and a secret form of worship. Oh
what variety of Saviors have we? every man is for his particular Redeemer, his
distinct messenger of the Covenant. Here is Christ, and there is Christ. Now
who shall calm this troubled Sea, raise up these ruins, new-joynt these
dislocated bones, reduce these Mutineers? There is nothing but one thing (which
I despair ever almost to behold) namely a free general Conference to effect
this; did not our Savior thus confute the Pharisees, the Apostles, the
Gentiles the Fathers of the Primitive Church the Marcionites, Manichees,
Arians, Macedonians, Nestorians, Eutychians, Monothelites, Pelagians, and all
the dangerous Heresies of their times? Yes, Humor seduced them, and Argument
reclaimed them; and this must still be the Engine to batter down Error; the
judgment is not easily satisfied, men must be disputed into the true belief.
The right faith is not attained unto by a confident opinion, or a bare
subscription; no, there must be a Guide to the blind, Romans 2.28. I wisdom dwell
with counsel, Prove. 8.12. The spirits of Prophets are subject to Prophets:
But whilst Prophets live apart, and do not consort, and confer with their
fellow Prophets, men are likely to have as great a medley of faiths, as they
have a multiplicity of fancies. Oh then that people are sick, and yet that they
will take no Physic, that they have a broken title, and yet that they will not
go to Counsel; that they wander, and yet they will not ask for the right
way: yea, that they ride post in error, and yet that they will not stop, to
know whither their Praunser does lead them; every man cleaving to his admired
Teacher, and pleading his private conscience, as if the Devil had not his
Chapel, and Chaplains, and some insinuating Beau-Clerk could not bewitch the
ear, and set a spell for conscience. What is this but to be such a Bedlam in
Religion, that he refuses all binding? or to be such a deep melancholic
creature, that he does feed upon nothing but his own black duskish humor, till
at last he is deaf to all parley. Is this the right way to be settled in the
truth? No, it is the only way to tread the Maze of delusions, to hold up the
worship of Diana with a cry, to lay in the bed of Jezabel without a suspicion
of incontinency, to turn the back upon the Temple of the Lord, Ez'ch. 8.18. to
be mad upon Idols, Jer. 50.38. and to say, We will perform our own vows, which
we have vowed to burn incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to power out our
drink offerings to her. Jer. 44. 25. Oh if we would rightly understand God, we
must consult with them which have understanding in the Visions of God, 2 Chronicles.
26.5. which feed in the strength of the Lord. The Priests lips preserve
knowledge, and they shall ask the Law at his mouth. Thou must be led to God by
the ear; the Saints-bell to ring thee into the Temple of glory is the
Messengers tongue. Thy confidence does arise from conference, thy discretion
from discourse, thy resolution from reason, thy quieting from questioning.
Jonah is peremptory till God does parley, yea full of discontent till God does
dispute; he is rectified by an argument, yea reclaimed by interrogating, Should
not?

Fourthly, this does show, that if God does plead against Jonah's error, that
sin should meet with opposition. How many consume in the flames of their
vicious courses, because there are none to pull them out of the fire? Jude ver.
23. How many go on in a wild range to damnation, because there are none to
convert a sinner from going astray, James 5.20? Oh if Saul sought for lost
Asses, should not we seek for lost Souls? if Nehemiah repaired the broken walls
of Jerusalem, should not we re-edifie the downfalls of the Church. Is there no
Balm in Gilead? is there no Physician there? why then are not the hurts of the
daughter of my people healed? Yes, we should leap into the water to save men
from drowning, and venture amongst Swords, and Spears to rescue Captives? If
Nathan had not rebuked, David had slept long in a polluted bed; if Huldah had
not pronounced the threatenings of the Law, Josias had never been so famous for
a melting heart; if Saint Peter had not called the Jews murderers to their
faces, they had died under the guilt of the heaviest bloodshed without a
penitential pricking; if Saint Paul had not severely reprehended the
Corinthians, they had connived at the incestuous person, and he had never been
purged out as leaven, nor had they purged themselves with the sharp Potion of
a godly sorrow; there is nothing more beneficial to a reckleste sinner, then a
Christian reprehension, and opposition. Meritus accusing Elpidophorus the
Apostate, Victor.
and showing him the Baptismall Garment, that he had wrapped him in after he
had taken him out of the Font, reclaimed him from his backsliding. Gregory of
Tours blaming sharply Chilperick for taking part with the Sabellian Heresy,
Aimonius, l. 3. c. 41.
converted him. Desiderius preaching of Charity and justice, before Geysa King
of Hungary, made him send for his brother Solomon, Bons^n. l. 4. Decad. 2.
and with tears to restore the Kingdom to him. Landelius, of a thief, was made
a strict and upright liver by Ausber s showing him his wretched demeanor.
Sbigneus Bishop of Gracovia resolutely reprehending Uladislaus Jagello his
King, he did not only make him a pattern of reformation, Cromer. lib. 20
but he drew such affection from his royal breast, that he sent him Queen
Hed^^ces marriage-ring for a present. Sin would never flourish with such a
green top, if wicked men were but hewn down by the Prophets. Hos^^. 5. there
would not be so many undutifull children playing mad pranks, if the earth were
but smitten with the rod of Gods mouth, Esaias 11.4. If this Lion did but roar,
the Beasts of the field would tremble; if the Watchmen of Ephraim were with his
God, he would a waken the whole Land to duty. But alas, the Priest has lost
his golden snuffer to clear lights, or his molten Sea to wash sacrifices; he
does put honey into the sacrifice, he does save the Soul alive which should
dye, Ezech. 13.19. He does dish out all his cippets according to the palate of
the Age, and limb out all his Pictures as they may best please the eyes his
Doctrins do limp if the times do halt, as Chsophus the Sycophant of Philip
feigned himself lame, because his Master had through a wound a laking leg; he
has smiling transsitions, if his Grandees be but blithe, as ^arisophus the
Parasite laughed afar off, when he saw Dyonisius merry with his Friends. But is
this to divide the word of truth aright, to walk with a straight foot toward
the Gospel? to declare the mind of God as of sincerity, and in the sight of
God? Is this the way to awaken consciences, and to save souls? No, to cast
conscience into a sleep, because the noise of their sins do not tingle in
their ears; and to fetter Souls to Hell, because men's chains are not shaken
about their heels. The best Preacher is the faithful Reprover, he is the true
Pleader. Does not God so? Yes, Jonas is passionate, but God does oppose him; he
is eager upon a cruel bent, but God does increpate, and interrogate him,
Should not?

Fifthly, this serves to show, that sin does carry a self conviction with it,
for God does but say, should not, and has Jonah any thing to say against it?
No, here is a question out of question, a conviction beyond contradiction. What
should I say? wicked things take away all excuse: he that does ill, can be no
Advocate for himself, his soil must stick upon him, for he cannot assoyl
himself. He that does plot sin, does consult shame to himself, he needs
no Jury to pass upon him but his own confession; nor no Judge to sentence him
but his own conscience, he is condemned in himself: (...), Matter formidinis
Chrysostom. Gravamenlae siouis. Cass. Glibanus ardens Pierius. Spina infixa Je^on.
Habemus consitentem reum.
there is in him the mother of sear, the smart of the wound, the burning
furnace, the thorn sticking in the flesh. See we not it in many clear
examples? Yes, David when he was charged with his sin, has he any thing to
excuse himself? No, we have the guilty man acknowledging the fact. What says
he, but that which would declare himself a witless creature? What answer does
he return, but that which scandals any wise man? I have sinned, and done very
foolishly. When the unworthy guest is reprehended; Friend, how came thou
hither, not having on the wedding garment? Does he not put up the check in
silence? yes, there is no Respondent to be heard of, a Nihil dicit is returned.
He does speak so little, that he cannot speak; For the man is speechless.
Rodolph having fought a battle against his liege Lord Henry 4th being wounded
in his right hand, Haec est manus, qua Henrico Domino meo fidem firmavi. Granz.
lib. 5. Metrop. c. 16.
he needed no body to tell him why he suffered; no, he was privy enough to his
own fault, for says he in anguish of soul, This is the hand (wounded from
heaven) with which I swear allegiance to the Emperor Alphonsus, the 2d of
Naples, when Charles the eighth came into Italy to invade his Territories, his
Fathers Ghost appearing to him, wishing him to deliver up his Crown for the sin
he committed in the way called Glarea; G^icciard. l. 1.
there was no want of a Monitor to hasten him out of the Country, for his own
conscience chased him away for that known sin. When Simon, a young man, had
done many execrable things against his own Country, the Scythopolits entering
the Nations, and having in one place slain thirteen thousand, his own inward
guilt made him to presage sad things to himself; for, said he, Tempus divinae
vindictae scelerum suorum ^desse. Joseph. Bell. Judaic. lib. 2.^.19.
This is the time of divine veageance for all my sins. So that every wicked man
is his own Intelligencer; he does keep more then Quarter Sessions in his own
bosom, without hue and cry, he can sind out the Malefactor, and bring the
Prisoner to the Bar. O then that men plead ignorance to their own crimes, or
make themselves the greatest strangers to their own delinquencies. What,
charge them with such errors? No, they bear out all with high looks, and
daring defiances. It is presumption, and peril, to name such sins in their
hearing, howsoever to particularize them out for their personal defaults.
faults. Men will not acknowledge their own debts, nor confess the false coin
they have minted Master, it is I? What, Judas the Apostle, Judas a Traitor?
Christ himself shall almost be accounted a slanderer to imagine it, or affirm
it. Is thy servant a dog, that I should do such things? no, rather Elisha is a
dog, thus to bark against a man of worth. Why weepest thou my Lord? No, thou
might spare thy censures, and spare thy tears; thou have mistaken the man,
for Hazael does find no such cruel heart in his bosom. Thy servant went no
whither, says Gehezi, 2 King. 5.25. Gehezi a ranger? a bribe-taker? no, Elisha
does wrong his good servant; his spirit brought him false information, when it
told him it went with him; he does stand in his Masters presence like one that
never stepped over his threshold, nor never was out of his call; Thy servant
went no whither. I have obeyed the voice of the Lord, says Saul, If ye will
believe his own tale, he was Saul the dutiful, and devout; not Saul the
irreligious, and sacrilegious; though the Calves of the Amalekites bleated in
his ears, and Agag the Portentuous strutted up and down in his Camp, yet he had
taken no more then he should take, and killed as much as he should kill; he had
been obsequious, and strict, a most precise servant; I have obeyed the voice of
the Lord. Thus men behold their selves with another face, than they can see in
the glass of their own conscience; let their sins be never so heinous and
prodigious, yet with the Whore in the Proverbs, they wipe their mouths, and go
their way, and say, I have not sinned. But oh beloved, why do ye thus hide
your selves from your Gods eyes, and convey out of sight your own records?
has not every man a genius attending upon him? and does he not carry about him
a Day-book of his constant and continual practices? Yes, and if he does not
look the better to it, this Genius will be a dis-genius to him, and this
Day-book will prove a black-book to him; for how audaciously soever men in the
foulest facts justify their innocence, yet this defense is but for a short
time, for ere long with shaking heads, blushing cheeks, and glaring eyes, they
shall be enforced to charge themselves with that, which they now would clear
themselves of. Does not sin carry a conviction with it? Yes, see it in Jonah;
God does but interrogate his conscience, he had enough within him to resolve
whether he were not erroneous, and God just: for what other sense can there be
given of this solemn question, Should not?

Sixthly, Whereas God does plead, and Jonah does submit, for he does return no
answer to Gods interrogatory; it does teach us further, that if we be penitent,
we should be silent; we should not quarrel out our sins, but as before we were
brought to conviction, so now we should forbear contestation. Apprehension of
sin should be fuller of dejection than defense, of remorse than justification;
the tie should be so forcible, that it should tie up our tongues, as if we had
nothing to say for it, nothing to say after it. Not he which does still fight,
but he which does lay down his weapons does confess the victory. Demamah does
come of Damam; Domitus est, he is conquered; and indeed, the silent sinner is
the only vanquished man. Simonides was wont to say, that they whose lives were
bad, their greatest honor was their silence: Quorum indecora esset vita,
maximum decus esse silentium.
for as Democritus said, what more unseemly, than that they which knew not what
to speak, could not hold their peace? for, can not deny thy errors, and yet
can not refrain language? Does not thy conviction strike thee dumb? Yes, we
must pluck down the swallows nest; for that bird, though it cast down never so
much dung, Hirundinem in domo non suscipiendam esse Jeron. l. 2. Cont. Ruffin.
Nescit paenitentia loqui. Cassiodor. Mulierem ornat silentium. Adag.
yet it is so far from being ashamed of it, that it does never leave
chattering. But God forbid, that the defiling sinner should be so full of
noise: no, true repentance does not know how to speak, or howsoever is sparing
of speech. It is an Adage, That silence does adorn a woman, much more a
Convert; for where should there be found more modesty, than in an humble soul;
find we it not in scripture? Yes, Ephraim does strike upon his thigh, rather
then to use Oratory to excuse himself: Job does abhor himself in dust and
ashes, rather than he does turn Proctor for his sins; Mary Magdalen is full of
tears, but not of words; the Publican does abound in knocks, but not in
speeches. And assure your selves, that dumb gestures are fitter for repentants,
then high phrased bablings, Pharisaicall boastings and stridulencies. Oh then
that we cannot make the criminal man to hold his tongue, that we cannot silence
the talking sinner; that though his bell be riven, yet his clapper is not taken
out; that though the statute of Bankrupt be sued out against him, yet he is
walking the streets, and has something to say for his reputation. Do we not
see that open drunkards, known oppressors, public quarrellers, mischievous
disturbers of Church and State, are rise of their tongues? Oh where shall we
find inarticulate guilt? what crime is there that is not answering, and
Rhetorising? yes, full of replication and retortion. But is this to be Jonah?
No, they may sin with him, but not submit with him? he is refelled, and he has
instantly done with anger, and argument? as full of words as he was before, yet
being pleaded out guilty* he does not whisper after Gods interrogatory, not so
much as say, may it be? shall it be? can it be? it must not be; no, he does end
like a man both convinced, and silenced with Gods should not?

Part 2.
Now let us come to the Springhead: I. Had thou? and should not I? Am not I
thy match? nay, if thou considerest the matter truly, Am I not thy better? Do
I not excel thee by many degrees? What then, had thou liberty, and shall not
I have authority? Had thou, and should not I? We had the Pleader before, and
now we have the person to be justified. God does defend his own right, stand
for his own prerogative, maintain himself against Jonah, to be above Jonah:
for, had thou, and should not I? From hence observe, That God is supreme. For
if man has a power in any thing, God has a greater: can man vie titles with
God? no, All my bones shall say, who is like to thee? If all David's bones were
Quiristers, they should chaunt out nothing but Gods perfections: Lord, who is
like unto thee? And indeed if man can do something, who is the possessor of a
few Mud-walls, Parchments, and Parkes, Rentalls, and Royalties: then what is
God, who is the Possessor of Heaven and Earth? Genesis 24.1. If man, who is but a
shining Gloworme below; then what God, who is the Majesty on high? Heb. 1.3. If
man, who can be beheld without danger; then what God, who cannot be eyed
without expiring? Whom no man has seen, nor can see, 1 Timothy 1.16. If man who
does carry no slames in his skin; then what God, who is a consuming fire? Heb.
12.29. If man who is but a Saint by infusion; then what God, who is the King of
Saints? Rev. 15.3. If man, whose knowledge does reach no further then his own
heart; then what God, which can declare unto man what his thought is, Amos
4.13. nay, who is greater then our heart, and knows all things? 1 Job. 3.20.
If man who cannot make a Gnat, a Spire of Grass, not an Hair white or black;
then what God, who is the former of all things? J^r. 10.16. If man, who has
much ado to get a little pomp; then what God, with whom is the greatness of
excellency? Exodus 15.7. If man who can hardly for a while keep his own spirit
within his own body; then what God, who is the Lord of the spirits of all
flesh? Numb. 27.6. If man whose power is limited, and whose designs may be
frustrated; then what God, who is so great, that none can stay his hand? Dan.
4.43. If man who is but of yesterday; then what God, who does inhabit eternity,
Isa. 57.15. If man who cannot span the compass of his own body; then what God,
whose right hand spanneth the Heavens? Isa. 43.12. If man, who at most does but
dwell in an Ivory Palace; then what God, who dwells between the Cherubims? 2 Samuel 6.2. If man who has his days set, and there is a stint for his
greatness, then what God, Who lives for ever, and his Dominion is
everlasting. Dan. 4.34? If man who cannot make a Pillar to quake, nor melt a
flint, then what God, who can make the Mountains to quake, and cause the hills
to meli? Nah. 1.13, if man who cannot walk but in a calm, and that upon firm
land; then what God, who has his way in the w irlwind, and his path in the
mighty waters? Nah. 1.3. Esai. 43.16. and yet must man be such a man, and God
be undeified* Should thou have freedom, and God be abridged? Had thou? and
should not I? What art thou? what is God?

1. What art thou? the cracked sherd of a ruin, the broken bough of a windfall,
the splintered plank of a shipwreck; Adams Ulcer, the wrimpled skin, stark
hand, blind eye, chapfallen lip of that old man; the lake-diver, the
furnace-brand, Prae omnibus malis homo est pessimum; unaquaeque bestia habet
unum malum, homo omnia. Chrysostom.
the brimstone-match of that cursed man. Above all evils Man is the worst;
every beast has one evil, but man all. Whatsoever man was at the first
creation, yet he may be carried now to some Stage, as a strange Beast to be
shown as Laerlius says of Stilpon. As ye cannot find a Fish without skales, so
ye cannot find a man without strange Finns. Lacrt. l. 2. c. 12 Aelian var. hist
l. 10. panorm. l. 1. de rebus gestis Alphonsi.
Instead of men we are like wild Vultures in the Woods. Arislotle that had
searched man's intralls, nay, which by his deep wisdom had dissected him, for
who could better have done this, then that rare Anatomist of Nature? Yet what
says he of man, but that he was the spoil of time, the mockage of fortune, and
image of inconstancy. Stob. Ser. 96.
Therefore Plotinus was wise, who when Aemilius would have his Picture drawn,
denied it him, Erasin. l. 8. apoph.
intimating that it was in vain to take the Picture of a wretched creature.
Indeed man is so miserable, that Silenus told Midas, that the best thing were,
not to be horn at all the next thing was to die soon. Optimum non n^sci,
pr^^imum cito aboleri. Comaedia vita nostra, ^uius ultimus actus in morte. Aen.
Syl. lib. 3. com: Alphonsi. Putredo in ortu, bestia in vita, esca vermium in
morte.
Let man seem to enjoy never so much outward greatness, yet man's life is but a
Comedy, whose last act is death. Solon, that by the Oracle was prononnced to be
the wisest man of his age, said, that man was but rottenness in birth, a beast
in his life, and worms-meat in death. Man art thou not thus? can thou not
apprehend it? will thou not believe it? then let me a little further decipher
thee, skin thee, and unskin thee. At thy first conception oh that thou could
see thy self! Thou art but a drop of baseness, a spermatick stein, thou art
gendring many months to get flesh, and skin upon thy bones, thou suckest
unclean blood, and do wsim in a loathsome puddle, thou put out thy head
like a beetle out of a dunghill, thou art groaned forth with the half-slaughter
of thy Mother, thou art plucked out of the womb, and do lie in the eyes of
all like an hideous fright, there is not an hair of thy head, not a tooth in
thy mouth, thou look like raw flesh, yea, like a prodigious clodder, this is
thy entrance; and when thou art rinsed and perfumed, thy navell cut, thy skull
seamed; and by the Midwifes art, made fit to receive the Babes kiss, thou do
hang upon the breast, or art fed with spoon-meat, thou art rocked in a Cradle,
wrapped in swadling-clothes, watched, and waited upon, carried in the arm, led
by the hand, learned to go, taught to speak, before thou can give one
sensible expression of a reasonable creature; And afterward when by much
nurture, and education thou have gotten some rudiments into thee, whereby thou
might declare thy self man, what manner of man do thou witness thy self
to be? even at thy ripe age, what are thy gests, and guises, and garbs, and
modes: Thou risest in the morning out of thy bed, where thou have lain so many
hours forgotten of thy self, thou clothest thy self like one ashamed to be seen
without his Vest, thou call the water to wash off thy nights filth, thou
pickest thy nasty ears, thou purgest thy fowl nostrils, thou clensest thy
polluted teeth, and by degrees when thou art count, and terse, spunged, and
powdered, every hair set right, and every abiliment put on, what is thy days
work? how do thou spend precious time?

If thou be for profit, thy ranges are known; after thou have called up thy
servants to hunt for gain at home, thou thy self as one in full quest for lucre
abroad, art visiting other men's Storehouses, searching their Warehouses,
ransacking their Cellers; Thou go to the Customhouse to try what exporting,
and importing there has been, thou repairest to the Exchange to examine what
Merchant thou can meet with, with whom thou may truck in Minivers, and
Tissues, Musks, and Civets, the teeth of Elephants, the bones of Whales, the
stones of Bezars, the claws of Crabs, the Oils of Swallows, the skins of
Vipers, yea, be it but in black Coal, black Pitch, white Chalk, or white Soap,
rusty Iron, or abominable Mummy, it will serve the turn; or if thy
merchandising fail there, thou turnest thy trading another way, to seek about
for a License, or a Patent, or perhaps to pry out some decayed Heir, or
foundred Gallant, that thy Ferret might be sent forth into that borrough, or
thy Setting-dog let loose to drive that Covey, to hook in some Morgage, or to
prey upon some forfeiture; and if all these devices will not take place, then
thou stirrest thy legs to gosuck Venom from a Petty-fogger, or Magic from
some Conjurer. And thus does the drudge of the world spend his day.

If thou be for bravery, I cannot follow thee by the track, nor find out thy
various Motions. The Gallant is counted a wild creature; no wild Colt, wild
Ostrich, wild Cat of the Mountain, comparable to him, he is indeed the Baffoon,
and Baboon of the times; his mind is wholly set upon cuts and slashes, knots
and roses, patchings and pinkings, jaggings, taggings, borderings, brimmings,
half-shirts, half-arms, yawning breasts, gaping knees, Arithmeticall middles,
Geometrical sides, Mathematical wastes, Musical heels, and Logical toes. I
wonder he is not for the Indians branded skin, and ringed snowt. His
fantastic dotages are so many, that he has a Free School, bookish about
inventions for him; nay, an Academy of wits, studying deeply to devise fashions
according to his humor: Know ye not the multitude of Students, Artists,
Graduates that are subliming their notions to please this one Light-head? Then
hear them by their names, Perfumers, Complexioners, Feather-makers, Stitchers,
Snippers, Drawers, yea who not? yet amongst these does the Nitid Spark spend
out this time: this is the Gallants day.

If thou be for dainties, how art thou then for spreadtables, and plenished
Flagons? thou art but a Pantry-worm, and a Pastry-fly. Thou art all for
inlandish meat, and outlandish Sawces, thou art the Dapifer to thy Palate, or
the Cupbearer to thy Appetite, the creature of the swallow, or the slave of the
wesand. The Land has scars flesh, the seafish, or the Air fowl curious enough
for thy licorous throat, by thy good will thou would eat nothing but Kids and
Fawns, Carps, and Mullets, Snipes and Quails; and drink nothing but
Frontiniack, white Muskadines, Leathick-wine, and Vine de pary. Thy Olies and
Hogoes, Creepers and Peepers, Italian Cippets and French broaths, do show what
a bondsman to the paunch thou art; even the Idolatour of the Banqueting House.
Thy belly is thy God. Thus does the Glutton wast out his Pilgrimage: this is
the ^picures day.

If thou be for lust, what an Itinerant art thou? can thou mark thy
Foot-prints whither thy legs, and thy eyes carry thee? thou should be
looking upon her that was once the desire of thine eyes, and embracing her that
was given into thy bosom, and paying wedlock-rights to her, that was the wife
of thy covenant; but thou have plucked out that eye that thou did six upon
the face of thy first Love, thou have pulled back the hand which thou did
give in marriage, and cancelled the bond that thou did seal with solemnity
upon thy Nuptial day, and thou art no longer for a chaste wife, but for strange
flesh, even like a fed horse neighing after a new Paramour: Thou have forsaken
thine own threshold, and art laying wait as thy neighbors door; thou have left
the bed undefiled, and art for a Couch of dalliance: thy wives breath is
distasteful, her face displeasing, and her company odious, and thou art now for
amiable Paragons, for Nymphs of beauty; these are those whom thou did court,
and complement, hunt for, and haunt their society; to which thou do stretch
out thy chaunting tongue, and grasping arms; to which thou do engage thy
swarty heart, and blacker Soul. When thy wife can scarce have fragments, these
shall have banquets; when thy wife can scarce have fair language, these shall
have Dorian music; when thy wife can scarce have seemly raiment, these shall
have vails, and rails, cutworks, and networks, blew silk, and Purple, Jaspers,
and Saphires; when the wife must drudg at home, these shall dance abroad; when
the wife must walk on foot, these shall be coached. The Bride is cast off, and
the Bedfellow embraced, the Spouse rejected, and the Curtisan entertained.
Howsoever the wife is tendered, and respected, dieted and robed, sure I am,
these are fed, and clad, men will run into Debtbooks, lay in Jailes, and
oftentimes hang on gibbets for these. And thus does the voluptuous man measure
out his time, trickle out his hours; this is the Sensual man's day.

Thus man thou art skinned, and when thou art unskinned, what manner of wight
art thou? the prodigy of the world, the horror of the senses, fit for nothing
but to be hurled upon the dunghill of nature, or to be hid in the vault of
lothsomnesse; within four days thou will stink above-ground, within four
months thou will rot underground, thy Heirs do challenge thy Coffers, the
worms thy Carcass. Whose shall all these things be? Whose shall thou be?
Within a short time there will be as little seen of thee, as of a Banquet eaten
up to the bones, as of a Vessel drawn out to the dregs, as of a Castle rased
to the last stone, or a City burnt down to ashes.

Oh man then, thou mist of fancy, thou bubble of pride, why art thou enamoured
upon thy self? No, if thou could take the right glass to behold thy
physnomy, thou would abhor thine own face. Beware therefore how thou do set
too high a price upon thy self, no, leave thy self magnifying humors, for when
thou have reduced thy self into thy true materials, either living, or dying,
Who art thou?

But thou will say, thou art injured in thrights, much is suppressed that might
make thee eyed with honor? What is that? that thou art the Image of God, and a
partaker of the divine nature. It is true, grace is a luster, and
sanctification, a Splendor; But bring all these perfections together, yet if
thouwert as chaste as Joseph, as meek as Moses, as just as Samuel, as righteous
as Job, as zealous as Elias, as full of divine raptures, and ecstasies as Enoch;
yet whose are all these qualifications, and endowments? alas they are none of
thine, they are not the gifts of nature, but the gifts of the spirit, therefore
what have thou to do to glory in another largesses? thou may have the
comfort in them, but God must have the praise of them. Besides, if thou could
number thy sins with thy services, thy wants with thy gifts, thy errors with
thy graces, thou would think thy self but a pusill Saint. Jobs clothes did
defile him, and we have silthinesse under all our skirts. If thou should be
extreme to mark what is done amiss, who is able to stand? One trespass takes
away the honor of much obedience; howsoever, multitude of guilts do obscure
the brightest Saint. Therefore seeing thou are peccant under a state of grace,
yea considering thy daily and infinite failings, let not the purest creature
face heaven as a worthy; for in respect of thy regeneration, and election, if
thou do lay to heart how much of corrupt nature does remain in thee
unmortified, and feel the running soar of concupisence breaking out
continually with putrified matter, why should thou be arrogant of thy
virtues? or make sanctification an ostentation? No, thy blemish is apparent,
therefore as holy as thou art; yet, Who art thou?

2. What art thou? But what is God? Oh his name is eminency, his person
perfection. He is Adonai of Eden, as if he were the basis of the whole world.
He is Jah, as if he had nothing but Being in him: He is El, as if he had all
power in him: He is Shaddai, as if he had all sufficiency in him. Alas, how can
I describe him? or tell the world his ineffable properties? He is so bright,
that he is invisible; so past understanding, that he is incomprehensible; so
steady, that he is unchangeable; so wise, that he is omniscient; so powerful,
that he is omnipotent; so boundless, that he is infinite; so endless, that he
is eternal. Oh how are mine eyes dazeled in looking upon this Sun? how is my
soul in a trance, Quanto diutiuc considero, tanto res obscurior mihi videtur.
Cic. de not. Deorum. Quod ineffabile est, silentio adorandum esse. Socrat.
Eccl. Hist. lib. 6. Nomen non habet. In rebus divinis multum esse caliginis.
Nec periculosius alicubi erratur, nec labori osius quaeritur. Aug. l, 3. de
Trinit.
when it does fall into these divine raptures? Simonides took time to tell
Hiero what God was, and no time at last was sufficient to draw from him an
answer: for said he, The longer I do consider upon it, the more obscure it
does seem to me. Euagrius hearing men make long Orations of God, he wished them
to forbear, for that which is ineffable is to be adored with silence. Attalus
the Martyr, being desired to tell what was Gods name, he said he had no name.
Cato Uticensis, said well, In divine things there is a great deal of
darkness. A man may err no where more perilously, nor search for any thing
with more dissiculty. God is so great, that he wants a known Cause by which he
should be demonstrated, and a Genus by which he should be defined: he is so
great, that he has heaven for his Court, and Angels for his ministering
spirits, which is one, and yet three; one in essence, three in existency; in no
place, and yet every where, to whom all men are as Grasshoppers, and the vast
Ocean as the drop of a Bucket, who can see in the dark, and search hearts;
which every year does sustein whole nature, and every day does feed a whole
world, which does preserve Saints in Dungeons, and confound Tyrants in their
Thrones; which does shake the Universe with earthquakes, and amaze the stoutest
with Thunder; which is tied to no Law, and yet is pure justice; which has no
hand, and yet can do all things, which can nourish men without bread, and heal
men without physic; which can take away the spirits from the living, and raise
the dead; which is an universal surveyor, and will be an universal Judge;
which can punish with unquenchable fire, and ravish with unspeakable joy, whom
Heathens confess, Christians believe, and Angels adore; whose praises not a
Quire of Seraphims can chaunt forth, whose perfections none but a Trinity it
self can describe. Oh man therefore think upon God, and leave thinking upon
thy self; consider his transcendencies, and be appalled at thy insufficiencies;
thou art but a Minim to the Almighty, but a mere nothing to the All, All-God.
Who art thou? What is God?

Howsoever, if thou be great, God is greater; if liberty does belong to
thee, let it not be denied God: for, Had thou? and Should not I? Yes, God
must have a precedence in actings above man.

1. Because he is a free Agent; the Stoics indeed did tie their Gods to an
(...), a fate that overruled them; but God is liable to no such destiny,
Appetitus rei non habitae. Aq.
his will is not as man's, an appetite of a thing not had (for he which has all
things, what can he desire more for complacency?) but his will is only a
decree, Ordinatio erga rem amatam. Idem.
or purpose concerning a thing beloved. He does will every thing out of
affection, not necessity: He does love himself necessarily, but all other
things ultroneously. In all the good things we do enjoy, we can see nothing
but the efflux of favor: God does not regratiate, because we cannot
ingratiate; we should never find God a comfortable Agent, if he were not a free
Agent: we do not engage God to bless, he is not led along by the chain of our
deserts; for who has given unto God first? No, I have loved you freely; there
is no promeriting, or prompting of kindness: And there is nothing that God does
by constraint, or violence, but his own pleasure is the attractive of all his
workings, for he does all things according to the counsel of his will. This
is the manner of Gods actings, can man equal him? no, man is carried
oftentimes contrary to his own inclination, and does vary from his inward
principles, the imperate act of the will being contrary to the elicit; for how
many of man's actions are involuntary? that though the will cannot be compelled
yet the outward execution is captivated and mancipated. Yea, whereas Man has
many interpositions and oppositions (for what a slave is man to objects,
motions, examples, and commands) yet can God be thus intercepted and impeded?
no, Job. 23.13. Dan. 4.35. Job 23.13. Isai. 46.10. Psalm. 135.6. Romans 9.19.
he is one in mind, and who can turn him? he does whatsoever he will in the
armies of heaven, and the Inhabitants of the earth, and no man can stay him,
nor say unto him, what do thou? What his soul desires, that does he. I will
do whatsoever I will. Whatsoever the Lord pleased that did he. Who has
resisted his will? Thus then ye see the difference betwixt God, and man in
acting; and if man may lord it, how much more the Lord Paramount? If man which
is but an implicated and mixed Agent, how much more God, who is an extricated
and free Agent? Had thou, and should not I?

2. Because he is a wise Agent. Indeed man does bear a name for a very prudent
creature; yea some are so famed up for judgment, that they are called Sages;
but what are these seeing persons to the all-seeing God? no, this shutter of
the flesh does hinder man's light from shining, the form is straightened by the
matter; but God being wholly immateriall, a pure spirit, Coarctatur forma per
materiam* Aq:
he cannot but transcend man in wisdom. Man does know all things externally,
for acquisite knowledge is gotten from abroad, and infused knowledge is
communicated, but God has no derivative knowledge; to know any thing, Redire
in su^m essentiam:
he does but reflect upon his own essence; those Ideas which are conceived to
be in God, do contain all intellectual species; therefore, Who has been his
Counsailer, or taught him at any time? Man's knowledge does come with much
tediousness; for how long is he learning of his lesson? But Gods knowledge is
instantaneous; He does understand all things in one, for the intellect being in
act, Omnia intelligit in uno. Terminus discursus* Praesene intuitus Dei fertur
in omne cognoscibile.
there is an end of further inquiry. Gods present intuition is fixed upon every
thing that is to be known. Man does but know things in time, and which do
really exist; but God calls things that are not, as if they were: for whereas
his knowledge is measured only with his eternity, what is there from
everlasting to everlasting, that is out of the verge of his knowledge? no;
entia, things that have any being with all the limits of time, he does
understand by the knowledge of vision; and non entia, which are not, nor ever
shall be, Scientia vis^^nis; scie^tia simplicis intelligentiae.
he does understand by the Mirror, that is by the knowledge of his own
unlimited wisdom. Man does understand but few things, for we do boast of
wisdom; but how short principled are we? there is an unknown land which we
have not yet coasted, Terra incognita.
there is a Labyrinth that we want yet a clew to pass through. If wisdom
should unlock her great Library door, we would think, that we had many Authors
yet to peruse, yea, Decades, and Pandects yet to turn over. Knowledge puffs
up, but the Mercuriall brains would judge that they were but ungifted, inculti
and inscii.
and simply endowed to what they should be. But what, has God to learn? No,
Heb. 4.12. Joh. 37.17. Vt nihil sit extra. Quamvis infinitorum nullus sit
numerus, non tamen est incomprehensibilis ei, cujus seientiae non est numerus.
Aug. l. 12. de Civit Dei. c. 18.
all things are naked before his eyes with whom we have to do. He is perfect in
knowledge. The adaequation, or extent of his knowledge is such, that nothing
can be beyond it. Though there be no number of infinite things, yet this is not
incomprehensible to him, whose knowledge has no number. Man does things
oftentimes improperly, and with great indiscretion; he knows not how to keep
his boundaries; he does either too much, or too little; he is either too early,
or too late; too eager, or too slow; whereby he has more scandal, then honor
in his undertakings. But is there any such indecency, or incongruity in Gods
actings? No, he is neither redundant, nor deficient; look upon all his works,
and see how thou may magnify the eutaxy concinnity, fitnes and fulness of
them, yea, thou may cry out in wisdom have thou made them al, they are
brought forth in number, weight, and measure. Now if blind man does assume so
much to himself, how much more he, who is all Eye? If the half-witted Agent
does stand so much upon his liberty, should not the wise Agent? Had thou? and
Should not I?

3. Because he is a pure agent. Man indeed is pure, but he is but a half-washed
Creature, the Clean water has not taken out all his steines, nor the spirit of
Sanctification all his filth. No, man has in him perfection of reality, but
not of regularity; of integrity, but not of integrality; of adunation, but not
of adequation; of intension, but not of extension; or as (they commonly call
it) of parts, but not of degrees; for though the Land of Promise be won, yet
the Canaanite does dwell in the Land; though grace be infused, yet
concupiscence is not expelled. Now who can look for an absolute pure creature
with such a mixture of natural corruption? Who can bring a clean thing out of
filthiness? No, Man indeed does many a good action, but the black Ethiopian
begetting the child, though it does live, yet the Parents skin is seen upon it;
such a person may be Evangelically accepted, but he might be Legally cursed.
For what one absolute thing can the holiest man pride himself in? No, though he
be converted yet being partly unregenerate, his very tears do draw a soil from
his eyes, and his prayers from his lips, and his duties from his fingers, and
his thoughts from his heartstrings; for he cannot weep as he should, nor pray
as he ought, nor obey as is required, nor think as is enjoined. Woe to the
laudable life, Vae vitae laudabili. Aug.
if God should be severe: the most fined wheat does grow with a chaffy husk,
the purest Gold has some base oar mixed with it, the compleatest actions of
men have an adhaerency of evil cleaving to them; there is either wanting
something of mortification, or faith, or zeal, or constancy in it; we either
mingle some sin with an eminent virtue, or we neglect a greater good for a
less; or we sever the pleasure of godliness from the trouble, or we do good
only for trial sake, or are led only by example, or rest upon the outward
action, or mind not the object, or do not take opportunity, or are guided
merely by success, or are too disdeignfull, or too slippery, or too confident.
Oh there are a thousand ways, whereby a service may be disparaged, and guilt
creep into the most magnified act of reformation, or devotion. In a pure,
impure Creature, who can look for exact sanctity? No Man; the best man is but a
defiled Agent. But is God no more perfect? yes, he is Holy, Holy, Holy,
uncreated holiness, essential holiness, holiness in the abstract, eminently
good, only good, the chief good; who has given all the Laws of holiness, and
does inspire all the motions of holiness, and does water the root, and ripen
the fruits of holiness; who has given us an holy calling, and holy
Priesthood, and holy Sacraments, not only his holy Angels to direct us, but
his holy Son to die for the guilty, and to purge the defiled. Now, can he have
any corruption in his actions? No, Are not my ways equal? Ezech. 18, What
iniquity have your Fathers found in me? Jer. 2.5. No, I am the Lord your holy
one. Es. 43.15. The Lord is holy in all his ways, and just in all his works.
So holy that no creature but out of mere compassion, can be looked upon by
those pure eyes, the holy Angels do put vails before their faces. The very
foundations of the earth would shiver, the fabric of Heaven would fly into
splinters, the Crown of God would fall from his head, and his white Throne
crack in pieces, if Gods works had any blame, or blemish in them. Let us look
upon them all, and with admiration in our hearts, and hymns in our lips, let
us discern nothing but beauty, brightness, purity, and perfection in them. God
is not only glorious in Majesty, but glorious in holiness, Exodus 15.11. his
grace equal to his infiniteness, and his sanctity to his eternity. Man may
every day be made a Devil, yea, for his best actions judged to Hell. But shall
these seek for a Malignant in Heaven? or call God Delinquent? If frail man, who
has in him as much error as truth, as much disobedience as duty, and as much
guilt as grace can have approbation in his actions, shall not Gods works be
justified? If man can go for an Agent, who is so steined, shall not God, who is
such a pure Agent? Had thou, and should not I?

Application.
Quid profuit altu^ Erexisse caput? Claud. Audux Japeti genus. Horace.
1. This serves first to show that there is one above man to be thought on. Man
I confess does look high; but to what end does he lift up his aspiring head?
No, this daring generation must be tamed; for let man be never so great, yet he
has his Superior; let him plead all his rights, yet here is one which does
out-priviledge him; for had thou? and should not I? On then that we hear none
but man's name, and look no higher then man's face; that we borough below, and
dwell at the sign of the naked man. That man which does come out of the
slime-heap, and is but a potfull of ashes, a bottle of dreggs, a patched
garment of old Adams tatters, whose breath is in his nostrills, and his days
but a span long, which does walk upon the same miery Earth, and refresh his
lungs with the same moist air with us; who has not a mouth wider, nor teeth
sharper then our selves; which cannot fast in the day, nor see in the night no
more then we; which will faint as quickly, and weep as soon as we; which has as
much want of raiment and need of Physicians as we; which is soaked with
Tempests, and frighted with Thunder as well as we; which does feed with us,
tire with us, sleep with us, and will ere long be taken off from his legs, lie
upon a death-couch, be carried out by Bearers, and consume to grave-gelly as
well as we, and yet for a few gay clothes, gorgeous building, large rentalls,
masterly looks, and menacing threats, we do yield all the honor, and terror
to man, as if we need not look beyond his shoulders, or the top of his Bever*
Oh how is the world Potentate-strooke? Grandee-inchanted? we are only waiting
at man's heels, listening to the thunderclaps of his lips, fearing his cold
irons, and strangling gibbets. But has not man his equal? Merlto tumet
Sabellus. M^rtial. l. 1. Stripis Archillea faslus Virgil. 3. Aen.
yes, though man do swell upon the thought of his high deserts (and great is
the haugh tinesse of this Achillean race) yet man does but stand upon the lower
ground, he is but an Inferior; for wipe thine eyes, chafe thy temples,
expostulate with reason, awaken conscience, and see if man be the object to
whom all thy regard, and reverence ought to be limited. No, if thou can lift
up thine eyelids, pry into the Heavens, and behold afar off that great
Tribunal, where thy last account must pass, thou will say thou have mistaken
thy aw, misplaced thy dread. For let there be never such Tremebundoes below,
yet this Earth has not the face of authority, which thou ought to stoop
unto; No, there is One higher then the highest. It is a dangerous thing to fall
under man's displeasure, but It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
the everliving God. What are man's fetters to Gods chains of darkness? man's
Executioners to infernal Fiends? man's vengeance-corners, to Gods tormenting
Tophet? Fear not them then that can kill the body, and cango no further, but
fear him that can cast both body and Soul into Hell fire. Let summoning, and
sentencing man go, and tremble thou at the judging, and cursing God. Here six
thine eye, and fasten in thy conscience the Doomsday-nail. For what is man to
God? No, God will not endure Man to be his Competitour, or Compeere; he does
plead here a Superiority above man, for had thou? and should not I?

But alas what is all this, but loss of breath? but charming in the ears of
deaf Adders, dead Pulpit-haunters; we may preach our selves speechless, and
our Auditors breathless, before we shall sermon-up Gods pre-eminence: Where is
that effectual Teacher, spirit-lipped Lecturer, that has gotten God the
precedence, and preferment above man? And yet is not this generally known? is
it not the cry in every Congregation? the reverberation of the very walls of
the Sanctuary, the noise in every ear? the principle in every conscience? do
not wise men hear it? and fools understand it? do not old men learn it? and
children confess it, as their known lesson? does not commen reason instruct
us, that if God be great, the greater, the greatest he should be made
Superior, Supreme? if man must have his due, must not God have his right?
Had thou? and should not I? yes, else never think of God, or speak of God, or
avouch a God, if man must be the Such, the Non-such. How can we walk with God,
if we do not consider his power, or acquaint ourselves with our God, if we be
strangers to his perfections? or stir up our selves to take hold of our God, if
we have no feeling of his greatness? What a Creature is man amongst his
Fellow Creatures? For oh that dumb nature does magnify God, and that we are
silent in his praises, that the Heavens declare the glory of God, and the
Firmament shows his handy work; that one day tells another, and one night
certifieth another, that there is neither speech nor language where their voice
is not heard, that their line is gone forth throughout all the Earth, and their
words unto the end of the World; yea, that Tigers and Unicorns, Stones and
Rocks, Fields, and Wildernesses, Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapors, Storms and
Tempests, Mountains and all Hills, Fruitful Trees and all Cedars, creeping
things, and feathered fowls do in their kind set out God in his excellencies,
and yet that the fool has said in his heart there is no God, and he that is a
little wiser than he (even the reasoning Formalist) has not God in all his
thoughts, that he is not made a Superior, nor used like a God, for he has not
an eye to look upon him, nor an heart to reach up high enough to him, no he is
far above out of his sight. That people in general do not think of God out of
devotion, but conviction, not out of pure honor, but amazing horror. Oh to
such a contemning people, who would ever be a Superior? to such an undevout
people, who would ever be a God? Here is a strange Creed and a worse Catechism.
Is not every Temple a scandal, and every Pulpit an infamy to such livers?
Deserve they Scripturcs, or Sacraments, the knowledge of God, or so much as to
bear his name? Take away Gods praises, and what is profession? silence his
honor, and what is religion? deprive him of his glory, and what is his Deity?
Is not this? to the world his Lordship? and to the Church his Godhead? does he
not delight in it? does he not demand it? Yes, there is nothing more dear and
acceptable to God, then that we should ascribe greatness to him Deuteronomy. 32.3.
speak of the glorious honor of his Majesty, Psalm. 145.5. behold his high hand,
Isai. 26.9. Offer the sacrifices of praise, Heb. 13.15. for God does not dwell
so much in consecrated walls, as in consecrated lips. Thou art holy, and do
inhabit the praises of Israel, Psalm. 22.3. Oh then that we should ever mention
God, if we do not magnify him; for who would not fear thee O God, and
glorify thy name? Rev. 13.4. Our brutish rites, our titular, customary
acknowledgements, are but lean fare upon his Table; we must prepare a pure
diet for the divine palate, for he does feed upon ecstasies, and raptures. Oh
God, praise waits for thee in Sion, and unto thee shall the Vow be performed
in Jerusalem Psalm. 65.1. The praise of his power, and the Vow of his
all sufficiency. We should leave all the specious things upon earth, and think
only on the glorious God. The earth should seem barren, and God fruitful; the
Sea dry, and God moist; the Cedars low, and God high; the Mines poor, and God
rich; the Stars dark, and God bright. Or, if nature has any thing in it
singular, God should be more admirable; if the Rose be sweet, God should be
more fragrant; if the Nightingale does sing pleasantly; God should seem to be
more melodious; if the Lions do roar, God should be more terrible; if the
Pearls have luster, God should have the more splendor; if the air be spacious,
God should be infinite; if the marbles be durable God should be everlasting; if
the Giants be strong, God should be Omnipotent; if Princes be Majesticall, God
should have the true Crown and Scepter. We should take off our sight, and
delight from these things, and our eyestrings, and heartstrings should be only
toward our God; if we look upon these, we should gaze upon God; if we be
affected with these, we should be ravished with God; we should say, what is a
Nectarean draught, a delicious banquet, an embroidered garment, an enamelled
hanger, a marble statue, a face of beauty, an arm of chivalry, a brain of
policy, curious galleries, engraven chimney pieces, stately belconies, lofty
turrets, furnished wardrobes, burnished dining-chambers, specious Theaters,
precious Jaspers, odoriferous perfumes, orient colors? no, we should call
these things but the sophistry of judgment, the Magic of the senses, cheats
to delude under-wits, trifles to please half-sighted Naturalls: but when we
come to look upon him, who is all Magnificence, we should say, What is worth?
what is wonder? what is compleatnesse? what is eternity? what is
incomprehensiblenesse? What is God? What is the admirable Universe to the
incomparable God? Principium Philosophiae est admirari Summum Cicero. lib. 2.
Offi^. Admiratio est reverentia ex magna imaginatione erga Maximum. Damas. l.
2. c. 15.
The beginning of Philosophy is to admire the Ghiefest, and this is not only
the beginning, but the summary of all Divinity. For what is Admiration, but a
reverence toward that which is principal out of an high imagination? Now who
transcends God? then why should he not be most eminent in estimation? We use to
affect him most, where we see some choice things; now how is every thing in God
matchless? Great things indeed are done here, yet not such but we can conceive
the utmost extent, both of the Acts and Authors: but great things does he, and
we cannot comprehend him, Job 37.5. we can track out other men's ways, but his
ways are past finding out, Romans 11.35. The report of other things is come to
our ears, we have discovered them to the full, we desire to hear no more of
them: but when shall we have a full relation of God? or our ears be filled with
his report? are we privy to so much, that we desire no more? No, These are part
of his ways, but what a little portion is there heard of him? Job 26.14. We
can sift, and screw out other things, but meet we not here with that which is
inscrutable? Can thou by searching find out God? can thou find out the
Almighty to his perfection? Job 11.7. yet as supereminent as God is, what
peerlesse esteem is there of him? do we seat him in the first place? do we
make him a superior? no, we profess him, but do not prize him; we subscribe
to him, but do not ascribe to him; we discourse of him, but do not deifie
him. God has the least part of the day spent upon him, there is the least
speech heard of him, our eyes look seldomest toward heaven, our hearts are
least intent upon God. Who would not think, but that we had lost our Bibles
that our Temples were all razed, that we had denied our Baptism, forgotten
every Article of our Belief? neither our ways, worship, wits, or wills, do
declare a God. In this Sermon-age have we learned a God? In this
Lecture-solstice, instead of the light of a Savior does there so much shine
amongst us, as the light of a Superior? Superiors do carry great authority
with them, but what sovereignty has God? their commands are ruling, but are
Gods laws binding? we live as we list for all this God, and act at pleasure
for all this superior; we even mock at this God, and brave upon this Superior.
Sure I am, his manifest precepts are neglected, and his known laws violated in
despite of his jurisdiction, and maugre his authority; as if he were not able
to prescribe or judge. Do we, or dare we carry our selves thus to other
Superiors? do we set up them with no more honor, or give to them no more
obedience? Yes, we yield to this bright Phoebus, Cedamus Phoebo, Virgil. 3.
Aenead.
and scatter our Palace-fumes through every corner of the presence chamber
where such a Clarissimo does sit in his Chayr of state: mark the passages under
Dionysius King of Sicily: they hearken, and listen, creep and cringe, flatter
and flagge, honor and humor, correspond, and comply; they did lay at his
feet, nay lay under his feet to satisfy his command; the Spaniel did fawn, the
Ape make faces, the Mag-py chatter'd, the Setting-dog quested, the Tumbler
rolled, and the Mastiffe did tear to content such a Master. O how obsequious
and servile were they to man's injunctions? their knees did bend, their heads
were uncovered, they had Sycophants tongues, and Parasites cheeks, they did
shut up their lips, and opened their purses, did bear burdens like Asses, and
were led up and down with rings in their nostrils like Bears, they did venture
their carcasses, and jeopard their consciences to such an one, to express duty
and devoyre. But has God this impery over us? is he such a Superior? is his
reverence like to this fear? his worship like to this prostration? his
obedience like to this obsequiousness? no, the great God of heaven has not so
much submission or subjection, as a petty Commander, or an under-Officer. For
he does charge, and enjoyne, send forth his severe Edicts, and fiery laws,
Deuteronomy. 33.2. He does write out commandments with his own finger, and make the
visions plain upon Tables, threaten plagues, denounce judgments, even no less
then the bottomless pit, the close prison, the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, and what does he get by it? People do withdraw the shoulder, turn
the back, clap with their hands, kick with the heel, behave them selves
proudly, make the neckiron, and the browbrass, see no more than if they lived
in Egyptian darkness, hear no more than if they were in a spirit of slumber,
obey no more than if they were given up to a reprobate sense: Oh hear Gods sad
complaints, How long shall I suffer? Mar. 9.19. I have sent my Prophets early,
and late, Jer. 7.13. I looked for grapes, but found none, Isai. 5.4. I am
broken with your whorish heart, Ezekiel. 6.9. I am pressed under you as a Cart is
pressed with sheaves, Amos 2 13. I am weary with repenting, Jer. 15.6. So long
does God wait and attend, and lo no respect, no answering expectation. Such an
uncommanding God, and unprevalent Superior do we make of him. Now would not
man be thus served, and shall God? No, I beseech you consider what the true
power of government is, what a domination does belong to a Superior: and as
thou stoopest to man, submit to God, fear him as if thou saw him throwing
Angels out of heaven, drowning the old world for disobedience, cleaving the
earth to swallow up some, sending down fire from heaven to consume others,
smiting some at midnight like the firstborn of Egypt, some at the sunrising,
like the Sodomites, some in the midst of their Camps like Achab, some upon the
princely Throne like Herod; or fear him, as if thou saw him driving out the
Pegs out of this fair Structure, pulling down the poles of this goodly stage,
sapping the Universe, undermining the world, nulling the whole Creation,
clashing the Heavens, melting the Elements, and turning this whole earth into a
Bonfire, rifling the Graves, raising the dead, putting on his Judges Robes,
stepping into a glorious Tribunal, passing sentence upon the quick and the
dead; Can thy heart but thrill, and thy conscience tremble at the thought of
such a Superior? Thou think thou can lay on heavy strokes, and speak
formidably; but stretch out thine arm as far as thou can, and roar as
loud as thou art able, yet have thou an arm like God? and can thou thunder
with thy voice like him? Job 40.9. Thou think thy words shall stand, and
whatsoever is decreed, or enjoined by thee, thou will make havoc but it shall
be executed; but, are thy resolutions as firm, and thy mandates as
Magisteriall God's? No, Heaven and Earth shall pass away, rather then one
tittle of his word shall fail: thou think, wretched are they that do not
obey thy commands; but cursed are they that do not confirm all the words of
Gods law to do them, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Oh then let man be no longer the God, and
God brought under man; but let man be cast out, and God set up; know his power,
consider his authority, apply thy self to his will, conform thy self to his
laws, fear the least guilt before such a confounding Judge. Let man be never
such a man, yet there is a Numen above him. God here does enter the lists with
man, and plead for his superiority, he is the most high, and must be chief:
For had thou, and should not I?

2. This serves to tie up the murmuring tongue; for is God a Superior, and
shall we quarrel with him? will not man be contested with, and shall God? must
thou be born with, and shall not God be forborne? Had thou, and should not I?
yes, (...). Hamith of Hamah. Querela cum impatientia Cassiod. Oblocutio
indebita contra Deum. Aquin. Justitiam ferientis accusare. Greg. Sibilus
latentis odii Hugo. Morsus in manum medici. Naz.
this finding fault with Gods actions, is called an obstreperousnesse against
the Almighty: yea, Hamith in the Hebrew, does signify a man in a tumult: This
sin is styled a grievance with an impatience, and unjust contradicting of God,
the accusing of a punishing God, the hissing of a secret hatred, yea the biting
of the Physicians hand, as if God could not decree any thing, unless he had
obtained our vote; or act any thing, unless he would give us leave to guide
his hand. But woe be to him that says to his father, Why have thou begotten
me? or to his mother, Why have thou thus brought me forth? Isa. 45.10. What is
this, but to slide from the foundation in a gust? or for the Anchors to come
home in a Tempest? How unseemly is it, that we should bring God to the test?
summon him into the Court, revise his proceedings, or take upon us to
ventilate, winnow, skreen every grain that does drop from his providence?
Cannot we be out of a state of welfare, but we must be out of patience? must
God do every thing according to our wilis, or is he unjust? No, He does not
hear us according to our desires, but according to our souls health: Non audit
ad voluntatem, sed ad sanitatem. Aug. in Ps. 21 Electos Dei cernimus and pia
agere, and crudelia tolerare. Gr^g. Nos te injuste cu^pabamus dum ligares, dum
se^a res homines ^onos. Arnob. in Ps. 50:
afflictions may happen, and yet man never awhit the more miserable; for cannot
righteous men suffer, and yet be happy? Yes, we have often seen the elect of
God live religiously, and yet endure bitter things. Oh God we did unjustly
blame thee? that thou did bind, and out gracious people. Therefore we should
repine no more at Gods changing of our conditions, than at the changing of the
weather; nor at some humbling us in our pilgrimage, than at the catching of a
fall in our journey; nor at the cutting short of our means, than at the
clipping of our over grown locks. God is our Superior, and we must submit all
to his pleasure. But how hard a thing is it for God to keep us quiet? no, we
came with a cry into the world, and we are froward Creatures all the days of
our life: the wisest men have been subject to these distempers, the most
virtuous men have been prone to this impatience. This was the sin of the
Israelites: Wherefore has the Lord smitten us this day before the Philistines?
1 Samuel 4.3, and of Job, Wherefore have thou brought me out of the womb? Oh that
I had perished, and no eye had seen me, Job 10.18. and of David, Why have thou
forgotten me? why go I mourning when the enemy oppresses me? Psalm. 42.9. And
are not we such Malcontents and Mutineers? Yes, not an accident can fall out,
but we are ready to be disturbed at it; not an action can pass from Gods
fingers, but we are forward to question both his wisdom and justice. Neither
plenty nor scarcity, peace nor war, rain nor drought, heat nor cold, the
freedom of the Ordinances, nor the restraint of them can please us. But why do
we thus lift up our tongues against God? or set our mouths against heaven? Is
not this to dig up the rottent bones of the Israelites? or to stigmatize our
selves with their branded sins? Yes. Murmur not as some of them murmured, and
were destroyed of the Destroyer, 1 Cor. 10.10. Is it fit for us to snarl
against God, and strive with our Maker? no, if the will of an earthly Superior
must be yielded to, much more of the heavenly; for had thou, and should not I?

Thirdly, this serves to teach us all humility, for if God be a Superior
should not this abase us? can we be haughty, and insolent, when our Better is
in our eye? No, he that does truly believe a God, and acknowledge his Power,
and Superiority, should be clothed with humility, and decked inwardly with
lowliness of mind. Blessed are the poor in spirit, but cursed are the arrogant
in spirit. Excelsa patria, humilis via Aug. ad Dioscorum. Nisi quis a seipso
deficiat, ad eum qui supra se est non appropinquat. Greg.
The power of Religion is to cast down high Imaginations, and every thing that
exalts it self. The Country is high, but the way is low. Unless a man does
come beneath himself he can never get up to him, who is above him. Learn of me,
not to create a World, not to bring forth things visible and invisible, not to
work miracles, not to raise the dead, but to be humble and meek. Oh then that
the chain of pride is worn about the neck of Religion; that the spiritual
person is puffed up with a fleshly mind, Discite a me, non mundum creare, non
visibilta and invisibilia fabricare, non miracula in mundo facere, sed, quoniam
humilis, and mitis sum. Aug. de verb. Dom.
that there is an haughty Gospeller, a proud Professor; that superciliousnesse
is under the eyelids of mortification, and most self-estimation where seems
most self-denial; that they which pray most, do rise up from their knees with
defying brows; and that they which are oftnest at Lectures, do come from the
Pulpit exalting their gate, and stret ching out their necks. Christ had need
come again to wash feet, and to set a little Child in the midst of us, for
Religion has not her haughty eye plucked out of her head; no, the pride of
Israel does testify to her face. But oh beloved, let us abate of this
high-mindednesse, if we be weaned from the breast, let us not have too much of
the milk of vain glory hang upon our lips. It is enough to make us humble, that
we are but Inferiors, for it there not one that has pre-eminence over us?
Yes, God is our Superior. How then can we be great in our own eyes, when God
does excel us by many degrees? No, our qualifications are not to be thought of
in respect of Gods perfections; for lay Face to Face, Place to Place, Power to
Power, Honor to Honor, Graces to Graces, and what is the Black-more to the
Bright God? The Sunburned Creature to the glorious Creator? No, God does every
way out-vy thee, outweigh thee, outshine thee; thou may have some
eminencies in thee, but God has greater: for Had thou? and should not I?

4. This serves to excite every man to uphold the dignity of his place; we must
not be proud, we must not be pusillanimous; we must not be of an arrogant, nor
an abject spirit; if thou be great, come not beneath that sublimity which
God has raised thee to; the Moralist will tell thee that that noble virtue of
magnanimity is for every man to defend his just honors. I find this in Gods
Ethics, He would not abate of his rights; he was a Superior, and he would not
be made a Minor. No, Had thou? and should not I? It is a disgrace to recede
from the interests of our callings, it is ignominy to pejorate our degrees. If
our names be much set by, we should not do vulgar things to lessen our
reputations; if we be more honorable then our brethren, we should prenoble
this priority with honorable actions; prepotency should carry with it
superlativenesse of worth, glorious Titles should beget Heroical Breasts,
Ambros.
lest there be Nomen inane, and crimen immane, a vain name, and a main sin. The
noble Vine should bring forth the sweetest grapes, Stars of the greater
magnitude should give light according to the Orbs in which they shine. As
every one has received the gift, so let him administer the same, as good
disposers of the manifold graces of God. The young man should not lose the
vigor of his sappy years, nor the old man should not lose the reverence of his
gray hairs, the Magistrate should not rip the fur out of his cap of
Maintenance, nor the Priest should not unhallow the consecration of the Lord
upon his forehead; the Factour should not turn Filcher, nor the Guardian
Bloodsucker. It is an heavy thing for the Pilot to run the Ship upon the Rocks,
or for the Watchman to betray his Tower, or the City-keies; It is a scandal to
this day to the Sons of Eli to have the charge of the sacrifices, and to lurch
with the flesh-hook; and to Judas to bear the bag, and to be a thief: And as
base is it, for men to pretend for the public, and to live upon the common
purse; or to cry up Gods cause to seize upon the Church-Patrimony. Oh horrible
collusion, and execrable perfidiousnesse! Would any honorable minds have in
them such ignoble resolutions? or any religious hearts such un-Gospel-like
practices: Every just man should act with an analogy to his pretended equity,
and every holy man should observe the symmetry of his vowed sanctity. Pliny. l.
28. c. 6.
The Pythagoreans would never lay the left thigh over the right. Plut. in Apoph.
Cato Major hated that Soldier that would move his hands walking, or his feet
sighting. Q. Curtius.
Alexander would not go to the Olympian games, because there were no Kings Sons
there to meet him: all these intimating that no man should do any thing
indecent for his places, and Calling. Smaragdus in luce obscurus? Adag.
Should an Emerald be dark in the clear day? No, if thou have any worthy parts
in thee, thou should make the gemme to be known by the luster. Non similiter
pingis, and fingis. Macrob. Saturn. l. 2. c. 2.
It was a tart reproof of one to Mallius, who was an excellent painter, and yet
had deformed children, that he did not paint, and procreate, in the same
manner. So it is fit that the births of our actions should be answerable to the
dignity of our callings. What an infamous thing was it for Tiberius, that for
two years after he was Emperor he never stirred foot out of Rome, and that
afterward he could not be drawn out of the Island of Capreae, but there
invented his detestable Spintriae Sueton.
Frabricks of lust. And for Caligula, that he made but one expedition in all
the time of his reign, and that was with a mighty army to come down to the
Seashore to gather Cockles as the Vt spolia Oceani.
spoil of the Ocean, for which he wrote a triumphant letter to the Senate.
Opera magna potius quam necessaria fecit.
And for Claudius that he delighted only to make great, but not necessary
works; and that he was more famous for restoring the saecular games, than for
erecting any stately Monuments; that his chief skill was to kill men by
degrees, that they Vt sentirent se mori.
might feel their selves to die, Postero die, and in corvivium, and in aleae
lusum admoveri jussit.
and the next day to send for them to come, and feast, and play with him. And
for Domitian, who for the vast power, and authority which was put into his
hands did nothing memorable, but only studiedan exquisite art Ne musca quidem.
of killing of flies, and setting up golden Statues to his honor, and
inventing, and assuming glorious titles to himself, Dominus, and Deus noster
sic fieri jubet.
as Our Lord God does command it so to be done. And for Ninyas the Son of
Ninus, who shut up himself in his Palace, shunning the sight of all men,
thinking to have his satiety of unintermitted delights, Per omne vitae tempus
reclusus in regia, conspectumque hominum vitans, Existimabat in continuis
versari voluptatibus, vacuum esse curis, summam in principe esse felicitatem.
D^od. l. 2. c. 6.
and that to be free of all cares was the only felicity which did belong to a
Prince; And for Sardanapalus, who ended a famous Empire which had continued
1360 years, who for his immoderate licentiousness was firnamed (...) Athen. l.
12. c. 12.
the Absolute Effeaminate; as if he had been eviratus, unmanned. And for
Alexander, who in his latter end was so highly corrupted, that it was said,
Alexandrum ex Imperatore clarissimo Darii satrapam factum videri Sabel. l. 5.
Enc. 4. Plut. in Cleomene.
Of a famous Emperor, he was become one of the Courtiers of Darius. And for
Ptolomeus Philopater, who was wont to go up and down the streets with a
Timbrell in his hand, and spending out his days in pleasure, he left
government of all things to his Curtesan Agathoclia, and the bawd Onanthes; And
for L. Verus Antonius, who was said to bring from the Parthian Battle, nothing
but an army of Libertins, and he himself so sensual, that he delighted only in
the presence of one Agrippus, who was called the Apolaustam cognominabant.
Voluptuary. And for Commodus, who not only was vested like a woman, and
sprinkled his hair with gold-dust, Humanum stercus cibis immisceret, eosque
irrideret, qui eom mixturam abborrerent. Fulgos. l. 9. c. 1.
but put man's ordure into meat, and derided them which would not feed greedily
upon it, and brought up jesters naked in Chargers spread over with mustard. And
for Leo the tenth, those excessive luxuries, and manifest lusts which were
charged upon him, did wonderfully obscure his virtues. And for Julius 3d, who
at Port Flumentane, when he was 70. years of age lived in such excess of lust
and riot, that it was said, Fruendo potius, quam regendo Pontificatui totus
incumberet. Panvinius.
that he entered the Popedom rather to enjoy it, then govern it. Now is this to
assert the honor of a place? or to dignify that which has illustrated them?
No, this is to vilipe greatness, or to embase nobleness. A true Peer will
rather part with his George, then his Virtues, Leonis Pont. 10. animi virtutes,
cu nimia saepe vitae luxuria, tum objectae libidines obscurabant. Jovius in
ejus vita.
and pollute the graves of his Ancestors, than stain himself with blemishes
dishonorable to his family. He whose worth does carry an adequate
commensuration with his calling, is best skilled in Geometry, I might say he
has the best insight into Divinity; for do not all gracious persons observe
this level? and make greatness the square of goodness? Yes, when Joseph was
left officer in his Masters absence, he would not meddle but with that which
was under his disposing; he had the command of all Potiphars goods, but his
Mistress he thought was none of those utensils a Steward ought to deal with:
therefore when she tempted him to lie with her, he would be her servant, but
not her bedfellow; he would lose his coat, rather than be drawn to a couch of
dalliance; he reads over the Bill of his charge to her, and tells her, that
she is left out of the commodities which he was to lay hand on. Behold my
Master knows not what he has in the house with me, but has committed all
that he has to my hand. There is none greater in his house than I, neither
has he kept any thing from me but thee, because thou art his wife. How then
shall I commit this great wickedness, and so sin against my God? Genesis 39.7,
8, 9. verse. Thus Michaeas when he was sent for to resolve whether Achab should
go up to Ramoth Gilead or not, though four hundred Prophets had declared before
for the journey, and said, it should be prosperous; and the King himself had
expressed his high dis-affection against him; for he does not prophecy good,
but evil unto me: and a prepared messenger had used all manner of insinuating
terms to put the Court-tone into his mouth; for Behold now the words of the
Prophets declare good unto the King with one accord; let thy words therefore be
like one of them, and speak thou good. Yet it is neither the Kings displeasure,
nor the Messengers flattery, can make him vary, or put a pliable, compliable
Tongue into his mouth; no, I am a Prophet, and must keep my calling unspotted;
therefore whatsoever the Lord says, that will I speak, 1 King. 22.14. Thus
Nehemiah, when he was entreated to a conference by Tobiah, Sanballat, Geshen,
the powerful men of the Country, and a messenger with an open Letter in his
hand, had charged him with rebellion, telling him that he aspired, and affected
the Crown: for thou would be King, and accused him for seducing the
priesthood, as if he had gotten Mercenary Chaplains to preach up his Title, and
given him the lie; for it is not done according to these words that thou say
but thou feignest them out of thine own heart; and as the last design they
had treated with his own party, even corrupted the seeming Saints of the age;
yea hired the Prophets to take him off, and terrify him; for Noadiah with the
rest of the holy league and combination had put him in fear; and Delaiah the
son of Mehetabeel, in show devotion had shut up himself in the Temple, and
there upon his knees, had sought God, that by revelation he might state the
business; He, even he dissuaded him to leave the wall, and to take Sanctuary;
for says he, Let us come together into the house of God, and shut the doors
of the Temple, for they will come to slay thee, yea in the night will they come
to kill thee; yet against all these frights and charms, Nehemiah does stand
resolute; yea the prophetical lure cannot take him, for he thinks that these
Altar-wights, and Vision-men, are not too much to be trusted, snares and gins
he thought might be laid in the Temple it self. Therefore Nehemiah does keep
his ground, and would not be struck blind by the Seers themselves, nor drawn
away from his charge by a revelation-string. It is the wall that I have
undertaken the defense of, says he, and if I depart from it, I betray the
cause: if I do but turn my face, all will desert the business; farewell Wall
and City. Let Noadiah, and Delaiah, if they will shut up themselves, when they
ought to be animating the people; or house themselves, when they ought to be in
Armies, or strengthening the hand of them which are ready to fight; but if I
depart, I turn Recreant; if I leave the wall, they will say, There does go the
Corner creeper, let us go after him, for he is gone to save one, to preserve
his own head: whosoever does post away, I must stay by it, whosoever do secure
themselves, seek refuges, speed away as fast as their legs will carry them, yet
it shall never be said that Nehemiah was a dastard, a Renegade, Retrogade,
heel-changer, back-turner, faulterer, falsifier, fortune-seeker, fugitive. I am
Nehemiah, and neither Noadiah, nor Delaiah, shall draw me after them: no, let
them have their single trace, their distinct vagary, I am a leading man, no
following man; I am a fixed man, no fleeing man. Should such a man as I flee?
who is he that being as I am, would go into the Temple to live? I will not go
in, Neh. 6.10, 11. Epaminondas being accused, because contrary to the
Baeotarchicall Law, he had stayed out above seven months in an Expedition, and
for this error, judgment of death was ready to be pronounced against him;
Indeed, says he, my crime is great, that making bold with this short time, I
have brought home to your State the conquest of all Lacedemonia, and Messenia.
Plut. in praecep. Politicis.
The valiant Captain intimating, that a glorious victory was far to be
preferred before time or law. Cato executing the Calphurnian Law, that no man
should come to offices by bribery, the Candidates were so offended, that they
set upon him with violence; and though he were Praetor at that time, yet no man
assisted him, but even the Senators deserted him; but afterward escaping out
of their hands, he made such an Oration (being gotten up into the Rostra) that
he both calmed and shamed his enemies; then the flattering Senate highly
magnified both his wisdom and courage: At ego vos non laudo, qui deseruistis
Praetorem in discrimine, nec ei succurristis. Plut. in Catone
Ay, says he, you praise me, but I do not praise you, who forsook your
Pretour in danger, and would not defend him. The prudent man thinking it not
fit that he should suffer the dignity of his place to be trampled under foot,
and his Pretor-ship contemned.

The Egyptians had a custom, that no man could set up his Image in public,
but by the approbation of the chief Priests: when Darius therefore would have
his Statue placed at Memphis, nigh to the statue of Sesostris, the High Priest
would by no means yield to it, saying that Darius had not yet attained to the
honor of Sesostris his attempts. Se nondum opera Sesostris aequasse. Diodor l.
1. c. 4.
The stout High priest thinking it a disparagement to him, that he should be
drawn to an unjust consent by the motion of a Prince, but he thought it
requisite to maintain the credit of his place, to give honor to them which
had deserved it. Severus the Emperor being sick of the Gout, the Soldiers in
an heady humor saluted his Son Bassianus (afterward called Caracalla)
Augustus Severus, highly displeased at the passage, cited them all to the
Tribunal, and there having humbled them, he told them, Nunctandem
intelligitis, non pedes, sed caput imperare. Fulgos. l. 2. c. 2.
At last they might perceive, That not the feet, but the head did reign over
them. The courageous old man seeing himself assaulted by his inferiors,
princely vindicated the honor of his place, showing them that a good Governor
was not to be cast away for a lame leg; and that it was the brain, and not
the feet, which made the Emperor. The Citizens of Argentine (now called
Strasbourgh) coming to Henry the 7th to have their liberties confirmed, they
using a tedious Oration, and immoderately extolling the power of their great
Lords of the City, E^s derisit Imp. nulla responsione dignatus, donec se
submitterent, ac se non Dominos, sed cives Argentinenses testarentur. Cuspin.
the Emperor thinking it unseemly, that they which came to beg for favors,
should too much magnify their own greatness, told them they should have
nothing from him, till they knew how to speak more submissively, and style
themselves not Lords, but Citizens. Lewis the 11th of France, desiring to
thrust an Abbot injuriously out of his place, commanding him Cedere to give up
his Right, and to yield the possession of it to one whom he should nominate;
Quadraginta annis vix priores duas literas alphabeti percepi A. B. (Abbae) nec
nisi exactis alteris quadraginta sequentes duas, C. D. (Cede) addiscere cogito.
Aegidius Corrozens de dictis memorab.
the Abbot thinking the King to have no absolute power to dispose of
Church-rights without some high crime, or the parties voluntary consent,
resolutely told him, that he had been forty years learning the two first
letters of the Alphaphet, A. B. that is, to know how to be made an Abbot, and
he should be forty years longer before he should learn the two next letters
C. D. by which he meant Cede; that is, that he could not understand how to
yield up an Abbotship. When the Athenians sent the Thebans word that they had
made an happy peace with Alexander Pheraeus, because he Promised them by the
benefit of this league he would sell them a pound of flesh for an half
farthing, the Thebans taking this as a mock put upon them, they wished
Epaminondas to return them this answer, Nos ad carnes has praehebimus sine
precio lign^. Plut. in Apopheg.
that if they had concluded any thing in this peace prejudicial to the state
of Thebes, that they would send their General to burn down all their Forests,
and that they would give them wood on freecost to roast their Flesh withal.
Pinguis porcus, quam macer hircus esse in in^;lo. Jovius in Elogiis.
When Galeotius Martius Narniensis was to suffer at Venice for religion, a
certain vicious liver derided him, and called him fat hog, Galcottus thinking
it an inhumane thing to reproach a dying man, told him, I had rather be a fat
hog, then a lean goat.

Thus ye see variety of examples, how worthy men have insisted upon their own;
that the greater they were, the greater care they had to procure reputation to
their Stations. But how many of these Worthies are there now to be found? No,
like men, that had some Lethargy, Vertigo, or palpitation of the heart, they
have forgotten every thing, that should be dear, and precious to them, and even
trembled to be their own propugnatours? Where are their emblasoned arms? where
are the crests of their escutcheons? they have forfeyted their arms, they have
steined their blood; every Hind, or Rural Blebeian would have disdeigned to be
so narrowbrested; what regard have they expressed to fame, or family, name or
Nation, Church or God? No, they have had vast Estates, and even for the rentall
sake they have looked to preserve their skins, and not their credets; their
heaps, and not their honors. Oh what a fetter is the golden chain? what an
intoxicating bowl is the cup, that does run over with earthly abundance? their
esteem is starved to get the bread of increase, and they have left a lean
conscience to make sure the fat portion; let all honor go, when the main
dormant of the house does crack, and the roof of greatness does begin to be
untiled; the fane does turn according as the wind of security does blow, and
the ship does sail according as the rudder of self preservation does steer.
These are no Statesmen, Estates-men; not public spirited men, but purse
spirited men. Their great Oracle is the chinking penny, and their bright Numen
is the golden-wedge; this is the handicraft of such Mechanics, the creeping
hole of such earthworms, the foxburrow of subtle Worldlings, the Stage Play of
State-actors; or, if ye will, the politic Mummery. But oh! why do ye thus
indignifie dignities? God has given you the wings of an Eagle, let not the Bat
take as lofty a flight; be as great as your Parentage, and Pedigrees, Ties, and
Titles, Lands, and Livelyhoods proclaim you to be great; yea, be as great as
your great Creator has made you to be; let not God have the bringing of you
forth, and the Devil the bringing you up; if ye be cut out of the whole piece,
let not this broad cloth shrink up; if ye fight for the wall, let not the
frokman take the right hand of you in worth; as ye value your places, illustre
them; as ye tender your dignities, leave them dignities; lose not an inch of
your stature, Simia in purpura. Servilis Capillus in nobili Capite. Zeno do^.
embezle not your stock, sell not your Birthright; Let there not be an Ape in
purple, the servile tuffe upon the Noblemans head, be not poor spirited under
rich preheminencies. Ye see how all men have stood up in their own right; Oh
then that ye should not have hearts great enough to engrandise your selves
according to the eminency of your callings. What is this but pusillanimity of
spirit? It is not the gorgeous house, (...)
nor splendid array, that make you mighty; it is not the sword, and spear which
do declare your prowess, but he is a man of a generous, courageous spirit,
which does express himself, as worthy as his abilities and titles do empower
him to be. No man must be Inferior to himself. God has given man permission,
nay a president to reciprocate with his state. He himself was a Superior, and
he would not be made a Demi. Jonas had done something, and God would have right
to do more. Had thou, and should not I

5. This serves to show that we ought not to deny that to God, which we do
grant to our selves. For Had thou? and should not I? Shall not the Judge of
all the Earth do right? and shall not the Judge of all the Earth have right?
That is a penurious religion, which does feed it self to the full, and does
turn off God with fragments; here is a sacrifice without smoke. (...) Lucian
We which assume glory to our selves, should give glory to God; yea, we which
are rigid in our own proprieties, Sacra^^^ (...) ^^n (...) constant* (...).
we should be as strict in Gods Prerogatives, for Give (...) God that which is
Gods: If thy evidence be any thing worth, or there be any claim to be made by
thy Patent, or Charter, P^a cele^^^^ ^^venda. August.
Our ^^ly things have as great validity in them. Yea, whatsoever ready payment
thou do expect, Gods debts should be as soon discharged, Pious things are the
greatest engagements, and should have the first satisfaction. Should thou God
it alone, and the true Deity not be permitted to have joint authority with
thee? (...) Homer.
Yes, (...) God too, and have equal right, and rule with thee. Oh that God
has nothing but a name, a Canticle, a Parasange, that he is outed of all, but
an Appellative. He is the great God, but he has the least Jurisdiction; thou
can have many things, that thou will not suffer God to participate with thee
in. Thou may have thy house, but not God his Temple; thou thy badges of
honor, but not God his Sacraments; thou thy rents, but not God his tithes;
thou thy Officers, but not God his Ministers: Thy evidence must not be
falsified, Gods faith may be corrupted; thy name must not be touched, his
Divinity may be blasphemed: a man cannot trespass against thee, but thou
look for satisfaction; but a man may sin against God, and he is not bound to
right him with repentance: thy customs, usages, laws, and limits must be
looked to, but here people are discharged of all ties, free grace does make
them free of all laws, there are pure professors, which say they are beyond
duties, beyond Ordinances: thou must be reverenced, and worshipped, but the
more saucy and rude men are with God, the more fervent and devout they are, not
so much as salute him with a prayer at the entrance into his house, nor uncover
their heads to him so long as they stand in his prefence, or receive his Laws;
not so much as bow at his saving name, or kneel at his blessed Sacrament; thou
can not be made venerable enough, every Mushroom grown up in a night, does
look even to be adored, but all honor to him is will worship, and all reverence
superstition. Oh what an Optimus, Maximus, art thou? what a P^ssimus, Minimus
is God? thou art a Potentate, he is but an Infimate; thou a Praegrand, but he a
Perpufill, a Petite. But what is this, but to seize upon Gods Crownland, and to
deprive him of his Regalities, and Numinalities? Shall not the general include
particulars? shall not the Landlord have all the rights of the Tenant? Shall
thou which do sit upon thy wooden chair, and art not as big as an Elephant,
which have upon thy back but a few garments of the D^ers puke, and the hairs of
thy head not so comely as the alablaster, which can not make a leaf, nor
create a guat, whose feet do daily touch the Earth, and have none but a company
of Flesh-worms creeping about thee as Attendants, vie privileges with him
which does sit upon a Throne? who is bigger then the whole Creation, whose
garments are as wite as swow, the hairs of his head like the pure wool? which
forms the Mountains, creates the wind, builds his stories in the Heavens,
and has thousand, and ten thousand Angels ministering unto him? No, God is thy
Superior, whatsoever is allowed thee must be granted him; For, Had thou? and
should not I?

Part 3.
Now let us come to the stream which should flow from it, and that is mercy,
sparing; Should not I spare? From hence observe, that Gods natural inclination
is to compassion; if he be offended, does the grievance always stick at his
heart? no, He retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy,
Micha. 7.18. Mercy is his pleasure, and his plea; indeed ordinative justice is
in God essentially, but punitive justice is in God accidentally, Justitia
ordinans. Justitia puniens.
because it is a strange work, strange from his sweet nature. At what leisure
does he lift up the Rod? he does not punish, till there be no remedy, 2 Chronicles.
36.16. With what a difficulty does he reject a people? He cast them not from
his presence, as yet, 2 King. 13.23. for as Uladislaus King of Hungary did put
up so many injuries, Mutum Idolum. Dubrav. l. 32.
that he was called the Mute Idol: so God is deaf, and dumb to infinite
provocations. Yea, as Pericles, when one had rayled upon him all day, and
followed him home at night with clamours, he showed himself not to be
discontented at it, but only said to his servant mildly, Ito, and hunc civem
ad domum reducito Plut. in Pericle. Beneficium se putabat accipere
augustissimae memoriae Theodosius, cum r^garetur ignoscere. Amb. de obit.
Theodos.
Go thou, and lead home this Citizen to his own house; so God does endure
oftentimes our molestations patiently by day, and causes us at night to be
lead home quietly. Theodosius counted it for a favor, when any one would
entreat him to forgive; and nothing is more acceptable to God, than when any
does sue to him for compassion; He does wait, that he may have mercy upon him,
Isai. 30.18. Instead of bringing in an ext inguisher, he does light up a
Candle, Psalm. 18.28. instead of searing up the roots, he is as the dew to the
roots, Hos. 14.5. his cup is a cup of consolation, Jer. 16.7. his bands are
bands of love, Hos. 11.4. mercies are the sounding of his bowels, Isai. 63.15.
the shining of his face, Dan. 9.17. he does take no delight in wounding, but
healing, Hos. 14.14. not in recording trespasses, but blotting them out, Nehe.
4.5. If people have any remorsefull preparations in them, the comforter which
should relieve their souls is not far from them, Lam. 1.16. if they can
restore their obedience, he will restore comforts to them, Isai. 57.18. if he
would be accounted to abound in any thing, it is to be rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.4.
if he would be honored in any thing, it is in being magnified in mercy, Genesis
19.19. The Saints, which cannot rely upon him for every thing, yet they can
depend upon Him for this; for Why do thou not pardon my transgression, and
take away my iniquity? Job 7.21. Spare thy people, O God, and give not over thy
heritage as a reproach, Joel 2.17. Spare me according to thy great mercy, Nehe.
13.22. and I will spare them as a father spares his own children, Mal. 3.17. A
Judge oftentimes cannot forgive, because he is tied to the will of another;
Judex veniam peccatis dare non potest, qui^ voluntati servit alienae. Deus
autem potest, quia suae legis est dispensator, and judex. Tertul. Deus tam
liberaliter omnem condona vit injuriam, ut jam nec damnet ulciscendo, nec
confundat improperando. Bern. Quo non alter amabilior.
but God can, because he is the dispenser and judge of his own law. God so
liberally does pardon all sin, that he does damn none by revenging, nor
confound them by hastening their destruction. Therefore let none say, that we
have a rigid God: no, the Lord with whom we have to do is very pitiful,
James 5.11. Know ye not his name? it is the father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3. Know
ye not his Throne? it is the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4.16. If the whole world
were destitute of mercy, yet with thee is mercy, Psalm. 130 4. Than Augustus,
there was none more courteous: So than God, there is none more compassionate.
The molten Sea, the Shewbread, the bright Lamps, the sweet Incense, the Smoke
of the sacrifices, Moses Chayr, Aarons breast plate, the preaching of the
Cross, the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, do not all these proclaim mercy?
who would ever enter into a sanctuary, hear counsel, search conscience, look
up to heaven, pray, or sancrifice, name a God, or think of the tree of life,
which is in the midst of the paradise of God? if there were no mercy? Do not
all visions, revelations, covenants, promises, messages, mysteries, legal
purifications, evangelicall pacifications, confirm this? Yes, mercy is the air
in which we breathe, the daily light which does shine about us, the gracious
rain of Gods inheritance, it is the public spring for all the thirsty, the
common Hospital for all the needy, all the streets of the Church are paved
with these stones, yea, the very Presence Chamber is hung with nothing but this
curious Arras: What should become of the children, if there were not these
breasts of consolation? how should the Bride, the Lambs wife be trimmed, if her
Bridegroom should not deck her with these abiliments? how should Eden appear
like the Garden of God, if it were not watered with these Rivers? It is mercy
that does take us out of the womb, feed us in the days of our pilgrimmage,
furnish us with a souls stock, close up our eyes in peace, and translate us to
a secure resting place. It is the first Petitioners suit, and the first
Believers Article, the contemplation of Enoch, the confidence of Abraham, the
Syrophoenicians Physic, Mary Magdalens laver, St Peter's teare-stancher, St
Paul's scale-dropper, the expedient of the penitent, the ecstasy of the
reconciled, the Saints Hosannah, the Angels Hallelujah. By this Noah swam in
the Ark, Moses was taken out of the Bul-rushes, Jonas lived in the belly of the
Whale, the three Children walked in the fiery furnance, and Elias was taken up
in a fiery Chariot. Ordinances, Oracles, Altars, Pulpits, the gates of the
Grave, and the gates of Heaven do all depend upon mercy. It is the Load-star of
the wandering, the ransom of Captives, the antidote of the tempted, the prophet
of the living, and the ghostly father of the dying; there would not be one
regenerate Saint upon earth, nor one glorified Saint in heaven, were it not for
mercy. Therefore Jonas, would thou pluck out mine eye? tear out my bowels?
thou art a man, and thou should be merciful; but I am a God, and should not
I be merciful? Yes, if thou continuest the spighting Prophet, I must be the
sparing God; Should not I spare? Yes, God will be merciful, for his own
nature, for the nature of mercy, and for the nature of men.

1. For his own nature, and that because first it is most proper to him, for
is it not inherent to him? Yes, the mountains shall depart, and the hills shall
be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the
covenant of my peace be removed says the Lord, that has mercy on thee, Isai.
54.10. Thou O Lord art a God full of compassion, and gracious, long-suffering,
and plenteous in mercy, Formaliter de nominans ipsum Aq.
Psalm. 86.15. Yea, he is usually called in Scripture, Miserator, and
misericors, The merciful, and gracious God; Mercy being so in God, that it is
constitutive, and formally denominating Him; yea he does not desire to be known
so much by his omnipotency, majesty, or eternity, as by his mercy: This then as
it is most expected from God, so it will be most expressed by God, because it
is most proper to him.

2. Secondly, It is most honorable to him; for is God so exalted in anything,
as in showing of mercy? no, his works of power are nothing like to his works
of mercy; the pardoning of one sin, and the saving of one soul, is more then
the framing of the Universe, Aug.
and the creating of Angels; God is to be glorified in mercy, Romans 15.9. a
whole quire of Angels sung an Hymn to the honor of mercy; therefore except a
man would leave the Church without a Chauntry, or silence all the praises in
heaven, God must have liberty to express mercy; for it is to him, the thing
most honorable.

3. Thirdly, It is to him the thing most uniting; for what does draw, and
gather the multitudes to God, but mercy? There is mercy with thee, therefore
shall thou be feared, Psalm. 130.4. We are astonished at his glory, we dread his
power, we flee from his justice, but his mercy does knit us to him; Who would
b^ afraid of a compassionate God? No, the stretching out of this golden Scepter
does make us approach to him with confidence: Deus est appetibilis propter
bonitatem. Aq.
other things might separate us from God, but God is appetible in respect of
his goodness, and kindness, and favor, and mercy. Therefore that God might
call in Believers, and have his Courts througed with professors; he does
exhibit mercy, because he does find it is the thing most uniting.

2. He is merciful, for the nature of mercy. For what is mercy? but an efflux
of a sweet disposition, Condecentia bonitatis. Contristants affectus, ablatio
mali, debitae poenae remissio.
a sympathizing affection, a remedying virtue, a remitting virtue, a prompt
virtue, which does but expect a call, and it does present it self; for he will
be gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry, Isai. 30.19. Which does embrace,
when it might strike; accept, when it might abhor; crown, when it might
crucify, which cannot contemn tears, reject the prostrate, nor give a repulse
to the suppliant; which is continually lighting up of Candles, that sinners
might see their errors, and melting of consciences, that converts might be new
stamped, and bringing blood out of the wounds of a Redeemer, ^^at not a Captive
might be left in prison; it would draw men to be frighted with the pit, to leap
out of hell, and to seal heaven. Therefore God does seem to be ravished with
the beauty of this divine grace, and would show mercy even for the nature of
mercy.

3. He is merciful, for the nature of man. For what is man in himself, but one
shut up in Caitiffes hole? yes not only in durance, under lock and key; but
ready to perish in the dungeon, that cannot pay his Goal-fees, much less has
money enough to buy his pardon; no, if God would offer him mercy, yet he must
not condition with him upon the easiest terms, for he has not an earnest penny
to bind the bargain; Breve est, parvum est, minus est. Chrysostom.
whatsoever he can tender, he is ashamed to have it mentioned, it is short of
the account small in respect of what is demanded, yea less then the lowest
proposition which can be made. I am less than the least of thy mercies, Genesis
32.10. If less than the least, then how shall he deposite for the greatest? Now
how shall this necessitous creature be relieved? The bitings of want are sharp
and bitter. Gravissimi sunt morsus necessitatis. Salust.
At this exigent man is not wholly helpless, though he has no succor at
home, yet he he has a friend abroad. Here is an object for pity, a place for
divine compassion; he cannot depend upon his own means, yet he has something
to rely on, he shall be relieved out of the Exchequer. If he can but cry at
the grate, there is a listening ear which does hearken to him. God does expect
such a suitor, and is ready to satisfy his requests. If he can but apprehend
wants, he has felt his last of them. For wherefore am I rich (says God) but
to supply the indigent? Wherefore have I bounty, but to make it a common
treasury for the distressed? Shall this man then perish? No, the merciful God
will preserve him. He does see his miseries, he does hear his plaints, it is
enough that he does confess, that he does stand in need of God, and does fly
to him for redress, he shall not be left without aid; yea, there shall be
commiseration, because there is extremity; God will be merciful, because of
the nature of man. Thus then ye see how Gods inclination is for mercy, and the
reasons for it, how then is Jonah in a distraction? he is too bold to inculcate
upon the ruining point, as if he would put indignation into Gods eye, vengeance
into his breast, swords, spears, thunderbolts, balls of wildsire into his hand;
Can God consent to such a furious Prophet? no (says God) neither mine own
nature, nor the nature of mercy, nor the nature of man will suffer me to
subscribe to thee: therefore appease thy rage, give over thy dooming humor;
howsoever if thou be inhumane, would raise up a bloody God? If thou be
infl^^ible, should I be inexorable, Should not I spare?

Application.
1. This does serve to show that our first interest in God is by an application
of mercy: for has nature with all her endowments any claim in this tenure? No,
till God has spared, there is nothing but the sword of justice held to the
throat: Our first recovery is by the benefit of a pardon. Ex venia convalesco.
Greg*
Justification is the foundation-stone of the spiritual building. Can two walk
together except they be agreed? Amos 3.3. Can God, and man consort together,
except they be reconciled? no, as Bassianus, and Geta so long as they were in
contention parted the Palace, Cuspinian.
and would not sit at the same Table; and as Agamemnon, and Achilles so long as
the difference lasted between them, Sabellicus. l. 3.
would not come into one another Tents. So an unregenerate state does beget a
perpetual quarrel betwixt God, and the sinner; what freedom can he expect
that is holden with the cords of his iniquity? what pleasant fruit can there be
tasted from that Plant, whose root bears gall, and wormwood? what delight can
the Father have to cast his eye upon the brows of the children of wrath? No, an
unpardoned soul is under the Executioners power, an unjustified conscience is
filled yet with an hellish Fiend? Let not a guilty heart boast, nor a man
without the wedding garment think to sit down at Gods Feast, as an acceptable
guest: Mercy is the first ingratiating act, thou art fit for nothing but to be
exposed to vengeance, till God does spare. Should not I spare?

2. This does serve to show the sweetness of mercy, it is a sparing. Oh that
the Cities of refuge are vilified! that Gods mercy seat has lost its honor!
Vespasian was wont to drink out of his Grandmothers Tertulla's curious cup at
all solemn Feasts, but we have given over upon the most memorable occasions to
drink out of the golden bowl of mercy; Sueton.
Agesilaus had a Friend which had pleasured him at many exigents; yet this
Friend falling sick, and weak, desiring him to stay by him, and assist him,
Plut. in Agesil.
he turned him off, and marched away, parting from him with a jeer, saying, How
hard a thing is it, both to pity, and to be wise? So this Heavenly Grace which
has been beneficial to us upon all occasions, we now can scarce endure the
company of it, but we reward it with a scoff in stead of respect: it may call
to us for presence, and observance, but if vanity, or ambition has an
expedition to employ us in, we have more mind of our march, then of Mercy. Oh
was ever a Benefactour thus contemned? Nay, was ever a Preserver thus
neglected? does it not rescue us? does it not spare us? and was ever
indulgence, a pardoning virtue, so ill entreated? so disesteemed? No. When
Philip was conquered, and the Grecians upon it expected nothing but slavery,
Titus Flaminius proclaiming life, and liberty, the despairing people were so
transported with it, that they gave such a shout, that the very birds in the ear
fell down dead with the noise. When the Crotoniats were besieged in a Castle,
Sabellic. l. 7. c. 1.
and they were ready to dye for thirst, Dionysius sending them in water, and
freely pardoning them, they were so overjoyed, Diodoru^. l. 14
that they sent him golden Crowns. When Frederick had subdued Millain, and, by
the persuasion of Uladislaus, Dubra^. l. 12.
he had forgiven them an horrid outrage committed against him, they took it so
kindly, that besides other rich gifts they honored him with, they sent him the
Candlestick of Solomon. But where are our Songs, and Crowns, and golden
Candlesticks as thankful Memorialls of Gods mercy? No, we are often spared,
but purse up all favors like legacies, which are never thought on, after the
money is told out; or we turn them off like Physicians, which are no longer
minded, then the cure is working; if we have saluted freedom, farvvell God, and
mercy. Indeed a sparing God ought to be precious to us, Mercy should be the
gaze of our eyes, and the trance of our hearts; for the light of Heaven should
not be more pleasing to us, than the light of Gods countenance, not the
sparkling Ruby, then Gods white Stone; not the Apple of the Eye, then Gods
pitiful eye; not the nources breast, then Gods bosom; not the casting a
judgment out of Court, than Gods casting sins behind his back; not the
pardoning signet, than Gods setting us as a seal upon his heart; nor the
forgiving of debts, than the not imputing trespasses; Oh how should we dance
about this appeasing Altar, bow toward this propitiatory, smell with a
fragancy the costly perfumes which come steaming out of this golden Censer? But
alas we sponge out the memory of benefits, raze out the characters of
preservation, we eye not our rescues after they are reached forth unto us; we
look not upon our pardon after it be once granted. Favor has scarce a
Panegyric, or Mercy an Anniversary; we consider not what it is to be freed, we
know not what it is to be spared. To be spared from an Amerciament, a Tax, a
Sequestration, a Messenger, a troublesome Officer, is very operative upon us;
such a thing does lie near to our hearts, there is cap, and knee, the seet
tripudiate, the cheeks look blithe, the teeth chatter at such a respect; but to
be spared by God there is neither reverence, nor worship, echo, nor ecstasy:
we desire mercy, but not delight in it; pray for it, but not prize it; weep for
it, but live not worthy it. Oh what despisers are we of favors? what a
lethargy is there of mercies? how seldom do we kiss Gods sparing hand? Is
this sense? is this discerning? is this gratitude? is this devotion? Do ye thus
requite the Lord, oh foolish people? Let me pull the vail from the face of this
beautiful Rachel, and show you what an amiable Creature she is; let me
represent Mercy to you, and cause you to look upon her as a Celestial Deity. I
do not say, it is that which gave you the first quickening, inched you in the
womb, rocked you in the cradle, set you upon your legs, gave you feature and
stature, rudiments and reason, favor and fame, which bought every cloth to
your backs, has put the keys of your houses into your hands, furnished your
Wardrobes, burnished your Dining-chambers, opened your shops, steered home your
ships, stored your Warehouses, guided Customers to your thresholds, filled your
Coffers whereby ye are able to trade with the greatest; and purchase with the
richest; which has brought you from the single to the second services, from
the Stall to the Summer House, from the coorse dress to the Livery, and the
golden Chain; that has been your Agent, your Solicitour, your Spoaksman in the
City, Friend at Court, your Steward by day, and your Chamberlain by night; but
I pass by variety of blessings, though ye cannot say but all these clusters do
hang upon Mercies boughs, and all these swelling Rivers do flow out of Mercies
vast Ocean, there being not a year wherein Mercy does not bestow amongst you
Donatives, nor a day wherein Mercy does not scatter amongst you her largesses.
But I tell you (according to my Text) that Mercy is your refuge, and your
Shield, your Castle, and your Sanctuary, your Sentinel, your Champion, your
Pleader, and your Patron; it does keep your feet out of the snare, your necks
out of the yoke, your breasts from the arrow, your heads from the Pole-axe; it
is your ye that watches over you in darkness, your arm every morning; it does
preserve your bodies from judgments upon Earth, and save your Souls from the
torments of Hell; when ye are ready to be punished, it does pardon; when ye are
ready to be spoiled, it does spare. Oh that Mercy is such a bright Star, and
yet that we have neither observed the Asterism, nor taken the Altitude of it,
that we are ready to commit Idolatry to a preserving Man, and yet cannot
worship at the footstool of a sparing God! that Heathens have been astonished,
Christians have wondered, and Angels admired at the sight of those protections
which we have enjoyed, and yet that our rescues are gone out of our eyes, and
our deliverances out of our lips; that mercy has no memory; nor preservation
any observation; that the pardoning God is not a magnified God; that he has
for all his favors nothing but ingratitudes. Benefits have no Triumphs, Mercy
does not wear her Crown; the impressions of blessings are worn out, the Records
of safety are lost; Oh that our praises were answerable to our protections! But
amongst multitudes, which have been cleansed from the Leprosy, there is but one
which does return to give thanks. Oh beloved have ye tender skins? can your
shoulders endure no burdens? do ye love to be kept from the hour of
temptation? do ye desire with the woman in the Revelation to have the two wings
of an Eagle to fly from dangers? Rev. 12.14.
can ye not endure to be chastned with the rod of men, broken with a tempest,
to be tossed like a ball in a large Country, to be fanned in the gate of the
land, to be set as a mark for the arrow, to have your teeth broken with gravel
stones, to drink the water of gall, or to eat the bread of Mourners, to be
bound in fetters, and holden in the cords of affliction, to have your heads
bowed down with sufferings, or afflictions wreathed about your necks? Does the
least distress drive you into passions, make your hearts melt within you,
discruciate you, exanimate you, cause you to tear your own flesh, make a
wayling like the Dragons, and to belch out your sorrows with a rage, that does
reach up to Heaven? And is Mercy your Guardian, and the Keeper of your heads to
prevent all these miseries, and to secure you from all these hazards, and yet
will ye not know her soft hand, and cherishing breast, not honor every joint of
her preserving arm, and magnify every feather of her safegarding wings? have
ye honors, and Hymns, Charmings, and chauntings and none for Mercy? what not a
distich, a semibrief for Mercy? Does Mercy bless all the Earth, and is all the
Earth dumb? does that spare, and are we speechless? Zeal then, where are thy
sparks? Devotion where is thy fervent tongue? what is all the worship of the
times, if there be no ardency to Mercy? sing no more Psalms, away with all your
melodious tones, if Mercy has no quire, and does want her sweet singers; that
is a strange Chapel, where Mercy has not her Anthems. Oh therefore look upon
Mercy, observe Mercy, know her sweetness, consider her benignity, apprehend
her favors, take notice of her benefits, and as ye love your lives, tender
your own blood, let mercy have your life-song: Oh how often has she been unto
you a refuge from the storm, a cover from the face of spoils? How often has
she fenced off dangers, and hid you in the secret pavilion? Oh therefore when
this glorious Queen does enter your streets, let all the Bells in the steeple,
all the Tongues in the Professors heads, ring a peal to the honor of mercy;
let there be praises, and parasangs, Elogies and exultations, songs and Selahs,
to exalt mercy. Mercy must needs be a singular thing, when God here does plead
so much to be esteemed a sparing God; Should not I spare?

3. This serves to show that we have our lives upon mercy; for he that does
spare, Nihil admirari. Plut. Toll misericordiam Aug. Si quoties homines
peccent, sua fulmina inittat Jupiter.
might judge. If with Pythagoras his Scholars, corrupt nature had not taught
us to wonder at nothing, doubtless our preservations might be astonishments.
Take away mercy, and what might we be, but the spoils of divine justice? If our
punishments were equal to our provocations, what should we be but the
miserable of the world? we have nothing but Compassion to be the Citadell of
the Nation, the Counterscarpe against battering judgments; they are neither
our fenced Cities, nor trains of Artillery, our puissant Navies, nor redoubted
Captains, that are our security; It is the mercy of the Lord, that we are not
consumed, Lam. 3.22. We have sins enough amongst us to bring all the plagues of
Egypt upon us, to level our Walls like Jerichoes, to consume us into the
cinders of Sodom and Gomorrah; Ah sinful Nation! ah people laden with
iniquity! a seed of evil doers, Isa. 1.4. in all our doings our sins do
appear, Ezekiel. 21.24. we have deeply corrupted our selves, as in the days of
Gibeah, Hos. 9.9. there are our manifold transgressions, and mighty sins, Amos
5.12. If there were an Ezechiel that could consider what the Ancients do in
the dark, nay take notice of the abominations which are committed in the midst
of Jerusalem, a man would think that God were forsaking both Sanctuary and
City; for, the riot and excess, pride and insolency, spleen and malice, fraud
and falsehood, oppression and cruelty, forgery and bribery, perfidiousnesse and
perjury, hypocrisy and apostasy, perverting of truth and persecuting of
Religion in this Nation, is such, that we seem to be nothing but a hold of foul
spirits, and a cage of unclean birds: oh what dismal vengeance, and brayning
judgments do these sins deserve! we might think we heard the noise of a
National downfall in these execrable courses, Fragorem pereuntis Antiochiae
jam tum in auribus ejus circum^onuisse* Erag. l. 4. c. 7.
as Zozimas the Monk of Palestine heard the crack of perishing Antioch a long
time before it came; yea, the walls and pillars of the Country might seem to
melt before our destruction, as the marble statues of Anthony at Alba did
sweat, Plutarch.
and could not be wiped dry before his overthrow; yea, at the approach of these
ruining judgments, the whole Land might seem to be warned with a loud summons,
Bonsin. l. 3. decad. 7.
as at the approach of Attila into the Roman Territories, a voice was heard
often in the night, Italy look to thy self. What place may seem to be safe
amongst us? what privilege secure? our Castle-gates might seem to unbar, of
themselves, our Fortresses to sink, our Temple-doors to shut up, our Ordinances
to take shipping to sail into some foreign Country. It is true, God does
spare, but he might open his armory, and bring forth his weapons of
destruction; yea turn against Jacob with a flaming fire, which might devour
round about. Oh therefore let us not pride our selves in our strength, nor
glory in our Hoasts, and Heroes, it is Gods mercy which is our tutelar Numen,
we are preserved only by the clemency of a sparing God; Should not I spare?

4. This shows that we are never quite lost; for a judgment may be reversed,
the punishing God may become a sparing God. Let Marius if he will, being
overcome of Sylla, fly to Praeneste, and deliver up himself to Pontius
Pelesinus, to be slain; Livy. (...),
but let not us be thus diffident of a sparing God. No, Distrustfulnesse is a
word fitter for the mouth of Dionysius the Tyrant, then for the lips of a
Christian: for whatsoever sad presages there may be of ill fate, and continuing
misery; yet as Aethra told Theseus, God can turn all things backwards. Deus
omnia convertitretrorsum. Eurip. 1.
If a blind Rhodian, when he had been kept long in a Cave by a Tyrant, and fed
like a beast, was so dis-figured, that his friends wished him to make away
himself, that he might end his miseries, could repel the motion, and say, That
all things were to be hoped for, so long as life does continue; Eras. l. 8.
Apoph.
then let not us deny our selves remedy in extremity, or lock the door in the
midst of dysasters, as if no comfort could enter, for this were to loose the
Shute-Anchor. Sacram anchoram solvere. Adag.
Oh therefore when we want bread, let us knock up our friend at mid night to
relieve us; when our chain is heavy, let us file it off by devotion; when men
ride over our heads, let us pray, and hope under the horse-hoofs; for may not
God feed us under devouring judgments? Yes, Out of the eater there may come
meat. Afflictions have but their stints, the punishing God may be a sparing
God: Should not I spare?

5. This serves to exhort us to imitate God; for does he pardon, and are we
implacable? does he spare, and will we revenge? Oh that man does desire a
gracious God, and yet that he himself is so irefull? that he does need so much
mercy, and yet will show so little? that there is no repealing of his decrees,
nor reversing of his sentence: that no Wolf is more unreconcilable, nor no
Leopard or Tiger more unappeaseable; that the wildest beast that does range
upon earth, is not more merciless than man. Do not all Courts of justice feel
this intractablenesse? Do not all Prisons cry out of this inflexibleness? Yes,
woe be to him that comes under the fury of an enraged neighbor; there is no
peace to be had, unless with Nahash they can get the right eyes of their
enemies, or with Lewis the proud Earl of Fanders, Amonius de gestis Franc. l.
4. c. 71.72. Bonsin. l. 1. Dec. 1.
they can see their Adversaries strip themselves, and with bare legs, and bare
heads, implore favor; or with the Mysians, they have liberty to sacrifice the
bowels of the greater part of their Opposites, as a pleasing oblation. The
wisdom which does descend from above, is easy to be entreated, but the
wisdom which does descend from beneath is hard to be entreated: they must
unhouse, unskin, slash till they see the naked entrails, and suck blood till
the veins be dry, before their hearts will relent. Ferdinand King of Naples, A
puero conceptum odium servavit usque ad senectutem. Pont. de magnanimit. c. 8.
Susceptas cum aliquo quacunque de causa postea nullo tempore deponebat. Pavi
nius. Hic me De us jubmergat, si ullt inimicotunc parsurus sum. Paul. Diac. l.
29. Ret. Romans Hoc inquit ut ad Idiotamver e dixisti. Apud me vero non multum
habet momenti; neque magni pendo ex i^sdem genitum esse genitalibus. Plut. de
piet. erga fratres. Rex praeter dignitatem regiam calce repulit, haud esse
referens Majestatem Regis faemineis ululatibus polluendam. Bonsin. l. 5. c. 2.
was so tenacious of his malicious intentions, that he kept them from
childhood to old age. It is observed of Pope Paul the 4th, that those grudges
which he once conceived against men, that they never after left festring in his
breast. Justinian the 2d. who is usually called Rhinotinetus, being in a great
danger to be cast away in a Tempest, was desired by Myaces, that he would take
a vow to pardon his enemies, that the Tempests might cease; but says he, Let
God rather drown me here, then I will spare one enemy. Plutarch being chosen to
be Arbitrator between two brethren, the one a common man, and the other a
Philosopher, he desired the learned man for the honor of his Philosophy, that
he would surcease all spite with his brother, and the rather, because he was
inferior to him in parts, and equal to him in birth; but he answered, This
may very well agree with my brother, the Idiot (that is a private man) but it
does carry no weight with me, neither do I regard at all that we come from the
same parentage. Colomannus King of Hungary, intended an expedition against the
Russes, Queen Laura prostrate at his feet, desired pardon, and peace; but he
most unprincely kicked her away, and said that the Majesty of Princes was not
(...) be steyned with womanish howlings. Thus ye have seen the exulcerated
spirits of men, and how this Devil of Malice (above all the black infernal
spirits) if it once get possession, will not be cast out without much
difficulty and danger. An Adu^terer, a Drunkard, an Infidel, may sooner be
reclaimed, and converted, than a man of an hateful nature. Such sharp teeth
are there in man's mouth, such griping claws there are upon his feet, such a
savage heart there is in his bosom. Strike but at this hornets nest, and see
what hissing, and stinging there will be; stir but this Lion out of his Den,
and see what roaring, and tearing there will be: was ever Viper, Dragon,
Basilisk more venomous, than a spleenative person? By the old Law the Dam must
not be destroyed with the young ones, but malice will ruin both old and young;
even sees a Kid in the Mother's milk, nay, in the Mothers blood; not leave the
Parent with a Message, nor the Infant with a moiety. Oh that man should have
so much rough nature under a smooth skin, and carry so much of the Fiend under
a fair complexion; that he should embrace so gently, and gripe so dreadfully;
greet so courteously, and grind so cruelly; tread so softly, and trample so
Tyrannically: In a Blacksmiths shop there are nothing but Anviles, and Hammers,
and Pinsers, and Malls; In a malicious man's house are nothing but Warrants, and
Writs, and Attachments, and Executions; Vulcan himself was never such a
forge-striker, nor Cyclops such an Anvil beater. Thou art afraid of kites for
thy pullary, of Wolves for thy sheep, but take heed of this Caniball for thine
own flesh; this torrid Zone does scorch all that come under it, this Hericano
does shake all in pieces that is subject to the blast, or dint of it. Thou
had better shoot the Gulf, live under the foot of Mount Aetna, be seated in
the Hircanian Forest, then to live nigh to such a rancorous creature. Cankers
do eat thy fruits, but these thy stonewalls; vermin devour thy corn, but these
thy coin; swine root up thy grass, but these thy Inheritance; Mastiffs snatch
away thy staff, but these thy Evidence; wild bulls cast thee into the mire,
but these into a Dungeon. Fevers have but their fits, malignant Planets but
their Seasons, deluges but their sudden inundations; but there is neither
term, limit, nor period, to an hateful man's rage, and fury. Absalon that
stayed three years in Geshur, Jacob that served Laban twenty years, the infirm
man at the Poole of Bethesda, that was sick of his disease eight and thirty
years, had a shorter time for their miseries, than they which fall under a
spightfull man's displeasure; this Ostrich is not to be tamed, this flint is not
to be softened, this ulcus profundum is not to be healed. But oh beloved, why do
ye plead the spirit, if ye express corrupt nature? or believe a God, if ye
will not imitate him? How do his mercy, and your malice, his clemency, and your
cruelty, agree together? Oh draw your Physnomy from his face; and fetch your
affections from his bowels; conform to him, by whom ye would be justified;
resemble him, by whom ye would be saved. Be ye merciful, as your Heavenly
Father is merciful. Forgive one another, as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven you. Maintain Birthringhts, defend just claims, but make not every
cavil a solemn quarrel. No, bear with men's infirmities, pass by frailties,
cover a multitude of provocations; for if God be so gentle, why should ye be so
extreme? if he be so yielding, why should ye be so unappeaseable? The Ornament
of the age is the affectionate person, the Mirror of the times is the
placable, peaceable creature, which does feel least of the sting of injuries,
and does not suffer an offense to come to her rankling coar; which is seldom
seen at a Bar, and oftener consulting with a ghostly Father than a Paradoxing
Politician. Clear your grounds from noisome weeds, build with planed Timber,
drink no dreggs, eat no Bears flesh, set no snares, dig no pitfalls, paint no
Crocodiles upon your doreposts, have no Panthers in your galleries, purge out
leaven, expel poison, keep no goaring cattle in your pastures, breed no
fierce whelps to worry your neighbors. Remember that the wrath of man does not
accomplish the righteousness of God, that he that hates his brother is a
Manslayer; therefore, As much as in you lies have peace with all men, yea,
Above all things put on love, which is the best bond of perfection. Consider
how your Savior was like a Sheep upon Earth, which did not open his mouth, and
that in Heaven be sits like a Lamb in the midst of the Throne; As David did
not regard Shimei's cursings, so walk you like deaf men, and blind men in the
midst of this abusefull, and provoking age. Let Abraham say, Let there be no
strife betwixt me, and thee, for we are brethren, and let Saint Paul say, Ye
have not hurt me in any thing; feed not upon discontents here, which are to eat
Mannah in your Fathers Kingdom; let not your instruments here jar, which are
elsewhere to stand amongst the harpers harping upon their harps.

Be readier to lend a courtesy, than to repay an injury, and to shed tears
than to shed blood; Leave vengeance to God, and for the sake of Christ's wounds,
feel not too much thine own bruises, or cuts. Prepare for the Sacrament by
reconciling thy self to thy brother, and pave the way to Heaven by a charitable
demeanor. Forbear desolations, when thou art able to lay wast; and let thy
Enemy live, when thou have his life at thy mercy: for this is not only the
sign of a noble nature, but it is to be a partaker of the Divine Nature; for
when God can ruin, he does preserve; when he can extirpate, he does spare,
Should not I Spare?

4. Part.
Now let us come to the Channel, Nineveh that great City, wherein are more,
than sixscore thousand Persons, that cannot discern between their right hand,
and their left hand, and also much Cattle.

In which words there are three things considerable.

1. The name of a place, Nineveh, 2. The nature of the place, that great City,
3. The description of it, wherein are more than sixscore thousand persons, that
connot discern between their right hand and their left hand; and also much
Cattle.
First for the name of a place, Nineveh. What? Nineveh the proud, and profane,
arrogant, and peccant, whose insolency, and security was such, that a Prophet
was drawn from far to discover their iniquity, and denounce judgments? (For
Jonah is sent not only with a message, but a menace, he must cry against it,
because their wickedness was come up before God. Chap. 1. v. 2. and he must
cry confusion to it, and that speedy too, for Yet forty days, and Nineveh
shall be overthrown? Chapter 3. v. 4.) No, this is not the Nineveh which God is so
tender of, and he does argue so with Jonah for the preservation of it: no, if
Ninveveh had persisted in her impiety, God would have been no Pleader for her,
neither would he have made the least motion for her sparing; but it is Nineveh
the changed, and renewed; for Nineveh had been wicked, but she had seen her
wickedness, searched it out, and separated her self from it: and here indeed
is the incentive of Divine commiseration. For so soon as God saw his message
entertained, he is no longer an Adversary, but an Advocate; he does pitey
Nineveh, and would pardon it; he does speak for it, and does spare it: Yea, he
does reason with Jonah, why Nineveh having confessed the fact, and put her self
upon the mercy of the Court, God should not recall his sentence, and spare the
Execution of Judgment. What, says God, shall I trample upon the prostrate?
ruin the humbled? then I shall seem to abhor that, which I do affect, and to
punish that which I do take pleasure in; Who will ever blush for sin, if
abasement be despised? or shed tears, if the weeping transgressour be judged?
these then having found out their sin, I can no longer pursue it; they were
guilty, they are innocent, they were culpable, they are acceptable; such a
seeking people are to be owned, such a submitting people are to be remitted:
Nineveh is to me now a fit subject for sparing. Should not I spare Nineveh?

And that God did not spare Nineveh for the bare Walls, but for the repentance
within the walls, is the judgment of the most learned Expositors, Niniveh ad
concio^em Jonce acta panitent ia paenam sibi denuntiatam evadebat Chelm. in
Nah. 2.
Nineveh expressing repentance at the preaching of Jonah, it did escape the
threatened punishment, says Chelmannus. Deus peccatoribus paenitentibus
ignoscit, and paenas commeritas ab eis avertit. Pis. in Jon. 3. v. 11. Tu homo
mortalis, and non tui juris and arbitrii, velles par sum fuisse (...), e^ cujus
umbra voluptatem aliquam percepisti; Et ego, qui Deus sum aeternus, and omnium
Dominus, non parcerem iis, qui mihi approbantur, and quorum paenitentia est
jucundissima?
God does pardon penitent sinners, and does turn away their deserved judgment,
says Piscator. c Thou art but a mortal man, and though thou be not of
thine own power and jurisdiction; yet thou would have had the Gourd spared,
from whose shadow thou receivedst a little delight: and shall I who am the
eternal God and Lord of all, not spare them who are approved to me, and whose
repentance is to me most accept able? says Gaulter.

Eos ob paenitentiam a morte absolvit. Cor. nel. a lapide, in loc.
For their repentance God acquitted them from death, says Cornelius a Lapide.
De paenitentia nihil dicit quod eam jam viderat Jonas. Dedi spirit um
paenitentiae, ut omnes salvi fierent, Ribera in loc.
God does speak nothing here expressly of their repentance, because Jonah had
seen it before; but he gave them the spirit of repentance, that all might be
saved, says Ribera. By the judgment of these then, Deus haec little
paenitentiae opera probavit, and acceptivit, eisque paenam condon avit simul
and culp^m, ut videtur. Chrysostom. in hom. quod nemo laeditur nisi a seipso. Id. l.
1. de orando Deum. Mortem suam lachrymis funerant. Anno de Paen. c. 6. Hoc
timore utiliter concussi Ninivitae ad Jonae praedicationem, plenam terroribus
paenttentiam egerant, and misericordiam a Deo impetrarun^. Council. ^rid. Ses.
14. c. 4. Sic Vega l. 3. de justif. c. 5. and Tho. Aq. s. p. 3. q. 84. Art. 6.
ad. 1. and Aug. 1.16. de civit. Dei. c. 3. and Ephrem. Ser. de Jona.
and many more, it is apparent; tha though God does but only name Nineveh, yet
he meant penitent Nineveh; yea, for their change, God does change: and because
they did not spare repentance, he would have them spared for their repentance.
Should not I spare Nineveh, that is, Nineveh the repaired and renewed?

This then being the true sense and signification of the word (that I might not
seem to dig amongst Rubbish, and put my spade into empty Historical
conceptions, as if I would scrape Divinity from the stone, and lime, and mortar
of Nineveh, and not from the manners and graces of the place) penitent Nineveh
being here to be understood: from hence I draw this fruitful observation, That
Repentance does carry with it pacification: Nineveh thus qualified shall be
spared; God can no longer be angry, than whilst men stand out against him; if
the flag of defiance be pulled down, God does instantly listen to an
accommodation; for why should they be made to grieve, which do grieve already?
where there is (...), an anguish for sin? or why should their heads be broken,
which are come to their right wits? Where there is (...), a new brayning, or a
transmentation? Taenitentia est recuperatio integritatis. Aq. 3. q. 84. art 6.
Repentance is the recovery of integrity. It is true, sins are not sanctified,
but the person is fanctified; so soon as his sins are renounced, take away
the leprosy, and the flesh is sound. Paenitentia omnes defectus ad perfectum.
Amb.
Repentance does reduce all defects ^o perfection: yea it is Melioris vitae
inchoatio. Layman.
the beginning of a better life; the liablenesse then unto death is gone, so
soon as this vital principle does enter: how can God exact any thing for
sin, when the penitents will has destroyed it; Paenitere dicitur, qui nollet
fecisse aliquid jam a se factum. Navar. Praelud. 10.
for to repent is to desire, that that which has been done, had never been
done. It is an hard thing for God to sue a cancelled bond, or to require a debt
that has been discharged: Paenitentia pertinet ad justitiam commutativam; nam
est aequabilitas quedam in compensationem. Aq. 3. Sum. q. 85. a 3.
all reckonings are cleared, when God by repentance has received his
commutative justice.

I know there are many curious questions about sin, as whether the sin of Adam
which effectively vitiated whole nature, be greater than the sin against the
Holy Ghost, which objectively is not only against the love, and truth of God,
and that gift, and union by which all graces have their influence, but against
the eminent goodness of God by which the divine relation is dissolved, and
therefore expressly called the sin unto death: and whether man be obliged to
the sins of all his forefathers, as well as to the sins of Adam, because
we are baptized into the remission of sins, and not sin; and David (though
born of lawful wedlock) says, I was born in iniquity, and in sins has my
mother conceived me: Or whether a man shall answer only for Original sin,
and not for other sins, if he do not imitate them, as Jerome holds; and
whether the punishments of sin be sin, because they are not only effects of
divine justice, but a contracted depravation, as after precedent sin there does
come a subsequent corruption, and obduration oftentimes: Whether pardoned
sins be quite abolished, or whether upon reiterated transgression they do
not return: whether the preterition of good, Delictum est declinare a bono,
peccatum est facere malum, peccatum est perpetratio mali, delictum est desertio
boni. Quid enim aliud sonat delictum, nisi derelictum Aug. in q. Levit. q. 10
or the perpetration of evil; or if ye will, whether the sin of omission, or
commission, be the greatest; and whether to the formal deordination of sin,
there be absolutely required a complete consent, because he which can resist is
not enforced to yield; or a mere nescience, pawsing delight or propathy, do
not of it self cause sin: and, to be brief, whether a man may not sin in
serving God, or sin in his sleep, or sin in thinking of his former sins,
or sin in looking upon the sins of others: these and many other intricacies
have been propounded concerning sin; but repentance does answer all these
Problems, and take away all these scruples for repentance is a reparation, a
purgation, a remedy, a redintegration: I do not say but the Macula, the spot of
sin, may remain till the day of judgment, there to the greater glory of the
Redeemer, to be covered with the righteousness of Christ; but the reatus, the
guilt is wholly removed, God does not impute it, nor look upon it as a
greevance: No, God has received his ransom, Exodus 30.12. the emnity is
slain, Ephe. 2.16. there is an healing, Hos. 14.5. as steyned as they were
before, they are made as wool, and as white as snow, Isai. 1.18. their blood is
washed away, Ezekiel. 16.9. the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there
shall be none, and the sins of Judah, but they shall not be found, Jer. 50.20.
The penitent does become forthwith a favorite, and is a darling in his Princes
eye. Does the humbled sinner seek for acceptance, Nescit tarda molimina
spiritus sanctus. Justificatio fit in inftanti.
and does the soul long hang in suspense? is the Petition laid aside? is there
no answer to be gotten from Court? Yes, the Holy Ghost knows no delays,
justification is in an instant. The sacrifice is no sooner offered, but the
atonement is gotten, the keys of the Kingdom do no sooner stir, but the
gates of Heaven do stand open. Solution I am not well skilled in, (what virtue
suffrages have for souls departed); but I am sure Absolution has a present
effect and efficacy. David does get souls-ease with a breath, I have sinned
against the Lord, says the King, The Lord has put away thy sin, says the
Prophet, 2 Samuel 12.13. Mary Magdalen does not depart out of Christ's presence
without her pardon in her hand, no she sought for it by tears: And he said
unto her, thy sins are forgiven thee, Luk 7.48. Zacheus is not put to
expectation, what the issue of his humble acknowledgement of Christ should be;
no he had called him Lord, and he shall presently find him a Lord, for This day
salvation is come to this house, Luke 19.9. This Deiopeia can be the Mother of
none but a fair Progeny, none but amiable beauties come out of the womb of
repentance. In Goshen is nothing but light, upon mount Garisim are nothing but
blessings, out of repentance comes nothing but a state of approbation. I will
rather fear that the Rainbow is not an undoubted sign to prevent a deluge,
and the Urim and Thummim not to be a certain Oracle to resolve doubts, then I
will suspect repentance to be an infallible Charter for spiritual liberties.
Oh that thou were penitent, I would show thee the Serpents sting falling out of
thy sides, the Angel of the bottomless pit dropping his keys out of his
hand, the Accuser of the brethren standing speechless in Gods Court, this
Jordan washing thee clean, this Bethesda healing thee of thy mortal disease,
the Angels of heaven coming forth to salute thee, and rejoice over thee, and
the Father stretching out his hands to embrace thee, and putting shoes upon
thy feet, a ring upon thy finger, and the best robe upon thy back: Whatsoever
Penitent does stand here, I pronounce, that he has broken the yoke of bondage,
he has leaped out of Hell, and though Pharaoh, and all his Host do pursue
after him to catch him, and to new-fetter him, the Devil, and his trained
bands of sins do march after him to captivate him, and to bring him back to his
old chains; yet he is out of their reach, he has left all his Enemies behind
him, and none shall be able to lay hands on him, if he has but past this red
Sea, the Egyptians whom he has seen to day, he shall see no more hereafter,
they all lay pickling in that brine, drinking their last in that deep, and
quesoming bowl, either swimming dead above water, or lying dead upon the Shore.
The penitent, and his sins are parted, as Moses left the Court, when he took
upon him to be a deliverer to Israel, and Zacheus left his Publicans office,
when he intended to devote himself to Christ; he has given them a discharge,
and quite abdicated them, as Ephraim said to his Idols, quid mihi ultra? What
have I to do any more with you? Hos. 14.8. Repentance is the Funeral of sin,
and the birthday of grace, a man then shifts himself out of the tatters of
natural corruptions, and does array himself in the bright vestment of
regeneration, as Jehoshuah put off his filthy garments, and put on a change of
raiment upon his back, and a glorious Mitre upon his head. He is so
transformed, that not only all the Earth does look upon him with delight, but
the eye of Heaven is taken with him: he need not be troubled with any of his
former guilts, nor fear the charge that his sins have preferred against him,
for the Enditement is taken out of Court; he dare present himself before the
Judge, for he is sure to be justified at the Throne of grace. The Penitent man
shall be pardoned, Nineveh shall be spared. Repentance is a Virtue; now can
there be a Virtue, which should leave a man as a spotted creature in Gods eye?
No, they are called Purgatory Virtues, Quaedam sunt virtutes transeuntium, and
in divinam fimilitu^inem tendentium, and hae vocantur virtutes purgatoriae.
Tho. 12 ae. q. 61. art. 5. virtu^ ex ipsa ratione nonunis importat perfectionem
potentiae Tho. 12 ae. q. 55. art. 2 Virtus uniuscujusque rei est, quae opus
honum reddit. Aristot. 2 Ethic. c. 6.
which belong to men in their passage, and frame in them a Divine Similitude;
for as natural virtues perfect the essence, so do these the operations, it
being impossible that there should be a Virtue where there is not a regular
action, because Virtue does inherently carry a rectitude with it; so soon then
as this virtue is entered, it does beget a straightness in the Soul, and
raises up in it such a sweet composure, that it may be proportionate for
Divine favor. God cannot but approve, that which he did detest; and love that
which he did loath; therefore God instantly does close with the Penitent, and
does give him for laying open his plague sore, the application of a plaster;
and for his searching his ways, the razing out of his foot prints, and for his
rent heart, a reconciled breast; and for his tears, clean water to purge him;
and for lifting a brow to Heaven, the light of his countenance. The Penitent
has no sooner made his addresses, but he has a gracious reception, for, Let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for
he will abundantly pardon. Esa. 55.9. Return oh backsliding Israel says the
Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you. Jer. 3.12. I have heard
Ephraim lamenting thus, Thou have corrected me, and I was chastised as an
untamed Heifer, convert thou me oh Lord and I shall be converted, for thou art
the Lord my God. Surely after that I converted, I repented, and after I was
instructed, I smote upon my thigh. I was ashamed, yea, confounded, because I
did bear the reproach of my youth. Is Ephraim my dear Son, or pleasant Child?
Yet since I spoke unto him, I still remembered him. Therefore my Bowels are
troubled for him, I will surely have compassion upon him, says the Lord. Jer.
31: 18, 19, 20. Israel does no sooner take unto him words, but he is answered
with a promise of divine favor, I will heal their rebellion, I will love them
freely, formine anger is turned away from him, Hos. 14.5. Jonah does but make
his Prayer in the dark Chapel (the bowels of the Whale) and he is cast upon
dry land as a pardoned Creature; the Publican does but go up to Gods house for
a little Sinners Ointment, and he does depart out of the Temple justified. The
Penitent does no sooner move the Court, but his Petition is granted; or bend
his knees, but mercy does come flying from Heaven upon Cherubims wings to him.
The matter of repentance is sin, and strange it were that repentance should not
be exquisite about her own matter, to heal the Ulcer, that she is intent to
cure; yes, Paetentia est de praeteritis peccatis. Sylv. prier.
as it is of forepast sins, so that which is forepast, has by repentance lost
the future being; it does bring it to such an utter waste, that there is the
Paenitentia est ad destructionem, and remissionem peccat^* Navar.
destruction of sin, and the remission of sin. I confess repentance does not
this as a passion, but as a virtue, and not as a positive, but a dispositive
virtue, and so it does not only take away the act, but the offense of sin: for
by Dolor est displicentia seu^eprohatio fac^icum intention removendi sequelam
ejus s^, offensam dei, and reatum poene Tho. 3. p. q. 85. art. 1.
displicency there is a reprobation of the fact, and by remotion there is a
purging away of the guilt; for as it is contrary to all sins, so according to
the nature of Opposites it does cause an utter expulsion, and that not only of
the pravity, but the noxiousnesse of sin; for repentance working in the virtue
of Christ's passion there is no sin, which Christ suffered for, but repentance
is able to abolish it; yea it does hall to the Cross, both the crime, and the
criminality of sin, that is the curse. Paenitentia est immutatio Voluntat^s
Repentance is a motion, for it does cause an alteration: now man's will is no
sooner changed, but Gods will is changed with it; that as man does cease to
transgress, so God does cease to be incensed; Offensa direct opponitur
gratiae, in hoc enim dicitur aliquis offensus, quod repellit eum a gratia sua
-- gra^ia autem gratum reddit. Tho. 3. p. q. 86. art. 8.
for as an offense is against Gods grace, so repentance does restore a man
again to that grace, and grace presently does make man acceptable. For though
sins have not in them a connection as virtues have, for virtues draw a man from
a multitude to unity, that is, God; but sins draw a man from unity to a
multitude, namely, his several delights; Vnum peccatum non dimittitur sine
alio; h^c enim est contra misericordiam Dei, quae est perfecta. Debitum culpae
contra iatur amicitiae, and ideo una culpa vel offensa non remittitur sine
altera. Si d^^pliceret illud peccatum, quia est contra Deum super omnia
delictum (quod requiritur ad rationem verae paenitentiae) sequeretur, quod de
omnibus peccatis paeniteret. Tho. 3. p q. 86. art. 3.
yet a man repenting in particular of some grievous sins which burden his
conscience, and in general of all sins that he conceives he may have
committed, this shall procure him a full remission, for one sin is not forgiven
without another. So that it does appear that pardon of sin is an inseparable
effect of repentance, for as sin in those that have the use of reason cannot be
forgiven without repentance, so it cannot but be forgiven by repentance; for
repentance has ever grace annexed to it, and that grace does confer
justification; Was it ever heard that a justified person had yet a new
reconciliation to make? No, justification is from one contrary to another, that
is, from a state of wrath, to a state of favor: to be accounted innocent, and
made righteous is the formallising act of repentance. What then? shall
repentance be a project, which depends wholly upon event? or an experiment,
whose issue is in the success? or a lottery, where blanks, or prizes may be
drawn? shall a man abhor himself, and not know whether he shall be rejected, or
accepted? shall a man turn to the Lord with all his heart, and have no
assurance, whether God will show his face, or turn his back upon him? This were
then an anxious vexation, yea, repentance to be repented of; but the imposthume
which breaks out kindly, is past the danger, penitent Nineveh is to be
spared. Can God profess emnity, where men desire to take away the ground of
discord? No, Acquaint thy self with God and be at peace. Job. 22.21. Nudus
sermo, sed immensitatem salutis continens, Miser^re mei Ch^vs. de muliere
Chanan. Hom. 12. Recurrunt ad Dominum, and Dominus ad eos Bern. de consid. l.
2. c. 1.
Can he turn off Suitours? and despise Suppliants? No, to cry Lord have mercy
upon me is a naked speech, but it does contein in it infinite comfort. Can God
seek up them by vengeance, which are already come home to him by repentance?
which live not at a distance, but are returned with all their heart? 1 Kings
8.34. No, They have made their recourse to God, and God to them. God cannot
disgrace men with their errors, nor put them to the blush, where they are
ashamed of their iniquities, Ezech. 43.10. nor march out with his trained
bands, where men prepare to meet their God, Amos 4.12. Nor scowre with plagues,
where men wash and make clean, Esa. 1.16. nor smite hippe and thigh, where men
knock upon their breasts, Luke 18.13. For what were this but for God to insult
upon the prostrate? and to set his face against them that seek his face? yes,
it were to wring the sinne-offering out of the sacrificers hand, and to kill
men at the sides of his own altar. God can try no masteries with them that
submit, nor lay them gasping for life, which are already half dead in
spiritual anguish; for then he should lay his axe to the root of the fruitful
tree, and make a waste upon the ground, that brings forth herbs meet for the
dresser; not make men bear their iniquity, but bear their integrity; not
only not be slack to them that hate him, but quick against them that deprecate
him. But God does reciprocate with the penitent, if he does repent, God does
repent: Conversus est ed puniendum peccatum, and ego convertar ad liberandum
eum. Aug. Ps. 84. Deus nunquam despicit p^nitentiam, si ei sincere, and
simpliciter offeratur. Chrysostom. de reparatione Iapsi. Non sinis infirmos
computrescere. Qui se medicis dederit, seipsum sibi abnegat. Amb. in Ps. 130.
Interius.
The offender does turn to punish his sin, and God does turn to free him.
Hard-heartednesse may be fruitless, but compunction is never in vain. God
does never despise repentance, if it be offered to him with sincerity, and
simplicity. God is a Physician, and will he slight his Patients? or suffer them
to die under his hands? No, how then can he be styled the Healer? therefore he
will visit them, administer to them, give them his constant attendance, his
examining eye, his gentle hand, a certain cure; for such is the goodness of
God, that though he does loath the corruption of the disease, yet he does take
compassion upon the groans of the languishing, Thou O God wilt not suffer
impotent and infirm Creatures to rot under thee, as Stratonicus told a
Physician. No, such are come under his hands, and renouncing their selves, they
have wholly cast their selves upon his skill and faithfulness, therefore he
will take strict charge over them. To deny men recovery under the mercy of a
gracious God, were worse then for Dionysius to pluck the golden beard from
Aesculapius. He does heal inwardly that which did wound outwardly. The fruit of
the grief is recompensed with remedy. Quando sic paenites, ut amarum sapiat in
anima, quod dulce fuit in vita, been ingemiscis erga Deum Amb.
Esau may weep his eyes sore, and find no comfort, but the convert does never
shed tears without success. When thou do so repent, that that is bitter in
thy soul, which was sweet in thy life, thou do groan happily toward God. God
is the Lord of Hosts, and he does bath a sword in heaven against contemners;
yea, water Nations with blood, where his professed enemies do live; but God
cannot fight with sighs and tears, bended knees, wringing hands, and pacifying
lips. If the heart of stone be changed into an heart of flesh, there is nothing
left for the hammer of judgment to bruise or break; God has no rod but for the
disobedient, nor no blood-axe, but for Malefactors: if repentance has shaven
men, there is no other sharp Razour to come upon the head: God cannot strike
where the penitent has given the first ^^ow at sin, the very standing up in
the gaps, does fence out all judgments; one moist eye will take away all
grievances, as Alexander said, That one tear of Olympias would blot out all the
accusations of Antipater. Where men deplore sin and implore mercy, where the
eyes are rinsed, and the heart cleansed, the sinners stand no longer like
culpable persons; no, the fruit of their lips is peace, Isai. 57.19. These have
quieted Gods spirit, Zach. 6.8. Shall Si^neon lie in prison, when Benjamin is
come? shall the sinner continue in bondage, when repentance does appear? No,
though God cannot spare the obstinate and incorrigible, yet can he not spare
the prostrate, and the penitent? Yes, Should not I spare Nineveh?

But some will say, how shall we be penitent? If we be Nineveh, that is, if we
answer their penitential works. Which are those? Would ye know them? then
search the Records, view the Original, take out a Transcript, and ye shall
find them thus filled up, or penned down in the Catalogue.

1. Hearing God in his Messengers; for Nineveh is converted by the preaching of
Jonas. People usually find the way out of the world by the light of the
ministry, and are listed into Gods Camp, by attending to the beat of this
Drum, and repairing to Gods Muster: it is teaching which does give us our first
conception in grace, and organize our parts to be shaped penitents. Faith
comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. as if the spirit entered by the ear, or that
were the clicket-gate of conversion. Preaching is so effectual an Ordinance,
that it is called The power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16. and the savor of
life unto life, 1 Cor. 2.16. Woe be to him which does choke this seed, or does
trample under foot this Pearl. Ministers are Gods authorized Messengers, to set
before us the way of life, Jer. 21.8. To turn many unto righteousness, Dan.
12.3. To seed men in the strength of the Lord, Mich. 5.4. By such as these
Lydia's heart was opened, Acts 16.14. The Romans were called to be Saints, Romans
1.7. The Corinthians were begotten through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. The
Galathians had Christ formed in them, Gal. 4.19. The Ephesians which were far
off, were made near, Ephesians. 2.13. And indeed the Church has not a rarer engine
for conversion, then this sacred function. It pleased God by the foolishness
of preaching to save them that believe, 1 Cor 1.21. By this the door of faith
is opened, Acts 14.27. the dispensation of grace is bestowed, Ephesians. 3.12. the
excellency of knowledge is communicated, Phil. 3.8. the unsearchable riches of
Christ are brought home to our doors, Ephesians. 3.8. Preaching does level mountains,
make crooked things straight, cleave the Rocks, turn deserts into Gardens,
quicken the barren wombs, teach five Cities of Egypt to speak the language of
Canaan, raise up of stones children to Abraham, open the eyes of the blind,
turn men from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, Acts
26.18. make manifest the secrets of men's hearts, and cause them to fall down
upon their faces, and worship God, 1 Cor. 14.25. The ministers lips being
touched with this heavenly sire, they send forth Verba flammantia ad aures
audientium procedunt. Greg. Hom. 3. in Ezech.
words flaming with zeal into the ears of their Auditors, they do Convenientes
curationes ad hibent. Theod. Dial. 2.
apply sit medicines to all diseases Formas insculpunt. Greg. Nys. de. Paup.
Amand. Et benig. complectendis.
they do grave and stamp the first impressions of regeneration upon men's
souls, Proscindunt spiritualem sulcum, ut cum purgatus ager sit cordis nostri
pulchros virtutis surculos conseramus: Olympiodor. in Ecclesiast.
they do plow up the spiritual surrow, that the field of the heart being
purged, it might receive the graffs of virtur; they do chew the food of
instruction for the nourishment of the body mystical, Just. in Cantie. Inter
tenebras hujus vitae praesentis student venruram lucem nunciare.
they crow in the midnight of this life, to show that light is coming. Here is
the calling which is Greg. Moral. l. 38.^.5. Totius mundi cordimentum. Jeron.
Cont. Lucif.
the seasoning of the whole earth; Omnibu^ mem^ris pulchrior, and Iretiosior
est. Chromant. in 6. Mat.
the eye of the Church more precious then all other members. How have these
seeded the world with Believers filled the streets of the new Jerusalem with
gorgeous buildings? put bright Gems into the Imperial Crown of Christ Jesus?
St. Peter at one Sermon converted three thousand, St. Paul whole Nations. By
these the Amasei were brought from their Idolatry, in the reign of Justin. 2.
Zo^ar. tom. 3. and multitude of Moors living in the desert of Eaprapit, were
converted by Maturianus, Victor, Vand. Persel. lib. 1. How is Bonisacius famous
for the conversion of the Germans? Vincentius of the Spaniards? Palladius, and
Aydanus, of the Scots? and amongst our selves, Berinus for the conversion of
the East Saxons? Bed. l. 3. c. 7. And Jaruma for the conversation of the west
Saxons Bed. l. 3. c. 33. O then that thou feast so many pulled out of the pit
by the hand of the ministry, and preached home to God by the fervency of
Teachers, that the stones of the spiritual building are hewn at the Pulpit,
and the Pearl of everlasting life bought at the Temple-Mart, and yet that thou
have no opinion of, nor no reverence to this Calling: that thou can not smell
the persume of the Sanctuary, nor see the brightness of these stars in the
right hand of God; that thou have scarce a foot for a Temple, or an ear for a
Preacher. But oh beloved, look with an eye of reverence toward these
consecrated walls, know the worth of this holy ground, account this the place
of Gods Throne, the beauty of hol^nesse, yea no other then the house of God,
and gate of Heaven: As they said of old, Let us go up to the Seer, so let us
repair to the Crier, let us hang upon the Ministers lips, and suck our fill at
these breasts; consider the eminency and necessity of this calling, for thou
may starve in thy Tent, if thou do not step forth to gather this Mannah;
thou may be to seek for repentance, if thou do not find it under the
Ordinances, Nineveh was converted by the preaching of Jonah.

2. Not to be too curious in our Counsailers, Nineveh does accept of Jonah for
a Prophet, though a Stranger by Nation, and a man opposite in religion. So we
should accept of any lawful Messenger; for strange it is that some have
itching ears, no Teacher will please them; they have an heap of Teachers, as if
they could find nothing but in the heap, they run from Pulpit to Pulpit to
cheapen Doctrines, as Customers go from shop to shop to bartar for Wares. It is
naught, it is naught, as if it were worth neither looking on, nor bidding price
for. They hunt Counter for Textmen, and like idle scholars they will learn
little of the same Masters, they must have variety of Paedagogues; I am of
Paul, I am of Apollos, I am of Cephas. They drink of all waters, and scarce any
spring has liquor good enough to relish with them, Projecta vilior algd est
Virgil Eclog. 2.
no the Crystal stream to distempered Palates is baser then dregs, or draffe.
The full despise the Honeycomb; and these surfetted hearers, nauseat the most
Mellifluous Instructours. Mannah is but light bread, with the Israelites they
must have Quails; how many Ornaments of learning, and Mirrours of judgment
are too meanly endowed for some ripe wits? Despectus tibi sum, nec quis sum
quaeris Alexi.
Many a rare gifted Divine may say to his Auditor, I am thy contempt, neither
do thou think me worthy thy asking for. The Daughter of Pierias have no
greater glory than to despise the Muses, and these no greater pride then to
avile the worthy Preachers. Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? Can any
inspired thing come from such carnal Teachers? alas they may have some
learning, but they have no piety; they may have some gifts, but they have not
the spirit. And why not? have they not as much sincerity? are they not as often
at their knees? do they not seek God? and desire to speak out of the mouth of
God, as much as others? oh then that Pharaoh is only for his own Inchanters,
and Achas only for his own Court-Prophets! that some men will eat no meat, but
that which is dressed by their own Cooks, nor wear a Vest, but that which is
made up by their own Stitchers; which will hear none, nor allow of none, but
those which agree with them in every Tenet, and do not vary from them in the
least principle. The foolish Galathians were for their own false Apostles, and
the ripe-witted Corinthians for their artificial Teachers; the great Council,
the Sanhedrim of the Jews will not accept of a Messiah from the Apostles, no,
rather whip them for preaching up such an one to them. The Stoics and Epicures
will receive no counsel from Saint Paul, no, rather stick to their infidelity,
then he shall reason them from their Idols. What means this Babbler? So many
men will not be converted, but by whom they affect; nor saved, but by whom they
prize, and magnify; they will die in their sins, if their own Physicians do
not cure them; yea, lie in Hell, if their own Key-keepers do not open
Heaven-gates unto them; they will shed no tears, if their own weeping Doctors
do not melt them out; nor accept of no repentance, if their own mortifying
Teachers do not stab and pierce their hearts. But, does it become men to be
thus singular, and precise in reformation? must they have it in their own way,
and by their own men? No, they should be glad to be led into the right way by
any Guide, and to be called home to God by any Crier. A wise Auditor does hear
all willingly, Prudens Auditor omnes libenter audit, omnia legit, non personam,
non scripturam, non doctrinam spernit, ob omnibus indifferenter quod sibi
deesse videt quaerit; non quantum sciat, sed quantum ignoret, considerat. Hugo
de Sanct. Vict. in suo Didascal.
he does peruse all things, he does despise no man's person, writing, or
Doctrine, he does indifferently seek from all, that which he sees to be
wanting to himself, he does consider not how much he does know, but how much he
is ignorant of. Oh therefore renounce this limitation of Doctrine, or
particularising of Teachers, be not too strict, who shall rectify thy
conscience, nor too curious who shall save thy soul, listen to the motions of
repentance from any Interpreters lips. Nineveh is not captious to accept of
Jonah for a Prophet.

3. Enduring sharp Doctrine, for Jonah does not treat gently with Nineveh, but
he does come with thunderclaps of vengeance, with a mouth full of menaces, Yet
forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown. That tender ear which cannot
endure threatenings, will hardly hear of reformation; The ear is the raster of
the Soul, and this taster must not only have sweet sawces for the relishing
diet; old nails must be plucked out with violence, even with their heads
flying off; old stocks will not be shaken down, they must be hewn down; the
sinner never change till the Minister does change his voice, Gal. 4.20. there
must be loud calling to awaken men out of the spirit of slumber; there must be
knocking to purpose to shiver in pieces an heart of adamant; this kind of dead
carcass, which has lain so long in the grave, that it begins to stink, it
will not be raised up without much groaning in the spirit. Ezra must sit
astonished till the evening sacrifice, Ezra 9.4. before he can amaze the
Israelites with their sins; Huldah must read the curses of the Law, before she
can make Josiahs heart to melt, Saint Peter must lay blasphemy and bloodshed to
the charge of the Jews, Adhibent prodisciplin a molestam severitatatem Aug. ep.
78. ad Bonif. Ad puguos, and pugnam accingamur, ne quid nobis ereptum cedat in
praedam ferarum. Chrysostom. adv. Jud. orat. 1. Sic mihi contingat semper bear
amicos terrendo salubriter, non adulando fallaciter. Bern. ad Brun. Colon.
Archiep. ep. 9.
before they will be pricked at their hearts; Sinners will never be corrected,
unless Ministers use a troublesome severity for wholesome discipline: We must
smite, and sight to deliver preyes out of the wild beasts jans. So let me ever
bless my friends, by terrifying them kindly, rather then by flattering them
deceitfully. I know people do delight in mild doctrine, and that the pleasant
tabret should be in the Ministers lips, to tell them rather of comforts, then
corruptions; of perfections, then defections; of privileges, then
prevarications; No errors must be spoken of, but those of their enemies, nor
trespasses, but those of the adverse party; where sin might rather be a
derision, then a conviction, or a taunt, then a necessary check; they their
selves must not be blamed, or shamed, live they never so impiously, yet they
must not be called wretches; or let them behave themselves never so accursedly,
yet they must not be styled Reprobates; the children of Belial must not be of
their lineage, the Cockatrice eggs must not be found in their nest, nor the
Vipers breed spied out in their hole; they must be of the generation of
Abraham, though both their ears, and their hearts be uncircumcised; they must
be Sainted though they have nothing of religion, or holiness, but the
lip-stroke. Saul though he knew he had disobedience enough to rend a Kingdom
from him; yet he would have Samuel to honor him before the people. So these
though they be privy to their own execrable courses, yet they would have the
Ministers tongue to be the flute of their praises, and every Pulpit to ring of
their fame; they cannot endure to be taxed wish guilts, nor terrified with
judgments; they would fashion out preaching after their own mould, and dip
Doctrines in the pukes of their own Dyfat; the bells must not stir unless they
will ring their changes, nor bread must not be offered for the sustenance of
souls, unless it be spread with their own butter. Ps. 55.21. Prophesy not
unto us right things, but preach unto us smoo^h things. Esai 30.10. If a man
walk in the Spirit of falsehood, and prophecy of wine, and strong drink, he
shall be a Prophet to to this people. Micah 2.11. Jerobeam must have a Sinner
for his Chaplain, and a liar for his Court-teacher, or else the man cannot be
merry, sor they make the King glad with their wickedness, and the Princes with
their lies. Hos. 7.3. So that such kind of Divines are but Proctours for
profaneness, Advocates for impieties; not Ministers, but Ministrels; not
Interpreters, but Impostours. If their Masters have a mind to be blithe, their
Preachers must smile with them; or if their Patrons halt, they must limp with
them; such must be the Sophistry of the Pulpit, the sorcery of the Sanctuary,
the Magic of the Ministry; as if such Prophets were read in nothing, but the
Commonplace book of temporising, or studied in nothing, but the Topics of
conformity. These men may have excellent parts, and endowments, but they are
not gifted with reprehension, Homer.
to strike, and stab sin at the heart, as Patroclus could put all the armor of
Achilles, but his weighty spear with which he was wont to goar men to death was
too heavy for him to weild. But when the Parasite is gotten into the Pulpit,
and there is nothing, but Courtship in the Preachers lips, when he does congee
to the humors of the age, and make low legs to the fancies of the times, when
there is like People like Priest, what hopes is there of conversion? no, the
giving of flattering titles, putting pillows under every armhole, and having
men's persons in admiration, do but confirm men in their sins, Delectat ea
facere in quibus non metuitur Reprehensor. Aug. in Ps. 9. Magis obruere, quam
attollere. Bern. ad Romaldum ep. 72.
and strengthen the hands of the wicked, Ezech. 13.22. For it does delight men
to do those things, in which no Reprehender is feared. This is the way rather
to throw down to destruction, than to lift up to salvation. Woe be to them that
go about to tame the Ministry, or to file the Preachers tongue; which would
have him only choose his Text out of the Bible, but draw his observations,
amplifications, and applications out of the Book of compliance; which will not
attend to Amos no longer, than he does not prophecy against Bethel; nor hear
John Baptist gladly, than when he does not glaunce at Herodias; which are ready
to cast their riders, if they do put spurs to their sides; which are ready to
lift up their heels against them, if they attempt to bridle them; which are apt
to smite at a Prophet, if he does cry out against the Altar, and to shed the
blood of Zacharias between the Porch, and the Altar, if he cannot speak low. Oh
what sense of sin, or dread of judgment can there be in these men's breasts,
where flattery does so inchaunt them? No, like the beasts of Sicily they are
ready to rot with too much sweet pasture; or like wasps they are ready to be
quesomed with sucking too much honey out of the Gallipot; pleasing Doctrine is
the poison of the Temple, and a blandishing Preacher is the Chain of Hell. When
frogs croak, the Tempest is at hand, when the Messengers of God are the
Pandours of licentiousness, Vengeance does tie at the door. The gentle wind
will never purge the air, nor the dull plowshare prepare the soil; if people
would be saved, they must sit out a threatening Sermon, and hear a rebuking
Priest with patience, saying with Boniface to Saint Augustine, I receive thy
words full of truth with trembling, Suscipio tremens verba tua verheribus plena.
though every sentence does seem to scourge me. Submit to this, or else no
hopes of conversion, for Nineveh turned Penitent, because she could endure a
threatening Jonah, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown.

4. Apprehending danger: for Jonah does denounce judgment, and Nineveh does
effectually lay it to heart. Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown.
So the people of Nineveh believed God. Did they believe, and shall we give no
credit? when the Heavens write out our judgments in Capital letters, shall
not we read our own fatal condition? when the Lord does roar from on high,
Jer. 25.30. shall we be deaf below? when He smites the Earth with the rod of
his Mouth, Es. 11.4. shall not we see the whipping-Pillar fet up? when He hews
down men by his Prophets, Hos. 6.5. shall we say, only timetous and suspicious
fools stand in aw of the Prophets Axe? when he causes a grievous Vision to be
declared. Es. 21.2. shall we turn this grievous Vision into a Panick fear? that
instead of the stings of dangers, and the frights of miseries, there is nothing
but drinking up scorning like water, Job 34.7. making a wide mouth, and drawing
out the tongue. Es. 57.4. not saying, these Temple-warnings carry sad presages
with them, but away with all these Pulpit-lightenings, the pen of the Scribes
is in vain, the Prophet is a fool, the Spiritual man is mad; as if People
would drink away the dread of all crime, as Medea told Syrus; Popasti scelus.
Victorius lib. 8. var. Iect. c. 4. Me pransum, and unctum neca bunt. Plut. in
Ap^ph. Aegyptum Does omnes hospitio excipere, and salvare posse. Rhod. lib. 29.
c. 21.
or would be killed with Gods punishing hand, being gorged with delicacies, and
anointed with carnal deligh^s, as Chabrias told Iphicrates; yea, as the
Egyptians in respect of the fertility, and strength of their Country thought
it was able to Feast all the Gods, and to keep them safe; so against the
predictions of ensuing vengeance for sin, we think our fruitful, and
formidable land is able to sustein us, and secure us to perpetuity. Vain men we
dream rather of dignity, then danger; of jollity then judgment; all the
threats of the Temple do not make us look pale, all the cries of Jonah do not
terrify us; no, they daunt, but we do not faint; they predict, but we not
believe; we are readier to say, the land is not able to bear these men's words.
Amos 7.10. then to think of our own burdens; or to lay a snare for him that
reproves in the gate, Esa. 29.21. than to doubt of any snare coming upon our
selves. Ne te credideris, q^^a non facis ista, moneri Ovid de T^i. l. el. 15.
But thou which art opposite to warninge, can thou say thou were ever truly
admonished? No, Behold ye despisers, and wonder. Is there any thing more
ominous then this sat heart? and spirit of slumber? no of all bad things, the
evil of an obstinate, and inflexible mind is worst; Malum inflexibilis and
obstinatae mentis pessimum. Bern. ep. 125.
for then we seek to outface the Prophets, and to put God himself out of
countenance. Therefore when misery is approaching, put not the evil day afar
off, when vengeance does knock at the gate, dance not upon the threshold; when
God does hold up his rod, think not it shall draw no blood. The Lion has
roared, who can but fear? Amos 3.8. If thou had the strength of Sampson, do
not wrestle with Gods Messengers, if thou had the puissance of the Anakims,
do not try masteries with the trained bands of the Sanctuary; for the Prophets
wait upon Gods person, and God will live, and die with his Lifeguard. I will
watch over my word, they shall know that there has been a Prophet amongst
them. Away therefore with all your trusty Politicians, and take up these as
your confiding men; believe the Prophets, and ye shall prosper, 2 Chronicles. 20.20.
So the men of Nineveh believed God.

5. Not delaying repentance. For Nineveh was a City of three days journey, and
Jonah had but even as it were entered the City, not gone his full circuit; and
what a new face is there to be instantly discerned? Jona's cries are heard; and
the City is converted. So we should not linger too long in repentance, for it
is a sad sign, when the child does stick in the womb; Esaus untimely tears
made him a perpetual mourner, the foolish Virgings are locked out of the
wedding, because they knew not their trimming-season; How long shall evil
thoughts remain within you? Jer. 4.14. Will thou not be made clean? Hibbekah of
Hachab.
when shall it once be? Ezekiel, 13.27. Oh sad complaints! Protraction in Hebrew,
does signify supplanting; for there is nothing does more undermine our
felicity, then to be too tardy in necessary duties. Hector blamed Rhesus for
coming to the siege of Troy, Euripides.
at the end of the ten years War; so repentance is a scandal, which is
expressed with too much prolonging; the Pinarii which came late to the feast of
Hercules, Plut. in q. Romans
were enjoined fasting; so they which do neglect opportunity, are left to
starve upon their after-services. If God does call, and men will not make
appearance* they come at last rather for stripes then embraces. We that will
not give God his right without a tediousness, are like the Areopagites which
bad the Matrone of Smyrna demanding present justice for the death of her Son,
Valor M. l. 8. c. 1.
to come and require it after an hundred years were past. Should we wait upon
God, and must he attend upon us? the Lord, upon the servant? the Judge upon the
Delinquent? Must we be so much entreated to be accepted? or so often invited to
be made happy? Are we not ashamed to deserre a patient God? do we not tremble
to give him so may repulses? How often would I have gathered thee, and thou
would not? If God does desire affection from us, let us send our hearts to
him at the first call; if he will be pleased to enter, Sera satio semper mala
est Culumella.
let us not drive him to too much knocking. Late sowa grain does seldom
thrive. To day if ye will hear my voice, harden not your hearts. He that
gives thee but a day, will not suffer thee to prepare thine ear to morrow,
for then a deaf care, and an hardened heart may meet together. Plurimum
momenti habet celeritas. Plut. in Apoph.
In commendable things, Celerity is of the greatest consequence, as Julius
Caesar was wont to say. O that thou which must account for time, dare make
bold with the next new Moon. Must thou not reckon for every week? Mamentum non
^eribit de tempore. Bein.
Yes, not a moment shall perish. Mark then how the shadows do decline upon the
Dial; yea consider every dropping of the Hourglass. Let not God stay thy
leisure, have not a post dayed repentance. Rise out of bed at the first cocks
crowing, put on thy armor, when the Trumpet does sound away to the March. Must
gray hairs teach thee repentance? wilt not leave chanting with the world, till
the Daughters of singing be abased? Can not feel the weight of sin till the
Grasshopper be a burden? wilt come so often to Church with an uncircumcised
spirit? or leave the Pulpit with a flinty heart? Does the Preacher but plow
upon a Rock, or wash a Morian? Is the Day Star yet to arise, which should give
light enough to the world to see thee a penitent? Is the Minister yet to be
born, that should preach to thee thy conversion-Sermon? did never yet hear a
solemn warning? were never present at an affectuall call? Does the Plowman plow
all the day to sow? does he open and break the clods, and no fruit appear upon
the ground? Isai. 28.24. Has the Minister sweat, and yet do thou chil
inwardly has he preached himself hoarse, and yet has he not spoken loud
enough to thy conscience? Art not confounded at the thought of so much
neglected doctrine? do not fear the curse of so much disesteemed counsel?
have thou an heart which cannot repent? or will thou repent when there is no
place left for repentance? Should repentance be the last act of thy life? or
should thy first souls-search begin at the last gasp? No, if thou have heard
but one penitential cry, thou should look upon thy self with terror, that
thou art yet to be humbled or cleansed. Thou art not often called upon to take
thy Rents, to lay hold on an inheritance; then why should thou weary so many
Pastors, kill so many Preachers, to call upon thee to be penitent? No,
Repentance should be timely, speedy, or else the professor is worse then the
Ninevits, for Jonah does but begin to cry, and Nineveh is converted.

6. Sin has her stirring motions; for was there only the shaking of ears at
Jonah's Sermon? No, there was the shaking of limbs; the cry will not suffer
them to receive the message upon their seats, they are driven to stand up to
it, for I read of a Rising, chapter 3. v. 6. So repentance should quicken men, and
put them upon spiritual addresses. Omnis virtus in action consistit. Cic. l.
1. Officiorum. Imperfectum and languidum bonum est. Senec. de vit. beat. c. 22.
All virtue does consist in action. That good which does go no further then a
conception, is imperfect and languishing. They are blamed which do not frame
their hearts to turn to the Lord, Hos. 5.4. An heart-touch is not enough, there
must be an heart-frame, the judgment must not only be enlightened, but the
affections must be inclined; that is a fruitless Sermon where all ends in
motions, and men go not beyond incentives: Gods messages must call us up, and
set us to work; for Arise, and be doing, 1 Chronicles. 22.16. They must put us into
the right way, and make us mind our steps, and expatiate in endeavors; We must
follow on to know the Lord, Hos. 6.3. There are many distances to be gone in
Religion, therefore we must stretch out our selves toward that which is
before, Phil. 3.13. Else Agrippa might have been a Saint, for he had some
warnings in him; and Felix might have been a penitent, for he had his
tremblings. Oh what shall we say then to them, which perhaps do receive the
warning, but all their repentance does lie in their ears? they attend to the
cry, but they do not arise from their seats? Is it enough to see God angry, and
not to pacify his displeasure? No, this is but to take notice of the sadness
of the times, or to receive the bruit of impending misery, the main thing is to
dispose our selves to prevent a judgment. Therefore as we apprehend the
misery, so we must apply the remedy, prepare for action, do something to avert
the punishment: In Niveneh there was a warning, and a stirring, a crying, and a
Rising.

7. Greatness is not thought on: for this cry does not only make the ears of
the vulgar to tingle, but the consternation is entered into the palace, he
which sat in the Throne, and wore the Robe, is made to forget his Throne, and
Robe; he does not only move with the rest, but he does rise with the first,
For word came to the King of Niveveh, and he arose from his Throne, and laid
aside his Robe. And so the voice of the Lord should break the Cedars, and make
them leap like a calf, yea Lebanon, and Shirion, like the young Unicorne; the
mightiest should have their judgement-frayes, and shiver under Gods threatened
plagues. Antidotum ad versus Caesarem. Sucton. Feriunt summos fulgura montes.
Horace.
Is there any antidote against Caesar? any preservative against divine wrath?
No, Gods lightnings strike upon the highest mountains. What is a Throne to
him, that has built his stories in the Heavens? What is a Robe to him, that is
clothed with jealousy as with a garment? Can a golden Scepter fright away a
judgment? or all the Jewels of the Crown redeem a man from vengeance? shall
the munition of Rocks be a safe defense? Shall thou reign because thou dwell
in Cedar? No, God takes Kings by the Collar, and hurls them under his feet; he
does smite the great house with breaches, and make the houses of Ivory to
perish. That great Pharaoh that asked, Who is the Lord, that I should hear his
voice? shall hear ere long, Who is Pharaoh? that would match his princely lips
to the lips of the Almighty? Oh then, that many were not enclosed in their own
fat, and infatuated with their Chariots of Glory, as if they should out-runne,
and out-ride all miseries; yes they have lost their sight with glaring too much
upon their glistering heaps, and their senses by drinking too deeply out of
the intoxicated Cup of abundance; like Licinius, because they have so much
ground, Plut.
that a Kite cannot fly over it, they fear no dangers; and like Charles the
8th of France, because they have great Riches to trust to, Tametsi neque manu,
neque consilio multum valeret, maximis tamen opulenti regni viribus innisus,
armis atque ausu plurimum confidit. Jovius. lib. 1. Tristor.
they distrust not to be happy against all accidents: these high-to wring
Eagles which have built a loft, think their nests shall never be pulled down;
these fat Bulls of Basan, which graze in the green pastures, never look that
they shall be taken by the horns, and flayed; these great Leviathans which
swim in the vast Ocean of greatness, never expect that the harping iron shall
be darted into their sides, and that they shall be played withal like a bird,
bound for the Maids; that the basket shall be filled with their skins, and the
fish-pannier with their heads. The rich man's goods are his strong confidence,
Prove. 10.15. They which dwell in the clefts of the Rocks, say, Who shall bring
us down? Obad. 3. These never Rise, forsake the Thron, and cast away the Robe.
It is an hard thing to see these Chuffes tremble in a Temple, or to let fall an
eylid, or to bruise a breast before the most mortifying Preacher. Pashur, that
is a Governor, never thinks that he shall be a slave, and that his name
shall be Mager-missabib, Fear round about: the Prince of Tyrus, which was of
perfect beauty, and shone upon earth like an anointed Cherub, which sat his
seat by the seat of God, which sealed up the sum, walked as in Eden, where
every precious stone was his covering, never imagined that he should have been
un-Numen'd, be made a man, and not God, and that he should dye the death of
them, which are slain in the midst of the sea. There lies hid a kind of
sorcery in the Throne, the Robe is a kind of enchanted vesture; how many might
have sit in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, were it not for this Throne,
and might have been arrayed in the pure and fine linen, which is the
righteousness of the Saints, had it not been for this Robe? Do we not see,
that an upper seat in the Congregation, a scarlet Coat, a sumptuous building, a
large Rentail, Parks, and Fishponds, Lordships, and Royalties, make men contemn
all Doctrine, and scorn the most devout Messengers? If Eliah does reprove such,
he is made to fly the Country; if Jeremiah does deliver his errand freely to
such, it is enough to have his prophecy cut in pieces with a penknife; if
Cyrill meddle with the great Julian, he shall be hewn a sunder in the middle,
and his liver eaten up by the Heathens; Theodoret. l. 3. c. 6.
if Ignatius reprehend Bardas for his vicious life, and tell him judgments
hang over his head, he shall be locked up into a Sepulcher for many years,
afterward banished, and at last slain. Cuspinian.
The high-crested worlding cannot endure a check: the Throne, and the Robe,
make men conceive themselves superior to all reproofs; how do they snuff and
snarle, fume and rage, show their tusks, and put out their stings, look like
Leopards, and sparkle like Basilisks, if they be but rebuked, or threatened? A
Jonahs cry against them fills all the Country with tumults; they storm upon
their Thrones, and defy in their Robes, yea, vow by the honor of their
Thrones, Here rich men in general are only meant.
and Robes, that they will be revenged; a man had better anger all the Witches,
and Conjurers, provoke all the Centaures, and Minotaures in the world, then to
menace this haughty spirited generation. The Devil has his strongest chains
upon rich men's heels, he is most Prince, where disdeignfull men sit in the
Throne, or wear the Robe: He has thrust fees into these men's hands to oblige
them to him, and given them a salary to make them his Stipendaries; he has an
Incorporation of Cosmopolites, an Host of Lucre-worms; oh the golden wedge does
weigh heavily, the fat portion is a sweet morsel, For riches a man will sell
his Soul; how few can separate themselves from this fair Concubine? or stop
their ears against this Syrinx? no, where there are painted Portalls, seeled
Parlours, Warehouses, Wardrobes, Deeds, deb-books, Gemms, and Jewels it is a
difficult thing to unlock a door to let in regeneration, or to open a casement
to look toward Heaven. But oh beloved, why do men thus fetter their affections
to greatness? or live contentedly in this lofty, and well freezed Prison? Have
rich men no Souls to save? or will their riches secure them against Divine
vengeance? cannot God cast down thy Throne? and tear in pieces thy Robe? smite
thee upon the Throne? and strip thee naked for all thy Robe? is a golden
nightcap an head piece? and a velvet jacket, a breast plate against his
judgments? why then does not greatness stoop as well as penury? and listen as
well as indigency? yes, the cry from Heaven ought to be as shrill to thee, as
to the ears of the most despicable. Oh therefore, when God does denounce
plagues, forget the Throne, and the Robe, trample the world under thy feet,
look with an eye of neglect upon all pomp, and splendor, and be as active to
quiver up Gods arrows, and to sheath up his sword, as he that does grind at the
Mill, or does crouch for a piece of silver in the streets; this is to imitate
Nineveh, yea, the greatest in Nineveh, for Word came to the King of Nineveh,
and he arose from his Throne, and laid his Robe from him.

8. An humble dress: for the King of Nineveh does not only lay off his Robe,
but cover himself with sackcloth. Did the King of Nineveh so, and shall not our
Penitents be tied to as much humility? will they be Penitents, and not part
with a new fashion? or loose a new fangle? does the King of Nineveh put off the
Robe, and do these put it on? does he cover himself with sackcloth, and do
these cover themselves with silks, and Sattins, cloth of silver, and gold? what
be as sumptuous as Lords? as gorgeous as Princes? and yet is this dread of
judgments? dismayed repentance? oh feat converts! oh spruse Penitents! They
that wear soft raiment are in Kings Courts, Luctuosus habitus. Jeron. Vince
ves^em. Cyp. de habit. Virg.
but repentance has no such glistering Gallants; no this is rather a
Correction-house, then a Stage; a Whipping-post then a Wardrobe. Where there is
true humiliation for sin, there must be a mournful habit. If thy heart be
subdued, Mollia indaumenta animi mollitiem indicant Perald. Non monilium, aut
vestium quaere ornamenta sed morum Cyp de hab. Virg.
Overcome thy garment; otherwise it will be said that thy spirit is not very
sad, thy dress is so trim; or thy conscience is not much mortified, thy back
is so gaudy. Loose attires show a dissolute mind; thou art fitter for a dance,
then dejection; for jovisance, then repentance, therefore look not for the
adoraments of jewels and vestments, but of manners. What true Penitent was
ever too busy with the Mercers shop? or minded too much the Featermaker, and
Perfumer? No, Micah does appear Stripped, and naked, Micah. 1.8. Esaias does go
harefoot. Esa. 20.2. the Israelites did not put on their ornaments, nor best
garments, Exodus 33.4. Powders, Spangles, Cuts, Jags, Frizles, Crispings,
Purple, and Crimson, are fitter for Swartrutters and Ruffians, then for true
Penitents. There is a strange talking of God, where every member of the body
does speak it self to be Absalon; or a strange chattering of repentance, where
from top to toe there is nothing to be seen but the embelished Daughter of
Herodias. I can find such Penitents at the Bacchaanals, Saturnals, and
Lupercals; yea, at the Feasts of Lucina, Cybele, and Flora. Is this the School
of mortification? no, the staircase, or tiring-room of vanity; these are
strange kind of pieces, that are inlay'd with nothing but garishnesse, or
checker-worked with pride. Are these splendid Blades, and nitid Sparks fit to
defend a Nation? Yes, with their Corslets, but not their consciences; their
rapiers, but not their repentance; I will as soon look for a protection from
Jebusites, and Pherezites (those cursed people in the Land of Promise) as from
such. They may call themselves Hectors, and Demagorgons, and indeed I think
there is some truth in the titles, for they are fitter to fright a Country then
to support it. If there were no other provocations in the Land, yet there were
fuel enough for consuming judgments, in peoples excessive and unlimited
pride. Oh our patched faces are enough to make us Monsters in Gods eyes, our
long tails to sweep all blessings out of the Nation, our powdered hair to fetch
Gods rasour to shave these besmeared locks, and if a man should search the
Wardrobes, Cabinets, Complexion bottles, a man would wonder that the flying
Book of curses had not already lighted upon this exotic Island, or that this
Theater of vanities were not burnt down with fire, Tolerabiliora in adulterio
crimina sunt; ibi enim pudicitia, hic natura adlteratur. Aug. de verbis Dom.
and brimstone from Heaven. There are more tolerable things to be found in the
Stews, then amongst these Ravishers of manners; for there modesty is but
corrupted, but here nature. Away therefore with these fine, superfine guises;
repentance does admit of no such garbs. If thou conceivest therefore that God
does threaten the Nation, make thy tiring room to be sensible of it, let Jonahs
cry fetch all thy new fashions from thy back; Is this a time to take Vineyards,
and Oliveyards, and Figtrees? so, is this a time for tersing, and sprusing, and
flaunting? No, this is a time to rend, and not to sew. Eccles. 3.7. God does
call now to baldness, and sackcloth. Es. 22.12. Attire your selves therefore
in your judgment suits, and cloth your selves in your visitation rags. When
Jonah does preach destruction, the King of Nineveh does not keep State, no he
has little Imperial seen about him, he does lay aside his Rohe, and cover
himself with sackcloth.

9. An height of abasement. For the King of Nineveh does not leave his Throne
to take up an inferior Chair, for this had been but to change seats, but he
does take up his place where a bondsman in another case would not have rested
himself; He was a King, but he does couch down with the Caytiffe, for he sat
upon ashes.

And to be Penitent I must sprinkle you with these ashes, nay, prepare you a
low stool upon these ashes. Job abhorred himself in ashes. Job. 42.6. and
Daniel humbled himself in ashes. Dan. 9.3. Repentance has never bowed you low
enough, till it has thrown you upon the ground, and cast you upon the ashes,
that ye might think your selves as base as ashes, and that there is no higher
price to be set upon you then ashes. Oh what self-contemning expressions do we
find in all them, which have turned but an eye to Heaven? Elizabeth the famous
wife of the Landgrave of Hesse, after her conversion forgot all state, and
dignity, and fashioned her self after the manner of a poor woman, Ad
pauperculae morem se componebat and quoties ad licelesiam Evangelicae
praedicationis gratia^ accessit, non nisi inter insimas mulieres considebat.
Sabellic. l. 8. c. 5. Vest, voce, habitu, incessu ut minima crat. Jeron. in
Epitaph. Paulae. Humi sedebat, and panem suum provolutus in terram gemitu
comedit. Marul. lib. 1. c. 8.
and whenever she went to Church to hear Gods word, she sat amongst the
lowest women. Paula the great Matron of Rome, when she went to Bethleem, was so
altered, that a man would not have thought her to be the same woman, she was so
changed in vesture, voice, habit, and gate, that she seemed to be one of the
meanest. Francis the Father of the Minors, because Christ was laid in a cratch,
was wont for the most part to sit upon the ground, and grovelong to eat his
meat groaning. So repentance has never wrought her effectual work upon thee,
till it has pulled the admiring eye out of thy head, and the proud heart out
of thy bosom; Abnegation, or self-denial, is the penitents necessary lesson.
Is there any thing more unseemly, then to see a lofty spirited convert? Perit
homo amando se, hic invenitur negando se Aug. ser. 48. de diverse. Si intelligas
quid sit alium abnegare lunc percipies, quid sit abnegare teipsum. Chrysostom. hom.
50. in Mat. Si ipse esset, pius profecto non esset, Greg in Evang. hom. 32. Qui
me desiderat seipsum despiciat, qui vult facere meam voluntatem discat negare
suam. Pern. sermon. de S. Andrea.
the crucifyng nails of repentance will not suffer the flesh to live in
magnifying desires of it self. Blessed are the poor in spirit. Man does
perish in loving himself, he is preserved in denying himself. If thou
understandest what it is to deny another, thou will then apprehend what it is
to deny thy self. It was an high word of St. Paul, to say, No longer I live,
but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2 20. A man to be quick, and yet expired, to be
seen of all, heard of all, saluted by all, and yet no Paul: yet thus it was,
Saul was gone, and St Paul does come in the stead; or not he living, but Christ
lived in him; and indeed, if he had still been himself, he himself had not
been godly. If any one will come after me, let him deny himself. He must take
the great man out of his eye, and streyn the worthy out of all parts of him. If
Christ does leave a man his skin, he does not leave him his will; for He which
desires Christ must despise himself, and he which would do Christ's will, he
must renounce his own. And thus ye see, how repentance does not only
anatomize, but atomize you, naught you, nusquam you, null you. All high
conceits, and glorious, vainglorious, imaginations of your selves are gone. Oh
thou penitent, so soon as ever thou deniest thy self, thou losest thy self;
for what art thou? a Perpusillus, a Nanus, a Nemo, a Demi, a Dwarf, a very
Nobody. Thou which were a bright Candle, art now a snuff; thou which were a
spread flower, art now a dry leaf; thou which were a pearl, art now ashes: Oh
therefore upon the day of thy repentance, let high birth, high crests, high
looks, high titles, all elate, inflate, lofty, stately, imaginating,
engrandising, preheminencies, and privileges be forgotten, and count thy self
the bran of the boulter, the sweepings of the floor, a scuttle, a spanfull of
ashes; sift thy self into these ashes, and sit upon ashes, for thou see how
the great King of Nineveh, by this loud-cry of Jonas, does see that if Gods
jugdements should calcine him, and his City, what a Caput mortuum, and terra
damnata, should be left of them; therefore whatsoever his Throne was before, ye
see now his penitential stool; He sat upon ashes.

10. A restraint of Delicacies; for here is a Fast proclaimed, and a fast kept.
Repentance must not run to the Dresser, or step into the Cook-roome, or sit
down in the banqueting house, revell, and riot, quaffe and carowse, whilst men
are preventing a shipwreck, quenching a sire, pacifying an incensed God, and
averting eminent judgments: no, it is much that a wounded conscience can have
an eager appetite, or bended knees, can creep to the Pantry, or watery eyes can
look out for Feasts. Spread Tables, variety of Services, Chargers, Flagons,
eating Lambs out of the Flock, feeding without fear, drinking wine with a
song, do not agree with repentance; these things are fitter for Sardanapalus,
Heliogabalus, then for the Penitent. Repentance must not hunger after the
Creature, whilst she is soliciting the Creator; nor come to her appetite,
whilst her stomach is full of the sense of sin, and divine wrath; let her earn
her bread, and do her work, before she does sit down at the Table: She is to
stretch out her hands indeed, but not to receive what the Feastmaker shall
carve out; she is to open her mouth, but not for dainties; she has a diet of
her own (Humiliation-bread) and let her feed upon that; she has a Cup of her
own (the penance-goblet) and let her drink of that; when she is preserving of
life, let her not mind too much nourishing of nature; when she is freeing her
self from destruction, let her not be too intent upon Belly-chear: Can the
Mariner gorge himself, when the tempest is coming? or the Soldier eat, when
the enemy does look him in the face? or the Penitent be at his repast, when
vengeance does blow her trumpet? no, then let men not eat, but abstain; not
feed, but fast. It is a day of atonement, Number. 31.50. therefore it must not be
a day of pampering; Mucore suo. Pro corporis castigatione cessatio a cibo. Aug
de fide ad Petr. Semper virtuti jejunium cibus fuit. Leo in ser. de Jejun. dec.
Mensis. Paenitentia a licitis caute se restringit. Greg 5. Moral. jejunium
humilitatem commendat, Praestat homini seipsum intelligere. Aug. ser. de Jejun.
remedium salutis, radix gratiae. Amb. de Elia and Jejunio. Paenitens sine
jejunio est sicut miles sine gladio. Chrysostom. in Mat. 6.
of afflicting our souls, Levit. 16.29. therefore it must not be of satiating
the flesh; of rolling our selves in dust, Micah. 1.10. therefore it must not be
of surfeiting our selves with excess. Though at other times men's mouths may be
satisfied with good things, and they may eat of the fat, and drink of the
sweet, yet then they must not eat the bread of men, Ezech. 24.17. but like the
Cephalus, they must live with their own moisture; there must be for the
chastisement of the body, a cessation from food. Always fasting (at such
times) was the diet to virtue. Our daily bread is not to be thought on, when we
are begging pardon for our daily trespasses; then repentance must refrain from
things lawful. We must show our selves the servants of God in fasting, 2 Cor.
6. we must sanctify a meeting, and call a fast, Joel. 2. David's knees were
weak with fasting, Psalm. 109.24. The Israelites fasted all day till night,
Judge. 20. Ester and her maidens fasted three whole days together, Ester 4.
Fasting does testify humility, and it is singular to make a man understand
himself. It is a remedy of health, and a root of grace. A penitent without
fasting, is like a Soldier without his sword. Apelles the Egyptian Monk, was
wont to hew his body with fastings, as one does timber with the axe. Hilarion
would feed his body with chafe, and not with provender, lest the beast should
grow too lusty; St. Jerome says, that Asella used fasting for a recreation;
Euphraxia would teach her body to fast extremely, that she might dream rather
of meat, than abominations. How does it grieve me to think that the Altar of
Aridalus could not be approached, nor people could not be initiated under the
Goddess Isis, without high preparatory fasts, and that we think to get our
admission under God with voraginous paunches, and soaked gullets, as if we
would have God to seal our pardon in the Larder. But we must not have the crumbs
hanging between our teeth, when we are petitioning for mercy; nor belch in Gods
face with our full stomachs, when we are begging for life; no, hollow cheeks,
sunk eyes, gnawing bowels, macerated sides, fainting spirits, are better then
swollen faces, swallowing throats, reeking stomachs, eyes starting out with
fatness. Does Nineveh seek to appease Gods wrath by sitting down by her
fleshpots? eating bread to the full? turning over their bowls? wallowing in
her vomit? no, the dread of Gods judgments has shut up all their Pantries,
locked up all their Cellers, the whole City does sit like an Anchorite, there
is no pleasant bread to be gotten, neither flesh nor wine come into their
mouths; to free themselves from stripes, they chasten themselves before the
Lord; to procure mercy, they proclaim a Fast.

11. The whole strength is put to the work; for Nineveh does not act singly,
but the generality is called on, King, Nobles, Citizens, and all sorts of men.
And indeed where the danger is common, there ought to be an unanimous
prevention. A defective assistance is next to absolute carelesseness. If the
Iron be blunt put more strength to it, that a joint endeavor may set an edge
upon gracious attempts, we should be knit together as one man, Judge. 20.11. and
lift as it were with one shoulder, Zeph. 3.9. Joseph was angry, when one
Benjamin was but wanting, so it is a greevance in a religious design, when the
whole kindred do not meet; a work of importance should have a joint
advancement, if they be of the same fee, they should come to do their suit and
service with us; where all are interessed, every one should send in their
supply. In that renowned meeting at Shiloh, about the accident at Gibeah, All
the children of Israel, and all the people came to the house of God and wept,
and sat there before the Lord, and fasted, and offered burnt-offerings, and
peace offerings unto the Lord, Judge. 20.26. In Esters humiliation, Mordecai,
and all the Jews in Sushan, and Ester, and all her maids fasted, Ester. 4. In
that great pacification enjoined in the 2. of Joel. The people are summoned,
the Congregation called, the Elders gathered, and not so much as the Bride, or
Bridegroom exempted. The Stone in Scyros if it be cast into a River, being
whole it does flote above water, ^lin. l. 36. c. 17.
but if it be broken it does sink to the borome; so united devotion is
powerful, but divided ineffectuall; if we would have the Boat goon happily, we
must row alike at the Oar. Pariter remum ducere. Aristoph. D^on.
Eleas said of the Lacedaemonians, that Target stuck to Target, and Helmet to
Helmet, and so indeed we should all serve together in the same virtuous
resolution. Philopaemanes was wise, Plut.
who built a Temple to Jupiter Plitorius, where all should meet to agree about
the same commendable action: and such a Temple (though not to such a God) were
fit for us, where all worshippers might congregate together, to promote
religious undertakings with an holy combination; that Physic does work best,
where none of the ingredients are wanting, but there is a perfect compound. A
sad thing it is, that when some are upon their knees, others should be walking
after their pleasures; when some are seeking of God, others should be seeking
of their booties; when some are shedding of tears, others should be singing of
catches; when some are fasting, others should be juncating: what do this show
but collateral winds, one blowing against another? or mutinous Soldiers,
turning their weapons one upon another? doubtless such a land is splay-footed,
or such a Church does look asquint. Therefore let there be an harmony in pious
intentions, what one builds, let not another pluck down, what one lays a
foundation for, let not another undermine; but where the hazard is public,
let there be a public union to eschew the peril; here ye see all Nineveh was
incorporated into the same reconciling act, all joining together, King, Nobles,
Citizens, and all sorts of persons.

12. A memorable thing done in repentance: for the Ninevites made their Beasts
to fast, and wear sackcloth: and shall Nineveh do this, and we do nothing to
imitate the president? Profaneness can bring forth prodigious things, and
shall repentance bring forth no eminent things? we can find Monsters in the
one, and shall we not Mirrours in the other? was Phidias known by his image?
Archimedes by his engines? Architas Tare^tinus by his Cube? Flavius Melphitanus
by the Card and Compass? Plato de repub. Petrus Cieza. l. 2. Rerum Indic. c. 9.
and shall repentance be known by nothing that is illustrious? Have seals
their stamps, odours their sents, elixirs their virtues; and shall there be no
print, perfume, operation, whereby repentance may be discerned and
distinguished? Shall this newborn have upon the birthday not be lovely
shaped? shall this Diamond at the first cutting have no luster? shall this
metal when it does come hot out of the Mint, not be purely refined? do we
strive to be ingenious Students, politic Merchants, sagacious Statesmen,
redoubted Captains, and but vulgar Penitents' Yes, if in other things we are
choice, here we should excel; if in other things we are laudable, here we
should be incomparable; in this we should be in our prime, show our selves most
elaborate, yea set forth repentance as our Masterpiece. Do we not find
repentance thus adorned every where in scripture? yes, look upon the repentance
at Bochim, Mizpeh, Hadadrimmon, the repentance of David, Job, Mary Magdalen, St
Peter, and St Paul, and see how repentance is dignified and illustred; and find
we not these marks of honor amongst other religious penitents? Yes, peruse a
whole Catalogue of them Godfrey of Bononia, being the first that scaled the
walls of Rome, whereupon happened an heavy slaughter, he was so afflicted for it,
that he wished he could wash out this guilt of that blood with the blood of
Saracens. Godfrey of Loraine, Aemil. l. 5.
having burnt a Church at Verdun, he was so troubled for it, that he built
another at his proper charges, and would often labor in the Masons work with
his own hands. Aurea a Virgin of Paris, Schafna burgenfis.
having reconciled her self to God, she lived afterward a very severe life,
and built her a seat, Marulus. l. 4. c. 11.
where she might have fifty Psalms at her right hand, and fifty at her left
hand, and fifty at her back to meditate upon. Charles Earl of Valois, having by
false accusation destroyed Enguerra Marignan, being visited with sickness, he
did so lament this fact, that he not only procured his body to be taken down
from the Gibbet, and solemnly interred, Fulgosus.
but he neglected no duty of Religion, no charity to the poor, nor passionate
humiliation to expiate this foul crime. Starchatherus, a valiant Champion,
having slain virtuous Olo in a bath, such an horror came upon him, Tantus
horror incessit. John. Magn. l. 8. c. 12.
that he was ready to drop down dead, and spent out his whole life afterward
in a most anxious manner. Hermannus bishop of Prague being converted, he
bewailed that he had spent more time in Princes Courts, than in the Temple,
Dubrav. l. 11.
and was infinitely grieved that he had been more conniving, then resolute
against sin, vowing for time to come, Vt peccatum, quod loquendo contraxerat,
acendo emendaret Gennad.
to be (as he proved) the glass of Penitents. Severus Sulpitius, being deluded
by the Pelagians, seeing his error, he afterward enjoined himself perpetual
silence, that that sin which he had contracted by speech, he might correct it
by holding his peace. Thais of Alexandria, after she had renounced her lustful
life, was ever such a dejected creature, that she durst never mention the name
of God, but only said, Oh thou which have made me, Qui plasmasti me, misere
mei. Sabel. l. 5. c. 5.
have mercy of me. Lewis, Landgrave of H^sse, having lost his way in an
hunting, he was enforced to lie in a Wood-makers house, where the Wood maker,
not knowing the Landgrave, expressed most sharp language against him, with
which the Landgrave was so struck, In posterum vitain suam, and Aulicorum mire
emendavit. Cytiac. Spangenberg. in venatorio Diabolo.
that he afterward most rigidly [reformed his own life, and the lives of his
Courtiers, and died a most exemplary Prince. Was this the repentance of former
ages, and do we only preserve the scabbard, and have no keen blade left in it?
were these our Predecessors, and Progenitors as it were, and have we buried
all of them, but their names? then pity it is that we should have any of our
Ancestors gold, if we have none of their graces; or that we should possess
their revenews, if we have embezled their repentance; or that we should enjoy
their Redeemer, if we have rejected their Reconciliation. What shall a naked,
titular, ironicall, histrionicall, Mathematical repentance content us? what is
our Repentance? what memorable thing is there evident in it? oh that we could
think on it without a partial heart, or look on it without an hypocrites eye.
Alas, we do but only observe a day of Church-meeting, look upon God with a brow
of familiarity, stand up as if we would prescribe laws to Heaven for agreement,
wrimple at a Pulpit-launcing, fill our ears with Panegyricks of Jerusalem, or
sarcasms' against Babylon, sing a Penitential Psalm, or hear an artificial
Lecturer. Now, is this Rachel that ye have served so long for? No, the wrong
party does lay by your sides, a very blear-eyed Creature, in the morning you
will find it to be Leah. Oh umbrage of humiliation, and walking ghost of
repentance! Repentance is a joining our selves to the Lord in a perpetual
Covenant Jer. 50.5. and shall this Covenant be sealed, and signed without
binding Articles on our side? It is a returning to our first husband. Hos. 2.7.
and dare we return to our former husband without a new plighting of that
fidelity, which we promised at our first espowsalls? It is a rising from the
dead, Ephesians. 5.14. and can we come out of our graves without
resurrection-cheeks? It is a translating of us into the Kingdom of his dear
Son, Col. 1.13. and shall we be carried no further to Heaven, then a
throat-puffe, or a lungpipe-pant can blow us? Oh beware, these Temple larves,
Congregation Mummeries will do us little good. We must be other men, and more
expressive men, then ever we were before; we must declare something that is
signal, yea, set up a Monumental repentance, the Ninivites did so, they made
their Beasts to fast, and wear sackcloth.

13. An anguish for sin: for how is Nineveh at her contrition? She is turned a
most disconsolate Creature, every street of the City does proclaim her Mourner,
yea, every gesture, and motion does testify her sad apprehension of sin; there
is nothing to be seen it, but afflicting buffets, it does echo with
ejulations, and is drenched, and showred with tears. So a true Penitent should
be the troubled Creature of his age, the sight of sin should daunt him, yea,
exanimate him; this childbirth must be in sorrow, this ague must be with a
shaking sit, this fining with an absolute melting. The Sun should not seem to
shine upon the day of thy repentance, no, there must be a clowded sky, a black
eclipse, dark mists, tempests, and thunder to be discerned. He is a strange
Penitent, that does not change countenance, that does feel no inward gripes,
and has not every heart-string aching. The humbled spirit must be a contrite
spirit, Nullus potest nobam inchoare vitam, nisi eum veteris vitae poeniteat.
Aug. de medic. Poenit, c. 2. poenitentia est poenae tenentia. Nav. Poenitentia
est punientia, Sylvest. prier. Erubescentia de peccato. Rich. in 4. did. 18.
q. 4. ad 3. Est vindista quaedam, semper puniens in se, quod dolet commisisse.
Aug. de vera, and falsa poen. c. 8. tom. 4.
repentance cannot be without godly sorrow. No man can begin a new life, but he
which is afflicted for his life past. Repentance is a torturing with pain, or
Repentance is a chastising punishment. There must be a blushing for sin. Yea it
is a self-avengement, whereby a man is ever correcting in himself, that which
he feels with distress he did commit. Thus then ye see how repentance does
pierce, and pinch, grind the heart, and soak the eyes at the first entrance;
Contrition is full of collisions, and convulsions, rough waves, and rushing
Surges, sparkling and scaldings, bosom-thrillings, and eye-drippings; A true
Penitent is brought to the Aliar, and would even make a sacrifice of himself,
he seems to have no more life left in him, but to vent out his own anxiety;
there must be the torment of sin in repentance, that which the infernal
spirits should do below, a contrite spirit must here perform; the Penitent for
a time must feel the Chains of darkness, the gnawing worm, the fiery lake, the
weeping, and gnashing of teeth; if he would not suffer the everlasting curses,
he must try what a Tophet he can raise up in his own conscience. Oh my gentle
Penitent, I know not how to comfort him; the insensible Sinner does go for an
impenitent, the remorseles for a Reprobate; he that has not a rent heart, has
a Pharohs heart; they which are not weary and heavy laden, I find no
refreshments for them; as Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance, so no more did he ever open his lips to invite them, which are not
conscious of their own unrighteousness; there are no plasters but for
smarting wounds, nor wine but for the sorrowful, nor breasts of consolation but
for the crying children, nor garment of beauty, but for the spirit of
heaviness; God does light up his candle to none but those which sit in
darkness, nor cast out his Anchor to none but where the Ship does crack, and
is ready to sink; he does lift up only the hands which hang down, and
strengthen only the weak knees; he does hold only the aching temples, and wipe
only the blubbered cheeks. They whose hearts are as fat as brawn, and as hard
as the nether millstone, which are at ease in Sion, settled upon their lees,
frozen in their dregs, whose eyes are blind, their ears uncircumcised, and
consciences seared with an hot iron, which cannot answer crimes with cries, nor
provocations with vexations, let them perish in their steely, and flinty
condition; Let the brokenhearted only be bound up, consolations be shed into
the breast of them, which recount their sins in bitterness of soul, let the
golden Thau be set only upon the foreheads of the Mourners of Jerusalem; let
the distressed Publican only depart out of the Temple justified; let Paradise
be promised only to the penitent thief. Shall the childrens bread be cast unto
dogs? shall God feed the secure with the dainties of the perplexed? It is an
easy matter to rise out of bed, but is it so to rise out of sin? to put on
garments, but is it so to put on the Robe of innocence? to get an interest in
nature, but is it so to get an interest in Heaven? It is an easy matter to
take up a Bible, to walk to Church, to pen down a Sermon, to profess the
Gospel, to Saint a fancied cause, but is it an easy matter to repent? No, is
it a difficult thing to fight a Battle, and not to obtain this conquest? to run
a race, and not to win this prize? to pacify man's wrath, and not to appease
Gods indignation? Yes, oh that thou saw, how a Sinner must be broken in
pieces, before he can procure his reconciliation! does repentance require no
passions? yes, greater then those of Esau for the loss of his birthright, or
those of the Egyptians for the slaughter of their firstborn. Oh the
sharp-pointed weapon of compunction! oh the grinding millstone of contrition!
this red Sea, and Wilderness must be past before the desired Canaan can be
entered; the Penitent must lie (as it were) for a while in Hell, and feel,
though not specifically, yet analogically some of the torments of the damned,
Initium omnis peccati est superbia, per quam homo sensui suo inherens a
mandatis divinis recedit, and ideo ^portet, quod illud destruit peccatum
hominem a proprio sensiu discedere faciat. Ille autem qui in suo sensu
perseverat, rigidus and durut vocatur, unde and frangi dicitur aliquis, quando
a suo sensu divellitur. Tho. Suppl. q. 1. art. 1.
before he can have a sense of inward satisfaction; For the beginning of all
sin is pride, whereby a man cleaving to his own senses does recede from Gods
commandments, therefore it is fit that these senses should be punished, yea,
that that hardness which is contracted by sin should be broken, and shivered;
for that contrition might annihilate the sin, it must even almost annihilate
the sinner; therefore it is styled a comminution of him; not only a sensitive
passion, but a spiritual contusion; there must not only be attrition with a
little diminution, but contrition with an absolute dissipation, for there is
divisio ad minima, a division, or demolition to the least sherd, shiver, or
dust. For the object of contrition being guilt, and every guilt requiring his
proper grief, how eager had that contrition need to be, that is to be exercised
about all these sins? all the sorrows of nature are not like to the griefs of a
penitent in respect of displicency; but only in respect of the exterior
anguish; nature may exceed in her griefs, but contrition as it is essentially
seated in the intellective appetite, cannot be dolor nimius, too great a grief.
All which serve to show what a salt, and brackish Sea must flow into a penitent
Soul. I read of the Mahometans, that they must drink of a bitter water, before
they are permitted to go up to the Mountain of Pardons; sure I am my Penitent
must drink of his Marah, before the sweet tree can be cast in. Repentance
cannot be without remorse, Nineveh is a Mourner.

14. An acknowledgement of sin: for what are these dolorous transitions, but
silent publications of sin? yes, Nineveh is at her shrift, and brought to open
confession; for in the 3. chapter v. 8. she does speak out, and is not sparing to
lay open her evil ways; What then, can a concealer of sin be a true Penitent?
no, He that hides his sins shall not prosper. Prove. 28.13. It is to shame
repentance to have her born dumb, or not to have her tongue-string cut. I will
go, and return to my place till they acknowledge their sault. Hos. 5.15. God
does live at a distance from the mute Penitent. Cain was a Runagate, Saul's
Kingdom was rent from him, Judas was cast out as a Son of perdition, because
none of these would confess sincerely, what they were privy to. Where is thy
brother Abel? I cannot tell, says the first, Genesis 4.9. Wherefore had thou
not obeyed the voice of the Lord, but have turned to the prey, and have done
wickedly in the sight of the Lord? I have obeyed the voice of the Lord, and
gone the way which he sent me, says the second, 1 Samuel 15.19. One of you shall
betray me. Master is it I, says the third. Matt. 26.25. Oh it is a dangerous
thing for men to be strangers to their own sins, which they have been most
familiar with, that they should neither have an eye to discern them, nor a
tongue to discover them. What not reveal that, which thou have made most
public to Gods eye? but suppress disobedience, as if the searcher of hearts
could not find it out? No, Repentance has none of these clanculary courses,
but it does bring forth her stolen goods, when the thief is sought after; and
open the Castle gates, when God does come to summon the Rebel, saying, I am
the man, these have been my handy-works, thus cries the Penitent; for where
there is remorst, there ought not only to be a reflection, but detection, not
only contrition, but confession. For sin is never thoroughly apprehended, till
we have consitentem reum, Accusatio sul. Tolet. 3. l. c. 6. Execrando malum
sibi imputat Lumb. l. 4. did. 15. Vulnera nutrit, qui tegit. Paschas. l. 3.
Paschal.
the guilty man acknowledging his error, yea, till there be an accusation of a
man's self. A Penitent by execrating evil he does impute it to himself. For how
does a man expel sin, but by casting it out at his lips? He does nourish his
wounds, which does hide them. Yea, this must not be a formal repetition of e
rours in the general, but every trespass which does come to his knowledge,
must be rehearsed upon the tongu's end, mon simplex per deodum historiae se bet
esse maninistatio; haec ea m potius esset eccusatio quam ixcusatio. Tolet 3. c.
8.
otherwise confession were rather before God an Accusation, then an Excusation.
Oh therefore unravell your lives, sweep the hid corners, rake the cannels, lay
open the secrets of your hearts, and lives, disburthen your consciences, let
not sin lie rankling within, but let the festered corruption run out at the
mouth of the wound, speak out your errors, and tell out all your crimes in
Gods ears; for thus does Nineveh, she is at Confession, for she does mention
her evil ways.

15. A reparation for sin, for the Ninivites had offended God many ways, and
now they are bringing in opposite virtues to those irregular provocations; they
do return back unto God his own, as well as they can; and clear the arreerages,
as well as they are able; if they had sinned in neglecting Prophets, they will
now hear Jonah; if they had contemned judgments, they will now believe God; if
they had been too much taken with the Throne, they will now sit upon the
ash-heap; if flaunting attires had been their transgression, they will now wear
sackeloth; if they had trespassed in delicious fare, they will now fast, and
neither eat bread, nor drink water; and look through the whole series of their
proceedings, ye shall see nothing but a contradicting of their sins, and
oppugning of them with contesting virtues. And thus we ought to learn this
permuting art, to change grievances into graces; that what God has suffered
in, we endeavor to make him just satisfaction; Deus non potest recipere
damnum, sed injuriam. Molin. tr. 2. l. 3. Poster. disp. 715.
for though God can have no damage, because the greatest Tyrant cannot take
away any thing from God, for who can strike his person? Diminish his essence?
deprive him of Power, Majesty, infiniteness, and Eternity? yet God may be
wronged in his Laws, Honor, Service, and so subject to an injury; now this
injury must have some retaliation: restitution ad pondus, according to
adaequation, we cannot make; yet we should come as nigh as we can according to
a Geometrical proportion, that wherein God has suffered, there might be in us
a Contrapassion, Though Aq. 22^.61.4.
as Aquinas calls it. Satisfaction is a species of justice, and we are very
unjust, if we have raised up an enemy, and will let him go without
recompensation of the wrong. Opera paenalia.
I do not tie you to paenall works, as whipcord, cuttings, pilgrimages, and the
like, which they call electious actions, for I find not these reckoned amongst
either remedies, Opera indebita.
or duties; yet I would tie you to works established, and enjoined; Opera
sancita, and debita.
yea, to make God satisfaction as near as you can in specie, in the kind. As if
ye have sinned by ignorance, to search for wisdom as for silver; if by
indevotion, to be more frequent in the duties of worship; if by blasphemy, to
tie up your tongues to a greater reverence of Gods name, if by malice, to bear
injuries more patiently; and so to stop all the breaches of your guilts with
contrary virtues. The Corinthians Revenge is pertinent to this business. 2
Cor. 7.11. that what we have offended God in, we revenge upon our selves; thus
let God have justice done him, for Nineveh does make reparation.

16. Devout supplication: for did Nineveh repent only with penitent gestures,
and prefer no Petition? Yes, she did cry mightily unto God. And indeed I doubt
whether there be any repentance, where the Court is not moved to reverse a
sentence The Penitent must not only be supple, but a suppliant, not only
sollicitous, but a Solicitour. Why should a sinner be looked on if he will not
speak for himself? or be released, if he will not mediate for his discharge?
In that day a man shall look up to his Maker. Es. 17.7. yea, not only lift up
his eyes, but lift up a prayer. 2 Kings 19.4. that is, call passionately, crave
importunately, cry mightily; A Penitent should pierce the air with these darts,
awaken Angels with this Gunshot, conquer God with this Artillery; by prayer he
should endeavor to make the spear drop out of Gods hand, to pluck down his
Standard, to unharnesse the Lord of Hosts, to draw him to a treaty, and to get
him sign Articles of peace; Prayer should stay execution, procure a reprieve,
and bring down a pardon; when Terrors are coming forth, prayer should stop
their march; when God is levelling his arrow, it should make his bow unbend;
when he is putting a yoke about the neck of a Nation, it should make it drop
asunder: Have not the Saints in all ages thus diverted judgment? Yes, Spare
thy people oh God, and give not thy heritage over as a reproach. Joel 2.17.
Hide not thine ear at my breathing. Lam. 3.56. We beseech thee, oh Lord, we
beseech thee, let us not perish. Jonas 1.14. do not the faithful rely upon
this, as their principal refuge? Yes, Let us go speedily to pray before the
Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts. Zach. 8.21. In trouble they have visited
thee, they powered out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them. Es. 26.16.
And does not God expect thus to be courted? Yes, I will for this be enquired
of, by the house of Israel. Ezech. 36.37. I sought for a man that should make
up the hedge, and stand up in the gap for the Land, that I might not destroy
it. Ezech. 22.30. And does he not promise high success to such addresses? Yes,
If my people which are called upon by my name shall humble themselves, and
pray, and seek my face, I will hear from Heaven, and forgive their sins, and
heal their Land. 2 Chronicles. 7.14. God is pacified, so soon as the Penitent does
petition; the Father attoned, so soon as the child does cry. Wherefore criest
thou unto me? Exodus 14.25. They cried, and their cry came up to God, Exodus
26.23. He heard my cry. Ps. 40.1. I have looked upon my people because their
cry is come up to me, 1 Samuel 9.16. Oh these cries do mount beyond an Eagles
flight, they pass through guards without resistance, open the Gates of heaven
without a key, get audience when none else can be admitted, they press into
Gods privy Chamber, shake his Throne, and bind his hands; they command above,
and reign in heaven, God does yield infinitely, if men cry mightily. One
supplicatory shaft is better than a quiver of Arrows, a single Trooper of
devotion, is better then an Army of Giants. How many have filed off the fetters
of their sins, escaped out of the Keepers hands, shut up the mouth of hell, and
stood spotless amongst the pure and bright Angels, by the benefit of prayers?
The Cities of refuge, the horns of the Altar were never so secure as prayer.
Moses by lifting up his hands struck down the Amalekites, Hezekiah by crying to
Him which dwelt between the Cherubims, fetched an Angel out of heaven to
destroy an hundred fourscore and five thousand in a night; Asah by but saying,
Help O Lord, we rest on thee, and are come out against this multitude,
dispersed an Army of ten hundred thousand. By prayer, Hannahs barren womb was
made fruitful, David turned Achitophels wisdom into foolishness, the Prophet
restored Jeroboams withered hand, Eliah fetched rain from heaven, Elisha raised
the dead. By prayer then, what sins may not be pardoned? what judgments may not
be removed? Say but Lord have mercy upon me, Dicito miserere mei, and Deus
illico aderit. Chrysostom. de muliere Chanan. hom. 12. Pulsanti aperitur, si modo
pulsent ostium preces. Cyp. ad Cler. and Pleb. Ep. 8. l. 1. Orationis purae
magna est vitrus, and velut ^ldelis Nuntius peragit, and penetrat ubi caro non
pervenit. Aug. in Psalm. 65. Medici pecuniis, Deus sola oratione placatur.
Chrysostom. in 2 Mat.
and God will instantly be present. It is opened to him that knocks, if only
prayers do knock at the door. Great is the force of a pure prayer, and like a
faithful Messenger it does walk, and go whither the flesh cannot come.
Physicians are pacified with gifts, but God with prayer alone. Oh how has
prayer calmed the tempests of a troubled mind? yea stilled the noise of the
thunders at Gods judgment seat? it is a penitents balsome, and the best music
in Gods ears; it does fright Devils, and exhilarate Angels, it does cancel
bonds, cast inditements out of the Court, compromise differences, reconcile
mortal adversaries, acquit the guilty, justify sinners, cure phrensies, ease
conflicts, put songs into mourners lips, fill the breast of disconsolate souls
with ecstasies, dig Mines, fish for Pearls, fetch pensions out of Gods
Exchequer, nay draw the signet off from Gods right hand to seal Church-grants
to the faithful: so soon as this wise woman from the wall does but speak, the
City is spared; so soon as this Aligail does present her self, the whole
family is preserved; so soon as this Ester does appear, the golden Scepter is
stretched out; so soon as this Angel does come down, the waters are stirred,
and there is virtue in the pool of Bethesdah for all diseased and distressed
Creatures. Oh that devotion were but articulate, that repentance could but open
her lips, and the penitent draw up all his desires into this short Enthymeme:
this is the true sweat of our brows, whereby we should earn our bread, the
Candle which should never go out in the house of the virtuous woman to enrich
her family; yea, the key which does unlock all the chests in Gods Treasury. It
is the setting the face, whereby we might look right upon God; the foot, that
should carry us with boldness to the Throne of grace, the Altar of incense in
Gods Sanctuary; nay the golden Vial in heaven, which does send up sweet odours
into the nostrils of God. David's sling, Sampsons jawbone, the Lamps in Gideons
pitchers, never won such conquests as prayer. It has been the prop,
protection, and promotion of the Saints in all extremities. When nothing could
relieve them, prayer has comforted them; when nothing could assist them,
prayer has supplied them: Oh what wonders might be told of prayer! the Church
has not had a more happy Agent to work miracles: see a few Monuments and
Trophies set up to the honor of prayer. Fulco Earl of Anjou, being much
troubled in mind for his grievous sins, Admit Domine miserum Fulconem,
perjurum and fugitivum tuum. Aemil. an. l. 3.
flying to the sepulcher of Christ at Jerusalem, and there using these words,
Lord, admit miserable Fulco, a perjured person, and thy fugitive, presently
received souls-ease. Charles Martell being prayed for, that a secret sin of his
might be forgiven, there was a schedule found upon the Altar, which mentioned
both the sin and the pardon. Piamon beholding an Angel writing the names of
some professed men, Bergomens. l. 10.
and blotting out the names of other; he rehearsing this vision to the persons:
they which were guilty fell into such contrition, and prayed so devoutly with
Piamon, that the vision being renewed, he found the Petitioners names recorded
amongst the rest. Sabellic. l. 9. c. 5.
The three witnesses which accused Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem; the one
saying, if I lie, let me perish by fire, the other, if I say not true, let me
be consumed with the falling sickness; the third, if I do not deliver true
testimony, let me lose mine eyes: the first with a spark of fire, having
himself and all his family burnt, the second being tormented to death with the
falling sickness, the third was so frighted with these judgments upon his
fellows, that confessing his sin, and bewailing his error, Eusebius. Ecl. Hist.
l. 5. c. 8.
though he lost both his eyes, yet he departed not out of the world, till by
faithful prayer he obtained pardon.

Theodosius being distressed by Eugenius the Tyrant, Tu omnipotens Deus nosti,
quia in nomine Christi filii ultionis justae (ut puto) praelia suscepi; si
secus in me vindica. Russin. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 23.
and Anbogastes, he had no sooner uttered this prayer; Oh Almighty God, thou
know that I have undertaken these Wars out of just revenge in the name of
Christ thy Son; if otherwise, he thou avenged upon me; but a wind arose, which
drove the enemies darts into their own bosoms. Attila having besieged Orleans,
Anianus the Bishop of the place, wishing the people to prostrate themselves
before God in prayer; after the prayer, he bad them look out if no help were
coming, and none appearing, he renewed the exercise twice more, and forth with
Aetius the General of Valentinian came, Greg. Turonens. l. 2. c. 7.
and after a great slaughter, put Attila and his whole Army to flight. Rophilus
and Mercurialis, by prayer made a Dragon tame, which before had destroyed man
and beast, and tied it, and threw it into a deep pit, from whence it never
after returned again. Marul. l. 2. c. 2. Id. ibid. Signonius. lib. 6. Imp.
Occid. Greg. Nyssen in Monod.
Radegund the wife of Clotharius, by prayer made the Captives chains to fall
off. Caesarius Bishop of Arles, quenched a great fire at Budeaux by the force
of prayer. Gregory Nazinzena, sailing from Alexandria to Athens, by powerful
prayer saved a Ship ready to perish in a grievous tempest. Did not the prayers
of Monica turn St Augustine from a Manichee to an Orthodox professor? did not
the prayers of St Amborse assuage the wrath of Valentinian II, enraged by the
instigations of Justina his Arian Mother? did not the prayers of the Christians
in the Army of Aurelius Commodus, fetch rain from heaven in the midst of a sad
drought, whereupon it was called the thundering Legion? did not the prayers of
Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria, with the rest of his devout Priests, bring
such an heavy judgment upon Arius, that when he was in his highest favor at
Court, by the procurement of Constantines sister, he but turning aside to a
privy, voided out his guts and intralls, and died most miserably? Yes, infinite
it were to relate all the memorable effects of Prayer; a Christian is never
higher, than when he is creeping upon his knees, nor stronger then when he is
stretching out his hands toward heaven, nor more endearing, then when he is
exercised in prayer; he will do more by an ejaculation, then others can do by
their spears; and by entreating the face of God, then others can do by
gathering of parties; and by looking upward, then others can do by plotting
beneath: Oh therefore be familiar with prayer, count it your chief antidote,
and your principal engine; only remember to petition passionately, and to
supplicate ardently, for the prayer of the righteous avails much, if it be
fervent, Jam. 5.16. Consider the Ninivites high accent, they did cry mightily.

17. Renovation of life: for the Ninivites did not only see their evil ways,
or (as before) confess them, but they laid it down for a ground, that they
must renounce them; for, Let them turn every one from his evil way. Shall we
have repentance without reformation? this were to lay an unhewen stone in the
bottom of the building, Si in homine de homine aliquid supererit. Bern. tr. de
dilig. Deo.
or not to wash the child from the unclean blood, after it is come out of the
womb. What change is there, if in man there does remain any thing of man?
Diaholum cum ipsis choreis agentem introducere. Chrysostom. Adv. Judae. Orat. 1. c.
1. Vertit ad numerum virtutum numerum criminum. Greg. Hom. 33. in Evang. Agere
paenitentiam nihil aliud est quam profiteri, and affirmare se non peccaturum.
Lactant. l. 6. c. 13.
If men weep and wail, and change not practices, this is to bring in the Devil
in his old dance. That is sincere repentance, which does equal the number of
virtues, to the number of sins. To repent, is nothing else but to profess, and
affirm, that a man will do his best to sin no more. Shall we stumble at the
old stone? burn our fingers in the former flames? run into the Pesthouse where
we catched our first Plague-fore? Children would not do thus, beasts will be
better warned. It is the reproach of judgment to double errors. Men must not
steal again, when the branding-iron is newly taken from their hands; nor fall
to more forgeries, so soon as they are come down from the Pillory; nor break
out into mutinies, when they have been but lately strapadoed: the sorrows of
repentance should restrain all future vitiousnesse. That is an unsteady
conversion, which does wander again in the old by paths; yea a filthy
repentance which does defile it self with disclaimed impurites. The Dog may
return to his vomit, and the swine to the wallowing in the mire, but the
Penitent must not lick up that which he has disgorged, nor soil his skin in
his old puddle; for this were but to hide sin a little out of sight, and not to
put away the evil of our works from before his eyes; to heat our cankred
metal, but not purely to purge away our dross, and our time. It is to sorrow
to shame, and not to sorrow to repentance. Any Euripus can have such a present
flowing, any Proteus can have such a momentary shape: oh it is an heavy thing,
Nil citius lachryma arescit. Adag. Novit vias, quibus effugiat Encrates.
when nothing does dry sooner then a tear, and that men do repent, but not to
stay with God; that Eucrates does know his creeping holes by which he may get
out again. It is in vain ever to undertake the work of repentance, if we do
not put away iniquity far from our Tabernacle, Job 22.23; and thoroughly amend
our ways, and our doings, Jer. 7.5. We must keep our selves as undefiled, as
moral diligence can preserve our purity; we must abstain from all appearance
of evil, hate even the garment spotted by the flesh; Puri simus, prout moralis
diligentia servet. Toler. Stow. Desti laborare oculis Philostrat. in Sophistis.
our familiar sins we should cast off when we begin to repent, as Henry the 5th
cast off his old Comrades when he began to reign; if they present their selves
with the greatest amiablenesse, we should see no beauty in them, as Isaeus,
when a rare Paragon was shown him, and was asked whether she was not fair and
fit for his dalliance; he answered, I know not, for I have given over to be
guided by my eyes. Isabella of Portugal, Turquet. Suidas. Dominus meus
Crucifixus, fell and aceto potatus est, and ego oleum edam^ Murul. l. 4. c. 2.
after she was converted, affected nothing which might please the senses.
Origin so abated the vigor of sensual desires, that he seemed to carry but a
withered body about him. Palaemon was wont to taste nothing that was pleasant,
for my crucified Lord drank Gall and Vinegar, and shall I eat oil? Oh that the
Nazarites, Rechabites, and Essences could live with so much contempt toward
worldly pleasures, and that we cannot abdicate wonted jovisances. Is this the
dying wound of mortification? is this the sacrificing knife of repentance?
What? repent, and keep the Concubine still in thy house, bowse with
Boon-fellows, comply with Temporisers, not loose one new fashion, not abate one
writ? a prodigious, hideous repentance. Thy Covenant with the Devil remains
uncancelled; thy old elves suck thy paps, and what art thou then but still
possessed, or haunted? Will thou come leprous out of Jordan? No, repentance
should heal up thy botches, and bring a new skin upon thee, reform thy manners,
transform thy affections, make thee Saint all over. Did the Ninivites repent
only by sitting upon ash-heaps, wearing of sackcloth, or being pinched in their
entralls? were they as enormous, flagitious, detestable, and execrable sinners
as ever? No, repentance had eaten out their corruptions, cut out the coare of
disobedience, made them sound in their inwards. Nineveh has washed her face,
rinsed her conscience, the filthy Channels are swept, yea, the whole City
cleansed; oh with delight and pleasure, may a man look upon such a purified
place; it is able to ravish every eye. There were sins, but Repentance has
chased them out of the walls; there were evil ways, but what foot now does
follow the old tracks? No, let them turn every one from his evil way.

18. A reformation of oppression: For the Ninivites thought of the violence of
their hands, that whereas Nineveh had been a bloody City, and the whip departed
not from it, they now begin to think of the cut veins, and lashed sides, they
had caused in the City; how many there were, that were to accuse them for
cruelty, and to impeach them of tyranny. And indeed that is a very formal,
superficial repentance, where men are not sensible of their damnifying,
injurious, courses; oppression is of a skarlet hew, yea, it is put amongst the
number of crying sins. Shall a man desire God to remove judgments, when he
does remove Landmarks? or to cast away his rod, when he himself does chastise
with Scorpions? or that he might have a taste of free mercy, when he does eat
the fruits of others without money? shall a man repent with his Bears teeth in
his head? or his Lions skin upon his back? No, it is in vain for any man to
sigh for compassion, where the sighs of the poor do cry for vengeance. Can a
man think to pacify God, till he has pacified the world? Does God look upon
Oppressors with a pleasing eye? no, they are Monsters, and Horrors to him;
How are they described in Scripture! Oh that they had eyes clear enough to see
their own Natures! they are pricking briars, Ezech. 28.24. threshing
instruments, Amos 1.3. mighty hunters, Genesis 10.9. Wolves of the evening, Zep.
3.3. which take up all with the Angle and gather all with the drag. Hab. 1.15.
which thrust with thigh, and shoulder, Ezech. 34.21. which smite with the fist
of wickedness, Es. 58.4. which swallow people alive as the grave. Pro. 1.12.
which groundsell their estates with damages, roof them with detriments,
plaster them with the brains of widows, and hang them with the skins of
Orphans, Ex rapto vi^^^ vunt. Coel. Rodig. l. 18. c. 1 Judaea latronibus
repleta est. Joseph. Antiq l. 17. Praedatum, and expugnatum in nomine Dei
tendite. Azaur. 34 Qui hoc potitur, de finibus agri dicit legitime Plut. in
Lysandro.
which keep a shambles of butchers meat, and have their Cauldrons boiling with
the limbs and quarters of poor people chopped in pieces with their cleavers;
which like the Cardaces amongst the Persians, live upon Pillage, which fill a
Nation full of nothing but thieves, as Josephus said, when the Prison doors
were set open to condemned men; which did mind nothing but free booty, and
plunder, as if they lived under Mahomets Law, which did determine all rights by
power; or as Lysander, they settle all Titles by the sword. Now can the just
God endure such rapacious, and savage creatures? no, he which is the Pleader
for the poor, will not be the Patron of Oppressors. Till they have cured their
blood-shotten eyes, let them not look up to Heaven for pardon; till they have
quit their hands of violence, let them not stretch out their hands for mercy.
Has God given to every man his own Enclosure, to own the Hedge-breaker? or
allowed every man the freedom of his own bark, to justify the Pirate? No, Woe
be to him that builds a Town with blood, and stablisheth a City by iniquity.
Is it not of the Lord of Hosts, that the people shall labor in the Fire, and
weary themselves for very vanity? Habbac. 2.12, 13. Hear this, oh ye that
swallow up the needy, even to make the poor of the Land to fail, saying, when
will the new Mooon be gone, that we may sell Corn? and the Sabbath, that we
may set forth Wheat, making the Epha small, and the Shekell great, and
falsifying the Balances of deceit, that we may buy the poor for Silver, and the
needy for a pair of Shoes? The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob,
surely I will never forget any of these works. Shall not the Land tremble for
this, and every one mourn that dwells therein. Amos 8.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Oh
therefore thou which have been a Grinder, and a Griper, whose chief means do
consist in spoils, and whose principal gatherings are heaps of extortion;
which have forborne nothing, that policy, fraud, forgery, bribery, could put in
practice; with a burdened Conscience feel the weight of thy injuries, as well
as of thy impieties; profaneness should not only sting thee, but oppression:
for remember the Ninivites repent of the violence of their hands, as well as of
their evil ways: Let them turn every one from their evil ways and from the
violence of their hands.

Thus then have I shown you Ninevehs repentance with all the essential, and
integrant parts of the same; if ye would learn your lesson truly, ye see how
many partitions and divisions ye must be exact in; if ye would be complete, ye
must resemble this Penitent; if ye would be spared, ye must be such a Niniveh.
Should not I spare Nineveh?

Application.
1. This does show that mercy is the privilege of the Penitent, It is Nineveh
that is to be spared. Wisdom is too high for a Fool, and pardon for the
refractary. What have thou to do with peace? So, what have thou to do with
Reconciliation? Godliness has the promises. It is Goshen that is free from
plagues, Rahabs house has the red thread hanging out at the window. Are Gods
dispensations common? have the wicked any share in Soulsinterests? No, Balsamum
purissimum vas requirit. Bern. Ser. 54. in Cant* Jupiter aquilam diligit. Adag.
Privilegium est privata lex. Aecursius. Jus togae exteris non datur Plut. Ad
ludos Olymbiacos nemo accedit, nist qui stripem legitimam probet. Rhod. l 29.
c. 8. Plut. de impud. verecundia.
the stranger shall not intermeddle with their joy. The Israelites eat Mannah,
Mercy is the Childrens bread. Balsome does require the purest Vessel. Jupiter
does only love the Eagle. The blind, and the lame have no Temple propriety.
Privilege is a private exemption. The right of the gown was not allowed to
Foreigners. None could come to the Olympian games, but they which could prove
an unspotted Stock. It would defile Gods favors to make them indiscriminate,
and stein mercy to let it be free, and public. Nicostratus would not give his
beautiful Lacedemonian Lady to Archidamus, because he did not derive a
Pedigree from the Race of Hercules, as Plutarch says. So God will not espowse
mercy to every sordid, low-bred Suitour. Oh then that Esau does come crying for
a blessing, that Adoniah would have Abishag, that every vicious liver does
expect mercy. No, God will be jealous for his people. Joel 2.18. He will be as
the dew to Israel: Hos. 14.5. He does bind up the brokenhearted. Es 61.1. Gods
Sun may shine upon the just, and unjust, but the Signet upon his right hand is
only for the particular Favorites They are the sure mercies of David. Ps.
55.3. Penitents are only the pardoned generation, Nineveh is to be spared.
Should not I spare Nineveh?

2. This does show that where there is the greatest provocation, there may come
a pacification; God does not only spare, but he does spare Niniveh. Who more
execrable, then Nineveh? yet Nineveh now is acceptable. Therefore if ye have
been not only the Sons of Adam, but the Sons of Belial. Deuteronomy. 13.13. not only
guilty of inferior sins, but done abominable iniquity. Ps. 14.1. not only been
tempted to evil, but sold your selves to commit evil. 1 Kings 21.20. not
transgressed only occasionally, or by accident, Tu times defice re^ubi veritas
reficere te promittit? Beth ep. 108. ad Henric. Mutd^ch. Non remaneat
dubitationis nubilum, quod obstet lumini veritatis Aug. ep. 3. ad volusian. c.
2. Nulli deest unctio, nulli salus. Bern. in F. S. Mattini. Oh paenitentia,
quid de te referam? Ligata solvis, clausa reseras, desperata animas. Cyp. de
laud Poen. Ex suto aurumfecit. In profundo malignitatis jacuit, and usque ad
vertitem virtutis ascendit. Chrysostom. Hom. 12. de muliere. Chan. Quis in seculo
peccavit enormiks Poulo? quis in religione gravius Petro? Chrysolog. in ser.
Rhegino. l. 2. Ma trul. l. 3. c. 4.
but committed e vill with both hands earnestly Micah. 7.3. not only matched
inconsiderate transgressors, but overpassed the deeds of the wicked, Jer. 5.28.
Yet do thou fear that he will refuse thee, which has promised to refresh
thee? No, Let not the cloud of distrustfulnesse darken the light of truth, and
grace. Thy saviors name is Christ Jesus, to show that ointment and salvation
is wanting to none. Oh Repentance, what shall I say of thee? thou do loosen
the bound things, unlock the shut things, and do quicken the desperate and
decayed things. He has turned a poor Canaanitish woman from dirt into gold,
she lay in the bottom of disobedience, and he has raised her up to the top of
virtue. Who in the world sinned more enormously then Paul? who in the Church
more grievously then Peter? yet both these obtained not only (said Chrysolog^s)
a Ministry, but a Magistery of holiness. Therefore let us not turn off the
most noisome diseases, as desperate cures. Judas by this showed himself the son
of Perdition, (as Chrysostom.) because he held his sin unpardonable, yea it did
set the mark, the brand of a castaway upon Cains forehead, that he cried out,
My sin is greater then can be forgiven: What trespass has not an hope of
pardon? What trespasser may not be a bosom darling? as strongly as the Devil
has kept his Captives in wards, yet the Gates of Brass may be broken in
pieces. St Augustine may renounce his Manicheism, Justin Martyr his worshipping
of Idols, and St Cyprian (as some say) his Magic. One bright star may give
light to many men stumbling in darkness. One Boniface may reduce the Hassions
from their strange Gods and Goddesses, Bortreia, Berter, Camberth, U^rade, to
embrace the true Deity; One Vincent may convert 5000 Jews in Spain, and 8000
Saracens in Mauritania. One Dambrowca may change the heart of Mieceslaus, Duke
of Polonia, from being a stisfe Infideli, Cromer. l. 2.
to be a zealous Christian, and draw him to propagate the faith throughout his
whole Territory. Marul. l. 3. c. 4.
One Patrick by making a Circle, and opening the earth as far as the circle
went, may convert the Irish. One Poppo a Priest, Crant. l. 3. Metrop. c. 34.
by wearing a plate of red hot Iron upon his hand like a glove, may convert a
number of Swedes and Danes; yea, what dissolute liver may not be cleansed out
of natural corruptions? Mary, the famous Egyptian Saint, who had spent her
younger time in most scandalous lusts, may, when she was going up to Jerusalem,
at the feast of the exaltation of the Cross, to finger the gains of a
Prostitute, be so renowned, that she lived 45. Fulgos. l. 6. c. 9.
years as the mirror of purity. Thais, the infamous strumpet of Alexandria,
may be so touched in conscience, that she may bring all the goods which she had
gotten by her lewd life, and burn them in the open Market-stead, and afterward
live such an austere life, that when she dyed, a fiery chariot appearing in the
air, and Paulus the Monk thinking it had been for his great Master Anthony, Non
Anthonio, sed Thaidi meretrici. Sabellic. l. 5. c. 5.
an answer might be given by an Angel, That it was not for Anthony, but Mary,
to carry her into heaven. Swayne of Denmark, who had been the bloody Tyrant of
his Country, upon slig^^ suspicions, butchering many of his Nobles and
subjects, may prove so remorsefull, that he may strip himself out of his Royal
robes, go barefoot, fall down grovelong in the Church Porch, Saxo Oram. l. 11.
bitterly lament his sin, and give away half Stefnick Province to religious
uses. Denodate a great Courtier in Persia, who along time had followed all the
delights of the Court, and conformed himself to his Princes pleasure;
Articulatim dllaniatus est. Marul. l. 3. c. 4. Fulgos. l. 6. c. 9 Niceph. l.
18. c. 25 Marul. l. 1. c. 2
afterward may give over his office, and prove not only such an eminent
Professor, but such a constant Martyr, that he may be torn in pieces joint by
joint. What should I speak of Mutio, the great Egyptian Theife, whom Fulgosus
does mention? or of Golinduch, the Persian Witch, whom Nicephorus makes
relation of? or of Peter of Constantinople, the covetous Tole gatherer, whom
Marulus makes a large description of? all which were hainously wicked, and yet
came to be transcendently gracious. What therefore is uncleanness without her
bath? bondage without a door of hope? May not the greatest sinner in the world
melt out his guilts at his eyes? and feel the oil of joy suppling his
conscience? Yes, were thou the flying Dragon of cruelty, the fiend of envy, the
Lucifer of pride, a Shimet the Standard Bearer of tumults, a Doeg the Boutefeau
of mischief, an Achitophel that has stirred every Gimmer of the Oracle, to
give pernicious counsel, an Hazael that has fired Cities, slain Infants,
ripped up women big with child, a Gehezi that has run after bribes, an Achan
that has stolen the Babylonish Garment, and the golden Wedge, a Judas which
have sold thy best Master for a few mercenary pence which art such a
transversed creature, that thou have turned thy tongue in thy mouth, thy eyes
in thy head, thy conscience in thy bosom, which have falsified thy
protestation, denied thy subscription, violated thy Oath, expressed thy self
Apostate, and art almost as ill as an Infidel; yet if thou can but have
remorse, and reformation; are Christ's wounds dry, that there is no
cleansing-blood left for thee? No, let who will decree justice to thy body, I
despair not of mercy to thy soul, I can pray for thee, and pledge for thee,
show thee a Redeemer, and drop some of his ransomepieces into thy hand; for
has not repentance her golden Altar in heaven? yes, if I could see thee look
back upon thy miscarriages, and turn back from thy exorbitancies, eye scarlet
sins with scarlet cheeks, and touch the foreskin of thy pullutions with a
circumcising knife: if that tongue of thine could speak but ten words of true
English, or that heart of thine could feel but five checks of a true Penitent;
if thou had but Manasses knees, Mary Magdalens eyes, and the Jaylours
scruples, I should call thee Convert, and pronounce thee Saint: if I need not
fear the reality of thy repentance, I do not doubt the certainty of thy
reception; for see here the Broadseal hanging up in Gods signet office: Is Saul
amongst the Prophets? Is Nineveh amongst the favorites? Yes, she was one
spightfull against heaven, and near to divine vengance; yet now having turned
her contumacy into contrition, she is declared by God to be one, meet to be
spared: Should not I spare Nineveh?

3. This does show, that pacification is to be resolved on not according to
profession, but repentance; for it is not, Should not I spare Jerusalem? but,
Should (...) I spare Nineveh? Jonah is called from Jerusalem, because he had
prophesied there, and Jerusalem remained obstinate; but being sent to Nineveh,
he does no sooner cry there, but the ear of the penitent Auditour is opened;
therefore he does reject formallizing Jerusalem, and spare heart-strook
Nineveh. Humble repentance is better then high-gifted profession; and the
sincerity of reformation, then the imposture of information. What do Jerusalems
Visions and Prophecies, Feasts, Sacrifices, distinction of meats, purifyings,
do her good? No, one tear of Nineveh does excel all this rituall piety.
Nineveh is preferred before Jerusalem, Nulla res sic exterminat bonum, ut
simulatio. Chrysostom in 7. Mat. Levius est aperte peccare, quam fingere
sanctitatem. Jeron. l. 60. in Es. Quod proprium est Dei sibi assumit. Greg. l.
8. Moral. Quis magis impius, an profitens impietatem, an mentiens sanctitatem*
Bern. in Apol. ad Guliel. Abbatem. Histrie pietatis. Budaeus, videtur potius
ludere quam sacrificare. Chrysostom. Orat. 11 Ad. Jud^^or.
because Nineveh had the vital part of Religion, Jerusalem but only the shadow
and figure. What taste then is there in the white of an Egg? What relish in
crude ostentations? no, hypocrisy is the poison of devotion, or the dead fly
in the box of pure ointment. Nothing does so expel goodness, as dissembling.
It is a lighter thing to sin openly, than to feign impiety; for the Hypocrite
is such a Mimick, that he would cheat his Maker of his Glory, for that which is
proper to God, he does assume to himself. St Bernard does put a question, who
is the more wicked man, he which does profess impiety, or he that does belie
piety? and he does determine that the Hypocrite is worse then the Libertine,
because the one does intend no holiness, and the other does but seem to intend
it, for he has but the show of holiness, and not the power, 2 Timothy 3.5. Now
is there any thing worse than a counterfeit? a man of show? and is it not thus
with the Hypocrite? Yes, Heis but the Stageplayer of Religion, He does seem
rather to play, then to sacrifice. He has Ordinances only to boast of, or
Altars only to make a smoke in the Country. Hypocrisy in the Hebrew, does
lively decipher this, for it does come of a word that dothsignifie a clowded
creature; Keneph of Kanaph, nebulosus, aut velatus fuit. Nebula a nebula. Et
inter nebulones, hypocrita est maxim infignis. Bud. Quasi tot stercoribus
repletum in conspectu aeterni Judicis pectus ejus faetet. Greg. l. 8. Moral.
In Latin the worst practiser we can imagine is called such a duskish creature,
and amongst all the misty creatures the Hypocrite is the most sky-colored, he
is a man in a Cloud. It is true he has a sweet voice, but if thou could sent
him, he has but a stinking breath; if thou do not think so, God does believe
so, for no dunghill does smell worse in Gods nostrills, then a Hypocrit's breast.
Now shall this ill-savoured person think to fetch over God with profession? no,
Gods favors are not so free, that he will accept of a man only because he can
buckle, and bu^^le, frame faces, and make mouths; hang down an eye-brow, and
lift up an hand; chatter and charm; groan, and grovell; wheel, and circle,
amaze the age with conflicts, and ravish the World with ecstasies; speak like an
Oracle, and prophesy like a Sybil, which as some say, do love no Church-musick
because he himself would be accounted the Organ-pipe of devotion, and does hate
Church Service, because he would have his Enthusiasticall raptures to go for
the pure, and true Letany; he cannot endure Auricular confession, because he
would have all the shrift before him, and his Eldership; he has plucked down
the Font, that his holy basin might be consecrated, and has put down
Holy Days, that there might be no Saints but of his Canonising; yea, many are
persuaded the man would have Bishops again, if he might put on their Rochet,
and an high Commission Court, if he might sit Chief, and pronounce censures;
Sure I am, abominable Tithes, that were once accounted but Statute-right; yet
when he comes to be sole Proprietary of them, the taking of them away is cried
out against as horrid sacrilege; yea, many things which were scaree held
lawful jure humane, are now made justifiable jure divino; So that any thing
shall paffe for current money, if it does bear but his own stamp upon it; and be
registered in the Church-book as a child duly initiated, if he has but the
baptising of it; so that here is paint enough, but is God to be taken with
colors? No, the seeming to be somewhat, the making a fair show in the Flesh,
the having a name to live, the being Jews outwardly, the drawing near with the
mouth, the serving God by the precepts of men are of little officacy, or
validity before the incorrupt Judge; he does respect neither protestation, nor
obtestation, nor obsecration, nor illumination, nor jubilation, nor meditation,
nor maceration; no, if thou could (as thou have high fancies of thy self)
match a Monk in mortification, or compare with an Anchorite in external
rigours, yet these things would be of little estimation with God Almighty; and
the reason is, because thou art but a practitioner, and not a Practiser a
Projectour, and not a Professor in all these things; whatsoever thou do is
rather out of affectation, then affection; contrivement then conscience; to
please thy humor, than to please thy God. Thou do but Court the age, thy
principal intention is not to make God Master, and to advance his glory; no,
thou have another Monsieur which thou waitest upon, thou art a Servant, a
Dayman to Mammon, or popular applause; therefore take thy wages, where thou
have done thy work, thou have wrought for the World, and let the world be thy
Paymaster. God has not a purse, but for his own Stipendaries, the Hypocrite
gets not a penny out of his bank; for shall God make satisfaction to
another Hirelings? no, such men have driven at fame, and labored for fame,
and they are full of fame, and let them sit down quiet with the boons of fame,
They have received there reward. All these things they have done that they
might be justified before men; and they are justified, and they shall no where
else be justified; the honor of the times is the Hypocrites Heaven, and they
have reigned in it, and let them expect no other Kingdom. No, they are at their
last blessing, here is their Abraham's bosom, their Paradise, their new
Jerusalem, their Celestial joy, and Majesticall glory; they have had the
worlds Hallelujah, and that beautiful vision, and let them end only such
glorified Saints; there is neither Robe, nor Crown elsewhere remaining for
them. I do not read indeed, that Cain, and Nimrod, and Pharaoh, and Absolon,
and Dalilah, and Jesabel shall have the precedence of the Hypocrites; but I
find that those which are of the next blood, but Gosins removed, shall have the
first step before them; for Publicans, and Harlots shall enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven before them. Why so? why otherwise? they failed God in his main
expectation, he looked for conversion, and they give him inversion; he for
reformation, and they give him transformation; he for a rent heart, and they
give him rent lips; he for a contrite spirit, and they give him contrite
spitle; he for turning into another man, and they give him the turning into
another mode. Oh thou sagacious Hypocrite, thou which live by thy brain, and
have nothing but a crafty skull for thy principal endowment, though thou
think thou can befool all thou meetest with, and dementate the whole
Earth, yet will thou not at last be the mere underwit, and the grand Vappe? For
do thou think thou can filch from the Law, and lurch from God, and escape
scot-free? no, Hue and cry will be sent after thee, thou will be apprehended,
and shall hold up thy hand for Burglary. When the Libertine, and thou, shall
meet together in Gods Court, and both be called forth to trial (for as great a
Judge as thou art upon Earth, shall thou not stand before that Tribunal)?
which of you shall plead least guilty? Thou will say, that man did lie in the
mire, and thou have but rinsed thy outside; he does stink afar off, and thou
have no better smell, then what thou have borrowed from thy Civet-box, or musk
ball, those same Arabic Odours, and exotic unguents of thine; he never had a
Limbeck to distill truth, nor a fining pot to melt a Church into primitive
purity he would not leave a warm Couch to wait upon morning-Lectures, nor had
the art of brachy-graphy to pen down Sermons, he never had an eye clear enough
to spy out Sodom, nor a tongue loud enough to cry out against Babylon; he never
expostulated with God about Zion, nor sent a Breviat of his own devising and
inventing into Heaven for God to plead the cause of his Saints; he never melted
before a Pulpit, nor came flaming out of a Sanctuary; he never walked like a
demure Capuchin in the streets, nor looked like an Heaven-dropped Angel at the
Table of the Lord; Nor thou neither had, nor did these things but out of
subtlety, and collusion, as thou learned them in the School of Ananias, or in
the Academy of the Pharisees, to abuse the age, to amaze the World, to get
Magnifiers, to gain Customers, to screw into an Office, or to buy some
Church-windfal: therefore if thou were were sifted, thou would appear, as
coorie meal and very bran, as the Libertine; for though in these things thou
art the better man, yet in other things thou art the worse Christian; for the
Libertines life being so corrupt, he is a s^^in to himself; he can have sense
of sin, and be ashamed of it; confess it, feel remorse for it, hate it, and
utterly renounce it; but the opinion of thy gifts, and the pride of thy
holiness, will not suffer thee to be thus conscious and conscionable; those
eyes of thine are blind, that though thou can spy out all the errors of the
Parish, yet thou can not thine own guilts; those lips of thine are dumb, that
though the sins of the age be thy daily neighing, and braying, yet thou can
not lisp out thine own crimes; those cheek: of thine are impudent, that though
thou shamest multitudes for trangression, yet thou thy self know not how to
brush, no not for such sins as all the Land does ring of, and all Christendom
does defy; when the Libertine is talking of his exorbitances, thou art talking
of thy endowments; when the Libertine is summing up his grievances, thou art
bringing in a Catalogue of thy graces; I thank God I am not as other men, nor
as this Publican; When the Libertine does look like a condemned man, thou
look like a man, that is rectus in Curia the bright object of innocence for
an admiring eye to gaze upon; when the Libertine does stand afar off, thou do
perch up to the nearest approachment, when the Liber tine does hang down his
brow, thou have a forehead as high as Zidkijahs; when the Libertines heart does
shiver, thine is flinty; when the Libertine does think it a just duty to bring
iniquity to remembrance, and to recount his sins in the bitterness of his soul,
thou do esteem it a blemish, and reproach to thy high parts, and rare
qualifications to be dejected for any sin; thou dreamest of a state of
perfection, and wilt not be brought to the rectifying bent. Mary Magdalen may
have her seven Devils cast out of her, but the Pharisee does keep his old
Beelzebub in him; he may bestow a feast upon Christ, but he does get nothing but
belly-cheer from him; Christ must starve, if he has an appetite to repentance;
for he is fuller of censure, then souls search, or of questioning his Savior,
than of trying of conscience, or of arraigning the woman, then judging himself;
he can tell all her crimes, but he cannot find one fault in himself; let the
woman stand at Christ's back, he sits looking on him in the face; let the
woman storm down tears, till she wash Christ's feet with head water, y^^ he will
not rise from the table to weep with her, or to increase the bath; no, it were
a miracle to see a Pharisee shed tears, or his eyes at high water; let the
woman wipe her Saviors feet with the hairs of her head, the Pharisees locks
are too reverend to be employed about such a base use; therefore to the woman
it may be said, That much is forgiven her, because she loved much: but we read
nothing of his love, and so nothing of his forgiveness. To the woman it may be
said, Thy faith has saved thee, but we read only of his feast, but not of his
faith; of his cates, but not of his comforts: Mary Magdalen may become a new
woman, but the Pharisee does remain the old man. So that by all this it does
appear, that if the Libertine be not the better liver, yet he is the better
Penitent; the Libertine may be renewed, but it is an hard thing for an
hypocrite to be a Convert; his eyes are dazeled with the brightness of his
gifts, his ears charmed with the music of applause, he droppeth to hell from
the precip^^e of vainglory, and is cut down as fuel for eternal torment,
because (though a withered branch) he does hang upon the Vine; his clean
outside will not suffer him to reform; he is so full of notions, and
directions, adages, and admonitions, prayers, and hymns, that he cannot think
of repentance; no, let these Libertines repent, it is enough for the Hypocrite
to teach repentance; he is quite drunk with his enchanted Cup; the being
enamoured upon his imaginary holiness, does damn him, Hell may bring him to
some sense of sin, but upon earth he is stupefied, he is past feeling, and
has the heart which cannot repent, Romans 2.5. The Hypocrite may be a Professor,
but he cannot be a Penitent; and if not a Penitent, what will all his Church
tinctures do him good? no, Jerusalem had these fukes to Admiration, Prophesies,
Ordinances, Altars, Types, what not? yet for want of repentance, she is turned
off as a despised creature; the great Prophet of his age is drawn from her, and
sent to a place that she disdained in heart should stand up in competition with
her in any spiritual prerogative, even Nineveh; yet because Jerusalem had
profession, but no repentance; and Nineveh had profaneness, but repentance;
the Libertine shall be preferred before the Hypocrite, proud Jerusalem shall be
rejected, humbled Nineveh shall be respected; for Jonah had cried long in
Jerusalem without fruit, he does but begin to cry in Nineveh, and Nineveh does
begin to answer the cry; here is no sign of humiliation, or reformation in
Jerusalem, but in Nineveh such penitential ensigns are discerned, as no
Nation ever had the like, leaving off the Throne casting off the Robe, putting
on sackcloth, sitting upon ash heaps, fasting rigorously, crying mightily,
every one turning from their evil ways, and from the violence of their hands;
therefore when God is silent for mercy to Jerusalem, he speaks out to have
Nineveh spared; for should not I spare Nineveh?

4. This does serve to shame our perverseness; for does Nineveh submit, and we
oppose Nineveh express repentance, and we refractarinesse? What, Nineveh, that
was the Mistress of Witchcrafts, which had the broth of abominable things in
her Vessels, which was mad upon her Idols, and built Altars to shameful
things? and not we which are so far from Idolatry, that we think we see God
with the clearest eye that is in the head of the whole world; which hold our
selves the most inspired Nation upon earth, which have amongst us the
dispensation of grace, the revelation of the mystery, the light of the knowledge
of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ? yet is Nineveh here fit to be
spared, and we to be judged? What, has the Idolater more propensions to
repentance then the Christian? Is not this our scandal? may it not be our
horror? doubtless there is an high pervicacy, Depravatio mentis semper est
devia a tramite veritatis. Amb. in Hexem. Difficulter coercetur voluntas malo
animo ^^tiata. Greg.
and pertinacy in us, or else we might long since have been as reformed as
Nineveh; for is it not an easier matter to be converted, where the affections
only are distempered, then were the judgment is corrupted? yes, the
depravation of the mind is ever wandering from the straight rule of truth. How
can a man sail rightly, if his pilot be erroneous? The will is difficultly
restrained, if it be viciaeted with a bad judgment; Mentem implicant, and
ligant conscientiam. Amb. Dolium mellis non tollit amaritudinem absynthii.
Eras. Adag. Caecatis mentibus acti. Sedulius. Ordinis ignorantia conturbat
negotiorum naturom. Amb. in 118. Psalm.
intellectual aberrations do entangle the mind, and fetter the Conscience. If
the Reason be disturbed, how shall the desires be regulated? The bitterness of
wormwood will not be taken away by a double proportion of honey. These are the
men which being driven on with blind apprehensions of a misinformed
understanding, do rush on desperately to their own confusion. The ignorance of
just order does disturb the nature of all achievements. But where the
principles are rightly grounded, it is an easy matter to incline to practice.
What is the reason then that we which are habitually prepared, and want no
manner of necessary qualifications, are more defective in duty, than the
Infidels, which were deprived of these endowments? that Nineveh does repent,
and not we? how shall we justify our selves before that blind people? or
answer this to that newly enlightened people? Alas Nineveh lived in obscurity,
or was but dimsighted, but we have the free use of both our eyes, and yet in
seeing we do not see. What, shall that Heathenish glimmering exceed our
Evangelicall brightness? Turpe est tacert cum Barbaris loquentibus. Isocrat.
Shall this new Professor be the better Disciple? and produce better arguments
for his conversion, then the old studied Logician? No, it is a disgraceful
thing for us to hold our peace ( as Philocteta said) when Barbarians speak;
that our gospellising duty should not speak in as high an accent, as the
Gentiles obedience. Themistocles could not sleep that the Trophies of Miltiades
should be greater than his, Plut. in Themistoc. Rupit Hyarbitam Timagenis
aemula lingua. Horat.
and it burst Hyarbita in pieces, that he should not be as eloquent as
Timagenes, so it may take away, if not our rest, yet our reputation, if not our
life yet our honor, that Pagans should be Superiors to us in works of Piety.
Did Aeneas take it in high disdeign, that Turnus should tender more affection
to La^inia then he? and may not we take it, as our check, and disparagement,
that men which are led only by the light of nature (upon the first call of a
Prophet) should be more passionate Lovers of repentance then we, which are or
seem to be the great Beauclarks, and Bible searchers of the Earth? How may it
confound us, that they which are lately matriculated into the University do
surpass us, who have been ancient Graduates? or that the puny Scholars, which
have but newly taken forth their lessons, should be better Proficients then we,
which seem to be of the high form? Herodot. l. 3.
Was Cambyses ashamed, that the King of Aethiopia should send him a bow that
none of his Army could draw? and is it not our shame that the Ninivites here
have sent us a bow, that none of us can draw up an arrow to the head in it?
What, shall the Pagans, or new Converts be better Archers in matters of
Religion, then we? Shall not our Bibles better instruct us for pious behavior,
then the Books of the Sybils, or the Turkish Alcaron do others? Then we do seem
to take our principles out of Scripture, but our presidents from Infidels
examples, yea, the Infidel in reallity is the better Christian; we may be
better skilld in the Creed but they are better experienced in the Decalogue; we
know God better, but they serve God better; yea Sinners of the Gentiles have
more apprehension of sin, more conviction, and compunction, than we which are
Saints by calling; their breasts are more bruised, their eyes more moistened,
their lips more fervent, their consciences more wounded, and awakened then
ours; their consternations and conflicts, their terrors and tears, anguishes
and agonies, do far exceed ours. To what end then are all our speculations, and
criticisms, precious truths, and precious Titles? No, we may tremble, that we
have one Temple standing, or one star shining in the Firmament of the Church,
that we know a Savior, or are named a Church; our Oracles and Ordinances,
Lectures and Sacraments, Principles and Privileges, are all a reproach to us;
for we pollute the land upon which we tread, we defile the Gospel which we
profess, and stein the very God, which we do seem to worship; we make our
Altars to weep, our Temples to sob, and our Profession to howl, for we are but
nominall Gospellers, and notionall Protestants; our flesh is impure under the
laver, we embrace the Devil with the Bible under our arms, we drop to Hell
from our Pulpit-sides; we have indeed an eager appetite for souls food, and
curious palates to taste of the best, listening ears and voluble tongues, a
satiety of teaching and a surset of Gospel Truths, but little humiliation,
little mortification; we do surpass Mores and Turks in revelations, but those
may equal and excel us not only in moralities, but in apprehensions of guilt,
and purity of life: Oh that we would leave talking so much of our Religion, and
ask where is our repentance? where is our regeneration I doubt we are such poor
Penitents, that we may go to the Paynims breasts for groans, and the Heathens
eyes for tears, and the Infidells consciences for Reformation. And is not this
our dishonor, and scandal? yes, it was a sad thing when the Lord sent his
people to the Isles of Chi^^im to learn fidelity, Jer. 2.10. so is it for God
to send us to the Ninevites to learn repentance. Oh therefore if there be any
sparks of an holy emulation left glowing in your bosoms, be not worse
Penitents then they were; they had shorter time, and less means, and shall
your superior advantages leave you in an inferior condition? Do ye appease
God, for they pacified him; be not ye in a state to be punished, for they were
in a state to be spared. Should not I spare Nineveh?

5. This does show the excellency of repentance, for is not that a rare virtue,
that has brought Nineveh into a condition to be spared? yes, all the pomp of
Nineveh, her glorious walls, sumptuous Palaces, rich Merchandise, melodious
music, conquests abroad, triumphs at home, Street-lustre, Court-splendour,
fall short of the magnificence of Repentance; Oh the beauty of these ashes, the
finenesse of this sackcloth, the nourishment of this fasting, the music of
these cries, when Nineveh is another Nineveh, her habit and heart, countenance
and conscience, speech and spirit changed; pride turned into humility, defiance
into dejection, security into submission, fury into fear, tyranny into
trembling; when the King is chief Mourner, and Nobles, Citisens, Beasts,
fellow-Mourners with him; the soft Couches left, the spread Tables forsaken,
the Shops shut up, the musical Instruments cased, and nothing but kneeling
upon stones, wallowing in the mine, sitting upon dunghills, sighing like
distracted men, groaning like dying persons, to be seen amongst them; the City
is now bright, Nineveh does now shine. And indeed what more admirable, then to
see persons in the penitential garb, men frayed with sins, shivering under
judgments, their remorselesse hearts smarting, their stupid spirits thrilling,
their dumb mouths opening, their dry eyes streaming, their deaf ears tingling,
their polluted conversations rinsing? crying with Ezrah, We are here before
thee in our trespasses; or with Daniel, To us belongs nothing but shame, and
confusion, or with Manasses, my transgressions, oh Lord are multiplied, my
trespasses are exceeding many, I am not worthy to see the height of the Heavens
for the multitude of my unrighteousnesses; when they have nothing to fly to but
prayers, nor depend upon but mercy, when they count plagues their due doom, and
hell their just desert; when they wring their hands, that God might embrace
them; and lie at his feet, that vengeance might not trample upon them. Oh
joyful day, when a sinner does begin to suspect, and search himself; when his
wicked life does lie like a burden upon his Soul, and the shame of his sin
has made him an horror in his own eyes, when he does call himself culpable,
and pronounce himself wretch; like Pelagia, Pelagus omnium viti^rum. Fulgos. l.
6. c. 9.
who would no longer be called Pelagia, but Pelagus, or he does take some
revenge upon himself, either like Amus the Egyptian Monk, who having taken
some pleasure in his beauty, would never after see his naked flesh; or like
Paulus surnamed the Simple, Marulus. lib. 4. c. 3.
who having offended with his tongue, enjoined himself three years silence; or
like Solomon a King of Hungary, who caused himself to be five times dragged
through the open streets in detestation of his sins; or like Martin, Jeranes.
who being reprehended for weeping too much, Bern.
said, he had need to wash thoroughly, that he might have a clean face, for Gods
pure eyes. These, these are the rare penitential spectacles, and
representations; for what are capering feet, swelling cheeks, tempests in the
brows, lightning in the eyes, thunderclaps in the lips, pikes in the hand,
steel-bonnets upon the head, to humble, lowly, self-denying courses? no, one
souls check does excel all the jollity upon Herod's Birthday, one tear all the
pomp at Asuerosh's Feast. A penitent creature is more amiable then Absolon, a
mortified person more glorious than the Prince of Tyrus. Oh therefore prize
repentance, and never think thy self eminent till thy penitential day be
dawned upon thee; oh happy time, when the sense of sin has shaken thee out of
all the glory of the world, thrown thee down like a forlorn Abject, made thee
look pale under guilts, dread divine justice, prefer a motion for compassion,
and weep and wail till thou have gotten an assurance of a pacified God. Nothing
made Nineveh so blessed as repentance, her Ivory Walls shook, her strong
Foundations tottered, her Palace roofes seemed ready to fly into splinters,
nothing but plaints and shrikes, tears, and blood, hurling into rubbish,
burning unto Cinders was expected, till repentance was visible; and repentance
has no sooner entered the streets, but all the City is joyous, and secure, not
a stone is to be removed, not a bone to be broken, not an hair of the head to
be touched; no, before sin had made it Nineveh to be wasted, but repentance now
has made it Nineveh to be spared; for Should not I spare Nineveh?

6. This serves to put us upon trial, whether we that would be the pardoned
people are the penitent people; shall all this discourse end in an Express, or
a Narrative? No, I would willingly not only make a relation, but a collation,
not only set forth a representation, but find an equiparation; else I shall but
tell a tale of Nineveh, or show you how repentance was Nineveh's Custos, how
that coming in before the forty days were expired, Nineveh did not expire;
how repentance kept every Pillar unshaken, and every limb unshivered; how it
held the Crown upon the Kings head, preserved the Nobles in their Courtly
Equipage, the Merchants in their Spleadid trassick; how their Palaces and
Banquetting-houses, Castles and Theaters, Statues and Sepulchers, Exchequers
and Wardrobes, Courts and Arsenalls, Magazines and Records, Fishponds and
Gardens, Pearls, and Perfumes, Laws and Lives, were all safe and secure by
Repentance; that not so much as a tree was blasted, a spire cast down, an Image
defaced, a fly skalt, a worm burnt, a dog brained, or a beast slain throughout
the whole City merely through the benefit of repentance; for the people had
repented, and here is their brestplate, shield, and headpiece. Repentance does
prevent detriment, they are not endamag'd in the least, vengeancetook not a
shoo-latchet from them; Repentance does ratify their liberties, confirm their
immunities, renew their Charter; they are still Proprietaries in all their
Fees, Lords of all their royalties, their authority and jurisdiction, opulency
and affluency, celsitude and sublimity, power and pomp, principality and
pre-eminence, Procerage and Peerage, Crown and Crown-land does continue: Oh
Repentance how have thou saved a flourishing City! it is thou, that were the
Cure and the covert, the shadow and the shelter, the Buttress and Buckler;
Nineveh had fallen, if thou had not supported it; and perished, if thou had
not protected it; b^^ thou did open Ninevehs ears to listen to a Prophet,
that it might not hear the thunders of a confounding God; thou did lend
Nineveh faith, that it might believe God; that trembling at the threatenings,
they might not feel. nor see the terrors of a perishing decree executed; thou
did clad them in sackcloth, that they might not be stripped of their gorgeous
raiment, thou did sprinkle them with ashes, that the smell of fire might not
be felt within their walls; thou did enjoin them the fast, that ere long thou
might set them down again at their spread Tables; thou did make them cry
mightily, that no other cries might be heard in the City, but those of
devotion; thou did make them turn from their evil ways, and from the
violence of their hands, that their evil ways might not bring all manner of
evils upon them, and that the violence of their hands might not expose them to
the violence of ruining justice; it is thou that did teach Nineveh the art,
and learn her the secret, and mystery, how to prevent an imminent danger, and
to preserve her self at an exigent; that she stood still upon her old basis,
when her groundsell was sliding, and cracking in pieces; that her fabric
remained firm, when the whole structure was dropping down, and not one stone
ready to be left upon another: Oh Repentance how may we honor thy succouring
bowels, and kiss thy securing hand! Oh great is thy potency, yea, a kind of
omnipotency is bestowed upon thee to rescue people, and Nations from the
greatest of hazards; thou keep Nineveh safe, when after a thousand years
triumphant state, she had but forty days respit either to repent, or to have
utter destruction; by thee, for that time she retained all her pristine
greatness; for Penitent Nineveh was Nineveh the Glorious. This can I say of
Nineveh, but can I express the like confidence, or assure the like bliss to
you? Oh that I could! I shall make it my Prayer, but I cannot yet bring it into
my Creed; I look with doubtful eyes upon you, and carry a jealous heart
toward you; ye stand, but what is your foundation? ye may stand by your
prudence and policy, your tradings and truces, your arms and artifices, your
formidable numbers and dreadful Navies, but do ye stand upon repentance? Here
is much profession and formality, hunting of Sanctuaries, and presenting your
selves at Sacraments, but what repentance? Ye would be Nineveh, but are ye
Nineveh? ye would be prosperous Nineveh, but are ye penitent Nineveh? are ye
not to seek for repentance in the midst of all privileges and Ordinances, your
exquisitie principles, and accurate Preachers? If ye would limit your
confidence to your conversion, might ye not expect rather co^^ounding
judgments, then preserving mercy? Gods correcting hand, than his comforting
hand? chains of vengeance, then bands of love? If ye would come to your
trial, does not the trial of your countenance testify against you? if ye
would stand to your discovery, and to the remembrances that ye have left of
your selves: have ye not discovered your transgressions, and made your iniquity
be remembered? it is true, ye live in the Lords eye, but ye are sinners before
the Lord exceedingly: ye tread upon Gods ground, and walk every day upon his
consecrated earth, but ye have polluted the Lords land, ye have turned Bethel
into Bethaven, an house of Prayer into a den of Thieves; ye are rather Jezreel
then Israel, Sodom than Nineveh. Ye would be reprieved, but where are your
qualifications for pardon? ye would be spared, but are ye Nineveh? ye may have
Ninevehs wishes, but have ye Ninevehs fruits? ye may match sins with Nineveh,
but can ye match repentance with Nineveh? ^^grave ne rediret seculum Pyrrhae
nova monstra questae. Horat. -- ipso sceleris molimine Tereus Creditur esse
pius. -- Ovid 6. Met. Vitrum pro Crystallo. Adage.
no, this age of Pyrrba has nothing but Monsters in it. Tereus as bad as he
was, might have been esteemed innocent in respect of us; Nineveh, as guilty as
it was, might have been a Saint in comparison of us. We have Ninevehs crimes,
but not Ninevehs conscience; Ninevehs prevarications, but not Ninevehs
humilations; we are but shining-glasse in respect of that bright crystal. Shall
we make an experiment of it? then answer to your charge, and see how ye can
clear your selves upon trial.

First, Nineveh heard God in his Messenger; But our Messengers may cry in the
streets, and deliver their errands, and neither their presence, nor prophecies
regarded. Alas, we use Ministers as Tapestry hangings, to look upon; or as the
statues of old Worthies, to adorn our houses, we love to have such to procure
credit to our Country, and to set up the fame of a reformed Church; but we
bestow little attendance upon them, or yield little attention to them. One,
Octavius, (a Nobleman of Rome) wore a Jewel in his ear, and yet he told Tully,
that he could not hear him; it is strange, Cicero in Brutor Habes aures
perforatas.
said Tully, when thou have thy ears bored through. So our Auditors, though
they wear in their ears the Jewel of a Christian calling, yet they cannot hear
us, though their ears be bored through with profession. Antimachus read, in
his school, his rare Thebais, but all his Disciples forsook him, saving Plato,
Plut. in Apoph Plato instar omnium.
whereupon he said, that Plato was instead of all: So deliver we never such
serious messages, it is only some choice Plato which will stay out the
publication of them. The truth is, many people have little opinion of a Temple,
they have unconsecrated the walls, and the Ordinances; every one takes upon him
our calling, so that a true Preacher is not distinguished from the Rustic, or
Mechanic; men in general are so perfected, that they need none of our
literature, and so replete with principles, that they are brimfull of
mysteries, every one is a Phoenix, nay our birds can fly with their shells upon
their heads, they have tapped so much out of their own Runlets, that they need
not broach any thing out of our Vessels; yea, their showers of infusion are so
abundant, that they count it a madness to go to the Academical spring. Every
stripling is a Theologue, and can divine without Authors; the well is not so
deep, that they need to draw up waters with the ancient bucket, nor the trade
so difficult, that they must endure an Apprentiship to learn it; that though I
do not see yet, that men can fight without Captains, nor sail without Pilots,
nor know the laws of men without Counsailers, yet every man can take up this
leading-staffe, and steer this ship, and expound the laws of God without
gloss, or Commentary: there is such a strange revelation, as if they could
create a new world out of nothing, or they could find Honey in a dead carcass,
or Iron could swim, or Rocks gush with water, or they could blow down walls
with Rams horns, or Balaams Ass could speak again, or a Virgin the second time
could bring forth a child, or they had been all touched with fiery tongues from
heaven, to speak to the world the wonderful things of God? all the miracles of
former ages must be appropriated to their inspirations; an absolut generation,
that need none to counsel them, pray for them, teach them, no they are all
Preachers: Tithes are unnecessary, Ministers are superfluous; they live, they
say, upon the bread of other men, and eat up the far of the Land with their
university teeth; other men can do the Church-duty, as well as they, therefore
they are Burdens, Pressures, Robbers, Thieves; they hear God in their
mystical Meditationmen, not hear God in his Messenger; so that what between
the formal, and phanatick Gospeller, the Minister is quite cast out of doors.
They will fetch nothing from the Temple, or be relieved by Gods Almoner,
howsoever not take their repentance out of a Prophets mouth; whatsoever
necessary Agent there is in the Nation, yet Jonah might be spared, he might
forbear his cries in our streets.

2. Nineveh was not curious in her Counsailers: a stranger was received there,
but here not the home-born can be admitted; for though we know many Messengers,
their persons and their parts, their Country and their calling, their
Commission and their competencies, their gifts and graces, their labors and
language, yet they cannot be entertained. A Prophet is without honor in his
own Country: Native commodities are of no price, Grapes of our own growth taste
not well, homebred Artisants have little employment. Alexander likes not long
the Grecian habit; Tiberius would wear no silks of his own Country; Vitellius
would eat no Mullets, but such as were fetched from the Carpathian Sea. So with
us, our own Teachers are men of no brain, we have scarce a Preacher that can
speak sense to this intelligent age; this man is too deep, and that man is too
shallow; this man's Arrows do drop short, and that man does shoot beyond the
mark; this man has no lungs, and that man is too stridulent. I see many a
solid Divine cried down; such as learned men admire, illiterate men deride. We
are so choice of our Pulpit-men, that I think we would have Samuel raised out
of his grave to Prophecy to this Nation, or send for some Angel from heaven to
be our Pastor: and yet if either of these had continued awhile amongst us, the
one might be sent back to his Sepulcher at Ramath, and the other returned to
his upper loft. We are not like to be Converts, for we have none that can teach
us the penitential art, we cavil at our Prophets, though we know their
delegated power, and conspicuous abilities; whereas Nineveh was not so
scrupulous about her Messenger, but does even accept of a stranger.

3. Nineveh does endure sharp Doctrine: for though Jonah cried, Yet forty days
and Nineveh shall be overthrown, yet there was no offense taken; but what
Prophet without hazard, could deliver such a message in our streets? no, we
would be readier to brain the Prophet, Innocentissimo viro o^ulos esso di
jussit, quod ei in illis, que injuste appetchat, obstitit. Fulgos. l. 9. c. 5.
Cromer. l. 4.
than to lie at his feet, and to clip out his tongue, than to attend to his
cries, as Beniface the 7th plucked out the eyes of Cardinal John, because he
opposed him in his unjust desires; and Boleslaus the second King of Polonia
killed Stanislaus, Bishop of Cracovia, because he severely reprehended him.
Prophets in these days must rather put a Flute in their mouths, then a
Trumpet, and come with a Paper filled with nothing but joy, and glee, and
bliss, rather then with a scrowl written within and without with nothing but
lamentation, mourning, and woe. How grim are our looks upon an increpating
Teacher, how tetricall are we to a challenging Messenger? He that does strike
at corruptions; had as good go and smite at the holes of Aspes: he that does
threaten Malefactors, had as good go and wrestle with Bears. Oh Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, thou which killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent
unto thee! We must have our praises sung out in the Temple, and have the Pulpit
for nothing but Panegyricks, to be made the Non-pariles of Religion, and to
have all the Encomiasticks that belong to true virtue attributed to us, as the
Cities of Achaia sent all the conquering Crowns of Musicians to Nero, as to the
Prince of Musicians. We keep so many Preacher, but as so many Limbners, or
Heralds, Sueton.
or Confectioners, or Minstrels: If they come to be Proposers and Opposers,
Restrainers and Rebukers, to give a sanctuary-gripe, or a Pulpit pinch, to hold
a Razour over our heads, or to shake a scourge in our eyes, to style us
sinners, or God a Judge, Vae vobis, they are fit for nothing then but Clinks
and Gibbets: Jonah may escape well enough in Nineveh, but he would not come off
with so much safety here: Oh we would live at case in Sion, and have our taste
remaining in us without stirring; we had rather be hung up with the silken
halter of flattery, then be put in mind of the hangmans Rope; and go to
destruction laughing, then be frayed before hand with the noise of ruin. Ye
Preachers, (says the Age) dip your tongues in Oil, supple your doctrines,
apply gentle plasters, sow pillowes under every arm-hole, cut out complying
shreds, or else ye will want the countenance and preferment of the times; beye
cautious, or else ye are neither acceptable, nor secure. A resolute Prophet,
does stand upon a precipice, if he does discharge his conscience, he will not
keep his ground. How often has truth here been jayled? bondage at the heels of
him, which here does denounce vengeance? This Land cannot hear a menacing
Messenger, though the streets of Nineveh could hear Jonah threatening, Yet
sorty days and Nineveh shall be overthrown.

4. Nineveh does apprehend danger: for Jonah has no sooner pronounced the
judgment, but the people of Nineveh believed God: that is, they verily
thought, and resolved, that the state of their City was upon the point of
destruction, at the brink of ruin: But we have no such credulous breasts, nor
believing hearts. Tell us of dangers? no, we defy such seditious Preachers,
such tumultuous Prophets; calamity is but your jealousy, danger but your
discord, peril but your peevishness. We are a righteous people, and not to be
punished; we are a formidable people, and not to be frighted; they are a
scandalous people, which accuse us of sin; they are an audacious people, which
terrify us with judgments; we have graces enough to make all the Devils in
Hell recoil, we have prayers enough to petition away all plagues, we have
ships enough to shoot away all enemies from our coasts, Knolls in his Turkish
Hist.
we have spears enough (as that French King said, who went with 200000.
soldiers at his heels against the Turk) to uphold the Heavens if they should
fall. We are quiet, and secure after the manner of the Sidonians, Judge. 18.7.
Our houses are safe from fear. Job 21.9. We are at ease from our youth, Jer.
48.12. We can dwell in Cities without gates, and bars. Jer. 49.31. We stretch
our selves upon our Couches. Amos 6.4. Our walls our Targets, our Magazeens,
our Capitol, our Castle of Angels, our Martial blades, whose faces are as
Lions, whose feet are as swift as Roes upon the Mountains, our redoubted
Captains, which can sleep in their armor, and rise up harnessed at the sound
of the alarm, whose music is the beating of drums, and can sing Ha, Ha, at
the blowing of Trumpets; men so resolved to fight, that they do but expect an
enemy, and so valiant, that one can chase a thousand; which are used to
marches, musters, casting up of Banks, raising of Forts, drawing of lines,
making of rolling Trenches digging of Mines, battering of Walls, drayning of
ditches, drying up Rivers, framing Pall sadoes, Sconses, Redoubts,
Counterscarps, tumbling of Garments in the blood, filling places with dead
bodies, fishing, sanning, risting, sacking Towns and Cities, leaving fruitful
places more desolate then the Wilderness toward Diblath, levelling goodly
Structures, as Shalman destroyed Beth-Arbel, yea soaking Lands, and Nations
with showers of tempests of blood, all these shall settle the Land in firm
peace, look upon the Nation, and see if it be not the quick corner of the Earth
for living Souls, the Worlds gendring place, sown with the seed of man, her
children like the sand, the offspring of her bowels like the gravel, numbers
of people like the Stars of Heaven, or Grasshoppers for multitude, Who can count
the dust of Jacob? or the fourth part of Israel? Number. 23.16. Yea, a Land of
Soldiers, the sighting Country, as if it had been like that in the Poet sown
with the teeth of Serpents, or Titan had peopled, this Island with his race and
progeny. What a Cluster of Chieftains? what millions of Heroes are there here?
this whole Land seems to be no other then an Artillery-Garden, a
Trayning-Field, the feeble as David, the strongest as Adino the Eznite, who
lift up his spear against 800 men at once, as Eleazar the Son of Dodo the
Abohite, who smote the Philistims, till his hand was weary, and clave to his
sword; and as Shammah the Son of Agee the Hararite, who stood in a field of
lentiles against an Host of Enemies. Now are we not without suspicion of danger
under such a Banner? Yes, the poison of all our Enemies cannot envenome us
through the virtue of this military Antidote. We fear? No, let the earth fear?
Destruction to us? No destruction to all round about us, destruction to them
that attempt our downfall, destruction to you that preach it.

This is the considence, and self hardiness of the age; though the scourge
pass through, and flow over, yet it shall not come at us. Es. 28.15. though
the clouds gather, yet we think of no storm; though the leaks break in, Multo
minus praesentes, quam absentes hosts timendi sunt. Marineus. lib. 12. reg
Hispan. Eustath. in H^ad. 8. Procella ingenti rerum suarum semper se vino
ingurgitavit. Victor. lib. 8. Var. Lect c 4. Aelian. lib. 12. Var. Hist.
yet we dream of no shipwreck, we fear neither approaching nor apparent
dangers, as John of Aragon feared neither absent, nor present enemies. We rush
into those courses, that we know judgment do attend upon them, as Protesilaus
leaped out of the Ship, though he knew, that the Oracle had pronounced, that
whosoever came first on shore should be slain. Zenotymus in the greatest
tempest of misfortune was drunk; so we are intoxicated against all dangers;
Yea, as the ancient Celtae, though they were in an house that was all on a
flaming fire, yet they never stirred foot, thinking they should never be
crushed, nor burnt; So we stand in aw of no perils, though smoke, and fire
predict otherwise. We sleep quietly, expel all dread, our hill is so strong,
that we shall never be removed, the munition of Rocks is our defense, none
shall pluck us out, our ditch is the Sea, none can swim over to us, all our
Ports are locked, none can force an entrance. This day is pleasant, not the
face of an Enemy is to be seen, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much
better. These same dangers are but the melancholic apprehensions of
Malcontents, or the dreams of lunatic Teachers; we lay our hands upon our
Swords, and contemn all these, as panick fears. So that we have not such soft
hearts, and tender ears, as Nineveh had; no, our Messengers denounce, and we
give no credit to them; whereas Jonah does but threaten, and the men of Nineveh
believed God.

5. Nineveh does not delay repentance. For Nineveh was a City of three days
journey, and Jonah does but enter the City, or but get up to Court, and his
cries are heard, and the City conve^ted. But alas how do we weary God with
expectation? the eye of Heaven aketh to see this Nation humbled. Success rem se
relicturum ^ur non bis de erdem re deliber^^et. Plu^a. ch in Ap^^h.
Augustus Caesar told the people of Rome that he would leave them a Successor,
that should not twice deliberate of the same thing, but we are a very
deliberating people; too much hastiness may spoil good intentions, but too
much protraction attaineth to nothing. Simulavit se cras obtemperaturum. Quin
ad Deum preces faciamus. Sozomen. l. 8. c. 19.
Theophilus, Patriark of Alexandria, would have had Nilammon accept of the
Ministry, and he feigned that the next morrow he would; when the morrow was
come, he deferred him with this pretense, that it was fit first that he should
make his prayers to God; and he had so many subterfuges, that he gave up the
Ghost without satisfying the request; so when we are invited to repentance, we
make Nilammons haste, we are full of our evasions, and die in our
procrastination: Artaxerxes intending a War against Nectanebis King of Egypt,
he appointed Pharnabasus to advance the design, which he promised to do with
speed, but spending many years in preparing, Mirari se quod tam celer in
sermon sit, and in action tam tardus. Diod. l. 15. Timeham ne me cito
exaudires, and sanares a morbo concupiscentiae, quam maleb im expleri, quam
extingui. Aug. l. 8. confess. c. 7.
and bringing forth nothing to issue, Iphicrates the Commander of the
Mercenaries, told him that he wondered he should be so quick in speech, and so
slow in action; so we have nimble tongues, but torpulent endeavors. We may
affect repentance, and beg it of God, but yet as St Augustine says against
himself, we are afraid that God should answer us, we had rather have our
Concupiscence fulfilled, then extinguished. Forty years long was I grieved with
this generation, but has not our grievance exceeded that of the Jews, not
only in heinousness, but in tediousness? How many plasters have there been
laid upon our sores, and yet the ulcers are as bad as ever? How often has this
Morian been washed, and yet he is never the whiter? If all the Amphyctions were
gathered together in counsel, Amphyctionum consessus. Adag.
they could not devise a way for us to embrace their resolves at present. How
many Ministers heart strings have we broken, sending them into their Graves
with our impenitency, to afflict their dying spirits? we repent at leisure,
whereas Nineveh repented instantly.

6. Nineveh had stirring motions: for Jonah does deliver his message, and there
is honor done to it, reverence expressed to it; the King of Nineveh is not the
same man, for as mighty as he was, he seems now to have his Lord in chief, a
Commander greater then himself, call upon him; and therefore he does witness
to him submissive offi^iousnesse, observance, and veneration; he does not sit
like a King, but like a Minor, one under authority, or an head-servant (at
best) amongst the rest of the Attendants, he does bow before his Master, and
forgetting all dignity, and Grandeur, he does rise up. The King of Nineveh rose
up. But Gods messages to us are not thus extimulatory, instigatory, and
impulsory, we change neither posture, nor gesture, carriage, nor countenance,
we hold up our domination, and keep our seats. The great God cannot make us
abate of the Clarissimo, we will lose nothing of the Prince to show our selves
penitent; we hear much, but are moved with nothing: let God declare what he
will, we declare no astonishment. The King of Nineveh rose up, but when will we
stir? or move an inch from our benches or chayrs, descents, or degrees, leave a
scarf or a scutcheon, a blew Garter or a Coronet, fly out of a Porch or a
Belcony, a Shop or a Counting House, as people terrified with the sense of sin,
and danger? no, our proud hearts cannot shrink up, our stiff limbs cannot
arise, repentance or vengeance can scarce make us vail an hat, or leave a chayr
empty. The precept of Numa was, Move thy whole body, whilst thou do adore the
Gods; but we have no such laborious concitations, Circumagas te, dum Deos
adores. Plut. in Numa. Lacrt. l. 6. c. 1.
or circumagitations. As Antisthenes said of the Athenians, that they never
moved out of their shells, so no more do we out of our wonted garbs. We must
keep state in our most religious works, and act the Prince too much even in
repentance it self. The Prophet does rebuke, and we keep our stations, the
Preacher does threaten, and we sit; even at the most piercing, launcing,
castigatory Sermons, what stirring is there? No, a man would think that our
hearts did not change, for neither our faces, nor our feet do change; there may
be much advising, but little alteration seen; we retein our old modes,
customs, passages, and places. We sit till misery must cast us down grovelong,
or judgment strik us down dead: our humiliation has little perplexity in it,
or our repentance reverence. When the Lord denied to go up with the Israelites,
Exodus 33.8.
the people rose up. When sad tidings was brought to Job, he rose up. But no
news, nor needs will make us stir from the cushion no, We sit in the seat of
the scornful, or like Aholah, 3 Job 1.20. Psalm. 1.1. Ezech. 23.41. Zach. 5.7.
Rev. 18.7.
sit upon our costly beds; or like the woman called wickedness, sit in the
midst of the Ephah; or like careless Babylon sit as Queen, as if we should
never be a widow, nor see any mourning. The powerfullest Sermons cannot make us
stand up to them, we take all our warnings sitting. Security is the mother of
negligence; and how are we the heavy eyed children of this drowzy-headed
Mother? Securitas matter negligentiae, Greg. in Pastoral.
for whereas we should rise up to show that admonition has prompted us to
duty, and that we are fixing our thoughts, straining our wits, and gathering
our forces together to promote holy actions; we on the contrary do but only
give the hearing to the message, and never lift up our selves to accomplish or
accelerate that which is enjoined; no, (...), animi torpor. Aquin. Jeron. de
homine perf. Maxim negligentes in rebus maximis.
there is in us a torpulency of spirit, we are most negligent in the things
most important. We show neither fear, nor express endeavor. The Prophet does
call, and we sit by it, whereas Jonah does cry, and the King of Nineveh rose up.

7. Nineveh does not think of greatness, for the King of Nineveh is the first
in the action. But alas our great ones are no such good Leaders, they must have
the path beaten out for them, before they can set forward; or the whole family
is upon employment, before these principal Servants can fall to work.
Greatness which should be exemplary, thinks it self exempted; they which
should appear in the Front, do come up in the Reere. These laden Carts move but
slowly, these heavy bustards have much ado to raise their flight, and be upon
the wing, Mysorum ultimus navigat. Adag.
He which has great adventure to put into his Ship, does sail last. It is as
hard for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, as for a rich man to enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. The seed does with a difficulty spring up, where
the thorns do grow. Not many mighty, not many noble. It is a rare thing for
Obadiah to be one of Gods Nobles, or for Daniel to open a window toward
Jerusalem, for Asah to purge a corrupt State, or for Josias to have a melting
heart at Huldahs prophesying. There is the least grace usually, where the hand
has found out much; they which have the fullest Coffers have the emptiest
consciences. God does draw few servants from Mammons thresholds, the rich
Merchants which are bartering for so many Jewels, very seldom purchase the
true pearl; he can hardly look up to Heaven which has his eye upon his shop;
nor seek for durable riches, Leones catuli informs nascuntur, non moventur
nisi bimestres, vix ingrediuntur semestres. Erasm. Damonum carcer sit quisque
in hoc s^culo qui propter divitiat and honores laborat. Greg. l. 15. Moral.
which does lay up gold as dust. The Lions whelps are a long time before they
come to their feet, they do not stir under two months, nor walk under seven.
The Devils Prison is filled chiefly with persons of high birth, and high
fortunes, he has in chains honorable slaves, his Captives go in skarlet, wear
golden chains about their necks, ride in Coaches, and lie upon beds of Ivory,
therefore Saint Gregory says, that a Rich man's heart is the Devils Dungeon;
Oh the witchcraft of abundance! the Vipers gall that is in a Worldlings
inwards? How many would have been humbled to the Earth, but that their gainful
places will not suffer them to come to their knees? how many had been true
Penitents, but that ambition will not suffer them to lose any thing of their
present degree. These lofty Pines are most barren, whereas Nineveh has her
sweetest fruit upon the highest trees; these are the last at the penitential
service, whereas the King of Nineveh was the first in action.

8. Nineveh had a humble dress: for the King put off his Robe, and he and the
whole City was covered with sackcloth. But alas we are so far from repentance
in the heart, that we have not repentance on the back; we are so far from the
sackcloth, that we are all for the Robe, and the Miniver gown. If we be
Converts, we are very spruse ones; if Penitents, we are very gay, and gaudy
ones. Oh the monstrous pride, and prodigious bravery of these days! Pliny does
report, Pliny l. 19. c. 1. Sabel l. 8. c. 7.
that the first dying of flax began in Alexandria, Sabellicus writes, that the
Aelians first wrought cloth of gold, and that the Babylonians first invented
embroyderies. But whosoever were the first Inventers of these things, their
Inventions have proved so fruitful, that nothing will please us, but costly
dies, curious textures, and all the artificial Draughts of the needle; our
Garments so costly, that purple which was wont to be bought at the equal
weight of silver, Illud vestimenti genus, and apud reges carissimum esset, and
magnificum, nam purpura aequi ponderis olim argento redimebatur. Athen* l. 12.
c. 10 externos habitus edicto proh ibuit. Aventin. l. 4. Annal. Bojorum.
Gregoras. l. 2.
and very seldom came upon the backs of any, but Princes, is now of little
esteem amongst us. Lewis Emperor of Germany by solemn Proclamation forbad all
foreign apparel; but he had been no Emperor for us, for there is nothing
will please these times, but that which is outlandish. We are so much addicted
(though quite contrary to Scripture, and indeed what is Scripture to the
un-Bibling Natural) to strange apparel. Zeph. 1.8. that there is scarce any
thing, that is English seen about us; as it was said of the Courtiers of
Andronteus the younger, that in respect of their hateful disguises in
apparel, they seemed no longer to be Grecians, but a ^medly of Latins,
Mysians, Triballians, Syrians, and Phaenicians. So we have brought all Nations
into the Wardrobe, or to act upon the garment-Stage.

The Kings of Egypt were wont to give unto their Queens the tribute of the
City Antilla to buy them girdles; Diod. Sic.
and how much girdles, gorgets, wimples, cawles, crisping-pins, vails, rails,
frontlets, bonnets, bracelets, neeklaces, slops, slippers, roundtires,
sweetballs, rings, earings, mufflers, glasses, hoods, lawn, musks, civets,
rosepowders, gessamy butter, complexion waters, do cost in our days, many a
sighing husband does know by the years account. What ado is there to spruse up
many a woman, either for streets, or Market, Banquets, or Temples? She is not
fit to be seen unless she does appear half naked, nor to be marked, unless
she has her distinguishing pitches upon her, she goes not abroad till she be
feathered like a Popin-jay, and does shine like alablaster; it is an hard thing
to draw her out of bed, and an harder thing to draw her from the
looking-glass; it is the great work of the Family to dress her, much chasing,
and fuming there is before she can be thoroughly tired; her spungings, and
perfumings, lacings, and lickings, clippings, and strippings, dentifricings,
and dawbings, the setting of every hair methodically, and the placing of every
beauty-spot topically, are so tedious, that it is a wonder, that the Mistress
can sit, or the waiting maid stand still all the scenes of this fantastic
Gomedy be acted through. O these birds of Paradise are bought at a deererate!
the keeping of these Lannerets is very chargeable! The wife oftentimes does
wear more gold upon her back, then the husband has in his purse; and has more
Jewels about her neck, then the annual revenue does amount to; and this is
the Shee-pride, and does not the Heepride equal it? yes the Man now is become
as feminine, as the Woman. Men must have their half shirts, and halfarms, a
dozen casements above, and two wide luke-homes below: some walk (as it were) in
their Wastcoats, and others (a man would think) in their Petticoats, they must
have narrow wastes, and narrow bands, large cuffes upon their wrests, and larger
upon their shinbones, their boots must be crimped, and their knees guarded; A
man would conceive them to be Apes by their coats, Sope-men by their faces,
Meal-men by their shoulders, Bears or Dogs by their frizled hair; And this is
my trim Man. And oh that I could end here, but pride does go a larger Circuit,
it is travailed amongst the Commons; every Yeoman in this age must be attired
like a Gentleman of the first head, every Clark must be as brave as the
Justice, every Apprentice match his Master in gallantry, the waiting
Gentlewoman does vy fashions with her Lady, and the Kitchen maid does look like
some Squires daughter by her habit; the Handicrafts-men are in their colors,
and their wives in rich silks. Oh where will pride end her pilgrimage? And that
which is the height of immodesty, and the abominable impudency of pride is
this, that these made Beauties in these strange dresses will talk of points of
religion, as if they had lately dropped out of Heaven, as celestial spirits;
and speak of mortification, as if they had learned repentance from some
Gabriel, or Michael; none so busy in giving Church-orders, or prescribing
rules of reformation; they can lament the wickedness of the Times, and teach
the Nation the proper sacrifice that is to be offered to appease an incensed
God. Oh scorn, and mockery of direction, where pride is the prime Counselor!
A pitiful agreement that is wrought by such Peacemakers, a woeful
reconciliation that is procured by such Mediators. These are fitter to curse a
Nation, then to be isntrumental for a pacification, and to irritate a patient
God, than to assuage an offended God; if Job, Noah, and Daniel can do no good
at such a time, were despair of such Interceders; the ruin is apparent, where
pride is the refuge; Oh they must not be cuts and jags, laces and embroyderies,
a glistering people that must be mitigaters of wrath at such a season, but they
must be rents, rags, slashes, Sithy-coats; and sackcloth people, that must
undertake this work. If our Country had never a sin but pride, yet this being
so excessive, and execrable as it is, it were enough to shake this Island in
pieces with an Earthquake, or to drown it in a deluge of vengeance, to call in
God and Magog to pluck off these Antic abiliments, and to flay off those skins
which have clad themselves in such exotique disguisements; These may name
themselves old fashioned Protestants, but they are but new fashioned Penitents.
Oh strange repentance, which will not lose an Ornament, but renew levities, and
exceed all ages in indecencies; which admits of persons to be proud till
they be ridiculous; proud, till they be prodigious. Is this the Ninivites
penitential apparel? no, we repent in curious dresses, and changeable suits,
and the Ninivites in casting away the Robe, and covering themselves with
sackcloth.

9. Nineveh had the height of abasement, they sat upon the ash-heap. But we
are rather for the Bullion-heap, or the bullet-heap, or the building-heap, than
for the ash-heap! We think what Cities, and Castles, what Rents, and Revenews;
what Ammunition, and Artillery we have, rather then we consider that our
Cities deserve to be sacked, our Castles to be rased, our treasures to be
melted out of our hands, our Magazines of war to be emptied, and this Nation to
be left so unweaponed, that there should be neither sword, nor spear remaining
to defend the Land; we are enamoured upon our present estate, and have high
hopes that all shall be preserved in a prosperous, flourishing condition,
rather then that all may be levelled, wasted, consumed, spoiled, and laid in
ashes. We cannot lead away our hearts from minding our potency, nor turn away
our eyes from gazing upon our greatness, nor cast away our penns from writing
out large Titles of our might, means, Confederates, Allies, Troops, and trained
Bands. We never dissemble more, then when we speak of our weakness; nor double
more, then when we say we are upon the declining point; we will not come at the
ash heap, because we imagine, that all the flames of divine vengeance cannot
turn this Nation into a Bonefire, or burn us to nothing, as in a devouring
furnace; no, sprinkle these ashes upon Rome, or Constantinople, the Crim
Tartar, or the great Mogul; we fear no such ash-heap. Oh these arrogant hearts
of ours cannot apprehend any thing to be pernicious, and exitiall to us, we are
falling, and fainting indeed, when we do not lift up our selves to boast? 1 Chronicles. 25.19. we are burting beasts, and will not leave to take unto our selves
horns. Amos 6.13. we love to exalt our gate. Prove. 17.19. and to stretch out
our necks. Esa. 3.16. Pride must compass us like a Chain. Ps. 73.6. we are
Princes in our own opinion, and delight to have the Crown of pride upon our
heads. Esa. 28.1. we must be strong as the Oaks. Amos 2.9. and ride in our
Chariots of glory. Esa. 22.18. We dread neither our enemies, nor our guilts;
for let our sins be never so many (as they are infinite, beyond the cyphring up
of the best Arithmetician) or never so grievous (as they are horrid, roaring in
Gods ears with a Sodoms cry) yet they must neither daunt, nor enfeeble us, nor
pluck down our confident looks, or abase us to the ash-heap; she candle does
yet give a glorious light, we are loath to think of the snuft; we have built up
our selves to admiration, it is irksome to conceive that God should smite the
great house with breaches. No, away with depression, diminution, casting down,
or coming low; we would be above, Victor. l. 6. variar Lect. c. 12.
and not beneath, the head, and not the tail; with Egnarius we cannot leave
showing our white teeth, though they be ready to drop out of our heads; with
that Lydian King, Plut. in Solone.
Croesus, we cannot forbear showing our vast treasures, though Cyrus be coming
to singer up all. As Bardus Durus under Basilius Porphyrogenitus said, Calceum
coceineum fieri non potest ut qui hunc semel in conspectu multitudinis induit,
facile exual. Cedrenus.
that he that had put on the shoo of honor would hardly put it off. So we that
have put on greatness, will hardly slip off this Pantossle; no, we began with
success, and we shall never end with dysaster; all the spite of enemies cannot
kindle a flame in the Nation, we shall never be brought to the ash-heap; we
think we have prayed away our sins though we practice them, and though they
never went an inch breadth from our hearts, yet we think we have expelled them
with a Lecture-sigh. We make those things Monuments of our fame, that will turn
to be Memorialls of our infamy, as the Persians sent home the Parian marble to
build a Trophe to the honor of Victory, when Phydias after the Marathonian
battle built of it a Statue to Nemesis. Pausanias in All. cis.
Thus happen what will, we keep up our spirits, and keep our seats; we sit in
our Porches of greatness, and upon our benches of Command, rather then sit
upon ashes. What is the talk of our age, but of our vigor and valor, our
prosperity and prowess? Pigmalion cannot leave looking upon his own Pictures,
nor we upon our own Images; we are a warlike Nation, a luster at home, a
Terror abroad; the great Britton is as astonishing, as the great Briareus;
these are the fancies of our excellencies; but there is no speech of the
serpents nest amongst us, the Cockatrices eggs, the Vine of Sodom, the root of
gall, and wormwood, that we are a seed of evil doers, children of Belial, a
very generation of Vipers, that God is weary with repenting, and the axeltree
of his patience breaking in pieces, that the iniquity of the Amorites is even
full; and the roll, ten Cubits broad and twenty Cubits long, is ready to fly
abroad; no let who will be appalled at the apprehension of Divine justice
drawing nigh, we do not wag our heads (as the Scripture says) at the thought
of judgment. Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown; yet many an
hundred year, and England shall stand. This is our conceit, and this is our
confidence, therefore we cover not our faces, as if we had seen our last of
worldly welfare; we lie not upon the ground, as if our downfall were at hand,
we sit not upon ashee, as if we were ready to be consumed to ashes. No, we have
little fear of vengeance, for we are not dejected; we have little repentance,
for we are not abased. We walk upon our turrets, and tarasses, when we see the
Ninivites lie in the dust; we sit upon our Theaters of pomp, and vainglory,
when the Ninivites sit upon the ashes.

10. Nineveh had a restraint of delicacies, for they neither did eat meat, nor
drink water. But we have in stead of such pure fasting, full Platters and full
Bowls. Cato said to Julius Caesar, Sueton.
that he only came sober to destroy the Commonwealth, but we cannot come sober
to preserve the Commonwealth. When the strict Law of C. Fannius concerning the
high moderation of nourishment, that was to be observed generally (except it
were at the Saturnalls, and Roman Plays) came to be remissly kept, it is said,
Plerique vino madidi in comitium venerunt and ebrii de salute reip.
consulebant. Macrob. l. 3. Satur. c. 17.
that the people came soaked with wine into the Senate House, and in a drunken
humor consulted about the safety of the Commonwealth. So we go about to save
Kingdoms, and save souls by riot, and revelling. We cannot shut up our mouths
to fence out a judgment, nor lose a meals meat to obtain a blessing; we are
tied by the teeth to hinder us from religious exercises, our tables are our
snares to in thrall us to misery. One would think, that man lives by bread
alone, for he is always feeding; and that he were preserved by his liquor, for
he is more for his cups, then the cup of consolation; if we would diet our
selves, we might be healthful, and fit for action, but we are so full fed,
that our pursy spirits are adapted for nothing that is sacred; we are so much
for the Manger, and so full of Provender, that we even melt in our grease, when
we should ride post to avert a judgment. Oh these slow bellies, Epicures,
Sabellic. l. 10. c. 1^.
and Gourmandisers are dull Agents in a Churches pacification; Instead of thin
bodies macerated with fasting, we have bodies gorged like Maximinians, as if a
cup full of water might be drawn from our sweaty sides.

The intemperance of the Nation is such, that a man may say of it, as Diogenes
did of Maronia, That if a man were blindfold he might know which way to look to
it, Sentiens totam civitatem nihil esse, nisi Guaponam. Eras. l. 6. Apoph.
Vniversa gen^ Anglica supra catero: mortales conviviorum studiosissima est.
Jovius lib. 2. Histor. Gloriarentur, quod magis cottabis periti essent, quam
quod jacularentur. Athen lib. 11. c. 9. Plin. l. 8. c. 51. Macrob. l. 3. Sa^.
c. 13. Valor. Max. Erasm: in Adag.
as to a Cooks shop, for the whole Land does seem to be nothing else but a
Victualling-house: It was truly observed by Jovius, That the English Country
above all Nations upon earth, was most addicted to the throat. Indeed, as
Athenaeus says of the Sicilians, Excess is our mastery, and playing of prizes.
Sozomene does report of a Monk in Coelosyria, called Battheus, that he was so
sparing of meat, that for want of eating, worms bred out of his gums: And
Zenophon relates of Cambyses, that he was so moderate in drinking, that he
never drank till thirst compelled him. But we eat so, that we may rather fear
worms breeding in our bowels than in our gums, and we drink so, that not
thirst, but a cup-appetite does provoke us. Servilius Rullus, was the first
that brought in a whole boar into a banquet. Q. Hortensius first brought in
Peacocks. The Ionians, second services. The Lydians, Carycks, a curious dish,
which had all manner of rare confections in it. Whosoever were the inventers of
these things, we are the imitators; yea, we have out-scienced all the Artists
in voluptuousness, and luxury for Charger-principles. The Nine cites did
neither eat nor drink to pacisie Gods wrath; but we wi l hazard our selves upon
all the judgments from heaven, rather than we will punish the flesh too much
by abstinence, were it to save our heads, or preserve a Kingdom; no, we are old
eaters, and old drinkers.

First To examine more strictly our eating. Are not our minds wholly set upon
banquets? do we not with the Israelites lust after flesh, and eat oftentimes
till the meat does come out of our Nostrills? Can there be a Nation more guilty
of fullness of bread? can we imagine more riotous eaters of flesh? Turks would
make us blush, the blind Infidels shall rise up in condemnation against us;
Curistians, and yet men given to the appetite? Protestants, and yet Epicures:
we know where these Helluoes dwell, we could call by name these slaves of the
palate, which have mind neither of Church nor State, but of their spread Tables
and delicious fare, which face all judgments with nourishing their hearts in
pleasure, as in a day of slaughter, and will jeopard the loss of privileges,
and Ordinances, rather then they will forbear from their belly cheer, to eat
ashes like bread. It is not their daily bread, and food convenient that will
satisfy them, but they must have dainty bread, and food sumptuous; they are
such insatiable Gourmandisers, as if with Matthew Bishop of Cracovia, they
would bury all their treasure in their Guts; or with Hugutio Fagiolanus,
Cromer. l. 6. Petrarch.
they would not rise from a banquet to save an Estate; or good diet did run
more in their minds, than sad accidents to themselves, or their dearest
friends; or Galienus having heavy news brought him of his Father Valerian in
Parthia, he said no more, but, Ecquid ha^emus, quod prandeamus* Trebel
Heave we any thing to go to dinner with? God does not only put meat into many
unclean mouths, and spread a Table for unthankful guests; but he gives the
freedom of his creatures to them which know not how to use their liberty; which
do eat not only to satisfy nature but to surcharge it. It would astonish a
man to see what killing, and flaying, and basting, and larding there is for our
curious appetites; If a true account could be brought in for one years.
^able-expences in this Nation, what a large bill of fare would there be? I
doubt whether the Spaniards Indies would defray the costs of it. Oh these teeth
of ours are very chargeable, these upper and neither milstones of our jaws do
grind the Creatures; how sparing and penurious soever we are to the afflicted
and distressed (for the Epicure is the worst enemy, or coldest friend to a
suffering Church, he cannot spare crumbs to Christ, nor a few mites to his chain
or treasury, his devouring we^and costing him so many pounds) yet we are lavish
enough in our sustenance, we care not what we sacrifice to our delicious
throats; Plut in Lucullo.
There are a people, which with Lucullus, cannot sup in the Apollo under the
price of 50000 Deneirs: or with Michael Angelus, they desire to have at their
Tables an hill of bread, a chase of beasts, Nicetas.
a pond of fishes. Plato said of the Agrigentines, that they did build to day,
as if they should live for ever, Aelian.
but we feast to day as if we should dye to morrow; for every banquet is so
costly, as if men were going into another Country, Orexim convivii. Lamprid.
and taking solemn leave of all their friends. With Heliogahalus, they prepare
a whetstone to their appetites, and have such variety of provisions, as if,
with the Thessalians, (...). Athen. l. 10.
they wished that their Tables might be wat^essull, or Cartloads of
entertainments. Every meeting has such sumptuousness and superfluity in it,
as if they had the pillar which Alexander found in the Persian Palace to order
banquets by, Columna conviviorum. Polyen. l. 4. Theopomp. l. Hist. 35.
or as if they were of such an insatiable appetite, that with that Paphlagonian
Thyn, no less than an hundred Dishes would serve them at a meal, or they had
need of some Historian to describe their prodigality; as Lamia had Lynceus
Samius, to Register every Dish of that great banquet which she bestowed upon
Demetrius Polyorcetes. Plut. in Demet^io.
There is a people with us so given over to licorousnesse, that it is an hard
thing to get a Cook to please them, they had need lay before their Palate
dressers, the eleven Books of Timarchidas Rhodius, to teach men how to prepare
diet; or to send into Persia, to get the old directions how to season a dish
that might be called Jupiters brayn; or to go search Egypt, if there can be
found an heir of Numatius Plancus, to produce the Records of the
interchangeable banquet which past betwixt Mark Anthony, and Cleopatra. The
Hoga's, and Olies, and Lumbards of these times, are not choice enough for them,
no, they must have more curious inventions, if their purses would retch to it,
their palats are as delicious as ever were those of Nero, Vitellius,
Sardanapalus, or the greatest feastworms that ever were in the world. Oh, to
the hungry every bitter thing is sweet, but these which are daily surfeited
with delicacies, nothing almost rellishes well with them, nor has the licorous
gust; it cannot be powdered, and pickled, spiced, sawced, larded, sufficiently
for them; What should I say? their Palates are their Altars, their Services are
their sacrifices, their Belly is their God, they are the black Idolaters of the
smoaky, reeking, steaming Kitchen; not Ninevites I will warrant you, which
consume their selves with fasting, but Epicures, which would gnaw as long as
their teeth can chew, and would die with meat in their mouths; And thus much
for our eating.

Secondly, To take a more serious review of our drinking: the Ninevites would
not drink water, but we will drink; and the Spring, Cum legati Atheniensium
laudassent Philippum prae nimio potu, respondit Demosthenes, Habet hane
virtutem cum spongia communem. Plut. in Demosth Aelian. l. 2. Var. Hist. Duas
ollas instar Lovis inclinatus exhausit. Nicet. Coniates. lib. 3. Nec temere
unquam a triclinio sobrius abseessit, nisi distentus, and madidus vino. Sueton.
Velut carceribus emissae belluae. Guagninus in descript. Muscov. c. 1. In
bibendo parem non habuit. Ravis. Reliquum est, ut mare ebibat. Athen. l. 8. c.
6. l. Id. l. 10. c. 11.
or Conduit shall be none of our Celler; no, we must drink of the sweet, and it
is well, if any thing be dulcy, and meracious enough for us; it must not only
take away thirst, but satisfy the taste, not only refrigerate, but inebriate.
We are compassed about with the Sea, and one would think there were an Ocean
within land; we are rid of our ravenous wolves, but when shall we of our
riotous wombs; we seem to be steeped in liquors, or to be the Dizzy Hand. We
drink, as if like Philip, we were nothing but spunges to draw up meislure, or
we had tunnels in our mouths, as it was said of Dyotimus the Athenian, or with
Camatherus Logotheta, We drank like Oxen. It is pity there are no nets to
catch these fishes, nor no harping Irons provided to dart into the bellies of
these Whales. Noah planted a Vine, and the world was never since sober; we are
the Grape-suckers of the earth. The More is abstemious, the Spaniard sober; but
we, the wit-foundred Nation. There are many like Claudius, which seldom go
sober over their thresholds, they rise up from their meetings like wild beasts
let loose from their Dens, they triumph with Heraclides, not to have a
Cup-Peer, they would seem (as Theocritus Chius said of Diocles) to drink up the
Sea, they have never drunk enough till their Cups fall out of their hands, as
it happened to Alexander, when he contended with Proteas who should have the
last draught. To be strong to drink wine, is become a kind of Chivalry, men
wageing battle at their full bowls, as in a pitched field; they which have
drunk down most, are like them that have knocked down most: Fimon gloried over
Lacydes, for this, like a very Conqueror, Gloria parta ingens, occidimus.
Eustath. Hiad. X. Vinolentorum Achilles Guido Bitur.
and Licinius as a Capital Drunkard, would be styled no less than Achilles.
Thus excess is excellency, riot reputation: yea, their glory is in their
shame. How is our Land by these intemperate creatures made an Hogs-sty? the
brimming bowl like Circes Cup, turning men into swine. Yea, how is this
glorious Nation made a Bedlam, or a nest of Furies? for in their distempered
humors, what distracted and frantic parts do they act? like the youth of
Agrigentum, they cast tables and stools out at the windows; and like Michael
Balbus, they are ready to cut off ears and noses, and to slay children in their
parents arms; Athen. l. a. c. 1. Cedren. Plut. c. 15. de mulier. virt.
as Lucius served Micca the daughter of Phidelinus. Oh that this mad crew
should not be kept close, that those wild beasts should be suffered to range
the streets; that we have houses of Correction for lazy persons, and no
Bride-wells for these spend-thrifts; chains for Runnagates, and no fetters for
these Hectors; that these common Bowsers, and daily Drunkards which make it an
art and habit to quaffe and carouse, though in their fuming fits they care not
to scandal the innocent, to assault the peaceable, to violate the chaste, to
reproach Religion, to brave upon authority, to revile their parents, to rend
the heavens, and damn their own souls, yet if they can show but a coat of Arms,
and call a Squire their Father, no Bench of justice will touch them, as if
Drunkenness were a kind of generous quality, or Progeny were a dispensation to
riot. Oh my soul, tremble at the horror of this heinous and reigning sin; for
is there any man come nigher to an Atheist, or a Devil, then a customary
drunkard? And would to God that this were but only a masculine sin, but it
has spread it self into both sexes; neither the bashfulnesse, nor modesty of
women, can restrain them from participating in the guilt: If the breaths of
women were tried, Pliny. l. 14. c. 13.
as Cato the Censor commanded they should be in Rome, I doubt the criminal
smell would be found to proceed from too many of them. Domitius deprived a
woman of her dowry, Aetod.
because she was proved culpable of this trespass; and a Matrone was adjudged
to be starved, because she did but open a box where were the keys of a
Wine-cellar; Fabius Pictor in Annal.
and Fatua Fauna was whipped to death with myrtle rods, because she drank wine
out of a bottle secretly. Oh if such heavy sentences were pronounced and
executed in these days, what should become of many women? Lactant. l. 1. c. 22.
for is not this a feminine vice? Yes, Martial need not write of his drunken
Fescennia, nor Ausonius of his Merce, nor Aelian of his Cleio, for we amongst
our selves, may find a multitude of these intemperate sottish women, which will
quaffe with the most riotous, and give pledge for pledge, and take off cup for
cup. Oh blemish of the Nation! and affrightment to the very heavens!

Well then, in respect of meat and drink (intemperance amongst men and women)
are we the fasting Nation? no, some superficial fasts we have had amongst us,
but I am jealous whether one, properly kept for sin: Those were strange kind
of fasts, where the next days excess, nay perhaps that nights riot takes away
the virtue and honor of a Fast. Oh that we could yet turn to God in Fasting.
For for the present there seem to be amongst us, the Gourmandising of Luernius,
which continued many months together; or the surfeiting meetings of Ariamnes,
Athen. l. 4. c. 13. Philarehus. l. 3.
who feasted the whole ye are through, or the superfluities of the Sibarites,
whose provisions were so splendid, that they were wont to invite their guests a
twelvemonth before to prepare an appetite; or the Adonalian, Agonalian,
Consualian, Carmentalian, Hyacinthian, Athen. l. 12. c. 16.
Panionian, Feasts of the Heathens; nay the very Lupercals, Saturnals, Org yes
and Bacchanals, rather then any solemn fasting: our teeth may tell us, that we
are not humbled; our full Platters, and flowing cups, that judgment never
entered into our consciences; no, we eat away the fear of plagues, and drink
away the dread of an avenging God; when we are nearest to punishment, we are
most eager upon rioting, as Nyseus of Syracusa, when he was told, that he had
but a few months to live, he fell the faster to his Banquets, and his bowls.
Oh this Land will perish by a surfeit, or dye of a dropsy; Athen. l. 10. c. 12.
there does seem to be few mortifying Reconcilers and Peacemakers, where there
are so many boon-fellowes and Comrades. Oh that we could send the Glutton and
Winebibber out of the Nation, then there would be some hopes that we might
sacrifice to God a true sinne-offering, but in the mean time all our devotions
seem to smell too much of the Larder, and the Cask; we are too lusty and
vigorous, too full-fed, and drenched in liquors to repent; true repentance must
be lean and meager, as if we had eaten away our right to the Creature, and
drunk away our life-plea: Thus did the Ninevites repent, they put upon
themselves a restraint from all delicacies, nay they half killed themselves
with a strict forbearance from necessary sustenance; they kept a pure fast.

11. The Ninivites put their whole strength to the work: for there were Kings,
Nobles, and Citizens which repented. But it is an hard thing for us to be thus
unanimous in good things; there may be unus, some particular person that may
advance God, and godliness, but not unusquisque; every person, we do not join
ut unus, as one man, nor ad unum, to a man. Oh that there were the same mind in
all to leave the land of curse, Omnibus idem animus, scelerata excedere terra
Virgil. Aeneid. 3.
or the curse of the land; but there is an Isthmus, which does devide many from
the main Continent; yea, we are distant one from another in intentions, and
resolutions as far, as the Artick, and Antarctick poles are one from another;
our discrepancy, and distermination in good things is such, that it has parted
the community, and separated it into several members; Congeriem secuit.
sectumque in membra redegit. Bellum sociale.
we are diametrically opposite, and like the several factions in Rome at a
sociall War. We do all things distributively, and not collectively;
disparately, and not identifically. How many are there, which act by consent?
no, they are so few, that a child may tell them, the glory of Jacob is made
thin, Huc caput, atque illuc humeri --
Woe is me I am as the Summer-gatherings. This way does the head go, and that
way the shoulders. We do not put our full sorce to chafe our temples thoroughly,
we employ not the whole hand to rub our brains to apprehend sin; no,
Exprobarunt, qued uno digito caput scalperet.
as it was said ominously of Co. Pompeius. so may it be said of us, that we do
but scrape our heads with one finger. If Sylla would have the triumphant
Chariot of Bocchus, and the golden Image of Jugurtha to stand in the Capitol,
Sabellic. l. 3. c. 6.
Marius would have them removed, and beaten in pieces. So we pull down, that
which others set up. Alexander said that he, and his Companions might drink, so
long as Antipater did watch for the Commonwealth. So the generality we think
may be sensual and secure, impious and impenitent, Bibamus nos, vigilet modo
Antipater. Plut.
so long as there are some that are considerate, and conscious, strict, and
rectified. A small company we think will suffice to do the Church work, a few
are enough to prevent judgment, and preserve the Land. If it be our own Babel,
which we are to raise, the whole Earth can meet to build it; if they be our own
Calves, which we are to worship, the people can be gathered from Dan to
Beersheba to kneel down to them; the whole flock is upon the wing, when we fly
about our own projects; the whole kennel is raised, when we hunt our own game.
There is a conspiracy in evil, but there is no such confederacy in that which
is good; we can assemble, and associate to exalt our own designs, but we
cannot pacify God by mutual covenant, or repent by solemn league; no, here we
are ill-affected, and clear Malignants. There are Epidemicall diseases, and
reigning defections, but no such universal perfections; there are National
sins, but not National graces; Kingdom skars, but not Kingdom lustres; no,
here we are in our several Classes, and divided into parts, and partitions.
There is a tumult in our humiliation, we repent as it were in a distraction. If
some have feeling, others have insensibility; if some lie grovelong upon the
ground, others stand upon their tiptoes; if some appease, others incense; if
some seek to sheath the sword, others draw it further out of the scabberd, and
whet the edge of it. Oh when shall we agree indistinctly to procure a general
pardon? or make a Dominion-addresse to Heaven, to be acquitted and accepted?
No, we have several breasts, and not the same motions; several Orbs, and not
the same constellations; like Gedeons Fleece, if one side be wet the other is
dry; or like Egypt, if there be light in Goshen, there is darkness over all
the Land besides; Rachel is fair, Leah is blear eyed, David does dance before
the Ark, Michol does mock; so some are prostrating their selves to regain
favor, others prosecuting their unregenerate desires; some quenching flames,
others others blowing up the coals. Oh when shall we be free of the Cannanite,
and Pherizzite out of the Land? when of Newters, Libertines, Hypocrites, that
the whole nation might accord together in a pacifying service? that there might
be an united dejection, that the whole Kingdom might offer (as it were) the
same propitiatory sacrifice, that every heart, and spirit might have the same
penitential impressions, and expressions; that we might agree in conscience,
as we do in Country; and in longings, as we do in language; and in repentance,
as we do in relations; the whole Nation putting all their stocks together to
purchase a general pardon, that God might say, this is the Land of Converts,
the Island of Penitents; But alas we repent by peecemeal, man by man, whereas
Nineveh repented as one man; King, Nobles, and Citizens.

12. The Ninivites had a memorable thing to testify their repentance: for they
made their beasts to fast. But we do not characterise nor set up any monument
to the honor of Repentance; no, we go via tr^^a, in the beaten road, we sail
in the ordinary Current, we sight with the old dudgeon dagger, and build after
the old fashion, we have nothing but customary wonts, and common usages; we
shut up our shops, throng Congregations, try men's gifts by preaching according
to the number of hourglasses, and by the sixteen foot, and an half pole of
commensurated devotions, by shrinking up at the stabbes of confoding doctrine,
and gathering collections by brachygraphy; just like the Jews, which humbled
themselves by afflicting their souls for a day, or by hanging down their heads
like a bulrush; or the Pharisees who repented by disfiguring themselves, and
making sour faces; if these external garbes, and superficial formalities
will justify our conversion, we are Penitents, otherwise we are yet to begin
our repentance; we do not exceed, transcend, there is no praestancy, nor
praepoldolency to be discerned; the flood of repentance does not come in with a
springtide, we do not impregnate it with some seed derived from a noble lineage.
We build no Almshouses, that it might be said these are the Hospitalls of
repentance; we redeem no Captives, that it might be said that these are the
ransomed Creatures of repentance; we impose no severities upon our selves, that
it might be said these are the mortifications of repentance; we hold our selves
to no reverentiall stints, that it might be said, these are the consecrated
hours of repentance; we vow no eminent fruits, that it might be said, these are
the conspicuous graces of repentance; no our repentance begins, and ends
without any egregious thing in it, to draw the observing eye of the world to
look upon us with admiration, or setting the whole earth in a gaze at the
beholding of us. In other things we are singular, but in this very vulgar. Nero
built a Palace, that was called the golden house, which had such a Colossus in
it whereupon his own Image stood, and such dining rooms (the roofs of them
moving like the celestial Orbs) and such artificial clouds, which dropped
down ointments, sweet waters, fragrant flowers, and such aquaeducts, groves,
fish ponds, and lakes surrounded with structures, like a little City, that it
was the wonder of the world to behold it, and he himself so proud of it, that
Nero-like, Vt diceret se quasi hominem tandem habitare expisse. Sueton. Plus.
in Demetrio. Q. Curtius.
he brake out into an high ostentation, saying, Now I have a house fit for a
man dwell in. Ptolomaeus Philopater framed a ship of that admirable length, and
breadth, that it held 3000 soldiers, and required 4000 rowers. Alexander kept a
nuptial Feast at the marriage of Statira, the Daughter of Darius, that he had
9000 guests at it, and gave to every one a drinking cup of gold.

And what indeed is there that man does lay his hand unto, but he does desire
to be seen great in it, that it might be said, This is the Act, and this is the
Actour? yes, we excel in many things. But as Alexander the great did many
notable things, but he only failed, that he could not dig through Mimantes; so
we do many glorious things, but we only are defective, that we cannot dig
through repentance: As God said of Hypocrites, Alexandro magn^ id unum ex animi
sententia non contigit, quod Mimantem sodere non potuit.
they come as people use to come, so we repent, as people use to repent; there
are no adorning stamps, and beautifying prints to be seen upon our repentance.
Oh that repentance were our garment, how should it be embroydered; that it were
our chimny-piece, how should it be engraven? that it were our Picture, how
should it be limned? that it were our palfrey, how should it be trappered? that
it were our linen, how should it be rinsed? that it were our chamber floor,
how should it be rubb^d? Oh we desire to have every thing else about us choice,
neat, and splendid; only our repentance is abject, despicable and sordid; we
have a beautiful face, and a black soul; a bright parlour, and a dark
conscience; a clean cup, and a defiled repentance. If repentance be our child,
we may blush that it should call us Father; if it be our quintessence, we may
be ashamed of our Chemistry; how does our art most fail us in that which should
most honor us, and eternally bless us? Oh there are many of us profess
repentance, and presume of repentance, but how may we be troubled at the
calling it forth? tremble at the sight of it? can we own it? will God accept of
it? No, he is as ready to condemn our repentance, as our sin, and to judge us
for an hypocritical conversion, as for an irreligious conversation. For is
there any thing conspicuous in repentance? Is it Ninevehs repentance? No, thou
have nothing remarkable in thy repentance, whereas Nineveh had a memorable
thing to verisie and magnify her repentance, she made her beasts to fast, and
wear sackcloth.

13. Nineveh had an anguish for sin, the whole City is a mourner. But we are
the joyous City, the Tabret and Harp do not depart from us. ferit aurea sidera
clamor. Virgil. Aeneid 2.
Repentance should be a doleful creature; yea, her sorrowful accent should
pierce the skies. But our Repentance does make no noise in the Church, the
shriekes of a Mourner are not yet come into our lips; our hearts seem to have
their old fore-skins, for they have not yet smarted under the circumcising
knise; a great draught seems to be amongst us, our Land is turned into powder
and dust, for the Cloud is not rent under us. The unclean spirit does here
walk in dry places indeed, the watercourse of repentance are stopped. Oh that
we could purisie by water, that Repentance had not lost her laver. Ex
teneritate affectus. Aquin. 22 a. q. 82. a. 2.
Tears come from tenderness of affection, but our hearts are not so soft to
melt into sorrow. Here are sins enough to bring down a tempest, to make every
Trespasser an Heraclitus, and the whole Church a Niobe. Alas, alas, might be
the tone of the streets, there might be a National wayling heard from one end
of the Land to the other; but where is that key of Eliah, that should unlock
these clouds? where is that Moses rod which should fetch water out of these
Rocks? we should slere, sweep abundantly, but we do not so much as lachrymari
distill with sorrow: Aquin.
Oh compunction, whither art thou fled? oh contrition, where shall we find
thee? our ears do not tingle, our eyelids are not sore, we do not seek after
the Lord lamenting. Oh that our hearts were not made gross, that we were not
turned into pure Adamant, that we were not Brass and Iron; but there is a sad
indication of it, for we do not bow down heavily, the cry of Jerusalem does not
go up, we look upon our guilts without remorse, we feel errors with indolency,
our sins can strike not tears out of our eyes; we are the sinful Nineveh,
but we are not the weeping Nineveh. With Ulysses, Plut. de tranquil. animi.
Plur. in Cleomene. Cardan de subtle. Bod. l. 3. c. 4. Quotidie lachrymae,
quotidie gemitus. Jeron. ad Eustach. Moral. l. 2. c. 7 seron. in epitaph
Paulae. Crantz, de Saxon. l. 7. c. 37. Octo luxit mensibus. Amb. de obitu
Theodos.
we can rather weep for a dead Dog, then for those things which do concern our
souls; with Cratosiclea, we dissuade men from weeping; with tomaxina, we will
rather burst in pieces, then shed a tear; yea, we are so leagued with the
Devil, that like the Magitians in Bodine, we cannot weep. Where is there a
Jerome, that can say, There are daily tears, and daily groans? Where an
Arsenius, which had loose eyebrows, and swollen eyes with weeping? Where is
there a Paula, that wept so bitterly, that she had need to be wished to spare
her eyes. Where a religious Otho, that was pierced with unspeakable
compunction? Where a Theodosius, that lay eight months together in tears? No,
our tears are sparing, and soon dried up. How few can prove themselves
Converts by their penitent eyes? or can show their selves bruised under their
sins by their broken hearts? No, we have many Rivers in this Nation, and yet
we are a dry Island; there are many crying inhabitants, but few weeping
penitents; the flame may here rage, for here is no water; the top of Carmel may
wither, for the springs are dried up; we are bruised in the Temple, and yet
little moisture is drawn from us; the Minister does often turn the Cock, but
the Pipes are empty, no water does run forth; Jonah does cry frequently, and
cry passionately, yet he cannot here raise up the mourner; the Devil has taken
away our terrors, and taken away our tears. Here are few sigh with the
breaking of their loins, that judgments might not break the bones of this
Nation: here are few take up a wayling to prevent a Kingdom from crying it
self dead; the whole Land may perish for want of mourners, the songs of the
Temple may be turned into howlings because there is none to howl for the
abominations of the times. Are we Nineveh? No, we are a very insensible people,
a tearlesse Nation.

14. Nineveh does make an acknowledgment of sin, for she does ingeniously
confess her evil ways. But alas, our lips will not open, repentance amongst
us is not yet come to speech; we have Converts and Penitents, but have they a
mouth? No, No man says, What have I done? Jer. 8.6. We rather hide our sins,
then bring them to light; we love not to show our Rags, to tell our Debts, to
lay open our sores; no, we will plead not guilty, and be pressed to death,
rather then confess the Indictment; the streets do roar, the Pulpits ring,
Conscience yell, and yet the sinner is dumb, and the Offenders tongue cannot
stir in his mouth; no, Peaccavi, I have sinned, is too big a word to get out of
a Trespassers lips. We desire powerful Teaching, quickening Doctrine, warming,
heating counsel; but wherefore? only to kindle against the times, to flame
against other men's trespasses, but not to sparkle against our own errors; for
all the fervency of the Temple shall not fire upon our consciences, that a man
should say, this was my Sermon, God this day found me out, spoke to mine ear,
arraigned my guilt; no, there is nothing but death, or doomesday, will find a
Transgressor a mouth; for here is much searching, but no shrift; much
profession, but there is no confession, neither in aure sacerdotis, in the ear
of the Priest, nor in aure Dei, in the ear of God: no, our foul stomachs will
not disgorge, we will not empty our Privies; Confession we hold a reproaching
of our selves, therefore we will not put our selves to infamy, not so much as
shame our selves before our God. We have had many judgments, many Lectures,
many Fasts, but is the dumb Devil yet cast out of us? no, we can hear of our
sins, look on them, feel the inward stings of them, but not confess them;
No, though the Israelites confessed their sins, Neh. 9.2. and Jerusalem,
Judea, and all the Region round about Jordan confessed their sins, Mat. 3.6.
and the Greeks which dwelt at Ephesus, confessed their sins, Acts 19.18. yet
with our people this is no particle of their Religion, they have heavy
pressures, but no disburthening of conscience; they provoke the eyes of Gods
glory, without telling out again these grievances in his ears: It is the nature
of a sinner to suppress all, to keep all to himself, to be reserved to his
God; yea to study a strange art of concealing: Men sin with a forehead, but
repent without a mouth, they cover their transgressions with Adam, and hide
their iniquities in their bosoms; they can find out the filth of the whole
City, rather then the dunghills at their own doors, and reckon up all the vices
of the age, Ego sum Atila, Rex Hunnorum, Hagellum Dei, N^^h. Olaus c. 9. in
Atila. G^oze de dict. and factis memorabil.
rather than their own personal crimes; for either they defend their courses
with impudence; as Atila when he was reprehended for his extreme cruelty, he
was not ashamed to say, I am Atila, King of the Hunnes, the scourge of God; or
they turn them off with derision and jeers, as Raphael Urbinas, when he was
faulted for making the Images of St Peter and St Paul too red, he said, he made
them so not as mortified men upon earth, but as glorified Saints in heaven; or
they maintain them with boasts, as Virgil, when he was justly accused for
stealing Verses out of Homer, Macrob. Saturn. l. 3.
says he, This is a glorious thing the Thunderbolt from Jupiter, or to wrest
the Club of Hercules out of his hand; or they excuse them by example, as
Aristippus being rebuked for living too sumptuously beyond the degree of a
Philosopher, Erasm. in Adag.
says he, This is no fault, for the Gods then would not permit excess in
their feasts. So that men have a subterfuge, or a wily evasion, rather then a
true detection or acknowledgement of sin. That whereas the Just man is the
first accuser of himself, Theodoret. l. 4. c. 7.
such are the last accusers of their selves. I read of Valentinian, which laid
open all his wicked life to Saint Ambrose, and said, Bring medicine to the sins
of a sick soul; And that many Gentiles, when the Temple of Serapis was
overthrown, Plures ad religionem Christianam se transtulerunt consitentes
peccata Soc^at. l. 5. c. 17 Macrob. l. 2. c. 12. Maximus ejulatus erupit,
omnibus cumeo lachrymantibut^
and the sign of the Cross was manifestly seen fixed upon the walls, testified
their conversion by a free confession of their sins; And that Saint Origin
being enticed under Decius to sacrifice to Idols, made such a lamentable
confession of his sins, that he drew all the Congregation to weep with him. The
like might be said of Marcellinus, Victorinus, Antidius, Uththazares, Natalius,
Eleusius, and many others. But we cannot get men for all this to bring forth
the Prisoners in chains, and accuse them at the Bar; no, they leave this to the
last Tribunal, in the mean time their sins stick in their throats, and they
are tongue tied Penitents; oh monstrous, and hideous silence! I do not wish thee
to make the world thy Confessor, except it be in point of injuries; and such
Crimes, as require Ecclesiastical discipline, for what has thy fellow-sinner
to do to exact a privity to thy errors, who will but upbraid thee, and
scandal thee? but yet I exhort thee, and injoin thee not to neglect this to
God, and his Steadsman; for wherefore has God the absolute, and his Minister
the delegate power of Absolution, but for thee to exonerate a burdened soul?
But how hardly will thou be inclined to this? thou will rather perish in thy
sins, then reveal them; and endure the curse of thy evil ways, then tread out
thy erroneous foot-prints by confession; we stand all before God as strict
walkers, as men that had stirred every foot with a steady gate; sure I am, what
wanderings soever we have had, these strayings never come into our lips; and yet
the Ninivites here look over every path, and pace, and are sensible of their
excursions, exorbitan^ies, irregular motions, deviating treads, and sad
aberrations, and present before God how their disordred affections, and
refractory desires had led them aside, and caused them to expatiate, and
therefore they discover, and confess their evil ways.

15. Nineveh made some reparation: For he that had seen Nineveh in pomp and
pride, crisped and curled, jetting and prauncing, swimming in delights and
bathed in pleasures, soaring in ambition, and saginated with excess, putting
the bridle into the mouths of Nations, and making most of the Kingdoms upon
Earth to tremble with the shaking of her scepter, and now looking out not like
a Commander, but a Caytiffe; not as a ruling City, but as a rufull City; not as
a place full of honor, and splendor, but full of squallour, and horror; not
looking upon her self with delight, but dejection; as one that was ashamed of
her own face, blushing at Sunlight, as if the streets were fitter for her than
her sieled parlours, and the dunghills than her soft couches, pronouncing her
self unmeet, to be seen, or known being fitter to pine above ground, or to rot
under ground, then to draw breath amongst the living, he would think that
Nineveh was about to make a mends for all her excess; for every strip of this
sackcloth, every handful of the ash-heap, the bowels griping for food, and the
beasts lowing for fodder, do testify Nineveh to be a most satisfying Creature.
But how long will it be before ye will be brought to pay Ninevehs mulct? or to
make this reparation for sin? It is said, that Another life does require
another diet, Alia vita, alia diaet. Adag.
that when our hearts change, every thing about us should have a change. But we
repent, and do remain the same persons, and in the same postures, we put our
selves to no pain, nor suffer any alterations, either in our backs, or bowels,
benches, or beasts. And is not this a strange garb? what, repentance without
reparation? no, sin does require some satisfaction. I know there is no
compensant satisfaction, but there is a deprecatory, not of commensuration, but
castigation; not satisfaction of condignity, but indignity; not of justice for
sin, but of hatred against sin; not placative and expiatory, but cruciative and
punitory; not as a cause of reconciliation, but as a sign of detestation; not
as an ablegation of punishment, but as an obligation of a change; not as a
clensing from the curse, but as a horror of the trespass; not as an
instrument of justification, but as an adjunct of mortification; not to procure
innocence, but to declare humility. Prosper says, Prosper sent. 5 Taterni
flagelli disciplina. Aug. l. 22. contra Faust. c. 67. Nec opus est transitoria
satisfactione pro iis malis, pro quibuc aeternus ignis est paratus. Eucher.
Hom. 3. ad Monach.
it is a a temporal secerity. Saint Augustine says it is the Discipline of
Gods fatherly rod. Eucherius says truly, that there need no transitory
satisfaction for sin, for which Hell sire is prepared. And so indeed we do not
make it a purgation of sin; but a correption, and correction, a vibration, or
ejaculation against sin; and shall we renounce sin without smiting of it at the
parting? or giving of it a farewell battering? How can we do this better than by
causing pride to have shame, pleasure to have pain, security to have horror,
presumption to have abjection? no, as there is nothing troubles the heart of a
haughty man more then to see himself plucked down, and his Enemy reign in his
stead; so there is nothing more offensive to sin, then to see it self abased,
and her clear opposite put into her place: But oh beloved, when will ye fall
upon this translocating act? or work of opposition? no, ye repent but do not
punish sin with that which should most vex her, or trample her down with the
foot of her greatest Adversary. But how then can ye be Penitents? no, there is
no Repentance without an holy revenge; See it in Nineveh, it does every thing
with an infesting of sin, and bringing in that to abandon it, which did carry a
clear repugnancy against it, and thus it does satisfy for the injury of sin,
and make a Reparation.

16. Nineveh had devout supplication: For, Let them cry mightily unto God. But
we look for favors without asking, and for mighty comforts without mighty
cries. We shake not the tree, that the fruit might fall; we unlock not the
treasury, that we might carry home handfulls of bounty. God does incline to an
amiable countenance, but there is none to entreat his face; he does offer
embraces, but there is none to spead out hands to Heaven; he is ready to
redress misery, but there is none to power out a Complaint; he would preserve
many as happy Creatures, but there is none to speak good for the people.

There is an Altar, but the sacrifices do not flame upon it; there are golden
Censers, but the odours do not steam out of them. God does listen and none cry;
he does sit in his Court of Audience, but none make addresses to him: Open thy
mouth wide, and I will fill it; but we would have the mouth silled without an
opening. Seek unto the Lord early, and make thy supplication to the Almighty,
and he will awaken unto thee, and make the habitation of thy righteousness to
prosper. Job 8.5, 6. But we would have God to awaken without calling him up, or
have the habitation to prosper without building it up with devotion. Amyclae
periere silentio Servius.
We are like the Amyclae which perish by silence, or we are a kind of mowls (as
Ammianus Marcellinus called Julianus Capella) because we are deaf and dumb:
Deaf to good counsel, and dumb in exercises of devotion. Plutarch does speak
of dry Banquets, Sure I am, Ammian. M. l. 17. Sicca convivia. Plut.
We have saplesse devotions. There were that kissed the Calves, but sew that
kiss the Son; our lips, and Gods ears are at a great distance. We hunt the
wrong quest, for we do not seek things by prayer. Dan. 9.3. Zeal seems to be
at the last gasp, or giving up the ghost, for there is no breathing out of the
cry. Lam. 3.56. Prayer was wont to shake the roofs of Temples, nay to shake the
Throne, and God in his Throne, but there are no such gusts now come out of our
lips. We rather live by our policies then our petition; by our brains then our
tongues. We project, contrive, consult, confederate mightily, but we do not cry
mightily,: We have an house without noise, a Church without Orisons; we fish
for Pearls without this drag, and would break open the Castle without this
petard set to the Gate of it; we have much indigency, but little ardency; much
fear, but little fervency; we scarce consider the subject of our requests; our
Petitioners might be taken up for strayes; if we do pray, we are deviating in
our prayers, our supplications pererrate, praying is a kind of dreaming. I
sleep, but my heart waketh; but we are oftentimes in a deep sleep, for both
tongue and heart do sleep, very drowzy devotions come from us. Hilarion
threatened his body in prayer, that it might not trouble him with carnal
motions; and he threatened the Devil, that he might not assault him with
temptations: for when on a time that evil spirit (as he was at prayer)
counterfeited the shrieking of Children, the bleating of Calves, the lowing of
Oxen, the roaring of Lions, Orare perstitit, donec cessaret tumultus. Jeron. in
vita. Hilar.
the clashing of armed men, he would not be frighted from his devotions, but
went on in his prayer, till the tumult ceased. But we are not so intent, and
uncessant in our prayers, the flesh, and the Devil can soon take us off.
Anthony told the Jews, that though he had met with many dull and heavy people in
the world, Vobis inertiores non comperi. C. Rhod. lect. Antiq. l. 5. c. 10.
as the Marcomannians, Quadians, and Sarmatians, yet says he, Than you, did I
never find any more fluggish; so we are more reckless then the most undevour,
our prayers do show what an oscitant and torpulent people we are, for we must
carry all at the first charge, or we do lay down our weapons; we do not rally
our forces, and renew the fight. Oh what light skirmishes do we use? how do we
retreat upon the first Justs? we do not hold up our hands till they be weary,
as Moses did; we do not with wrestlings obtain blessings as Jacob did. No, we
may be sent away with repulse, for we press but faintly, we may be smitten dead
with curses, for we avert judgments in a very languishing manner. Besides
diverse times our devotions are but designs, for our own ends, and not for the
safety of Nineveh; we would fetch in judgments, rather then prevent them, as
the Disciples in their requests, would have fire brought down from heaven to
consume their enemies. Caligula wished that Rome had but one neck, that he
might strike it off at a blow; and the 2d Council of Rhemes desired that their
enemies eyes might be blind, their hands wither, and their members rot; and so
many men in their prayers in stead of just Petitions, insert their own
distempered passions; but this is rather to execrate, then to pray; yea to
curse, then to cry. Yet what strange fire does there oftentimes burn upon the
altar? what unclean beasts are there offered up for sacrifice? what hateful
Bills are there sent up into the Pulpit? Oh the Petitions smell of brimstone,
they seem to be brands that come flaming out of ^ophet; yea, rather Bullets,
then Bills, or imprecations then prayers; yet further, prayers too often are
impertinencies, for whereas we should cry for crying sins, we feign sins to
our selves, and invent criminal things, which God himself was never offended
with, and about these we exercise our zeal, and not about those sins which Gods
law has prohibited, and our own consciences are convinced of, which are the
stains of the Nation, and all Christendom abhor, which are ready to sink
States, and subvert Kingdoms: thus with the noise of imaginary sins, we still
the noise of our proper, personal, detestable, and execrable sins. The
children of Jacob by talking of a wild beast that had devoured Joseph,
concealed their own murder; Nero by calling the Christians City-wasters,
blanched over his own firing of Rome; Arbogastes by telling the people of a
strange Messenger, which should bring such sad news to Valentinian the second,
that it should make him to lay violent hands upon himself, suppressed his own
villainous destroying him: so we in our prayers, have the art of conveyance to
slip-in other men's sins rather than our own, or to bewail invented sins,
rather than apparent sins. Can we not dissemble in our Petitions? yes, as
well as in our practices; why else does God complain of men's howling upon
their beds, rather than whining out their own errors? They have not cried unto
me with their hearts, when they howled upon their beds, Hos. 7.14. Their fear
toward me is taught by the precepts of men, Isai. 29.13. as if there were
rather State-prayers, then Penitents prayers. Ye dissembled in your hearts,
when ye sent me unto the Lord, saying, Pray for us unto the Lordour God, Jer.
42.20. The Pharisees made long prayers, but short enough of their own guilts,
there was not a word of their own Superstitions, wicked Traditions, devouring
widows houses, and teaching children to cheat their own Parents. There is a
craft in Prayers, we are the greatest Impostours in our devotions that can be
imagined; there is some speech of sins in general, but not of sins in
special, of sins that our own fancies have fixed a blemish upon, but not of
the deep spotted, the crimson and scarlet sins. When shall we lift up pure
hands? 2 Timothy 2.8. Lift up our hearts with our hands unto the God in the
heavens: Lamen. 3.41. Leave counterfeiting, falsifying, and tergiversating in
our suits? No; we can power out our hearts like ointment, where, when much is
run out, a great deal will stick to the sides, but we cannot power out our
hearts like water, Lam. 2.19. that our sins may be drayned forth to the last
drop. Oh if this Nation could but speak out, and lament, and deplore the grand
and horrid guilts of the times without reservation, or partiality, I would
think that God might yet be entreated for the Land, and that our prayers might
preserve us; but we are guilefull in that wherein we ought to be most sincere,
the hypocrite cannot be cast out of our prayers, our devotions are delusions,
we endeavor to fetch over heaven with a circumvention, we cry cunningly,
artificially, dis junctively, by parts, by halfes, rather then cry really,
accumulatively, mightily. We cannot speak out our proper sins, nor lance the
wound to the bottom, when we are begging balsome from heaven? Now will God
pardon that Malefactor, which will not confess his own crime? Can this Nation
ever be secure, if indevotion or hypocrisy does conceal one capital sin? no,
so long as Achan lays lurking, the whole Camp may be cursed; so long as Shebah
be shut up within the walls, the City is exposed to danger; so long as the
Calves bleat in the Host, and Agag walk up and down with his head on his
shoulders, the whole Kingdom may be rent away. One heinous sin suppressed, may
break out with a general destruction. Oh then that all the sins of the Land
without diminution, retrusion, substraction, could be bewailed in our lips with
one National yell, this were to cry mightily. But alas, we that neither pray
considerately, nor ardently, nor charitably, nor pertinently, how do we pray
powerfully, or cry mightily? No, we may be Egypt, to cry out of the sense of
plagues, but we are not Nineveh, to cry out of the sense of sins: as loud as
the noise of devotion seems to be in the Land, as if we were the only
Petitioners upon earth, and the spirit of prayer rested amongst us; yet there
being so much collusion in the most sacred exercise, and that which does most
endanger the Nation being least apprehended, a child may stretch out his voice
with more force then we, here is but a Crickets sound, like muzzled beasts we
do but counterfeit a bellow, like dumb men, we do but make a noise, our prayers
are smoothered, our devotions throatled, sure I am as highly gifted, and
petition arced as we are, we do not pray with Ninevehs lips, we cry softly, and
not cry mightily.

17. Nineveh had a renovation of life: for let him t^rn every one from his
evil way. But we are a talking people, and not a turning people; if our
tongues be a little better then theirs were, our ways are as evil as ever. We
repent only in Adages, or repent only in Ordinances, we do not repent by
ordering our feet, to pace other ways. Have our Pulpits yet renewed us? or our
Fasts cleansed us? No, He that was filthy, is filthy still, not one track
altered, not one beaten path forsaken; some amazement there may be, but no
amendment; some humiliation, but no reformation. If God should judge us by our
feet, we should be found men of an evil tread; if by our ways, he might strike
us dead in our ways: for we have corrupted our ways, Genesis 6.12. our ways are
perverse, Number. 22.32. desolation and destruction is in our ways, Isai. 59.7.
We walk in the ways of them that forget God, Job 8.3. Is this to turn? is this
to renounce evil ways? no, we may turn to a Cause, turn into a Temple, turn
into a Closet, turn into a Councell-chamber, turn to devise new plat-formes,
but this is the height of our turning. We look up to heaven with as black
brows, and walk in the Church with as crooked feet as before: we would rather
teach the world repentance, than practice it, and cleanse the age, then purge
our selves. What Adulterer has yet unclasped his hands with this Curtesan?
what Drunkard has drawn his lips from his intemperate cups? What proud
person has yet shifted himself from his fantastic gawdies? And if these
sinners be not yet unfettered, what shall we think of them whom the Devil has
in a stronger chain? if these trespassers be inflexible, what shall we conclude
of those whose neck is as iron? what is the state of them which stand in their
ways, and sweat in their ways, and ride post in their ways, that an Angel
with a naked sword in his hand, can hardly make them give a check with the
bridle? Oh if these noonday sinners be so unreformed, then if we should search
the blind corners, pry what the Ancients do in the dark, look through the hole
of the wall, what strange Chambers of Imagery, and creeping things, and
four-footed beasts might there be there discerned? How many black Night-birds
would there be there seen pourtrayed upon the walls? where then are men's feet?
do ye see any new ways trodden? will these turn? do any turn? No, the times
may turn, and the face of things may turn, there may be several variations,
and changes in humane affairs, but not in humane actings; men are resolved upon
their paths, settled upon their motions, constant in their extravagancies, they
will not turn from their evil way Who has believed our report? to whom is the
arm of the Lord revealed? Were ever so many Pulpits despised? were there ever
so many unregenerating Sermons? there may be many that watch over souls, but
how few that win souls? there may be many Counsailers, but who is a Father?
people may be wrought to a faction, and turn from one sect to another; but who
turns from his evil way? they may swim into other Seas, but like Porcupines,
the change of waters do not make them lose their prickles; they may shift
places, but like Serpents, they carry their poison with them whithersoever they
creep; they turn but only to other principles, but not to other fruits; they
turn from opinions, but they turn not from their evil way: They may be stepped
into more dangerous ways, for they are but turned Proselytes, and the
Scripture says, that that is to turn twofold more the children of Hell; but
they are not turned to God. Oh this Land does echo with Lectures, but who
shall teach it Repentance? Faith, and repentance, are the two great Lights of
the Church, but both Sun, and Moon are in an Eclipse; our faith is a
distraction, and our repentance a contagion, and corruption; there is an impure
faith, and a filthy repentance. We talk much of the Gospel, and Reformation,
but when shall we be once Evangelicall? when once the Reformed Church? what,
fly from Rome, and go to Sodom? a sad separation; we have left Romes
corruptions in doctrine, but do we not keep still her corruption in manners? we
are better Believers, but are we better Saints? We are gotten we say out of
Egypt, but do we not carry Epypt into Canaan? It is true, we have brought a
golden pot of Mannah, an Aarons rod, two Tables written with Gods own finger,
an Altar, Urim, and Thummin, and a Mercy-Seat thither, but have we brought
purity of life? Is not the Land of promise, a Land of provocation? For all the
ground we have left behind us, have we left either in the red Sea, or in the
Wilderness, or upon the Banks of Jordan our evil ways? No, we have polluted
the Lords Land. For all the glorious titles we put upon our selves, we are but
the Frontispiece? the Sign-post, the Vizard of Reformation, for where are our
reformed consciences? our reformed ways? Are these his ways? no, they are
Natures ways, the ways of the Nations, the ways of Cain, Corah, Balaam,
Jeroboam, Ahab. God would be ashamed to walk before you in such ways, or to
prescribe unto you such paths. If your eyes be open, what repentance do ye see
amongst us, but beating down of Crosses, clashing of Church windows,
demolishing a Font, new-placing a Communion Table, and plucking off that same
abominable Rochet? but has this Reformation cleansed away one sin? has it made
us more moral then Turks or more pure then many Paynims, and Infidels? are our
evil motions, our evil lusts, and our evil ways gone? Is there not as much
pride, and riot, and covetousness, and slander, and theft, and craft,
peevishness, and perfidiousnesse, cousenage, and contention, as there is at
this day amongst Scythians, and Barbarians? a nimble voyage then that we have
made, which are not sailed beyond the Lands end; a long journey that we have
traveled, which are not gotten out of our old ways.

The times are bad, who shall better them? Look upon the faces of all your
religious men, and single out that praepious person, that ye think is able to
convert this Age. What Saint is able to purify this corrupt Nation? what
Prophet to change this sinful people into Nineveh? no, we may be turned from
many things, but not from our evil ways; we are so degenerated, and
habituated in vicious courses, that I am afraid, that if Enoch which walked
with God were alive again, he should not draw us to walk after him, if Noah the
Preacher of righteousness were to preach over his old notes, we would mock at
him rather then listen to him, not a man more would be saved then was, but we
would leave him to ship himself, and his family only in the Ark, if Elias were
to prophesy to this Age, he himself might be carried up in a fiery Chariot, but
leave Ahab, and Ahaz ab to plagues and vengeance; If Christ Jesus were once
more to take flesh upon him, he might sooner be led again to the Cross, then
crucify our unmortified lives. Oh what balm is there in Gilead for this wound?
what Jordan to cleanse this leprosy? the most perverse Jews, and the most
obstinate Scribes, and pharisees were never hardlier to be converted, then we.
Oh how does this Figtree cumber the ground? if nothing but bearing of fruit
will save it, it is in great hazard to be cut down. God is ready to shoot, and
fight, and to bring up his front, and main battle against us; but where is
reformation to latch arrows, break in pieces Spears, to meet the Vancurriours
in their march, and to carry an army of Judgments out of the Nation? No, there
may be threshing Mountains, beating hills as chafe, shattering gates of
brass, cutting asunder bars of iron, giving people up as dust to the sword,
and driven stubble to the bow, turning Cities into an heap, and Eden into a
Wilderness, sweeping away the valiant men, and causing the carcasses of the
dead to fall as the dung, throwing do^^^ golden Candlesticks, and bringing a
famine of the word upon a Nation, that has been full fed with the Ordinances,
for there is no Reformation to rescue a perishing Country, or to preserve a
falling Church. Polydamus himself though a Champion stepping into this sinking
Cave, thinking to upold it with his shoulders, Latebram dementis fati
sepulchrum haebuit. Val. Max. l. 9. c. 12.
shall find that to be his Sepulcher which he supposed should have been his
shelter. Go ye now to my place which is in Shiloh and see what I did to it, for
the wickedness of them that dwelt therein. So if we would consult with the
rotten bones, and bare scalps of judged sinners, they would return the same
answer, Qualem exitum eg^^habui tu habebis. Philostra^^s.
that the head of Orpheus did to Cyrus when he consulted with it, what should
be his last fate, What end I had, the same thou shall have: For as the one had
his head struck off by the Thracian Maenades, so had the other by Thomiris. We
that do renew the sins of other men, do but hasten on our own judgments. It is
strange that the Hyppodamus can cure it self by letting blood in the thigh, the
Swallow by eating chelidony, and the Heart draw out darts by grazing upon
dyctamnum, and that we cannot have the wit, or grace, to cure our maladies by
repentance. What can we expect from obstinacy in sin but inevitable ruin? sin
at last will wrap us in her fatal Robe, as Alcibiades having dreamt that he
should dye covered with his harlots garment, Justin. l. 9.
Critius Tisimenus, and Bagoas, slew her in his lap, and destroyed him, leaving
him nothing but her amorous vest to hide his nakedness. What can we presage
from execrable courses, but a desperate and? if sin be our harbor, judgment
will be our pursuer, (...).
as Pompey when he came to the Castle called Evil Government, he concluded of
nothing, but future destruction to himself. What monstrous sins have we amongst
us to foretell prodigious punishments? Our Bibles have brought nothing but a
Scripture Language into our mouth, and our Pulpits have taught us nothing but a
Sanctuary phrase; as for our lives we are more wild, than when we were
barbarous, and more irreligious, than when we had no Ordinances. Is not this
Land full of Hacksters, Witches, Magitians, Ruffians, Cheaters, Forgers,
Pilferers, the Cutpurse-hall of the Earth, and the Stews of the whole world, as
if all Miscreants were met here as at a general Rendevouz? search but our
Jailes, look but upon our gibbets, and we may see what pure Creatures we are.
If evil ways will make an evil people, then how is this Kingdom the Broad
way, the high rode to destruction? Amongst the mildest, and most moral people,
what digressions, and excursions are there? there is a bad way in the Shop, a
worse in the Tribunal, and worst of all in the Pulpit^ in the first there is
little, but fraud and deceit; in the second little, but corruption and bribery;
in the third little, but schism, heresy, and flattery. And when shall we see
Merchant, Judge, or Priest declining, or turning from his evil ways? No,
inveterate sinners, are rarely true Penitents. These are our usages, and we
will cleave to them; these are our ways, and we will walk in them. Aesculapius
cannot cure this diseased Country, Hercules cannot clear this Augean stable. To
the shame of our Church, to the scandal of the Gospel, to the braving upon
Heaven with Sodoms faces, and to the bringing in of a Destroying Angel to lay
the whole Nation wast, we persist in our courses. And how then are we Nineveh?
no, we reform not, our feet have their former motions, there was never more
wicked paths in the land, then are now visible. Did Nineveh thus? no, Let us
turn every one from his evil way.

18. Nineveh was touched with oppression; for it is not barely said; Let every
one turn from his evil way, but likewise, from the violence of his hands. But
when shall we make this addition to our sins, or look upon oppression as a
principal sin? No, Whoredom, Drunkenness, Blasphemy, Hatred, are sins of an
evil name, but Oppression goes for an argument of wit, and sets forth a person
only as a man of the better brain. How shall the Merchant live without his
Shop-arts? or the great man in the Country Lord it, without crushing of
Tenants? or the Judge go to his grave as a well fleshed fatling, without
feeding liberally upon his by-Incomes? For this end the Merchants is for his
scant measure, wicked balances and bad of deceitful weights; the Country Lord
is for the rough justle, thrusting with thigh and shoulder, and the Rulers love
to say with shame, Bring ye. The Ninevites hands do ache with their violence,
but when shall this violence smart upon our fingers ends? Oh it were a
comfortable age, if there were none to smite with the fist of wickedness. What
sweet tongues soever we have with Jacob, yet our hands are the hands of Esau.
God may say to us as he did to Cain, I will require thy Brothers blood at thy
hand, Genesis 4.11. If God should demand (according to his Law) hand for hand,
Exodus 21.24. What a dismembered Nation would there be? the hand of the avenger,
Numb. 35.25. would be ready to pursue too many. Men's hands are at work, and it
is an hard thing to deliver one out of the hands of him that is too strong for
him, Deuteronomy. 25.11. We should lift up our hands as the incense, and stretch out
our hands to the needy, and join the right hands of fellowship; but we kiss our
hands, and clap with our hands, and strike with our hands; our hands should be
full of nothing but devotion, almesdeeds, and pledges of charity, and they are
full of nothing but mischiefs, shrewd turns, and batterings of violence. Woe
be to him that comes within the reach of these hands, and feel the weight of
these hands. Most men like Saul, stand with a Spear in the hand, or with the
Israelites, they are ready to cast stones with their hands. Whether they will
wash them yea or no I know not, sure I am, their hands are defiled with blood;
whether they will cut them off yea or no, I cannot resolve you, certain I am,
they do offend them; there are the hands of cruel Lords Isai. 19.4. hands that
ought to be fled from, 1 Samuel 27.1. We may fear the hands of many, as much as
the claws of Vultures. Oh Land of boisterous hands! Oh Nation of brutish
violence! These beasts of Ephesus will not be unskinned, these fat Bulls of
Bashan will never have their horns sawn off. May not God say still, Oh ye
destroyers of my heritage? Jer. 50.11. Are not the birds of prey swifter than
the Eagles of heaven amongst us? Lam. 3.19? Here is much projecting for means,
every one lies in wait for blood, and hunteth his neighbor with a net, Mich.
7.3. It is much that many people can take their nights rests, for they sleep
upon the clothes laid to pledge, Amos 2.8. It is much they can dwell in their
houses, for the stones were hewn out of the wrong quarrey, they build their
Houses by unrighteousness, and their Chambers by wrong, Jer. 22.13. They have
wedged up vast Estates, but how were these heaps gathered? Are not the
treasures of iniquity in the houses of the wicked? Micah. 6.20. Oh that these
men can walk the streets, the cries of the oppressed are so shrill against
them; that they can eat their meat, when they find such strange flesh in the
Cauldron; that they can desire to be admitted to their estates, when they know
by what an Ahabs evidence they hold the Vineyard; that they can make their
Wills, when they feel, at their last death-prongs, that they are but to give
away ill-gotten goods for Legacies! They are dangerous neighbors to live by,
for the wicked does devour the man more righteous than himself, Hab. 1.13.
They are uncomfortable Fathers, for the Lion does tear in pieces for his
whelps, Nahum. 2.12. Go tell Herod the Fox, Luke 11.32. Ye may tell him well
enough, for Herod will continue a Fox, and leave his Cubs behind him. Mahomet
the Great, coming into a great field, Dracula.
where he saw variety of tortures, that a Vay^od had to put his subjects to
death by, was astonished at it; and how may it amaze us to see the many engines
that the Oppressor has to torment the innocent, tenter-hooks, harping irons,
grinding-milstones, whipping-posts, Gibbets. For all the noise of our
Sermon-bells, and the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven preached amongst us,
here is nothing but shaving, and fleecing, pinching and biting, catching and
crushing, supplanting and circumventing, consuming and confounding, decocting
and despoyling, slaying and flaying, prosecuting and persecuting, mingling and
powdering, glozing and varnishing, sophisticating and adulterating, lengthning
out of suits, and spining out of quarrels, siding and shouldering, trampling
and shivering, dreadful decrees in the Court of Conscience, and horrid Orders
diverse times in the best Court of Judicature, as if oppression were a science,
and tyranny a trade. Oh where shall the wronged seek for relief? where shall
the innocent find a bar of justice? It would perplex a man to think how many
writs are filed, how many records are entered, how many Bills are preferred, how
many judgments and executions are passed, how many Regiments there are of
Sergeants and Bailiffs, how many Brigads of Atturneys and Counsailers in this
one little Kingdom. If violence were not predominant, what need there be called
in so many necessary Agents to restrain it? if the house were not ruinous, what
need there so many Master-Workmen be employed to repair it? These are fangs
enough of oppression; but come forth, and I will show thee more abominations.
How many are there that seek places to suck the veins of the people? how many
buy Offices to shark upon the Commonwealth? how many turn Informers,
Promoters, Waiters, Searchers, not to discover, but to distill, not to punish,
but to prey upon errors. Oh, if I should lead you into the Forest it self,
where all the wild beasts and ravenous Serpents do range, ye would think that
this were the Land of Tigers and Dragons. And for all this, yet are we the just
Nation? no, a Land of cruelty and oppression. Men covet fields, and take them
by violence, Micah. 2.2. Violence is in their Palaces, Amos 3.10. The earth is
filled with violence, Genesis 6.11. As if with Epitadeus, we had taken away
Lycurgus-law for Field-right, Legem agrariam sustulit, ut citra delectum
possessiones quaererent praeva^e^tes. Plut. in Agide Nunc mutuo, nune d^no,
nune minis omnia ervium bona in suum fi^cum congregavit Johan. Magnus. l 7.
and propriety of lot, that without distinction the more mighty might have the
more mighty possessions; or with Visvur King of the Cothes, we should get all
men's Estates into our Coffers, either by sleight or force. What restraints can
there be to some men's violence? No, Tyranny does leap over every fence, as it
is said of Cleopatra, that wheresoever the hope of money did proffer it self,
she spared neither temple nor sepulcher, nor sanctuary. Thus we see how
injustice does fiske the Nation, and when shall we feel our rough palms? or be
sensible of the violence of our hands? The stomach of this Nation is surfeited
with oppression, Pecanta rum ubicunque spes ^ffaig^r^t, nequ^ Temp um, neque
sepulch^um neque Asylum ullum violare dubitavit. Joseph. l. 15. c. 4.
and when shall we perceive it to take a vomit? Do ye hope for the generality
ever to see true dealing Merchants, righteous Landlords, faithful Pleaders,
and just judges? Will tearing Officers leave off, of their own accord, to be
rapacious? or corrupt Courts reform themselves without the physic of
regulation? Will men give over to live by their wits, to make the best of their
places, and to advance themselves by any manner of artifices? Men have their
Bibles continually in their hands, but is it credible that according to
Scripture, men will restore that which they have gotten by robbery and
violence? Levit. 6.4. Is there a Zacheus to be expected? or instead of
restitution, will they but forbear from further wrongs? or instead of
satisfaction, will they not renew and increase more damages? I am afraid that
instead of emptying their houses of preys, and clensing their Estates from
injustice, and casting back their ill-gotten goods over their neighbors
thresholds, they will finger more, snatch at the rest, make a perfect rifle of
the remainder. Oh this Land has been so addicted to extortion, and cruelty,
that I doubt whether there be Repentance enough left in it, to make it a just
Nation. Our men will as soon lose their inventions, as their injuries; their
skins, as their brutishness; their brains, as their bruisings; their hands, as
the violence of their hands. Our streets will scarce ever be free from the
sighs of the oppressed, the curses of the tortured, the cries of Orphans, and
tears of widows; oh fierce, furious, rigorous, barbarous, harsh, hardhearted,
truculent, and tyrannical Nation! we repent, and yet our hands are never the
gentler, nor the juster, whereas Nineveh repented, and made oppression a
penitential branch, for she turned from the violence of her hands: Let them
turn every one from their evil ways, and from the violence of their hands.

Thus have I at last presented to you at large the repentance of Nineveh, oh,
that face could answer face in water! Are ye Nineveh? The message is sent to
you, what en tertainment has it? Jonah does cry, but in what ears? do ye yet
feel dangers, that ye might yet believe God? do Gods judgments heave you, that
ye may arise from your Thrones? ye have afflicted your bodies often, but did ye
ever keep a Ninevehs fast? ye have perhaps stripped your selves a little, but
have ye had Ninevehs sackcloth upon your backs? ye have humbled your selves ye
think, but did ye ever sit upon Ninevehs ashheap? ye have been something active
in the work, but did ye ever put to Ninevehs whole strength? ye have had some
mention of repentance, but is it to be seen (as it was with Nineveh) in some
memorable thing? ye have mourned, but have ye shed Ninevehs tears? ye have had
some acknowledgment of sin, but did ye ever come to Ninevehs confession? ye
have expressed some reparation, but did ye ever make Ninevehs satisfaction? ye
have been soliciting in Heaven, but did ye ever awaken God with Ninevehs mighty
cry? ye have been reforming a great while, but have ye had yet Ninevehs
clensing of conscience from particular and personal sins, that every one might
turn from his own evil way? ye have made an heavy spoil upon stonework, and a
miserable flashing of senseless garments, and a pitiful slaughter of naked
forms, but is the Dragons head yet broken? is Beelzebub yet cast out? have your
reforming weapons cut the throat of Oppression? are ye quit of the Violence of
your hands? answer positively, and punctually, if not to the letter, yet to the
substance of your prototype, or else your repentance will end in a fiction, ye
shall seem but to dally with Sanctuaries, to trifle with sermons, and make
conscience but a mere Sexton to unlock the great doors, to sweep the Church, to
ring the bells, and open the Pews that a company of Formalists might take their
Seats. Here is a Gospellising people indeed, but where are the penitent people?
I do not say where is the glorious City? but where is Nineveh? may not our eyes
ache, and our hearts almost despair, before we shall see the sick Patient take
this bitter potion to recover? we will learn a thousand things, before we will
take out the lesson of repentance, where are these disciples? our sins are
become so intimate with us, that there is now no shaking hands with them, or
turning our backs upon them; we have taken deep draughts of warning, but we are
sick of the dropsy, the more we drink, Quantumvis febricitantes biberunt,
semper tamen fitiunt. Chrysostom. in 12. Mat. hom. 38. Impietas adeo coarctat, ut
vix respirare finant Folengius. in Ps. 109. es subsinire. Plautus. Comas
circumtondere- Lucian. Scelus in furorem vertitur. Lact, Justin. Patr. de ligne
vitae. Peccata quamvis magna and horrenda, cum in consuetudinem venerint, aut
parva aut nulla creduntur. Aug. in Enchi^. c. 82. Qui in malae conjuetuden is
carcere inclusi sunt, a semetipsis e^ire non possunt. Jeron.
the more our thirst does increase. We have had some motions, and inclinations
to good things, but our sensual hearts would not suffer them to go beyond the
perculsions of Felix, or the propensions of Agrippa. Impiety does so
strengthen, and girt us, that it will scarce suffer us to take breath. It is an
hard thing for us to cleanse truly, we do but a little dawb our lips, or wash
the outside of the platter. Shall we ever be perfectly shaven? no, I doubt we
will but round our locks. We are so far from reformation, that after a few
checkings, chillings, gnashings, gnawings, we return with the greater
eagerness to our sins, Sin turns into fury. We have been so used to
provocations, that we are even become contemners, the sense of disobedience
seems to be taken from us, For, sins, though many, and monstrous, yet when
they are come into Custom, they seem either small, or none. We are so immured,
that there is little Jail delivery to be expected, for, they are locked up in
the prison of Custom, they cannot pass out of the nether gar e, that is, they
cannot get out from themselves. Here is much buckling in prayer, staring in
reading, trampling upon pavements, drinking up whole flagons of Pulpitliquor,
schisming for the truth, consecrating parties for the godly, and well affected
people; yet all our lip-reverence, eye-search, feet-lackying, ear-bibbing,
factioning for better principles, and hallowing for select brotherhoods, they
scarce bring forth a conspicuous Penitent. Some men are all for Ordinances, and
some men are above Ordinances; some men speak too much and some men will scarce
speak at all; some men will bow to the earth, and some men will not stir their
caps; some men think they are as evil as the Devil, and some men as pure as
Jesus Christ; some men will go well suited, and some men will go starknaked; some
men will have no Minister but the Artificer, and some men no Magistrate but the
Messiah; yet amongst all these where are the Ninevites? such as truly bleed
under sin? and renouncing worldly pomp, upon the ash-heap desire forgiveness?
such as make a reformation of their wicked lives? and a restitution of their
ill-gotten goods? Jonah does more good in the streets of Nineveh with a days
journey, and a few cries, then is done amongst us in the space of many years,
by the most fervent counsel, or most zealous exhortation. One Jonah does
convert Nineveh, but many Prophets have not been enough for us. If there were
an Interpreter one of a thousand, yet if he spoke alone, should he speak
effectually? Alcinoi inensa. Adag.
no, Theseus himself cannot do our work by himself; the Table of Alcinous would
not suffice our appetites; Hercules must go beyond the number of his twelve
labors if he came to undertake this attempt, and at last cast away his Club,
as if here were no good to be done, not by Hercules himself. One mouth we see
is enough to chew meat for the whole body, and one Steward to provide for the
whole Family, and one Surgeon to heal many wounds, but one Preacher were not
enough to renew this Nation. We are for variety of Teachers, we cannot ride
without our Leer-horses carried by our sides in State; nor marry without
Polygamy, nor hear without a cluster of Teachers. We angle in all Rivers to get
fish, and shake all trees that the desired apple might fall. And when we have
had our multiplicity of Souls Guides, how far do they lead us? to information,
but not to reformation; to reasoning, but not to repentance; we suck at many
breasts, and yet are starvlings; we hear many Clocks strike, and yet we do not
believe that the hour is yet come, that we should fall to our work. What should
I say? All the Watchmen upon the walls cannot give us warning, all the
Shepherds of the Country cannot find this lost sheep, all the clouds of Heaven
gathered together cannot water our dry consciences, all the hammers of the
Temple striking in their order, cannot break our stony hearts, the whole
College of Physicians cannot cure us, Myriads of Preachers that have been in
this Nation have not yet been able to convert us. We come away dry from the
purest springs, and poor from the richest Mines, and unregenerate from the most
soulsaving ghostly Fathers. If the presence of one Messenger contemned, will
make men one day know, and feel that there has been a Prophet amongst them,
then what a judgment does this Nation lie under for the vilifying, and
nullifying of so many Seraphicall Sermons. The zeal of many Teachers, and Gods
patience for many years do leave us in impenitency, whereas whole Nineveh does
turn Penitent by one Jonah, and the cries of one days journey. Behold ye
Despisers, and wonder. We can protest, and profess, blow Trumpets and whiten
walls, varnish Religion and transfigure godliness, but we cannot repent; no,
we need no repentance (say many); we are beyond repentance, say others, let
Nineveh repent. But oh beloved, let us be more serious with our souls, and
real with our God; at last can the times justify us, or the partiality of our
friends save us? no, repentance is our trial, and God is our judge; we are a
wicked generation, and an ill-affected people till we turn; do ye call home
your ears therefore from the false Prophets lips, and take your hearts out of
the Inchanters hands, which tell you ye are a pure people, and the godly of the
earth; oh thousands may perish by such Pulpits; there is not a stronger chain
of hell, then the tongue of an insinuating and infatuating Teacher, which for
morsells of bread, and handfuls of barley, will transgress; let us account him
the true Preacher, which will purify our inwards, yea the right Jonah which
will preach us into Nineveh. We know our sins, let us have Ninevehs
heart-stroaks; our sins do pursue us, let us have Ninevehs protection and
preservation; let us not pretend Religion except we repent, let us not repent
except we be Nineveh. Oh let not our eyes be open, and our hearts asleep, our
ears listening, and our consciences deaf, our tongues pure, and our
conversations defiled. If God does threaten, do ye believ God; if he does move
from his Throne, do ye arise from your Thrones; if he does put on justice like
a Cloak, do ye cast away your Robes; if he be ready to rend your Garments from
your backs, do ye put on sackcloth; if he he blowing up his coals, and about to
burn against Jacob, do ye sit in the ash-heap; if he be calling in variety of
judgments to plague, do ye call in King, Nobles, and Citizens, to pacify; if
he be resolving upon dismal things, do ye do memorable things; if he does
frown, do ye weep; if he be setting your sins in order before you, do ye
confess them; if he be righting himself for injuries, do ye make reparation;
if he be upon the point to confound mightily, do ye cry mightily; if his feet
be turning into the visiting ways, do ye turn every one from his evil ways; if
his hand be laying hold on judgment, do ye purge your selves from the violence
of your hands. Let us leave nothing in despair, that we may not despair, but
after Ninevehs repentance, we may have Ninevehs faith, saying, Who can tell, if
God will turn, and repent, and turn away from his fierce wrath that we perish
not? Chap. 3. v. 9. So long as we are impenitent, all our Statesmen and
Estatesmen, Challengers and Champions, Guards and Gunrooms, Treaties and
Truces, Treasures and Triumphs, cannot secure us, but so soon as Repentance
does come, our fears do vanish, our hopes do revive, our confidence does wax
strong, and our safety is infallible; Oh therefore that our sins, and our
miseries may not meet together; let us try how we can break our hearts, and
break up the fallow ground, and break off our sins by righteousness; that
God may not search Jerusalem with lights, let us search our selves; consider
what has been done in the quaffing-room, the bed of dalliance, the
Banqueting House, the Councell-Chamber, the Treasury, the Tribunal, the
Parlour, and the Pulpit: let us ransack all back-rooms, search all blind
corners, and leave not a sin undiscovered, which conscience may ache under,
and repentance can mortify. Oh for all the cries of your sins, and the cries
of the Temples, the stings of guilt, and gripes of conscience, the scandal of
your enemies, and the scourge of heaven, for the pattern at Bochim, the
precedent at Mizpeh, the example of Nineveh, to save the land, and save your
souls, Repent. Oh Repentance, thou which begannest at the first fall, which
did save eight persons at the flood, a little family at the destruction of
Sodom, a great Nation at the slaughter in Egypt: which were commanded by Moses,
enjoined by the Prophets, which were the first cry of John Baptist in the
wilderness, Mat. 3.2. the first voice that the Word himself uttered at the
unsealing of his commission, Mark. 1.14. which the Apostles did proclaim, and
the whole Christian Church does prescribe, which art able to transnature and
translate people, to purify them in life, to pacify them in death and to
justify them at the Throne; which can unlock the gates of heaven, put the
triumphant palm into the hand, and set the Crown of immortal glory upon the
head; oh be thou visible in this Nation, and till thou can make us the new
Jerusalem, make us Nineveh. Oh beloved, listen to repentance, begin the work,
make it complete, think it a necessary thing to repent, think it not an easy
thing to repent, make a strict inquisition, and have an heart-aking discussion;
fall upon your knees, hold up your hands, let not your conversion be too
high-browed, nor your repentance too blunt-edged; blush and bleed, sigh and
sob, wring and wayl, scrape the walls infected with the leprosy, hate the
garment spotted by the flesh, Mortify your members which are upon earth,
abstain from all appearance of evil, live as if ye conversed with Angels, and
did but tread below to cleanse your selves before ye put on the white Robe. Oh
come out of the finig-pot without any dross, come out of the Bath without a
steyn; as your crimes have been exorbitant, so let your repentance be
exemplary. So me-think I see judgment drawning back, the destroying Angel
called off, the arrows taken off from the string, the vial of wrath set by;
for if thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? So long as ye are peccant,
can God pardon sin? so soon as ye are penitent, can God punish repentance?
No, I see Gods compassionate eye looking upon this renewed face, fire from
heaven falling upon this acceptable sacrifice; tears shall quench all
indignation, repentance prevent all judgments, and reformation be the Rahabs
thread hung out at the window to keep the house in safety; if ye be humbled, God
will be pacified; if ye be Nineveh, ye shall be spared: Should not I spare
Nineveh?

Now let us come from the name of the place, Nineveh, to the nature of the
place, That great City; and to the description of it, wherein are more than
sixscore thousand persons, that cannot discern between their right hand, and
their left hand, and also much cattle.

That ye may not forget that which I delivered unto you in the beginning, I
will for the present join both these parts together, and show you (as I did at
first) that God in these words does produce reasons, why he should spare
Nineveh, and that because it was no Family, or Village, or Borough, but a
City; and no obscure vulgar City, whose streets were short, lanes straight,
buildings low, or compass narrow, but a vast, large, great City; yea, match all
the Cities upon earth, yet, as the Poet said, Let Rome be to me instead of all;
Sit mea Roma mihi --.
so Nineveh had the precedence, and preheminency, it was the most celebrated
and magnified City, That great City. But will some say, We shall know a City by
the City-rarities, are there any things to be found in it? Yes, Wherein.
Wherein? Ah but when? Is there not some precedent age to be looked back unto, to
set out the glory of this City? Indeed we have been Trojans is little comfort
or honor; no, Fuimus Troes*
fore-past happiness is rather anguish then solace, misery then honor; what
therefore, has not this City been flourishing, but is now decayed and
desolate? no, it is in the standing beauty, it is for the present magnificent,
for there are. Are? what are there? gorgeous structures, rich merchandises, but
scarce inhabitants to dwell, or trade in it? no, there are Persons. Persons? but
in what numbers? if a man take the sum of them, is there any large tale to be
brought in? Yes, Sixscore thousand. Ay but perhaps the reckoning is too great,
or but nigh to the number; no, there may be a surplusage added, for there are
more then sixscore thousand. But are not these intelligent persons, and so they
could foresee the danger, and little pity can belong to them, because they
perish wilfully? no, they cannot discern, not only the policies and City arts,
but not obvious and familiar things, they cannot discern between their right
hand, and their left hand. Well, is all now spoken? no, there is a further
aggravating reason, for And also. What is this enlargement about? it is about
poor dumb beasts, there are persons that cannot, and there are cattle that
cannot discern; Well, there were sixscore thousand persons, but is there any
such store of cattle to move pity? yes, multitudes of persons, and multitudes
of beasts, much people, and much Cattle. Now Jonah (says God in effect) does
not every word here plead for a sparing? yes, it would grieve one to see an
house set on fire, or an hamlet laid level, how much more a City? and if a
City of mean quality, how much more a great City? and if any great City, how
much more that which is the most famed City in the world? which is superior to
all in glory? That great City? And if a City that has but a little in it, how
much that which has some things of price in it? for wherein; and if a City
that was once happy, but is now become unfortunate; how much more a City in her
visible splendour? Wherein are; And if a City wherein are only Warehouses, and
Banquetting-houses, Marble-pillars, goodly Theaters, lofty Citadels; how much
more that City, wherein there are persons And if a City wherein there are
persons in thin ranks; how much more such a City, that has such a company of
persons in it, that they are able to plant a little Country? even sixscore
thousand; And if a City that is but voyced up to be so great for ostentation
sake, how much more that City that has such multitudes in it, that if there
were strict inquiry made, the former number will not suffice, but the Bill must
be enlarged? for there are sixscore thousand persons, and more. Oh Jonah, whose
heart would it not appall and terrify, to see that great City, and that vast
company perish at one stroke? yes, and if this be considered, that many of them
are not come to years of understanding, they know neither sin nor judgment,
provocation, nor reconciliation, the benefit of life, nor the miseries of
death, for they are blameless, harmless, heartlesse, artless Infants, which
know not their own names, which cannot discern between their right hand, and
their left hand. Besides if the ruin of reasonable persons do not move
compassion, should not the rage against bruit beasts, the one cannot discern,
and the other cannot discern; the offering of Infants would be grievous, and so
the sacrificing of so much cattle in the destruction of the City; the shrieking
of Infants would be dreadful, and so the bleatings, brayings, neighings,
bellowings, roarings of so many bruits. Oh thou have an heart of flint, if
these things do not melt it; thou art no man, and worse then a beast, if the
destruction of so many Infants, and so much Cattle, do not make thee relent.
Howsoever if thou have no sense, nor apprehension of these doleful, dismal
accidents, yet the great numbers both of Infants and Cattle, do incline me
absolutely to spare: Should not I spare Nineveh that great City, wherein are
more then sixscore thousand persons that cannot discern between their right
hand, and their left hand, and also much Cattle?

As I have for a while joined both these parts together, so now I must sever
them, and begin first with the nature of the place, That great City. Wherein
there are three things considerable the subject, City. the attribute, Great.
the eminency, That.


That great City.

First, For the subject, City. From hence observe, That a City in it self, is
an attractive of pity. He which does preserve a particular man, or a
particular family, Bonum vult cennibus, sed non idem bonum. Aquin.
will he readily destroy a City? No, Gods greatest providence is seen in the
greatest things, He wills good to all, but not to all the same good. Where
there is the chiefest perfection, there God is chiefest in conservation. What
more beautiful then a City? no, Mountains, Rivers, and Cities, are esteemed the
great wonders of the world. There is a great weight in the name of a City. Est
grande m^mentum in nomine urbis. Tacit. l. 1. Omnes homines feruntur ad
civitatem, quodam impetu naturae. Cicer. 1. Offic.
All men are carried to a City (as to a place of the greatest honor) by a
certain instinct of nature. Solomon does compare the strength of affection to a
strong City, Prove. 18.19. And Esaias says, that there are houses of joy in the
joyous City, Isai. 32.13. Yea, God does animate Jeremy to deliver his message
with confidence, for he had made him like a fenced City, Jer. 1.18. as if he
could single out no better thing upon earth to show the power of his
providence, or to put courage into his Prophet. What offerings were there
appointed to be at the building of a City? Ezech. 48. and what solemnities were
there used with Cymbals, Psalteries, and Harps, at the dedication of a wall of
a City? Nehe. 12.27. A City then must needs be a thing of principal esteem;
yea, Civitas vocatur quaedam perfecta congregatio Uar sil. Patav. c. 4. de
defensore pacis. Nihil est principi illi Dequi omnem hunc mundum regit, quod
quidem in terris fiat acceptius, quam concilia, coeisuque hominum jure socioti,
quae civitates appellantur, Cicero de somnio Scipion. (...)
Marsilius could say, that a City is a kind of perfect Congregation, and
association. Tully, by the light of nature speaks expressly, That to that
great prince, God, which does govern the whole world, there is nothing more
acceptable upon earth, then councils and companies lawfully met together, which
are called Cities: God himself, as he would not be without a Law, an Ark, a
Tabernacle, so he would not be without a City, which is called the City of God;
yea, how dear a City is to God, may appear by the name of it in Hebrew, which
does come from a word that signifies to stir up, as if God by the name of a
City, were stirred up to provide for it: indeed he keeps the City, and his
eyes are toward the City, and it is graven upon the palms of his hands, as if
a City were precious in his account; he will spare many things, but especially
a City, Should not I spare Nineveh a City? There are many things in a City
which may take Gods eye, and endeer it to him.

First, it is a goodly resting place. Men had at first but mean sleeping-rooms,
D^mus antra fuerunt.
their Houses were but hollow Caves, or Dens. But now God has allowed them
nearer structures, where they may house themselves: and will God be ready to
unlodge men from those Bedchambers, where he has suffered them so sweetly to
take their rest, and repose?

Secondly, Cities are places of meeting; for what is a City, but a Community?
there people cluster together, for the seed of a City is as the gravel.
Clvitas Communitas.
Esa. 48.19. it does multiply Merchants like the stars of Heaven, Nahum. 3.16.
therefore He, who is Bonum commune, the Common good, will he be hasty in
destroying Generalities?

Thirdly, they are places of Order; for a City has Government, and Authority
in it, Non maenia sed leges civitatem servant.
they are not walls, but Laws which keep Cities. Now God which is the Judge of
the whole Earth, will he destroy those places which excel in Government, and
Magistracy, the very image of his supreme Regiment?

Fourthly, Cities are places of Arts and Sciences: for in the Country there are
none but Heardsmen, and Tilthmen to be found; but in the City is the Cunning
Artificer, a man, which does find out intricacies, out of whose brain do come
all the rare inventions upon earth; now the Only wise God will he deface those
places, where so much pregnancy; and acrimony of with does abound?

Fifthly, Cities are conspicuous: for a City set upon an hill cannot be hid,
let them seated where men please, they are the places of the greatest dignity;
Now God himself who is clothed with glory, and Majesty, will He ruin those
places, which do shine and carry in them the most radiant beams of his own
excellency? will he throw down those piles, and Spires of worldly magnificence?
wound the face of beauty? strike out the right eye out of the head of the whole
world? No, for these reasons God will spare Cities. It is true, There is no
evil in the City, but the Lord has done it, but that evil does not come in
haste, but with much protraction, and delay to a City, the City usually feels
of it in the last place; God does land his judgments upon the Shores side, and
does make them take a long march through the Country, before they do pitch down
their Tents, dig Trenches, lay straight sieges, and set up scaling ladders
against the City. Indeed if a City does live out of fear, live in pleasure, and
dwell carelessly, if the Harp, the Viole, the Tabret, the Pipe, the wine, be in
their Feasts, if they deride, and defy judgments, then God may fray the City
in the midst of her jovisance, case up her musical instruments, bring in the
voider to her sumptuous Banquets, turn this dancing City into a sorrowful
Lady, yea, make this melodious City a Ramah, wherein there shall be nothing but
mourning, and weeping, and great lamentation; instead of the mirth, and the
jollity of the City, the cry of the City shall go up to Heaven. 1 Samuel 5.12.
For if a City wax proud, and insolent, daring, and braving, it shall know, that
they are neither gates, nor bars, walls, Towers, impregnable Castles, millions
of armed men that shall secure her, Gods confounding judgments shall pull down
the most potent, and haughty City. A City of perverseness, Ezech. 9.9. shall
be a City of perplexity. Then the City shall be smitten, Ezech. 33.24. laid
desolate, Es. 27.10. made a Den of Dragons. Jer. 10.22. a defenced City shall
be made an heap, Es. 25.2. It shall be said, This is the City, which shall be
visited, Jer. 6.6. As ambitious, arrogant, aspiring, powerful, puissant, and
pompous as she was, yet she shall be abased, and laid low. Es. 26, 5. Yea, God
will set his face against the City for evil, and not for good. Jer. 21.10. But
if there be any goodness in the City, It shall be called a City sought, and
not forgotten. Es. 62.12. Yea, they of the City shall flourish like the gross
of the Earth. Psalm. 72.16. there shall be the possession of the City. Ezech.
48.20. the City through prosperity shall be spread abroad. Es. 57.8. Glorious
things shall be spoken of the City. Ps. 87.3. Yea, they shall say, We have a
strong City, salvation shall God appoint for walls, and bulwarks, Es. 26.1. The
Enemy shall not come into the City, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before
it with shield, nor cast a bank against it. 2 Kings 19.32. So that ye see that
if a City will honor God, God will favor that; yea, his affection shall be
more passionate to it, because it is such a glorious Habitacle; Nineveh shall
be the rather spared, because a City. Should not I spare Nineveh, A City.

Application.
1. This shows, that God is the Cities Friend, yea, the City has not such a
Patron as this Preserver of men. Except the Lord does keep the City, the
Watchman waketh but in vain. Ps. 127. 1. Trust not in your Marshalls, or
Magistrates, these are but your Dii medioxumi, your middle Gods; ye have a more
Tutelar Numen, the Lord God Almighty to rely upon; what need the City fear any
enemy if God be their Friend? no, though Friendship amongst men diverse times
be very dangerous, that men care not how they sell their Friends like
commodities they have no use of; or make spoils of them, as spend thrifts do
of their fairest estates, like Philip, who because Aratus gave him faithful
counsel, which Philip did not approve, he gave him a secret poison that should
consume him by degrees: which when Aratus perceived, he cried out to his dear
Friend Cephalus; O Cephale, haec sunt praemia regiae amicitieae. Eras. l. 6.
Apoph. (...) Si Parmenio ftruxit insidias, cui fidendum? si non struxit, quid
agendum? Plut. in Apoph
Oh Cephalus, these are the rewards of a Kingly friendship; yea,
perfidiousnesse of Friends diverse times is such, that it is a snare to be
familiar, as Antipater said of Alexander, when he had taken away Parmenio his
old trusty Counselor and Commander, upon suspicion of Treason, If Parmenio
has wrought Treason, whom shall we trust? if he has not wrought it, who can
be safe? But God has no such deceit in his Friendship; but he declares
himself as the best of Friends. For as Dionysius the elder, seeing the
faithful love that was between Damon and Pythias, desired to be taken into
their fellowship, so an happy thing it were to be entered into such a league,
Rogo ut me quoque in vestram amicitiam recipiatis. Eras. l. 5. Apoph. Assiduo
vindex assiduus esto. Alex. ab Alex. l. 6. c. 10. Neminem pulla vest indutum
esse. Plut. in Pericle. Ciceren is Atticus.
as there is betwixt God, and a City. As by the lex Elia every rich man was to
be an Advocate for the poor, To the diligent be thou a diligent Defender. So
God is the Cities constant Pleader, and Patron; as it was the dying comfort of
Pericles, that no man wore a sad attire, so long as he governed, So the City is
no Mourner, so long as it is under Gods protection. God will give his own
weapons to a City to fight with, as Hercules gave his Bow and arrows to
Philoctetes, his dear friend; as Titus Pomponius Atticus, did so affect Cicero,
that he was called the Atticus of Cicero; So God does desire to limit his
Titles to this Friend, and to be named no other then Hers, even the City God;
the very editions of his deep wisdom are dedicated to the City; as Cicero for
the entirenesse that was betwixt him, Rex stultum facinus, civium incusavit,
dicens se non tanti facere ventis tempestatibusque aedificia exposita, ut ob id
veteris amici domum diruere vellet. Panormit. de gestis. Alphonsi. Dum hostem
quaeritis, amicum mihi adducitis. Bruson, l. 1. c. 3.
and Lucullus styled one of the best books, which he ever wrote, Lucullus. God
will suffer nothing of his Friends to be touched, as Alphonsus would not the
house of Nicolaus Buzutus to be meddled with, in the uproar at Naples; he is
ready to free her when she is brought to him, as an enemy, as when Antonies
soldiers brought to him Brutus under the name of Lucullus, he set him at
liberty, saying, Oh my soldiers, what have ye done? ye have brought me hither
a Friend instead of an enemy, Nay, as the love betwixt Theseus, and Pirithous
is reported to be such, that they went down to Hell together; so God will go
through all extremities with his City. It is no easy matter to persuade a City
out of Gods favor; no, he will rather show her the accusations, that are
brought against her to testify the confidence of his love, then make her away
upon suggestions, and informations; as Alexander for a great cold which he had
gotten by washing in the River Gydnus (which brought him to the point of death)
drank of a potion that his Physician Philip had provided for him, and in the
mean time showed him a letter, which his Adversaries had wrote against him,
accusing him, that he had been corrupted by Darius to poison his Master. It
must be an high thing that can dis-unite God, and his City; God will search
strictly, before he will separate. He does so love a City, that he would not
ruin Sodom, till he had examined it; ten righteous persons in it might have at
last preserved it; it burnt to Cinders for want of Saints, and not for want of
a compassionate God. He does so love a City, that he does give Laws for the
safety of it, it must be created, and patlied with before it be assaulted, for
Woe be to him that does make a breach, or shake a stone in the wall, or shed a
drop of blood, or rifle the innocent Tradesman, till conditions of peace be
offered, for When thou come night to a City to fight against it, then
proclaim peace unto it. Deuteronomy. 20.10. So that if Cities be at truce with God
Almighty, and have not made him through restless grievances their professed
and provoked Adversary, they may trade freely, rest quietly, fear no
molestation, u^lther at the Custom-house, nor Council Chamger; there shall be
old men, and old women in the streets, and every man walk with his staff in
his hand for very age, the streets of the City shall be full of boys and girls
playing in it. Zach. 8.4, 5. they may sing alowd upon their beds. Psalm. 149.5.
sorrow, and sighing shall flee away. Esai. 35.10. God will lead them out of
doors in the day time, and put them to bed at night; he will keep their
City-keyes, and set Guards over them. Oh therefore serve God, and your Master
will take you into his protection, he will not only give you a Charter, but be
the City-Standard-bearer, and Champion. Whosoever will not spare, he will
spare, yea, even because it is a City. Should not I spare Nineveh, a City?

2. This shows that a City in it self is a place of honor; for do men cast
contempt upon that which God himself does magnify? will God spare Nineveh,
because a City, and shall not a City for this be thought worthy of an
excellency? yes, Civitatem principalissimum esse little, quae humana ratione
constitui possunt. Aquin. lib. 1. Pol. c. 1.
or else we correct Gods Herauldy, and strive who shall be the best Judges
about Titles of honor; let no man therefore deprive a City of her Cap of
Maintenance, or abase the furred Gown; For a City is the most principal thing,
of all things which can be constituted by man's reason, as Aquinas says. Shall
the foam never be wiped from the lips of contemners concerning a City? yes, it
is the part of an ignoble spirit, to vilify that which God, and nature have
dignified, if a man would commend a place, it is enough to say, It is a City.
Let men lessen the reputation of it what they can, yet a City must needs be a
place of honor; first in respect of the laudable conversation. Behold what
commerce does it instills a kind of generosity by mutual negotiation, Aspice
quid faciant commercia. Juven. Prima sit in vobis morum tu tela. Ovid. de med.
fac. Est and in in essu pars non temnenda decoris. ld. l. 3. art.
where is an interchange not only of goods, but manners. Behavior is one of
Men's principal Ornaments; yea the very gate and gesture, carry a kind of grace
in them; and where shall ye see these with greater luster, than in the Citizen,
who is a man generally composed of a laudable deportment: Rudeness may be
earthed into the Hind, but the breath of a Citizens lips is courtesy, the
stretch of his hands respect; yea he seems to be nothing but the mould not
good manners; sure I am, seemly carriage has borrowed two of her best titles
from the City, namely Civility, Urbanity.

Secondly, a City is a place of honor; because there men wind up a clew of
means in a more noble way than other men; for whereas these men (for the most
part) have no great patrimonies left them, nor fields to till, nor Pastures to
feed; yet by a mere ingenious and artificial way, they raise vast Estates.
Diodorus Siculus says, that they are called Merchants from Mercury, Deus
facundiae. Caesar. Comment. Hermes Grace, quod sermo vel ^nterpretatio (qua
utique ad s^rmonen pertinet) Herme nia dicitur. Vnde and mercibus praeest,
quiae inter vendentes and ementes sermo fit medius. Calep. in voce, Mercurius.
that great Godo wit, that though he be the inventer of all Arts (as some hold)
yet the Merchant has the honor to have his name engraven into him; and
therefore it was as Caesar thinks, that he saw so many Images of Merchants
built to Mercury, as if he were their particular Deity. Calepine expressly
says, That he is called Hermes, because he is set over Merchandise, and that
that calling does require communication and conference. Yea, as Hermes
Frismegistus borrowed his name from him in Greek, so does the Merchant in
Latin. A lofty derivation, and yet the learned Ancients thought they must go
so high to find out the Original of Merchants. I do not only find that in
latter times, Laurence Medici Duke of Florence, and Rodolph King of Bohemia,
the Son of the great Albertus, that Pertinax the Emperor, as Petrus Gregorius
reports, and Psammeticus King of Egypt, as Diodorus affirms, were
Merchants; and if we can find crowned Merchants, then Merchants must be thought
to get their means in a splendid way, for Princes would never spot their
Courts, and soil their Robes in meddling with a sordid calling. In general ye
see, that this person does not hew, and plaster, and delve, and drive for his
living, but by the near art of contracts, and the curious science of commerce,
as it were by wit and pregnancy, he does advance both his name and family.
Merchant, and Citizen, therefore, lift up thy face as a person of honor.

Thirdly, a City is a place of honor, Vicissitudinari^ commercio. Columel.
because there is a daily Mart, where by exportation and importation, she does
supply other Countries, and store her self with all manner of necessaries; for
a Citizen does not content himself with what he does find within his own
walls, but like a laborious Be, he does fly to all the quarters of the world,
to gather honey for his own Hive: He has a magnetic virtue in him, to draw
commodities to him from the farthest Zone; Impiger extremos currit mercator ad
Indos. Horat.
yea he will search all the Storehouses of Egypt, the Warehouses of Persia,
the perfuming-shops of Arabia, and Treasuries of the Indies, to be replenished
with all the rarities which the earth does afford; the Citizen is the great
Cosmographer, he is most skillful in the terrestrial Globe, Mercatura est
magna and copiosa multa undique adportans. Cic. l. 1. Offic. ignotis repetens
compendia terris. Tibul. l. 1. Mercibus hic Italis mutat sub sole recenti.
Rugosam piper, and pallentis grana cumini. Quae nobis and nostrae reip.
supersua sunt exportant, and aliunde quae nobis necessaria sunt quaeve apud nos
non inveniuntur important. Petrus Gregori is de rep. l. 4. c. 7. Commercia sunt
juris Gentium. L. ex ho^ jure justit. and jur. P. dict. capit. qualitas.
Mercatores, negotiatores institores, propolas, nemo negare potest. Plut. 2. de
Rep. and Callistratus. l. 2. de nundinis.
If ye would see the Map of the world, go to a Citizens shop, for Merchandise
is vast, and copious, it brings home things from all places, yea from unknown
Lands, it fills the Land with all Nature's wares and wonders. By exchange it
does lend, and borrow, and so by permuting for Native commodities, it gains
the varieties of all Countries, for the nature of Merchandise, is to carry out
superfluous things, and to bring in necessary things. Therefore to pull down
the Merchant, and the Citizen, it were to turn the whole Kingdom into a
plow-share, or a Grasiers hide, or a Weavers shittle; we must eat nothing but
our own fatlings, drink nothing but our own Cider, wear nothing but our own
wool, Physic our selves with our own druggs, mint out of our own Mines; yea,
it were to unrigge a great part of our own shipping, to embarque our own
Nation, to build Blockhouses against our selves, and to bar up our Havens; we
can walk then no further than the Seashore, or to the Lands end, and there
upon our own cliffes bid adieu to all our neighbour-Nations, and proclaim our
selves strangers to all the world; it were to put an end to the difference
between free-trade, and Companies trade, and to unty one of the strongest
twists that ever was in the world, namely that of humane and National society,
for Merchandise is by the Law of Nations, as the Civilians hold. Did I say by
the Law of Nations? I might say by the Law of God. For wherefore does the
Scripture say, That God has made a path in the Sea, and that men may go down
to the Sea in ships, and do their business in great wate^s, and that the wise
woman is like a Merchans ship, that brings her food from afar, and that the
Kingdom of heaven is like unto a Merchant man seeking goodly Pearls: If
Merchandise by Gods Law were not justifiable, and honorable? yes, this calling
is requisite, and exquisite; it is the Nations Head-servant, High-steward, sent
out to all the earth, as to a general Market, and fairstead, to buy her
provisions, and things of the highest price to furnish her, and adorn her. And
what she meets withal for her use, she transmitteth home, nay brings in her
own hand to her dear City, that the City might be a Spring within her self,
and a Conduit to the whole Country; Merchant and Citizen, therefore, still
stand thy ground with reputation, for thou may be looked upon as a person of
same.

Fourthly, a City is a place of honor, because multitudes live there with an
unanimous expression; yea many hundred thousands linked like persons of one
Tabernacle; yea many a family not so combined as a City, therefore it is called
a Society or a Corporation.

A City is a communion of men alike in desires. Communio quaedam funilium.
Aristot. l. 3. Polit. c. 1. Vinculo quodam societatis in unum coeunt.
Cognationem quandam natura constitutit. I. lorentinus. l. 3. co. l. 45. sect.
fin. leg. Aquil. P. Civitas quasi civium unitas. Petrus Giegor. l. 1. c. 3. d.
1.
Citizens are knit together in a certain bond of society in one; Nature there
has constituted a kind of kindred, that they should act and agree together
like men of the same lineage and consanguinity. Therefore a City does signify
no more, nor less, than the unity of Citizens. And indeed if it want unity, it
is but a tumult, a wrestling-place, a pitched field, and not a City; the Towers
are then undermining, and the walls shaking and falling. For, If a City be
divided, how shall it stand? a miserable thing it is, when their tongues are
divided, and there is strise in the City, Psalm. 55.9. Scornful men (that is
turbulent and sactious men) bring a City into a snare, Prove. 29.8. These are
some of the breaches of the city of David, Isai. 22.9. Breaches indeed, that
will bring the whole building into ruin, for the City is then becoming a City
of destruction, Isai 19.18. Yea, like a Potters vessel that shall be broken in
pieces, and cannot be made whole again. Jer. 19.11. Epidetus said well, That
discord is the wit-foundring of a City, Nun neque ebrius sobrium cocere potest,
neque sobrius abebrio persuaderi. In enchir.
just like a quarrel between sober and drunken men. Athenaeus out of Aristotle,
tells a sad story of one Telegoras, who being a man of great fame, and so
dearly beloved of the people, that if they could not get a just price for their
commodities, they were wont to say, Athen. l. 8.
They would go, and freely give them away to Telegoras, which they often did: a
company of rich Citizens which did equal him in estate, but not in worth,
spightfully envied this reputation of his amongst the people, and fell into
such heart-grudges, that upon a time, a great fish being to be sold, and no man
coming up to the price of it, it was carried away to Telegoras, which the
wealthy maligning Citizens, seeing, they were so enraged at it, that they
raised up the City into an uproar, violently assaulted his house, and person,
and most inhumanely deflowred his Daughters, whereupon there grew afterward
such a deadly fewd betwixt the two discontented parties, that it could not be
quieted, till Ligdamis the Ringleader of the dissension, made pure slaves of
them all, and insulted over them like a true Tyrant; and this was the fare of
the Naxian Citizens. Diodor l. 15.
Diodorus does make a sadder relation concerning the Citizens of Argos, who
falling into mutual diffentions and distractions about superiority, there was
such a woeful face of misery and desolation seen in the City, that no man lived
in safety, for many were tortured to death, and others cut their own throats,
that they might not be tortured; yea, certain Orators arising, stirred up the
people so against the rich men, that no man of wealth was secure, thirty of
them were questioned, and tortured, and slaughtered at once, and after that two
thousand and two hundred. And afterward the Orators themselves being ashamed
of their bloody practices, that they had been instruments, and instigators in
such diresull passages, out of a kind of remorse, giving over their wonted
pleading, and refusing to accuse any more, the rage fell upon them, and they
were murdered, and perished with the rest; the effects of this dissension were
so horrid, that by way of detestation, it was afterward called the Scythalism.
The Palentocia (that is, Plut. in quest. Graecis.
the bringing in of Usury again) what combustions did it raise amongst the
Megarensians? The Citizens of Constantinople falling into contention in the
seventh year of Justinian, Euagrius. l. 4. c. 13. Niceph. l. 17.10.
their popular pledge to raise parties; what troubles did there break forth?
Citizens were banished, Houses burnt, the Temple of Sancta Sophia defaced, and
the uproare did not cease till three thousand were slain; Plut. Joh. Mag. l.
21. Hist.
when Carthage was divided into the factions of Hanno, and Haniball, how, soon
did it come to be an enslaved City? Did not contention quite overthrow the
Teutonick Order, which for so many years had been famous? Did not the
seditious carriages of John, Shimeon, and Eleazar, destroy Jerusalem faster
then the sword of Vespasian, or Titus? yes, discords of Citizens have ever been
ominous, and diverse times fatal. The happiness of a City then is, when the
waters of Shiloah run softly, when Citizens delight themselves in an
abundance of peace, when there are no alterations in their meetings, nor
litigations in their counsails; but they are built like a City at unity in it
self, Psalm. 122.3. Oh this unity does carry in it an universality of felicity,
it is the basis and battle ax to a City; it fears no gusts, when it does
stand upon this sure pinning; nor enemy abroad, when there is no enemy within:
Oh it is a rare thing to see a due crasis in the humors of the City, and to
hear all the strings of that great instrument in tune, that the spleen does not
swell to put the whole body out of course, or the Salamander does not appear
pear to foretell a storm coming; that the Vessel be not cracked, that should
hold the water of the City-preservation, nor a moat gotten into the eye of it
to trouble the sight in the foreseeing of dangers; that the City be not
splay-footed, or goggle-eyed, but both the feet, and the eyes move the same
way; that they allagree together like Workmen to raise the same Fabric; or
there is no more difference of sounds, then if they were singing a diapason,
where but one voice as it were amongst all is to be heard; oh where there is
unity there needs no barricadoing, Sic mihi state Lacedaemonii, and muro
cincti sumus. Philostrat. in Sophistis. Alev. ab Alex. l. 4. c. 8.
nor rampering, for unity is a wall of brass to a City, as Isaeus said, then
the City seems to be espowsed, and men live together in as much kindness as
if like man and wife, they were coupled together with a Conjugall knot.
Alexander ab Alexandro does report that in Athens there was a Magistrate of
peace appointed that should compel all factions to an agreement, Diodorus. l.
3. c. 3.
and indeed there is nothing more expedient then this Officer of concord.
Diodorus says, that the Troglodites though they were throwing of stones, and
shooting one at another, yet if a Woman did but appear they were presently
appeased, so all contentions should cease in a City so soon as this beautiful
Lady of Unity does show her amiable face. Scipio Asricanus desired to know of
Tyresius, why Numantia had gotten so many Victories over Rome, and yet at last
was conquered; who answered, that Concord had gotten the Victories, Concordia
victoriam, discondia exitium praebuit. Bruson. l. 2. c. 4.
and Discord brought the ruin. So indeed, to cement and secure a City, there
is nothing better, then Concord; True Citisens they have their City in high
veneration, and though there be many thousands of them, yet they all bow to the
honor of the City, as to a common Parent; for he is an unnatural child, that
can tread upon the feet of his own Mother, or gripe her hand, or break her
head; a seditious person which has nothing but quicksilver in his brain, and
Aquafortis on his tongue, reasoning, and arguing quite contrary to the grounds
of City-safety, he seems not to be a Citisen, or one of those lovely children
which her eye does look upon with pleasure; but an Hermaphrodite, which she
has brought forth to her grief, all rightbred Citisens looking to the glory
and welfare of the City with a kind of sacred reverence; therefore seeing such
infinitenumbers can live together in such admired unity, all conspiring to vote
up the Cities Weal, and dignity, a Citisen (if right) is a Worthy, and may be
looked upon as a person of Renown.

Fifthly, a City is a place of honor, because of buildings; House and riches
are given of the Lord. Prove. 19.14. and where does the Lord show his rare
Architecture but in a City? There are the glorious structures, and Piles of
wonder; Habitations built with hewn stone. Esaias 9.10. goodly houses. Deuteronomy.
8.12. wide houses, large chambers, carved windows, rooms seeled with Cedar, and
painted with vermilion. Jer. 22.14. yea, there (if any where) are the ivory
Palaces. Psalm. 45.8, regali splendida luxu. Virg. 7. Aenead. Haud timeam magni
dixisse palatia caelil Ovid. 1. Met.
and costly stones seen, from the Foundation to the Coping 1 Kings 7.9. and
pavements laid with white and black, red and blew, Marble. Ester 1.6. The
beauty of a City is usually in the buildings, where there are Princely
Edisices. Yea, a kind of Heavenly Palaces; the Porches, the Doors, the Skreens,
the Pillars, the walls, the windows, the stair-cases, the chymny-pieces, the
Dining-chambers, the Bed chambers, the Galleries, the Turrets, the Lanthorns
are all glistering and resplendent, such clusters of houses as if they were a
Forest, such variety of Buildings, as if a man came into a City to see all the
prime, and curious spectacles of a Nation; indeed Art can present the eye with
no more pleasing object, then the sight of a City. Princes thought they could
never set out their royalty better then in building of Cities, as Ashur in
building this Nineveh. Genesis 10.11. Nebuchadnezzar in building of Babylon. Is
not this great Babylon, that I have built for the house of the Kingdom by the
might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? Dan. 4.30. Cyrus in
building of his Cyropolis, Alexander in building his Alexandria, Inveni
Iateritiam, reliqui marmoream. Sueton. Ad aedificandum furore quodam
rapiebatur. Nicet. Nomen meum his monumentis inscribam. Plet. in Pericle.
Naturam vires suas in unam urbem essudisse. Platina.
Trajan in building of his Nicopolis upon the Banks of Ister after he had
conquered the Mysians, and Dacians; and Augustus in turning Rome from a City of
brick to a City of Marble, as if these Princes with Isaaclus. Angelus were
enflamed to leave these buildings behind them as relics of their fame, or
they desired with Pericels to engrave a never-dying honor in these Monuments,
declare the excellency of Cities. Sure I am, they are so specious, that they
have dazzled the eyes of the greatest. Constantius the Emperor, when he came to
Rome, and saw the transcendent glory of it, he cried out that Nature had
emptica out all her sorces upon that one City. Tamerlaine when he came to
Constantinople, and observed exactly the walls, the gates, the streets, the
bathes, the gardens, the houses of State, the Castles, the Obelisks, the
Theaters, the Temples, and especially that of Sancta Sephia, Knowls in his
Turkesh History
he was so wrapped with the sight of these things, that he professed it never
grieved him to have come from the furthest part of the East, were it but to
save that famous City from ashes, Bafazet before his coming, having besieged
it. A Citizen then being so gloriously seated, where he has daily so many
stately Mansions, and Palaces within the Circuit of his walls, how can he but
be a person of repute?

Sixthly, a City is a place of honor, because there areliberties. Wherefore
does the Apostle say, that ye are Citisens with the Saints. Ephesians. 2.19. but
that he would intimate that Citisens had great immunities? It was enough for
Saint Paul to say, he was a Roman, Acts 22.25. as if having the rights of a
Roman Citisen, he ought not to be handled like a common man; the Centurion
does confess that with a great sum he obtained that freedom. Acts 22.28.
Municipal privileges were ever very high, for they do not come of Maenia (as
some would have it) the walls, as if they had liberty to live within the walls,
Isti Perigrini certe transitu contenti esse debent. P. Greg. l. 4. c. 4.
Claudius. C. prohibuit, peregrinae conditionis homines gentilia nomina assumere
Romanorum. Alex. ab Alex. l. 4. c. 10. Lex vetat peregrinum ne in murum af
scendat. Cic. l. 2. de Orat. Hotoman. de verbis juris. Plut. de Stoicorum
pugnis. Alexander ab Alexandro. l. 4. c. 10.
but of Munia grants, or honorary concessions. Peregrini, the strangers
couldlay no claim to them; no, such were to be contented only with a passage
through the City. Claudius Caesar would not suffer them to use the names of
Citizens: Lully says, they could not go up the City walls. Hotoman says, that
they were not received into protection, nor had the rights of marriage, or
making their Wills, that true Citisens had. Plutarch says, that Antipater durst
not call Zeno, and Cleanthes Citisens of Athens, though they lived at Athens;
No, though they had continued a long time in a City, yet still they were
peregrini, quasi extra patriam, Strangers because they were out of their
Country; and Boerius says, that in France they are styled Albini, quasi Alibi
nati, allines, as if they were born elsewhere. Alexander ab Alexandro does
report that the Thebanes, Lacedaemonians, and Athenians did not admit any to the
freedom of a Citisen, unless they could derive an ancient lineage from the
stock of some Citisen; Suidas says, that there was an Office called (...),
which had power to exterminate all Foreigners from the participation of those
rights, and to cast them out of the City. Sure I am that the lex Paphia in Rome
was so strict, Affirmans se passurum facilius allquid fisco detrahi, quam
civitatis Romanae honorem vulgari. Sucton
and severe against the reception of persons unto the Titles of Citisens, that
Augustus Caesar, when his Daughter Livia was a Petitioner for a Tributary
Frenchman to be made free, he out of respect to the Law, would only exempt him
from taxes, but not make him a Citisen, saying, that he had rather his
Exchequer should suffer, then the dignity of the Citybe eclipsed. This Freeman
then, that sees others, only walk upon the stones of the streets, or gaze upon
the magnificent shows, or salute acquaintance, or sleep in an hired lodging, or
pay penniworths for the costly Wares which the City does afford but cannot lay
claim to the least immunity, when the Citisen himself does rise up every
morning with multiplicity of rights, and has privileges meeting him in every
corner; and has the City-liberties in all places attending upon him, how can
he but be eyed as one conspicuous? yes, he is the eminent Citizen, even for his
enfranchisement.

Seventhly, A City is a place of honor, because there are degrees of honor,
the Livery, the golden Chain, the Bench. St Paul, that said he was a Citizen of
no mean City, Act. 21.29. does infer, that that City had high offices, and
places of authority in it, for no mean City does declare no mean Government and
jurisdiction to belong to the City; there were those that served the City,
Ezech. 48.18. as if the City commanded like a Master. How was Jerusalem once
great amongst the Nations, and Princess amongst the Provinces? Lamen. 1.1.
Hephzibah, and Beulah, how did they shine in principality and praefectures? It
is said, That they shall be as a crown of Glory in the hand of the Lord, yea as
a royal Diadem, Isai. 62.3. And wherefore? but that the Citizens there shall
have a kind of Majestic power; not only goods, but government; not only
means, but magistracy; not only degrees of Estate, but degrees of honor:
Citizens are ever upon the rising hand, and coming to places of preferment;
elsewhere men may get ample fortunes, and raise great Families; but here is
ornament and regiment, dignity and domination, promotion and presidency, the
City Vest, and the City Sword to be expected. Alexander ab Alexandrio says
that the City of Sparta had two Tribes for men to rise to honor by, Alex. ab
Alex. lib. 1. c. 17.
which were called Aegida, and Pitana; the Athenians had three tribes, which
were called Godeontae, Ergadae, and Hoplitae, as Plutarch says; Plut. in
Solone. Alex. ab Alex. l. 5. c. 18. Blondes l. 3. Romae triumphantis.
The City of Megara had sive tribes, which were called Heraci, Piraci,
Megarenses, Traspodicei, Cynosurei; and as Blondus relates, the Romans had
five and thirty tribes. And is there any City that have not their several
Orders, states, and degrees, whereby men are going up by steps to the top of
preferment? Yes, a Citizen is a graduall creature, that is ever footing it
through all the motions of advancement and dignity. In Rome (except it were by
origination, or cooptation) they first began at Manumission, when the Master
laying his hand upon the head of his servant, and delivering him up to the
Praetor, he was registered for a freeman; asterwards he was called ad pileum to
the cap, which was a token of his liberty; then he was called to the white
Garment, the gold Ring, and a new name; and then he was called ad togam,
tunicam, to the gown, and coat under it; then to the curule Chair, then to jus
imaginis, to have power to make Images and so having passed through several
effices of Aediles, Quaestours, Pre ors, and Tribunes; at last they became to
be Senators and Consuls: And is it not thus in every City? yes, from Freemen,
Liverymen, Commoncouncilled at last they come to mount up to higher degrees of
command; and in fine to be chief Magistrates. Now a Citizen that thus from
creeping out of the nest, does after fly to the tops of Mountains, and after
that does take an Eagles flight, is he not to be highly esteemed? yes, this
going from garment to garment, from office to office, from title to title, till
at last he does become a Cities-Maximus, does show a Citizen to be an
illustrious person.

Eighthly, A City is a place of honor in respect of large payments, Tribute to
whom tribute, and custom to whom custom, Romans 13.7. Now in defraying tributes
and customs, who does exceed the Citizen? We find that Solomon, which exceeded
all the Kings of the earth in riches, had much of his Royal revenue from the
Merchants; and the traffic of the spice Merchants, 1 King. 10.15. The
adversaries of the Jews wrote to Artaxerxes, that he should hinder the building
of Jerusalem, because the City would pay no toll, tribute, and custom, Ezrah.
4.12. They speak not of the Country, but their chief spite is against the
City, as if the toll tribute and custom did come from the City principally;
and Artaxerxes seduced by that information, returned a quick answer, by all
means to obstruct that design; Give ye now commandment (says he) to cause
these men to cease, and that this City be not builded, for why should damage
grow to the hurt of the King? v. 22. as if his chief damage he thought would
grow, and accrue, by the City substracting her wonted payments. Vectigalia
quaecunque quaelibet civitates sibi ac suis curiis -- firma atque perpetua
manner pracipimus, ut in l. Vectigal. 10. Aelian. l. 8. Var. Hist. Instituit
vectigal braccariorum, linteonum, citrariorum, 1. pellionum plaustrariorum,
argentariorum, aurificum, and ali arum artium. Alex. ab Alex. l. 4 c. 10. Et
Herodian. l. 3. Zenoph. de rep. Laced.
In all great impositions laid upon the people, the Citizens are chiefly called
forth ad census to taxes. Honortus and Arcadius, as if they knew where their
Crown stock lay, they wrote only unto Cities, to see that there should be no
diminution of the accustomed payments. Aelian says, That Demetrius Polycrates,
got a thousand two hundred talents from Cities. Severus Alexander, who was one
of the best Emperors, drew his vast sums with which he built his baths, and
left such an incredible treasure to his Children, from Handicraftmen which
lived in Cities. Zenophon does report, That if the Lacedaemonians went to war,
the Cities chiefly maintained the Soldiers. In the great Wars that Augustus
the Emperor had before the Empire was settled, all Nations being almost
beggered through the charge of three and twenty Armies, that he was enforced at
one time (as Dion says) to maintain in the field; when he was at his last
cast, and knew not where to get money, it was the City of Rome, which by giving
him the five and twentieth part of their Estates, and setting a great Tax upon
the sides of every City-house, Dion. in Augusto.
and by large voluntary Contributions, supplied all his wants; so that
whatsoever the extremity be, the City still must bring the remedy: it is the
Purse-bearer of the Nation, or the trusty surety to engage for all exigents. If
this Cloud does not drop, a grievous drought may afflict the Country; if these
Milch-kine do not give down their milk, there may be nothing to sees for the
hungry family; if this Physician does not administer, the sick patient may give
up the ghost; the City is the Domininical Letter, by which we reckon how the
year will go about, or the golden number by which we must cast up the accounts
for all accidents: Alas, the Citizen, and the Merchant, does get more (if he
has free trade) in a short time by traffic and commerce, than the
Countryman does in an age by tillage, and the profit of his ground; here are
the vast gains, and here must be the grand and vast disbursments; the greatest
Princes upon earth are enforced to fly to the banks of their Cities, as their
last refuge; whenever treasure does fail, they must go dig in these
God-mines. A City was wont to be called the Kings-Chamber, for the safety of
his person, and it may be called the Kings Coffer, to fill his empty hand with
ready coin in specie; whatsoever be demanded, here is the Cashiere, or
Paymaster: Oh then, shall a Citizen be reckoned amongst the Sporades, which are
Stars so obscure, that their asterisms cannot be taken; no, let him go for one
of the Stars of the greatest magnitude in a Nation. Even for payments sake, the
Citizen ought not to be looked on, or spoken of, but as a person of honor. All
that has been said then being duly considered, let no man lift up the Robe of
a Citizen with disdain, nor belch out contempt and ignominy in the face of a
Citizen; no the churl is base, the Epicure is base, the Oppressor is base, the
Boaster is base, the Sycophant is base, but the Citizen is honorable; there
were Citizens before there were Heralds, Heaven it self is compared to a
City, or the City of the new Jerusalem; yea, there needs no more to set out
the honor of a City, then that God would spare Nineveh, because a City: Should
not I spare Nineveh, a City?

3. This shows, That as a City is chief, so it should be chief in commendable
demeanor. A City should be a place of example, the great Idea, from which all
round about it should be effigiated, the Prototype, by which all adjacent
places should be stamped; for that being principal, why should it not
formalize all those members that depend upon it for actuating? When thou art
the head, why do thou beneath thy self to be the feet? Caput cum sis, cur
pes existas. Naz.
Does not a Cities virtue diffuse virtue? yes, when it was asked why Peloponesus
was so good, it was presently answered, that Aegina (the head-City) nourished
up none but good children. Aegina bonos filios nutrit. Erasm.
When Syracusa (the prime City of Sicily, came to resort to Plato, which
instructed Dionysius, there followed such throngs out of the Country,
Tyrannidis sedem pulvis occuparet. Plut. de dignos. adulator. Swabo. l. 11.
that the dust of their feet filled the Kings Court. When Echatane in Media,
came to addict it self to worthy things, it presently instructed Armenia, and
at last it came to be the Persian School: for from that place they learned
their archery, the worshipping of their Gods, their grave attires, their doing
honor to Princes, and the adorning of them with the Tiara, and Cydaris, Royal
Ornaments. When the lex Fannia, Vt universa Italia, and non sola urhs, lege
sumptuaria teneretur. Macrob. l. 3. Saturn. c. 17.
a law to restrain excess in diet, came by the Consuls to be constituted in
Rome, presently the lex Didia, and Licinia, other laws of the same nature came
to be enjoined in the Country; that all Italy, as well as the City, might
conform to this law of Moderation. See how much good one City-example will do
for virtue; and may not one City-example do as much evil for vice? Yes, the
City does sell her examples, as well as her commodities, and her sins as well
as her wares; yea, the quick trade does run in Crimes, she does send down
these by wholesale into the Country; this plague in the City does infect the
whole Nation, a whole Land may curse a City for bad presidents. If the City be
full of perverseness, Ezech. 9.9. the disobedience will spread to all parts; If
the City be bloody, Nahum. 3.1. it is enough to sell Chopping knives to their
Customers elsewhere. What pure worship will be left in the Land, if according
to the number of the Cities, be the number of the Gods? Jer. 11.13. If the
chief Cities of the ten tribes set up the golden Calves, the whole Region will
seem to be nothing but a bleating Crib to the honor of those new Deities,
people far and nigh will swear by the sin of Samaria, and will say, thy God
oh Dan lives, Erasm. in Adag. Cael. Rhodigin. Pol. Virgil. l. 3. c. 6. de inv.
rerum. Sabellic. l. 3.
and the manner of Beershebah lives, Amos 8.14. The lust of Corinth made all
Greece a Brothel-house, the intemperance of Plintine turned all Egypt into a
Tippling-booth. St^o^ first finding out fine silk, it has corrupted all
Nations with garish attires. Guarde, Jesdi, and Hispaa, the chief Cities of
the Arsacidans, being accustomed to lie with their sisters, and mothers, it
taught all Parthia incest. A City of Phoenicia having stolen Io the daughter of
Inacus from the Graecians, Herod. l. 1.
it soon set the Cretians on work to steal Europa from the Phoenicians, and the
Grecians to steal Medea from Colchis, and Troy to steal Helena from Menelaus
the Prince of Lacedemenia. So that ye see that a Cities bad example is like a
Gangrene, it will not rest where it first began, but convey a contagion to all
the members, and at last to the vital parts.

Thus much in general, for your selves in particular, as God has made you a
City, so do ye principle out goodness to the Land: for a shame it were for the
sowrest fruit to grow upon the top-branch, or the worst Scholars to be in the
upper form. Shall ye be taught duty from abroad? or learn conscience of the
Country? shall the man in russet direct thee in thy furrs? the leathern girdle
instruct the gold Chain? Shall there be more noble motions, and pious
resolutions in the rural Swain, then the Citisen? Shall thou mind nothing but
the vent of thy ware? and the fale of thy merchandise? yes, thou have another
trade to look after; A Citisen should show to his Customers the best Patterns
of holy life, and open the packs of religious presidents; A City should be the
Burse, and Magazine of virtuous demeanours; or else it will be said, that the
Citizen does study nothing but himself, and that his Counting House is his
conscience, and his penny his God. Oh therefore God has given you honor,
maintain your honor, let the great wheel of virtue stir here, and the morning
star of grace shine here. Let not the mirery ways be cleaner then your paved
streets, and the thatched shuds be nearer built then your tiled houses. Let not
the Country man, when he comes amongst you be lothed with the smell of your
intemperance, or recoyl at the sight of your fraud, or blush at your
neutralizing, or be ready to deride your pride, or to hiss at your malice, or
to freeze with your indevotion, or to drop down dead with seeing the blood of
oppression sprinkled upon the stones of your streets; but prepare choice sights
for the Country man's eye, that he may go home, and say, I have seen the Phoenix
of religion, the Paradise of Piety, the Temple of the Holy Ghost, the Suburbs
of Heaven; I have learned grace out of every Citizens mouth, and bought
bargains of sanctity at every shop, enough to stock my self, and supply all my
neighbors. Thus shall ye show your selves to be a flourishing City, when ye
are as full of Professors, as Traders? and of Saints, as Merchants; when ye
have trafficked for godliness at every Port, and fetched home the true Pearl
further then the Indies: Well remember, that To whom much is given, of them
much will be required. Ye should have a priority of duty, because ye have a
priority of dignity. A City should serve God before others, because God would
spare a City before others. Should not I spare Nineveh, a City?

4. This shows, that if God would spare a City because a City, that the City
should spare it self; not suffer her immunities to be infringed, when she can
preserve them, nor her rights to be injured, when she can vindicate them. What
were this, but for a Citizen to dig down the walls of his own City? or to
unbody his own Incorporation? It was a famous saying, 2 Samuel 10.12. Be of good
courage, let us play the men for our people, and for the Cities of our Gods.
Doubtless every one ought to express much fidelitity, and prowess for these
Cities, or else he does conspire against his own Society, and the open enemy is
not worse then such a secret Traitor. Sceva would not deliver up Epidamnum to
the enemy, Plut.
though he had received 220 darts in his shield, and lost one of his eyes, but
held it out till Caesar came in to his rescue. Livius.
The Citizens of Saguntum burnt themselves rather then they would submit to
Hanibal. The Citizens of Bizantium held out a siege of two years against
Severus, Herodian.
and when their weapons were spent, they threw their imagery, and brazen
statues at the faces of their enemies. The Citizens of Numantia held out a
siege of forteen years against Scipio; Florus.
and after that, they gathered all their goods, money, and armor, and laying
them all upon an heap, they fired them and their selves, that they might leave
nothing to the Conqueror but the name of Numantia. Bonfin.
The women of Aquilegia made bowstrings of their hair, that their soldiers
might shoot against their enemies. Vincent.
The women of the Vindelici for want of military preparation, threw their own
children instead of darts against their besiegers, rather then they would yield
to Drusus the Father of Germanicus. Such resolute spirits have men expressed in
former ages in defense of their Cities, and they which were wanting in
relieving, or assisting them, how are they branded with infamy? It is Pompeyes
shame to this day that he would not come in to the relief of his faithful City
Laurea, but suffered it to be taken, and burnt though he were so nigh, that he
might have warmed his hands with the heat of the devouring flames. The
timerousnesse of those perfidious soldiers, who seeing a great army of the
Turks besieging them at Alba Graeca (as Bonfinius calls it) capitulated with
their enemies, to deliver it up, was so hateful to Paulus Knisius ( Kinisius
he calls him) that taking them alive, he caused them to be roasted, and by
degrees to eat one another. Cities then are vigorously and valiantly to be
defended; yea, if many men have fought so stoutly for the walls of the Cities,
how ought others to strive as earnestly for the freedom of their Cities?
Ignominy to them that do desert them, or basely betray them. Rights, Liberties,
and honors go at a low rate amongst such heartlesse and faithless Factours.
Citizens should spare them, for God has set them a Copy. Should not I spare
Nineveh, a City.

5. This reproves them, which in stead of sparing, take delight in nothing
more then demolishing of Cities. It was a searching question, which the wise
woman from the wall put to Joab concerning Abel, Why seek thou to destroy a
City, a Mother in Israel, 2 Samuel 20.19. It was a blemishing objection that
Hezekiah propounded to Rabshakeh, that like a man of a brutish spirit, he held
himself appointed, to lay waste senced Cities into ruinous heaps. Furius
Camillus, does hear ill to this day, Sabell. l. 9, Aenead. 3. Bern. Saccus.
lib. 8. Hist. Ticinens. Nich. Olaus in Atila. Guliel. Paradinus de statat Burg.
c. 8.
that he destroyed the famous City Veii, because it was so pleasantly seated,
that men were ready to leave Rome it self to go live at Veij; and so does
Antonius ( Vespasians General) who going into the Baths of Cremona, and
finding them cold, said he would soon have them hotter, for he presently set
the City on fire, and consumed it; and so does Atila, who ruined Tongres, and
in it an hundred Churches; and so does Frederick (surnamed Aenobarbe) who for
an abuse offered to his Empress Beatrice, caused the City of Millaine to be
razed, Diod. S. l. 14.
and the platform of the City (at that time) to be plowed up; and so does
Himilco, for destroying Messana in Sicily, and leaving them neither wall, tile,
stick, nor stone; Strobo. l. 13.
and so does Craesus for laying waste Sidena, and cursing any man that should
reedifie it; and so does Alexander, for laying in the dust the two famous
Cities of the east, Cyropolis, and Persepolis; Q. Curtius.
and so does P. Aemilius, for levelling to the ground 70 Cities in Aepiras. Oh
what thunderclaps do there come out of many men's mouths to shake down such
glorious Ornaments? what Furnaces do there burn in many men's breasts to consume
such ensigns of Art, and Architecture? Can they not walk freely in the world,
unless they stamp down Cities under their feet? Can they not see the way to
their ambitious designs, but by the light of flaming Castles, Temples,
Palaces, and Houses of state? Did Vulcan beget them? were they born under mount
Aetna? do they desire to shine in the world like blazing Comets? or to scorch
all before them, like brands taken out of the infernal Pit? why else are the
scattered stones of a City such a pleasing spectacle to them? or the ashes of a
City such a glorious triumph? How justly might they crouch for a piece of
silver, which care not in an humor to melt away the riches of so many ages?
how ill do they deserve an house to hide their heads in, which care not in a
fury to expose so many Citizens to the bleak air? Well, if such there have been
in the years of old Pagans and Infidels, which have been thus barbarous; yet
let every Christian heart tremble to work such desolations; for these things
are like the Destroyer, not like the Creator. Let us spare Cities therefore,
for God does spare them, even because they are Cities: Should not I spare
Nineveh, a City?

6. This further does show, That a City is at the height of impiety, when the
time of her fate and fall be come. Such people wilfully destroy the City, for
God would spare it, even for that it is a City. Would God spare? Then, have not
these rejected all warnings, which have brought their selves into a condition
on not to be spared? yes, God is highly incensed, if he does let loose those
judgments which he has restrained, and does open those floodgates which for
a time he did scluseup. If God has made thee a vessel of honor, how have thou
trespassed, Fecit te vas in honorem, cur te in contumeliam facere
praesumpsisti. Bern. de 7. grad. Confess. An seme^est panam commeruisse parum?
Ovio l. 2. de Tr^st. confiderans hujus miseri miserabilem conditionem, misereor
quidem, sed vereor ne frustra. Bern. p. 70.
which have turned thy selse into a vessel of wrath? We are a very urging
people, if we have lost the benefit of a sparing God? Seems it a small thing
unto you to deserve punishment? No, we have done evil to purpose, if vengeance
does lie at the door. I pity this state of wretchedness ( says Bern.) but
God knows whether I shall prevent it. Does judgment threaten this Nation? oh
then, that I could shake men into an apprehensio^ of their manifest and
monstrous guilts? there are deep spots if this Nitre must be used, there are
high affronts when God must dash men's contempts upon their haughty faces. Do ye
dread any charging plagues? then why do ye not find out your challenging
sins? Do your ears glow, and do ye suspect no bad news? do ye seem to see
nothing but rods, and rasours, and yoaks, and fetters; and yet are ye so blind
that ye cannot see your violating of Gods laws? Must God lock up your doors
before ye will consider what bad Tenants ye have been? must He pluck away all
your Wares, before ye will consider the sins of your trading? must he spew
you out of the City, before ye will take notice what a surfeit ye are upon his
stomach? does every Mechanic talk of the danger of the times, and yet can
neither Citizen nor Senator cry out of those execrable things, which are ready
to make the City an execration? have ye lost your cares, your eyes, your
tongues, your wits, your consciences? do ye praunce in the City, when ye are
ready to stamp upon the stones of your streets? do ye dance upon your
thresholds, when ye are ready to stagger with amazement? do ye walk with
stretched out necks, when your necks are ready to stoop down with the weight of
judgments? do ye add thirst to your drunkenness, when the cup of astonishment
is ready to be put-to your lips? do ye scorn the menaces of scripture, when all
the curses which are written in this book, and those which are not written, are
ready to fly in your faces? do ye abuse Sermons, when your Pulpits shake before
their dropping? do ye lie in the lap of Dalilah, till the Philistines come and
bind you? do ye eat, and drink, marry, and give in marriage, till the flood
break in and sweep you all away? Can ye never hear your errors, but in
general shrieks? nor see your provocations, but when vengeance does open your
eyes? Ye have often said, that this City must suffer, and that the end of all
will be dismal; do ye say it, and not fear it? or fear it, and not flee from
it? Oh that thou had known in this thy day, those things which belong to thy
peace! that thou had but as much prevention as thou had judgment, or as
much conscience as thou have a presaging spirit, that thou were but as true a
Saint as thou would seem to be a Prophet! but ye can only foresee, and
foretell, but remedy nothing. If we may live but a short time merrily, we care
not if the rest of our days be spent in misery, as that desperate person, who
being told he should not live seven months, said, Sex menses satis sunt vitae,
septimum Orco relin quo Victor Varia ^^ct 1. 11. Osotius. (...) rerum (...)
nuel^.
Six months are enough for my life, the seventh let death take. We cannot
forsake those courses by which we are certain to perish, no more then Garzias
Sousa at the siege of Aden, could be persuaded by Albuquerke to come down from
a Tower where, by arrows and stones, he was sure to be either shot to death, or
to have his brains dashed out. How many perils do we see, that we put to the
venture, whether we shall escape them, or be ensnared with them? we dread
vengeance with impenitency, and reflect upon ruin with stony hearts; we feel
malignant humors rising without taking a purge, and fear sinking at Sea
without pumping out the water. We are rather Inquisitors of dangers, then
Interpretors of them; we are the fearfullest people in the world, and yet the
recklessest. Our own predictions, or convictions, will not make us look inward.
If we suffer, we cannot cry out of Gods justice, but of our own insensibility
and obstinacy. If our house be left desolate to us, we are justly guilty of the
dilapidation of it. We bury our selves in our own ruins, and lie down in our
own confusion. In the midst of the most grievous terrors, there is no crying
out of the heynousnesse of sin. Oh secure Laish! oh Jerusalem frozen in her
dregs! The very putting of the sickle into the corn, do not make us see how we
are grown ripe for judgment, the noise of thunder cannot awaken us out of our
deep sleep. If brimstone be cast upon our habitation, we think fire shall never
be put to it; if the Lord set his face against the City, we outface all
hazards. It was miserable to the Germans to fear an enemy in the Country,
Bonsin. l. 8. Decad 2.
and yet to give their selves to banqueting, till Cadan the Tartarian Prince
came upon them and slew them. It was fatal to the Mariners of Polychostus, to
quake at the thought of Antigenus, and yet to be drunk, and fast asleep, when
he set upon their Navy, Polyaen. l. 4.
and destroyed it. So as ominons it is for us to be appalled at Gods
judgments, and yet to quaffe and snort them away, as if the angry and arming
God would never strike. He is the patient God, but if we challenge him into the
field, he will show himself to be the Lord of Hosts. He is a sparing God, but
if we out-sin his mercy, he will declare himself to be the judging God. Our
reformation might bind his hands, but our remorselessnesse, and contumacy will
urge him to lay on confounding strokes. For why should he spare us, when we
will not spare our selves? if threatenings cannot humble the Sinner, God has
judgments enough to break his heart. Oh therefore deal truly, do ye fear the
state of the City? then know that the City has highly provoked the eyes of
Gods glory, that it must be punished; consider that there are briars, and
thorns in it, that God does come to hew in the City; and that strange Creatures
have been in the nest, that God does step forth to break Cockatrices eggs; and
that the Pot is full of filth, that it must be set upon the coals, and God must
take out the scum of it. Oh then that the City could search her walls, and see
what Delinquents do lodge in it, yea, go from house to house and find out all
the suspected, dangerous persons, which haunt this Corporation to work the
utter ruin of it, that conscience would bring to open view more Malefactors,
then all the privy searches, or loud cries of the Temple have yet discoverd. It
is high time to settle upon the work; for if the City be in any hazard, there
are grievous sins in it that do jeopard the welfare, and safety of it; God is
irritated beyond measure, when he is driven to visit, and does spy in it
transgressions wonderful, when he is ready to inflict plagues that are
wonderful. Shall thou reign because thou art closed in Cedar? shall thou be
secure, because thou art closed about with so many propugnacles? no, God may
judge this City, and judge it, because it is a City? and what an urging people
then are ye, which have turned favor into fury? would God willingly be severe?
no, vengeance does never approach till impiety is at the height, till Job,
Noah, and Daniel can save but their own souls, and not the places where they
dwell, and for which they sacrifice their averting, and reconciling prayers: Oh
think how often ye have smitten at Gods face, and wounded his honor, when he
is enforced to strike, and such Petitioners cannot bind his hand. Oh ye are
Sinners before the Lord exeeedingly, when ye have transnatured God, changed him
from a gracious to an avenging God, for ye see he does take no delight in
wastes, and desolations; No, this is contrary to his inclination, and
propension, his tender mercy, and ingenerate, indeified compassion, for if your
sins did not turn away his pitiful eye, harden his soft bowels, and make him
weary with repenting; he would spare the City, and that because it is a City,
Should not I spare Nineveh, a City.

Great.
Now let us come to the attribute, Great. From hence observe, serve, that
Greatness in it self is precious in Gods account. How can the great God but
affect that which is great? Yes as immensity is one of his properties, so
greatness has a bright reflex in it. Magnitude does carry a commensuration
with it, and excellency does arise out of magnitude, for where a thing is
attained to this extensive proportion, Differentia inter facere and efficere.
there is in it a visible distinction from other things; because it is not in
the doing, but it is done, and so has efficacy, and eminency in it. The Hebrew
words which are put for Great, (...).
do significantly express this, for the one does come of a root that does
declare, that the thing has increased, or magnified it self; and the other of
a root which does intimate that the thing is copious, or it has multiplied it
self; so that to be great is no more then a thing grown up, or come to a kind
of fullness, and gracefulness. I do not say, it has no further to go, but it
is gone to a fair distance, or waxen so well in the parts, that it is fit to be
admired; for how has the ey a kind of marvelling enter into it at the
beholding of that which is great? what should I say? if a thing be good, it
cannot be to great; no, the more great, the more perfect. Ab Epirotis Pyrrhus
Aquila nominabatur. per vos, inquit Aquila sum. Quid ni enim sim vestris armis
velut alis evectus? Plut. in Pye^ho. Phocion Chrestus appellatur. Alex. ab.
Alex. l. 2. c. 11. Graecorum ultimus appellatur quia Oraecia jam effaeta nullum
se dignum virum ab illo protulerit. Plut. in Philop. Augustus dictus est ab
auctu Cuspinian.
Man's wit can ascribe nothing more to her Worthies, who she is enamoured upon,
than to proclaim them Great, For to what end else were all those equivalent
Titles devised? Pyrrhus after the defeat given to Pentauchus the Captain of
Demetrius, was called the Eagle. Phocion for his rare parts called, the
Excellent; Philopaemenes called, the Last of the Grecians, because there never
came any after him ( Greece being past childbirth) which did match him.
Octavianus Caesar after the Battle at Actium, and the Conquest of Egypt, and
the Empire settled in peace was named Augustus, as if he were increased to the
height. All these Titles were given to these several persons, that like
deserving men they might be esteemed Great. Yea, the name Great conferred upon
some in express terms, as upon Valerius, Fabius, Pompey, Alexander, Gonsalve,
Leo; yea, this is the highest title of honor, that can be attributed to the
most flourishing Princes upon the face of the earth, as to be styled the Great
Mogul, the Great Cham, the Great Turk. To be Great then, is of high esteem with
men, and is it not as highly prised by God Almighty? yes, what thing is there
of value with him but to set out the excellency of it, he does record it to be
great, the great lights, the great depths, the great Sea, the great Mountains,
the great Rivers, the great Behemoth, the great Leviathan, the great
Wilderness, are so called. Yea, things which in a more sacred way do relate to
him are thus dignified, as the great Nation. Genesis 12.2. the great Altar. 2
Kings 16.15. the great Temple. 2 Chronicles. 12.9. nay, not so much but the Church
has this glorious character set upon it, what the world might look upon her
with reverence, and wonder, for it is called a great house. 2. Tim. 2.20. and a
great City. Rev. 11.8. Et non decernis, Taure, quid esse velis. Mar l. 2.2.
Epig. -- vixit inaequalis. Horat l. 2. Sat. 7 -- Nil fuit unquam, Sic impar
sibi. Id. l. 1. sat. 3.
Thus ye see how God does love greatness in other things, and why not in
Cities? yes, or else as it was said of (...), that he was so mutable, that he
knew not what he would have, nor what he would be, and of Prisous; that he
lived unequally to himself; and of Tigellius Sardus, that for his fickle
expressions, he was like a person unlike to himself: so a man might suspect God
had various affections in him, that what he does resent in one thing he has a
regret against it in another: but there is no such inconstancy in the immutable
God; therefore as he does exalt other things by their greatness, so he does
set out the honor of Cities by being great; or describing them to be great.
Ashur built Reshen, the same is a great City. Genesis 10.12. Gibeon was a great
City, as one of the royal Cities, greater then Ah. Jos. 10.2. Sidon the great.
Jos. 11.8. Hemath the great. Amos 6.2. the Canaanites had great Cities, and
walled up to Heaven. Deuteronomy. 1.28. Yea, great and goodly Cities. Deuteronomy. 6.10. How
is Gebers Sons portion magnified for this? To him pertained the region of
Argob, which is in Basham with threescore great Cities, which had walls and
brazen bars. 1 Kings 4.13. Yea, how is Babylon because it was a great City
mentioned with all the emphaticall appellations that can be imagined? It is
called the Virgin Daughter. Esa. 47.1. the Golden Cup. Jer. 51.7. the glory of
Kingdoms, and the beauty of the Chaldees excellency. Esa. 13.19. No marvail
therefore, if God does so plead for the preservation of Nineveh, for it was no
vulgar inferior City, but a City, and a great City. Should not I spare
Nineveh, a great City? Yes, the greatness of it was a great inducement God to
restrain the imminent danger of it; for first, it had been a long in coming to
that height; Elephantis partus. Annosa quercus. Marmor durabile, diuturnitate
temporis durescit.
greatness is not suddenly attained unto, no, there is a long time for the
production of it. Men rise by degrees, and so do all other things. An Elephants
birth (as some say) is two years in the bringing forth, an Oak is an hundred
years in the ground, the durable Marble lies many hundred years in the bowels
of the earth before it is hardened. Tantae melis erat. --
Could Nineveh then on an instant lift up her head with glory? no, of so great
difficulty was it for her to be seen in her bigness, and beauty. How then does
it grieve God to lay wast such a City, which had such a tract of time to be
completely built? He would spare Nineveh the Great, because by so many pawses,
and interstitiums it came to be Great. Secondly, because of their long
standing, for it had continued in that flourishing condition for above a
thousand years; old evidences, old Monuments, old gold, old Proverbs, old
Families, and pedigrees are dear to us, how much more the great City, which was
the old City, shall be precious in Gods eye? He that would not have us to
remove the ancient bounds, will not be very ready himself to deface that which
is ancient. Age is a Grown of glory; and diuturnity in any thing is thus
diademed; Omnia momentae antiquitatis servande sunt, Val. Max. l. 3.
the hoary hairs of a long continuance upon the head of any thing, as well, as
any man, are venerable. Allethe moments of Antiquity, are to be observed.
Theophilus caused one to be beat en with clubs, because he overshadowed an old
house with new buildings, and so the honor of ancient things is strictly to be
preserved. Art not thou of old O Lord our God, our holy, one? Hab. 1.12. Yes,
and as he is of old himself, so be does affect any thing that is old. Nineveh
then that was not only the City of Conquests, but the City of continuance, not
the City of Authority, but the City of Ages, which could plead prescription of
time, and out date the longest-lived City then in the world, which might be a
grandame to all the younger daughters; for when they were sparse conceived in
the womb, or drawn from the womb by the Midwife, or were out of their swaddling
cloths, which had not a stone laid, or a gate built, then she stood upon her
feet, traced the earth with terror, was full of Towers, and Palaces, sat in a
Throne, had her Imperial Robe upon her back, Provinces, and Kingdoms doing
obeisance to her; Oh is it not pity, that such an old, gray headed City should
perish? yes, a man would not make a spoil of old Altars, old Liberties, old
Statues, old Customs, old Records, old Sepulchers, how much less should the
great God make a devastation of such an old City. No, he would spare it because
it was great in dominion, and great in diuturnity, of a large extent, and long
standing; I might likewise show you that God would spare this great City for
the great misery that should happen upon the fall of such a great City; for
what a loud shriek must there be heard from the lips of so many perishing
souls? and likewise for the great repentance that had been expressed in such a
vast City; for what a Sea of tears had there dropped from the eyes of such
numerous Penitents? But I have shown you the speciousnesse, and spatiousnesse
of the City, and this was enough to prompt God to spare it, even be cause it
was Great, Should not I spare Nineveh, the great City?

Application.
1. This serves to show, that God is no enemy to greatness; I accuse not
riches, Divitias non accuso, sed illum, qui male utitur. Chrysostom. Hom. de divite,
and paup. usus horum bonus, ^abusio mala. Bern. de consid. ad Eugen., l. 2. c.
6.
but him who uses them ill. The use is good, the abuse is only evil. Is
prosperity an execration? or greatness a curse? no I find it styled the Lords
dowry, Genesis 30, 20. and Gods candle, Job 29.3. and Gods cup, Psalm. 23.5. and
Gods crown, Prove. 14.24. Greatness is oftentimes the pledge of Gods goodness,
yea the seal of his favor; so far from being a smile from Mammons brow, that
it is the shining of Gods face, Numb. 6.25. so far from being the amiable
complexion, that the Devil should lend us, that it is the beauty of the Lord
our God upon us, Psalm. 90.17. We seem to live upon Gods bread, for God which
fed me all my life long, Genesis 48, 15. and to dwell in his Tenements, for He
made them houses, Exodus 1.21. and to mount the hill of preferment upon the back
of his saddle horse, for I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the
earth, Esa. 58.14. and to king it amongst our brethren by his inauguration; for
He set them amongst the Princes, and made them inherit the Throne of glory, 1 Samuel 2.8. The various flowers that spring from prosperity, are they not styled
Gods garden, Ezech. 28.13. The diversity of comforts, and benefits which we
enjoy in this world, are they not sanctifications as it were of the divine
providence? blessings of the heavens above, blessings of the deep beneath,
blessings of the breast, and the womb: Genesis 49.25. I know there is a Mammon of
unrighteousness, but that is, when it is in the hand of an evil Possessor.
Talibus bonis non fiunt homines boni. Aug. ad Ripar. and Paulinam ep. 45. Quae
hic honorant, ibi onerant. Id. ad Maximum ep. 203.
I know our riches may eat our flesh like fire, but that is, when usurpation or
injustice has turned these into sire-brands. It is true, by such goods, men
are not made good; and the honors of this life may be the burdens of the next
life, but that is when unregenerate men are entitled to them; sin does damn
every thing to us, grace does make every thing a blessing; make good thy tenure
therefore, and fear not thy freehold; a Saint may enjoy a great Mansion, a
great Castle, a great City. Terrenae civitatis temporalis gloria non destruit
caelestia bona sed astruit. Bern. in ser. ad mil. Temp. c. 3.
Temporal glory does not destroy eternal felicity. Conversion is a just
Owner, Repentance has the lawful demise of all copious Revenue. Be penitent
therefore, and be potent; be a Ninevite, and fear not thy great City, forget
not thy sackeloth, and in time convenient I forbid thee not scarlet; lie upon
thy ash-heap, and lie afterward upon thy bed of down; neglect not fasting, and
taste of delicacies; enjoin penance to thy beasts, and ride upon thy Palfrey;
cry mightily, and sing joyfully; turn from thy evil ways, and walk (if thou will) in a paved Court; forbear the violence of thy hands, and let thy hands
(if thou can) be filled with abundance; be but rich in God, and let there be
no end of thy riches; seek the Pearl, and wear Jewels. For are piety, and
prosperity, religion and revenue, grace and greatness, opposites? Is wealth a
larges: only for sinners? must every Professor be a Beggar, and live in an
Almes-house? Has the Devil the whole world in fee-farme? does he grant Leases
of all the possessions upon earth? must all rich men needs be damned? this were
to justify Julians rage, who took away all the goods from the Christians,
telling them that their Savior commanded them to be poor. We must be content
under our poverty, if God send it, not make have to be rich, or make riches our
principal livelihood, but otherwise we may enjoy riches as well as others.
Jacob was virtuous, and yet he had his two bands, Genesis 32.10. Boaz was pious,
and yet a mighty man of wealth, Ruth. 2.1. Job righteous, and yet the great man
of the East, Job 4.1. Jehosaphat religious, and yet he had riches, and honor
in abundance, 2 Chronicles. 17.5. It is a distemper to make a Saint an Hermit; or a
Friar, Mendicant; as if whosoever has sufficiency, Hoc attendite, ne passim
divites reprehendatis. Aug. in Ps. 5. Injustae dicuntur divitiae, non quia
aurum and argentum injustum fit, sed quia injustum est eas putare divitias,
quae avaritiae non auferunt egestatem. Amb. in Psalm. 118. Nec diviti obsunt
opes, si ijs been utatur. Jer. ad Salv. Sufficientiam vitae non indecenter,
quisquis eam vult. Aug. ad Probam. ep. 121. Ne putenmala, dantur and bonis; ne
putentur magna, and sum bona, dantur and malis. Aug. ad Bonifac. ep. 70.
this man must have no fullness; or whosoever be mighty, he must not be great.
But oh be careful in this, that ye do not generally reprehend rich men. Riches
are not unjust, but it is unjust to think those riches, which do not take away
covetousness. Riches do not hurt the wealthy man, if he use them well.
Sufficiency of estate, whosoever does desire, he does lawfully desire it.
Riches that they might not be thought evil, they are given to the good; that
they might not be thought the chief good, they are given to the evil. So
then, a righteous man may challenge his earthly possessions, as well as the
greatest worldling; yea, it were no solaecism to say, That the Saint is the
true Land-holder upon earth. The wicked have riches by permission, but the
godly by commission, the one by possession, the other by promise; for is not
Gods covenant past, and his patent sealed to the righteous? Yes, there God
commanded the blessing, Levit. 25.21. there shall be showers of blessing,
Ezech. 34.26. and blessings powered out in such an abundant measure, that there
shall be no room to receive them, Mar. 3.10. Saint then, rise as fast as thou
can, so long as fraud does not promote thee; let thy house be stately, and
thy chambers large, so long as thou do not build thy house by
unrighteousness, and thy chambers by wrong, Jer. 22.13. Serve God, and thrive
under so good a Master, let not thy obedience run at low water, and then let
thy prosperity rise as the flood. God will not be offended at thy greatness,
for he does plead for greatness: Should not I spare Nineveh, a great City?

2. This does show, that there will ever be degrees of states and conditions;
Zoar was but a little City, Bethlehem was the least amongst the thousands of
Judah, and yet Nineveh here is a great City. Oh then that some people would
weigh men in the balance without allowance of their grains, or prepare the
same last for every foot without granting a larger size; which justle with
their Neighbors if they seem to out-top them, and count them Giants, Monsters
of mankind, if they have a larger proportion then themselves; Why should thou
be my superior? why should not I be as great as thou? This is with Tarquinius
the proud, to lop off the heads of the poppies in the Garden, till all be
brought to the same height; or to serve men, as that inhuman Host Procrustes
served his guests, who laid them all in one bed, and they which were too long
for the bed he cut them shorter, and they which were too short for it, he
stretched them out to belonger. But is there an equality in other things, that
people would expect a parity amongst men? Are all stars of the same
brightness? all Pearls of the same luster? all Mines of the same richness?
all Fowls of the same swiftness? all Beasts of the same bigness? all Trees of
the same fruitfulness? No, Nature has her differences, and why not the like
amongst men? Yes, before ye can reduce men to an evennesse, and an identical
greatness, ye must first bring them all to the same height, complexion,
strength, Hecale pauperrima fuit, and de ea dixit Plaut tus in ^istellaira St
quidem eris, ut ^olo, nun ^uam Hecase fies.
humor, wit, and trade; Indeed I know, Nature cannot endure to be under, or if
people could live as some of their familiars do desire, get promotions by
wishes, there would not be a Hecale, that is, a poor person in the world. But
this cannot be, for there will be diversity of men, if there were but two twins
living alone upon earth; howsoever as the world is now peopled, Tu in legione,
ego in culina. Nec toga, nes focus est, nec tritus cimice lectus. Martial. lib.
11. Epig. Si hunc sustuleris, universum interit. Chrysostom. in Ps. 148.
it is but a stage of several Actors: the Adage says well, Thou a Commander
in an Army, another a drudge in the Kitchen; there is one richly clad, and has
his warm fires to beak himself at, and soft lodging every night, and another
to whom their is neither coat, nor hearth, nor well dressed bed. Human society
cannot subsist without a superiority, take away a Chief, and the whole world
will go to ruin. Were all the parts in Nebuchadnezzars Image alike? The body
is not one member, but many; if the whole body were an eye, where were the
hearing? if the whole were hearing, where were the smelling? 1 Cor. 12.
Therefore the Scripture speaks of Princes of the Assembly, Numb. 16.2.
Ancients of the people, Isai. 3.14. Such as are set over the Congregation,
Numb. 27.16. Heads of the house of Jacob. Mic. 3.9. Dignities, 2 Pet. 2.10.
Principalities and Powers, Tit. 3.1. Shields of the earth, Psalm. 47.9.
Foundations of the earth, Psalm. 82.5. Mountains of Israel, Ezeck. 36, 1. Men
higher then Agag, Number. 24.7. Which have the key, Isai. 22.22. Bear the sword,
Romans 13.4. Hold the Scepter, Amos 1.5. And excellent Majesty is added to them,
Dan. 4.36. Therefore content thy self with thine own state and condition,
every one does not carry a Governor about him, nor does he find a Ruler in his
Scabbard, nor puff out himself a Magistrate by stout language: He is not
skinned Prince, nor does bring a Scepter out of his Cradle, much less can Crown
himself with the principle of equality; what Myriads of Dynasts, and Despots*
and Imperial Creatures would there be, if the Doctrine of parity were pure
Revelation? But in all Ages there have been, and to the last age there will be
Orders and Degrees; yea to the world end we shall see the ignoble and the
noble, the impotent and the potent, the needy and the full, the subject and the
sovereign, the small City and the great City. Should not I spare Nineveh, a
great City?

3. This does exhort every one to be sensible of his greatness; for oh that
God has made thee great, and that he hearth nothing of his own bounty! that he
has raised thee, and yet thou art silent under such a liberal Benefactor!
that thou art great only in thy ostentation, or haughtiness, but not in thy
thankfulness! where is thy praise for such preferment? thy sacrifice for such
greatness? No, the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters Grib, but God
does raise up servants, which know not their own Master, or has maintained
Pensioners, that understand not the royal hand of their own gracious Prince.
Antoninus Caracalla, does vex Cilo, Vexavit Cilonem, qui eum educaverat. Dion.
Nescire se utrum in numero hominum, an Deorum poneret. Plut. in Lycurgo.
who had brought him up. So we grieve our Fost r-father. Lycurgus that was so
good, that Apollo knew not whether he should put him into the number of men, or
Gods; and which had given such singular laws to his Lacedaemonians, and done so
many good offices for them, yet his last reward was to have stones cast at him,
and after one of his eyes struck out, to be banished the Country. So we
recompense God rather with injuries and indignities for his favors, than with
any commemoration of his mercies. Bless the Lord O my soul, says David, and
forget not all his benefits, Psalm. 103.2. A high duty, and very few there are
amongst us that are officious in it; we receive many blessings out of his
hands, but he does receive very few blessings out of our lips, instead of not
forgetting all his benefits, there is scarce one that does stand upon record,
or is engraven into our thankful souls; no, we are so far from singing a
Benedictus, that the blessing is no sooner handed, but we are ready to sing a
Valedictus. How us this Land embroydered with mercies? Blessings are the
chekerwork of heaven, but are there any carved pillars amongst us where these
favors are cut out, and graphically pourtrayed? God many Temples in this
Nation, but few of them are consecrated; Te Deum is not sung in them; God does
not seem to inhabit the praises of Israel. We leave God so soon as our turns
are served, as Diomedes left Callirhoe, so soon as she had saved him from the
fury of her father Lycas, Sabel. l.c. 7.2.
who was wont to sacrifice all his strange guests upon the Altar of Mars. Pro
gratiarum action nihil aliud scripsit Caesari, quam Mihi nihil. Macrob.
Saturn. l. 2. c. 4.
Augustus paid all the debts of a decayed Senator unasked, but he returned him
no other thanks, but this unthankful rescript, To me nothing; so let God
disburse never so much to us, or for us; yet we suppress all his bounty, we
cast up all the sums in naked empty Ciphers, To us nothing. But oh beloved,
does man for favors meet with no better requital? Yes, the Abideni having
their City taken by slaves, they upon a certain time being drunk, a woman
leaping over the wall, and acquainting them with the accident; to the honor of
the woman, they set up an Image with her picture in it, because by her means
they recovered their City again. Athen. l. 13. c. 11.
Pyrrhias redeeming an old man out of the hands of Pirates, and he telling him
where he might find a great deal of gold covered over with pitch, he getting
the treasure, and growing infinitely rich upon it, offered a Bullock to
testify his thankfulness, Nemo been merito bovem immolavit praeter Pyrrhiam.
Plut in quaest. Graecanicis. Diodor. Sic l. 20.
for the old man's kindness, insomuch that it went for a Proverb, That no man
was more thankful then Pyrrhias. Demetrius Polyorcetes, freeing the Sicyonians
from the yoke of Prolemy; they took it so thankfully, that they called their
chief City after his name, Demetrias; and kept an annual feast as long as the
City stood to commemorate such a deliverance. These and thousand the like
examples, might be produced to declare how apprehensive people are of men's
favors, but where is there the like gratitude expressed toward God? Let him
pleasure us in never so many things, yet he does get neither pillar nor
bullock, nor any thing called after his name: as noble hearts as we seem to
have to others, we are base toward our God; we think it inhumanity to forget
courtesies, but here we forget blessings; man can hear of his Civilities, but
not God of his respects. Here all obligations and engagements dye with the
participation of the favors, as if we had neither sight, speech nor affection;
so that we are strict Courtiers, but very formal Christians? we are men's very
humble servants, and thrice bounden, but we are Gods very insolent servants,
and scarce one twisted; oh what are the ties, and bands of blessings? We do not
render again according to the benefits done unto us. 2 Chronicles. 32.25.
Ingratitude is branded upon our brows, breasts, eyes, ears, lips, and lives:
where is there promotion, and devotion, favor, and zeal met together? No, oh
ye great men, ye are the great dis-esteemers, and disparagers of mercies, a
non-magnifying, and unglorifying generation. Ye cannot see favors at Noontide,
nor speak of mercies, when every corner of your houses is a Pulpit, where ye
have domestical Chaplains to preach out unto you Gods blessings. Why are ye
thus blind, and deaf? would ye weep for the want of blessings? and do they
congeal you with their warmth? is it your high ambition to be great, and does
greatness dwarf you by raising you many Cubits above your brethren (...)
constrain not Heaven to defy you, as if ye were detestations; Force not God to
cry out, Hear oh Heavens, and hearken oh Earth, as if ye were Monsters. Set
your eyes therefore (if it be possible) right in your heads, and seek up
mercies; turn the keys in those rusty lips of yours, that that bedridden duty of
thankfulness may walk sorth, and sing hymns to the honor of blessings; if ye
be great, know who has given you these dimensions; if ye be great, be not too
great for your Maker; Cogit^ quo cultu transieris Histriam, and quibus nunc
utaris vestibus E^asm. in vita Chrysostom.
as Chryso^lom said to Gaynas the Arian Captain, Bethink thy self in what poor
attire thou diost once posse through Histria, and how richly thou art now
apparelled; So consider ye the simple weed perhaps, that was once upon your
backs, and how God has given you change of apparel. Had ye always such
shops, such Counting-houses; such wardrobes, such cupbords of plate, such
chains, such jewels, such habitations, such honors? have ye forgotten your
beginnings? can ye not tell how many pieces ye were worth when ye were first
sworn Freemen? or ye sealed the first leaf to have a standplace for trading? oh
swollen cheeks, staring eyes, infatuated brains, look backward, search out your
selves to the first year, and quarter, nay, the first change of the Moon, when
your prosperity crept out of the nest, and first cast the shell from her
spoonfeathered head; and set down every penny that ye have received out of Gods
privy purle; remember how many thousand pounds ye are indebted to Gods
blessing. Ye are ignorant men to imagine that the Original of your welfare
began at your selves, yea arrogant, and Mad men to think that your own
prudence, or diligence has advanced you. Ireturned, and saw under the Sun,
that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor bread to
the wise, nor riches to men of understanding. Eccles. 9.11. are ye high? ye are
lifted up; are ye great? ye are made great. Consider therefore what a small
stock ye had once to begin with, and how God has conveyed unto you hidden
Treasure, what Minums ye were once in the world, and what Grandees ye are now
become; and let every man of you, like a person rapt and transported with a
trance, and exstasy, that ye are made Heavens Favorites, say with David, Who
am Ioh Lord God? and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto? 2 Samuel 7.18. Oh if ye will not confess the kindness of your Creditour, he may
well call back what he has lent you; if ye will not acknowledge what webs ye
have spun out of his providence, he may justly recocover his Weoll, and his
Flax; Let them be fired out of their estates, or shipwracked in their means, or
turn Bankrupt in trading, who so long as they abound know not the benefit of
fullness, or so long as they are advanced see not who has advanced them. Oh
therefore if your mouths be satisfied with good things, know who it is that
has given you such a taste of bounty, if ye have treasures by the heap,
consider who it is that has filled your coffers; if ye be great, bless the
Author of your greatness. When ye eat in plenty, and are satisfied, praise the
name of the Lord your God, which has done wonderfully with you. Joel 2.28. say
with David, All that we enjoy comes of thine hand, and all is thine own. 1 Chronicles. 29.16. I know it is an hard thing to fetch praise out of preferment, or
gratitude out of greatness, to get a rich man to speak, or a great man to
magnify; but know your duty, lay to heart the office of prosperity, and see
Gods Image stamped upon your coin, and him written Founder upon the
groundsells, pillars, tarasses, roofs, and lanthorns of your houses; oh
therefore perfume an estate with devotion, make Gods providence the crest of
your escutcheon. If ye flourish upon earth, look up to heaven; if your boughs
be laden with fruit, let God taste the first ripe apples of the tree; if ye be
rich, celebrate divine favor; if ye be mighty, remember your best Friend; if
ye be great, be not unthankful; why should Gods eye be fixed upon thee? why
should his rain fall upon thy ground? why should thou see the Rivers, and
floods, and brooks of honey, and butter? why should he take thee by the hand?
why should he lift up thy head? is there no reason for thy weal? then there is
all the reason for thy zeal. They have poverty, thou have prosperity; they are
empty, thou do abound; they have a narrow border, thy border is enlarged;
they have extremity, thou have excellency; they have hardship, thou have
honor; they have neither means, nor meat, thy portion is lat, and thy meat
plenteous; they are fallen into decay, thy increase does rise like the spring:
oh then that thi^ distinct state should not beget in thee distinct devotion;
the sight of their pressures might extract from thee praises; thou do deserve
to be pinched with their wants, and clothed with their rags, if thy abundance
do not make thee sacrifice a whole burnt offering to the honor of thy
promoting God; then as thou would be preserved, bless him that has blessed
thee, for greatness is not only a testimony of devine bounty, but an argument,
and inducement for devine commiseration; if thou be gracious, and grateful,
God will look upon thee the rather, because thou art great, he spared Nineveh
because it was a great City. Should not I spare Nineveh, a great City?

Fourthly, this serves to show what great endeavor there ought to be used in
preserving this great City. Is such a great City easily spared? no, though God
does tender it, because it is a great City, yet he does look that the Citisens
fervor should be answerable to his pity. Oh therefore have ye Gods eye in
your head? or Gods heart in your bosom? do ye look upon it with a perplexed
eye, or glow toward it with enflamed zeal? is your vigilance quick-eyed? your
dread dismaying? your solicitousnesse anxious, your dejection abased? your
contrition grinding? your mediation vehement? your reformation twise-rigorous?
oh there must be strong Physic taken to recover such a Patient, potent Friends
employed to get such a condemned Creature reprived. It is no ordinary
humiliation, that will prevent the judgment against such a place; no, there
had need be a wailing like the Dragons, and a howling like the Ostriches.
Micah. 1.8. Yea, as at the reversing of the bloody decree, there had need be a
great fasting, and mourning, weeping, and wayling, and many lying in sackcloth
and ashes. Ester 4.3. the people had need lift up their voices, and weep till
they have no more power to weep. 1 Samuel 30.4. Yea, the Priests, the Ministers
of the Lord had need weep between the Porch and the Altar, saying, Spare thy
people oh God. Joel 2.17. Yea, with Hezekiah they had need to rend their
clothes, to go up into the house of the Lord, to send Eliakim which was over
the household, and Shebnah the Scribe, and the Elders of the Priests covered
with sackcloth to Esaias the Prophet, to spread the Letters before the Lord, and
to pray earnestly to him that dwells between the Cherubims, to turn back such a
Senacherib. Yea, with Moses they had need to break in pieces the Tables of the
Law, to tear asunder all their Bibles, as if they were unworthy of the
knowledge of God, and to burn the golden Calf in the fire, and grind it to
powder, and strew it upon the water, to abolish all the memorialls of those
things which have been occasional to the sins of the times, to stand in the
gate of the Camp, and do execution upon the particular Offenders, to go up unto
God with a trembling heart, as not knowing whether the place and people be not
past reconciliation, Peradventure I shall make an atonement for your sin, and
plainly to confess the fact, and acknowledge the guilt, to lay open all the
heinous, and hideous abominations of the times, which are known, and visible,
Oh this people have sinned a great sin in making them Gods of gold; yea, to
importune God to be appeased, and rather then we should not come away with the
pardon in our hand, to offer to be slain at Gods feet to save so many lives; to
be sacrificed our selves, to redeem such a goodly place from an exigent; yea to
have our names and persons razed out of the land of the living, rather than the
name of Israel should be expunged; Yet now if thou will forgive their sin; if
not, blot me I pray thee out of the Book which thou have written. Thus we had
need to be all vigor and vehemence, dejection and devotion, sollicitousnesse
and sorrow, conflict and conversion, satisfaction and sacrifice, prostration
and propitiation, reconciliation and reformation, soul and solemnity in so
importunate a work. Oh it is a great City, and how many sins are there to be
expiated? Oh it is a great City, and what a great trespasse-offering must there
be made for it? oh it is a great City, and what great Penitents must there be
to preserve it? Set the whole City before your eyes, and see how ye had need to
set your whole strength to it to anticipate, Qui timide rogat, docet nega re.
Seneca. In disputationibus adeo vehemens erat, ut ex illius oculis ardentes
scintillae egredi viderentur. Laert. l. 2. Coma horrore arrigebatur, oculique
animi quoddam tripudium circa dogmata occupati testabantur. Eunapius de vita
sophistarum. Tympanizo sed Ajacis scuto. Cael. R. l. 10. c. 11. Sudores
manabant, and venae frontis contumescebant. Jovius in Elogiis. Tu percute, ego
caput praebebo; neque fustem tam durum invenies quo me a tuis disputationibus
abigas. Aelian. lib. 10. Variar. Hist. Sparta, inquit, ex uno non pendet. Plut.
in Apoph.
or to repel vengeance lifting up her hand to strike. Either plead earnestly,
or the case is lost; either administer the best Physic, or the party does die.
He which does pray but faintly, does teach God to deny: He that do h mediate
remisly, does but prepare God to reject. O when I read of the earnestness that
many men have had in other attempts, and see how languishing, we are in matters
of greater conseqence, how do I think that people have least care of their
souls, or zeal to the Church. Menedemus Eretriensis was such an earnest
Disputant, that burning sparkles seemed to come out of his eyes. Chrysanthius
was another man than himself, when he came to determine deep points of
Philosophy, for his hair stood right up, and his eyes seemed to dance.
Scopelianus acted the Soldier so well, that he seemed to have Ajax his Helmet
upon the stage. Andreas Maro Brixianus, made verses, till his brows sweatt, and
the veins of his forehead did swell. Diogenes was so desirous of learning,
that when Antisthenes reprehended him, he would not give back, when he beat
him, he would not depart; Thou shall never find a club hard enough to drive me
away from thy disputarions. Callicratidas was so desirous of victory for his
Countrymen, that when the South-sayer told him, that the Spartanes should have
the conquest, but he must dye in the battle for it; Let me dye, says he, so
long as my Country may be happy: Sparta does not depend upon the life of one
man. When Rome was punished with a great dearth of corn, Pompey having
searched the Granaries of Sicily, and other places for supply, and gotten
together a great quantity of provision, he was so ardent to succor the
famishing City, that a great tempest arising, and he being dissuaded not to put
to Sea at that time, Na^^gare necesse est, vivere r^n est. Plut. in Apoptheg.
he leaped into the Ship, and caused the Anchors to be drawn up, saying, It is
necessary to sail, but not to live. Antonius Abraeus, at the siege of the
Moluccae, being Admiral of the Navy, and shot through both his cheeks with a
Bullet, Alphonsus Albuquerque sent another to be his substitute; no, says he,
I will endure no substitute, N^n seginus, quam si nu^ um accepi^^t vulnus
mur^re suo perfanctu^ est. Osor. l. 7. rerum Eman.
for I can give counsel with my wounds dropping, and out of earnest longing to
see the work perfected; he lifted up himself, and managed every thing so
stoutly, as if he had received no wound at all. A S^ythia^, to harden his body,
went naked in a Snow, the King of the Country asked him if he did not freez, he
bad the King see whether his forehead did freez; no, says the King; then,
Qu^medo frigus non tolerem, cum nihil sim aliud praeter fr^n^em? Aelian. l. 7.
Var. Histor. Sueton. de Nerone. Plut. Orat. 2. de fortuna Alexandri.
how can I freez, says the other, when I am all forehead? Nero, to get the
honor of a rare singer, often purged, and vomited, took much oil, and wore a
plate of lead upon his breast. Apelles to get the fame of a rare Painter, drew
the picture of Alexander so exactly, that the people said that Alexander which
Philip begat, was Alexander the Great; ^at the Alexander which Apelles had
limmed, was Alexander the greater. Hadingus, a King of the Danes, that he might
excel in the Magical art, he compacted with Othinus the worst of spirits, and
drank of sweet potions to iufuse vigor into him for horrid attempts, and
suffered himself by Aragnoptus and Haflius, Deductus est ab illis ad loca
inferna, in quibus plurima arcana mortalibus incognita contemplatus est. Joh.
Magnus l. 2.
to be carried down to hell it self, that he might learn there secrets unknown
to any mortal men. Thus have I given you variety of examples, to show you how
industrious men have been to attain to their desired aims and ends in
several kinds, and all these have I produced, to shame us in our religious
designs, the Orator, Philosopher, Actor, Soldier, Musician, Painter, and
Magician, do out-vy us in diligence and earnestness: oh that spiritual things
were prosecuted with the like heat, that natural, moral, or damned things
are. The children of this world are wiser than the children of light. Wiser?
nay activer. Oh that the great City had but as much service and sedulity
bestowed upon it as a great project, or a great fancy; we have brains, and
arms enough for other things, but here we have neither pregnancy nor prowess;
we think to save a great City without laying both shoulders to her support, or
calling forth the two Masterworkmen, Body and Soul, to do their utmost for her
preservation; the great City has not so much regard shown her, as a great
beast, or a great Faulcon, or a great Picture; oh how tender we are of these?
how negligent we are of this? God may take pity of the City, but we express
little commiseration to it; he may plead for it, but we do not intercede for
it; he may say, Should not Ispare? but we do not say, Oh that it might be
spared; we would preserve it only by looking on it, or talking of it, or
putting up a formal motion for it; we do not fast as if we deserved not to eat
bread till the City were in safety; nor weep, as if we had not tears enough in
our eyes to lament the afflicted state of the City; nor pray, as if we would
not rise up from our knees, till we had procured peace for it in heaven; or
reform, as if we would not leave a guilt behind to curse the City: no we walk
the City, and discern no breaches in it; we gaze upon the City, and behold not
the sides of it cracking, we are blind in seeing her sins, and stupid in
fearing her judgments; as if we cared not to have this pile of wonder pulled
down, and this bright Diamond to be shivered in pieces; all Nations admire it,
and we only slight it, or neglect it: This City does wall in recklesse
Inhabitants, feed unthankful guests, and hold out her breasts to unnatural
children, which are neither aff^ctionate to her welfare, nor compassionate over
her ruin, Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed, let it be destroyed;
for we do not keep it from sinking or burning: If there were such a Jonah here,
there would not be such Ninevites. What do we at the cry? how are we frighted
at the threatening? It is a great City, but what great insensibility, indolency,
and indevotion is there in it? When I read how the Heathens pacified their
offended Deities, the Athenians digging up the bodies of the dead, as if their
precedent sins had defiled Delos, and carrying them to Rhenta with this
prohibition, that no man afterward should either be born, Sabel. l. 6. Antid.
3.
or dye in Rhenia, for the sake of those cursed bodies that were there laid;
Zerxes throwing his princely vessel, and a golden goblet, and a Persian sword
into the Sea, because he had whipped the Hellespont. The Romans burning their
Armor, Herod. l. 7. Alex. l. 3 c. 22. Eurip. in Iphig. Jeron. l. 13. com in
Esaias c. 46. Polydor l. 5. c. 8. de invent. Jovius l. 34. Histor.
Chariots, and Ships, as if they had put to much confidence in their own
strength. Agamemnon offering his own Daughter Iphigenia to Calchas the Priest,
to be made an obation for all Greece at dulis. Belus sacrificing his own
children. Heliopolis sacrificing three of the purest men they could find in the
City to appease Ju^o. Themistitan sacrificing every year twenty thousand
Infants and children, that the incensed Gods might be reconciled to the City. I
say, when I read this rifling graves, burning of goods, and butchering of
living souls amongst the Heathens, how am I astonished to see with what cheap
sacrifices we would procure an atonement: in stead of digging up dead bodies,
we will not dig up our dead sins; in stead of burning our goods, we will not
incinerate our pleasures, in stead of offering up blood we will not offer up
tears. Oh superficial pacification; Is this enough to mitigate an avenging
God? Is this enough to unsnare, to extricate a great City? surely ye never saw
the City, or took the length of it, or measured the compass and circumference
of it, that are so scant and narrow in your devotions. Is this City so stiff,
that it cannot bow? is it so pleasant, that it cannot cry? is it seated in such
a dry soil, that there is no water in it? Oh sit upon Ninevehs ash heap,
macerate your selves with Ninevehs fast, drench your streets with the water of
Ninevehs Conduit, or else this great City which has been your great Triumph,
may be your great Terror; ye may enquire for a gate to sigh at, and find none,
or seek for a pillar to shed tears at it, and not any be left standing; what
tongue can express, or heart conceive, the great misery upon the downfall of
so great a City? Art thou better then populous No? Nah. 3.8. Art thou better
then the great Nobility? and the great Church? These are fallen before thee,
and thou may fall after them; where then is the City Scout? the City
Remembrancer? the City Solicitor? Oh the City does look pale, fetch blood into
her cheeks by your pity; the City does shake, prop her up with your Petitions:
the City is sick unto death, cure her with your conversion. I do not wish you
to fight and kill, I am no warlike man, neither have I any Martial tongue in
my head, but I wish you to plead, and pray, bring forth your right Artillery,
make use of your proper weapons; the stout hands I call for, are supplicating
hands; the bright harness I require, is the complete armor of Righteousness.
It is no field Ammunition which I press for, but Temple Ammuntion; no Camp
Ordinance, but Closet Ordinance; Oh that the Penitent were discharging with his
eyes, and the Supplicant shooting with his lips; that we had some hearts edged
with repentance, and some tongues sharp pointed with Devotions; the Soldiers
that I desire are Intercessors, and the Captains that I long for, are
Advocates; and would to God I could gather these Companies together, summon in
all the Trayned-Bands, see ye all stand in battel-array; that the ranks of
Converts would discharge, and say to God Almighty, Oh wash away our blood, and
rinse us not in vengeance, for it is a great City; cause not thy anger to fall
upon us, for if thou be offended, multitudes must feel thy displeasure, it
is a great City; break us not with thy tempest, for if this storm does dash us,
many must be soaked in ruin, It is a great City: sift not the house, for vast
heaps must be ridled. It is a great City: put not the Cup of astonishment to
our mouths, for numbers are to be drunk with this fatal bowl. it is a great
City; cry not an utter destruction, for this line of confusion must stretch
far. It is a great City; smite not the great house with breaches, and the
little house with clefts, for a cluster of goodly Eabricks must then be
battered, and shattered, it is a great City. Oh what great affection, great
pity, great care, great zeal ought we to use for this great City? we had need
to bring forth our strongest shore to underset this building, and lay down our
whole estate to redeem this Jewel. Citisens then, where are your City-bosoms,
your City-bowels, your City-grones, and your City-cries? Oh the great pride,
riot, lust, oppression, malice, perfidiousnesse, apostasy, heresy, and
blasphemy of this City, does require a Catholicon, a composition of all
penitential ingredients to purge out the several noxious humors out of this
diseased body. Great sins, and great judgments do necessitate a great
Repentance. Broken hearts, where shall I feel you? trickling eyes, where shall
I see you? penitent Petitioners, where shall I hear you? Are ye at ease in Sion,
when the gates of Sion are ready to lament? are ye with Sampson asleep in
Dalilahs lap, when the Philistims are upon you? No, sigh in the Temple, that ye
do not sob in the streets; groan in your closset, that ye do not roar in the
fields; wash the City in tears, that it be not washed in blood; oh let there be
some zeal to free you from flames, some repentance to prevent ruin. Prepare to
meet thy God oh Israel. Gather your selves together, yea, gather your selves,
oh Nation not desired, Before the decree come forth, before the day pass as
the chafe, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you. Remember that it
is a great City, and that there is a great danger; therefore express a great
humiliation. If ye have any remnants of grace, any reverence to Gods Laws; any
sense of sin, or dread of a confounding God, consider, and correct; try and
cleanse; weep, and reform. God would have pity, if ye would but soften the
bowels of his compassion, he would spare, if ye would but prepare for mercy;
but ye must be fervent Petitioners, for it is a great blessing ye expect, ye
must be serious, and solemn Converts, for it is a great City, that you wish to
be spared. Should not I spare Nineveh, a great City?

That.
Now let us come to the eminency. That, that great City. That, that is that
Paragon, and Gemme of Cities, This is that disciple, so this is that great
City; Joh. 21.20.
For name all the Cities, that ever were in the world yet was there ever any
that was greater than Nineveh? No, former times had not the like, nor later
times the equal. Former times had not Thebes in Egypt, that opened an hundred
gates. Corinth, that with her strong Castle built upon the Acro- Corinth, was
called one of the fetters of Greece, Telesine which contained in it once 16000
Families. Carthage which was 21 miles in compass. Babylon, which amazed
Alexander to see her stately walls, her pensil gardens, which seemed to hang in
the Air, her artificial groves, where treesgrow without any earth seen about
them, her lofty Castle and miraculous kind of bridge built over the Euphrates.
Rome which built so loftily, that Augustus Caesar was enforced to make a Law,
that no man should build above seventy foot high: which was so large, that it
contained in it seven hills, 37. gates, and 400000 men under the Cense, and so
full of rare spectacles that it was accounted an earthly bliss to see Romam in
store, Archbishop Abbot. Dr. Heylin. Mr. Purch^s. Mr. Hackluit. Sr. Ed. Sands
Mr. Lithgoe. Thevet. an old history of the West Indian Conquest by Ferdinando
Cortez, and Pizzarro:
Rome in her flower. Yet none of these Cities in their greatest luster were
able to stand in competition with Nineveh. The Cities of former ages could not,
and the Cities of these present times cannot. I confess, I read of many
excellent Cities in these days. Odia in Siam is said to have above 40000
Families. Calecut in Malavar, does stretch out three full miles in length by
the Seashore. Mandao is so large in compass, and so full of all manner of
provisions, that it held out a siege by the space of twelve years, against all
the forces of Miramudus, the great Mogul. Cambaia is reported to have in it
800000 persons. Nanquin has in it, besides large numbers of people, ten
thousand ships, which are able with the Mariners that are to go in them, to
make a goodly City. Quinzay honored (as it is reported) with 12000 bridges,
and a lake in the midst of the City of 30 miles compass, with two Islands,
wherein are gorgeous houses, and magnificent Palaces. Grand Carre built where
Memphis once stood, or nigh to it, which has in it, as some Historiographers
write 18000 streets, insomuch that Sell mus the great Conqueror was three days
in passing them ^hrow; and such numbers of people that they count it nothing in
a great plague every seventh year, if they lose but 300000 in the year. Hispua,
now called Casbin, which the proud Persisians do call Half the world, and say,
that the compass of it cannot be rid about on horseback under less time, then
a whole day. Musco that wooden City, which has in it sixteen Churches, and the
Princes Palace with seventeen Turrets, and three great Bulwarks, and 25000
Soldiers for a constant guard. Cambalu (the seat of the Crim Tartar, who is
called the shadow of spirits) which is said to be 28 miles in compass, and
has in it a mighty confluence of merchants, insomuch that there are said to be
10000 Carts to have come formerly every year laden with silks from China, and
besides other Inhabitants it is reported to have 50000 Astrologers in it.
Vienna famous for beautiful Temples, stately Monasteries, and a magnificent
Palace for their Emperors, but it has in it no great quantity of ground, nor
multitude of Inhabitants, but as the Court does replenish it. Paris, which is
said to be ten miles in compass, and has in it lofty, and curious buildings,
and 600000 Citisens, besides Soldiers and Scholars; of which last there are a
multitude, by reason of their 55 Col-Colledges. Sevill, which is said to be six
miles in compass, and has many excellent buildings, Churches, Monasteries,
Princely houses, and a goodly bridge over the River Baetis, and indifferently
well peopled. Constantinople, where the spread Eagle was first plumed, and flew
out of her nest into the Imperial Arms, and that not only here began to look
toward the East and West, but chiefly because when Constantine had resolved to
build a glorious City, and had laid the foundations of it in Asia (some say, in
three several places) the Eagles would not suffer the Workmen to go forward,
but took up their tools in their bills and claws, and carried them to
Byzantium, where this glorious City was built; glorious it was once, and
something now sightly, be it but for the Mosques, Statehouses, Almes-houses, and
the Seraglio. Tlascalan, which is a goodly City in Guastacan, of large extent,
and so shining afar off, that Ferdinando Cortez thought at the first fight of
it, that it had been built all of pure silver. Mexico, which is in Tremistatan,
six miles at least in compass, and had in it about 70000 Families, and a
goodly lake joining to it, whereupon there were wont to be 40000 Canaoes
fishing, and all the banks of the Lake spread round about with fair Towns,
Cusco, which has in it one of the goodliest Marketplaces in the world, and
highly decked with rich, and sumptuous buildings, for every Courtier was
commanded there to build a Palace, and the whole City seemed to be nothing, but
a large Chest heaped up with silver, and gold. Imperial, a City in Chile,
which was able once to set out 300000 Soldiers against their Enemies; El
Dorado, the greatest City of America, some say of the world, full of Gold in
Coin, golden Plate, and Armor, a City so big, that Deigo Ordas was a day and a
half traveling before he came to the Kings Palace. Yet none of these Cities in
their greatest glory, were able to equal beams of Majesty with Nineveh; no, I
have gone a large peregrination to visit all the chief Cities in the world, but
when I would show to you the nest of the Phoenix, I must carry you back to
Assyria, and wish you to turn your eyes upon Nineveh. Whatsoever it is, it was
the Prince of Cities, That great City. Great for the Founders, Jeron. in Loc.
Hebr. H^go de S. Victore. Pezel. in Mellif. Histor. Arius Montanus. Gra^ay.
Hervin.
for Ashur departing from Nimrod for his great cruelties, came hither, and laid
the foundations of this City, which not only the scripture does witness, Genesis
10. but it is confirmed by the testimonies of many learned men. And Belus his
Son added something to the glory of it, for he after he had subdued so many
Countries, that his subjects made him a God, and offered the flesh of their
Captives to him for a sacrifice, out of great depredations he bestowed much
cost upon the City. But it never came to perfection, till the time of Ninus,
who reigning 52 years, Sabell l. 1. Aeneid. 1.
and being a Prince of invincible courage, and happy success, joining with
Ariaeus he vanquished Pharnus the King of the Medes, and crucified him, and
some say he killed Zoroastes (though Volateran say, he dyed with the flashes of
lightning) howsoever certain it is, he won his Country of Bactria, as he did
Armenia, Arabia, and Lybia, and grew to be such a mighty Prince, that the
Caldeans called him Hercules, and the Assyrians Jupiter; now this Ninus coming
home full of prey to this Nineveh, after he had built three Temples in
gratitude for his victories, one to Belus his Father, another to Juno his
Mother, and the third to Rhea his grandmother, to the perpetual eternising of
his name, he bestowed all the rest of his vast treasure upon this City, Eusebius
in Chron. Coactis undique viribus, and his quae ad tantum opus spectarent,
urbem c^ndidit. Diodor Sic. Eusebius. in Chron B^d. in Gen^^ q 6^ Aug. de civi
tate Dei. l. 16. cap. 3. Paterau^n oppidalum, caput Imperii statait. Strabo. l.
6. Ab Ashur initia ejus civitatis caepisse, quam postea Ninus ampliorem, and
augustio rem fecit. Pezel. in Mellif Histor. de Chald. pers. Graec. Monarch.
usque ad Romanos Nava habitavit. Jonah 3.3.
which was to be called after his own name Nineveh, of Ninus, though some call
it Ninoe, and Eusebius Nisibis; and the better to beautify the City, he caused
all his principal Artificers and the flower of his Nobility, to come and build
here, so that it became at last the splendor of Assyria, and the Wonder of the
whole world. It is true, many learned writers do hold Ashur, and Ninus to be
the same person, yet by the judgment of very choice Authors, the contrary is
maintained, Strabo says, that Ninus raised up his Fathers little town to be
the head of an Empire. Pezelius out of very good Antiquities does affirm, that
it may be safely held that Ashur gave but the beginning to the City, and that
Ninus set it up in perfect beauty. Yea, it was That great Conqueror, that made
it That great City; And that it was such a City, I shall make evident, not only
from forced derivations, by which some Critics would assert the excellency of
the City, as Nin veh of Nave, Fair, or of Nava, full of habitations, or from
glorious titles, as

1. That it was called Megalopolis, The great City, or Rahabboth, The peopled
City: but I make it evident from that clear testimony of Scripture, that it
was called a Great and excellent City, or an exceeding great City, that is, a
matchless City. In the Original, it is a City to God, or a City for God, as if
it were fitter for God, than man to dwell in it; the firstborn, the
first fruits were Gods, and why not the first City? it is called a City for
God, Arias Mont.
as if it were of an heavenly kind of magnitude, as Cedars are called the trees
of God, for their procerity and loftiness; the lofty Cedar, and this lofty
City.

Secondly, It is that great City. From the duration of it? What City upon earth
had such an uninterrupted felicity a^ Nineveh? No, Athens, Thebes,
Constantinople, and Rome it self, though they shone brightly for a time, yet
they had their City-eclipses, strange variations and changes, by direptions and
rapines, yea sad alterations both of Governors and Government. But this City
had no such hurles and state-Hericanoes; but it continued in a quiet,
peaceable, and flourishing condition, some say for 1500 years, others for 1400,
and all agree for above a thousand; a City that had never fever, nor
convulsion, epilepsy, nor palsy, in such a long decourse of Ages, how must it
needs wax, and thrive to the height of greatness?

Thirdly, It was that great City, for the vast wealth that was found in it, for
Belesus joining with Arbaces, (some call him Arbactus, Some call him Belochus.
and Arbastus) being present at the taking and burning of the City, begging of
Arbaces after the sacking and rifling of the City, to have barely the ashes of
the City to be bestowed upon him, which at the first was freely granted him, he
found such infinite store of gold and silver in the ashes, that it raised him
to an incredible estate, there being an hundred millions of Talents in gold,
and a thousand millions of Talents in silver, found melted in the Palace of
Sardanapalus, besides the heaps of such coin that was gathered up in the
several corners of the City. Well then, for that great Treasure, let it be
that great City.

Fourthly, That great City, for the great emulation that was born against it;
for was not the eminency of Nineveh accompanied with much envy? Yes, there were
many that did malign the honor and greatness of it, and amongst the rest,
Semiramis. This Semiramis, from being a base child, as some report; from being
an exposed child, as most aver; by the mercy of shepherds was taken up, and
fostered till she came to ripe years, when appearing to be one of peerlesse
beauty, she was presented to the Viceroy of Syria, who being rapt at the sight
of her, received her very joyfully, and thankfully, and within a short time he
married her to his eldest Son Menon. The Viceroy being summoned to wait upon N
nus in an expedition, He, and Menon, and Semiramis, went along together
(according to the Eastern custom) into the Wars, where Ninus casting his eye
upon this Semiramis, he thought her too rich a Jewel for a subject to wear, and
took her home to his Cabinet, yea forced her, and wrested her from Menon, (for
which he strangled himself) and made her his princely Bride and bedfellow,
being enamoured upon her more then he was upon all the other rare beauties
which attended on him, or were his amorous eye-marks, or his lustful Baths.
Semiramis seeing her perfect conquest, that she had the Vitor himself in
fetters, made use of her opportunity and authority; she secretly therefore
envying the glory of Nineveh, and ambitious in her self to raise up a Pile of
her own, that should out-beam Nineveh; she begged this boon of Ninus, that she
might have liberty to build a City her self, her Prince being wholly at her
devoyre, and not able to deny her any thing, he granted her suit, Some say
Nimrod began the building of Babylon, that Semiramis enlarged it, and
Nebuchadnezzar perfected it. Others do say, That Semiramis was the principal
person to advance the glory of Babylon, and brought it in her days near to
perfection; for Berosus l. 4. does write, that Nimrod built only the Tower, and
not the City, nec designatam urbem fundavit; And he affirms (if any credit
may be given to him) that Nebuchadnezzar built only a new City joining to the
old, and as Scaliger notes upon the fragments of Berosus, says that there he
built his stately Pensile Gardens to satisfy the desire of his wife Nitocris.
and furnished her with treasure to build where she would, and what she would,
she instantly fixes upon Babylon, and bestowed so much cost in building, that
she thought to make it the mirror of Architecture, and the Nymph of Cities.
Indeed the walls she made so admirable, that they were esteemed as one of the
wonders of the world; in the rest of the buildings, her pride and ambition had
radiant reflexes; But because the saw that she had a restraint in her
boundless desires, so long as Ninus lived; therefore she presented a second
Petition, and that was, that he would give her leave to step out of the
Bedchamber into the Throne, and to reign as absolute Prince for some short
time: some say, it was but for one day, others for two, others for five; Ninus
infatuated with passionate affection, subscribed that Petition too; oh fatal
thing for a Prince, for to deliver the Scepter out of his hand, or to give away
his Crown for an hour! for Semiramis in this stint of Government, before the
last minute of her command was expired, got her Husband to be made away, and
murdered; Oh prodigious new Prince! what mischief may be done in the space of
a few punctilioes? Well, Semiramis being footloose, wading through her Husbands
blood to the bank of Principality; she dedicated all the treasures he had left
her, to the shrine of Babylon; Babylon is decked and adorned with all the
Jewels of the Crown, which she could spare. But because vast expenses will
drayn even Princes Coffers; for where the Vessel is always running, at last
it will be drawn out to the dregs, therefore Semiramis finding a decay of
riches, she goes forth to dig in the Gold-mines abroad. She mustereth up an
Army, and marches forth with such a Besome of Soldiers, that she was able to
sweep all the earth as she went, in that expedition she conquered the
Aethiopians, and returning back with fame and spoil from that place, she
invaded the Sagdians, Hir^^nians, Parthenians, Arachosians, Araspians,
Parmisedans, Chorismans, Semiramidis exercitus habuit contra Indos peditum, ut
Ctesias tradit, ter decies centena millia, equitum millia quingenta, Currus ad
millia centum erant totidem numero homines super camelos cum gladiis cubitorum
quatuor. Naves divisae ad duo millia, quas cameli deferebant. Diod. Sicul. l.
2. c. 5. Sabellicus lib. 5. c. 5. Poliaen. l. 8. Suidas with some alteration
does thus relate it, (...).
Dahans, Sacans, Arians, Avilans, Susitans, Branchidans, and being victorious
in all these places, she brought home the wealth of all these Countries, as a
present to Babylon, but when Babylon had singred up all the largesses of her
Royal bounty, she does carry her Purse again abroad to be filled: Her next
trace was to India, and thither she carried such a dreadful Army, that not
Tamerlain, Cingis, Pompey the great, Augustus the mighty, the great Cham, the
great Turk, the Mogul, the Emperor of China, Metuzama, Atabaliba, no not Zerah
the Ethiopian, or Zerxes himself (or any that I could read of) ever appeared
in the field with such pomp and power; for she had in her Camp three millions
of footmen, five hundred thousand horsemen, an hundred thousand Chariots, as
many Camels, whereupon men rode with swords of four cubits long, and as many
Camels and Horses to bear burdens, and to go upon errands, and as many
Elephants, which some say were natural, others artificial, and two thousand
ships carried upon Camels backs, to convey her Soldiers over Rivers; other say
their number was ten thousand. With this puissant and formidable Army, she
passed over the River Ganges, and entered into the Dominions of Staurobates,
King of India, most valiantly encountered, defeated him, and harrassed all his
Country. Some indeed do say, that Staurobates did meet her upon the banks of
Ganges, and there drowned most part of her Army, and slew her, so that she was
never after seen; but this is but a confident and groundless assertion, and
cried down by the unanimous consent of the most authentic writers, who avouch
that she entered India, dispersed, if not killed Staurobates, and returned
victorious; the place of her death was not at Ganges, but at Bactria, where she
being warned by an evident token, that she had received at the Oracle of
Jupitor Haman, that the time of her death drew nigh; she called all her
Captains and Commanders about her, causing them to swear allegiance to her Son,
and so resigning up the Empire to him; She did not vanish out of their sight as
Diodorus Siculus says, but fairly in the presence of them gave up the Ghost,
and that may appear by the Tomb which she left behind her, Semiramis
Assyriorum Regina, cum mortem instare oraculo cognovisses, filio omnibus
praefectis parere jusis, repent disparuit. Diod. Sic. l. 2. c. 5. Ni vir
malus, and auro insatiabilis esses, loculos mortuoum non moveres. Plut. in.
^oph.
and the Epitaph that she her self caused to be engraven upon it, which was,
Here lies Semiramis the Great, whosoever will open this Tomb he shall find
treasure enough, which Darius (some say Cyrus) attempting, he found nothing but
a Paper with these words in it, If thou were not an evil man, and insatiable
of gold, thou would not have disturbed the sepulchers of the dead. Semiramis
is now laid in her Tomb, but so long as she sat in her Throne, she reigned for
Babylon, and fought for Babylon, Babylon had her eye, and her tongue, her head,
heart and hand; and though Babylon were once an undutifull handmaid to her: for
in her absence she rebelled against Her, the news of which being brought to
Semiramis as she was combing her hair, she took it so offensively, that she
vowed never to dress her head, till she had reduced her to obedience, which
she really performed, for half dressed as she was, she marched away, and laid
such a strict siege to the City, that in time she brought down her haughty
spirit, and made her upon her knees to beg pardon. When she had thoroughly
humbled her, and severely chastised her, setting up her Picture in a Pillar of
brass with her hair dishevelled in memory of that rebellion, she renewed her
affeection to her, and made her once more the Minion of her favor, dropping
down bounty to her, as if she would gild her with honor. Though Babylon did
excel Nineveh in the strength of the wall, and in the bridge over Euphrates
which was 5 furlongs long, and in two Palaces, the one at the West end of the
City being ^0 furlongs in compass; and another at the East end 30 furlongs in
compass, and in an Obelisk, or spire, which was an 150 foot high, and 24 foot
thick; yet it was not half peopled so much as Nineveh, because as Q. Curtius
says, that but 90 furlongs of it were built, the rest of the ground being a
lotted to Vineyards, and tilth, to maintain them in a straight siege. Nulla
urbs tanto ambitu, tantave moenium magnificentia constructa est. Vrbem condidit
non aequa laterum dimensione, nam duae muri parts longiores fuerant reliquis.
Horum latus quodque longitudine stadiorum centum, quinquaginta, breviorum vere
stadiorum nonaginta. Qua muri dimensione ambitus stadia complectitur 480. Diod.
Sicul. Ninos, quae and Nineveh est, imperat Cordiais, Mydonibibus, Arabus,
Syris multis intra, and trans, Euphratem. Stratus. l. 6.


But when she had expressed toward her all the munificence, and magnificence,
which could be devised, she could never dress up this younger sister to be
trimmed like sent Nineveh; no, she had priority of her in beauty, and in
excellency; for Nineveh had fifteen hundred Turrets in it, and Babylon had but
seven hundred; Nineveh was 480 furlongs in compass; Babylon not above 380.
Nineveh was in breadth 190 furlongs, Babylon not above an 100. Nineveh was a
City of three days journey, Babylon (so far as we can read) not a days.
Besides the largeness of the streets, and the beauty, and numerosity of
buildings in Babylon were nothing comparable to those in Nineveh; so that
though Babylon was fair, yet not able to match faces with Nineveh; no, Babylon
was a great City, but Nineveh was That great City.

Fifthly, That great City: For the great testimony, that it has from the most
approved Authors. Diodorus Siculus does say, that No City was built with so
great compass of ground, or magnificence of walls; Strabo does say, it was a
mighty City, and ruled far and nigh, namely, over the Gordians, Mygdonians,
Arabians, Syrians, and over many Countries within Euphrates, and beyond
Euphrates. Carolus Stephanus does say, that it was so extended in situation,
that under three days, a man could not have the full sight of it through
Streets, and Lanes, and that it was the most peopled place in the world, and
the most delightful place to behold, through many curious Artifices, and rare
Monuments, which the Citisens, and Assyrian Princes, had set up to their
honor, and except the River Tigris ( for nigh to that it was built, and not to
Euphrates, as some hold) should injure it by some inundation (as it did by
casting down a great part of the wall in the reign of Sardanapalus) it were in
it self inexpugnable, and impregnable. Arbaces found this to his cost, for he
was enforced to besiege it three years, and he had never taken it, Haec totius
terrae imperium, olim magna pompa, maximisque viribus nulli postea regioni
aequandum tenuit. Ar. Mont. Scimus illam non modo similem fuisse magnis
urbibus, quales hodie multae in Europa sunt, sed superaste omnia, quaecunque
praecipuum nomen obtineret. Calvin in 4. Jonae. Cui par magnitudine neque
fuisset antea, neque esset futara. Ribera in 3. Jonae.
but for the rising of the River. Arias Montanus says, that the height of the
walls was an hundred foot in height, and the breadth of them so large, that
three Carts could go abreast upon them, the Towers were a 1500, and two hundred
foot high; and that it was such a stately City that it commanded the Empire of
the Earth, to which none was yet equal either for Pomp, or Force. Calvin
says, It was not like to our Cities in Europe, but it did exceed them all,
which of them soever have had the greatest fame, and renown; So that now ye see
what is spoken here by the Spirit of God concerning Nineveh, is no hyperbole,
as when we say that a thing is whiter then snow, sweeter then holly, clearer
then the Noonday; No, man may have his nimieties of expression, his
diffluences, redundances, superjections, and transiliences of speech, but the
Scripture does not blandish, over-phrase, extra-fame any thing; truth it self
cannot falsify, Nineveh here has from God but her just commendation; for it
was singular, and supreme, a great City, and That great City. Should not I
spare Nineveh, that great City?

From hence observe, that Eminency has an eminent respect with God Almighty,
he is loath to pluck down that City, which he has suffered to rise up to the
height of greatness. Jerusalem was become a prime City, the joy of the whole
Earth, the perfection of beauty, and how does our Savior weep, when he looks
upon Jerusalem? weep? why weep? what, is he offended at such a delectable
object? do the Towers, or the Bulwarks, the Fort of Sion, or the Temple grieve
his eyes? no, he does weep, because he was to shed the first tears, but
Jerusalem ere long was to weep her self blind, to weep her self dead; it was an
ancient City, and she was now crumbling away to her first dust, it was a great
City, and she was now demolishing to her first stone yea, Not one stone shall
be left upon another; the very thought of her misery makes our Savior cry out,
Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou have killed the Prophets, and stoned them which
were sent unto thee; that blood will fetch out all the blood in thy veins,
those stones will dash out thine own brains; thou would not be gathered,
therefore thou shall be scattered; thou would not come under my wings,
therefore thou shall fall under other Nation's claws; thou had an house, but
thy house shall be left desolate unto thee: Thus ye see that though Jerusalem
had been the Cutthroat, and Executioner of his Prophets, yet becaushe she had
been a place of eminency, it cannot but grieve him to see how she has brought
this blood of Martyrdom upon her self, to gush to death with the blood of
revenge, and how her stones of persecution will be the stoneheap that will
crush the head of a whole City with direful curses; Christ cannot think of
this accident without groans, nor look upon this sad fate without tears.
Ephraim had been another famous City? and how is God pained to the heart to
behold Ephraim in danger? When Ephraim spoke, there was trembling, sure I am,
when God does speak against Ephraim, there is trembling. Ephraim is joined to
Idols, let her alone; alone? how long? see how soon God does renew his
presence, and pity to Ephraim. Thou have gone, says God, to the Assyrian, and
sent to King Jareb, and these could not heal thee; But what shall Ephraim be
without remedy? these cannot heal thee, shall none heal thee? yes, alas sick
Ephraim! if thou will, thou shall not yet fester to death in these wounds, I
(says God) offer to be thy Physician. Oh Ephraim what shall I do unto thee?
Hos. 6.4. He will teach Ephraim his own, shame him in his exorbitances,
represent to him, what a mixed piece, and a clammy patch he is become, a mere
Time-server, and Newter, Ephraim is mixed amongst the people, a cake not
turned. Hos 7.8. yea, he will call him simple to his face, Ephraim is a silly
Dove without heart. v. 11, yea, and he will plead kindness to him, ask
Ephraim, if this be the fruit of his affection, instruction, protection? Oh
Ephraim did I never do thee any courtesies? was I never useful, and
beneficial to thee? yes, I taught Ephraim to go, taking him by the arms, I
drew him with the cords of a man, with the hands of love, and I was as one that
took off the yoke from his jaws, and laid meat unto him. Hos. 11.3.4. Thus God
will hint defection, accuse of folly, and intimate favor, he will counsel,
and chide, admonish, and rebuke, rather than he will repel, and reject; he
will never leave, till Ephraim leave old strayings, and come to new tracks,
till Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with Idols? I have heard,
and observed him, I am like a green firr tree, from me is thy fruit found. Hos.
14.8. yea, when God is constrained to be rough against Ephraim, how is it as if
a Father should dishinherit, or tear out the bowels of his own heir? Is
Ephraim my dear Son? is he my pleasant child? since I spoke against him, I
earnestly remembered him still, therefore my bowels are troubled for him. Jer.
31.20.
With such a heaviness (if ever) God does deliver up Ephraim to judgment,
shake down his walls, bring the yoke of captivity into his streets. Oh Ephraim,
how shall we part? how shall I separate my heart from thee? thou have done much
unto me, yet Oh Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? There is a saying in the
sixth of Micah. 9. That the Lords voice cries unto the City. What City? What
cry? A City says God, that I have fetched the stones of it out of a far
Country; for, I have brought you (says God) out of the land of Egypt, and
redeemed you out of the house of servants; yea, I appointed Master-workmen to
go along with the materials, and advance the buidling, I sent before thee
Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, v. 4. and I yet further preserved the quarry-pieces,
whereof the City should be framed, by might and miracle, that they might not be
seized upon, scattered, and dashed in pieces by the way; for Oh my people
remember, what Balack the son of Moab consulted, and what Baalam the son of
Beor answered him from Shittim unto Gilgal. Thus far I have gone for this
City, nay I never left it till in despite of all opposition, and maugre all
practisings against it, I raised it up to be the glory, and astonishment, the
Mirror, and Terror of all Nations, that it might be called the auspitious
City, the City of vigilance, and vows, of prospection, and provision, that ye
may know the righteousness of the Lord. This is the City, now what is the cry?
to call in Invaders to assault it? or Conquerors to fetter it? No, to call up a
prudent person, to acknowledge the founder. The man of wisdom shall see his
name. But what such need of this cry? or this man? What? great need, for the
City is ready to be carried to the Correction-house, to be led to the
whipping-pillar, for there is a rod prepared, and the hand lifted up to strike;
danger indeed, what shall procure the deliverance? is there any means left to
keep the City from the lash? Yes? says God, if the City has but a good ear,
she need not fear her back; she shall not suffer, if she can but hearken, or
feel the Rod, if she can but listen to the Rod, therefore hear the Rod, and who
has appointed it. Thus ye see how the City is tutored, that it might not be
tortured; and admonished, that it might not be abolished; and directed, that it
might not (as they call it) be Disciplined. What endeavor is there to propulse
judgment? to avert vengeance? to save the City from the Rod? not the Lords
yerk first scourges the City, but the Lords voice cries unto the City. If it
be an eminent City, there shall an eminent Cry be made unto it. Corazin and
Bethsaidah were great Cities, for great things were done in them; great things
have their large commensurations, they will raise up Cities to be quantitative,
according to the proportion of their favors, the moiety and degree of their
excellencies have an accrument; spiritual Prerogatives mount Cities higher
then the spires of their buildings; and the highest verticals of their
ingenious and prosperous negotiations. Now then Chorazin, and Bethsaida, great
things are done in you; ye are great, but do ye continue great? are there
great things done by you? do ye not lessen your greatness? minorate your
extensions? diminish your expansions? Yes, (says God) it does grieve me to see
how great things are deampled and dismagned amongst you. But is there not a
great reckoning to be made for the neglect of these great things? yes, remember
if ye be not great Proficients, ye will be great Sufferers. I would not have
you be so, why will ye be so? what, Corazin and Bethsaida, Grandees in gifts,
and Perpusilloes in fruits? this is to turn white into black, light into
darkness, augmentation into diminution, great into little. Away ye lean-sides,
and take heed ye Skeletons; if this be your temper, your distemper, your
exsiccating, and your exsuccating yourselves, your growing backward, or growing
downward, I fright you ye thinskins, ye little-doers, I denounce a woe against
you, Woe be to thee Chorazin, woe be to thee Bethsaida. Woe? is this the Dialect
of appretiating? is it the accent of your God, which does respect eminency?
yes, God is respective, though he be minatory; for he is minatory, and yet
monitory; he does but denounce the woe, but not execute it; threaten it, but
not inflict it: I hear the crying of a woe, but not the flying of it; Christ
does awaken, but not afflict; terrify, but not confound: let Chorazin and
Bethsaida but yet do their great things, and the great curses are gone; if they
be as good, if they be but better then Tire and Sidon, they shall enjoy still
these great things: I tell them what they should have done, and are Chorazin
and Bethsaida undone; if these things be yet done? no, fruitfulness makes the
head of the Axe to fly off, if they can but repent in the sackeloth and ashes
of Tire and Sidon, Chorazin and Bethsaida need not fear this woe to strip them,
or burn them. Romans 11.
That great graffe that was put into the Olive Tree, is it readily torn out
again? no, the Olive Tree, though bad enough a great while, was not presently
destroyed, no more shall the graffe if it has any sap in it. It is not said,
be faint-hearted, and despair; but be not high-minded, and fear. It is not
said, Lop off this graffe, but, boast not thy self against the branches: Do
not say that the branches were broken off, that I might be graffed in; but
being graffed in, see that thou do fructify more then those withered
branches. Then whatsoever sentence was upon the dry, dead Olive Tree, yet this
is none of thy doom, if it be not thy guilt; I have graffed thee in, and I
would bark and stock thee in: consider, I do but handle the graffe, I do not
hew it; fear not their excision, if thou do not feel their barrenness; for,
Behold the severity of God toward them which fell, but toward thee goodness,
if thou do continue in thy goodness, Romans 11.22. See what great advising
there is, to keep a great graffe safe. Ephesus had a great golden Candlestick,
and is it quickly removed? no, I have something against thee, but it is, that I
might have nothing against thee. Thou art fallen from thy first love, can not
fall to thy first love? renew thy affections, and suspect no afflictions
Repent, and do thy first works, and thy first privileges are as sure as ever.
So that God does but shake the Candlestick to settle it; Gods hand trembles,
when he should remove a golden Candlestick, let it have at last but bright, and
pure light in it, and God will as soon remove out of his Throne, as remove a
golden Candlestick. So then, there is an eminency of tuition attending upon
every thing that has in it eminency. Vnus universans. Justin. Mart. qui est
unum omnia, non servet unum quod habet plurima? Sine quantitate magnum. Aug. de
Trin. l. 1. c. 1 Aliquid recedens. Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 2. Omnia eadem
virtute, qua condidit, moderatur. Lact. Firm. Divin. Instit. l. 1. c. 3.
He which is that one chief good, that has in him all particular good; yea,
which is that one thing, which has in him all things; will he not universe
every particular of his own kind? or preserve that one thing, which ha^h in it
the most things? he which is great without quantity, will he not support those
things which are risen up to the greatness of quantity? He which cannot be
conceived so exactly, but there is something in him surpassing man's
understanding; who is so absolute, that he is incomprehensible; will he not
retain those things in their due honor, which do surpass, and have a
recedency from other things of the same nature? He which does order all things
by the same power with which he did create them; when he has created a thing
great, will he not uphold it in that greatness? yes, with him is the
greatness of excellency, Exodus 15.7. Therefore he will have the greatest
esteem of those things, which have in them the greatest excellency. He is the
most high God, Genesis 14.10. to show that the most high things shall have from
him the most high respect. Can a Maid forget her ornament, or a Bride her
attire? Knolls in the Turkish History.
Jer. 2.32. Can a Maker forget then his ornament? or a Bridegroom forget his
marrying vest? Muleasses at the taking of the Castle of Tunes, grieved to see
the rude Soldiers trample under foot the rich colors, and costly perfumes: So
it does grieve God to see any one undervalue that which is choice, therefore he
will not underprize it himself. Thou will not willingly break a rich Glass,
throw away a Pearl, rend a Robe, God then will not readily destroy that which
is precious. No, if a thing be worthy, it is fit for Gods eye; if it be great,
Periturum se potius, quam perditurum. Suet.
it is fit for his preservation. As it was said of Titus that noble Emperor,
That he had rather perish himself, then destroy. So God will as soon part with
his essence, as his compassion. He will bear long, before he will deface, and
have his long sufferance, tried to the height, before he will make a wast of
eminency. There is not that great Ruler, or that great Nation, or that great
Church, or that great Saint, but he does tender to the height, before he does
stretch out his punishing hand. See how he does here plead and expostulate with
Jonah about Nineveh, he would spare it, because it was eminent, it was that
great City: Should not I spare Nineveh, that great City.

1. Now God will spare Nineveh that great City; first, to teach the world, that
things of eminency are to be prized, The Apostle does command us to approve of
things which are excellent, Phil. 1.10. For we have strange eyes in our heads
which cannot see beams in those things, which excel all other as far as
light does excel darkness, Eccles. 2.13. Whatsoever things are amabilia,
lovely, if there be any virtue, any praise, think of these things, Phil. 4.8.
They are bad Merchants in our calling, which know not the worth of those things
which cannot be valued with gold, that the Topaz of Ethiopia is not to be
compared unto them, that there shall be no mention made of Coral in respect of
them. Wherefore do ye kick against my sacrifice? 1 Samuel 2.29. So wherefore do
ye lift up your heels against that which is eminent? shall not that be valued,
which is invaluable? then ye are not to be valued. It was ill to despise
Mannah, so is it to dis-esteeme that which is of high esteem. We should have
nothing but peerlessenesse in our thoughts, and eminency in our eyes. Lum'n
aeternitatis in simo mortalitatis. Aug. de catechis. rudibus.
For this is to have the light of eternity in the slime of mortality. The very
Egyptians cried out Abrech before Joseph. The Queen of the South came to hear
the wisdom of Solomon, Herod desired to see Christ. Wheresoever there is worth,
there ought to be an high regard; whatsoever has excellency in it, it ought to
be looked upon with an eye of reverence: Telemachus having viewed Menelaus
stately House, with all the Gold, Ivory, princely Couches in it, did he give it
a Title beneath it self? no, Jovis aula. Homer.
no, he said It was fit to be Jupiters Court.

Nicostratus beholding a rare picture which Zeuxis had made, stood sixing his
eyes so long upon it, that one asked him, why he would stand gazing so long
upon a dead picture? says he, Aelian. Lux aeterna erat in templo Jovis
Hammonis. Plut. de defect. Orac.
Thou would do so, if thou had mine eyes. Cleombrotus could not admire
enough the everlasting light that was in the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, which
ever burnt, and shoon most brightly, and yet every year spent less oil.
Agesilaus seeing Epaminondas (though an enemy) marching out against him in
brave order, he cried out, Oh magnificent man! Oh hominem magnificum! Plut. in
Ages.
Mahomet the Great said, he held himself the greatest Captain in the world,
except Matthias: Matthias was eminent even in Mahomets esteem. The house of
Nestor at Pylen, was admired, Cuspinian.
even in the days of Pausanias. Incisia was much honored, Pausan in Messen.
because of Elephants bones which were found in the earth, to testify that
Hannibal passed through that Town, Jovius l. 27. Hist. A. Gell. Attic. Noct. l.
25. c. 20. Aug. Confess. l 4. c. 11.
when he came from the Alps. The Salaminians were wont to show a Cave, where
Euripides wrote his Tragedies. St Ambrose out of reverence to his high sanctity
was so respected, that his very enemies would not hurt him. Epiphanius Bishop
of Ticinum, when Theodoricus took the City, was so regarded by the barbarous
Soldiers, (though of a contrary judgment) that they used him with all
civility, Evod. in ejus. vita.
whilst they stayed with him, and wept at their departure from him. Porphyrius,
though a deadly opposite to St Origin, yet he was wont to call him the most
learned man, and the Prince of Philosophers. Platin.
Libanius was an Heathen, and S. Chrysostom a Christian, yet being demanded,
whom he would have to succeed him in his Rhetorick-Lecture, Id.
when he was dead, he said, Chrysostom. What should I speak of more? Alexander
himself reverenced Jaddas. Theodosius kissed the dead eye of Paphnutius. The
majesty of the face of Marius, so daunted the Soldier that should have taken
away his life, that he said, I cannot kill Marius. The Turks so honored the
memory of Scanderbeg, that they dug up his bones at Lyssa, and wore them
like Jewels in their Turbants. Shame then to them, which abase that which is
precious, and can honor nothing but that which is contemptible. Do ye know the
cast of your own eyes? or are ye acquainted with the sparklings of your own
hearts? then to what things do your eyes glaunce, and your hearts glow? are
not the rarities of nature, and the specious things of this world, more
endeared unto you, then the most excellent graces? and made more eminent then
the endowments of the spirit? Oh eminent Spectators, and Judges! what is this
but to unconsecrate piety? to underprize preciousnesse? to profane the gold of
the Sanctuary? with Michol, to mock at a spiritual trance? nay with Saladin, to
defile with dung the very sepulcher of our Savior? All singular things then
ought to have a singular account, God here has exemplified it; he would spare
Nineveh, because it was eminent, That great City.

Secondly, God would spare Nineveh; That great City, to show that his mercy is
not to be limited. Jonas would have it destroyed above all places, because it
was that great City, full of sin, full of provocation. But God would have it
spared above all places, because it was that great City, full of danger, and
had most need of mercy. Is thine eye evil, because mine is good? Man is a very
precipitate censurer; woe be to the world, if man be the Protonotary in Gods
Court, to have the chief hand in his Records, and Decrees. If he had power to
bring Gods mercy under his restraint, and to bind Gods orders in his narrow
lists, we should have strange determinations. We doom upon earth, and damn to
hell many persons, as if they had sinned beyond favor, and were too great to
be pardoned. Mary Magdalen should have been a weeping Lady till death, if she
had wept till Simon had stanched her tears. Not a Publican, or Harlot (though
never so penient) should have reigned above, if the Scribes and Pharisees had
had the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and had had the office to put on Crowns.
Man is a rigid and severe sentencer. God keep thy estate from his justice, thy
life from his verdict, and thy soul from his charity. Can there any good thing
come out of Nazareth? This people which know not the law are cursed. Who is
this David? who is this son of Ishai? there be many men now adays, that run
away from their Master. There are men so liberal of their judgments, that we
may say to them, as Diogenes said to one in the like kind, Quam nuper de coelo
venisti? Laert. l. 6.
How long is it since thou came out of heaven? They are settling of other
men's future estates, when they had more need to be ordering their present
callings; or howsoever, not to pronounce beyond their Trades, as Ptolomy
rebuked a smith, who would needs be spending his opinion upon Music, Do not
consider, Eras. l. 6: Apoph.
(says he) How thou speak beyond thy Hammer? Where these men have liberty,
many a wicked man shall be justified, and many a righteous man shall be
condemned, as Megabysus magnified the coorse Pictures of Apelles, but by no
means he would give in his approbation to those which were drawn by true art.
Aelian. l. 2. Var. Hist.
That attempt which has gotten the success by baseness, shall be more cried
up, then that which has been advanced by nobleness, as the people admired the
Pyramide, Eras. in Sim.
that Rhodope the Harlot built more then all those which the brave Kings of
Egypt erected. But does God sail according to man's Load-star? or march
according to his beating the Drum? Is the circumference of divine favor
measured according to the stretching of these compasses? Do those cheyms go
according as these Clocks do strike? Is Gods balance guided by these weights
below? or do his Orbs turn about according to the motion of the worlds Primum
mobile? Shall every one be a sinner, that man does call Malignant? or every one
a Saint, whom he does put into his Calender? No, I would be loath to have my
conscience brought up as a pupil in this University, or my soul to clear her
innocence before this Tribunal. Man has a cursing humor, and is apt to
reprobate too much; we should have wretches by scores, nay sons of perdition by
myriads, if man had the Book of life in his keeping. But Gods mercy does exceed
man's severity, he has a Springtide (that by some secret influences) does rise
higher in the Channel, then the ordinary course of this brackish Ocean would
make it to flow. The woman taken in Adultery shall be acquitted, though those
brayners with stones, taken out of Moses Law, would have had her knocked down,
not considering how nigh their own skulls were to pelting. That modest
Petitioner that durst not come too near, nor speak too loud, which had rather
lift up his eyes, then lift up his tongue, and carry it with knocking upon his
breast, then knocking out selfe-fancies, which has nothing in his lips but an
arraignment, or a Petition of grace, God be merciful to me a sinner, shall
depart away justified, sooner than he which justified himself, and quavered
upon his personal innocence, I thank God I am not as other men are, and had no
other style for the disconsolate Petitioner, than that snarling scorn, This
Publican. God has compassion, where man has no bowels; and pity, where man
has nothing but reproach. Two Brabant horsemen came over to help Edward the
second against the Scots, but hearing nothing but scandals uttered against
Robert Bruce (whom they knew to be a prince of admired worth) though the cry of
the Soldiery was wholly in the defamation of Robert, Hector Poeth. l. 14.
yet they openly prayed for his happy success, and deserted our Army. Amanus
Aurelianensis, going to his Bishopric, desired Agrippinus the Governor of the
City, that the Prison doors might be set open, to honor his entrance with the
release of condemned men; he denied it, and said, They were all Villains and
Monsters, and should suffer the pains of death: oh no, says Amanus, there may
be some men amongst them, as just as our selves, therefore I pray you release
them, lest God does declare their innocence; the Governor still denied it,
till a stone fell miraculously from heaven, and so bruised him, that he was
glad to free them, Bonsin. l. 4. Dec. 1.
whom he would gladly have executed.

The Magistrates of Thebes whould have condemned Epaminondas, because he went
and sought against the Arcadians, and Messenians, though they had given him
commission, only because he would not return back at their command, to give
answer to a frivolous accusation, but the Citizens seeing him come home with
Honor, and Conquest, and knowing the integrity and innocence of their famous
Captain, Probus in Epaminonda.
in despite of the peevish Magistrates, got him to be discharged. So God does
assoyle where man does accuse, and justify where man has nothing but hard
censure both in his lips and heart. Gods rule, and man's square do differ; He
will not have mercies confined according to man's limitations. God, and Jonah,
are here in a contest, the two Bars vary; Nineveh must perish at the one,
because it is That great City: Nineveh is spared at the other, because it is
That great City.

Thirdly, God would spare Nineveh, That great City, because he desire^h to be
honored in a great Preservation, Gillas habuit praecordia liberalitatis, and
benignum finum.
that he might be said to have in him (as it was said of Gilias of Agrigentum)
the heartstrings of liberality, and the bosom of benignity; God would be
abundant in goodness. Exodus 34.6. and save by a great deliverance. Genesis 45.7.
not spare a particular eminent person, or a distinct eminent family, but That
great City, that upon all the glory there might be a defense. Es. 4.5. this is
the triumph of divine favor, or the Trophe which he does aim at, to be pight
up to the honor of his Commiseration; then is God conspicuous like himself,
when great Countries, great Nations, great Churches participate of his mercy;
that it might be said, here God has been Ensigne-bearer, here is his great
Banner flourishing, and his very Buckler hung up. The whole Camp of Israel
defended by God, raising up one David to kill the great Golias; whole
Christianity preterved by God's setting out one Constantine to vanquish
Maxentius, and ^icinius; this makes eminently for his name, and fame, to be
ecchoed forth. Alexander ab Alex. l. 1. c. 11.
Prolomeus thought he had never expressed bounty, till he might be surnamed
Euergetes, The Beneficent person, and so God thinks he is never compassionate
enough, till he might have the general cry, that he is, That sparing God.
Cyrus would give such large Patents, that he might be seen to make Cities
happy: Beatas civitates efficere. Pontanus de Principe.
So God would so enlarge his Charter, that the place which he does intend
favor to, might be discerned to be eminently blessed; that he might be
honored with an eminency, he will spare with an eminency, not a City, or a
great City, but That great City. Should not I spare Nineveh, that great City?

Application.
1. This does serve first to show the happiness of this place, for are ye only
a City? no, a City with an eminency, the greatest of the Land, the greatest of
many; what are Amsterdam, Hamborough, Quinborough, Dantsick, nay, the royal
Cities of many Countries, Stockholm, Copinhagen, Vienna, Sevill, Rome it self
to you? this City was once called Augusta, the large City, Vrbinum, quia urbes
binas in se continebat.
doubtless much more may it now, when it has enlarged the Circuit. As Urbin
was so called, because it contained two Cities in one, so many Cities do seem
to be included within your walls. It is such a City, that it is fit only to be
shown upon Holydaies, as Charles the Archduke said of Florence; your beauty is
now such, that as Aristobulus said of the Persian Susa, ye may be called, the
Lily. Diodorus says of Triocala a City in Sicily, (...).
that it was so named, because it had it it three fair things, Fountains,
Vineyards, and an unaccessible Rock upon which it was built; but Triocala will
not fit you, but ye had need to be called Polycala, for the many fair things
that are here visible; This City for Courts of justice does seem to be a grand
Tribunal, for provisions for the poor a wide Hospital, for warlike
preparations an admired Arsenall, for multiplicity of trading a stored
Warehouse, for Beautiful buildings, a gorgeous Palace, for the means of
salvation, the Temple of the Earth. It is not a City only spoken of in our own
Country, but a renowned City. Ezech. 26 17. a fat heyfer. Jer. 50.11. yea, a
kind of Princess amongst the Nations. Oh that ye had rinsed eyes to look upon
the City, or thankful hearts to acknowledge Gods goodness to the City, that
men could behold what a Stage of wonders is here daily before them, and reckon
up the several Jewels, which are looked up in this Cabinet. But I doubt ye
darken your own splendour, or diminish your own portion, ye see not the Sun
which does shine amongst you, ye mark not the rich Commodities which are landed
at your own stathes, ye cannot tell the price of your City-sword, nor know not
the worth of your Cap of Maintenance; it is too likely, that ye leave all to
the City Remembrancer, insomuch that one at the Lands end is as well acquainted
here, as ye are, with your own City. I am afraid ye have given over
perambulation to know the bounds of your City, or that ye maintain a City-scowt
only to discover things abroad, but have not a City-Accountant to bring you in
a full sum of your yearly blessings Here ye are settled, but ye deserve not to
be thus housed; here ye are mured in, but your walls are too good for you; God
might give away this City to new dwellers, that would say, their lot is fallen
unto them in a fair ground, or create new members of this Incorporation that
would sing an hymn to him for such variety of blessings. Alas ye possess
much, but ye prize but little; ye are. more successful, then sensible; ye
cannot measure your own height, or observe the Zenith, where the Sun does shine
with perpendicular beams. But oh let no man tell you the name of your own City,
or take for you the altitude of your own greatness; do not travel into the
Country to ask what hapness is here apparent; nor sail abroad to enquire what
ye do enjoy at home. Ye are blind indeed, when ye must be led in your own
streeets, and ye have lost your memories to purpose, when ye cannot tell every
night, what ye have seen in such a place every day. On therefore consider into
what an Eden the Lord has put you, and praise him in the highest for such a
blessed Paradise; your felicity does transcend, God has raised you to a kind
of height of eminency, for ye are not only a City, but above many Cities in the
world, ye may be called That great City. Should not I spare Nineveh, That great
City?

Secondly, this shows, that the City is eminent with God, if ye do not
withdraw his affection from it; he does prize the City, because it is That
great City; the City cannot be too great for God, if it be not too great for
your selves; he is satisfied with your large Circuit, if ye do not cast your
selves out of your own walls, or make him drive you beyond the Line. Make him
but Lord in chief over the City, and hold in fee under him as long as ye will;
do but your true homage to him, and he will deliver back again unto you your
sword, and Mase, and keys to keep for many Ages; If ever ye perish, your blood
be upon your own heads. Thy destruction is of thy self, oh Israel. Misery will
never come from Gods justice, but from your own wickedness; his Rod will never
be felt, till the scorner does call for stripes. Ye see that he does love your
pavements, if ye do not break them up; and does take delight in your buildings,
if ye do not pollute them; and rejoice in your treasures, if ye do not make a
forfeiture of them. Ye are blessed then, why are ye sick of your own felicity?
ye dwell safely, why are ye offended at your own peace? Do ye wish the welfare
of the City, or desire to continue in this eminency? No, methink I see you
bringing pick-axes to dig down your own walls, and springing mines to blow up
your own houses, and kindling sparks that will set all in a flame from one end
of the City to the other. Has God built this City for his own service and
worship? no, it seems to be some Bear-garden, or Grate to put Lions in, or a
nest of Cockatrices. Oh the hideous noyses that are heard within these walls!
the filthy smells that are in this City! the Dung heaps that lie in the open
streets, the execrable sins and trespasses that are here committed; this City
seems to be nothing but a fence-wall for miscreants, or a lodge for Anakims
to shelter themselves in; I will deal modestly, I shall forbear to show you the
faces of the Monsters, or to hold up the Gorgons head in your sight; but thus
much I will say in general, that Gods name is much dis-honoured, his truth
corrupted, his Deity blasphemed, his Laws violated, his Messengers despised;
prayers are but customary gales, praises but ditties of humors, Sermons but
notional speculations, Sacraments but badges of an affected community; the
Saints weep, the poor cry, and the oppressed roar; Grace is turned into a
vizard, and Religion into refined policy, and if I should reckon up all, a man
would think here were sins enough amongst us, to bury the ancientest family
in oblivion, to shake the greatest City in the world into scattered stones,
nay, to cast Adam out of Paradise again, if he were in his greatest Dominion,
and to throw down the Angels out of heaven again, if they were in their
greatest brightness: Oh then that ye are the Contrivers of the fall of so
great a City! Is it nothing unto you to be held Conspirators against the safety
of a City? yes, Cilicon that deluded the City of Miletum, Suidas,
with continually saying All things are well, till he had delivered it up in
the hands of the Priennenses: Pausan. in Achaic. Strabo. l. 12.
Zenias that carried all fair to the City of Elis, till he had brought it
under the subjection of the Lace demonians: Dorylaus Tacticus, which betrayed
Eupator in his head City: Baditzes, that when the Saracens had a long time
besieged Amorium, and were ready to depart from it, sent a secret Letter to
them, Cedren.
that if they would but renew the assault, they might easily enter at such a
place as he named to them, which they did, and the City was put to slaughter:
all these are branded with infamy, for seeking the destruction of their own
Cities; how much more then you, which by your prodigious sins are plotting
greater treachery against your City, then these, or the most perfidious persons
that ever lodged within a City walls? for these brought but armed men into a
City, but your sins are ready to bring hosts from heaven, yea to fetch down
the Angels from above, to be revenged of you for all the execrable impieties
which have been committed in this City; Take away therefore the heynousnesse of
your sins, as ye would have the eminency of the City to be preserved. The
City may stand long, if ye do not weaken the foundation of it. If the City does
fall, we know what hands to charge for pulling it down; they are not the hands
of justice, but the hand of transgression that are guilty of this fact; they
are your provocations and abominations, that neither profession can shame, nor
Pulpits restrain, that are making their combinations to work the ruin of the
City. Neither Catiline, nor Marius, nor Dositheus, nor Lasthenes, nor all the
treacherous friends, are like unto your proditorious sins; no, these call in
Gods judgments, open the City-gates to them, put arms into their hands, to
slaughter on the right hand, and on the left; yea so enrage them, that they
will not leave wasting, till they have laid the City level with the ground.
The City has been great, is great, and may continue great, if ye your selves
do not conspire against the greatness of it. God ye see is no enemy to the
City, nor does he envy the greatness of it; no, an eminent City does carry an
eminent respect with Him; make him not an enemy then, and he will not shake one
stone of your greatness, but add more stones to build up your greatness; ye
see his high inclination to the preservation of eminency, he would not destroy
Nineveh, because it was That great City; but he would spare Nineveh, because it
was That great City. Should not I spare Nineveh, that great City?

Thirdly, This does show the horror of this Cities desolation, if ever it does
happen to perish, for it is That great City, and it will be that great
casualty. Oh the dream be to our enemies, and the interpretation to them that
hate us. Let the woman called Wickedness, which does sit in the midst of the
Ephah of curses, rather fly into the Land of Shinar, then take her flight to
this City, and here rest as upon her Base. For if this City come to be visited,
there are not tongues enough in the whole City to reckon up all the miseries
that such a judgment will bring along with it. Our cheeks may look pale, our
eyes drop, and our hearts tremble at the apprehension of such a fatal day;
ruit alto a culmine Troja. Ilium ingens.
sure I am, Troy then shall fall from her very Culmen; it is Ilium the Great,
and great will be the infelicity of such a curse. It was Troy-novant, it is
Troy le-grand, and it will be Troy l'extinct. Do Cities fall with a small
crush? no, let me carry you to the broken walls, and lead you through the ruins
of other Cities. Heliopolis, that was once a City beautiful in buildings, and
had a famous Temple in it, now so razed, that there is not a foot-step to be
seen either of City or Temple. Neque urbis, neque Templi ullum restat
vestigium. Jeron. in Dan. c. 11. Thebae, ad unam portam redactae, vix votus
nomen servant. Paus. in Arch. Execrutus est, quicunque eum locum instauraret.
Strabo. l. 13. Paus. in Phoacis. fundamenta adhuc monstrantur. Strabo. l. 10.
Thebes destroyed all but one Port, so that it does not seem to keep the old
name. Sidena utterly ruined, and a curse laid upon all men by Craesus, which
should go about to rebuild it. All the Cities in Phocis, in the holy War (as
they called it) wasted by the Amphyctions, that it seemed a large Country,
without a City, as Pausanias. Eretria in Eubaea so demolished, that there is
nothing but the foundations of it, like the dry bones of a consumed Carcass,
to be shown. I might show you the like of Troy, Carthage, Cyropolis, Myrenae,
Alba, Aquileia, Cremona, Masilia, and many other glorious Cities, which are so
desolated, that it would be an hard thing to find but a stone of the old
foundation. And well it were that the rage had but extended to bare walls; but
the City, and the Citizens, often perished together; the walls of stone, and
the walls of flesh, had the like battery; the pick-axe and hammer brought forth
for the one, Persae instar sagenae incolas includentes, tanta Barbarorum
multitudo mure sese circumfuderat Herodot
and the sword and pole-axe brought forth for the other: oh what murders and
massacers, have there happened at the destruction of many Cities. The Citizens
of Eretria being enclosed as it were in a net, were all put to the sword. The
Citizens of Scotussa (in Thessaly) being called forth into the Market-stead, to
hear the laws of conquest, which they were to observe; the elder men were made
away by Bowmen and Dartmen, Pausan.
which lay in secret to murder them; their young men in a more barbarous way,
hewn in pieces, and the women and children sold for slaves under the Crown, as
they called it; the City of Sybaris in Greece, which had once five and twenty
Cities under the jurisdiction of it, and did lead out against the Crotoniates
above an hundred thousand men, being at last taken by these Adversaries; they
were for the most part drowned by the River, which they let into the City, and
those which escaped that death, perished by the sword of the Soldiers. Yea, it
is well that they suffered but a common death, for in many places they were put
to death with torture and extremity. M. Fulvius by the counsel of Pollia, did
not only kill the Tusculanes, but first whipped them most grievously, Val.
Max. l. 9. cap. 10. Aelian, l. 9. de. Var. Hist.
and then struck off their heads with an Axe. The Locrenses first defiled the
bodies of their Captives with lust, then they thrust sharp needles into their
fingers ends, holding them a long time in pain, then they beat them to death
in a Mortar, and cast them into the Sea. Lucius Catilin, was wont to destroy
his enemies, first by breaking their arms and thighs, then by cutting off
their ears, Ludov-Vives. in. 3. lib. Aug. de civitate Dei. c. 2.
then by plucking out their tongues, paring off their noses, and tearing out
their eyes, and at last by beheading them, Henry the sixth, conquering the
Sicilians, he did sees some to death in hot Caldrons, others he fried to death
at a fire, others he sowed up in a sack, and threw them into the Sea, others he
put brazen Crowns upon their heads, stuck full of sharp nayls, and some he set
upon a brazen chayr made red hot, that they might waste to death by pieces.
Yea, should I relate all, Crantz. l 7. Metop. c. 17.
I could show you how some have been so savage to their enemies, that they have
sown them up into the bodies of new slain beasts, and there suffered them to
remain till they rotted alive, that at last they might be devoured of such
beasts as live by feeding upon dead Carcasses; and that others have tied hungry
Vulturs to the heels of their Captives, which might eat out their bowels by
pieces; and that they have sprinkled the faces of their Hospital Gods, with
the blood of their slaughtered enemies, as if they had done a most pious work,
and they were but offering a most pleasing sacrifice; and that they have
consecrated their instruments of cruelty, by which they have executed their
bloody designs, calling them holy Swords, and sacred Spears. Yea, and to turn
over unto you one leaf more of this black book, they which will not spare your
walls, and bodies, will they your goods? no, these were the foment of the War,
or the leading staff of the march; they hold up their Spears for prey, and
sight for booty. Ye have then traded all this while, but to lay up a bank for
the Emperor, and to sweat out your strength, cripple your legs, and craze
your brains to treasure up heaps for the Soldiers to dip their fingers in; ye
are the Rent-gatherers, they are the Receives; ye are the the Drudges, they the
Heirs. Are not these common accidents upon sacking and risting of Cities? When
Ticinum was taken by Odoacer, what benefit was it to be rich? no, Vt quisque
divitiis excelle re existimabatur, sic ad praedam maxim requisitus. Sigon. l.
14 Imp. Occid. Omnibus veteribus ornamentis, and pristints opibus amissis.
Pausan. in Arcad. Signa admiratione quaeque digna Romam missa, caetera Attili
Auxiliorum duci Philopameni duci donata, and hac aipsa atate pud Perga menos
inter Corinthiorum spolia visuntur. Pausan. in Achaic. Q. Curtius.
as every one did abound more in wealth, so he was the more subject to prey.
When Megalopolis was conquered by Cleomenes, what relic was there left of
their precedent greatness? No, all their ancient Ornaments, and former riches
were quite lost. When Corinth was taken, by Mummius, the City was stripped of
every thing that was glorious, and the tokens, prints, or impresses of honor
worthy of admiration, were sent away to Rome, the rest of the goods were given
to Philopaemenes the Captain of the Auxiliaries of Attalus, and a great part of
the spoil was a long time to be seen at Pergamus. What miserable wastes
strippings, extirpations, eradications of all state and greatness, were there
made at the sackings of Cremona, by Antonius? at Aquileia by Attila? at
Scotussa by Alexander Pheraeus? yea, as when Beasts are killed, men hang up
their skins in pomp, and triumph, so the Philistims hang up Saul's armor in the
Temple of Astaroth, Menalaus Euphrorbus shield in the Temple of Juno, and the
English, the French guilt spurs in the Temple of Gurtrois; and all the wealth,
and booty that is gotten by such Conquests, as plate, pearl, purple, ointments,
spices, and the like are sent home, as presents for Friends, as it fared after
the Battle of Granicus. Cyrus at the first Battle which he had in Asia, from
the general Conquest of the Country, and the preys which he had gotten in
several Cities, Pliny. l. 33 c. 3.
carried home besides infinite store of apparel, and rich furniture, a vine,
and plane-tree all of beaten gold, the rich gobblet of Semiramis, and fifty
thousand Talents in Coin. The Graecians by the victory which was gotten at
Plataeae over the Persians, got such an infinite deal of treasure, golden
bracelets, chains, cauldrons of silver and gold, that gold and silver was but
as brass unto them, Herod. l. 9.
the Aeginets barely by buying the Plunder, raised themselves from a
contemptible to be a very potent people. Ptolomaeus Euergetes in the battles
which he had with Seleucus, carried away from the several Cities which he had
spoiled fifty thousand Talents of silver, Hieron. in Esai. 11.
and two thousand five hundred golden Vessels of their Gods. It is incredible
to relate what wealth Alexander the great got from the particular Cities of
Damascus, Pusargad, Babylon, Persepolis, Ecbatana, and other Cities, besides
that treasure which he kept for the maintenance of his own Army, he employed
ten thousand Mules, and five thousand Camels to carry home to Greece the
infinite Talents of silver, Plut. in Alex. Q. Curr. Diod. Sic. Strab.
and gold which he found in the Cities. When Mahomet the great did win
Constantinople, he was astonished at the abundance of wealth wh he met withal,
Knowls in his Turkish history.
and to this day it is a proverb amongst the Turks, that if any one does prove
rich, He has been at the siege of Constantinople. These are the ruins of
estates, which happen upon the loss of Cities; in a moment their keys are
wrested out of their hands, their heaps scattered, and they which were rich
Owners must then wander abroad for relief, and be glad to beg gratuities, or to
kiss the feet of the Adversary for an alms out of his own fullness. And happy
were ye if I could here make an end, and the last Post were arrived, which
could bring evil tidings of the miseries upon taking of Cities; but I must
bring in Jobs fourth Messenger of sad news, for after all other extremities,
conscience at last comes to her punishment, this also must be made a Captive,
and wear the slaves-chain; the walls are not only broken, but the Altars dug
down; men are not only locked out of their houses, but their Temples; their
goods are not only forced from them, but they are deprived of the Pearl; their
liberties are not only lost, but their freedom of the Ordinances; pure
doctrine, and worship, and faith are in bondage, and the soul is enthralled.
Cincta obsidient civitas, and suc^ensa, cum omni ^opu^^, conflagravit. Ens. l.
8. c. 11.
A whole City in Phrygia because it would not yield to Dioclesians decree to
change religion, was compassed about with armed men, and the City, withal the
Citisens in it, burnt to ashes.

In the City of Alexandria, Julian coming to take possession of it, because
the Christians would not turn Heathens, but showed up and down, the skulls of
them which they found were remaining of such as had been sacrificed in the
worship of Mythra, Amicus amicum frater fratrem, parents liberos percutiunt,
and in mutuam caedem corruunt. Socrat. l. 3. c. 2 Victor. de persec. Vandal.
the enraged Heathens wounded most, stoned some, strangled others, some were
slain with a sword, and others were crucified, friend spared not friend, nor
brother his brother, nor Parents their own Children. Hunerick was no sooner
Conqueror, but in all the Cities which he had subdued, he commanded alteration
of religion, and not being obeyed in it, he instantly killed, or banished five
thousand of Bishops, Priests, and men of all orders. Yea, it were infinite to
relate the several cruelties, and tortures, that Cities have undergone in point
of conscience, when they have been enforced to come under the yoke of the
Conqueror. But this is a thing so evident, that there need no OEdipus to
expound the riddle, nor Antiquity searched into to find out the Annals of
forepast miseries; Conscience has been an old slave upon such accidents, men
that will not permute a God, and suffer their faith to be new-stamped, must
either run, or dye for it. Oh then if ever your sins bring in Gods Judgments
into your City, marching rank and file, see the variety of sorrows ye must weep
under; as happily as ye now seem to live, ye must have another face of
wretchedness amongst you; whatsoever present comforts ye now enjoy, yet then
nothing but exigents, and dysasters; your looking-glass will be snatched away,
your Mirror cracked, your bright Diamond shivered in pieces, this goodly City
of yours all in sherds; ye may seek for a threshold of your ancient dwellings,
for a Pillar of your pleasant habitations, and not find them; all your specious
Mansions, and sumptuous Monuments are then gone; not a Porch, Pavement,
Seeling, Tarrasse, Staircase, Gallery, Turret, Lanthorn, Balcony, Bench, piece
of a Skreen, pane of a window, post, nail, stone, or dust of your former houses
to be seen. No, with wringing hands ye may ask, Where are those sweet places,
where we traded, feasted slept? where we lived like Masters, and shone like
Morning-stars? no, the houses are fallen, and the Householders dropped with them;
we have nothing but the naked streets, or naked fields for shelters; not so
much as a Chamber where to lodge a Friend, or to couch down our Children, or
repose our own members when we are spent with weariness, or afflicted with
sickness; Woe unto us, our sins have pulled down our houses, shaken down our
City, we are the most harbourlesse, seatlesse, people in the world; we live
rather like Forraigners, than Natives, yea, rather like beasts, then men. Foxes
have holes, and the fowls of the air have nests, but we have neither holes nor
nests: our sins have deprived us both of couch and covert; we would be glad if
any Hospital or Spittle would receive us; Dens, and Caves, the bleak Air, or
cold ground are now left unto us as our only Shades, and Refuges. But this is
but the misery of stonework, of Arches, Dormans, Roofs; but what will ye say
when it does come to skin work, arms, necks, and bowels? may not your dear
persons come to be joined in the hazard? and your tender persons touched? yes,
ye which have walked the streets in state, may then run the streets in
distraction; ye which have searched out others with severity, may then be
plucked out of corners by others with rigor; ye which have been bowed unto
with reverence, may t^en bend your knees for mercy; with one leg, or half an
arm, ye may beg the preservation of the rest of your members; what inventions
shall ye then be put to, to secure your selves? yea, perhaps what would ye not
give to save your lives? and your tears it may be will not rescue you, nor your
gold redeem you; but your veins must weep as well as your eyes, and your sides
be watered as well as your cheeks; when your sins shall shut up all the
Conduits of the City, and suffer only the Liver Conduit to run; when they allow
you no showers of rain, but showers of blood to wash your streets; when ye
shall see no men of your Incorporation, but the mangld Citisen, nor hear no
noise in your streets, but the cries, the shrieks, the yells, and pants of
gasping, dying men; when amongst the throngs of Associates, and Confederates,
not a man will own you, or come near you; when your Customers will slip from
you, your Friends hide head, and your servants flee out of your fight; when ye
shall see your kindred slain in one place, your wives in another, your children
in a third, and your selves at last, it may be, cut in two, to increase the
number of dead Carcasses: When, as populous as year, ye shall be but numbered
to the sword; as puissant as ye are, the valiant shall be swept away; as sine
fed as ye are, ye shall be fed with your own flesh, and made drunk with your
own blood; when your trespasses have been so outrageous, that vengeance does
deny you a being, that ye are thought fit for nothing but to be killed in the
place, where ye have committed the crimes; and to suffer the pains of death
within those walls which you have cursed with your Sodoms faces, and Egyptian
hard heartedness; when your Politicians can no longer help you, but must have
their subtle brains dashed in pieces with yours, nor your Lecturers can no
longer save you, but ye must meet together at the Congregation near the
Shambles; when this great City shall be but a great Chopping-board to quarter
out the limbs of sinners, or the great Altar wherein a whole City is to be
sacrificed: Oh doleful day of new-painting your walls, new-paving your
streets, new-summoning of a Commonhall; when all are called forth to nothing
but the derision of Adversaries, the insulting of Enemies, to have your breasts
to try the points of spears, your sides the keenness of swords, your heads the
weight of pole axes, your bodies to be made foot-stools, and your dead
carcasses stoppings for truculent Foes to tread and trample upon; when there
will be no pity upon the aged; nor compassion upon the young, but heaps, upon
heaps, tumbling of garments in blood, and swords made fat with slaughter: Oh
see what a crimson City crimson sins will then make. Or if ye do escape the
dint of the sword, and your lives be given you for a prey, shall not your goods
be a prey? yes, some may be reserved out of the greatest massacre; when men are
weary with killing, a retreat may be sounded, and men called off from the
slaughter, yet can ye then challenge your old houses? or bring your keys to
your old Chests? No, your titles are gone, your interests lost; ye have traded
your selves out of your estates, or sinned your selves off your proprieties;
The enemy is now Housekeeper, Land-holder, ye have forfeited all to the sword;
farewell Inheritances, Purchases, Leases, Wares, Wardrobes, Furniture, Jewels;
as ye have gotten perhaps these goods unjustly, so they shall be taken away
unjustly; as ye have fetched them in with violence, so they shall be forced
back with violence; vengeance from heaven will have satisfaction of you for all
your fraudulent bargains, cruel pawns, extorting Morgages, bloodding of
widows, skinning of Orphans; or, as ye have used your goods for pride and
bravery, so ye shall see all your gallantry plucked from you, and your new
fashions wrong from you: ye shall behold others flaunt in your attires, or
spruse up themselves with your curious Dresses; ye your selves may be glad of
the worst sithy Garment ye left behind you; yea perhaps of a cast Garment from
your Adversaries backs; or as ye kept all your estates to your selves, that
though God took you out of the mire, yet having wiped off your own dirt, ye
never pluck out others which stick in the same extremities; which have
forgotten your own beginnings, and being now mounted to sublimity, are good for
nothing but to ride the trappered Horse, or wear Furs; and a great company
of these uncompassionate creatures this City has, that the indigent poor, and
the suffering Gospel, can thank them for little succor, and sympathy; that
when themselves fare deliciously every day, Lazarus cannot get fragments from
them; and when perhaps they have Obadiahs estate, they have not had Obadiahs
heart, but get means greedily, and keep it penuriously. Now these
self-thrifts, how shall divine justice judge them for this parsimony? they
which would grasp all, shall lose all, their close hutches shall be locked up
from him, who has a new key to open them, their cankered gold shall eat them
out of their vast abundance; they shall be driven to live upon alms, and to go
along with the tattered crew (which they contemned) to beg for support and
sustenance; they shall wish, that they had but one spare bag, which all the
cries of the distressed could not make them to open; or that they had but a few
of those mites, which all the tears of necessity could not make them to
scatter abroad; no, they would trust nothing into Gods hand, and God shall shut
up all hands and hearts against them; they had no commiseration, and no eye
shall pity them. If they be not slain in the heap, yet they do but live to see
their own misery; their sins have made them Bankrupts, they are undone, ruined.
And oh that the loss of money were the greatest mischief, but there is a
treasure of greater value in danger, Conscience is ready to be rifled; there is
not an absolute conquest made, till the inward man be in fetters, thou must be
a slave in principles; oh it is an hard thing at that time to be a Jew
inwardly, to keep the girdle of truth about thy loins; thou must then bear the
fruit of the degenerate plant, or strange vine, power out the Drink Offerings
of other sacrificers, follow the sorcery of the Mistress of Witch-crafts, or
learn Magic with them that are brought up in the doctrine of Devils; thou must
limp with the halting age, fit thy mouth to answer the general showt, That
great is Diana of the Ephesians; thou must taunt thine own Father, spit in the
face of thine own Mother, and hiss away all thy true brethren; thou must be
divorced from thy old faith, though never so chaste, and deny Sarah to be thy
wise, though thy espousals with her were never so solemn: the Jews had but
lived a while under the Babylonian, and they soon learned to speak in the
language of Canaan, and the language of Ashdod; the Samaritanes had continued a
very short space under the Assyrian, and they soon worshipped the true God, and
the gods of the Nations; so that corruption in Doctrine quickly does follow
outward subjection, if the City does come under another Lord, the Citizen is
commonly a double slave both in soul and body. That though perhaps many men
care not what become of conscience, that if they could keep their walls, skins,
and purses, they would pawn their souls to any Broker, they have a Religion
sitted for any ages and accidents. Yet they to whom profession is dearer then
the right eye, and the purity of the Gosspell then the lifeblood; is not this
an heavy punishment? Yes? if the soul be the darling, and there be no more
dangerous chase, then the hunting of souls (and what shall a man give in
exchange of his soul?) then it is a mortal wound to have the soul stabbed; Oh
miserable age, if this hour of temptation should come upon you, that men should
be led away with the error of the wicked, and fall from their own
steadfastness; yea for outward respects, make shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience; yet thus it will be then, there will be no safety for incontaminate
faith, thou will either be a Nicodenus to come to Christ by night, or if with
Daniel, thou do open thy windows publicly toward Jerusalem, thou will be
cast into the Den of Lions; Ecelolius will then turn Renegade, and Marcelline
will hazard to cast in his grains of incense to Idols, Demas will forsake all
for this present world, S Peter himself will scarce be a Saint in the
Judgement-hall, but for fear of a Damsel forswear Christ. Thou will then be a
complicated and complete slave, a slave in thy house, a slave in thy person, a
slave in thy estate, and a slave in thy conscience. Oh therefore if it be
possible, shut the City gates before judgment does enter, or meet the enemy
afar off, before he draw nigh to the City; for if tears, and prayers, and
reformation, do not stop his passage, here will be variety of miseries ye see,
at his sudduing the City; there must be an eminency of repentance, or else
there will be an eminency of wrath; it will be That great Visitation, for it is
That great City. Should not I spare Nineveh, that great City?

4. This serves to show, that as eminency is dear unto God, so it ought to be
unto us: Oh that God would spare a City that is eminent, and that we will spare
nothing that is eminent; that eminency begets in us the greater envy, and
eminency is to us a kind of execration; that we take a delight in abasing, and
defacing that which is eminent; that Temples, Sacraments, the verdict of
Antiquity, and the primitive Presidents have been contemned by us; yea, as Job,
though there was not the like unto him upon earth, had his three Philosophical
friends arguing him into an Hypocrite: many Saints that have excelled upon
earth, and which no doubt have been put into Gods book of remembrance, and
shall be made up amongst his Jewels, how have they here been underprized by our
Lapidaries, and cast by like stones of no luster? if we should turn up the
Grave-stones, or knock at the Tombs of the deceased, how many precious
creatures may we find there buried with rage, whom the earth looked upon with
reverence, and the Angels with pleasure? were not these things the practices of
former ages? Yes, Cain, where is thy brother Abel? Doeg, where is Abimelech,
and the Priests of Nob? Ahab, where is Naboth the Jezraelite? Judas, where is
thy Master? Achan, where is the Babylonish Garment, and the golden wedge?
Baltasar, where are the vessels of the Sanctuary? Antochus, where is the Altar
of the Lord, which thou did profane and defile? oh sad Quaeries! Have not
Heathens detested the abusing or contemning of that waich is eminent? yes, it
was a scandal to Phayllus, to take away the Jewel of Minerva, Parchen. de
Amat. 25.
and to give it to the wife of Ariston: And to the Senate of Rome, that by open
decree they burned the Books of Numa concerning the pontisiciall right, and the
discipline of wisdom, which were found by accident in the field of L.
Petilius; Precium librorum Domino Olvendum statait; id s^riba non accepit. Live.
Dec. 4. l. 10.
for though the price of the Books was appointed to be given to the Lord of the
Fee, yet the Scribe would not receive it. And so was it to Appius Claudius, for
casting the south-saying Chickens into the Sea, which did not tripudiate, pick
up their crumbs with a rebound: for for his jeer that he made in hurling the
Chickens into the water, namely, that seeing they could not eat, he bad them go
drink enough; it is reported that he lost that great Battle which he fought
with Adberbal the Carthiginian, in which so many were slain and taken,
Sabellic. l. 9. Aenead. 4.
that there were but thirty remaining to flee with him out of the field, to
make his escape: Pheron the King of Egpyt, does hear ill amongst the Heathen,
for casting but a Spear into Nilus, Herod. l. 2.
when it rose eighteen foot high, for it is said, He was presently struck
blind. And so does Cambyses, for striking at Apts with his sword, Fulgos. l. 1.
c. 2.
for mounting his horse, it is said with the same weapon he wounded his thigh,
of which he ^yed; and so does Zerxes, Nerodot. l. 6.
for whipping Neptune, and threathing to eclipse the Sun, for for this very
thing, their Histories relate he lost his great Army of ten hundred thousand
persons. And so does Heligoabalus, for forcing a Vestall Virgin to marry him,
and for fetching the Palladium, Fulgos. l 1. c. 2
(which was a thing so sacred, that it was never seen but once, namely when a
sire happened upon the Temple of Peace) home to her, and for endeavoring to
put out the Vestal sires; for for this (say they) his Soldiers after rose
against him, killed him in a privy, dragged his body up and down the streets,
to brothel houses, and at last cast it into Tiber. Cicer. Philip. 13.
How infamous amongst them are C. Plancus, for defacing the Senate House?
Manlius, for razing the Statues, Plut. in Man lio. Valor. Max.
Theaters, and Monuments of Rome? Erostratus, for burning the Temple of Diana,
to get himself a name by it? The very Heathen, abhorred those persons which
injured or dishonored that which was precious; for they expressed a kind of
sacred reverence toward any thing was eminent. Vnus sabricius, is est qui
difficilius a sua virtute dimoveatur, quam sol a consucto suo cursu. Suidas.
Fabricius so honored Phyrrhus his enemy, that one of his Soldiers stealing
by night into the Camp of Fabricius, and offering to poison his own Master, the
noble General so hated the motion, that he sent him again to Pyrrbus bound, to
receive condign punishment. Demetrius could not be drawn to break in pieces
that famous Picture of Protogenes, called Jasylus which was 7 years in the
drawing, Plut.
saying, That he came to sight with Rhodians, and not with Pictures: Vispasian,
though Josephus had done his Army all the mischief that he could at Jotapata,
yet when the Town was taken, he caused him to be diligently sought out, and
being brought to his presence, he expressed to him the highest honor, Jos. l.
de vita ejus ad sinem.
and at last set up his statue in the Library. Doriaeus Rhodius, a famous Sea
Captain, being taken in a Sea-sight by the Athenians, Pausan. l. 6.
for the very glory of his name was set at liberty without ransom. Alexander
blushed, beholding a Persian weep, to see the rich Table of Darius made the
foot stool to Alexanders Throne, and with a kind of modesty removed the Table,
Q. Curt.
out of honor to the use that it had formerly been employed in. Titus, though
an Heathen, yet highly esteemed the Temple of Jerusalem, Josephus.
and was beyond measure grieved, that the obstinacy of the Jews within in
forced it to be destroyed,; yea he wept bitterly, when he saw the Sanctum
Sanctorum fired, accounting it the most glorious sight which ever his eyes
beheld, So that amongst Paynims we may see the due regard, that has been
testified by men of worth to magnificent things, or illustrious persons, and
yet that nothing amongst us is eminent, or venerable; that we take pleasure in
tearing down top branches, tumbling down Spires, cropping the fairest flowers
of the Garden, spilling Quintessences, and trampling upon Gems and Jewels, that
neither ornaments, nor monuments, pillarsnor palaces, Tombs nor Temples,
Priestsnor Saints, the most ennobled things, or endowed persons, can escape our
disdain or rage; that our glory is in shame, even in contemning that which all
ages have honored, and our forefathers (the most wise and virtuous amongst
them) valued and celebrated; If this be worth, what is pride? If this be
reverence, what is arrogance? neither nature, nor grace, would teach us thus to
mock at our Progenitors, and to call all generations past blind, or mad: was
there never a judicious Protestant before us? or shall wisdom take her first
breath, or last gasp with us? was never grace before in the Church? did the
spirit, begin to blow, and flame, and anoint only in these days? if there
were any good thing, or good man conveyed unto us from former times, why have
they been so dis-esteemed? How are the Churches abiliments gone, even to her
swadling-clouts? How are the Martyrs legacies swallowed up, even to the laver
they gave to newborn Infants? Our Savior (the Jews said) had a Devil, and
what Saint has not seemed to be possessed? How many Stars, though never so
bright, shine in their proper Orbs? how many Angels, though never so celestial,
watch over their true Churches? What are Gifts, Graces, Mortification,
Devotion, Evangelicall Doctine, or Angelical ecstasies, days dedicated to
piety, and persons consecrated to contemplation with some people? How are the
mighty overthrown, and the weapons of war destroyed? oh tell it not in Gath,
nor publish it not in the streets of Askelon, lest the Daught rs of the
uncircumcised triumph, lest Rome should say, that her Inquisition, or Stakes,
could not have made a quicker dispatch of eminent Protestants, than our
differences and passions: Oh let us be so far reconciled, that God, the spirit,
repentance, innocence, zeal, supernatural affections, and fruits, all pious
things, and heavenly persons may have just esteem; let men have worth in their
cyes, and preciousnesse in their hearts, to tender and honor every thing that
is prime, and has a pre-eminence sealed upon it. God, ye see, would here spare
Ninev h, because it had eminency in it, it was That great City. Should not I
spare Nineveh, that great City?

Fifthly, This does show, That we all ought to aim at eminency, that seeing
(That great City) was so acceptable to God, we should look to be of the new
Corporation, to have the best Burgesship, to be Citizens with the Saints, and
of the household of God. That it may be said, these are the men of an excellent
spirit, Prove. 17.27. A Kingdom of Priests, Exodus 19.6. which walk worthy of
the Lord, Col. 1.10. of whom this world is not worthy, Heb. Laus, and vita omni
commendatione superior Monod. Greg. Naz. in vit. Basil. Ejus virtutem pro lege
fere omnes habuerunt. Id. ibid. Totius patriae decus. Amb. in Orat. sun. de ob.
Satyri. Nunc in Pauli chorum pervenerunt ante Coronas suas. Chrysostom. Adv.
Jud. Orat. ^.1.1. Solvamus bono principi stependarias lachrymas. Amb. de obit.
Valent. Orat. fun. t. 3.
11.38. and which are counted worthy to obtain that world, Luke 20.35. Oh rare
Worthies! when praise and life is above commendation! yea when men come to such
an exactness of conversation, that their virtue is to the world as a Lan lyea,
their graces are so resplendent, that they brighten the place where they dwell,
and are as it were the Ornaments of the whole Country! Yea, they seem to be in
heaven, before their translation, and to be in the Quire of Paul, before they
receive their Crowns; they have the affectionate votes of the people whilst
they live, and their stipendary ^ears when they dye! Oh what Magnifico like to
such a Professor? What Citizen like to such a Saint? What are all these
glorious structures, to the lively stones of God's building? what are your
artificial Ornaments to spiritual endowments? what is the magnificence of a
City, to the prerogative of adoption? no, the robe of Righteousness does excel
all your Mercers wares, one ingot of grace is to be preferred before all the
wealth of your City. Oh therefore a less number of Traders, and a greater of
Gospellers; fewer Citizens, and more Saints. For what conspicuousnesse like to
that of Religion? what eminency like to that of Regeneration? no, if ye want
your Christian interest, ye have only parchment privileges, your happiness
does not go beyond your City-walls. The savor of lise unto life, is not to be
bought amongst all your Perfumers, the true Pearl is not to be purchased from
all your Jewellers: Oh therefore that I could cause you to take the true City
oath, and make you true freemen in heaven, otherwise your best tenure is in a
painted Portall, and your heaven is in an Exchange; ye are never enfranchised,
till ye have the liberties of redemption; nor right Traders, till ye are making
bargains at the free mart of the spirit; nor wealthy Citizens, till ye have
the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Oh then that ye would
remove your Traffic, have your (...), your City commerce, or conversation in
heaven; that ye would seek for durable riches, bags that do not wax old, a
stock of graces, these are greater riches then the treasures of Egypt; that ye
would think your security to consist not in Bulwarks, Stantious maentnibus,
mentibus, morthus. ^ug. de civitate. Dei lab. 1. c. 33. Non Imperatorem, sed
salui m er^plamputabant. ^g. in in orat sun. de obit. Valent.
but in the Towers of your religious constancy, that ye might say, our walls,
spirits, consciences, and conversations are remaining firm; that your
demonstrations might be so celestial, as people might be drawn to bless you
whilst ye are living, and to bewail you when ye are dead, that they might think
that not only your persons, but salvation almost were taken from them at your
departure, as Saint Ambrose said of Valentinian. Think not of your City that
had a first Builder, but think of the City which has foundations; whose
builder and maker is God; think not upon your City-seal, but the seal of the
living God. Oh remember that this City has keys too, for without shall be
dogs; therefore be so qualified, that ye may enter in through the gates into
the City: Oh happy thou that do go in this City-Livery, that art a prime
Citisen in this Corporation, for then thou art risen to the height, thy soul
is blessed; God will spare That great Saint for his eminency, when for eminency
he does spare That great City. Should not I spare Nineveh, that great City?

Sixthly, this shows that Repentance does present to Gods ey every thing in
us that might draw compassion, as Niceveh here being penitent, God has before
him all the motives, which might incline him to spare it, it was a City, a
great City, and that great City; that as the women from the wall had variety of
arguments why Abel should be spared, and the woman of Tekoah why Absalon should
be called from banishment, and Bathsheba why Solomon should be designed to the
Throne, so repentance does exhibit to God all the instances, impulsions,
instigations, extimulations, that should make God propense to favor; As it is
the nature of a Rhetorician to speak not only ^acunde elegantly, but aecunde
fluently, Pectus refertum habuit Plato. Victor. var. Lect. l. 9. c. 5. In
instruendo dislipatus esset. Cicero in Bruto Sttabo. l. 13.
and completely to a business, it being said of Plato, that he had a stored
breast, and of Curio, that he was ample in giving informa^io^; and of ^yctamus
the Scholar of Aristotle (who was afterward called Theophrastus, he Divine
speaker) that with all manner of suavity he could speak fully to the subjects
which he did handle; So repentance is copious in setting out a Penitent with
all his adjuncts, and appurtenances, inferences, and references to make him
acceptable. Polycrates when he presented the mother of a Soldier which dyed in
the Wars to a rich Citisen of Samos, (...). Eras. in Adg.
he delivered her with these terms, I give this Mother to thee to maintain,
and all the good services of the Soldier were rehearsed. Plato undertaking to
bring AEschynes into favor, who had been a long time neglected in the Court of
Dionysius, he used all his Rhetoric to ingratiate him, telling the Prince that
he was a man of profound judgment, Plut. de disc^n adult.
one of strict life, and that he had traveled a great way to wait upon him,
yea, nothing was omitted to endeere him Fabius Maximus, that he might be set
out with his due honor, being brought into the City by the greatest Concourse
of Senators and people, he was desired to make a stand in the open
Marketstead; where, by the invention of Aretius, there was a stately Monument
set up for the people to gaze upon, and every thing related that was praise
worthy in him, as that he had been Aedile, Censor, Valor. Maxim.
Tribune of the Soldiers, Pontifex, Augur, five times Consul, and twice
Diclatour; and that in his time he had taken Tarentum, subdued the Ligurians;
so restored the battle, when Minucius was flying, that he was called the
Father of the Army; so vanquished Hannibal, that he might be styled the
Deliverer of the Roman Empire. Pompey at his triumph (which was the greatest
that ever I read) had every thing brought in that might express the glory of
it, there was represented to the people his Victories over Pontus, Armenia,
Cappadocia, Paphlagonia, Media, D^ universo orbis unbitu triumphasse visas est,
quod memini profe^^o pisum est usquam. Plut. in Pompeio. Plut. in Antonio.
Cholers, Iberia, Albania, Syria, Cilicia, Mesopotamia, Phoenicia, Palestina,
Arabia; and that he had conquered a 1000 Castles, 900 Cities, 800 Piratical
ships, and that in Africa, Asia, and Europe, he had done such wonders, that he
seemed to triumph over all the World. Cleopatra when she prepared her self to
go meet Mark Authony, that the Majesty of such a glorious appearance might be
fully known, there is described every thing that might witness her Princely
Pomp, namely, that she sailed down the River Cydnus in a bark overlaid with
gold, the Oars being of pure silver, the Cables of silk, the sails of purple,
the odours so costly, that they perfumed the banks sides with sweet smells, her
maids of honor attired all like Nymphs, and her self sitting under a Tent of
gold, did seem to be the very De^ty of beauty; But never any Narration,
Triumph, or Spectacle did ever so decipher, and delineate a thing, as
Repentance does all thy motions, affections, prepararations, passages, and
perfections. God has an observing eye over a Penitent, and does exarate, and
can enumerate all his manifestations; he has bottles for thy tears, files for
thy Petitions, witnesses for thy vows, baggs for thine alms, and books for thy
actions. He that made the ear, does he not hear? Does he not see my ways, and
count all my steps? are not these things written in thy book? does he not
search the heart, and reins? Scientia relative dicitur ad scibile. Tho. Aq. p.
1. q. 14. art. 15. Alternante conceptu. Aug. de Trim. l. 15. c. 14.
Can there any thing be concealed from him? flee his notice? or be
undiscernable to his all seeing eye? No, Knowledge is relative to that which is
sci^ile, a thing is no sooner perceptible, but God does apply his understanding
to it, not by a variable conception, but by present insight; he which does know
infinite things, must needs know in thee such things as have both initiation,
and termination. Oh penitent then see how God does look upon thee, look thee
through, search thee, and mark thee, that every thing thou do, does come to
his notice, and is under his eye. If thou would be seen with comfort, and
seen completely, turn Penitent; for repentance is an object, that is never out
of Gods clear, distinct, and district view; here Gods eye is piercing, and
fixed. Josiah does no sooner humble himself, but every melting in his breast,
and slash in his garments is considered; the Publican does no sooner approach
to God, but his distance, his dejection, his blushing, his knocking, and his
humble tone is taken notice of. Hezekiah does no sooner apprehend judgment,
but his turning his face to the wall, his pious gales, and calling upon God for
an approbatory remembrance are called to mind; Mary Magdalen does no sooner
seek reconciliation, but her modest gesture, her torrent of tears, her
head-spun napkin, and her passionate kisses are spoken of; yea, Ahab is but an
Actour upon this Stage, and his personating of repentance is called upon to be
discerned, for, See thou not how Ahab is humbled? Oh then that thou could
repent, that thou did repent, should thou not be apprehended? yes, though
before thou were never looked upon, or seen with delight; yet then thou
should have Gods eye of grace, and his eye of inspection, his bright and his
broad eye fastened upon thee. Return, return, oh ye Shulamite, return, return;
that we may look upon thee. Cant. 6.13. the returning Shulamite is a creature
sit for the heavenly gaze, God will look upon her, and not pass the least
thing, that is remarkable in her; six his eyes, and feed his eyes upon her,
consider her beauty, and admire her new-acquired greatness, speak like one
affected, and ravished with her. Who is she, that looks forth as the morning,
fair as the Moon, clear as the Su^, terrible as an army with banners Cant.
6.10. Oh then so soon as thou have but cast thy self at Gods feet, God does
stoop down to take thee up; so soon as thy sacrifice is laid upon the coals of
the Altar, the smoke of it does ascend to Heaven; so soon as thou do but lay
hold on thy Savior, be it but upon the hem of his Garment, yet he is sensible
of thy first feeling of him, though with some remoteness. Who is this that
has touched me? for virtue is gone out of me. God is privy to the least
address, and the smallest expression that ever thou did make, when thou
did desire an union with him. He knows the first turning up the flag, when
thou did break up thy fallow ground; and the first gash that was made, when
the circumcising knife did cut off thy uncircumcised foreskin; he can tell thee
thy conception, thy quickening, thy birth, the first drawing at the breast, lying
in the Cradle standing upon thy feet, growing up to ripe years, and performing
the manlike acts of a Penitent. He can repeat to thee thy checks, thy
conflicts, thy groans, thy protestations, thy supplications, thy fruitfulness,
thy fervency, thy watchfulness. Oh then if God has all things under his eye,
how can repentance be rejected, or despised? no, depend upon thy repentance,
trust, and rest upon it, jeopard a soul, and venture heaven upon it, think thy
state is secure, thy bliss infallible, for God will examine thy repentance to
find out all the assurances for thy justification, as in his plea for Nineveh,
he does urge all the arguments and ratifications for the sparing of it, as that
it was a City, a great City, and That great City. Should not I spare Nineveh,
that great City?

Seventhly, This does show, That no earthly eminency is certain, for God once
spared Nineveh, that great City, but now that great City is wasted: Nineveh
nunc tota est vastata. Hayt. de Tartaris. l. 12. Funditus periit. Pappus in 3.
Jon. Centum annis ad concionem Jonae acta paenitentia paenam sibi denuntiatam
evadebat. Verum cum felici rerumsuccessu elata ad vomitum rediret, excusso
timore Dei, Dominum tandem usciscentem experta est. Pappus. in a Nahum. Carthw.
Hist.
some say that Mosul is built out of the ruins of it, as Tunis is said to be
built out of the ruins of Carthage: howsoever the old Nineveh is demolished.
Haiton says, it is wholly decayed, Pappus says it is utterly perished; for he
says, Repentance at the preaching of Jonah, saved it for an hundred years, but
afterward being puffed up with happy success, it felt an avenging God.
Carthwright which lately traveled into those parts, says, That he saw but
some pieces, and broken walls remaining of it, and that Almutsal, or (as we
call it) Mosul, was built upon the same place where it once stood. The most
judicious Writers hold, that after Arbaces had taken it from Sardanapalus, it
did continue under the Medes in some flourishing condition, till the time of
Cyaxares, the son of Phraartes, who began to destroy it, and Astyages his son
levelled it with the ground. O then what stability is there in any earthly
greatness? That great City has had both her Obit and her Funeral, yea, there
is scarce an urne remaining where we may find her ashes, (...).
or a Tombstone upon which we might write her Epitaph. What pleasure then in
smelling of these Nosegayes, or looking with delight upon the brightness of
these falling stars? Why do put water into a riven vessel? That nothing was
seen scarce remaining of it. Cyril. Alex. in Nahum. M. Gregory in his
description of the Assyrian Monarchy, says, That if Ninus which built Nineveh
were now alive, he should find the City to be so fallen into mine, that he
would not know it to be Nineveh. Cur perforato aquam dolio ingeris? Chrysostom. Hom.
77. in Matthew. Alba ligustra cadunt. Virg. Ecce mundus, qui diligitur, sugit.
Greg.
this world is cracked, and split, and can hold nothing in it long, the whitest
stowers welk and drop. It is much we can enter into league, or vow familiarity
to such a mutable friend. Behold the world which is loved, does flee away. We
do but warm our selves at a blaze, borrow our light from a melting Candle,
travail with a fugitive guides these Musks will lose their sent, this juicy
meat will turn into dung, this keeper of our treasure will prove a Thief; our
best buildings here stand upon a weak pinning, our richest Garments are
stitched up with a rotten thread, our strongest-ships are subject to Leakes; how
soon will these mists be exhaled, these bright days be obscured with dark
night, these pleasant Comedies be acted out? Oh that our hearts could trample
upon this earth, as well as our feet do; that our consciences could renounce
the world, as well as our profession does, that we could wear St Paul's Crucifix
about our necks, I am crucified to the world, and the world to me! How many
great families have we seen decay? how many great Cities have we found laid in
the dust? Baldness is come upon Gazah, Jer. 47.5. How is Sheshach taken, the
praise of the whole earth? Jer. 51.41. What City like to Tyrus? yet she
destroyed in the midst of the flood, Ezech 28.8. Babylon the glory of Kingdoms,
the beauty of the Chaldees excellency, yet she that cried a Lady sure for ever,
is now but a poor Madam; The hammer of the whole earth is cut asunder and
broken, Ier. 50.23. Yea, Nineveh that was the Crown Imperial of the whole
world, has now lost her Diadem, That great City, has not one of her thousand
five hundred Towers, or one of her splendid Palaces to be seen: Oh then why are
ye enamoured upon your beautiful Empress? do ye dwell here in the enchanted
City? are ye out of the dint of vengeance? do ye fear no judgments? what
should make you so confident? Nineveh's circuit was more large, her walls more
strong, her streets more populous, her treasures more abundant, and her
dominion more ample then yours; then may not ye drop, as well as Nineveh is
fallen? Are your sins less? No, ye have four sins within your walls, (and
yet I will except fraud, pride, partiality, and bribery) that shall justify
Neneveh from being the more guilty sinner. Four sins? What are they? I know
ye are good at asking of questions, and apter to sciscitate, than to eliminate;
therefore because I have often heard you told of these things, and yet I could
never see you blush at these things, but rather rage; not softened with
ministerial zeal, but rather hardened, therefore I shall not speak where the
Lord has commanded to keep silence, Amos 5.13. nor throw abroad his Pearls,
but where he has directed me to cast them, nor impart his holy things, but
where he has enjoined me to give them, Mat. 7.6. If ye command the Prophets,
saying, prophecy not, Amos 2.12. and the times be come about that no man must
strive, nor reprove another, for the people are as they which strive with their
Priest, Hos. 4.4. Then why should we reiterate that which we have had preached
upon the housetop? and made plain upon Tables? for fear therefore I should be
charged to bring in railing accusation; I shall-say only as Michael did, when
he contended with the Devil about the body of Moses, The Lord rebuke thee. But
these sins are such, that if ye had walls of brass, and guards of Anakims; they
will make every beam of your-houses, and every stone in your buildings, cry out
confusion to you. Ye have nothing but conversion to preserve you, and I doubt
whether ever I shall see Ninevehs repentance amongst you. Oh that the Jonah
were born, that could cry effectually in your streets! oh that the Auditors
were yet so prepared, that they could listen to a message from heaven with
Ninevehs ears! oh be ye smitten grove-long to the earth, wallow your selves in
the ash heap, weep till a, tear more cannot melt out of your eyes, reform,
till there be not one sin left for conscience to turn new spy unto, and so
may repentance be your preservative, a kind of Guardian Angel to the City,
with Nineveh ye may yet be spared. But if ye be spared, I wish ye not to be
secure; for if your repentance should intermit or abate in the vigor, if ye
should fast and fall to your old riot, or put on sackcloth and change this
sackcloth into new fashions, or cry mightily unto God and cry but till the
judgment be removed, or turn from your evil ways, and wax as exorbitant as
ye were before, and forbear from the violence that is in your hands, and then
become as club-fisted as ever; the renewing of your former sins, will but
renew your former dangers; therefore your repentance must not only be fervent,
but firm; not only unfeigned, but unchangeable; for remember Loths wife,
remember Nineveh, she humbled her self, and was pardoned; she repented, and was
spared; but she repented but for a time, and was spared but for a time; she
turned again to be Nineveh the wicked, and she happened to be Nineveh the
miserable; a temporary repentance, procured for her but a temporary safety. God
aid not cry the second time, nor send a new Jonah to her, but he sent a curse
instead of a cry, and desolation instead of a Prophet; she is now ruined into
That great heap, that was spared, because she was That great City. Should not I
spare Nineveh, that great City?

3d General part.
Wherein are more then sixscore thousand persons, which cannot discern betwixt
their right hand, and their left hand, and also much cattle.

Now let us come to the description: Wherein are more, etc. In which observe
these two particulars.

First, The principal commodities. Wherein are more then sixscore thousand
persons, which cannot discern between their right hand, and their left hand.

Secondly, The less principal commodities: And also much cattle.

First for the principal commodities: in which these parts are considerable.
1. The receptacle, Wherein. 2. The season, Are. 3. The treasures, Persons. 4.
The quantity, Sixscore thousand. 5. The surplus, More. 6. The qualifications,
Which cannot discern betwixt their right hand, and their left hand.


Wherein.
First, for the Receptacle, Wherein. Elsewhere had been no credit to Nineveh,
but that Nineveh was the place, in which such choice things are to be found,
this is honor, Wherein. From hence observe, that Happiness must carry with it
an Appropriation; the Appropriation is the approbation of it, yea, the
apprehension, and (as I may call it) the appurtenancy of it; that is the most
beneficial Jewel, which is worn about our own neck, and the comfortable
light, Intus ca^are. Tullius.
which does shine in our own Horison! That is the best music, when men do sing
within; he is a pitiful mason which does build for others, and has not an
house to hide his head in, and a lamentable tilth-man, which does plow, and sow
for others, and has not at the latter end of the year any crop of his own to
reap: what matter though thousands be recorded for fortunate persons, if thy
name be not put into the Catalogue? Nos es in illo albo. Plinius. Mihi ipsi
balneam ministrabo. Aristoph. A te tua cura and consideratio inchoet, ne
frustra extendaris in alios, te neglecto. Bern. de Consid. ad Eugen. Quid nobis
cum alieno? Greg. Naz.
or that never such great multitudes are in the bath, if thou do not step in
with them? A man has joy by the answer of his mouth. Prove. 15.23. when a man's
own mouth can speak satisfactorily, and feelingly for that which should truly
bless. Let thy care, and consideration begin at thy self, lest in vain thou
be busy about others, thy self being neglected. Let us know amongst our
selves what is good, as Elihu says. Job 34.4. Particular experience is beyond
general relation. Why should thou destroy thy self? Eccles. 7.16. He does
destroy himself, which does not principally make sure, that which is proper for
his own preservation. What have we to do with that, which is foreign? He that
hears of much, and acquireth nothing, is like the fool, which foldeth his
hands together, and eats his own flesh. Eccles. 4.5. for should he only see
other men put meat into their mouths, and not feed himself; yes, his mouth
craveth it of him. Prove. 16.26. That which a man does possess is his proper
advantage, for neither welfare nor honor, law nor gospel, peace of
conscience, nor the joys of Heaven are useful to us, if we have not a proper
title to them. Therefore let not the blessing be mistaken, but let it be
individually our own, as ye see it was Ninevehs happiness to have this felicity
with a restriction, or in the proper ubi, Wherein.

Application.
First this does reprove them, which know blessings only by hearsay; there are
places that have them, but do they center at home? can they say of their own
station, Wherein? No, they have a rumor of much by report, but have nothing in
their own enjoyment? and is not this a wandering kind of comfort? Domestica
mala graviora sunt, quam ut lachrymas recipiant. Herod. l. 3. Se suos
discipulos docere december minis; verum qui ipsum docerent citra timidit atem
loqui, se ei daturum centum minas. E^asm. Plut. in Apoph.
to see fullness abroad, and want at home? yes, domestical miseries are
greater, then can be expressed by tears; as, Psammenitus told Cambyses. Oh that
we should live by the gazel or satisfy our selves by an extraneous welfare!
What is this but like Isocrates, which taught all his scholars resolution in
pleading, for ten pounds, but he would give him an hundred pounds (out of a
sense of his own timidity) which could teach him the like courage; if we be
satisfied with the endeavors of others to attain to great things, and have not
the like affections to make our selves happy, we are but like the fishes,
gladioli, as Themistocles said of Eretrienses, which carry a sword upon their
backs, but have no heart within. Oh therefore let us not be given too much to
visit the state of others; but let our eyes be in our heads to observe our own
condition, whether the right blessing be in the right place. Let every man
prove his own work, that he may have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in
another. Gal. 6.4. Oh let us not talk of dainties, and taste no delicacies our
selves; or speak of banks, and have no treasures in our own possession; or tell
tales of Heaven, and have no heavenly interest, and evidences; for this were
but to be imaginarily happy, or implicitly blessed. Therefore let us plead out
our own entail to felicity, and bring it home to the proper place, as Nineveh
here had it rightly seared; for, Wherein.

Secondly, this does show that some do enjoy distinct felicity; for though this
were no where else to be seen, yet in Nineveh it was to be found, Wherein. The
Lord does rain upon one City, Hac te mensa oivitas honorat. Plut. in Lycurgo.
Suidas. Sabel. l. 5. c. 3.
and not upon another! The wind blows where it lists. God does distribute
to every one, as he pleases. Amongst the Spartanes, they were persons highly
favored, which got the public Banquet, to whom it was said, The City does
honor thee with this Feast. They were men specially respected by the
Athenians, which were graced so far as to have entertainment in the Prytaneum.
It was L. Minutius only, that got the golden bullock; Cromer. l. 5.
and Zelislaus that had by Bodislaus the 3d, the golden hand given him for his
valor. What should I speak of more? Particular preheminences happen, as God
does command the blessing. Levit. 25.21. oh then, be ye privy to your own
privileges, Vti datis, tanquam innatis. Bern.
use not things conferred, as if they were inbred. For do ye hold all things in
Frank-almoigne, and yet will yet not know your own Benefaciour? are blessings
Donatives, and yet will ye not acknowledge your distinguishing God? yes, such
things as cannot be espied elsewhere, are seen in you; as those things, which
other places were destitute of, were enjoyed in Nineveh; for Wherein.

Thirdly, this does show, that greatness does not consist in bare title, but
in effectual demonstration, for Nineveh is not only That great City, but that
great Receptacle, Wherein. To have a name to live, and to be dead, is to be but
a great stinking Carrion. If a man thinks himself to be something, and is
nothing, he deceives himself. Gal. 6.3. that is, he is but the great Cheat of
himself; for, for all his great thoughts, he is but the great
Something-Nothing. They are not leaves, but fruits, which justify the figtree,
Matt. 21.19. they are not fancies, but fruition, which reallize comfort. There
are a generation of men, which are pure in their own eyes, but if their purity
do reach no further then their own fight, they are the botches of the World;
their own eyes see that in them, which is not elsewhere visible; they are
Saints of their own glimmering, their purity does not reach beyond their own
eylids. The young man, that cries out Good Master, what shall I do to inherit
eternal life, must not think to carry eternal life with a grand question; no,
this is but like a young man's vapor, or a busy headed Critic; eternal life
does require more then scepticall Divinity; he must be as great in acting, as
he was in scrupling, or else that will happen to him which did happen to the
young Questioner, to go away sorrowful. It is not enough to say with Laodicea,
I am rich, and increased with goods, and stand in need of nothing, but we must
be as rich in conscience, as we are in confidence, or else Laodicea's doom will
light upon us, to be wretched, miserable, Grande Apollini^ t^mplum natat, and
quocunqu^ vento pellicur. Pomn. Mela. l. 10. in descript Aegypti. Plut. in vita
Phocionis. M^^tus probas honesta, suam s^queris. Seneca. ep. 21.
poor, blind, and naked; if Laodicea has no other goods but those which are
locked up in her own protestations, and asseverations, she is but rich only in
tongue; such great conceited Creatures are but like the great Temple of Apollo
in the Island Chemnis, which wanting a foundation is puffed up and down, with
every gust of wind; or there is nothing left in them (as Antipater said of
Demades the Orator) but just as there was in the sacrifices of the Heathen,
besides the belly and the tongue; they only approve of good things, but do not
pursue them. Oh, woe to them then which are only voiced up to be great; but
setting aside their own tumor, and the peoples rumor there is no greatness
to be seen in them. Shall these go for great Professors? no, great Impostours.
Great expressions must justify great titles, as Nineveh was called That great
City, and has great things to be manifested in it, it was a singular
Receptacle, Wherein.

Are.
2. Now let us come to the Season, Are. Wherein are. Not there were, but there
are. From hence observe, that present bliss is the honored bliss. There is
no remembrance of former things. Eccles. 1.11. no, former things are decayed,
and so their glory is vanished with them; what operation in spent druggs? what
taste in dead wine? a sithy garment is fit to be left off, a withered beauty is
not looked upon with an eye of pleasure. Vortuna peracta Jam su^. Virgil.
Cyathus exiccatus: Diphil. pereundi mill figurae. Ovid.
Who can call him Owner that has wasted his estate? or Conqueror, that has
lost the Field? no, that which is wanting cannot be numbered. Eccles. 1.15.
Felicity is then extinct, the full bowl of welfare is drunk out to the last
drop, there is nothing left but a thousand perishing figures to be seen. What
beauty is in a consumed thing? No, desolate Babylon is like the raiment of them
which are slain, thrust through with a sword. Es. 14.19. Broken Moab is like a
vessel wherein there is no pleasure. Jer. 48.38. That is the true happiness
therefore, which is come to no diminution, or abatement, where the spring does
not fail, but the waters are sure. Esa. 33.16. where the clusters are not
lessened, but the presses are full, and the fats overflow. Joel. 3.13. where
the might, and magnificence, honor, and splendor of a people is as apparent
as ever; when not former, but present times do shine with bright felicity.
Wherein are.

Application.
1. This does show in the first place the stablenesse of Gods providence, it is
as easy for him to continue, as to convey a blessing. Nineveh had been happy,
and Nineveh still is happy, Wherein are. Would we not fly from God, he would
never be weary of spreading his wings over us, would we not cast off his
protection, we might continually take Sanctuary in him. The eternal would be
our refuge, and we should be safe under his everlasting arms. Deu. 33.27. he
would settle blessings upon us by a covenant of salt, Number. 18.19. As we have
reigned in many privileges, so he would build up our Throne to all
generations, Deus cum temporibus, and rebus non concidet, alius ex alio factus;
sed invertibilis in vertibilibus est. Naz. in Orat. de s^ipto. Quiequid capit,
non des^it, quin perfecisset. Semper stare, and nunquam cecidisse, divinum est
and mirabile. Chrysostom. Hom. 77. in Matthew.
Psalm. 89.4. Yea, he would set our Tabernacle in the Sun. For God does not
alter with times, and chances, being made another than he was, but he does
remain unchangeable in the most changeable conditions. As it is said of Portius
Latro, that what he undertook he never gave it over, till he had perfected it;
so Gods providence is as consummative, as operative: he would not only be the
God of comforts, but the God of constancy; not the God of Aids, but the God of
Ages,. I am that I am, immutable, invariable. And is this nothing to have
interminable felicity? Yes, Ever to stand, and never to fall, is a divine and
miraculous thing. Yet this might be our fixed state, if we would perpetuate our
obedience; we might weave out our web to the last thread, write Decades of
felicity. God would never disturb or interrupt our happiness, if our sins
did not molest or disquiet him. Oh what a diuturnity and indesinency of bliss
might there be, even from generation to generation. See it in Nineveh, it had
been happy, it is happy, Wherein are.

Secondly, This exhorts us to preserve our felicity, we are not yet deprived of
blessings: no, Wherein are. What? are, and are not? are we weary of welfare? do
we begin to loath Mannah? have we dwelt so long in Canaan, that we know not the
worth of a Land of promise? Yes, we are even satiated with comforts, and
nauseate our present state; we do what we can to grieve providence, and to
exasperats a blessing-God, to make gaps in our own hedge, and to pluck down the
sticks of our own nest, to drive away Angels from watching over us, and to
force God which has thus long dwelt among us to turn his back upon us, and to
leave our coasts with distaste and displeasure. Oh the horrid sins which are
committed amongst us, as if we would invite in Devils, and make this Land a
Cage of unclean spirits! we are sick of our happiness, and doubtless do
desire a change. It is said of Alexius Comnenus, that when upon the day of his
inauguration, he subscribed the Creed in a slow trembling manner, it was an
ominous sign to all, what a wicked man he would prove, Nicer. l. ^.
and how nigh the ruin of the Empire was at hand; so we which have thus
violated the faith, and are come to such a sloathfulnesse and lukewarmnesse in
Religion, it does presage that our very inwards are corrupted, and the
foundations of our welfare shaking. When Philip the last King of Macedonia,
Plut. in Fluminio.
a little before the great battle which he faught with Flaminius, stepped up
upon the top of a sepulcher, to make an Oration to his Soldiers, it foretold a
sad event of the issue of the fight; so we which have trod upon so many dead
heads of famous Martyrs, which at first conveyed unto us our faith and worship;
it is a kind of prediction, that this at last will be fatal to our Church. Is
this the way to preserve blessings? no, it is the high way to blast every thing
which has been flourishing amongst us. Are we not happy? and may we not still
be happy? then why will we compel happiness to swim over Sea, and to carry so
many blessings along with it, as we would be glad again with wringing hands to
recall them, and regain them: oh I speak to you in a timely hour, your sins I
hope have not yet made God to abhor the excellency of Jacob, nor left you naked
before the Lord; no, ye have yet much in your keeping, preserve that which is
in your possession; all is not gone, no, your blessings are in your eyes, ye
may yet feel them (if ye be not insensible) with every joint of your singers,
Wherein are.

Thirdly, This does serve to teach us constancy, for is providence constant,
and not obedience? is God unchangeable in mercies, and not we in sincerity is
God no back-slider, and shall we be Apostates? no, if he does retain his
vigilance, let us retain our integrity; if his heart be firm, let not us
forsake our first love. Oh that we were as indeclineable, as he is immutable!
He does not vary, but are not we sickle? does Judah yet rule with God, and is
faithful with the Saints? Hos. 11.12. No, if ever we were good, Religion must
now pass upon a Postdate; if there were some eminent things in us, yet can we
say, there are: Oh that unclean shewbread did not stand upon the Table of the
Lord, that the pure metal were not taken out of the golden Candlestick, that
we had not made breach of wedlock, and sued out a Bill of divoroe. What pillar
of the house has not been shivered* what foundation has not been shaken? Now
is there any thing more injurious to God, or scandalous to profession, then
inconstancy? who put these new hearts into our bosoms? who taught our tongues
these strange soloecisms? Those things deserve disgrace, Vituperationem
generant, quae in mediis conatibus aegra deseruntur. Cassiod lib. 4. ep. 21.
fides vera non est si non sit perpetua. Amb. in 2. Cor. c. 6.
which wax saint in the midst of their endeavors. That is no true says, which
is not perpetual. My soul does tremble at that speech of St Augustine, They
which fall, and perish, were never in the number of the predestinate. The firm
Christian is the memorable Christian: oh therefore preserve your Religion as ye
would your Fathers inheritance, nay as ye would the first eyes with which ye
saw; why should ye not be as firm in faith, as God is in providence? he does
give blessings, and does continue them. Nineveh is as rich in them as ever,
Wherein are.

Persons.
3. Now let us come to the Treasures, Persons. From hence observe, That these
Persons are the worlds perfections. God the Former of all things, and the
inimitable, and incommunicable Creator, (who by a finger of Omnipotency, out of
a rude Chaos, nay, an unshapen un-ented Nothing has set up and set forth this
specious and spacious Universe) after the had made his coorse pieces, brought
forth at last Man, as his Masterpiece, the beam and beauty of the Creation,
which had not only the excellencies of all creatures in him, but a superior
excellency above all Creatures, insomuch that he that had seen man, had seen
not only all the rest; but he that had seen him, had seen that which elsewhere
no eye could behold; no Pearl nor Star like unto him; for indeed he was the
precious Pearl, and the bright Star of the whole Creation, taken out of the
Chaos, but with a particle in him derived from the shining heap; the rare
extract, or Elixir of all created things, yea the twist of things visible and
invisible, a natural Phoenix, a supernatural Seraphim closed up in one skin.
God made him the Apex of all other Creatures, and made him to culminate with
the sublime spirits, that though his altitude was not equal, yet he came but a
few cubits beneath them a little lower then the Angels, Psalm. 8.5. A little
lower; for if they were intellectual, he was wise; if they were indeficient,
he was immortal; if they were shining, he was bright; Crowned with glory and
honor; if they had heaven, he had paradise; if they reverlations, he
mysteries; if they joys, he ravishments; the Angels daily visit man, as a
Partner, camp about him, as a darling, rejoice over him as a Mirror, and convey
his soul at last to their own Chantrey, to sing a part in their celestial
quire. But take man according to his proper Nature, and he is a rare creature,
he was made last, and so as a quintessence extracted out of the virtue of the
whole Creation, yea the limit and luster of Gods creating power; he was made by
consultation, the rest of the Creatures God made by his authority; there was
but a Fiat, let it be made, and every thing received a being: but man was made
by deliberation, Faciamus hominem, Let us make man, as if there were so many
secrets, and things of weight and consequence, to be considered in man, Amb. l.
6. Hexem. c. 7. Rupert. l. 2 de Trin. Cuspinian.
that the wisdom of the whole Deity was summoned to conclude upon them, as St
Ambrose and Rupert hold: He was made a Lord: the son of Macrinus is said to be
born with a Crown on his head; sure I am, man at first was constituted Prince.
Scanderbeg (its said) came out of his Mothers womb with the shape of a sword in
his hand; Pontan. l. 2. belli Neapolit.
but man it was that carried the commanding sword, for all Creatures were made
subject to him, in so much, that Hugo does bring in the whole Creation, Vide oh
homo, dicit mundus, quomods amavit t^, quia propter te fecit me servire tibi,
quia propter te factus sum, ut servias illi, qui fecit and me, and te; me
propter te, te propter se Hugo in Didasc. l. 1. Vt eadem spectaret, unde illi
origo est. Lact. de Opisic. Dei. l. 2. c. 8.
crying out to man, See O man how the Lord loved the, he made me to serve thee,
that thou might serve him, me for thee, and thee for himself; he was made a
rational Creature, other Creatures had their properties, but none such a
perfection; no, he it was that was to order all things by discretion and
judgment; yea, to stand upon earth, and to pry into the heavens, that he might
look up to those things from whence his first beginning came, for man was made
to contemplate upon the Creator; he was made to be the draught of Gods own
face, for after God had finished the rest of the Creation, he set up man as his
Picture, or the Creature wherein the Creator might seem (if it were possible)
to be effigiated, or represented. Let us make man according to our image and
similitude: that man should be a kind of terrestrial Deity, or earthly Numen
amongst the Creatures. Augustus Caesar seemed to carry spots like Stars upon
his breast. Sueton. Lacrtius.
Py^hagoras had a thigh like gold, and was every where so beautiful, that his
scholars thought him to be Apollo. Magnes of Smyrna, was so comely, that he
was carried up and down from City to City to be seen, Suidns.
and the Magnesians were so taken with him, that the very sight of him bereft
them of their judgment. Antinous a Bithi^tan, was so admired by Adrian the
Emperor for his rare feature, Volater. l. 23. Anthropolog. Porma vero, and
fuici venustate adeo ^^ira and ell^nti, ut pl^stes, v^l piclor, illius imaginem
nullus potuit expr^mere. Plut. in Demetrio.
that the Emperor at his death built a Temple for him at Mantinea, a City in
Egypt, and stamped his Image upon his coin. Demetrius Poliercetes, was so
surpassingly fair, that his physnomy could not be taken by any Painter. But if
all the pure complexions that ever were upon earth could be presented, what
were they to my matchless Paragon? to amiable Adam? No, God himself was so
rapt with him, that he seemed to be the pleasure of the heavenly eye, for when
God had viewed every thing he had made, he only said, It was good; but so soon
as Man was created, it is said, God saw every thing that he had made, and
behold it was very good, Genesis 1.31. as if the making of Man had added an
Ornament to the whole Creation; and indeed it was so, for God does take this
Creature as the principal Impress both of his power and honor, Man is the
glory of God, 1 Cor 11.7. What should I speak more of this peerlesse Creature?
he is so excellent, that he is Gods intimate favorite, God does wear his
Crown, sit in his Throne, spread out his wings, stretch forth his right hand,
open his breast, listen with his ear, search with his eye, give Laws,
Covenants, Promises, Visions, Inspirations, infusions, Mysteries, Sacraments,
merely for man's benefit; yea, he does send down his Angels, his Spirit, his
Son, keep a Book of Remembrance, and a Book of Life for his sake; he does
enlighten him when he is blind, guide him when he is wandering, redeem him when
he is lost, and will raise him when he is dead, he never does leave him, till
he has justified him at his Throne, and glorified him in his Kingdom: God made
the world for Man, and he has dressed up his own Court for Man, that he might
see his face, enter into his joy, live in his sight, and reign in his presence:
seeing then man is thus dear unto God, how are men blessings wheresoever they
breath or tread? yes the earth is beautified in having such Creatures, and
Nineveh happy in enjoying such persons. Wherein are persons.

Application.
1. This serves first to exhort man to know his exccellency; Man, if thou do
oppose God, and despise thy Superior, I know not how to make thee mean
enough; but if thou do submit to God, and honor thy superior, I know not
how to make thee great enough: It does delight me to see a bright creature come
out of the slime heap, and to see these slimeheaps such actuated Models, that
they should have the whole world wait upon them, and heaven gaze upon them,
that the Creation should bow before them, and the Creator himself how down to
them; that Sons of Adam should be such a glorious progeny; yea, that dust and
ashes should excel the Sun in brightness that so many secrets should be in
these narrow closures, and such rare endowments in these little boxes, that it
is a mystery even to search man, that his birth is so strange, for I am
fearful, and wonderfully made, and his gests so singular, for he is girded
with power, and has as it were the strength of an Unicorn; that man is a kind
of mavelous and mighty spirit in the world: that it is man that finds out all
the rare inventions, studies out hidden causes, the Day book of present
Accidents, the library of Antiquities, eminent in disquisitions, famous in
experiments, sounding the depth of the Seas, taking the height of the Stars,
not an Herb but he does know the virtue of it, not a Gem but he does understand
the value of it, skilled in the variations of nature, vicissitudes of events,
changes of States, in Mineralls, and Meteors, Thunders, and Comets, Influences
and Constellations, as if he had a Chamber in the bowels of the earth, a Closet
under the hollow of the Moon, or a Study in the eighth sphere, which has the
lips of knowledge, and the mind that has understanding, which has Orpheu's
harp in his mouth, and can draw Congregations, and Kingdoms after him with his
tongue, which is the curious Observer, and the eloquent Orator; which has
wrought all the strange feats, settled all the Ordinate rules, achieved all the
Conquests, and reered up all the Monuments which are upon earth. Oh Man, what
weight, and wonder do there lie couched in thee? Lord what is man that thou
should be so mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou should so
regard him? But Lord, what is man that he should be so unmindfull of himself?
and the Son of man, that he should so little regard himself? Oh Man, how have
thou wretched thy self? God made thee a Lamp, and thy light is extinguished;
he did set thee upon thy feet, and thou have brought thy self to thy knees;
thou should be the splendor of the whole world, and thou have made thy self
a scandal, a blemish, a curse to thine own being; where are thy primitive
engravings? where are thy Creation prints? Oh Lucifer how art thou fallen from
Heaven thou Son of the Morning? Bern.
Lucifer is become Noctifer, instead of a Moning-star, a Night-Orbe, a Star fit
only to shine in Hades, the Region of darkness; So oh Man, how have thou
eclipsed thy brightness? where is thy wonted fulgour? where are thy morning
beams? no, thou art now instead of a wonder, an astonishment, and fright; for
he is a rare man which does live according to his endowments, and act according
to his privileges; instead of those Ornaments, that were wont to be seen in
man, there are now so many torments of Soul; Tot animael tormenta Jeron. Tota
sua viscera serpens concutit, and imprimendae malitiae pestem vomit. Greg. Ego
adolescentule, non ob patrias, sed proprias cujusque viri virtutes, mercedem,
and munera dare seoco. Plat. in Reg. and Imper. Apoph.
yea, Man is so envenomed, as if the serpent had stirred all his poisoned
entrayles to infect him. Whatsoever our Forefathers deserved for virtue, and
piety; yet can we challenge their honors? no, we are degenerated, and so have
forfeited all their rights, as Amigonus the second, when a debauched Soldier
came to ask his Fathers Salary, said to him, no, I pay stipends to Soldiers,
not for their Father's, but their own virtues. Oh man, how shall I deplore thy
disfiguration, and deformation? thou know not thy self to be Man, thou have
scarce any part of a Man about thee; setting aside thy visage what affections,
or actions have thou to declare thy self to be Man? thou have beauty in thee
to be the Lure of thy Iusts, strength to be the Club of thy passions, wisdom to
be the Craftmaster of thy damned policies, dominion to be the Rentgatherer of
thy covetousness, and the Wardrobe-keeper of thy pride; what man-like thing is
there discernable in thee? no, thou have perverted every excellent thing in
thee to the satisfying of thine own vicious, and pernicions desires, and
designs. Man being in honor may be compared unto the beasts that perish. It is
worse to be compared to a beast, then to be born a beast; for a man naturally
to want reason is tolerable; Pejus est comparari, quam nasci; naturaliter non
habere rationem, tolerabile est; hominem vero ratione decoratum esse, and
irrationali creaturae comparari, voluntatis crimen est Aug. Homil. Heu tristis,
and lacrhymosa mutatio! Bern. s. 35. in Cant.
but to be endowed with reason, and to be compared to the unreasonable
Creature, this is the crime of the will. Oh sad, and lamentable change! that
Man which was the Inhabitant of Paradise, the Lord of the Earth, the Citisen of
Heaven, the domestical servant of the Lord of Sabboths, the brother of blessed
spirits, and Coheyre of the Heavenly Powers, should now by a sudden change be
turned out of himself, and become a beast! as if for the generality here were
nothing, but Dens for savage Creatures, Cribs for bruits, and Stalls for
beasts; that it was not so dreadful for Loths wife to be changed into a Pillar
of salt, Miriam into a Leper, Saul into a Phrentick, as for Man to be changed
into a Beast. A beast indeed, who must not only be rid with a bridle, or
pricked with a goad, but he does wallow in the mire, and does he down in dung,
which has mind of nothing but inhumane, barbarous, obscene, filthy, beastly,
and brutish things. And would to God that this were his last, and worst change;
but I doubt there is another Metamorphosis to be found of him, that he is
changed into a Fiend, and a Devil; for the Devil is his Companion, and
Counselor, his Leader, and Lawmaker; no Conjurer more conversant with his
black Demon, nor Witch with her familiar spirit. Insomuch that it may be said
to too many, that the God of this World has blinded their minds, that the
Prince of the air does work in the children of disobedience, that a lying
spirit is in their mouths, that the Angel of the bottomless pit has locked
them up in close prison, that they are of their Father the Devil, that the
Devil is entered into their hearts, yea, that Satan has filled their hearts
to lie to the Holy Ghost. Oh Men, then where is your Manhood? what Monsters,
and Prodigies are ye become, that ye should be turned into Beasts, and Devils?
Is this according to the honor of your nature? the perfection of your
endowments? Oh look with shame, and horror upon this woeful evirating, or dis^
humaning your selves; and reassume your first dignity, live answerably to your
qualifications, be Men; and assure your selves, if ye glorify God as he has
enabled you, that ye are the Beauties in your several Stations; yea, that the
Earth has no greater Ornaments, then Men; ye may see it here in Nineveh, which
had not more rich and precious things to be found in it, then these Persons.
Wherein are Persons.

Secondly, this does serve to present to the City her treasures, these living
souls are your lasting Excellencies; As Cornelia being the Mother of the
Gracchi, she brought forth her two sons, Haec sunt ornamenta mea. Plut.
and said to the Roman Ladies, which delighted in other things, These are my
Ornaments, so when ye have viewed all the principal things within your walls,
Sicut pascua sine armentis non sunt specios^, sic nec civitales sine In^olis.
Epictetus
yet these are your true Glories. As pastures are not graceful without Herds,
so no more are Cities without Inhabitants. As Lycurgus called men, the walls of
Cities, so are they the Decorements of Cities; If your walls were made of
Alablaster, your streets paved with silver, your houses built of gold, your
posts and standards studded with Pearls, and ye had stars for lamp-light to
bring you to bed, yet these same skinned gemms, and quick-breathed Jewels which
hang about the neck of your City, do far excel the luster of all other things
which your City does enjoy. Oh why then do ye strip your walls of their best
hangings? trample upon your treasures? abase your City-stock? vilify Men? It
grieveth me to see with what wonder ye do look upon other things, with what
contempt upon your Citisens; with what care ye do preserve other things, with
what disdeign ye do overlook these in their extremities; with what wariness ye
do eschew injury to those things, which do tend to your magnificence, with what
viosence ye do push at these with thigh, and shoulder, and beat them to pieces.
Is there a more dying groan amongst you than for the neglect of these living
souls? is there a shriller yell amongst you than the passionate cry of the
oppressed? But let there be less pride, and cruelty amongst you, and more
charity and equity; for these are your City treasures, and are most to be
valued; the blessings of a City are the Persons of a City. Where in are persons.

Thirdly, this does serve to exhort these Persons, that seeing they are
treasures, they do not diminish their own worth. Oh that ye should live to the
honor of the City, and that ye live to the ignominy of it; that the mire in
the streets is not worse, then the filth of your behaviors, that the great
blomishes within the walls are the skars of your conversations; that your
lusts, and riots, pride, and profaneness do more shame the City, then all the
sinks, and dunghills in it; do ye look to preserve the City? Fovea peccatorum.
Greg. Dum ante oculos hominum sine confusione reatus aperitur. Isiod de sum.
bono. Suo sibi contplacere delicto. Jeron. in 1. Amos. Melius est luto pollui,
quam peccatis. Chrysostom. in 12. Heb.
no, ye go about to drown it, for there is a ditch of sins. Oh it is a
dangerous thing to a City, when sin does walk up and down the streets with a
Sodoms face, guilt appearing in op^^ sight with an impu en brow; when men take
a felicity in sinning, and have pleasure in unrighteousness. To walk up and
down the City with merry faces, were not so ill, as to look out with sinful
countenances, for It is better to be defiled with dirt, then sins. Oh then why
do ye go scattering abroad your horrid crimes? and fill every corner with your
abominations? Are ye the credit of the Corporation? no, when the City does
present you, it does but show her own infamy, and disgrace; your vicious
behaviors are worse than if there were breaches in the walls of the City, her
buildings half-levelled, and all the Monuments defaced; if ye were virtuous,
the innocence of your lives would more adorn the City, than the beautifying the
gates; for the City does shine only in the presence of Saints. Oh therefore
leave no stinches behind you, but perfume every place where ye do set your
feet: blur not the Picture which ye would have looked upon with delight, but
draw it out with orient colors; your mortified demeanours, and gracious
fruits, do procure the great fame and renown to the City; what is your
City-sword, Seal, Hall, Bench no, these are but dumb and dead ensigns, the
honor of a City is in the Citizens, the Persons. Wherein are persons.

Fourthly, This does serve to fright men from bloodshed, for the sacking of a
City is nothing like to the slaughtering of the Persons. If men be of such
value, then they should not be hewn down like beambles, nor butchered like
Oxen. Parcissima sit sanguinis effusio. Hippoc. Ah nimium faciles, qui tristia
Crimina caedis. Fluminea tolli posse putatis aqua. Ovid. Fast. l. 2.
Let the shedding of blood be in the most sparing manner. Oh these Cains, and
Doegs, and Alimeleches, and Hazaels, and Herod's, how detestable are they both
to God and man? They are so partial in their own crimes, that they think the
guilt bloodshed can be washed away with a little River water, which do suppose
that the steyn of bloodshed is gone so soon as they have sheathed their
swords; and the noise of murder is stilled so soon as they have struck down
their enemies speechless. No, The blood of Abell does cry. God will make an
inquisition for blood; and a strict inquisition there will be. That God which
does require blood at the hand of every beast, Genesis 9.5. doubtless he will not
spare man for it. He that says, Thou shall not kill, Exodus 20.13. And tells
thee that his image is in every living person, Genesis 9.6. will teach thee what
it is to kill men in a fury, and to deface his Images, as if thou were but
battering down painted Pictures. Just Wars are lawful, but barbarous
executions are brutish and Diabolical: In the heat of battle, men should kill
with a desire to preserve life. It is one of the aenigmaes of profession so to
constitute a War, that there be no culpable scruple in the close. Sure I am,
that as there are required for it a lawful authority, a just cause, and a
right intention, P. Nav. l. 2. c. 3. n. 268.
so it must not be ex odio, out of hatred. And how is that but out of hatred,
if a man should shed one drop of blood more then that which is necessary, out
of insolency and blood-thirstinesse? The lives of the vanquished are not wholly
at the mercy of the Conqueror, he had need distinguish well between a Conqueror
and a Cutthroat: For as vindicative War is the lawfullest, so that be
moderated, that a man be not a too severe righter of his own injuries; no, he
ought to be satisfied with the victory; Clarus. l. 5. Sent. Sect. Practic.
Criminal. q. 60. n. 30. Molina Tract. 3. de just. disput. 34. Abbas. in. cap.
Latores. n. 3. de Cleric exc^m. ad stabiliendam securitatem contra vald^
pertinaces and desperatos hosts. Becan. c. 25. q. 10. Victor. de jure belli.
n. 48. Amb. ep. 28. ad Theod. Imp. Quatenus fieri potest cum minimo damn
hostium and incolarum, Victor de^ jure bell. n. 55. Molina disp. 102. Sect. in
hoc secundo. Molina disp. 117, Concl. 4.
and as much as much as may be to leave revenge unto God. The Authors and
principal executors in an injury, ought to be slain, and not the generality
which are drawn in to be parties. Yea, killing is allowed but only against
obstinate, and desperate adversaries. For the community cannot be touched
without the hazard of many innocents, as St Ambrose says: Conquest then must
end with the least damage, both of the Enemies and Inhabitants. If it should be
true, that a Christian taking a Christian captive, cannot sell him to make him
a bond slave, as Molina holds: Then, if liberty be so much tendered, how much
more life? Oh there is not a more crimson sin, then when blood touches
blood, Hos. 4.2. That is, That there is no end in bloodshed: when blood is
powered out as dust, and flesh as dung, Zeph. 2.17. When widows are increased
like the sands of the Sea, Jer. 15.8. When a Land is soaked with blood, Isai.
34.7. Oh that men to men should be such Tigers and Furies! as if it were a
mirth to open the Conduits of life to gush forth till the last drop, and to
water fields with tempests of blood. What dreadful examples of cruelty do we
meet withal in ages? Pericles (as Plut. reports) exterminating the
Calcidenses, and Estienses. The French, after the defeat at Thermopylae (as
Pausanias says) destroying the Callienses to a man, plucking the Children from
their Mothers breasts, and killing them, tearing in pieces the marriagable
virgins, so that happy were they which could get a Frenchmans sword to dye upon
without further torture. Totila (as Gregorius Turon. reports) flaying quick
Herculanus the Bishop of Perusium, and cutting off the heads of all the
Citizens. Sylla, slaying twelve thousand in one City of Preneste. Attila 30000
at the sacking of Rome. Abderamen an hundred thousand at one battle in
Gallicia. Marius so busy in killing his Countrymen, that he wished himself
the only Roman to be left alone: Hanibal so eager in destroying Flaminius, and
his Soldiers, that he felt not an earth quake which happened in the time of
the battle: Don Pedro the cruel, making Spain in his time a Charnel house,
full of nothing but dead men's bones. Mahomet the great causing the streets and
Temples of Constantinople to swim with blood. Selim the Turk killing the
Persians so with without mercy, that he built a Tower barely of their dead
heads. Oh these men, if it were in their power, how would they exanimate
nature? dispeople the earth, and leave the world a wilderness? Wounds are
their feats of activity, blood their cordial, crying groans their music,
ghastly faces their looking-glasses, shivered bones the relics of their
puissance, and dead carcasses the emblems of their glorious triumphs. But woe
and alas to such harsh Encomiasticks. I which never slew man, nor have yet
seen a man slain, do account such praises, which have blood for the ground of
the ditty, but sad honors. These things may be famous amongst Pagans, but they
are but doleful accidents amongst Christians; For we which are commanded so
keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, and to be courteous and
tenderhearted one toward another, and to love one another with a pure heart
fervently, are so unsainted, that if we speak with the tongue of men and
Angels, and have not charity, we are but as the sounding brass, and the
tinkling Cymballs: doubtless the thought of these things should make us
oftentimes either to sheath up the sword in affection, or to go to War in
tears. Whence come Wars? whence come contentions? are they not from hence, even
from the lusts that are in your members? And are lusts justifiable pleaders at
Gods Throne? Is there a judge? is the reckoning hastening on? will blood be one
of the most criminal guilts at that Tribunal? then how ought we to skreen and
riddle our souls concerning the steyn of bloodshed? He which has slain his
brother, how shall he show his face before that Father? he which has a bloody
hand, how shall he lift it up with innocence at the white Throne? How will the
lives of men go at an high rate at that day, when here God does prize the
chief Treasures of a City to be these Persons? Wherein are Persons. Should not
I spare Nineveh, that great City, wherein are Persons?

Sixscore thousand
4. Now let us come to the quantity of the Treasures, Sixscore thousand. So
many there were in the minority of years; how many then were there of riper
age? From hence observe, That a great blessing to a City, is, to abound in
people, Numerosa multitudo, isocrates. Civitas est societas ex multis viciniis
constans. Pet. Greg. Stante Corona. Ovid. (...). E^rip. in Phrixo.
for a true City is a numerous multitude; yea, an happy City is a society
consisting of many neighbourhoods. When a Crown of living souls seems to
stand together, and a whole Country is met in a Ring; for, Cities are a
confluence of men, and not desolate wildernesses. That, as it is said, Who can
tell the dust of Jacob? and the number of the fourth part of Israel? Number.
23.10. So who can tell the multitudes of a populous City? Oh it is a glorious
thing when a City does pass Arithmetic, when the total sum can scarce be
cyphered up. Who can tell? Who can number? when such a loud peal is rung within
the walls, that a City is full of noise, Isai. 22.2. when there is such a crowd
for room, that the place is too narrow for men to dwell in, Isai. 49.19. when
new hangings must be bought for such a large family, or new Bedsteads, set up
for the plenty of guests, that come to lodge there, that a City does spread out
the Curtains of her habitations, and increase on the right hand, and on the
left. Es. 54.2, 3. When such a flood of Inhabitants does seem to stream in the
streets, that the Citizens are like many waters. Rev. 17.1. when such swarms of
living souls do skip up and down in the streets, that they are as the
grasshoppers for multitude. Judge. 6.5. When the sandheaps do scarce exceed the
number of their lovely issues, the fruitful Mothers seeming to have gotten
shoals and shores of progenies into their wombs, the offspring of their bowels
being as the gravel. Esai 48.19. Is not this glory? is not this honor? yes,
this is to be a City with an excellency, as Ninevehs fame and felicity is here
described to be great, that she can reckon by her many thousands, even sixscore
thousand.

Application.
1. This does serve first to present to you your Life-Blessing, are ye not
peopled? Vnd undique circum Fundimur Virg. 3. Aeneid. Quoque capit latis
immensum moenibus orbem. Ovid. 2. de Ponto. -- turba vias impleverat agmine
denso. Lucan. ad Call. Pl. Veteri exhausta habitatore H. Boeth. Pudendus ex
ercitus ex maneipiis. Plut.
yes, the City of Numbers; every street, and lane stored with dwellers, yea, a
City so plenished with Inhabitants, that it does seem to contain a world within
her walls; the ways seem to be too straight for frequency of passengers. If it
should be said to you, as it is Number. 1.40. Take the sum of the people, or, give
in the full tale. 1 Samuel 18.27. what troops might here march forth? what armies
might be drawn out? Armorica (Bretaigne) in France, was so thinned of men after
the wars of Maximian, that it was afraid, that the Country should be drained of
the old Inhabitant; after the battle of Cannae, Rome was so desolate, that it
was enforced to raise up a shameful Army of slaves; but these fears are not
yet come upon you, for the Lord your God has blessed you, and ye are, as the
stars of Heaven for multitude. Deuteronomy. 1.10. yea, we might almost say to you,
that ye are a great people, which cannot be numbered, or counted. 1 Kings 3.8.
ye know the bounds of your City, but which of you all do know the vastness of
your Inhabitants? oh your Vine does hang full of clusters, your ricks stand
thick with corn, ye have a rich Banquet served up with variety of services,
your quarry is large, your book in solio has so many pages in it, that there
want figures to number them; how much liquor is there in this spacious
Winepresse? how many sockets with bright lights shining in them are there in
this mighty Branch? Oh ye are a great City, and a great People. If blossoming,
and budding, and filling a place with fruit be a blessing, how high ought the
tone of your Magnificat to be? the sound of your hymn ought to be little
inferior to the noise of the Hallelujah in Heaven. It is a blessing when God
does fill the face of the world with Cities. Esaias 14.21. but it is a greater
blessing when God does fill the face of a City with the amiablenesse of
Inhabitants; and is not this your happiness? yes, oh that ye could see it,
that ye could sing to the honor of it, that ye had learned some special
Antheme, or some Psalm of degrees for it; that ye would make it not your
boast, but your exultation; not your pride, but your praise; not your glory,
but your glorifying. Sure I am, few Cities upon earth have a greater incentive
of celebrating; for as Cyprus was called Macaria the Happy Island for
fruitfulness of ground, so may ye the Happy City for fruitfulness of people;
Knowls in his Turkish Hist.
Your sons grow up as the young Plants, and your daughters as the polished
corners of the Sanctuary; hither the Tribes go up, even the Tribes in their
Order, ye are sown with the seed of man, yea, your seed is as the dust of the
Earth; ye have enough to answer all Nations in traffic, ye have enough to
answer your enemies in the gates; ye have planted whole Countries beyond the
Seas, and ye have a Noursery yet left to make wast plains, and wild
wildernesses, Orch-yards, and Gardens. Ye have the double blessing amongst you,
the blessing of the backet, and store. Deuteronomy. 28.5. and the blessing of the
breast and womb. Genesis 49.25. What a large Ordinary is this City? how many
Tables are there, here every day spread to satisfy hunger? what a spacious
Bedehamber is this City? how many Couches are there every night here prepared
to refresh weary souls? What a spring of people is there here? the breath of
life never stirred quicker in such a quantity of ground. Nature here does show
her organizing art; this is one of her gendring Receptacles. The Myrmidons were
so many, that they were said to be begotten of Pismires; and this City does so
abow^^d with people, that it may be called one of the Ant-heaps of the earth;
the Curetes are reported to be begotten by a stroke upon a Mountain, and living
persons do here so abound, that they seem rather to be struck out, then brought
forth; their increase is so plentiful, and speedy, that a man would think that
they came up like spring-flowers to garnish the City, or that they were rained
down from Heaven by the virtue of the sweet Influences of the Pleiades. Oh look
about, and see that if these Persons be your treasures, how fast your mint do
go, and what incredible heaps ye have in banks; ye are the skinned, and fleshed
City, the true Corporation indeed, for here are enough to make up not only a body
Politic, but a Republique of bodies; if all your bodies should appear at
once, ye would scarce have streetroom enough for them, they would adorn your
City more, than your hangings of Arras at the most public show; Every place
is so thronged with them, that people can scarceget passage, every dwelling so
stored, that there is scarce an empty house to be found; your births do so
exceed, that ye can scarce build fast enough to house them; the branches have
almost as much timber, as the stock of the tree, the land without the enclosure
is almost as fruitful as the ground within the hedge; your Suburbs do almost
vye multitudes with the City. These slifts, which have been taken from you, are
grown up to a wonderful height. The daughters which have come out of your womb
do equal the Mother in pedigree, and progeny; But are the people treasures?
are ye affected with these treasures? have ye done honor to the Lord of the
Mine, that your City is sprinkled, scattered, heaped, and wedged with these
treasure? that ye are filled with these precious and pleasant riches (as
Solomon says) that these glistering pieces are in every corner, that your
wealth cannot be told, that there is no end of your riches? did ye ever open
your Coffers? look upon your riches? bless your selves, and bless your God in
this abundance? oh if a multitude in the Hebrew does come of a verb that
signifies to make a noise, Strepuit (...) ab (...) arena. (...). Eurip. in
Hecuba. Populus civitatis robur. Dionys. Halic. l. 3.
and to congregate in Greek does intimate as much as the sand, if a multitude
be a weighty thing, and the people be the vigor, and strength of the City, if
there be no greater happiness than to see a people led like a flock: Psalm.
77.20. and to have the noise of a multitude in the mountains, as of a great
people. Esa. 13.4. and to have people to flow to the mountain of the Lord.
Micah. 4.1. and to have them increase, as they have increased, and to be sown
amongst the people. Zach. 10.8, 9. yea, if the glory of a City be to be full of
people. Lam. 1.1. and the honor of a King be in the multitude of his people.
Prove. 14.28. then how are ye bound to magnify God for this loud sound in the
City, for the quick sand which run up and down by heaps in the City, for the
City weight, and the City strength (the huge bone, and the backbone as it were
of the City) to see people flock, and flow, increase, and fill, and grow up to
the number of multitudes? Did ye ever look upon the goodly house that God has
given you, and see how richly he has furnished it for you? Did ye ever mark
your golden Cup, and consider how God has fillled it brim full with people?
people shining amongst you like the Sun beams, or lying as thick as the dew
upon the grass. Did all the bells in the City ever ring, the trumpets blow,
and the wind-instruments play, I mean your thankful lips make melody to the
Lord for the People? No, I doubt ye have forgotten your people, that though
they daily face you, and their clappers strike in your ears; yet that ye are
both blind, and dumb in extolling God for this high speeched favor. What
Hecatomb have ye ever offered for this numerous blessing? Have ye ever sung
Hosannah in the highest for this high mercy? I question whether ye have an
Altar in the City for this service, or whether the smoke of the sacrifice has
bin seen ascending. Have ye told over your people in heaven? and sent up a bill
to God Almighty of your multitudes, and wrote in the bottom, Sit nomen Domint
benedidum, Let the name of he Lord be praised for this populous City? No, I am
afraid ye have too much silence, closing up your lips, and too much ingratitude
sticking upon your heart strings, that God has not heard from you a great
while concerning the state, welfare, prosperity, innumerability of the City;
that ye have not sent him word how the people do, how this City is stocked with
people, and what quantity of these treasures there are. Would ye have a City
with bare walls? or these gorgeous buildings stand without Inhabitants? ye
deserve it, if God has given you houses, and householders, and has breathed
the breath of life into every living person amongst you, and ye will not so
much as give him thanks for this quickening mercy. Therefore as ye cannot show
to the world a greater Ornament of your City, then your people, so present this
people to God as your City-Benediction; let it be the cry of your streets, and
the charm of your Pulpits, an ecstasy for the people! a Rhapsody for the
multitudes! Oh for this keep your solemn triumphs, and hang up your banners for
Tokens. Study the flesh-song, the womb-streynes, as ye have the
people-blessing, so learn the People-ditty; let young Men and Maidens, old men
and Babes, Bride grooms and Brides, Masters and Servants, Liverymen and
Senators, Princes and Judges, Closets and Galleries, Chambers and Chapels,
Towers and Temples, City and Suburbs, Heaven and earth, echo and rebound with
varied notes, of a Canticle upon the Persons. For that Persons in great
multitudes, are a great blessing, ye may see it here by Nineveh, who has it
mentioned as her high felicity, to reckon Persons by thousands. Wherein are
sixscore thousand persons.

Secondly, This serves to eye your present blessing, that ye are yet preserved
in your thousands. Ye are yet a populous City, and the Lord God (if it be his
blessed will) make you a thousand times so many more as ye are, Deuteronomy. 1.11. But
if the Arrow that flies at noon day, Psalm, 91.5. should glide amongst you, how
many wounded breasts would there be? If God should send the Pestilence amongst
you after the manner of Egypt, Amos 4.10. with as consident a foot as ye now
walk, yet then with the Magitians of Egypt, ye would not be able to stand
because of the boyles, Exodus 9.11. If Hippocrates were then amongst you with
his precious odours, and sweet ointments to persume places; If Miadererus were
shooting of Guns in every corner of your streets, Quercit in Diet Polyhist
Sect. 2. c. 8. Avicen. l. 1. Fen. 3. Doct. 2. c. 7. Gal. l. 1 de d^sser Feb. c.
4. Paulus Aegin. de re medica. l. 1. c. 32.
because the forceable noise dissipates the air, and sulphur, and saltpeter,
with strong sinells purge it. If Quercitanus, and Avicen, were preseribing the
strictest rules of diet; if Galen, and Paulus Aegineta, were giving cautions
against Plethorick bodies: If Aetius, Aretaeus, Rasis, Rondeletius, Albucasis,
Azaramias, Baria, Papillia, Chelmetius, Fernelius, Fallopius, Georgius
Pistorius, Georgius Cusnerus, Guido de Canliato, Gulielmus de Saliceto, with
the most expert Physicians that ever lived, were then teaching you the art how
to make Confections, Electuaries, Pills, Pomanders, Cordials, Epithymes,
Frontals, Funtanels, and to make new sires, and fumigations of Storax,
Calamint, Labdanum, Ireos, Nemphar, Dragagant, Withy-cole, and a thousand other
materials for pure smoaks to expel ill sents; yet they might be all
ineffectuall to prevent that irresistible stroke. For I am not yet resolved
with some Astrologers, that if Saturn and Mars be in dominion under Aries
Sagittarius and Capricorn, and in opposition to Jupiter, that the plague does
infallibly follow; nor that it does arise always from hot and moist air,
Hippoer. l. 2. Epidem. Galen. l. 1. de Temp. c. 4. Avenzoar. l. 3. Tract. 3. c.
1.
as Hippocrates and Galen do hold: nor from hot and dry air, as Avenzoar
conceives; nor that kindred do take the infection sooner one from another than
strangers, because of the assimilation of blood, as Vido Vidio affirms; and
that Virgins are more subject to it than married women, because the spirits are
fluid, and retained, and so apt to putrisie, as Mindererus holds; Cells. l. 8.
de re Med. c. 27.
neither do I think that wine is an Antidote against all poisons; nor that if a
man be well dyeted, he may escape any infection, Lacrt. l. 2.
because Socrates (if it be true) lived in Athens in many plagues, and yet was
never touched with it, being a man of high temperance: But I hold that a
Pestilence is the Hand of God, as David calls it, 2 Samuel 24.14. and the sword
of the Lord, as it is styled, 1 Chronicles. 21.12. So that when God will strike, or
where, or by what means, is uncertain; only this is certain, that whenever
God does lift up his hand he will strike home: Is there a more terrible and
dismal blow, then that of the Pestilence? No, it is the noisome pestilence,
Psa. 91.3. and if this stinche come up into your nostrils ye are gone, God will
make you then smite with the hand, stamp with the foot, and cry alas, Ezech.
6.21. Yea, it is a weapon so sharp, that it is able to leave a Nation without
an heir; for I will smite them with the Pestilence, and disinherit them, Number.
14.12. There is nothing but a burying-place to be seen, where a Pestilence does
cleave to a place, Deuteronomy. 28.21. Behold a pale horse, and he that sat upon it
was death, Rev. 6.8. If this pale horse come to neigh in your streets, and
death be the Rider, such an Horse, and such a Rider, are able to dash asunder,
and to dash into the grave many thousands. I read of fourteen thousand seven
hundred, that dyed in one plague, Number. 16.49. of twenty four thousand which
dyed in another plague, Number. 25.9. of seventy thousand in a third plague, 2 Samuel 24.15. Paus. in Baeoticis. C. Rhod. ant. lect. l. 8. c. 12. Dion. and
Ziphilinus. liabell. l. 9. Aencad. 1. Ensebius lib. 7. c. 21.
The Ectenae, a people of Baeotia, with their first King Ogyges, were wholly
destroyed with the plague, so that the Hyantes and Aeones, came in their stead
to people the Land. A golden Coffer in the Temple of Apollo at Babylon, being
opened, it infected the whole Country with the Pestilence, and spread it into
Parthia. At Rome, in the Reign of Commodus, there dyed for a great while two
thousand men a day. In Africa, there dyed in one plague, an eleven hundred
thousand. Under the Reign of Gallus, there dyed so many in the East, West, and
South, that many Countries seemed to be even left destitute of Inhabitants, and
remained for a long time uninhabited, which gave occasion to St Cyprian, to
write his Books de mortalitate. In this City, how often have there dyed ten
thousand, and twenty thousand in one plague; and in the Reign of Edward the
third, the Pestilence was so hot, that there were buried within the space of a
year in one Church (how many then were there buried elsewhere) commonly called
the Cistertians, Speech Chronicle. p. 694.
above fifty thousand persons. And may not the like happen again? Yes, Gods
hand is not shortened. There are now amongst you more people, and more sins. A
Pestilence is the sickle of the Grave, and the wormes-Caterer, the firstborn
of death. It is that which makes the great fall in the forest of man-kin, the
Hericanoe upon this troublesome Sea, the Master-gunner in this bloody battle;
if the Pestilence does once discharge, how many are slain at one shot? there is
a deadly destruction throughout all the City, 1 Samuel 5.11. It will chase men
out of their dwellings, as if there were some fierce enemy pursuing them, and
shut up Shop doors, as if execution after judgment were served upon the
Merchants, there will then be no other music to be heard, but doleful knells,
nor no other wares to be born up and down, but dead Corpses; it will change
Mansion-houses into Pest-houses, and gather Congregations rather into
Churchyards, then Churches; the busiest Servants will be keepers, and the most
active Officers searchers; the Markets will be so empty that scarce necessaries
will be brought in, a new kind of Brewers will set up, even Apothecaries to
prepare Diet-drinks; people then are afraid to eat, lest their meat should come
out of infected shambles, or to wear raiment, lest it should be stitched up
with the plague; they shall lie down at night without the lest spot seen upon
them, and rise up in the morning with Gods tokens seen upon them, Carbunculus,
carbone.
yea with a Carbuncle scalding in the flesh, like a fiery coal; they shall walk
out from their houses without the least disaylment or distemper, and drop down
dead before they can get home again to their own thresholds. Pestis tempore
suge cito, procul, tarde revertaris. Filinue in Epidemiarum antidoto. c. 1.
Omnis infirmitas in pestilentiam facile transire protest. Id. ibid. c. 4. Peste
laborantem opus est singulis sex horis ex pannis omnibus mutare, alioqui
inficium tur. Id. ibid. c. 10. Sis semper a socir remotus in aere aperto ad
minus per spatium by cubiti, and ab infecto per sex cubitos, and cave ne ventus
ab co in te spiret, and inter te and ip sum sint sol, ig nes and odores. Id.
ib. c. 25.
In the time of a stilence fly quikcly, far, return Pestilence fly quickly,
far, return slowly, every disease about thee does turn into the plague; every
sixth hour thou must have new clothes, lest the former be insected; come not
nigh thy soundest friend within the distance of two cubits, not nigh an
infected person within the space of six cubits; thou must beware lest the wind
blow upon thee from him, and lest there be any sun, fires, or odou betwixt him
and thee If thou be hayle, thou had need to eschew thy dearest
acquaintance; if thou be sick, thy vowed familiars will flee from thee; the
Lord shall scarce have a Page to attend upon him, nor the Lady a trusty
Chambermaid to wait upon her; the brother will then scarce look upon his
sister, the husband upon the wife, or the tender Mother upon her
darling-Infant; not a Beggar will wear the marriage-suit, if thou would
bestow it upon him, nor a Porter be hired to go on thy errand, though thou
would give him a lease for life for his journey; thy friends can hear
nothing from thee, nor thou any thing from thy friends; thy gold is left to the
justice of a serving-man, and thy breath is left to the mercy of a Nurse; thou
art dead whilst thou art unburied, and thou art buried without any but Bearers
to go along with thy Hearse. Of all miseries, the Pestilence is the fray, of all
dreadful things which can happen upon earth, this is the horror. Oh how much
then are ye bounden to God, that ye have not felt for many years the stripes of
this sharp Rod, or that ye have not drunk out of the Vial of Gods wrath this
water of gall. Oh that ye would cleanse your streets with repentance, that this
infection might not breed out of your sins, that ye would purge the air with
obedience, that your purity might preserve you from this contagion; above all,
that ye would every one of you feel the plague in your own hearts, that ye
might not feel this plague in your sides. A Pestilence would scatter you,
thin you, and carry you by heaps under ground, whereas yet every Housekeeper
has a family about him, and this City has her streets swarming with
Inhabitants. Oh know it to be a blessing, to be able to number by your
thousands, as it was to Nineveh here, Wherein are sixscore thousand.

Thirdly, this does show, that numbers should be a motive to compassion; for
unkind is he that would grieve the Generality cruel is he that would destroy a
multitude, Cujus iter c^sis angustans corporum acervis. Catullus. Sueron.
Bonsin. l. 5.0.1
which can wade through heaps of slain bodies. It was the voice of a Monster to
wish, that all Rome had but one neck, that he might strike it off at a blow.
When Genovepha saw C^ilperick about to put a great company of guilty men to
death, she desired him to take pity upon them for their number, and never gave
over, till she had obtained their pardon. Josephus having won the City of
Sephor, the Galilean Soldiers would have had him to put all the Citisens to
the sword, but he abhorred it, and invented a means to save them, Josephus in
vita sua.
because so many should have perished in that bloody act. Onademus of Chios
having suppressed his enemies, his Friends wished him to expel every one of
the faction which was opposite to him out of the City: No, says he, they are
too many to be so harshly used, Erasm. l. 6. Apoph.
and I am asraid, says be, that if I should thus be rid of all mine enemies,
my Friends would sall out amongst themselves. When Lucullus took Amasia, a
famous City nigh to Pontus, he lamented that his soldiers had sired the City,
but he preserved all the Citisens, Plut in Lucullo.
because he saw so many should be exposed to the fury of the soldier, and he
said, he desired every way to have been honored as much for saying Amasia, as
Sylla was for saving of Athens.

Thus ye see how a general misery has drawn commiseration from all generous
spirits, and indeed there is no greater act of nobleness, then to detest to be
Author of a public calamity. Oh that the insinuation of one Jonah should be
more powerful to incite to mischief, then the exigents of sixscore thousand
should be to incline to pity. It was the solemn Petition of Moses unto God,
that he would not kill all the people as one man. Numb. 14.15. Merciless then
are their eyes, and savage are their bowels, which can ruin multitudes. It
was forbidden by the Law to destroy the whole Nest. Deuteronomy. 22.6. A few ears
might be plucked by the high way side, but the sickle must not be put into the
standing Corn. Deuteronomy. 23.25. Wastes, and spoils are sad spectacles, and weeping
triumphs. Oh therefore let the face of a generality aw you, be amated at horrid
attempts wherein multitudes are concerned, tremble at Massacres. Let the
sixscore thousand be ever dear in your eyes, for God ye see does look upon
Nineveh with pity, even for their Numbers. Should not I spare Nineveh, that
great City, wherein are sixscore thousand.

More.
5. Now let us come to the Surplus, More; More then sixscore thousand. From
hence observe, that God is exact in accompting. He calls all the stars by
their names, and as Job says, he can reckon up all the springs of the Sea. Job
38.16. the hairs of our head are numbered by him, yea, what is there that he is
ignorant of? Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand? or meteed
out the Heavens with a span? or comprehended the dust of the earth in a
measure? or weighed the Mountains in scales? or the hills in a balame? Esai.
40.12. Cannot he tell every drop of water, as well as hold the Rivers, and Seas
in his fist? Cannot he name the extent of the Heavens, as well as mete out the
Heavens with a spanne? cannot he reckon up all the sands in the world, as well
as he has told them out all dust by dust? cannot he express the true poise
of hills, and mountains to a dram, and scruple, as well as he has weighed them
in scales, and balances? Yes, though we read of Joseph that He gathered Corn
in abundance, and left off numbering, because it could not be numbered. Genesis
41.49. and that there were sacrifices, that could not be told, or numbered for
multitude. 1 Kings 8.5. and of times, which do contain days without number,
Jer. 2.32. yet are not all these things perspicuously discerned by God
Almighty? yes, what object is there, which can be hidden from his all seeing
eye? what can surpass the comprehension of him who is infinite? Touching the
Almighty we cannot sind him out. Job. 37 23. He is styled the God of Knowledge.
1 Samuel 2.3. Though we cannot sind out Him, he can find out us, and all things
about us, (...) Totus oculus. Aug. Cognoscit res in causis, in seipsis, in
seipso. Aquin. Aug. l. 83. q. q. q. ^6. Res sunt in nobis consuse, in Deo
distinct Vasquez. Deus intelligendo essentiam Sui, intelligit omnes
perfections and quidditates creabiles. Capreol. in 1. Sent. distinct. 30. a. 1.
or concerning us; though we be a people of ignorance, yet he is a God of
knowledge; yea, Oh the depth of the wisdom, and knowledge of God. Romans 11.33.
Is there such light to be found in the Sun it self? no, His eyes are ten
thousand times brighter than the Sun. He is all Eye, that is, he is perfest in
knowledge. Job 37.16. He does know things in their causes in themselves, in
himself. For all things are in God objectively. He beholds nothing out of
himself Things are in us confusedly, but in him distinctly; yea, in us
terminatively, but in him diffusively, and without limitation, as Navarret. God
understanding his own essence, with understand all the perjections, and
quiddities of the Creature. Yea, Gods being bath in it all the other manners of
being, eminently. There is in God not only apprehendens habitudo, an
apprehending hal nude, but plenitudo in simta, qua omnia continet. an insinite
plenitude, by which he does contain all things, as Navarret. Originally all
things are in the divine essence, formally in Gods practical knowledge, as the
same writer says. Esse divinum sins essendi modos enimenter praehabet. Aqui.
Navarret. de Id^is. Ad cognoscendas creaturas non habet Deus aliquod movens
objectum praeter divinam essentiam. Nav. de Idaeis.
God does not need any intellectual habits, or species to represent things to
him, for his understanding is so complete, that it is perfected without
faculties, or exhibiting shadows or patterns. Navarret says, That it is an
unquestionable ground in Divinity, that for God to understand the Creatures, he
does need no other moving object but the divine essence. Things may be
sometimes in us potentially, in him always actually; in us fallibly, in him
infallibly. Howsoever we do know things by a successive, and not by an
instantaneous, or simultaneous action; yet he does know all things at all
times, without all means, and without all measure. He knew all the righteous
persons that were fit to enter into the Ark, he knew all them which did not bow
their knees to Baal, he knew all the thousands, and the surplus of them which
were in Nineveh, that there were sixscore thousand, and more. Should not I
spare Nineveh, that great City, wherein are more then sixscore thousand?

Application.
First, This serves to exhort you to a confident dependence upon God in all
extremities. For, he which did know every particular creature in so great a
City; Ne gutta pluviae ecilo cadat, nisi Dei nutu. Valvin. in 2. Joel.
does he not know every particular accident which does happen unto us? Yes, not a
drop of rain can sall from heaven upon our heads, but by his appointment, and
with his privity. We are in the bosom of God, we are in the eye of God, he has
a Prospective-glasse, by which he does look from Heaven to Earth, he does open
a as Cement through which he does see all the agitations that are in the world;
he needs no Intelligencer, for he is Inspector himself; He, as upon the top
of the hill, beholds all things which are done in the valley; he has Candle
light continually in his house, and therefore nothing can be acted in darkness
before him; he walks in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, therefore
he knows the state of every particular Church. Illad quod in tempore novum,
non esse novum apud cum, qui condidit, tempora. Aug ep. 5. ad Marcel. l 2.
That which seems new in time, is not new with him, which created all times.
Oh then that I hear a sheep bleating, as if there were no shepherd to look
after it, or look upon it! that I hear a child crying, as if it had lost a
Father, or his fatherly providence and preservation. Can God prepare a Table in
the wilderaisse? I am weary of my life, what good shall my life do me? who
shall raise up Jacob, for he is small? thy breach is great like the Sea, who
can heal thee? all joy is darkened, the mirth of the Land is gone. Woe is me
now, for the Lord has added grief to my sorrow; I fainted in my sighings, and
have no rest. When I cry and showt, he shuts out my prayer. The anger of the
Lord has divided them, he will no more regard them. Is this the City that men
call the perfection of beauty? the joy of the whole earth? The Lord has cast
off his Altar, abhorred his Sanctuary. Our bones are dried, our hopes are lost,
we are cut off. These are the sad groans of an asslicted family, the broken
speeches of perplexed Sion: we are chastised, and the rod will never be hung
up; we are brought to a mourning condition, and we must moisten our graves with
our dying tears; we are the footstool of the earth, and all the Angels of
heaven cannot remove this trampling foot; our collar is loosened, and we shall
never be girded again with strength; we are carried away to Babylon, and we
shall never see Sion again; they which have dominon over our bodies, rule over
us with rigor, and God has forgotten us; the earth is a Correction-house, and
heaven is no Sanctuary for us; Barth. Bonon. in ejus vita.
yea, as Antonius Vrceus Codrus for a little Chamber which he had burnt down,
went against the persuasion of all his friends, and lived in the Woods, and
after that returning, he lay the first night upon a Dunghill; and when he
entered into the City, he could not be drawn to live in his own house, or in
any other house of quality, but lived six months in a mean man's house, as if
all were lost, and he were never able to rise again. So if a few sparks be
fallen upon our estates, or we but fired out of a little means, we think we
are never able to repair these losses: no, we are punished, and we shall
perish. Porus, King of India, Justin. lib. 12.
when he was vanquished by Alexander, he took it so heavily, that though he had
his life given him, yet he would not for a great space eat any meat, suffer his
wounds to be dressed, or be persuaded to live. So if we be but crosed in any of
our designs, and cannot enjoy that liberty and fullness which formerly we had,
or carry any cuts about us, we would even starve upon accidents, or suffer our
wounds to rankle; we are unwilling to live, or despair ever again to live
happily. But oh sigh gently, speak softly, chide not with providence, roar not
under casualties, fret not your selves into your graves, for are ye the men
that maintain a Creed? and stand up to the Creed? what one true article of
faith have ye? howsoever do ye believe a God? what thus to loosen all the
joints of a Christian dependence? to distrust a God? oh remember, that ye have
suffered nothing but what the wisdom of God held convenient, and the
providence of God is able to restore double for it. Moses fled for his life,
and kept sheep, and afterward became a mighty Ruler. Ye have heard of the
patience of Job, and have seen the end which the Lord wrought, Jam. 5.11.
Howsoever, do ye suffer any thing out of Gods sight? no, his eye is upon all
your trialls, all your miseries are scored up in heaven, he does keep a
Catalogue of all your sufferings: oh therefore take courage, lift up your hands
which hang down, strengthen your feeble knees, witness patience, express
confidence; for why should ye be a fainting people under a knowing God? no,
when ye are ready to complain, and murmur, and vex, restrain these distempered
passions, by calling to mind that ye have a seeing, and a searching God, that
has taken notice of all your sorrows; he can tell you all your losses, reckon
up all your injuries and indignities, repeat to you all your extremities and
exigences; ye know not better how many eyes ye have in your heads, nor how many
fingers ye have upon your hands, then he can bring in the full tale of all your
distresses. That he is such an observing and intelligent God, ye may see herein
Nineveh, he can number out to her all her thousands, and the surplus. Wherein
are more then sixscore thousand persons.

Secondly, This does serve to repress sin: for oh that thou dare trespass
before such a knowing God; can thou do any thing in such a close reserved
manner, that he shall not have cognizance of it? I know there are a company of
men, which are all upon the point of secrecy, and laying snares privily,
saying, Who shall see them? Psalm. 64.5. Yea, a generation of men that have set
their mouths against heaven, which say, How does God know? and is there
knowledge in the most high, Psalm. 73.11. But these men shall hear God ere long
answer them in thunder, and tell them, I know your manisold transgressions, and
your mighty sins, Amos 5.12. Yea, these things have thou done, and I kept
silence, then thou thoughtest wickedly, that I was such an one as thy self,
but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes, Psalm. 50.21.
Oh Lord thou have searched me, and known me, thou know my down-sitting and
mine uprising, thou understandest my thought asar off. Thou compassest my path,
and my ^ed, and art acquainted with all my ways. There is not a word in my
tongue, but lo, O Lord thou know it altogether. Thou have beset me behind
and before, and laid thine hand upon me, Psalm. 139.1.2, 3, 4, 5. God could tell
Adam of his eating the forbidden fruit, Cain of murdering his Brother Abel,
Saul of sparing Agag, and taking a part of the prey, David of slipping in to
his neighbors Bed, and covering the fowlnesse of that guilt with the skin of a
dead Husband, Asah of trusting in his Physicians, Hezekiah of showing his
treasures to Merodach Baladan, the Scribes and Pharisees of their secret lusts,
which deserved stoning, A^anias and Saphira, of their keeping back part of the
price; what then unto God, can be undiscovered? no, he has not only a
multitude of about spies thee, but he himself is the constant visiter of all
thy actions; Mercury feared not Gallus, not Vulcan, nor all the Gods so much
for the discovering his close passages with Venus, Natales Comes. l. 2. Myth.
c. 6.
as the Sun; so this Sun is shining into all corners to reveal the most hidden
passages; yea, God will beat the woods to make the birds fly out of their
secret nests, and smoke the dens and buroughs, to make the beasts which are
eathed under ground to appear; thine own dogs shall bark in thine ears, thine
own corrupt humors break out in thy skin, thine own secret privies stink in
thy nostrills; On then that many men think to draw a curtain before Heaven, and
to steal lewd attempts, and to cast a mist before the eyes of the all seeing
God, as if men were safe, and secure in some clandestine practices; no, these
Cheats thou may put upon men, thou may daily decoy, and delude thy
brethren, thou may be such a riddle, that all the earth cannot enterpret
thee, but there is no such sin-sophistry to be used with God Almighty. As he
does know his own decrees, his own honor, his own laws, the leaps of thy
invention, the whirls of thy affections, and the pitchings, and intrenchings of
thy resolutions, so he does know all thy trespasses. Herodot. l. 3.
As Phydaena found out the counterfeit Smerdes by his cropped ears, and Augustus
Caesar the Pseudo-Alexander which pretended himself to be the Son of Herod by
his rough hand, Joseph Antiq. l. 17. c. 14. Polyaen. l. 6. P. Jovius.
and Sisyphus the thief, Au^ylochus who stole his cattle by the privy brand
which he had set upon his beasts feet. So God has his fecret marks, and tokens
whereby he does know all thy sins. Muleasses hiding himself, was found out by
the smell of his odours, so God will follow thee, and find thee by the sent of
thy sins Oh then do God know, and do thou offend? do he see, and do thou
transgress? Will he sorce the Queen before me? So, will we violate Laws in
the Lawmakers presence? what, despise Gods sight? contemn his very eyes Oh
consider this, ye that forget God, which invent, and attempt horrid, and
prodigious things, as if ye carried every thing in secret, and had shut God out
of the room, and conveyed your selves into such lurking-holes, that God heard
not a word of your counsels, nor had not the least hint of your designs; Oh
yes, he is in the midst of all your plots, and the great Note taker of all your
passages. Oh then are all your studies, and stretches, stirrings and steps in
Gods eye? does he keep records, and has he volumnes of all your disordered
proceedings then if the discovery of one sin does so trouble you in this world
how will the bringing to light such execrable and infinite sins, confound you?
If the man which hid himself in a Cave that Hercules might not see him, Erasm.
in adag.
seeing him one day pass by the Gaves mouth, at the sight of him fell down
dead; then ye which tremble now so much (as so ye must do, if ye be not
Atheists) at the thought of a discerning God, then when ye shall look upon him
with your guilty eyes, and he look upon you, with eyes like a flame of fire,
how shall ye see him with amazement? ye that now dread not Gods eye, shall then
call to the Rocks to cover you, and the hills to fall upon you, and hide you.
Oh then that I could instill a sense of Gods presence into you, and make you
feel him in your breasts, brains, eyes, lips, pinching hands, and crossepacing
feet, that I could show you the Angels writing out your inditements against
Doomsday, or get you to turn over the leaves of those Books which will be
opened against you at that great reckoning. Is God ignorant of any of your
crimes? no, he can reckon up errors, and additions; for ye see he does here
number out to Nineveh her thousands, and the Surplus, Wherein are more than
sixscore thousand persons.

Thirdly, this does show, Sabellic. l. 51.
that if God be skillful in the number of a City, he is as skillful in the
number of his elect. If the Egyptians carried the scheme of Antiquity in their
brains, and yet at that time had no library in their Country; if Anthony the
famous Egyptian could say all the Bible by heart, Aug. Prolog. l. 1. de doctr.
Christ.
and yet never learned letters; if Cyrus said, it was a shame for a General
not to be able to repeat the names of all his Commanders, as well as a Surgeon
could the names of all Instruments, and therefore there was not an Officer
under him, but he understood who he was; Zenoph. l. 5. Exped.
if Portius Latro could utter every thing which he had conceived, or came ever
into his sight as well as if it had been written before him, Senec. l. 1.
De^lam.
if Franciscus Cardulus Narniensis could rehearse two whole pages backward and
forward, after once reading to him, Alb. in desc. Vmbriae. Cicero.
then doubtless the Omniscient God is not unacquainted with them which are
most dear to him, his Elect. No man does forget (though never so old) where he
has laid his gold; much less God, where he has laid this rich treasure. The
foundation of the Lord remains sure, the Lord knows who are his. 2 Timothy
2.19. these Hidden ones. Psalm. 83.3. cannot be razed out of his remembrance;
these sealed servants, Rev. 7.3. cannot be expunge* out of the roll. There are
a people written in the earth. Jer. 17, 13. and their memory may be compared to
ashes. Job. 13.12. but there are a people which are graven upon the Palms of
Gods hands. Es. 49.16. to whom God has given an earnest. 2 Cor. 1.22. which
are sealed with the holy spirit of promise. Ephesians. 1.13. and written amongst
the living. Es. 4.3, that God can as soon reverse his decree, and change his
own essence, as forget these. All the miseries upon earth, all the Devils in
Hell cannot wrest one of these out of the hands of God. Praescientia est unam
quamque rem, antequam eveniat videre, and id quod futurum est, pruisquam
prasens sit, praevider^ Greg. lib. 1. Dialog. Datur certus numerus electorum,
qui nec augeri nec minui potest. Aquin.
Praescience is to see every thing before it come to pass; and to foresee
every which is to come, before it is present; So that the faithful are all
penned down, and registered. There is a certain number of the Elect, so that it
cannot be increased, or diminishd. Try out therefore thy predestination-prints,
yea, give all diligence to make thy vocation, and election sure, and thou can
not lose thy privilege, nor thy Crown. The number of the elect is known; for
God could reckon up the thousands in Nineveh, and the Surplus. Wherein are more
then sixscore thousand persons.

Which cannot discern between the right hand, and the left hand.

6. Now let us come to the qualifications, which cannot discern between the
right hand, and the left hand.

In which words there are three things considerable. A defect, which cannot The
determination, discern The degree, between the right hand, and the left hand.


First for the defect, Which cannot. From hence observe, That some things carry
an impotency in them. Nothing can work beyond the Sphere of the activity. The
creature is finite, and so limited in power; David would not exercise himself
in things too high for him, as if something were beyond his reach, or rule, the
Apostle would not stretch himself beyond his line, for this had been to
outmeasure himself, and to make Saint Paul greater then he was, either by
gifts, or calling. Man is such a creature, that he can but act pro virth,
according to his power. ^uc^ser is quite flagged by endeavoring to ascend
higher, then an Angelical wing could carry him; Adam brake his neck upon the
banks of Paradise by attempting to attain to that wisdom, which was inhibited
to his nature. It is true, for those things, which are within man's capacity,
Nil mortalibus arduum est. Horat. Non opis est nostrae. Virg. Quid membra
immania prosunt? Ovid. Terra volat. Suidas. Bos, porrecto ultra Taygetum
capite, bibitex Eurota. Plutarch.
and compass, Nothing his hard to mortal men; but as they are mortal men, so
they are circumscribed, and consined in their abilities, and operations; there
are some things, which transcend our might, of which we may say, these things
are out of our verge, what do these man-like members of ours avail us? Would a
man teach nature Paradoxes? or force nature to incongruities? no, these are but
the solaecisms of attempts, and the Monsters of designs, The earth may as soon
fly, and a Bullock stretch his neck beyond Taygetus to drink out of Eurota.
Man's might and mind cannot effect every thing; no, Oh thou valiantest of
Heroes, here thou laboust in vain! The eye of man can see but to the just
distance, and so impossibility does fly the sight. Heroum quondam fortissime
frufira. Ovid. Impossibilitas ^dr^m, fugit aspectum rei. Arist. 7. Metap. c. 29.
Does not the whole cry of scripture witness an impotency in many things? Yes,
Can a Rush grow without mire? Can a Blackmore change his skin? shall horses run
upon the Rock? If thou have run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee,
then how can thou contend with the horsemen? A wounded spirit who can bear?
Who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness? who amongst us can dwell with
the everlasting burnings? who shall declare his generation? will ye plead with
me? shall a man make Gods unto himself, and they are no Gods? when he takes a
prey, who shall make him to restore it? shall any teach God knowledge, that
judges the highest things? These are a part of his ways, but who can
understand his power? can thou resrain the influences of the Pleiades? or
loosen the bands of Orion? can thou bring forth Mazzoroth in their time?
can thou bring forth Arcturus with his Sons? No, there are many things which
are beyond man's list and boundary; in other things he may be complete, but in
these things defective; yea, there are times and stints, which do deprive all
men of a very aptitude, or faculty, to do things at such a season; then they
are disabled, they cannot. Which cannot.

Application.
First, This does show, That Man is a wanting Creature, he does drop out of his
Mothers womb like a lump of indigencies: yea, he is carried up and down a great
while like an empty vessel. How ill does this body agree with us? there is a
kind of imbred debility in us all: our first saluting the world, is to declare
our selves mere weaklings. Quam male no bis hoe corpus conveniat* Seneca. Heu
intuta manens undique debilitas. And. Alciat. Emb. 169. Editus in lucem jacuit
sine viribus infans. Ovid. Non meminisse imagines. Corn. Gallus. Negatio
causae. positio contrarii. Tho. Aqu. 22 ae q. 75. art. 1. c.
Our riches is only in a skin, or our strength in a cry, or our life in
breathing. We understand not who touch us, we know not that we are living, we
cannot so much as remember the images of those things which are presented to
us; we are not only destitute of many things, but they are denied to us; for as
Privation is the want of that which ought to be in us, so Negation is the want
of that which ought not to be in us, not to be in us at such a time; and so
there is in us the subtraction of the cause, which does produce and cause the
position of a contrary disposi^ion; our power then is impotency, and our Can,
Cannot: Oh man make not too much of thy self, speak not too haughtily, look
not scornfully, let thy first light, nakedness, cradle, humble thee, thou were
a green, faint, weak sprig, and spire, thou were at, I can not. Which cannot.

Secondly, This does show, that Negatives for a time do deprive us of all
power. How can thou expect that upon earth, which is denied thee in heaven?
no, we may wish for it, but we cannot; we consult to no purpose, we labor in
vain, we lose our sweat till the constellation be over, till the time of the
Negation be out. Can we do any thing invitu Minerva, against the everlasting
wisdom? against Gods decree? no, it is a fruitless thing to contest with the
heavenly pleasure, to act against Gods prohibition, to wrestle with his
Negative providence. Behold his soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him,
Heb. 2.4. which is lifted up, before the vision lift it up; no, we may seek
help, and be helpless; we may strive, but we cannot. Oh then remain quiet
under accidents and lift not up thine arm till God put strength into it: what
should an Infant do turning Champion? The Israelites may send up a cry to
heaven for their hard bondage, but they must not move a foot out of Egypt, till
Moses be sent for a Leader; the diseased man may lie at the pool of Bethesdah,
but it is in vain to step in, till the Angel do stir the waters. Launch not
out with thy Ship too soon, Naviga secundum fluvium. Eurip. in Anvigone.
Petrarch de expectatione meliorum temporum. Dial. Vbicunque fuerit providentia
frustratur universa contraria. Aug. l. de sin. gul. Cler.
but sail according to the tide. I expect better times, says one in Petrarch:
Expect (says he) first a better decree. Make better men, and the times will be
better, otherwise I am afraid, the times will not be better but worse:
howsoever things are not ruled by men's expectations, but by Gods determination.
Wheresoever Gods providence does govern, it does frustrate all contrary things.
We would be speaking comfortably to the Church, but let us lament the Churches
miseries, and our own sins, till the heavens open our lips; we must not desire
to be at our affirmation, so long as Gods Negative does bind us to silence.
There is a time when we may look for peace, and no quiet, when we may set forth
our selves for Agents? but we may bring forth the wind, spend our strength in
vain; when we would, but we cannot. Which cannot.

3. This serves to show the strength of a Saints confidence; our arm is weak,
happy are they then that lean on the arm of the Lord: though an Horse be a vain
thing for battle, yet he that rides upon the heavens, as an horse may trample
down all before him; though our sword may lay on feeble strokes, yet the sword
of his excellencies may strike home, and strike down; though we have impotency,
yet he has Omnipotency: though we cannot, yet he can: though our ability
cannot relieve us, Illo dante habetur, illo adju vante completur Aug. de
sancta. Virg. Vbi defi cit humanum auxilium incipit divinum, Ferus.
yet may we not be supplied out of his power? Yes, He giving, it is had; he
helping, it is completed. For, Is there any thing impossible to him? No the
finger of God can do more, then Briareus with his hundred hands. Where man's
help does fail, Gods help does begin. God does visit his Church, when the whole
earth does seem to neglect her, and does shoot out his arrow of deliverance
when her quiver is empty; he does make his people go upright, when they are
bowed down so low, that that they have no hopes of rising again; and he does
heal them, when all the money is spent upon Physicians, and the disease does
continue; when no shoulder is thrusting for their dedefence, then they dwell
between his shoulders; when all their Towers of defense are battered down, then
he is a wall of fire round about them; how glorious is God in extremities? how
wonderful in exigents? When Senacherib had rifled Jerusalem, even taken away
all the treasures of the Kings house, and the treasures of the Lords house,
even to the golden Plates of the Temple, and not so contented, he sent up
taunting Rabshakeh to threaten the Jews, that if they would not yield, he would
make them eat their own dung, and drink their own water, and Hezekiah was so
frighted, that he clad himself, and his Nobles in sackeloth, and cried out,
This is a day of trouble, rebuke, and blasphemy; How did God in one night, free
the City of all dread, and lead back this insulting Army with an hook in their
Nostrils. When Asah was brought so low, that he had nothing but the heavenly
aid to depend upon, for he said, Help us, O Lord our God, for we rest on thee.
How did God disperse an Army of ten hundred thousand? When Jehosaphat feared,
and even fainted, for he said, Oh Lord our God, will thou not judge them? for
we have no might against this great company which is come out against us,
neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee How did God tell them
that he would clear the coasts of that formidable Army, without giving a
stroke, for ye shall not need to fight at all, go down only to see the slain,
and take the prey; for God had raised up such a division amongst the Moabites,
Ammonites, and Edomites, that they drew upon themselves, and (as the Scripture
says) helped to destroy one another, insomuch that Jehosaphat came but forth
to see their slaughtered bodies, and to take their rich spoil, and was three
days in gathering it, and could not carry it all away, 2 Chronicles, 20.25. When
the Barbarians brake in with such power against Theodosius, Sozomen. l. 7. c.
43.
that he had nothing but prayers left for his chief strength, how did God on
the sudden strike dead Ruges their Captain miraculously from heaven, and
consumed the rest of the Army with Pestilence, and with fire, and lightning
from heaven? When the Sultan of Egypt came with such forces into Jury, that the
Christians were as astonished persons; how did God put such courage into them,
Aemil l. 4.
that the next day the very faces of the Christians amazed the Infidels, and
they slew an hundred thousand in the field, and got such infinite prey, that
there was never the like seen in the holy Wars. When the Iathuanians, and the
Jaziges, (then Heathens) brake into Polonia with such fury, that they had
wasted a great part of the Country, Cromer. l. 10.
and taken a multitude of Captives, insomuch that L^scus Niger even despaired
to oppose them; how did God by an apparition of Michael the Arch-angell, so
animate him and his Soldiers, that a very small Army feared not to encounter
them, and fought against them puissantly, and successfully, yea he stirred up
the Captives to break off their Chayns, and fight magnanimously, and the women
which they had taken prisoners, frighted them with showts, and their own Dogs
which they had brought with them, welcomed the Polonians into the field, and
flew upon their Masters, and by multitudes worried them in pieces: oh then when
our hearts tremble under miseries, and our eyes are dimmed with continual
weeping, and our joints loosened with fraying terrors; what an excellent thing
is it to wrap up our selves in Gods providence? and to hide our selves under
the shadow of his protection? for how can the hand of the Almighty draw us out
of the bottom of despairing distresses? yes, he is powerful, when we are
impotent, he can, when we cannot. Which cannot.

Discern.
2. Now let us come to the determination, to what subject this defect is
limited, and that is to a matter of knowledge, they did not know, Which cannot
discern. From hence observe, That God does not discern, where man does not
discern; that is, God will not inflict judgment, where men want judgment; he
counts it no reason to judge them, which are destitute of reason; where there
is an imbecility in the intellect, God is so far from punishing such, that he
is pleading for them: so that a state of ignorance is a kind of state of
innocence, inscius, and innocuus, the not knowing, and the not guilty, do
usually go together, for knowledge is the ground of guilt, therefore where
there is carentia scientiae, a want of judgment, there is almost, carentia
reatus, Melior est sidelis ignorantia, quam temeraria scientia. Aug.
Tol^rabilius est Deo quenptiam cum ignorantia in humilitate jacere, quam cum
clatione alta sapere. Greg. l. 17. Moral. Non tibi deputabitur ad culpam, quod
in vitus ignoras. Aug.
a want of guilt. Better is a pure ignorance, then a rash knowledge. It is a
more tolerable thing with God, that one lie in an humble ignorance, then soar
aloft in an elate wisdom. That shall not be imputed to thee for sin, which
against by will thou art ignorant of: for first, there may be a natural
incapacity, and then the dullness of the understanding is a blunting of sharp
reason. That ignorant man may be excused from punishment, which does not find
that which should instruct him. Or secondly, There may be an ignorance, per
difficultatem materiae, By the difficulty of the matter, when objectum (...)
radians non percipitur, A dazzling object cannot be discerned by a weak eye: Now
there is a great indulgence for such an ignorance; for, explicit faith is for
an explicit judgment, H^b^tudo m^ntis est acutae rationis obtusio. Hugo. Ille
ignor ins pot^st excusari a pot^^a, qui quod dis^^ret, non inv^nit. Aug.
otherwise unlearned men might be cut down by Cartloads as fuel for Hell, for
want of the sap of knowledge: an entire and distinct knowledge belongs to all
instructed, but not in an entire manner, all by the necessity of the precept
(it they be of ripe years, and have evident manifestation) are bound to know
those things which are revealed in Scripture to be true, but by the necessity
of the means they are chiefly bound to know but such things as principally, and
essentially belong to the Redeemer, and Redemption, Justification,
Sanctification, and such as are the necessary, constitutive, parts of
salvation; the Catholic faith they must not be ignorant of, but the
Scholastical, problematical, polemical faith, they are not absolutely enjoynd
to; for if a man should oblige illiterate and undisciplined men to the
mysteries of the Trinity, the secrets of the Hypostaticall union, the
Modalities of the Mediator ship, the speculations of Christ's passion, the
intricacies, and scruples of the resurrection with varieties of notions in this
kind, this obligation would be sued against so many Nonsolvents, that not only
a Captas might be served upon the third part of the Laity, but a great company
of the Clergy might be carried to Prison with them. All the difficulty I know
does lie in this, to know what an entire faith is; Duraud 3. d. 25. q. 1.
Occham. Dial. p. 1. l. 3 c. 1. Bannes 22. p. 349. Altisiod. Sum. l. 3. tr. 3.
c. 1. q. 5. Grass decis. aur. l. 2. c. 8. n. 16.
now though I do not hold with some, that it is only an assent of the mind to
some general, and universal thing, wherein diverse particulars are contained,
with a will not to believe any thing that is opoposite to these, and to submit
to the Church for the distinct understanding of the particulars, for this were
to make an entire faith, a confused, and aenigmaticall faith, the very Chaos
not more dark: and I wonder that they which hold, that they which err in one
point are Heretics in all the rest, can put such a stupid, stark-blind faith
into particular men's breasts; which I find is an opinion so full of dangerous
and destructive blindness, that the most learned of that side, though they
have not quite disclaimed the point controverted, yet they have rejected the
rigor of it; Eymericus holding, Eymetic. p. 1.4.7. n. 8 Vasa 2 disp. 121.
Pezant. 22. q. 2. art. 8. disp. 1.
that all the Articles of faith are explicitly to be belived, and Vasquez.
says, that by distinct faith the redemption of Christ, the mystery of the
Incarnation, all the principal articles in the Creed, and all points needful
for the ordering of life, and working aright are to be believed by an unfolded
faith, and Pezantius is so large, that he says the Articles touching the
unity, essence, and Trinity of the persons, Creation, Remission, eternal life,
the Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, and second coming of Christ, Baptism, the
Lords Supper, Confession, the ten Commandments, the prayers in the Catechism
are clearly, and necessarily to be believed. So that an entire faith is not an
implicated thing, restrained to one thing, out the general is made very
distributive, and diffusive in many singular, and particular things; yet this
entireness of faith do I hold but only in things necessary, not accessory to
salvation, I mean for the evidence of faith; for faith being of things not
seen, and faith and knowledge being two distinct habits, a man may believe many
things that he does not know, as the Scripture says expressly for the joys
of Heaven, 1 Cor. 2.9. knowledge is inseparable from faith in things revealed,
as they are revealed either in themselves, or to us; but not so in
Ecclesiastical propositions, and tendries, except they be (due diligence being
used) very perspicuously manifested, and it is an hard thing for the best
Church to have a full spiritual anointing, to prophecy upon matters of faith
like the Holy Ghost, and to write out her decrees with the Sunbeam. For seeing
the whole Catholic Church cannot make one new Article of faith, I believe she
is limited in knowledge: and as the Angels have not perfect knowledge, but
according to their state; so the Church has not absolute, and complete
understanding. Therefore if an humble Believer in these things should have
obscurity and darkness, not to bring in a positive affirmation, I believe it
is no very damnable ignorance; for he does not understand, and he Cannot
discern. So that ye see both a natural incapacity, and the difficulty of the
matter may excuse from sin, and in the third place, the strength of temptation,
only that subtle wits may induce to evil things, with such a speciousnesse
of good, that the most virtuous man may oftentimes be led away; if therefore
there be a pure ignorance both of the law and the fact, and the seduced person
does not suspect any thing of evil in the attempt, Non suspicatur de malitia
actionis. Advertit rationem justi.
(as the Casuists say) but does aim in his attentions at that which is just,
he being persuaded by others, that that is the Law, which is not the Law, and
that that is an honorable action, which is most dishonorable; he having
neither perverseness, nor contumacy in his breast, this error is almost not a
curse; for both forgetfulness, and inadvertency, if they be true,
Circumctantiae valde immutantes naturam actionts.
and real, are high circumstances to change the nature of the action; the
guilt therefore does not stick upon these misled people, but upon them, which
sin out of malicious wickedness; these may sin materially, but not formally;
they may do evil, but think no evil, purpose no evil; they may be drawn to
put an hand to a wicked cause, but they are they which sin with both hands
earnestly, that are the true culpable Actours; as in the matter of Abs alon,
the Devil in the business was Achi ophel, which was the Oracle of the cause,
and not those which went in simplicity of heart, and knew nothing. 2 Samuel
15.11. So that ye see in many respects, that though ignorance be an ignominy,
yet it is not absolute impiety. Do not the Scripture give in abundant testimony
to confirm this? yes, if the whole Congregation sin through ignorance, and the
thing be hid from the eyes of the Assembly, Levit. 4.13. there is a sacrifice
of atonement permitted. God appointed Cities of refuge for sins of ignorance,
even for them, which shed blood unawares, and unwittingly. Jos. 20.2, 3. If
intention do specify actions, then where there is no insight into a thing,
there can be no intention, and for want of an evil intention, there is no
evil man; the predominant thing in irregularity is the will, therefore he
which is involuntary is well nigh inculpable. In the 45. Ezech. 20. God was
pleased to appoint a means of reconciliation, for the house of the simple. What
a fervent Petition did Habbacuck put up for these kind of trespasses? A prayer
of Habbacuck the Prophet, for the ignorances of the people. Hab. 3.1. In this
case our Savior was pleased to pray for his very murderers, Father forgive
them, they know not what they do. Luke 23.34. The Apostle does assure much
comfort both to the Jews and Gentiles upon this ground, to the Jews, I wot that
through ignorance ye did it. Acts 3.17. to the Gentiles, the times of this
ignorance God winked at. Acts 17.10 he confesses, that he himself was admitted
Saint upon this point of indulgence. I obtained mercy, because I did it
ignorantly through unbelief. 1 Timothy 1.13. Shall Mephibosheth be adjudged
unfaithful to David, that he went not along with him to aid him in the
general defection, when he was lame of both his feet, and his servant had
conveyed away his Ass? so, shall any be punished by God Almighty, which are
disabled to understand, and satisfy the command? No, that God that would not
have a stumbling block put before the blind. Levit. 19.14. will not himself
break the bones of the blind, if he does stumble through infirmity. If a man
has his neighbors goods committed to him, if he ought not to answer for them,
if they were taken out of his house without his knowledge, then doubtless a
man ought not to be responsible for that which he cannot any way prevent. Who
can expect a deaf man to hear? a Bedridden man to walk? the dry Pools to flow
with water? the flinty rocks to be fruitful fields? or the ignorant to be
obedient? No, Justice has no place, where man has no power, unless by his
own default he has lost it. How do God plead here for an ignorant people? God
cannot but spare where men cannot discern. Should not I spare Nineveh that
great City, wherein are more then sixscore thousand persons, which cannot
discern?

Application.
1. This serves first, to open the door of hope in the valley of Achor, for
impotent persons to enter by, or to show God upon his mercy-seat, shining with
a face of grace upon all truly disabled persons. God has no balance to weigh
moates in, that have no weight in them; nor no Ax to hew the wind, which has
no power to make resistance; he has no wrath against them, which know not how
to provoke him; nor justice against them, which cannot discern. Scienti, and
non sacienti: To him that knows his Masters will, and does it not, he shall
be beaten with many stripes: but God has no Rod to whip them which were never
taught their lesson. It is true, the evil servant said, That God was an hard
Master, which gathered where he did not strew, Non est consequens, ut contimo
erret, quis quis ali juid n^scit. Aug. Peccator non est, qui non apprehendit
verum sed qui approbat falsum. Aug Vtraqu^ cognitio Dei, and tui tibi est
n^cessaria ad salutem, quia sicut ex no titia tui v^nit timor D^i, ita ex Dei
notitia amor; De ignorantia tui sup^r bia, ac de Dei ignorantia venit
desperatio. Bern.
but the good God is not to be judged by the evil servant; for God might
gather of him, because he had found him strewing, for he had bestowed a Talent
upon him, and he had hid it, therefore not his insufficiency, his want, but his
indiligence, his sloth was punished, It is not consequent that he must err,
which does not understand a thing. Not he is the faulty person, which does not
apprehend the truth, but he which does approve of ^alshood: Indeed there is an
abridgement of Christianity which every one must learn, namely to know God and
our selves; and this short lessen every one must be exact in, for by the
knowledge of thy self, there is instilled into thee the fear of God, and by
the knowledge of God, there is kindled in thee a love of his promise. If thou
know not thy self, there will be nothing but pride; if thou know not God,
there will be nothing but despair. But this compendious Divinity being gotten,
and all the necessary things which are requisite for this prime art; other high
sublime things may be dispensed with, which appertain to these things, if we
have not means, and opportunity, qualifications, and endowments, to attain to
them; the substance we are tied to, but not the appendances, appurtenances,
especially where God does deny power and faculties. The ungifted person, is an
unquestioned person, mere nescience carries her pardon in her hand For will
God contend with Cripples? cut the throats of them which know not how to make a
thrust at him? exact tribute of them, to whom he has given no stock to pay
him? surprise men asleep, accuse them for not eying of precepts and principles,
which live in the dark? no, let Minos and Rhada na^^th^^s be thus rigid, but
the merciful God is not so sev^re. He does not expect of Babes to digest
strong meat, nor exact the daily tasks of the family from sick servants; He
requires of a man according to that he has, and not according to that he has
not, 2 Chronicles. 8.12. No law does bind unless it be manifest: Therefore if thou
can but understand necessary faith, and duty, trouble not thy self, if thou
can not understand mysteries; for God thou see here would not judge the
ignorant, but does plead for them; he would spare them, because they could not
discern: Which cannot discern.

Secondly, This does serve to spring compassion in men's breasts toward the
ignorant; for oh that man's bar does condemn those whom Gods bar does acquit!
should severity be expressed toward them which want judgment? should we have
a Gibbit for the non-intelligent? or an Ax for the ignorant? No, oh holy
simplicity, Stumpsius.
as John Husse cried out at his death: to execute justice upon such, were like
the Athenians, who took up Arms against the poor Pismires, in the mountains
of Hymettus, for keeping their gold from them. Tully never gat more credit,
S^idas.
then in defending the young Noble men of Rome, for not doing every thing
according to the Rules of War, pleading that they were not yet attained to
years sufficient to perform all things according to martial dipline: Oh what a
slaughterhouse has there been made in the world by severe sentences?
Damasippus kills the Citizens of Rome like sacrifices, Sabel. l. 3. Aenead. 6.
because Marius the younger did but continue a little amongst them. Usuncassan,
killed his Son Masubeus, though young, and not capable of treason, Fulgos. l.
5. c. 8
because he suspected, that in time he would take part with his Mother
Gu^lumonech. Theodosius the younger, sending a great Apple (which had cost him
an hundred pieces of silver) to his Empress Eudoxia, and she sending it to
Paulinus, Cedren:
and he presenting it again to the Emperor: Theodosius imagining that there
was too much familiarity between him and his Empress, though poor Paulinus was
wholly innocent and ignorant, within a short time after he took off his head
for it. Plut. de util. Inimie.
Pausanias was accused of treason, because he did but use Themistocles with
honor, and interchange Letters with him. Domitian executed Hermogenes
Tarsensis, because he made but a few strange Pictures in a History, Sueton.
and crucified the Artisants which drew the figures. He destroyed Metius
Pompusianus, because he kept but a Globe of the world in his house, and had
certain Orations taken out of Livy, of Kings and Captains. The presence of Ivan
Basiliwich, Emperor of Mesco, was so dangerous, that he made away many, if
they did but laugh, Alexand. Guagn. in desc. Muscov.
because he thought they derided him; or whisper together, because he conceived
they were talking of Treason. Tiberius was so cruel, that no day was free from
punishment, not the most holy, and every crime was capital: if kinsmen did but
lament the death of their friends, it was cause enough to dye with them; if
Virgins were but maliced, and accused, they were sure to suffer; And whereas by
an ancient custom of Rome, Sueton.
it was not lawful to put to death Virgins, whilst they continued in their
virginity, he would cause them first to be deflowred by the Executioner, and
then to be strangled; yea, guiltlessnesse in those days was so little a
protection, that if persons were but questioned, they would either stab their
selves at home, or drink poison in the open Court, rather then suffer his
bloody sentence to pass upon them; And oh that Christiany had taught us more
justice! Are there none in other Lands, though Christian, that dye upon
suspicions, and suffer for such things that they know not of, but the first
notice of the crime coms from the lips of a desperate witness? Is innocence or
ignorance any sparing plea? are not many made transgressors for a word, and for
such a word as has a sinister interpretation from the intention of the
speaker? or, if some do but transgress, is not a community oftentimes
endangered, which never knew, nor heard any thing of the design? if men be but
accused, is it not enough to be condemned? does it stand with the honor of a
Bar, to dismiss them as guiltless persons which appear before it? Christendom
is large, and it seems to teach all the world truth and virtue, but I doubt
all her Pulpits have not sanctified her judgment seats; the souls under the
Altar groan, and I am afraid the blood under the Tribunalls do cry. If it
should be so, what is this but to wrest judgment? Deuteronomy. 16.19. To pervert
judgment, 1 Samuel 8.3. to turn judgment into gall, and the fruit of
Righteousness into wormwood, Amos 5.7. Oh therefore let the Judge pity, and
the Jury tender all them which are not conscious of the fact; let the subtle
Foxes and savage Tigers be destroyed, but let not a slaughter be made of the
innocent Lambs; let the Ostriches, and birds of prey be caught and crushed; but
let not the necks of the harmless Doves (which have neither the nature, nor
desire to do mischief) be wrong off: free them which have neither brain nor
breast for illegal actions, spare them which do not discern: Which cannot
discern.

Thirdly, This does serve to show what is the justifiable ignorance, namely
that which cannot discern; not that which may discern, and will not; but that
which would, and cannot discern; if helps be administered, it is not ignorantia
supina and crassa, supine and gross ignorance, which does come from debility of
judgment; but it is desidiosa and affectata, slothful and affected ignorance,
which does accompany gifts and abilities; it is negligentia, non impotentia;
negligence, not impotency: incuria, non incapacitas; recklessnesse, not
incapacity: it is not ignorance, ex absentia auxiliorum, from the absence of
means, but e socordia exercitiorum, from the disuse of exercises; if ratio
directiva agendi, the directive reason of doing; and aptitudo sciendi, the
aptitude of knowing be present: then the defect is not inevitable, but
voluntary; for when a man does not know such things as a man is bound to know,
then he does not things only ignoranter, sed per ignorantiam, as the Casuists
say, ignorantly, but through ignorance, that is a contracted ignorance; for it
is not ignorance of improbable things, which all, or the greater part do not
understand, or of insuperable things, which no man constituted in such
condition has conceived; but it is of possible things, which if due industry
were used, might be apprehended: now then ye see what ignorance it is that will
excuse, not privative, but negative; not vincible, but invincible; not
acquired, but imbred ignorance; not ignorance of election, or an evil
disposition, but ignorance of nature. There is a great difference between them
which understand not Gods ways, and those which desire not a knowledge of his
ways, Job 21.14. Between them which are destitute of knowledge, and these
which do reject knowledge, Hos. 4.6. Between them which are deprived of sight,
and those which close their eyes, Mat. 13.15. Beware them which rub their eyes
to see, and those which have a spirit of slumber, Multa scienda nesciuntur, aut
sciendi incuria, aut discendi desidia, aut inquirendi verecundia, and quidem
hujusm^di ignorantia non habet excusationem. Bern.
Romans 11.8. Beware them which are judicially ignorant, and those which are
willingly ignorant, 2 Pet. 3.5. Many things to be known are not understood,
either through neglect of knowing, or backwardness of learning, or
bashfulnesse of inquiry, and this ignorance has no excuse. Oh then thou which
have the springs open, and yet wilt draw no waters out of the wells of
salvation, which have the sincere milk dropping upon thy lips, and yet wilt not
suck the breast, which have wedges and ingots of tried gold cast out of infinite
Pulpits; and yet art as indigent in principles, as if there were no Temple
treasure to be had; thou must not think to have ignorance thy plea of comfort,
but thy indictment, thy conviction, thy doom; all thy formal attendances, lost
hours, fruitless Pulpit-haunts, will return with terror upon thy soul, for
thy understanding is not perfected, thy conscience is not settled, thou art no
more instructed then an infidel, nor reformed, then if thou had never trod
upon Church-ground. Take heed therefore how thou do infatuate thy self, or
drink thy damnation-draught out of this enchanted cup. Ignorance is a motive of
pity, but not desperate, fostered, nourished, and habituated ignorance; no,
God does not spare them, which will not discern, but those which cannot
discern. Which cannot discern.

Fourthly, this does reprove them which sin against their own Discernings,
which can discern, and do discern, and yet their words are stout against God.
Mal. 3.12. they are Cockatrices, that will not be charmed. Jer. 7.17. they
trespass against their inward checks, and sin against the very impulsions of
conscience. Oh if wilful ignorance be a sin, what is wilful presumption? when
men have rare endowments, and astonishable demeanor, when they have excellency
of gifts, and horror of conversation; when they are as bright as Seraphims in
knowledge, and as black as Beelzebub in behavior; when they are privy to their
own prevarications, and yet for morsels of bread, and handfulls of barley, for
a few temporary rewards, and perishing preferments they will transgress; If I
have any experience to know the Bench of defiance, this is the Seat of the
scornful; If I have any judgment, to understand what cauterising is, this is
the conscience seared with a hot Iron; If I have any skill in the Stone-heap,
this is the Pharaohs heart. What? discern, and yet disobey, what is this but
Nimrods Tower? or Lucifers wing imped with the feathers of haughtiness, and
arrogance? they sin against revealed truth, the Vision is made plain upon
tables, so that he that runs may read it; but though the Vision be never so
evident, what care they for the light of Scriptures? Nicet. l. 1.
no, they have nothing but the beams of their own designs, which do shine
bright in their eyes: as Ibancus, when Alexius Angelus sent Alexius Palaeolagus
with the open Bible in his hand to reclaim him from his Insurrection, he
committed him to Prison with the Scripture in his hand; so it is enough to
deserve fetters, to urge Scripture. Secondly, they sin against their own
attestations, Why then have thou not kept the oath of the Lord? 1 Kings 2.43.
an oath is a bond upon the Soul, but these bonds are as easily broken as
Sampson brake the cords of the Philistines; For, for all the solemn oaths in
the days of Andronicus Comnenus, and Isaacius Porphyro genitus, men's teeth
were pulled out, Nicetas de imper. Isaacii Porphyrog.
their lips cut off, and the envied persons thrown into dungeons: Oaths in
those days were a low fence which many men could easily leap over. Thirdly
they sin against Counsel, that whereas, next the mouth of God, the mouth of
the Wise is the best Oracle which men can consult with; yet as Lewis the 11th
of France, used his Counselors to hear them rather then to be directed by
them, so men of old did prosecute what they had concluded against the judgment
of the purest Saints, Valor M. l. 9. c. 5.
and the cry of all Christendom. Yea, if the Authors which did act these things
in those days, were men which had pretended so much piety, that a man would
have thought the confirmed Angels could as soon have fallen from their
steadfastness, as they from the honor of their profession; and what did they
but such things, as except they should have struck at the face of God, and
endeavored to pluck the Crown from his head, deny him, and disavow him, they
could not have done worse; and by what instruments did they effect these
things? by such, as unless they had borrowed tools from Cyclops himself, more
fatal Engines could not have been employed; and for what ends did they do it?
not to cleanse religion, for the Church if it had before a little soil in it,
did in their days become a sink, but it was to gather windfalls, and to warm
themselves at the flame of combustions; and where did they it? even in the Land
of their Nativity, and in the birthplace of their Christianity; and when did
they it? even when all Nations stood admiring the bliss of the Land, and no
doubt the very Angels of Heaven rejoiced over the prosperity, and zeal of the
Church. Such sinners there have been in former times and other Lands. Now is it
not an astonishment to behold such sins? Is there a more grievous offender then
he that does presumptuously, and will not hearken? Deuteronomy. 17.12. No, Keep thy
servant from presumptuous sins, that they do not get the dominion over me. Ps.
19.13. the dominion of Pharaoh was not so ill; no, it is next to him that was
possessed with the Spirit, called Legion. Who is he, and where is he, that
durst presume in his heart to do so? Esther 7.5. Oh will conscience never
awaken? yes, those guilts which are now lulled asleep by the songs of
self-willed humors, and popular applause, when they have slumbered out their
hours will rise up like wild furies; and who would, for thy present imaginary
satisfactions, have thy future bitter conflicts? will death never knock at thy
door? yes, as it has broken into the Palaces of Princes, and congealed their
blood royal; so they are not thy broad gates that can keep it out, nor thy
sprightly spirit that can fence off that exanimating blow; Ambition has but a
faint breath in the nostrills, thou which have often been pinched by death,
must at last endure her killing gripe; that rocky body of thine will at last
cleave, and that stony heart of thine will at last like Na^al's, die within
thee like a stone; and what benefit will it be to thee, when thou art wrestling
with the Prongs of death, that thou have wrastled thus in the world to prepare
terrors for thy death-Couch? oh what a sad parting will there be between thy
spirit and thy presumptuous sins? will Doomsday never come? yes, whatsoever
capital enemies thou have driven out of thy sight, yet thou can not expel
the Judge, but he will face thee, and force thee to trial. For, We must all
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, not to look on him, but to be
looked into by him, to receive those things, which are done in our bodies,
whether they be good, or whether they be evil. And oh when thou shall be
plucked out of thy grave to bring along with thee such a load of guilts upon
thy back, spotted with all thy black speckles, deep-died in all thy crimson
steines, without either Solicitour, or Counselor to assist thee, Churchman to
preach up thy case, or Swordman to defend thy person, thou and thy naked soul
being only to act all at that Bar; how shall that Bar, and that prisoner, that
soul and that sentence, that Judge and those presumptuous sins agree? oh who
would for a few haughty looks, arrogant attempts, insolent bravings, to vaunt
over known precepts, and defy manifest Laws, venture to be fettered in that
long, and strong chain, to be skal'd in that fierce and inextinguishable
furnace, to storm with those tempests of tears, to chatter with those grinding
torments, to be adjudged to weeping and gnashing of teeth? Oh adulterers, and
adulteresses, Blasphemers, Epicures, Oppressors, Persecutors, Tyrants, hear
afar off the last trump blowing; behold at a distance the sign of the Son man
appearing in the clouds, set up Christ Jesus Tribunal in your consciences,
before ye come to make your district, and impartial account before that white
Throne: Oh that ye would not pluck the eyes out of your heads whilst ye are
living, that ye would put the right eye into your heads before ye die; that ye
would not draw up the sentence in self-damning letters, that ye would not begin
Doomesday in convictions; If our hearts condem us, God is greater than our
hearts, and knows all things. If the man be speechless, then the next words
are, Take him, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into outer darkness: Oh
that I could warn you from these guilts! that I could separate and save you
from presumptuous sins: for what confidence can ye have, when it shall be
urged, that ye knew both the crime, and the curse? what shall ye be able to say
for your selves, when it shall be said to you, that ye did discern? thoughts
accusing are unanswerable witnesses, the sear which begets pain is a sad
convulsion-fit. Thine own heart knows. Eccles. 7.22. Out of thine own mouth
will I judge thee, oh evil servant. Luke 19.22. are silencing objections* oh
think I beseech you in time of those two dreadful sayings, that in John 9.41.
If ye were blind ye should have no sin, but now ye say, we see, therefore your
sin remains, and that in the 15 of John 22. I^ I had not come, and spoken to
them, they had not had sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin; this same
Seeing of theirs makes them go broad-waken to fell, this same speaking of
Christ will make them liable to inevitable damnation. They cannot desire sire
better light, no they say, We see; they cannot wish for a new interpreter, for
Christ has spoken to them. Whatsoever sin may be wiped off from the score, yet
such a sin remains, whosoever may pretend some excuse for their sin, yet
these have no cloak for their sin. Indeed to what end are very featured men, or
carry upon them the fairer physnomy of Christians; to what end are Scriptures,
Temples, Sacraments, Vows, Devotions, the presence of Saints, the examples of
Martyrs, Angels or Spirit, Judgment or Conscience, if people care not to
bicker with their own hearts-strooks? such sins are the precipice of the soul,
the threshould of hell, and above all other sins a thousand times, do deserve
the thunderbolt of God. Praecipitiwn animae. Jeron. ^^imen insernt. Greg.
^illies fulm^n Dei merentur. Chrysostom.
For Herod's shining Gown, and Asuerosh's Empire, would I not stand at the last
day amongst presumptuous sinners. Blessed is he which condemns not himself
in that which he allows, Romans 14.22. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of
our conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12. Oh therefore leap not the ditch, to get to the
bank of your own affected aims; skip not out at the window to walk after
corrupt nature, put not on your own fetters to make your selves slaves, step
not into the Pesthouse where ye know the infection rages, seek not out Satan,
sight not out the way to hell, bring not diseases upon your selves, shed not
your own blood, cast not your selves wilfully into the bottomless pit, sin not
against the light of your own Notebooks, and those fairer Manuscripts in your
own souls, turn not out of the beaten path, vary not from what ye do discern.
The knowing sinner is a prodigious sinner, the self blind trespasser, is worse
then the Egyptian with his hand-caught darkness; or Zedekiah, with his eyes
torn out, a sighting conscience is more terrible then Goliath of Gath to
encounter with. God has no mercy for obstinate sinners, which do commit sin,
though they do discern it; no, he will only spare them which cannot discern.
Should not I spare Nineveh that great City, wherein are more then sixscort
thousand persons which cannot discern.

Between their right hand, and their left hand?

Praeter aduitos, (...) intelligentes sumplusquam duod ^iesmillia hominu^^ --
Domino parvulos and simplices homines ma^ime curae esse. Chelm. in lot.
3. Now let us come to the degree; Between their right hand, and their left
hand By such are understood Insants. Besides men of ripe age, and intelligent,
there are sixscore thousand, and more, of other men -- So that children and
simple men are highly cared for by God, says Chelmannus. Simple men we had
before, and now God does proceed to children which cannot discern between the
right hand, and the left. God does search out a cause, why he should be moved
to mercy toward Insant, which were not come to the years of discretion, Causam
exquirit p^opter quam moveatur ad mi sericordiamerga infant^s, qui ad
discretionts annos nondum venerant, cum carerent judicio. Baro. in loc. Multi
essent infantes, qui nondum propriis de lictis fu^rant tale exitium promeriti.
Call. vin in loc. Inter dexteram and sinistram, phrasis haec est petita a pueris
qui nesciunt utrum dextra and sinistra sit valentior, and usui cuilibet aptior.
Rupert. in loc. sic. Cornel. a Lapide, Arias montanus, Pappus Ribera, and malti
alii.
seeing they want judgment, namely because they could not discern between the
right hand, and the left, says Baro. There were many Insants which had not
deserved such a destruction by their own sins, says Calvin. Be^ween the right
hand, and the left; this is a phrase taken from children, which know not
whether the right hand, or the left, he stronger, and more apt for any use,
says Rupert. And to the same purpose does Cornelius a Lapide, Arias Montanus,
Pappus Ribera, and many others declare their opinions. I shall not stand upon
the curious observations which many have insisted upon, as that God has
completely furnished us, in giving us two feet, two eyes, and two hands; and
that some things are more serviceable to God Almighty then others, as our right
hand to us is more useful then the left; and that by the right hand and left,
we should learn to distinguish between truth and falsehood; and many the like
strange conclusions drawn out of these words, which I shall pass over, because I
hold them too subtle speculations. I shall stand only upon that which I
conceive is most natural to the Text, which is this Observation, That
knowledge is incompatible with Infancy, for they cannot discern between their
right hand, and their left hand. As the man is, so is his strength, Judge. 8.21.
So as the child is, so is his judgment. Woe to thee, O Land, when thy King is a
child, Eccles. 10.16. That is, when he does want, not years, but wisdom; which
does intimate that a child is not come to years of discretion, knowledge does
proceed from observation, for I have learned by experience. Genesis 30.27. Now can
a child resolve upon accidents? or try conclusions? was there ever heard of an
Academy of Infants? no, Christ which was Comprehensor from the beginning, and
had his knowledge of union perfected at the first hour of his quickening, yet
his experimental knowledge came by degrees, therefore it is said, That he
increased in wisdom, Luke 2.52. The habit of wisdom he had at the first,
Scientia Christi be ata augmentata non fuit, quia omnia videbat in Verbo; nec
scientia Christi ind ta, and infusa, quia a principio plenarie habuit omnes
species intelligibiles: tota quaestio est de scientia ac suisita, and si haec
incrementum non habuisset, null a scientia Christi augmentata saisset. Aquin.
And though many h^ld no acquisite knowledge in Christ, and Tho. Aquin. once
published his opinion to that purpose in 3. S^nt. did. 14. q. 3. art. 3. yet
he modestly recanted this error in 3. p. of his Sums. q. 9. art. 4.^. and 3.
p. 9.12. art. 3. c. saying, That though Christ learned nothing of men nor
Angels, yet that his experimental knowledge was increased, Luc. 2. and he
yields a reason, that seeing Christ received a reasonable soul, sequitur quod
in anima Christi aliquis habitus sci^ntia fucrit qui per abstractionem
specierum potuerit augmentari, for though the intellectus possibilis had the
species of all things in it from the first, yet the intellectus agens knew
things in act, in succession of time, the knowledge of Christ being increased
not according to essence, but effect, non accipiendo sed pandendo. Greg. Peter
Lomb. 3. sea. did. 24.
but the exercise of wisdom he had in time. Butter and Honey shall he eat,
till he know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, Isai. 7.15. So that till
he had left the breast, and was come for some space to a change of diet ( butter
and honey) his knowledge in this kind was not practical, the following verse (
v. 16.) does declare it: for before the child shall know to refuse the evil,
and choose the good, the Land which thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both
her Kings. Before the child shall know, then he did not always know. And if
Christ must have time to exert his wisdom, what other child at first can be
complete? No, of that prophetical child, called Mahershalulhazhaz, it is said,
before the child shall have knowledge to cry, My Father, my Mother the riches
of Damascus, and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken away by the Kings of
Assyria, Isai, 8.4. So that the understanding of children is at first so weak,
that they know not vulgar things, even to give just titles to them, which have
the nearest relation to them, not to call Father and Mother. Saint Paul could
say, When I was a child, I did as a child, as if nothing but childish
expressions were to be expected from such. Amongst all the prime things of
nature which were from the foundations of the world, name me an intellectual
Infant, one that delivered Principles, and taught Maxims in his
swadling-clowts, I mean by the force of his natural powers only. I confess I
read, Plin. l. 11. c. 52.
That the Son of Croesus, at the age of six months, spoke, and saved his
Fathers life; and that Sigebert, the Son of Dugobert, the fortieth day after
his birth, being baptized by Amandus, Sigebert in Chron. Anno Dom. 633.
plainly answered, Amen; and that in the year 1117. there was an Infant lying
in the Cradle, made a long continued speech to his Mother busied in her
family-cares, Dodechinus in appendice. Mar. Scot.
wishing her not to be too intent upon worldly things, for God was ready to be
revenged on the world instantly, if the Virgin Mary standing at the Throne of
God, did not intercede to have the judgment prolonged; and many other like to
these instances I have heard of in former and latter times, but these things
were done by mircale, and not by the ordinary course of nature, and so indeed
God may make the senseless Infant, as well as the dumb Ass to speak; but of it
self the Infant, as an Infant has no knowledge. I have read of Infants born
with teeth, but never of any which had birth and reason together. As in the day
of the Nativity, the Navel is not cut, the breasts not fashioned, the hair not
grown, Ezech. 16. So the understanding is not come to any measure of
discretion. Infans is not only non sans, but as some more exact Etymologists
say, it does come of the verb insatuo. Indeed I so find it often in the vulgar
translation, Relinque infantiam, leave thy foolishness, Prove. 9.6. that is thy
infancy. Infatua quaeso consilium Achitophelis. Turn I beseech thee, the
wisdom of Achitophel into foolishness. 2 Samuel 15.15. that is, make him as
simple in counsailas a witless Infant. Certain Pelagiaris held that Infants
had knowledge, and were able to be guilty of actual sins; Quomodo Deum
agnoscant, qui nec Mammas, nec Matrem agnoscant? Aug. l. 1. de pec. mor. c. 35.
but Saint Augustine does not only confute them, but deride them. How can they
acknowledge God, which know neither breast, nor Mother? Therefore Petrarch does
give very solid comfort to a Parent bewailing the denth of his Infant, wishing
him not only not to be dismayed with any worldly chance, or not to be
afflicted, seeing his child had escaped these afflictions, but chiefly to
rejoice because the state of a dying Infant is without any danger; Turpiter
perire non potest, qui sine peccatis periit. Petrarch.
for says he, An Infant cannot perish shamefully, which does depart without
sin. What sin can they have, which have not knowledge? they are so far from
that, that they understand not the place of their births, their Fathers door,
the parts of their body, not the right hand from the left. Should not I spare
Nineveh that great City, wherein are more then sixscore thousand persons, which
cannot discern between their right hand, and their left hand?

Application.
First, Omnium rerum principia parva sunt Cicer. 5.5. de fin. Incipere noti
esse pusillum, sed ju^^a pusillum La^rt. in vita Socratis. Principium anima
sequitur Plot. En. 6. l. 7. c. 23. Plat. in Xenoph. Hoc vellus a me non
Carminatur. Suidas!
this she weth that wisdom has a diminutive beginning. The beginnings of all
things are very small. Socrates said, It was not a little, but next to a
little, to begin. The Soul does follow the beginning. If it does follow the
beginning, then it was no great Leader before. What can there be found in
tabula rasa? in an empty table? When Zenophon came first to Socrates, he asked
him where men might be made good? he told him, he knew not; Then follow me,
says Socrates. So indeed, being young, we neither know what good is, nor where
it is to be had; but by much following, and waiting, this skill is attained
unto. Xenocrates his young scholar was termed Wool unearded; and so at first
the comb has not touched us, we are like a rough fleece which is not broken
with the sharp teeth. This is man's beginning; now what is the reason that so
few can remember their beginning? oh that we could shake our bags to the first
penny of our means, that we could see the thrum from which the web took her
first threads, how then could the intelligent, be insolent? no, this is one of
the strangest sorceries, and maddest enchantments, which can be, that a wiseman
should be a proud man. Gyraldus.
For, if God does give understanding, and wisdom to the wise. Dan. 2.21. then
what is the reason, that Knowledge pusseth up? 1 Cor. 8.1. It was a vain thing
in Q. Ennius to hold that the soul of Homer was in him; and for Demonax to
proclaim himself to be the first: and only wise man of the times, for as
Agathocles told him if thou be the first, how art thou the only? if the
only, how the first so is it, E^as. l. 8. Apoph.
for any amongst us to swell upon endowments, and to idolize their own rare
gifts. These same Insects of vain glory, are the strangest little humming bags
of pride that can be imagined; Animula ^anae gloriae. August.
It may be that they are acute, but how long has this edge been upon them?
perhaps they are wise, but what droves of notions did there stand in the
Fair-stead of their brains a few years since? oh therefore let them bless God,
and not magnify themselves in these conveyed perfections for if God had not
given them more judgment, then Nature at first bestowed upon them, we should
have heard little of their great reading* or grand experience. Their first
knowledge was so small, that it is a shame even to name it; they know not, I
say God, or a Church, or the right way to Heaven, but they knew not their right
midwife their right nourse, not their right hand from their left* Which cannot
discern between their right hand, and between their left hand.

Secondly, this does show how necessary the strict education of children is,
son is it not fit to provide much for them, which by nature do enjoy so little?
yes, Teach a child the trade of his way. Ye Fathers bring up your Children in
the nurture, and education of the Lord; if thou would have them either Sages
or Saints, it is requisite to prepare them a brain stock, and a
conscience-lively hood, or else thou may leave them too much thine own, and
let them shift in the world like unprovided children with their simple
Naturalls; the breast is not more necessary, then instruction; nor the Fathers
bosom, then the Masters tongue. Does a Patrimony consist only in Rents, and
Royalties, and large Debtbooks? no, then thou may leave a rich heir, but not
a wise child; there is a richer treasure to be had, then that which thou have
locked up in thy coffer, and more precious Jewels, then those which thou, or
thy Ancestors have provided for thy Son, therefore send him abroad to search
for these, and give him stock to make a purchase. Indeed the Parent should be
the grand Tutour to his child; for the ancient Egyptians would suffer children
to learn nothing but of their own Fathers; and Agasicles being demanded, Herod.
l. 6. Se little discipulum malle esse, quorum esset and filius. Plut. in Apoph
Laconicis. Xenophon.
why he would not resort to Philopanes to learn Philosophy of him. No, said he,
my Father is able to instruct me in this, and it does belong most conveniently
to him to give Wisdom, who has given Nature. Where Parents have been diligent
in this duty, what eminent Children have they lest behind them? Cambyses
teaching himself his Son Cyrus, how did he become afterward the wonder of the
world? Nicon a Mechanic, but withal a very learned man, teaching Galen
Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, and other liberal arts, how did he so excel
afterward, Gesner. in ejus vita. (...). Laert. l. 2. in Aristip. Plut. Laert.
ubi supra.
that he was esteemed the Prince of Physicians? Aristippus was so well
instructed by a prudent She-parent, that he was surnamed the Mother-taught.
Pythagoras was such a Schoolmaster to his Daughter Dama, that she excelled in
all learning: And Aristippus made such a rare Disciple of his Daughter Arete,
that when he was dead, she was able to keep up his school, and read public
Lectures. Such singular Ornaments may children prove, if Parents themselves can
bestow upon them good education; but if Parents cannot do this themselves, let
them not neglect at the dearest price to buy this abroad; it is the best
purchase they can make for their children, a Will cannot give such legacies.
What an egregious person did Isocrates declare himself to be by having the
happiness to be brought up under Gorgias, Plut. in vit. Isoe.
Tisias, and Theremenes,? What a Splendor was Aeschines by purchasing learning
at a thousand Drachms from the learned Ctesiphon. Plut. in vit. Aeschin.
Pausan. ins Archad.
What a luster of his age was P. Scipio, by the instructions of his great
Master, Pobybius of Megalopolis. Decads might be produced of the high advantage
that millions have received by this beneficial paedagogy: therefore be
careful to bring thy precious stones to these Lapidaries to be filed, and thy
costly new-woven clothes to these dy-fats to receive their tincture. Remember
that Solomon desired wisdom more then riches, and honor, and that he does tell
thee that Wisdom is the principal thing, and the price of it above rubies.
Prove. 4.7. A wise man is the mirror of mankind, his name is blessed, his
presence reverenced, every adage which does fall from his lips honored; unto
such an one men give ear, and keep silence at his counsel, after his words
they speak not again, they wait for him as for the rain, and open their mouths
wide for him as for the latter rain. Job 29.21, 22, 23. Thy Son's brightest
beams come not from thy inheritance; no, it is Wisdom that will make his face
to shine. Eccl. 8.1. therefore Who is as the wise man? a vast estate committed
to a man of no judgment, does proclaim a witless Landholder; therefore fill
thy Sons brain rather then his purse; and provide him wisdom, rather then a
Manor house, or a multitude of Tenants. And if thou can go one step
further, furnish him with grace, thou gave him none of this by nature, no,
the natural man perceives not the things of God. Plut.
Flesh and blood revealed not these things unto thee; to be born of the flesh,
is to be born at most but to natural policy; therefore if thou have grace thy
self, communicate it to thy child, that as Tiberius, and Gracchus were said to
suck eloquence out of Cornelia's breasts, so these may suck heavenly motions out
of thy inspired lips; nourish them with fruit that drop from thine own Tree,
spin out a curious homespun garment, to deck them in the eyes of the Church,
God, and Angels; be ever imprinting into their minds divine precepts, and
engraving their souls with celestial Characters. But if thou have not so much
judgment thy self, think not only of the Dancing Master, or the
Fencing-school, or the Artillery-Garden, but settle thy Son under some
religious Divine, and throw down talents (which I doubt that cramped hand of
thine can hardly part with upon such a bargain) to purchase the Pearl, to have
his wits exercised in scripture, to have the eyes of his understanding
enlightened, and to gain a spiritual understanding, Col. 1.9. that thy child
may be able at last to take the latitude of Christianity, yea to comprehend the
length, the breadth, the height, the depth of Christ Jesus What are all the
Maxims of the earth, to the mysteries of the Kingdom? No, redemption,
justification, adoption, regeneration, faith, and to know a right in the tree
of life, excel all the speculations that the double refined Wits of the times
can teach otherwise: oh then that many men think their children should get
these things only by sitting under a Pulpit, or learning a public Catechism,
but not by making an absolute schooling of the study of virtue: no, people
think that these things are to be taught at any rate, and in any time; they set
them to learn other things without these, or these with other things; they will
neither allow their children time, nor means to make grace a trade; I hear of
seven years for a calling, but of no such apprentiship for to learn merely
Religion: a strange saving way that men have in pious things, their own
consciences cost them little at the Pulpit, and they are as thrifty Husbands
for the souls of their children in matters of grace; the conscionable Divine
has few Disciples of this nature, or he cannot match the Lawyer, or Physician,
or common Tradesman, no not the Horse-rider, Engineer, or Minstril, in the
souls fees, which he has gotten. Ministers must not be covetous, and
Professors are very penurious; Gods judgments I doubt, have taken out of your
Purses vast sums, because ye would not bestow them upon your childrens virtuous
education, to prevent those extravagant, lawless, irreligious, and seditious
ways, which (to the grief of your hearts) they have trod; therefore if ye
would have them serve God, train them up at the greatest expense under them
which may institute, and precept them in principles of true godliness; Eusebius.
how many noble Christians came there out of the school of Pantaenus, both in
Alexandria, and India? what a virtuous man proved Gratian, Sigon. l. 8. Imper.
Occid.
by being brought up under Ausonius? and Hugo of France, by having his
education under Floriacensis? and amongst our selves, Kebius Corinnius the Son
of Solomon, Id. l. 7. reg. Ital. Beda, and Mat. Paris.
Duke of Cornwall, by sailing into France, and living many years with St.
Hilary, to have his conscience enflamed with the love of God, by the sparks of
those zealous lips? And were former times spare-handed to their spiritual
Masters? No, that was the golden age indeed: As for human learning, I find many
liberal, Voletaran. l. 9. Anthrop. Homer. l. 9. Iliad.
in so much that Q. Fulvius gave to his Master Ennius a whole City, and
Achilles gave to his Master Phoenix half his Kingdom, and half his honors; So
amongst Christians, I find, for the learning of Religion, and grace, Gratian
gave unto Ausonius many presents, and amongst the rest a Picture with his
Fathers Image set all with precious stones, Sigon. ubi supra.
telling him that he had paid but what he ought, and that he ought more then he
had paid. And Matthias Corvinus (that renowned Prince) bestowed the whole
County of Veredarium upon his Master Johannes Vitesius, Bonsin. l. 1. Dec. 4.
and infinite other examamples which might be produced to this purpose.
Therefore if thou be not a parent that does smell of the earth, a mere
Father of the Hutch, if thou do love thy child's soul as well as his body, if
thou would have him reign in Heaven as well as rule upon earth, provide some
Master-workman that may lay in him the foundations both of wisdom, and grace;
thou see he had little of either of these when thou were first called his
Father; alas he knew not thee, nor himself, He knew not his right hand from his
left. Which cannot discern between the right hand, and the left hand.

Thirdly, This does show, That Infants rightly baptized, have undoubted
salvation: for if Baptism does take away Original sin, what other sin can be
laid to their charge? they have so few motions to sin, that they cannot discern
between their right hand, and their left; why then should we look with an eye
of dread upon those Infants which come bathed and rinsed, and made heaven white
from the laver of Christ? I do not like them which fright men of riper age with
torturing scruples, that no man can be saved but those which have swum through
their whirle-pool, but I tremble to see an Euripus prepared for Infants; that
they will neither let them have peace for themselves, nor their infants. Alas
poor Infants, when ye are bastardised in the arms of your heavenly father, or
disinherited when your elder Brother has taken you by the hand, and
acknowledged you for coheirs. Have ye no certain interest in heaven, by the
virtue of the seal? may ye be damned with the blood of Christ trickling upon
your souls? is the Covenant of no validity to you? is not the Ordinance an
undoubted pledge of your justification? No marvel then that many say, that
they are above Ordinances, when the power of the Ordinance is so much
disparaged amongst our selves; what, Infants slain at the Font? and left to the
Devil with the purgative waters upon their faces? Why then do they baptize
them at all? or administer to them the Physic, if they their selves doubt of
the operation of it. Esaias no doubt, had more confidence in his plaster of
figs, and Elisha in sending of Naaman to go wash in the River of Jordan. Is a
ministerial act so full of suspense? then why are they ministers, if they
unpower, cassate their own function? Have they received true Orders? then why
do they doubt of the efficacy of the Ordinances? the Parents may as well
suspect, whether they can, or do baptize; namely whether they have a lawful
calling, and execute it lawfully; as they perplex the Parents, in saying, That
if their Infants be baptized, they cannot tell, but that they may drop into
hell from the Sacrament, if they dye Infants. Cannot they tell? then let them
tell me nothing upon my Deathcouch, that can tell so little comfort at the
laver. I confess I should be loath to take my Absolution from them at my last
gasp in the world, that can give so little resolution at the first breath in
Christianity. St Augustine was said to be Darus pater Infantum, The hard Father
of Infants, because he denied heaven to Infants not being baptized; but are not
these more unkind Fathers, which will not ascertain heaven to Infants when they
are baptized? The Pelagians, which held no Original sin, held Baptism
requisite for an outward admission into a Church; and do these hold Original
sin, and shall Baptism give but an external initiation into a Church visible?
a visible fallacy (to speak in the mildest terms) to attribute to Baptism no
more, then a Pelagian privilege. If these do not judge Original sin to be
levissimum peccatum, the lightest sin, then this is gravissimum peccatum, a
most grievous sin, to say Original sin does remain, though Infants be
baptized. If Baptism has no more virtue, they had, for an heavenly interest,
as good bid the Father to go wash the Infant at a Pond, or the Mother to go
rinse it at a Conduit; for the Infant gets no other qualifications, if it do
live, but only to have liberty to enter a Church, and communicate with the
faithful, and sit down at the Table of the Lord; all, outward and common. But
what is this to the soul? to everlasting bliss? that if the Infant dye an
Infant, the Parent may but weep for the Iosse of Nature, and not shed tears
for the spiritual detriment; yea, that the Infant may be parted withal with
comfort, because God has let it live, till baptism had graffed it into a
Savior: oh the soul of a Parent is never out of perplexity, till the soul of
the child be out of a state of guilt; the thought of a damned child, makes the
Parent half in hell with his deceased Infant. I have seen the portraicture of
Angels upon a Font, but I abhor to see the Devil pictured there; the Holy
Ghost came down visibly upon Christ at his Baptism; and was not this an
earnest of the Holy Ghost coming down invisibly upon the baptized? St
Augustine does put a question, Quaero utrum quisquam tanto errore esset, ut
neget aliquem ad Baptissimum admitti, aut frustra esse admissum contentendat.
Aug. in exp. Epist. ad Romans Proluteis aureos eos Baptisma facit, Chrysostom. hom.
9. in Johan. Ascendamus ex aquis tanquam ex mortuis aureos eos Baptisma facit,
Chrysostom. hom. 9. in Johan. Ascendamus ex aquis tanquam ex mortuis vivi servati
per gratiam ejus qui vocavit nos Basil. de S. S. In Baptismo Diabolum omne
virus nequi tiae amittere. Cyp. ep. ad Maximum. In baptismate deterrimo alite
expulso, pacem terrae nostrae columba Spiritus Sancti nuntiat. Jeron. Cont.
Lucif.
I demand (says he) Whether any one would deny Baptism to be admitted, or
would be in such an error, as to say it was admitted in vain. Baptism does
make of miery persons, men pure gold. By holy baptism we are circumcised from
sin. L t us ascend out of the waters, as the living from the dead, being saved
by the grace of him which called us. In Baptism, the Devil does lose all the
poison of his wickedness. In Baptism, the black Raven, the Devil being sent
forth, and not returning, the Dove (the holy Ghost) does bring the Olive Branch
of peace. Thus the Fathers do proclaim the infallible effect of Baptism upon
the present administration. Yea, why were the Baptized in the Primitive Church
called Fideles the faithful, but that they held them certainly Believers? and
Illuminati, Illuminates, but that they resolved that the light of grace was
entered into them? and Neophyti, New Plants, but that they were persuaded that
they were transplanted out of Hell into Heaven? yea, why was the white
baptismall garment put upon them, but that they absolutely concluded, that they
were in a state of innocence, and prepared for a state of glory? to pollute
therefore the virtue of Baptism is worse then the filth that Constantius
Copronymus left behind him in the Font.

Oh therefore preach up the honor of Baptism, and preach comfort to the souls
of Parents concerning their Baptized Infants; what obstacle can there be to
exclude them from grace? I find but these Impediments.

First, that there be not an unlawful Minister; then if ye can justify your
calling, why do ye not justify your act?

Secondly an undue administration; then if ye be strict in the matter, and have
invented no new form, why do ye not assure the effect?

Thirdly, a want of a foederal right; then if ye will not make Christians
Infidels, why should ye deny the saving virtue of the Ordinances to their
Children?

Fourthly, that there be no infidelity, or dissimulation, and how can these
diffidere, distrust, that know not what it is to misbelive? or be ficti,
feigned persons, that are unskilled in arts, or crafts, which know not their
right hand from their left? All the stumbling blocks being then removed, why
should we not walk on without interruption to confirm salvation to baptized
Infants? yes, all the grounds in Divinity ratify this as an unquestionable, and
irrefragra^^e truth, for if the Sacrament of Baptism be not only
significative, and obsignatory, but exhibitive, and applicatory; if God be
never separated from Baptism justly administered, if Christ and his passion be
the substance of that Sacrament, if that Sacrament has an equal effect in all,
if a person lose the stein of all guilts in those waters, and there be not
only a cleansing and purifying, but a beautifying, and brightning allution,
insomuch that characterizing graces are bestowed upon the baptized; if they be
incorporated not only into the Church, but into Christ; if they be past the
gates of Hell, and the gate of Heaven does stand open to them; then why should
we dry up the waters of Baptism upon the foreheads, or raze the Celestial
prints out of the souls of baptized Infants? Why should we smother these
children in the lap of the Church? or pluck away these children from the knees
of their Mother, so soon as she has given them her blessing: Why should we not
call these Christ's sheep, when we find the ear-mark of his passion upon them?
Why should we suppose that God would reject these, whom he has ownd by his
Ordinance? does not the Scripture settle this, as a firm truth upon a sure
basis? yes, they are sanctified, and cleansed by the washing of water. Ephesians.
5.26. they have received the washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the
Holy Ghost. Tit. 3.5. They are circumcised with the Circumcision made without
hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, and being buried with
him in Baptism, they are risen with him through the faith of the operation of
God. Col. 2.11, 12. Yea, they are not only baptized into profession, but
baptized into Jesus Christ, and planted into the likeness of his Death, and
Resurrection. Romans 6.3.5. they are so much Christ's, that they are clad with
Christ as with a Redemption- Vest, For, As many as are baptized into Christ,
have put on Christ. Gal. 3.27. Why should we doubt that they want either
pardon, spirit, salvation, or Heaven it self? No, the Scripture says, that
they are baptized for remission of sins. Acts 2.38 and baptized by one spirit.
1 Cor. 12.13. and that Baptism does save. 1 Pet. 3.21. and that unto such
belongs the Kingdom of Heaven. Mark 10. And what the Scriptures do assert,
the Fathers do yield their suffrages to. In baptisatis Infantibus quamvis id
nesciant habitat Spiritus sanctus A g. de praed^stinat. Dei. Quid cuiquam
prodest, quod baptisetur, nisi justificetur? Aug. l 21. de civi. Dei^e. 17.
Neminem eorum qui accesserant ad Christum per fidem, sana sides, and sana
doctrina putabit exceptum ^sse a remissione peccatorum. Aug* de pec. merit and
remiss l. 1. c. 28. Per Baptismi Sacramentum, nativitais sordes deponuntur,
propterea baptizantur parvuli Origin. Hom. 14. in Lue. Parvulus ad acci piendam
remissionem peccatorum facilius accedit, quod illi remittuntur non propria sed
aliena peccata. Cyp ep. 59. ad Fidum.
Saint Augustine says, that In baptized Infants, though they know it not, yet
there does dwell in them the Holy Ghost. Yea, What does it profit any man that
he is baptized, if he be not justified? Nay, the same Father says expressly,
that sound ^aith, and sound doctrine will never think them excepted from the
pardon of sins, which do come to Christ by Baptism. Origin says, that by the
Sacrament of Baptism, the pollutions of birth are removed, and therefore
Infants are baptized. Cyprian says, that a child does come to receive
remission of sins more easily, because not his own, but another sins are
pardoned. Fulgentius says, that a little Infant mox ut baptisatus fuerit, si
de hac vita discedat, factum esse haeredem Dei. l. 1. de veritate praed. c. 12.
if it should depart out of the world, so soon as it is baptized, it is already
made the Heir of God. Saint Augustine in his 23. ep calls him an Infidel
which will not believe this. The Council of Valent. c. 5. says, that in
Baptism there is a true washing from sins, regeneration and redemption, and
that there is nothing in that Sacrament vain or mocking. The Council of Mllevi.
Can. 2. says, That Infants are therefore baptized unto remission of sins, that
that might be cleansed away by regeneration, which was contracted by Birth. The
like I could show many, of Foreign and hombred Protestants.

It is sufficient to propound the judgment of our whole Church, Rubric before
the Catechism for Confir mation of children; at the end of it.
which says, That no man shall think, that any detriment shall come to their
Children by deferring Confirmation; for he shall know for truth, that it is
certain by Gods word, that children being baptized, have all things necessary
for their salvation, and be undoubtedly saved. I know the main seruple in
opposition to this is about election, that if any Infant were not decreed from
everlasting to be saved, his Baptism will nothing avail him, but it is evident
that these were elected, for God suffered them to live so long, till they were
baptized, and so made members of Christ's mystical body; therefore if they
should die instantly after they have been hallowed by the Sacrament, their
Baptism is a confirmation of their Election, and that not only by the
judgment of Charity but by the judgment of Certainty we may pronounce and
determine, that the Ordinance has purged them, and will crown them; Oh
therefore leave tearing open a bleeding wound, and casting wildfire into the
flames of a Parents burning heart, to double his distresses for the loss of
his dear Infant, as if it were dead, and may be damned; no, bless your own
work, loose not the consecration of your own function, ye have the commission
to baptize as well as to preach; show the parent Heaven for his Soul in your
Pulpit, show him Heaven for the Soul of his Infant in the Laver, assure him
that his deceased child is flown to Heaven with Ordinance-wings. The Infant
has been cleansed in the Church, and what can it do afterward to deserve Hell?
what corrupted understanding disordered will, or misguided affections can an
Infant have? it is free from guilt, for it is free from evil motions; it knows
not how to provoke, for it knows not how to sin; oh therefore spare them, whom
God would spare; God would not destroy Infants, because Infants cannot discern;
they cannot discern criminal things, for they cannot discern small things;
they cannot discern between their right hand, and their left* which cannot
discern between their right hand, and their left hand.

Fourthly, this does serve to exhort all (chiefly them which have a special
relation) to tender the estate of Infants. For, who should not deal justly with
them, which understand not their own right? who should not discern as much as
may be for their advantage, which cannot discern any thing for their own
behoof, not so much as discern between their right hand, and their left. If
thou ought to open thy mouth in the case of the dumb, then much more for
them, whose tongue strings are not yet unloosened to plead their own case? if
thou ought to be eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, then much more for
them, who have not an eye to read an evidence to see the strength of a title,
nor a foot to walk to a bar to demand justice? Is there a more noble thing then
the Patronage of Innocents? and the protection of fatherless children? Famous
for this is David, who tenderly regarded his friend Jonathans children; and
Abraham who rescued, and redeemed his cousin Loath out of Prison; and Mordecai
who took the charge of his Kinswoman Ester upon him, bringing her up with all
respect and faithfulness at home, and when she was called to be Ahashuerosh's
Queen, he walked every day before the Court of the women's house to know how
Ester did, Strabo. l. 10. Geog.
and to inquire what would become of her. Ester 2.11. And Lycurgus, to whom his
elder brother Polydectes having left the government of Sparta, till his Heir
yet unborn came to age, though the wife of the deceased offered to destroy the
fruit of her womb, if he would marry her, and take the sole government upon
himself; yet he would not accept of it but in show, wishing her not to endanger
the fruit of her womb, but suffer her self to be delivered, and send the child
to him, and he could soon make it away: the birthday being come, and the child
sent to him, in stead of murdering it, it proving a man-child, he presented
him to the Spartanes, saying, Behold your King, and naming him Charilaus, he
stoutly defended him in his right against his Mother, and Leonidas: And
Micithus who most worthily gave high education to the Sons of Anaxilas, and
when they were come to full age, though they entreated him to continue the
government; yet he would not, Diodor. l. 11.
but left their Honors of Zanctes and Roegium to them; and went himself, and
lived with much honor at Tagaea. Cuspinian. 92.
And Isdigerd King of Persia who being appointed Guardian to Theodosius by his
dying Father Arcadius, he sent Antiochus his chief Eunuch to take the charge of
the young Infant, and to bring him up in a most Princely manner, and faithfully
to preserve the Empire for him. And Ferdinand King of Aragon, who being
appointed by Henry, King of Castile, his brother, to educate his young Son in
his Minority, he having discharged that, the Castilians desired him to take the
Kingdom upon himself, he seeming to accept it, brought in the young Prince in a
close royal habit, Egnatius. l. 6. c. 5.
and got him to be proclaimed King, and Crowned him. And the Senate of Rome,
who having the young Son of Ptolemy King of Egypt committed to their tuition,
sent Marcus Aemilius, and Lepidus chief Priest most carefully to bring up the
child, Valor. Max. l. 6. c. 6.
and to settle all things for his future reign: which was so really performed,
that the young King kept the Cradle wherein he first lay with much care and
reverence, and decked it, and adorned it for the honor of Rome, saying, that
he knew not whether he were more happy in the fortune of his Father, or the
fidelity of the Senate. And Baldwin the second King of Jerusalem, who upon the
death of Boemund, having taken Antiochia into his protection for his Son, kept
it 22 years to his use, and at last restored it to him, marrying his daughter
Halys to him, and when that King died, Tyrius.
and his daughter would have taken the Kingdom to her self, he drove out his
own daughter, and settled the Heir. And of later times Frederick the third
Emperor, who having the posthumous Son of Albert the second King of Ha^ga^y,
and Bohemia put under his tutelage, when the Princes of the Empire wished him
to destroy the child, and now this opportunity was given him to annex these
Kingdoms to the Empire, he denied it with detestation, saying, ye wish me
rather to be rich then good, I prefer honesty before all the honors of the
world. Thus did these, and thus ought all just men to do, for Infants are
Miserable persons as the Civil Lawyers say, Aencas Sylvius. l. 3. Com. in
Alphons. Mis^rabiles personae.
that is, Creatures, which deserve the highest pity; yea, they are commonly
called Orphans, persons deprived of all help; and who should not support the
weak? help the helpless? yes, the Father is gone, has he left never a Friend
behind him? the children are exposed to mercy, is there never a compassionate
creature to look upon them with an eye of humanity? Is this your reveren e to
dead ashes? is this your commiseration to your sucklings which want both bosom
and breast upon the death of the Parents? It was the voice of Cain to say, Am I
my brothers Keeper? but should we not all be Keepers to them which are left to
the wide world to keep? yes, we should succor such as our own bowels, and
bring them up as our natural children; but where are those kind Friends, or
true Foster Fathers to be found? All relations of amity, and consanguinity will
not bind men to express these faithful respects; The Parent upon his
death-Couch is not troubled more with his dying pronges, than with vexatious
cares to whom to commit his children; he is afraid of his most intimate
Associate, he does dread his nearest kinsman; and well may he: For what
fidelity is there to be found amongst sworn Familiars, or Allies? if the Father
does entrust these, they may keep the children, but they will make their selves
Heirs; the Father has put the moath into the garment, the woolfe into the
fold, the cankerworm amongst the fruits; oh what a poor remainder will there be
left after such sharp teeth no, they will eat out his estate, his posterity,
his name? What incredible disbursements, what large bills of account are there
brought in at the end of the Term? what restless molestations, and chargeable
suits must the Heir be put to before he can recover his right; if this Helena
be once caught, it will cost ten years siege to regain her. A Captain will as
soon deliver up a Castle, as these an Executorship; like the Devil in the
Gospel, when they a long time have possessed such a body, they will not be
cast out without much renting, and tearing; if by subtle insinuations, and
plausible pretenses of integrity, and holiness they have screwed their selves
into such a place, neither the memory of their dead friend, the vast gains they
have already tasted of, the shame of the world, the violation of humanity, the
dishonor of profession, or all the justice of the land can wrest them out.
What therefore does the Father choose these for Executours? he had as good send
his children to the Mortar to be beaten to powder, to the Milstones to be
ground to dust, to the Shambles to be chopped to pieces, to the Furnace to be
burnt up to a few ends of brands. Oh the sad groans and the piercing cry that
there is of oppressed Infants, and injuried Orphans in the Land? the children
do not know their right hand from their left, but the Executors do know both
their right and their left, to catch, and gripe. Oh say the poor Orphans, our
Fathers bones are rotten underground, and our Inheritances above ground. Oh
that ever we were born, for to what are we born? we can but look upon our
fathers means, we must not look to be Demies in what our Fathers bequeathed us;
no, so much is gone to bind out the Executors Son, so much to marry his
daughter, so much to purchase such a Manor, so much to buy such an office, we
see where the birds do nestle, but we cannot climb the Trees to catch them; we
perceive in what Chests our goods are laid, but they have iron bars upon them,
we cannot break them open; we may see the kindheart of out Father in his will,
but we have nothing but his hand, and seal to testify his fatherly care over
us; he left us enough, we are happy in little, but only to peruse what were
his intended legacies; he trusted, on that he had distrusted! he put
confidence, oh that he had had timely diffidence; his Funeral is past, oh that
we had been buried with him; we waited upon him to his grave oh that we had
been nayld down in the Coffin with him; that we had had, he same hearse cloth,
and the same grave spade with him; that as we came out of his loins so we
might have consumed with his loins; we have his name, but where are his goods?
No, the lean Kine have eaten up the sat, the needy Executor has eaten up the
rich Heirs. Alas we are not our Fathers Heirs, we are still his Mourners; our
funeral tears must never be dried up, we must always wear our bla^ks; our
Father had an house, but he left the key with others, and the children shall
scarce get entrance; our Father had gold, but others have sent it to the mint,
and set a new stamp upon it by that time that we have paid costly for our
education, and discharged our Lawyers Bills to instate us, we are outstated; we
shall scarce have enough to buy us a place of preferment; No, not to buy us
clothes, the Executour may fit on the Bench, but we may lie in the Clink; he
may live in his Lordships, but we live in an Almshouse; we have nothing to
support our souls, but prayers; nor to relieve our bodies, but to go feed upon
pity; we might have been a Wonder, we are a Warning; we might have been as
Splendor, we are a Terror; Oh let all Parents quake at the c^oice of such
Trustees! Oh let all Orphans tremble at the thought of such Executors; we are
discerpted, we show you our broken bone for a Spectacle; we are excoriated, we
leave our skins for a fright. We can but seal up our sense of such
perfi^^ousnesse with cries, and curses. Is this only a passionate complaint?
are there no bleeding instances to be produced? yes, most woeful precedents.
Demosthenes having a large Patrimony left him by his Father, Plut. in Demosth.
his Tutors (as Executors were then called) sope^verted the benefit of it to
their own ends, that what through cove ousnesse, and what through
carelessenesse they wasted all; insomuch that there was not enough left at
last, Victor. l. 6. var. hist^. 8.
to pay the Schoolmaster of Demosthenes. Antiochus and Philip King of Macedon,
having the Kingdom of Egypt left to their charge, till Ptolemtes Son came to
age, they shared the Kingdom between them, and exposed the Orphane to go seek
subsistence. Lucius Tarquinius having the Son of Ancus Martius committed to his
care, Sabel. 4. l. Ennead. 8.
carried him out to hunting, and possessing himself of his means, never
suffered him to return, but drove him to wander abroad for a being. Andronicus
Comnenus, being kinsman to Alexius the Son of Manuel, though he had sworn, and
taken the blessed Sacrament, to be true to him as a faithful Guardian, Nicetas.
yet he deprived him of all* Murziphlus the great Confident of Isaacius the
Greek Emperor, to whom he communicated all his secrets, and at his death
trusted him with the tutelage of his Son, most wretchedly thrust the young
Infant out of his just possession, telling the people, Cuspin.
that the Empire had need of a Man, and not a child to govern it, What shall I
need to allege more confirmations, when our own age is too deplorable an
example? Every Country, and Court, does cry out of the false Executor. The
Father may bequeath what he will, at last there is nothing found of his Goods,
but in the Inventory, or of his Estate, but in Bills of laying out; the poor
Orphans come out of these men's hands so full of stripes, as if they had lived
in some Correction-house, they must redeem their selves from this captivity, as
if they were some slaves of Algier. There is no year of Jubilee diverse times
that can set them into their just possessions, nothing but the day of
Resurrection to repair their damages; these insatiable Creatures drink out the
Vessel to the very Lees, they fell down a whole Forest of means, till they
leave nothing but stocks and roots; what have we amongst us but the Infants
Elegies? or the Orphans Threnes? We are the Land sprinkled, and dyed with the
tears and blood of the fatherless. Oh that such men should name their selves
Christians! is there such in justice to be found amongst Turks? Oh that they
should think to leave behind them a flourishing issue; will not the curses of
these injured Creatures consume their posterities out of the earth? Oh that
they should ever hope, or speak of heaven; for if no unclean thing shall enter
into the new Jerusalem, then how shall these get passage which are polluted and
besmeared with blood? How shall they be able to look upon the faces of their
dead friends at the last day, whose harmless Infants they have worried? how
shall they be able to mere these Orphans at Gods judgment seat, whom they
have shouldered at many a Tribunal? Oh the criminations of the Father, and the
execrations of the children, will draw out a confounding sentence from the lips
of such a Judge. All ye then that have either sense of honor, desire of
welfare, prickle of conscience, or expectation of heaven, deal more justly with
speechless and helpless Infants. Is it not a shame to crush spawns? to crop
buds? to tear up the root, of new sown Corn? to damnify and destroy them, who
have neither wit nor reason to apprehend an injury? And is it not so with
Infants? Yes, they have so little jugdement, that they know not their right
hand from the left. Which cannot discern betw^en their right hand, and their
left hand.

Fifthly, This serves to show, That seeing God would spare the lives of
children, because they were such undiscerning Creatures; that it is the height
of cruelty to spill the blood of Infants. For though it be an heavy thing to
kill Champions; yet is a sadder thing, when children are dashed in pieces at
the head of every corner of the streets, Nah. 3.10. When there is no compassion
taken of the young, Deuteronomy. 28.30. When Children are brought forth to the
murderer, Hos. 9.13. Esau could not be expected to be more cruel, then to
slay the mother with the children, Genesis 32.11. Pharaoh was not a worse butcher,
then to kill children; Herod's shambles were not filled with worse meat, then
with the limbs and quarters of slain and slaughtered Infants. Oh that they
which have newly taken breath, must breathe their last, that they which are
newly come out of their Mother wombs, must be sent unto Natures back room; that
they which have not seen the world, must be driven out of the world; that they
which have not walked beyond the Gradie, must set their last step; and, if not
walk, yet be hurled into the grave; that a Father cannot any longer look upon
the reflex of his own face, nor a Mother cannot keep any longer in her arm the
beloved fruit of her own womb; that the Murderer fights with Infants, as if
he were fighting with Giants, or knocks down children which cannot stand upon
their legs, as if he were braying Zamzummins; which unsheathe a bloody sword
against them, which are ready to smile in his face; and stretch out their
dismal hands to ruin them, which are ready to stretch out their sporting
hands to recreate him; that green fruit must be plucked from the tree, and the
spark newly kindled be quenched; that childrens blood must dye the Soldiers
Ensigns, and the victorious Pompatick must vaunt himself Conqueror of Infants;
that he must have such soft flesh to set his rough foot upon, and turning
slaughterman, he must turn butcher of Chickens; that the City he thinks does
not echo rightly til it be full'd with the shrieks of Infants, nor the stones
shine bright enough for his barbarous eye, till they they glister with the
blood of Infants: A sucker of new laid Eggs, a drinker of wine in the Must, a
feeder upon Gnats, a Caniball of Infants. Is this Chivalry? is this prowess and
puissance? Whatt, o blow the Trumpets over slain children? to sing an (...), a
Conquering song over massacred Infants? a mighty Hanibal! a valient Heroules
indeed! glorious Triumphs! and memoralbe Prophees no doubt! it is pity such a
Combatant should not be Crowned at the Olympians games; or such a Soldier
should not strive for the Armor of Agamemnon. Is it not immortal honor to
strik them dead, which could not lift up an hand to fight against them? or to
shed the blood of those whose harmless breasts never thought of enmity, and
never had will nor skill to shed blood, but only to shed tears? If this were
rightly considered, indeed it were a thing rather to be lamented then prided
in, and fitter for astonishment then insulting; let Pardals, and Panthers,
rather do it, than those which profess morality, or seem to carry an atome of
humanity about them: Hazael before he had committed the crime, shivered at the
sound of it, trembled with horror, that he should be imagined to be such a
Monster: What, a Babe-stabber? shall dead children be my victorious wreathes?
shall this manly arm of Hazael, have the force of it felt in the bowels of
Infants? That creature is fitter for the kennel than the Court, or Camp, and
meeter to walk in a Dog's, than a man's skin. Is thy servant a Dog, that he
should do this thing? 2 King. 8.12.13. Nay, so vile a thing. Vile indeed, baser
there cannot be conceived. Whosoever set up such a Scene, these parts cannot be
acted, but they must go under the name of a Tragedy, as the Caphyenses who
destroyed all the children of Conailea in Arcadia; and Munatius Flaccus,
Pausan. in Arcad. Aul. Hirt. de bell. Hisp. Appi. Plut. in Alex.
who slew the Children of Attegna in their Mothers laps, and tossed them upon
Pikes; and Numulizinthis, who killed children to feed their Parents with them;
and Alexander, who killed the children of the Casseins, as sacrifices to the
ghost of Hephestion. Take heed of any crying sin, especially of the blood of
innocent Infants. Alas, how can these offend you? what, kill persons in a
Gallantry? Devils may, Christians should not: No, if any be set upon
bloodshed, let them sheathe their swords in the bowels of their enemies, and
not gore the streets with the blood of Infants; for these cannot be guilty of
grievance, nor offer a distaste; destroy them that can discern, but these can
discern so little, that they cannot discern between their right hand and their
left. Which cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand.

Sixthly, This does show, That the ground of divine commiseration, is
Innocence; He that would be spared, he must be as guiltless as the Infant, to
discern no more of evil motions, then the child does discern of the motions of
the body, which does not know when his right hand, or his left hand stirs.
We are wished in Scripture, concerning malicrousness, to be as children, yea,
to be as new born babes, except ye be as one of these little ones, ye cannot
enter into the Kingdom of heaven. O that we were thus wise, nay, that were thus
ignorant, that we did practice as little and discern as little in the matter of
sin, as Infants Oh happy then were both our breasts and our brayns, our hearts
and our hands, our affection, and our actions: oh glorious thing to come to
self-denial, to stoop beneath our selves, to feel as little man about us, and
as much Infant in us, as may be; to act as in our Minority, to live as in the
Cradle. Oh when we are too subtle, and sagacious, skilled in all Natures
principles, and versed in all her dogmaticall rules, to know how to invent all
the mediums, and to set on working all the motions to sin, we are then far from
Christians; we must learn to go backward, to lose our experience, to wax a
little simple, to have no more wit to apprehend the courses, nor no more memory
to imprint the thoughts of sin, than an Infant. Regeneration does leave as
little of the old Man in us as may be, we are become new Creatures, new
Infants. Old things are passed away. No longer I live. What else does
mortification, and the crucifying of the flesh signify? Yes, the Progeny of
the spirit has little of carnal wit, or carnal operation in it. Sure I am, a
state of grace does require an high degree of innocence, that not only the
conformity to sin, but the conscience of sin, Heb. 10.2. Must be taken out of
us. We must cleanse our selves from all filthiness, 2 Cor. 7.1. Wash our bodies
with pure water, Amarum quod sanctitati contrarium Jeron. Aque gutta vino in
jusa a se tota d sicit, vinique sapor^m and colorem induit. Cyp. Nec vitia
nesciisse, sed emendasse. Amb. Castitas animae. Greg.
Heb. 10.22. We must be unspotted, or not steyns; undefiled, or not scandalls.
That is bitter, which is contrary to Sanctimony. A drop of water, if it be
infused into wine, it must lose the old taste: We must be such strangers to
sin, that though formerly we cannot say, we have not known it, yet now we have
corrected it; so soon as we have espoused our selves to our heavenly
Bridegroom, there must be in us a chastnesse of soul. And oh would to God,
that since we arose out of the sleep of sin, that we had washed the filth out
of our eyes; that since we were come to Court, that we had left our filthy
raiment behind us; that profession had none of our old corruption, or
repentance none of our former impurity: if we would be Penitents, we must carry
only the law of sin, and not the love of sin in our members; the lustings of
the flesh, and not the fruits of the flesh in our demeanours. We must now have
another sap running in our branches, another sign hanging out at our doors; we
must be like the winnowed wheat, and the refined gold; that Abraham may take
seisin of the promised Land, he must come out of Ur, of the Caldees, that
Iscaa^ may live, the Ram must be offered. If we would be accepted, how
conversant soever we have been with earthly desires, yet now we must disclaim
all commerce with the world; if we would be spared, how skillful soever we have
been in all fleshly designs, yet now we must return to the Infants ignorance,
to apprehend little, to know nothing, no not our right hand from our left.
Should not I spare Nineveh, that great City, wherein are more then sixscore
thousand persons, which cannot discern between their right hand, and their left
hand?

And also much Cattle.

Now let us come to the less principal commodities: And also much cattle.

In which there are three things considerable.

1. A gracious enlargement, And also. 2. A strange subject, Cattle. 3. A
considerable plenty, Much.
And also.

First, For the gracious enlargement. And also. God had said much before, but
he has not said all; the expression had been large, and yet God is not at his
last: if the hard heart of Jonah did not yet relent, God will try another
softning, he will not keep back an inference, not lose a motive: no, he has
another clause yet behind, And also. From hence observe, That God will conceal
nothing which may tend to the advantage of his Saints. Behold how he loved him,
Joh. 11.36. So behold how God does value these! he does favor them, and there
is no end of his affection; as he has never looked enough upon them, so he
has never spoken enough for them; they shall have his Narration, and his
amplification, his enlargement. As Elisha had never said enough in the
commendation of Eliah, My Father, my Father, the Chariots of Israel, and the
Horsemen thereof, 2 King. 2.12, So God has never spoken sufficiently in the
defense of his Saints: My Saints, my Saints, the pleasure of my my heart, and
the parley of my lips. Oh how plentiful is thy goodness which thou have laid
up in store for them which fear thee, Psalm. 31.19. So, how plentiful is his
patronage? as God renews, and gives more grace, Jam. 4.6. So he pleads,
and gives more arguments. He will not only appear in the case of the Saints,
but he will maintain their cause, 1 King. 8.45. never shut up his lips, till he
has convinced, evinced, brought off his Saints clear and innocent; as it is a
point or his mercy to take his Saints into his favor, so he accounts it a
point of his honor not to see them foiled: Job says, That his moras had
upholden them which were fallen, Job 4.4. So Gods words do uphold the faithful
in their most shaking and tottering condition. Julius Caesar was very desirous
to have condemned Cn. Dolabella, Extorqueri sibi causam, C. Cottae patrocinio.
Suct. in J. C^^s
but he said that his case was extorted out of his hands by the Oratory of C.
Cotta: so God will so argue for his Saints, that he will wrest them out of the
hands of their enemies; God will look over his papers to find out new proofs,
he will search all his Records, examine all his evidences, bring in all his
witnesses, insist upon all circumstances to acquit the faithful. Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? If they do, they shall have part of
their charge answered, and more added then they can reply to; he will handle
every weapon, rather then he will not fight out their safety, he will make all
the stars in Heaven to shine, rather than they should want light in their
defense: As our Savior never left writing on the ground, till the accused
woman was freed; so God will never leave urging of reasons, till the criminated
Saints be absolved. Lucius Cotta had his case seven times heard in the Court,
Cicero pro Mur.
and he was not discharged, his Advocate would not give over, but made the
eighth motion; and then he was released. So God will go from time to time, and
from allegation to allegation, till he has brought his Clients out of danger.
Simon the Pharisee bare a great spite to Mary Magdalen, he laid a grievous
accusation against her, he would fain have had her chidden from Christ's back,
or warned from the touch of his feet, or shamed before the multitude, or
banished the Room; he blushed to see such an one within his doors, he was
ashamed to behold such an impudent person to press into such a presence, he
thought the worse of our Savior to suffer such a sinner to come nigh to him,
to stand sobbing in his ears, to le^ fall her filthy droppings upon his feet;
Is it for thy honor, on Christ, to permit her in thy company, to admit of any
respect from her? she has a box of ointment indeed, but it is a richer then
her skin, sweeter then her self; that is precious, but she is odious; that does
smell fragrantly, but she has an ill stink; she might have kept it to perfume
her self for her old lovers, the sent of it does not well upon my noble guest;
I wonder that thou will approve of her person, or accept of her present; thy
back is the worse for such a Malefactor, thy feet are the worse for such an
ointment; what, she stand pouring, suppling, washing, wiping, kissing here? No,
I defy her, I would draw thee to abhor her: know, who I am, take notice, what
she is; I am Simon the Pharisee, she is Mary Magdalen the sinner; I am thy
Feast-maker, I stand upon the honor of my table, we do not use to have such
persons present at our Banquets, no, not to look upon us when we are eating; we
Pharisees are strict persons, we cannot endure a sinner to be in our sight,
much less to come within our walls; if thou did value me, as I have honored
thee, thou would have tendered the honor of my calling, and the reverence of
my personage, and profession; I am another manner of man then thou do
apprehend, and she is another manner of woman, than (so far as I see) thou do
understand; I thought to have learned something of thee, but now I see thou
must be instructed by me; I am a Pharisee, but art thou a Prophet? What a
Prophet, and no better skilled in persons? a Prophet, and no more sensible of a
sinner? no, either the world is deceived in thee, or thou do wonderfully
mistake thy self; thou bear a great name, but thou do not satisfy my
expectation; the times cry thee up, but I suspect thee; such a Creature could
not but have been instantly discerned by a Prophet: If thou were a Prophet,
thou would have known, who it was that touched thee. But perhaps Prophets
know not all things; but, when they are told, they will not continue to do
those things which are dishonorable to their Mission; therefore I in form
thee, and assure thee by the sanctity of a Pharisee, that this woman is a
sinner, such an one as shall not come nigh to the back of a Pharisee, nor shall
not touch the feet of an holy Pharisee. Well, thus far the Pharisee has helped
the Prophet, shall not the Pharisee, and the Prophet now agree in the same
conclusion? yes, as I am a Pharisee, and thou art a Prophet; so let us get the
place cleared of this scandalous person: away with her, send her forth, hasten
her over the threshold, she is my scorn, and let her be thy execration, even
because I am a pure Pharisee, and thou art a reverend Prophet; drive her from
thy back, chase her from thy feet, expel her out of the house, let us be quit
of Mary Magdalen, free of the sinner; or else, as great a Prophet as thou
seem to be; I shall count the Pharisee the wiser, and the holier man; but
send away this woman, and the men shall accord well enough; the Pharisee and
the Prophet shall never disagreee. Well, the business is now brought as high,
as may be, but the Pharisee must not speak all, the Prophet may have leave to
speak for himself. Will thou then, oh thou Pharisee seem to inform a Prophet?
or judge a Prophet? then thou art a malicious Informer, and an audacious Judge,
thou seem to have told me much, and I tell thee thus much, that I not only
know the woman, but I know thee. Thou have told me what the woman is, but what
are thou? what is a Pharisee? he is but a new Sectary; ye are but a branch of
Hi^lell, your greatest raise was but from the school of Jason, which is not
above forty years before me. I tell you, I like none of these new religions,
especially not that of the Pharisees. Ye Pharisees are wont to say, that ye are
not as other men are, Extortioners, Adulierers, Unjust, but ye are all these; I
once banished you out of my presence, and I daily pronounce my woe against you;
ye say, ye are newly dropped out of Heaven, and I say Ye come out of Hell; ye say
ye are the only Saints, and I say, Ye are the principal Hypocrites. People are
bad enough as they are Libertines, but if ye snare them in as Proselytes, they
are double wretches, they are twofold more the children of Hell. Indeed ye make
pretenses of high sanctity, ye go with morters on your heads, Pharisaei,
mortarit. Pharisaei, impingentes.
as if ye would hide your selves from men's sight; and allow your selves so
little of the light of Heaven, that ye are ready to stumble against every
stone; and so vail your eyes, as if all the Farth were unclean, and not sit for
a Pharisee's sactified eye to behold, or to grace with a glympse, or a glaunce;
but all your religion lies in your broad Phylacteries, and your washings, and
your paying of mint, and aniseed, and Corbanes, and other corrupt Traditions;
it is true, ye have preserved scriptures better then other sects amongst you,
and ye have some talk of God, and Angels, and the immortality of the Soul, and
there are some shows of devotion, and morality (in your prayers, fastings, and
Almsdeeds) more conspicuous, than in other distracted professions amongst you;
but these are but the shadows of substantial piety, there is no dead ghost but
has some representations of a true body; ye could never delude the age, and
bewitch the world, if ye had not some of these religious impostures; but set
aside your holy crafts, and pious frauds, ye are the very Necromancers upon
earth; ye are whited Sepulchers full of dead bones, cups clean on the outside,
but full of bribery, and excess within; ye are ravening wolves in the point of
justice, ye have a wide swallow, for ye can devour widows houses; ye are mighty
precise in a sabbath, but not so in excommunicating out of your Synagogues;
very strict in an oath (as not to swear by the gold of the Temple, or the
offering) but not so in persecuting, and murdering your brethren; Oh Simon,
therefore why should thou pride thy self in the name of a Pharisee? I do not
hate Cain, or Lamech, or Nimrod, or Achitophel worse then a Pharisee, for a
Pharisee has nothing but the key of knowledge in his hand, and Moses chair to
dignify a learned Rabbi for a pompous seat; but in matters of Gods service, and
worship a Pharisee is a mere vain glorious Pusse, he does all things to make an
appearance, and to be seen of men. Thou thenkest that I speak too peremptorily
of the Pharisee and that I touch thy Order, and fraternity too boldly, as if I
never had the Pharisees spirit in searching; yes, I know a Pharisees
cons^ience, for I know thy thought, for thou did not speak out, thou did
only speak within thy self, that, if I were a Prophet, I should have known who
it was that touched me; yet, as close as thou were, I can tell thee thy
secrets, and therefore I can tell thee, that a Phatisee is but a seeret
Hypocrite. Count me therefore no longer ignorant, no, not concerning this
woman, I knew her before she set the first step toward me, before she stood at
my back, before she gave the first touch to my feet. Thou call her sinner,
and now I see that I am at a Pharisee's Table, for censure must be one Dish at
the banquet; if a Pharisce should not be traducing, his tongue would drop out
of his head; Is she a sinner? No, she was a sinner, but she is not a sinner,
for thou have seen her tears, did thou ever shed the like? Oh that thou
could! but thou can reproach, thou can not weep; thou art fuller of
scandal than remorse, thou have sins, and thou art silent and secure, thou
do fancy; she has sins, and she is contrite, penitent, she does weep; Oh
that thou should think that the sacrifice should not appease, that so many
tears should not expiated all her guilts. What, humbled, and yet desiled? a
Mourner, and yet a sinner? this is another trick of a Pharisee to revive sins,
when they are buried in repentance, still to call sinner, when thou beholdest
tears; when will hypocrisy be reconciled to compunction? When shall a sinner,
though never so deploring, get his pardon from a Pharisees lips? No, he is
still casting the old filth in the face, and presenting the old spots, when he
visibly perceives the nitre which has scoured themout; they which live in all
manner of sins, are the most eager censurers of other men's former sins; they
never talk of their tears, but their crimes; not of their present reformation,
but their precedent exorbitancies, to magnify themselves, they vilify others,
and to extol their own seeming virtues, they run descant upon others crucified
sins, and this is just the implacable Professor, right the Pharisee. But oh
Simon, says Christ, if thou wext any religious person, if thou were any thing
but a Pharisee, thou would shut up thy mouth, or wash it; thou would burn
thy black book, keep it clasped, cast it aside, or raze out all the gilt-marks
which thou have fixed in it. Indeed if this woman had come-in, painted,
powdered, curled, or brought her old swarratters at her heels, thou had had
just cause so to style her, but when she does come in, like one that is a
loathing to her self, torn in pieces with remorse, tortured with conflicts,
full of anguish and agony, skalt in the flames of hell as it were, and pained
as much with the sense of sin, as ever she was with the fangs and claws of the
seven Devils, which were in her; sobbing, wailing, weeping, as if she would
cleave her heart, chink her breast, fret off the skin from her eyelids with hot
and brinish water, not speaking a word, as if the astonishment of sin hand
struck her dumb, standing at my back, as if she were ashamed to look me in the
face, lying grove-long at my feet, as if dejection of spirit had so far abased
her, that she thought her self fit for nothing but to be trampled upon; yea,
kissing my seet, and anointing my feet, as if she would esteem it an high
favor if she might be honored to lay her penitent lips to my feet, and a
pledge of her acceptance, if I will but vouchsafe her (who has given me the
sweetest odor she is owner of, even her fragrant soul) to power a box of
costly Spikenard upon my meanest parts, even my feet; I say, if all these
things were considered, thou would have another estimation of her, change
thy opinion concerning her, give her a better title: She the sinner? no, thou
the sinner; not she the sinner, which has lived so vitiously; but thou the
sinner, which do judge so uncharitably. What do see? a woman so altered,
transformed, which has blushed out all her shame, and wept out all her filth,
and thrust all her sins behind her in standing at my back, and trampled upon
all her errors in falling down at my feet, and taken away the sent of all her
lusts, by pouring out this sweet ointment; shall she still be a blemish, an
ignominy, an abomination, a Sinner? Oh it is a miracle I see, for Balaams Ass
of speak, for a Pharisee to bray out any thing but sinner, they must be your
own Proselytes, or else they are no Converts; they must have the benediction of
your own synagogues, or else they have the malediction of your tongues; not
this people which know not the Law, but this people which know not your Orders,
are cursed; ye unhallow all which have not your consecration, and damn all
which are not intialed into salvation by your superstitions and traditions;
sharp prickles will never off from the Porkupines back, nor rank venom out of
the Vipers jaws, nor the calling of sinner out of the Pharisee's lips. But if
thou had either judgment, or charity, or piety, thou would leave this
Synagogue-barbarism, thou would give over thy Pharisees Dialect. For what
can desire more to make a child of Abraham, then such fruit? so many tears,
so much humility, so much abnegation and renuntiation, terror, consternation,
prostration, do not these discover a true mortified spirit? amongst all the
Proselytes and Rabbis, did ever see such a complete Convert I speak no more
of her crimes therefore, lest thou do disparage thy judgment; mention not
again any of her former guilts, least thou do forfeit thy conscience. She is
not Mary Magdalen the sinner, but Mary Magdalen the penitent; not Mary Magdalen
the sinner, but Mary Magdalen the Saint; yea, a famous, splendid, eminent,
glorious Saint; thou may be St Simon in the synagogue but she is St Mary
Magdalen at my back, and my feet. Look upon her, observe her, admire her; here
are many persons, but who so worthy? here are many guests, but who so
conspicuous? If thou were any thing but a Pharisee, it would be a pleasure to
thee, to behold her, yea a trance, a ravishment, to fix thine eye upon her,
every cast of her countenance is regeneration; every part about her, and
posture which does come from her, does speak heaven: she is the honor of the
meeting* the ornament of the feast, neither I hou, nor thy Table cheer, nor
thy guests, do so much affect me as the sight of this matchless Convert; No, I
am now welcomed, Mary Magdalen has given me the entertainment. I had but one
invitement, but I meet with a double feast: the Pharisee has feasted me, the
Penitent has feasted me, which shall go for the banquet? thou have been at
great charge, Mary Magdalen does serve up all her dishes in her eyes; thou
would think much, that a few dumb gestures, warm drops of a woman's
distilling, and a little box of Spikenard should be preferred before thy
sumptuous fare; I know that all this thinking, and speaking in thy self, and
hard censure against the sinner, is that thy provision, or thy piety, might be
most prized. A Pharisee does love to appropriate all to himseife, to engross
reputation, to monopolize praise, his person must have the vogue, and his
actions the cry; he must be looked upon with a distinguishing eye, and spoken
of with a discriminating tongue, no wares must be of prize, when he does open
his pack, nor no instrument make good music, when his Cornet does blow, or his
Cymball does tinckle; no, he must be the man of fame, the man alone. Therefore
the great question now will be, which way the seals of the balance will bend,
who shall be adjudged to have most graynes of reputation; that doubt will soon
be resolved, if every thing be measured and poysed according to the weights of
affiction: Who then has loved me most? Simon, or Mary Magdalen? The resolution
of this doubt must be determined by the superiority of respect; the most
affectionate person, must be the most endeared person. Let Simon and Mary
Magdalen thosefore lay down both their hearts and where the greatest love does
glow, let there the greatest honor be fixed. Simon, thou do love me; thy
envitement, thy entertainment does show it; but there is more then a matter of
delicacies to be considered, there is a thing called pardon to be regarded:
pardon, and, provision, favor, and a feast; now in respect of pardon, and
favor, in what breast does the greatest engagement lay? alas, Simon, thou art
a Pharisce, and according to thy principles, thou art no very criminal person;
a Pharisee is high in his no, a sinner in the inferior rank, some peceadilloes
he may have but his sins must not be too grievous, or too numer^us; the
Synagogue plaster has cured him of Ulcers, or howsoever of a Leprosy, which
does spread all over the body; he has washed too often to have any great filth
stick upon him, monstrous, and many sins must not be laid to his charge, for
this were to scandal his profession, to pollute, and deturpate the holy
Pharisee: thou would think much, Simon, that it should be said, that thou
were much in the Creditors Books, that one should aggravate thy debts, and
affirm that thou did ow fifty pence, that thou were guilty of fifty sins.
The sound need not the Physician, and he which is even disingaged, does think
that he is not obliged to the mercy of any Creditor. This then is thy account,
thus thou do daily cast up thy Bonds, and Bills; alas thine are but petry
sums, scarce worth a Creditors conrtesie, forbearance, or rasing out of his
Debt-book; thou can either pay them when thou will or it is hardly worth
thanks to have them forgiven; therefore whereas in thine own opinion, thy
owings are so small, thou can never think thy self much bounden to me, to
remit what I might exact with rigor. But here is one plunged in debt, and
overwhelmed with the thought of her excessive payments; she owes, for thy
fifty, five hundred pence, and she fears the Sergeants, and does presage
nothing but perpetual imprisonment, therefore she stands at my back as a
distracted person, and does fall down at my feet as if she were utterly ruined
if I be extreme: seeing then she has such a sense of her arrearages, and that
she is at her wits end, what shall become of her if I should severely prosecute
her, she is the party that will most bow, and stoop before a merciful
Creditor: Thou can say, that if there be two Debtors, and the one be forgiven
50, and the other 500 pence, that that party will love most, to whom is most
forgiven; then why should not I pronounce, that Mary Magdalen will have the
most fervency kindled in her breast toward me? Yes, in respect of thy sparks,
she will have flames, so that in the point of pardon and favor, she does far
exceed thee, and not so likewise in the point of provision, and the feast? Yes,
I might object that she came of her own accord; thou had some motive; she for
favor, thou for same; she to serve me, thou to observe me; she to be acquitted
by me, thou to be acquainted with me; sheto seek reconciliation, thou to seck
resolutions; she for gracious answers, thou for difficult questions; she to
satisfy conscience, thou to satisfy curiosity; she as a sinner, thou as a
Pharisee; she to give me spiritual sustenance, thou to give me natural; she to
satiate me with tears, thou with juncates; she to refresh my desire, thou my
appetite; she to feast my soul, thou my body: in these respects Mary Magdalen
has the precedence, the sinners banquet does excel the Pharisees, she has
the best Cook-room, and may carry it at the supernatural dresser. But to let
pass these things, and to come to those accidents, contingencies, and
coincident things which have happened at the banquet; thou have feasted me in
state, she in humility; thou in pomp, she in dejections; thou like a worthy,
she like a wretch; thou like a Pharisee, she like a sinner, she has given me
more then thou did bestow upon me, for since I entered into thy house, thou
gave me no water for my feet, but she has fetched water out of a new spring,
she has washed my feet with her tears, and she has been more complete in her
provision, for thou allowedst me nothing to dry and clean my feet, but she has
brought a towel along with her, the strangest and finest that ever touched
flesh, she has wiped my feet with the hairs her head: she has been more
debonair then thou, thou did entertain me only with a few fair looks, thou
were too haughty to be too familiar, but she has made me the better man, used
me like a Lord, honoring the meanest part about me: Thou gave me no kiss,
but she has not ceased to kiss my fees. She has made me to smell in the
room, but what perfumes did thou bestow upon me? no, nourishment was enough
for me from thee, but ointments thou thoughtest were too chargeable: My head
with oil thou did not anoint, but this woman has anointed my feet with
ointment. What now then think thou of thy self? what think thou of this
woman? thou have been looking on her a great while, have thou eyed her rightly?
No, I doubt thou have beheld her all this while with the Pharisee's eye. For
fear therefore that thou should wrong her with thine eye, though she has
all this while stood at my back, yet I will now turn my face upon her, take a
sight of her: yea, I look, and look thou again, take a better view of her.
See thou this woman? this woman? this rare, precious, peerlesse woman? thou
look for high praise for thy entertainment, and I praise thee, but thou must
not except equal thanks, or honor with this woman: no, thou have spread thy
Table, but Mary Magdalen is the Feast-maker. Her water, and napkin and kiss,
and ointment, far exceed the variety of Dishes which thou have prepared. So
that the Penitent with Christ, does carry the credit from the Precisian: Mary
Magdalen has more commendation from the Saviors lips, then the Pharisee; and
the Pharisee it seems thought so: for as a man convinced, after Christ had
expressed the inequality, he does make no replication. The Pharisee is
silenced, and now our Savior does continue his discourse, he does leave the
Pharisee, and enter into parley with the woman: yea, whereas we do not find
that he justified the Pharisee, but does leave him to his Synagogue balsomes:
this woman has what she does come for, she is paid for her water, and napkin,
and kiss, and ointment. Woman stand up, stand forth, thou have given me water,
and I rinse thee; thou have wiped me, and I sponge thee; thou have kissed my
feet, and I set my Saviors lips to thy soul; thou have anointed me, and I
perfume thy spirit, thou came a sinner, but I will not send thee away a
sinner: no, thou have seen thy last minutes of a sinner. Thy sins are forgiven,
Luke 7.48. And whereas there are new murmurers arise, that after the Pharisee
has left muttering inwardly, there are others that say in themselves, a
cavilling generation, which had learned their spirit of contradiction from
their old opposing Master; that when he had laid down his weapons, they renew
the assault, being loath that the woman should go away without her old name,
the Sinner; traducing Christ, that he should dare to absolve her. For they that
sat at meat with him, began to say within themselves, Who is this, that
forgiveth sins also? v. 49. That the woman might not be troubled with this
interposition and alteration, Christ does renew his authorizing grant, putting
another seal to the pardon. For he said to the woman, Thy faith has saved
thee, go in peace, v. 50. So that the woman now is cleared and discharged,
forgiven and saved: Oh gracious Savior! oh blessed Mary Magdalen! All this
long discourse have I used, that by one full instance ye might see, when God is
pleased to show mercy, he will find out all the incentives that may conduce to
compassion, a here ye see, that God omitteth nothing that might bring off this
penitent creature with honor; there is not only an assertion that she was
worthy, but here is a dissertion, a large dispute about it, Christ has a
gradation of arguments for her. And is it not so here in my Text? Yes, there
was a discussion, and an enforcement, that Nineveh was to be spared, because it
was a City, a great City, that great City, and that great City which has
things of price in it, persons, and their multitudes, and surplusage mentioned,
that they had sixscore thousand and more; and their disabilities, that they
cannot; and in a thing of the highest consequence, that they cannot discern;
and not for intricate things, but for common, trivial things, they cannot
discern between their right hand and their left; and, lest all this should be
too little, that the sparing grace should not be condiscended to; God, if he
has not said enough, he will say more, adds to the affirmation a confirmation
and to the enforcement an enlargement. And also Should not I spare Nineth that
great City, wherein are more than sixscore thousand persons, which cannot
discern between their right hand, and their left hand. And also.

Application.
First, this does serve to show the benefit of a divine ingratiating. Since
thou were precious in my sight, thou were honorable. Es. 43.4. so honorable,
that God will be a restless Advocate for his Saints. I will never leave thee,
nor forsake thee. Not only look upon his Saints, but stand by them; not only
assist them at the first, or for once, but never take off his helping hand,
till he has brought his work to perfection. He will contend with the whole
Earth for them, now a contention ye know is not quickly at an end, no, there is
a long debate before a business can be stated; so God will weary the
quarrelling world, and make men desist from opposing, and molesting, before he
will give over answering, and confuting. As in prosperity, there shall be a
succession of blessings, The Plowman shall overtake the Reaper, and the treader
of grapes, him that sows seed. Amos 9.13. So in protection there shall be a
continuation, concomitation, and connection of arguments, reason upon reason,
multiplicity of proofs, God will be at the first entering of the suit, and the
last hearing in the Court, a faithful Solicitour, which will never desert his
Client, till the sentence be past, or the decree gotten. Julius Caesar having
undertaken the defense of noble Masintha, he did not only argue the cause for
him against King Hiempsa, and roughly oppose his Son Juba afterward; and a
third time take him out of the hands of a Provinciate, Sueton.
who would have carried him away by force; but at the expiration of his
Pretorship, being commanded to go into Spain, he carried the records of the
Court, and the Rods of the Lictours along with him in his littour, that
Masintha might not be summoned, or proceeded against til his coming back, and
at his return most honorably got him cleared So God where he is interessed in
a case, he will go through all emergencies, till he has brought every thing to
an happy close. The Augures in Rome having a mind to the house of Claudius
Centumalus, they prosecuted him in the Court, Valor. Max.
that he might be constrained to pluck down his house, because it was built so
high, that it hindered their sight, from observing the flight of the sourth
saying birds. Cato observing the spite and covetousness of the Augurs,
perceiving that the man must either give them the house, or pull it down, he
undertook the defense of Centumalus, and got the house to be measured; and
though it was manifested that the offense was in all probability causeless,
yet the South-sayers being of a troublesome spirit, and uncessant in the
quarrel, he wished Centumalus to sell his house to Calphurnius, and to convey
himself into some Foreign Province; the counsel being embraced, and the
bargain made, Calphurnius, was no sooner entered into his Possession, but they
were as much enraged against him, and renewed the suit, saying, that the house
was forfeit to them, because he had bought it of Centumalus without their
consent, they having their exception recorded in Court against inconvenience:
Cato answered, that their plea had been good, if they had proclaimed their
exception in the City, or signified it in a legal way to Calphurnius before
the house was bought; but both these failing, the bargain was justifiable, so
at last he got both Man, and case discharged. In like manner, if one thing will
not help the Saints, another shall, God has variety of reliefes to aid the
innocent. When Themistocles the Grecian was in the Army of Xerxes the Persian
King; Diod Siculus.
Manda-ae his kinswoman came and besought him, that he would now be revenged of
Themistocles (whom he had in his hands) for killing her two Sons at the Battle
of Salamine; Xerxes dearly loving his kinswoman, but infinitely pitying the
case of Themistocles, told her, that a business of that consequence ought not
to be done in a passion, but upon mature deliberation; therefore he wished her
to forbear a while, and afterward to attend upon him, and she should have his
resolution; she failed not to repair to him, and vehemently pressed home her
suit; Xerxes told her, that her bitterness was such for the present, that she
was not fit to be heard, but let her come with a more calm spirit, and he would
take her request into consideration, and so he dismissed her the second time;
she made her third address, and then Xerxes told her, that Themistockles was
not taken as a Captive, for then at her request he would have executed him, but
he came to him upon safe conduct, and it stood not with his honor to murder
him, whom he had taken upon him to preserve; Manda-ae, not satisfied with this,
cried out that her Children were dead, and there was the person that slew them,
therefore he did her not right, if he were not destroyed with them. The Prince
being perplexed with the impatience of the woman, turned her over to his
Council, saying, that whatsoever they determined, he would stand to.
Sheapplieth her self of the Council, they set a long day for the time of
hearing, till Themistocles might learn the Persian tongue, when pleading for
himself he was fairly acquitted. So God will weary the Saints enemies with
tediousness, and as often as they renew their motions, he will have new
answers for them, and never cease till he has freed them with honor. The
wicked may be violent at first, but God will hold them so long in debate, that
at last their edge will be dulled, as it was said of Lucius Crassus when he
accused Marcellus that he was sharp in the onset, but leight in the close. Why
then are we dismayed that Gods first argument does not take, if God has not yet
disputed us out of danger, Impetu gravis, exitu levis. Val. Max
has he no more disceptations behind? yes, if a Syllogism in Mode, and Figure
will not do it, or a short Enthymem, God will bring an Induction, or a Sorites,
or a (...), that he will enforce the Adversary. God will use all his
demonstrative reasons, and search all his Topicall heads, that he may be
Victour for his Saints. Therefore if one thing has not done it, another thing
may. Is God scanted in reasonings? No, Chrysippus himself was never so well
provided. When he has alleged many things here, he has an enlargement still
in store. And also.

Secondly, this does serve to daunt the Politician: he does carry it high, and
soars in the admiration of his contriving brain; as if Nestor were not his
match, nor Ulysses his equal; no, Magnus Apollo.
with the Prince of Tyrus, he thinks he is Wiser then Daniel. Ezech. 28.3.
the great Apollo of the age, oh how is he enamoured upon his projects, and
idolising his designs? In this thing I am prevalent, in that thing I am
successful, What cannot I do by my ingenious, and aritificiall head? here lies
the maze of inventions; the Labyrinth of devices, I have all the Sages in my
breast, I carry a Senate house about me; I have the magnetic virtue of
consultation, yea, the very bowl-tick Elixir; people do not know what a spawn
of choice maxims are conceived in this belly, what a convey of rare
disquisitions can fly out of this brain. How many jewels are in this Cabinet?
how many stars do there shine in this firmament? I can speak like a Prophet,
and interpret like an Angel; every point of the wind may be found out, but not
of the gales of my resolutions; people may take the height of the stars, but
there is no Jacobs staff, nor Astrolabe can take the altitude of my sublime
conceptions; I leave no foot prints of my intentions for men to discern; no,
the Age is at a loss, and hunt dry foot to think to find out me in my form, or
to follow me in my leaps, and various jumps, races, and traces. Ay but take
heed, that all this be for just ends, for the happiness of the Church, and the
glory of God. Procure things honest in the sight of all men. Romans 12.17.
Deliver a City by thy wisdom. Eccles. 9.15. with Bezaleel and Aholiab, build a
Tabernacle by thy Wisdom, or like Joseph, sustein a Kingdom by thy wisdom, or
like Solomon, pronounce some astonishable judgment in an intricate thing, that
all the earth may ring of it; if thou have wisdom, let it be the wisdom which
descends from above, Jam. 3.17. Be wise concerning that which is good, and
simple concerning that which is evil, Romans 16.19. For if there a good wit in a
bad skull, as it was said of Galba, Ingenium male habitat. Sueton.
If thou have a serpentine wisdom, not for dove-like, but serpentine ends; if
it be, with Absalon, to set up a Pillar of thine own vainglory; or, with
Nimrod, to build a Tower against heaven; with the Midianites, to vex men with
thy wiles; or with Jezabel, to contrive how to get Naboths Vineyard, and
Naboths head; if thou do study scripture, to know how to evacuate Gods Law,
and strive for a fill in the greatest secrets of Faith, that thou may the
better understand to subvert Christianity; if with the Gibeonites, thou do
endeavor only to work wilily, Jos. 9.4. or with Jonadab, To be a very subtle
man, 2 Samuel, 13.3. To be cunning how to lay snares, and to frame instruments of
cruelty, and to fill a quiver full of deadly arrows, to make the people sigh,
and the Prophets go in sackcloth, this knowledge of thine will be fatal;
invention is good, but circumvention base; wisdom is commendable, but craft
abominable. How many abusing their wisdom, have at last foundred in the height
of honor. Polycrates who was so rich, that his wealth was turned into a
proverb, Herod. l. 3.
and so wise, that not only Samos where he lived, but Lydia and Jonia, and all
Regions round about him were filled with the fame of his excellent parts, yet
falling into horrid practices, craftily circumventing them whom he spighted,
and subtly plotting the destruction of his supposed enemies, he was at last
taken by Oraetes the Prefect of Darius, and crucified upon the top of mount
Micala. Cyrus, who was so wise a Prince, Bruson. l. 2. c. 27.
that Zenophon wrote the pattern of an absolute Prince by his example, yet
being puffed up with prosperous successes, waxing envious and cruel to all his
neighbors, he was at last taken by Tomyris, and had his head struck off,
Sabellie. l. 3. c. 4.
and thrown into a bowl of his own blood. Dionysius, who had Plato for his
Schoolmaster, and was highly magnified for curiosity of learning, but
degenerating afterterwards into a Tyrant, as to fettering of men in prison, and
chopping off their heads (after his hundred thousand men, which he had at his
command) was taken by Icetes and Timoleon, and banished to Corinth, where he
kept a School (as some say) and saw the deaths of his own sons, and the
deflouring of his daughters. Validissinorum populorum arbi ter, and victor
victoriae existe ret. Valor Max imus. l. 6. c. 1.
Syphax, King of the Marusians, who was so wise, that he was called the
Arbitrator of all Nations, and so fortunate, that he was called Conqueror of
Conquests, yet proving boisterous and barbarous, he was taken by Laelius, and
led in a chain to Scipio. Nero the wise, who for five years was the Mirror of
prudent Princes, yet afterward proving Nero, that his name to this day, for
all manner of heard and unheard of cruelties, is a fright and prodigy; how at
last did he fly out of Rome, lurk in a Cave, drink puddle water out of the
hollow of his hand, as out of a golden Goblet, and dye upon the point of his
own weapon? I could tell you the like of Lysimachus the politic, Sueton.
Murziphbe the sagacious, Haquine, Hiarnus, Regnerus, all which using wit, but
for a Vulture, or Blood-hound, how did it prove pernicious to them? therefore
there is no saying, My feat inventions have taken at this time, therefore they
shall always: no, this curious clock may be out of tune, this deep sounding
Bell may crack in the midst, the wise (as Job says) may be taken in their
crastinesse; thou have reasoned well for a time, but thy judgment may fail
thee; the wit that has not the sap of divine obedience running in it, will at
last wither at the root. It is hard for thee to kick against the prick, so it
is hard for thee to syllogise against Gods laws: how many of these nimble
Logicians have been found out at last to be but mere sophisters? and their
fallacies being discovered, how have they been ever after non plussed? Oh God
is a sore disputant, though he has not yet confuted, or convinced thee, yet he
will have another argument, the last argument: How many are there whom he could
not for a while dispute into reason, yet in conclusion, he disputed them into
ruin; he disputed Nebuchadnezzar into a forest, Pharaoh into the bottom of
the Sea, Haman unto a Gibbet, and Achitophel himself to be his own Executioner.
Be wise. O ye Kings, be learned ye that are Judges of the earth, serve the Lord
in fear. Without this fear of God, all your wisdom and learning is but a kind
of familiar spirit, or subtle Devil to reveal strange things to you for a
time, and at last to be paid dearly for these Magical principles. Oh therefore
if thy eye offend thee pluck it out: if thou do find thy wisdom to be
carnal renounce it, it will never do thee service at last; thou will curse the
time that ever thou have been led along so many years, by such an ominous
Counsailer. Have any hopes to end Victor? no, thou see what a terrible
opponent thou have. Thou may seem to have had the better of God Almighty for
a long space, he has disputed against thee, and by finenesse of wit, or a
subtle distinction, thou may take away the force of his argument: he may
have given thee warnings, and thou have neglected them, he may have sent many
motions to thy conscience, and thou have quenched them; he may inflict many
judgments upon thee, and thou have contemned them; but has God no more
arguments yet to use? Yes, he has, pleasure in unrighteousness, hardness of
heart, consusion, everlasting damnation, yet to urge thee with: either on
earth, or in hell, God will have the upper hand. When thou think God has
spoken all, yet he has more to say, as here, he had used many reasons to
Jonas, and he is able to make an addition an enlargement, And also.

Thirdly, This does show, That God is most passionate for mercy; ye never find
that God does argue for justice, as here he does plead for mercy: no, he will
reason, and enlarge for mercy. Mercy pleases him, Miseri cordia scepetrum
tenet Fasciculus Temp. p. 2. Quid est misericordia mea? Totum quicquid sum, de
misericordia tua sum. Fecist^ me ut sim, sed non fecisti me uthonus sim. Aug.
Concion, 2. in Ps. 59.
he does bear the name of it, and it is his delight. God has many attributes,
but mercy holds the Scepter. God is the God of my mercy, Psalm. 59.17. What is
this, God of my mercy? Namely, whatsoever I am, I am of mercy, for thou have
made me that I should be, but thou have not made me that I should be good: no,
this does come from mercy, so that mercy is above all the Creation. How is God
desirous to show mercy? how is he angry when he cannot show mercy? He comes
leaping over the mountains, Cant. 2.8. when he should show mercy, Currit dum
succurrit, He does ran that he might relieve, but he does make no such have
when he should execute judgment; no, what a going down, and examining,
parlying, and expostulating is there, Non dixit, Ponam sagittam in nubibus, sed
arcum. Amb. l. de Noah. and arca. c. 17. Playfer. Concion. ad Cler. post
pestem. in verbum, Sufficit.
before he will power vengeance upon Sodom it self. He has set his how in the
clouds. It is not said, he has set his arrow in the clouds, no, his bow
without an arrow, as if God must be forced beyond his Covenant, when he does
let fly an arrow to stick in the breast of a sinful person, or a sinful
Nation. He cannot deny himself, there is meant, by himself, his mercy; yet (as
one well observes) it is not said, he cannot deny his mercy, but he cannot
deny himself, because his mercy is himself; it is so himself, that when
justice is mentioned in scripture, mercy is doubled. The Lord is merciful and
righteous, yea, our God is merciful; Ps. 116.5.
as if mercy were a Counter-guard, on this side, and on that, before and behind
to justice. Oh then that mercy is thus dear unto God, and not so precious unto
us; that we desire any thing in God rather then his mercy; we would have his
wisdom perhaps, or his power, and if we could, his glory, and eternity, but we
care not for his mercy. What affections do there glow in us toward mercy? what
motions have we made for mercy? what preparations are we qualified with for
entertainment of mercy? no, this Mannah, this Angels food is light bread in our
esteems, we will not step out of our Tents to gather a gomer full of it. People
refuse the waters of Shiloah which run softly, Esa. 8.6. But oh beloved, let us
desire to enjoy from God that which is most divine, that which is the most
principal efflux of his everlasting essence, and is not mercy most eminent in
God? yes, it is the bosom, and bowels of God. How excellent mercy is in Gods
esteem, ye may find here in my Text, he has never done reasoning, and pleading
to be a sparing God; he has argument, and enlargement for it. And also.

Fourthly, this does serve to show, that one of the most incorrigible sins is
envy, for Jonah is spightfull, and with what a difficulty does God reclaim him?
he is enforced to use argument upon argument, and at last to put in an
enlargement. And also. Anger is cruel, and wrath is raging, but who can stand
before envy? Prove. 27.4. the Devil is called, The envious. No marvail our
Savior gave his new commandment for love, and his last legacy for peace, for
man's heart is inclined to any thing, rather then to love, and peace, malice,
and pertinacy, envy and obstinacy usually go together: the envious heart of
Esau against Jacob, of Saul against David, of the Jews against the Gentiles do
hardly come down; yea, next to original sin, this sin is propagated, it does
run in a blood, it is crimen, and semen partus, the sin as well as the seed
of the birth, Invidia genus est inimicitiae intractabile quidem, atque admodum
insuperabile. Bas. Sermon. in Invidiam. Non sic abibunt odia, vivaces aget
violentus iras animus, and saevus dolor aeterna bella pace sublata geret. Sen.
in Here. Fur Canes educatione mansu^scunt, Leon^s obsequio tractabiles fiunt,
Invidi tantum officiis agr^stiores. evadunt Bas. ser. de Invidia.
the child does partake of the Parents envy, as well as his name, or nature; it
is ex traduce, it is hereditatory, howsoever, a pernicious sin it is, and very
permanent; fires may be quenched, and diseases may be cured, but many engines
must work to put out this flames, and the skilfullest Physicians administer to
purpose to remove this malady. Envy is a kind of displeasure intractable, and
almost insuperable. As Juno said against Hercules, so do too many pronounce
against their enemies, Hatreds shall not thus depart, an enraged spirit shall
drive on living distasts, and cruel spite (all peace laid aside) shall wage
everlasting wars. Dogs with usage will grow gentle, and ^ions with observance
wax tractable, but the envious with courtesies remain savage. Take heed
therefore how thou do strike fire into his tinder, how this leaven does
spread in the lump, how this root of bitterness does come to spread in thy
affections, for if thou be envious, thou art even inexorable; how must thou
be waited upon, and worshipped? how many motions must be made? how many
meetings must be set? how many meek men must be troubled about one stubborn
man? how many wise men about one mad man, before a disterence can be
compromised, or a displeasure forsooth perhaps not worth a flies spleen, or a
dogs anger, can be taken out of thy festered heart? Thou may see it here in
my Text, how is God molested here with froward Jonah? his splenative Prophet?
he had conceived a spite against Nineveh, and what a pleading must there be to
bring him into his right temper again? there must be an amplifying of reasons,
terque, quaterque, three, and four times to be persuaded will not serve the
turn; no, God must press many particulars, and after a multitude of arguments,
he must bring in an enlargement, And also. Should not I spare Nineveh that
great City, wherein are more then sixscore thousand persons, which cannot
discern between their right hand, and their left hand. And also.

Cattle.
2. Now let us come to the strange Subject, Cattle. A strange Subject indeed;
for, Nunquid de bobus cura est Deo? Has God care of Oxen? So, are Cattle a fit
subject for the only wise God to discourse of? yes, he gave them life, and the
lives of them are tender to him. From hence observe, that God is compassionate
to the very beasts. His providence does reach to the very brutish Creatures.
All the beasts of the Forests are mine. Mine by sovereignty, and sustentation;
they are a part of my glory, and honor, therefore under my care, and custody;
they had their distinct Creation, for, God says, Let the earth bring forth the
living Creature, Cattle, creeping things, and the Beast after his kind. Genesis
1.24. as if the earth were not complete without this furniture. Sure I am, they
were snatched by God out of the general deluge, and put into the Ark as a
special treasure. Genesis 7.2. and when they came out of the Ark God entered into
a Covenant with them, for, This is the token of the Covenant which I make
between me, and you, and every living Creature. Genesis 9.10. Solomon amongst his
blessings does reckon, not only that he had made him great works, and built
Princely houses, that he had silver, and gold, and the peculiar treasure of
Kings, that he had Vineyards, and Orchards, Men singers, and Women-singers; but
that he had possession of great and small Cattle. Ec. 2.7. David does describe
it as an high perfection of a flourishing Kingdom, not only that the garners
are full affording all manner of store, but that the Sheep bring forth
thousands, and ten thousands in the streets, and that the Oxen are strong to
labor. Psalm. 144.13, 14. Moses would not leave an hoof in Egypt, and
wherefore? but to show, that these hoofed creatures were worthy the carrying
along with them. It is an heavy punishment when a judgment does light upon the
Cattle, the murrain of Beasts was one of the plagues of Egypt. And find we not
a sad groan throughout all the Scripture, when this heavy accident does happen?
yes, How do the Beasts groan? the herds of the Cattle are perplexed, the
flocks of Sheep are made desolate. Joel 1.18. Where is thy Flock, thy
beautiful Flock? Jer. 13.20. Does not Amos join the death of Beasts with the
destruction of men? yes, Your young men have I slain with the sword, and taken
away your horses. Amos 4.11. God does threaten this, as one way, by which he
will be avenged upon a disobedient people, that they shall be cursed in the
increase of their Kine, and the Flocks of their Sheep, Deuteronomy. 28.18. This was
that, which made Habbacucks belly to tremble, his lips to quiver, and
rottenesse to enter into his bones, that the Flocks should be cut off from the
Fold, and there should be no Herds in the Stalls. Habbacuck 3.17. Without
Cattle the whole earth does languish, and a great part of man's Dominion is
diminished, the prejudices are many if beasts be wanting. A man cannot march
into the field without them, for An horse is prepared for Battle. Prove. 21.31.
there would be a thin table without them, for, if all the labor of man be for
his mouth, Eccles. 6.7. without these he cannot eat of the sat. Nehem. 8.10. a
man can scarce cloth himself without these, for, from these come the goodly
raiment. Genesis 27.15. and the Family clad in skarlet. Prove. 31.21. our shops can
scarce be well furnished without them, Ivory, Furs, Masks, Sables,
healing-horns, Bezarstones, etc. come not these from Beasts? Besides are they
not goodly to look upon? yes, a pleasing sight it is to behold the
burthen-bearing Camel, the swift paced Dromedaty, the scaled Rhinoeros, and in
a word the Princely Lion; therefore if a man consider his honor in the field,
his sustenance at the Table, the bravery of his back, the benefit of his
Merchandise, or but merely his pleasure and delight, he must say, Beneficiorum
Dei animalia etiam habent partem. Aug. de quant. animae. Animantia fecit Deus
propter hominem -- animalibus ministrat propter hominem. Chrysostom. Hom. 28. in
Genesis Domestica, and sylvestria animalia homini benefica. Plato. In Polit.
Cissamim Coum supra modum pecuariis gregibus aiunt fuisse divitem. Zenod.
Pecunia a pecude. Sabellic. l. 3. Aenead. 4.
that of Gods blessings the beasts have a part; and that God does stretch out a
providentiall hand to beasts for the comfort of man, yea, whether they be tame
or wild, they are highly beneficial ^o man. Why did Aristotle, Aelian. C.
Plinius, Albertus Magnus, Michael Herrus, Gesner with many others, write such
large and learned Treatises of Beasts, if to men they were not very useful?
Did not the Patriarks wealth chiefly lie in Beasts? and was not Cissamis of
Cous famous far and nigh for his riches in Cattle? Did not money of old carry
this stamp upon it, as if in Cattle men imagined the greatest treasure of the
earth to consist? Did not Tullus Hostilius, as Valerius Maximus says, and
Maximinius the elder as Capitolinus writes; and Caraloman as Volateran
reports, come to the height of preferment by having their first raise by the
increase of Cattle? Why are Jasons golden Fleece, the Cornucopia, the plenty of
the horn which the Naiades so decked with flowers, and Trojanes great horse,
so wondered at then over all the world, to this day so famous; but that people
in general conceived that in these Beasts there was a great deal of profit,
and advantage? have not the noblest presents been usually tendered in Beasts?
Yes, Cornelius Cossus gave to P. Decius the Tribune, an hundred Bullocks with
one white one having the horns tipped with gold, as a gratification for
defending the Roman Army from the Sabines; and Canutus sent as a testimony of
his royal respect, a goodly horse shod with gold to Lotharius the Emperor.
Saxo Gram. l. 13.
Amongst the Heathens was Neptunes threeforked Mace, or Apollo's Harp more
famous then Pans sevenbranched Pipe? Calepin.
No, he was called Pan, because in looking to Cattle, people held that he
conveyed all the manner of blessings to the world. Seeing then by the light of
the Scripture, and the light of nature, by our pastures, and our stables, by
our markets, and our shops, by our bargains and our backs, by the taste of our
mouths, and the pleasure of our eyes, in sitting at home or traveling abroad,
in war and in peace, beasts are so commodious, and beneficial; no marvail if
God put in as an additionall motive to preserve this City for Beasts; that he
would spare Nineveh amongst the rest of the impulsive reasons, even for the
Cattle, for so is it here urged. Should not I spare Nineveh that great City,
wherein are more then sixscore thousand persons, which cannot discern between
their right hand, and their left hand; and also Cattle.

Application.
First, this does serve to show that we should honor God in our blessing of
Cattle? For should not we spy, that which God does spare? and prize, that which
God does preserve? Yes, if our land were so bared of Cattle, that we should
need to have a present sent us of them to store our Country, as Artaxerxes gave
to Timagoras the Athenian Ambassador fourscore Kine to replenish his Country,
Plut. in Artax.
that the people might have milk enough; or our tame beasts forsook our
pastures, and ran into the woods, Sigebert. Conjugati projumentis homines
currus trahebant. Bonsin. l. 8. Decad. 12.
and the wild beasts forsook the Forests, and came running into the streets,
as they did in Germany in the year 1086. or that men were enforced to draw in
Trace to plow our lands, or to be yoked in Carts to carry up and down our
commodities, as it happened in those dismal civil wars under Uladislans the
third King of Hungary; we would then think Cattle a rich Possession. Alexander
was so touched with the loss of a sew Horse, Diod. Sic. l. 17. Pausan. in
Archad.
which the Mardi took away from him in the Reere of his Army, as he marched
into India, that he threatened to burn down their Woods, destroy their
Country, and to kill them to a man, if they were not restored. Ulysses when he
had lost a few mares, sought all Greece to regain, and when he had found them,
built a temple to Diana for them; the serviceable beast was so precious to
ancient times, that they knew not how to give honor sufficient to it: Solon
commanded all the people to sacrifice to the Gods for the use of the Ox, Lege
Solonis bos tantae venerationis erat, ut aeque capitale ^rat bovem, and hominem
necare. Alex. ab Alex. l. 3. c. 12.
and made it as capital a crime for any man to kill a bullock, as to slay a
man. Oh then that we see not Gods bounty in the benefit of the creature, that
we cannot apprehend blessings, when they are scattered before us, that we pass
by the beast, and look not up to be Creator; that we make use of the beasts,
and do not magnify providence; yes, let us not visit our stalles without a
meditation, nor walk out into the pastures without a contemplation, nor behold
the flocks, and herds, but say, This is the place, where there is no want of
any thing which is in the earth, Judge. 18.10. This is the Land which the Lord
cares for, the eyes of the Lord are always upon it, from the beginning of the
year, to the end of the year, Deuteronomy. 11.12. Our pastures are clothed with
flocks, Psalm. 65.13. The Lord has made us plenteous in goods, and in the fruit
of our cattle, Deuteronomy. 28.11. Our hills flow with milk, Joel. 3.18. Our horn is
iron, and our hooves brass, Amos 4.13. Our Land is full of horses, and our
Chariots are infinite, Esa. 2.7. Our horses are swifter then the Leopards, and
more fierce then the wolves of the evening, our horsemen are many, Hab. 1.8.
Our cattle are fed in large pastures, the oxen also, and the young asses that
till the ground, eat clean Provender which is winnowed with the shovell and the
fan, Esa. 28.23, 24. We run to the bountifulness of the Lord, for the wheat,
and the wine, and the Oil, and for the increase of the bullocks, and the sheep,
Jer. 31.12. Our bullock gendreth, and fails not, our cow calveth, and casts
not her calfe. Job 21.10. Upon our mountains there do not not come the fear of
briars and thorns, but they are for the sending out of bullocks, and for the
treading of sheep, Esa. 7.25. God does abundantly bless our provision, Psalm.
132.12. The glory of Lebanon is given unto us, the beauty of Carmell and Sharon
is amongst us, and we see the glory of the Lord, and the excellency of our God,
Esa, 35.2. Oh that we cannot see that which we daily behold with our eyes, or
have not a mouth to confess that which does pass into our mouths; that God
does cause his beasts to neigh, and low, and bleat in our ears, and yet that
we cannot understand a Creator, that he does send them by droves unto us, and
yet that we do not perceive them presented to us by the hand of a benefactor,
that we cannot discover the true owner of the herd, or find out Gods mark set
upon his cattle: that we sit upon them, but know not who has lent us the
steed, or lay our burdens upon them, but consider not what friend has given
us the use of his beasts, or cloth our selves with them, but apprehend not
whose fleece we wear upon our back, or feed upon them, but chew not between our
teeth the kindness of our nourishing God. No, they are our beasts, and our
cattle, as if God had no propriety in them, or deserved from us no respect for
this memorable gift: but oh, if we would not walk on foot, or bear our own
loads, or be to seek for raiment and nourishment, let us lay to heart our
Creature obligation, let cattle be valued by us, for they were highly esteemed
by God, he would spare Nineveh for the cattle. And also cattle.

Secondly, This does show, That man is a stipendary; he is not perfect, he does
live much by supply, he is the best of the Creatures, Vt necessitate coactus
semper necesse habeat Dominum requirere. Chrysostom.
but he is not a complete Creature: No, to show that he must depend upon God,
he does daily find that he has use of the cattle: oh then, that Man cannot
shake this empty vessel of his, nor see what a bare hand he does carry about
him, that if there came not in relief from abroad, he were a very destitute
creature; he was born naked, that out of sense of his necessity, he might daily
have recourse to his God; so soon as thou art out of thy bed, thou had need
go to thy prayers; thy first words every morning should be a motion, a suit,
Lord help me, Lord succor me; thou seem to be an Householder, a Land-holder,
thou art but Gods Petitioner, Gods Alms-man; Ingeniosa fames omnes excuderit
arts. Hugo in Didas. l. 1. Qui in tempestate sunt ad arborem confugiunt. Plut.
in moral. Sine canibus, and retibus. Pindar. Auchora domus Terent. Cum metu,
and flein. Bern.
thy selfe-sufficiency is so little, that according to the proverb, as Hugo
says, Thy ingenious want had need to search out all arts. Thou meetest with so
many tempests in this world, that thou can not avoid running under the tree.
Thou can not live in this world without dogs and nets. The house does need
the shore, and man his Buttress. Why does man pass out his days with fears,
and tears, but that he is a Creature which is subject to many exigents, and
that he does carry the Beggars wallet at his back? Oh then, that thou do
stretch, and strout, as if thou were the most accomplished Creature: no, the
most indigent; this is apparent enough, if I take thee peeping into the world,
or creeping out of the world, going into bed, or stepping out of bed; nay if I
do but get thee to walk into thy pastures, or send thee to thy cattle, thou
would be a proprietary, thou art but a stipendary; Will I eat Bulls flesh?
Has God need of any Cattle? No, thou art the Cattle eater, and Cattel-user,
therefore he does spare them for thee: Yea, it was not enough that he spared
the persons, unless he spared the cattle. And also cattle.

Thirdly, This does show, That man has a right in the Creature; for why may
not any man participate of that which God does set apart for him? or spend that
which God does spare for him? I like not the Tatians and Priscillianists, which
do count Cattle unclean; nor the Manichees, which will not kill any beast, not
a Kid, or the least living Creature, because they thought they had a part of
the life of God; nor Tertullian, who in his Treatise Contra Physicos, is too
great a Montanist, holding according to the laws of his Religion a most
rigorous abstinence from the use of cattle, pronouncing all others of a
contrary opinion to him, Animales, Life-wasters, or Blood-spillers; strange
slifts no doubt transplanted from the old Nurcery of the Heathens, Herod. l. 2.
Strabo. lib. 7. Alex. ab Alex. l. 4. c. 17.
for the Barceans, Mysians, and the Prophets of Jupiter, and the Priests of the
Sun, held the selfsame opinion. But to what end has God made his Creatures,
if man may not have his freedom in them? what, should we bring them up only
for pleasure? or to feed our eyes with them, Alebant tantu voluptatis casa.
Sabellic. 6. Ennead. 6
as it is said the ancient Britains here did? no doubtless, since God has
taken away his levitical restraint, and recalled his inhibition concerning
forbidden Creatures, we may say with the blessed Apostle, Every Creature of God
is good, and nothing ought to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving,
1 Timothy 4.4. A Church-constitution may out of Ecclesiastical prudence, but not
absolute necessity, forbid the use of such things. But otherwise the Creature
is thine own, God has delivered it up to thy free enjoyment, thou have as
great a right and tenure to it, as thou have to breathe in the common air, or
to walk by the light of heaven, which does shine to all the world: It is true,
thou must not abuse it, but thou have an ordinate liberty in it; for if thou
be Gods Head-Tenant, and grand Less of all his Creatures, then the Cattle
do come within thy demise; why may not thou use them which God did spare: he
did not spare them for himself, but for Nineveh, and for her he would spare
not only Persons, but Cattle. And also cattle.

4. This serves to show the Dignity of the Creature, for Cattle must needs have
some excellency in them, when God would spare them; the Scripture does not
only say, That the Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament does
show his handiwork, but there the very Leviathan, and Behemoth, are brought
forth to wonder at; what beast is there, but does carry an impression of Gods
greatness in it, it is above all the statues and monuments of the world; man
cannot make one hair of his head white or black, much less then can he make
one living creature: a living Creature then is a ray of the living God. Does
not even nature teach you? So, do not the Cattle even teach you? yes, these
Creatures which are so beautiful, so numerous, so full of order, and vigor,
sagacity, and service, are Indices to thee, of the wisdom, power and all
sufficiency of God Almighty, though they be no thy Canonical, yet they are a
kind of Apocryphal Scripture unto thee, Arist. l. 8. Po^^
if Pauson painted an horse of War, Plin. l. 35. c. 6. Volateram. l 17.
and Nealces an Ass drinking out of the River Nilus, and Nicomachus Cows with
their dropping papps so lively, that people were astonished at the one, and
verily believed the other, and were ready to have made an experiment of the
third; then if painted Cattle do carry such affection, and delight with them,
what should the living? thou art not fit to live amongst the Creatures, which
do not know the worth of them; nor to have a sight of Gods workmanship, which
do not ascribe honor to it. Wherefore has God put an heart into thy bosom,
but to admire glorious Objects? Wherefore has God put a tongue into thy mouth,
but to magnify that, which he does present to thy eyes? not for thine own
comfort then as before, but for the Creatures worth, and the Creatours
perfection, pass thy judgment upon this Opifice, which does call for thy
approbation, and exaltation. Know therefore what it is for thee to stand in the
Fairstead, or at the Pasture-gate of Cattle, there must needs be an high
excellency of Cattle, when God would spare them; yea, when he would spare not
only persons but Cattle. And also Cattle.

Fifthly, this does serve to strengthen your Christian dependence upon God
Almighty. Oh cast your care upon God Almighty, for he cares for you; He cares
for you, for he cares for Ca^tle; He which feeds the Ravens, will he not
feed you? He that clotheth the grass, will he not cloth you? He that spares
the Cattle, will he not spare you? Are ye not better then many sparrows? so,
are not ye better then Herds, and flocks of Cattle? Oh that the eyes of all
things wait upon the Lord, Inest nobis magis desolatio, quam consolatio. Aug.
ep. 121. ad probam.
and that we that have the most knowledge of God have the least affiance in
him, that if God do but exercise us a little, there is in us rather Desolation,
then Consolation; yea, if the Heavens have been troublesome unto us for a while,
we give over our selves as dead men. As Domitian when there had been eight
months thunder at Rome, he was so distracted with it, that he cared not if the
thunderbolt were in his sides, Feriat jam, quem volet. Suet, in Domit
Let Jupiter now strike whom he will. Oh what a turbulent, and impatient people
are we, in the time of adversity? As Alcibiades when he was called into
question, and was wished to be of good comfort, for he had many Friends which
would stand firmly to him, he like a dismayed man answered, that he would not
trust his own Mother, for fear she should mistake the black stone for the
white; so we when we are under trial, like appalled, and confounded men will
trust none, Plut.
no, not our own Father, lest he should mistake destruction for deliverance;
tell the Israelites of a susteining Providence, when they are bitten with
hunger; no, it is a delusion, for, Can God prepare a Table in the Wilderness?
tell the distrustful Prince of Samaria, when an Asses head was sold for
fourscore pieces of silver, and a cab of Doves dung for five pieces of silver,
that in a short time a measure of sine flower shall be sold for a shekel, and
two measures of Barley for a shekell; no, it is a simple dream, for, If the
Lord should make windows in Heaven should this thing be? 2 Kings 7.2. So tell
us of any hopes of redress, when Gods heavy hand presses us sore; no, these
are but conceptions of lunatic brains, are these things possible? when shall
these things be? they will never be: we have lost all our courage upon a
defeat, and our faith in a dysaster; then we sob, and suspect, and fret, and
murmr, and despond, and despair; as if God had never called his Son out of
Egypt, nor led home his Captives again from the close Prison of Babylon. Art
not thou of old, oh Lord our God, our holy one* Is the Lords hand shortened? Oh
cast not away your confidence which has great recompense of reward. Heb.
10.35. Come out of this swoon therefore ye fainting creatures, breath again ye
dying creatures; let blood appear in your pale checks, and speech be heard from
your dumb lips; hope in the bottom of Dungeons; God can deliver you, if he
will, though the Furnace were prepared seven times hotter then it was before;
If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews thou shall not prevail, if this thing be
not of God it shall not stand. God can send a terror amongst the Midianites,
he can put an hook into the nostrills of Senacherib; The bush burnt with fire,
and the bush was not consumed; the Keeper of Israel lives, and neither does
slumber nor sleep. Faithful is he which has promised, his promises are Yea,
and Amen. The Lord can light your candle, the Lord can lighten your darkness.
Though the house of Israel be sifted like as Corn is sifted in a sieve, yet not
the least grain shall fall upon the earth; Why should ye not trust in this
little Sanctuary? why should ye give all for lost, when The eternal is your
Refuge? Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in
heart. As the Shepherd takes out of the mouth of the Lion two legs, or the
piece of an ear; so shall the Children of Israel be taken out that dwell in
Samaria, in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a Couch. Their Redeemer is
strong, the Lord of Hosts is his name, he shall thoroughly plead their cause.
God will have pity upon his Saints, for he does pity Beasts, he will spare his
Church, for he does spare Cattle. And also Cattle.

Sixthly, this does serve to exhort man to maintain his priority, for God does
first name the person, before he does name the Cattle; Oh then, that that which
is but put in the Additionall should exceed that which is placed in the
Principal; thus the servant should be better then the Master, the living
Creature then the regenerate Creature! that the greatest brightness should not
be seen in him, which is the Image of God; or the greatest luster should not be
found in him, who is appointed to be made up amongst the Jewels! Oh it is
shame, and scandal, when man is sent to the Creature to learn his duty, as, go
to the Pismire, o thou sluggard. The Stork knows his appointed time, the
Turtle, the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming, but my
people know not the judgment of the Lord. The Ox knows his Owner, the Ass
his Masters Crib; but Israel does not know, my people does not understand. Oh
it is an heavy thing, when the glo-worm does outshine the star, the scholar in
the Primer is more learned then he in the high Form, when the Creature is more
perfect then man? yet how often is it seen that the Beast does get precedence
of man; Vestes non mutant bestiae. Pliny.
for the Beast does not change his raiment, but man does affect change of
raiment; the Beast is satisfied with that which is necessary, but man though he
has a narrower mouth, yet he has a larger appetite; the Beast does follow his
instinct, but man neither his principles, nor conscience; the Beast has his
particular excellency, the dog, the horse, the Elephant, the Unicorn have their
several properties, but man has nothing in him that is singular, and
supereminent; the Beast can endure hardship, but man no afflictions; the Beast
can communicate one with another, and in their kind express their desires, as
a great Philosopher said, he knew the parley of birds, and the speech of Beasts,
but man is a reserved Creature, and unsociable; the Beasts can pity one
another, and help each other (as they are able) in distress; but man is
merciless, and unsympathising; the Beast is tractable, but man is stubborn;
the Beasts can live peaceably in the same pasture, but not man in the same
Country; the Beast is a thankful Creature, but Man ungrateful; the Beast does
relent to him that does yield, but man is inexorable; the Beast will not prey
upon them of its own kind, Satis est prostrasse Leoni.
not Lion upon Lion, or Tiger upon Tiger; but Man will devour his own
neighbor, yea, his very brother. Oh then see how man has lost his priority,
he may go to school to the meanest Creature, Man should teach Beasts, and
Beasts may teach Man. Oh Man blush at this disparagement, and be dejected that
the Beast which does look downward should be more noble then thou which have a
face which does behold the Heavens? and a soul little inferior to the Angels;
that Dens, and Caves, and Sties, and stalls should leave the Creature more
perfect then thou art, which have Schools, and Academics, and
Councell-chambers, and Scriptures, Temples, and Sacraments. Oh therefore
recover thy privilege, regain thy prerogative; thou should be Superior to
all Creatures, for thou were appointed to be Prince of all the Creatures; the
beast is but sensible, thou art intelligent; the beast has but a perishing
nature, thou have an immortal substance; the beast has but thee, and its
fellow Creatures to instruct him, but thou have God, and his blessed spirit to
inspire thee; the beast does tread in mire, and wallow in his own dung, but
thou have a laver, and the blood of a Redeemer to rinse thee; the beast is but
appointed for this earth, but thou art designed for heaven; oh therefore live
according to thy Creation, express thy self according to those purposes and
decrees which God has sealed with an intention to thine honor; thou art the
prime and predominant Creature, therefore carry an excellency along with thee.
Remember that here thou art a Prior, that God has given thee the chief place,
for God would first spare the Persons before the Cattle, the Cattle are but
brought in, in the additionall. And also cattle.

Seventhly, This does serve, To elevate man to aspire after his high
preferment; here thou art but spared, and cattle spared for thee; but have thou
no greater degree of happiness to attain unto? Yes, thou art not only set
forth to be an Heir of the Creatures, but to be a coheir with Christ Jesus.
There is an inheritance reserved for thee in the heavens, an inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled, which fades not away, 1 Pet, 1.4. Oh therefore
look with a kind of neglect upon this present estate, Misera quaedam est haec
vita, quae cum bestiis est communis. Anselm.
for it is a kind of miserable life which we have here, only common with
beasts; therefore if thou do know where thy durable riches, and thy better,
and more enduring substance is laid, then where the treasure is, there let the
heart be also. Let thy conversation be in heaven, set thy affections upon those
things which are above. Aug. ep. 45. ad Ripar. and Paulinam.
Let life everlasting have thee amongst her lovers: What are all these
pittances and moyeties, to that far more excellent and eternal weight of
glory? No, if we could consider, how many things, Si consideremus quae, and
qualia, nobis promittuntur in coelis, vilescerent omnia, quae hic habentur in
terris. Greg. Quid restat nisi ut jubiles? Aug. in Psalm. 94.
and how great are promised to us in heaven, all things here upon earth would
seem contemptible unto us. Some comforts thou may have here, but there what
does remain, but that thou should keep a solemn Jubilee? Oh then, that
through these chinks of the flesh, some beams of that heavenly light could
shine into thy soul, that with these dull ears thou could hear some distichs
of those new songs which thou shall sing with that celestial Quire, that afar
off thou could spy thy Crown, and get a glympse of that white Robe, and that
thy heart were already in heaven, and thy spirit conversing with the spirits of
just men made perfect. Oh step beyond this world, oh be translated in spirit,
press into the presence of thy Redeemer, and let thy soul serve above stairs,
and stand like a pensioner in the presence Chamber, despise this dung, contemn
this ash-heap, sigh under this chayn, bewail this wilderness. Thou would
have felicity, is this the situation of it? No, when thou say I would live
happily, Quando dicis Beat vivere volo, bonam rem quaeris, sed non hic. Aug.
in 13 Joh.
thou seek for a good thing, but thou must not seek for it here. Oh
therefore let thy fervor to heaven be so ardent, that all that the earth can
present unto thee, even Messuages, and Mannours, Debt-books and Free-deeds,
Wardrobes and Warehouses, chests of Treasure, or Cabinets of Jewels, Patents
or Charters, surred Gowns, or chains of Gold, Portalls or Palaces, seem
despicable to thee; though thou do spend some time with blear eyed Leah, yet
never be contented till thou do embrace the beautiful Rachel; though thou
drinkest some draughts of the dilute wine at the beginning of the banquet, yet
never be satisfied till thou do get a taste of the miraculous wine, which
will be brought in at the latter end of the feast; if thou could live never
so happily in Achish Court, yet do not fix there, but let thy desires be for
thy Crown in Jerusalem; if thou could see Christ here transfigured upon mount
Tabour, yet do not wish to build Tabernacles here, but let thy inward pantings
be to enter into thy Masters joy and thy Masters glory, ever to be with the
Lord, to enjoy the prize of the high-calling of God in Christ Jesus, and to
follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes: there thou shall be a companion of
Angels, whereas alas here thou art but a Lord of Beasts, there thou shall have
a communion with the Saints, whereas here thou do but converse with Cattle,
for, after the persons are spared, the greatest additionall that can be made,
is the sparing of Cattle. And also Cattle.

Eighthly, This does serve to show, That we ought to express commiseration to
Cattle; for seeing God would spare them, why should not we? Yes, spare them 1.
by respective usage; The just man is merciful to his beast, but the mercies of
the wicked are cruel; he is a beast which is barbarous to his beast; he is no
better then a slave, which does make the beast his slave; thou must neither
feed it under the necessary allowance, nor work it beyond the strength; be
neither too sparing of Provender, nor too extreme in punishment; it is pity
but he should dwell in an Almshouse, which has no purse for his ^east; and
that he should live under a Tyrant, that has nothing but a whip for his beast,
which pinch it till it faint, or lay burdens upon it till it sink; that
because he is a Master, does not care what penuriousnesse or severity he does
express to it. Where shall this dumb Creature be righted? God has a Bar for
this oppressed Creature, and the right beast, (even the savage Master) shall
one day mere both with a pound, and a scourge. Secondly, Spare the Cattle by
moderate use; for though ^^an has a right to the Creature, yet no Impery over
it: he may participate of it, but not riot upon it; he may enjoy it for his
necessity and delight, but not for his excess and surfeit: no, those
voluptuous Libertines, and insatiable gluttons, shall one day know what it is
to tyrannize over the Creatures; God is offended with evil beasts, and
slow-bellyes, men given to the appetite, which have mind of nothing but eating
lambs out of the flock, and calves out of the stall, Amos 6.4. that is,
killing, and devouring: the cry of the Creatures shall one day bring in a sad
arraignment at Gods Bar: Dives that fared deliciously is in hell flames, and
our Savior does denounce a curse to all his fellow Epicures, Woe be to you that
are sull. Gula claus^^ para disum, primogenituram vendidit, Sustendit pistorem,
decollavit I aptistam, ejeci^ Baltasarem. Innoc. de vilit. con. human. Malae
Dominae servitur gulae. Amb. deelia and Jejun. Qui Christum desidera^ and illo
pane vescitur, non magnopere curat, quam de pretiosis cibis stercus conficiat.
Jeron, ad Paul.
If surfeiting cast our first parents out of Paradise, lost Esau his
birthright, hung up the chief Baker, beheaded John Baptist, and rent away
Baltazvrs Kingdom, then it is a sin not superficially to be regarded. He
does serve an ill Mistress which obeyes his appetite. He which desires Christ,
and does make him his nourishment, does not care greatly of what precious meats
he does make his excrements. Take heed therefore thou do not fall from thy
Dresser into Hell, and that thy Cook-room does not provide for thee a boiling
Caldron below, that thy riotous banquets do not provide for thee ravenous
hunger in another world; as thou would spare thy soul, spare the Cattle by
moderate use. 3ly, Spare the Cattle by avoiding merciless destruction. Battles
were never ordained against innocent Creatures. It is the height of outrage, to
make a sport and pastime in the spoil of Cattle; when men ruin Countries and
Cattle, fire Cities and Cattle, as if Cattle were enemies, or they would wage
War with unreasonable Beasts. Valiant Soldiers! doughty Champions! yet how
many of these horrid practices do we meet withal in Histories. Phero, Val. Max.
because a woman's urine could not cure his blind eyes, he fired the Town Gleba
rubra, and destroyed all the Cattle. Dr. Heylin.
The King of Siam entering the Kingdom of Pega, not only burnt Corn, grass, and
fruits, but slew all the Cattle. Alexander in revenge of a wound, which he
received before Cyropolis, he levelled the City to the ground, and made a
miserable spoil of the Cattle. Well, Q. Curtius.
these things may satisfy fury, but will they be acceptable to the just God?
What, set up a Banner against Beasts? bid defiance to beasts? hew them in
pieces, as if they were at deadly fewd with them? or consume them to ashes, as
if they had broken the truce with him? No, shame to this barbarous rage, God
would not have his Creatures thus butchered and burnt. Men should spare Cattle,
because God would spare Cattle. And also Cattle. Should not I spare Nineveh
that great City, wherein are more then sixscore thousand persons, which cannot
discern between their right hand, and their left hand. And also cattle?

Much.
3. Now let us come to the considerable plenty, Much. From hence observe, That
plenty of Cattle is an eminent blessing. Not only when a man can nourish a
Cow, and two young sheep, Esa. 7.21. But when Jerusalem shall be inhabited as a
Town without walls for the multitude of men, and cattle therein, Zach. 2.4.
For, for this end, did God bring them forth out of the Ark, that they might
breed abundantly upon earth, and be fruitful and multiply, Genesis 8 17. That
there might be some shepherd of a fair flock, tha^ Formosi pecoris custos.
Virg.
people may build their old wast places, and repair the desolations of many
desolations, and strangers may stand and seed their flocks, Esa. 61.4, 5. Their
flocks, not their cullets. Moses does mention this as a blessing to the
Israelites, I know that ye have much cattle, Deuteronomy. 3 19. Job to be set out as
the great man of the East, it is said, That he had a stock of Cattle, 7000
sheep, 3000 Camels, five hundred yoke of Oxen, and five hundred she-Asses, Job
1.3. Yea, Laeta boum possim campis ar menta vid^mus Virg. Aene^d. 3 Circa
sollicitae pecorum custodia noctis Pastores tenuit vigiles per pascua laeta
Juvenal. Forum venale, ut oves, anima lia, and carn^s vaeneant. Petrus G^eg. l.
2. de rep. Aristot. l. 7. Polit. c. 7. Plato. l. de rep. Theophrast. lib. de
legibus, Suidas. l. 6. de legibus.
Solomon had not only Cattle, but a number above all that were in Jerusalem
before him, Eccles. 2.7. And indeed there is scarce any thing more excellent in
the kind, then when we see joyful herds of Oxen in the fields every where,
when there are wakeful shepherds to keep numerous flocks. Petrus Gregorius, who
does describe the perfection of a City, does think that Walls, Towers,
Castles, Suburbs, Orchards, fair streets, Judgementseats, are not more
necessary, then a forum venale, a Marketstead, where in abundance there may be
sold, sheep, cattle, and flesh. So Aristo le, Plato, Theophrastus, Suidas, and
all do conclude. So that God does most aptly here set out the greatness of
Nineveh, not only by the vastness of her buildings, or the multitude of her
inhabitants, but by the emphaticall expression of the numbers of her Cattle,
that there were much cattle. And also much cattle.

Application.
This first does serve to show unto you, Plus habet hic vitae -- Claud. de seen
Veronensi. Vitam sufficientem, optabilem, and nullius rei indigam. Arist. 1.
Ethic.
The sweetness of abundance, to have much in any thing, there is much favor,
much felicity. Every man does live; but he that enjoys this, has the more of
life in him: life in others is but a common breathing, but abundance does
afford the sufficient, desirable, and absolute life concerning nature; for
then a man does not uphold a being only, which every miserable wretch does;
but he does possess all things which are requisite to the use of life. Quae ad
usum vitae opus sunt. omnia possidet. Dion l. 38. Sine divitiis nulla res
necessarit fieri potest. Demosth: 1. Olynth. Sufficientiam vitae non indecenter
vult, quisquis eam vult. Aug.
For though the life of a man does not consist in the abundance which he does
possess, yet the life of a man is much sweetened by such abundance; seeing
without estate no necessary thing can be almost performed. Whosoever does
desire sufficiency, he does not unlawfully wish for it: for it is a comfortable
thing to find Gods blessings resting within the house, Ezech. 44.10. The Crown
of the wise is their riches, Prove. 14.24. Riches are pawns of Gods favor, and
he does bestow them upon his truest Saints, and his dearest Church; She shall
mount upon the high places of the earth, and God will give her fea^hers like
gold. It is a privilege of divine bounty, to have the blessing upon mount
Gerizim, to have a people enjoy much. Oh then how infinitely are we bounden to
God, that he has given us not only competency, but sufficiency; not
subsistence, but plenty, that we have royal dainties amongst us, Genesis 49.20.
That we are the green Vine, fat, and flourishing, that our height is as the
height of Cedars, and our excellency does mount up to the heavens; that we are
the head and not the tail, above and not beneath; that no people in every thing
do exceed us in excellency, and variety of blessings: Is Israel a servant, or
an home-born slave? Jer. 2.14. Have we no more then a bondmans portion? yes, we
are as it were the Isaac, the son of laughter, the Heir of our Fathers
principal means. Some Nations have convenience, we satiety; they have
something, we have Much; oh then that we look not upon our portion, that we
consider not the preciousnesse and variety of Jewels which are bestowed upon
us: Oh shall we be prosperous, and stupid? the plentiful Land, and the
unthankful Land? not see our own sunshine? walk up and down in this Paradise,
and not observe the pleasant and fruitful trees which God has planted there
for us? What, be strangers in our own. Country? not know what a flourishing
Island we are seated in? it is pity then that these eyes of ours should have
sight any longer to behold this Nation; or that these hands of ours should feel
a new blessing put into them; contempt of mercies, makes us unworthy of all
future favors Oh therefore if we be great, let us take notice how beneficial
divine providence has been unto us. Let us bless the bosom out of which we
have received such infinite bounty, yea kiss the breast from which we have
sucked so much sweet milk. It becomes well the just to be thankful And let us
magnify God according to the accent of his own high-speeched liberality; let
there be much praise, for there is amongst us much merchandise, much treasure,
much cattle. And also much cattle.

Secondly, this does serve to show unto you, that Gods bounty in small things
is conspicuous, for God here is affectionate, and compassionate to Much Cat^le:
There is the least of Gods mercies. Genesis 32.10. and, the very least of these
are comfortable, and considerable; Joseph. l. 18. Ant. c. ult.
for as it is said of Asineus, that famous Captain of the Jews, that he was
small of stature, but great in spirit; so the smallest blessing is efficacious
to our benefit. Augustus Caesar made much of one Lucius not two foot high,
Ravis. Plinius. l. 7. c. 16.
and showed him for a spectacle at an high solemnity; Mamus Maximus, and one
^ullius not two Cubi^s high, were preserved by the Romans in little boxes to
be seen; so the least grown mercies of God are worthy both of our preservation,
and observation; oh then that we can look upon none but the choice Pictures in
the Gallery, or smell none but the fragrant flowers in the Garden, that none
but high mercies have any high respect from us. We can talk a little perhaps of
Merchandise, Laws, Privileges, and Ordinances, that these might have their
liberty, and freedom; these same Superior mercies may have some discourse from
us, but we have neither h^^r^s, nor tongues concerning those things which we
count inferior mercies, as wholesome air, seasonable weather, our daily bread,
the fruitfulness of our grounds, or the increate of our Cattle; no, these
things are too mean for our conference, or contemplation; Nunquam parvum, quod
satis est. Seneca. ep. 102. Flumina magna vides parvis de fontibus orta. Ovid.
1. de remed.
but ha^ is never small, which is enough; those mercies are never little which
carry sufficient comfort; great R^^ers may flow from a small spring, so rich
benefits may come from contemned mercie^. Little David took away the dread of a
whole host; a little City preserved Loath; so undervalued favors may have
infinite succor and support in them; those things are all of high price, which
continue our being, and save our lives, that though we do not sing at the
presence of them, yet we would weep at the want of them; Oh therefore, as our
Savior would not have the fragments to be lost, so let not us lose the broken
pieces (as we may count them) of the rich banquet of divine favors; there is
not a spangle of Gods Gown but it is precious, not a pin in his building but it
is useful; not a little Star which does shine in the firmament of his
providence but has in it virtue, and influence. Oh therefore speak not only of
high blessings, as much alliance, much honor, much gold; but pass not over
the least blessing in silence, if it does go no further then the stable, or the
stall, that thou can say much Cattle, And also much Cattle.

Thirdly, this does show that where there are much Cattle, there should be much
commiseration. For what, will ye keep your Cattle only to your selves? have ye
never a Calf to kill for travelers, that come to your Tent-dores, as Abraham
did? Genesis 18.7. have ye not a few sheep to carry to David, and his
hungerstarved Army, as Abigail did? 1 Samuel 25? 18. have ye not a horse to set a
wounded man upon, as the Samaritane did? Luke 10.34. Does God spare your
Cattle? and do ye use them only for your own pomp, and voluptuousness? then it
is pity that God should spare any thing for you, which will spare nothing for
others: If God give you the fat and the sweet, ye should send part to them for
whom nothing is provided; so, God gives you Gattle to relieve the necessities
of them, which have no Cattle: not much Cattle, for much covetousness, or much
state, or much luxurity; but much Cattle, for much charity, and much
compassion; or else ye are but Drovers, and Horseriders, or Kitchin-men, and
not true House keepers. Job did not eat his morsels alone, Nehemiah spread a
Table for an hundred and fifty Jews, and slew his Oxen, and Sheep to feast them
liberally. Neh. 17.18. and it was Dives only, which kept the private house, and
reserved his delicious fare for his own lips. Luke 16.19. Bounty should be the
fruit of abundance, and sympathy the stream which should flow from the spring
of prosperity; If thou have this worlds goods, and shuttest up thy bowels of
compassion, how dwells ^he love of God in thee. If the Clouds be full they
will power out rain upon the Earth. Fullness should abound to rich liberality,
yea, abundance is appointed to supply want. 2 Cor. 8.14. God has not given
thee a hand only to lift it up to thine own mouth to feed thy self, but thou
must stretch out thy hands to the poor. Prove. 31.20. thine own sides must not
only praise thee for a liberal person, but the loins of the miserable ought
to bless thee. Trees can sweat out their gums for others to catch, and rich
men should their Almsdeeds for the poor to participate of; people should sm^ll
works of charity afar off from the houses of the wealthy, as they may at a
great distance smell fragrant scents from a Garden of spices, the Sun does warm
all the world with beams, Frumenta domi conclusa vermium esca. Chrysostom. S. 7.
de P. Cum aurum das ut equum co^^pares, animo non anger^s; cum autem
corruptibilia exponis, ut regnum c^^^orum accipias, lachry. mandum tibi putas.
Basil Ser. 1. in divit. ^avar.
so should these greater lights all about them with bounty.

The Corn that thou keep in thy Chambers, the Vermin may eat it, but that
which thou throwest into these furrows will fructify to thy profit; thou will
bring forth thy money readily to buy an horse, and why not thy bags to purchase
Heaven. Heathens guild their dead Images, and we should these living Images of
God Almighty. As they which are warned out of a Country, make up all their
estare in ready money; so we which are summoned out of this world by death,
should make up our estates in Almsdeeds. Oh it is an excellent thing, Viv ntia
Dei simulachra excolere. Lactant. l. 6. c. 13. de vero cultu. Omn^m substantiam
suam in p ^uniam commutant, Ita faciunt ad coelum vocati.
for dying men to carry with them the blessing of Orphans, which have been
brought up with them as with their Father. Job. 31.19, and at their departure
to present to God Almighty a Certificate subscribed with the hands of the poor
that Abraham's true Children may enter into Abraham's bosom; and that the Lamb
may feed them; which have given Christ here meat when he was hungry, and drink
when he was thirsty; Oh then, why do ye not horse the needy that they may carry
news to Heaven, how ye have relieved them? why do ye not dress your Oxen and
your Sheep for them; that they may send word to your best friends what Banquets
ye have bestowed upon them for his sake: ye may make use of your Cattle your
selves, but where there is much Cattle the distressed should get a taste out of
your abundance.

They are strange persons which seem to be born to themselves, and to live to
themselves; these are fit to dye in a Stable, or to breath out their last gasp
among their herds of Cattle, to have nothing but an Ox or a Ram for their
ghostly Father, or to be buried in a Beasts skin for a windingsheet. I esteem
thee no rich man, if I do not hear thou do scatter abroad talents out of thy
vast means. Thou which do hoard up an estate for thine own secret ends, or
do lock it up only for posterity, and the indigent get no sight of it; let
the old Fox, and the young Cubs, if they will, talk of the warm borough, that
they are earthed together in; for my part I hold them to be but wretched
Beggars. Should people lay their foundations here below? No, with Gnodophur
King of India, (newly converted by St. Thomas) they should give over building a
royal Palace by princely expenses, Marulus.
and go build a Palace for themselves in Heaven by Almsdeeds; they should not
desire to have Troops of Horses attending upon them, whithersoever they go;
Munster. in Cosmog.
but with Henry the 4th. Emperor of Germany, they should desire to have
throngs of the poor waiting upon them in the streets, Fields, Tents, and
Chambers; yea, they should so excel in works of Charity, till they get a
surname by them, Metaphrastes in ejus vita.
as John. Patriarch of Alexandria, was so abundantly liberal, that he was
called, Almoner.

Oh how am I ashamed, that when I find amongst the Heathens so much Charity, as
Tullus H^stilius would not take the rents of his Crown-land which his
predecessors did, but divided them amongst the poor, Fulgos l. 3. c. 8. Joseph
l. 15. c. 12. Plut. in Arato. Athen. l. 12. c. 15.
and Herod the great, gave fourscore thousand Cores of Corn at one time, and
that Ptolomee K. of Egypt gave unto Aratus the Sicyonian upon one particular
accident an hundred and fifty. Talents to distribute amongst the poor; and the
Noblemen of Cimon the Athenian carried out whole sacks full of money to share
amongst the distressed; Cuspinian.
and Nerva, who most princelike gave away far above an hundred thousand pieces
of good money to sustain poor Citizens: and that we have a company of
Christians, whose eyes are sunk in their heads, for they hide their eyes from
their own flesh, which have the twisting of the guts, for their bowels of
compassion never work, they live only by the Creed or the first Table, they
have not learned their duty to their neighbor, That they should love their
neighbor as their selves. I doubt Paternoster has not come this good while
into their lips, because Frater-noster is such an eyesore in their sight;
they are good for nothing but to be Scavengers to carry away the dung of the
City; they never open their purses, or unlock, except it be for a bargain, or a
purchase: they have much Cattle, but not a beast for their neighbors; they had
rather their herds should dye of a rot, then that they should be put to the
charge of a banquet; that their silver and gold should be cankered, then that
it should be kept bright by Alms-deeds; they are wealthy, but they send no
Tokens to God Almighty, nor write any gratulatory Epistles to be delivered to
him by the hands of his distressed Members; God has filled every corner of
their houses with abundance, but they distribute not a sackfull of silver, or a
true talent of gold in their whole lifetime; they believe in Christ, and the
Heathens in Idols, but the Idol can make the more moral, the more charitable
man. It is as hard for a Camel to go through the eye of a Needle, as for a rich
man to enter into the kingdom of heaven: Gold is their hope, and therefore they
will not weaken their confidence by diminishing their estates by Alms-deeds,
their eyes cannot be satisfied with riches, and they will not abate the desire
of their eyes for a souls satisfaction; they seek great things to their selves,
and they will not lose their great designs for the name of Worthies, or the
title of Benefactors: no, they have much Cattle, and they will keep up the
honor of the pasture, rather then expect that the blessing of charity should
increase the gendring. But oh, why has God trusted you with such plentiful
Estates, that he should not call any thing back again when he has use of it?
Was the Lease sealed only to your selves? no, read it over advisedly, and ye
shall find that the poor were joint Tenants with you; oh therefore deal justly
with them, which have a proper interest with you, least God bring a ^oris
factum, a plain forfeiture against you, and take home all again into his own
hands; ye deserve no more then your brethren, why then will ye keep the entire
possession to your selves, and not pay the outrents? therefore look to your
conditions, observe Articles; for bounties sake, neglect not works of charity,
for the sake of providence, be strict in Alms-deeds; when Gods Receivers come,
send them not away empty; when he does make demand by his authorized Officers,
pay what he has covenanted with you for. Know that he has been willing to
promote you, that ye might be willing to communicate, and that he has made you
rich, that ye might be rich in good works; therefore conclude, that charity is
requisite, where welfare is eminent, and that there must be much commiseration,
where there are much cattle. And also much cattle.

Fourthly, This serves to exhort you, To be very circumspect in the ordering of
a great estate: Grande patrimonium temptatio grandis. Cyp.
for where there are much cattle, there is much danger. A great patrimony is a
great temptation. The desire of money is the root of all evil, they which
would be rich fall into snares, and into diverse foolish and noisome lusts,
which drown men in perdition and destruction. Those same covetous practices, 2
Pet. 2.14. are usually the hazards of conscience, and the precipices of the
soul. Nihil laboriosius, quam terrenis desideriis aestuare. Bern.
There is nothing more troublesome then the surges of earthly desires: Here are
much cattle in this City are all rightly ordered? No, whereas thou should
have a escape Goat to take away the sins of the Congregation, or a Lamb to
send to the Ruler of the people, Esa. 16.1. or a Colt to lend to the Savior,
to ride with triumph into Jerusalem, thou may have a Kid to send to thy
Harlot as Judah had, Genesis 38.17. or thou may have Cattle to offer sacrifices
to an Idol, as Aaron and the Israelites had, Exodus 32. or thou may ride post
upon some creature, to carry the Letters of the High priest to persecute the
Church, as Saul did, Act. 9. or thou may saddle an Ass, (after all thy
wretched counsails have been unsuccessfull) to speed home, and hang thy self,
as it happened to Achitophe^. 2 Samuel 17. or thou may kill a beast to see the
liver, that thou may consult about thy damned witchcraft, as it is recorded
of the King of Babylon, Ez^ch. 21.21. Oh where there are much Cattle, there may
be many abuses; plentiful fortunes are prone and liable to infinite disorders;
they which are enclosed in their own sat, are too dark-sighted in heavenly
things, the pampered steed will not travel well in Gods service, They which
are fat and shinning, are apt to kick with the heel against God Almighty. He
which does not know how to be moderated in his affections, Qui moderari nescit
cupiditatibus, is quasi equis raptus indomitis volvitur. Amb. l. de Virg.
is like a man ^essed up and down with horses. Oh the black spots which are in
rich men's faces! how does the Devil set up his standard upon his lofty hill?
yea, these are the flower of his Army with which he sights his main battails:
If there be a Nimrod, he can send him on hunting with fury; if there be a
Pharaoh, he can set him to employ taskmasters, that shall make the people whom
he did spite, to sigh under heavy burdens: If there be an Achab, he can make
him sick unto death, till he has gotten Naboths Vineyard, and to make no
conscience to kill the owner, that he may snatch the Vineyard key our of his
dead hand; if there be an Absalon, he can lure him to pluck the Crown from his
Fathers head, and to commit the most detestable sin which ever the Sun beheld,
even to lie with his Father Concubines in the sight of all Israel; if there be
an Ahaz, he can make him restless till he has corrupted Religion, even set up
an Idolatrous Altar by the Altar of the Lord; if there be a Balthaz^r, he can
provoke him to quaff^ in the Bowls of the Sanctuary; if there be an Herod, he
can entice him to perjure himself, and at a strumpets motion, to strike off
the head of John Baptist that famous Prophet, whom not long before he heard
with reverence. Oh what will not wealth attempt? what prodigious courses are
not rich men subject to? it is an hard thing to abound in means, and to have a
pure conscience; humility, justice, are all here jeoparded. Who have gored the
Nation more then these fat Bulls of Bashan? who have stung the Church more then
these huge Scorpious? Oh, mighty men fear no Laws, dread no Pulpits; the most
unnatural things do not daunt them, the most odious things do not shame them;
to secure their selves, and to satisfy their selves, they will pollute the
earth, and blaspheme the heavens; they have much cattle, and they will dispose
of them as they think sitting. Has not wealth made this City insolent? and
abundance made it trespass with a defian^e; he that had had but one Lamb, or
single Kid, or an only horse would have been more careful how the Cattle
should have been employed; but here have been much Cattle, and the surfeit of
means have brought all manner of diseases upon the people; immoderate wealth
has made them even lawless, and shameless. Some of the Cattle have been
bestowed in gifts, and have all been dedicated to honorable ends? No, think I
beseech you of your first presents. Some Cattle have been spent in
entertainments, and have ye had none but noble guests at your Table? No,
consider what spots, ye have had in your Feasts. Some Cattle have traveled for
it, and have there none but good Riders backed the beasts? No, I doubt Zidkijah
has rod upon one Praunser to hearten on Ahab to sight against Ramoth Gilead;
and that Baalam has rode upon a second, to curse the people of God; and that
Achan has rode upon a third to catch the Babylonish Garment, and the golden
Wedge, and Jehu has rode upon a fourth to knock down the Altars of Baal, and
to keep up Jeroboams golden Calves; and Haman has rode upon a fifth to get a
cruel decree sealed to put all the Jews to death. Perhaps he in Heaven would
not suffer every design to take place, but there have been some fruitless
journies; yet there has been old riding for it. Thus ye see how wealth may
transport men, excess of means may carry along with it excess of guilt; Much
Cattle, much Sin. Oh therefore know how exorbitancy is incident to prosperity!
if the hand has gotten much, it is apt to lavish out treasure to horrid
drifts; if people be lusty and strong, they are prone to be Champions to any
manner of execrable contrivements; these flies come out by swarms in warm
weather, these corruptions break out frequently in full bodies; it is a rare
thing to see a fluency of revenew sanctified with a crucified heart; therefore
stop thine ears against these charmers, or else thou will be seduced: Watch
warily against these puissant and vigilant Philistines, or else if thou were as
strong as Sampson thou will be bound, and have thy eyes plucked out. Not many
mighty, not many noble: when Uzziah was strong, his heart was lifted up to his
destruction. 2 Chronicles. 26.16. there is a suspicion of disorder, because there is
such a powerful temptation; there is a jealousy of error because there are
Much Cattle. And also much Cattle.

5. This does serve to excite all people to forbear from injury where cruelty
may cause great detriment; for would God spare Nineveh, because there was Much
Cattle, and would many men the rather be meddling with Nineveh because there are
much Cattle? I know the Cormorant, and bittern do love to be lodging in the
upper lintels. Zeph. 2.14. and the ravenous Beasts delight to be grasing in
good pastures. Ezech. 34.18. Fishes, Jer. 16.16. would be fishing in stored
pond, and Fanners, Jer. 51.2. would be fanning in full floares. There is much
spite born against those places where there is much booty, and much spoil. The
humor of the age is to be thrusting their hands into heaps, and to carry away
rich plunder, To leave a Land which is as Eden before them like the
Wilderness. Joel 2.3 and to find out as a nest, the riches of people, and to
gather places clean as one gathers eggs, that are left. Esa. 10.16. that as
Lucullus when he took Tigranocerta, he carried away eight thousand Talents of
stamped Coin, Plut. in Lu^ullo.
and as Belisarius when he overcame Gilimer the Vandali, he carried away from
Tricaranum in Africa such infinite sums of money, Sigion. l. 27. Imp. Occident.
that such heaps of treasure were never before seen at one time; and Pompey
from his Conquest in Asia brought home such tables of pure Pearl, Moons of
gold, and Cups of Myrrh, and a closet of exact gemme, Plin. l. 37. c. 2.
and a foursquare Mountain set with Hearts, Lions, huge apples, and a large Vine
all of gold, and the rare statues of Mars, Minerva, and Apollo of the same
Metal. So these would be fingering of the like preyes, and enriching their
selves with the like riflings. But is rapine a just possession? No, the
quarrel had need be very just, or else the depraedation is utterly unlawful;
the power of the sword is not always a justifiable Judge; it may bring in
conquest, but not always right to direption, and sacking; Plut. in Fabio.
therefore Q. Fabius would not suffer his soldiers to meddle with the goods of
the Citisens, saying, It is enough that we have subdued them, Nec ipse
concupivit attingere, nec alium permisit. Plut. in Arist. Plut. de liberal. c.
11.
let us leave the Gods offended to these Tarentines. Aristides at the great
Victory, which was gotten over the Persians at Marothon, though there was
plenty of silver and gold found; yet he himself would not touch any thing,
neither would he suffer his soldiers. Probus Augustus in the many Conquests
which he won, took nothing but Darts and Arms. Quae alii avide raperent spolia,
lege vetarentur. Jovius in piscario. l 6.
Charles the fifth at the famous Battle of Pavy, would suffer no spoil, but
that which the greedy soldier desired, he inhibited Howsoever, for men of the
same religion in my opinion it is a sad thing, that if battles be fought, that
victory should not satisfy them, but they should carry the vanquished to
Dungeons, and make a general stripping amongst them I find the contrary in
Scripture, for when Pekah King of Israel had conquered Ahaz King of Judah, and
had of all sorts taken two hundred thousand Captives, and much spo^^, and
carried them to Samaria; the Prophet came unto him, and sharply reprehended him
for it, saying, Because the Lord your God was wroth with Judah, he has
delivered them into your hand, and ye have slain them in a rage which reaches
up to Heaven: and now ye purpose to keep und r the Children of Judah, and
Jerusalem as servants and handmaids unto you: but are not ye such that sins are
with you before the Lord your God? Now therefore hear me and deliver the
Captives again, which ye have taken prisoners of your brethren, for the fierce
wrath of the Lord is toward you: wherefore certain of the chief of the Children
of Ephraim stood up against them, which came from the war. And said, Bring not
in the Captives hither, for this shall be a sin upon us against the Lord, ye
intend to add more to our sins, and to our trespass, though our trespass be
great, and the fierce wrath of God is against Israel: So the Army left the
Captives, and the spoil before the Princes, and all the Congregation; and the
men which were named by name rose up, and took the Prisoners, and with the
spoil clothed all that were naked amongst them, and arrayed and shod them and
gave them meat, and gave them drink, and anointed them, and carried all that
were feeble of them upon Asses, and brought them to Jericho, the City of
Palmtrees to their brethren, so they returned to Samaria, 2 Chronicles. 28. chapter from
the 9. ver. to the end of the 15. According to this famous Precedent, use
favor, and tenderness to all them of your own Family (as it were) and Faith,
of your own Region, and Religion; and though they may fall under your subduing
hand, yet let them not fall under your spoiling hand: Though one brother may
fall out with another, and there may be trying of Masteries, yet not binding of
hands, and carrying him away Slave; or picking his pockets, and leaving him
Beggar; I see it in practice, but I find it not in Scripture; for this were not
to defend a right, but to destroy an interest; and not to sight for conscience,
or conquest, but covetousness, and cousenage; oh it is an heavy thing to
vanquish, and undo, to subdue, and subvert: to make an absolute wast in a day,
nay, an utter ruin in an hour; no, thou should show more equity, because thy
brother had once ability; and express more compassion, because there was once
Much Cattle. And also much Cattle.

Thus beloved have I shown you many things concerning a City, -- Habent
memorabile quod fit. Catullus.
Infants, and Cattle (perhaps such things, as ye have not heard of) sure I am
there is never an one of these, but have some memorable thing in them. If the
stone called Cappotes whereupon Orestes sat, when he was recovered of his
madness was thought fit to be laid up to posterity, then how ought this place
to have an everlasting Record, where so many things of price were freed from
impending ruin. Nineveh was famous; what should I do, in conclusion, but look
about for the City? I cannot find the same City, but shall I not the like?
Nineveh is fallen, but can it not elsewhere arise out of the ashes? such a City
I would look upon, and may not mine eye be thus blessed? Oh that I should lose
the City for want of due search, or that this City of yours should lose it self
for want of a proper duty. Liber de Duci bus Bavariae.
Can ye not change the name of your City? yes, as Strasburgh was once called
Silberihal, but being made the Exchequer to receive the Roman tribute it was
named Argentina: So cannot ye for that observable accident in my Text,
(Repentance) part with your own name, and be contented to be called Nineveh? Is
it impossible to make you such a City? what does hinder? give me but your
affections, set but your hearts to the work, and the City is raised in
instant; change but your consciences, and ye shall presently change your name.
Oh Argentina, oh Nineveh; when shall I see thee? why should I not forth with
see thee? If ye love a Sermon, if ye love your selves, if ye love safety, ye
ought to do this; for it is not This great City of yours, not the multitude of
your Persons, not the plenty of your Cattle, which will make you happy, unless
Nineveh does enclose all these, I mean unless Repentance does give you title,
and testimony, safeguard, and security. Have Ninevehs Target, and fear no darts,
have Ninevehs Propitiatory, and fear no avenging God. The Altar of Haliaeus
defended all that fled to it, and so would such a Thysiastery raised up in your
City. Pollux.
Will ye then alter your Name? change your lives? prepare such a Mercy-seat for
God to appear upon within your walls? Oh that ye can think of Nineveh, and not
be ashamed of your selves. Nineveh was Heathenish, ye are Christian; Nineveh
had but one Prophet, ye have had many; Nineveh had, but the cry of one day, or
a few days; ye have had the cries of many years; yet when will ye match
Nineveh in attention, submission, ashes, sackcloth, fasting, prayer, and
reformation? Plut.
Lucius Sylla an old Dictatour blushed to see Cn. Pompey a young man to triumph
before him; So may not ye account it an high disparagement to you, to see
Nineveh but newly entered into religion (a very Tyro) to ride in the Triumphant
Chariot before you, which are grown gray headed under profession? ye would be
spared, but when will ye seek God with Ninevehs penitent heart? Oh let
judgment I beseech you as much afflict you, and affright you; remorse as much
humble you, and change you, as they did Nineveh; Lacit.
that as Plato for resembling his Master was called Socrates junior; So ye, for
resembling this City may be called Nineveh the younger; If your peril be as
great, let your prevention be equal, else in coming short in the pacification,
ye will come short in the preservation. For can God and ye tread the same
ground, if ye walk by his sides as enemies? No, if ye rend away from God by
disobedience, he will pluck you off, though ye were as the signet upon his
right hand. Where is Capernaum, which was lifted up to heaven in privileges?
Where are the seven golden Candlesticks? Oh talk not of your Temples, and
Lectures, your Protestations and Speculations, your pure looks, and pure
language, there is nothing will save you but humiliation and sanctification. We
have had personating men a long time amongst us; but when shall we have the
true penitent men Alexander Severus, did cut asunder the sinews of a man's
hand, which did present to him the false brief of a Case, and do not we fear
to be punished for offering to God a counterfeit repentance? Oh ye which do
humble your looks, and not your hearts; which do make many new faces, and yet
live in your old sins, may ye not be surprised in your dissimulation? perish
in your hypocrisy? Oh that the Gospel revealed, does not teach you more
sincerity; that judgment denounced, does not quicken you to more integrity?
Will ye dissemble to the last? and jeopard the ruin of a whole City in your
outside cleansings? -- tremuit saeva sub voce tonantis. Lucan. l. 5. Pharsal.
How far can ye imagine, that ye are off from the collisions of justice?
every corner of your City does seem to tremble under the voice of a threatening
God. Oh your sins do cry, and vengeance is awakned with the noise of them,
the heavens are offended with you, and the earth does seem to rise up in
tumults amongst you; your courses have been such, that most do defy you, and
few do pity you; there are many which do wish your destruction, and are sorry
that they cannot make you the miserable of the earth; they consult sad things
concerning you, yea conspire against you night and day; their brains do work,
their hearts do boil, their mouths do foam, and they would willingly be
stretching out their hands to shake you, and shiver you; ye have e^emies within
your City, ye have enemies in your own consciences, your sins do threaten
more calamities to you, then all the inveterate and implacable adversaries
which ye have upon earth. How can ye oppose such irresistible forces? no,
though ye had guards of Giants, and every common Soldier were an Ashibenoh,
(the head of whose spear weighd three hundred shekels of brass) yet your sins
will beat you down before your enemies. Oh stand up in your own defense, open
the right Arsenall; Have the armor of righteousness on the right hand, and on
the lest; use Ninevehs weapons to sight this battle vanquish all your sins by
crying louder for mercy, then they do for ruin; escape vengeance by flying
from your provocations, before indignation has attached you; your City is
threatened, take heed ye do not sleep out the hour of your security. Presumption
may subvert, let contrition deliver you: the time may be short, the work is
great, the danger is apparent, the misery will be unspeakable; lay aside,
neglect, awaken from torpulency, pluck down your haughtiness, surcease from
obstinacy: your City walls do shake, let your hearts shake; your buildings are
loose upon the foundation, groundsell them better by mortification: all your
goods are ready to be sacrificed to vengeance, bring forth your sin offering
before the sparks have taken fire: if there be in you any listening to a
warning, credence of threatening, obedience to counsel, foresight of danger,
sting of guilt, or obligation of duty: pity the City, and petition for the
City, shed lakes of tears to obtain the peace of the City, kill droves of
sins to procure the safety of the City; wear sackcloth least ye do go naked;
fast least ye do starve; sit upon the ash-heap, least ye be brought to an
ash-heap; creep upon your knees, least ye do creep into corners, shut up your
selves into your closets, least ye be shut into dungeons; fly to heaven, least
ye do fly out of the Land; confess your sins, least justice do read the Bill
to your faces; condemn your selves, least ye be sentenced without reprieve;
look upon your errors with passions, be humbled with conflicts, repent with
agonies, appease with fire, reconcile with ropes, weep with torrents, pray with
shrieks, cleanse with nitre, attend at the Court of Audience, lay it out at
Gods judgment seat, wash in Jordan, till the le prosie be departed, wrestle
with the Angel, till ye have obtained the blessing; Leave not one grievance in
heaven to prosecute you, not one injury upon earth to accurse you; be perfectly
renewed, that ye may be perfectly secured. Thus, if I can now leave you with
bleeding hearts, sobbing breasts, suppliant tongues, abased bodies, frayed
souls, purified consciences, and rinsed conversations; ye are Nineveh, and your
City may yet prosper. For ye see how God pleaded out his case for Nineveh, and
freed his Clyent, the City was humbled and preserved, repentance prevented her
overthrow; not a man was smitten, though there were multitudes of Persons; not
a beast was destroyed, though there were much cattle. Go, and do thou likewise;
do likewise, and enjoy likewise. Oh that I could be such a Jonah to you! that I
could cry out, such a City! that I could make you thus to believe God, and
serve God; your humiliation should free you from all horrors, your dejection
from all dangers, your devotion and reformation from all exigents; your walls
should not be battered, your Bulwarks not demolished, your Palaces should not
be laid wast, your Temples should not be shut up, your shops should not be
rifled, your persons should not be massacred, nor your Cattle slaughtered; but
your Liberties, your Lives, your Goods, your Royalties, your Ordinances, your
Oracles, your holy Altars, holy Priests, holy Vessels, holy Shewbread, holy
Incense, and Holy of Holies; even all your spiritual prerogatives, and
Church Priviledges, should be ratified to you upon earth, ye should continue a
safe people, and flourishing City; yea, after ye had served God in his Church,
ye should serve him in his Temple; he should translate you from this City, to
the City of the new Jerusalem, that after ye had enjoyed all the preferments of
the material, or mystical City, ye might have the joys and pleasures of the
glorious City, even the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Which
that ye may have, the Lord grant for his mercies sake. Amen.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, I entreat thee, that, before thou do peruse the Sermons,
thou would first amend the Errata. Other literal, and casual errors, I
must leave to thy own judgment to Correct.
PAge 37. for, as Magisteriall Gods r. as Magisteriall as Gods p. 57. for, turn
against Jacob r. burn against Jacob p. 69. for filled up r. siled up. p. 81.
for immaginating r: immagnating. p. 86. for serve together r. serre together.
p. 98. for Essences r. Essenes. p. 105. for beautiful vision r. beatificall.
p. 151. for, fiske the Nation. r. fist the Nation. p. 179. for, Interceptours
r. Interpretours. p. 209. for, Pylen r. Pylos. p. 259. for, ascement r.
Casement. p. 265. for, laboust r. labourest. p. 307. for except r. expect. p.
308. for, alteration r. altereation. p. 311. for; bowltick r. bowletick. p.
312. for, sill r. skill.


