THE RECOVERY.
YEt once more Peace turns back her head, to smile,
And take some Pity on our stubborn Isle;
She, and her Sister Truth now Hand in Hand,
Return to visit our forsaken Land.
I see, I see, O Albion! Bless the Sight!
Truth long Eclipsed lift up her Sacred Light,
And chase away the obscene Birds of Night.
The Will Boding Scrcech-Owl we so long did fear,
Hovering above us in our thick'ned Air;
Whose Fatal Note was never heard, but Death
Followed the Infernal Evidencing Breath.
Hail Lovely Truth! Oh! Spread thy Rays Divine,
And bid thy Dawning Beams more fully Shine;
Already thy Glad Influence We find,
And all now see but They who will be blind:
They see whilst Thou hold'st up thy Guiding Light,
The Dangerous Error of their Former Night;
A Night, which all our Heaven did Invade,
By the Dire Skill of State Magicians made;
In a Dark Cell the Wayward Brothers met,
I'th'midst a Chair there was for Satan set;
Which in his Absence --
A little Withered Conjurer Supplied,
And all his Imps drank Venom from his Side:
His Word was (then He out his Tap did pluck,)
Come my young Pugs of Treason, come and Suck:
This Hellish Rite performed, to work they go
To raise up Darkness from the Shades below;
Thick Mists of Popular Fears and Jealousies
Did at their Necromaintick Call arise,
And in Black Clouds hid the British Skies.
Here first their unskil'd Spirits their Visions played,
And learnt their Visions to the Hatfield Maid:
Here first were raised the wondering World to scar,
The Armies Harris Mustered in the Air.
But now the Charm's Dissolved, and England's free
From the Enchantment, does it is Madness see;
Sees its vain Fears of that Expected Day,
No Royal Blood stained the Fifteenth of May:
Prevailing Truth has opened Britains Eyes,
And Folly seen, begins to make Her wise.
O let us then Unite, make Faction cease,
Nor think Confusion is the way to Peace;
That Schism must the Churches Fall prevent,
Or breaking Law, secure the Government.
Let Traitors to expected Trial come,
And from the Mouth of Justice hear their Doom:
It Is so, the Traitor comes, now, now maintain
Justice thy Seat, nor bear the Sword in vain.
Tho Hackney Speakers would over Law prevail,
And Conquer Thee by telling a false Tale;
Though Factious or Guilty Lords appear,
To blunt that Sword whose Edge they justly fear;
Tho Garter Blue, and Star the Court should awe;
But oh! that Star does now its Beams withdraw,
Nor at the Trial will its Light dispense,
To cherish Treason with its Influence.
What then are they who from thy Hand would snatch
The blackest Traitor Hell did ever hatch?
When they but once that Horrid Paper see,
Which does almost exceed in Villainy,
Satan, or his Vicegerent Sh -- ry;
Who in this Cause so much had never done,
But that he knew the ugly Brat his own.
Yet all in vain strives Councillors and Lord,
Revenging Goddess, speak the Fatal Word;
Nor let Confession turn aside thy Blow,
But once strike Rogues that own that they are so.
Had this been early done, t'had saved the Guilt
Of so much Blood so Prodigally spilt;
While certan Villainy did hurry hence,
To Unjust Death Suspected Innocence.
But Justice now in this Triumphant Scene,
Thy Shame does end, and Triumph does begin.
All this to thy Defender CHARLES is due,
Who now with Thee His Glory does renew;
Already with fresh Beams the Crown does shine,
Power Sacred grows, and Majesty Divine.
His Majesty's Scepter's in His Hand held fast,
Nor like a Reed is bent witth every Blast:
Hold, hold Great CHARLES, this Resolution hold,
And in thy own and Kingdoms Cause be Bold;
What ever of this Mighty Body, Thou
The Head Resolv'st, We thy Hands will do;
Dare to be Happy, and to make Us so.
How Great is Majesty, and how August?
How God-like, when it is Resolutely Just?
Then it is that Willing Subjects gladly meet,
To throw their Lives before their Monarchs Feet;
The it is their Fortunes they before him lay,
Sue to be Ruled, and Glory to Obey.
Such CHARLES is now thy State, and such the Train
Of these that now Petition Thee to Reign;
See, even thy Prodigal Son does now desire,
To leave his Husks, and Swine, and Wapping Mire,
In which so long He wallow'd up and down,
Known to each Dirty Kennel in the Town;
And to his Injured Father, and his Lord,
Would by his much wronged Uncle be restored:
How well have W -- s, J -- s, and W -- n,
B -- h, G -- d, T -- y, their great Duties done*
How have They taught the People to Repent
Their Zeal for their great Idol P -- t!
How have They shown the Arbitrary way
That Monster took to make Us all its Prey?
They to lose all, claimed more than was their Right,
And stretched their Power only to break it quite.
These, These are They who have True Service done,
Meriting their Sacred Favors from the Crown:
These, These have made a Dissolution be,
Not Wisdom only, but Necessity.
These thus removed, our Jealousies and Fears,
Were ever so Deserving Pensioners!
Then Charles, since all things now conspire to bless
Thy Peaceful Age with Conquest and Success,
Begin, Resolve, and Venture to be Great,
Nor overthrow these Vast Designs of Fate:
Begin at home, Purge thine own House, and free
From Villains Tongues the Ears of Majesty;
False P -- s from the Bedchamber Discard,
Let Catch-pole Br -- s thy Court be barred,
Nor leave one Factious R -- l in the Guard.
FINIS.

