An Elegy, and Acrostick, and also an Anagram, On the Death of that Faithful
and worthy Minister and Servant of GOD, MR. JOSEPH CARYL.
REader, Expect no quaint heroic Verse
Of Mine, should deck Renowned Caryl's Hearse;
Expect not from my Tender Years such Rymes,
As from the Learned Sages of the Times:
I having yet, not Thrice Five Winters told.
But blame me not as being over-bold;
What though the subject be Divine, and fit;
Most stable, solid, and accurate Wits
They all were Silent, therefore I step't forth
To Weep over, and Lament our loss in's Worth.
SOrrow, and Affection's my Aonian band;
His Worth, our Loss, my fork'd- Parnassus and
My Helicon; and my Castalian-Springs,
The Word of God, the supreme King of Kings,
Oh First, and Last, All Is all, Tri-um-Jehove!
Thou God of Goodness, Wisdom, Power, and Love,
Assist my poor, my weak, and feeble Quill,
And give me Strength, as thou have gave me Will;
That my Stentorian-Voice may Stellify
Caryl on Earth, who is Glorified on High.
CARYL's extinct! resplendent Phoebus, How
Is It, that thou dreadest not thy downfall now?
Our Sun is set! in greatness, influence,
And glory far beyond the reach of Sense:
In all the Good that e're thou do, he did
Excel, as thou the Stars in Daytime hid.
His Influence, was Sp'ritual; and did tend
T'Eternity: but thine with Time must end.
Cease thy Diurnal course; Now, now there needs
A swift retraction of thy fiery-steeds.
Either extinguish, or eclipse thy Light,
That we may Mourn in obscure shades of night.
It is well known, his greatest Work has been,
To make Christ Lovely, and disparage Sin:
He always labored, all men to convince
O'th dangerous stratagems of the Stygian-Prince.
He did declare the Mind and Will of GOD,
And showed the meaning of his Word and Rod:
He was another Cato; he reproved
All Vice, impartially, (as't him behooved.)
He was our Faithful Sentinel, he stood
Upon his Watch-tow're, always for our good.
He Warned us of, he Labored too, Showed how
We might Prevent, or else Prepare for now
Come, or approaching Judgments: Now he is gone,
God may command the rest to let us alone.
He was a Pillar, he did support the Frame
O'th glorious House, we nominate by God's Name:
But now He Is fallen, we may suspect God will
Go on t'remove our Chief Supporters still.
His Doctrine was Substantial, always founded,
Clearly demonstrated, and firmly grounded
Upon the Sacred Word of God, which does
Admit no Falsity, the Word of Truth;
Which faithfully, and in veracity,
He suited to each ones capacity.
He wisely did distribute unto all.
The share and portion to their lot did fall:
Reproof, and Terror, to those to whom 'twas due;
Advice, and Counsel, whom't belonged unto;
Comfort and Cons'lation he did divide
To whom 'twas due; and unto none beside:
^e meted out to all their due; he was
A Boanerges, and a Barnabas.
He Lived according unto what he Teach'd,
And put in Practice th'Doctrine that he Preached
How Holy, and Exemplary was his Life!
How Meek, how Humble, Patient, hating Strife!
How Publick-spirited, Watchful, Laborious!
How Wise, and not Erroneous, nor Censorious!
At last, without fear, dread, despair, or horror,
He faced, and overcame the King of Terror.
And as to Gifts, and Parts, God had bestowed
Them plenteously upon him, and endowed
Him with a studious, sharp, and ingenious Wit:
Obscurest things were easy unto it.
A vast-retaining Memory, and a wise
And prudent Heart, (with noble Faculties;)
His Will conformed to God's and his Affections
Were Regular; so also were his Actions.
And as to Learning, th'University
Know'th well his progress and proficiency:
He was a walking-Library, past Dimension
Of Vulgar and of common Apprehension:
Witness that learned Exposition fame
Has (to eternize his ne're-dying Name)
Made famous th'row-out Europe; even amongst those,
Who are the Scriptures, and the Churches foes.
By which Twelve Books on Job, he did obtain
Such Honor, as but few (or none) do gain.
And thus confusedly, I Have ^n brief run over,
Part of his Worth; but now I Will add no more:
For some will not believe't, but will esteem him
Of little worth, and greatly flattered deem him:
And such I Will leave to these their thoughts of heart,
And come a little to the Elegiack part.
According to his Worth, so is our Cross,
And therefore great, yea, very great's our Loss.
True; in our time, brave Worthy's do resort
Unto the Happy, to the Heavenly Court:
But wherefore CARYL, did thou thus bereave us
Of so great Good, thus suddenly to leave us?
But stay, sad Genius! Call back that Expression:
He Is taken away, because of our Transgression.
The Sins that he Reproved, have called away
Him from his Work, in this most Needful day.
Oh that all Heads were Waters, and all Eyes
Fountains of Tears! That our Heart-rending Cries,
Commix't with Sighs, and Groans, and Tears might drowned
This World of Sin, lest it this World Confound.
Come Holy Mourners, you that have the Arts
Of Weeping Eyes, and broken Bleeding-Hearts.
Come, here is Occasion for your Lamentation;
CARYL's expired! that son of Consolation
And Thunder: Come, weep over, weep over the Crimes
Of these Heartbreaking, these Rebellious times.
Weep Rocks, weep Mountains, now more mild by far
Than many Men, in this base Ir'n age are.
But CARYL is not Dead; his Name shall live
Throughout all Ages: Fate it shall survive.
He having done his Work, is fallen Asleep;
(Ah! Can our Adamantine hearts not Weep!)
For when th'Arch-Angels Trump shall sound from Heaven,
When Sun, Moon, Stars, are of their Light bereav'n;
When all, this all, by Fire shall be destroyed;
And all be stripped of all they have enjoyed:
When Jesus Christ the Lamb, turned Lion, shall
Appear in Glorious Majesty to all:
When many, with Dread and Despair shall fly
To Rocks and Mountains, to Fall on them: Cry
To them for shelter; think'ng to shun him there
Who see's, and knows at all times, every where,
All things, and persons;) say'ng, This is the Day
Wherein his Indignation He Will Display.
A blessed Encomion! CARYL will then receive
From him that sits on th'Throne; then, then! he will have
A glorious body; and re-entertain
His Better-part, never to part again;
I mean his Soul, which even now does possess
Those endless Joys, which never will be less.)
The Righteous Perish, and are taken away;
None lay't to Heart, nor yet Consider, they
Are taken from approaching Ills and Dangers;
But altogether to Gods Word are Strangers.
And since it is so, what Judgment will, or shall,
Sinful, unfruitful England, next befall.
Oh Brutus heirs! this, and such losses tend
To future Judgments, if ye don't Amend.
God for our Sins may punish seven times more,
With greater Judgments; oftener than before.
And oh! what horrid Judgment must it be,
That must be worse full Seven-times, than those three
Tremendous-Judgments, Plague, and Fire, and Sword?
And this God will Inflict, he says in's Word.
Sure God will vex us in his sore Displeasure;
And make his Wrath wax hot; open his treasure
Of Indignation; which he did prepare,
For those who Live and Die without his Fear.
I Will not determine, but I Will labor still
To submit to, and acquiesce with, his Will.
Come Reader, come; on Trust take Tears and Groans,
That we like Niobe, may Weep to Stones.
It Is Famous CARYL, who served us in the stead
Of Argus, and Briareus; now is Dead!
An Acrostick.
JS CARYL Dead! Or is it a fictious Fame?
Or has her lavish-trumpe mistook his Name?
Say, Is it he, or not? Ah yes, it is He;
E v'n that beloved, flourishing, fruitful Tree!
Pray then? If God cause Green trees to expire,
How shall we Dry ones 'scape the axe or fire?
Can CARYL Die! who lived so much Respected;
And can our flinty hearts not be Affected?
Rend Hearts (not Graments;) never urge a Why,
You may know th'cause: Sorrow does seem t'reply,
Lo, Famous CARYL's Dead! and you must shortly Die.
JOSEPH CARYL, Anagram RIS' HOLY-PEAC'
WE hear of War, which often Desolates
And mighty Kingdoms often Depopulates:
Oh that in th'midst of War (if War don't Cease)
There might RIS', and continue HOLY-PEAC.
God has been long contending with our Land,
To make us Humble, under's mighty Hand:
For when we are most Debased in our own Eyes,
Then HOLY-PEAC' we may expect to RIS'.
In th'latter times, it is said, that HOLY-PEAC'
Should RIS' up; and should more and more increase:
Though HOLY-PEACeful CARYL's called away;
This HOLY blessed PEAC' may RIS', and stay.
BY S. R. Aged 14 years 3/4 Aug. 1673.
London, Printed for Rowland Reynolds at the Sun and Bible in the Poultrey,
1673.71.


