THE JUDGMENT OF Vrines.

By Robert Record Doctor of Physic.

Whereunto is added an ingenious Treatise concerning Physicians, Apothecaries,
and Surgeons, Set forth by an Eminent Physician in Queen Elizabeth's days.

With a Translation of Papius Ahalsossa concerning Apothecaries Confecting
their Medicines; Worthy perusing, and imitating.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Peter Parker at the Leg and Star in
Cornhil, against the Royal Exchange, 1679.

To the Reader.
IF either the corruption, or abuse of things, might deprive us of this lawful
and necessary use of them, even the sacred Scriptures, our laws, our provisions
of life and clothing, might fall under declension, if not abolition: It is true
from the inspection of Urine, some have presumed to pretend a larger judgment,
and indication, then may justly be drawn or conjectured out of it; yet it is
generally concluded by Physicians, both ancient and modern, that both Urine
and Pulse are so necessary, that without them all knowledge of Physic,
besides, is doubtful, obscure, and uncertain: whereof the first shows the
estate of the liver and veins, the second of the heart and arteries: The Urine
because with the blood it is conve^ed into all parts of the body, and from
thence returns back again in the veins, to the liver and urinall vessels,
brings with it some indicature of the state and disposition of all those
parts from whence it comes: and who shall please to peruse that exact piece
of Daniel Becherus, shall find observable pieces, both concerning the urine,
and diverse experimented medicines made with it. Concerning the judgment of the
Pulse, who shall please to peruse Doctor May upon Pennant, shall find the
Pulses motion not so certain an indicature, because in some diseases there is
cessation, or none, or small appearance to conjecture by. Concerning the
Author, he was one of the first who labored to reduce the tractate thereof,
unto order and method, and has been seconded by laborious Fletcher, to whom
our English Nation owes much for their labors: The antiquity and pains of
the Author has caused it to be presented again to the Press, hoping, with
judicious men, it shall receive the acceptance is desired and studied

By the well-wisher of your health, R. R.

The PREFACE.
The good use of a covetous example.
THough the unsatiable greedines of covetous men do many and sundry ways
hurt, yet some ways it may do no less good, if men will not disdain (as they
ought not) to use it in such sort as I shall show you.

But because that unsaciableness is never satisfied, but beside thousand of
means invented already to quench the unquenchable greedines, it seeks and
finds daily new and new means innumerable, so that it were an infinite labor
to declare them all. I will wittingly, and purposedly pass them over, only
taking one general sentence, which shall be in stead of all the rest.

Vespasian, one of the great schoolmasters of avarice, which could pick out
profit of every thing (yea, even of men's urine) taught his Scholars (I mean
the whole court of covetous persons) this lesson ensuing: Lucri bonus odor
(...) qualibet.
Lucre is sweet, and has a good savor;
Though it come of Urine, dirt or Ordure.


This sentence, if it be withdrawn from the filthy lucre of unsatiable
covetousness, wherein it is detestable, and employed rather to the due lucre
of man's sustenance, then it becomes tolerable: But if it be referred to the
necessary lucre of man's health, then is it greatly commendable. If there can
be then any commodity for man's health gathered out of urine, (as there may be
much) men should not be negligent in seeking of that thing which should do good
both to themselves and others? seeing the covetous are so diligent in seeking
for that thing which shall profit neither themselves nor others?

And the negligence is so much the greater, if men be more remiss in seeking
after so necessary a thing in a matter so commendable, then the covetous in a
bad thing.

But in as much as this thing (by reason it is not plainly set forth) is with
no less difficulty to be studied on, then it is necessary to be used, the
ignorant may have some excuse: I therefore in the name of many other, have
taken this pains on me, to set forth this thing so plainly, Ignorance set aside.
that ignorance can have no excuse.

But that no man should doubt of the truth of this Treatise, or of mine intent,
Why this Book is written.
in putting forth the same rather in this our English tongue then any other: I
shall briefly show reasons of both; First, for the truth of it, The first
reason.
I will boldly speak, knowing for certain that no man that can judge it, will
say or think otherwise, but that it is as true as man's knowledge can devise
it. And it is the opinion of the most excellent writers of Physic both Greeks
and Latin; namely, Hippocrates, Galen, Aetius, Aegin^ta, Philotheus,
Theophilus, Actuarius: also Cornelius Celsus Plinius, Constantinus, Africanus,
and Clementius Clementinus, with others more, conferring also with these
Avicenna, Egidius, Polidamus, and such like: But with what temperance and
moderation they that are learned may perceive. These have I followed chiefly in
this judgment of Urines.

And in the use of medicine and diseases touching urine, I have joined with
them Dioscorides, Quintus Serenus, Columela, Sextus Platonicus, and diverse
others. Now if there be any man that doubts of the truth of those writers in
this thing, I am not here to force belief upon them.

The inter of the Author.
But now as touching mine intent in writing this Treatise in English; though
this cause might seem sufficient to satisfy many men, that I am an English
man, and therefore may most easily and plainly write in my native tongue,
rather then in any other: yet unto them that know the hardness of the matter,
this answer should seem unlikely: considering that it is harder to translate
into such a tongue, wherein the Art has not been written before, then to write
in those tongues in which the terms of the Art are better expressed.

Now to show briefly the causes moving me thereunto. I am sure, there are but
few that ever sought counsel for their health, but they know that the common
trade to attain to the knowledge of the disease, is by the judgment of the
urine, though not alone, yet as the principal.

Likewise, as there is not any thing so good, but the abuse of it may cause
harm to ensue thereupon. So this judgment of urines, though it be a thing highly
to be regarded, yet if it be used rashly without foregoing signs it may cause
(as it does often) some error in the judgment of the Physician, though he were
right excellently learned: not so much by the ignorance of the Physician, as by
want of knowledge in the patient, which should instruct the Physician, in such
questions as he needed to demand of him: and not to look that the Physician
should tell him all things at the first sight, more like a God then man.

So that if there be any Physician so arrogant, that he will take upon him to
tell all things alone, and will not hear the Patient speak, specially not
knowing the party before, neither seeing other signs but only the urine, as I
dare boldly pronounce, That such a man is unworthy to be called a Physician. So
it shall be good for all men, not to trust to the judgment of such a one: for
by such mis-use in this thing not only much harm befalls the patients, so that
it has been the occasion of many men's death, but also very much reproach has
ensued to the whole estate and order of Physicians, and has caused that
excellent and most necessary art to be contemned, derided, and little set by.

To avoid the more this inconvenience, I have written this little Treatise to
all men in common, The use o^ this Book.
that they may learn to have some knowledge in their own urines, and thereby
may be the better able to instruct the Physician, at the least, what sort of
urine they have made from time to time from the beginning of their sickness, and
somewhat before.

And also what sort of water they were wont to make in their health? so that if
men will be diligent to mark their water in time of health, they shall not only
be able to instruct the Physician (as I have said) but should be also able to
perceive the cause of the disease sometimes before the grief come, and so by
the counsel of some discreet Physician avoid the sickness before it be fully
entered: yea, and by due marking of their urine, they shall perceive from time
to time, how they shall govern themselves in meats and drinks, in exercise and
rest, and the like things, so that thereby they may eschew both the diseases,
and also the causes of the same.

Now what a commodity this may be to all men, and what thanks he has deserved
that has taught this so great a commodity to all men in general, I leave it
to every man's own judgment.

And thus (as you may perceive) I have declared the causes of this my pains,
taking them to be for the profit of the whole Commons indifferently. Howbeit,
if any mean learned Physician shall be thereby furthered in his judgment, I
will not envy him, but will be the gladder, the more number of men I perceive
to take benefit by it.

I am sure that the true judgment of urines, according to the mind of
Hippocrates, The difficulty of Judgment in Urine.
Galen, and such like, is very hard, though not to excellent Clerks, yet to the
meaner sort; partly by reason that it is written so dispersedly in their works,
and not in any one Book peculiarly and sufficiently: and partly because that
sundry words used in the same (as in the rest of Physic) are obscure to them
that have not been exercised in all kinds of learning, and that with the
knowledge of both the Greek and Latin tongues. Therefore I trust, that this my
pains shall be some help also, to them that lack the exercise of such study
and knowledge.

But because there is a common saying in the mouths of many men now a days,
that it is a profaining of learning, and a means to bring it into contempt, so
to set it forth in the vulgar tongue, that every man indifferently may read it,
and study it: The answer unto it.
To this I will briefly answer, that this saying is not only against many
great learned men's acts and examples, but also against manifest reasons:
besides, that it encludeth a pernicious kind of counsel. For if every thing
should be put away, or left undone, that evil men may pervert and use to an
evil purpose, so should we have no good thing remain: meats and drinks must be
taken away, because many abuse of it. And because evil men do abuse of both
eyes, and tongues, shall all men therefore pluck out their eyes and their
tongues? Because many men do abuse laws and authority, shall men expel laws
and high powers? Many evil men and heretics have misinterpreted Gods word,
yet ought Gods word nevertheless to be taught vulgarly to all men. Though the
Pope, Cardinals, and Monks, have practiced to poison men, even with the very
Sacrament of the supper of the Lord, yet no man will be so mad, therefore to
eschew the use of that blessed Sacrament: And yet all this follows, if men
allow that common saying, above written. Better means it were to set forth
publicly all that might do good to the public wealth, and straightly to
punish the abuses of them, then to punish good men and good things, because
that evil men offend. It is a like error to that sort of doctrine, which
contemned wine as an evil thing, because that many were made drunken with it.
But to leave this, and to come more particularly to the matter.

What is learning unlearned, or knowledge unknown, any thing else but a vain
name? Learning then increases most, when it is studied of most: And learning
then triumphs most, when it has most favorers and followers. And then does
ignorance (learnings enemy) rejoice most, when learning reigns in fewest, and
blindness rules most: so that then is learning most profained, contemned, and
hated, when it has most enemies: that is to say, when most men are ignorant.
For that old saying shall always be true: Learning has no enemy, but the
ignorant.

Plutarch his sentence.
Ask that great Cleark Plutarch what his mind is in this: Whether the
judgment of health be a meet thing for every man to study: and thou shall
hear him answer: that shame it is for men to observe the crying of Crows, and
such like things in beasts and birds, whereby men judge of the change of
weathers, and to be negligent in marking motions within themselves, and
alterations preparing unto sickness. Yea he requires so exact knowledge in
every man appertaining unto health, that he notes it for a great shame, and
calls it unsensibleness in a man if he be so ignorant, that he shall need to
ask of the Physicians, what meats are best for him. And to ask what meats
shall best digest in him, is as absurd a question (says he) as to ask what
meats are sweet, sour, or bitter, and such like. Yea beyon^ all this, he
requires in every man the knowledge of his own pulse, which is a thing harder
then the judgment of urines.

Examples of Writers in the Vulgar tongue.
Now if you require Examples, the whole world is full of them. They that wrote
i^ Greek, wrote in their own vulgar tongue (...) and so did they that wrote in
Latin, written in their own common speech.

Besides that, have we not infinite examples of Learned men in Germany, France,
and Spain, which wrote of Physic in their own tongue? Yea, Is not our own
England full of Examples? How many Books of Practices? how many Herbals? and
other like Books of Physic, has there been put forth many years past? And yet
unto this day do not learned wits sleep. How much is all England bound to
that Worthy and Learned Knight Sir Thomas Eliot, Sir Thomas Eliots Castle of
Health.
which took the pains to build a Castle of Health for all English men (besides
many other learned Books that he has pu^ forth in the Vulgar tongue) whereby a
man may learn both to govern himself so, that though he escape not all
sicknesses quite^ yet he shall eschew the great dangers of them? England may
rejoice of such a Knight: yea, England has too few that follows such
example. But if England had as many well willing doers as she has cruel and
spiteful disdainers, then were England the Flower of all Realms in the world.

Now will I leave this and draw nearer to my purpose, and will desire all men
that shall read this Book, patiently to bear with my boldness, and thankfully
to receive my good mind. And if there shall be found in this Book, or in any
other that I shall put forth, a small error or oversight (for greater errors, I
dare say there shall be none) I shall desire all them that shall find any, to
advertise me thereof by word or writing, and I shall be ready not only to
render condign thanks, but also to amend duly that shall be thought amiss, or
else to yield a reason for the proof of the same,

An exhortation to the Reader.
And now to make an end: I will desire every man soberly and discreetly to use
this my Book, not using it to the taunting or checking of other men: nor to
trust in their own knowledge further then they ought.

And likewise I shall exhort all men, not to mock and jest with any Physician
(as some light wits do) tempting them with Beasts stale, in stead of men's
urine: others bringing to them men's water for women's, and such other like
things. For in this doing they deceive not the Physician, but themselves. For a
man's water to be like a woman's, it need seem no strange thing. Howbeit, again
there is a notable difference, insomuch that that water which in a man
declares health, if it were a woman's, might declare some disease; and likewise
that which in a woman signifies health, if it were a man's water, it might
betoken sickness. And if a man's water and woman's be like, and betoken both
diseases, those diseases may be diverse and not one.

Yea two men's waters being both alike, shall not declare always one grief,
except they agree also in age, diet, exercise, and other like things

Also, that a Beasts Water may be like a Man's (the Man's sickness being
thereafter) Hypocrates witnesses, and experience teaches, as I shall declare
hereafter.

Therefore if you seek the Patients health, look that you receive the urine
diligently: and as soon as you can, present it to the Physician, and be
diligent to instruct him in all things that you can, and that he shall not have
need to ask. And so no doubt, you shall receive great commodity of that Art,
to the health of man, and the glory of God, which has given such knowledge
unto man.

THE URINALL OF PHYSIC.
CHAP. I. Of the Division and Order of this Book.
BEcause that nothing done confusedly can be well understood of the Readers,
for every thing the better order it has, the better it may be understood, and
is much more easily remembered, when the order of it is well and certainly
known: The sum of this Book.
I have therefore digested this Book orderly, as I shall here set forth, to the
intent that you may read, as it were in gross the whole Book, and thereby keep
it the better in remembrance.













CHAP. II. How Urine is engendered in Man and how it passes forth.
AS unto them that are learned and know by the Art of Anatomy the situation of
the parts of man, and the natural office of every part, it is easy enough to
perceive the original generation and cause of urine, without any example: so
unto them that neither know the situation, nor offices, no, neither yet the
names of the parts of man's body, it is scarce possible to make them to perceive
the generation of urine, without some sensible example^ But because it is very
hard to find an artificial example, which can alone duly express this work
of nature, I will use therefore an example of a natural work, which shall
express in many points this thing, though not in all; for such can there none
be, but the thing it self.

And in as much as this example is not easy to be understood of all men,
though the most part do now a days partly know it by experience of finding
springs of waters, I will first propose an artificial example, to make both
the other to be the better perceived.

An example of Stilling.
It is daily seen in distilling of Waters, that the temperate heat of the fire
does separate the purest part of the juice from the herbs, and also from the
grosser juice. This by natural lightness is drawn into the head of the
Stillatorie, where by the coldness of the helmet, it is made somewhat grosser,
and so through natural heat descends and passes forth by the Pipe of the
Stillatorie.

The Original.
And as the Art of man uses to make this water, so does nature use to make the
water of springs, whereof come all rivers, streams and floods, except the sea.
For seeing the earth is not perfectly sound and thick of substance, Cause of
springs.
as stones and some woods appears to be, but it is hollow and full of holes,
as you see that cork is: so that the air which by his subtleness pierces into
never so little a hole, enters and fills this hollowness, nature so leading
to it, because no place should be empty: In which place by the coldness of the
earth, the air is turned into water, as you may see in walls and pillars of
stone, namely, of marble, how the coldness of the stone turns the air into
water, and hangs full of drops, which sometimes trickle down apace, as if
they did sweat. So when the earth has turned the air thus into water, then
does it drop down and gathers together, and so runs out as it can find or
prepare way* As long therefore as there is hollownes in that place, with such
sort of coldness, and none other let, the Spring of water shall never cease.
But if the way by any mean be stopped, then the water turmoileth and labors,
either to expel that let, or to make a new way.

The causes of diversity in taste of Water.
Now this water being thus engendered of the air which has no taste, is also
naturally without all taste: but the taste that it has is the taste of the
veins of earth or metal, by which it does run. And that is the cause that
some waters are sweet, and some sour; some fresh, and some salt, and otherwise
diversely tasted; some also are hot, and some cold, and with other like
qualities endued, according to the ground whereby it passes. But of this I
will not now speak, because I have appointed for it a peculiar Treatise, if God
grant me time: Only this I say now, that a man that is expert, can by the
color, taste, and other qualities of the water which he sees, tell what vains
of earth or metals is in that place whence that water comes, though he see it
not.

And this water is expelled out of his first place, as unprofitable there to
remain; and yet when it is come forth thence, it is good for diverse and sundry
uses.

The generation of urine.
Thus may we think of the generation and use of urine or man's water.

Three Concoctions.
It shall not need that I here reckon exactly the places, causes, and the order
of the three concoctions which go before the generation of urine, but it shall
suffice to te^ briefly, that of the meat and drink togethe^ concocted in the
stomach is made rud^ blood: (if I may so call it) which rude bloo^ is wrought
again, and made more perfect^ in the liver: and thirdly yet more purified in
the hollow vein, where the urine i^ separate from it, as whey from milk, but
ye^ may not exactly be called urine, till it com^ into the reins or kidneys,
which draw it ou^ of the hollow vein, by a certain natural power resting in
them. And then does the reins or kidneys alter it perfectly into urine us the
coldness of the ground turns air into water. But you must take this comparison
o^ similitude to be spoken of the alteration it self, and not of the cause.

Now when Urine is thus made like to that fashion of water (as I said) then as
the water passes forth from his first place, by issues outward, so does the
urine descend from the reins by certain veins (as it were) called Water pipes,
and runs into the bladder, from whence at due times it is expelled forth, if
the way be not let. So that you may compare the reins to the head of a conduit,
the water pipes, to the conduit pipes, the bladder to the conduit, and the
shaft to the rock of the conduit.

And further as the water does declare by ^aste and color the qualities of the
earth, or ^eins of metal, whereby it runs, and from whence it comes, so
the urine by ^olour, and other ways, declares of what ^ort the places that it
comes through, and humors that it comes from are affected.

And yet not only serves for this, but also ^s the water, though it depart
from the earth as superfluous in that place, yet in other places and to other
purposes it is greatly profitable. So the urine, though it be expelled as a
superfluous excrement, yet beside the commodity of judgment, which it gives
of the parts that it comes from, it does also serve for diverse uses in
medicine, and other good commodities: Of both which, I will anon orderly write,
after I have declared certain things appertaining to the due judgment of it.

Of the Instrument and parts by which Urine is engendered and passes, mark this
Figure following.
excretory system

A. Is the liver. B. The hollow vein C. Veins by which the reins do draw the
urine, and therefore be called sucking veins. D. The reins. E. The water Pipes.
F. Is the Bladder. G. The spout of the yard.
All the other parts beside, appertain to Generation and seed.

CHAP. III. What Urine is, and what tokens it gives in general.
YOu have heard now how urine is engendered, from whence it comes, and ^y what
places it passes, which things all, ^o the intent that you may the better keep
^n mind, you shall note this short definiti^n.

The definition of urine.
Urine is the superfluity or wheyie substance ^f the blood into a hollow vein,
conveyed by ^he reins and water pipes, into the bladder. ^o that hereby you may
plainly perceive, that if the blood be pure and clean, and none (...) grief in
the reins, Water-pipes, Blad^er, nor Shaft, then shall the urine so declare ^t,
being also perfect and pure in substance and color, and all other tokens
according ^o the same. But if there be any grief in any of those parts, or the
blood corrupt by any means, then shall the urine declare cer^ain tokens of the
same, as I shall anon parti^ularly express.

But first it shall be necessary to instruct ^ou of the vessel place, and time,
meet to judge urine, and of the manner of receiving

CHAP. IIII. Of the form of the Vrinall, and of the p^ and time meet to judge
urine, and how it should be received.
THat urine should be kept to see, wh^ is first made after midnight common or
namely when the patient has slept lo^ but you must take heed whether the pati^
be man or woman, The order to receive urine.
that they make not the urine in another vessel first (as many use do) and then
pour it into the urinall wh^ it is settled, for that causes much de^ and error
in the judgment of it. And that the Patient cannot well make it in (...)
urinall, either by weakness, or any ot^ cause, then let them make it in
another v^sel; but see that it be clean and dry; and soon as the water is made,
pour it forth p^sently into the Urinall altogether, and lea^^ no part of it
out, as some curious folk^ use to put the clear part only into the urin^ and
cast away the dregs, as though it sto^ not with their modesty to bring such for
gear to the Physician, others of such like fo^lish mind. Pour it therefore in
wholly, an^ let not the urinall stand open, namely industy place, but stop it
close with a glove (...) other leather, and not with cloth, paper, nor ^ay, and
let it be brought to the Physician within six hours at the furthest, for after
that ^ime it cannot well be judged.

The Urinal.
Now as touching the Urinall, it should be of pure clear glass, not thick, nor
green in color, without blots or spots in it, not ^at in the bottom, nor too
wide in the neck, out widest in the middle, and narrow still toward both the
ends, like the fashion commonly of an egg, or of a very bladder being
measurably blown (for the Vrinall should represent the bladder of a man) and so
shall every thing be seen in his due place and coour. If neither the grossenes
of the Vrinall neither the color, nor spots shall let the true sight of the
color and substance of the urine, and the contents of it: neither the deform
fashion of the urinall shall alter the regions or rooms of the urine.

The place
Likewise concerning the place meet to behold urines, you must look that it be
neither too dark, so that your fight should not discern perfectly, either the
color, substance or contents, for lack of light: neither yet that your sight
be likewise deceived, if the place be too light, as in open light or beams of
the sun.

The time.
Besides this also you must mark the time due to behold urines, but because
there o^ no one time be assigned certain and exact judge all parts of it, I
will briefly show t^ order of the things to be considered in the time.

First, when the urine is made, while it yet somewhat hot, you shall consider
the c^lour of it: for that may best be discern then; and likewise the
thickness of the substance of it, which if it be mean, shall the^ be best seen.
All other things, as the bubbl^ and the contents shall be best judged som^what
after, when the urine is somewhat co^led, and they be duly settled in their
prope^ places.

CHAP. V. How many things are to be considered in Urine.
NOw leaving this as a brief instruction of the generation of the Water or
Urine, Four things to be considered in Urine, viz. Substance, Color,
Quantity, Contents.
and of the manner of receiving it i^ vessels due, with time and place meet to
consider it. I will particually declare how many things are to be considered in
it, which ar^ commonly named four, that is the Substance, the Color, the
Quantity, and the Contents and the Savor thereto may be added as the fifth; to
the which fifth, if you shall join stableness and order, as two accidents common
to the first four things, (but yet no less to be considered then they) then
shall you judge the more certainly.

Stableness.
Stablenes is called, when the urine continues certain days together of one
sort. And if it alter every day, Unstableness. Order.
then is that called unstableness or changeableness, to which thing order does
appertain: For order is the following of one thing after another, as black
colored urine after white, green or pale. I mean not, because that so it ought
to follow, but only that you must observe how it does follow. For black Urine
does not signify the same if it follow after green urine, as it does if it
follow after white urine: so that the order ought also to be marked.

Substance.
But now to return to the four first things.

Three sorts of substance in urine. Thin.
Substance is called in urine, the urine it self, in respect of the thickness or
thinness of it: So that there are 3. sorts of substance in urine: thick, thin,
and mean.

Thick.
Thin substance is called, when you may perceive well the joints of your fingers
through the urine. And contrariwise it is called thick, when you cannot well
see your fingers through it: and that is in the middle between extreme thick
and extreme thin, Mean (...).
is called, mean.

Colors are diverse, but the principal are these six, white, pale, flaxen,
yellow, red and black. And all the other colors are contained under these six.

Light white as Chrystallie, snowie.
As under white, are contained clear as crystal, white as snow, and pure as
water which three are light whites.

(...) Dark white as milke-white, horny ^ray, pale, flaxen, yellow.
Then are there other three more darker as milk white, clear like horn, and gray.

After white, follows pale color, an^ then flaxen, (...), an^ then yellow,
which may be called golden, for it is the color of pure gold.

Light saffron, saffron color. Claret. Red. Crimson. Purple. Blew. Green.
After it follows light saffron, and the^ saffron, then claret color, and
then red, after it crimson, and then purple, and the^ blue.

Then is there green of diverse kinds, as ligh^ green, green as grass, stark
green, and dar^ green.

Oily.
There are also oil colors (that is, popi^ gay green) of three sorts: as of
green, ligh^ oily, stark oily, and dark oily.

Ash color.
After these is there Ash color like un^^ lead; Black.
and after it, as last of all comes blac^ And these be the chief colors.

Now as touching quantity, it is also in three sorts; much, little, and mean.

Quantity Much.
Then it is called much quantity, when it exceeds the measure of a man's
drinking.

Little.
And then is it called little, when a man pisseth less then he drinks.

Mean.
And that is mean, when a man's pissing and his drinking is of like quantity. All
this must be considered by due proportion.

Contents.
The contents are all things in the water, that be of another matter and
substance particularly, then is the urine: Sediment. Sublation. Cloud.
as the sediment or ground, the sublation or swim, and the cloud, To these are
added other dis-form contents, like hairs, like husks, like bran, Crown.
and such other. And also the crown of the urine, with the bubles, and other
things swimming on the top of it.

For the better understanding of these contents, you must note that the whole
urine from the top to the bottom, is divided commonly into three rooms or
regions.

(...) rooms or Regions. Ground or Sediment.
The lowermost is the region of the ground or sediment: so that the grounds or
sediments are the contents that occupy the lowermost region. Or yet more
properly, the sediment is called a certain substance of grosser matter then is
the urine, like to a quantity of very watery phlegm, which sleeteth a little
above the bottom of the urine: But if it be so light, that it swim in the
middle region of the urine, then is it called the sublimation or swim.

Sublimation or Swim.
And if it be yet more lighter, so that it does fleet in the highest part of
the urine then it is called a cloud: whereby you may perceive that the ground,
Cloud.
the swim, and the cloud are but one thing in substance, and differ only by
lightness and height, and takes his name according to the region that i^
occupies. Another division of the three Regions.
But yet again note, that ever^ one of the 3. regions, is farther divided into
other parts also; whereby you may know exactly, how far all contents differ
from the just room of their region; so that the whol^ urine must be divided
into eleven just parts of which the nether region occupies fou^ the fifth is
the void room between that an^ the middle region, which contains 3. more that
is to say, the sixth, seventh, and eigh^ And then the ninth is a void room
between the middle region and the highest, which highest region, contains the
other tw^ parts that remain, that is the tenth an^ the eleventh, as this Figure
shows which hereafter follows.

urinal divided into sections for measuring urineABove these 3. regions, about
the very brink of the urine, you may see a certain ring as it were, going
about, and that is called the crown. Crown.


Bubbles.
Highest of all things in the urine are the bubbles which either go about with
the ring only, or else fleet in the middle of the urine only, or else both.
Yea sometime they cover all the whole top of the urine.

Fattiness.
Beside these, there is oftentimes as it were flotes or fattiness on the top,
and sometime certain spots only, which are like to drops of oil. And these
commonly are the whole contents. For as for gravel or stone, or any like thing
is contained under the name of dis-form contents.

You shall also understand, that in the contents must the substance, the
quantity, and color, be observed.

Substance.
The Substance is either equal or unequal.

Equal.
Equal Substance is called, when the ground swim, or cloud, (for to them
appertains this consideration) is not tattered and dispersed, but justly knit
together.

Unequal.
Unequal is contrary, when it is thinner in one part then in another, or
flittered out, and not jointly and uniformly joined together.

Quantity.
The quantity must be considered in respect to a mean, which if you know well,
then may you soon judge that to be overmuch, that is more then it: and that to
be too little, that is less then it: But this mean quantity must you learn of
a perfect whole water, and best by the teaching of some good Physician.

Of colors I have spoken before sufficiently for their variety.

CHAP. VI. What a perfect Urine is, and also how many ways all parts of the
Urine may be altered in a healthful man.
NOw that you know the difference o^ such things that ought to be considered in
urine, before you shall learn by consideration of them, to judge of the person
that made it, how he is disposed in his body: you must first know how many
ways the parts of the urine may be changed in a healthful man. For the
better understanding of which thing, and of all that shall be said hereafter, I
will first define what a perfect whole urine is, which as it betokens no
grief in it self, so it is a true rule to examine all other urines by that,
which are not whole, but declare in them some grief.

A perfect whole urine Galen c. 12. Crisib.
A perfect whole urine is mean in substance and in quantity, and in color pale,
or party saffron, with a white ground, duly knit and stable, without bubbles
and other evil contents.

So that this perfect whole urine declares the difference of all other urines;
For every urine the more it agrees with this, the better it is: and the more
it differs from this, the worse it is, as I shall anon particularly declare.

And here you must mark, that this perfect whole urine is not only taken of a
perfect whole man, but also of the lustiest time of man's age, that is at thirty
years: or more largely, between twenty five and thirty five. For in every age
does the urine alter, as you shall hear by and by.

The difference of Urine by age in men.
Children.
THe Urine of children differs but little in color from pale, or light
saffron and in substance it somewhat exceeds i^ thickness the substance of
young men's urine and has much ground in it. Galen 2. presag. Hippoc. 13.
And the more they do grow in age, the higher waxes the color, Young men.
the substance the thinner, and the les^ is the ground. And therefore when age
i^ most freshest, Men.
the color is pale (so that the urine of flourishing youth or perfect manhood,
is pale or light saffron) and the^^ rests, and goes no higher, and the
groun^ of it is mean. But now after that time the more age increases and youth
decays, the more the color changes from pale toward white, Age.
and the ground waxes lesser an^ darker: so that the urine of old men is thi^
and white, with little ground, inclining unto cruditie.

Of the Urine of Women by age.
Women.
THe Urine of women which are temp^rate in health and in their flourishin^
youth, does decline somewhat from pa^ and light saffron toward white, and the
substance is in manner thin, Young women.
but it has more ground then men's urine; now all they that be under this
flourishing age, the younger they be, the whiter colored is their urine, and
the more ground it has; and if they be elder, the more aged they are, Aged
women.
the whiter also is their urine, but the ground is everless and less. And this
you may see how both diversity of age, and diversity also of kind or sex,
causes alteration in urine, without change of health; for you must understand
all these ages with perfect health.

The diversity of Vrines, according to the times of the year.
EVen as the diversity of ages alters urine, so does the times of the year.
Spring.
For the more that the spring time draws toward heat the more the urine
gathers high color, departing from pale and flaxen, toward pale and light
saffron: and the inequality of substance changes into a due equality according
to nature, and the ground does wax thinner, and the quantity is more in
respect to that is drunk: so that about the midst of the spring they return to
a mean.

Summer.
In the beginning of Summer, the color appears pale and light saffron, and
the substance mean, the ground white, duly kn^ and stable, but yet thinner then
a mea^ ground. And the more that the Summ^ proceeds and draws to the
highest, the lesser is the quantity of urine, in comparion to the drink and
the ground, changes from his natural whiteness to a palish color an^ is much
lesser and thinner. And this thinness glystereth withal, and inclines toward
golden and saffron color.

Harvest.
When Harvest comes, then the colors do return to a mean again: but the
thinness and brightness remains still; the ground also is still obscure and
little, but y^ it is white, duly knit and stable. And a^ Harvest goes
forward, so the urine retu^neth to a mean in all things.

In the middle of winter and thereabou^ the urine keeps due quantity, but
the color inclines toward white, and the groun^ is over great, but in all
other points it mean.

Winter.
And as Winter goes on, the substance urine appears diverse, and the color
whit^ the quantity greater in respect to the drin^ and the contents greater and
unconcoct but toward the spring time they return toward a mean as I have
before said.

Yet beside these, also diversity of countries causes diversity of urine,
Countries alter urine.
even by the ^ame reasons as does the times of the year. For countries that be
temperate exactly, make urine like unto the spring time. And those countries
that be hot and dry make urine like unto summer. And contrariwise, cold and
moist alter water, as does winter. But countries that are dry and distempered
between heat and cold, make urine like harvest.

Meats drinks and medicines.
Also meats and drinks, and order of diet, causes urine to alter, and medicines
also, as not only experience reaches, but also Hippocrates witnesses in the
sixth Book of his Epidemies, (or raining sicknesses) in the fifth part and the
fifteenth sentence, as for example: Meats of light concoction*
Those meats that are light of concoction and good in substance, cause good and
temperate urine with pure contents: but contrary meats cause discolored urine,
and thin, with strange contents.

Meats of hard concoction.
Meats that will not concoct, make lesser contents, and diverse in substance.
Evil meats cause greater contents, and in nothing duly formed. And as the
quality of meats does alter urine, so does the quantity also. For if a man have
eaten much, and not concocted it, his urine shall be thin and white, and
sometime without ground. But if this crudity (or rawness in stomach) contin^
long, the urine will become diverse in su^stance, Drinking of wine.
and in contents.

Also wine drunk abundantly causes ^teration in urine.

Fasting long.
But now contrariwise, if a man do s^ long, his urine will appear fiery and
saffr^ colored, and thin with lesser ground

Suffering of famine.
But if a man suffer famine, and do n^ nourish, his water shall be thin and whi^
with a certain glistering, and witho^ ground.

Labor.
Moreover, exercise and rest changes ^rine: for through excessive labor, the
uri^ changes from light saffron, and at leng^ becomes saffron colored, with
lit^ ground, thin, and higher colored then should be. And some time there
fleet on the top a certain fastness, specially aft^ overmuch weariness.

Rest.
But idleness and rest does contrariwi^ cause white urine, with greater and
gros^ ground.

Sleep. Watching.
Furthermore sleep, and watching, if the exceed measure, they alter urine; but
the^ is a difference between both sleep a^ watching coming of sickness, and
the^ both when they be taken willingly in heal^ For if that sickness cause
overmuch slee^ ^hen is the urine whitish, with substance either fully thick, or
but partly thin, and the contents many and undigest.

Natural sleep.
But if that such sleep come naturally the urine is not so white, but rather
flaxen, and the substance mean, with greater and well concoct contents.

Voluntary sleep.
And likewise they that have watched purposedly, and not by reason of sickness,
their urine is but little changed. Watch in sickness.
But if they watch for any sickly cause, their urine will change but little at
the beginning: but with continuance the contents will be dispersed, and at the
last clean wasted, and the substance of the urine waxes thinner and thinner,
by little and little, and the color inclines either to white and watery, or
unto golden saffron, oily, or black, according as the cause is that makes it
so to change.

Of alteration by complexion, I will write in the next Chapter.

Now have you heard as touching alteration of urine in health, according to
diversity of ages, both in men and women, times of the year, countries, meats
and drinks, labor, rest, sleep, and watch: so that you must have regard to
these in all judgments both in health and in sickness. For if these be not
diligently marked, they may cause great error, as you may well co^der.

What is to be considered in urine
First therefore, in every urine you (...) consider, whether it be a man's or a
wom^ and what age he or she is of, then w^ time of the year it is, and what
count what meats and drinks the person us^ and likewise of labor and rest,
sleep (...) watch: And then must you consider (...) every one of these does
alter urine: so (...) if the altering of them from that health urine (whereof I
spoke in the beginning this Chapter) be but such as one of the foresaid things
would cause, then may it be judged to come of any disease, as for ^^ample. High
colored water in sum^ (so that it pass not saffron color) or w^ colored
water in winter, should rather reckoned to come of the time of the y^ then of
any sickness: and likewise of o^ things.

CHAP. VII. What be the general qualities that alte^ the parts of Urine.
BEfore I treat of the signification of (...) parts of Urine, I think it good
to instr^ you of the general qualities which cause all alterations in urine:
whereby you shall perceive not only what every urine does betoken (as I shall
anon set forth) but also if you mark well this Chapter, you shall see ^he cause
why every urine does so signify.

You shall understand therefore, that there be four chief and only qualities,
whereof all things that are both in the Sea and Earth are made: as man and
beast, fish and fowl, trees, herbs, stones, and metals. These four qualities
are heat, cold, moistness and dryness: and these four continuing duly tempered
(as nature ordered them first in every perfect body) be the cause of continual
health. But if they be altered wrongly, then do they cause diseases diversely,
according to the diversity of the alterations: And as they do cause diseases,
so they change the color, substance, and other parts of the urine, whereby we
may conjecture the cause of the disease; and so consequently the disease it
self, though sometime it declares the disease it self, and not the cause
thereof.

Passive and active qualities.
But now to come to the matter meetest for this time, you shall mark that two of
these four qualities are named Passive, and they cause but small alteration in
comparison. The other two are called Active, an^ they cause great alteration.

The Active qualities are heat and col^ and the Passive qualities are dryness
an^ moistness.

Moistness.
When Moistness therefore exceeds alone, it dulleth the natural color of
urin^ thicketh and ingrosseth the substance, an^ increases the quantity. And
as the ove^ part of it above waxes rough and trouble^ so the ground increases
and continue^ raw and unconcoct.

Dryness.
But dryness does diminish the quantit^ of urine, and also the contents: It
maket^ it thin in substance, clear and bright, an^ causes mean color, and the
ground appears grosser.

Heat.
Likewise heat, if it exceed measure bu^ little, it makes pale and light
saffron color in the urine. But if heat exceed greatly it causes golden and
saffron colour^ with mean substance, and a little brightness the ground is
mean, in respect to the quantity of urine, but it declineth from the du^
whiteness toward saffron color.

Cold.
But cold on the other side makes urin^ turn to white color, and changes the
substance from a mean. And if the cold increase, the urine will alter from mean
substance, and therefore consequently will be either thin or gross. If it be
thin or unpure, the ground shall be either obscure and little, or much, and
that diverse and unconcoct.

And this is the working of these four qualities when they exceed alone.

But and if two of them exceed together, there may result of that sort four
other distemperances; as hot and dry, hot and moist, cold and dry, and cold and
moist. Compound distemperatures of qualities.
Now what alterations these and every one of them does cause the urine, you may
easily conjecture, if you keep in mind that which I said of the four simple
qualities, and so add togethet the alterations.

And this must you remember therewith, that where they both agree in any
alteration, they cause that alteration to be the greater: and where they be
contrary, they cause the alteration to be nearer to a mean: howbeit somewhat to
help you, take this brief declaration.

A temperate man.
As a temperate man does make that perfect urine, written of before, ( in Chap.
6.) so the urine of a sanguine man (which is hot and moist) shall be yellow, or
light saffron colored, by the reason of the heat, and somewhat gross, by
reason of the moisture.

A choleric man.
In a choleric man (being hot and dry (...) the urine shall be in color as in
a sanguin^ man, but in substance thin, by reason of the dryness.

A melancolike man.
The urine of a melancholy man (whose nature is cold and dry) shall be white
through the cold, and clear for the dryness.

A phlegmatic man.
The phlegmatic man (which is cold an^ moist) makes urine white through cold,
an^ thick by the moisture, for as heat and col^ alters the colors, so
dryness and moistur^ changes the substance. Now if you have remembered all that
I have written before then shall you be the meeter and better able a great deal
to perceive the reasons (...) the tokens which urine does give. And (...) shall
your knowledge be the more certai^ if you know not only the thing, but also the
cause of it. Now therefore will I wri^ of the signification of the parts of
urin^ particularly, that you may perceive the first, and chief commodity of
urine which (...) works for man's health.

CHAP. VIII. The significations of the parts of Urine particularly.
I Told you in the sixth Chapter of this Book what urine was most perfect,
sound, and healthful of all other. And I said, that it was the rule and trial
to examine all other urines by, so that the nearer that any urine was to it,
the better it was; and the further that it declineth from it, the worse it is.
This I said, should be as a general rule, which thing to be true in healthful
men, you may perceive by that I have written already. And that it is also true
in sick men. Hypocrates, witnesses, saying, That Urine is best, whose ground
is white, duly knit and stable, all the time that the sickness prevails. But
Galen to supply that that is understood in this saying, and so to make it
perfect, adds thereto, That it must be of color party golden or pale, and
of a mean substance between thick and thin. And also in these things is
required stableness, to make it a perfect Urine; for that which is unstable in
any part, in that it is not perfect.

Here were a place to speak of the difference of this changeableness or
unstableness; for there is one sort called ordinary, and another called
unordinarie, and of both these are there diverse differences. But because they
depend of an exacter judgment the^ unlearned men can well attain unto, I
overpass them for this time, and will declare the other differences of urine,
whereby it alters from this mean urine, in all parts particularly.

Substance or urine.
And first I will begin with the substanc^ of urine, the which (as I said
before) is o^ three kinds, thick, thin, and mean.

Mean.
A mean urine is that, that is in the middle between extreme thick, and extrea^
thin. And as it is mean between them i^ substance, so is it mean in
signification, so it does betoken (of it self) only good temperance and health.
But the other two betoken distemperance and default of concoct^on, and that
diversely, according to the diversity of the causes of them, as you shall no^
consequently hear.

Thin urine.
First to speak of thin urine, either it does still ^ continue thin, as it was
first made, or else it does she^ly wax thick and troubled. That that does
contin^ still thin does betoken lack of concoction, and so do^ the other also;
but yet this that continues thin be^keneth more lack of conoction, for it
betokene^ that nature has not yet begun to concoct. A^ therefore is that
water, a sign of extreme crud^ or rawness in nature. But that that waxes
thick, it begins to cool, though it betoken lack of concoction, yet does it
declare that nature has begun to concoct already, notwithstanding it is an
evil urine, for it signifies that nature has need not only of great strength
to perform that concoction which she has begun; but also that there is
required long time to the performance of the same. For the which cause, Galen
calls this, Of all Vrines the worst.

Thus have you heard touching crudity and concoction, what thin urine does
signify, so that all thin urine betokens crudity. And beside that does
further betoken (as witnesses Hypocrates) gatherings or apostumations in the
nether parts of the body, namely, if it continue so very long, and the patient
escape death.

Thin and white.
Furthermore, if such thin urine have with it a light whiteness, it is a very
evil sign. For if it be in a burning ague, it is a token of frensines. But if
the patient be fransick already, and the urine does so continue, it does most
commonly betoken death. And if he escape death (the which is seldom seen) then
shall he be long sick, and escape hardly.

Thin urine also betokens diverse other things: as the stopping of the reins,
and of the water veins. And likewise, if a man have had much bleeding, or laxe,
or pissing, his urine will be white and thin, and almost without ground: Like
manner in old age, and long weakness of sickness. Also in young children if it
continue long, it is a deadly sign.

Yet thin urine does sometime betoken the end of sickness and recovery of
health: as in Agues (namely quotidians) if at the beginning of them and so
after, the urine did appear thick and troubled, and especially if the color
amend therewith.

Thin and ^axen.
And if it be thin in substance, and of flaxen color, then is it better then
thin and white: for because the color is better though^ the substance be all
one; so that though^ it betoken some weakness and lack of concoction, yet not
so much as does the other, for the color is meanly concoct: that is to say,
natural heat is meanly increased.

Thin and golden.
But if it be thin and golden, it is ye^ more better then thin and flaxen: for
the color is more exact and this betokens concoction half complete, for that
which it lacks in substance, it has in color.

Thin and saffron.
After this is there thin and saffron colored, which betokens first lack of
concoction, and beside that default of nourishment as in a young man that
fasteth long: And sometime it betokens that excess of her^ in the inner parts
of the body, does caus^ choleric humors to abound, as in the feve^ tertian.
Beside all this, it betokens thought, carefulness, and watching, and also
overmuch labor, and taking of heat in the Sun.

And thus have you heard the significations of thin urine, both alone, and also
with such colors as it can be coupled.

Now shall you hear what thick urine does betoken, both alone, and also with
such diverse colors, as it may be coupled.

Thick.
Thick urine (which is, so I mean, when it is first made) either it does
continue still thick, or else it does settle, and wax clear. If it continue
still thick, it betokens that that disturbance which was in the blood, that
is to say, the rage of sickness does still continue strongly: and that
natural strength is but weak. This urine is not so good as that which does
settle and wax clear. For that does betoken that the disease shall shortly be
overcome: howbeit there remains yet somewhat of that distemperate trouble in
the blood: yet nature has the over-hand and expels the matter of the grief,
and therefore is such a urine called good, but yet it betokens some lack of
concoction, though not so much as that which continues troubled and thick
still.

Also thick urine (if it be exceeding thick) does betoken death, as Hypocrates
says, And the urine that is thick and troubled, lik^ beasts urine, does
betoken head ach, either present already, or shortly after to com^ If thick
urine appear in an ague, when thin urine went before, it betokens tha^ the
sickness will abate straightwaies, for ^ declares that nature has overcome
the matter of the sickness: but if it appear thick ^ the beginning of the ague,
and do not wa^ thin in process of time, it betokens plent^ of matter, and
weakness of nature; so the there is fear lest nature should be overcom^ except
the color do amend.

Thick and white.
Thick urine also betokens openne^ of the water pipes and reins. And if it b^
thick and white, it betokens great plen^ of raw humors, and sundry kinds of
fleg^ to be gathered in the body: and betokene^ also (namely if it be much)
that those gath^rings, which might be looked for in so^ agues shall not ensue,
for the matter which should cause them departs out by urine but the whiteness
of this urine is bright snow. For if it be somewhat darker li^ the whiteness of
milk, it is a token of the stone, either in the bladder or reins, namely if
such urine chance in the end and amendin^ of sickness.

Gray.
But if the color of it be gray, it betokene^ not only plenty of matter in the
body, but also that the whole body is possessed with a dangerous sickness,
whereof oftentimes it chances the patient to break out with blisters and heat
in his skin.

Thick and claret.
Next after this follows thick claret color (for flaxen, yellow, nor saffron
color does not agree with thick urine) and it does signify that the disease
shall continue long, specially if the ground of it be also of claret color.
But yet this disease without peril of death.

Thick and red.
Thick urine, if it be red colored, does betoken abundance of blood, as is seen
in continual Agues, and in all perilous Agues, as witnesses Theophylus. If
this water come by little and little, it is an evil token, for it does always
declare danger.

And if that sort of urine (in such Agues) do wax troubled, so that there come
with it deafness of hearing, and ach of the head, with pain in the neck and in
the sides of the belly, it betokens that the Patient shall have the falling
evil within a seven night.

Thick and crimson.
And if a thick urine have a crimson color, If it be burning Agues, and the
Patient then have the headache, it betokens that a chief critical sign either
is then present, or else nigh at hand.

Thick and blew.
But if the urine be thick and blew colored, it signifies diversely, as the
persons a^ that made it. For in them that are in wa^ of recovery, it betokens
that they sha^ escape their grief. It signifies also pa^ in the water-pipes,
or else that the part has runn much.

And if it appear such in old men, and the continue long, it declares not only
that the bladder is infected with evil humors, b^ commonly also that he shall
be rid of them But if it come after the grief of the stone, ^ declares that
the grief shall be turned into the strangurie.

Thick and green.
Thick urine and green, namely in Ague^ is a token of the yellow Jawnders,
either present, or ready to come.

Thick and ash colored.
Thick urine and ash colored, if it appea^ in Agues and do not settle, it is a
sign of madness, But in the burning Ague, it betokens that the strangurie
will come shortly.

Thick and black.
But if a black color appear in thick urine it betokens sometime well, as in
the end of the Fever Quarten, and of melancholic madness, for it betokens
that the melancholic matter, which caused the diseases, does avoid out.

But sometimes it is an evil token, for it signifies that either the blood is
burned through exceeding heat, or else that natu^ll heat is clean quenched
through deadly ^ld, and therefore is commonly called a ^adly sign, namely in
sharp Agues, if it ^ve an evil savor. And so means Galen, ^hen he says,
that he marked, The thicker ^at a black water is, the worse it is, and
^oreover, That he never saw any escape, which made such Urine.

And thus have you heard of the significa^ons of thin and thick urine, with
such co^ours as may be coupled therewith.

Now will I write a little of the colors a^one, and of such tokens as come
chiefly of them, rather then of the substance or any other part of the urine.

Colors of urine.
The colors of urine declare commonly, how heat and cold do reign in the body,
so that the whiter the urine is, the greater is the cold, and natural heat
less; and the higher colored that the urine is, the greater is the heat.

White.
But to speak particularly, that you may perceive it the better. If the urine be
white, it is a sign that concoction fails quite, and the lighter colored,
the worse.

Pale.
Pale color is better somewhat, though it also declare lack of natural heat
and strength.

Flaxen.
And flaxen color, though it betokens beginning of concoction, yet it is not
pe^fect: howbeit it may be well taken, if all ^ther signs be good.

Pale, light saffron.
Pale and light saffron (as you have hea^ before) are the best colors and most
temp^rate, which betoken exact concoction.

Golden saffron.
But golden and saffron color declare e^cess of heat.

Claret red. Crimson Purple. Green oily.
Claret is next, and then red, after it crimson, and then purple, then green,
and l^ of them is oily urine, which as they go in o^der, so they declare
greater and greater he^ with increase, not only of the quality, b^ also of the
matter containing the same.

Blew ash color.
But now of the other side, blew urine, an^ ash color, are tokens of excessive
cold sometime with matter, and sometime with out; and so likewise of black
urine, howbeit it comes sometime of excess of heat.

But how you may know the difference both of it and all the other, now will I
show in order, with the rest of their significations

White.
White urine, if it come in great quantity in a whole man, it betokens much
drinking of thin wine.

But if it be mean in quantity, with a due ground, it declares cold
distemperance of the liver. The urine does appear white, with a dis-form and
unconcocted ground, in them that have the dropsy. But in old men, white ^rine
is no great evil sign, as you may per^eive by that I said before of Ages, how
^hey alter urine. But in young men, and such ^s are of freshest age, it is a
worse sign, and ^pecially if it have either no contents, or else evil
contents. And if urine continue ^ong time white without changing, it betokens
painful beating of the head, daselling of the eyes, and giddiness, and also
the fal^ing evil, lothsomness of good meats, and ^usting sometime after evil
meats, greedy hunger, pain in limbs, and painful moving of the sinews, and
diverse griefs of the head and reins, and also pain in the fundament, and
great weakness by sickness, for all these do follow continually lack of
concoction, either cold, or stopping of the urines and conduct, or transposing
of the humors.

But the differences of these cannot easily be known of every man, yet such as
are learned may gather certain distinctions of them by the accidents which
follow diseases.

Milk white, hornwhite, gray.
Dark white colors, as milk white, white, white like horn, and gray, If they
appear in the beginning of Agues, and in the increase of them, they do betoken
much pain. But in the decrease of Agues, they declare he especially if it come
plentifully.

Pale, flaxen
Pale urine and flaxen, do not lightly pear in Agues, except they be easy Ag^
and short, as those which continue but day, but if that it do follow after bu^
Agues, it declares that they be fully d^ved.

Pale, saffron.
As for pale and light saffron, they are (...) I said before) the best and most
perfect ^lours, namely, in young men and f^ youth. But in old men, women and
child^ (whose urine, as I have said, declineth ^ward white and pale) it does
betoken t^ their body is too hot, either by reason^ their diet, or else of
their exercise. Bu^ as much as it is but mean excess, it declare^ but small
grief.

Golden saffron color.
Golden and saffron colored urine, if be either somewhat thin, or very thick,
^ther it has no ground, or else very few, a^ dark contents. But in this they
differ, the golden urine declares excess of heat, a^ matter also, by reason of
meats, sharp med^cines, chafing of the blood through ange^ heat of the bowels,
or else heat of the tim^ of the year.

But saffron color appears rather wit^ default of matter, through some
affection o^ the mind, watching, heat of the sun, labor, and such like things,
which increase thin and yellow choler, and diminish natural heat, ^o that the
cause of this color is choler it self, increased either in quantity, or else
in quality. But in old men and women, and ^uch other, there is some greater
cause that occasioneth it, for it signifies an Ague com^eth of saffronly
choler dispersed through the whole body; after which there follows commonly
giddiness, headache, bitterness of ^he mouth, lothsomeness of meat, thirstiness,
Also in young men, such urine is caused through much exercise, and use of hot
meats.

Of Claret and red Urine.
Claret urine.
CLaret and red urine is colored either of the mixture of red choler, or else
of the corruption of blood; such urine oftentimes goes before Agues. For when
the blood does so abound, that it cannot be duly labored, nor can take no
air, there is engendered a certain corruption, which as it is red of color it
self, so it causes the urine to be red in color if it be much, else it makes
only claret color. But if it be exact red lik grain, it betokens that blood
issues into it, out of some veins nigh to the reins, which either are broken,
or other ways ^pened. But how it may be known fr^ whence it comes, and how,
there are any means to search, but because they are^ light to perceive, I will
reserve them for P^sicians that are learned. This color o^ self is no great
evil sign, namely in yo^ men, for it betokens excess of blood, wh^ may well
be born of them. But in old m^ it is a very evil sign, for it betokens
^ther long sickness, or else death, since na^ is so weak that it cannot keep in
her natu^ humor. And if that red color, come^ red choler, as it does in young
men, for (...) most part and not of blood (which thing learned Physician may
conjecture partly (...) the former diet, and other signs more) t^ accidents
shall be the more troublous; ho^beit yet not so evil, as when it comes (...)
saffron or golden choler, for this cause greater thirst, and more troublous
sleep the the other.

Of Crimson color.
Crimson color.
CRimson color is a token that the goo^ humors of the body are burned, an^
turned into red or black choler, which cau^ worse griefs then the other;
howbeit if (...) have a good ground, the grief is the more moderate: But if it
have either no contents for a space, or else evil contents, and the urine
appear like a thick myste, but somewhat glistering light, it is a sign that
nature needs such strength to recover her self to her own state.
Notwithstanding such urine is caused sometime in whole folk, by reason of much
labor, and long journying, and then it has some good signs therewith. But in
them that have a sharp Ague, such crimson color of urine does betoken that
corrupt blood does abound, and that it does putrify, and turn into choler. And
commonly they that make such urine, do thirst much, and are dry in their
mouth, and are troubled in their sleep, and feel sharp Agues, and are half
distract, and feel pain of the liver with coughing.

Howbeit, yet these signs may be sometimes as well good as bad, according as
the colors do change to better or worse.

Of Purple Color.
Purple color.
PUrple color declares need of much strength before it can be altered to a
good urine.

This urine is a sign of burning choler. And if it do continue very long, it is
a token of the yellow Jaunders, with abundance gross and corrupt choler,
gathered in the ^ver. And at the beginning there goes w^ it some spices and
grudgings of the Ag^ with a little thirstiness; but unless there b^ discretion
used in the diet of such a Patie^ it may turn to a much worse disease.

Of Green Vrines.
Green color.
GReen color is an evil and a dangero^ token, for it needs not only long
tim^ but also cotinual strength to bring it ag^ to a good trade. The higher
that this cold is, the more it declares that choler exce^eth the other
humors: which if it be a^ more burned, will cause black urine, which I will
anon speak. But if green o^lour come of wasting of the fat, then is somewhat
like to oily color, or popin^ green: but if it come of abundance of purp^lish
color, and through increase of his qu^litie, then does the color incline more
^ward black, and glistereth with shadow green, drawing very nigh unto black.
Af^ green choler follows madness, parbrea^ing, and avoiding of choler,
sometimes wi^ matter, or else burned: and also continu^ thirstiness, and
burning heat of the tongue straightness about the stomach. And like other
things. But if the patient continue strong, and the color of the urine do wax
lighter, there is good hope, else there is great fear, least of the dryness and
burning, there do follow contraction of the sinews, which will kill the patient.

Of Oilie Urine, or Popinjay Green.
Oilie urine, or popinjay green.
Oily Urine is of three sorts, as I said in the fifth Chapter, that is, light
oily, stark oily, and dark oily.

Oily urines are a token of unnatural heat, and the higher that the color is,
the greater is the heat. And also they betoken melting of the fat within a man,
for of it are they so colored. But at the beginning, when there is a little
fat melted, the urine is light oily. For if it look stark oily, then it
signifies that the disease increases. But if it come once to dark oily, then
is the disease sore increased, Hippocrates in the seventh Book of his Aphorisms
speaking of fatness in urine, says thus: Who so makes urine with fatty flotes
coming much and fast, they have sharp pains in the reins.

Which sentence though it seem more to appertain to the contents then to the
color, yet does not only Galen, but also Aetin^ Actuarius, and also another
Grecian, (who name I know not) expound it amongst colors: and by it declare
the difference ^ know whether that wast or melting ^ fat be in the reins it
self, or in other parts o^ the body. For if it come fast together, (^
Hippocrates says) then comes it from the reins it self, and betokneth the
wasting ^ be in them. But if it come softly and increa^ by little and little,
then does it declare the the whole body is overcome with unnatural heat, and
that the fat of it does wast it does betoken (as Act. witnesses) a wasting
Ague; consuming the body.

Of blew Urine, Ash Color, and Black.
BLew color, Ash Color, and Black do differ only in lightness and darkness
For ash color is darker then blew: an^ black is darker then any of them both.

Blew color.
Blew color sometime comes of moderate melancholy, and then is the urine
somewhat thin in substance. And sometime i^ comes of great cold, and then it
is thick in substance. And sometime it is a token o^ mortifying of some part.
Yea, and sometime even of whole nature: namely, if the color change to worse
and worse, and there went before no token of concoction.

Ash Color.
Ash colored urine comes of like causes, and betokens like things. Howbeit
it is so colored many times, when the party that made it, has been sore
beaten and bruised. But in this you need not the help of urine, for you may see
the walts and tokens of the stripes in his body.

Black urine.
Urine which is extreme black, sometime betokens extreme heat, and sometime
extreme cold, the which both you may distinctly discern, if you do observe
order of alteration in the colors of the urine that the patient made last
before. For if his urine before were green, or like thereto, then does the
black urine which follows it, betoken extreme heat. But if it were last before
blew or ash-colored, then does it signify extreme cold. This black color
though it be commonly an evil and deadly sign, as I said before, (speaking of
thick urine and black) yet sometime it is a good token.

For in all diseases lightly that come of melancholy matter, it betokens that
the matter does avoid, and so the sickness to end. And such urine does appear
many times after purgations or other meats and drinks which purge the spleen;
namely, if a man do labor upon them, that was before diseased of the spleen.

Howbeit, sometime meats and drinks of li^ color cause black urine, as Galen
witnesses namely, after dark red wine, and Allegant.

But in moderate Agues, if such black ^rine do appear, it is a token of death,
excep^ it be on some Critical days. And likewi^ in sharp agues, especially if
the savor b^ strong and stinking: unless it come of some grief of the bladder

Quantity of urine.
Let this suffice for this time, as touchin^ colors. Now for the quantity of
urine, ^ when it is mean, it is a good token: so when it is either too much, or
too little, it is an evil sign, except it come of such cause, (as showed
before) that alters urine in healthful man.

Much in a whole body.
As first excessive quantity of urine, com^meth of much drinking of thin wine,
as Re^nish wine, and such like. But that shall yo^ thus know: for the color
will be whitely, and the substance thinner then a mean^ the contents also will
be diverse, and not d^ly knit. Likewise if there be aboundanc^ of raw humors in
a man unconcocted, an^ yet nature persevering strong, then is ther^ great
quantity of urine, and somewhat thi^ of substance, but not so white as the
other and the contents of this are better. Als^ (as Hippocrates says) much
Urine made i^ the night, 4. Aph. 3.
is a token of small sege; so that if any impediment let natural sege, then
will the quantity of urine be the greater. But in this as the color is mean,
so is the ground both greater and grosser, yet in healthful folk may the
urine, by another means also be greater then a mean, and that may be by
medicines which provoke urine, but then is the color more natural then the
last that I spoke of, and the ground is thinner of substance, so that it is
dark and scarcely seen, and then is there a certain glistering in the urine it
self.

Little urine in a whole body.
Now contrary ways, and of contrary causes comes small quantity of urine.
For it comes sometime of lack of drink, or dry meats, and then is the color
light saffron, with a small ground, but yet somewhat gross. Also both meats and
medicines that are clammie, and apt to stop the water-pipes, do cause little
urine, but then is the ground also little and thin.

Besides these, much sege causes urine to be lesser, for if the one excrement
be greater then nature would, the other must needs be less, if the body be
healthful. In this urine, as you may partly know the cause of it by the
knowledge of the excessive sege, so will the urine it self be thinner, and the
ground very dark, thin, and not duly knit. And the many ways may this
alteration appear in healthful body.

Much urine in a sick body.
Now in a sick person, much urine either betokens the dropsy, and then is it
lik^ water, with a raw and diverse ground or else if it be white, thin, and
witho^ ground, then does it betoken the pissing ^vill. And this urine (as
witnesses Galen ^ in his first Book of Judicials) is the worst ^ any other of
like sort, Diabete.
I mean which decla^ lack of concoction, for it declares the decay^ yea I may
say, the utter extinction of tw^ natural powers, that is, the retentive power
and the alterative power also.

Much urine, in color fiery, and light saffron, or of any like color, is to
be feared namely, if it be coupled with evil contents But if it be of crimson
or purple color and so proceed, especially if no concoctio^ went before it,
then does it incline to evil and betokens a certain mortifying and wasting
of the whole composition of the body*

But if much urine come in an Ague, namely toward the end, and that there went
before it little urine, thick and ruddie, then is that a good token, 4. Aph 69.
as witnesses Hypocrates for it betokens the Ague to be at an end. And this
Urine will be white and thin moderately, and will have a mean ground.

Little urine in a sick body.
Now little quantity of urine, with a gross ground, unduly knit and unconcoct,
is an evil token; for it betokens the weakness of the alterative power,
which is not able to extenuate, concoct, neither alter the matter, and
therefore does it with much difficulty pass forth in such grossnes. Howbeit, if
there follow after it a more thinner urine, with the ground well and duly knit,
and stable, then is it without fear. For this latter urine (as you heard
before) is a token that the cause of the other is overcome and vanquished.

This little quantity of urine comes sometime in vehement Agues, and then is
the violent heat, cause thereof. Sometime also it comes of the stopping of the
water-pipes, not only through clammy meats and drinks, but also of some disease
or grief in them.

And this now shall suffice for an Introduction, as touching the substance,
colors, and quantity of urine.

Contents.
It follows next, to speak of the contents which so greatly help to the right
judgment of urine, that Hippocrates (in his second book of Prognostications)
does by them only; yea, and that by one of them (I mean the ground (pronounce
the judgment of a perfect urine; saying, That that is the best Urine, Sediment.
which has his sediment or ground, white, duly knit and stable, and that
continually all the time of the sickness.

Now seeing this great Clerk and Father of Physic, does thus esteem the
ground, it shall not seem unmeet, that I orderly do write briefly of those
principal things that are to be considered, as touching the contents; and
first of all of the ground, which has alteration (as you have heard) both in
substance, color, and quantity.

But now as touching the substance? then is it only mean, when the third
concoction in the veins is perfect. For the ground is the excrement (as you
might say) of that third concoction, and is like in form to matter, save that
it is more duly knit together then is matter, and does not smell so evil as
it; or else you may liken it to thin steam.

Gross ground.
This Ground is then gross, when the veins are replenished with raw humors.
Howbeit this grosseness or thickness is not always an evil token; for
sometime it is a sign that nature has prevailed against the crude humors
which caused diseases, and does expel such superfluous excrements. And that
shall you discern by the goodness, of the color, and also if it come in the
declining of the sickness: for if it come at the beginning, either in the
increase of the sickness, then are they to be suspected as evil; especially if
they bring with them evil colors.

Thin ground.
A thin ground, being also pure, and so cleaving to the bottom of the Urinal,
that it will not lightly rise, though the urinall be shaked, it is a token of
great weakness of nature in the third concoction, and such a ground appears
most in white and watrie urine. Howbeit sometime a thin ground comes by the
reason that the raw humors are extenuate through natural heat, which getting
new strength, does extenuate and disperse all grossness of raw humors within
the veins. For the property of heat, is to knit and bind together thin things,
and to extenuate and disperse gross and raw things.

Color of the groun^
Now as touching the colors of the ground, the perfect ground is neither
exceeding white, neither yet pale, but mean between both, for if there appear
any such excessive white, then is it some rag of phlegmatic matter, or else
matter extremely concocted, which comes from some inward member being sore;
and that you may discern (as I said before) by the toughnes, and by the savor.

And if any man be desirous to know the cause why the ground is white of
color, let him remember, that the ground is the superfluous excrement of the
blood being perfectly concocted in the veins. Now that the blood it self, when
it is exactly concocted, is turned into a white, or at least, a party white
color, you may conjecture by the generation of milk, and also the seed of
man, yea, and of matter, which all three are nothing else but blood, exactly
concocted, save that matter comes of evil blood.

Pale. Flaxen.
And therefore whenever the ground has in it any other color then white, it
is no good token: As first, if it be pale and flaxen colored, then it is
swarved from his right and commendable color. Howbeit, yet it may be born as
but meanly evil, because that that color comes of small excess of choler.

Saffron. Actuarius.
But if it be more higher colored by choler, so that it be saffron colored,
then is it an evil token (as Actuarius says) for it declares that choler is
excessively increased, either by the order of diet, or else by the corruption
of blood, or some other ways. 7. Aph. 32.
Howbeit Hippocrates in his Aphorisms, seems to say the contrary, for he
says, That when the ground is so colored of choler, especially if at the
beginning of the sickness it were waterie to sight, then does it betoken a
quick sickness; that is to say, as Philotheus expounds it, Philotheus.
a sickness, that will shortly be ended, and so it may justly be called a good
sign. Notwithstanding as in this point it is a good token, in that it
signifies that the disease is nigh the end, so it may be called (as Actuarius
calls it) an evil sign, because it does betoken a choleric sickness, and
that choler does unnaturally abound.

Antonius Musa.
And if this answer do not content you, (though it content Antonius Musa) then
may you say more better (as I think) thus: That if the ground be at the
beginning of the sickness colored with choler, and so increase (as Actuarius
seems to mean) then is it an evil token indeed, for it declares both the
abundance, and also the increase of choler. But if the ground, at the beginning
of a choleric disease were warry, that is, white and thin, and afterward turn
to saffron color, which is the exact color of choler: or else to a yellow
color (which is somewhat less choleric) then is it a token that the
choleric matter, which before lay lurking in the body, does now begin to
avoid; and so the cause of sickness, thus by nature expelled, health must nee^
follow.

As contrariwise, if after yellow or sa^fron color it change unto whiter, and
the be no certain token of concoction, then it an evil sign, and a token of
frenzy. Howbeit, if there be any token of certain concoction, then is the
same a good sign, that if you take heed, you may perceiv^ here what a necessary
thing it is to observ^ order in the alteration of urine, of which I have partly
spoken before.

Claret color. Red. Bloody.
Now therefore to go o^n If the ground be of claret color, either red o^
blew, the token is not good. For these bloody colors come either of too much
abundance of blood, or else by reason that the retentive power is so feeble,
that it cannon keep in the good humors, but suffers them to run out.

Claret red.
Claret color and red, do betoken a certain default of concoction in the
veins, and that through the excess of red choler. Bu^ yet this default is but
mean and without danger, seeing that the hurt is only by quantity, whereas some
other do hurt both by quantity and quality also.

Bloody.
Bloody grounds are altogether worse then red (though they be better then
ash-colored, and black) for they betoken that the blood is nothing duly
wrought, especially if their quantity be much, withal, for then the quantity
of matter does let the powers to work, which thing yet as it may be born, so it
declares need of long time to recover health.

But if this do come through weakness of the powers in themselves, then is it
an extreme evil sign: for it betokens that the powers are overcome with
weariness in working, and be not able to keep in the good and profitable
humors. Which thing to discern more exactly, you shall take artificial
conjectures by other circumstances, which give also tokens of judgment;
namely, as by the age of the person, by his order of diet, and such like.

Blew. Ash Color Black.
Now to make an end with the other colors which are of a dark hew, as
blew-ash-colour and black: These of all other are the worst, and most envious
to nature, and the nearer they cleave to the bottom of the urinall, the worse
they are.

These colors come of a black melancholy humor, being engendered within the
veins, or else coming from some other part into them: or else it betokens
deadly mortifying. But sometimes it comes of sore bruising and stripes, and
generally comes (namely the black) either of exce^sive cold or excessive heat.

And now for a conclusion, whatsoever have said of the ground, you shall
unde^stand the same to be spoken of the swi^ and the cloud; for they are in
kind but o^ thing, save that they differ in lightness an^heft, and therefore
also in places: But the judgment of their substance and color, ^ much after
one rate, though some difference there be, as you shall hear hereafter.

Quantity
And likewise of their quantity, which as it is then only commendable when it i^
mean, so if it be greater then a mean, it dot^ declare some alteration in man,
though no^ always extremely evil, for sometime it i^ a token of fatting, or
growing to a corporateness, Great.
and that it does signify, if non^ other evil sign be coupled with it. For
though the person feed much on nourishing meats, and that with rest and an idle
life, ye^ natural heat appears so strong, that she can easily concoct such
meats. According to this says Galen in his Judicials, that the plenty of the
ground in urine betokens certain and exact with concoction: And that as the
body is repleat with crude humors, so it declares that those same be in
expelling out at that present time. And for this cause (says he) in all
children commonly, and in men also which feed much, or be of some other cause
replete with humors, their urine has a great ground.

Also oftentimes it chances the pores of the skin to be stopped, so that such
excrements as were wont to pass out by them, are enforced to seek a new
passage, which they find most readiest by the urine, and thereof are the
contents, and namely the ground, oftentimes increased. And all these ways
chance in health. But in sickness, it chances many and gross superfluities do
appear in the urine, as often as the natural powers, namely, the alterative or
concoctive power being weakened, such crude humors pass out undefied.

So does it chance (as witnesses Alexander Trallianus) That the urine of them
which have the Colic, Tral. 2. cap. 33.
is phlegmatic and has a great ground. But if the contents be either great, or
gross in the beginning, or in the augmenting of sickness, (namely if the
Patient have any notable Ague) it argues abundance of humors, to the
concoction of the which there needs both strength of natural powers, with
time and good speed.

Little Contents.
And now contrary ways must you judg^ of the smalness of the contents, for they
becaused either of great labor, long fasting stopping, or obstruction of the
veins, and such like parts, or else of slacknesse of concoction. Gal. 2. pres.
Hip. 26.
And (as Galen says) when the body is replete with crude and raw humors, then
is the ground great, but if the body be replenished with choleric humors, then
is there in the urine either little ground or none at all; but in such case it
is well, if there be any sublimation or swim.

Urine without ground.
Now seems the place most meet to speak of such urines as have no ground at
all, nor other orderly content, and that will I do by the order of the colors
of the urine, according as Actuarius proceeds.

The urine that is very white, and exceeding thin, and so lacks the ground,
does betoken either some notable obstruction, either immoderate cold, or else
cruditie and lack of concoction. And as these tokens may be greater or lesser,
so shall the things which they betoken be judged in like rate, either more, or
lesser.

But if the urine be pale colored, or flaxen, and then lacks contents, as
it does declare lesser obstruction, so it does signify as great cruditie, as
the other before.

And so shall you judge of urine that is yellow or flaxen colored. For in them
it appears, that natural heat does prevail. Notwithstanding such things (I
mean the default of the ground with those colors) may chance (as often they
do) through vehement pain, immoderate labor, long watching, and also default
of matter.

But such urines as be higher colored then these that I have named, by their
colors they declare the qualities of the humors which do prevail: and also
betoken a certain putrefaction, and cruditie in the veins.

It chances also sometimes, that some gathering sore being in some of the
principal members, by his unnatural heat withdraw thither the matter (even as
it were by cupping) and so does cause the urine to have no ground. And though,
indeed, it is never a good token to lack the ground in a urine, yet it is less
to be complained of, if the color and substance draw nigh to a mean; for in
such a case it betokens, that though nature be somewhat slack, yet will she
shortly gather strength, so that there shall appear a ground in the urine.

Now to show you the reason, why it chances no ground to appear in the urine:
First, in case of cruditie, when there wants perfect concoction, there must
needs want also the contents in the urine; for they are the excrements (as you
might say) and the superfluities of the third concoction. Likewise though
concoction be perfect enough, yet may there want the contents, if there be any
notable obstruction or stopping of the veins, namely, seeing the contents are
somewhat gross of substance, and therefore unable to pass, if the way be any
thing stop^.

After the same sort shall you judge of long fasting and default of meat, and
moreover of such meats as are unapt to concoct. For in all such cases, there
can be engendered few or no contents.

And contrariwise, though nature do work many superfluities, yet if the womb
be so loose that it yields many seges, then as the urine shall be the lesser,
so shall the contents be few or none: for nature then does expel by sege, those
superfluities, which should cause the contents.

And likewise, when there is in any part of the body an inflammation or
excessive heat, which does draw matter to it, either that any of those parts
are weak, unto which nature is wont to expel such superfluities; for in all
such cases there may want the ground, and the other contents in the urine. And
as for some of them (I mean cruditie and opilation) they may be well enough
born withal, unles their continuance be long.

But now again, there is great difference touching the time of the sickness in
which it chances, for in the beginning and increase of sharp Agues, if the
ground be lacking, it betokens great weakness of natural strength, which if
not prevented, may continue unto the chief strength of the sickness. And after
such an urine, there does follow much waking and disquietness, half madness
and trouble of mind, and all those shall be according to the greatness of the
Ague, either extreme or mild. And sometime it is a token that there shall be a
gathering sore in some part of the body, namely, if other agreeable causes come
therewith, as a winterly disposition of the air, with an uncertain state of
sickness, and unconstant alteration, and mean weakness of the Patients power.
But in the declination of the sickness, such urine ought not greatly to be
blamed, for then has nature escaped the brunt of sickness, though she be yet
weak. Yea, and in the chief strength of sickness (as well as in the declination)
it may seem no strange thing, if nature (as though already she had the
over-hand) do gather her power together, and draw a little nourishment to her
self, and thereby causes little or no ground to appear. But afterward when
she is somewhat refreshed, and does more liberally nourish the body, then does
she show forth contents in the urine. And lightly the order of the contents is
such, that first there appears a cloud, which afterward does gather more
strong and weighty substance, and does become a swim or sublimation: And last
of all, when it has gathered a right natural whitness, and due substance,
then will it grow to a ground.

CHAP. IX. Of difform Contents.
OTher things should I here speak of, as touching the Judicial of the
contents, both of their stableness, that is, their continuance in good form,
and of their due knitting, being neither tattered, nor dispersed, nor yet
overmuch clodded together. But because the exact judgment thereof exceeds
the capacity of mean wits (for whose sake I have written this Book) and cannot
lightly be perceived of them, but by the Instruction of a lively voice, I will
for this time overpass the exact and perfect declaration of them reserving it
to a place more due: And now will I briefly overrun the other things which
remain to be considered in urine, but yet not without some mention of those
other, as occasion comes: and first those difform Contents which occupy the
place of the ground, Difform contents.
and therefore take his name also.

Of this sort there are four principal: the first is in bigness of a small
fatch, and red colored, which you may call therefore red fatches, because of
their likeness. These (as witnesses Galen) are engendered of the consumption
and wasting of the flesh, 6. Epid.
when the fatness is already melted away. But in this there is great
difference, for sometime it is only the wasting of the reins, and sometime of
the whole body: as if there appear in the urine tokens of due concoction, then
is that wast in the reins only. But if there appear in the urine default of
concoction, (namely being great) or if the patient have an Ague, then is it the
wast of the whole body, and that stands well with reason, that when it
betokens the wast of the whole body, there must needs appear default of
concoction; for in such case those parts which are the Instruments of
concoction are so weakened, that they cannot do their office. These contents, by
reason that they are gross and heavy, therefore they appear always in the
bottom of the urinall.

Brannie contents.
Other difform contents there be also, of which some are like bran, and some
like scales. And of those that are like bran, there is one sort smaller, and
another grosser; the smaller sort is like the bran of Wheat that is finely
ground, and those may I call fine bran. The grosser is like bran of Barley, or
of evil ground wheat, and may therefore be called gross bran, Fine bran. Gross
bran.
for it is thrice as big as the other.

Scales.
The third sort which is like Scales, has no notable thickness, but only
breadth and length. These three do betoken waste of the strongest parts of the
body; but yet not all alike, as Hippocrates does declare in the second Book of
his Prognostics. Howbeit, because that place of Hippocrates is so difficult,
that scarcely the great learned men can agree thereon, I will not now meddle
therewith, but will write Actuarius mind of those three.

Fine bran.
When the Ague (says he) is grounded in the bottom of the veins, then there
appears such fine bran. Howbeit, sometimes it is a token of the only grief
of the bladder being scabbed, as witnesses Hypocrates, 4. Aphor. 77. But then
has the Patient no Ague, and again, there does appear tokens of concoction in
the urine. But when it comes of the whole body, this is the cause thereof; The
Ague getting power and prevailing unto the hard parts of the body (as in those
Agues which are called Fevers hectike) then in the striving between those parts
and the Ague, the Ague having the masterie, does by his violence raise of such
brannie scurffe. For the nature of fire (whose operation the Ague has) is to
work according as the matter is that it finds, either to melt it, if it be a
liquid and unctuous thing, either else to scale it and fret it, if it be hard
and unpliant: and the harder that the matter is, the greater scales it fretteth
off; which thing you may see by daily experience, how fire melts wax and
tallow, and such like, turning them into liquids: whereas of iron and of other
metals, Scales.
it makes scales and not liquor.

But when the Ague has attained and overset, not only the substance of the
veins, but also the strong parts of the body, and does melt and waste them,
then does there appear in the urine, scales, broad and thin, which you shall
know to come (...) the whole body (as I said of the other before) if the
Pacient have an Ague, or the^ appear default of concoction in the urine ^ else
if these two be absent, it may come o^ the blistering of the bladder, as
Hippocrate^ writes 4. Aphor. 81. and namely, if ther^ be in the urine an evil
savor withal.

Gross bran.
Now to speak of the great and gross bran, which as it is much greater then the
other, so does it declare a greater strength of the Ague, and that in the whole
body, and all the parts of it, enflaming and burning the whole substance
thereof, and therefore is it not only the worst of them all, but is nigh unto a
deadly sign, Note.
and that either by the waste and consuming of the great and strongest parts of
the body, or else by the burning or drying up of the blood. Which two things
you may discern asunder by the color of them. For if they be red, then come
they of the burning of the blood; but if they be white, then come they of the
wast of the strongest parts of the body.

Hippoc. 7. Aphor. 31.
Of this kind of contents speaks Hippocrates saying: In whatsoever Agues there
does appear grounds like unto gross bran, it is a token that the sickness
shall continue long. Which saying, Galen does understand so to be true, If the
Patient have sufficient strength to continue with such sickness, else it may be
a sign rather of short life, then of long sickness. For as that token is
commonly deadly, so those few that do escape, do recover hardly, and not
without the long sufferance of the violence of that cruel Ague.

Now as touching the foreknowledge of it, whether the patient may endure with
it or no, that shall you gather of the multitude, order, and stableness or
unstableness of it. For if they be many in number, and proceed to worse and
worse, then it is an evil and mortal sign, and does declare that nature is
wearied and does quite faint through the waste and decay of the whole
constitution of the body: But contrariwise, if they appear few, and do alter
continually unto less evil tokens, then is there good hope of health. And
this shall suffice as touching these.

Ragged scraps.
Now to speak of the rest, of the ragged scraps, hairs, and other like: First
you shall understand, that sometime a good ground is coupled with certain evil
and unconcted fragments of all sorts of humors, for sometime there appears
with the contents certain ragged scraps, enclining in color toward a yellow,
or a white, ^ else some such like, if those appear in gre^ quantity, they
declare the matter to be ha^ unconcoct, and that the humor (who scraps they
are) does abound in the depth ^ the body, and is as dust or burned, but if the^
be few, then declare they the malice ^ the humor to be milder, and that the ^
of evil meats does cause them, the great^ that such ragged scraps are, the
lesser adu^on of humors they declare to be in t^ veins, and the lesser they
be, the greater he they do betoken. For the cause of suc^ ragged scraps is
excessive heat, which do turn those humors into a thickness, and as ^ were a
bony nature, by reason that they ha^ remained long in certain veins, and we^
neither dissolved, nor extenuated, nor ye^ quickly expelled by urine.

Hairs.
Besides these there are hairs of sundr^ lengths, some an inch, and some an
handfu^ long, some longer, and some shorter; an^ these are in color whitely,
and do betoke^ grief of the reins. These are engendered in the water-pipes,
which go from the reins t^ the bladder, so that as long as those water-pipes
are in length, so long may those hair also be, which are a gross and baked
humor wrought in form of a hair.

Of those speaks Hippocrates, saying; 4. Aph. 76.
In whose Urine soever there does appear little pieces of flesh, either as it
were hairs, those same come from the reins, namely, if the urine be thick.
Howbeit these are sometimes seen in such men's urines as feel no grief in the
reins, but only have fed some continuing space on phlegmatic meats, which will
prepare matter to such diseases, as they do also to many other griefs, of which
to speak in this place it is meet.

But to go on with this thing that we have in hand, beside such ragged scraps
and hairs (as I have spoken of) there appear sometimes in the ground of the
urine, and also dis-parkled abroad in the urine it self, sundry and diverse
kinds of motes (as it were) which do declare that there is grief dispersed in
sundry parts of the body. Motes.


The places of the contents. The lowest region.
And this now may suffice, as touching contents of every kind: Therefore now
will I a little repeat out of Actuarius of the diversity of judgment, by the
places or regions of the contents.

That ground which fleeteth nigh to the bottom of the urinall, being in other
points also good and mild, does betoken no strange thing. But if it be
unconcoct and deformed it betokens default in nature. And if his, parts be
disparkled asunder, it betokene^ a dimness in nature, which does not rest the
rebellion of noisome humors, so tha^ in such case there appears need both ^
long time, and also more strength to overcome that evil. But as it is
commendable that the ground fleet nigh the bottom o^ the urinall, so is it
discommendable if it lye^ flat on the bottom of the same.

The middle region.
Now as touching the swim or sublimation, if it be good in color and other
ways, then does it differ only in place from a right ground: and that comes
of an unnatural ^iness, which makes it to be so light, ^o fleet above his due
place, but if his ^r and other like points be evil, yet ^oth it betoken less
evil, then if it ^in the right place of the ground.

The regio^
^ now as touching the third and high^ ^gion, which is the place of the clouds.
^e appear a light and thin cloud, it be^th no small grief of the head. But
^fference is there in the clouds, the that they be in color and substance,
^ther they differ from a right good ^urall Content. And therefore need ^ng time
to return thereunto. And ^y ways, the worse that they are in and substance,
the less they are to be blamed, by reason of their place, which is so much
distant from the natural place of Contents. For this is a general rule: The
lower that good contents fleet in the urine, (excepting always such as cleave
to the hard bottom) the better they are. And contrary ways of evil contents
and such like, the higher they fleet, the less evil they betoken.

The proportion of the regions, to the parts of man.
Now to make an end of this. You shall observe a certain proportion that is
between the parts of the urine, and the parts of man's body. The highest part of
the urine does betoken, the highest part of the body, namely the head, and such
other near unto it. The middle region of the urine does represent the middle
parts of man, as the breast, the bowels, and the parts about them. The hither
region of the urine does purport the lowest parts of man, from the bowels
downward. And if you mark well this proportion, you may the easier judge the
griefs of the parts of man.

For when the contents which in color and substance are natural, and yet by
the abundance of windiness be lift up to the higher part of the urine, it
declares some great pain to be in the head. And in like manner, when the swim
or sublimation does declare grief, that grief must be lo^ed to be in the
middlemost parts of man (^ I said before) and so of the other.

Again, as this proportion between the regions of urine, and the parts of man's
body does declare that place in certain heigh^ so does it in breadth also by
like proportion if you do duly mark the side, unto which the contents do
decline.

And if you mark well what I have sai^ you may perceive the only cause of me^
such griefs, when the contents is only di^ordered in place, comes of an
unnatura^ windines, but yet commonly annexed wit^ phlegmatic and unconcocted
matter.

And as the windiness does cause disord^ in the contents, so it causes also
another kind of things not to be neglected in urine and that is bubbles:
Bubbles.
which sometimes flo^ in the ring or garland only, and sometime^ in the
midst of the urine only, and other times do cover the whole face of the
urin^

The Bubbles which stand round abo^ over the garland only, and continue without
parting, if they he of the same color the the urine is, they declare great
pain to be it the head, and that in all parts of the head^ if the Bubbles join
together without parting. But and if they occupy only the one half of the
garland, then is that pain in the one half of the head. And so forth may you
judge by like proportion.

But if they do part in sundry places, and join not all together, it is a
token that the pain is the lesser, and comes of a weaker cause. The more
yellower that their color is, the greater they declare the pain in the head to
be. If they be white, or rather whitish, and stand about in the compass of the
garland, they betoken little pain or none. And if the urine be thin withal,
they betoken weakness of natural heat, or else the opilation and stopping of
the reins, namely, if there appear no ground in the urine. This does
Hippocrates witness, 7. Aph. 14.
saying; When in the urine there swimmeth bubbles, they betoken grief in the
reins: And also that it shall long continue. The reason of the long continuance
(as Galen and Philotheus do both declare) is, because that the grief comes
of cold and tough phlegmatic matter, which always is long before it may
overcome. Lib. 28. c. 6.
Pliny also says, that that urine is evil, which is full of bubbles and thick,
in which if the ground be white, it is a token that there shall be grief either
about the joints, or else about the bowels. Howbeit, yet sometimes the bubbles
are not an evil token, but contrariwise, a good token of concoction, and
declare that nature does now apply her self wholly unto concoction. And this do
the Bubbles signify, when they appear in the water, in which they were not
seen long before. And therefore in an Ague, we may conjecture the declination
of it, when we see bubbles to appear after that sort; except it be so that they
appeared in the urine at the beginning of the sickness, and has so continued
still: For then they declare grievous pain to be in the head, yea and that
dangerous, if the urine also be thin in substance. But if the substance of the
urine be thick, then the bubbles are not so evil a sign, neither declare so
greivou^ danger.

Sometimes in stead of Bubbles which do not appear when they should, it
sufficet^ that there appear a gross some (as it is sometimes seen to rise upon
wine) and it does betoken even the same thing that the Bubble do, Foam.
especially in the declination of the Ague of which I spoke a little before.

These Bubbles do appear very thick above the garland, in the urine of him that
has the issue of seed, or wast of nature. Sometime also there are seen in the
Bubbles certain small scrapps (as you would say) much like hairs in grossness,
and of such length sometime that they reach from the one side of the bubble
unto the other, and sometimes longer, and sometimes shorter, which things may
come either of the wasting of the reins, or else of the shedding of nature.

The cause of the generation of bubbles, and also of the dispersing and
elevation of the contents, is an unnatural windiness. Of which, as there are
diverse kinds much differing asunder, partly in multitude, partly in substance,
and partly also in quality, so does the bubbles engendered of them diversely
vary, according unto those differences, whether they be sole and several, or
jointly many knit together. But windiness if it be gross, then does it puff
up such Bubbles; and if it be subtle, then does it rather work a dispersion in
the contents, and is not able nor meet to cause Bubbles. And hereby may you
know the quality of the windiness, and likewise also the quantity. For there
appears less quantity of windiness to be where the contents only are
dispersed, then where such Bubbles be engendered.

Now as touching the other qualities of it, as heat and cold (which are the
chief qualities indeed, and most active) you may judge them by the color of
the bubbles. For as pale color, and other low colors declare coldness of that
windiness, so high colors enclining toward yellow or higher, be certain tokens
of heat.

Bubbles that are small, and thick knit together in the garland of the urine,
does betoken a gross windiness, whose cause cannot easily be vanquished; for
the grossness and toughness that is in them, will not suffer them to swell
great, and that causes them to be so small. And contrariwise, the greater that
the bubbles be, and the more bouled, the more they declare that windines that
causes them to be severed from tough matter. Moreover, the colder that such
windiness is, the lesser grief is felt of them.

Bubbles in the urine of old men, namely being great and large, do betoken
cold wi^dinesse, but sometime such bubbles are ^ sign of rheum distilling from
the head into the lights, especially if the Patient at the entering of Summer
were very hot, and (...) did drink much, which matter, the head being dried,
did draw unto him, and did distill again part of it down into the lights
whereof comes a cough, and part of it into the womb, which thereby is moved
to laxe.

CHAP. X. Of the Garland and other like things.
AS I have compendiously, and yet not very slightly spoken of those former
parts, to be considered in urine, so will I briefly speak of a few more, which
may not well be omitted, and so make an end of the Judicial.

The Garland.
First, therefore in the over-part of the urine, round about the edge of the
urine there appears a garland, circle, or ring, which does there appear, by
reason that the higher part of the urine being thinner than the rest, and more
subtiller, and therefore does not only more sooner alter, but does more readier
declare the alteration. Howbeit sometime there does appear no ring at all; and
that is when the color of the urine, and of it is all one, by reason of the
great force of the cause which alters the urine, but yet so that nature does
match that humor, and is neither overcome by it, neither yet has overcome it.
For if nature have plainly either got the victory, or lost it, then is there
another color in the garland, then is in the rest of the urine.

Now if the color of the urine be evil, and the color of the garland better,
it is a token of health. As if the color of the urine be yellow, red, or
crimson, or any such like, and the color of the garland be white, or whitely,
it is a token full of good hope; but when the color of the whole urine is
evil, and the color of the garland worser yet, then is it an evil sign. As
when the color of the urine is green or purple, and the garland worse
colored, then is it a plain token that nature is overcome, and that the evil
humors have gotten the upperhand.

Of these more particularly does Egidius treat, but yet not more truly nor more
sufficiently, his words are these: If the circle of the urine be thick and
waterie, it is a token that the hinder part of the head is oppressed with
phlegmatic matter; but if it be purple-coloured and thick, then is the
forepart of the head overcharged with blood.

A pale and a thin circle declares the left side of the head to be troubled
with melancholy matter; but if it be red and thin, it betokens choler to
abound in the right part of the head.

Leddy or ash color.
A Leadie or Ash colored circle, does signify the falling Evil, through the
great grief of the brain.

And further declares that such grief shall proceed by the sinnews into the
other parts of the body. But if after such a leadie color there follow a
reddsh color, that is a good token; for then does nature gather strength
again, and the powers of the brain reviveth.

Green.
If the color of the garland be green, and the Patient have a burning Ague, it
is to be feared, least that the abundance of choler shall cause a Frenzy.

Black.
Black color in the circle does sometime betoken mortification, and sometime
only extreme heat. But these shall you distinct (as I said before of the urine
it self) by the order of the colors. For if green color went before, then
does the black betoken adustion through heat, but if his color last before was
ash color, then is it a token of death, coming through the dominion of cold.
And thus much as touching the colors may suffice for this time. Quivering in
the garland.


Sometimes also you shall perceive a quivering and trembling in the garland,
and that declares grief in the back bone. And thus many tokens be taken of the
circle or garland.

Fattiness.
Sometimes there will appear fleeting on the urine, certain scum or fattiness,
sometimes like drops of oil, and sometime like a thin spiders web, and these
both do betoken the melting of the fat within the body, as Hippocrates
witnesses in his Prognostics, 7 Aph. 30.
howbeit in his Aphorisms he does assign it as a token of the grief of the
reins peculiarly, saying; In whole urine there fleeteth fattiness, and that
much at once, they have pain in the reins, but shall not long endure.

This Aphorism does Galen understand so to be true, if that fattiness appear
quickly and much at once; else if it come by little and little with longer
continuance, so does it not betoken wast only of the fat about the reins, but
rather throughout the whole body, which sign yet is not always evil, except it
continue long; for if it continue but a little while, it declares no great
evil.

Stinking sa^our in u^^ne.
Now to go forth with other signs; If the urine have a stinking savor, it is
ever an evil sign, for it does betoken some putrefaction more or less; as of
the bladder only, by some blister or sore in it: and that most certainly, when
the stinch is very great, and there appears also scales in the urine, and
matter. But if there be matter in the urine, and the stinking savor but mean,
then does it declare the sore to be in some other part of the body. But this
ever is true, that matter in urine is a token of a sore. And if in continuance
of time the matter and stinch do abate, it is a good token, but if the other
continue or increase, it is an evil sign. If the urine do stink, and there
appear no matter in it, then is it a token of some mortifying. For if there be
in the urine mean tokens of concoction, then is the mortification in some one
part of the body; but if the other signs in the urine be evil, then is that
mortification rather of the whole body, then of any one part of it.

And thus have I overrun briefly the chief things to be considered in urine,
which (I say) are appertaining or annexed to the urine it self. Howbeit two
other things there are, which though they be more plainer then these other, yet
may they be overpassed no more then the other: that is to say, blood coming
forth with the urine, and gravel expelled therewith also.

Blood.
Blood coming forth with urine, does declare some sore to be in the reins or
bladder (as Hippocrates writes in his Aphorisms) or else some vein to be
broken about the reins, namely if it come suddenly, and without manifest cause.
Howbeit, as Galen, Oribasius, and diverse others do declare, and reason also
with experience does consent, there may appear blood in the urine also, i^ that
there be such a sore in the liver, or in t^ shaft. But in any of these cases,
the pain fe^ in the place and part, will utter from whence the blood comes.

Gravel.
Now to speak of gravel: Hypocrates says, In whose urine there appears
grave^ in the bottom, they have the stone in the bladder, or else in the
reins, as Galen adds; but commonly if the stone be in the reins, the gravel
will be red, as Hypocrate^ declares in his sixth Book of his Epidemies, And
thus now will I make an end of the judicial of urine.

CHAP. XI. Of the Commodities and Medicines of Urine.
THe greatest commodity of urine is already declared: that is, That it does
declare unto man, the manifold diseases which happen unto him; and thereby does
not only give him knowledge of the cause, and so consequently of the cure of
the same, but also warns him before of the grief to come, whereby he may take
an occasion to eschew it, if he will be diligent.

Now as this is the greatest commodity of urin, so it has many other as well
in use of medicine as other ways, of which I will write some, though not all.
And first out of Pliny, Pliny.
which recites strange operations of the urine of a Hedgehog, and of a Beast
that the Greeks call Leontophon, and moreover of the Beast Lynx, which I omit
now with many other: but this will I not omit, Urine of man.
that Hosthanes says: That if a man let his own urine drop upon his feet in
the morning, it is good against all evil. And that it is good for the gout, we
may perceive by Fullers, which never have the gout, by reason that their feet
are so often washed with it.

Ostrich urine.
The same Pliny writes, That the Urine of an Ostrich, will do away blots and
moles of Ink.

Also that if Urine be tempered with water of like quantity, and so powered at
the roots of the trees, it will both nourish them (as many men say) and also
drive all noyance from them.

Bees.
The urine also of men or oxen, tempered with honey, and given to Bees, will cure
them that are poisoned with the flower of the Cormier or Cornoiller tree.

Beans.
And likewise if Beans be steeped in urine and water three days before they be
sowed, Dioscorides Stinging of Adders, etc.
some judge that they will increase exceedingly. Dioscorides says, That a man's
own urine is good to be drunk for stinging of Adders, and against poison, and
also against the dropsy when it does begin: And for the stinging of the
sea-Adders, of scorpions, and dragons; it is good to soke the stinged part
withal.

Dogs urine.
The urine of Dogs is good to soke the place that is bitten with a Dog, and to
cleanse manginess, and itchinesse, if salt peter be added thereto. And that
that is old will more strongly cleanse scales, scurff, scabs and hot pushes.
Also it stays fretting sores, namely, on the privy members. Furthermore it
stincheth mattering ears, if it be dropped thereinto, and if it be sod in the
rind of a Pomegranate, it expels worms out of the ears.

Childs urine.
The urine of a child under 14. years of age does cure the toughness of breath,
if it be drunken. If it be sod in a brazen vessel with honey, it heals
creythes, and also the web and the tey in the eye. There is made of it and
copper, good soulder for gold.

Dregs of urine.
The dregs of urine is good for Saint Anthonies evil, if it be nointed thereon,
so that (as Galen does wisely add) the sore be cooled first with some other
thing, and be not burning. If it be heated with oil of privet, and laid to
the womb of a woman, it will assuage the grief of the mother, and cures also
the rising of the same. It cleanses the eie-lids, and the creythes in the eyes.

Ox stale.
Ox stale being tempered with myrrh, and dropped into sore ears, heals the
pain of them. The urine of a wild Bore, Wild bore.
is of the same virtue if it be kept (as Sextus Platonicus writes) in a
glass, and dropped warm into them, but it has a more peculiar property in
breaking of the stone, and to expel the same, if it be drunk.

Goats urine
Goats urine drunk every day, with Spikenard, and three ounces of water, is
good for the dropsy, for it expels urine by the sege, and it cures pain of
the ears, if it be dropped into them.

Ass piss.
Ass piss (as it is written) is good for the grief of the reins, if it be
drunk.

Mules stale.
Mules stale (as Paulus Aegineta says) is good to heal pain in the joints.

Camels and goats stale.
The stale of Camels and Goats also does provoke sege, and therefore is good for
them that have the dropsy.

Sextus Platonicus.
Sextus Platonicus says, That Goats urine (if it be drunk) does provoke
woman's terms, and cures pain in the ears being droped into them, Paulus
Aegineta.
and being mixed with mulset wine, and so dropped into the ear^ it draws out
matter, if there be any.

Wild Bore.
The urine of the wild Bore with mulse vinegar, is good for the falling evil,
if it be drunk.

Dogs piss.
A Dogs piss tempered with dust, and l^ in wool, will heal corns marveilously,
an^ destroy warts.

Childs urine.
A child's urine will heal the stinging of Be, Waspe and Hornet, if the place be
washed therewith.

Man's urine.
A man's urine will cleanse the freckle^ and spots in the face. And if a woman
cannot be delivered of the after burden, let he drink man's urine, and she
shall be delivered straight.

Collumella.
Collumella says, that the best dunging f^ young shots of trees, is man's urine,
namely which has stood half a year. For if yo^ water vines or apple trees with
it, there no dung that will cause so much fruit as ^ will do: Sheeps urin
and not only that, but it cause^ also the savor and the taste both of the
apples, and of the wine, to be much the better.

Constantinus Affricanus.
Constantinus Affricanus says, That the urine of a Sheep, or an Ox, with some
hot oil is good for the grief in the ears that comes of cold. Vitalis.
Urine (as Vitalis de Furno says) fretteth, dries, and burns, and is good
for the grief of the spleen, if it be drunk, as Gentilis writes.

Ass stale.
The Urine of a male Ass, as the same Vitalis says) tempered with Nardus does
increase and preserve hair.

M. Virgilius
And as some say (by the writing of Marcellus Virgilius) Urine is of no small
nourishment, for diverse folk in the time of dearth, have been preserved by the
only use, and drinking of it.

Marcellus.
Also Marcellus the Practitioner, in the 27. Chapter does witness; That the
Urine of a man is good for diverse diseases of the womb and bowels, and namely
for the Colic, because that partly with provoking of vomit, and partly by
occasion of seges, it expels strongly all noisome humors, and for the same
cause does common Practitioners keep it still in daily use.

Vldericus Huttenus.
Vlderick Hutten also witnesses, That he did drive away the Ague above 8.
times with the only drinking of his own Urine, at the beginning of his
sickness. And many still do use the same practice, and it proves well.

Likewise Marsilius Ficinus writes that Many men do use to drink urine for
the Pestilence; Marsilius Ficinus.
which thing did Galen write long before him, and also Paulus Aegineta; and do
testify also, that it preserved them tha^ drank it: at the least way as they
thought

Galen.
All urine (as Galen writes) is hot i^ virtue, and sharp (as says Aegineta)
howbeit, it differs according to them that mak^ it. For the hotter they are
that make it, the hotter is it also, and likewise the colder urine comes of a
colder body.

Men's urine is the weakest of all other except tame barrow hoggs; for they in
ver^ many points agree with man, but the urin^ of wild Bores is stronger.

Man's urine
Men's urine is of as strong cleansing virtue as any thing else, and therefore
do Fulle^ use it to scour and cleanse their cloth. An^ in cure of griefs also
for the same reason it is used to soke, and wash maunginess, an^ scabbedness,
and running sores that are ful^ of corruption and filth, and specially if they
have in them putrified matter, and for suc^ sores on the privy members it is
good, an^ for mattering ears, and for scales and scurf^ if the head be washed
in it.

I have healed with it many times sores on the toes, namely, which came of
bruises, and were without inflammation, and that in servants and husbandmen,
which had a journey to go, and no Physician with them, bidding them to wet a
small clout with it, and to put into the sores, and then to bind a cloth about
it, and as often as they listed to make water, to let it fall on their sore
toes, and not to take the cloth away till it were quite whole.

Chrisocola
That medicine which is made of childs urine, called of some men in Greek,
Chrysocola (that is to say, gold soulder) because men use to soulder gold. This
(I say) is exceeding good for sores that are hard to heal. For this medicine
do I use for the chiefest, mixing it with such other things, as are good for
such like sores:

In the time of Pestilence in Syria, many did drink Childrens urine and men's
also, and thought that they were preserved by it.

Alchumists.
Of urine also, do Alchumysts make diverse things, as salt, and other things more.

And many other commodities there be of urine, as for washing and scouring,
and other like, which for briefness I over-passe, and the rather, because they
are commonly known of all folk.

Of the Diseases touching Vrines, and the Remedies for the same.
NOw to come to that I promised, as touching the griefs which hinder urine, or
expel it disorderly, either in time oftener then is meet, or in quality, with
other fashions then is agreeable to it, or like other sorts, I will briefly
write, not intending to teach the art of curing them, (which would require a
longer Treatise, and a meeter place) but only to name certain of the most
common diseases, and to set after them such simple and uncompound medicines
only which cure those griefs.

Stopping of urine. The stone.
First therefore, touching the hinderance or stopping of urine, it is not
unknown, that one common cause is the stone, which sometimes is in the reins,
and sometime in the bladder. I showed you before, that commonly you may discern
those two asunder, by the color of the gravel, but the more sure token is the
grief in the sick part.

Now for the cure of the same, does these medicines serve, which follow. But as
I have always said, you shall use them with the counsel of some learned
Physician; for there is great difference both of the grief, and of the
medicines.

Medicines for the stone, both in the Reins and Bladder.
Astra Bacca. Ameos. Angle toches sod. Betony. Bryony root. Bylgrum. Chamamel.
Capers Bark, namely of the root. Claret seed. Clot seed. Dock root. Fenel seed,
and root. Goats blood. Gladian. Gromell. Gum of Plumtree, and Cherry tree. A
hedge Sparrow. Harebell. Kneholm root and Berries. Madder root. High Mallows
seed and Root. Mugwort. Parseley. Pelliter of Spain. Pyony Berries which are
black. Radish. Sampere. S. John's Wort. Sperage. Scholm. Swines Fenell. Sothern
Woodseed. Sour Almonds. Tent-wort. Tutsan Berries. Water Plantine. Winter
Gilli-flower
And beside these there are diverse others.

Also the Stone it self that came from a man, being braid and drunken, will
break and expel that other within him.

Beside the stone, also it causes the urine to be clean stopped, by reason of
weakness of the expulsive virtue, and sometimes through clodds of blood, which
rest in the shaft. Sometimes also through tough and clammie humors, and
sometime through some swelling within the yard, and diverse other ways also, of
which the declaration is too long for this place and time: but another time I
intend to write of them at large, and of all other griefs of man's body.

But to return to this matter that is in hand. One other stop of urine there
is, which does not clean let it, but causes it to avoid lesser then it should;
and this comes of like causes as that other last did, save that the cause is
less, according as the stay of urine is, and therefore the cure in both is much
like. For if it come of weakness of the expulsive virtue, then with the use of
other hot meats and drinks, those medicines are good which do provoke urine,
as these be that follow.

Medicines which do provoke urine.
Annise-seed. Ally-saunders. Alkakengi. Basyle. Bylgrum. Cammock. Charlock.
Chervell. Carawayes. Calamus Aromaticus. Cubebes. Dictany of Candie. Dragance.
Fumitorie. Fatchys. Flower delyce. Garlike. Ground pine. Ginger. Helecompane.
Honey. Juniper and the Berries. Lase saverie. Leeks. Mints. Margerom. Maiden
hair. Navew. Nepte. Negella Romana. Nettle. Pepper. Pie Ryall. Quinces. Rue.
Rosemary. Rocquet. Savine. Sage. Saverie. Time. Valerion. Wild Marjoram. Wild
Parseley. Wild Time. Water Cresses. Woodbinde.
with many other, and namely those for the most part, which I named before to
be good for the stone. But there must be discretion in the use of them.

Besides those, is there a disease named the Strangurie (which some corruptly
call the Strangurion) in which Disease the urine does continually drop forth,
Excess of urine.
as fast as it comes into the bladder. And therefore may it well be noted the
first kind of such griefs as provoke forth, and further urine excessively. For
that strangurie these Medicines following are noted good.

Medicines for the Strangurie.
Alisander. Astra Bacca. Brokelime. Ceder berries. Ceterake. Calamus
Aromaticus. Gladiane. Knot grass. Kneholm. Sperage. Seholm. Spatula Fetida.
Turpentine washed. Wild Fennel. Water mints.
But you must consider (as I have often said) that as the disease may come of
sundry causes, so it must have sundry cures. For most commonly these are good
that I have written, yet such may be the cause of the sickness, that they may
do harm, therefore take always counsel of some learned Physician.

Another kind of excessive making of urine comes of the weakness of the
retentive virtue in the reins, whereby the Patient pisseth as fast as he
drinks, Flux of urine. Pissing evil. The piss gout.
and that in like quantity. This I may call the flux of urine, or pissing
evil: or after the imitation of the Greeks, the piss gout. For which disease
it is not greatly commendable to set forth medicines with the only bare names.
Howbeit, if I do it, I trust no man will the rather misuse them, namely being
warned so often to take no medicines without counsel, and specially in this
thing, For some of the Medicines must be received inwardly, and some of them
emplaistred outwardly.

Medicines for the pissing evil.
Apples. Dates. Elecompane. Perys. Myrtle Berries. Night shade. Cycory.
Comferie. Endive. Paritarie. Penny wort. Lettis, Lintels. Pomegranat.
Purselane. Vine leaves.
Other defaults there be of excess of urine, as of them which cannot keep their
urine, and namely of children, which piss their beds. This disease comes
oftentimes of the dissolution of the muscle which should keep the urine, and
therefore requires cure meet for it, and unmeet for this place, and such
shortness. Wherefore for this time here I will make an end, trusting that all
men will with as gentle heart receive this my writing, as I of gentleness have
taken the pains to set it forth.

Additions. Of the diversities of Colors, and of the making of them.
BEcause that it is not very easy for every man to distinguish colors duly
asunder, I thought it good at the end of this Book, a little to touch the
distinction and making of them, namely of such as are mentioned before in this
Book.

Milk white.
Milk white, by the name of it self does sufficiently declare what it is; for it
is the very color of milk, though the substance need not to be so thick in the
urine, as in the milk, for the color must be understood several from the
substance, both in this and all other colors, which thing would be remembered,
for it might else (as it has often done) deceive the simple folk.

Horn white.
Horn white in like manner has his name of the thing that it assimuleth most,
for it is like the white and clear part of a horn of a lanthorn, or such like.

Gray.
Gray is like the white part of a man's nail next unto the joint, or like hoar
hair that is not very white, for gray is so much darker then horn white, as
horn white is darker then milk white.

Pale.
Pale color has a certain appearance of yellow in it, but is exceeding little.
If you sees a piece of the rind of Pomegranate, and then put to it thrice as
much clean water, it will be a pale color.

Flaxen.
But if you put thereto little or no clean water, it will be flaxen colored,
that is somewhat more yellower then pale.

Pale.
After it follows pale, which is a kind of light yellow, something lighter in
color then crown gold.

Yellow.
For the color of pure gold (as an angel or royal) is a right yellow color.

Light saffron.
A light saffron color is, that color that saffron does make when it is
steeped in water, and laid light on any white. For if it be laid on deep, then
does it make a full saffron color. Saffron.
For that is called a saffron color, which saffron does die, and not that that
is in the saffron it self. Red. Claret.
For that is very red, and is higher then claret, which is a mean color
between saffron and red, as if it were made of them both mixed together.

Crimson.
Crimson is a dark bloody color, well known by his own name, but is not in
urine so light as it shows in cloth. Purple, Purple.
needs not to be much described, being so commonly known, howbeit if you will
see the making of it, mix a dark crimson, with an orient blew, and it will be
purple. And because that many men be deceived in the latin name of this color,
you shall observe that it is not that which in Latin is called Purpureus color,
(as most men think) for that is rather a crimson, but it is called more
peculiarly Purpura violacea, or Passeus color.

Blew.
Blew color is the color of the clear Sky, or of Azure. Howbeit, in urine it
is not so orient, but if you will mix pure white (as white lead, or pure lime)
with due portion of right black (as cole dust, or other like) then there will
of these amount that blew, which is ascribed to urine.

Green.
Green is a compound color of blew and yellow duly tempred together. And the
right green have I in this Book called a stark green. Stark green.
But if the yellow do exceed in it, then is it a light green; and contrariwise,
if the blue do exceed, Light green.
then is it a dark green: Of this green does Dioscorides mean, when he does
say of diverse herbs, that their leaves be black; and sometime when he notes
white-lines to be in herbs, he means a light green, though he other times
understands thereby a certain horiness; of which thing in mine Herball you
shall read more exactly.

Oily.
Oily colors differ from green oily in their lightness of hue, and thinness
of substance in the urine where they appear. The light oily is somewhat
lighter, Light.
(or rather) brighter and more glittering then light green, Stark.
So is the stark oily brighter then the stark green, Dark.
and the dark oily then the dark green, which all comes through the thinness
of substance in the urine.

Ash Color.
Ash Color is darker then blew, and is made of the same sort that blew is, save
that it requires more of the black by twofold. This is the color of lead,
which is much darker then the inner part, though indeed both are one color,
and differ only in brightness and darkness, which ought rather to be called
the hue of colors, then color.

Black.
Now as for black, I need not to speak any whit, for as all men do know it, so
these very letters do show it, which though of all other it be most deadly, yet
is it surely of all the most mighty, for it overcommeth all colors, and none
can change it, so that well it may be called the color of death. For as death
overcomes all bodies, so black does damp all colors; beside, that it is the
messenger and token of death, which is the end of all things, and black the end
of colors.

The Exposition of certain Words.
NOw for because I was enforced to use some (though but few) terms in this
Book, which be not well known of the most sort of men, though a great number
know them well enough, by often talking with Physicians, I thought it good here
to declare some certain of them, for the aid of the most simple sort.

Ages.
Because that in the judgment of urines, the differences of ages ought to be
considered, you shall understand that the chief differences of them are four,
that is to say, Childhood, Childhood.
Youth, Manhood, and Old Age, for though there be commonly 7. Ages reckoned,
yet these be four principal, and the other three be comprehended under these
four, childhood endures from the hour of birth till the end of 14. years of
age, and is of complexion hot and moist. At the end of 14. years begins
youth, Youth.
and lasts till the 25. year, and this age of all other is in complexion the
most temperate. From 25. until 35. years, Manhood.
is the flourishing of manhood, but yet that manhood lasts (though not in
full freshness) until 50. years of age, and this age is of complexion hot and
dry. From 50. years forward, is the time of age peculiarly called, Age.
in which time man's nature is cold and dry, and not moist, as many do falsely
think.

Alterative Active q. Brightness.
Active qualities, see the title of qualities.

Alterative virtue, see in the title of virtues.

Brightness in urine must be marked for a several thing from cleerness. For the
brightness betokens the orientness and the beauty of the color, with a
certain glistring. And cleerness is referred to the substance of urine,
Clearness.
and is ever annexed with thinness of it. Yet is it a diverse quality from
thinness. So may an urine be clear in substance, by the reason of his thinness,
and yet not bright in color, and not clear in substance, but this would be
well pondered, lest this necessary distinction, cause a negligent confusion.

Critical days.
Critical days be such days, on which there is (or may be) perceived some
certain token and great alteration in the sick body, either to health or death,
or continuance of sickness. What these be, more at large I will hereafter (God
willing) declare in a Book peculiarly, because it requires more largeness of
words, then is meet for this place. But one thing I must tell you, that the
same days also be called Judicial, Judicial days.
but not Indiciall, for the Indiciall days are of another kind: but yet
associate to these other.

Cruditie.
Cruditie is the rawness of the meat in the stomach, when the natural operation
of it cannot duly digest the meat which it has received; and therefore the
urine which declares default of such digestion, is called a crude, raw, and
unconcoct urine.

Cupping.
Cupping is commonly known, that ^ needs no declaration.

Cloddie urine.
A cloddie urine is that which has in it clods of blood, or other crude matter,
or any clusterings of difform contents.

Dark ground is not meant of the darkness of color, but rather of the
slenderness of substance, so that it can scarcely be discerned to be any
ground, by reason that it is so near in shape and substance to the rest of the
urine. Dullness.
Dullness of color is contrary to brightness, so that when the color lacks
all brightness, then is it clean dulled, and whatsoever thing causes decay of
such brightness, that thing dulleth urine.

Diverse.
Those contents be called diverse, which have neither their own right form, nor
any other certain, but are altogether disordered and out of form, rather
seeming to be many, then to be one.

Duly knit.
Duly knit, is a property of due contents, when they are not tattered, ragged,
nor jagged, nor flittering asunder, nor yet are not so clammed together, as
tough fleam, or any such thing, but are in a moderate mean between both these.

A gathering
A gathering sore, is that sore that is caused of the excessive recourse of
humors into any part of the body, as a bile, or any other like.

Harvest.
Harvest, seek times of the year.

Judicial days.
Judicial days, seek Critical days.

Inequality.
Inequality of substance in urine does appear to be the difforments and
disagreeing of the parts of it together; as when it is thin in one part, and
thick in another. Howbeit, it is as well used for the alteration from a mean
substance to thickness or thinness, or other ways unnatural. Obstruction,
Obstruction.
is a stopping commonly of the veins, and such great conduits (which convey
blood or any other humor) so that the thing which they should convey cannot
freely pass as it ought. But if the like stopping happen in the pores of the
skin, (I mean those unsensible holes, by which sweat passes out) so that
neither sweat, nor any like excrement may pass that ways, then is it most
named Oppilation. Howbeit, Oppilation.
as these words be sometimes used the one for the other, so they be applied
also to other sundry parts of the body; but evermore they betoken such stopping
in that part, that natures work is hindered thereby.

Principal members.
Principal members (as to our purpose now) are these 3. the brain, the heart,
and the liver.

Passive. Putrefaction.
Passive: seek Qualities.

Putrefaction is commonly known to signify, rotting.

Qualities.
Qualities active, are named heat and cold, because they are more apt and able
to work, then to be wrought. And contrary ways, dryness and moisture are
named passive, or suffering qualities, because they are more ready to be
altered by the working of hea^ and cold, then to work themselves; howbei^ yet
they do work also.

The four times of sickness.
There be in sickness four principal parts of time, to be observed of
Physicians: The beginning of sickness, the increase or augmenting, the standing
or chief force of it, and the declination or asswaging of it.

The beginning.
The beginning is, from the time that sickness has overcome man's strength, and
brought him to lie down, till there do appear manifest signs of concoction of
the matter, The increase.
whereof the disease comes, at which time, the sickness waxes fiercer and
fiercer: and while it so continues, that time is called the Increase and
augmenting of sickness, but when the violence of the sickness is at the most,
The state.
so that the rage of it is at one stay, and neither increases nor decreases,
that time is called the standing, stay, state, or chief strength of the
sickness. And after that the furious rage of sickness does abate, and calm his
cruel storms, then is the declination of the sickness: Declination.
after which (if the Patient escape as very few die in the declination) then
follows recovery to health again. And these be the four general or
universal times of sickness. Beside these there be other times more
particular, Times of the year.
whereof how to speak I need not. The diversity of times in the year are duly to
be observed, for they do much alter man's body.

The Spring.
The Spring time increases blood and brings all the parts of the body to a
temperance, as nigh as it can. For it of all other times is the most temperate,
neither excessively hot, nor cold; neither moist, nor dry; but of a just
temperature, as Galen proves abundantly in his first Book of Temperaments,
where he does much blame them that name it to be hot and moist, which he says,
is of all other the most pestilent state of air. This Spring, after Galens
mind, does begin about the tenth day of March, and ends about the 14. day of
April, so that it lasts but 6. weeks, and 2. days. For at the rising of the
Pleiades (which is now in our time about the 24. day of April) he says that
Summer does begin. Summer.
Which Summer is in complexion hot and dry, and therefore meet to increase
choler, which in that time does abound. The Summer lasts 21. weeks. Harvest.
Harvest does begin after Galens mind, about the 17. day of September, and
lasts 7. weeks. The Harvest, is dry of complexion, but neither only hot, nor
only cold, but is distemperate in heat and cold. For in the morning and evening
it is cold, and at noon it is hot. So may it not be called justly (as men do
name it) cold and dry. In this time does melancholy increase. At the end of
Harvest, about the seventh day of November, Winter.
does Winter begin, which time is cold and moist; and therefore increases
phlegm, which is like in complexion unto it. And the Winter lasts till the 10.
day of March; so is it in length about 17. weeks and a half, and then begins
the Spring time again. And this is the course of the year, after Physic. Other
men which entreat of Husbandry, Another sort of these times.
do part the year into 4. equal parts, giving 3. months to every time. Unto
the Spring they give February, March, and April. To the Summer, May, June, and
July. Unto Harvest, August, September, October. And unto winter they appoint
November, December, and January. Why the Physicians part the year one way, and
writers of husbandry another way, at more convenient time I will declare.

Virtues. Attractive.
Virtues natural are four. The first is, That which draws nourishment into
due places, and that is called the attractive virtue. The second, Alterative.
is it that alters the nourishment into a due form to nourish the body, and
is called the alterative virtue. The third is that virtue, Retentive.
which keeps in the good nourishment, till the alterative virtue has duly
altered it, and therefore is called the retentive virtue. The fourth, is called
the virtue expulsive, Expulsive.
because his office is to expel those superfluous excrements which are left,
when the other virtues have done their office duly.

FINIS.

