THE URINAL OF PHYSIC.

By ROBERT RECORD Doctor of Physic.

Whereunto is added an ingenious Treatise concerning Physicians, Apothecaries,
and Chyrurgians, Set forth by a Dr. in Queen Elizabeth's days.

With a Translation of Papius Ahalsossa concerning Apothecaries Confecting
their Medicines; Worthy perusing, and following.

LONDON, Printed by Gartrude Dawson 1651.

urine measuring pot To the Reader.
IF either the corruption, or abuse of things, might deprive us of this lawful
and necessary use of them, even the sacred Scriptures, our laws, out provisions
of life and clothing, might fall under declension, if not abolition: It is true
from the inspection of Urine, some have presumed to pretend a larger judgment,
and indication, then may justly be drawn or conjectured out of it; yet it is
generally concluded by Physicians, both ancient and modern, that both Urine
and Pulse are so necessary, that without them all knowledge of Physic,
besides, is doubtful, obscure, and uncertain: whereof the first shows the
estate of the liver and veins, the second of the heart and arteries: The Urine
because with the blood it is convened into all parts of the body, and from
thence returns back again in the veins, to the liver and urinall vessels,
brings with it some indicature of the state and disposition of all those
parts from whence it comes: and who shall please to peruse that exact piece
of Daniel Becherus, shall find observable pieces, both concerning the urine,
and diverse experimented medicines made with it. Concerning the judgment of the
Pulte, who shall please to peruse Doctor May upon Pennant, shall find the
Pulses motion not so certain an indicature, because in some diseases there is
cessation, or none, or small appearance to conjecture by. Concerning cerning
the Author, he was one of the first who labored to reduce the tractate
thereof, unto order and method, and has been seconded by laborious borious
Fletcher, to whom our English Nation owes much for their labors: The
antiquity and pains of the Author has caused it to be presented again to the
Press, hoping, with judicious men, it shall receive the acceptance is desired
studied

By the well-wisher of your health, R. R.

THE PREFACE.
THough the unsatiable greedines of covetous men do many and sundry ways
hurt, The good use of a covetous example.
yet some ways it may do no less good, if men will not disdain (as they ought
not) to use it in such sort as I shall show you.

But because that unsaciableness is never satisfied, but beside thousand of
means invented already to quench the unquenchable greedines, it seeks and
finds daily new and new means innumerable, so that it were an infinite labor
to declare them all. I will wittingly, and purposedly pass them over, only
taking one general sentence, which shall be in stead of all the rest.

Vespasian, one of the great schoolmasters of avarice, which could pick out
profit of every thing (yea, even of men's urine) taught his Scholars (I mean
the whole court of covetous persons) this lesson ensuing:

Lucri bonus odor caece qualibet.
Lucre is sweet, and has a good savor;
Though it come of Urine, dirt or Ordure.
This sentence, if it be withdrawn from the filthy lucre of unsatiable
covetousness, wherein it is detestable, and employed rather to the due lucre
of man's sustenance, then it becomes tolerable: But if it be referred to the
necessary lucre of man's health, then is it greatly commendable. If there can
be then any commodity for man's health gathered out of urine, (as there may be
much) men should not be negligent in seeking of that thing which should do good
both to themselves and others? seeing the covetous are so diligent in seeking
for that thing which shall profit neither themselves nor others?

And the negligence is so much the greater, if men be more remiss in seeking
after so necessary a thing in a matter so commendable, then the covetous in a
bad thing.

But in as much as this thing (by reason it is not plainly ser forth) is with
no less difficulty to be studied on, then it is necessary to be used, the
ignorant may have some excuse: I therefore in the name of many other, have
taken this pains on me, to set forth this thing so plainly, Ignorance set aside.
that ignorance can have no excuse.

But that no man should doubt of the truth of this Treatise, or of mine intent,
Why this Book is written.
in putting forth the same rather in this our English tongue then any other: I
shall briefly show reasons of both; First, for the truth of it, The first
reason.
I will boldly speak, knowing for certain that no man that can judge it, will
say or think otherwise, but that it is as true as man's knowledge can devise
it. And it is the opinion of the most excellent writers of Physic both Greeks
and Latin; namely, Hippocrates, Galen, Aetius, Aeginota, Philothous,
Theophilus, Actuarius: also Cornelius Celsus Plinius, Constantinus, Africanus,
and Clementius Clementinus, with others more, conferring also with these
Avicenna, Egidius, Polidamus, and such like: But with what temperance and
moderation they that are learned may perceive. These have I followed chiefly in
this judgment of Urines.

And in the use of medicine and diseases touching urine, I have joined with
them Dioscorides, Quintus Serenus, Columela, Sextus Platonicus, and diverse
others. Now if there be any man that doubts of the truth of those writers in
this thing, I am not here to force belief upon them.

The intent of the Author.
But now as touching mine intent in writing this Treatise in English; though
this cause might seem sufficient to satisfy many men, that I am an English
man, and therefore may most easily and plainly write in my native tongue,
rather then in any other: yet unto them that know the hardness of the matter,
this answer should seem unlikely: considering that it is harder to translate
into such a tongue, wherein the Art has not been written before, then to write
in those tongues in which the terms of the Art are better expressed.

Now to show briefly the causes moving me thereunto. I am sure, there are but
few that ever sought counsel for their health, but they know that the common
trade to attain to the knowledge of the disease, is by the judgment of the
urine, though not alone, yet as the principal.

Likewise, as the is not any thing so good, but the abuse of it may cause harm
to ensue thereupon. So this judgment of urines, though it be a thing highly to
be regarded, yet if it be used rashly without foregoing signs it may cause (as
it does often) some error in the judgment of the Physician, though he were
right excellently learned: not so much by the ignorance of the Physician, as by
want of knowledge in the patient, which should instruct the Physician, in such
questions as he needed to demand of him: and not to look that the Physician
should tell him all things at the first sight, more like a God then man.

So that if there be any Physician so arrogant, that he will take upon him to
tell all things alone, and will not hear the Patient speak, specially not
knowing the party before, neither seeing other signs but only the urine, as I
dare boldly pronounce, That such a man is unworthy to be called a Physician. So
it shall be good for all men, not to trust to the judgment of such a one: for
by such mis-use in this thing not only much harm befalls the patients, so that
it has been the occasion of many men's death, but also very much reproach has
ensued to the whole estate and order of Physicians, and has caused that
excellent and most necessary art to be contemned, derided, and little set by.

To avoid the more this inconvenience, I have written this little Treatise to
all men in common, The use of this Book.
that they may learn to have some knowledge in their own urines, and thereby
may be the better able to instruct the Physician, at the least, what sort of
urine they have made from time to time from the beginning of their sickness, and
somewhat before.

And also what fort of water they were sour, or bitter, and such like. Yea
beyond all this, he requires in every man the knowledge of his own pulse,
which is a thing harder then the judgment of urines.

Now if you require Examples, the whole world is full of them. They that wrote
in Greek, Examples of Writers in the Vulgar tongue.
wrote in their own vulgar tongue: and so did they that wrote in Latin, write
in their own common speech.

Besides that, have we not infinite examples of Learned men in Germany, France,
and Spain, which wrote of Physic in their own tongue? Yea, Is not our own
England full of Examples? How many Books of Practices? how many Herbals? and
other like Books of Physic, has there been put forth many years past? And yet
unto this day do not learned wits sleep. How much is all England bound to
that Worthy and Learned Knight Sir Thomas Eliot, Sir Thomas Eliots Castle of
Health.
which took the pains to build a Castle of Health for all English men (besides
many other learned Books that he has put forth in the Vulgar tongue) whereby a
man may learn both to govern himself so, that though he escape not all
sicknesses quite, yet he shall eschew the great dangers of them? England may
rejoice of such a Knight: yea, England has too few that follows such
example. But if England had as many well willing doers as she has cruel and
spiteful disdainers, then were England the Flower of all Realms in the world.

Now will I leave this and draw nearer to my purpose, and will desire all men
that shall read this Book, patiently to bear with my boldness, and thankfully
to receive my good mind. And if there shall be found in this Book, or in any
other that I shall put forth, a small error or oversight (for greater errors, I
dare say there shall be none) I shall desire all them that shall find any, to
advertise me thereof by word or writing, and I shall be ready not only to
render condign thanks, but also to amend duly that shall be thought amiss, or
else to yield a reason for the proof of the same,

An exhortation to the Reader.
And now to make an end: I will desire every man soberly and discreetly to use
this my Book, not using it to the taunting or checking of other men: nor to
trust in their own knowledge further then they ought.

And likewise I shall exhort all men, not to mock and jest with any Physician
(as some light wits do) tempting them with Beans stale, in stead of men's urine:
others bringing to them men's water for women's, and such other like things. For
in this doing they deceive not the Physician, but themselves. For a man's water
to be like a woman's, it need seem no strange thing. Howbeit, again there is a
notable difference, insomuch that that water which in a man declares health,
if it were a woman's, might declare some disease; and likewise that which in a
woman signifies health, if it were a man's water, it might betoken sickness.
And if a man's water and woman's be like, and betoken both diseases, those
diseases may be diverse and not one.

Yea two men's waters being both alike, shall not declare always one grief,
except they agree also in age, diet, exercise, and other like things

Also, that a Beasts Water may be like a Man's (the Man's sickness being
thereafter) Hypocrates witnesses, and experience teaches, as I shall declare
hereafter.

Therefore if you seek the Patients health, look that you receive the urine
diligently: and as soon as you can, present it to the Physician, and be
diligent to instruct him in all things that you can, and that he shall not have
need to ask. And so no doubt, you shall receive great commodity of that Art,
to the health of man, and the glory of God, which has given such knowledge
unto man.

THE URINALL OF PHYSIC.
CHAP. I. Of the Division and Order of this Book.
BEcause that nothing done confusedly can be well understood of the Readers,
for every thing the better order it has, the better it may be understood, and
is much more easily remembered, when the order of it is well and certainly
known: The sum of this Book.
I have therefore digested this Book orderly, as I shall here set forth, to the
intent that you may read, as it were in gross the whole Book, and thereby keep
it the better in remembrance.













CHAP. II. How Urine is engendered in Man and how it passes forth.
AS unto them that are learned and know by the Art of Anatomy the situation of
the parts of man, and the natural office of every part, it is easy enough to
perceive the original generation and cause of urine, without any example: so
unto them that neither know the situation, nor offices, no, neither yet the
names of the parts of man's body, it is scarce possible to make them to perceive
the generation of urine, without some sensible example. But because it is very
hard to find an artificial example, which can alone duly express this work
of nature, I will use therefore an example of a natural work, which shall
express in many points this thing, though not in all; for such can there none
be, but the thing it self.

And in as much as this example is not easy to be understood of all men,
though the most part do now a days partly know it by experience of finding
springs of waters, I will first propose an artificial example, to make both
the other to be the better perceived.

An example of Stilling.
It is daily seen in distilling of Waters, that the temperate heat of the fire
does separate the purest part of the juice from the herbs, and also from the
grosser juice. This by natural lightness is drawn into the head of the
Stillatorie, where by the coldness of the helmet, it is made somewhat grosser,
and so through natural heat descends and passes forth by the Pipe of the
Stillatorie.

The Original.
And as the Art of man uses to make this water, so does nature use to make the
water of springs, whereof come all rivers, streams and floods, except the sea.
For seeing the earth is not perfectly sound and thick of substance, Cause of
springs.
as stones and some woods appears to be, but it is hollow and full of holes,
as you see that cork is: so that the air which by his subtleness pierces into
never so little a hole, enters and fills this hollowness, nature so leading
to it, because no place should be empty: In which place by the coldness of the
earth, the air is turned into water, as you may see in walls and pillars or
stone, namely, of marble, how the coldness of the stone turns the air into
water, and hangs full of drops, which sometimes trickle down apace, as if
they did swear. So when the earth has turned the air thus into water, then
does it drop down and gathers together, and so runs out as it can find or
prepare way. As long therefore as there is hollownes in that place, with such
sort or coldness, and none other let, the Spring of water shall never cease.
But if the way by any means be stopped, then the water turmoileth and
labors, either to expel that let, or to make a new way.

The causes of diversity in taste of Water.
Now this water being thus engendered of the air which has no taste, is also
naturally without all taste: but the taste that it has is the taste of the
veins of earth or metal, by which it does run. And that is the cause that
some waters are sweet, and some sour; some fresh, and some salt, and otherwise
diversely tasted; some also are hot, and some cold, and with other like
qualities endued, according to the ground whereby it passes. But of this I
will not now speak, because I have appointed for it a peculiar Treatise, if God
grant me time: Only this I say now, that a man that is expert, can by the
color, taste, and other qualities of the water which he sees, tell what vains
of earth or metals is in that place whence that water comes, though he see it
not.

And this water is expelled out of his first place, as unprofitable there to
remain; and yet when it is come forth thence, it is good for diverse and sundry
uses.

The generation of urine.
Thus may we think of the generation and use of urine or man's water.

Is shall not need that I here reckon exactly the places, causes, Three
Concoctions.
and the order of the three concoctions which go before the generation of
urine, but it shall suffice to tell briefly, that of the meat and drink
together concocted in the stomach is made rude blood: (if I may so call it)
which rude blood is wrought again, and made more perfecter in the liver: and
thirdly yet more purified in the hollow vein, where the urine is separate from
it, as whey from milk, but yet may not exactly be called urine, till it come
into the reins or kidneys, which draw it out of the hollow vein, by a certain
natural power resting in them. And then does the reins or kidneys alter it
perfectly into urine, as the coldness of the ground turns air into water. But
you must take this comparison or similitude to be spoken of the alteration it
self, and not of the cause.

Now when Urine is thus made like to that fashion of water (as I said) then as
the water passes forth from his first place, by issues outward, so does the
urine descend from the reins by certain veins (as it were) called Water pipes,
and runs into the bladder, from whence at due times it is expelled forth, if
the way be not let. So that you may compare the reins to the head of a conduit,
the water pipes, to the conduit pipes, the bladder to the conduit, and the
shaft to the rock of the conduit.

And further as the water does declare by taste and color the qualities of the
earth, or veins of metal, whereby it runs, and from whence it comes, so
the urine by color, and other ways, declares of what sort the places that it
comes through, and humors that it comes from are affected.

And yet not only serves for this, but also as the water, though it depart
from the earth as superfluous in that place, yet in other places and to other
purposes it is greatly profitable. So the urine, though it be expelled as a
superfluous excrement, yet beside the commodity of judgment, which it gives
of the parts that it comes from, it does also serve for diverse uses in
medicine, and other good commodities: Of both which, I will anon orderly write,
after I have declared certain things appertaining to the due judgment of it.

urinary system Of the Instrument and parts by which Urine is engendered and
passes, mark this Figure following.
A. Is the liver. B. The hollow vein C. Veins by which the reins do draw the
urine, and therefore be called sucking veins. D. The reins. E. The water Pipes.
F. Is the Bladder. G. The spout of the yard.


All the other parts beside, appertain to Generation and seed.



CHAP. III. What Urine is, and what tokens it gives in general.
YOu have heard now how urine is engendered, from whence it comes, and by what
places it passes, which things all, to the intent that you may the better keep
in mind, you shall note this short definition.

The definition of urine.
Urine is the superfluity or wheyie substance of the blood into a hollow vein,
conveyed by the reins and water pipes, into the bladder. So that hereby you may
plainly perceive, that if the blood be pure and clean, and none other grief in
the reins, Water-pipes, Bladder, nor Shaft, then shall the urine so declare it,
being also perfect and pure in substance and color, and all other tokens
according to the same. But if there be any grief in any of those parts, or the
blood corrupt by any means, then shall the urine declare certain tokens of the
same, as I shall anon particularly express.

But first it shall be necessary to instruct you of the vessel place, and time,
meet to judge urine, and of the manner of receiving it.

CHAP. IIII. Of the form of the Vrinall, and of the place and time meet to
judge urine, and how it should be received.
THat urine should be kept to see, which is first made after midnight commonly,
or namely when the patient has slept long: but you must take heed whether the
patient be man or woman, The order to receive urine.
that they make not their urine in another vessel first (as many use to do) and
then pour it into the urinall when it is settled, for that causes much deceit
and error in the judgment of it. And if that the Patient cannot well make it
in the urinall, either by weakness, or any other cause, then let them make it
in another vessel; but see that it be clean and dry; and as soon as the water
is made, pour it forth presently into the Urinall altogether, and leave no part
of it out, as some curious folk do use to put the clear part only into the
urinall and cast away the dregs, as though it stood not with their modesty to
bring such foul gear to the Physician, others of such like foolish mind. Pour
it therefore in wholly and let not the urinall stand open, namely in a dusty
place, but stop it close with a glove or other leather, and not with cloth,
paper, nor hay, and let it be brought to the Physician within six hours at the
furthest, for after that time it cannot well be judged.

The Urinal.
Now as touching the Urinall, it should be of pure clear glass, not thick, nor
green in color, without blots or spots in it, not flat in the bottom, nor too
wide in the neck, but widest in the middle, and narrow still toward both the
ends, like the fashion commonly of an egg, or of a very bladder being
measurably blown (for the Vrinall should represent the bladder of a man) and so
shall every thing be seen in his due place and color. If neither the grossenes
of the Vrinall neither the color, nor spots shall let the true sight of the
color and substance of the urine, and the contents of it: neither the deform
fashion of the urinall shall alter the regions or rooms of the urine.

Likewise concerning the place meet to behold urines, The place
you must look that it be neither too dark, so that your sight should not
discern perfectly, either the color, substance or contents, for lack of light:
neither yet that your fight be likewise deceived, if the place be too light, as
in open light or beams of the sun.

The time.
Besides this also you must mark the time due to behold urines, but because
there can no one time be assigned certain and exact to judge all parts of it, I
will briefly show the order of the things to be considered in their time.

First, when the urine is made, while it is yet somewhat hot, you shall
consider the color of it: for that may best be discerned then; and likewise
the thickness of the substance of it, which if it be mean, shall then be best
seen. All other things, as the bubbles and the contents shall be best judged
somewhat after, when the urine is somewhat cooled, and they be duly settled in
their proper places.

CHAP. V. How many things are to be considered in Urine.
NOw leaving this as a brief instruction of the generation of the Water or
Urine, Four things to be considered in Urine, viz. Substance, Color,
Quantity, Contents.
and of the manner of receiving it in vessels due, with time and place meet to
consider it. I will particually declare how many things are to be considered in
it, which are commonly named four, that is the Substance, the Color, the
Quantity, and the Contents; and the Savor thereto may be added as the fifth; to
the which fifth, if you shall join stableness and order, as two accidents common
to the first four things, (but yet no less to be considered then they) then
shall you judge the more certainly.

Stablenes is called, Stableness.
when the urine continues certain days together of one sort. And if it alter
every day, Unstableness. Order.
then is that called unstableness or changeableness, to which thing order does
appertain: For order is the following of one thing after another, as black
colored urine after white, green or pale. I mean not, because that so it ought
to follow, but only that you must observe how it does follow. For black Urine
does not signify the same if it follow after green urine, as it does if it
follow after white urine: so that the order ought also to be marked.

But now to return to the four first things.

Substance is called in urine, Substance.
the urine it self, in respect of the thickness or thinness of it: So that
there are 3. Three sorts of substance in urine.
sorts of substance in urine: thick, thin, and mean.

Thin substance is called, Thin.
when you may perceive well the joints of your fingers through the urine. Thick.
And contrariwise it is called thick, when you cannot well see your fingers
through it: and that is in the middle between extreme thick and extreme thin,
Mean Colors.
is called, mean,

Colors are diverse, but the principal are these six, white, pale, flaxen,
yellow, red, and black. And all the other colors are contained under these six.

Light white as Chrystallse, snowie.
As under white, ate contained clear as crystal, white as snow, and pure as
water, which three are light whites.

Waterie. Dark white as milke-white, horny gray, pale, flaxen, yellow.
Then are there other three more darker, as milk white, clear like horn, and
gray.

After white, follows pale color, and then flaxen, after it follows pale,
and then yellow, which may be called golden, for it is the color of pure gold.

Light saffron, saffron color. Claret. Red. Crimson. Purple. Blew. Green.
After it follows light saffron, and then saffron, then claret color, and
then red, after it crimson, and then purple, and then blue.

Then is there green of diverse kinds, as light green, green as grass, stark
green, and dark green.

There are also oil colors (that is popingay green) of three sorts: as of
green, light oily, Oily.
stark oily, and dark oily.

Ash color.
After these is there Ash color like unto lead; and after it, as last of all
comes black. And these be the chief colors. Black.


Now as touching quantity, it is also in three sorts; much, little, and mean.

Quantity. Much.
Then it is called much quantity, when it exceeds the measure of a man's
drinking.

And then is it called little, Little.
when a man pisseth less then he drinks.

And that is mean, Mean.
when a man's pissing and his drinking is of like quantity. All this must be
considered by due proportion.

The contents are all things in the water, Contents.
that be of another matter and substance particularly, then is the urine:
Sediment. Sublation. Cloud.
as the sediment or ground, the sublation or swim, and the cloud, To these are
added other dis-form contents, like hairs, like husks, like bran, and such
other. Crown.
And also the crown of the urine, with the bubles, and other things swimming on
the top of it.

For the better understanding of these contents, you must note that the whole
urine from the top to the bottom, is divided commonly into three rooms or
regions.

Four rooms or Regions. Ground or Sediment.
The lowermost is the region of the ground or sediment: so that the grounds or
sediments are the contents that occupy the lowermost region. Or yet more
properly, the sediment is called a certain substance of grosser matter then is
the urine, like to a quantity of very watery phlegm, which fleeteth a little
above the bottom of the urine: But if it be so light, that it swim in the
middle region of the urine, then is it called the sublimation or swim.

Sublimation or Swim.
And if it be yet more lighter, so that it does fleet in the highest part of
the urine, then it is called a cloud: whereby you may perceive that the ground,
the swim, and the cloud are but one thing in substance, Cloud.
and differ only by lightness and height, and takes his name according to the
region that it occupies. But yet again note, that every one of the 3. Another
division of the three Regions.
regions, is farther divided into other parts also; whereby you may know
exactly, how far all contents differ from the just room of their region; so
that the whole urine must be divided into eleven just parts, of which the
nether region occupies four, the fifth is the void room between that and the
middle region, which contains 3. more, that is to say, the sixth, seventh, and
eight. And then the pinch is a void room between the middle region and the
highest, which highest region, contains the other two parts that remain, that
is the tenth and the eleventh, as this Figure shows which hereafter follows.

ABove these 3. regions, about the very brink of the urine, you may see a
certain ring as it were, going about, and that is called the crown. Crown.


Highest of all things in the urine are the bubbles which either go about with
the ring only, Bubbles.
or else fleet in the middle of the urine only, or else both. Yea sometime
they cover all the whole top of the urine.

urine measuring pot

Beside these, there is oftentimes as it were flotes or fattiness on the top,
Fattiness.
and sometime certain spots only, which are like to drops of oil. And these
commonly are the whole contents. For as for gravel or stone, or any like thing
is contained under the name of d^ form contents.

You shall also understand, that in the contents must the substance, the
quantity and color be observed.

The Substance is either equal or unequal. Substance.


Equal Substance is called, Equal.
when the ground swim, or cloud, (for to them appertained this consideration)
is not tattered and dispersed, but justly knit together.

Unequal is contrary, Unequal.
when it is thinner in one part then in another, or flittered out, and not
jointly and uniformly joined together.

The quantity must be considered in respect to a mean, Quantity.
which it you know well, then may you soon judge that to be overmuch, that is
more then it: and that to be too little, that is less then it: But this mean
quantiry must you learn of a perfect whole water, and best by the teaching of
some good Physician.

Of colors I have spoken before sufficiently for their variety.

CHAP. VI. What a perfect Urine is, and also how many ways all parts of the
Urine may be altered in a healthful man.
NOW that you know the difference of such things that ought to be considered in
urine, before you shall learn by consideration of them, to judge of the person
that made it, how he is disposed in his body: you must first know how many
ways the parts of the urine may be changed in a healthful man. For the
better understanding of which thing, and of all that shall be said hereafter, I
will first define what a perfect whole urine is, which as, it betokens no
grief in it self, so it is a true, rule to examine all other urines by that,
which are not whole, but declare in them some grief.

A perfect whole urine is mean in substance and in quantity, A perfect whole
urine Galen c. 12. Crisib.
and in color pale, or party saffron, with a white ground, duly knit and
stable, without bubbles and other evil contents.

So that this perfect whole urine declares the difference of all other urines;
For every urine the more it agrees with this, the better it is: and the more
it differed from this, the worse it is, as I shall anon particularly declare.

And here you must mark, that this perfect whole urine is not only taken of a
perfect whole man, but also of the lustiest time of man's age, that is at thirty
years: or more largely, between twenty five and thirty five. For in every age
does the urine alter, as you shall hear by and by.

The difference of Urine by age in men.
THe Urine of children differs but little in color from pale, Children.
or light saffron, and in substance it somewhat exceeds in thickness the
substance of young men's urine, Galen 2. presag. Hippoc. 13.
and has much ground in it. And the more they do grow in age, the higher
waxes the color, Young men.
the substance the thinner, and the less is the ground. And therefore when age
is most freshest, Men.
the color is pale (so that the urine of flourishing youth or perfect manhood,
is pale or light saffron) and there rests, and goes no higher, and the
ground of it is mean. But now after that time the more age increases and youth
decayed, the more the color changes from pale toward white, Age.
and the ground waxes leffer and darker: so that the urine of old men is thin
and white, with little ground, inclining unto cruditie.

Of the Urine of Women by age.
THe Urine of women which are temperate in health and in their flourishing
youth, Women.
does decline somewhat from pale and light saffron toward white, and the
substance is in manner thin, but it has more ground then men's urine; Young
women.
now all they that be under this flourishing age, the younger they be, the
whiter colored is their urine, and the more ground it has; and if they be
elder, the more aged they are, Aged women.
the whiter also is their urine, but the ground is ever less and less. And
this you may see how both diversity of age, and diversity also of kind or
sex, causes alteration in urine, without change of health; for you must
understand all these ages with perfect health.

The diversity of Vrines, according to the times of the year.
Even as the diversity of ages alters urine, so does the times of the year. For
the more that the spring time draws toward heat the more the urine gathers
high color, Spring.
departing from pale and flaxen, toward pale and light saffron: and the
inequality of substance changes into a due equality according to nature, and
the ground does wax thinner, and the quantity is more in respect to that is
drunk: so that about the midst of the spring they return to a mean.

In the beginning of Summer, the color appears pale and light saffron,
Summer.
and the substance mean, the ground white, duly knit and stable, but yet
thinner then a mean ground. And the more that the Summer proceeds and draws
to the highest, the lesser is the quantity of urine, in comparison to the drink
and the ground, changes from his natural whiteness to a palish color and is
much lesser and thinner. And this thinness glystereth withal, and inclines
toward golden and saffron color.

When Harvest comes, Harvest.
then the colors do return to a mean again: but the thinness and brightness
remains still; the ground also is still obscure and little, but yet it is
white, duly knit and stable. And as Harvest goes forward, so the urine
returns to a mean in all things.

In the middle of winter and thereabout, the urine keeps due quantity, but
the color inclines toward white, and the ground is over great, but in all
other points it is mean.

And as Winter goes on, Winter.
the substance of urine appears diverse, and the color white, the quantity
greater in respect to the drink, and the contents greater and unconcoct; but
toward the spring time they return toward a mean as I have before said.

Yet beside these, also diversity of countries causes diversity of urine, even
by the same reasons as does the times of the year. Countries alter urine.
For countries that be temperate exactly, make urine like unto the spring time.
And those countries that be hot and dry make urine like unto summer. And
contrariwise, cold and moist alter water, as does winter. But countries that
are dry and distempered between heat and cold, make urine like harvest.

Meats drinks and medicines.
Also meats and drinks, and order of dier, causes urine to alter, and medicines
also, as not only experience teaches, but also Hippocrates witnesses in the
sixth Book of his Epidemies, (or raining sicknesses) in the fifth part and the
fifteenth sentence, as for example: Meats of light concoction.
Those meats that are light of concoction and good in substance, cause good and
temperate urine with pure contents: but contrary meats cause discolored urine,
and thin, with strange contents.

Meats of hard concoction.
Meats that will not concoct, make lesser contents, and diverse in substance.
Evil cause greater contents, and in nothing duly formed. And as the quality
of meats does alter urine, so does the quantity also. For if a man have eaten
much, and not concocted it, his urine shall be thin and white, and sometime
without ground. But if this crudity (or rawness in stomach) continue long, the
urine will become diverse in substance, Drinking of wine.
and in contents.

Also wine drunk abundantly causes alteration in urine.

But now contrariwise, if a man do fast long, Fasting long.
his urine will appear fiery and saffron colored, and thin with lesser ground.

But if a man suffer famine, and do not nourish, Suffering of famine.
his water shall be thin and white, with a certain glistering, and without
ground.

Moreover, exercise and rest changes urine: Labor.
for through excessive labor, the urine changes from light saffron, and at
length becomes saffron colored, with little ground, thin, and higher
colored then it should be. And some time there fleereth on the top a certain
fattness, specially after overmuch weariness.

But idleness and rest does contrariwise cause white urine, Rest.
with greater and grosser ground.

Furthermore sleep, Sleep Watching.
and watching, if they exceed measure, they alter urine; but there is a
difference between both sleep and watching coming of sickness, and them both
when they be taken willingly in health. For if that sickness cause overmuch
sleep, then is the urine whitish, with substance either fully thick, or but
partly thin, and the contents many and undigest.

Natural sleep.
But if that such sleep come naturally the urine is not so white, but rather
flaxen, and the substance mean, with greater and well concoct contents.

Voluntary sleep.
And likewise they that have watched purposedly, and not by reason of sickness,
their urine is bur little changed. But if they watch for any sickly cause,
Watch in sickness.
their urine will change but little at the beginning: but with continuance the
contents will be dispersed, and at the last clean wasted, and the substance of
the urine waxes thinner and thinner, by little and little, and the color
inclines either to white and watery, or unto golden saffron, oily, or black,
according as the cause is that makes it so to change.

Of alteration by complexion, I will write in the next Chapter.

Now have you heard as touching alteration of urine in health, according to
diversity of ages, both in men and women, times of the year, countries, meats
and drinks, labor, rest, sleep, and watch: so that you must have regard to
these in all judgments both in health and in sickness. For if these be not
diligently marked, they may cause great error, as you may well consider.

What is to be considered in urine
First therefore, in every urine you must consider, whether it be a man's or a
woman's, and what age he or she is of, then what time of the year it is, and
what country, what meats and drinks the person used; and likewise of labor and
rest, sleep and watch: And then must you consider how every one of these does
alter urine: so that if the altering of them from that healthful urine
(whereof I spoke in the beginning of this Chapter) be but such as one of those
foresaid things would cause, then may it not be judged to come of any disease,
as for example. High colored water in summer (so that it pass not saffron
color) or white colored water in winter, should rather be reckoned to come of
the time of the year, then of any sickness: and likewise of other things.

CH AP. VII. What be the general qualities that alter the parts of Urine.
BEfore I treat of the signification of the parts of Urine, I think it good to
instruct you of the general qualities which cause all alterations in urine:
whereby you shall perceive not only what every urine does betoken (as I shall
anon set forth) but also if you mark well this Chapter, you shall see the cause
why every urine does so signify.

You shall understand therefore, that there be four chief and only qualities,
whereof all things that are both in the Sea and Earth are made: as man and
beast, fish and fowl, trees, herbs, stones, and metals. These four qualities
are heat, cold, moistness and dryness: and these four continuing duly tempered
(as nature ordered them first in every perfect body) be the cause of continual
health. But if they be altered wrongly, then do they cause diseases diversely,
according to the diversity of the alterations: And as they do cause diseases,
so they change the color, substance, and other parts of the urine, whereby we
may conjecture the cause of the disease; and so consequently the disease it
self, though sometime it declares the disease it self, and not the cause
thereof.

But now to come to the matter meetest for this time, Passive and active
qualities.
you shall mark that two of these four qualities are named Passive, and they
cause but small alteration in comparison. The other two are called Active, and
they cause great alteration.

The Active qualities are heat and cold, and the Passive qualities are dryness
and moistness.

When Moistness therefore exceeds alone, Moistness.
it dulleth the natural color of urine, thicketh and ingrosseth the
substance, and increases the quantity. And as the over-part of it above
waxes rough and troubled, so the ground increases and continues raw and
unconcoct.

But dryness does diminish the quantity of urine, Dryness.
and also the contents: It makes it thin in substance, clear and bright, and
causes mean color, and the ground appears grosser.

Likewise heat, Heat.
if it exceed measure but little, it makes pale and light saffron color in
the urine. But if heat exceed greatly, it causes golden and saffron color,
with mean substance, and a little brightness; the ground is mean, in respect to
the quantity of urine, but it declineth from the due whiteness toward saffron
color.

But cold on the other side makes urine turn to white color, Cold.
and changes the substance from a mean. And if the cold increase, the urine
will alter from mean substance, and therefore consequently will be either thin
or gross. If it be thin or unpure, the ground shall le either obscure and
little, or much, and that diverse and unconcoct.

And this is the working of these four qualities when they exceed alone.

But and it two of them exceed together, there may result of that sort four
other distemperances; as hot and dry, hot and moist, cold and dry, and cold and
moist. Compound distemperatures of qualities.
Now what alterations these and every one of them does cause the urine, you may
easily conjecture, if you keep in mind that which I said of the four simple
qualities, and so add together the alterations.

And this must you remember therewith, that where they both agree in any
alteration, they cause that alteration to be the greater: and where they be
contrary, they cause the alteration to be nearer to a mean: howbeit somewhat to
help you, take this brief declaration.

As a temperate man does make that perfect urine, written of before, A
temperate man.
( in Chap. 6.) so the urine of a sanguine man (which is hot and moist) shall
be yellow, or light saffron colored, by the reason of the heat, and somewhat
gross, by reason of the moisture.

A choleric man.
In a choleric man (being hot and dry) the urine shall be in color as in
sanguine man, but in substance thin, by reason of the dryness.

A melancolike man.
The urine of a melancholy man (whose nature is cold and dry) shall be white
through the cold, and clear for the dryness.

A phlegmatic man.
The phlegmatic man (which is cold and moist) makes urine white through cold,
and thick by the moisture, for as heat and cold alters the colors, so
dryness and moisture changes the substance. Now if you have remembered all that
I have written before, then shall you be the meeter and better able a great
deal to preceive the reasons of the tokens which urine does give. And so shall
your knowledge be the more certain, if you know not only the thing, but also
the cause of it. Now therefore will I write of the signification of the parts
of urine, particularly, that you may perceive that first, and chief commodity
of urine which it works for man's health.

CHAP. VIII. The significations of the parts of Urine particularly.
I Told you in the sixth Chapter of this Book what urine was most perfect,
sound, and healthful of all other. And I said, that it was the rule and trial
to examine all other urines by, so that the nearer that any urine was to it,
the better it was; and the further that it declineth from it, the worse it is.
This I said, should be as a general rule, which thing to be true in healthful
men, you may perceive by that I have written already. And that it is also true
in sick men. Hypocrates witnesses, saying, That Urine is best, whose ground is
white, duly knit and stable, all the time that the sickness prevails. But
Galen to supply that that is understood in this saying, and so to make it
perfect, adds thereto, That it must be of color party golden or pale, and
of a mean substance between thick and thin. And also in these things is
required stableness, to make it a perfect Urine; for that which is untable in
any part, in that it is not perfect.

Here were a place to speak of the difference of this changeableness or
unstableness; for there is one sort called ordinary, and another called
unordinarie, and of both these are there diverse differences. But because they
depend of an exacter judgment then unlearned men can well attain unto, I
overpass them for this time, and will declare the other differences of urine,
whereby it alters from this mean urine, in all parts particularly.

Substance of urine.
And first will begin with the substance of urine, the which (as I said, before)
is of three kinds, thick, thin, and mean.

A mean urine is that, that is in the middle between extreme thick, Mean.
and extreme thin. And as it is mean between them in substance, so is it mean
in signification, for it does betoken (of it self) only good temperance and
health. But the other two betoken distemperance and default of concoction, and
that diversely, according to the diversity of the causes of them, as you shall
now consequently hear.

Fist to speak of thin urine, either it does still so continue thin, Thin urine.
as it was first made, or else it does shortly wax thick and troubled. That
that does continue still thin does betoken lack of concoction, and so does the
other also; but yet this that continues thin betokens more lack of
conoction, for it betokens that nature has not yet begun to concoct. And
therefore is that water, a sign of extreme crudity or rawness in nature. But
that that waxes thick, after it; begins to cool, though it betoken lack of
concoction, yet does it declare that nature has begun to concoct already,
notwithstanding it is an evil urine, for it signifies that nature has need
not only of great strength to perform that concoction which she has begun; but
also that there is required long time to the performance of the same. For the
which cause, Galeu calls this, Of all Vrines the worst.

Thus have you heard touching crudity and concoction, what thin urine does
signify, so that all thin urine betokens crudity. And beside that does
further betoken (as witnesses Hypocrates) gatherings or apostumations
stumations in the nether parts of the body, namely, if it continue so very
long, and the patient escape death.

Thin and white.
Furthermore, if such thin urine have with it a light whiteness, it is a very
evil sign. For if it be in a burning ague, it is a token of frensines. But if
the patient be fransick already, and the urine does so continue, it does most
commonly betoken death. And if the escape death (the which is seldom scen)
then shall he be long sick, and escape hardly.

Thin urine also betokens diverse other things: as the stopping of the reins,
and of the water veins. And likewise, if a man have had much bleeding, or laxe,
or pissing, his urine will be white and thin, and almost without ground: Like
manner in old age, and long weakness of sickness. Also in young children if it
continue long, it is a deadly sign.

Yet thin urine does sometime betoken the end of sickness and recovery of
health: as in Agues (namely quotidians) if at the beginning of them and so
after, the urine did appear thick and troubled, and especially if the color
amend therewith.

Thin and flaxen.
And if it be thin substance, and of flaxen color, then is it better then thin
and white: for because the color is better though the substance be all one;
so that though it betoken some weakness and lack of concoction, yet not so much
as does the other, for the color is meanly concoct: that is to say, natural
heat is meanly increased.

Thin and golden.
But if it be thin and golden, it is yet more better then thin and flaxen: for
the color is more exact and this betokens concoction half complete, for that
which it lacks in substance, it has in color.

Thin and saffron.
After this is there thin and saffron colored, which betokens first lack of
concoction, and beside that default of nourishment, as in a young man that
fasteth long: And sometime it betokens that excess of heat in the inner parts
of the body, does cause choleric humors to abound, as in the fever tertian.
Beside all this, it betokens thought, carefulness, and watching, and also
overmuch labor, and taking of heat in the Sun.

And thus have you heard the significations of thin urine, both alone, and also
with such colors as it can be coupled.

Now shall you hear what thick urine does betoken, both alone, and also with
such diverse colors, as it may be coupled.

Thick urine (which is, so I mean, when it is first made) either it does
continue still thick, Thick.
or else it does settle, and wax clear. If it continue still thick, it
betokens that that disturbance which was in the blond, that is to say, the
rage of sickness does still continue strongly: and that natural strength is
but weak. This urine is not so good as that which does settle and wax clear.
For that does betoken that the disease shall shortly be overcome: howbeit there
remains yet somewhat of that distemperate trouble in the blood: yet nature
has the over-hand and expels the matter of the grief, and therefore is such
a urine called good, but yet it betokens some lack of concoction, though not
so much as that which continues troubled and thick still.

Also thick urine (if it be exceeding thick) does betoken death, as Hypocrates
says, And the urine that is thick and troubled, like beasts urine, does
betoken head ach, either present already, or shortly after to come. If thick
urine appear in an ague, where thin urine went before, it betokens that the
sickness will abate straight ways, for it declares that nature has overcome
the matter of the sickness: but if it appear thick at the beginning of the
ague, and do not wax thin in process of time, it betokens plenty of matter,
and weakness of nature; so that there is fear lest nature should be overcome,
except the color do amend.

Thick urine also, betokens opennesse of the water pipes and reins. Thick and
white.
And if it be thick and white, it betokens great plenty of raw humors and
sundry kinds of phlegm to be gathered in the bodies: and betokens also (namely
if it be much) that those gatherings, which might be looked for in sore agues
shall not ensue, for the matter which should cause them deparreth out by urine:
but the whiteness of this urine is bright as snow. For if it be somewhat darker
like the whiteness of milk, it is a token of the stone, either in the bladder
or reins, namely, if such urine chance in the end and amending of sickness.

But if the color of it be gray, it betokens not only plenty of matter in
the body, but also that the whole body is possessed with a dangerous sickness,
whereof oftentimes it chances the patient to break out with blisters and heat
in his skin.

Thick and claret.
Next after this follows thick claret color (for flaxen, yellow, nor saffron
color does not agree with thick urine) and it does signify that the disease
shall continue long, specially if the ground of it be also of claret color.
But yet this disease without peril of death.

Thick and red.
Thick urine, if it be red colored, does betoken abundance of blood, as is seen
in continual Agues, and in all perilous Agues, as witnesses Theophylus. If
this water come by little and little, it is an evil token, for it does always
declare danger.

And if that sort of urine (in such Agues) do wax trouble, so that there come
with it deafness of hearing, and ach of the head, with pain in the neck and in
the sides of the belly, it betokens that the Patient shall have the falling
evil within a seven night.

Thick and crimson.
And if a thick urine have a crimson color, If it be burning Agues, and the
Patient then have the headache, it betokens that a chief critical sign either
is then present, or else night at hand.

Thick and blew.
But if the urine be thick and blew colored, it signifies diversely, as the
persons are that made it. For in them that are in way of recovery, it
betokens that the shall escape their grief. It signifies also pain in the
water-pipes, or else that the party has runn much.

And if it appear such in old men, and that continue long, it declares not
only that the bladder is infected with evil humors, but commonly also that he
shall be rid of them. But if it come after the grief of the stone, it declares
that the grief shall be turned into the strangurie.

Thick and green.
Thick urine and green, namely in Agues is a token of the yellow Jawnders,
either present, or ready to come.

Thick and ash colored.
Thick urine and ash colored, if it appear in Agues and do not settle, it is a
sign of madness, But in the burning Ague, it betokens that the strangurie
will come shortly.

Thick and black.
But if a black color appear in thick urine, it betokens sometime well, as in
the end of the Fever Quarten, and of melancholic madness, for it betokens
that the melancholic matter, which caused the diseases, does avoid out.

But sometimes it is an evil token, for it signifies that either the blood is
burned through exceeding heat, or else that natural heat is clean quenched
through deadly cold, and therefore is commonly called a deadly sign, namely in
sharp Agues, if it have an evil savor. And so means Galen, when he says,
that he marked, The thicker that a black water is, the worse it is, and
moreover, That he never saw any escape, which made such Urine.

And thus have you heard of the significations of thin and thick urine, with
such colors as may be coupled therewith.

Now will I write a littler of the colors alone, and of such tokens as come
chiefly of them, rather then of the substance or any other part of the urine.

Colors of urine.
The colors of urine declare commonly, how heat and cold do reign in the body,
so that the white the urine is, the greater is the cold, and natural heat
less; and the higher colored that the urine is, the greater is the heat.

But to speak particularly, White.
that you may perceive it the better. If the urine be white, it is a sign that
concoction fails quite, and the lighter colored, the worse.

Pale color in better somewhat, Pale.
though it also declare lack of natural heat and strength.

And flaxen color, Flaxen.
though it betokens beginning of concoction, yet it is not perfect: howbeit
it may be well taken, if all other signs be good.

Pale, light saffron.
Pale and light saffron (as you have heard before) are the best colors and most
temperate, which betoken exact concoction.

Golden saffron.
But golden and saffron color declare excess of heat.

Claret red. Crimson Purple. Green oily.
Claret is next, and then red, after it crimson, and then purple, then green,
and last of them is oily urine, which as they go in order, so they declare,
greater and greater heat with increase, not only of the quality, but also of
the matter containing the same.

Blew ash color.
But now of the other side, blew urine, and ash color, are tokens of excessive
cold, sometime with matter, and sometime without; and so like wise of black
urine, howbeit it comes sometime of excess of heat.

But how you may know the differences both of it and all the other, now will I
show in order, with the rest of their significations.

White urine, White.
if it come in great quantity, in a whole man, it betokens much drinking of
thin wine.

But if it be mean in quantity, with a due ground, it declares cold
distemperance of the liver. The urine does appear white, with a dis-form and
unconcocted ground, in them that have the dropsy. But in old men, white urine
is no great evil sign, as you may perceive by that I said before of Ages, how
they alter urine. But in young men, and such as are of freshest age, it is a
worse sign, and specially if it have either no contents, or else evil
contents. And if urine continue long time white without changing, it betokens
painful beating of the head, daselling of the eyes, and giddiness, and also
the falling evil, lothsomness of good meats, and lusting sometime after evil
meats, greedy hunger, pain in limbs, and painful moving of the sinews, and
diverse griefs of the head and reins, and also pain in the fundament, and
great weakness by sickness, for all these do follow continually lack of
concoction, either cold, or stopping of the urines and conduct, or transposing
of the humors.

But the differences of these cannot easily be known of every man, yet such as
are learned may gather certain distinctions of them by the accidents which
follow diseases.

Milk white, horn white, gray.
Dark white colors, as milk white, white, white like horn, and gray, If they
appear in the beginning of Agues, and in the increase of them, they do betoken
much pain. But in the decrease of Agues, they declare especially if it come
plentifully.

Pale, flaxen
Pale urine and flaxen, do not lightly appear in Agues, except they be easy
Agues, and short, as those which continue but one day, but if that it do follow
after burning Agues, it declares that they be fully dissolved.

Pale, saffron.
As for pale and light saffron, they are (as I said before) the best and most
perfect colors, namely, in young men and fresh youth. But in old men, women
and children (whose urine, as I have said, declineth toward white and pale) it
does betoken that their body is too hot, either by reason of their diet, or
else of their exercise. But in as much as it is but mean excess, it declares
but small grief.

Golden and saffron colored urine, if it be either somewhat thin, Golden
saffron color.
or very thick, either it has no ground, or else very few, and dark contents.
But in this they differ, that golden urine declares excess of heat, and matter
also, by reason of meats, sharp medicines, chafing of the blood through anger,
heat of the bowels, or else heat of the time of the year.

But saffron color appears rather with default of matter, through some
affection of the mind, watching, heat of the sun, labor, and such like things,
which increase thin and yellow choler, and diminish natural heat, so that the
cause of this color is choler it self, increased either in quantity, or else
in quality. But in old men and women, and such other, there is some greater
cause that occasioneth it, for it signifies an Ague comes of saffronly choler
dispersed through the whole body; after which there follows commonly
giddiness, headache, bitterness of the mouth, lothsomeness of meat, thirstiness,
Also in young men, such urine is caused through much exercise, and use of hot
meats.

Of Claret and red Urine.
Claret urine.
CLaret and red urine is colored either of the mixture of red choler, or else
of the corruption of blood; such urine oftentimes great before Agues. For when
the blood does so abound, that it cannot be duly labored, nor can take no
air, there is engendered a certain corruption, which as it is red of color it
self, so it causes the urine to be red in color if it be much, else it makes
only claret color. But if it be exact red lik grain, it betokens that blood
issues into it, out of some veins nigh to the reins, which either are broken,
or other ways opened. But how it may be known from whence it comes, and how,
there are many means to search, but because they are not light to perceive, I
will reserve them for Physicians that are learned. This color of it self is no
great evil sign, namely in young men, for it betokens excess of blood, which
may well be born of them. But in old men it is a very evil sign, for it
betokens either long sickness, or else death, since nature is so weak that it
cannot keep in her natural humor. And if that red color, come of red choler,
as it does in young men, for the most part and not of blood (which thing a
learned Physician may conjecture partly by the former diet, and other signs
more) the accidents shall be the more troublous; howbeit yet not so evil, as
when it comes of saffron or golden choler, for this causes greater thirst,
and more troublous sleep then the other.

Of Crimson color.
Crimson color.
CRimson color is a token that the good humors of the body are burned, and
turned into red or black choler, which cause worse griefs then the other;
howbeit if it have a good ground, the grief is the more moderate: But if it
have either no contents for a space, or else evil contents, and the urine
appear like a thick myste, but somewhat glistering light, it is a sign that
nature needs such strength to recover her self to her own state.
Notwithstanding such urine is caused sometime in whole folk, by reason of much
labor, and long journying, and then it has some good signs therewith. But in
them that have a sharp Ague, such crimson color of urine does betoken that
corrupt blood does abound, and that it does putrify, and turn into choler. And
commonly they that make such urine, do thirst much, and are dry in their
mouth, and are troubled in their sleep, and feel sharp Agues, and are half
distract and feel pain of the liver with coughing.

Howbeit, yet these signs, may be sometimes as well good as bad, according as
the colors do change to better or worse.

Of Purple Color.
Purple color.
PUrple color declares need of much strength before it can be altered to a
good urine.

This urine is a sign of burning choler. And if it do continue very long, it is
a token of the yellow Jaunders, with abundance of gross and corrupt choler,
gathered in the liver. And at the beginning there goes with it some spices and
grudgings of the Ague, with a little thirstiness; but unless there be
discretion used in the diet of such a Patient, it may turn to a much worse
disease.

Of Green Vrines.
Green color.
GReen color is an evil and a dangerous token, for it needs not only long
time, but also cotinual strength to bring it again to a good trade. The higher
that this color is, the more it declares that choler exceeds the other
humors: which if it be any more burned, will cause black urine, of which I
will anon speak. But if green color come of wasting of the fat, then is it
somewhat like to oily color, or popinjay green: but if it come of abundance
of purpelish color, and through increase of his quality, then does the color
incline more toward black, and glistereth with shadowie green, drawing very
nigh unto black. After green choler follows madness, parbreaking, and
avoiding of choler, sometimes with matter, or else burned: and also continual
thirstiness, and burning heat of the tongue, straightness about the stomach.
And like other things. But if the patient continue strong, and the color of
the urine do wax lighter, there is good hope, else there is great fear, least
of the dryness and burning, there do follow contraction of the sinews, which
will kill the patient.

Of Oilie Urine, or Popinjay Green.
Oilie urine, popinjay green.
Oily Urine is of three sorts, as I said in the first Chapter, that is, light
oily, stark oily, and ddark oily.

Oily urines are a token of unnatural heat, and the higher that the color is,
the greater is the heat. And also they betoken melting of the fat within a man,
for of it are they so colored. But at the beginning, when there is a little
fat melted, the urine is light oily. For if it look stark oily, then it
signifies that the disease increases. But if it come once to dark oily, then
is the disease sore increased. Hippocrates in the seventh Book of his Aphorisms
speaking of fatness in urine, says thus: Who so makes urine with fatty flotes
coming much and fast, they have sharp pains in the reins.

Which sentence though it seem more to appertain to the contents then to the
color, yet does not only Galen, but also Aetius, Actuarius, and also another
Grecian, (whose name I know not) expound it amongst colors: and by it declare
the difference to know whether that wast or melting of fat be in the reins it
self, or in other parts of the body. For if it come fast together (as
Hippocrates says) then comes it from the reins it self, and betokneth the
wasting to be in them. But if it come softly and increase by little and little,
then does it declare that the whole body is overcome with unnatural heat, and
that the fat of it does wast: it does betoken (as Act. witnesses) a wasting
Ague, consuming the body.

Of blew Urine, Ash color, and Black.
BLew color, Ash Color, and Black, do differ only in lightness and darkness.
For ash color is darker then blew: and black is darker then any of them both.

Blew color.
Blew color sometime comes of moderate melancholy, and then is the urine
somewhat thin in substance. And sometime it comes of great cold, and then it
is thick in substance. And sometime it is a token of mortifying of some part.
Yea, and sometime even of whole nature: namely, if the color change to worse
and worse, and there went before no token of concoction.

Ash Color.
Ash colored urine comes of like causes, and betokens like things. Howbeit
it is so colored many times, when the party that made it, has been fore
beaten an bruised. But in this you need not the help of urine, for you may see
the walts and tokens of the stripes in his body.

Black urine.
Urine which is extreme black, sometime betokens extreme heat, and sometime
extreme cold, the which both you may distinctly discern, if you do observe
order of alteration in the colors of the urine that the patient made last
before. For if his urine before were green, or like thereto, then does the
black urine which follows it, betoken extreme heat. But if it were last before
blew or ash colored, then does it signify extreme cold. This black color
though it be commonly an evil and deadly sign, as I said before, (speaking of
thick urine and black) yet sometime it is a good token.

For in all diseases lightly that come of melancholy matter, it betokens that
the matter does avoid, and so the sickness to end. And such urine does appear
many times after purgations or other meats and drinks which purge the spleen;
namely, if a man do labor upon them, that was before diseased of the splcen.

Howbeit, sometime meats and drinks of like color cause black urine, as Galen
witnesses, namely, after dark red wine, and Allegant.

But in moderate Agues, if such black urine do appear, it is a token of death,
except it be on some Critical days. And likewise in sharp agues, especially
if the savor be strong and stinking: unless it come of some grief of the
bladder

Quantity of urine.
Let this suffice for this time, as touching colors. Now for the quantity of
urine, as when it is mean, it is a good token: so when it is either too much,
or too little, it is an evil sign, except it come of such cause, (as I showed
before) that alters urine in a healthful man.

Much in a whole body.
As first excessive quantity of urine, comes of much drinking of thin wine,
as Rennish wine, and such like. But that shall you thus know: for the color
will be whitely, and the substance thinner then a mean: the contents also will
be diverse, and not duly knit, Likewise if there be abundance of raw humors in
a man unconcocted, and yet nature persevering strong, then is there great
quantity of urine, and somewhat thin of substance, but not so white as the
other, and the contents of this are better. Also (as Hippocrates says) much
Vtine made in 4. Aph. 3.
the night, is a token of small sege; so that if any impediment let natural
sege, then will the quantity of urine be the greater. But in this as the color
is mean, so is the ground both greater and grosser, yet in healthful folk may
the urine, by another means also be greater then a mean, and that may be by
medicines which provoke urine, but then is the color more natural then the
last that I spoke of, and the ground is thinner of substance, so that it is
dark and scarcely scene, and then is there a certain glistering in the urine it
self.

Little urine in a whole body.
Now contrary ways, and of contrary causes comes small quantity of urine.
For it comes sometime of lack of drink, or dry meats, and then is the color
light saffron, with a small ground, but yet somewhat gross. Also both meats and
medicines that are clammie, and apt to stop the water pipes, do cause little
urine, but then is the ground also little and thin.

Besides these, much sege causes urine to be lesser, for if the one excrement
be greater then nature would, the other must needs be less, if the body be
healthful. In this urine, as you may partly know the cause of it by the
knowledge of the excessive sege, so will the urine it self be thinner, and the
ground very dark, thin, and not duly knit. And thus many ways may this
alteration appear in a healthful body.

Much urine in a sick body.
Now in a sick person, much urine either betokens the dropsy, and then is it
like water, with a raw and diverse ground, or else if it be white, thin, and
without ground, then does it betoken the pissing evil. And this urine (as
witnesses Galen in in his first Book of Judicials) is the worst of any other
of like sort, Diabete.
I mean which declare lack of concoction, for it declares the decay, yea I may
say, the utter extinction of two natural powers that is, the retentive power,
and the alterative power also.

Much urine, in color fiery, and light saffron, or of any like color, is to
be feared, namely, if it be coupled with evil contents; But if it be of
crimson or purple color, and so proceed, especially if no concoction went
before it, then does it incline to evil, and betokens a certain mortifying
and wasting of the whole composition of the body.

But if much urine come in an Ague, namely toward the end, and that there went
before it little urine, thick and rud die, then is that a good token, 4. Aph.
69.
as witnesses Hypocnates for it betokens the Ague to be at an end. And this
Urine will be white and thin moderately, and will have a mean ground.

Little uril in a sick body.
Now little quantity of urine, with a gross ground, unduly knit and unconcoct,
is an evil token; for it betokens the weakness of the alterative power,
which is not able to extenuate, concoct, neither alter the matter, and
therefore does it with much difficulty pass forth in such grossnes. Howbeit, if
there follow after it a more thin urine, with the ground well and duly knit,
and stable, then is it without fear. For this latter urine (as you heard
before) is a token that the cause of the other is overcome and vanquished.

This little quantity of urine comes sometime in vehement Agues, and then is
the violent heat, cause thereof. Sometime also it comes of the stopping of the
water-pipes, not only through clammy meats and drinks, but also of some disease
or grief in them.

And this now shall suffice for an Introduction, as touching the substance,
colors, and quantity of urine.

It follows next, Contents.
to speak of the contents which so greatly help to the right judgment of
urine, that Hippocrates (in his second book of Prognostications) does by them
only yen, and that by one of them (I mean the ground (pronounce the judgment
of a perfect urine; saying, That that is the best Urine, Sediment.
which has his sediment or ground, white, duly knit and stable, and that
continually all the time of the sickness.

Now seeing this great Clerk and Father of Physic, does thus esteem the
ground, it shall not seem unmeet, that I orderly do write briefly of those
principal things that are to be considered, as touching the contents; and
first of all of the ground, which has alteration (as you have heard) both in
substance, color, and quantity.

But now as touching the substance? then is it only mean, when the third
concoction in the veins is perfect. For the ground is the excrement (as you
might say) of that third concoction, and is like in form to matter, save that
it is more duly knit together then is matter, and does not smell so evil as
it; or else you may liken it to thin fleam.

Grosses ground.
This Ground is then gross, when the veins are replenished with raw humors,
Howbeit this grosseness or thickness is not always an evil token; for
sometime it is a sign that nature has prevailed against the crude humors
which caused diseases, and does expel such superfluous excrements. And that
shall you discern by the goodness, of the color, and also if it come in the
declining of the sickness: for if it come at the beginning, either in the
increase of the sickness, then are they to be suspected as evil; especially if
they bring with them evil colors.

Thin ground.
A thin ground, being also pure, and so cleaving to the bottom of the Urinal,
that it will not lightly rise, though the urinall be shaked, it is a token of
great weakness of nature in the third concoction, and such a ground appears
most in white and watrie urine. Howbeit sometime a thin ground comes by the
reason that the raw humors are extenuate through natural heat, which getting
new strength, does extenuate and disperse all grossness of raw humors within
the veins. For the property of heat, is to knit and bind together thin things,
and to extenuate and disperse gross and raw things.

Color of the ground.
Now as touching the colors of the ground, the perfect ground is neither
exceeding white, neither yet pale, but mean between both, for if there appear
any such excessive white, neither yet pale, but mean between both, for if there
appear any such excessive white, then is it some rag of phlegmatic matter, or
else matter extremely concocted, which comes from some inward member being
sore; and that you may discern (as I said before) by the toughnes, and by the
savor.

And if any man be desirous to know the cause why the ground is white of
color, let him remember, that the ground is the superfluous excrement of the
blood being perfectly concocted in the veins. Now that the blood it self, when
it is exactly concocted, is turned into a white, or at least, a party white
color, you may conjecture by the generation of milk, and also the seed of
man, yea, and of matter, which all three are nothing else but blood, exactly
concocted, save that matter comes of evil blood.

And therefore whenever the ground has in it any other color then white, it
is no good token: As first, if it be pale and flaxen colored, Pale, Flaxen.
then it is swarved from his right and commendable color. Howbeit, yet it may
be born as but meanly evil, because that that color comes of small excess
of choler.

But if it be more higher colored by choler, so that it be saffron colored,
Saffron. Actuarius.
then is it an evil token (as Actuarius says) for it declares that choler is
excessively increased, either by the order of diet, or else by the corruption
of blood, or some other ways. Howbeit Hippocrates in his Aphorisms, 7. Aph. 32.
seems to say the contrary; for he says, That when the ground is so colored
of choler, especially if at the beginning of the sickness it were waterie to
sight, then does it betoken a quick sickness; that is to say, as Philotheus
expounds it, Philotheus.
a sickness, that will shortly be ended, and so it may justly be called a good
sign. Notwithstanding as in this point it is a good token, in that it
signifies that the disease is nigh the end, so it may be called (as Actuarius
calls it) an evil sign because it does betoken a choleric sickness, and
that choler does unnaturally abound.

And if this answer do not content you, (though it content Antonius Musa) than
may you say more better (as I think) thus: Antonius Musa.
That if the ground be at the beginning of the sickness colored with choler,
and so increase (as Actuarius seems to mean) then is it an evil token indeed,
for it declares both the abundance, and also the increase of choler. But if
the ground, at the beginning of a choleric disease were watery, that is, white
and thin, and afterward turn to saffron color, which is the exact color of
choler: or elso to a yellow color (which is somewhat less choleric) then is
it a token that the choleric matter, which before lay lurking in the body,
does now begin to avoid; and so the cause of sickness, thus by nature
expelled, health must needs follow.

As contrariwise, if after yellow or saffron color it change unto whiter, and
there be no certain token of concoction, then it is an evil sign, and a token
of frenzy. Howbeit, if there be any token of certain concoction, then is the
same a good sign, so that if you take heed, you may perceive here what a
necessary thing it is to observe order in the alteration of urine, of which I
have partly spoken before.

Claret color. Red. Bloody.
Now therefore to go o^n If the ground be of claret color, either red or
blew, the token is not good. For these bloody colors come either of too much
abundance of blood, or else by reason that the retentive power is so feeble,
that it cannot keep in the good humors, but suffers them to run out.

Claret red.
Claret color and red, do betoken a certain default of concoction in the
veins, and that through the excess of red choler. But yet this default is but
mean and without danger, seeing that the hurt is only by quantity, whereas some
other do hurt both by quantity and quality also.

Bloody grounds are altogether worse then red (though they be better then
ashcoloured, Bloody.
and black) for they betoken that the blood is nothing duly wrought,
especially if their quantity be much, withal, for then the quantity of matter
does let the powers to work, which thing yet as it may be born, so it declares
need of long time to recover health.

But if this do come through weakness of the powers in themselves, then is it
an extreme evil sign: for it betokens that the powers are overcome with
weariness in working, and be not able to keep in the good and profitable
humors. Which thing to discern more exactly, you shall take artificial
conjectures by other circumstances, which give also tokens of judgment;
namely, as by the age of the person, by his order of diet, and such like.

Blew. Ash Color. Black.
Now to make an end with the other colors which are of a dark hew, as
blew-ash-colour and black: These of all other are the worst, and most envious
to nature, and the nearer they cleave to the bottom of the urinall, the worse
they are.

These colors come of a black melancholy humor, being engendered within the
veins, or else coming from some other part into them: or else it betokens
deadly mortifying. But sometimes it comes of sore bruising and stripes, and
generally it comes (namely the black) either of excessive cold or excessive
heat.

And now for a conclusion, whatsoever I have said of the ground, you shall
understand the same to be spoken of the swim, and the cloud; for they are in
kind but one thing save that they differ in lightness and heft, and therefore
also in places. But the judgment of their substance and color, is much after
one rate, though some difference there be, as you shall hear hereafter.

And likewise of their quantity, Quantity
which as it is then only commendable when it is mean, so if it be greater then
a mean, it does declare some alteration in man, though not always extremely
evil, for sometime it is a token of fatting, or growing to a corporateness,
Great.
and that it does signify, if none other evil sign be coupled with it. For
though the person seed much on nourishing meats, and that with rest and an idle
life yet natural heat appears so strong, that she can easily concoct such
meats. According to this says Galen in his Judicials, that the plenty of the
ground in urine betokens certain and exact with concoction: And that as the
body is repleat with crude humors, so it declares that those same be in
expelling out at that present time. And for this cause (says he) in all
children commonly, and in men also which feed much, or be of some other cause
replete with humors, their urine has a great ground.

Also oftentimes it chances the pores of the skin to be stopped, so that inch
excrements as were wont to pass out by them, are enforced to seek a new
passage, which they find most readiest by the urine, and thereof are the
contents, and namely the ground, oftentimes increased. And all these ways
chance in health. But in sickness, it chances many and gross superfluities do
appear in the urine, as often as the natural powers, namely, the alterative or
concoctive power being weakened, such crude humors pass out undefied.

So does it chance (as witnesses Alexander Trallianus) That the urine of them
which have the Colic, Tral. 2. cap. 33.
is phlegmatic and has a great ground. But if the contents be either great, or
gross in the beginning, or in the augmenting of sickness, (namely if the
Patient have any notable Ague) it argues abundance of humors, to the
concoction of the which there needs both strength of natural powers, with
time and good speed.

Little Contents.
And now contrary ways must you judge of the smalness of the contents, for they
be caused either of great labor, long fasting, stopping, or obstruction of the
veins, and such like parts, or else of slacknesse of concoction. And (as Galen
says) when the body is replete with crude and raw humors, Gal. 2. pres. Hip.
26.
then is the ground great, but if the body be replenished with choleric
humors, then is there in the urine either little ground or none at all; but in
such case it is well, if there be any sublimation or swim.

Urine without ground.
Now seems the place most meet to speak of such urines as have no ground at
all, nor other orderly content, and that will I do by the order of the colors
of the urine, according as Actuarius proceeds.

The urine that is very white, and exceeding thin, and so lacks the ground,
does betoken either some notable obstruction, either immoderate cold, or else
cruditie and lack of concoction. And as these tokens may be greater or lesser,
so shall the things which they betoken be judged in like rate, either more, or
lesser.

But if the urine be pale colored, or flaxen, and then lacks contents, as
it does declare lesser obstruction, so it does signify as great cruditie, as
the other before.

And so shall you judge of urine that is yellow or flaxen colored. For in them
it appeared, that natural heat does prevail. Notwithstanding such things (I
mean the default of the ground with those colors) may chance (as often they
do) through vehement pain, immoderate labor, long watching, and also default
of matter.

But such urines as be higher colored then these that I have named, by their
colors they declare the qualities of the humors which doc prevail: and also
betoken a certain putrefaction, and cruditie in the veins.

It chances also sometimes, that some gathering sore being in some of the
principal members, by his unnatural heat withdraw thither the matter (even as
it were by cupping) and so does cause the urine to have no ground. And though,
indeed, it is never a good token to lack the ground in a urine, yet it is less
to be complained of, if the color and substance draw nigh to a mean; for in
such a case it betokens, that though nature be somewhat slack, yet will she
shortly gather strength, so that there shall appear a ground in the urine.

Now to show you the reason, why it chances no ground to appear in the urine:
First, in case of cruditie, when there wants perfect concoction, there must
needs want also the contents in the urine; for they are the excrements (as you
might say) and the superfluities of the third concoction. Likewise though
concoction be perfect enough, yet may there want the contents, if there be any
notable obstruction or stopping of the veins, namely, seeing the contents are
somewhat gross of substance, and therefore unable to pass, if the way be any
thing stopped.

After the same sort shall you judge of long fasting and default of meat, and
moreover of such meats as are unapt to concoct. For in all such cases, there
can be engendered few or no contents.

And contrariwise, though nature do work many superfluities, yet if the womb
be so loose that it yields many seges, then as the urine shall be the lesser,
so shall the contents be few or none: for nature then does expel by sege, those
superfluities, which should cause the contents.

And likewise, when there is in any part of the body an inflammation or
excessive heat, which does draw matter to it, either that any of those parts
are weak, unto which nature is wont to expel such superfluities; for in all
such cases there may want the ground, and the other contents in the urine. And
as for some of them (I mean cruditie and opilation) they may be well enough
born withal, unles their continuance be long.

But now again, there is great difference touching the time of the sickness in
which it chances, for in the beginning and increase of sharp Agues, if the
ground be lacking, it betokens great weakness of natural strength, which if
not prevented, may continue unto the chief strength of the sickness. And after
such an urine, there does follow much waking and disquietness, half madness
and trouble of mind, and all those shall be according to the greatness of the
Ague, either extreme or mild. And sometime it is a token that there shall be a
gathering sore in some part of the body, namely, if other agreeable causes come
therewith, as a winterly disposition of the air, with an uncertain state of
sickness, and unconstant alteration, and mean weakness of the Patients power.
But in the declination of the sickness, such urine ought not greatly to be
blamed, for then has nature escaped the brunt of sickness, though she be yet
weak. Yea, and in the chief strength of sickness (as well as in the declination)
it may seem no orange thing, if nature (as though already she had the
over-hand) do gather her power together, and draw a little nourishment to her
self, and thereby causes little or no ground to appear. But afterward when
she is somewhat refreshed, and does more liberally nourish the body, then does
she show forth contents in the urine. And lightly the order of the contents is
such, that first there appears a cloud, which afterward does gather wore
strong and weighty substance, and does become a swim or sublimation: And last
of all, when it has gathered a right natural whitness, and due substance,
then will it grow to a ground.

CHAP. IX. Of difform Contents.
OTher things should I here speak of, as touching the Judicial of the
contents, both of their stableness, that is, their continuance in good form,
and of their due knitting, being neither tittered, nor dispersed, nor yet
overmuch clodded together. But because the exact judgment thereof exceeds
the capacity of mean wits (for whose sake I have written this Book) and cannot
lightly be perceived of them, but by the Instruction of a lively voice, I will
for this time overpass the exact and perfect declaration of them reserving it
to a place more due: And now will I briefly overrun the other things which
remain to be considered in urine, but yet not without some mention of those
other, as occasion comes: and first those difform Contents which occupy the
place of the ground, Difform contents.
and therefore take his name also.

Of this sort there are four principal: the first is in bigness of a small
fatch, and red colored, which you may call therefore red fatches, because of
their likeness. These (as witnesses Galen) are engendered of the consumption
and wasting of the flesh when the fatness is already melted away. Red fatches
6. Epid.
But in this there is great difference, for sometime it is only the wasting of
the reins, and sometime of the whole body: as if there appear in the urine
tokens of due concoction, then is that wast in the reins only. But if there
appear in the urine default of concoction, (namely being great) or if the
patient have an Ague, then is it the wast of the whole body, and that stands
well with reason, that when it betokens the wast of the whole body, there
must needs appear default of concoction; for in such case those parts which are
the Instruments of concoction are so weakened, that they cannot do their office.
These contents, by reason that they are gross and heavy, therefore they appear
always in the bottom of the urinall.

Other difform contents there be also, of which some are like bran, Brannie
contents.
and some like scales. And of those that are like bran, there is one sort
smaller, and another grosser; the smaller sort is like the bran of Wheat that
is finely ground, and those may I call fine bran. The grosser is like bran of
Barley, or of evil ground wheat, and may therefore be called gross bran, Fine
bran. Gross bran.
for it is thrice as big as the other.

The third sort which is like Scales, Scales.
has no notable thickness, but only breadth and length. These three do
betoken waste of the strongest parts of the body; but yet not all alike, as
Hippocrates does declare in the second Book of his Prognostics. Howbeit,
because that place of Hippocrates is so difficult, that scarcely the great
learned men can agree thereon, I will not now meddle therewith, but will write
Actuarius mind of those three.

When the Ague (says he) is grounded in the bottom of the veins, then there
appears such fine bran. Fine bran.
Howbeit, sometimes it is a token of the only grief of the bladder being
scabbed, as witnesses Hypocrates, 4. Aphor. 77. But then has the Patient no
Ague, and again, there does appear tokens of concoction in the urine. But when
it comes of the whole body, this is the cause thereof; The Ague getting power
and prevailing unto the hard parts of the body (as in those Agues which are
called Fevers hectike) then in the striving between those parts and the Ague,
the Ague having the masterie, does by his violence raise of such brannie
scurffe. For the nature of fire (whose operation the Ague has) is to work
according as the matter is that it finds, either to melt it, if it be a
liquid and unctuous thing, either else to scale it and fret it, if it be hard
and unpliant: and the harder that the matter is, the greater scales it fretteth
off; which thing you may see by daily experience, how fire melts wax and
tallow, and such like, turning them into liquids: whereas of iron and of ocher
metals, Scales.
it makes scales and not liquor.

But when the Ague has attained and overset, not only the substance of the
veins, but also the strong parts of the body, and does melt and waste them,
then does there appear in the urine, scales, broad and thin, which you shall
know to come of the whole body (as I said of the other before) if the Pacient
have an Ague, or there appear default of concoction in the urine: else if these
two be absent, it may come of the blistering of the bladder, as Hippocrates
writes 4. Aphor. 81. and namely, if there be in the urine an evil savor
withal.

Now to speak of the great and gross bran, Gross bran.
which as it is much greater then the other, so does it declare a greater
strength or the Ague, and that in the whole body, and all the parts of it,
enflaming and burning the whole substance thereof, and therefore is it not only
the worst of them all, but is nigh unto a deadly sign, Note.
and that either by the waste and consuming of the great and strongest parts of
the body, or else by the burning or drying up of the blood. Which two things
you may discern asunder by the color of them. For if they be red, then come
they of the burning of the blood; but if they be white, then come they of the
wast of the strongest parts of the body.

Of this kind of contents speaks Hippocrates saying: Hippoc. 7. Aphor. 31.
In whatsoever Agues there does appear grounds like unto gross bran, it is a
token that the sickness shall continue long. Which saying, Galen does
understand so to be true, If the Patient have sufficient strength to continue
with such sickness, else it may be a sign rather of short life, then of long
sickness. For as that token is commonly deadly, so those few that do escape,
do recover hardly, and not without the long sufferance of the violence of that
cruel Ague.

Now as touching the foreknowledge of it, whether the patient may endure with
it or no, that shall you gather of the multitude, order, and stableness or
unstableness of it. For if they be many in number, and proceed to worse and
worse, then it is an evil and mortal sign, and does declare that nature is
wearied and does quite faint through the waste and decay of the whole
constitution of the body: But contrariwise, if they appear few, and do alter
continually unto less evil tokens, then is there good hope of health. And
this shall suffice as touching these.

Ragged scraps.
Now to speak of the rest, of the ragged scraps, hairs, and other like: First
you shall understand, that sometime a good ground is coupled with certain evil
and unconcted fragments of' all sorts of humors, for sometime there appears
with the contents certain ragged scraps, enclining in color toward a yellow,
or a white, or else some such like, if those appear in great quantity, they
declare the matter to be half unconcoct, and that the humor (whose scraps they
are) does abound in the depth of the body, and is as dust or burned, but if
they be few, then declare they the malice of the humor to be milder, and that
the use of evil meats does cause them, the greater that such ragged scraps
are, the lesser adustion of humors they declare to be in the veins, and the
lesser they be, the greater heat they do betoken. For the cause of such ragged
scraps is excessive heat, which does turn those humors into a thickness, and as
it were a bony nature, by reason that they have remained long in certain veins,
and were neither dissolved, nor extenuated, nor yet quickly expelled by urine.

Besides these there are hairs of sundry lengths, Hairs.
some an inch, and some an handful long, some longer, and some shorter; and
these are in color whitely, and do betoken grief of the reins. These are
engendered in the water-pipes, which go from the reins to the bladder, so that
as long as those water-pipes are in length, so long may those hairs also be,
which are a gross and baked humor, wrought in form of a hair.

Of those speaks Hippocrates, saying; 4. Aph. 76.
In whose Urine soever there does appear little pieces of flesh, either as it
were hairs, those same come from the reins, namely, if the urine be thick.
Howbeit these are sometimes seen in such men's urines as feel no grief in the
reins, but only have fed some continuing space on phlegmatic meats, which will
prepare matter to such diseases, as they do also to many other griefs, of which
to speak in this place it is meet.

But to go on with this thing that we have in hand, beside such ragged scraps
and hairs (as I have spoken of) there appear sometimes in the ground of the
urine, and also dis-parkled abroad in the urine it felf, sundry and diverse
kinds of motes (as it were) which do declare that there is grief dispersed in
sundry parts of the body. Motes.


And this now may suffice, as touching contents of every kind: Therefore now
will I a little repeat out of Actuarius of the diversity of judgment, The
places of the contents. The lowest region.


That ground which fleeteth nigh to the bottom of the urinall, being in other
points also good and mild, does betoken no strange thing. But if it be
unconcoct and deformed, it betokens default in nature, And if his parts be
disparkled asunder, it betokens a dimness in nature, which does not resist
the rebellion of noisome humors, so that in such case there appears need both
of long time, and also more strength to overcome that evil. But as it is
commendable that the ground fleet nigh the bottom of the urinall, so is it
discommendable if it lie flat on the bottom of the same.

The middle region.
Now as touching the swim or sublimation, if it be good in color and other
ways, then does it differ only in place from a right ground: and that comes
of an unnatural windiness, which makes it to be so light, and to fleet above
his due place, but if his color and other like points be evil, yet then does
it betoken less evil, then if it were in the right place of the ground.

the highest region.
But now as touching the third and highest region, which is the place of the
clouds. If there appear a light and thin cloud, it betokens no small grief of
the head. But this difference is there in the clouds, the better that they be
in color and substance, the farther they differ from a right good and natural
Content. And therefore need they long time to return thereunto. And contrary
ways, the worse that they are in color and substance, the less they are to be
blamed, by reason of their place, which is so much distant from the natural
place of Contents. For this is a general rule: The lower that good contents
fleet in the urine, (excepting always such as cleave to the had bottom) the
better they are. And contrary ways of evil contents and such like, the higher
they fleet, the less evil they betoken.

The proportion of the regions, to the parts of man.
Now to make an end of this. You shall observe a certain proportion that is
between the parts of the urine, and the parts of man's body. The highest part of
the urine does betoken, the highest part of the body, namely the head, and such
other near unto it. The middle region of the urine does represent the middle
parts of man, as the breast, the bowels, and the parts about them. The nether
region of the urine does purport the lowest parts of man, from the bowels
downward. And if you mark well this proportion, you may the easier judge the
griefs of the parts of man.

For when the contents which in color and substance are natural, and yet by
the abundance of windiness be lift up to the higher part of the urine, it
declares some great pain to be in the head. And in like manner, when the swim
or sublimation does declare grief, that grief must be lodged to be in the
middlemost parts of man (as I said before) and so of the other.

A gain, as this proportion between the regions of urine, and the parts of man's
body does declare that place in certain height, so does it in breadth also by
like proportion, if you do duly mark the side, unto which the contents do
decline.

And if you mark well what I have said, you may perceive the only cause of most
such griefs, when the contents is only disordered in place, comes of an
unnatural windines, but yet commonly annexed with phlegmatic and unconcocted
matter.

And as the windiness does cause disorder in the contents, so it causes also
another kind of things not to be neglected in urine, and that is bubbles:
Bubbles.
which sometimes flote in the ring or garland only, and sometimes in the
midst of the urine only, and other times do cover the whole face of the
urine.

The Bubbles which stand round about over the garland only, and continue
without parting, if they be of the same color that the urine is, they declare
great pain co be in the head, and that in all parts of the head, if the Bubbles
join together without parting. But and if they occupy only the one half of the
garland, then is that pain in the one half of the head. And so forth may you
judge by like proportion.

But if they do part in sundry places, and join not all together, it is a
token that the pain is the lesser, and comes of a weaker cause. The more
yellower that their color is, the greater they declare the pain in the head to
be. If they be white, or rather whitish, and stand about in the compass of the
garland, they betoken little pain or none. And if the urine be thin withal,
they betoken weakness of natural heat, or else the opilation and stopping of
the reins, namely, if there appear no ground in the urine. This does
Hippocrates witness, saying; 7. Aph. 14.
When in the urine there swimmeth bubbles, they betoken grief in the reins: And
also that it shall long continue. The reason of the long continuance (as Galen
and Philotheus do both declare) is, because that the grief comes of cold and
tough phlegmatic matter, which always is long before it may overcome. Pliny
also says, Lib. 28. c. 6.
that that urine is evil, which is full of bubbles and thick, in which if the
ground be white, it is a token that there shall be grief either about the
joints, or else about the bowels. Howbeit, yet sometimes the bubbles are not an
evil token, but contrariwise, a good token of concoction, and declare that
nature does now apply her self wholly unto concoction. And this do the Bubbles
signify, when they appear in the water, in which they were not seen long
before And therefore in an Ague, we may conjecture the declination of it, when
we see bubbles to appear after that sort; except it be so that they appeared in
the urine at the beginning of the sickness, and has so continued still: For
then they declare grievous pain to be in the head, yea and that dangerous, if
the urine also be thin in substance. But if the substance of the urine be
thick, then the bubbles are not so evil a sign, neither declare so grievous
danger.

Sometimes in stead of Bubbles which do not appear when they should, it
suffices that there appear a gross some (as it is sometimes seen to rise upon
wine) and it does betoken even the same thing that the Bubbles do, Tome.
especially in the declination of the Ague, of which I spoke a little before.

These Bubbles do appear very thick about the garland, in the urine of him that
has the issue of seed, or wast of nature. Sometime also there are seen in the
Bubbles certain small scrapps (as you would say) much like hairs in grossness,
and so such length sometime that they reach from the one side of the bubble
unto the other, and sometimes longer, and sometimes shorter, which things may
come either of the wasting of the reins, or else of the shedding of nature.

The cause of the generation of bubbles, and also of the dispersing and
elevation of the contents, is an unnatural windiness. Of which, as there are
diverse kinds much differing asunder, partly in multitude, partly in substance,
and partly also in quality, so does the bubbles engendered of them diversely
vary, according unto those differences, whether they be sole and several, or
jointly many knit together. But windiness if it be gross, then does it puff
up such Bubbles; and if it be subtle, then does it rather work a dispersion in
the contents, and is not able nor meet to cause Bubbles. And hereby may you
know the quality of the windiness, and likewise also the quantity. For there
appears less quantity of windiness to be where the contents only are
dispersed, then where such Bubbles be engendered.

Now as touching the other qualities of it, as heat and cold (which are the
chief qualities indeed, and molt active) you may judge them by the color of
the bubbles. For as pale color, and other low colors declare coldness of that
windiness, so high colors enclining toward yellow or higher, be certain tokens
of heat.

Bubbles that are small, and thick knit together in the garland or the urine,
does betoken a gross windiness, whose cause cannot easily be vanquished; for
the grossness and toughness that is in them, will not suffer them to swell
great, and that causes them to be so small. And contrariwise, the greater that
the bubbles be, and the more bouled, the more they declare that windines that
causes them to be severed from tough matter. Moreover, the colder that such
windiness is, the lesser grief is felt of them,

Bubbles in the urine of old men, namely being great and large, do betoken
cold windiness, but sometime such bubbles are a sign of rheum distilling from
the head into the lights, especially if the Patient at the entering of Summer
were very hot, and so did drink much, which matter, the head being dried, did
draw unto him, and did distill again part of it down into the lights, whereof
comes a cough, and part of it into the womb, which thereby is moved to laxe.

CHAP. X. Of the Garlanded other like things.
AS I have compendiously, and yet not very slightly spoken of those former
parts to be considered in urine, so will I briefly speak of a few more, which
may not well be omitted, and so make an end of the Judicial.

The Garland.
First, therefore in the over-part of the urine, round about the edge of the
urine there appears a garland, circle, or ring, which does there appear, by
reason that the higher part of the urine being thinner than the rest, and more
subtiller, and therefore does not only more sooner alter, but does more readier
declare the alteration. Howbeit sometime there does appear no ring at all; and
that is when the color of the urine, and of it is all one, by reason of the
great force of the cause which alters the urine, but yet so that nature does
match that humor, and is neither overcome by it, neither yet has overcome it.
For if nature have plainly either got the victory, or lost it, then is there
another color in the garland, then is in the rest of the urine.

Now if the color of the urine be evil, and the color of the garland better,
it is a token of health. As if the color of the urine be yellow, red, or
crimson, or any such like, and the color of the garland be white, or whitely,
it is a token full of good hope; but when the color of the whole urine, is
evil, and the color of the garland worser yet, then is it an evil sign. As
when the color of the urine is green or purple, and the garland worse
colored, then is it a plain token that nature is overcome, and that the evil
humors have gotten the upperhand.

Of these more particularly does Egidius treat, but yet not more truly nor more
sufficiently, his words are these: If the circle of the urine be thick and
waterie, it is a token that the hinder part of the head is oppressed with
phlegmatic matter; but if it be purple-coloured and thick, then is the
forepart of the head overcharged with blood.

A pale and a thin circle declares the left side of the head to be troubled
with melancholy matter; but if it be red and thin, it betokens choler to
abound in the right part of the head.

Leddy or ash color.
A Leadie or Ash colored circle, does signify the falling Evil, through the
great grief of the brain.

And further declares that such grief shall proceed by the sinnews into the
other parts of the body. But if after such a leadie color there follow a
reddsh color, that is a good token; for then does nature gather strength
again, and the powers of the brain reviveth.

If the color of the garland be green, Green.
and the Patient have a burning Ague, it is to be feared, least that the
abundance of choler shall cause a Frenzy.

Black color in the circle does sometime betoken mortification, Black.
and sometime only extreme heat. But these shall you distinct (as I said before
of the urine it self) by the order of the colors. For if green color went
before, then does the black betoken adustion through heat, but if his color
last before was ash color, then is it a token of death, coming through the
dominion of cold. And thus much as touching the colors may suffice for this
time.

Quivering in the garland.
Sometimes also you shall perceive a quivering and trembling in the garland, and
that declares grief in the backbone. And thus many tokens be taken of the
circle or garland.

Sometimes there will appear fleeting on the urine, certain scum or fattiness,
Fattiness.
sometimes like drops of oil, and sometime like a thin spiders web, and these
both do betoken the melting of the fat within the body, as Hippocrates
witnesses in his Prognostics, 7 Aph. 30.
howbeit in his Aphorisms he does assign it as a token of the grief of the
reins peculiarly, saying; In whole urine there fleeteth fattiness, and that
much at once, they have pain in the reins, but shall not long endure.

This Aphorism does Galen understand so to be true, if that fattiness appear
quickly and much at once; else if it come by little and little with longer
continuance, so does it not betoken wast only of the fat about the reins, but
rather throughout the whole body, which sign yet is not always evil, except it
continue long; for if it continue but a little while, it declares no great
evil.

Now to go forth with other signs; If the urine have a stinking savor,
Stinking savor in urine.
it is ever an evil sign, for it does betoken some putrefaction more or less;
as of the bladder only, by some blister or sore in it: and that most
certainly, when the stinch is very great, and there appears also scales in
the urine, and matter. But if there be matter in the urine, and the stinking
savor but mean, then does it declare the sore to be in some other part of the
body. But this ever is true, that matter in urine is a token of a sore. And if
in continuance of time the matter and stinch do abate, it is a good token, but
if the other continue or increase, it is an evil sign. If the urine do
stink, and there appear no matter in it, then is it a token of some
mortifying. For if there be in the urine mean tokens of concoction, then is the
mortification in some one part of the body; but if the other signs in the urine
be evil, then is that mortification rather of the whole body, then of any one
part of it.

And thus have I overrun briefly the chief things to be considered in urine,
which (I say) are appertaining or annexed to the urine it self. Howbeit two
other things there are, which though they be more plainer then these other, yet
may they be overpassed no more then the other: that is to say, blood coming
forth with the urine, and gravel expelled there with also.

Blood coming forth with urine, Blood.
does declare some sore to be in the reins or bladder (as Hippocrates writes
in his Aphorisms) or else some vein to be broken about the reins, namely if it
come suddenly, and without manifest cause. Howbeit as Galen, Oribasius, and
diverse others do declare, and reason also with experience does consent, there
may appear blood in the urine also, if that there be such a sore in the liver,
or in the shaft. But in any of these cases, the pain felt in the place and
part, will utter from whence the blood comes.

Now to speak of gravel: Hypocrates says, Gravel.
In whose urine there appears gravel in the bottom, they have the stone in
the bladder, or else in the reins, as Galen adds; but commonly if the stone
be in the reins, the gravel will be red, as Hypocrates declares in his sixth
Book of his Epidemies, And thus now will I make an end of the judicial of urine.

CHAP. XI. Of the Commodities and Medicines of Urine.
THe greatest commodity of urine is already declared: that is, That it does
declare unto man, the manifold diseases which happen unto him; and thereby does
not only give him knowledge of the cause, and so consequently of the cure of
the same, but also warns him before of the grief to come, whereby he may take
an occasion to eschew it, if he will be diligent.

Now as this is the greatest commodity of urin, so it has many other as well
in use of medicine as other ways, of which I will write some, though not all.
And first out of Pliny, Pliny.
which recites strange operations of the urine of a Hedgehog, and of a Beast
that the Greeks call Leontophon, and moreover of the Beast Lynx, which I omit
now with many other: but this will I not omit, Urine of man.
that Hosthanes says: That if a man let his own urine drop upon his feet in
the morning, it is good against all evil. And that it is good for the gout, we
may perceive by Fullers, which never have the gout, by reason that their feet
are so often washed with it.

Ostrich urine.
The same Pliny writes, That the Urine of an Ostrich, will do away blots and
moles of Ink.

Also that if Urine be tempered with water of like quantity, and so powered at
the roots of the trees, it will both nourish them (as many men say) and also
drive all noyance from them.

The urine also of men or oxen, tempered with honey, and given to Bees, Bees.
will cure them that are poisoned with the flower of the Cormier or Cornoiller
tree.

And likewise if Beans be steeped in urine Beans.
and water three days before they be sowed, some judge that they will
increase exceedingly. Dioscorides Stinging Adders, etc.
Dioscorides says, That a man's own urine is good to be drunk for stinging of
Adders, and against poison, and also against the dropsy when it does begin:
And for the stinging of the sea-Adders, of scorpions, and dragons; it is good
to soke the stinged part withal.

Dogs urine.
The urine of Dogs is good to soke the place that is bitten with a Dog, and to
cleanse manginess, and itchinesse, if salt peter be added thereto. And that
that is old will more strongly cleanse scales, scurff, scabs and hot pushes.
Also it stays fretting sores, namely, on the privy members. Furthermore it
stincheth mattering ears, if it be dropped thereinto, and if it be sod in the
rind of a Pomegranate, it expels worms out of the ears.

Childs urine.
The urine of a child under 14. years of age, does cure the toughness of breath,
if it be drunken. If it be sod in a brazen vessel with honey, it heals
creythes, and also the web and the tey in the eye. There is made of it and
copper, good soulder for gold.

Dregs of urine.
The dregs of urine is good for Saint Anthonies evil, if it be nointed thereon,
so that (as Galen does wisely add) the sore be cooled first with some other
thing, and be not burning. If it be heated with oil of privet, and laid to
the womb of a woman, it will assuage the grief of the mother, and cures also
the rising of the same. It cleanses the eie-lids, and the creythes in the eyes.

Ox stale.
Ox stale being tempered with myrrh, and dropped into sore ears, heals the
pain of them. The urine of a wild Bore, Wild bore.
is of the same virtue if it be kept (as Sextus Platonicus writes) in a
glass, and dropped warm into them, but it has a more peculiar property in
breaking of the stone, and to expel the same, if it be drunk.

Goats urine
Goats urine drunk every day, with Spikenard, and three ounces of water, is
good for the dropsy, for it expels urine by the sege, and it cures pain of
the ears, if it be dropped into them.

Ass piss.
Ass piss (as it is written) is good for the grief of the reins, if it be
drunk.

Mules stale.
Mules stale (as Paulus Aegineta says) is good to heal pain in the joints.

Camels and goats stale.
The stale of Camels and Goats also does provoke sege, and therefore is good for
them that have the dropsy.

Sextus Platonicus.
Sextus Platonicus says, That Goats urine (if it be drunk) does provoke
woman's terms, and cures pain in the ears being droped into them, and being
mixed with mulset wine, Paulus Aegineta.
and so dropped into the ears, it draws out matter, if there be any.

Wild Bore.
The urine of the wild Bore with mulset vinegar, is good for the falling evil,
if it be drunk.

Dogs piss.
A Dogs piss tempered with dust, and laid in wool, will heal corns marveilously,
and destroy warts.

Childs urine.
A child's urine will heal the stinging of a Be, Waspe and Hornet, if the place
be washed therewith.

Man's urine.
A man's urine will cleanse the freckles and spots in the face. And if a woman
cannot be delivered of the after burden, let her drink man's urine, and she
shall be delivered straight.

Collumella says, that the best dunging for young shots of trees, Collumella.
is man's urine, namely, which has stood half a year. For if you water vines or
apple trees with it, there is no dung that will cause so much fruit as it will
do: and not only that, but it causes also the savor and the taste both of
the apples, Sheeps urin
and of the wine, to be much the better.

Constantinus Affricanus says, That the urine of a Sheep, Constantinus
Affricanus.
or an Ox, with some hot oil, is good for the grief in the cars that comes of
cold. Urine (as Vitalis de Furno says) fretteth, Vitalis.
dries, and burns, and is good for the grief of the spleen, if it be drunk,
as Gontilis writes.

Ass stale.
The Urine of a male Ass, as the same Vitalis says) tempered with Nardus does
increase and preserve hair.

And as some say (by the writing of Marcellus Virgilius) Urine is of no small
nourishment, M. Virgilius.
for diverse folk in the time of dearth, have been preserved by the only use,
and drinking of it.

Also Marcellus the Practitioner, Marcellus.
in the 27. Chapter does witness; That the Urine of a man is good for diverse
diseases of the womb and bowels, and namely for the Colic, because that
partly with provoking of vomit, and partly by occasion of seges, it expels
strongly all noisome humors, and for the same cause does common Practitioners
keep it still in daily use.

Vldericus Huttenus.
Vlderick Hutten also witnesses, That he did drive away the Ague above 8.
times with the only drinking of his own Urine, at the beginning of his
sickness. And many still do use the same practice, and it proves well.

Marsilius Ficinus.
Likewise Marsilius Ficinus writes that Many men do use to drink urine for the
Pestilence; which thing did Galen write long before him, and also Paulus
Aegineta; and do testify also, that it preserved them that drank it: a the
least way as they thought.

All urine (as Galen writes) is hot in virtue, Galen.
and sharp (as says Aegineta) howbeit, it differs according to them that
make it. For the hotter they are that make it, the hotter is it also, and
likewise the colder urine comet h of a colder body.

Men's urine is the weakest of all other, except tame barrow hoggs; for they in
very many points agree with man, but the urine of wild Bores is stronger.

Man's urine
Men's urine is of as strong cleansing virtue as any thing else, and therefore
do Fullers use it to scour and cleanse their cloth. And in cure of grief s
also for the same reason, it is used to soke, and wash maunginess, and
scabbedness, and running sores that are full of corruption and filth, and
specially if they have in them putrified matter, and for such sores on the
privy members it is good, and for mattering ears, and for scales and scurf,
if the head be washed in it.

I have healed with it many times sores on the toes, namely, which came of
bruises, and were without inflammation, and that in servants and husbandmen,
which had a journey to go, and no Physician with them, bidding them to wet a
small clout with it, and to put into the sores, and then to bind a cloth about
it, and as often as they listed to make water, to let it fall on their sore
toes, and not to take the cloth away till it were quite whole.

That medicine which is made of childs urine, called of some men in Greek,
Chrisocola
Chrysocola (that is to say, gold soulder) because men use to soulder gold.
This (I say) is exceeding good for sores that are hard to heal. For this
medicine do I use for the chiefest, mixing it with such other things, as are
good for such like sores:

In the time of Pestilence in Syria, many did drink Childrens urine and men's
also, and thought that they were preserved by it.

Of urine also, do Alchumysts make diverse things, Alchumists.
as salt, and other things more.

And many other commodities there be of urine, as for washing and scouring,
and other like, which for briefness I over-passe, and the rather, because they
are commonly known of all folk.

Of the Diseases touching Vrines, and the Remedies for the same.
NOw to come to that I promised, as touching the griess which hinder urine, or
expel it disorderly, either in time oftener then is meet, or in quality, with
other fashions then is agreeable to it, or like other sorts, I will briefly
write, not intending to reach the art of curing them, (which would require a
longer Treatise, and a meeter place) but only to name certain of the most
common diseases, and to set after them such simple and uncompound medicines
only which cure those griefs.

Stopping of urine. The stone.
First therefore, touching the hinderance or stopping of urine, it is not
unknown, that one common cause is the stone, which sometimes is in the reins,
and sometime in the bladder. I showed you before, that commonly you may discern
those two asunder, by the color of the gravel, but the more sure token is the
grief in the sick part.

Now for the cure of the same, does these medicines serve, which follow. But as
I have always said, you shall use them with the counsel of some learned
Physician; for there is great difference both of the grief, and of the
medicines.

Medicines for the stone, both in the Reins and Bladder.
Astra Bacca. Ameos. Angle toches sod. Betony. Bryony root. Bylgrum. Chamamel.
Capers Bark, namely of the root. Claret seed. Clot seed. Dock root. Fenel seed,
and root. Goats blood. Gladian. Gromell. Gum of Plumtree, and Cherry tree. A
hedge Sparrow. Harebell. Kneholm root and Berries. Madder root. High Mallows
seed and Root. Mogwort. Parseley. Pelliter of Spain. Pyony Berries which are
black. Radish. Sampere. S. John's Wort. Sperage. Seholm. Swines Fenell. Sothern
Wood-seed. Sour Almonds. Tent-Wort. Tutsan Berries. Water Plantine. Winter
Gilli-flower
And beside these there are diverse others.

Also the Stone it self that came from a man, being braid and drunken, will
break and expel that other within him.

Beside the stone, also it causes the urine to be clean stopped, by reason of
weakness of the expulsive virtue, and some times through clodds of blood, which
rest in the shaft. Sometimes also through tough and clammie humors, and
sometime through some swelling within the yard, and diverse other ways also, of
which the declaration is too long for this place and time: but another time I
entend to write of them at large, and of all other griefs of man's body.

But to return to this matter that is in hand, One other stop of urine there
is, which does not clean let it, but causes it to avoid lesser then it should;
and this comes of like causes as that other last did, save that the cause is
less, according as the stay of urine is, and therefore the cure in both is much
like. For if it come of weakness of the expulsive virtue, then with the use of
other hot meats and drinks, those medicines are good which do provoke urine,
as these be that follow.

Medicines which do provoke urine.
Annise-seed. Ally-saunders. Alkakengi. Basyle. Bylgrum. Cammock. Charlock.
Chervell. Carawayes. Calamus Aromaticus. Cubebes. Dictany of Candie. Dragance.
Fumitorie. Fatchys. Flower delyce. Garlike. Ground pine. Ginger. Helecompane.
Honey. Juniper and the Berries. Lase saverie. Leeks. Mints. Margerom. Maiden
hair. Navew. Nepte. Negella Romana. Nettle. Pepper. Pie Ryall. Quinces. Rue.
Rosemary. Rocquet. Savine. Sage. Saverie. Time. Valerion. Wild Marjoram. Wild
Parseley. Wild Time. Water Cresses. Woodbinde.
with many other, and namely those for the most part, which I named besore to
be good for the stone. But there must be discretion in the use of them.

Besides those, is there a disease named the Strangurie (which some corruptly
call the Strangurion) in which Disease the urine does continually drop forth,
Excess of urine.
as fast as it comes into the bladder. And therefore may it well be noted the
first kind of such griefs as provoke forth, and further urine excessively. For
that strangurie these Medicines following are noted good.

Medicines for the Strangurie.
Alisander. Astra Bacca. Brokelime. Ceder berries. Ceterake. Calamus
Aromaticus. Gladiane. Knot grass. Kneholm. Sperage. Seholm. Spatula Fetida.
Turpentine washed. Wild Fennel. Water mints.
But you must consider (as I have often said) that as the disease may come of
sundry causes, so it must have sundry cures. For most commonly these are good
that I have written, yet such may be the cause of the sickness, that they may
do harm, therefore take always counsel of some learned Physician.

Another kind of excessive making of urine comes of the weakness of the
retentive virtue in the reins, whereby the Patient pisseth as fast as he
drinks, Flux of urine. Pissing evil. The piss gout.
and that in like quantity. This I may call the flux of urine, or pissing
evil: or aster the imitation of the Greeks, the piss gout. For which disease
it is not greatly commendable to set forth medicines with the only bare names.
Howbeit, if I do it, I trust no man will the rather misuse them, namely being
warned so often to take no medicines without counsel, and specially in this
thing, For some of the Medicines must be received inwardly, and some of them
emplaistred outwardly.

Medicines for the pissing evil.
Apples. Dates. Elecompane. Perys. Myrtle Berries. Night shade. Cycory.
Comferie. Endive. Paritarie. Penny wort. Lettis. Lintels. Pomegranat.
Purselane. Vine leaves.
Other defaults there be of excess of urine, as of them which cannot keep their
urine, and namely of children, which piss their beds. This disease comes
oftentimes of the dissolution of the muscle which should keep the urine, and
therefore requires cure meet for it, and unmeet for this place, and such
shortness. Wherefore for this time here I will make an end, trusting that all
men will with as gentle heart receive this my writing, as I of gentleness have
taken the pains to set it forth.

Additions. Of the diversities of Colors, and of the making of them.
BEcause that it is not very easy for every man to distinguish colors duly
asunder, I thought it good at the end of this Book, a little to touch the
distinction and making of them, namely of such as are mentioned before in this
Book.

Milk white.
Milk white, by the name of it self does sufficiently declare what it is; for it
is the very color of milk, though the substance need not to be so thick in the
urine, as in the milk, for the color must be understood several from the
substance, both in this and all other colors, which thing would be remembered,
for it might else (as it has often done) deceive the simple folk.

Horn white.
Horn white in like manner has his name of the thing that it assimuleth most,
for it is like the white and clear part of a horn of a lanthorn, or such like.

Gray is like the white part of a man's nail next unto the joint, Gray.
or like hoar hair that is not very white, for gray is so much darker then horn
white, as horn white is darker then milk white.

Pale color has a certain appearance of yellow in it, Pale.
but is exceeding little. If you sees a piece of the rind of Pomegranate, and
then put to it thrice as much clean water, it will be a pale color.

But if you put thereto little or no clean water, it will be flaxen colored,
Flaxen.
that is somewhat more yellower then pale.

After it follows pale, Pale.
which is a kind of light yellow, something lighter in color then crown gold.

For the color of pure gold (as an angel Yellow. or royal) is a right yellow
color.

Light saffron.
A light saffron color is, that color that saffron does make when it is
steeped in water, and laid light on any white. For if it be laid on deep, then
does it make a full saffron color. Saffron.
For that is called a saffron color, which saffron does die, and not that that
is in the saffron it self. sor that is very red, Red. Claret.
and is higher then claret, which is a mean color between saffron and red, as
if it were made of them both mixed together.

Crimson is a dark bloody color, Crimson.
well known by his own name, but is not in urine so light as it shows in
cloth. Purple.
Purple, needs not to be much described, being so commonly known, howbeit if
you will see the making of it, mix a dark crimson, with an orient blew, and it
will be purple. And because that many men be deceived in the latin name of this
color, you shall observe that it is not that which in Latin is called
Purpureus color, (as most men think) for that is rather a crimson, but it is
called, more peculiarly Purpura violacea, or Passeus color.

Blew color is the color of the clear Sky, Blew.
or of Azure. Howbeit, in urine it is not so orient, but if you will mix pure
white (as white lead, or pure lime) with due portion of right black (as cole
dust, or other like) then there will of these amount that blew, which is
ascribed to urine.

Green is a compound color of blew and yellow duly tempred together. Green.
And the right green have I in this Book called a stark green. Stark green.
But if the yellow do exceed in it, then is it a light green; and contrariwise,
if the blue do exceed, Light green.
then is it a dark green: Of this green does Dioscorides mean, when he does
say of diverse herbs, that their leaves be black; and sometime when he notes
whitelines to be in herbs, he means a light green, though he other times
understands thereby a certain horiness; of which thing in mine Herball you
shall read more exactly.

Oily.
Oily colors differ from green oily in their lightness of hue, and thinness
of substance in the urine where they appear. The light oily is somewhat
lighter, Light.
(or rather) brighter and more glittering then light green, Stark.
So is the stark oily brighter then the stark green, and the dark oily then
the dark green, Dark.
which all comes through the thinness or substance in the urine.

Ash Color is darker then blew, and is made of the same sort that blew is,
Ash Color.
save that it requires more of the black by twofold. This is the color of
lead, which is much darker then the inner part, though indeed both are one
color, and differ only in brightness and darkness, which ought rather to be
called the hue of colors, then color.

Now as for black, I need not to speak any whit, for as all men do know it,
Black.
so these very letters do show it, which though of all other it be most deadly,
yet is it surely of all the most mighty, for it overcommeth all colors, and
none can change it, so that well it may be called the color of death. For as
death overcomes all bodies, so black does damp all colors; beside, that it is
the messenger and token of death, which is the end of all things, and black the
end of colors.

The Exposition of certain Words.
NOw for because I was enforced to use some (though but few) terms in this
Book, which be not well known of the most sort of men, though a great number
know them well enough, by often talking with Physicians, I thought it good here
to declare some certain of them, for the aid of the most simple sort.

Ages.

Because that in the judgment of urines, the differences of ages ought to be
considered, you shall understand that the chief differences of them are four,
that is to say, Childhood, Youth, Manhood, and Old Age, for though there be
commonly 7. Childhood.
Ages reckoned, yet these be four principal, and the other three be
comprehended under these four, childhood endures from the hour of birth till
the end of 14. years of age, and is of complexion hot and moist. At the end of
14. years begins youth, Youth.
and lasts till the 25 year, and this age of all other is in complexion the
most temperate. From 25. until 35. years, Manhood.
is the flourishing of manhood, but yet that manhood lasts (though not in
full freshness) until 50. years of age, and this age is of complexion hot and
dry. From 50. years forward, is the time or age peculiarly called, Age.
in which time man's nature is cold and dry, and not moist, as many do falsely
think.

Alterative Active 9. Brightness.
Active qualities, see the title of qualities.

Alterative virtue, see in the title of virtues.

Brightness in urine must be marked for a several thing from cleerness. For the
bright-nesse betokens the orientness and the beauty of the color, with a
certain glistring. And cleerness is referred to the substance of urine,
Clearness.
and is ever annexed with thinness of it. Yet is it a diverse quality from
thinness. So may an urine be clear in substance, by the reason of his thinness,
and yet not bright in color, and not clear in substance, but this would be
well pondered, lest this necessary distinction, cause a negligent confusion.

Critical days.
Critical days be such days, on which there is (or may be) perceived some
certain token and great alteration in the sick body, either to health or death,
or continuance of sickness. What these be, more at large I will hereaster (God
willing) declare in a Book peculiarly, because it requires more largeness of
words, then is meet for this place. But one thing I must tell you, that the
same days also be called Judicial, Judicial days.
but not Indiciall, for the Indiciall days are of another kind: but yet
associate no these other.

Cruditie is the rawness of the meat in the stomach, Cruditie.
when the natural operation of it cannot duly digest the meat which it has
received; and therefore the urine which declares default of such digestion, is
called a crude, raw, and unconcoct urine.

Cupping is commonly known, Cupping.
that it needs no declaration.

Cloddie urine.
A cloddie urine is that which has in it clods of blood, or other crude matter,
or any clusterings of difform contents.

Dark ground is not meant of the darkness of color, but rather of the
slenderness of substance, so that it can scarcely be discerned to be any
ground, by reason that it is so near in shape and substance to the rest of the
urine. Dullness.
Dullness of color is contrary to brightness, so that when the color lacks
all brightness, then is it clean dulled, and whatsoever thing causes decay of
such brightness, that thing dulleth urine.

Those contents be called diverse, Diverse.
which have neither their own right form, nor any other certain, but are
altogether disordered and out of form, rather seeming to be many, then to be
one.

Duly knit, Duly knit.
is a property of due contents, when they are not tattered, ragged, nor jagged,
nor flittering asunder, nor yet are not so clammed together, as tough fleam, or
any such thing, but are in a moderate mean between both these.

A gathering.
A gathering sore, is that sore that is caused of the excessive recourse of
humors into any part of the body, as a bile, or any other like.

Harvest, Harvest.
seek times of the year.

Judicial days.
Judicial days, seek Critical days.

Inequality of substance in urine does appear to be the difforments and
disagreeing of the parts of it together; Inequality.
as when it is thin in one part, and thick in another. Howbeit, it is as well
used for the alteration from a mean substance to thickness or thinness, or
other ways unnatural. Obstruction, Obstruction.
is a stopping commonly of the veins, and such great conduits (which convey
blood or any other humor) so that the thing which they should convey cannot
freely pass as it ought. But if the like stopping happen in the pores of the
skin, (I mean those unsensible holes, by which sweat passes out) so that
neither sweat, nor any like excrement may pass that ways, then is it most
named Oppilation. Howbeit, Oppilation.
as these words be sometimes used the one for the other, so they be applied
also to other sundry parts of the body; but evermore they betoken such stopping
in that part, that natures work is hindered thereby.

Principal members
Principal members (as to our purpose now) are these 3. the brain, the heart,
and the liver.

Passive: Passive.
seek Qualities.

Putrefaction is commonly known to signify, Putrefaction.
rotting.

Qualities active, Qualities.
are named heat and cold, because they are more apt and able to work, then to
be wrought. And contrary ways, dryness and moisture are named passive, or
suffering qualities, because they are more ready to be altered by the working
of heat and cold, then to work themselves; howbeit yet they do work also.

The four times of sickness.
There be in sickness four principal parts of time, to be observed of
Physicians: The beginning of sickness, the increase or augmenting, the standing
or chief force of it, and the declination or asswaging of it.

The beginning.
The beginning is, from the time that sickness has overcome man's strength, and
brought him to lie down, till there do appear manifest signs of concoction of
the matter, The increase.
whereof the disease comes, at which time, the sickness waxes fiercer and
fiercer: and while it so continued, that time is called the Increase and
augmenting of sickness, but when the violence of the sickness is at the most,
so that the rage of it is at one stay, and neither increases nor decreases, The
state.
that time is called the standing, stay, state, or chief strength of the
sickness. And after that the furious rage of sickness does abate, and calm his
cruel storms, then is the declination of the sickness: after which (if the
Patient escape as very few die in the declination) then follows recovery to
health again. Declination.
And these be the four general or universal times of sickness. Beside these
there be other times more particular, Times of the year.
whereof now to speak I need not. The diversity of times in the year are duly to
be observed, for they do much alter man's body.

The Spring.
The Spring time increases blood and brings all the parts of the body to a
temperance, as nigh as it can. For it of all other times is the most temperate,
neither excessively hot, nor cold; neither moist, nor dry; but of a just
temperature, as Galen proves abundantly in his first Book of Temperaments,
where he does much blame them that name it to be hot and moist, which he says,
is of all other the most pestilent state of air. This Spring, after Galens
mind, does begin about the tenth day of March, and ends about the 14. day of
April, so that it lasts, but 6. weeks, and 2. days. For at the rising of the
Pleiades (which is now in our time about the 24. day of April) he says that
Summer does begin. Summer.
Which Summer is in complexion hot and dry, and therefore meet to increase
choler, which in that time does abound. The Summer lasts 21. weeks. Harvest.
Harvest does begin after Galens mind, about the 17. day of September, and
lasts 7. weeks. The Harvest, is dry of complexion, but neither only hot, nor
only cold, but is distemperate in hear and cold. For in the morning and evening
it is cold, and at noon it is hot. So may it not be called justly (as men do
name it) cold and dry. In this time does melancholy increase. At the end of
Harvest, about the seventh day of November, does Winter begin, which time is
cold and moist; Winter.
and therefore increases phlegm, which is like in complexion unto it. And the
Winter lasts till the 10. day of March; so, is it in length about 17. weeks
and a half, and then begins the Spring time again. And this is the course of
the year, after Physic. Other men which entreat of Husbandry, Another sort of
these times.
do part the year into 4. equal parts, giving 3. months to every time. Unto
the Spring they give February, March, and April. To the Summer. May, June, and
July. Unto Harvest, August, September, October. And unto winter they appoint
November, December, and January. Why the Physicians part the year one way, and
writers of husbandry another way, at more convenient time I will declare.

Virtues. Attractive.
Virtues natural are four. The first is, That which draws nourishment into
due places, and that is called the attractive virtue. The second, Alterative.
is it that alters the nourishment into a due form to nourish the body, and
is called the alterative virtue. The third is that virtue, Retentive.
which keeps in the good nourishment, till the alterative virtue has duly
altered it, and therefore is called the retentive virtue. The fourth, is called
the virtue expulsive, Expulsive.
because his office is to expel those superfluous excrements which are left,
when the other virtues have done their office duly.

FINIS.
The Safe, New Way of examining Urines by Weight, first invented and found out
by Joannes Baptista Van Helmont, that famous Philosopher, and Physician.
AN Ounce may weigh 600 grains. I got a glass Vessel with a narrow neck
weighing 1354 grains, but filled with rain Water weighing over 4670 grains.
The Urine of an old man is found to weigh in the same Vessel 4720 grains, or to
overweigh the rain water 50. grains. But the Urine of a healthy woman, of the
age of 55 years weighed 4745 grains. The Urine of an healthy young man of 19
years of age weighed 4766 grains. But the Urine of another young man of equal
years, being abstinent from drinking, weighed 4800 grains: And a young man of 36
years of Age, having a sertian with a Cough, weighed 4763 grains. But the
aforesaid young man of 19. years of Age, having a double Tertian, the night
before drunk little; but his water weighed 4848 grains, which was 82 grains
more then when he was in health. A Virgin troubled with a passion of the heart,
made water like rain water, and which therefore equally weighed with the rain
water. The Urine being warm, is always found to be a few grains lighter, then
when it is cold, as also more large.

Lee therefore the vessel be of a short neck, and pointed so, that even in a
point of time you may measure the Urine: To these other Observations may be
added, by a curious Observer of these Directions specified: And it is a far
easier Method, then that which by another Author is reduced into Aphorisms, by
weighing out of the whole man; and so judging of his particular estate.

Turnheiserus also, has invented a new way of judging of Urines, in framing a
Stillatorie Vessel for urine, and distinguishing it into 24. parts, and marking
it out, on the outside with his lines, divides the humane body into so many
Sections, and then judges of them.

Courteous Reader,
I Have only inserted these two passages, and late inventions, that those who
are curious Students in this way, may in prosecution of these new Discoveries,
confer the Ancient and Modern Practices together, being promised (if God please
to afford my Friend life and health) in a very short space, to enlarge these
Observations, and Novel Inventions, into a more full, and exact Method. In the
mean while I shall desire my gentle Reader to take these Offers, as they have
been presented unto me, in as good part, as I have freely published them;

Farewell.
A DETECTION Of some Faults in Unskilful PHYSICIANS, Ignorant and Careless
APOTHECARIES, and unknowing running CHIRURGIANS.

Written by a Doctor of Physic in Queen Elizabeth's days.

And also a Translation of Papius, concerning Apothecaries.

Useful for all sorts of People.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. 1651.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
AS the Books came to my hands, I have presented them faithfully to you. If you
accept of them, I shall account my labor well bestowed, intending it for the
public good; If otherwise you are offended at him that best owed them on me,
he desires you would, be pleased to present something of your own better; may
oblige him and others to thank you for it; I thought fit lastly, to acquaint
you that, since my fitting of Record this second time for the Press, lighting
by the help of a Friend, upon these two other Pieces: The one, A Detection of
some faults of unskilful Physicians; Ignorant, and Covetous Apothecaries, and
Unknowing, Running Chirurgions; Written by a Doctor of Physic in Queen
Elizabeth's days, a Book out of Print, and almost knowledge: I thought fit to
put again to the Press, as reproving the too frequent abuses of these times:
And also a translation of Papius concerning Apothecaries: Encouraged the
rather, since the publishing of that translated, or rather transverted
Dispensatorie by that Sapientum Octavus, Culpepper; wherewith I have presented,
as it came to my hands, a cursorie passage (by some Well-wisher to that
Honorable society of Physicians,) prefixed before his translation; Entitled,
The Translator to the Reader.

Courteous Reader,
THere is a Book lately put forth against Anthroposophia. It is conceived the
sum of the whole Book, collected from what is scurrilous, and unworthy of an
Academian, may be comprised in little more then a sheet of Paper, whereby you
may conceive how much the Author burtheneth the Readers patience with
superfluous trash; He is much troubled with Sendivogius, and Anonymus; Books, I
believe, his capaciy never yet understood, and for his being graveld at what is
wrote against Aristotle, he will find it a greater task to answer Basson,
Gassendus, or Van Helmont in what they have taxed him, then to write Invectives
without discretion. Concerning Mr. Culpepper, he says, He that looks on a
game, may see as much into it, as he that plays; It Is true, if he well knows
the game, but you have played your game with the Physicians, and though your
Gentilitie be not questioned, ingenious men will give you the Epithet of Eques
male moratus, though not according to Riders interpretation of Eques at Cards.
You say the Liberty of our Commonwealth is most infringed by three sorts of
men, Priests, Physicians, Lawyers; the one deceiving men in matters belonging
to their souls, (if your father were a Priest as is related, why might not he
do so) The second in matters belonging to their bodies, (hardly not more then
you by your Dispensatorie) The third, in matters belonging to their Estates
(you are reported to dave tried some other Professions,) but only fasten on the
Rayler. Physicians you say walk in the clouds, and that's the reason men are
led by the noses: It Is strange men in the clouds, should lead men below by the
noses; but you have as visible a piercing eye to see that, as you have into
Physic: But they are led by a company of proud, insulting, domineering
Doctors, whose Wits were born five hundred years before themselves; It Is a
pretty riddle a man's wit should antecede him five hundred years: If your own
went but half so long before you, I should believe they would hardly gallop up
to one another, and you scarcely wiser, in five hundred years subsequent: But
some have wasted whole Estates in Physic (it has certainly been with such
wise Aesculapians as your self,) though I scarce believe any wiseman would fool
out a groat on your judgment. It is unhansome and unbeseeming, you say, to see
a Doctor ride instate in Plush with a foot-cloth, (envy not their merits.)
When a Traslator may be trusted with his own government, and writes any thing
Dignum bono viro, he will be commended servum Reipublicae: but they dare not
visit a visited house, not for that they fear themselves, but because they
would not fear others, whose lives may be in as great danger: But you think you
have paid them with two Proverbiall Verses, when the Patients ingratitude, when
they are restored, may rather keep them away according to this Verse:

1. Angelus adventu: 2. Cura Deus. 3. Exitu Abbaddon.
Concerning Physicians in Italy and Holand, they have State-allowances, but if
our Eques can regulate no better, between allowances, and non-allo Wances, you
will never be made a Justice for equal distribution. But in the Colleges
Epistle, the not quoting of the virtues of the Receipts is objected against
them, but his Wits had never quoted them, had not more ancient wits afforded
him their light, though but a dark one to guide him. You say if Apollo had
served the nine Muses, as they serve their Apothecaries, they would have had no
more wit then nine Geese. I wonder whence the rare bird, or rather the feather
of an Apothecary, (for he was not fledged when he deserted the trade) aspired
to this height to be able to teach the Physicians, whose Books, he is not
worthy to carry, unless as an Ass carries meat for his Master, and for
himself: He had rather be Disciple to Zoilus, then Apollo, He says, The Nation
are all already Physicians: If their own opinion have not made themselves so,
your opinion labors to do it, with a grain of your selfe-conceited
understanding; But all the Ancients wrote in their mother tongues, and native
languages, (but not all their works by his leave) yet all the people were not
Physicians, neither in Arabia, Grecia, nor Germany; and both in Physic and
Arts, they retain their Greek and Arabian names to this day? And concerning
their Doses, how uncertainly they have delivered them, a searching man may
easily discover; You had need collogue with the term of worthy Countrymen,
when you tell, the College does in effect say, they are great fools: but you
would make them fit for the calling, if scurrility could fasten it on them.

The Apothecaries you say, would deserve the name of a company of Dunces, if
they should complain against the Physicians, and not connive for their trade;
but had my Gentleman gone out a Freeman in the profession, the Doctors would
have been so bold with him as to have, examined his sufficiency, as they do
others, before they pass their approbations for practice: You call Heaven to
witness, none of the College have provoked you; Whence comes this bitterness
then undeservedly against them, but from (as you write) the Saturnine
disposition you were born under; you Astrologers, write, some Planets are evil
in themselves, yet joined with some others, qualified with their conjunction
are better affected, though Scripture teach you, when God had surveyed all his
works, they were valde bona, and you can produce no place where ever the
heavens were cursed. But to conclude with the Gentlewomens. favors who must
not be forgotten: You present the beginnings of your labors at their feet, in
your low humility, with an Herculean undertaking to open unto them this famous,
though too much abused Art of Physic, and so conclude with as much Arrogance,
as you began with Folly;

Your Friend, Nisu bonos.

A DETECTION OF UNSKILFUL PHYSICIANS.
The First Part treats of diverse and sundry Errors, and Abuses, of the
unlearned and wicked sort of Physicians.
THat Excellent man and Great Clerk Aristotle, who for his incomparable
doctrine is of all Learned men named the Prince of Philosophers, has this
saying in the seventh Book of his Ethics: Non oportet tantum verum dicere, sed
etiam causam falsi assignare, that is, A man may not only tell the truth, but
he must also show and declare the cause of falsehood and error. As who should
say, The truth can never so well appear, as when it is compared to his
contrary, which is error, lie, and falsehood. Quia opposita semper juxta
seposita, magis clucescunt: Contrary things set one against another, are
always a great deal better known.

The Philosophers of ancient time as it appears plainly in Aristotle and
Galen, yea, and in the holy Doctors of the Church, In many of their works had
in a manner more ado to confute the false errors, sophistry and cavillations
that were then used, and imagined as true doctrine, then they had to write the
very truth it self. The great mercy of God had never been so well known, if the
fall and transgression of man had not been. And as S. Paul says in the 5.
Chapter to the Romans, Where sin has exceeded, there grace has the more
exceded. And Christ in Lu^e 7. said of Mary Magdalen, Many fins are forgiven
her, because she loved much. Now therefore before I speak of the abuses and
enormities of Physic, First, I will show and declare; What is the part,
office, and condition of a good Physician. Thus doing, I will first allege
Hippooratis Jusjurandum, that is the Oath that Hippocrates would that every
Physician should take before he practice any Physic. I will not recite the
whole Chapter, but the chiefest part. Caeterum quod ad aegros attinet sanandos,
etc. The English is this: And as concerning the curing of the sick, I will
ordain and devise for them as good a diet as shall lie in my power and
judgment. And I will take heed that they fall in no damage nor hurt. Nor yet
any man's prayers shall so much prevail with me, that I give poison to any man,
neither will I counsel any man so to do. Likewise I will give no manner of
medicine to any woman with child, to destroy her child. Moreover I will use my
life and science godly; I will not cut those that have the stone, but I will
commit that thing only to the Chirurgions. In what house soever I shall come
in, my coming shall be for the Patients commodity and profit. And I will
refrain willingly from doing any hurt or wrong, and from falsehood, and chiefly
from venereous acts, what kind of bodies soever I shall chance to have in cure,
whether it be of men or women, of free or bond servants. And whatsoever I shall
see or hear among my cures (yea although I be not sought, nor called to any)
whatsoever I shall know among the people (if it be not lawful to be uttered, I
shall keep close, and keep it as a Secret unto my self. Again the same
Hippocrates says in the Book or Chapter called Lex. (To eschew tediousness I
will leave the Latin) Whosoever says he, will truly get him the knowledge of
Physic, he must satisfy his mind, and as it were be accompanied with these
guides, with nature, science, a place meet and convenient for study and
learning, an institution from childhood, a labor and painful diligence with a
long time.

Item, In his Book De Medico, he says, The Physician must be of a good color,
and comely countenance, and of a good disposition of the body, he must also be
had in estimation among the common people, by comely apparel, and by sweet
savours (so that he be not suspected of too much excess) for by such means the
Pacients are wont to be delighted.

In like manner, the Physician must see and study, that he be of a modest and
sober mind, and not only concerning modest talk, but also in other things
concerning his behavior, he must be well disposed; for there is nothing that
gets a man better estimation and authority then to be endued with an honest
life and good manners. His countenance must be like one that is given to
study, and sad, and yet not overmuch, for so he should be taken to be stubborn
and scornful, and like one that disdaineth other men's company: but on the
contrary, he that has always a laughing countenance, and is given to too
much gesture and mirth, is taken for a lend person; and therefore this must
needs be eschewed: Also he must be just and bear himself upright in all his
business and affairs, etc.

In his Book De decenti ornatu, he says, A Physician being a Philosopher is
equal in some reflects unto God. Item, it is decent that the Physician be
gentle and courteous, for rudeness and churlishness are greatly mifliked, as
well of the whole as of the sick. He must of ten visit his Patient and be
diligent. He may not declare all things to his Patient, but some things he must
keep close from him, and must comfort him with a lively and merry countenance.
And sometimes to withdraw him from his fond desires, he must rebuke him, in
resisting with sharp words; and sometimes again he must entreat and comfort
him, with a dexterity and gentle persuasion. And yet notwithstanding he may
not always tell him of his present state, nor what shall become of him.

Thus much I have brought out of Hippocrates to testify and declare the office
and condition of a Physician. Now something will I bring out of Galen, who in
his Book entitled, quod optimus medicus idem est and Philosophus, declares
plainly by the very title of the Book it self, what learning a Physician ought
to have. He says also in his Book De Antidotis, That a Physician if it be
possible ought to have the knowledge of all herbs, if not, at the least he
ought to know those which be commonly used. Again in the Commentaries upon the
first Book of Hippocrates, De morbis vulgaribus: The Physician, says he, ought
in any wise to have a respect to profit and help his Pacients, and if he
cannot, then at the least wise that he hurt them not.

Item upon the 6. Book De morbis vulgaribus, he says, Albeit that the
Physician be gentle and courteous, sober and also merry, yet nevertheless he
ought not to minish his gravitie, for unless the Patient have in reverence and
estimation his Physician as a god, he shall never follow and obey his counsel,
it will be therefore very decent, that the Physician do not so abase himself
and flatter, that he bring himself in a contempt: Nor again, as it were another
Callianactes, show himself hoggish and rude. And that shall he easily bring to
pass, if in his countenance and talk, and all his honest behavior, he retain
the gravitie of a Physician, and so do persuade his Patient to follow and keep
those things that he appoints and ordains for him.

But now least I should be too tedious in alleging many Authors; I will come
to those of our time, and namely I will bring that man of high learning and
famous memory, Master Doctor Silvius, who sometimes was the public Reader of
Physic in the Universitie of Paris, having daily at his Lecture little less
then a thousand Auditors (or as they call them, Scholars) of the which I being
one, may plainly testify it to be true. The same Silvius says in his Book, De
ordine legendi libros. Galeni and Hippocratis, That a good Physician must have
all these properties.

First, he must be naturally bent and given only to truth, all the days of his
life, he must be circumspect, discreet, and of a good pregnant wit and memory.

Secondly, he must have a sound and healthie body, and must be able to abide
great pain in studying.

Thirdly, he must be endued with great riches, or at least he must have
sufficient to live by.

Fourthly, he must have and get his learning of the best learned men of his
time, who diligently even from his childhood must instruct him with these
sciences: Grammar, Logic, Music, Astronomy, and chiefly (as Plato
counsels) Arithmetic and Geometry, and also Philosophy.

Now to come to my chief intent and purpose, and (as they are wont to say) to
the Principal: These things above rehearsed, well weighed and considered, what
hope may there be conceived? what foundation and stay may be had? yea what
security and safeguard is there in these sort of fellows, which now a days
almost in all places so rashly, so fondly, and so wickedly do abuse the noble
Art and Science of Physic. Where is their great and manifold knowledge of the
tongues, of the liberal Sciences, of Philosophy, of Anatomy, of the Simples,
of the compound Medicines, and of the Temperatures or Complexions? where have
they studied? of whom have they learned their Science? (if I may call it a
Science) what Authors have they seen or read. Many of them will answer and say
unto me thus: Sir, although we have not this exquisite knowledge that you
require in us, yet we have had experience of many things, we have English Books
enough to teach us diverse medicines for diverse purposes, yea and some of us
have a gift of nature to heal many diseases.

I answer, that your reasoning is fair, but it is grounded upon a very slender
and feeble foundation. For first, as touching your experience, how can it be
good unless it be joined to knowledge and science? What though you have given a
Medicine: As for example, a purgation to purge fleam to any man in the Winter,
supposing that man to be some what aged, of a phlegmatic complexion, using much
phlegmatic meats, much sleep and much rest: and that the said Purgation has
taken good effect and wrought well, all this supposed; Let the like medicine be
given in the Summer to a man of another complexion, of another diet, and of
another age yea supposing this, that it be given to the self same man in the
Summer; Shall the same Purgation (think you) take such effect and operation,
as it did before in the winter? no verily; or else Hippocrates that ancient
Father and Founder of all Physic (whose sayings and writings we follow and
credit, tanquam Apollinis oracula) should have foully erred, and specially in
his Book De Natura Humana.

Galen in his third Book, De methodo medendi, says, That there be two
instruments of all manner of invention, that is to say, Reason and experience.
He that knows a thing that is invented and found by experience, and yet
cannot tell the reason of it why it is so: plainly declares to know it only by
experience. But that he may understand how much he erreth, let him give ear
unto me a while, for I mean to talk a few words with him, which follow only
experience. Thus much Galen; what he says after, I leave it, lest I be too
tedious.

The same Galen also upon the first Aphorism of the first Book of Hippocrates.
The experience (says he) of Physic is dangerous, (which be also Hippocrates
words) for the material subject of Physic is no tile stones, or common
stones, dirt, wood, or leather, as they are of other crafts and sciences, in
the which you may make or mar any thing without danger. For if you spill a
piece of wood or leather in mis-handling it, there is no danger, but only a
little loss or damage, which is soon recovered again by diligence. But to
prove things in man's body which be not before approved by learning and
experience, is not without danger of death.

Now as concerning your second reason, by the which you affirm to have many
English Books that teach you Physic: I answer, that the English Books teach
nothing of the true foundation of Physic. For if there be any that do it, how
can it be well understood without Logic and Natural Philosophy. For Aristotle
says, Vbi desinit Physicus, ibi incipit Medicus. A man must first peruse
Natural Philosophy, before he enter into Physic.

I do not deny but to have some Books of Physic in English, specially of the
Simples, well and cunningly set forth for Chirurgions, Apothecaries, yea, and
for sober and wise men that delight to read in such things, and know not the
Latin tongue, is not unmeet nor hurtful. Although I would not wish, nor it is
not decent, that either Surgeon or Apothecarie, or any other man, being no
Physician should practice or use any inward Medicine without the learned and
approved Physicians counsel. For as the two Proverbs say; Falcem ne mittas in
messem alienam, Et ne suitor ultra crepidam, let no man meddle with another man's
corn, but with his own. Let the Shoemaker meddle with his shoes.

But to the purpose, do you think to have in your English Books, all the
perfect knowledge that is required in Physic? Yea, have you the tenth part
only? We could never have it yet in Greek and Latin perfectly
(notwithstanding we have it now better then ever we had before) how then should
you have it? If English Books could make men cunning Physicians, then
Pouch-makers, Threshers, Ploughmen, and Cobblers might be Physicians as well as
the best, if they can read.

Then were it a great folly for us to bestow so much labor and study all our
life time in the Schools and Universities, to break our brains in reading so
many Authors, to be at the Lectures of so many learned men, yea, and the
greatest folly of all were, to proceed in any degree in the Universities with
our great cost and charges, when a Sir John lack Latin, a Peddler, a weaver,
and oftentimes a presumptuous woman, shall take upon them (yea, and are
permitted) to minister Medicine to all men, in every place, and at all times. O
tempora! O mores! O Deum immortalem! To what purpose have the Universities been
erected and founded in times past? To what purpose have they so many goodly
privileges granted unto them of all Princes, successively from all ages? what
does it prevail for us that be learned to proceed (as I said) in any degree of
Master, of Batchelour, or Doctor, and so to be allowed and have authority to
use our Science? when every man, woman, and child that list, may practice and
use Physic (idque impune) as well as we? and so, many times not only hinder
and defraud us of our lawful stipend and gains: but (which is worst of all,
and too much to be lamented) shall put many in hazard of their life, yea, and
be the destruction of many. Is this tolerable? Will the Magistrates always
wink at this? Shall there never be no reformation for such abuses? God of his
great mercy grant that once they mey be reformed. For if they be not, verily it
will greatly discourage men of learning hereafter to apply themselves to the
study of Physic, whereby the help, succor and safeguard of many a sick man,
woman, and child, shall be hindered and secluded: yea, and many shall fall in
danger, and be sick, which otherwise might be preserved from all sickness by
the right ministry of Physic. For Physic is appointed not only to expel
sickness, but also to preserve the body in health.

But now to the third part I answer: You say, that you heal many times by the
gift of Nature: I pray you tell me what you mean by Nature. Perhaps you
understand by Nature, a natural inclination or disposition, given by the
influence of Stars and Planets, (as I do not deny, but that we may be the
better moved and inclined to any Art by their influence) yet is it not a mere
gift, but only a disposition, and as it were a dexterity and natural to
wardnesse to heal some kind of disease: which thing notwithstanding is
oftentimes done more by chance, then by any certain Method, or Reason. For
verily, have you never so good a wit, disposition and inclination to any Art:
yet if you apply not that Art, and exercise your self in it earnestly, and
continually, and specially in this Science of Physic (which can near be well
used without great study, and the knowledge of div^rs other Sciences, as I have
said before) your doings shall be but rash, vain, and of small ^ffect. For as
the Philosopher says: Scientiae nobis, non innascuntur, sea acquiruntur, The
Sciences are not infused in us at our birth, but are gotten afterward: And
Science is thus defined in Logic: Science is an habit, (that is) a ready,
prompt and bent disposition to do any thing, confirmed and gotten by long
study, exercise and use. Therefore the natural inclination by the influence of
the Stars can profit but little, unless you apply your self with great
diligence and study to that kind of Science or Art that you intend to practice
and follow.

But if you understand (by Nature) God: I say plainly, that God does not give
the gift of healing to any wicked people, but only by aspeciall privilege to
those only that be of a most pure, sober, and holy life, as we read of the
Apostles, and some of the Prophets. And as Saint Paul says, in the first
Epistle to the Corinth. the 12. chap. To some is given the gift of healing by
the Holy Ghost. So that to heal by this manner of means, is not commonly to
use Herbs, Roots, or any other drougs bought at the Apothecaries shop, or to
take any money or other reward for the healing. For this kind of healing is
the mere gift of God, working in those (to whom it pleases God to give it)
without any labor or study. We hear of none now a days, that has this gift
of nature (I mean of God) saving only the Kings of England, and the French
Kings, which, as the excellent Doctor Tagaultius says, in the first book of
his Chirurgiry, have a special gift to heal the Kings Evil, called struma in
Latin.

Therefore I conclude, that howsoever you make your argument, your profession
and practice in Physic is hothing worth, but rather is false, deceitful,
unjust, unlawful, and not any longer to be suffered.

I could now, if I were not too tedious to the Readers, bring and allege out
of the Authors of Physic, certain notable examples of many rash and dangerous
cures, that has been done by many ignorant and lewd persons in times past, if
it were not that the daily examples appeared (alas) too much before our eyes in
these our days.

I will say nothing now of the City of Salisbury where I dwell, what abuses
has been, or be there now, concerning the Art of Physic. A reformation has
been made there, not very long agone, as touching such matters, but yet all
things are not so well brought to pass as I would wish, and as I think good
they were. I delivered once, certain Articles concerning the honest and
lawful use of Physic, unto the right reverend father in God my Lord Bishop of
Salisbury, which Articles being (at the least in my judgment) good and
lawful, if it would please his Lordship, yea, and all other most honorable
Bishops, each of them in his Dioces, to admit and put in execution. I would
suppose, imo, I would believe that Physic should be better and more honestly,
truly and justly used and ministered then it is now in these days.

And because that I would that every man should see and know, what Articles
they be that I delivered, I have thought it good to take a copy of them (which
notwithstanding I have somewhat altered) and rehearse them here in order.

Seven Articles concerning the ministration and use of Physic.
The First.

It were very meet, expedient and necessary that no Physician should practice
Physic in any Dioces, unless he were first allowed by some University: or at
the least having sufficient learning in the said Science, he were allowed and
licensed by the Bishop or his Chancellor in that Dioces wherein he dwells,

The Second.

It were good and necessary, that no Surgeon should practice his Surgery,
unless he could read and write, and had knowledge and experience in the
simples belonging to his Art. And that he presume not to let blood or undertake
any hard cure, without the Physicians counsel, if he may conveniently have it.

The Third.

That no Apothecary should minister of his own head, or ordain any purgation
or other composition of Physic for any man: or that he should prepare and make
any purgation or notable confection, without the Physicians advise and
counsel, unless that the Physician had first seen and viewed the Ingredients,
whereof the compositions are made, and specially the purgations.

The Fourth.

It is not decent not profitable for the Commonwealth, that any ignorant lewd
or ill suspected person, be he man or woman, should be suffered to make, sell,
or minister Medicines to any body, but that such kind of persons (being duly
examined and convicted by the learned Physicians of the Dioces) should have
condign punishment appointed them.

The Fifth.

That no Physician do take upon him the name of any degree of School, as
Batchelour, Master of Art, or Doctor: or cause and permit any writer, or
Printer so to term him, unless he can approve it to be so indeed by any
University.

The Sixth.

That no Midwife should disdain to come to ask counsel of the Physician, as
often as any woman being in labor of child, is in danger. It were good also
that the Midwives were first sworn, before they take upon them their office.

The Seventh.

It were also good and expedient, that (as the use of London is, granted by an
Act of Parliament) that the Physicians in every other Dioces, one, or two, or
more, should have license, to search and view the Apothecaries shop once a year
at the least, and see whether their stuff and Medicines be good and lawful or
not.

These Articles above rehearsed, I thought good here to allege, (although
under correction of my superiors) because that some occasion may be given to
reform the enormities and abuses in the Science of Physic. And here let no
man think, that I mean to speak any thing in any point against the
privileges and liberties granted by an Act of Parliament to the Company or
Corporation of the Physicians of London, for I mind not, nor may not meddle
with their privileges.

Many there are, that bear themselves very stout, upon an Act that was made by
King Henry the 8. in his days, affirming that Act to make full and wholly in
all points for their purpose, but they are foully deceived and far beyond the
mark that they shoot at. For whereas the Act presupposes in them a knowledge
of the simples, as of herbs, roots, and waters, and of the virtue and
operation of them. Alas, they can scant tell what a simple means: There be a
great number of them that knows not these common Herbs, Buglossum, Apium and
agrimonia, for in stead of Buglossum, which is Bourage, they will take Buglose,
being deceived by the sound of the word: for agrimonia the true Eupatorium.
They will take Eupatorium Mesue, which is described of Dioscorides under the
name of ageratum, for apium Parsley, they take commonly Smallage: for
Scolopendria, called otherwise Ceterach, they abuse Hart's-tongue. And to be
short, I my self have seen some Apothecaries take for the root of Rubia, the
leaves of Rubus: for the root of Mandragora, the root of Gentian: for
Hematites; Amethystus: for Sempervivum minus, the Herb called Thrift, or great
Stonecrope, they have taken little Stonecrope in making their Populeum.

To the purpose, whereas the Act presupposes a speculation or practice, they
practice at a venture a thing which they know not, whether it be cold, or hot,
dry, or moist.

Item, whereas the Act gives them license to minister Drinks for the Stone,
Strangury, and Agues: They know not the Stone in the back, from the Stone in
the bladder; neither whether the stone may be wasted and broken by Drinks and
Powders, or had out by incision. Moreover, they know no difference between a
Colike and a Stone: for they name them both one, whereas they be two sundry
diseases.

They know not what Stranguria is, nor how many manner of ways it may be
engendered in the body.

They can scant discern a Tertian Ague from a Quotidian. As for the mixed and
complicate Agues, they know not what to make of them; They call them new
diseases, because they can give them no other name.

Now verily, if these jolly fellows had but that knowledge only, which the
said act presupposes them to have, it were not so great a danger, if they
sometimes were permitted to give some medicines for the foresaid diseases. But
I pray you, how many of them have that little knowledge? which knowledge is but
little indeed in comparison of many other sciences, which be not only
profitable, but also necessary to attain the noble Science of Physic. If the
other Acts which have been made for the Reformation of Physic, be well scanned
and conferred together one with another, it shall plainly appear, that the
aforenamed act, shall not make so greatly for their purpose, who by ignorance
and rashness do use to practice Physic at their pleasure.

Verily I much marvel at one thing, that many which be of the higher sort,
reputing themselves to be of no small gravitie and wisdom will sometimes
give credit to such lewd persons, counterfeiting the Physicians. Indeed, I
suppose that they be partly deceived by the vain persuasions and fair
flattering speech of such fellows. Their communication is so fair, sweet,
gentle, pleasant and amiable; and their promise and warranting so earnest and
great, that they will go nigh to deceive the wisest man that is, if he have not
the more grace, and be very ware of them. And the better to allure the simple
people unto them: They will say to him whom they do take in hand; Sir, I will
none of your money now until you be whole, I will have money of you only for
the medicines which I must occupy for your disease. They will lightly warrant
every man to heal him, of what disease soever he has; and for all diseases
they have commonly but two or three sorts of medicines, and yet most commonly
they be Purgations or Vomits.

They purge so much and so often, that they purge many times, as well the soul
out of the body, as the money out of the purse.

Moreover, these fellows will also (to have the more credit given unto them)
name themselves after some great learned man's name. Sometimes they fain
themselves to be of some strange country, and will counterfeit their language
(as I know one in Salisburie) and look to be called by some name of dignity or
worship; as Master, Gentleman, Domine, Doctor, and all to deceive the people.

O, I would wish that every man would take heed, and I beseech God that every
man may beware or such false Physicians, which may be likened to Wolves or
Foxes, clothed outwardly with lambs skins, but inwardly are full of subtilty
and deceit. Many perish through the year at their hands, whereby the good
science of Physic is brought into an obloquie and reproach.

Many learned Doctors of our time have in their works envied greatly against
these abuses, and have wished some punishment to be established by the
Magistrates, unto such as wickedly and without all reason misuse and practice
this Science.

Here I could also somewhat touch some of the learned sort, which although they
bear themselves never so stout, and appear to men to do all things well, yet
nevertheless, they halt sometimes on both sides: They see and know many abuses
in the Apothecaries shops, and yet they wink at the matter, and are loath to
displease the Apothecary, who perchance is their friend. But the Proverb says;
Amicus Socrates, Amicus Plato, Amica tamen magis verita^ The truth ought to
take place in all things, and above all things.

There be also many Physicians that think themselves so profoundly learned,
that they believe that no man is able to match with them in learning, they be
so arrogant and scornful, that although the Patient be content to have the
counsel of two or three other Physicians to consult and confer together of his
disease, yet they will not willingly grant to it, but rather disdain to
confer with any other, the which perchance are sometimes a great deal better
learned then they are. They remember not what Hippocrates their Master says,
in his Book De preceptionibus, who being in Latin translated says thus, Nec
vero indecore se illegeret medicus, etc. The English is thus, That Physician
shall not do amiss, nor behave himself uncomely, which being perplexed in the
business about his Patient, and doubtful for want of perfect knowledge, do
cause other Physicians to be called, that by common deliberation, and
conferring one with another, the Pacients affairs may be duly examined and
known, so that they may be as co-adjutors (that is to say, helpers one to
another) to provide for some remedy. Some there be also (lest that other men
should learn their cunning) that will rather scrible them a Receipt, and will
make such dashes and strange abbreviations in their Bills, that their writing
seems rather to be Arabic, or like the the writings of the Cabalists, then
Latin. I fear me that they that write so, are ashamed of their own occupation,
and fear lest that if they should write plain, their errors and faults should
be espied. He that is a plain man will deal plainly, will speak plainly, and
write plainly.

Some there be also that be so stiff necked and heady in their opinions, that
they will be or no man gainsaid in any wise, no, and if you bring them never so
good a reason, although you allege them never so many authorities.

But I say, Plus vident duo oculique unus. All the wit of the world lies not
in one man's head. Therefore to conferr together upon a matter, it does
oftentimes great good, and no man (be he never so well learned) ought to refuse
it, as often as time, place, or any other occasion shall serve.

Also some Physicians there be, that be so greedy, and of such an unsatiable
desire, that they care not in what danger they cast themselves, what shame and
damage they sustain, so that they may have many cure, where sometimes one
would suffice them well enough, and be more perchance then they can well bring
to pass. They be so covetous that they would have all, and do all themselves,
and they envy many times at other honest men having cures, when they have
none. Thus doing, verily, they bring themselves in great contempt and does as
it were abate and blemish the honorable Science of Physic, which requires
rather to be sought earnestly with great sure, with humility, reverence and
praying, then to be offered, and as it were objected undiscreetly to every man,
and in every place, like a blind Harpers song, or a Pedlers pack. The common
Proverb says, That offered service stinks. And I have heard oftentimes say,
That Physic unless it be earnestly sought and well paid for, it will never
prosper nor work well with the Patients: I mean not by this that the Physician
must be always liberal and merciful to the poor, on whom his living
depends not, but on the rich.

Now to conclude and finish this first part, I will leave to entreat any more
of Physicians, (except as occasion shall serve) and now in the next Part
following, I will speak of Apothecaries, and touch somewhat their abuse and
negligence.

Whosoever will read any more of the tokens and qualities of foolish and blind
Physicians; Let him read a little Book of mine, Printed many years since, which
is Entitled: A Great Gallie lately come into England, out of Terra Nova, laden
with Physicians, Apothecaries, and Chirurgions, etc. made in form of a Dialogue.

A DETECTION OF SOME IGNORANT APOTHECARIES.
The Second Part treats of the ignorance and presumption of certain
Apothecaries.
IT is not unknown to many men, and specially to those that be truly and
exactly learned in Physic, that there has been, is now, yea and shall be (if
some good order be not taken) great abuses among Apothecaries, in handling,
keeping, choosing, and dressing their Drugs and Medicines. Insomuch that it is
suspected of most part of men (and I pray God it be not so indeed) that among
all other mechanic Arts of occupations, the greatest and most crafty deceit
that is, or may be in Apothecaries. Howbeit, I am not ignorant, but that within
these few years, some Apothecaries, by the help and counsel of good
Physicians, have begotten and provided them better stuff and simples to make
their compositions, then they were wont to have before.

And I believe verily, that if every Apothecarie would endeavor himself to buy
no stuff, but that should be pure and good: there would be a great many, that
would give better credit to Physicians and Apothecaries, and have a better hope
in them, then they have now a days, and all because they mistrust and suspect
so much the Apothecaries stuff and confections. Indeed, as covetousness is
the root of all evil, so many Apothecaries there be, that more for lucre sake
and greediness of worldly goods, do prepare their Medicines, then for any
care that they have, to deal truly with the poor Pacients and silly souls
that be in pain, The Physician many times shall ordain his counsel, and
appoint certain Medicines for his Pacient; which Medicines he knows
certainly shall do him good, being taken and used according to his counsel,
yet the same Medicines being taken and bought at the Apothecaries, and made
many times of naughty stuff, or not well prepared, shall not only do little
or no good at all; but shall also sometimes put the sick body in hazard of his
life, whereby shall no small trouble and shame redound unto the Physician, and
yet was he not the occasion thereof, nor in any fault at all. Some perchance
will allege against the Physician, that he may be in the fault, forasmuch as
he ought to have seen the stuff first, whereof the compositions are made, and
ought also to have been at the making and preparing of the Medicines which he
ordains.

Indeed it ought to be so, if all things went well, and specially if the
Apothecarie be suspected to have somewhat a large conscience, or that he be of
a slender learning and negligent, and passes not what he does so that he may
receive money. But you must understand that the Physician cannot always be
present at the making or delivering of such Medicines as he has appointed. For
sometimes he has mo Pacients to look to then one, and perchance he may be
twenty or forty miles from the Apothecarie, when he sends his Bill to him,
and therefore cannot be present. Many other occasions there be, that lets
the presence of the Physician at the making and delivering of medicines.

We had a sad passage of an Apothecary of late years, who being prescribed by a
Doctor to make up some Trochises for his Patient of Gordonius, not having them
ready, used in their room Trochises of Alhohengi in opio, which the Patient
took, and dyed within few hours after; whereupon the Widow of the deceased
Patient, instigated by some of her friends, proscuted the said Apothecary;
first for life, and secondly, to prohibit him for further using his trade,
with two several Bills and Inditements at the Kings Bench Bar, before that
Learned and Reverend Judge, the then Lord Chief Justice Brampston, where with
much charge he was acquitted, in both the several Trials.

But if the Apothecarie be an honest man, of a good conscience and learned; or
that he has such a one under him to serve the shop, that is of like qualities,
It is not then so greatly necessary for the Physician to be present, so often
as he ordains his counsel for any Patient. For even as a good tree will
always bring forth good fruit: So will a good Apothecary make and deliver
nothing at any time, but that that is lawful and good. But this Question (if a
man might be so bold) I would fain ask how many good Apothecaries be there in
England? how many do their duties as they ought to do? how many are learned?
how many are faithful? and how many are willing and desirous that the
Physicians should see their Drugs, and see the making of their compositions?
Many there be that disdain that the Physicians should be present at the making
of their Medicines, and who more then the ignorant, covetous, and contentious
sort of Apothecaries. The ignorant thinks (following their barbarous Nicolans)
that their knowledge (which is mere ignorance far excels and surmounteth the
knowledge of all Physicians. The covetous are afraid, lest if the Physicians
should be present that they should find a great deal of their stuff to be
sophisticate, corrupt and naught.

There be also another sort of Apothecaries, which be so arrogant and scornful
(by reason that they be grown very rich, God knows how) that they disdain the
Physician, and have him in no estimation, whereas in the ancient time, the
Apothecaries (as Galen and others witness) were but as servants and ministers
unto the Physician. Galen in his Commentaries upon the sixth Book of
Hippocrates, De morbis vulgaribus, says thus, The Ministers of the Phystian,
are gatherers of herbs, ointment makers, cooks, plaister-makers,
clister-givers, scarifiers, letters out of blood, but if we (meaning of
Physicians) after that we have learned these things do also sometimes the
like, we do no otherwise then even as a master or governor of a Ship, which
having knowledge in rowing, do row when he list, and get up to the top of the
mast, and does all other things belonging to the Mariners art and office. Thus
much Galen.

I need not to allege here the 38. chapter of Ecclesiasticus, where every man
is exhorted to honor the Physician, how much more then should the Apothecarie
honor and reverence him, which has chiefly his living by means of the
Physician. I speak not this because I, or any Physician should seek worldly
honor, or vainglory. For above all things, Soli Deo sit honor and gloria, yet
notwithstanding, according to St Paul's doctrine, we ought to give honor to
whom honor belongs. I remember that when I was yet in a manner but a boy, in
age, studying beyond the sea, after a year or two that I had studied in
Physic; I would sometimes (for to have the better knowledge in simples) resort
to some Apothecaries shop or other. But I should no sooner come into the shop
(specially of learned and honest men) but that immediately the Apothecarie would
welcome and receive me with all courtesy and humanity, and rise from his seat
to give me room, and so would entertain me with all gentleness that he might.
This did they to me being then but a Scholar, what would they do think you to
the Masters and Doctors of Physic? What makes many Apothecaries now a days
to set so little by the Physicians? This is one chief cause, they play the
Physicians themselves, they give and Minister Medicines of their own devise
(God wot a mad device) indifferently unto all men, yea, and the more ignorant
they are, the more bolder they be; for who is so bold as blind Bayard? Many of
them will not stick to look in waters, and not be ashamed even in the
Physicians presence, to ordain this or that Medicine for any kind of disease;
If any Physician do gently admonish them of their fault, and specially of
giving of Medicines after their own brain: They will say, that they may as well
prescribe medicines, as Physicians sometimes do use to make them. They may play
(say they) as well the Physicians, as the Physicians play the Apothecaries, as
though a Physician and an Apothecarie were all one. Indeed a Physician maybe an
Apothecarie, and have an Apothecaries, shop within himself in his own house, or
may be a Surgeon, and heal wounds or sores, or let blond himself: Sed non e
diverso. An Apothecary or Surgeon being only of that Art may not be a
Physician, unless he abuse and falsely exercise against all reason and
conscience, (as many do now a days) the Science of Physic.

To prove that a Physician may make, or cause to be made, in his own house any
kind of Medicines: it may partly appear by the authority of Galen before
alleged, and also by diverse other famous Authors of our time, and specially by
Manardus and Silvius. Manardus in the Prologue prefixed to the Annotations upon
Mesue, has these words: In times past, says he, the Physicians themselves
prepared the Medicines at their own houses, and so kept them ready made, the
which as often as need required, according to their discretion, and the
necessity of the sick, they used. But since these five hundred years or
thereabout, this kind of business has been committed or rather derived from
the Physicians, (not without, as I believe, the danger of the Patients) unto
certain which are called Spicers, or Apothecaries, etc.

Jacobus Silvius in his Book De Medicamentorum simplicium delectu, in the
beginning, whereas he speaks of the duty of an Apothecarie, declares, that
as well Galen, as other Physicians, did oftentimes prepare the Medicines
themselves. It is lawful then for the Physician (if he list) to prepare the
Medicines for his Pacient himself, but not lawful for the Apothecarie to use
or practice physic for any man of his own head.

I would wish that the Apothecary, as he is desirous of gain, so he would
provide all things necessary for his shop; and chiefly, and first of all, for
the chief guide and Instrument, that should rule all the roast, I mean the Book
of Bernardus, Dessennius, Cronemburgius, De compositione medicamentorum: The
perfectest in my opinion, and most excellent Book, I believe, that ever was
made for Apothecaries. Howbeit, because that some Physicians use the
compositions of other Authors; I would wish also that the Apothecatie might not
be without the Dispensatories of Valerius Cordus, of Fuchsius, or Nicolaus
Mirepsus, or the two Books of Silvius, containing the choosing, keeping, and
making of Medicines commonly used: Or, Examen tam simplicium quae compositorum,
Antonii Musae, and not to follow still their blind Nicolaus Praepositus, which
is full of errors. It were meet and convenient also, that the Apothecaries had
diverse searces to searce their Powders in, for some Powders would be searced
very finely, as they that be Dieuretick powders, and most part of Electuaries:
some more grossie, as the most part of Laxatives, except Agarick and
Colocinthis.

The Apothecaries have many excellent Dispensatories to direct them, in making
up their Compositions, as the new Phamacopaea Londinensis, that of Renodeus, of
Bauderon, Bertaldus, the Pharmacopaea Augustava and others: As also in Chymick
preparations, Grulingius, and those two excellent Pieces set forth by
Schraderus, his Pharmacopaea and Quercitanus Rodivivus, and I presume there may
be something of worth, in the Manuscript I have added at the end of this Work,
though he have failed in his judgment; in holding that there is ho Salt in
Vegetables, etc. But Guinther Bilich has given a sufficient refutation to that
folly, nor can he blemish well deserving Quercetan with the Title of (...).

Of Morters likewise they ought to have diverse sorts for all precious Stones,
(that enter into Electuaries) and Coral, ought not to be beaten in a brazen
mortar, but Pearls and Coral ought to be beaten in a mortar of white marble;
precious stones must be made or grinded into powder upon a stone called in
Latin, Lapis Porphirius, which is a kind of red marble. Also Purgations, or
Electuaries, Pills or powders mingled with any Syrrups ought not to be
dissolved in brazen morters, but in morters of glass, of stone, or of some
fine wood; yea, and if they were of silver for great men of high degree, it
were best. Also some Ointments ought to be made in morters of lead.

It were good also that no kind of poison should be pounded or dissolved, in
any morters occupied daily for the shop, for thereof has chanced much evil.

I had almost forgotten one great abuse, that a great many Apothecaries
commonly do use, that is, when the Physician prescribes any Losengis to be
made. The Apothecary will put to the powder as much sugar as pleases him,
insomuch that many times the Losengis shall have little other taste, then of
the sugar only, Fuchsius wills that there should be but thrice as much sugar
as is of the powder, so that to three drams or powder, there should be put but
an ounce und a little more of sugar, howbeit that some other (as he says) do
use to put four times as much sugar as of the powder. But Dessennius
Cronemburgius says, that the Physicians put commonly a pound of sugar, to an
ounce of powder. And to say my fancy and opinion, it were good that the
Physician should determine and appoint in his Bill, how much sugar he would
have to be put with the powder. For sometimes it happens that he ordains a
Purgation in Losengis, sometimes he uses some bitter powder, or very hot
powder, that requires of sugar more or less, but commonly bitter or very hot
pouders require more sugar; and pleasant and temperate ponders require less:
but many Apothecaries are very liberal, which spare for no sugar when they
make Losengis, because they have more respect to their profit, then to the
Patients health. Again, they love to make all things pleasant and sweet, so
that sweet money may come in. And it is most commonly seen, that the most part
of sick folk abhor sweet things. Wherefore they should know of the Physician
(unless he determine it himself in his Bill) how much sugar he will have to
the making of the Medicines.

Now at the last to conclude, because that Apothecaries shall know partly what
their duty is, I will here recite what Silvius says in the place before
alleged, of the Apothecaries duty. And thus I have translated his preface into
English.

Although that the Apothecarie be endued with many things, commonly a greeing
with the Physician: as with natural discretion, a perfect knowledge of the
medicines, a great diligence in all such things as belong to his office, and an
honest behavior; yet nevertheless many things are in a manner peculiarly
appropriated unto him, the which sometimes were also proper and belonging unto
the Physicians, at what time they themselves prepared the medicines, as it
appears that Galen should have done it, in many places by his writings. Now
such things as be proper to the Apothecaries are these: The choosing Medicines
gotten by discretion and long experience, afterward the manner to keep them,
and to know the time when they are in their power and force, or when they are
destiute from all virtue and corrupt. Also, how and in what manner each of them
ought to be used, either by it self alone, or else to sees it, or to bruise
or break it with other, or to prepared after another sort and manner. It is
also convenient and necessary for an Apothecarie to know his Grammar, because
he may the better understand the compositions of the ancient writers, and also
the daily writings (which commonly they call Receipts or Bills) of the
Physicians. In the which writings, if perhaps they have written any thing more
or less then need is, or more unpleasant then the Apothecarie conjectureth in
himself, to be meet and convenient for the pacient, he then may gently tell and
warn the Physician of it.

Moreover, we would that the Apothecary knew perfectly the Art and Science to
choose the Medicines, to prepare them, and to compound their together. We would
also have him to be contented with a mean apparel, to be merry and pleasant
in communication after an honest sort, diligent in the Patients business, to
be no covetous, no lascivious, no drunkard, nor contentious person: all which
things are even in like manner to be observed of the Physician as of the
Apothecary, as Hippocrates testifies in his book, called, The Office or Duty
of a Physician.

And if the Apothecary be indewed with such perfections of spirit, of the body
and also of fortune: he will never give any Medicine (specially being of any
great operation) to any man, unless he be of the counsel of some cunning
Physician; nay, neither will he give any thing, be it of never so little
effect, knowing not the virtue of it. For oftentimes certain remedies, although
they seem but weak, yet nevertheless through quantity, quality, and space of
time being unwholesome, or the occasion many times of great diseases, and takes
away the right and true way of curation: Insomuch that under such remedies, the
body being in cure, will soon afterward bear greater and stronger remedies, but
not convenient to the purpose. Moreover he shall not commit any crime or fault,
either for love or favor, or hatred, or fear; nor he may not be seduced by
money or led by ignorance. Neither shall he give at any time any poison, or
things procuring abortion, any thing that is too old or out of use, things
altered and sophisticate, or any Quid pro quo? But he shall ask counsel, (as
often as need shall require) of a well learned Physician, what simple or
compound medicine is to be substituted and taken, for lack of one or the other.
He shall not augment nor fortify the quantity of any strong medicine to the
intent that by a greater evacuation ensuing, men should suppose him to have
better Apothecaries stuff then any other.

O! I Would the Apothecaries of these days would frame themselves to this
rule, and the Physicians likewise on their side, Physic should not then be so
little regarded and set by, as it is now a days, yea by opprobrious words and
taunts despised of a great many. Now I beseech the Almighty and living God,
that once he would make the Physicians and Apothecaries to be of that desire
and mind, that each of them would rather wish to be indeed, then to seem or to
be called a right, good, and honest Physician, a right, good, and honest
Apothecarie.

And if they do neglect that godly gift and grace, I pray God that once some
punishment may be appointed by the Laws and Statutes for them which will
enterprise to practice a Science (so healthie to man's body, when it is well
ministered, and again so hurtful and dangerous, when it is ignorantly and
rashly handled) before they know it. Thus much Silvius. And here I will make an
end of Apothecaries, now to the Chirurgions.

A DETECTION Of the rash Boldness and Ignorance of diverse CHIRURGIANS.
The Third Part.
THere be many Chirurgians in this our time, that practice Surgery, more by
blind experience, then by any Science, who in using many things appertaining to
their Art, know almost the virtue and opperation of nothing that they do use.
For how should they know it, when they are altogether unlearned? yea, and many
of them there are that know never a letter in the book. Whereas Surgery
being counted as one or the chiefest parts of Physic, (having his practice
chiefly in the time of war) it were necessary that the Chirurgian were not
only prompt, feat, and diligent in his doings, but also that he were well
learned in Philosophy and Physic, and also some what in Astronomy.

But how many shall a man find in a country that have learning? how many are
there that proceed in their cures truly and uprightly as they ought? not very
many I believe. For the most part being ignorant and void of all good learning,
yea, and know almost no part of anatomy (which is most necessary for a
Chirurgian) cannot scarce heal a green wound, and some there be that can scant
let a man blood (which is a handsome and pretty feat, and yet not so hard a
thing to be done) not well apply a Ventose called otherwise a cupping Glass,
unless they put the man to pain and trouble. There be some that esteem
themselves so well exercised and perfect in the Art, that they think that no
cure can come amiss to them. They will enterprise and take in hand all manner
often cures, be they never so hard or incurable: for they have fear of nothing,
but rashly go to work in all things. They will cut, they will lance, they
will cauterise (which they call searing with a hot burning iron) they will saw
off a leg or an arm of the body, they will use corrosives that shall pierce
even unto the hard bones, and they will make an issue almost for every trifle,
and for every disease, without considering the circumstances of the whole
matter, not weighing the strength, the age, and the complexion of the body,
besides many other things that are greatly to be considered in such cases. And
possible it is many times that the Patient has need of some inward Medicine,
which the Chirurgian can, nor may well give without the Physicians counsel.

And indeed it were very meet and necessary, that the Chirurgian should
undertake no hard or dangerous cure, without the Physicians advice. Howbeit, as
I see now a days, the most part of them do all things, following only their
own fantasies.

They stick not to give Electuaries, Sirrups, and other Medicines themselves,
yea, and Purgations also: which thing me thinks is very uncomely. It is not
reason that he that should be but as a Minister unto the Physician (as I
alleged before out of Galen, when I treated of Apothecaries) should use the
part of a Master and Philosopher, and ordain such things as he knows not the
nature of. It is not unknown, that many poor Patients perishes under such rash
and lewd Chirurgians.

But to say the truth, the fault is not so much in them, as in those that gird
credit unto them. For as the world goes now a days, if a Physician, or
Chirurgian has a fair tongue, and has also somewhat a comely body, and can
speak (I will not say flatter) indifferently on every man's side, gratifying
each man according to his quality, desire and mind: every man unless he be
very wise and circumspect, will lightly give ear and credit unto him, and
account him for a discreet and cunning man. Such a one shall lack nothing, he
shall be welcome, he shall have much courtesy and pleasure showed him, finally,
he shall have his whole hearts desire, (that is money enough) For such Fellows
by their subtilty and fair tongue, will allure more people unto them, and get
themselves more treasure in one quarter of a year, then shall an honest and
good Physician in the space of three years, and all by their fleering face and
flattering words.

I would to God that all men would beware of such fellows, and remember the
Proverb that says: Dulci sub melle saepe venena latent. Under sweet meats is
many times a poison hid. And as Virgil says, Hinc procul O pueri fugite, latet
anguis in herba, Take heed, and flee far hence O children, for the snake lies
privily hid under the grass.

It is written in the ancient Authors of Physic, that in the old time, the
Physicians were wont to exercise Chirurgerie themselves. Howbeit it has been
now of a long time, that the Chirurgions do only exercise this part of Physic
for many considerations, and chiefly for this occasion, as Hippocrates says,
Vita brevis, ars vero longa, The life of man is short in comparison of the
Science of Physic which is long. Therefore because the Physicians cannot well
give themselves to study diverse other Sciences, which be necessary to Physic,
and make Medicines, and use also Chirurgerie, and go and visit their Patients:
It has been thought good that other men called Chirurgions, (and yet having
sufficient knowledge) should have the office and ministry to use and apply
outward Medicines, and not to enterprise and use all Medicines for all diseases
both outward and inward, as some do, for in so doing they go beyond their
bounds.

There are excellent pieces of late put forth of Chirurgerie, as Glaudorfius,
Hildanus, Paracelsus and others in Latin.

Foelix Wartius in the German tongue.

Reads Works, Banisters, Wood-hall, Pareus by Johnson, and others in English,
Cook.

Chirurgetie although it be a manual Art, yet it has his speculation, which
cannot be had without reading of diverse Authors, and especially Hippocrates,
Galen, Aetius, Paulus Aegineta, and of the latter Writers, Tagaultius,
Hollerius, Bologuinus and others. As for Joannes de Vigo, whom the Chirurgions
of our days do now most follow; I would not that they should so greatly trust
him, because that he is not to be followed and read without great discretion
and judgment, for the obscurity and doubts, yea and errors that be in him. He
brings in many things in his Book, which belongs rather to the Physician to
know and practice, then to the Surgeon: as Electuaries, Potions, Purgations,
and many other inward medicines. If the Surgeon have knowledge in Physic, I
mean that he know the complexions, the nature of Simples, and the effect and
operation of Compositions, he may use them, else not. For if he do, he shall
do as a blind man that shoots at a hare, he shall work at all adventures, and
many times with the danger of his Patient.

I much marvel, why the Surgeon should disdain to come ask counsel of the
Physician, when he has any hard or doubtful cure, it can be no hinderance to
him, and to say the truth, it is no great profit to the Physician, unless it
be for some rich man. The good Physician will use the poor as the poor, and
the rich partly for his money, as well as for his love and friendship. For the
Physician must have his living by some kind of persons. And not only the
Physician, but also the Apothecarie and Surgeon should deal charitably with
the poor, and use every man according to his capacity. But this I have spoken,
Velut obiter, as by the way: Now to the purpose.

Many perchance will say unto me, what needs the Surgeon come to ask any
counsel of the Physician for any cure that he takes in hand, whereas it is
well known that the Physicians (except one among an hundred) do not use to
practice Chirurgerie themselves, and by this means cannot instruct the
Surgeon in that thing, that they know not.

I answer, that the most part of the Authors of Physic, do treat of
Chirurgerie in their Works, and although we meddle little, or nothing, with
outward diseases, yet do we know what belongs to them, and how they ought to
be cured. And I say also that Chirurgerie can never be well practiced without
learning, or a reasonable way of proceeding which is called in Latin
Rationalis methodus, the which the most part of Chirurgions have not. As for
example; A man has an hot inflammation, or (as commonly they call it) a
swelling or imposthume in some outward part of his body, and feels great
pain. What remedy shall the Surgeon use for the expelling of it? he must
first consider what is the nature and quality of an Inflammation, called in
Greek Phlegmone, whether it be engendered of pure blood only, or else mixed
with any other humor, what is the cause of it, and what be the signs?

Now let us suppose that the said Phlegmon be engendered only of a superfluous
blood, and the cause Antecedent be Phlethora, that is, abundance of good blood
in all the body. Now what shall the Surgeon do in such a case? shall he
apply any thing to the swelling, without considering whether the body must be
let blood or not? Whether the swelling or Phlegmon be yet in fluxu, that is a
breeding; or in statu, that is, in the worst case that it can be; or in the
declination, whether or when, he ought to use repercussives, resolutions, or
both together? The general rule of Physic says, that in the beginning of all
inflammations, we should use repercussives, that is, Medicines to repel, and
drive back the fluxion of humors: But I put the case that the swelling be in
the Emunctories, or that one has the Pestilence. The Surgeon perhaps
following the general rule, will lay a Plaster to repel the said inflammation
or swelling. Does he well think you? he does so well that either he puts the
Patient in great jeopardy or else he kills him.

Wherefore the Surgeon must think that a great many things must be
considered more then one, as often as he undertaketh any cure of weight; and
must think it no shame nor reproach to counsel with a Physician in such
matters. For verily I say, (to conclude in few words) That no man be he
Surgeon or Apothecary, shall never work well without a true method and
learning. For look what thing soever he takes in hand, what cure soever he
has, he being destitute of learning, shall never bring it well to pass,
without the aid, help, and counsel of the Learned Physician; for if he chance
to do any notable cure, it shall be peradventure more by hap hazard, then by
procurement and diligence. Here I could bring in many other abuses of
Chirurgerie; as now some pretend and exercise Physic (to their shame,
deceiving the people) under the cloak of Surgery; some drive off, and linger
out the time, to have the more money. Some be so presumptuous, that they will
warrant every Patient, when oftentimes many by their negligence (and for lack
of a good diet, or some other good Medicines which should be appointed by the
Physician) dye upon their hands. Some when they have done all that they can,
and see that their Patient begin to go to wrack, then immediately with all
speed, they will run to the Physician with their Patients water, and then to
ask counsel when it is too late: and all because they will shake off the
burden from their own shoulders, to cast it upon the Physicians neck, and to
put all the fault in him, if any thing chance otherwise then well, that so they
may be clean discharged and unburdened from all manner of blame and reproach.
Some go from town to town, from market to market to utter their trumperie
(their ware I would have said) and to show their cunning among the homely and
simple people of the country.

But all these wily and deceitful fashions are not yet thoroughly known, nor
can never well be, until such time as a Reformation be made by some Law or
Statute, which I pray God to grant shortly, to his glory, the profit of the
people, and for the good of the Commonwealth. AMEN.

To both the Universities, Oxford and Cambridge, A Peroration.
THus much I had (Right Worshipful) to say,
And to declare most plainly to you all:
The great abuse committed every day,
In this our Art, which Physic men do call.
The chiefest points I have in general,
But only touched in this my little Book:
He may know all the matter in special,
Who so to it more narrowly will look.
I marvel much, and sore lament to see,
That such abuse has been suffered so long,
And is now yet, (it will none other be)
You and we have (me thinks) great wrong,
Therefore ye should no more the time prolong,
But seek some means the learned to defend,
With privileges, that to you do belong,
And thus doing, you shall no man offend.
I ever had, and have yet at this hour,
A great desire, both in my heart and mind
That every good Physician to his power
Do all things well, so worship shall he find.
But now there are Physicians so unkind
To God and man, that they pass not a straw
Which of both ends go before or behind,
They are so void of truth, and fear of law.
This sort will now envy with force and might,
Straight against me, and this poor silly Book.
(Wherefore I pray, defend me and the right)
They will lay wait for me, and always look,
What time they may destroy me with their hook
I mean their tongue so venomous and sharp.
But by Gods grace, and your help, I shall brook
That well enough, and not come in their trap.
Mollibus haec non est, sed duris dura Securis,
Dura secat, damnum mollia nulla ferunt.
FINIS.
To the Reader.
THis Book has passed some good hands, with good approbation; who reads him
shall find learning, but mixed with some tartness, against Quercetan, an
Author the Paracelsians generally approve; and it seems, he assents unto
Schechius, Salem revera rebus non in esse et accidere terrennis partibus ab
igne, but Mullerus and the whole current of the Paracelsians are opposite to
this, as some other of his opinion: and if you please to hear Bartoline in his
own words, he affirms it to be contra omnem sensum and experientiam quae
salem magis vel minus rebus inesse testatur. Et. sed non opus est a calore
productum, sed calore seperatum. The Book may be useful to young
Apothecaries, and out of my good wishes to them I commend it to their perusing,
leaving it to better and more judging censures.

A TRANSLATION OF PAPIUS Concerning APOTHECARIES.
EVery Medicine whilst it is entire, has his temperament, and from thence his
perfect and integrall strength and faculties.

But for the most part, the work is in the preparation of the Medicines, that
they may be made fitter and convenienter for Diseases.

For to dry, moist are fitter.

To moist, dry are fitter.

1. Waters have a faculty of moistning, and repairing the Spirits. 2. Spirits
quickly and strongly revive, and repair the Spirits. 3. Oils do strongly
mollify and loosen. 4. Powders do dry. 5. According to the custom of the
sick, of which one is more pleased and delighted with a dry form, and the
other with a moist.
For the form arises from the preparation

That it may work more suddenly, by peircing with his thinness; and more
strongly, whilst the faculty, which is placed in the thinner parts, is
increased, those subtiler parts being drawn and straightened together, for
preservation sake, by taking the watery moistness away, which subjects it to
corruption. And although often, single Medicines, by their faculties and
workings, may suffice for one, or many diseases, yet there is often need of
their composure, as well for preparation sake.

1. For many distillations have need of infusions, for the custom of the sick,
of which, some stand affected to pills, and other to potions.

2. For the curative ends. 1. Malign quality of the Medicine. 2. The
troublesome smell or taste, and the dull slowness stird up and increased. may be
corrected
may be corrected

3. When many diseases are joined together, every Medicine may oppose his
several disease.

Treacle is compounded of many excellent Counter-poysons, Cordials, and such as
make the blood purer, because that ought to be a general Antidote for all
Poisons.

1. One preparation is made by resolving and separating some, or every
moistness from the dry earthy part, as in the calcination of Stones, Woods,
Coals, by burning, or otherwise drying them.

1. Or by drawing forth from an actual moistness. 1. Spirits, as from Wine,
Water. 2. Juice by expression. 3. Oil by expression, distillation.

2. From a potentiall moistness, Spirits Oil, by distillation.

2. From an actual dryness, the most thin, sub till, and pure earthy parts
by a dry distillation, as flowers of brimstone are made:

When the faculty of the Medicine is drawn, either. with or without Smell.
Savor. Color.


And that is performed by the said, Expressions. Distillations. Infusions.
Decoctions.
some times Infusion and Expressio^
are joined together with Distillatio^. Decoction.


For the same faculty is not in a native Medicine, prepared by the said ways,
or manner, for preparation changes the temperament, some more, some less.
Seeing that especially, on which fire works more strongly, does either
lessen, or consume the moisture, and conveyeth in an Eupyreuma, and somewhat
changes the faculty or the fiery heat, savor, and taste, mingling the
subtiler earthy parts with watery, when with his accidentary heat, it induces
sharpness.

Nor is any Medicine made more perfect and excellent, by any preparation,
(since to the perfection, in which every thing is created, nothing can be added
by art) but made more convenient by certain ends; and yet not always, seeing
many things are more useful and better without preparation, then prepared; as
the

1. Bezar-Stone, and rasping of Hartshorne, against poysens.

2. Or the same, as if in hystericall passions, Powder of Amber by the mouth,
and Balsome exhibited below.

Nor does that preparation always excel, which takes away the thicker earthy
matter, seeing that it is more profitable in many effects, then the thin.

It may be here enquired, whether Medicines, in the body may be so digested by
nature with the help of heat, as aliments; and whether every or some
preparation of Medicines, may serve helpful to this digestion. The soul of
man in the act of concoction (and cure by Medicines) uses the same heat, the
same humors, vapors, and vessels, thorough which also it conveyeth the
nourishment, and alters the faculty of the Medicine, resolves the humors,
and by help of the humors, the earthy parts, and by this means, in this
change, and resolution diminishes them, and separateth the thicker parts from
the thin.

In like manner the preparation of the first Aliment, and Medicament makes it
fit, that the Aliment may more easily be digested by the heart; and heat and
the humor pass thorough the Medicine and draw out his faculty, and lead it to
the affected part; yet notwithstanding some preparation takes away the virtue
or strength, as we have said of calcination. But this especially differs
between either act.

That in the Act of concoction the temperament of the first Aliment is changed
into the temperament of blood; but of this in the temperament of the cure of
the parts, the soul uses the temperament of the Medicine, uncorrupted, as
much as may be, as well to the changing of the qualities, not natural of the
humors and parts, as to the evacuation of things hurtful: so as the Medicines
may not properly be said to be digested, or concocted.

But there are seven principal ways of Physic preparations:

1. Powdering. 2. Melting. 3. Expression. 4. Infusion. 5. Decoction. 6.
Distillation. 7. Extraction.
Powdering is, when a dry Medicine is reduced into Powder, by brufing or
beating it, that it may be the easier with liquor, either simply dissolved or
mixed: serving whereto, is drying of neat of the Sun or fire; of which sort
also is that calcination, which is called reverberation. To many things, in
brusing them, some liquor is added, which prohibiteth the dry exhalation, or
vapouring away of the smell; as Rose Water to certain Aromaticall Spices; to
Mush, Ambergreese, etc. Water to Almonds, least they cast forth their Oil; to
the seed of Wild seem with Opium, otherwise the clamminess hinders the
brusing, or breaking it; Ammoniacum, Galbanum, and such as are of that kind,
are dissolved in vinegar, at the fire.

1. There is some calcination imperfect, as when all the watery moistness is
resolved in the coals, something aereall combustible being left; and when in
like manner Hartshorn by a resolving water, the greatest part of the matter
which coagulateth or joyneth together by the help of heat, is resolved and
drawn forth.

2. Other calcination perfect, as when every coagulation is resolved by fire
only, or other helping dissolvers, without ashes; as is performed in
calcination of stones, and metals, and when woods are burnt into ashes.

All things calcined, or all ashes, have a power of drying, and some have a
greater, some a lesser sharpness.

The virtue or efficacy of drying, comes: 1. Partly from the rarity or
thinness in every thing, by which it can receive the humors into it self. 2.
Or from the hidden heat or flame, lying in the ashes of stones, or lime burnt,
in which, because they are more folid, the flame (which insinuated it self in
burning) lies hid; and after by the contrary qualities of water, that is,
moistness, and cold, it is brought forth into act, whilst the flame lurking
extremely resists the qualities of water, but nor so in oil.

There is greater sharpness in those things, whose matter before burning was
thick and sharp; as Vitriall, rind of an Oak, Wormwood, etc.

From this reason we exhibit charcoales to Cattle we intend to fat, especially
oaken coals, that their powder may easily be drawn by the veins, and pass
thorough them, by reason of their thin and subtilness, and so may dilate the
veins to make them receive a greater quantity of blood, may provoke the
stomach by his acrimony, by his dryness, may draw the chyle and blood, and
thence from may prevent Aposthumes in men; especially the coals of the Linden
Tree, that the grosseness of the blood may be cut, least the Spirits should be
suffocated.

Of ashes also, some are true, as of stones and plants, from which all the
liquor is truly carried away by the fire; some like, or analogicall, as of
metals who appear dry to the Senses, but by their power keep in themselves
their native liquor, by whose benefit they may be poured: forth, or altogether
reduced: of which kind is gold especially.

From hence may be demanded, whether ashes retain or keep any virtue or faculty
of the Medicine, since the faculty whether hid or manifest, is not but in the
temparement, by smell and savor; but in calcination the temparement, odor,
and savor, are altogether destroyed (for nothing is left but the earthy
matter) but contrarily, in some of them, a strange heat is induced, native
coldness of the earth and acrimony, and in all things which have smell and
taste, a different smell and taste; so that I can conclude no otherwise, but
that there is nothing at all retained of the proper virtue of the Medicine in
the ashes.

The calcination of Iron, and Cyprian Brass (seeing they agree in substance,
and only differ in certain accidents) is chiefly made from Sulphur, because
it is greedily drawn and imbibed, by these being hot, for the Sulphur, by his
hidden accrimony and thinness, peircing, all the coagulation, or matter, which
holds and keeps them together, is dissolved and exhaled away: And whether
the coagulum of other mettalls, may be so dissolved by loosning waters, that
the potentiall moistness may be resolved into vapors; I much doubt of.

2. Liquefaction, or melting, is generally an actuation, or working forth of
moistness lying hid in a dry body, by heat, (a waterie body excepted) but that
ought so here to be, that the liquid matter remaining, by piercing may work
that in the body, which by his virtue or faculty it is able to do.

The material principles of which sublunary bodies consist, are two, 1. Earth,
and 2. Moistness, which are the subject of heat, upon which he works, for
earth is the bound or limit of moistness.

Of humors or moistness, some subsist by themselves, all earthy matter being
removed: such as is an airie waterishnesse, which is: Spiritous or Oily. Both
of which are inflammable, or apt to be kindled. To these, as to the earthy
matter, so many material principalls are answerable in an animate body, (by
which name that is nourished in these.)

Again the Olie has three differences, for it is either from the far of living
creatures, in plants, from which that which is drawn forth, yields his chief
nourishment, or flows by his own accord from stones, (as Petroleum) but is
not fit for the nourishment of a living body by reason of the excessive heat,
as also the rest. And for the same cause, that which lies hid in amber,
brimstone, and wax, (for that which lies hid in honey, is of one and the same
kind with oil of wax) But Manna and Saltpeter, because they easily take
fire, prove and show a hidden oil in them; but then by reason of the scarcity
of the oil, as also for the plenty of the earthy mattter, that is first
resolved, and vapoureth away into smoke, before it is separated from the same.

Besides these, there are others which are not actuated, or brought forth, but
by heat, nor are kindled by themselves (that is, do not nourish a flame) but
the heat being removed, return to their former dryness.

And again of these things, there is a threefold sort or kind.

1 One sort of plants, seeing that the ashes of these melt. 2. Of Metals. and
these are fluxible, or run forth in the fire, 3. Of Minerals. and these are
fluxible, or run forth in the fire,
And truly these, cannot be separated at all from their earthy matter, without
their loss.

By the said humors, or moistness, we understand the oilie, which is melted
out, that it may preserve, and keep his actual moisture, the which is done by
mixing the oiles, (especially those of the same kind) or also hot water, (for
so we melt or dissolve Manna) or vinegar: (as we melt Rosins) for by this
means, the earthy matter, overcome by the aerie; by the multitude, or by help
of a little heat, continues moist.

Those things easiest melt, which the heat can easiest penetrate:
Notwithstanding either 1. The Soliditie or hardness which is in iron or brass:
Or 2. coldness actual and potential which is in other metals. Or 3. actual
dryness, or scarcity of the oil contained, which is in Amber. But earth, and
the said watery and aierie humor, is not found in all sublunarie bodies, nor
can all sublunarie bodies be resolved, (as Pseudo-Chimices vainly imagine) into
these principles. But of that Solution and Separation we shall presently
handle.

3. Expression. By hand or press (when greater strength must be used) the
jucinesse is drawn from the plants and their parts: Or simply, the waterie or
oilie juice, by certain helps: As: 1. Almonds unhusked are drawn forth (least
the husk or rind should suck or imbibe a great part of the juice) and being
bruised that the oil without any hinderance may pass forth, through the
thinner earthy parts, a little quantity of rose water is poured upon it, as
well for smells sake, as that it may come forth the readier; and after this
manner an oil is drawn forth of the meal of the Sesame seed.

2. Nutmeg is hung up in a covered still, that it may touch the hot water, that
the hot peircing vapors afterward may carry away with them in the expression,
the flowing oil.

3. Yolks of eggs, boiled or fried in a frying pan unto hardness, more easily
send forth their oil, being afterward pressed.

4. From corn or grain put between two hot plates of iron, an oil is drawn
forth, which is gathered together by heat.

4. Infusion. Dry things are infused into liquor fit for our purposes, that by
helps of actual or potentiall heat, they may impart their virtue to the
liquor, and so may be more use fully received in at the mouth, or else that
the hard may be softened, or loosed, or that the liquor many correct some
quality of the thing infused, or contrary. So we infuse Rubarb, or the leaves
of Sena, into hot water, (lest the thin parts should exhale by boiling) being
well and close covered, and leave them in a warm place, (and so likewise the
leaves of Roses, Rue, etc. in vinegar) that the moisture actually warm, passing
through all the earthy parts, may receive into it self, the virtue of those
things which is in the thin parts.

So Purgatives, or changing Medicines, being infused in wine, or spirit of
wine, we place in a cold place, that the wine may not sour, and that the
moisture potentially hot, which I have said it will make in the hot bath, that
the moisture by the actual and potentiall heat, may work so much the stronger;
but this latter is compounded of Infusion, and Concoction.

The thing infused are left the longer in the liquor, if the matter infused,
be the grosser or harder, and the moisture potentially hot; but less while,
if the liquor be more thin, and penetrateth more, and has less potential heat.

For you must take heed, that they stand not so long infused, that they may
putrify, or contract foulness, or hoariness.

To infusion belongs 1. We pour out a cold emulsion, (as for example sake)
with the seeds of Melons, or Pompeons, husked and bruised, and strain them
through a linen cloth, so long as they will cast forth a milkie juice. 2.
A^lie. 3. When a hot iron, flint, or stone heated, communicates their
astriction to oil or water quenched.

That oil which they call Philosophers oil, takes from the flame a very
heating power, as well in this Infusion, as in the following dry distillation.
4. When pouders or things calcined, as either salt, and ashes poured forth,
receives the taste and smell, and strength of the juyces which they imbibe.

But Spirits suddenly resolved exhale and vapor away, Being infused in salt,
or ashes flowing. 5. Lotion, as when the yellow color, and troublesome smell
of turpentine is washed away with water, as also when the Cyancan, and Armenian
stone are washed, oiles and fat, that the vicious malignant qualities, and foul
smell may be taken away.

Lie, is a waterie or spiritous humor sifted through ashes. Therefore it is to
be valued as well from the nature of the ashes, as the moisture poured out on
it, for from the ashes, it has his strength of drying, cleansing, and cutting
by his sharpness, which the actual and potentiall hear of the liquor poured
forth increases, and by consequent it has no strength of softning or
conglutinating together.

If the moisture poured on, be potentially hot, or cold, of the same nature
will the lie be also.

But seeing the ashes does retain nothing of the virtue of the medicine,
neither from the lie will any virtue be in it at all. The lightness of the
lie, arises from that moisture of the ashes, which we have said is melted with
a vehement fire, and advance the passage through the vessels, taken by the
mouth, and after the cleansing of the foulness away, induces especially a
smoothness to the skin of man.

In the said faculties, and in the manner of generation, it is like to the
wheyie part of blood, by which name it has a sympathy with the reins and
bladder, and from thence a dieuretick power of cutting the phlegm, and
de-obstructing the veins. But it has no sweating power, unless it be got
from good wine, or the Spirits of wine, nor of a counterpoison by it self,
unless it be got from distilled waters, decoctions, and infusions of this
kind, or that plants resisting poison, be put in place of strata, in the
straining through.

But by accident whilst it resists putrefaction, and tough clammy poisons by
drying, and cutting, by urine and sweatings, it carries along with it the
poison, nature together thrusting forth the poison, by which advice, many drink
their own urine in times when the air is infected.

That mixture also is like to infusion, when the oil and watery humor is
mixed with the earthy matter, for when the oily humor repelleth from it the
water, contrarily the waterie may be easily dried up with the earthy: so that
thence it may easier admit the oil, it accords rather that the earthy matter
be mingled before with the waterie moist, then with the oylic; so in the
threefold medicine, lythargie, or whitelead, is first mingled with vinegar, and
after with oil.

5. Decoction. The humor is either digested by the fire alone, or with the
humor and earthy matter, until that either for the most part, the waterie
parts exhale away, as it is in boiling of salt water; 1. Of a Nitrous humor,
of juyces, expressed, etc. That no occasion of Putrefaction on may be given 2.
The vicious or evil qualities exhale away. 3. Hard things may be softened. 4.
The Medicinable quality of the things infused, may be communicated to the
humor. 5. And that the moist pants may be exactly mixed and united with the
earthy.

And these also are two ends of insolation, when we expose into the sun, oil,
spirits, or vinegar, with things infused, for this also is a certain decoction,
or digestion, that the earthy matter, may be gathered together and settle, so
that afterward it may be separated.

That humor is either an oily, or a waterie juice drawn forth; water, wine,
beer, sweet wine, honyed wine, and vinegar. Foolishly called by some a
menstruum, since no Physical infusion or decoction requires the spaces of a
month, but may at the utmost be finished in three days space.

1. Decoction is made in a vessel shut or closed, when we fear the loss or
flying away of the subtle and thinner vapors. 2. Or in an open vessel, when
we would exhale offensive qualities: There is need of being careful about it,
and looking often to the matter, that it may not be burned, and of double
clarifying it, either in the bath, to keep in the faculties of the things
infused, and to prevent Empyreuma.

1. By reason of the delay, hard things require a long time (which for this
cause ought first to be put in, and require more moistness) in which their
great abundance of moisture is to be resolved for avoiding putrefaction: 2.
Less hard, require a lester time, when there is not such great abundance of
water to be resolved; so we boil leaves, to the consumption only of the fourth
part of the water: 3. Flowers and Spice require a short time, to the boiling of
which, two or theee walmes will suffice.

Sometimes the decoction is reiterated or the infusion, by a straining or
expression renewed, that the thicker parts being separated, those which are
thinner, may in the other decoction, be mote exactly united together.

There is also a certain natural coction, as when new Wine boyleth up, or as
new Beer brewed, Honey and water mixed, new Wine, etc. and some infusions; when
as the potentiall heat actuated, or put a working separateth the grosser parts
from the thinner, (some advancing upward, and some settling downward, and
resolves the thinner parts into vapors or spirits, which being scattered, if
there be not space, or issue enough to go forth, the same break the vessels a
pieces though very strong.

Though according to the opinion of Actaurius, Sirrup, or a Julep, be water
boiled with Honey or Sugar, or Wine boiled to the third part, yet at this day,
all Decoctions are called Sirrups, in which water with plants is boiled, either
with, or without Sugar or Honey; and Juleps when stilled waters, Rob, when the
juyces are pressed forth in an equal weight with Sugar, or boiled with a half
part of Sugar. Sugar and Honey are added, for cleansing, taste, or lusting sake:
For by their clamminess, as by a coagulation, it conserveth the parts united.

In preparation of simple Sirrup, for continuance (as for example sake) of
flowers of Violets, or Roses; it is best to have the juice of Violets pressed
out, to be infused raw in Sugar clarified warm, (not boiling, lest it exhale
away some of the smell) and to set it into the Sun, to resolve away the
superfluous watery moistness; and if insolation suffice not, by inclining the
vessel to separate that which is watery, and then being boiled again, to pour
it on, for so the, smell and strength of the Medicine will be preserved, and
kept more powerfully; concerning which, our Reformer Quercetan, has nothing he
can more boast of.

But seeing in Roses, there is an aicry spirituous, and oily matter, which
either does not enter the juice, or is more drawn out by a fervent decoction;
it is best, that Roses be first infused in a boiling, or fervent decoction, and
some hours after pressed forth; and to this juice other Roses be put, and
being about nine times iterated, by infusion in Balneo (to prevent Empyreuma,
and Evaporations) then that juice at length pressed or strained out, should be
boiled with about a third part of Sugar, to a fit consistence in Balneo Mariae:
For since the purgative strength of Roses is rather placed in the earthy part,
Quercetan erreth, whilst he would have the digestion of the juice at length
drawn, or pressed forth, to be repeated in Balneo, and that which is clear to be
separated, adding thereto the earthy parts.

But plenty of the said flowers being wanting, infusion in boiling water, the
vessel being well closed up, has the next place; nor then is there any need
of Balneum; it suffices to be placed in a warm place for certain hours; or
if you had rather use the distilled water of Roses, it ought not to boil
forth, but to be placed a while in Balneo with the Roses.

There is also a salt made or prepared by decoction out of salt waters: It is
the propriety of Salt, to bind and be sharp, brachish, and of a watery of
spring, by which name, it receiving into it self a moist air, forthwith
melts, as also others which from their first origin, are rather watery then
earthy.

From hence it follows, that no true Salt can be got out or Plants, yea, even
from them which abound with Saltness: Such as are, Kaly, or Saltwort, and
Sea-grape, or knotted Kaly: For which cause we refuse, and altogether reject
those white Powders, which are made of sodden lies; whilst lie filtered is
stilled, till there remains in the bottom a thicknese like Honey, which is
dried at the sun, or by the Furnace, and at length, for whiteness sake, is
burnt by a moderate fire in a Gold smiths pot, when they want a native genuine
saltness; and if there be any, it is much inferior to that in natural Salt;
when in like manner, the lie retains nothing of the nature of a Medicine
(besides sharpness) much less the foresaid Powders, unless peradventure, those
which are void of all sharpness, may be useful gently to dry, but will not
answer the labor of making them, and cost in their operation.

Neither can true Salt be gotten, or made out of urine. For if it be boiled or
stilled, till the watery moisture is resolved into vapors, and the dregs be
calcined, there arises a Powder with an odious taste; and if you pour water
upon the thing calcined, and after draw it by distillation, you may truly wash
away the stink; but you will have remaining, rather the taste of Saltpeter,
then of Salt.

But what madness is it to reckon Vitriall, Alum, and Sugar, in the number of
Salts? where is their faltness, shall then likeness make all things the same.

In like manner also, by decoction almost are prepared, your Lohochs, your
Electuaries, candid things, Morsels, Pills, Trochisces, Glisters, Suppositories,
Ointments, Pultesse, and Cerots.

In making your Medicines, which are called Lumbitives, and Arteriacks, from
the rough artery, a Windpipe they mollify. The Arabians call those Medicines
Lohochs, which have power to mollify the Breast, stay Catarrhes or Rheumes, and
cut phlegm, and they make a decoction first to clamminess, then add Sugar
Pennels, and boil it to the thickness of honey and after expression when it
begins to cool, mingle the rest in a mortar, without decoction; as Vine
kernels, sweet Almonds husked, juice of Liquorice, Tragacanth, and Gum Arabic,
Ireos Roots, and white Starch, Because their strength will rather be weakened by
decoction, then drawn forth.

But seeing the cutting faculty is extreme contrary to tough and thickning, and
that the one weakneth the strength of the other, sometimes they are wont with
great oversight to be mixed together.

In like manner in Electuaries, they are first boiled in the same order, of
which I have formerly advised you, those things whose faculty may fitly be
drawn forth by decoction, to the consumption of their parts; there is after
added a third part of Sugar, and then it is boiled up again to a consistence,
as well for taste, as lasting, and last of all such things are added, which are
not fit to be boiled, such as are conserves, flowers of Cassia, pulp of Prunes,
Tamarindes, etc. or Sena leaves, Rubarb, Agarick, Coloquintida, are infused
into the boiling decoction, and about twelve hours after, they may bestreined
with expression, and the expression forthwith boiled up to a consistence with
Sugar, the rest as I have said being added.

Those things which we will preserve, we first cleanse, and throw away that in
the roots which is woody, and by decoction we soften hard things, and take away
the bitterness from bittter things, (though this rather serve for gluttony
then Physical intentions) and being lightly dried, we put Sugar to them warm
boiled up to a fit thickness (for too much heat shrinketh the fruit) till they
are well covered, and then if any of the waterie moistness appear, that being
separate, and reboyled is poured on: but some fruits (as for example sake)
Cherries are presently dipped into the said Sugar.

The soundness of the Flowers is conserved (from whence they are called
conserves) if unto them being small bruised, a double part of Sugar carefully
poudered be mingled, and exposed to the Sun to dry up the watery moisture, and
therefore they are to be gathered in fair and dry weather, and the whites are
to be clipped off from the roses for their bitterness.

Some times to gratify the sick, we mingle powders simple or compound, or
distilled oiles with sugar, and also medicines cut into small parts: If the
powder be pleasant or purging (that the purgative power may not be weakened by
too great a proportion of sugar) we mingle an ounce of it dissolved and
perfectly boiled with a dram of the said sugar in odoriferous water, or such as
shall serve for our purpose, but with pouders less grateful one dram, with
two ounces of Sugar, but of oil one scruple, with half a pound of Sugar, and
the Sugar being boiled enough, remove it from the fire, beat it a good while
with a Pestle, until the pouders or oil are well mixed together, and then
pour it forth upon a Table, and frame out round pellets, or four square
Tablets or Lozenges, or Long (which they call Bits); Sometimes to the Sugar
poudered we mingle only some few drops of distilled oil without any
decoction: but this we have referred unto our Infusions.

Pills called Cataphotia (because they are swallowed) are made up either of
Extracts, or Pouders, moistened with some lost humor of such a bigness, as any
one may swallow them: an that they may not offend in smell or taste, let them
be gilded. The close is esteemed by the working of the Ingredient, v. g.

The scone of the golden pills of Nicolaus, is to purge all humors, which
Scammony performs, but more slow phlegm: therefore Coloquintida is added to
it. But Aloes though it loosen the belly; yet it is chiefly here inserted,
because according to the opinion of Mesue it strengthens all the bowels, (but
especially the Stomach and liver, by opening this, and cleansing that) and by
his thickness corrects the acrimonie or the rest: Mastich, and Tragacanth by
their clamminess, corrected the sharpness; the seed of Fennel and Annise,
Saffron, and Roses, correct the power which is offensive to stomach, brain, and
heart; and also prepare and fit the phlegm, by cutting and cleansing it: Aloes,
Parseley seed, and the other seed. And because gentle purgatives are mixed with
strong and vehement pursers, there is almost the same quantity of correctors,
that is, ten dragms, as of Purgatives, which are eleven drams: And whereas a
dose of Pills ought not to exceed four scruples: this Mass ought to be divided
into about 20. drams, by which name, there shall be in every dose of Aloes,
Scammonie, Coloquintida, whose highest dose is ij. and 12. grains, of each 15.
grains, and 3. grains, And to every Pill shall have of vehement Purgers 18.
grains, which dose is therefore the greater, because the correctors, do not a
little dull and weaken the strength of the Purgers.

By the like reason round orbicular Pellets or Trochises are framed, the
strength of Agarick being an enemy to the stomach, is corrected by wine, in
which ginger is macerated; and with Tragacanth (which is slow and dull) an
Union is made of the broken and scattered parrs; And the sharpness and
malignitie of Coloquintida in the Trochises of Alhandal. For ten ounces (some
read evilly so many Dragms, for otherwise the Purgatives should be much
overcome by the Correctives, which were saulty) are rubbed with oil of sweet
Almonds, for one whole dupe; and then they are reduced into a Maste, or body,
by the infusion of four ounces of Rosewater, of Bdellium, Gum Arabic, and
Tragacanth, of each nine Dragms. The Mass being again dried in the shadow
being very small beaten, is at length with the said infusion brought into a
paste.

Clysters are profitable in vomiting, when the sick hold not those things which
they receive at the mouth, or when they can receive nothing by the mouth: They
are good in a hard belly to loosen it, and the dregs or excrements; and in a
fluid or moist, to bind the same, and to thicken the excrements, or mollify
the sharp.

For Ulcers in the guts, to cleanse and glue them together, and for diseases of
the belly, of the reins, and bladder, for they can work strongly upon these
parts, by discussing the vapors and windiness.

Loosning may be caused in one of full age, by a pint of flesh pottage, of
decoction, of milk, barley, or emollient herbs, of water, or whey strained
(that the passages may be cleansed) and of Sugar or honey boiled (least
windiness may be moved) half an ounce strained for cleanness; sometimes
instead of honey, we take purgative Electuaries in the same or less quantity,
according to their faculty, and the Patients strength, and by reason of the
disease, of oil, or fat (by reason of the dryness of the intestines, and
excrements) three ounces or five; then we add, when the sharpness of the rest
is not sufficient to provoke, and advance the work, or the sense is duller in
the night gut, about a dram of salt, sometimes we add a yolke or two, to wash
and cleanse the guts, that they may not be hurt by the sharpness of the
humors, or to dull the stirring or provoking faculty.

Sometimes (if there be no obstruction present, for otherwise, heat by drying
causes and increases obstruction) in a cold distemper, a Glister is made of
Muscadine, or Spanish wine, with an ounce of seeds discussing wind, boiled and
strained hot, and mingled with half an ounce of Treacle, So you may gather by
these, the use of the rest: When we would have Clisters kept a good while, we
exhibit them in a lesser quantity, decocted, and avoid all sharp things.

When either age, or custom will not endure Glisters; as

1. They that ace troubled with piles, or Ulcers of the Fundament, are offended
with Glysters; or if Glysters and Purges do not work, we will draw them from
the head, or the midriffe, as in old diseases, or of the stomach; then we put
up Suppositories into the Fundament of young women to loosen them, of Butter,
or Larde, 2. And unto people of full age, provoking and cleansing of the root
or Beet scraped, anointed with a littie Butter, sprinkled with a little Salt
and Honey boiled up into hardness, whew the Fundament does not perfectly feel
or is moved, we will put on it a little purging Powder, or otherwise frame some
of fit and conveinent matter.

When Oils will not cleave or fasten on the parts, Art has invented Ointments
which may stick and hold closer to, and work stronger.

Therefore either oil distilled is mixed with Wax, Manna, or the like
Aieriall matter, (for cause of a more exacter mingling by reason of their
simpathy) and a terrestrial matter, (by reason of his making up in form of a
liniment.) 1. And it is called a Balsome, because it comes very near to the
nature of a true Balsome. 2. Or the juycie parts of the plants are boiled with
oil, or butter (rather then their juice pressed out) because if they have
oily or spirituous parts in them, by this means, that, and the strength of it
is extracted and drawn forth (which is not in the watery juice.) 3. The dry
plants are sod with equal portions, of Wine, Butter, Oil; that the aquosity
or watrynesse of the Wine, may as well restrain the collection of foul
corrupt matter; and that the fire by insinuating his heat, may not change the
temper of the ointment; and that the spirituous parts, peircing by their
thinness, may draw out the spirituous and oylse part which is in them, and may
com municate it to the oil.

Either decoction is drawn to the consumption or the Watery juice Wine.
When the watrynes is not mixed with the oil, and gives occasion of
Putrefaction. By Olives, of which oil omphocine is made, we understand the
wild boiled in oil; according as Theophrastu, and Atheneus conceive in their
writings, because Astringent oil cannot be pressed forth, neither from ripe,
nor putrified Olives, nor from unripe, which rather yield a watery juice
astringent.

Emollient pultisses are made with emollient decoctions, bran, and pouders, and
oil, butter, fat, honey, and the decoction strained forth, is mixed with
pouders; that which is fat, is poured upon the hot (for that must not be
boiled) till all things mingled come into the form of a pultiss. But those
which draw from the inward parts to the Superficies, (as heat, nourishment,
etc.) are made of sharp mustard seed, and dry figs (because they draw and
restrain that the mustard seed burn not too much, which the day before are
macerated in varm water, and is bruised and brought into a Masle.

When we would draw less violently we take equal parts of both, or two of
figs, and mustard, one of mustard, and of figs.

Cerots, are of a thicker and dryer consistence, besides pouders, oiles, and
fatts, they take up wax, and rosin (which makes them stick and cleave faster)
especially Turpentine, or hard Rosin (for the mildness and sweetness) and they
are boiled so long till they soil not the hands: The matter of them is various,
according to the end which they are to be used for, which are either to repel,
draw, mittigate pain, strengthen, soften, discuss, dry up, digest crudities,
open, purge, conglutinate and harden a scar.

Destillation is made when the actual or potentiall humor, is resolved by
heat into vapors, and separated from his earthy dregs which presently by the
compassing cold growing together drop or distill into a simple water, spirits,
or a spiritous water, or oil.

1. Destillation otherwise is made in Ballneo, to prevent (a collection of
corrupt matter in the whole Bulk, Empyreurna.
) and Adustion) only upward, because the watery vapors especially are lifted
up.

2. Or without Balnenum, which we may call a dry Distillation: For by this, the
Water and Oil descend downward, or the vapors are lifted upward, which are
Watery, Spiritous, Oily.

For whilst in the thing distilled, the water and spirit are both together,
then they both ascend together by reason of their thinness, and therefore the
Distillation is to be reiterated, that afterward the spirits by their thinness,
may go before the watery vapors, for the water, spirit, and oil are all
together: thus the waterie and spiritous vapors are lifted up together, and
they by reason of their natural affinity, carry the oily with them, by
reason whereof the oil being separated, the distillation is to be reiterated,
for severing the spirits, but if with the earthy matter, the oil only is
joined, by a dry distillation it ought to be increased with a greater heat that
it may be separated from the earthy matter (which it hardly forsakes) either by
descending, or smally ascending; to which purpose, peculiar Organs or
Instruments are required.

The Spirits by reason of their lightness, will by no means descend: In
Balneo, either not at all, or very sparingly they are lifted up; because if the
fire work not on them (which the water of the Balneum hinders)they cannot be
separated from the water.

The Spirits by reason of their thinness, and potentiall heat, that they may
the sooner increase and grow together, require refrigeratories filled with cold
water, which are either fastened to the top of the Elembick, or a right, or
winding crooked Pipe is fastened with the beak of it (therefore called Serpens,)
because thereby the Spirits staying the longer in the Cockle, do the more put
off their collection of corrupt matter, passing through the cold water of a
large vessel.

In distillation which is made downward, either a Paper is put upon the juycie
plants, having a linen cloth spread over the platter or dish with good store
of sand, to which hot coals are put; for as soon as the heat has drawn forth
the vapors, when they are restrained from being lifted up, being grown
together, they fall down into the platter set under in drops.

Or else in rosinie woods, being included in a Potters vessel, coals being
placed about them, which draw forth by their powerful heat, that which is
fattie; from whence the oil flows, by a cover with holes (without the earthy
matter) into a vessel set under, (set close to the earth for refrigeration
sake) or amber melts after this manner in such a vessel, but that the thinner
part or the earthy matter may not pass through the holes, we use dry sand, or
powder or flints, or tiles, or ashes of bones burnt, and to wash away the
stench and blackness, a vessel below is filled up to the half with water, into
which the falling drops slide or fall into another vessel, set under of
purpose.

In distillation which is speedily made upward, the Spirits are separated from
the water, by an Instrument of a large neck, which they call Phyola, a plain
pot with a wide mouth, whilst as I said, the former are listed up; as soon
therefore as the waterie vapors succeed, the receiving vessel is to be
changed; the other shut up the watery vapors with a sponge, or parchment
paper, set upon the cucurbite.

In this kind of distillation, sharp, tart vapors, have this peculiar, that
after (for example sake) the waterie vapors arising out of Vinegar, Salt,
Vitrioll, Alum, Saltpeter, are lifted up; they are separated first: without
Acrimonie, (therefore we suffer the said vapors of Vitrioll to exhale before
distillation in an open Vessel) and that which is left of the waterie humor,
the stronger heat does by boiling more exactly mingle with the subtiler earthy
parts; till at the length it separateth and drives forth that violently from
the thicker matter.

That is called water of Salt, etc. unskilfully oil, seeing it has nothing
common with oil, besides the thicker consistence apparent; but Spirit (though
improperly, since every Spirit is inflamable, and potentially, or virtually hot
by it self) it may be called for his potentiall heat, but accidental (for
this from fire, which has insinuated it lelse, and sharpness partly from fire
from the said mixture) in which it differs from the nature of water, and agrees
with the Spirits: If therefore those Spirits separated again, be poured upon
the earthy matter, forthwith the vapors go forth much sharper and hotter, and
by reason of their aerie and fiery nature, suffer themselves to be shut up very
heavily, by which cause the recipient vessel ought to be very ample and large,
least it break, before the concretion be made of the vapors.

To Distillation, which is made upward a little Wine, or Water is sprinkled on
the fresh Plants, which are not juycie enough, that you may draw away the water
from the dry; If you desire only water, something spirituous they are powered
into water, wine, be water, if it be spirituous it self. And they are left in
Balneo for 24. hours, that the virtue may be the more communicated and
imparted to the humor.

But if you would add fresh Flowers gathered at diverse times, the infusion is
to be made in the Spirit of wine, in a cold place, least by placing they may be
corrupted.

For example, Cinnamon water; this being broken small, is hanged in a piece, in
a blind limbech, filled with water, so as the water may not touch the bag;
then let the water boil till all the parts of the Cinnamon be moist and warm
fitly; then take out the Cinnamon, and beat it into paste, and then again let it
be infused and distilled in the former water.

If thou desire Spirit, and Oil out of Plants, you ought to boil the matter
before always, either in his proper humor or moistness: So red Roses
exquisitely bruised, and stopped up in a glassie vessel, and placed in a cellar,
till the potentiall heat actuates, and the moisture boyles up, compelled by the
Antiperistasmi, or repulsion on every part of the cold.

Cherries with their kernels (for the Spirits lie enclosed in them) are placed
in a warm place, the Lees of Wine or Oil being poured upon them, that their
heat lying hid, may stir up the Spirit till it boil up. Or with water poured
on, and the said lees, as is done before the distillation of the Spirits, and
the Oil.

Juniper berries, Wheat, etc. are first to be bruised, that the water may pierce
all the parts, and the Spirit with the Oil may unite unto it. If you separate
the Spirits from the water, by distillation sometimes repeated, at the length
you shall have the most pure Spirits, together with the Oil from all Plants
potentially hot.

None but a fool, will call those Infusions, or Macerations putrefaction,
because this is an innated destruction of heat, that the actuation thereof, and
this is a progress not unto perfection, (as that) but a passage to the
corruption of the thing.

If there be a little part of oil in it, the dry matter ought to be infused
into the Spirits, that they may pierce the more, and draw the oil with it.

The purging force, taste, sweet, bitter, salt, and the color, seeing it is
placed in the thicker earthy matter, they are not communicated to the humor in
distilling (nor the smell of the purple violet, etc. by reason of the smalnes
of the odoriferous exhalation) as it chiefly appears in the example of sirrup
of Roses purging, in whose Distillation the water draws away nothing, but the
Astringent faculty; (under which it stays the looseness of the belly without
Inflammation) the purging part being left in the dregs; and this very
Observation ministered the first occasion to Extraction,

If water distilled (as for example) of Roses, be often poured on fresh Roses;
the distillation being iterated. by so much the more his strength is increased;
but the same doured upon the Lees, forthwith to still, as the water of Capons,
were to spend time foolishly, seeing that the qualities of flesh are
communicated not by distillation, but by decoction.

When the most subtle earthy matter is mixed with oil only, as in Wax,
Sulphur, Rosins, Amber, then there is required to the distillation, some
loosing spirituous matter, which may carry the oil along with it; an humor,
and earthy matter, which may keep back Empyreuma, and Adustion, and the
ascension of the subtle earthy matter.

Such loosing things which effectuate all these together are common, Salt, Sal
gemmae, Saltpeter, Salt Ammoniack, plume Alum, pure sand, ashes of bones
burnt, powder of flints, and Tiles or Bricks, these especially hinder the
ascent of the earthy matter.

Distilled vinegar, and spirit of wine, have truly a loosing power, and carry
the oil with them: but to the distillation of Amber are impertinent, because
they ascend before the Amber melts, and so preserve it not from the heat or
violence of the fire.

If the first distillation of Amber be made rightly, there does not need
another in Balneo, which they call rectification, for so much as the water
washes or takes away of his color, so much it takes away of his strength.

Pitch; and Colophonie, by reason of their great viscositie and grossness,
before are sod with rich wine to the consumption of the wine; that Alum
afterward added may so much the easier pass or penetrate, this liquid matter,
and the oil separated from the earthy matter, may ascend more speedily.

There is another kind of distilling of oil, when hot glowing Bricks or Tiles,
broken in pieces, are quenched in the oil (from whence it is called oil of
Bricks): because it takes from the fire his grew heat, and from the Bricks his
Astriction; and being after reduced into powder, are forced out by a strong
fire; that by this means they may also receive more heat and astriction, and by
the same manner oil of quick lime is prepared: And seeing it is the nature of
oil, and of oily things, that being put to the fire they are presently
inflamed; these if they be actually dry, they swim above the water, contrary
to all reason.

1. Amongst Oils are reckoned, spirit, as I said of salt, the water being
concrete from the vapors of brimstone, set on fire under a bell.

1. Extract of Cinnamon, which setleth at the bottom in water distilled.

2. The moistness which is drawn from Worms being stopped up with paste in a
glass, with heat of an Oven.

3. Or which from Couslip flowers, and by insolation is drawn forth.

4. And when in like manner the white of an egg, hung in a pot with Camphire,
flower of Brimstone, or Myrrh, or Tartar burnt, mixed with a sharp moisture,
the dryness vanishing or vapouring away, which they received or took from the
heat, they return into their former watery nature.

Secondly, Oil is sought from stones, Jewels, Mercury, Antimonie, metals,
and out of all those things, which have now before felt the strong resolving
force of fire; from Crystal, Tartar, Coral, Pearls, Vinegar which has an
extreme contrary nature.

Yea though Saltpeter, and Manna also are presently inflamed, yet the scarcity
of Oil is much overcome by the earthy and cold waterie matter, so that rather
that which is oily in it may be consumed by the fire, then separated by
distillation from the said matter.

To draw oil from blood by distillation, is to mock God, by whose Ordination,
nature in the third concoction has wrought out oil from blood more perfectly,
that is to say, fat, tallow, butter, which if after the common Liquefaction or
coction of flesh, and bruised bones from water, thou requirest more pure, the
temparament being unhurt, thou shall some days of Harvest set in the sun, that
thou may separate the purest from the dregs settled downward.

But behold how in a matter so hard and difficult they trifle here, which
exhibit a Mutiny of which it appears not, whether it be the dried flesh of
a man or a beast, and whether it came to a true Balsome; or whether it dyed not
by poison, or whether or not they were not the late carcases of many men,
rather anointed over with Myrrh, Aloes, etc. then with true Balsom, and
though true Balsom was used to the bodies of great men, whether in so long a
time, the force and virtue be not gone forth and expired, and by reason of the
corruption which was joined with it, whether the Indian or Succedanean Balsum,
made from Oil of Cinnamon, Cloves, and the like things were not much more
excellent.

Now when your Oils are distilled, and your spirits, whether those so mixed, in
Hermes vessel by boiling them longer, it behooves to mingle them more exactly,
that from thence they may draw an Elixir: (which these Triflers call Circulati)
one of the two Homogeneall principles, that is to say, of the air.

One truly increases the heat and smell of the other, and the same faculty or
strength which is in the smell, but here observe the madness of Quercetan,
above or beyond all his other doatings, he mingleth ( page 60. Lips. edit.) 59.
Medicines, which every on 1. Either strengthens the principal parts, 2.
Refreshes the spirits 3. Breaks the strength of poisons. 4. Resists
putrefaclion. 5. Cutteth gross thick humors: And he calls it a specifique
Medicine to cure inveterate diseases, giddiness, falling sickness, palsy,
madness, melancholy; but how that may be called a special or specisique
Medicine, which is composed of so many different species or sorts, which is
directed for diseases, which are most different in causes, and in kinds.

Seeing this Medicine consists for the greatest part of hot things, and heat
may be increased in distillation, with so frequent, and so much fire, it ought
to be most hot, how then can it be profitable to some hot causes of these
diseases?

How can the strength which is placed in the earthy matter, and in the
temperaments of the said Medicines, these being destroyed remain, all the rest
being removed and taken away. Besides his manner preparation is full of
vanities and deceits, why are the first spirits distinctly taken, when
afterward they are to be mixed? what need is there to pour forth the spirits
upon the lees or dregs pressed out, or calcined; the spirits being lifted up, if
the oil be not carried together with them. How only does that, and that which
is pure ascend afterward? what have honey and sugar here to do.

To a dry destillation, sublimation also belongs, for it is done after the
same manner by sand, when the most thin earthie matter of Sulphur, Salt,
Antimonie, green rust of Brass, and Stibium, is elevated by a strong fire,
till it stick to the sides of the Still, like a most thin powder. I distill, I
say, of Brimstone (least all the earthy matter may not be lifted up) and of
Vitriol calcined, and salt poured forth (that all the waterie humor may be
taken away)of each equal parts, and I increase the fire more and more, whilst
almost all the Sulphur ascends, when it cools again, I add again to the
Sulphur, sublimed, taken away of the said Vitriol and Salt, of each equal
parts, and in the like manner or reason; distill it.

Almost after the same manner, are flowers of Stibium made, (but that to the
correcting of his virulency, and least he should inflame in calcination)
Saltpeter, and Tartar is added; these being together set on fire, are calcined
in an earthen vessel, that the poison may exhale away; what is calcined we
wash with water, (to diminish and lessen the virulency) let what is washed be
melted, and the melted powdered and elevated in a small sublimatory, for it
ascends slow and heavily.

By the like reason from Quicksilver, to which, re-purged by Oxalmen, aqua
fortis made of vitriall, and Saltpeter is added; afterward aqua fortis again
by distilling is drawn away, and that is thrice poured on with aqua fortis;
then to the Mercury beaten Spirit of vitrial is poured, that so for the space
of 24 hours, the Spirits may exhale at a strong fire. Lastly, I digest that
Powder, either in Spirit of Wine upon Sand, in a bilnd Limbech, and to these
poured out put on others, and do so thrice, that I may have the precipitate; or
else I increase the fire in a small sublimatory underneath, till the glass is
fired or heated with a purple brightness, and a citrine or red flowers ascend,
(and so I have the sublimate) upon which I pour the Spirit of Wine, and after
take them away by distillation; the distillation being thrice repeated.

Here, I pray, observe Reader.

1. That an actual humidity is taken from Mercury, by exhalation, whose cause
is fire, which actuatech the exhalation, and aqua fortis (which by the simpathy
it has with Mercury) by reason of the original humidity, receiving the fire
into it self, otherwise avoiding this enemy of Mercury, cury, detaineth the
Mercury in the fire; and by this means takes away his actual coldness and
moistness, by exhalation of his actual humor; so that the moist remaining
parts which are in him, are more exactly mixed with his earthy matter; by which
mixture and insinuation of fire into Mercury, it takes his strong sharpness,
and caustic power.

2. That Mercury by interveniency of aqua fortis, receives the fire into it
self, is manifest from his color; first white, and then yellow, with redness.

3. But whether from Mercury and Antimony his venenosity, from Sulphur his
sharpness, by this or the like manner may be diminished or taken away,
experience will teach thee the contrary; therefore take none of them into your
body, whatsoever preparation be made of them, and believe not Quercetan whose
primary Chymick Medicines, are Mercuric, Antimonie, and Mineral Spirits.

4. That the drying cause ceasing, Mercury returns to his former humiditie
is the chiefest argument: that that should be numbered amongst the metals; but
in all his nature it is contrary to metals, although it does very much
counterfeit a simpathie; Since from heat, and Aqua fortis it may be reduced
into powder, but reduced into liquor from these: Metals offer violence unto
metal, when it is mixed with those melted: For it makes those soft, which
naturally ought to be hard.

7. Extraction, properly so called, is a separation of a most subtle earthie
and oily matter, (if there be any in it) with his faculty or strength by
Infusion, Expression, and Distillation, as well as from his thicker earthy
matter, as well as from his moist waterie, the spirits for the most part
exhaling together. For by Infusion and Expression, the most pure earthy and
oily matter, is communicated to the liquor, and the thicker separated.

By distillation the waterie humor is separated to the consistence of honey,
or newwine sodden to the consumption of the third part, and the remaining
matter is exactly mingled in boiling: although those extracts which want oil,
nor were infused in spirit of wine, are afterward dried altogether in the heat
for preventing putrefaction, from whence the strength of the Medicine is
greater in a small portion, then in a great, whilst as yet the thicker matter,
and the liquor are joined together.

Quercetan bids, that the matter yet warm, if it be oily, (as it is in
Guiacum wood, and Sassafras, and Juniper Bark) be poured forth into a glass
dish or platter, full of Water for coagulation sake: but that is all on,
whether it be done or intermitted, for it is nothing available for Physic
intentions.

To Extraction chiefly are requisite and fit, simple and compound Medicines,
bruised in pieces, (that the liquor may more easily penetrate) which have their
strength especially placed in the earthy matter, such as are those chiefly,
which are of a strong smell and raste, and most part purging.

From liquors, 1. water, water distilled of the same kind, or which are
serviceable for the Physical intention. 2. Wine, and Spirit of Wine. These
truly more penetrating the matter, and by mingling themselves with the most
subtle parts, sooner draw forth the strength, and longer bear the stay or
continuance of the Infusion without Putrefaction; but work it so that the
Extract may better agree with hot temperament or diseases, because the Spirits
are rather carried upward then downward.

It is fit and convenient that Infusion and Meceration should be made in
Balneo, in a Vessel most carefully stopped (that nothing may breath out) that by
help of the actual heat, the humor may penetrate the more, and imbibe the
faculty.

The time of Maceration or soaking, is to be judged from the consideration of
the things infused (for hard and Rosinous things such as Guiacum, are macerated
to stir them) till the liquor poured on is mingled sufficiently with the
oily matter, or is sufficiently tincted or affected with the color, or savor
of the medicine; for then either other liquor is poured on the same matter, and
that so often reiterated, till such time as it is no more affected with
tincture or savor, and then at length all the liquors affected, are put
together and distilled, the Extract being left in the bottom of the Vessel or
Bladder: After this manner Rubarb, Rhapeticum, Aloes, Gentian, Cinnamon,
Nutmeg, Myrrh, or else the said liquor affected, is poured on the plant of the
same kind, and it is twice or thrice reiterated: So is Cinnamon, Wormwood,
lesser Centurie, Angelico root, Zedoarie, Galingal, the true Acorns, and
Elecompane root, which neither give tincture, not are endued with manifest
smell or favor; they are macerated, or soaked for one day or two, and then the
liquor pressed forth is poured upon a plant of the same kind, and this is done
twice or thrice: In like manner distillation is made in Mechoashau, Bryonie,
Pyonie, Masterwort root, etc. In the Extraction of fresh Flowers, of Peaches,
Plums, Roses, Flowers, Herbs, and Roots of Celandine, etc. There is no need of
effusion, or putting on of any other moisture, but the reiterated, pressing
forth or the juice often, ought to go before the distillation, and the Infusion
into the moisture pressed forth of the fresh Flowers, and Herbs: But to bruise
Celandine, and distill it, and to put the distilled water, upon the dry Lees,
etc. is trifling to no purpose, in so great plenty of Celandine, experience it
self in the strength of either Extraction will be testimony sufficient.

But seeing the Extract of the Roots of Bryonie, Ireos, and Cuccopintle may be
made after three manners: That is to say, That either dried, they may be
infused in spirit of Wine, the juice pressed forth out of the fresh Roots
distilled: Left in a Cellar for a few days, and then the white troubled water
poured forth, the white Lees may be dried in the shadow.

The Question is, which way may best draw forth the strengths or virtues of
them; for persons troubled with the Mother, Hydropicks, or those which have an
ill habit of body. Quercetan preferrteh the third way, I the first; Lee reason
and experience conclude the controversies and determine it.

For first, heat is required in all the three Effects, or Dispositions, which
here the Spirits of Wine administer to them.

Secondly, Crude juice is less apt, because it is it self a phlegmatic
matter, and cannot choose but be corrupted by the moist air of the Cellar, and
has nothing which may preserve it from corruption.

Thirdly, The faculties of these consist not in the thin matter which goes
forth with the Water distilled, but rather in the thick earthy matter, as their
Pouders show plainly.

Quercetan, in glutinous and clammie roots adds a half part of white bread in
their Infusion (that the nourishment mixed with the Medicine, may as well by his
clamminess incrcase his glutinous strength, as derive, or convey, the Medicine
the sooner to the liver,) and being all moistened with wine, places them in
Balneo till they become red, and moreover digesteth the juice waxing red (that
it may become the redder) being pressed forth; for truly the simple man
thinks the red juice will be sooner turned into blood, and so also the red
wine, (and by the long snout of Meleagers Bear) before distillation: But I say,
we may more commodiously draw forth the nature from bread exhibited by it
self; but if there be need of extraction of the glutinous or clammy part from
corn, and drawing the Medicine through the veins; all true Philosophers (not
such Sophisters) will with me, prefer decoction far before it, with which the
thick glutinous Dansick Beer is made, if with the said extract (made without
bread) that may be mingled.

He also infuseth black Hellebar in vinnegar, (being most adverse to the
spleen) to draw forth the faculty for diseases of the spleen, and will have the
proper salt mixed with the distilled waters, as also others with the extracts;
to what end I pray? for seeing every faculty which was in the Medicine, before
calcination, by this is taken away; whether that he may corrupt the extract, or
water by his sharpness, or by his dryness keep back putrefaction; or that
beyond others he may seem to savor better. The same man extolleth without any
judgment his oleous extract of Guiachum; for seeing in the cure of the French
disease, and the Catarrhe, there is first or chiefly required some astriction,
by which the members may be strengthened together; truly for this intention,
every man understands decoction to be far more needful and useful, which has
any judgment; although a small dose of the extract, be fit for those which
shall use it, especially for delicate and tender persons.

And in his Extract of man's Skull, he is altogether childish, as of the
Secondine, a Calves liver and lungs, Pearls, and Corrals.

For what does he draw forth of the Spirits from the Skull, other then a
certain fat, and something from the earthy matter, and ashes by decoction in
Balneo? but will that Extract take away the causes of such a disease as the
Falling Sickness? he will hardly persuade children to it: from the Secondine,
Liver, and Lungs, what I pray, can be drawn? the broth of their decoctions,
yea, even the substance it self eaten, and the powder of the Secondine; will
it not offer nature the strength it self perfecter to be extracted? Pearls
and Corrals only beaten, will yield all their virtue they have received from
Gold, without any trouble of dissolving or washing with water of corrosive
spirits.

Whether hitherto have not all kind of preparation of Medicines been unfolded
by us: Truly they have been altogether: But where are their Medicines so much
cried up, their Secrets, their Magisteries, Mercuries, Sulphurs, Elixirs,
Tinctures, Quintescence. This Talkative Chymick Apollo, has invented and
framed words without matter, (...)
from that infernal desire of lying and cousening, to gain to his Sophisters
authority, an opinion of subtle wisdom.

But if we shall speak properly, a Secret and Magisterie are the same, nor are
they special, but most general Appellations of witty Inventions; And the
tincture is the Extraction of the proper color, which seeing it is not a
Medicinable quality, it ought to be most estranged and alienate from true
Physic preparations. I omit that for the most part it is sophisticated (as for
example) spirit of wine, draws his redness from white bones and ashes, and
black Treacle; and this every liquor potentially hot will perform, especially
if the earthy matter be also endued with heat, which Turners do, who shave
pure white plates, -- from yellow Amber: But this is of an Optic
contemplation: When we Germans would express a thing dissolved by concoction,
and say it is neither boiled nor roasted; Of which kind peradventure, Elixir
might first get his name.

A Quintescence presupposes four other things: If they reckon up the four
Element, this Quintescence will be some divine thing, which is false, seeing
from a corruptible Elementarie body, a divine thing is not made, (being
different in the whole kind) perpetual, light some, and endued with a circular
motion, and seeing they are separated also by a most long distance of places.

Neither is Mercury it self so inconstant and mutable, as they are in defining
their Mercury and Sulphur; they have often affirmed to my face, that by these
terms they have meant a Quintescence.

From all which it is most apparent, that great wrong has been done to the
Galenists; 1. Whilst the Paracelsians object, and obtrude ignorance unto them
of preparation of their Medicines, and impudently arrogate the knowledge of
their preparation to themselves only. 2. Whilst Quercetan ascribes only to
himself by his New Phamcopea the knowledge, and skill of this Art, in which
notwithstanding he has brought in, or innovated nothing at all, he has
discussed nothing by their cause answerable to a wise man's judgment, he has
exposed or set forth nothing of his own invention of any worth or moment; what
he received or got from the Germans in his travel, he venteth it forth for his
own inventions, and has propounded and set many things forth of diverse kinds,
false and idle, and which are not pertinent to the Apothecaries trade and
profession.

And contrarily he has left out and omitted better ancient Medicines, and has
thrust worse in the place of them, and very many manners and ways of
preparations, which chiefly the Art pf compounding and making up of Medicines
requires; For which several causes, this Pharmacopea does rather deserve to
be styled, A Bundle without Method, of certain Medicines to blind and deceive
men ignorant and unskillfull in the Art of Physic, that the selfe-conceited
they may learn to calumniate the truth, brag and vaunt forth their vanities
and smokes, despise true wisdom, by spreading forth very gainful Flowers of
Hermeticall Flateries.

An Universal. Table for Judicials of Urine.
THe commodity of judgment by it: The manner and order of generation of
Urine. When the Urine should be taken. What Vrinall is best to this use. What
light is best to see an Urine. How long it may be kept before it be seen. That
it ought not to be shaken before it be judged. That it must be kept wholly, and
not a part of it only.
These things hinder judgment.

Much shaking of it. Darkness of light. Over-bright light. The beams of the
Sun. Cold, and Wind. A thicks or green Vrinall: and also if the Vrinall be
not due in fashion.
These alter the Urine.

Diversity of kind. Man. Woman.
Distinction of Ages. Childhood Youth Manhood. Ages.
Complexion. Sanguine. Choleric. Melancholy. Phlegmatic.
Diversity of Countries. Times of the year. Spring. Summer. Harvest. Winter.
Meat and drink. Medicines, namely Purgations. Exercise and rest. Much fasting.
Surfeting and drunkenness. Much watching. Long sleep. Anger. Fear. Company
with Women. Gleat solubleness. Strong costiveness. Much Vomit.
These are to be considered in Urine.

1. The Substance Thick. Mean. Thin.
2. The Quantity. Much. Mean. Little.
3. Cleernesse and darkness. 4. The savor. 5. The manner of pissing. With
pain. Willing. Unwilling.

With ease. Willing. Unwilling.
6. Colors. Light white. Christallie. Snowie. Waterie.
Dark white. Milk white. Hornie. Gray.
Plale. Flaxen. Yellow or gold color. Saffron. Light saffron. Full saffron.
Claret. Red. Crimson. Purple. Blew. Green. Light green. Green as grass. Stark
green. Dark green.
Oily. Light oily. Stark oily. Dark oily.
Ash Color. Black.
7. Contents. The Sediment or ground The sublimation or swim. The Cloud.
8. The Crown, or Circle. 9. Bubbles. 10. Fatness. 11. Difform contents. Hairs,
like red Fatches. Branny. Gross. Fine.
Scales. Ragged scraps. Motes. Matter. Blood. Gravel, or Stones. Seed.
12. The Regions. Highest. Middle. Lowest.
13. The Order. 14. Continuance and Alteration.
These in general be the things meet to be considered in Urine, of which
particularly in this Book you may read as much as to this time and purpose
serves.

The Contents of the Chapters of this BOOK.
OF the Division and Order of this Book. folio 1 How Urine is engendered in man,
and how it passes forth. folio 2 What Urine is, and what tokens it gives in
general. folio 9 Of the form of the Vrinall and of the place and time meet to
judge Urine, and how it should be receive. folio 10 How many things are to be
considered in Urine. folio 12 What a perfect Urine is, and also how many ways
all parts of the Urine may be altered in a healthful man. folio 18 The
difference of Urine by age in men folio 20 Of the Urine of Women by age ibid.
The diversity of Vrines, according to the times of the year folio 21 What be
the general qualities that alter the parts of Urine. folio 26 The
Significations of the parts of Urine particularly. folio 31 Of Claret and Red
Urine. folio 43 Of Crimson Color. folio 44 Of Purple Color. folio 45 Of Green
Vrines. folio 46 Of Oilie Urine or Popinjay green. folio 47 Of Blew Urine,
Ash Color, and Black. folio 48 Of Difform Contents. folio 66 Of the Garland,
and other like things folio 81 Of the Commodities and Medicines of Urine. folio
86 Of the Diseases touching Vrines, and the Romedies for the same. folio 94 Of
the Diversities of Colors, and of the making of them. folio 100 The Exposition
of certain dark Words appertaining to the Art of Physiks, used in this Book.
folio 104 A Detection of Unskillful Physicians folio 123 Of Ignorant
Apothecaries. folio 151 Of the Boldness and Ignorant of diverse Chirurgions.
folio 159 A Translation of Papius concerning Apothecaries. folio 185
FINIS.

