HYMNS, and Spiritual SONGS. Extracted From SCRIPTURE; on occasion of some
useful Texts discuss't. Composed In private Meditation, and made use of (once)
In Public: for the Saints Comfort: Now Published for their sakes that sung
them; or others that desire them.

Psalm. 32.7. And compass me about with Songs of Deliverance

Psalm. 77.6. I call to mind my Song in the Night. --

Matthew. 26.30. When they had sung an Hymn they departed.

Plinius secundus pleads that Christians, at meetings did. Nil Romany legibus
contrarium, nisi hoc solum, quod antelucanos Hymnos Christo cuidam canerent
deo. Eusebius. cap. 32. p. 67.

London, Printed by J. R. for the Author, 1682.

To the Reader.
AS Errors in judgment cloud our heads; in affections, our hearts; in action,
our lives; (humanum est errare;) So specially do errors in divine Worship
obnubilate our devotion to God: So that all may say, (or be mute) as David, who
understands his errors? Ps. 19.12. who can indeed?

But of errors in Religion, both in Doctrine and Worship; (not here now to
treat at large:) of aspiring to Deity, as Pagans; arrogating legislation, as
Papagans, affecting domination, as Prelates, I only touch (obiter) the self
assumption of the Titles, empty Names, and Forms; of Church, Ordinances, and
Ministry, without the things themselves; As we Protestants of all sorts (too
often) do. Oh how 't would become us first to enquire after divine measures, by
that Scripture-golden reed, and to be ashamed of all we have done; and next to
wait, and seek for that Holy Spirit as the Apostles were bid, in Acts 1.4.8.
rather than temerate (as one says) Gods sacred mysteries with unwashen hands,
and make that a mean of temporal Life; that (through the justice of God)
becomes the occasion of our own and others spiritual (if not eternal) death.

But two things concern us all that venerate that second Command, (that Papists
expunge the Decalogue) the one is to know the Holy will of our God, both for
matter, and form; that the first be bonum the second been; good, well done;
that it be not called vain Oblation? etc. The other is to fear his wrath, that
ever attends divine jealousy: If but so small (as may seem) an error slip us,
as did Nadab and Abihu, at the entry of Worship in offering strange fire, and
common; or as Eli's Sons, or Uzah's rash touch, or Naamans cringing to Rimmon,
(for company, with his King; and Master) or as Uriahs usurping the Preisthood:
All which are fatal examples, that do caution us to be tremulous: for in all
the parts of Worship, Preaching, Prayer, Ministration of Instituted seals, and
Censures, etc. I fear our errors at our Masters coming will be found not a few;
so that we may say as Naaman the Lord pardon us, etc. as 2 Kings 5.17. or as
David about Uzahs boldness in Error. 2 Samuel 6. v. 7.

The Lord made a breach, because we sought him not in the due order.

But I only mean to touch a little that part of Worship that is called singing.
And since its needless to lay open the Theory of it, being so well done by
others, as Cotton, Sydnam, Rous, Barton, Hen. Ainsworth. Those of N. E. and in
that of Scotland: Let me only hint at the Nature, Form and Use of Song in
General; the Occasion, and rise of these in particular.

For the Nature I do not mean Jigs (as the Papist styled Hopkins) nor bare
Poems, as Crafhaws or Herberts, Quarles, Withers, or Pordage's etc. who though
their songs may be good, and spiritual, and far usefuller (especially to youth)
than amorous lays of Wit, wanton Rhapsodies, and profane Ballads: yet I should
scarce take them as materials for Worship: The ornature being human, and
polite: But this I mean by it. A Spiritual Song, in Scripture words or sense,
composed in measures tunable, sung alone, or with others to the Lords own
praise, our own or others joy; in a sweet harmony of heart and voices.

This may (at present) serve to hint the nature of song (as the Author takes
it) till more convenient time be to enlarge upon it.

The great point that depends of late is, about the form, how to do it aright?
(here quot capita tot sententiae;) some seclude it wholly their Assemblies and
Families, as lost; like Hebrew-Musick and Meeter, (till it is restored) and so
practice it not, other than by prayer and praise: (natural worship.) Some (in
the other extreme) make so common, and formal work of it, that as the Minister
sits above it as if it were below him, to exhibit a song, so a Clark (the fag
end of Antichrist) takes upon him to lead as a Reader. Some (few) only join
(as in prayer) with one that has a song, and utters it, (whether extempore or
no I say not,) not the voice of any present joining harmony with him: as Silas
and Paul and Miriam of old did, etc. This I like not. Some again are for it; but
act not, as stumbling at a promiscuous assembly, not yet being on mount Zion,
where the Lamb's new song will be; these are holy souls, but short of duty, for
there be songs in the night; one may sing at the lowest, by the skirts of Zion
with an eye to the heights, as Jer. 3 1, 12. nay in Jeremiah's Dungeon, or
Daniels Den, or the Bishops Colehouse, or the three Children in the Flames.
Others are for acting (as we may) now on the lowest round of Jacobs Ladder, the
Foot stair of Gods Temple.

Yet again some are for the Old way, the Old Translation, all old, etc. Others
for correction and Reformation, of which sort, I am one: and though it has been
used, (till of late) to sing in the words of David: (as of old, 2 Chronicles.
29.30.) Yet I scruple not to use the Canticles, nor the sense of other
Scriptures in the same or other words; consonant to the Analogy of Fa th. If
then for the matter, my song be in the words of the Sacred Scripture (or
reducible to it,) and for the form, I neither limit my self in the composure,
nor yet impose on others; least of all fix a stand or bound, beyond which none
(in time to come) ought to go; though of more light and spirit than I am, and
aiming at purer Reformation, yea waiting for a renovation of all: I see not why
any can scruple to join with me so, or I with them.

Now for the use of Hymns and Songs, I find the advantages that accrue, many;
to compose and calm our evil spirits, as Saul's was by David, 1 Samuel 16.16, 23.
To allay a vexed, perturb'd mind at the sight of a sinner as the Prophet, 2
Kings. 3.15. was by a Minstrel: and one a late so weary in travel, that he
could not Preach, till he had heard Music. As (on the other hand) the mind
being (...). well composed, (as Jam. 5.13. or merry,) it exhilerates and
improves spiritual joy, and comfort; made Paul's Chain light, and Stocks easy:
sometimes its instructive as some Psalms be, or corrective as others; now and
then it is prophetical, often precatory; always monitory and edifying, etc.
Above all, in combats of mind, or military congresses: it is wonderful to read
the bless't efforts (and contrary effects) it has produced in the open Field;
at the facing (not foyling only) of an enemy: as in 2 Chronicles. 20.21, 22. and
times of war plainly demonstrate, both animating the hearts of the good; and
daunting the faces of the adversary. Besides at the end of Supper our Lord he
and they sang an Hymn: as all acting they [plurally] in two Evangelists, Math.
26.30. Mark 14.26. as did the Jews ending their Paschal-feast, and though as
corrupt times and Roman Impositions grew on; certain vain gaudy customs, in
Chores, Choristers, Organ-Pipes and like Trumperies were by Satan's malice, and
superstitious minds foysted and mixed with the duty, and some made Hymns in
praise of Arian Bishops. Yet take off the Rites and Abuses, and let none invent
Instruments of Music like David, Amos 6.5. nor play on them before an Image,
as Dan. 3.7, 15. and I see not but that old Hymnizing way and gift might be
restored, 1 Cor. 14.26. and a glory fill this, and other appointments.

Now for the occasion of this way, the Author uses: observe this twofold
account.

1. Casting an eye cursorily, on a plea (one of the times published) for forms
of prayer, he argues thus: If it be lawful in Singing, to use stinted set
Forms: why not in prayers too? to let pass, Why not in Sermons also? Or
Homilies, etc. I only answer (for my own part) that no set forms of song are by
any composed, in any Translation (and far less imposed by any humane sanction)
on purpose to stint, straiten, or direct the spirit of God, its gifts, or
graces in any; that were to break the second Command as Mr. Cotton argues: And
as bad as the old Latin Missale, so I never should use even the best Psalter.

2. (And more personally) note that the Author many years ago being in his own
and others eyes, under a sentence of death, despaired of life (in an agony of
dolor) had suddenly injected, and impress't on his spirit that place, Psalm.
32.7. preserve from trouble, and compass me about with songs of deliverance.
Which makes me say if God has performed his part in the former, ought not I to
essay to sing thus, and as Hezekiah to call on others, Isai. 38. ult. in
(consort) to rejoice in hopes of a glorious deliverance at hand: the sparks of
which hope, (laid up in Heaven for us) are already kindled above, and are
taking fire on earth, never to be extinct till it have consumed, the Idols, and
Priests together: inflamed the restorers zeal; and well warmed our
Isles-Inhabitants with a love of reformation, never to be cooled by all Papists
can do; till that promis't restitution of all, as Act. 3.19, 21. and the desire
of Nations come, Hagg. 2.7. to fill his second Temple with his glory.

As for these songs (such as they be) do any ask what for matter, I say they
derive from Scripture-fountain: for else I desire they may be vilipended: But
for the form of composure, they flowed from serious Meditations in secret,
sober reflections on the subjects then discourst, and some (such as memory
helped to recall) had birth in private closet songs, though many are lost for want
of a speedy record. If any dislike the method, heads, (in some of them) the
transitions, in others the reflections on present times, the dull strain, bad
poetry, or plain style; the Author deems it not fit to apologize to cavillers,
let them do better or let these alone, as the Hymns are at his own cost, so he
cares they only have them, that, with any joy in God, once sung them.

If any say [cui bono] of what use? I say of the same use as a penned Sermon,
dying speeches or prayers (not to impose, but) for the recalling to mind,
things useful to us before; and to the future profit of others, the same end
(though a lower mean) as for which Scripture in general, and Psalms in particular
were left: and though the power, and presence of a duty is not to be penned, yet
on the remembrance of things heard, salvation in part depends, 1 Cor. 15.2. If
you say there is a store too much already. I yield, yet not too much: bonum quo
communius eo melius, its a pity bread and water, because plentiful, are (as
Manna was) therefore more slighted, and a sign of a fulsome glutted age.

But let such stand by, that the hungry, poor, and meek may eat and be
satisfied; some have tasted honey out of these bare carcasses; are these jejune,
let others provoke their zeal, and stir up far better gifts to do more
worthily: But I ask, is it lawful to gloss on a text by a long Sermon, and not
sing too a short Hymn? Is It called novelty, or innovation? admit; yet as not
old, so nor new things are (if bonum and been) to be refused, a scribe of
Christ house is to bring out of the Lords treasury, both new, and old, and at
last the Lord will make all things new: and yet Sternhold and Hopkins did well
(though not in Popish opinions) in Psalms. Some body must break the Ice to
others, call them Novatians who list: besides in Eusebius and Ecclesiastical
History it was thus so frequent to do; that some (a late) do use (of their own
composure) after Supper, an Hymn: Causabon's Reports of some poetical
Enthusiasms, and Religious Extasi's, and some Females in Hysterical fits, that
uttered verse, extempore, witness H. Tr's late large folio: may all serve to
excite the gift, or to pray it down, amongst us.

They that use this way are few: I know but one grave learned man besides, that
so concludes in an Hymn, publicly: If any consult our Predecessors they may
find this way with some Martyrs used in Mr. Fox, and one laid on Qu. Ma. Desk
against Popery: a Woman on the death of one sweet Child, sung thus All praise,
O Lord, with heart and voice,
we freely give to thee;
To whom the death of all thy Saints,
we know full dear to be.


In Dr. Beards Theater p. 43. chapter 14. in Mr. John Fenwick, on Zion's joy in her
King, (p. 92, 93.) A very pious Hymn. In Geo. Withers specul. p. 77, 85. 91.
142, 143. Also Pordag's Poems p. 157. 207. 215. 257. 300. The Pilgrim sings often
sweetly (See the book) Vpon's passage from Babel to New Jerusalem. Nay one is
put in the preface to some of our large Bibles. Which who can dislike? If Tune
or Meeter displease any, can song in consort well be without both? If so, do
so, yet consider, it is as lawful to use poetry, to sing in orderly voice,
harmony and measure, as to use Grammar, to teach Hebrew, or Translate the Bible
to Mother Tongue: if human Ornature under the Law, was not allowed that Altar,
yet what polish't stones did Solomon's Temple show, by direction of the spirit
of Prophecy in David, and of what polish't Saphyrs will your New Jerusalem be
made? but all Gods, not man's.

It Is no error in a Preacher to seek out Dibvrei chaphets, words of desire,
Eccl. 12.10. (i. e.) verba complacentiae Vatablus, though cadency in rhymes, and
lines, delight not God: yet it and method too in English Speech, Prayer, Print,
may profit us, and help Memory, and please Affection in the vulgar. I bring but
a loop, or Badger-skin to tie, or warm, at the Altar: (or if only to sing in
our Families) not to impose a form) only till times of bettering: let it be
welcome (as that woman's box to Christ:) to do what we can, as Mark 14.8.

But because they were so pleasing to some that begged, and others that took
Copies of them at the uttering, though not so many, so full, and distinct as
here: I hope it will be as welcome (this New year) to such, to see them in
Print, as then to hear'em and however, let none grudg the Youth if I dedicate
this first part to them; and if these pass off well; being only 500 Copies,
(and the charge pretty deep too.) To the Elder of my Auditory I may produce (in
due time) the Second Part with a larger Epistle, on the various
Scripture-victories from Genesis to Revelation, if God permit. I add a Title
too, and Index to find any Hymn: if any use, them (to conclude) let your tuning
of the heart, be the most melodious part, for Non vox, sed votum; non musica
chordula, sed cor; non clamor, sed amor, psallit in aure dei.

Some Dedicatory Odes in three Poems to Little Children, [To be prefixed to the
First Part of Hymns.
Psalm. 34.11. Eccles. 12.1.

Come little Children, lend your ear,
To learn how you the Lord may fear.
Cast wanton Ballads, all away,
Thus daily learn to Sing, and Pray.
(1st. part) On your Misery.
LOrd I was born at first in sin,
To Satan sold a slave;
And thus before my life begin,
exposed to wrath and grave.
No good by nature can I do,
yet bent to evil am;
A stranger unto God also,
of fallen race, I came.
My birth in sin, and misery
did force many a cry:
My life, subject to vanity,
did truly Prophecy.
My Childhood, like to Moses was
exposed upon the flood,
Helpless, and in hopeless case,
weeping and in my blood.
In Childhood I did place delight
in baubles and fool-toyes:
(So ignorant of what was right,)
those were my greatest joys.
I quickly to do evil learn,
and naughty words to use,
But good, I slowly do discern;
and often to do it refuse.
I better pleased am with play,
or toys (that fancy feed;)
Then keeping of Gods Sabbath day;
or learning pray, or read.
How shall I ever be so wise,
as Isa'ck was; and some
(That young were burned Gods sacrifice)
when suffering times do come.
2d. Part. On your Duty.
WHen years do ripen up your wit,
now Primrose-vertues gather:
Learn often to read in Holy Writ,
and so to call God father.
Children that can their Fathers tell
do please; ripe wits they prize;
Early to know God, sure does well;
such babes are truly wise.
Learn willingly your Catechize,
to understand each part:
To say it by rote must not suffice:
true knowledge lies in the heart.
Ask questions of your Parents often,
as well as answer theirs;
He learns but little, profits naught,
that doubts not, nor enquires.
Avoid Cards, Dice and all such Games,
as now too much are used,
Let wanton sports; quarrels, nicknames,
and jears be quite refused.
Gods holy name take not in vain;
use not one idle word:
All wanton talk, and dance, refrain:
cry not (if hurt) O Lord.
If recreation you must have
be it cheap, short, innocent,
Your carr'age sweet and habit grave,
(as babes) meek and content.
But above all, O learn to pray,
bemoan your sinful nature;
Beg (not in forms or words) to say
me Lord make a new Creature.
Keep, love and prize Gods Sabbath day,
in Worship, be rev'rent;
Also to what your Parents say,
be most obedient.
How free was Isa'ck bound, admire,
(affecting Martyrdom)
And three, behold saved in the fire,
mind these if sufferings come.
(3d. Part.)
Now to encourage tender hearts,
This Hymn some hope to youth imparts.
LOrd thou me first did form,
to thee I sure was born,
And shall I be away from thee
by sin and Satan torn?
My Parents did thee fear.
and me to God devote,
And in thy law and holy awe,
my nurture, did promote.
My infant life God spared.
that favor was not mean;
It Is sad to dye in youth, and lie
our life with the unclean.
I good example had,
that kept from great excess,
Which fills the bones of aged ones
that sins of youth possess.
Restraining grace is good;
natural Conscience too,
This gives me hope, that God will op'e
my heart it to renew.
I have my Parents dear
vows, prayers, and tears often cost;
How cannot e're be, that they should see
so precious blossoms lost.
Abram for Ishmael
did pray with some success:
But God would place the promised grace
on Isa'ck's head express,
(2d. Part.)
LOrd when with Abraham
thy Friend, thou covenant struck
It past for deed of gift, to's seed
of which they long partook.
His seed though now cast off
to him (at last) he will take
He does declare those Children are
beloved for Fathers sake.
Eight instances there are
recorded in Gods word,
Who did in youth, fear God, love Truth:
which comfort does afford.
Isa'ck was offering made,
on the alter bound, and laid;
Yet so when bound, he no fault found;
but God that slaughter staid.
Joseph to Israel brought
his brethren's bad report;
They him for that, do emulate,
tho's Father loved him for it.
when Joshua was young,
his zeal was hot for God;
So 's Obadiah and King Josiah,
that down Ball's altars trod.
Samu'll betimes was called,
Yea made Gods Prophet young;
To Eli old, sad tidings told:
and Israel judged long.
Jeremy was sanctified
and young did prophecy,
And John was from the womb called home,
fore* going the most high.
Lois and Eunice gave
Timothy education,
Fully to know Scriptures, that show
wisdom unto Salvation.
All ages since produce
young Martyrs not a few
That have defied the Tyrants pride,
the love of Christ to show.
Such times, O Lord, prevent:
but if that may not be;
Fit me to dye, ere I deny
my Lord that died for me.
(Of the three Children see Hymn 94.)
Besides the Index (or an Alphabetical Table) at the end; the young reader
(after the Epistles) finds and hint of the heads, or Scriptures to which most
of the Hymns relate: as these seven that follow.
1. THe glory of Christ Offices (viz.) 1. Feeding. 2. Pleading. 3. Ruling and
defending his.

2. The happiness of them, enjoy the presence of God with them, (Nations or
Saints.)

3. Of Christ breaking and Conquering of all, especially his four last
adversaries. (viz.) The 1. Dragon. 2. Beast. 3. Whore. 4. Death.

4. The defeating of all Plots and Plotters, on Esther 9.1. and Psalm. 37.12,
13. etc.

5. About the last part of Redemption by Christ both of our bodies and spirits,
and of Zions repair, Resurrection of witnesses; the future glory, and liberty
of the New Jerusalem.

6. The joy, and Halelujahs of all Saints at Christ's standing with them on Zion.

7. Some more private Meditations, and Poems on Paradise regained, and also
Occasional Hymns: on our fires (so often repeated,) on that in Breadstreet, the
late Drought; and after it Rain: On Death of Friends, or Children, and the
Sickness or Recovery of some. And on the Sabbath, etc.

(Errata's.)
PAge 4. line. 18. Read Wine, p. 12 l. 17. r. side p. 15. l. 11. f of r. and p.
16. l. 27. r. inquired. p. 19. l. 29. dele. [to] p. 20. r. and you from wick l.
14 r. Christ s p. 24. l. 5. r. O come. p. 25. l. 20 r. and for your) l. 24. r.
ye' ave trimmed up your Lamps. p. 26 l. 4. r. aye p. 29. l. 13. r. blessed. p. 30
l. 2 r: of's love (or d. of p. 31 l. 5. r. throw p. 32. l. 2 r. who thou art.
p. 36. l. 17. r. on. p. 45 l. 11. Gogs p. 47 l. 6. dele his. p. 48. l. 14. r.
compassions p 49. l. 12. r. hidd n. p. 55. l. 3. r. to a morn. p. 60 l. 22,
their eyes. p. 72 l. 2 dele the p. 74. l. 15. but those p. 75. l. 8. r. your h.
p. 83. l. 25. for nigh r. near p. 86. l. 3. for thus r. them. p. 87. l. 9 r.
and chapter 25. 6. p. 88. l. 1. d. s. p. 101. l. 10. boding. l. 11. r. none. p.
103. l. 25 r. scortching Sun. l. ult. where thine thou safe do. p. 110. l.
24. r. the Lord. p. 114. l. 29. r in's. p. 118. l. 6. r. rejoice. l. 8. for and
r. to's reign p. 119. l. 20. r. exalted be. p. 121 l. 22. hate and from her
retire. l. 24. r. burning her. p. 123 l. 20. r. on harv. p. 129 l. 2. r. vale
of. l. 17 dele the l. ult. dele to. p. 134 l. 1. r brake p. 137 l. 9. r. their.
p. 148. l. 13. and Nimrods hunt for prey. p. 149. l. 29. r. befall. p. 150 l.
27. r. said. p. 156 l. 8. dele s in nation. p. 157. l. 6. dele s in lamentation
p. 162 l. 12. r. so p. 163. r. will. p. 166. l. 8. dele s in Zions l. 12 r.
heads. p. 168 Hymn 146 two lines are added to the first staff, which belonged
to the second p. 174 l. 2. r. what sin? p 176 l. 3. r, their fate. p. 178 l. 7.
r. God. p. 193. l. 7. dele Hymn and division on the base p. 195. l. 4 r. if he
in us.

This Hymn two Adams fruit compares,
And way to the tree of Life declares.
AS man's first sin, quickly led in
A curse on's Children all:
So did the second Adam win
All lost, by t'other's fall.
The fruit that he, pluck off the Tree
Off knowledge, all did fill,
With ignorance and enmity,
'Against all his makers will.
Yet God thought fit, out of this pit
that fallen man should rise,
And come to eat, a fruit more sweet,
amidst Gods Paradise.
Oh therefore when, ye Sons of men.
will ye his calls embrace?
Return and come, to him, with whom
yet ye may hope for Grace.
Here grows a Tree of Life, will be
your food and medicine;
With him that well of life, does dwell,
to him your hearts incline.
Against the sting, of Adams sin,
here Antidote you will find,
Your dying Soul, may on this pole
its brazen Serpent mind.
Why will ye dye; this tree is nigh
to eat, if you endeavor
Your welcom's free, O taste and see,
yea, eat and live for ever.
2 Hymn.
A Pisgah sight, or foretasts and sips of Canaan.

Blessed be the Lord that has forgiven
our sin throw Christ his merit,
A new and living way, to Heaven
conducting by his Spirit.
Gods Sons are heirs of Glory all
joynt-heirs with Christ their King:
They all obey, his powerful call,
and new songs to him sing.
Their privileges here are great,
To ask, and have their will*
On his own Throne, Christ will them set
and so their joy fulfill.
Our bodies now so vile and low:
(through grief, contempt, and pain)
Though death under the clods them sow,
shall yet arise to reign.
Then no uncircumcised one
before that judge shall stand,
For heirs of Glory, they alone
must sit on Christ's right hand.
They that by Bacahs Vale, once past,
now come to Berecha:
And thus Before their King, at last,
still sing, Halelujah.
3 Hymn.
A Prophetic Lamentation for our Times.

O Lord draw near, prevent our fear
of Romish desolation,
For Babels whore lies at the door
with her abomination.
That man of sin, long since got in
and in Christ's Throne does sit,
And throw Gods anger, we are in danger
to fall into his pit.
The old Dragon fierce, does wound and pierce,
thy Sions blessed Seed,
But Christ departs, (that cuts our hearts)
who soon could wound his head.
But Lord return, for thee we mourn,
Our Prophets, we see none,
That where we are, can well declare,
while Christ our light is gone.
Send forth thy Sword (thy Holy word)
Leviathans head to wound,
Rouse Judahs Lion, let Virgin Sion,
no more sit on the ground.
Why does thy face, (so full of Grace)
eclipsed still remain?
Both Devils and men subdue; and then
thou Lord alone shall reign.
4 Hymn:
A Thirsty cry after that good Spirit of Adoption.

O Lord our hearts do thirst and cry,
for thy pure living water,
Thy spirit is good, Oh such a flood,
on droughty Souls Lord scatter.
Then shall we like thy Garden be,
full of all pleasant fruit,
For Christ laid up; O then he will sup
of Wines, his taste that suits.
Then Sharons's Rose (that withering is)
in beauty shall appear,
Thorns shall not so with Lillies grow,
nor Saints still Sackcloth wear.
Then shall that Sun of Righteousness,
heal them that fear his name,
True judgment shall in Desert dwell;
and wipe off Sions shame.
Then Babels moon, in darkness soon
unto a change will come:
The Virgins shall in triumph call
Their Bridegroom to his home.
Adopted ones, now cease all groans,
Heavens meet the Earth with Songs:
Lord come away, for such a day
thy whole creation longs.
5 Hymn. The Thirsty Soul.
ONe thing of thee Lord I desire
(and yet that one is all)
With' love of Christ my heart inspire,
that mine, I may him call.
O let the Coals of Jah inflame
my Soul with burning love,
Unite my heart to fear thy name
O send in Noah's Dove,
The Olive branch of peace to bring
wherein I shall rejoice;
And over all my sorrows sing,
in faiths melodious voice.
And when that King of Righteousness,
shall reign, and prosper too;
With peace he will our Islands bless,
them that oppress, undo.
Extend good will, to Sions Hill;
(that now we ruined call;)
Oh build again, Jerusalem;
repair her broken wall.
From Sion, Isreal's safety speed
(so long a captive lead)
So Jacob shall rejoice, indeed
and Israel shall be glad.
6 Hymn.
A sigh from the whole Creation.

In a Threnetick Hymn.

O Lord that true and righteous art
hark how thy Creatures all,
Do sigh and groan; by thee alone,
to be redeemed from thral.
From bondage of man's wickedness
we were redeemed (say they)
Why then are we man's vanity,
subjected to obey?
The curse and wrath we bear is great,
cross to our makers will;
How long must we by tyranny,
men's lawless lusts fulfill?
Lord sweep the world, refine the Church,
from dross, tinn, straw, and stubble,
By fire, and soap, revive our hope,
Our Island save from trouble.
No feller then on us shall come
nor burdens us oppress:
Christ will with justice, truth, and peace;
and Halelujahs, bless.
7 Hymn.
Zions Lamentation after the Lord.

HOw long Lord do thou hide thy face,
to us return, we crave,
The riches of thy powerful grace,
vouchsafe thy poor to have.
See how the Boars and Beasts of prey
do pluck and spoil thy Vine;
And where is your God, blaspheming say,
as if it were not thine?
The World in wrath, and blood does roll,
its burdens still increase;
To thee Lord, cries its weary Soul,
when shall these mischiefs cease?
Thy Spirits become to mighty ones,
a vile reproach, and scorn,
Among the pots, thy 'dopted Sons
do lie, black, and forlorn.
O turn to us, turn us to thee,
power out thy Spirit again,
Thy promise is (and that's our bliss)
Jesus shall live, and reign.
8 Hymn.
A sigh for pure Worship.

The 1st. Part.
LOrd show to us thy way, and will
to Worship thee aright:
Give by thy word and spirit that skill
to lead into thy sight.
When God to me said, seek my face,
my heart its echo cried,
To seek thy face, oh give me grace
But Lord, it do not hide.
For that alone will gladness give,
and joy, with peace, far more
Then corn and wine; souls do not live
on earth, or goods in store.
Then will I to thine Altar go,
and in its flames delight:
The way to bliss thus I shall know
and pleasures in thy sight.
Here I the end of wicked ones,
shall plainly see and read:
For life to Isreal's dry bones
hence i will believe and plead.
Lord have to bring that righteous King
into his Temple pure,
Its glory open; the whore, the Pope,
in their abyss secure.
That second Temple God will rear,
and his Salvation wall it;
In's beauty there will Christ appear,
Jehovah Shammah, call it.
9 Hymn.
Hopes for the approaching Glory.

The 2d. part.
OUr God will come in have;
in's Glory to appear;
And now fulfill to Zions Hill,
his promised good, so near.
Rejoice ye Sons of God,
All ye that Sion love,
Shake from your eyes the dust, and rise,
your sins, and bands remove.
His time now posteth on
For Babels final doom;
And great Salvation in every nation;
Oh let thy Kingdom come.
Though Nations rush, and rage,
Oh bring them to thy foot,
And hear the prayer of such as are
in dust; and destitute.
Then Jesse's branch will bud
Two staves unite in one:
Then may we hope, all priso'ns op'e
That Christ may have the Throne.
Idols he will abolish,
And worship pure appoint;
Sion espouse, to be his house,
And over it Christ anoint.
Oh then rejoice in hope,
Of such a glorious day,
When all that mourn their tunes will turn,
Singing; Halelujah.
10 Hymn.
Future hopes of Good.

YE Saints that do Jehovah fear,
sing with melodious hearts,
That chosen are, of God most dear,
his secrets, to impart.
Before the earths foundations, he
on you placed his Election,
And when these heavens no more shall be,
you will have a Resurrection.
Thrice blessed they be, whom God does choose,
and pure in heart that be;
Though men abuse and you refuse,
such God at last shall see.
Then Saints shall know as they be known,
and see God as he is;
God will not shame their names to own,
for such shall live in bliss,
Then shall your bodies glorious rise,
(first Christ's, then all his Saints,)
When power divine them clarifies,
and full joys ends complaints.
Oh who then would not sigh, and long,
this Kingdom's wine to taste;
Thy Kingdom come, and will be done:
that glorious state, O have.
11 Hymn.
Faith's triumph (in the hopes of a Resurrection) over deaths Victory.

ALL ye that live and die in Christ,
O bless the Lord with me,
Beyond the grave a hope you have
of perfect Victory.
Tho dying, yet behold we live,
in sorrows still, we sing;
Christ bore the curse, and sin (that is worse)
death's but (in name) a King.
What though from Abel to this day,
death of its conquests boast:
Christ through the sides of it, did ride,
and so its sting was lost.
Nature it King of Terrors, calls,
and terror it is to Kings;
Yet with delight, into Gods sight,
body and Soul, it brings.
Our first begotten from the dead,
arose, and sits on high,
But when again he comes to reign,
his foes at's foot must lie,
Our scattered bones about the Grave,
shall come again together,
And when we rise, with these our eyes
we God shall see, for ever.
12 Hymn.
Faiths triumph in the Resurrection of the dry bones.

ALL ye that love the Lord,
his grace that tasted have;
Though death devour, there is set an hour,
when you shall rise from grave.
Our life with Christ is hid,
Souls cannot dye therefore.
For while we sleep, our Lord does keep
Of hell and death, the door.
Oh then rejoice and sing,
Ye that dwell in the dust
Shall in your lot stand without spot
with spirits of perfect just.
What though our scattered bones
lie still about graves mouth,
Christ unto you will life renew,
that has dew of his youth.
Isra'ls dry bones at last
a spirit of Life shall get:
That Roman Sun and Jewish Moon
under a cloud shall set.
Then shall the righteous shine,
as Suns before Gods sight,
With holy ones, sitting on Thrones;
in everlasting light.
13 Hymn.
Doxolog. gratulatory.

Psalm. 16.7. ult.

BLessed be God for Jesus Christ,
and his free righteousness,
For nothing less, lost souls could bless,
and lead to happiness.
My soul bless thou, the Lord always
and all that in thee is:
Instructed be, behold and see
what great Salvation's this?
The Lord's set still before my sight
I shall not be deprest,
My heart and voice, do both rejoice
in hope, my flesh shall rest,
Thou will not leave my soul in hell
nor to the grave captive
But wilt me show what path to go
where I shall ever live.
For in thy sight fullness of joy,
and pleasures are in store,
All treasures stand, at thy right hand
of life; for evermore.
14 Hymn.
An Hymn of Petitions for the Spirit.

as Psalm. 51.12. Cant. 5. ult.

TO thee Jehovah I
do thirsting cry and crave
That early dew (thy spirit most true)
this droughty soul, may have.
Awake, O North wind, blow,
O South, breath pleasantly,
Behold how dry my Gardens lie,
my Plants wither and die.
Thou calls't for fruits, and lo!
I therein would abound;
But dead and dry my Roots do lie,
my fruit from thee is found.
The gates of Sion mourn,
Two witnesses dead lie:
O send that spirit that Christ did merit,
Thus shall we vivifie.
Then Babels whore shall wail
Saints shall immortal reign,
Immanuel with Saints shall dwell,
and endless joy, obtain.
15 Hymn.
After Cant, 3.1.

A Song of Love, longing for Christ.

OH thou the Bridgroom of my soul,
for thee thy spouse does long,
Have, come away, make no delay
revenge thy spouses wrong.
By night as I on bed do lie,
(in dark affliction)
I seek and cry yet cannot spy
my souls beloved one.
I of the watchmen then inquire
yet learned not where he was,
I got their wound, not yet him found,
but thence as I did pass,
Him that my Soul does love, I found
and then I held him fast,
Till in my bosom I him bound,
in mothers chambers, placed.
Nothing shall now his 'bode disease
his rest shall glorious be;
With Sion's peace, all troubles cease;
in Joy's eternity.
16 Hymn.
A Sigh for King Jesus.

O Holy one thy blessed Throne,
thy Saints do long to see,
In every Nation thy new creation,
and Christ in's own beauty.
The creatures groan to see that Throne,
the Prophets have foretold;
When he that bare our sin, must wear
Crowns above Ophirs Gold.
At thy right hand, our King does stand,
this world begins to reel;
The whore of Rome, let feel her doom,
why stays thy Chariot wheel!
When shall our eyes see him arise,
in favor unto Sion?
Her precious dust, all pity must,
that wait for Judas Lion.
Lord have the day, assume the prey,
this old world so subdue:
And of thy power both day and hour,
we will sing the Lambs Song new.
17 Hymn.
A Royal Song.

AWake my Heart, perform thy part,
doors everlasting open,
To sing a Song that does belong
to Christ our blessed hope.
These doleful jarrs and dreadful wars,
his Glory that forerun,
Only proclaim his blessed name
is near; his work near done.
Though the black signs, are doleful lines,
of what succeeds e're long,
Yet the effect (to all the Elect)
will issue in a Song.
Then he that came first as a Lamb,
to expiate our sin;
Shall without sin, once come again,
and then his reign begin.
Then shall be none of Babels Throne
then all things he will restore
To liberty; and Judges he
will settle as before.
18 Hymn.
On Christ's Intercession, a New Song.

1st. Part.
NOw blessed be our God of hope,
and Christ our Advocate.
The way to bliss that has set open,
to such' in darkness sat.
He in our Flesh, died, rose, ascends,
now sits on thy right hand,
That he all Isles, and the earths ends,
might have at his command.
(Says he) these Souls my blood, has bought,
and it on them i will sprinkle,
My patrimony to have I ought
without a spot or wrinkle.
The freeness of thy choice, I plead
O make it good to me,
For all thou gav'st I interceed,
and them i will lead to thee.
Oh then in Christ joy and believe,
it is now but ask and have;
Your prayers by him, God will receive,
and from the wicked save.
Before we were, he did obtain,
(and sprinkled now, we are;)
That we on earth, with him should reign,
in answer to his prayer.
Are you afraid God will not hear?
he minds Christ Intercession;
Your King when is wrath, begins to tear,
will never loose possession.
19 Hymn.
The Believers possession in Christ's Intercession.

2d. Part.
IN Christ Oh now rejoice,
that for our Souls does plead,
Who can accuse, whom Christ does choose,
and for them interceed.
Shall sin, or Satan band,
to nonsuit faith and prayer,
Yea if they stand, at our right hand;
at Gods, Christ does appear.
The voice of Christ's dear blood,
things better for us speaks,
Before Gods face, in's holy place;
the Serpents head it breaks.
and though God yet delay
to answer long-made cries,
He before the Throne, of God is gone
there in our stead, supplies.
His Vine he will save, and keep,
that he from Egypt brought;
None shall molest its quiet rest,
since Christ with his blood it bought.
No weapon formed shall be
against Sion prosperous then;
Both great and small, will perish all
in the way: even so. Amen.
Let our Immanuel, then
be blessed both now, and aye:
He Is that anointed, God has appointed
Ore all: Halelujah.
20 Hymn.
Zions complaint to her King.

1st. Part.
O Lord give ear to the complaint
of thy dear Sions Hill,
Whose sighs and fears, with voice of tears
Gods air and ears does fill.
Full sixteen hundred years ago,
Her King went up on high,
To intercede; but promised,
to come at midnight cry.
My King (cry's she) absents from me
at which my foes do mock,
And I forlorn with grief am worn,
deserted of my Rock;
My precious Saints are slain, or faint
my stones are poured forth,
My walls are down and golden Crown
trampled, as of no worth.
My glorious hopes of future good
lies under deaths dark shade.
My martyred Sons through Seas of blood
unto their Thrones do wade.
Thy prisoners of hope redeem,
revenge our spite and wrong,
We cry and say, make no delay,
But thou, O Lord! how long?
21 Hymn.
The Song of Faith, in the night, seeking Christ.

2d. Part.
MY soul does seek, inquire, and long
for thee my stay and strength,
My heart in hopes warbles its song
thee to enjoy at length.
For in this barren wilderness
nothing but droughts, I find
I flee to Christ in my distress:
yet still am left behind!
Then like the Heart I breath and pant
after the water brooks:
And when I find them not, I faint,
casting to heaven my looks.
Oh who will give one sight, a beam
of Christ that sits above
That floods of peace and joy may stream
exporting Faith, and Love.
Zion sits widow in the dark
as though she had no King;
This scene er'e long will turn; then hark,
we shall arise and sing.
For lo! He comes that absent was,
his Kingdom to receive,
And though dark clouds before him pass,
(Not seeing) let us believe.
22 Hymn.
For the fall of Idols.

FOr I come and bow before the Lord
in reverent holy fear,
Rejoice according to his word,
in Songs approach him near.
For sure confusion is to all
that serve dumb Stocks and Stones,
And to their own inventions fall;
him serve ye holy ones!
Their sorrows shall be multiplied
that graven Idols serve;
Yea Sons of Levi must be tried
that make God's Israel swerve*
Then Sion shall rejoice herein
and Judah shall be glad:
And all that have compelled to sin,
with Babel must be sad.
Such Vials shall on Babel fall,
will make her helpers mourn,
Her Crown, and lof'ty Cedars tall,
(crop't by Christ's hand) must burn.
Then shall the people of all Lands,
to Christ their offerings bring:
Ethiope with Israel stretch their hands,
all, Hallelujahs sing.
23 Hymn.
A Hymn sighing for Christ, in a Letter sent to Mrs. S. W.

MAke have my love, and only dove,
on wing of morning have,
Refute my fears, wipe of my tears,
his new wine let me taste?
Though I suspect I Am non-Elect,
and so his love denied,
That would relieve, could I believe,
he does the same abide.
Now let the Sun, and day fast run,
my fears shall terminate.
To think with joy, that Christ and I
in bliss shall be complete.
Then have, prepare, all ye that are
wise Virgins: ready trim
Your Lamps bring; come, lo your Bridegroom
is near, go to meet him.
For if his door be shut, before you have
your Lamps trimmed up,
Beyond all doubt, you will be shut out;
and never with him sup.
24 Hymn.
A 2d. sighing for Christ Kingdom.

MOst glorious King, thy Saints do sing
in hopes to see thy day
When every Crown comes tumbling down
that thine may stand for age.
Why ought we pray, and thus to say
as thou do us command,
Thy Kingdom come, and will be done,
if foes it still withstand?
How says thy word that Christ our Lord
is sole bless't Potentate;
Why should his cross, become our loss
or serve a worldly state.
That glorious tree on which blessed he
did suffer shame and scorn;
On which he spil'd his blood, did yield
true life to us forelorn.
And shall his cross, become our loss,
his glory turn our shame?
Nay! surely those that him oppose
shall bow to's royal name.
25 Hymn.
This song does the beleivers day
And future triumph's, fair display
SIng to the Lord ye holy ones,
ye Saints lift up your head,
And shout aloud, for in this cloud,
Christ will his glory spread.
What though your sight is not so bright,
faith in the dark can grope,
And feel such union, as gives communion,
oh! then rejoice in hope.
For Christ our hope, having with soap
our sins all washed clean
In Moabs pot, then shall no spot
on Zion more be seen.
Her blood, and fears, her sighs and tears,
for ever now shall cease:
No flames can scorch this firstborn Church:
but rather joys increase.
No Cana'nite shall dwell in's sight
nor pricking thorn, or brier:
No hypocrite, with Lillies white,
shall grow: but disappear.
Now will all Saints, turn their complaints
to lofty times of joy;
'Cause Judah's Lion, is King in Zion;
and none shall more destroy.
Oh then let all Saints, great and small,
expect this glorious day,
Your Summer's near, its flowers appear,
Lord have, and come away.
Cant. 2.11, 12. Luke 21.28, 30.
26 Hymn.
An Hymn of Christ's Cross, and Crown following it.

WHen man was made God to him said,
of each Tree freely take,
I have them set all to be meat,
thy appetite to slake.
But wretched he, his inn'cency
through that forbidden fruit,
He freely left, so was bereft
of man's state; like a bruit.
Now as that tree did prove to be
the cause of all our Fall,
So by this tree, (Christ's cross) we be
redeemed, and saved all.
Though on this cross our Lord the loss.
sustained of his life,
Yet so did he the Elect set free,
from sin and death, (so rise.)
Now Paradise most open lies
life's tree's to none forbidd'n
Christ serves for food, both sweet, and good;
he is that Manna hidden.
As by a woman our death (in common)
on all mankind did rest,
So now should come of Virgin womb
both grace and life, most bless.
27 Hymn.
The 2d. part.
ANd now Gods call is cried to all,
to come believe and take him,
Both Christ and Lord, and so his sword,
shall (nolens volens) make him,
Behold what signs in bloody lines,
before him do appear,
Sure he is not far, hark how the war,
does of the Lamb draw near.
As once he died, and signified
through bloody lines of his love.
So now that curse and sin that is worse,
from Saints he does remove.
Remember Lord, how much thy word
of his exalting speaks,
Hasten that crown of Babel down,
for he all Scepters breaks.
Shall ever more, that Romish whore,
our British Islands sway?
Hasten her doom, thy Kingdom come;
O now Lord come away
Then every nation; thy new Creation;
and all things glad shall be:
When Christ alone, set on his Throne,
in's beauty Saints shall see.
28 Hymn.
A Lamentation for England.

AWake my muse thy bow to use,
utter a Lamentation:
That Romish whore knocks at the door
of this our English Nation.
That man of sin, with her comes in
(the Dragon laid the Plot)
The Eagles spread, over Lions head;
if God prevent it not.
We are in danger through Gods (fierce) anger
if Christ be not our help
By Jebusites or Jesuits,
to loose the Lions whelp.
The Dragon tries how to surprise,
the Woman's relict Seed,
Unless that Sword of Christ (his word)
do wound his head, with speed.
Oh woeful day if she bears sway,
again in these our Lands,
Gods Saints she will make, burn at a stake:
and break Christ's holy bands.
But Lord arise, her sacrifice
in stead of Zion make:
O let Rome fall (beast, horns, and all,)
for Christ, and Martyrs sake.
29. Hymn.
Faiths breath in a Swoun, (sent a Friend in a Letter.)

Though once (my dear) I felt thee near
yet wist not whom you art
Now through this hole, i will feed my soul
with sight, to stay my heart*
I thought that he did come to be
no transient, but in-dweller,
But now he is gone! my soul finds none
that where he rests, can tell her.
I seek the street, and fain would meet
my choice beloved, most dear,
Sometimes I find him, yet do not mind him,
which makes him disappear:
Why does thy face (Lord full of grace)
eclipsed still remain,
Thy will be done; but here i will moan
till I thy face regain.
Down at thy feet, (as it is meet)
O bow all earthly things:
Make all adore thy face before;
sprinkle all Lands, and Kings.
30 Hymn.
A panting sigh, for Sions King:
Whose coming does Salvation bring.
OH thou to whom praises pertain
all Majesty and might;
Thy glorious Scepter sway, and reign
before thine Enemies sight;
For 1600 years behold
thy Saints (baptized in blood)
Have for a pray, to beasts been sold,
and eat (in tears) their food.
Stir up thy self in Righteousness,
vengeance (as cloak) put on;
Thy zeal for Sions Sons express,
proud Babels whore upon.
Thy watchman on our walls appoint,
let them see eye to eye,
Saviors, and Sons of oil, anoint
that shall their Lord stand by
Those mighty ones that plot our harm
let them begin to fall,
That Trumpet let it sound their larm,
and judge them great and small.
Of mercy then and judgment too,
thy Saints shall sing and joy,
For God will utterly undo,
all that our peace annoy.
Thy Scepter then, our Isles shall bless
with truth, and peace for aye,
The Sword, of violence Lord suppress;
Lord have that blissful day.
31 Hymn.
Here Saints do mourn, as Turtle Dove,
For Christ's return, that now is above.
OH Sions King and only Spouse!
How long will thou withdraw,
From thy dear Heritage and house?
The Isles wait for thy Law.
Hark how thy Turtles, Lord, do mourn,
to clefts of the rock they flee,
When shall our day and Sun return,
and we his glory see?
Thou answer'st prayers by terrible signs,
O God, in righteousness;
Thy covenant (writ with bloody lines)
gives hopes thou wilt yet us bless.
We at thy tokens are afraid;
the nations rush and swell;
Religion but a scorn is made,
to them amongst us dwell.
Oh now thine Iron rod lift up,
(as once on Egypts Land,)
To Beast and whore transmit that cup
of trembling, in our hand.
Of favor to us some token show,
some sign presaging good:
Let all thy, righteous vengeance know,
That spilt our precious blood.
Then in our land, thy saved flock,
shall thee praise, and adore.
And in the lamb, our King and Rock,
rejoice for evermore.
32 Hymn.
An Hymn of a soul burning in love after Christ's return.

MY soul does thirst with hot desire,
in love it burns for thee,
Lord put not out such holy fire,
but in it descend to me.
Before thee my iniquity
O do not set in wrath;
But justify, and me espy
righteous, alone by Faith.
From me thine anger turn away
(life in thy favor lies)
Visit my soul without delay,
and listen to my cries.
How long Lord wilt' the absent remain
whilst Saints in darkness dwell,
Repeat thy wondrous works again;
so we will thy glory tell.
Oh what a joyful day 'twil be,
to all in mourning state?
The Lord exalt alone to see.
the lofty desolate.
Then cool times of refreshing shall,
on parched souls descend,
Hail on the whore and beast will fall,
to Sion, wrath to end.
Oh then all ye that do belong,
to Christ believe and say
Make have to come: Oh dear Bridegroom
judge, reign; Halelujah. (Amen.)
33 Hymn.
Christ, and the beloved, enjoying, after longings.

HArk, O my Soul, he is come!
my love for whom I sought
My burning ceases, and joy increases,
since peace, to me he brought.
My great unworthiness,
and sins he has forgiven,
My Faith gives vision, like that fruition,
the Saints possess in heaven.
This world I now despise;
things that far better are
I do foretast, but best (at last)
he does for me prepare.
Though in this Vale of tears,
I often did clouded lie:
Yet in his book, I wishly look,
and there his face do spy.
Though sons of Belial now
this earth (accursed) possess:
All wrath shall cease, and Christ with peac^
this world (at last) will bless.
My conversation then,
shall still in heaven remain,
And thence, I still my hopes will fill,
Jesus shall come and reign.
Hope in thy promise, is
(though distant) wondrous sweet;
O then what grace, to see his face?
When all bow at his feet.
34 Hymn. Psalm. 118.22.
IN God let us all triumph;
that Stone that men despised,
Is now become the corner stone
most highly to be pris'd.
Oh joyful day indeed,
Gods act most marvelous;
Then let us cry Hosannahs high;
(on earth) Lord prosper us.
Glory to God on high,
praise unto Christ our King;
Peace and good will the earth let fill,
prosperity now O bring.
O let that little stone,
Cut out, (not by man's hands)
The Image beat, growing so great
till it shall fill all Lands. Amen.
35 Hymn.
A cry against Babels whore.

O God to whom vengeance pertains,
revenge the blood and wrong,
That Sion (for thy sake) sustains;
(thy Lilly) thorns among.
Lift up thy feet, have to behold,
our sighs, our griefs, and fears;
Repay them that have been so bold,
to mix our blood with tears.
Make Inquisition swift, and full,
after that whorish state.
That to her former sins, does pull
blood guiltyness, of late,
Lord make them like a wheel, O power
thy last hot vials on those,
Immanuels Isle that would devour,
and Christ thy Sun depose.
This shall the heavens with joy affect,
Apostles, Martyrs too:
For all that Sion do afflict,
thou wilt utterly undo.
Yea all the earth shall shout and ring,
sufferers be crowned with bay
All Sions mourners then will sing,
Amen, Halelujah.
36 Hymn.
Faith's triumph over all
Sions Enemies, and adversities.
THe Lord is Sions Sun and Shield,
from perils he us keeps
Light he and safety us does yield,
who slumbers not, nor sleeps.
Talk not so proudly, ye that plot
your mischeifs on your Beds
For God, that sees, decrees your
'twill fall on your own head.
Though God a bitter Cup, constrain
his people first to taste,
The dregs of ire (unmixt) remain,
for Sions foes, at last.
Gods furnace, Sions filth and tinn,
shall sepp'rate (like the dross,)
And when he has consumed our sin
then he will transfer our cross.
Then all, that mischief have devised
shall by their counsels fall,
And in their own nets be surpised:
yet Sion 'scape withal.
For God has sworn, (not to repent)
his hands upon his throne;
All that against his King are bent,
that hand, shall break each one.
Ye Sons of Sion then be glad,
shout of your King and say
Behold he comes in vengeance clad,
you to reward. Selah.
Lord break the wickeds Arms and Bands,
and like a wheel them make,
Snare them in the works of their own hands,
for Christ's and Sions sake.
37 Hymn.
This Hymn's a precatory ode,
Against all the Enemies of God.
O God our Rock and Isra'ls stone
Lift up thy mighty arm,
To save thy Flock, for thou alone
can rescue Lambs from harm.
O break the wick'ds arm, and might
against us that conspire,
And let them melt before thy sight,
as wax before the fire.
Thick clouds of blood over us increase
to save, O give command,
And from the Assyrian (for our peace,)
O let our Michael stand,
Thy Vine has long been watered,
with Christ's blood and her own.
Our bones long have been scattered
Our King kept from his throne.
For Sions controverse' Lord rise,
visit this vale of Vision;
Ye mighty ones descend likewise
bring all things to decision.
Then shall our storms, turn into calms,
our pricking thorns to bays,
Our (Dove-like) mournings into Psalms,
our sighs, and fears to praise.
38 Hymn.
An hymn full of complaints.
To Christ King of the Saints.
THou Lord of hosts most high,
whose Chariots Angels are,
Hark to the plaints of all thy Saints,
thine arm to save, make bare.
The Serpent now is in hope,
his deadly wound to heal,
The whore does think, more blood to drink,
and witness grave-stones Seal.
Rise Lord them disappoint,
O save thy Turtle Dove;
Thy times appoint, Saviors t'annoint,
to rescue those thee love.
Feirce Lions at us roar,
Foxes, with craft, combine,
And we have none; save thee alone;
to pity; Oh incline.
The Whore judge; and avenge
the blood of all thy slain;
The man of sin, break; and bring in
the Son of God's blessed reign.
How long shall Sions pains,
of that Man-child delay?
Have on that Birth; to rule the earth,
Lord Jesus! come away.
Thine Iron rod lift up,
thy foes to shivers bray,
Prevent our fears, wipe off all tears*
Reign thou O Lamb, for ay.
39 Hymn.
A Song of that Redemption day,
That our Adoption, does display.
Exodus 19.4. Psalm 148.14. Romans 8.23.

1st. Part.
SIng and rejoice, ye holy ones,
Gods Citizens most (free)
In him that has you saved from wrath,
adopted Sons to be.
Herein your privilege does lie
To God you are brought near;
But no compare of what we are,
to what we shall appear.
Those sighs and supplications all
that in his spirit ascend
Before his throne; shall every one
in joy, and praises end.
Then all that for Adoption wait
shall full redemption have,
Christ shall relieve, all that believe,
and ransom from the Grave.
Though our corrupt bodies of cla
will to vile worms meat, fade
Changed, at Resurrection day,
they glorious shall be made.
Then let us all, both great and small
ascribe blessing for ay;
To Jah's great name, and to the Lamb
sing songs* Halelujah.
40 Hymn.
The 2d. part.
TO Christ Jehovah now let us sing
That has redeemed us free,
From Hell beneath from curse, and death,
Grave! where is thy victory?
By conquests men Trophies procure,
and earthly glory win;
By sufferings, crosses, by death and losses,
Christ killed both death, and sin.
Our privilege to call God Father
is wondrous high and great,
A look* or kiss below, is bliss
but O then what is his seat?
To sit on thrones amongst glorious ones
Angels, and Saints, on high;
Oh that is a sight, full of delight,
but what is his face to spy?
To see that blessed Zion of God;
for which none seek, few care;
Redeemed from sin, clad, and led in,
where endless pleasures are:
To see that Babylonian whore
consuming in Gods ire,
But Christ exalted on Gods throne,
of Nations that desire.
To see Christ's chain on Satan's reign
a 1000 years, until
His fiery seat God's troops defeat:
so ends, Gods holy will.
Oh then who can their songs refrain
but must in tri'umph say?
Glory, and power each day, and hour
be to the Lamb, for ay.
41 Hymn.
The 3d. Part.
OH blessed be Christ's glorious name,
for what his blood did merit,
Our full release; and perfect peace,
both sealed by his Spirit.
How can we doubt we are cast out
since blood, our entrance in,
Has freely given into his heaven,
renting that vail of sin.
This Lamb of God himself once trod
Gods wine press, for our sin:
And still does tread: and interceed,
by's blessed spirit within:
Such sighs and groans his holy ones
still offer before his face,
Till Captives be, victors, and free,
advanced to heavenly place.
But Lord thou have more Grapes to cast
to the winepress of thy Father,
Thine Harvest reap, over Mountains leap
the Vine of the Earth, O gather.
Make Babels whore, naked and poor,
Let Saints (so long oppressed)
Fill to her double, that cup of trouble,
that thine may come to rest.
Then eccho's fill mount Zions hill,
and Saints Gods Harps will hear,
And see Christ's bride, set at his side,
both Palms and Crowns to wear.
42 Hymn.
4th. Part (in another Tune.)
SIng unto Jah ye Saints,
loud Halelujahs bring;
Alone to him that did redeem,
our souls from perishing.
He saved us (only he)
from sin and slavery
He dearly bought, and for us sought,
(though lost) Gods Sons to be.
The price was precious blood
that Righteousness did his merit,
Life was revealed by faith, and sealed
in first fruits of Spirit.
This earnest paid before
(of the whole purchas't sum,)
Did us secure, he would be sure
to pay't, when he should come.
Thus being ascended high
and set at Gods right hand,
Promis't again, to come and reign,
over all that him withstand.
For God has said and swore,
and will most surely do it
His Enemies that him despise
shall bow and kiss his foot.
Then Kings and Captains cry
ye Rocks us save, oh hide,
From the Lambs wrath, that now he has;
Oh who shall that abide?
43 Hymn.
The joy, that our deliverance brings,
All over the Earth, and Islands, rings.
LOrd Jesus when will thou again
return with righteousness
Thy Scepter's due, and promise true
And sure, we must confess.
Shall men detain, thy promis't reign,
the Almighty keep in's tomb
O let us see him King to be
when his full time, is come.
Then this our Land shall by thy hand,
of justice, yield subjection,
If thou O God, lift's up thy rod,
who shall not fear correction.
Over our dry bones, thy spirit groans
working in Saints compassion,
Live from the dust, yea reign we must:
with thee desire of Nations.
That couchant Lion, passant mount Sion
from's den, rampant will run
To change (over run) that Turkish Moon,
and darken the Roman Sunn.
Them both, he will stain, when Christ does reign
in's glorious Majesty,
Whose light shall fill mount Sions Hill,
'fore's ancients gloriously,
O then let us sing, that love this King
cry gladly Hosannah,
Thy Kingdom come, and will be done.
Amen. Halelujah.
44 Hymn.
Salvation told John in exile,
Is here expected, in this Isle.
YE Elders of the Lamb that are
attending at his Throne,
With palms, (white Robes) your selves prepare
to follow him each one.
For now he lives that once was slain,
whose blood redeemed the Elect,
His horns of power, assert his reign,
his eyes hidden wiles, detect.
Salvation give to God, we ought,
and to the Lamb all might,
Satan from Heaven is thrust, that sought
to accuse us, day and night.
That beast whose power upheld the whore
its horns hate and conspire;
To make her des'late, nak't* and poor;
and burn her flesh with fire.
That word and blood which victory,
for his first suffe'rers wone;
To Songs of Triumph turned shall be
when the Armageddon's, done.
Quick and short work God will effect,
on earth, for's people's sake,
(In pity to his own elect,)
the days he will shorter make.
Christ on's white horse to us is show'n,
(as the last King) to ride;
And new Jerus'lem (next) comes down,
adorned to be his Bride.
Then Angels, Elders, (Saints and all)
Hosannahs to him bring,
And before his footstool great and small,
let Halelujahs sing.
45 Hymn.
Whom God does into's covenant take,
Them he delivers, for's own name sake.
GOd of all Grace, now, blessed be,
that sinners fallen from him,
He Is pleased, by covenant, sure and free;
and blood, them to redeem.
The gifts and calls of God, are free,
if he will covenant make:
Unworthiness no let shall be,
he saves for's own name sake.
From Egypt God his Israel brought
to the promis t Land of rest;
For them (again) from Babel sought,
(because, there, sore oppressed)
So Lord! from Babel mystical,
Thy Zion call, and take:
Let her, and her proud Nimrods fall;
Oh! for thy mercies sake.
Lord pardon, purge, and heal our land.
that thine thou mays't us make;
Our full deliverance Lord command,
for Christ's and Zions sake.
Then joyful Songs here shall be sung:
for God will perfect make,
The work so wond'rously, begunn;
swift vengeance then he will take.
Then Saints before your King, rejoice,
behold he comes, again;
To judge, and fight, with Trumpets noise
Now Lord, come quick; Amen.
46 Hymn.
This hymn is Zions lamenting Song,
With whom her Sons cry Lord how long.
LOrd God of Hosts how long,
will thou thy work delay?
Oh come get done what tho 'st begun
for thee in hope we stay.
Zion long does complain,
and weeps in the wilderness
Says, i am alone, my Sons are gone,
Lord pity my distress.
My Garden fence lies wast,
on Earth I have no Friend,
My bleeding stanch, O Jesse's Branch!
my buds from death defend.
These subtle Foxes spoil,
that tear my Grapes so tender;
All that pass by, do pluck, and cry;
now let her King, defend her.
But yet i will rest in hope,
my head retains affection
He past through death; his lively breath,
shall give me Resurrection.
Our Lamentations shall
terminate in great joy,
Then falls the Throne, of Babylon,
for God will her destroy.
From the utmost ends of Earth,
Hosannah's heard shall be,
Our Isles shall sing to Jah, and bring
praise to Eternity.
47 Hymn.
The Thirsty Soul being set on fire,
With Love for Christ, pants in desire.
1st. part.
DRaw nigh thou whom my Soul does love!
mine eye on thee is fixed,
Save thee alone, object i have none;
all other ioys are mixed.
Oh may I see thy blessed face,
Than heaven it self more sweet,
If this I may not (yet) i will stay
below, and kiss thy feet.
I have been long confined and toss't
wandering like Noah's Dove;
For here is no true rest below,
Lord it is in thee above.
If I thy face yet may not see,
thou bids me, it to seek,
And sure fulfill his word, God will,
of the Earth, to all the meek.
They that him seek the Lord shall praise
their hearts for aye shall live,
True hunger is, Gods way to bliss,
on's word, then let us believe.
Though darkness often thy face eclipse,
and hides thee from my sight,
Yet will I stay for him, always;
for all his paths are right.
And though i am in the deeps low cast,
to him i will look again;
That floods can quell, and save from Hell,
for over all he will reign.
48 Hymn.
The Souls desires themselves do wast,
Of Christ to see, or hear, or taste.
(2d. Part.)
THis one thing needful Lord I seek,
(and that one thing's my all)
But for the same I on thy name,
(till I obtain't) will call:
That I may in thy presence dwell,
and after Christ inquire;
For in thy face, all joy I place;
and that is my whole desire:
This when I seek, but cannot see,
my Faith and Hope's delayed,
Despair gets in, and so to sin,
and Satan i am betrayed:
How long (Lord) shall my Soul be tossed,
'twixt hopes, and cloudy fears?
Show me thy face, so full of grace,
remove my clouds, and tears.
Our souls still long to see the day,
when our Immanuel,
That Lamb of God, makes his abode,
On Sion Hill to dwell.
But if my Bridegroom yet deferr,
i will wait his blessed time,
For either he will come, or we
shall shortly go to him.
Then conflicts end in victory,
our sighs, turn into praise,
This long dark night, ta' morning bright,
that Saints may sing always.
49 Hymn.
Love in desire, with panting breast,
Pursues, enquires, for Christ its rest.
(3d. Part.)
MY Soul (Lord)'s in a desert dry,
where waters there are none,
It longs to spy, thy Majesty,
and for thee makes its moan.
To see thy beauty, glory pear,
Oh how would that delight?
So to come near, (in holy fear,)
and joy before thy sight.
For all my joys (here) sorrows breed,
this world yields not content;
It Is Christ indeed, alone can feed:
to Siloe's well, i am sent.
When I the fiery poisoned sting
do of the Serpent find,
Then by looking on Christ my King,
healed is my heart and mind.
When I thy countenance can obtain,
and in it my pardon read;
And views (again) his Royal reign,
now Faith begins to feed.
Such sight then makes me cry aloud,
here Lord it is good to stay!
Then in a Cloud, my Lord does shroud
and hide himself away.
Then from my Mount descend do I
t'a vale of tears, and say:
Yet hope will I, day spring to espy,
and sing all tears away.
50 Hymn.
The Soul espying through the door,
Its fair beloved longs therefore.
(4th. Part.)
LOrd Jesus let thy (Sun-like) face,
shine all my darkness out,
That I may of thy saving Grace,
and love be out of doubt.
Sometimes (though it be not sought) thy face
thou 'rt pleased to let us see;
Such arbitrary acts of grace,
now show again, to me.
Thou bids us ask, yea seek and knock,
then sure thou wilt to us open;
No bars are strong enough; no lock
can shut the door of hope.
If my beloved still shut me out,
and say see me, no more;
Yet will I look (standing without)
in by the hole of the door.
Though Clouds and darkness us surrounds,
and Sion's flames grow hot;
His heart in Holy love abounds;
forget his own; he will not.
It Is good to live by Faith, whilst here,
in darkness, to hope for light;
When we in perfect light, appear
then full shall be our sight.
51 Hymn.
The Councels of Achitophels
To be defeat this hymn foretells.
1st. Part. Psalm. 9.16, 17.

WOnderful Councellor and King;
thou righteous art, and wise,
On wicked men their crafts to bring,
that mischiefs did devise.
For they work in the dark and deep,
their wiles do seek to hide,
Mistaking God to be asleep:
while he has all espied.
Tush! then they say, can God regard
what mischiefs we do hatch?
Yes he will retaliate; and reward;
your gins your feet shall catch.
By judgments, execute that are,
the Lord is known always,
Their own works are the wicked's snare;
Higgaion! sing Selah.
This to a future age, record,
for people uncreate
To read; how wickedness (abhorred)
God did retaliate.
Then men shall surely say, and sing,
for just men, is reward;
The Earth to judgment God will bring:
the suffering-meek regard.
Whosoever is wise to observe and tell
and such like things record,
These prudent ones shall know right well.
the kindness of the Lord.
52 Hymn.
The more men hate; (O Lord above)
Vouchsafe the more of thy free love.
(2d. Part.)
YE Saints of the most high!
Come and behold his deeds,
That he alone (unsought) has done,
for them he keeps and feeds.
The Foxes do conspire,
to spoil Gods tender Vine,
Then Providence, became its fence,
this Vineyard Lord is thine
Then of it, let us sing,
none surely hurt it may,
He never sleeps that watches keeps,
and waters 't night and day:
Men subtle may conspire,
and digg as deep as Hell,
God sees and smiles, and blasts their wiles
for he in heaven does dwell.
For he does Zion love,
and walks her Towers round,
Proud Babylon, falls from her throne,
God will her props confound.
Her Cedars God will fell,
her Sea, and springs dry up;
For Zions sake, God will her make
to drink on's sevenfoul'd cup.
Be thou exalt'd O God,
all humane Glory stain:
That so thy Son, on every Throne,
may then sole Monarch reign.
53 Hymn.
An hymn of the turning away
Of Gods anger from his people.
As Psalm, 85.1, 3. and Isaiah 12, 1. -- 5. (In partly Complaint, partly
Comfort.)

HOw long Lord shall thine anger burn
against thy Pasture sheep?
O let thy favor soon return:
still do not fury keep.
This wastes our life, and spirits away
our sins upon us bind,
From it our foes presume to say
our comforter's unkind.
Oh turn to us thy smiling face,
return our hearts again;
And turn thine hand on them apace
that will not Christ should reign.
Then when thy fury's turned away,
and God us comfort brings
Thence we with joy shall waters draw,
from our Salvations springs.
Then Sion, with her King, shall shout,
over Babels helpers all;
and all her Children, round about,
do sing at Babels fall.
The Lamb then sitting on the Throne,
them by clear springs will guide,
And wipe away the tears (each one)
that from our eyes, did glide.
54 Hymn.
The Virgins sigh for their Bridegroom.

Matthew. 25.1. -- 7.

YE Virgins chaste, go forth in have
your Lamps light up and trim,
For by and by that midnight cry
will call you to meet him.
Your dear Bridegroom's about to come,
and warns you to prepare,
For it is unkind, to sleep behind.
if you wise, Virgins are.
Let grace give light (as Oil) most bright
to all the world about,
For if you sleep, you cannot well keep
your Lamps from going out.
Then wrath and woe will be unto
such slumbring Virgins; when
The Bridegrooms door is shut; no more
but five go in often.
But O the Feast the glorious rest,
and joy that Marriage day
Shall bring each guest that's to be blessed
his face to see for aye.
For sure with fat and delicate,
both Wine and marrow rare,
That Bridgeroom will them feed, and fill
that do for him prepare.
Then come away, O do not stay,
to the wedding O make have,
For you er'e long shall sing the song,
he is come! Halelujah.
55 Hymn.
A groan from our evil times, for better.

as Isai. 32.1, 2. and Psalm. 12.1.

HElp Lord for upright ones do fail,
the faithful cease and those
That men's iniquities do bewail,
are preyes to cruel foes,
We wait and long for Righteousness,
and yet no good appears,
Our hopes, of healing times, grow less,
that still augments our fears.
Judgment turns back, no equity,
nor truth can entrance have;
Oh wake thy spirit of prophecy,
to raise them from their grave.
For sighs of poor that are oppressed
now Lord let Christ arise;
To set's in safe and quiet rest,
from all that them despise.
Then wisdom, knowledge, and Gods fear,
our times establish shall;
And Christ both Sword, and Scepter bear
to root out wicked all.
He shall be then our hidding place,
from winds, and stormy rain,
As shadow of a Rock; his grace,
shall hidden Lambs sustain.
The Lord his God, to him shall give,
his Father David's Throne,
And he for aye (with Saints) shall live,
and rule, war, judge alone.
56 Hymn.
A cry for Righteousness in the Earth.

as Psalm. 94.1, 2.

O God to whom vengeance belongs,
lift up thy self again,
Render rewards for all the wrongs
thy Saints on Earth sustain.
For they blaspheme thy holy name
and all the Earth oppress;
Thy holy Laws, and righteous cause,
they brand for wickedness.
The thrones of wickedness still forge,
their mischiefs for a Law,
Thy people for their duty, scourge,
and cause Prophets withdraw.
Lift up thy feet, Oh come again
our deso'late case behold,
All that thy Kingdom do disdain,
repay them seven fold.
Then prisoners in the pit that lie,
and Prophets in the cave,
Souls that do under the Altar cry,
just vengeance all will have.
Our Isles shall feast, while whore and beast
the Lord shall judge and slay,
But Sion Sing in Christ her King,
for aye. Halelujah.
57 Hymn.
The mourning solitary Dove
For Christ, pants, and is sick of love.
I allude to the Title Psalm. 56.1. (i. e.) the mute solitary Dove, having lost
her mate.

O Lord how is my joy exchanged,
to mourning, like a Dove;
My harp upon the Willow's hanged,
because i have lost my love.
I wander (bird-like) solitary,
seeking my paradise,
O for an Ark, or Sanctuary,
in Christ, where true rest lies.
My sin in vale of death, me clouds,
I mourning, (Sun-less) go,
Temptations me pursue in crowds,
my sins too; there is my woe.
To thee I cry Lord, from these deeps,
(deeps unto deeps, do call;)
If off all earthly joy thou strips;
O be instead of all.
Lord if thou through these clouds will look,
and from this pit me move;
My beauty, (that had me forsook)
returns, winged, like a Dove.
Lord unto Sion-mount show grace,
Jerus'lem build again;
Christ's Ark of presence, with us place;
in's glory; aye, to reign.
58 Hymn.
Lord (cry's the 'fflicted soul;) advance
On me thy lightsome countenance.
(as in Psalm. 4.6.)

THe light Lord of thy countenance,
be pleased to let me see;
So full a good, none can advance;
may that once shine on me.
For clouds of darkness me o'respread,
sin hangs my hopes in doubt;
Oh Sun of righteousness, me lead,
for now my Candle's out.
My Lord that erst his face did show;
in clouds did disappear,
When he will return, I do not know,
my hopes are mixed with fear.
Why are thy visits rare become?
(and often i have none at all.)
Oh now let faith thee welcome home;
my sloth rouse by this call.
Afflictions from thee pity crave;
Oh be not distant still,
Descend and visit this my cave;
and with thy light it fill.
Then shall I rise, and open mine eyes,
and turn my Thorns to Bay;
No night so long, but morning song
succeeds: let us hope for day.
Our Lord (at last) through clouds will have,
him every eye shall see;
But only they, that on him stay,
in that sight blessed shall be. Amen.
59 Hymn.
When God the cry of prayers attends,
For long delays, he will make's amends.
OH thou that prayers do hear,
how long will thou forbear,
To listen to the prayers that do
proceed from Saints sincere.
TO avenge thy peoples wrong
do not defer so long
Our jubilee, at last let us see,
and found our joyful song.
Hard things thy Saints have seen,
afflicted long have been
Lord by this rain keep and maintain
thy heritage fresh and green.
Let Rome's proud Hierarchy,
under thy judgment lie;
Then Saints shall sing, for Sions King
shall be extolled most high.
Then God will work his wonder,
old heavens dissolve with thunder,
His fire devours all Laws, and powers
that bound Religion under.
Then all the meek, and poor
praises shall sing before
The lambs high Throne; for he alone
their comforts will restore.
Ye heavens rejoice again,
let Earth be glad, for Then
The Lord has bles't, his flock with rest;
have Lord even so. Amen.
60 Hymn.
Thus shall our Faith triumph on high,
Over all the power o'th enemy.
Psalm. 83.12. ult.

OH thou (most high) whose councels are,
both deep, faithful, and true;
Against our foes thine arm make bare,
frustrate, and them subdue,
Thy Saints (at thy command) have prayed,
this sixteen hundred year,
Thy Kingdom, come (so long delayed)
Oh let it is time, draw near.
Behold how Romes Achitophels
for Babylon conspire,
To make our Isle (in which Christ dwells)
an hearth for Martyrs fire.
O Lord no longer silent be,
arise them disappoint;
Saviors on this our Mount lets see,
here our Messiah 'noint.
Them and their Nobles make (even all)
like Oreb, Zeeb likewise,
By their own counsels, let them fall,
their plots; themselves surprise.
Then from our Isles shall sound new Songs
of great Salvation,
When Christ revenges all the wrongs,
done to this Nation.
The heavens likewise, shall harmonize,
the Earth shall echo 'gain;
On Babels ruins shall arise,
to Christ, a glorious reign.
Then sing aloud, for in this cloud
our King and judge descends,
And with him Saints, and Angels crowd;
Gods mystery so ends. Amen.
61 Hymn.
From all that dare Gods throne withstand,
God to defend it lays his hand.
as Exodus 17. ult.

A glorious high and holy Throne,
Gods Sanctuary's called;
He in his glory sits thereon
Saints here are safely wall d,
Thence he will with vengeance just and right,
plead Zions bleeding cause,
And Rome judge (as the old Edomite)
when the Isles recieve his Laws.
For Gods hand still on's throne is laid,
and swears he will it maintain,
His Sword, and Scepter firm, are stayed:
to war with him's in-vain.
Ye Sons, of Zion bee'nt afraid,
your Lord of Hosts is great;
He weapon (and it is former) made,
he can all charms, defeat.
Against thee Lord no wisdom is,
no might, that match him can;
Thy purpose never goes amiss;
but help is vain, from man.
Then all ye holy ones rejoice,
Angels, and Saints proclaim
With harmony of heart, and voice,
the glory of his name.
That Sun of Righteousness, his beams
the Lord soon will display,
Whose healing wings; his cooling streams,
all pain, and thirst shall 'lay. Amen.
62 Hymn.
Gods presence mischiefs all prevents,
And with blessings of good, presents.
THe Lord's our King, and Shepherd great
he dwells, and raigns in Zion;
And thence he will craft and spite defeat,
thence roar as Judahs Lion.
If he in meekness, wrath delay;
then rouse him up, who dare?
And if he will ramp upon his prey,
no mortals high he will spare.
He Is the defense still, to his flock,
though Wolves assault them may,
And (when among them) stands their rock,
in dark, and cloudy day.
To Fatherless, and Widows too,
his help, becomes their Song,
In Joseph's Prison house also,
his presence goes along.
Do we through Vales of death's black shade,
(as Souls bewildred) walk?
His rod, and staff, shall (both) be made
comforts, to us to talk.
O Son of God (mount Zion's Lamb)
in glory have to appear;
Thy number call; inscribe that name
Jehovah, Shammah, there.
63 Hymn.
The visions of these latter days,
This hymn to Saints (in part) displayes.
OF all the sights, since man on Earth
the almighty did create;
That our Messiah should have birth,
this was surpassing great,
His coming first was poor and low
that few did him esteem:
But at 's return all is foes shall bow,
all Angels worship him.
Oh how the sight of Christ will feed:
our hopes of sin forgiven,
Here may we read (what grace decreed)
our just title to heaven.
To see all is enemies trembling stand,
below, under his feet,
But mourners, stand at his right hand,
O joyful sight and sweet!
To such a sight Lord me direct
here (at a distance) grace me,
(Amongst Elect,) him to affect,
that shall at last embrace me,
One glance is joy ineffable,
a smile glory in the bud,
Oh then, full sight, how comfortable,
none ever understood.
Then those in vale of death that sat,
as Pilgrims mourning long,
Shall come from solitude in state;
to Sion, with new song.
Then Virgins, followers, of the Lamb,
shall see that marriage day,
And in his name sing, and proclaim
victory; Halelujah.
64 Hymn.
This is that plant of high renown,
To whom all Scepters must bow down.
A plant (or branch) of great renown,
in Gods Paradise is,
It Is royal fruits, O Lord shake down
that them my lips may kiss.
This rose of Sharon may I smell,
O how 'twill me delight,
His beauty does the Sun excel,
yea it is ten Suns, for bright,
His head with glori's ever crowned
his lips most full of grace,
His wrath Devils and men confound;
all joy lies in his face.
His hand, a two edged Sword does bear.
his words, meek and most sweet;
Under his shade I sat; and there
prostrate did kiss his feet.
Lord make me so to know thy love,
love to return again;
From the same root and spring to move
(and in thy love) remain.
If I in darkness sit, i will hope
thou to me wilt be light,
A door of hope thou wilt to me o'pe,
and place me in thy sight.
Lord do not long defer thy word,
once more, let Saints thee see:
But if thou yet delay'st; afford,
to take us up to thee.
65 Hymn.
Here does the sou'l it self, excite
On Christ to fix its whole delight.
O love the Lord ye holy ones;
your strong Redeemer own,
Who for you has prepared thrones:
(not for himself alone.)
Nothing in us, (Lord) first did move thee:
save guilt and wretchedness,
But we have motives strong to love thee;
yet cannot like love, express.
If we to other lovers look,
wee're justly disappointed;
Nay cursed, b'ecause we him forsook
that's Gods chos'n-anointed.
Oh how this look (though from an hell,)
does up (as Jona) buoy,
And in dry desert, digs a well
of Everlasting joy.
Oh come desire of Nations, have;
now let thy Kingdom come:
Leap over all our mountains, fast:
and tread down whorish Rome.
See how our Isles wait for thy Laws,
and thrones of judgment just;
Revive thy work, worship, and cause:
in thee the Gentiles trust.
Then for the precious blood of Saints
shall come righteous vengeance,
And songs of joy, cease all complaints:
mourners on thrones advance.
Sions Redeemer shall appear,
before him the lofty bend;
All that with him, the cross did bear,
their joy never shall end.
66 Hymn.
When God his Christ from Heaven reveals:
The cross no more the Saints conceals.
YE that have mourners been,
and long-some troubles seen:
Lift up our head, be comforted,
your hope's are budding green.
Rejoice in Christ your King,
ye birds of Paradise sing:
The Cedars tall begin to fall,
your Lords now on the wing.
Your Faith (on's cross) may spy
him meek and most comely,
Yet suffering glory's but transitory,
he will reign eternally.
The more he was despised,
the more he will now be prized,
No might can stand, against his command,
that mischief have devised.
But with what joy shall we
our strong Redeemer see?
Sit Judge and King, when every thing
from sin, and curse is free.
To's Laws, Rulers shall bow,
or stoop at's feet, a low
Dagon and Baal 'fore's ark shall fall;
all the Isles him fear, and know.
Oh time flee fast away,
Lord have that blessed day;
That when our King comes, we may sing
Hosannahs, Halelujah. Amen.
67 Hymn.
Here Is love pleading with God in the dark,
For the return of the absent Ark.
(as in Jer. 8.19.) and Ps. 80.3, 7, 14, 19.

HOw long Lord will thou hide thy face?
which yet thou bidst us seek:
Why should thy haters thee disgrace,
insulting o^'e thy meek.
Our foes reproach us very much
asking us, where is your God?
This is the loss our heart does touch,
God's gone from's old abode.
Will not our foes ride over our head,
and soon, of all, bereave us?
And the ark to Dagon captive lead;
if once our God should leave us.
Oh now is the crown fallen from our head,
if once our God depart,
And all Religious hopes lie dead,
(in lifeless forms) at the heart.
But when will God return? O when,
and cause his face to shine?
These Lions to their final den,
O Lord (at last) confine.
Then shall Gods lambs feed in their place,
the spirit of Grace descend;
Our King in Zion show's bright face;
and Babels Kingdom, end.
68 Hymn.
The spouse by Bacha's Vale of tears,
Thirsts, till in Zion she appears.
FOr God, the living God,
my Soul pants and enquires,
In Vales I cry on mountains high,
I utter strong desires.
I seek, yet find him not,
asking of watchmen all,
I run, yet find, i am still behind,
and he far from my call.
Time was, my Lebanon,
did glorious Cedars yield,
For Christ my Spouse, that his own house,
himself (not man) might build.
But now my walls are broke
Foxes upon them walk,
My Lord is gone off from his throne,
from whence he once did talk.
But yet those Mountains tell,
good news to the desolate,
My Lord to reign, comes once again,
for this i will gladly wait.
With mercies he will return,
both Babels throne, to waste,
And to refresh our Wilderness;
do this O Jesus! have.
69 Hymn.
The Soul with pain seeks Christ: at last,
She finds, and so she holds him fast.
Cant. 3.1, 2, 3.

LIke to the flames of heavenly fire,
so is thy love O God!
Though It first descend, yet 'twill aspire
to fix there it is abode.
Delays or distance blow't not out,
though sin full often does grieve him,
Yet I of mine, (not his) love doubt;
(that good report i will give him.)
His loves first call with me did gain,
that did my heart command,
A visit now is hard to obtain;
in dry, and weary Land:
But O who understands his way;
to love, yet anger faign,
TO eclipse, and after beams display,
lift up, cast down again:
This Lord! (I by thy help) resolve,
Though now in the dark, I sit,
On thee firm hope still to revolve,
and to thy will submit.
Art thou withdrawn, i will yet pursue;
when slain, in the i will trust;
The hopes of better days (like dew)
shall even revive my dust.
70 Hymn.
The hidden face of God regained,
Breeds vows, and hopes he will be retained.
IN Bacha's Vale of tears,
(I thirst,) did pant, and grope,
At last appears (above my fears)
a blessed door of hope.
My Lord was wondrous kind,
for though he angry was,
Yet now I find, he is well inclined,
my trespass by to pass.
When first to me he came,
he knocked long at my door;
Blessed be his name (I may't proclaim)
his patience me forbore.
Now, if at's door I stay,
why should I not submit?
Thus hope I may (without delay)
at last, he will open it.
With mercies, many and great,
he will return again;
Plots he will defeat, his work complete,
and over our Isles shall reign.
His Tabernacle then
amongst us he will place, and hold;
Yea once again, from righteous men
rebukes shall clean be roul'd.
His candlesticks shall be
(for's walk) of Gold most pure;
Thrice blessed is he, that him shall see,
that day shall aye endure.
71 Hymn.
The afflicted Soul' and Spouse complaint,
That her beloved mate does want.
(like the 102 Psalm. title, etc.)

TOuching thy pleasant Vineyard, Lord
bought and by thee brought hither,
How sad is it, that men abhorred,
Should cut, and make it wither.
Good room thou for it, here did make
and caused it fill the Land;
And gath'red'st stones out, for its sake,
to plant it with thy hand.
Now when for's fruits God came to look,
but lost his expectation,
He left it wast, that Boars might pluck,
and make 't a desolation.
Oh barren, most degenerate plant!
(once) of a noble Vine,
That his return the Lord would grant,
and cause his face to shine.
Our desert then shall spring again,
and bud like Jesse's branch;
Our Lord will come (at last) to reign;
his Vine's-bleeding to staunch:
Light to impart to souls forsak'n,
to dry bones, lively dews,
Virgins secure (asleep) to awak'n,
to tell-mourners, good news.
The afflicteds prayers, he will then regard,
to Babel, blood repay;
TO Saints small and great, a just reward;
Lord! have that glorious day.
71 Hymn.
Of Zion's King, this Hymn let us sing.

2 Samuel 23, 3, 5. Isai. 60.17, 18.

THe Rock of Israel said,
who will his word fulfill,
All knees shall bow, for all do owe
subjection to his will.
This earth (through sin) accursed
with blessings shall increase,
Hill's barren soil, wine, milk and oil
shall yield: plenty with peace.
Our own God will us bless,
men shall no more oppress
Officers all, we peace shall call,
exactors, righteousness.
No Lion shall be there,
Christ Lambs to death to bring
His righteous Laws, (pleading their cause)
shall make the Widows sing.
Lord let thy Kingdom come
and holy will be done;
That Babylon may have no throne,
let whore and beast be gone.
Praise waits for thee O Lord
In Zion; joyful songs;
Fulfill thy word, furbish thy Sword,
to thee vengeance belongs.
Then Halelujahs we
will ever sing to thee,
With righteousness the Isles oh bless
and from proud Nimrods free.
72 Hymn.
The Spouse enquires where she may find,
Her well beloved Christ, most kind.
ALL ye my Lord that know
Or love; hark to my moan,
Ye watchmen all, to you I call,
Show where my love is gone.
What means his distance now,
when love has made him dear?
What win my heart, and then depart?
O this is hard to bear!
Or why's he gone, or fled?
(my sin is sure the cause;)
That once he came, (blessed be his name,)
how much his love still draws?
Where is that blessed place?
in Heaven; they see his face;
That way therefore, I must adore,
rev'rent, and's feet embrace.
In hopes i will wait the day,
when he will no longer stay.
But Clouds dispel, and tidings tell
of joy to last always.
Till then my heart shall be
his principality,
But men, and devils, sin and all evils,
at last shall vanquished lie.
73 Hymn.
This calls to humble Lamentation,
When God departs, from Soul, or Nation.
ALL ye from whom your Lord so dear,
is grieved away and gone,
That formerly you felt so nigh,
and seek, sigh, and bemoan.
Where once his light has on us shone,
and after is obscured,
Eclipst, and gone; that loss alone
is woeful to b' endured.
It Is greater woe, well to have been;
to enjoy, and after loose,
Gods lightsome face, of which (alas)
the comfort, few that knows.
Now (cries the soul) my Sun is set
my plants wither, and dye,
My hopes forlorn, faith's overborn,
waste does my Garden lie.
When he did first knock at my door
I thought he came to abide,
But I unkind sure caused his mind,
to ali'nate, and hide.
Now if I can his visit gain,
or smile, (one day in seven,)
My hopes again revive a main,
with some foretasts of heaven.
But when Lord Jesus wilt' return,
revive thy work; O then
Our Wilderness shall praise and bless,
thy Grace and power. Amen.
74 Hymn.
The Soul refresh with cheer divine,
Does t'its appart'ments rest incline,
Longing its burdens, to resign.
as Cant. 5, 1. -- 5.

LOrd I have long wandered abroad,
from Mountain unto Hill,
Now (pilgrim, like) seek rest, in God;
subject to thy good will.
In 'lonesome deserts though I bleat,
(often) weary, faint and sad,
Yet finest wheat of heaven, I eat,
Rock-hony makes me glad.
My burdens, sin, affliction, scorn,
Often cause my soul bow down.
(To ease my heart) himself has born;
he bought; I wear the Crown.
The fiery Serpents, often me fright,
I sing with thorns at breast;
My faith (at last) gets Pisgah sight,
in hopes of the Land of rest.
My faith and sense, combat together
and both their weapons try,
Which shall obtain, one knows not whether?
till Christ gives victory,
Return my soul unto thy rest,
take shade, in weary land;
They that this refuge find, are blessed:
for rain, and storm's at hand.
A joyful rest Lord does remain,
for all thy scatt'red ones,
A glorious King shall sit and reign,
and they (with him) on thrones.
75 Hymn.
When Saints of drought, and heat complain,
The Shepherd answers thus again.
Cant. 1.5, 6.

LOrd when my day at first begun,
and grace on me did shine;
I quickly felt a scorching Sun,
upon my tender Vine.
Hence (in appearance) I put on
a black and sable hue:
Oh when will thou let fall upon
my herbs of Grace thy dew.
This fi'ry Dragons raging heat
peirces my aching head,
Tempts me (like Jonah) often to fret,
(or wither) which I dread.
My Shepherds voice (instant) I heard,
standing behind my wall;
Said! flee to the Rock, be not afeard;
I knew't and took his call.
Though Clouds eclipse thy morning Sun,
and evidence is not bright;
At noon's, hot persecution;
cool evening, shall give light.
I am thy Sun, shadow and shield,
in me alone's thy rest,
Here light, and safety both I yield;
thus all the flocks are blessed.
A King most just shall reign er'e long,
him must his foes adore,
His Spouse singing her nuptial-Song,
then heat smites her no more.
76 Hymn.
The Soul, and Spouse, tempted with heat,
For cool refreshing gales entreat.
Eying that promise, Isai. 4.6.8. Song c. 25.6.

HOw long Lord shall this heat
of persecution beat,
Which makes me pray, shorten my day;
or make my Sun retreat.
Afflictions make me look
like bottles in the smoke,
My heart (alas!) withers as grass,
my fruitful branch is broke.
Yet Lord to thee I cry,
under thy shade I fly,
Thy healing wing, shall cause me sing,
and down in safety lie.
Though Zion's Sons have lain
among pots, (in vile disdain)
He has foretold, her wings, with gold,
he will beautify again.
Man's rage shall cease, and fall;
with noise of strangers all,
The branch (or Sons) of terrible ones,
shall break against the wall;
Then storms and heat shall ceases
Lambs feed, and lie in peace,
Then Babels Sun shall set at noon,
her torments have no ease.
Sing ye distressed, and poor,
now look to weep no more,
Your Sun does rise, lift up your eyes,
and before his throne adore.
77 Hymn.
When vials, Babel-Rome, consume.
Cool and refreshing times then come.
LOrd hasten Babels threat'n'd doom
for Zion sake afford,
Cool and refreshing gales to come,
from the presence of the Lord.
Why should thy Lambs be led aside,
and veiled from their right way,
From fellowship with thy holy bride
with false companions, stray.
The Pastors that thy flock have led
as wolves, have sucked their blood
The rest with tears, (or poison) fed,
dispersed (alone) in the wood.
But yet a Shepherd shall arise,
a Branch of great Renown,
His flock to save, from 's Enemies
and sway Scepter, and Crown.
His times will restitution bring
unto the whole creation,
His flock (from wilderness) shall sing,
for peace in every Nation.
The lofty shall be brought full low,
the lowly raised on high,
The Lord will righteous vengeance show
on Romes conspiracy.
Christ's word the Tyrants Sword will break
that often his lambs did gore!
To the heathen then peace he will speak,
and reign for evermore.
78 Hymn.
The Pilgrim now with Christ at rest,
His joy and triumph thus expressed.
LOrd I a stranger was,
and sojourner below:
Defiled with sin; till Christ came in,
thy Grace to make me know.
I sought in this world, rest
but found't labor in vain,
My life I spent To small content,
till I a Christ could gain.
My sin and misery.
became his time of love;
Though in my blood, he meant my good,
himself did's bowels move.
I was a wandering Sheep,
bleating in deserts strayed,
Till he me sought; and home me brought
me safe on's shoulders laid.
He fed m' in pastures green,
me led, by waters calm,
Sweet Wines, I gate, and down I sat
at's feet; and sang my psalm.
Lord what am I; Oh whence
is all this love to me?
That thou should take me home, and make
one of thy Family.
But when my Lord returns,
to's second Marriage feast,
He Will then admit all is lambs to sit
on's Throne, in endless rest.
79 Hymn.
The Pilgrim welcomed, (as a King)
By Christ, does further praises sing.
(As Deuter. 26.5. -- 11.)

LOrd when a Syrian-stranger, poor
ready to perish quite,
(I called) and begging at thy door:
was pitty'd in thy sight.
Thou brough't me in, and I was fed
with water, wine, and milk,
Thy robes of righteousness me clad,
more rich than royal silk.
When in's own Chamber I was placed
my King one secret told,
On's throne I should be with him graced
with his crown richer than gold.
And as a sign he would defeat,
and break Levi'thans head,
And give his flesh to's folk for meat
and's Manna for their bread.
As I mused on this mystery;
I quickly heard a voice,
Angels sang praise in melody,
so I 'gan to rejoice.
Now blessing, honor, to the Lamb
pow're, wisdom, riches, praise,
Hosannahs be to's glorious name:
and joyful songs always.
Now as I was about to sing,
I heard one on the throne,
Bad silence, while I heard my King
thus triumph sing: alone.
80 Hymn.
The Lambs triumph, that did obtain,
Both victory and our right to reign.
As Psalm. 40.7. John 17. Prove. 8.31.

LOrd I before the World began,
with thee in glory sat,
Yet came in form of flesh humane,
thine to redintigrate.
That body thou prepared, I gave
to death, an offering pure,
And victor did, ascend from grave,
'thine, lasting life to ensure.
To them I have thy will made known,
and will more of them call;
On them my blood and spirit bestown,
with me abide they shall.
And I that for them freely bled;
over sin will make them reign,
I Will for them plead; bless them with bread,
and see them once again.
That glory thou to me have given,
I freely share to them:
To reign on Earth, first, (after heaven)
in the new Jerusalem.
(This heard) with adoration great,
before his blessed throne;
I fell, at the foot of's mercy seat,
and praised the Lamb alone:
Amen (said I) blessing, and pow're,
let all things give to thee;
Both Saints, and Angels, day and hour
to all Eternity.
81 Hymn.
A glorious feast, Christ will provide,
Then lead to's rest his holy Bride.
Isa. 25.8, 9. -- Apoc. 19.7, 8.

OH Shepherd of the Sheep,
thine is both flock, and fold;
For thou have sought them out, and bought,
with price far above gold.
For them thou wil'st provide
a Feast of red wine, pure,
Most sweet of taste, yet best at last,
which feast shall aye, endure.
Mean while thy Vineyard thou
(though naked and forelorn)
Do safely guard, with watch and ward,
and wat'rest every morn.
Those boars, and foxes all,
(that humane judgment scapes)
Take in thy toil, that made such spoil*
of thy Vines-tender Grapes.
Then shall our winter end,
rains cease, in pleasant spring
Sweet flowers appear, then we shall hear
the Birds, and Turtles sing.
Oh blessed they that are called,
(with the Lambs Bride) to be guest,
For now each head is crowned and led
to's mansions: aye to rest.
Then must the Lamb resign
his Kingdom medi'atory,
Gods mystery, shall finished be,
i the Fathers Royal Glory.
82 Hymn.
When in this world, our Lord shall reign,
These happy things, shall then obtain.
(As in Psalm. 2.6, 9. -- and 72.3, 4, 12. Is. 16.5.)

WHen God shall Christ his Son anoint,
on Zions holy hill;
Salvation thence he will appoint,
For walls and bulwarks still.
The great shall then no terror be.
the good to overawe;
And force them into corners flee,
For keeping of Gods Law.
The vile no more account shall bear,
Tyrants no more oppress;
No peircing bramble, just ones tear,
None rise by wickedness.
But right, and truth, ascends the Throne,
to 'ffront iniquity;
And reason, justice, faith in one
united; shall agree.
Then worship pure, shall not endure
foggs superstitious;
Nor scarlet whore, shall more allure
to Babel, for Gods house.
Scripture our Royal guide, and Law
the word, the Sword shall blunt:
(Vengeance shall horns and mitres saw)
the Nimrods cease to hunt.
Thus Heaven, and Earth, to joy shall break,
(a joy that ends distress,)
He for the meek will judgment seek,
and hasten righteousness. Amen.
83 Hymn.
This Hymn enumerates the kinds
Of mercies: but the sum who finds?
As Psalm. 40.5. and 139.17.

TO God let us all sing praise
that by his word all made,
Thus heaven above; and all that move
on Earth, their being had.
For Sun that lights the day,
for Moon, and glittering stars,
That in the night foreshew us light,
(as signs) of peace, or wars.
For the Earth and all its hosts,
the Sea and what is therein.
All subject stand by Gods command
to man: though fallen by sin.
For Hail, and Rain, and Dew,
For stormy winds also;
For these fulfill Gods righteous will.
When men against it go.
For day and also night,
Summer, and Winter's frost,
(Contraries do Gods wisdom show
and often profit us most.)
But Lord what is fallen man?
dominion such to have,
Over all things here; and triumph there
with Christ, over death, and grave.
Consume Lord from thy Earth
destructive wicked men;
Oh come again, resume thy reign;
come quickly! Lord Amen.
84 Hymn.
When once on Christ we fix our eyes,
'Twill make us all this world despise.
On Apoc. 12.1.

A wonder great to John was shown]
a Church arrayed most sweet,
With the Sun (most clear) 12 Stars her crown,
but the Moon under her feet.
Oh blissful sight (once) glorious,
(now to behold most rare)
Our times show us not such a Spouse,
which dare with her compare.
When all is loss and dung for Christ,
(unworthy our esteem,)
Herein true pie'ty does consist,
Such Christ came to redeem.
Lord why should Saints on things below
their fond affections place;
Since he is ascended, and we know
we are foll'wing him apace;
who will show us any good? men say,
(but real good mistake,)
Lord of thy countenance, one bright ray
on us to shine, O make.
Oh this will glad, and cheer us more
than Corn, Oil, or new Wine,
The glory of this world 'twill lowre
to taste the joys divine.
When Idol-Dagon-self falls down,
Faith does this world disdain:
Earths Princes lose glory 'nd crown,
now Jesus comes to's reign.
85 Hymn.
The Bride with Christ unite'd by Faith,
Thus in communion sings; and says.
O thou most worthy to be sought!
thy praises we will tell,
Being into thy Chambers brought,
Our great Immanuel.
If one days fello'ship be so sweet
here under's cross and sorrow,
Or to sit pensive at his feet?
what joys succeed in the morrow?
Oh who can tell what joyful Songs
may here be sung 'ith' night?
What triumph's then, with heavenly throngs,
have Saints in perfect light?
To be espoused to Christ alone,
is unconceived grace:
What Is then to sit up in his Throne,
or still to see his face?
With Abr'am Isa'ck, Jacob too,
to consort in one chore,
The Gentile Nations, with the Jew
all singing evermore!
To see vile men, bundl'd, and thrown
down from Christ judgment seat,
All Clouds and Storms, quite over blown,
and only good ones, great.
Who can those future joys display?
the pleasures of that River,
And City new, where God will stay,
and Saints with him for ever.
86 Hymn.
When Jesus judge, and King shall reign,
He Will Truth and Right fully maintain.
Psalm. 96.13, Lo! he comes, etc.

OUr Lord and King shall come in have,
the flame devours before him,
Angels his Char'ots moving fast,
all bowing down adore him.
His Saphir Throne just judgment is,
his Scepter Righteousness,
His sentence unto Saints gives bliss
to the wicked pains endless.
With him in judgment Saints preside,
where the wicked shall not stand,
His flaming eyes they ca'n't abide
but fall under his hands.
Oh how the mighty trembling look,
through horror, shame, and fear,
When from his face that last rebuke
and sentence they shall hear.
They that before did judge the Lamb,
are doomed, with a [depart,]
That dreadful curse (they wished) God damn,
that word will break their heart.
The just shall greatly sing for joy,
when they his vengeance view,
For whore and beast will he destroy,
that judges strong and true.
Greatness (before him) yields no plea,
repriving execution;
Before whose white throne, heaven, earth, and Sea,
all suffer dissolution.
87 Hymn.
To the new Jerus'lem, and her King,
All nations must their glory bring.
After that Isaiah 60 Apoc. 21.

YE Nations all, and Kings mortal;
this Prophecy attend,
Your earthly glory, vile, trnasitory,
here fades, and's at its end.
Most glorious things the Scripture sings,
of the City of God so fair,
That down shall move from God above
in all dimensions square.
Her King's the Lamb, that built the same,
who ever lives, her light
None dwell within defiled with sin;
all gems most perfect bright.
Her pearly wall, and Towers so tall,
Salvation styled is;
Angels it guard, (with watch and ward)
the City of God is this.
Here only Saints b' inhabitants
that with the Lamb shall talk.
Through streets of Gold; (thus John us told)
all is Pilgrims sing and walk.
Here runs for ever, that clearest River
(all pleasures, joys for aye)
Oh blessed all they, here dwell, and stay
Jehovah (called) Shammah.
88 Hymn.
The Saints ultimate glorious state,
Admired, but none can it relate.
( 1 Cor. 2.9. and Apoc. 22.3, 4.)

OH all ye Saints that have a right,
to that last glorious state;
Triumph and sing, and take delight,
whilst you it contemplate.
To see God as we are seen, and know;
is (here) grace budding bliss,
But what it is (there is now can show)
to see him as he is.
To view our Lord in flesh, these twain
natures unite in one;
To see his wounds our way to reign,
and sitting in his Throne.
To taste the comforts of Gods spirit,
in their original;
Without desertion, to inherit
Christ's fellowship with all.
To join consort with Angels pure
in heavenly harmony,
With joy and praise, one hymn to 'dure
all 'long, Eternity.
But eye never saw, no ear yet heard
but on'ly thine O God!
The things ineffable, are prepared:
in that pleasant abode.
89 Hymn. (A 2d. part of the ult. glory and joys above.)
Now pain, crying and misery,
Cease, when the Saints Gods Face do see
Rev. 22.1, 2.

OH blissful glorious state!
what words can this define?
No terrene pleasures, celestial treasures,
nor how sweet? can divine.
O perfect sinless Church!
of holy firstborn ones,
What joys attend, (without an end)
those bright Eternal thrones?
Does sight of Friends refresh?
here is all with full content;
Here Gods own Plants, Christ with the Saints,
dwell near no more to absent.
Do springs (Rivers) delight,
or Gardens, walks so green?
In that one thing (Jesus our King)
may all (and more) be seen.
Do ordinances yield,
a well of Life most clear?
What life shall we attain, when he
in's glory shall appear?
Music will charm the ear,
put sense t'an ecstasy,
Here one sweet Song, shall last as long,
as vast Eternity.
Now grief turns into joy;
faith (hopes) run 'to fruition,
Now only love, and joys, us move,
int' naked perfect Vision.
90 Hymn.
The Spouse desires of Christ some signs,
To prove that is heart to her inclines.
Commenting on Cant. 1.1, 7.

LOrd give m' a reconciling kiss,
me to embrace incline:
For (sure) thy loving kindness is
far better than sweet wine.
As ointment pow'r'd forth, is thy name,
(that gives most fragrant smell)
The Virgin-upright-ones proclaim,
therefore they love thee well.
Lord! draw, and after thee we will run
the Kings chambers into;
Though black, (by hot and scortch Sun,)
yet comely i am also.
Tell me O thou my Soul does love,
where thou thy food do take
And rest at noon, (under thy grove)
in fafety thine do make?
My love to thee from thine, did flow
(when time of love came in)
And shall I now wander? oh no!
Nor sociate with sin?
Such love does ravish Lord thy heart,
(so will thou taken be,)
Oh never may the affections start,
that knit my soul to thee.
Cursed with a Maranath' is he
that loves not Christ the anointed,
And over all longs not him to see
for 's Zion, King appointed.
91 Hymn.
Hark how the faithful will begin
Welcome: when he to feed comes in.
(as Psalm. 24.7 -- 9. 2d. part.

YE lasting gates stand open, and
admit your glorious King
Let him not knock without or stand:
that does his welcome bring.
Why stand'st thou (blessed Lord) without?
break in, stay not to knock:
Thy key of love can ope' (no doubt)
each door, with bars, and lock.
But Lord I am unworthy, thou
under my Roof, should come,
Yet since my heart's thy house, I Will vow
to bid thee welcome home.
To entertain this King, who is able?
much less to do it well;
O Spikenard, (now my King's at Table)
send forth thy fragrant smell.
That Wine of's pomgranate i will break
(the same he brought) i will bring:
That caused my lips-(asleep) to speak,
and from the dust to sing;
I am my well belov'd's, he is mine,
among Lillies (white) he feeds,
Till day dawns; I with him will dine
over Hills, see, how he speeds.
Make have oh King, be like a Roe
come running, fly away;
Confound thy foes, make Princes know
thy reign abides for aye.
92 Hymn.
The Spouse fed of Christ's providore,
Beggs, Lord, such food give evermore.
TO the heavenly Court I went,
a visiting my King;
He knew't before, and ope't the door,
I came his fruits to bring.
I greatly was in doubt,
how I should entrance gain
Yet in I went, for word he sent,
he would me entertain.
When ent'red in, I found
a noble welcome home;
And all that came; (once blind, and lame)
yet for more guests was room:
The hungry, naked, poor,
yea blind and dumb, all sung,
(All healed, and clad) most princely fed,
his house with praises, rung.
Then I (for company,)
my Songs could not restrain,
That he should smile, on one so vile
and with him, cause to reign.
Our entertainment was
of dainties for a King,
The wine he drew, of's Kingdom-new
he did in person bring.
Oh then let every guest,
(though here grieved and oppressed)
Lift up your eyes, yon'd's paradise,
there hope to be at rest.
93 Hymn.
Ye Nations listen to this call,
Before Gods face, ye Isles shall fall.
(1st. Part.)
YE Nations all, attend this call,
for it is the voice of God
His Gospel take, er'e Christ you break,
with his heavy Iron rod.
To God O turn, your Idols burn,
let Dagon fall, before
The Ark of God: where is his abode,
and shall be evermore.
If ye withstand his strecht out hand,
by which he would you save,
It is most right, (in all men's sight,)
that judgmeht ye should have.
For God has sworn, this to perform,
that bow shall every knee,
Confess and know, must high and low,
Christ's glorious Majesty.
(2d. Part.)
LEt God arise, alls Enemies
shall scattered forces be:
Yea all that hate Zions good state,
before Gods face shall flee.
In's holy place, to see Gods face
and hear s most pleasant voice
Will finish Saints grief, and complaints
and make their hearts rejoice.
The Wilderness, joy shall express,
and sing to see that day;
When men of might, quite out of sight
shall perish, and decay.
Gods countenance he will then advance
upon the desert rose;
His dew shall light, on's Lillies white,
that in low Valleys grows.
For his elect he will then erect,
a throne of judgment high,
That he may bring, each lofty thing
before it to search, and try.
Then Saints shall bring their elect King,
near to the ancient of days,
And God with us shall dwell: and thus
we will sing Immortal praise.
94 Hymn.
Is God with us, (the Lord of Hosts,)?
Saints! do not fear, but rather boast.
O Glorious throne on high
on which thou Lord does dwell,
Dispensing grace; to Isra'ls race;
lets mark its footstool well.
Lions are subject'd to it,
before it stand spirits, seav'n
Whose Oil gives light, both day and night
leading to the highest heaven.
What times Saints are afraid,
hence (on a look, or cry,)
God gives command, with mighty hand
to save immediately.
Though thousands hem us in
with camps of men, and devils
Gods with his Church, is as a torch
of fire, devouring evils.
Ye Sons of Belial then,
dig pitts as deep as hell;
No crafts shall stand against Zions Land
whose King's Immanuel.
This Shepherd of Gods flock
is wise, and strong also
With mighty arm his Lambs from harm
to save, and keep them too.
For he amongst them walks
to feed, protect and guide
Who Lord! dares band against thy hand,
When thou art on our side?
Balaam by cursed crafts
sought Israel to devour:
When God will bless; man's wickedness
must fail, for lack of power.
If thou (Lord) stand for us
against us be who dare?
If on thy Son first, wrath begun;
thy foes, how can thou spare?
Shine forth O glorious Sun,
the Land, light' with thy rays,
Oh once again, descend: Amen.
so we will sing thy praise.
95 Hymn.
Ye Angels, Cherubs, Creatures all,
Sing praise in Chores Seraphical.
LEt Angels all that live above,
make a melodious noise,
Cast in your sparks to the flames of love,
with Martyrs; and rejoice.
For he that framed the world, has laid
and fixed all for his glory,
The Wheel of nature, and every creature*
in't's kind, do sing before 'yee.
Praise him ye floods, and waters deep
through which Christ lead his folk,
Let fire, and flame exalt his name,
where once (with three) he would walk.
Could we his inward converse learn,
with them three Nobles stout,
We should admire, that from that fire
(though called) they could come out.
Oh glorify that Lord in the fires
(ye Saints that loves him dear)
Though love you burns, yet from your urns,
a Phoenix shall appear.
When Christ your King, on Zion 'rises,
Babels hot flames, shall cease:
Saints pure devotion, then gains promotion,
with truth and lasting peace.
Christ Tent he then will place with men,
for evermore to stay:
With heat divine, Christ face shall shine;
and mak't eternal day.
96 Hymn.
Cantic. Igneum. On the three Children Dan. 3.

Christ present made three in the furnace four,
This kept them so, that fire could not devour.
( Heb. 11.34. (...),)

YE mortal Kings on Earth, behold
Christ's all-sufficient power;
Look on admire, that such a fire
three children cannot devour.
In one here is many wonders wrought,
the fire to burn, forbears;
Save only bands, loost off their hands,
and slayes persecuters.
So Moses turned aside (of old)
to view Gods bush on flame
Well we may 'dmire; zeal's hotter fire
that cooled and quenched the same.
No Royal rage can fires incense
too hot for faith, and love;
Lord on our Souls, such heavenly coals
let fall, and in us move;
That Jesus, that (for's love to us,)
could bleed, us to redeem,
He doubtless has quenched hotter wrath,
all glory (praise) to him.
Thou from a furnace hot like hell,
did save us in like manner,
That for thy cause, thy truth and laws,
thou might display thy banner.
When Zion's flames proud- Babel tames,
Saints have their jubilee;
The earth in peace, truth, righteousness,
shall bow, and sing to thee.
97 Hymn.
Lord let that long accepted year,
Of full redemption (hoped) draw near.
Psalm. 85.7, 8. etc.

LOrd God of Hosts that hear prayers
come down, thy heavens bow,
Sion, for which there is no man cares,
to save, arise do thou.
According to the days wherein
affliction we have had,
And years of sorrow we have seen
Oh now Lord make us glad.
The sins of our long Wilderness
and temptings, from us roll,
Thy vine, oh save; it plant, and dress,
with thy whole heart, and soul.
Hear then, what God will to us say,
for surely he will speak peace,
To his own Saints; that never they
shall turn to foolishness.
Sure his Salvation draws near
(God will the same command,)
That glory too; (for those him fear)
may dwell within our land.
To Jewish Rites, last Jubilee,
himself Messiah blew:
To Romish yoaks, his reign shall be
final and full adieu.
To God and to the Lamb therefore,
give Kingdom, power, always;
Let men and Angels, him adore,
and ever sing his praise.
98 Hymn.
When hopes are low, and undermined with fears;
And wicked highest, God usually appears.
Genesis 22.14. Zach. 1.8, 10.

OH God most high and wise,
thine ear to us incline;
Open thine eyes; and them surprise,
that against thy Christ combine:
When Councels are most rife
accomplished to be;
On Isa'c's life now stop the knife,
and God 'ith' mount, let us see.
Though Sons of Belial shout;
and tumults often assail:
Repress their rout, turn things about
that wicked's hopes may fail.
Though Zions hope's forlorn
amongst the Myrtle's low,
Her vail is torn; yet David's horn
shall budd again, and grow,
No weapon shall succeed,
against Zions peaceful state;
God has decreed, and that with speed,
Babel to desolate.
A new creation bright,
will God himself bring forth;
Where Christ shall sit protecting it,
even in the sides of the North.
Jesus our Bridegroom! come,
for thee the wedding stays,
Thy Kingdom come, to it make room,
let mourners sing thy praise.
99 Hymn.
Angels and Cherubims, all fulfill,
What changes God (presiding) will.
THe Lord above the Clouds presides,
he storms and winds does sway,
His Char'ots through Red Sea he rides
to find (or force) his way.
This world that seems to roll, and reel,
moves by divine command;
His spirit turns about each wheel,
and, when he bids, they stand.
Thou by thy power do rule always,
thine eyes all nations spy;
Yea when rebellious ones bear sway;
thou art exalted high.
When wicked ones are turned above,
God turns about the wheel;
Because the Lord does Zion love,
her foes sha'll 's vengeance feel.
All those that Zion hate, shall be
like Corn on the house top;
That, upright ones with joy shall see,
the Lords own sickle lop.
The Kingdom of Gods providence,
does bring great things to pass:
But when his Son shall rule, dispense,
the just flourish, as grass.
On foes, the Lord aloud will thunder,
to raise his witnesses;
And them advance, that long lay under
darkness, and sore distress.
That change shall be a joyful one,
when Christ above shall sway;
Causing oppressions to be gone,
and sighs to flee away.
100 Hymn.
One sits above the wheels,
To steer, when our Faith reels.
THe Lord has said his throne abides,
his Kingdom shall endure:
What if this world now rowls and slides,
his promise still stands sure.
Gods ship (as on a Sea) is tossed,
the winds contrary too;
Our anchor hold of hope, often lost,
Christ seems asleep also:
Then unbeleif makes surges beat;
has God cast off for aye?
Or is he gone, from's mercy seat?
does promise lie? we say.
Has grace forgot gracious to be?
can wrath, or'ecome his love?
Oh no it is mine infirmity:
i will wait for Noah's Dove.
I Will ( Jonah-like) look up again,
to Gods most holy Hill;
That over all winds, and waves can reign,
and change them at his will.
The old world God once turned to a Flood*
then Nimrods race, over turned;
He gave Levi'athan once for food:
and Babel's to be burned.
Old hearts, old world, shall be renewed,
all things restored shall be:
(the whore and beast being subdued,)
Christ set on high wee' I see.
Then let us our Hosannah's give,
and Halelujahs say,
To the Lamb, (once slain,) that now does live;
even our exalted Jah.
101 Hymn.
Some Consolatory Hymns, concluding the use of Psalm. 2.8, 9.

Unto the Lamb let us give praise,
That is, and shall be, he that was.
OH thou most mighty one,
Unto the Lamb thy Son;
Our Savior free, give praise do we,
for our Redemption.
For thy dea'r chosens sake,
Levi'athans head thou break
With such a wound, that whole and sound,
none ever could it make.
This Isle thy Scepter wun,
and here thy work's begun,
Oh Christ obtain thy throne again
once more cry it is done.
Though Nations, angry, rush,
and at the Lamb do push,
God with his look will them rebuke,
with Iron rod them crush.
They sport it in our pain,
rejoyc't, whiles we are slain;
Now they shall bow, as footstools low,
for Christ to rise, and reign.
Our sighs to joys shall turn,
and these our rods shall burn,
And God will raise to life, and praise,
with dew of heaven, our urn.
Oh then lets joy, and say
this is our longed-for day:
In darkness sing, for a blessed spring
now hastens. Halelujah.
102 Hymn.
God's able (in his time and will,)
All Is promises (of grace) 't fulfill.
Genesis 3.15.

OH thou that faithful art;
thou keepst thy covenant true;
We praise and bless thy righteousness,
that is (from us) thy due.
Thy promise first was made
to break the Serpents head,
Though he our heel do bruise; yet we will
believe what God has said.
Though Lions on us roar,
and Foxes watch to tear,
Yet Christ does keep his Lambs and Sheep,
and in his bosom bear.
The're is no thorn, nor brier;
can pierce Saints eyes or side,
No Cannanite dwells in thy sight,
nor Belial's Sons abide.
No vile uncircumsised;
no Sea, to toss us on;
Rejoice therefore; now fear no more,
utter destruction.
For God will purge the blood,
and filth Sion upon,
And when his wrath, finished he has,
then woe to Babylon.
No Idols then shall stand,
nor Idol-Shepherds be;
But Christ alone shall on his throne,
that day exalt'd shall be.
Lord have, thy word fulfill,
accomplish all thy will,
Let Isra'ls seed, return and feed,
on Sions holy hill.
When God again brings back,
his people captive led:
Then Jacob shall rejoice, and all
his Israel shall be glad.
103 Hymn.
Gods roaring heaven and Earth does shake,
Yet Saints in Christ their shelter make,
Joel 3.16. Isai. 26. ult.

OH Isr'els help and hope,
our only Savior,
Ease the complaints of thy dear Saints
in such a tempting hour.
Hark thy creation groans
by wicked men, thy rod,
O make it free, most gloriously,
like to the Sons of God.
Though all things dye and fade,
thou will make all things new,
Here we will be glad, since God has said,
that faithful is and true.
From him there shall proceed
judgment in Righteousness,
Thus wars shall cease, all men in peace,
in him, themselves shall bless.
Then prayers shall turn to praise,
even those cast off that seemed,
(Thousands of years, when Christ appears)
from wrath shall be redeemed.
For Christ himself comes forth,
earths blood open to lay,
TO avenge the guilt of all was spilt,
from Abel's to the last day.
Then no more crowns of thorns
and griefs shall Saints array,
But clad with praise, and palms always,
shall sing, with joy, for aye,
Amen. Halelujah.
104 Hymn.
Faith joys, and triumphs over,
The Dragon, beast, and whore.
Apo. 17.14, 15.

TO thee most holy one,
be given Dominion,
With victory, shall crowned be
that spotless Lamb, thy Son.
This Lamb once slain (as't were)
yet now is alive again,
Resolved to break (for Sions sake)
that 10 horned beastly reign.
What Lands did Rome admire
both hate, and shall, retire,
Now make her bare, and against her war,
burn in her flesh with fire.
Thus on that whore, Gods will
the ten horns must fulfill,
Which shall make way, for the lambs sway
on Sions Holy Hill.
Then Isr'els outcasts all
and suff'rers great and small,
Be gathered to Ghrist their head,
whom his own Spouse, he will call.
This little Stones-Kingdom,
a mountain now is become,
Nations desire, all things conspire,
before it to make room.
Here God will make a feast,
of fatts, and wines the best;
That fruitful Tree of life shall be
our Paradisean feast.
This is that joyful day,
now sighs all flee away,
The Son of God, shall make abode,
and reign in Zion aye.
105 Hymn.
The joy of long differed, return of prayers.

Psalm. 65.2, 3. and 126.5, 6.

OH thou that hear prayer
to thee all flesh shall come;
How long shall Saints utter complaints,
praying for thy Kingdom.
How long against our prayers,
shall Gods hot anger smoke?
Whilst men in scorn, exalt their horn,
our heart, with tears we soak.
Why hid'st thou in a cloud,
that prayers cannot pass through,
Iniquities out-vote our cries,
but them all pardon thou.
Then shall our hearts rejoice
the earth then will give increase,
For God will hear destitute prayer,
and Sion bless with peace.
A Lion then will rise
and roar out on his prey,
Seven phyals cup that whore shall sup,
on the Lambs ireful day.
Sion shall rise and sing,
answers our prayer over take,
But woe shall fall, on great and small,
with Sion war that make.
O then let us sow in tears
hoping that harvest day,
With Sions King to reap and sing,
and shout, Halelujah.
(2d. Part.)
Psalm. 102.13, 15.

The return of Prayers.

WHen God again vouchsafes
to hear his Childrens suit,
Then for our trouble he will render double
to the prayers of the destitute.
Then with a cloud, no more
will he his countenance cover
His Sun again, (after the rain)
shall shine, and storms fly over.
What comforts then shall spring?
surrounding Sions Hill,
That all shall sing, that love her King,
his dews their Fleece will fill.
Then Sharons rose shall bud
and Lilly of the vale
With thorns that stood, watered with blood,
shall rise, grow strong and tall.
For God by terrible things,
will answer to us give,
Thus meek shall eat, be satiate,
your hearts that seek, shall live.
Ye Saints then sing for joy,
for Babels helpers all
Cease from her throne, and every one
shall with (or from her) fall.
Ye Heavens, Apostles, all,
joy Prophets, Martyrs! say,
Now God in wrath, avenged us has,
Again Halelujah.
107 Hymn.
An Hymn for the Sabbath or Gospel Jubilee.

Dan. 2.44. etc.

LOrd have that glorious day of rest
that joyful jubilee,
Wherein the weary shall be blessed,
and from oppression free.
Hark how the whole creation pants,
with thine adopted ones,
The King of Righteousness it wants,
to set up judgment-thrones.
That stone that from the Mountain was
cut out (not in man's hand,)
Into a mount; O let it pass,
that may all powers command,
A burdensome foundation stone,
in Sion then shall lie
All that against it spurn (each one)
shall by it fall, and dye.
Thus God will raise henceforth his praise
avengers all, to still;
And crown the patient Saints with bays,
with joy, peace, and good will.
Then glory, grace, let us to it sing,
Babel is fallen, we will say:
This is our King, of him let us ring
and shout; Halelujah.
108 Hymn.
(Elijahs intercession.)

1 Kings 18.37. Romans 11.3.

O God to whom vengeance belongs,
lift up thy self on high,
Judge of the Earth revenge all wrongs
done to thy Majesty.
Thy blasphemous and cruel foes,
on high exalt their horn,
Christ's Tabernacle they oppose
and at his Kingdom scorn.
Where is our God? in taunt they say,
but we in hope, say so:
Thy judgments once again display,
then, where thou art, they will know.
Oh pay these Isles a recompense,
both them that sin, and suffer,
Justice, and mercy too, dispense:
then thanks and praise we will offer.
Turn thou Lord; give us yet one turn,
(that all thy rod may feel)
Exalt to safety, all that mourn,
vile ones make like a wheel.
Man's haughtiness, then shall descend
with Babel to the dust:
A Sword then Christ from heaven will send,
plead with all flesh, it must.
Thus multitudes, (Armies) shall fall,
in the valley of decision,
Then Christ his witness up will call,
and heal this vale of vision.
109 Hymn.
Our Souls are tossed 'twixt hope and fear,
Lord when shall Sions King appear?
Psalm. 43.3, 10.43.2.

OH Lord of hosts! thine enemies boast,
against thy Children dear,
Come do not stay, hear what they say,
where is your God, O where?
Though promise made, be long delayed,
Lord Jesus thou have said,
Thy word and will, thou will fulfill
our hop's in heaven up laid.
These swelling floods, threaten our bloods
Religion to ore flow:
Upon them look; through clouds rebuke;
thy vengeance on them show.
When Providence of all defense,
has stripped us utterly;
Do thou alone judge on thy throne,
and plead our cause, on high,
Let Sions pain, deliverance gain;
and glory to her King,
So shall our fear, soon disappear,
our sorrows, new songs bring.
But they that have long dug this grave
themselves let in it fall.
By mischiefs, cause most healing Laws,
subjecting great and small.
Open a door of hope. once more:
dawn everlasting day,
Rescue our Isle, Babel beguile;
so we will sing, Hosannah.
110 Hymn.
Oh Juda's mighty Lion!
Return to save thy Sion.
Rev. 12.2, 3.

LOrd Jesus have deliverance,
for Sion's now in pain,
So we thy praises, shall advance,
when Christ returns to reign.
Our travel now twelve hundred years,
(whilst Babylon has mirth)
Seems long; yet when our Lord appears,
'twill glad, both heaven and Earth.
The Dragon (seeking to devour,)
before the woman stands,
His rage, and malice, Lord, o're-power,
and from him save Three-Lands.
Let our deliverance come from thee,
by whom must Jacob rise?
Vain's all the help of man (we see,)
to the we lift our eyes.
If none can save, or plead (a word,)
in this vale of decision,
Thy mighty ones send down O Lord!
thy foes have in derision.
Then followers of the Lamb shall sing
triumphant Songs, and say
Salvation to our head, and King,
and praise to thee; O Jah.
111 Hymn. On that Psalm. 32.7.
With Songs of our deliverance near,
Encompass Lord thy People dear.
OH thou in the Heaven's that have thy seat,
deliverance that affords;
Saviors on Sions mountains set
let the Kingdoms be the Lord's.
Thy glorious arm in mighty facts
of old thou did make bare;
Now that thy name is near, thine acts
of wonder do declare.
Thine Ephah's heapt up full of sin:
and ripe the harvest grows;
When shall thy reaping work begin,
the Vine sat overflows.
Thy Char'ots once into the North,
were sent, (in numerous train)
Revive thy work, Angels send forth,
to quiet thy spirit again.
Fulfill thy wrath; thou have begun,
divide thou Babels Tongues;
And on her ruins, raise thy Son;
our sorrows, turn to Songs.
Then lasting smiles, succeed our frowns,
darkness preceeds our day;
To Christ belongs all Thrones, all Crowns,
all Isles. Halelujah.
112 Hymn.
Cantic. Halelujaticum.
Some signs of good the Lord does show,
That all thy name, and power may know,
Justice before his face does go.
SAlvations to the Lord belong,
Glory and Blessing too,
For all that long to do us wrong,
he will utterly undo.
Deliverance sure approaches nigh,
and glory in the Land shall dwell:
Thy Majesty's exalted high,
thy Robes of Justice smell.
Thy Harbingers O mighty King!
thus run before thy face,
It Is like our Spring, (the Birds so sing)
why should we not cry Grace!
Remember once 'twas Edom's word
it raze, (to the bottom) raze,
Therefore our Lord their rage abhorred
and turned to us his face.
Men's hearts seem to return again:
to pity Sions stones;
Earth shakes amain; for Christ will reign,
and raise our dry-dead-bones.
Thy Flocks shall feed safe in the woods,
the Lion couch in's denn;
The Lord thinks good, to enquire out blood,
so be it: Lord God! Amen.
113 Hymn.
When God to vengeance once arises,
Joy Saints; but sinners wrath surprises.
In a gloss on Judge. 5.2.11. Deuteronomy. 32.42.

LOrd for thy mercy's sake,
for Saints some vengeance take,
For unto thee appeal do we;
that heaven and earth did make.
Unto thy Saints return,
that wrath may cease to burn,
Now let our God, burn up his rodd:
so comfort them that mourn.
How long shall furious might
insult over godly right?
Lord let thy Sword fulfill thy word,
with right, O judge and fight.
And when our Heavens do smile
to save this floating Isle,
Sion, shall bless thy righteousness
whom they sought to defile.
Then Babels pride shall fall,
her Towers, and Captains all,
Her noble ones, cease from their thrones;
the Captives from their thrall.
Then Sions Sons shall say,
It Is he for whom we stay!
Lo! he again, is come to reign,
Lord welcome! Hosannah.
114 Hymn.
When God our freedom shall effect,
Great joy accrues to his Elect.
Isaiah 26.1, ult. Nahum. 1. ult.

WHen God from Babel shall release
his Captive Saints most dear
All wrong and violence quite shall cease
Christ will the Scepter bear.
No persecuting Wolf shall rage
to tear the Lambs of God,
Peace runs with truth from age to age,
and God will burn his rod.
The Lord Salvation will appoint,
for Walls and Bulwarks too,
Though he no man to save anoint,
that work himself he will do.
Though he for Jacob's seed Elect,
will use nor bow, nor Sword,
His power alone soon can effect
to save, even with a word.
Then truth over the earth shall spring apace
the Gospel shall succeed,
Justice shall run before his face,
to avenge each bloody deed.
Sion her solemn Feasts shall hold
the Belials be no more,
Christ's flocks shall safely feed, and fold,
and sing the Lamb before.
O Earth cover not thou the slain,
ye Saints shout loud, and say,
Lord Jesus have to judge and reign,
come quickly, come away.
115 Hymn.
Victoria Halelujatica (1st. part.
The air with Halelujahs rings,
When God the beast to judgment brings.
Rev. 12.9, 10.

LOrd thou art strong and righteous too,
and so do judge, and fight,
The vengeance of thy Temple show,
and do thy poor ones right.
Hark how the whole Creation groans,
and Sion cries for pain;
Longing to see the judgment thrones
and Christ set there to reign.
Awake, awake, thou arm that br ak,
of old proud Rahabs head,
And of Lev'athan food did make,
for Saints, in the desert led.
Now Babels whore as Queen would ride,
in bloody scarlet color,
O call from Wilderness thy bride,
and hasten Babels dolor.
Then we Salvation to our God,
and to the Lamb shall sing,
For he alone the Winepresstrod,
and shall our harvest bring.
Before him righteousness shall tread,
and follow him shall peace;
To springs of joy his Lambs he will lead,
all pain, with sin shall cease.
116 Hymn.
2d. part of the Lambs Victory.
The Lambs bride comes to a nuptial feast,
When God has judged both whore and beast.
Rev. 19.7, 8, 9.

YE Saints Hosannahs sing,
behold here comes your King:
Your faith may spy, your victory
and healing under's wing.
Now take triumphant palms,
sing joyful hymns, and psalms,
Your Pilat will these proud Seas still
and cause eternal calmes.
Just vengeance Christ will take,
for's Temple (people) sake,
Strong is the Lord, and true's his word,
Rome desolate he will make.
Then the Lamb's marked ones
with him ascend to Thrones;
Both Jew and Greek to him shall seek;
Sion shall bear new Sons.
Oh Saints awake arise
(beautiful in Gods eyes)
Shake off your bands, with Sampsons hands,
resume your Liberties.
For Christ took flesh that we
no more might Captives be;
His blood alone, purchased this throne,
there with him sit shall we.
Lord Jesus come away,
we waiting for thee stay;
Jf at thy feet, to sit be sweet,
much more's thy throne; O Jah.
117 Hymn.
Whosoever the Book of Providence reads,
May 'dmire at these his noble deeds.
Psalm 111.2, 5, 6.

TO God that all things made,
lets sing with heart and voice;
Heavens, Earth, proclaim their Makers name,
but Saints, much more rejoice.
To him that by his word,
all Creatures did produce,
Whose holy will* all shall fulfill
in order, ends and use.
To him whose wisdom, pow're
in all his works are shown,
Which wondrous are, and all declare,
that he is God alone.
To him whose promise is
a faithful word always,
Nor ever shall one tittle fail
that ever God did say.
To them he meat has given,
that to his fear are bent;
Whom once he takes, he never forsakes
minding his Covenant.
Let him from Isles therefore,
high songs of glory have,
From Idol Rome, and Martyrdom,
that wond'rously does save.
Salvation to our God;
and to the Lamb on high;
Him set above, him praise and love,
he wins the victory. Amen.
118 Hymn.
The just thus triumph over all,
That hating hope to see their fall.
On Psalm. 37.12, 14, 32.

THe Lord that loves righteousness,
will upright ones protect,
Against their wyles, and practices
that violence project.
The wicked plots against the Life
of just; (but it conceals,)
Their lust conceived, (nigh birth, and rife)
God with a blast reveals.
The men of violence and deceit,
and such as just men hate;
Thou Lord! most wise, do them defeat
and wilt make desolate.
That we being deliv'red free,
from their hands that us hate,
The fafe posessors then might be
even of our enemies gate.
Lord cease the hate of wicked men,
to those that Christ affect;
Or over them rule; come once again,
all to thy feet subject.
When God the Earth with peace shall bless,
the states with righteousness:
When Tyrants cease meek to oppress*
then all shall Christ confess.
Then mourners glorious garments wear
of praise, when Christ will call,
All nations before him to appear:
then God shall judge them all.
119 Hymn.
Changes below, shall all fulfill,
Not man's, but God's most holy will.
THe Lord most high does sit above
his Councels wisdom are;
To Saints he bears eternal love,
why should we then despair?
If wicked ones exalt their horn
and prosper for a while;
God eyes them with contempt and scorn;
but will on's people smile.
No waves, Gods Ark, can e're overflow,
though they may foam and swell;
They cannot past his License go,
that in this Ship, does dwell.
This World is hurled about, and reels
nothing can stablish't 'bide,
Till faith that Rock of ages feels,
on him we may confide.
The reins (though in the vilest hands)
Christ sits above to sway,
When he to turn about commands,
all must his will obey.
None's like the God of Jeshurun;
riding in's excellence;
(With healing in his wings;) a Sun;
and Shield for our defense.
Ride on, prosper, O mighty one!
till all shall thee obey,
To thee alone, belongs each Throne,
Amen, to this we say.
120 Hymn.
All things shall roll, and reel, and shake,
Till Christ comes all anew to make.
Hag. 2.7. Ester 9.1.

THe praise of Gods most holy name,
Oh let us sing always,
He is eternally the same,
his mercy lasts for aye.
That we are not consumed, it is
because he changes never;
In The burning bush, or deep abyss,
his power preserves us ever.
Our foes hate us with bitter wrath,
(and hate us ever will,)
Through grace, he that received us has,
and loved, will love us still.
Lord, heaven and earth, sea and dry land,
begin to reel and shake;
That God deliverance may command,
for his own Zion's sake,
Come forth all people, and behold
what turnings God has wrought,
His people to redeem; (of old,)
that sold themselves for naught:
Rahab he brake, for Isra'ls sake
proud Haman disappointed:
Sions Messiah's right will take,
for he is the Lords anointed.
Once more Lord shake, and overturn,
by the Reign of the little stone:
That Saints may sing, and Babel mourn,
and Christ be 'xalt'd alone.
121 Hymn.
This Hymn of praise, our Nation,
Should sing for Gods Salvation.
Isaiah 24, 15, 16.

YE People of the Isles abroad,
Gods fearful praises tell,
It Is he alone that is our own God,
that saves from lowest Hell.
Thou from the pit of human wrath
in which water was none,
(Like Joseph's) the afflicted has
plucked, by thy hand alone.
From Hamans fierce cruel devise
from Spanish Inquisition,
From Conscience Tyranny, (most wise
Lord) be our safe Physician.
From Nimrod's, Herod's, Absolon's
insatiate Tyranny's:
From Judas, Doeg's, Nero's Sons
their crafts, and cruelty's.
So we (Lord) saved by thine arm
thy wisdom, grace, and strength,
From Serpents wiles, and Dragons charm
shall fear, praise thee at length.
To thee we look for safety now,
our help on thee shall stay,
Oh King, do thou make all heads bow
before thy feet, O Jah.
122 Hymn.
Where Christ in saving power dwells,
That Land call it Immanuel's.
Isaiah 8.8. Hab. 3.2.

WHen God from Teman marched,
against Judahs adversary,
In Palestine, was his design
to place his Sanctuary.
Heathen in wrath he thrasht,
died red his Garments were,
To Isra'ls nation rode for Salvation:
because the Lord was there.
There Zion's mount he chose
his Tent in it to rear,
All that invaded it were made,
to feel the Lord was there.
Like as for our two Isles,
God did of old appear,
So for ungrateful ones, of late,
that mighty God was here.
The wonders God has wrought,
will show his Name is near,
Happy our Lands, if God commands,
Immane'l's throne, up here.
That City, truly may
be called the City of God,
Where Christ on high, in's majesty,
does reign, and make abode.
With reverence to the Lamb,
these Nations shall therefore
Bow and adore, thy throne before;
O Jah for evermore.
123. Hymn.
The soul traversing vales along,
Out of its deeps Eccho's this song.
as Psalm. 40.7. 130.1, 2.

IN every state; O Lord!
i will tune my heart for praise;
My sickness, health, poverty, wealth,
life, death; thy glory raise.
When men despise me most
or curse; whom thou have blessed,
If for thy name, I suffer shame;
thy glor'on me shall rest.
If poor, naked, and bare,
(as Job) in Garments rent;
My future bliss, true treasure is,
with that my Soul's content.
No honors here. i will seek;
nor hunt applause with men,
A better state, I emmulate,
to be God's Citizen.
My pris'n a Palace turns,
my torments yield me ease;
The Lions Den, hot wrath of men,
yield joy, comfort, and peace.
When others much abound,
for nothing i will endeavor
To spend my breath; and life to death,
that I may praise thee, ever.
124 Hymn.
The soul, resigned in all affection,
To Gods will yields entire subjection.
2 Samuel 15.25, 26,

THy holy and commanding will,
Lord, let me know, and do:
And all thy wise disposals still
submit to undergo.
Whole hecatombs of lusts here lies
(once dear as my right eye)
Them at thy feet i will Sacrifice,
and so to sin, will dye.
This glittering world (to some so dear
with all its poyson's sweet,
I neither want, nor love, nor fear,
all lies dead under feet.
My Isa'cks that so much content,
(as pleasant pictures) gave,
I am (with some a do) content
that God (at's call) should have.
The presence of thine Ark, I place
and prize, next to my heaven;
Yet if my Lord suspend his face,
my hopes, and joys stand even.
Yea Lord, if I must prostrate lie,
to smiters, i will endeavor,
In silence meek, to yield my cheek,
these deeps, shall praise thee ever.
May I of God this one thing crave,
i will better joys ask none,
Ere I descend my darksome grave,
to see Christ set on's throne.
125 Hymn.
Trials as waves succeed, and roll
But cannot o'rewhelm the faithful soul.
Psalm. 42.5, 7. ult. Jona. 2.4.

HElp Lord the deeps or'ewhelm my soul,
in mi'ry clay i am fast.
I to my Rock, for shelter roll,
till all my storms are past.
The floods of wicked men, their voice,
have lifted up on high;
The Saints twixt hope and fear, they hoyse,
while Christ asleep does lie.
Satan's high tempting winds do roar,
my faith's about to droop:
Spying, nor Sun, nor Star, nor Shore,
I loose my Anchor-hope.
But though my Lord retires, or walks
on waves, (even like some sp'rit)
My stormy Bark he boards; and talks:
he will all things put to right.
That Ship where Christ steers at the helm,
the Holy Spirit gives gales:
No Winds or Waves, her overwhelm,
Gods promise (her Mast) never fails.
Oh when that little-ston's-Kingdom,
grows to a Mountain-bless't;
Gods tossed Barks to Anchor come
within vail, safe, to rest.
126 Hymn.
The thankful soul desires always;
In every thing to give God praise.
Dan. 6.10. Phil. 3.1. 1 These. 5.16, 18.

LOrd tune my heart always
to sing thy lofty praise:
Yea though in deeps, me low, thou keeps,
for thence thou can me raise.
Thy hands at first me made,
and ever since me staid;
When sunk beneath; that pit of death;
thine arms were underlaid.
When mercies we receive,
its justice, praise to give;
But O to sing's a comely thing,
and joy, though all things grieve.
Some Birds all night do sing,
but only in the spring;
My winter night, shall sparkle bright
in hopes, i will praises bring.
Though Zion wast may lie,
and Babels Sons are high;
The righteous shall behold their fall,
standing that Red-Sea-by.
Such joys, Lord may I gain,
and such First Fruits obtain;
My desert (even) shall look like heaven;
my crown foretells my reign.
127 Hymn.
The Shepherd learns his young to go,
And how they may their Father know,
Of them his tender care to show.
Psalm. 8.2. Isai. 5.17. Hos. 11.3, 4.

AS I the Feilds of the wood did go,
a Shepherds voice, most sweet,
I heard, and thought I did him know
but feared; and fell at's feet.
For's head and face, most awsome was,
as though i would seen a God,
But sweet his words, (as Barnabas)
in's hands I spied a rod.
With this (said he) my flock shall be
(and tender Lambs) all fed;
With this such blows i will give my foes;
shall bruise the Dragons head.
I soon discerned my Shepherds voice;
he sooner, my condition;
My heart through hopes 'gan to rejoice,
at's feet I made petition
Lord me to health (when sick) restore;
When lame, apply thy baulm,
Lead me, that I may stray no more,
my swelling Seas, O calm.
When God shall strength, by Babes ordain,
avenging-foes to still,
Lambs in fat, pastures, he will maintain,
and reign 'or'e them he will.
Fear not, O little flock! for know
that it is your Fathers pleasure,
On you the Kingdom to bestow,
and rich durable treasure.
128 Hymn.
Christ for his kids, fights a fierce duel,
With Foxes, Wolves, and Lions cruel.
Cant. 1.7. Psalm. 9.16. Ezekiel. 34.12.

AS I upon the Mountains high,
(poor Kid alone) did creep,
I heard an echo to the cry;
the Shepherd's voice to's sheep.
The Northside of the Mount did yell
with houling beasts all day,
Where Lions, Wolves, and Foxes dwell;
and hunt for Nimrods prey.
On to'ther side the mount I found,
two little flocks of Kids;
Feeding their Shepherds Tents a round:
Christ standing them amidst.
Then I to him aloud, cried out.
Lord shield thy Lambs from harm;
Prevent these beasts that range about:
thy flocks against them arm.
His grant he soon to me dispach't,
(good news comes soft as oil)
These Beasts are watch't, and shall be caught,
in their own net, and toil.
No Lion on my Lambs shall roar,
nor evening Wolves devour:
Foxes shall lay their plots no more;
i will shield them, by my power.
Thou Lord alone, thy self make known,
just judgments to display,
When the wickeds bands, snare their own hands,
Higgaijon (sing) Selah.
129 Hymn.
Christ visiting his Lambs, most tender,
Does arm himself, as their defender.
as Mic. 2.12. 5.5, 8, 9. Zacr. 10.3, 4.

O all ye Lambs of God,
that to your King belong;
See what a tender, and strong defender,
your Shepherd's to his young.
His blood for them he shed,
will he deny them bread?
Shall God dear buy, and men destroy
that flock, over whom he is head?
Do Wolves and Lions roar?
(though fierce) they are his Cattle;
These all he will take; but you will make
like's goodly Horse, for battle.
Your Lord first from above,
you visited, in's love,
And surely when he comes again,
to dens these all remove.
Then fear not converts young,
to Zion that belong,
For judgment shall your foes be full,
but you shall have a song,
Both North, and South, shall sing
in hope; for Zions King
Will search for guilt of blood, long spilt,
and lore each lofty thing.
The Lamb shall sit alone
to judge on Zions throne,
And reign in peace, truth, righteousness,
and to hear his prisoners groan.
130 Hymn.
The Shepherds rod commands subjection,
The flock (though under sore correction)
Yields sacrifice in hot affection.
Psalm. 23.4, 5. Ezekiel: 20.37.

AS I among the flocks of God,
did walk; I heard a noise,
Like crying, caused by a sharp rod;
yet't made my soul rejoice.
One cried, my soul (Lord) weary is,
because of murderers,
Another sight for what is amiss,
and 'cause our hope deferrs:
Some said we are for thy sake, all day
(Lord) to be slain, designed,
The rest to beasts are made a prey,
(yet to Gods will resigned.)
This sad, O where is our Shepherd gone:
that used to be us among;
And that did (sighing) drop this groan,
But thou O Lord how long?
Why art to from us, absent so long,
as weary of thy flock?
In justice Lord avenge our wrong;
for thou 'rt our anchor's rock.
At last one ( David-like) was born,
riding on's Cherubim,
(Priest like) on's side, the writers inkhorn,
all the Angels Worshiped him:
His awful head, all Crowns did wear,
the rocks before him break:
All the Elects names, on's breast did bear,
and thus (King like) he spoke.
( 2d. part.) 131 Hymn.
The Lord to Christ this purpose swear,
That he who our transgressions bare;
Should thus, for us himself declare.
(personating Christ) as Matthew. 11.28.

TO me all power does now belong;
my lambs rejoice and sing,
My scattered flocks I dwell among
your Prophet, Priest, and King.
I made my self a sacrifice,
your peace so to obtain:
And to fulfill the prophesies,
now only King i will reign.
Your foes before you i will subdue,
and plague all that me hate,
But keep with you my covenant true,
blessed all on me that wait.
Do Gebal, Ammon, Amalek,
against my flock conspire:
Their plots, and hairy scalps, i will break,
and vex them in mine ire.
For I to purchase you have bled,
by that dear price, you are mine;
And for your sake, will interceed,
to complete my design.
Thus every knee, shall bow to me,
by force, or free accord;
Each eye shall see the majesty,
and judgment of the Lord,
This tidings told, I could not hold,
but heart, and tongue, must raise,
And to the lamb bowing, made bold
to lisp, and sing his praise.
( 3d. part.) 132 Hymn.
Gods Flocks now sing their songs to him,
That did to God, their souls redeem,
Their Shepherd, worthy 'f all esteem.
Revel. 4.11, -- 5.9, 12, 13, 14. v.

OH Shepherd of Gods flock,
thou only worthy art
That we always, should sound thy praise,
in life, in lip, and heart.
As lost Sheep were we all,
straying now here, now there
Thou Lord on him, laid'st all our sin,
he paid't in's blood, most dear.
What e're God promised,
he will certainly complete:
When all is done; all foes are gone,
then Saints ascend his seat.
Ye Angels, Cherubs all
adjoyn with Seraphim,
Unite your votes, extend your notes
in loudest praise of him.
To him that was that lamb,
(Gods sacrifice of old,)
He that was slain shall shortly reign,
the keeper of Gods fold.
To him whose watchful eyes,
mischiefs, and spite espies.
That will with right judgment requite
men's haughty'st majesty's.
To Angels praises then,
join Saints, and Sons of men,
Hosannah's loud, raise to the cloud,
sing praises, do it again.
133 Hymn.
Elders, and Witnesses each one,
Fall down before the Lambs high throne,
And sound his praise themselves alone,
Apoc. 7.9, 11, 14, 17. chap. 8.1.

AS I before the lamb's high throne,
(with songs and palms) did stand,
Among that multitude stood one,
that silence did command.
Then (bowing) I obeisance paid,
(all the Elders did the same)
Their four and twenty Crowns all laid
at'th' footstool of the lamb.
One of those Elders (for the rest)
his strict enquiry made,
What is this multitude (so blessed,)
with Palms? one spoke, and said.
From tribulation great these came,
their robes they have washed white,
And purified in the blood of the lamb,
made (thus) just in Gods sight.
Martyrs (with Witnesses) now make
their loud appeal, and true;
How long Lord er'e thou 'l vengeance take
and give that beast his due?
When shall dry bones revive again,
and sing that sleep in the dust?
Then Zion's King in's glory 'll reign,
(the Islands hope, and trust.)
Now sing, for now the ambush is fixed,
(and God has hid the gin)
That our reward, their vengeance, (mixed)
with joy will soon bring in.
134 Hymn.
Thy mercy's loads, and multitudes,
My soul in praises thus includes.
As Psalm. 68.19. 136.1. ult. 150.2, 3, 6. (in above 20 benefits.)

YE heavens sing praises to the Lord,
let Saints their blessings bring,
Let the earth his benefits all record,
yea praise him every thing.
Praise him for 's old electing love,
and Christ's redemption-blood,
His spirit, and grace, that from above,
rained Manna, for our food.
Him praise, whose pour did all create,
and providence them maintain;
And will renew their lapsed state;
that Christ over all, may reign.
For light, and peace, and health, oh do
(for day and night) him praise;
For comforts, yea and crosses too;
for good, or evil days.
For faith, and patience, joy likewise,
in God, lets sing and boast,
Who causes grace, in's exercise,
triumph in the Holy Ghost.
Him bless that plots, and plotters all
does wondrously detect;
Causing those wrongs on them to fall,
that they meant, for the Elect.
Now comes our King, Zion's his throne,
to the whore he will vengeance pay,
His flock shall sit, and sing each one,
praise him: Halelujah.
135 Hymn.
This instrument of seven strings
(In parts,) on our Salvation sings:
And joy to souls and Islands brings.
SIng to the Lord ye Saints
a new triumphant Song,
Let Isles abroad know that to God
Salvation does belong.
From Dragon, beast and whore,
from pits of desolation;
That gap't each hour, us to devour,
he wrought so great Salvation
For his unworthy flock
(a poor, and peeled Nations)
So has our God in's, Chariot rode
for sinful ones Salvation.
No merit was in us,
nor price of ours it bought,
For God (if he will work) is free:
Salvation gives, for naught.
If means a wanting be,
he (by divine creation,
With or without) can bring about
himself, decreed Salvation.
Lord thy design and end
on us let grace obtain,
(When judgments done) O let thy Son
by our Salvation, reign.
Then songs of praise, will we
join with Romes Lamentations:
And palms will bear, for Christ shall wear.
the Crown of our Salvation.
136 Hymn.
Herein the Isles wait, and petition
Jesus to be King, and Physician.
As in Psalm. 72.15. and 106.4, 5.

LOrd let thy Son his Kingdom come,
for which our Isles do wait,
For when his throne obtains its room
'twill cure both Church and state.
The good of those that thou have choose,
Lord grant our eyes may see;
That we before thee, may joy, and glory,
with these thy heritage be.
Hark to the groans, and piteous moans,
of all that suffer wrong,
Thy throne inherit, quiet thy spirit;
in those that cry, how long!
Then mounts to's throne that mighty one;
with righteousness begirt,
Over Isles that head, shall princes lead;
or tread, like mortar-dirt.
Religion then, with righteous men,
shall be no more oppressed,
The Mytres horns, the vulgar scorns;
the whole creations blessed.
Then Psalms shall be, Lord sung to thee,
Salvation to the lamb;
To Saints increase of joy, and peace;
to foes eternal shame.
137 Hymn.
Here Is prayer for Zions joy and peace,
That wickeds rage for aye, may cease.
As Psalm. 7.1, 2, 6, 9. and 122.6, 7.

LOrd quell the rage of wicked men,
their Counsels countermine:
Relieve thy Daniels from their den;
and once more save thy Vine.
For they not against us, but thee,
this crafty Council took;
Upon their rage, and villainy,
Lord (through this cloud) O look.
Be thou a shield, us to defend,
when they our flesh would eat
Help from thy Sanctuary send,
and mind our low estate.
No confidence in men we place,
nor yet in Princes high,
Now mortals cannot relieve our case,
their promise proves a lie.
But God has said, no weapon made,
prospers against the just
Their Swords shall their own breasts invade,
at Zions shield that thrust,
Shortly the Kingdoms of this world,
to Christ our Lord shall turn;
The beast in a deep pit be hurled,
and Babel-Rome shall burn.
The Lambs most holy war's at hand;
which victory attends:
And triumph, (in Emanuels Land,)
with Halelujahs ends.
138 Hymn.
To Christ our well beloved, this song,
Of's fruitful Vineyard: does belong.
(as Isai. 5.1, 5. -- and Psalm. 80. etc)

YE Sons of men, in Nations all,
this parable, attend,
You Zions Sons, obey this call,
to the Shepherds voice, now bend.
There is on earth a noble Vine,
planted within our Isle,
That shall ever long in beauty shine*
for God will on it smile,
By nature it was wild at first,
sprung off a stock most base.
Of Trees (for fruit, and use,) the worst,
till it transplanted was.
At last, the Lords electing love,
of wild did make it tame:
Into the true Vine, did it remove,
thus fruitful it became.
Its branches, over the wall are spread
its leaves (in winter) green,
Its Clusters full of wine (most red)
a sight, sair to be seen,
And shall the Lord its fence destroy?
(who watches it each hour.)
Or let the Foxes it' annoy,
the grapes thereof devour?
Oh no! his Vine, he will visit again,
destroy both Fox, and Boar:
From violence he will its peace maintain;
reign in it, for evermore.
139 Hymn.
God hears Saints prayers, and so has brought,
Plotters conspiracies, to naught.
Psalm. 83.3, 10. (as Psalm. 37.12, 13; 32, 33. v.)

THe righteous unto God do cry,
his ears to them inclines,
Defeats all vile conspiracy,
that crafty men design.
For they against the just are bent,
and crafty Council take,
And Midians Princes do consent;
Lord like a wheel them make.
The Dukes of Am'leck, Edom's stock,
(with five Philistim Lords)
Consult against thine hidden flock,
and these (Lord) are their words:
The name of Israel now we will raze,
their memory we will devour,
The houses fair, of God deface;
and these two Isles make our.
Lord rise, them see, and disappoint
their tongues O Lord divide;
Some Saviors ( Gideon-like) anoint,
and all their crafts deride.
That man may know thy power is high
in all the earth abroad;
May hear, and fear thy Majesty;
for thou alone art God.
140 Hymn.
The Lord in wisdom plots defeats
That justice may fulfill his threats.
Psalm. 7.13, 14, 15, 16. and Psalm. 9.16.

THy wisdom Lord is deep,
thy might who dare withstand,
Thy wonders are beyond compare,
when thou lifts up thy hand.
Associate ye your selves,
combine; together stand;
Consult again, but all is in vain,
against Immanuels Land.
For God has firmly sworn,
(his hand laid on his throne)
Eternal war, he will prepare,
For's Son who sits thereon,
He that so deep a pit,
To catch his Brother delves,
Both he, and all his part'ners fall
and in it sink themselves.
Thus God does wrongs repay,
vengeance retaliate,
No majesty was e're too high
but he above them sat.
Oh then let us sing thy praise,
whose works so wondrous be;
Ye saved flock, extol your rock,
to him for safty flee.
Exodus 18.9, 10, 11.

141 Hymn.
For Sion worshipping in Babylon.

(after the 102 Psalm.) v. 13.

HOw many Lord are the complaints,
of Sions Children dear,
How long shall Saints endure restraints
that worship in thy fear?
We see no signs (in our dark times)
of an approaching good:
Romes whore still climbs to higher crimes,
threatening more guilt and blood.
Thy holy worship men pollute
and Sanctuarys tread;
With feet of bruits, because it suits
unto that ten horned head.
But yet our God will rise at last
and mercy will it extend,
To Sion thou will it favor show
when time foreset does end.
For in her stones thy holy ones
secret delight do take
And therefore must pity her dust,
till God her breach up make.
Then shall the Jew and Gentile too,
the true Messiah 'dore,
The Nations all him worship shall,
and praise for evermore.
142 Hymn.
An hymn of Consolation for Sions mourners.

COmfort your selves, ye mourners all
to Sion that belong,
Shake off your bands, hark to this call,
arise, sing a new song.
You that are Children of the day,
and yet in darkness sit,
Your cloudy shadows fly away,
day spring will soon you visit.
For you have indignation born
from God, and men likewise;
But now your comforts all, return,
your Sun will quickly rise.
Hark how the Nations rush and rage,
for God their fury, has
In mercy, now begun to aswage,
and from us turns his wrath.
A banner of safety and love;
he for his truth displays,
And upon Sions Hill above
her King, his Scepter sways.
O then ye in the Isles that dwell,
wait yet a little while,
In faith do but this storm, repel,
and so your heavens shall smile.
All signs (Lord) of thy burning wrath,
in favor take away;
In pleasant streams, us cool and bathe.
Amen. Halelujah.
143 Hymn.
Of Christ news, by a new star came,
May n't we still expect the same;
God will by them his Son proclaim.
As Job 38.7. Psalm. 19.2, 3.

THy glory Lord the Heaven on high
and firmament declares,
Yea all their hoasts thee magnify,
consorting with the stars.
The brightness, number, influence,
of starry-skies proclaim
Their Makers skill and excellence,
that gives them all their name.
Sometimes (for God) they battles fight,
and (in their course) declare,
The deaths, and woes, of men of might
that great oppressors are.
At first creation, then behold!
these Sons of God all sing,
A new star Christ to the wise men told
born to the Jews a King.
Such new and dreadful sights portend
what shall this world affright:
When Jesus shall again descend,
to judge, and save the upright.
Thou star of Jacob; rise, appear,
come bright and morning star;
Irradiate our dark hemisphere,
O bee'nt so long, so far.
Thy rising brings Britains day spring,
and frights Herodians proud;
hen Sons of God again shall sing,
Lord have, shine through our cloud.
144 Hymn.
When once Gods terrible acts are past,
Things gratefuller obtain at last.
as Psalm. 65.8. and 102.13, 19.22. 1st. part.

WHen God his peoples prayer shall hear,
both Heaven and Earth shall shake,
Sinners in Zions trembling fear,
yea Moseses shall quake.
Mountains shall pass, and Hills will hop,
Fountains and Floods be dried,
Foundations shake and Head shall drop,
and from them Crowns will glide.
That Comet God, shakes a rod,
threatening to make us weep;
'Twas formed (brush-like) as sent of God;
both World and Church to sweep.
But when these dire effects of fire,
of Famine, Plague, and War,
Shall issue, in Nations desire
then shines that Morning Star.
His beams shall every thing revive,
his rod shall blossom still;
His humble ones, he will save alive,
his Sword vile rebels kill.
One star at's first appearance shone
with light, and influence:
Now may we give him, on's new throne,
over all, pre-eminence.
Did these wise men so much rejoice
seeing that star again,
O what a sweet melodious voice?
sounds at's eternal reign?
145 Hymn.
The Spouses beauty in Christ's sight,
Commended is with great delight.
Ps. 45.10. -- 14. Isai. 60.13.45. Apo. 19.7

LOrd I an Ethiopian was,
fallen, and born in sin;
Till thou (in pity) by did pass
and love, so did begin.
Sin and affliction, made me foul,
to woe, and wrath, exposed;
Till Jesus Oil and Wine, my soul
poured in, my wounds to close.
His robe of righteousness he spread
(so expiating guilt;)
He clad and fed me, crowned my head,
then washed me from my filth.
Whilst I admired thus at his love,
(his kindness shamed me:)
He further, for a time did move,
when I espoused should be.
A day wherein his love, my joy
he shortly would complete:
When Angels should their hymns employ,
to 'dore his glorious seat.
When darkness, distance, pain all cease,
with sin and sinners too:
All the Enemies of Zions peace,
he will utterly undo.
God will (at noon) rest in his love:
at night that rest shall ease us;
And we all Shepherds Tents above,
shall reign with Royal-Jesus.
146 Hymn.
Daughters of Zion, go forth, and come away,
To see your Sol'mon crowned that joyous day.
Cant. 3.11.

ALL ye that Zion's Daughters be,
Go forth to meet your King
That Crown, his Mother gave him; see;
at's Marriage: with him sing.
In Sol'mons reign at once did dwell
both wisdom, wealth, and peace:
So Christ (that Type) will far excel:
In's days, all wars shall cease
At the entrance of his blessed reign,
the Harlots judge will he.
And all the Kings, have with them lain,
with Harlots, doomed shall be.
A black afflicted Sun-burn't bride
from Egypt, he will espouse,
Her he will adorn: for her provide,
his second glorious house.
In's reign the des'late Isles shall joy,
and poor in every Nation;
Those that destroyed the Earth, he will 'stroy,
with final desolation.
The Virgins forth with him shall go,
with Oil their Lamps shall trim,
Angels above, with Saints below,
in Songs extolling him.
Sing Halelujahs before his face,
for now he comes to reign;
Proclaim before him, cry grace, grace:
thrice Halelujah 'gain.
147 Hymn.
For one thing Lord to thee I call,
And that (obtained) indeed is all.
as Psalm. 27.134.

LOrd I but one thing of thee crave,
and that is my whole desire;
Sight of thy beauty let me have,
and in thy house enquire.
For I from Mountain unto Hill,
have wand'red up and down,
If Christ (my Shepherd) hear me will,
his face, my wish, shall Crown.
The footsteps where his flock have gone,
I readily would trace,
For Lambs they should not be alone,
but Lord i would see thy face.
For thou in troublous time wilt me
(as in Pavilion) hide,
Thy presence, shall my conduct be,
thy Lamp shall be my guide.
And though I often walk in the dark,
thou Lord my light shall be;
The Land of the upright is my mark,
there God I hope to see
My Anchor faith, and patience, cast,
my sails of love I spread;
O breath on them, a prosperous blast,
to the hav'n of rest to lead.
Lord feed, and guide, protect thy flock,
thy King on's throne, advance;
When storms approach, be thou a Rock
for thine Inheritance. Amen.
148 Hymn.
Christ's tender Kids and Lambs are fed,
And by clear springs of waters led.
Isa. 40.11, 12.

LOrd here I am, thy tender Lamb,
depending on thy care,
Grant some relief to ease my grief;
see what my aylments are.
I cry and say, Oh who will lay
my mouth close to the breast,
Where Milk sincere, my soul may cheer,
to yield both strength and rest.
If I repair to folds that are,
my Shepherds flocks reputed,
(If Christ be gone) right food i have none
that to my hunger's suited.
Thy flesh and blood 's my only food
for I by this may grow;
(Of weak and young) both tall and strong,
and may my Father know.
Lord I a lamb too tender am,
with Satan 'lone to fight,
Yet by that name of Gods own lamb,
that Lion's put to flight.
And shall the power of dogs devour,
his tender Kids so young:
No! Christ has said, his flocks he will lead,
his water-springs along.
Lord feed thy Lambs, entangle Rams
whose horns so push, and slay;
Ascend thy throne, defend thy own,
Oh judge and reign for aye.
149 Hymn.
Gods time is short and fixed, when
Our tempter shall be bound and then
Shall cease the rage of wicked men.
as Psalm. 7.6, 9, 15, 16, 17.

A blessed day does hasten on,
of joy and consolation;
When violence and fury's gone
and Satan's fierce temptation.
Six thousand years this Serpent has
besieged beleivers fort:
And now far greater is his wrath
knowing that is time is short
No age nor sex of Saints are free
from's darts (of every sort,)
But Christ has wun's the victory,
and made his time, but short.
Zion has traveled long in pain:
shall now that birth abort?
Christ o'ver Nations all shall reign,
for Satan's time is short.
The conquest of the Lamb's begun,
which comfort does import;
The Captain's gone, his Armies run,
and now their time is short.
Sing on the heights of Zion, all
ye followers of the Lamb,
All, that against you arm, shall fall;
praise ye his holy name. Apoc. 14.1, 2. Halelujah.
150 Hymn.
Saints best Apolo'gy herein lies,
Against Satan's darts, and calumnies:
The Lamb's blood, and their innocencies.
(Ezra 4 6, 12, 15, Apoc. 12.10.)

O Lord our righteous judge that art;
null Satan's accusation:
Plead thou our right, and heal the smart
of's poysonful temptation.
See how he stands at our right hands,
if we do 'proach thy throne;
But you are defense, for innocence
against this wicked one.
If we Gods Children are, he will doubt,
and maks us question't too;
Lord prove thy love, his dart pull out,
that would our hopes undo.
But tho's intent, and wyles are bent,
the innocent to blame:
Let them conspire (be it Sword, or Fire,)
God turns it to their shame.
E're long the accuser shall be bound,
(Christ has prepared his chain:)
Whose sword, his enemies head will wound,
that Christ alone may reign.
Uprightness then, with Sons of men,
in much repute is had;
And every tongue, Gods Sons did wrong
with shame and horrour's clad.
The Lord prepares for plotters snares,
that on their heads shall rain;
And for the upright, a shining light,
when Jesus comes again.
151 Hymn.
On occasion of that Fire in Breadstreet.

Here lets condole others distress,
And for escapes, our thanks express.
Isai. 24.15. Psalm. 79, 1, 2, 5, 7.

O Lord how dreadful is thine ire,
where is the cause, what sins?
Did kindle first so dreadful fire?
for thence our woes begin.
Thine anger may alone suffice,
of which who knows the power?
Oh leave us not to our enemies
they will body' and soul devour.
Whether our flames come from thy hand,
or by malicious spite:
Lord search and make us understand;
revenge, and do us right.
By melting Lord, us purify,
that we may better grow,
And Lord sit by when thou do try,
that naught but dross may go.
In fires we do thee glorify;
may Christ there with us rest;
A Phoenix thence shall rise, and fly,
and Isles with it be blessed.
The Lord that chose us, plucked us out,
as brands from many a flame;
Will still us wall (as fire) about,
blessed be his glorious name.
But from these flames shall sparks arise,
proud Babel to devour;
That Christ (when Rome in ashes lies)
may reign, in glory 'nd power.
152 Hymn.
O bless't are all at peace with God;
When wars do 'larum us abroad.
Ps. 46.9. Matthew. 24.6, 7, 20, 21, 32.

O mighty Lord of Hosts,
the Lord of peace and war:
When thou in wrath, thy sword do bath;
in mercy us prepare.
Thy judgments threat'n our Land,
we see few signs of good;
Our crying crimes make perilous times,
deserving showers of blood.
Yet some our sins lament
desiring terms of peace;
And righteous laws, that God may cause
his anger toward us cease.
Or when thy Sword is drawn
O Lord! with it debate;
And stay thy hand: but give command,
the whore to desolate.
Thy controversy great
O Lord plead and decide;
For Treachery and Cruelty,
of Rome to the lamb, and bride.
In great disdain, and scorn
ten horns against her turn:
Then for that whore, (naked, and poor)
her paramours shall mourn.
All wars then end in peace
the earth from curse is free;
And in their King the Saints shall sing,
days of Eternity. Amen.
153 Hymn.
The Comfort of true Worship.

Psalm. 68.1, 2.

LEt God arise his enemies
scatter and wast away,
Such is their fate that Sion hate
like smoke they must decay.
At thy rebuke and presence great
the wicked pass with noise,
The righteous still before thy seat
in heart and lip rejoice.
For though the Nations rush and rage,
and swell as waters great,
Their force will Jacobs God assuage,
for Sion is his seat.
This burdensome and chosen stone
so weighty God does make,
That great and small on it that fall,
perish for Sions sake.
No weapon shall prosper at all,
no Council, Tongue, or might,
Against Christ's elect, can take effect,
when in his Temple bright.
Christ will appear why should we fear,
his angels are our host:
Tears, blood and prayer, our weapons are;
our hopes cannot be lost.
154 Hymn. This (and one more) given Mrs. J. H. on the death of their Son T. H.
When God for child, or friend does call,
His will must still our murmurings all.
Levit. 10.6. Psalm. 39.9, -- 11.

O thou Immortal one!
issues to thee belong
From cruel death, and deeps beneath,
God of Salvation!
Who can thy wrath abide?
when thou for sin do chide,
Beautys decay, youth fades away,
if thou thy face wilt hide.
Children are vanity,
whether they live or dye,
Alive they are a certain care,
dead comforts, by and by.
The more they steal our love,
our Lord gets less above,
This does provoke Gods by a stroke
our Idols to remove.
Thy sovereign hand, therefore,
and will let us all adore,
(Like A'ron) now in silence, vow
to over-love no more.
Now hopes for time i have none,
near friends before are gone,
Faiths victory to sing, and see,
i will long before thy throne.
155 Hymn.
Wishes in a Letter to Mrs. S. W. at Theobalds: (being many years bedrid.)

That being not hungry nor hardly bestead,
To fresh springs of solace your soul may be led:
And being not once discouraged in the way
As Israel of old, in their wilderness day,
Your soul may from strength, to full strength attain,
And so Sion mount at last you may gain.
I truly wish that you may fish,
in sanctuary streams,
But yet your eye may still epsy,
in them celestial beams.
That by those beams and crystal streams,
that from above descend,
Your soul may lighten, and faith may highten,
and persevere to the end.
And though I know your bodi's low,
and nature sore declined,
Yet when your Lord speaks but the word,
you will not be left behind.
For you shall straight on Sion height,
mount up and so shall sing,
Your songs of love to him above,
your everlasting King.
Oh then rejoice, hark, it is the voice
of him that's at the door,
Who calls, my love, my darling dove,
come now thou'st weep no more.
Adieu old World, confusedly hurled,
devoted to the fire,
Gods word's most true; all shall be new,
and let my soul expire.
My ripest plants Gods sweetest Saints,
are slipped away before,
And I forlorn with griefs am torn,
O let me stay no more.
156 Hymn.
Thus (sick) the soul to God did mourn,
And (healed) its praise did so return.
(according to Isai. 38.10, -- 20.)

LOrd though thy stroke me sick did make
yet did thy hand me raise;
This cup of saving health i will take
and render songs of praise.
I said if now my days expire
what comfort shall I have!
When expectation with desire,
lie buried in the grave;
My days have full of darkness been,
my sickness sorrow 'nd wrath;
For peace; my sin, has bitter been,
yet God revived me has.
The sentence I of death received,
(subscribing it was most just,)
The execution grace reprieved,
that I in God might trust.
My moan, was like a Crane, or Dove
for I was sore oppressed,
God undertook, my sin to remove,
that gave my soul true rest.
The Lord was ready me to save,
renewed my youth, and days,
Gave issues joyful from the grave,
we will therefore sing his praise, Amen Halelujah.
157 Hymn.
This second Hymn of praise they have,
That God has rescued from the grave.
Psalm. 6.3. -- 6. -- 41, 1, 2, 3. 39.4, 5, 10, 11, 13.

LOrd when thy hand on me,
did lay this sharp correction,
This was my prayer my vow, and care
to yield thee all subjection.
My life, and usefulness
and times, are in thy hand,
I Will yield them all up at thy call,
when thou shall me command.
Thou did me spare a while
my life, and strength restore,
Thou did me save from pow're of the grave
and now i will thee adore.
What shall I render Lord
or what return to thee?
My life, and health, my goods and wealth,
shall now devoted be.
My Lord Physician was
did visit at my call;
My heart from fears, my eye from tears,
he saved, and feet from fall.
Oh Lord who is like to thee?
now all my bones, shall say;
My vows in sight, of the upright,
to God, I freely pay. (See Ps. 116.3, 4, 12, 15, 16, 18.)
158 Hymn.
Though Satan leads into temptation,
Rebuke him Lord, be our Salvation.
See Zacr. 3.1, 2, 3. Matthew. 6.13.

LOrd from the old Serpent save
his subtilty, and pow're,
For by his wyles, souls he beguiles,
seeking them to devour.
No fence but thine there is
against an unseen foe:
To thee we cry, O King most high,
that do his crafts foreknow.
Sometimes he tempts to pride
to lust, or Heresy,
And often will stand at our right hand,
when unto God we fly.
But Lord us from him shield,
rebuke him by thy word,
Thy faith shall be our victory
thy spirit our Shield and Sword.
Though he the first man slew,
and may a David foyl;
This victory is Christ's, for he
his crafts and works does spoil.
He once from Heaven was cast,
and down to earth was flung;
O bind in's chain, that we again
may sing, that erst were stung.
For when our God of peace,
has trod this Dragon down,
His rage shall cease, Saints live in peace,
and Jesus wear the Crown.
Romans 16.20.

159 Hymn.
Gods works are from the first Creation,
Saints joy, their song; their meditation.
Ps. 92.4, 5. 103.22. 104.31.

THy works O Lord are great,
in wisdom they exceed:
Decree, Creation, and Preservation;
to be admired indeed.
How powerful was thy word?
that all these did create,
And when our Lord descends, that word
must all annihilate.
But heavens, when I consider,
which thou alone can span,
Lightenings and thunder; how do I wonder,
and cry, Lord what is man?
Yea Lord what is fallen man?
of him why mindful art't?
That Moon and Stars, serve monitors,
of what is sinners desert?
What signs or fearful sights
the Lord in heaven does fix,
All work for good; in famine, food:
in wrath, he will mercy mix.
As God on Isra'ls doors,
his mark of safety, gave,
And reigned on them a Beth-lehem,
us (in like case) he will save,
When vengeance-work is past,
and Gods dread fury's over:
Then sing your Psalms, and bear you palms;
Zion shall weep, no more.
160 Hymn.
Good tidings of our Lords Salvation
Brings joy and peace, to every nation.
(as Ps. 53.6. 67.2, 3. -- 6, 7.)

WHen God Salvation had decreed
for's captives to effect;
In Char'ots he rode out (for speed)
redeeming's own elect.
His wheels a path for him did pave
Red Sea and Jordan too
Free passage gave; but turned a grave
for those did them pursue.
Before him melted mountains great,
the Elements made a noise,
Rocks honey sweet, and oil did sweat;
here, lets in him rejoice.
When God will work, who shall withstand?
or save? what shall demur?
For his command (or mighty hand)
makes all lets to concur.
Jehovah is a man of war,
his hosts all creatures be
His angels are (yea every star)
engaged for's victory.
With vestures red the grapes he will tread;
so with a shout ascends;
Man's wrath is done, when God's begun:
this scene, Gods vyals ends.
161 Hymn.
After the night so dark, so long
That morning star will bring a song.
Ps. 97.11. Cant. 2.11, 12. Mica. 7.9, 10.

HOw long Lord will our darkness last?
(our grief prolonging night,)
When will our winter nights be past?
when shines our morning bright?
Long since, our day fled fast away,
our souls (like blind men) grope
Seeking for light, but lo the night
soon overclouds our hope.
Oh where is he 't promised to bring
the poor and blind by the way,
Make darkness light, the dumb to sing,
turn shade of death, to' day,
We still complain, clouds after rain
often make our hopes forelorn:
Yet is not far our morning star,
our daylight shall return.
Then Zion that in darkness sits
(her tears upon her cheeks)
Shall shine, when God her sin remits,
and day spring on her breaks.
Rejoice not then ye wicked men,
for God resists the proud:
To Gods upright is sown a light
morning without a cloud.
If Skies do loure, our King has pow're
over waves to tread his way:
He Will soon appear, cast anchor here,
look up and hope for day.
(see Luke 1.78. Acts 27.27.)

162 Hymn.
When in dark wilderness we walk,
God then to us does kindly talk.
(Isa. 35.1, 2, 6. 51.3. Hose. 2.14.)

LOrd i am in the wilderness,
afraid to lose my way,
Let thy command, me to that land
of uprightness convey.
My desart's that of sin,
there wandering, I am faint;
May I with' bread of God be fed,
and with the rock acquaint.
When for my murmuring;
hot Serpents often me sting,
If faith can spy my Lord on high,
healing is in his wing.
When thirst does scorch my soul,
my spring below, all gone.
Christ with a dew, strength does renew
then singing, I pass on.
In The vale of Bacha deep;
each step on it drops a tear,
While hope's delayed; my heart is staid,
in Zion to appear.
And though my way be rough,
and doubts over cloud my eyes,
My wilderness like Eden is;
and smells like Paradise.
My soul on Pisgah mount,
look over; these first fruits taste,
Go not aside, and Jesus guide
me to that Land at last.
(Ps. 107.2, 3, 4, 7.)

163 Hymn.
The reign of Christ, all wars shall cease,
From Babels yoke, Zion release,
So brings us universal peace.
Isa. 2.4. 11.6, 9.13. Micah 4.3.

1.
WHen Christ in righteousness shall reign,
according to Gods words:
Then truth, and peace, on earth, obtain,
and break all Tyrants Swords.
2.
The Nations then learn no more wars,
but under quiet vines sit,
Beating their Swords into Plow shares,
Tyrants their fierceness quit.
3.
With envy, cruelty, and wrath,
none shall the rest annoy:
And none in blood, his Sword shall bathe
none hurt, wast, or destroy.
4.
For Law and Justice shall obtain,
and peace with truth, shall greet;
Conscience detest, unlawful gain,
Kings bowing at Christ's feet.
5.
Then Ephra'ms envy shall depart.
Judah no more shall vex,
Divisions (causing thoughts of heart)
shall Saints no more perplex.
6.
The Lion, Wolf, and Cockatrice,
becoming meek and tame,
Yea Leopards (as in paradise,)
be like and dwell with' Lamb.
7.
The Mountains forth great peace shall bring
the earth its fruits in store,
Thus crowned the little Hills shall sing,
pale Famine kill no more.
8.
The heavens no more shall be as brass,
but into drops distill:
This Iron-age away shall pass,
and God our prayers fulfill.
9.
The whole creation eased of pain,
shall triumph every day,
'Cause Christ our King of peace, shall reign,
and let him reign for aye. Amen.
164 Hymn.
Thy blessings Lord in plenteous rain,
Both man, and beast, richly maintain.
Isai. 30.23, 25. 55.10. Ezekiel. 34.26. Zacr. 10.1, 2. Psalm. 68.9.

WE give thee thanks O Lord,
the Father of small rain,
That bowed thine ear, our pra'ers to hear,
and gav'st us showers again.
Thy bottles thou did open,
and made them power, a main
The earth so dry, to satisfy,
with a sweet plenteous rain.
Drought makes this mercy great,
that multiplies all grain;
Thus man, and beast, both feed and feast,
refresh't with fruitful rain.
Drought makes the dew more sweet
so's health succeeding pain,
Great was our fear, Famine was near;
yet God prevents with rain.
Thus God in the wilderness
with thirst did Israel train;
Causing the Rock, water his flock;
and clouds bread on 'em rain.
The heathen Idols are
then vanity, more vain,
It Is thou O Lord that do afford,
in season, moderate rain.
But bless't Lord is that Land
over which the Lord will reign,
Like rain shall he, on mown grass be,
or shining after Rain.
Lord rain thy word on us,
yea Rain down righteousness;
And so will we give thanks to thee,
and aye thy bounty bless.
On Rain after the late drought.
165 Hymn.
Thus blessed are all (both great and small.)
Such as the Lord our God does call.
Psalm. 56.4. Acts 2.38. Romans 8.29. 30.

LOrd when thou first to me inclined,
and called me by thy grace;
Thou did me find, lost, poor, and blind
yet did my soul embrace.
My sin and misery, both was
thy motives me to save,
In pity thou did by me pass,
and a free pardon gave.
He from a state did me translate
of darkness, and of thrall,
Into his light, marvelous bright,
and liberty withal.
His love could no denial take,
no nay; where God will call,
He will persuade, has pow're to make
his calls effectual.
Kindred, Estates, Possessions all.
and honors (though in hand)
Have (at Gods call) been left, let fall,
to enjoy that promiss't land.
Divine election, argues affection*
his calling, peace implies,
All justified, are sanctified,
and these he glorifies.
Then ever blessed be God, for this
adoption, by his grace,
If called then we his saved ones be,
and so shall see his face.
166 Hymn.
The souls treble, sung on the base,
And low submissive frame, and case;
1 Samuel 3.18. 2 Samuel 15.25. Lam. 3.27. -- 29.

1.
THe Lord Almighty framed us all,
That by his Gospel, did us call;
That to his will we might submit,
The better sort (even Angels) bow
Yea div'ls (against their wills) below
For to fulfill it, is most fit.
2.
Gods will is always just and good,
Oh if it, so, were understood,
'Twould all reluctance quell and still:
Our sovereign we thee call O God,
Lets's never rebel against thy rod,
Because it grows from holy will.
3.
Is it our lot tidings to hear,
Or things heavy, and hard to bear,
It Is best to hear in silence still,
For how can we attend Gods voice,
Our hearts hurried with jarring noise?
Against Gods wise disposing will?
4.
Have I nothing, and others all,
Are others great, we mean, and small,
Say not that things are ord'red ill;
For as the worst, often, crowns possess;
So God the best in rags may dress,
Yet these (at last) with glory fill.
167 Hymn. (Division sung on the base)
5.
DO all my comforts, turn to crosses,
So that for gain, I meet with losses
And emptyings, while others fill:
Some fruits are bitter sweets, and mock;
Let me climb up, this craggy rock:
And (Christ-like) mortify my will.
6.
Some things we hardly do obey,
Or else we do it in much delay;
Unless the Lord sugar his pill:
Herein obedience best is known,
In subjugating all our own
So to prefer Gods holy will.
7.
If God please others to admit,
On's table, or his lap to sit
I Am at his feet contented still;
For they that are submissive, now
(Though with a tear) to sit below
At last kiss, and embrace their fill.
8.
Is God displeased; yet I am mute,
Though causeless, me men persecute:
And daily (for Gods sake) me kill:
All quarrels with my God I must
Lay (with my mouth) low in the dust,
For perfect good, Lord, is thy will.
9.
If God (at last) one cranny 'f hope,
Or door of mercy'l to me o'pe;
Sit singing thus at's door I will;
Hope shall to me assurance be,
That Faith shall get the victory,
For God his promise will fulfill.
10.
Do wicked men our heads ride over,
In pomp, while Saints are low, and poor,
And Samson-like, grind in a Mill:
Yet God will quickly bring 'em down
And meek ones will with glory crown;
And mount his Son on Zion-hill.
11.
Does Babel's whore mount up on high
Decked in her double scarlet-dye;
Her gold'n cup with poisons fill,
Now Is a blessed time, Gods hand to turn
And cause her, (with the beast) to mourn,
So in her woe's fulfilled Gods will.
12.
If exiled from his Ark we be
Yet we again his face shall see,
And then sing songs aloud, and shrill;
But if he (in's) has no delight,
Let 'm do what is good in's own sight,
High grace yields to Gods lowest will.
13.
Like Lillies in the Vales that grow,
Or Violets sweet, that make no show,
So grace in self-content has skill;
It Is fed with secret dews above,
Absconds, yet to impart 't does love;
Melting its own into Gods will.
14.
In God i will place all my delight,
For that is ever good in's sight:
And brings my hearts desire and will;
In him an object full I mind
Tho 'n me he nothing pleasant find,
O let him rule; and have me still.
168 Hymn.
On Zion sparks of wrath first come,
Which end in flames, on papal Rome.
Jerem. 25.29. 1 Pet. 4.17, 18.

WHen God begins, wrath to inflict
On Zions Children dear,
To sinners woes it must predict,
Oh where shall such appear?
Gods cup of trembling Saints may think
far bitterer than gall;
Yet they but taste; sinners must drink
the very dregs on it all.
Though Famine, Pestilence or Sword,
may on the just lot come.
He Will feed and live (here) on a word,
till God shall call him home.
Lord what a burning bush is this?
how live we in these flames?
No furnace called; for where Christ is,
that Heaven it is self proclaims.
And when these wars their course have run
they will terminate in peace,
And when the Lamb's war (long begun)
shall end, our travels cease.
Those flames that in Gods bush have burned,
for now some thousand-years,
On Babels throne, and seat, once turned,
in them the Lamb appears.
Who Is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings;
his chos'n followers then,
shall in the shadow of his wings,
for triumph sing. Amen.
169 Hymn.
Ten horns once conquered, and tame;
(Against the whore;) subserve the Lamb.
Psalm. 75.4, 10. Zacr. 1. ult. Apoc. 6.16.

WHen God does rise his cause to plead,
that with the whore depends,
The beast and horns he will captive lead,
and so the last wrath ends.
Long has this controversy stood
and Seas of blood 't has spil'd,
Oh! that the Lord decide it would
in Armageddon field.
For meekness, truth, and righteousness,
and for his Zions sake,
That he the earth with peace may bless,
he will thorough vengeance take.
For he that judges her, is strong
and mighty is to save,
And his delay, and suffering long
will swifter vengeance have.
On Zion Hill, then with the Lamb,
his followers shall be shown,
Who shall proclaim their fathers name;
he also them will own.
Saying these my redeemed ones,
no Women could defile;
Follow the Lamb up to their thrones,
in whose mouth is no guile.
Then Kings, Captains, and men of Might,
with bound, free, rich, and poor;
To rocky holes again take flight,
and face the Lamb no more.
170 Hymn.
On the late Dissolution, 81.

Though all things have their Dissolution,
Our Lords return, makes restitution.
Ps. 11.3. and 75.3. Act. 3.19, -- 21.

LOrd what a world is this?
how is the whole-head sick.
When head and heart dissolve, and part,
where is body politic?
Foundations long have shook,
and all are out of frame;
The stone has smote God will promote
the Kingdom of the Lamb.
As once one little stone,
brought down that railing Goliath
wight
That in his pride Gods host defied,
and put all is host to flight:
So shall the little stone
by Gods decree once more;
Proud Babel strike, and dash it like
chaff of the threshing floor.
These bodies must dissolve
and be renewed again,
That they may be fitted to see
Christ's beauty in his reign.
Lord have thy Son to reign
then all things he will restore,
Wound but one head, and (by its dread)
ten horns shall thee adore.
Ps. 68.21. and 110.5, 6. Apoc. 17.15.

171 Hymn.
Rejoice we in the Lord of Host,
That never yet a Battle lost:
In's excellence believers boast.
Ps. 46.7, 11. 48.8. Isai. 13.4. Luke 2.13.

THou Lord of hosts art General,
of absolute command;
In heaven, earth, sea, the soldiers all,
before thee armed stand.
If thou commandst one Angel, go
and put that host to flight;
Or kill some bloody Herod, so
it is done all in a night.
If thou alone do but accost
an army in the field,
One look from thee, O Lord of host,
or frown, shall make them yield.
If thou to Emrods or small Mice,
do but allow commission,
Nay less, worms, flies, and smallest lice,
repress vile men's ambition.
Those Records of thy wars O Lord,
are stored, with the upright:
How God to women did afford
to vanquish men of might.
But when the Lamb of God does stand,
in Armageddon* last,
Satan, and Rome, at his command,
to flames below, are cast.
Dan. 7.11. Apoc. 16.16. 18.8.20, 10.

172 Hymn.
Happy are they, whose eyes shall see,
The good of them Gods chosen be,
They may rejoice eternally.
Isa. 12.3. Romans 8.33. 2 These. 2.13.

AScribe to God, Salvation,
(the fountain of All grace;)
That to our consolation,
amongst his elect, did place.
To him that in the lamb our head;
did call to holiness;
But to what happiness, he will lead,
what Angel can express?
To him that loves immutably,
whose gifts and calls are sure;
(Like to himself,) eternally;
without repentance, 'dure.
To him whose chain all is own in folds,
none can a link undo,
And in's own hands, he both ends holds
election, glory too.
To him that all his own foreknew,
and care on them has took,
And them in time to life, he drew;
and sealed up in's own book,
Lord had thy purpose passed us by,
had, never called nor chose;
But left us (fallen) in the pit to dye,
who could thy will oppose?
But since thou loved us out of the pit.
and that good work's begun;
That we may cry, grace, grace! to it,
go on, Lord, till it is done.
173 Hymn.
A Vision of Gods faithful Lambs,
By prayer a quenching cruel flames.
Exodus 3.3. Ps. 74.7, 8. and 83.12.

NEar Zions Hill I walked,
and in her fields did spy,
A flock of Lambs beset with flames,
Lord what are these said I?
A still voice to me said
this Antichristian flame
That Dragon blew (and's bloody crew)
but who shall quench the same?
A pool like Heshbon's, then
nigh to this flame, I spied
Which sighs and tears of sufferers;
the engine, (prayer) supplied:
A river also ran
in deep and bloody streams,
Whose cries (no doubt) them fires will out,
and bring again sweet beams.
The Lambs of God all joined,
and under the Altar cried;
How long shall groans of holy ones
for vengeance, be delayed:
Then stood amidst the Throne,
a Lamb as't had been slain,
Your blood (said he) avenged shall be,
on all that scarlet train:
And this take for a sign,
of swift revenge to come;
When they shall cry peace and safety,
then is their final doom.
174 Hymn.
Unfaithfulness lamented here,
And prayer for strength to persevere.
Ps. 5.9. 12.1, 2, 5. and 120.2, 3.

HElp Lord! for men that godly be
and faithful ones do quail;
Among the Sons of men, we see
that faithfulness does fail.
Against falsehood, and a lying tongue
be thou our sure defense,
For fraud and violence do wrong
to the poor man's innocence.
For sighing of the poor oppressed
now'le God rise to redeem,
And him in safety set at rest
from them that puff at him.
From lying lips that do deceive
deliver thou our souls:
Sharp arrows let their Conscience grieve,
and hot Juniper-coals.
How long shall judgment into gall,
hemlock, and wormwood turn?
Lord it to righteousness recall,
to cheer up them that mourn.
With judgment Lord, Zion redeem,
her converts free proclaim;
Then shall our land, faithful esteem,
and City prize the same.
Come Lord thy throne on earth possess,
the beast and whore subdue,
That thou may sway in faithfulness,
that are most just, and true.
175 Hymn.
The glory, and the dignity,
Of them (Martyrs for Christ) that dye.
Act. 7.54. Rev. 2.13. 14. 13. and 20.4.

Rejoice before the throne,
ye sufferers that are,
For upon it God's Lamb does sit,
his diadems to share.
Your faithfulness to death,
with him accepted is,
Behold him stand, at Gods right hand
to welcome you to bliss.
My cross with me you have bore,
reproach, want, and disdain;
And now as ye suffered with me,
so with me shall ye reign.
Have ye beheaded been,
or burnt, or rent in quarters,
Yet he will set on your heads, anon
a crown of life, like Martyrs.
If tempted sore to sin,
ye chose to perish rather,
That glory ye receive of me,
that's given me off my Father.
In witnessing his truth
ye that were so blasphemed,
Of you when on his glorious throne,
he will never be ashamed.
Oh then ye blessed ones,
with songs, your pains beguile,
Your day draws near, when he will appear:
yet but a little while.
176 Hymn.
After the Lamb, the Lord does call,
His chos'n generation all:
On which the beast. and whore must fall.
Psalm. 65.4. Isa. 41.9, 11. 1 Pet. 2.9.

(1st. Part.)
BLess't is that man O Lord (most high)
whom thou do choose to thee,
And causest to approach thee nigh,
his dwelling place to be.
This style God gave his only one,
in him he did us choose:
And every one he has foreknown,
he will never more refuse.
Gods chosen ones shall all believe;
that faith all fires endure,
No grain is lost, in Satan's sieve,
for Gods foundation's sure.
In The furnace of afflictions sore,
though God may Saints refine;
He pleads his interest, evermore
and still says thou art mine.
does Zion think her self forsook;
while foes do taunt and scoff,
The Lord that chose her them rebuke;
and her he will not cast off.
When God will save, who shall destroy?
accuse or them withstand?
These his elect shall long enjoy,
the work of their own hand.
For God has said his hand has laid,
help on his chosen one,
Ye sinners stoop and be afraid,
this Lamb shall have the throne.
177 Hymn.
That God elects, of's own good pleasure,
Is Saints most rich and joyful treasure.
Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. Mark 13.20. Romans 8.33. (2d. part) Luke 18.7, 8.

'TWas thy good pleasure, Lord,
mere grace, to it, did move;
Most to refuse, yet some to choose,
to call, and save, and love.
Of old thou did decree,
what number saved should be,
And to the elect, some word direct
to bring them home to thee.
Without thee, was no cause;
in us, nothing could merit;
Sin thou foresaw, yet us would draw,
that we might life inherit.
And that none might be lost
(with Antichristian brood,)
All he foreknew he marks them new,
by sprinklings of his blood.
Rejoice ye chosen ones
with elect Angels all,
By calling, your election's sure;
y' are saved from Adams fall.
Be glad in Christ your head,
the Lamb did you redeem,
Your foes for you will he subdue,
that chose Jerusalem.
And shall not God avenge
his dear Elect, that cry
Both day and night? yea (in their sight)
he will do it: and speedily.
Oh blissful sight, to see,
and hear the Elect all sing,
First comes the Jew, then Gentiles too,
triumphing in their King.
178 Hymn.
This soliloquy, when alone,
(And longs for Christ) the soul does groan.
Genesis 32.25. Ps. 102.6, 7. John. 16.32.

LOrd! i am now left alone,
away my comforts gone;
And to retire with thee desire,
and to my God make moan.
In desert walks my soul,
like Pelican, or owl,
Or Sparrow on house top alone
like Dragons, do I howl.
Or like the Turtle-Dove,
that mourning notes does love,
Finding no nest, nor mate, nor rest,
but in my Lord above.
I unto thee do fly,
to have thy company,
So flames the fire of hot desire,
in swift ascents to thee.
O when will it thou descend,
or this my conflict end?
Or call on me, to come to thee;
my prison rags off rend.
My friends before are gone,
and brethren left i have none,
If I must stay, Oh come away,
here leave me not alone.
And when my work is done,
my time, and glass is run,
Then O translate me to a state,
to shine above the Sun.
Mean while abide with me,
thy face often let me see;
And let thy Son ascend his throne,
in glor'ous Majesty.
178 Hymn.
In a friends Garden, while I walked
An heavenly muse, thus to me talked.
AS I into a Garden went;
(my friends and not my own)
To veiw the plants, my mind was bent,
there to converse alone:
This question sprung up in my mind,
whether in humane art,
Or Natures beauties, I could find
a Plant would ease my heart?
I looked a round on every Plant,
each herb and fragrant Flower,
But still my Soul did pleasure want,
and all those fruits proved sour.
I to the rose bush did repair
and thence a bud did pick
And thought it both fragrant and fair
yet there I found a prick.
Then pleasant part colored flowers
I gathered, but when they
Had been in hand very few hours,
their beauties did decay.
These pleasures are to others left,
a stranger reapes the fruit
But the possessour's quite bereft:
with care to keep the root.
But when the winter storms do blow
these pleasant Plants are gone;
So death does worldly beauties mow
till the Resurrection.
Is Paradise so lost? alas!
are things below all vain?
To Eden I will swiftly pass
Gods Garden to regain.
But this way, as I thought to gain,
I had no sooner tried,
My resolution how to attain:
than in my way I 'spy'd
A multitude of armed foes,
and Devils, against me bent
My way with crosses to oppose,
yet through that crowd I went.
Some turning back afright, I met
(as cowards retrograde,)
That smote my heart full of regret:
seeking me to dissuade.
I quickly cast them off with scorn;
yet were my garments rent
To rags, by many a brier and thorn;
as up Gods mount I went.
Ascents, with breathings are obtained,
to mount, yet sing, is rare:
Yet when advantage ground is gained
it yields a prospect fair.
And though the way was rough and long,
the top my faith did spy;
I made it pleasant with a song;
(as Larks) by mounting high.
At last, I saw the Garden wall,
and to the door I past;
The door was low, the wall most tall
shutt and enclosed fast.
Abundant entrance to obtain
I did to the porter cry,
Who said (with waiting) I might gain
an inlet by and by,
Mean while I heard a blessed Chore
of Angels in consort;
Singing about the wall and door,
which did my hopes comfort.
These are the Chariots of my Lord,
and all Gods Garden guard,
That all Pilgrims convoy afford,
and heirs of Life still ward.
While I without, did wait, and stay,
impatience made a dinn,
I heard within, a still voice say,
come let this pilgrim in.
The door was op't immediately,
and in the Pilgrim came,
But with so ragg'd a habit, I
quickly began to shame.
The Master bad me welcome thither,
and such new robes, me gave;
To style my self, I knew not whether
a King, or wandering slave.
He bad me freely entertain,
mine eyes, sense and desire
In The lower Garden; till again,
he came to lead me higher.
So while I cast about mine eyes
1. I spied a plant below
Most fragrant as in paradise
Adam could ever show:
This flower its azure head concealed
in'ts leaves under my feet;
Declined to have its worth revealed
save by its odor sweet.
2. A second on its lofty spire,
much like that Heliotrope,
To face the Sun seemed to desire
to turn, or shut, or o'pe.
(Said I) this much resembles love
that grace does much delight,
With Christ its Sun, to turn, and move,
dilating at his sight:
A third plant on the wall did lean,
3. (as Vines that fruitful are)
Its bulk nothing: most weak, and mean
yet blessed clusters bare:
Thus faith (a part from Christ) we call
a mere notion, and sound;
He Is only root, and strength; (that wall)
from him our fruit is found.
Next that presented to my sight
and 'long the wail did creep,
A flowr most fair and Lilly-white
4, among thorns, that made it weep.
Repentance like this flowr, does grow,
its own tears serve for dew:
Moist'ning its soil, and roots below,
which does its fruits, renew.
Two winter Gillivers I next
upon the wall beheld:
That with the cold, were nipt and vexed:
when plucked, how sweet they smel'd?
5. Like Twins, meekness and Patience thrive
(as Camomile, both grow,
(Tho trod on) yet they keep alive,
still green, and pleasant show.
The meek ones, mute, and silent sit
under the hand of God:
And unto hard things often submit
bearing his smarting rod.
6. Patience all humane injuries
sustains even unto blood,
Inflames it lives, in triumph dies,
still counting Gods will good.
7. One plant not of a pleasant smell,
but bitter taste it was,
To natures health, it profits well,
though nice ones by it pass:
Mortification makes contrite
and sinful self it scorns;
Restrains all carnal appetite,
with holiness adorns.
A Sister plant nigh that did grow
8. that hearts-ease, some well name;
A plant Solomon scarce did know,
it is worth, who can proclaim?
Contentment is that Jewel so rare,
a crown may want it; yet
A poor man freed of worldly care,
with godliness, may't get.
9. And as the Flowers from roots, must dye
or serve for Ornament,
So's he that can himself deny,
spend, or (for Christ) be spent.
10, A tree there grew that makes wise
discerning good and evil,
Makes face to shine, 'light'ns the eyes
its fruit, expels the devil.
11. A burning plant did next appear
hot in the fourth degree,
That warms the breasts of all sincere,
and makes them zealous be.
12. Then last I Sempiternum, viewed
whose greeness did surpass:
And by the Sun 'twas still bedewed,
this perseverance, was.
Now while I recreation had
to bind them up to gather
The Keepers voice me called, and bad
me first, to come up thither.
I went immediately, and he
int' a green arbor led,
Propounding of a mystery:
or riddle, and (thus he said.)
A pleasant plant in Eden grows,
Not every one it is value knows.
Its orient colors, shine out most
And smells most fragrant in the frost,
It beautifies deformed faces,
And the compleatest beauties, graces:
Its root does grow, above its stalks:
And as it spreads in fruit, it walks,
It Is low and often trod down by beasts,
Yet in its branches fowls build nests.
Its name and root if you once find,
And eat it will, sight restore if blind.
As life by eating once was lost;
So it is restored without all cost.
The tree of death was once dear bought
Now that of lif's enjoyed for naught.
The more it is plucked the more 'twil spread
It kills the quick, enlivens the dead,
Pluck it, and tell, what it is and whence,
A crown then is your recompense.
When I this riddle had pondered well
its meaning for to know,
Light from above, upon me fell
and did the secret show.
(The Answer to it.)
The Root is Christ, the Plant is Grace.
Which will the pure in glory place.
Next i will you tell of Edens Well.
AMidst Gods Garden did appear
A fountain, that was sweet and clear.
A pleasanter was never seen:
It kept the plants all fresh, and green.
Still flowing full but inexhaust,
Inviting all that saw't, to taste,
And come, drink in a golden cup,
These living waters bubbling up.
Hence Sanctuary-streams derive
That still keep all Gods roots alive.
In Golden pipes still issuing,
Cooling and chearing, every thing.
In it all that do wash their eyes,
May penetrate deep mysteries.
Like Manna 't tastes, as Milk and Honey,
Its waters run free without money.
All that to wash into it go
(Though leprous) 't makes them white as Snow.
The spots of sin, and Conscience-grypes,
And stains away it purely wipes.
He that does drink of this, in store,
For other Cisterns thirsts no more.
179 Hymn. Of the Fruit of Edens Garden.

NOw as mine eye did contemplate
and Edens Fruits desire,
To the tree of Life, the open gate,
I longing did enquire.
Considering what is on record,
of Adam and his Wife;
Kept by an Angels flaming Sword,
out from that tree of Life.
And now an angel to me flew,
having received command,
That tree of life to me to show,
and gave First Fruits in hand.
But told me, that above it grew
amidst Gods paradise;
One branch of which, gave such a show,
as dazzled mortal eyes:
This branch did over the wall extend,
with most delightful taste,
And down within my reach descend;
to eat my soul made have.
This beauteous and glorious branch
with choice fruits did abound
Its Kingdom to our times did lanch,
though with a cross first crowned.
To stay my longings often there fell
its apples here, and there,
These promises did relish well,
both food and physic were.
One also brought flagons of Wine
and bad me drink, and gather
The clusters of the choicest Vine*
for plant it did the Father.
180 Hymn. (Vltimate Glory.)

THis upper Garden on the mount
I longed and climbed to enter,
But under ground, (one gave account)
I through a Cave must venture.
This Cave I dark and silent found,
the first sight caused me weep,
One step me lodged next under ground
and there I fell asleep.
Yet prospect got I, (ere I slept,)
by faith, (at a small hole,)
Embalmed in Christ I should be kept
there he will not leave my soul.
Then flew it i. e. the soul
strait to paradise
such sleep to it, was gain,
My flesh did rest in hope to arise:
and both (with Christ) to reign.
Thus I put off mortality,
asleep (with little pain:)
In state immortal, by and by,
to rise and live again.
There I bad all the world adieu
here Sword and Shield let fall,
Looking to be arrayed anew,
when God is all in all.
But whilst I (at this Port deferred,)
did for my passage long:
Melodious Chore's within I heard,
so I in consort sung.
181 Hymn.
An Hymn of the immortal joys.
Where pains, nor sighs, nor sin annoys.
Psalm. 16. ult. 2 Timothy 1.10. 1. Pet. 1.4.

LOrd in thy Gospel tidings be
of death abolish't quite;
And life with immortality,
therein is brought to light.
This glorious mystery, (concealed
in Types) from ages past,
Thou in due time (by Christ) revealed
to us in mercy have.
This mystery does far excel,
all wisdoms transitory;
That in beleivers Christ should dwell,
the hope of future glory.
That Christ before us up should go,
and Anchor for us cast;
And for us intercede also,
then fetch us home at last.
If first fruit-joys, are here so great,
of immortality,
To reap an Harvest day complete,
what will the shouting be?
If tokens from espousing love,
so well the heart will stay;
What will the Bridegrooms coming prove
O what the marriage day?
If anchor cast within the vail,
may give so strong comfort;
What will our entrance with full sail,
into eternal Port?
Here Ends the first Part.
A Table Alphabetical the Title or Subject.
Hymn. 4 ABba adoption longed for Page 4 Hymn. 1 The two Adams, first and
second Page 1 Hymn. 51 Achitophels crafts defeat Page 57 Hymn. 140 Accusations
of Satan Page 171 Hymn. 53 Anger turned away Page 59 Hymn. 66 Ark before Dagon
(God gone) Page 75 Ark anchors (vid.) Bark Hymn. 35 BAbel a cry against it Page
38 Hymn. 171 Battle God never lost it Page 190 Hymn. 143 The Blazing Star, 1680
Page 164 Hymn. 125 Gods Bark (or Ark) anchored Page 144 Hymn. 183 Branch of
Christ glorious Page 218 Hymn. 134 Blessings 20 praised Page 155 Hymn. 102 No
Brier, or Thorn, to Zion Page 119 Hymn. 121 British Isles their Song Page 140
Hymn. 75 The burnt-scorcht Vine Page 86 Hymn. 32 Burnt in love to Christ Page
35 Hymn. 2 CAnan's sips Page 2 Hymn. 99 Changes do Gods will Page 138 Hymn. 95
Chores of Cherubs Page 110 Hymn. 101 Creation-groan, releiv'd Page 118 Hymn. 99
Christ's Iron-rod a stay Page 35 Hymn. 23 -- two sighs for him Page 25 Hymn. 20
Complaints 3 for Zion Page 22, 25, 143 Hymn. 124 Content in Gods will Page 103
Hymn. 66 The Cross is finite Page 75 Hymn. 56 A Cry for righteousness Page 63
Hymn. 143 Comet in December in 2 or 3 parts Page 165 Hymn. 34 Cornerstone Page
38 Hymn. 154 DEath of young Children Page 177 Hymn. 123 Deeps 2 or 3 cries
thence Page 142 Hymn. 43 Deliverance, joy to the Isles Page 48 Hymn. 170 The
late Dissolution Page 198 Hymn. 178 The Dove solitary Page 208 Hymn. 13 A
doxology of praise Page 14 Hymn. 12 Dry bones shall live and rise Page 13 Hymn.
180 EDens plants and flowers Page 213 Hymn. 133 Elders 24 sing to the Lamb Page
153 Hymn. 172 Elect to see their good Page 200 Hymn. 171 Election the chain of
it sure Page 201, 6 Hymn. 175 -- free in, not for Christ Page 206 Hymn. 108
Elijah's intercession Page 126 Hymn. 33 Enjoyment on longings Page 36 Hymn. 70
Enquiries for Christ the Spouse Page 78 Hymn. 90 Entertainment with Christ Page
105 Hymn. 145 The Ethiopian loved Page 167 Hymn. 21 FAith's Song in the night
Page 23 Hymn. 29 -- Its breath in a sound Page 32 Hymn. 36 -- Its triumph Page
39 Hymn. 174 Falsehood and perjury Page 203 Hymn. 151 Fire in Breadstreet Page
174 Hymn. 10 Future good hoped Page 11 Hymn. 178 GArden Plants Page 209 Hymn.
58 Gods countenance begged Page 65 Hymn. 177 45 -- 's Gifts and Calls free Page
207, 50 Hymn. 61 Gods presence defends us Page 69 Hymn. 93 Gospel call to the
Isles Page 106 Hymn. 180 Full of Glory Page 210 Hymn. 55 A Groan from ill times
Page 62 Hymn. 61 HAnd on Gods throne Page 69 Hymn. 141 Harlot of Rome judged
Page 162 Hymn. 156 For Health's return two Songs Page 180 Hymn. 109 Hope and
fear toss us Page 127 Hymn. 67 Hope and love groap Page 76 Hymn. 46 -- in
Zion's distress Page 51 Hymn. 169 Horns against the whore Page 197 Hymn. 104
The ten horns to burn Rome Page 121 Hymn. 43 Two Hosannahs to Christ Page 48
Hymn. 22 IDols their fall Page 24 Hymn. 122 Immanuel's Land's Song Page 141
Hymn. 181 Immortal joys Page 220 Hymn. 63 Incarnation a song on it Page 71 Hymn.
18 Intercession of Christ 2 parts Page 20 -- (see Elijahs) Hymn. 135 Instrument
of 7 strings Page 156 Isles. (See Britain) Hymn. 136 -- Christ their Physician
Page 157 Hymn. 107 Jubilee ( see Sabbath) Page 125 Hymn. 112 -- the effect in
Salvation Page 130 Hymn. 121 KIds bleating Page 148 Hymn. 148 Christ's care for
them Page 170 Hymn. 128 He fights to defend them Page 141 Hymn. 83 Kinds of
mercy sung on Page 95 Hymn. 90 A kiss reconciles Page 103 Hymn. 163 Kingdom of
Christ its blessing Page 188 Hymn. 3 Two LAmentations of the times Page 3 Hymn.
73 -- for Christ's absence Page 83 Hymn. 28 -- fears of Rome Page 20 Hymn. 79
Lambs feast of Love Page 91 Hymn. 81 -- his reign our rest Page 93 Hymn. 80 --
his song of Triumph Page 91 Hymn. 131 The flock sing of him Page 152 Hymn. 161
Light in darkness Page 185 Hymn. 15 Longings in search of Christ Page 16 Hymn.
157 MArtyrs for Christ Page 204 Hymn. 159 Meditation on Gods works Page 183
Hymn. 161 Morning Star near Page 185 Hymn. 65 Motives to love Christ Page 73
Hymn. 98 Mount appearances Page 113 Hymn. 143 NEws of Christ's Star Page 164
Hymn. 96 Nebuchadnezzars furnace Page 111 Hymn. 87 New Jerusalems glory Page
100 Hymn. 74 Nightingals night song Page 84 Hymn. 140 OAth of God for his
throne Page 161 Hymn. 5, 35 Ode precatory the Thirsty Page 5, 38 Hymn. 147 One
thing desired Page 169 Hymn. 30 PAntings for Zions King Page 33 Hymn. 180
Paradise its 12 Plants Page 214 Hymn. 14 Petition for the spirit Page 15 Pisgah
sight. (See Cannaan) Hymn. 60 Plotters prevented, frustrate, punished Page 68,
130, 160 Hymn. 76 Pilgrims two or three Songs Page 90 Hymn. 105 Prayers
returned, terrible Page 122 Hymn. 117 Providential works Page 135 Hymn. 8 Pure
worship longed for Page 8 Hymn. 153 -- pleaded for Page 176 Hymn. 168 Quenching
for sparks of wrath on Zion Page 195 Hymn. 41 RAmpant Lion is Christ Page 48
Hymn. 164 Rain after long drought Page 189 Hymn. 158 Rebuke to the Tempter Page
182 Hymn. 39 Redemption by Christ in 3 or 4 parts Page 43 Hymn. 11
Resurrection-state Page 12 Hymn. 57 Return of Prayers is amends for delays Page
66 A Riddle of Eden Page 215 Hymn. 18 A royal Song of Christ Page 19 Hymn. 68
Christ returned, is retained Page 78 Hymn. 107 SAbbath Gospel jubilee Page 125
Hymn. 44 Salvation the 24 Elders sing Page 49 Hymn. 130 Sighs for the great
Shepherd Page 150 Hymn. 17 -- for a sight of Jesus Page 17, 51, 2 Hymn. 130 The
Shepherds answer to Lambs Page 150 Hymn. 64 Sight of that plant renowned Page
72 Hymn. 176 A Soliloquy for solitary Page 208 Hymn. 111 Songs of deliverance
Page 129 Hymn. 86 -- of the last sight of God Page 102 Hymn. 48 Souls one only
desire Page 54 Hymn. 143 Star of Christ and that Comet Page 164 Hymn. 124
Subjection, contentment Page 143 Hymn. 164 Submission to Gods will Page 193
Hymn. 86 Terror of the judgment Page 98 Hymn. 68 Thirst to see God in Zion
Page 77 Hymn. 94 Throne of God glorious Page 107 Hymn. 149 Time of Satan short
Page 171 Hymn. 96 Three Childrens furnace Page 111 Hymn. 126 Be Thankful for
all Page 145 Hymn. 6, 26 A Threnetick for creation Page 6, 28 Hymn. 30 -- also
for Zion Page 33 Hymn. 25 Triumph of Saints Page 27 Hymn. 31 Turtle-doves note
Page 34 Hymn. 68 VAlley of Bacah Page 77 Hymn. 115 Victorious Halelujah's Page
133 Hymn. 71 Vine of Christ bleeding Page 80 Hymn. 54 Virgins call to trim up
Page 60 Hymn. 138 Vine a prophecy of it Page 160 Hymn. 85 Union and Communion
with Christ Page 97 Hymn. 128 Voice of our Shepherd Page 148 Hymn. 165 Vocation
a great blessing Page 191 Hymn. 63 Vision of the Lamb in Flesh Page 71 Hymn.
173 -- in Flames Page 201 Hymn. 184 Upper Garden's ultimate glory Page 219
Hymn. 77 Vials on Rome our cool gales Page 88 Hymn. 182 WEll of lif's spring
Page 216 Hymn. 91 Welcome to Christ's return Page 104 Hymn. 99 Wheels all roll
as God will Page 116 Hymn. 154 Wishes sent to a friend Page 177 Hymn. 104 Whore
and Dragon conquered Page 121 Hymn. 84 World under foot a beauty Page 96 Hymn.
97 YEars of jubilee Page 112 Hymn. 189 Yelling Wolves rang Page 148 Hymn. 96
ZEal as hot as Nebuchadnez. furnace Page 111 Hymn. 7 Zions lamentation for the
Lord Page 7 Hymn. 113 Zions joy surprises Page 131
Postscript.
Reader,
THE Author intends a Second Part all on the Scripture, if these bring but in,
his bare charges; but Observator Numb. 87. is so bold with Law, to come to a
Conventicle; forge a name, and abuse Ra-Conscience, and pervert part of a Hymn,
citing it (as Satan did Scripture) in part only, so tender he is of that old
Roman Nimrod that he will help to start a prey by barking at words, and next
imposing his sense, that verse was At Babel first confusion came,
Lord send it once again;
In her confusion raise thy name,
So finish Nimrods reign-
But to leave him to's scurrilous scrible, until the next House of Lords touze
him; I add

There being a late discourse of that Comet; the Reader is desired with that
book on Matthew. 2. to compare G. Withers in's Speccul. Sp. p. 132.

There will (to thwart their hopes) a New Star blaze
Within the West, that shall the World amaze;
And influences, through the universe
So quickly, and prodigiously disperse;
That aided by concurring Constellations,
It shall have some effects upon most Nations;
And cause such changes, as will make a stand,
In those attempts that now men have in hand, etc.
FINIS.

