LAZARUS HIS REST. Preached in a Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Ephraim Udall,
that famous Divine in London.

By THO. REEVE, Bachelor in Divinity.

Pastor ac pauper hac sunt homini Christiano ornamenta -- Mox ventilabrunt
adest paleas secerint a frumento, and quod leve est, and instabile sejungit ab
eo, quod alendi vim habet -- Non vereor accedere veretati non sum ad
sycophantiam commodus,

Basil. hom, 26. de Martyr mamante. Fugit sicut Loath, qui renuntiat viros,
abdicat se incolarum moribus, qui post se non respicit,

Amb. l. de fugae saeculi. c. 9. Nec enim saltem attingere debet praeclari
hujus muneris functionem, nisi paratus sit millies animam suam in mortem
tradere,

Jo. Chrysostom. de laudibus D. Pauli. hom. 6. LONDON, Printed for H. Moseley, at
the sign of the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1647.

Lazarus his Rest. Preached in a Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Ephraim Vdall,
etc.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. Death in it self
is hideous, Psalm. 116.15.
but considered in the Saints, precious; it is so in Gods sight, and shall it
not in men's? Yes we should look upon such occasions with Gods eye, see as he
see, prize as he prize; not make that death wretched, that he makes blessed;
nor that vile that he makes precious, for a precious Saint makes a precious
death. Pretitious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

Such a Saint I am now to present unto you, in whom we see scarce any infirmity
but that of nature, or little other scarre then that of the grave; Death might
unskin him, but it could not un-Saint him: no, he is the less man for death,
but not the less Saint; -- Vivit post su^era virtus.
he was a timely Saint, and therefore not a Saint to be untimed, he was a Saint
in life, a saint in death, therefore a saint after death; we may bury the man,
but we cannot the saint; no, in this he remains still vigorous, still precious,
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints.

And well may I say precious, I say not, what urn had in it more precious
ashes? but what shrine has had in it more sacred dust? There is a religion
that talks much of their saints working miracles, but here is one that
wrought the true miracles; he cured diseases, even the diseases of corrupt
nature, and drove away Devils, even Legions that came to possess him; when he
entered into the most serious search of himself, he could spy out nothing but
humane frailties; Pray (Sir) said he I beseech you, for the forgiveness of my
sins I mean my humane frailties, no other thing, I praise God does burden me.
O cleansed piece that had nothing in him but that soy^e, that concupiscence
^^ineth us withal! for besides that hereditary poison, Virus paternum Aug.
Peccata surreptionis: Aug. Peccata quotidianae incursionis. Tertull. Abrasa
spurcitiae vi^ae secularis. Bern. In mundo supra mundumesse. Amb. Sanctitas
munditiem significat Aquin. Zach. 9.7. Dan, 12.10. Heb. 10.22. Rev. 3.4.
and a few swellings, I mean inordinate motions, frail weaknesses and sudden
passions, sins of surreption, and daily incursion, he could discern no venom
in him; a man he was, but one that had as little of man as could be imagined;
unless therefore ye would have had him never to have been skinned in our
nature, what lesser imperfections could ye have wished to have been in him? no,
a saint he was because he had so little entirenesse with the flesh; because the
filth of wordly retriment was taken out of him, because he did learn in the
world to be above the world. If sanctity signify cleanness, then what a
rinsed creature have we here?

Envy it self cannot put him amongst the spots of the times, no, one he was
that might stand amongst them, which had the blood taken out of their mouths;
amongst them which were purified, and made white, amongst them which had washed
their bodies with pure water; amongst them, which had not defiled their
garments, his whole life being nothing but a study of self denial, and a
practice of mortification; he was no drunkard, no adulterer, no oppressor.

1 No drunkard, his temperance such, that he scarce ever knew an intemperate
draught, or drank to satisfy delight; that whereas he lived in the midst of a
riotous age wholly given up to excess (for this is a new kind of measure where
men drink beyond measure, Novum hoc mensurae genus, ubi nullus est mensurae
modus Amb. Vasa vinaria. Basil. Castitas est virtus sub jugo rationis impetum
libidinis refraenans, Aug. Si cingulo castitatis careas, omnia per terram
trahes. Ierom.
men carousing so long till they smell above ground, and seem to be nothing
else but wine casks) he seemed to be born to pluck the quaffing cup from the
mouths of Boon fellows, and to teach the world sobriety.

2 No adulterer, his chastity was such, that he did keep that wild beast of
lust under a yoke, he kept his garments from drabling by tying them up, by the
girdle of continency, he never knew any strange flesh; no, he betrothed his
affections to one, and as he loved her dearly, so he loved her only. That
whereas many walk the streets to meet with an unclean spirit, and dissolve the
bands of marriage as easily as Sampson did his green cords; these bands to him
were sacred and inviolable, he never desired to have them untwisted; he
possessed his vessel in holiness, and honor, he might stand forth as a
mirror of chastity. 1 These. 4.4.


3 He was no oppressor, his justice such that he never pinched for means, nor
fetched in the world with the dragge take; no, he had rather content himself
with food convenient, then raise his flanks by feeding upon other men's rights;
Divitem vell^ fieri de exiguitate mendici Cassiodor. Incommode commodum augere.
Cicero.
he never liked that estate that was wrested from the poores pittance, or that
came weeping home with the tears of the oppressed in it, no, he would not by
damage raise advantage. That whereas in this gripple extorting age, men care
not what key they use, so it will but unlock the door, or what hook they bait,
so it will but draw up lucre; great they will be, though it be with the curses
of multitudes, possess they will, though it be with an Ahabs evidence; he on
the other side kept his hands clean from all these unjust gains, Micah. 2.2.
he did never oppress a man, and his house, a man and his heritage.

What should I speak further of any vicious courses that this world is deeply
criminal in? he was touched with no gross sin; no, a Saint he was because he
carried a crucified heart to all that which the world calls contentment; he was
one that had passed through the refiners fire, and that had the fullers nitre
seen upon him, a Saint he was to the world, and a Saint no doubt he is to God
for his unspotted conversation, yea questionles even for his purity, he is
amongst those Armies of heaven, which follow the Lamb upon the white horses,
clothed in fine liynen, white, Rev. 19.14.
and clean.

But this ye will say is all but mortification, had he nothing in him of
vivification? yes he was enlivened with the most quickening powers of the
Spirit; his loins were not only girt up, but his lamp was burning, a Saint he
was for the most saintly expression.

How many singular graces and conspicuous virtues had he in him? I will not
insist upon all. I will mention a few; he was humble, he was peaceable, he was
charitable, he was devour, he was sincere.

1 He was humble, of no haughty, insolent demeanor, but the meekned creature
of his times, 1 Pet. 5.5. Cogitas magnam conslituere fabricam Celsitudinis? de
fundamento prius cogita humilitatis Aug. Psalm. 131.2.
one of the gentlest persons that ever trod your streets, a man clothed with
humility; being to raise a great fabric, he be thought himself of a low
foundation, his affections so soft, that his soul was even as a weaned child,
of a sweet, affable, courteous disposition, familiar with the meanest.

2 Peaceable, the well tuned string of the instrument, the calm stream of
Profession, he knew that to live in unity was to live an Angelical life, Nec
inveniri potest forma expressior conversationis Angelicae; quam unitas
socialis. Caffiodor. Ezech. 28.24. Number. 12.3. Tu nimium oneta^us es, da, and
pondus minuis Aug. Neh. 8.10. I^^is substantiam tuam colloca ubi patriam habes.
Chris. Job. 29.25.
therefore he composed his spirit to his heavenly temper, he never disquieted
the age with contentions, nor vexed his Parish with suits, but made more use of
his buckler then his sword, patience then revenge, no pricking brier or
grieving thorn, but very meek above all the men upon earth.

3 Charitable, so long as he enjoyed means, he thought himself over burdened,
till he had lightened himself with alms deeds he had no lither arm, for he did
stre^ch out his hand to the need; he fed not himself only out of his means,
but he did send portions to them, for whom none was provided, he loved to have
a stock going in his right country. The riches of his liberality 2. Cor. 8.2.
is sufficiently known to you all, he delighted to be another Job, even as one
that comforieth the mourners. How many tasled of his liberal spirit? yea how
many might even have perished if they had not been sustained by the virtue of
his charity?

4. Devout, not one that upheld a profession wherein there was nothing to be
seen, but the phantasme of Religion; not one of Thriverus his needle work
flowers, which are more for show then smell, Phantasma religionis Gorg. Romans
12.12.
but a man that glowed toward his God, and was fervent in the spirit; much
time he spent in meditation, much in prayer, he was the blown coal of zeal,
the bright flame of devotion.

5. Sincere, that is but a thickbrained strictness, that has not in it
simplicity, therefore out dear brother said he liked always in matter of
Religion clearness of spirit; Stulta rectitudo sine simplicitate. Beda. Ephesians.
6.5. 1 Timothy 1.5.
he could not double, nor comply; no what his conscience was persuaded of, he
followed in singlenes of heart; he hated palliating of a cause, what he
professed was out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and says unseined;
he had rather eclipse his credit, then suppress a truth; yea suffer death,
then be guilty of backsliding or revolting.

A Saint then he was in all these respects, and by all these graces shall he
not be justified before men? yes no doubt, and glorified with his God; he which
did thus excel in virtue is questionless now come to his true mount, Psalm.
16.3.
, God has taken home his true Saint to himself, Collos. 1.12. Gaudet
unusquisque angelorum tale onus tangere.
and made such a bright creature a meet partaker of the inheritance of the
Saints in light. Every one of the angels delighted to touch, to carry away
such a burden, as Chrysostom. said of the soul of Lazarus. And the rather for his
high perfections in his own calling.

Tunc est sermo vivus and efficax, cum est praeditantis sanctitas, and virtuosa
perfectibilitas. Greg.
A Minister he was and what not a Saint in his own sacred function? yes, then is
the Word lively and effectual when it is edged with the sanctified and
gracious life of the Teacher; and what an exact, accomplished Teacher have we
here? a man that had in him the very luster of piety, and splendor of
sanctity; few men had greater judgment, none greater integrity; he was not
only one of the walking Libraries, and speaking Oracles of his age a most
judicious, and industrious Preacher but a most gracious liver a burning and a
shining Lamp. Seipsum primo immolet, se primum vitiis sugulet, and sua prius
peccato membra mortificet, Orig. l. in Epist. ad Romans
He had learned well that of Origin that the Priest which would sacrifice for
others must take heed of a spot in his own oblation, he must first offer up
himself, kill his own personal vices, mortity his own unregenerate
corruptions. For what pleasant fruit can the people taste out of the Pulpit, if
the Minister himself should happen to be a wild Plant? Can a man gather
grapes of thorns?

Sermo dulcedi nem non habet, quem vita reproba intra conscientiam remordet,
Greg. in fine Pastoral.
That doctrine has no sweetness, which a reprobate life corrupts; no, a pure
conscience does more edify then curious discourse. Therefore how strict was
this our dear Brother to have his life exemplary, to deliver not only pointed
speeches, but to wound consciences by the sight of his innocent conversation?
there was nothing did drop out of his lips but it seemed to flow from the
clear spring of his own sanctified heart; he would not suffer his doctrine
to be traduced by the scandal of his life; Ad praedicandum plus conscientia
sancti amoris aedificat, quam exercitatio sermonis. Id. super Ezech. hom. 10.
Qui enim Christum annuntiat, ab omni vitiorum incentivo debet praestare se
alienum. Amb. in Ser. de. jejun.
no, he preached nothing in the Pulpit, but he first preached it to himself in
his Closet, his counsel was but the counterpane of his conversation, he knew
the Messenger of Christ had need be the most inculpable person upon earth; What
beneficial thing can he do to the Church, which remains himself a skarre
among men? or what comfort can it be to any man's soul to renew others, and to
continue himself uncorrigible? No, unto the ungodly said God. Why take thou
my covenant into thy mouth, and hate to be reformed? such an one may say with
the Father, I have drawn out a fair picture which exceeds the Painters
beauty, and have set others on shore, being tossing my self still upon the
waves of dangerous sins. Pulchrum depinxi hominem pictor foedus, aliosque ad
perfectionis ^^itus redigo, qui adhuc in delictorum fluctibus versor. Greg. in
Pastoral.
Therefore our Brother was careful to have the best man of the parish best
instructed, even to have his own demeanor, a kind of translated Scripture, or
the great Text to his people, lest when he had preached to others, himself
should be found a Reprobate.

The behavior then of this our dear and reverend Brother was nothing else but
the high prospect of virtue; and as he wanted not grace, so what wanted he
else to make him an eminent Minister? I known, 1 Cor. 4.1.
it is required of the Disposers, that every one be found faithful, and a
faithfuller steward there was scarce belonging to the whole family, that as he
dug the gold mines for treasure, and sought for wisdom as for Silver, so he
dispersed his Ingots with great fidelity. He labored in the Word, and
doctrine, labored till his labors were a burden, labored till he was scarce
able to labor; yet his feeble and crasie body could not intermit his pains,
but he strove with nature, and forced himself beyond nature; 2 Timothy 2.15. 2
Cor. 8.23. Es. 62.6.
a diligent workman he was, and one that needed not to be ashamed; he was one
of those Messengers of the Churchs, that was the glory of Christ, a Watchman
that did not hold his peace upon the walls, day nor night. How many of you saw
the Evidence of the Spirit in his teaching? How many of you have the seal of
his Ministry upon your consciences? a multitude of lost groates were found by
the light of this Candle, many thousand Converts have occasion in this City to
bless God, that ever their ears came under his charming, that ever they stood
within the presence of such a Pastor according to Gods own heart, Ier. 3.
who did feed them with wisdom and knowledge. A Saint then he was in the whole
course of his life, but an eminent Saint in his Ministry.

But if his Pulpit could not save him, Ibin asunt ubi consenuit, jamque quod
erat turbidum expiravit, aromatice olere, Plut. in mor. Athletae cum metam
vident, and accedunt propius, et si fessi, approperant, Thriv. l. 1. c. 1. mon.
and exemp.
his Deathbed did. Our Ibis having purged out of him every thing that was
offensive and ill savouring did at the last gasp smell most odoriferously,
yea, like one skillful in running of a race, when he drew nigh to the mark, he
did quicken his pace. Oh how admirable were his passages upon his deathbed? he
departed like a passionate Pilgrim, longing to set foot upon his own Country.
He did not then only patiently endure affliction, or spy out Death sapping
into his walls, but he turned himself out of this world, and looked out with
an aching ey to see his last Messenger approach, he declared a lively confidence
that he had of a mystical union with God, and aspired to have the fruition of
those joys, that he had got an engagement of by faith. Here I might speak
much, but I am struck mute by the command of my dead Friend, he has silenced
me from publishing any thing, that passed between us in private concerning his
spiritual scrutiny, his profession of faith, or the experimental grounds that
he found in himself of divine favor. But this I assute you that he died like
a man singularly studied in the deepest mysteries, and sealed up his life with
a most judicious, and firm consent to his professed principles; yea, I never
met with a more Angelical tongue, and ravished soul upon such a solemn
occasion.

His life then was admirable, but his death memorable, there he was a Saint in
transcendency. Dead then he is, but dead to his God; dead he is, but with the
death of a Saint; God and his saint are met, and after all the miseries of
death* what can we expect, but that which is precious? if the world should
still look upon him with an ey of neglect, God no doubt looks upon him with an
eye of divine favor; let him therefore be in thy sight, as he is in Gods
sight. Oh that thou saw but the honor that is done unto him above I that
thou saw but the noble entertainment which he has received at Court! what
brightness did there shine upon him at the opening of Heaven gates! what an
ecstasy has this soul felt by the raptive Hallelujahs of Angels! the hidden
Mannah is already melting in his mouth, the robe of glory is upon his back, the
crown of eternity is set upon his head the which sought for wisdom more
precious then Rubies, Pro. 3.15. Prove. 20.15. Ps. 126.6. Eccles. 7.1.
and had the lips of knowledge which are as a precious jewel, which went
forth weeping bearing his precious seed with him* and left a good name behind
him, better then a precious ointment he knows no doubt before this time the
benefit of a precious faith, 2 Pet. 1.1.
and has felt the comfort of the great and precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4.
he is gotten into the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21.19.
whose foundations are garnished with all manner of precious stones, and joined
to his blessed Redeemer, that precious, tried, corner stone laid in Sion. Es.
28.16.
Oh then let us not look sad at his death, for it is the death of a Saint,
precious let him be in our memory, for he is precious in Gods sight. Precious
in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. Text.


Jo. 11.11. Our friend Lazarus sleeps.

Christ is going to Judea, v. 7. and the Disciples think he is going to a
stone heap, for the Jews sought lately to stone thee, and will thou go
thither again? v. 8. No says Christ, my intention is not for the stone-heape,
but a dust heap; I may go amongst the living, but my purpose is for the dead;
this journey is not for my wakefull enemies, but my sleeping Friend, Our friend
Lazarus sleeps. Lazarus, I often visited thee at thy house, I will now visit
thee at thy grave; though Judea be a place envious, ominous, yet I will venture
to the stone-heape, for the dust-heapes sake, therefore Let us go into Judea,
for it is the sleeping couch of my Friend; Our friend Lazarus sleeps.

In the Text consider

1. The Nature of the person, Our friend 2. His name Lazarus 3. The accident
sleeps.
First for the Nature of the person, in which two things,

1. His Disposition, A friend. 2. His relation, Our friend.
First for his disposition, A friend. Christ would go into Judea for a Friend.
From hence observe that the memory of a friend should be precious, it is as the
dying ring bequeathed unto us, that nothing but death should pluck off from our
fingers, or as a sacred relic, that posterity should keep inviolate; that
when we cannot stand spectatours of our Friends, yet we should stand
Remembrancers* to recount all passages of worth, to preserve their graces; for
where else is the everlasting remembrancer, Psalm. 112.6. Prove. 10.7.
where the memory that should be blessed? Is not this commended to survivours
to take care of? Yes, that when they sive not, yet herein they should be
vital, they should have the breath of affection, for the breath in their
nostrills to continue them alive. Does not David thus chafe the temples of his
dead friend Jonathan? yes, Jonathan is gone, but Jonathan shall not thus part,
he shall breath still in commemoration, Woe is me, for thee my brother Jonathan
very kind have thou been to me, 2 Samuel 1.26.
thy love to me was wonderful passing the love of women, etc. Do not Elisha
thus call back Elias out of the clouds? My Father, my Father the Chariots of
Israel, 2 King 2.12.
and the horsemen thereof! he would not quite lose his Father, no, my Father, my
Father! he would not utterly let the Champion of his Country go, no the
Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof! he would have his Father still in
his eye, and the Kingdoms Champion dressed up in bright harness before him.
Do not the Jews thus preserve their good Josias still alive? yes, the memory
of Josias shall be like the perfume of the Apothecary, and as Music at a
banquet of wine. The smell of this persume shall not out of their nostrills,
Ecclus. 49.1.
the streynes of this music shall not out of their cares, the taste of this
banquet shall nor out of their palates, Josias shall live in memory. And this
is indeed the right committing of Friends to the earth, or the maintaining of
familiarity with them in their graves, Non ego tumulum floribus aspergam sed
spiritum ejus odore persundam, Amb. orat. funeb. de Valentin. Olim evisceratus
es, non tam subito erueris, Amb. orat. funebri de sat.
as Ambrose said of Valentinian I will not strew his tomb with flowers, but I
will sprinkle his spirit with a sweet odor, and this is the right enbalming of
Friends; he is but a formal Friend, that parts so soon as nature parts; no,
thou were long since embowelled into me thou shall not so suddenly be taken
out; still he remains, though not in sight yet in sense, still he is a Friend.
The use of this serves to reprove them which do so soon bury their Friends,
or put them so deep underground, or lay them with their faces downwards as if
being dead, they live no longer to them, the affection of the one, expectorates
with the wind of the other, zach. 11.
quod mortuum, mortuum, that which die let it die. Being once dead they never
pull off the dark mu^ster, to behold the face of their departed Friends, they
commit all to the earth, even the memory, they do not only bury that which
nature else would bury, the carcass, but they bury that which neither nature
nor grace should bury, they bury the friend, they three away all with the grave
spade; Priends carry nothing out of the world, nor they leave nothing in the
world, not their memory; they are but of short continuance, and a man may judge
it by the affection of them which they have left behind them; nature seemed
kinder to them, then seeming affection, for whereas nature suffered them to
live many years in the world, the other not three months, scarce three
minutes after their funeral, then earth to earth, one dead friend to another,
a double Funeral in one day.

Quanquam separati sumus aspectu non tamen affectibus. Amb. Perpetuus animae
debtor. Prudent. Quanquam nobiscum non vivit, attamen in nobis. Basil.
But is this affection? are these the bands of love? such a short stint put to
friendship? Do the pulse so soon leave beating? Have not one spark to glow
upon the grave of thy friend? yes though we be separated in sight, ye not in
apprehension, thou must still be a surety for thy friends reputation yea the
perpetual debtour of his spirit, to prize his name, to honor his memory, to
immortalise him, to give him a resurrection, to love him under ground as well
as above ground, that though he live not with us, yet he must live in us, still
he must be a friend. Christ cannot forget his friend, no let us go to Judea for
a friend.

Secondly from hence observe that we must venture for a friend, let us go to
Judea for a friend. 2 Doct.
It is a easy matter to say, Sir, I am wholly yours, it is the common
complement of the age. He loves his friend that exposes himself to danger for
him, Facile est dicere totus sum tuus Aug. 4. Ester 16. Cant. 8.6. Certandi
laborem non fugit. Chris. Incus non metuit strepitum. Adag. Use.
as Esther for her countrymen, If I perish, I perish. Love is as strong as
death sincere affection shunneth not a skirmish for a friend. The anvil of Love
fears not the greatest stroke of envy, and opposition; Jonathan will venture
to have a javelin cast at his head for his dear friend David, Abraham will
march through pikes and spears, to rescue his vowed friend Lot; we must
jeopard for a friend, let us go to Judea for a friend. The use of this serves
to reprove them which give over the venturous point, which run a way from the
stone heap; though hands be never so fastly joined together, yet if peril be
threatened, they unclose, pull back, withdraw, there is neither hand nor heart
then left; no, let the friend then shift for himself, if they can love a man u
pon safe terms they will stand by him, but if the stones begin to fly, Fugiunt
nee noscitur ulli. Agminibus comitum, qui modo cinctus erat.
they flee away and he is not known of any, that seemed before to carry the
crowd at his back. Men are then weary of friendship, sick of their friend, they
will not come at him, look upon him, but leave him to his own chance. But oh
beloved, a stranger an enemy might do thus much; that is but delicate
friendship therefore, that follows only the felicity of the friend, Sive in
vita, sive in morte.
passionate love like Ittai accompany a friend whether in life or death. The
name of a friend, should call thee out to all hazards, make thee to draw up
toward him, though thy passage lay by the stoneheap. Let us go to Judea, for a
Friend.

3. Doct. Pignus naturae. Avg. Omnis cogitatio taedium, and tota vita
peregrinatio est. Plut. Romans 12.18.
Thirdly, from hence observe that man's honor is to be of a friendly nature, for
this is the pledge of nature. Wherefore came thou into the world, but to be a
companion? if thou will not be a friend, every though is irksomeness, and the
Whole life a pilgrimage. What more worthy in man then humanity? and wherein can
humanity better be expressed then in friendship, wherefore says the Apostle,
As much as in you lies have peace with all men, keep the world quiet, distaste
no man; no, 1 Pet. 3.8.
be ye courteous one toward another, Let serpents sting, men embrace; Let wild
beasts be savage, men be courteous. The courteous man, draws the sweet breath
upon earth, gives to the world the fair touch, he is the pleasure of life,
the geinme of conversation, the right hand of familiarity, the link of society,
Dorice canere. Adag.
he makes men sing the Dorian tunes upon earth. Love brotherly fellowship says
the Apostle; brotherly fellowship, rather brotherly commerce, brotherly
fellowship, rather then unbrotherly frowardness; This brotherly fellowship is
the free tenure of the parish, the rest hold in villenage, the best town stock,
the rest is but a picklock to steal away the common treasure, for a litigious
person is the great boot haler, or harpy amongst men, 1 Pet. v. 17. Sive
irascatur, siverideat. Aug. Use.
whether he be angry or laugheth he is not to be trusted, for he is gendring of
mischiefs, to forage the country, and to pill the neighborhood; a man can
never be secure in his presence, for he is no friend. The use of this serves to
lament a sad casualty, a great misfortune is happened upon earth, the world
has lost her friend. We live in a froward age, a troublesome corner, the times
are set upon jangling, how hot soever the age be in spiritual fervor, yet it
warmeth not the Nation with affection, the love of many wax cold. Whatsoever a
sparkling coal there be in the Temple, yet there is but a dead ash in the
streets, burning zeal does not kindle kind respects amongst men. Many men have
no other spittle under their tongues then malice, their mouths are furred with
variances, Mites sunt donec nihil dicitur, vel agitur ni si pro eorum arbitrio,
Aug.
they are gentle creatures, so long as nothing be either said or done, but
according to their own wills, but then they rage and swell. He is a wise man,
which can tell in what breast truth of affection lies and that can weigh out to
himself a dram of unfeigned friendship for generally men can pronounce all
their Friends with a breath, Circuitu unguis.
and write all their Friends (as that wise man said) within the compass of a
nail. Oh these lips of ours speak a great deal of false English, these
arms of ours give many false embraces, these brows of ours have many false
smiles hanging upon them; if the Friend be common what is the reason that
peevishness and policy, and perfidiousnesse are so common? if the Friend be
common, why are suits, and spights so common? From whence come these tares?
Vnde-haec Zizania? Matt. 13.27.
from whence come these dissentions? If the world be at peace, why are there so
many Javelins, and Spears, Sacres, and Demiculverins, I mean so many
unkindnesses, and shrewd turns? doubtless these things show the flagge of
defiance hung out this is the drawing age, men fight at sharp. Armati coeunt
in vulniera fratres.
Brethren meet for wounds there is bickering, as in a pitched field. But oh
beloved, why abuse ye neighborhood? why make ye life a torment? chide out the
friend? 1. Pet. 1.22.
frown out the friend? no, love one another with a pure heart fervently. Be
not thou of a discourteous, much less of a vexatious disposition, but use the
world gently, give it a taste of thy good nature, Be a Friend.

But further a Friend, 4 Doct.
because helpful, for this party was a great Feast-maker. From hence observe,
that the helpful hand is the true trial of Friendship, he that never parts
with any thing, we account but a close Friend. A man may know whether the
Friend dwells at thy house, Si proximus non extit vacuo situ. Amb.
namely if thy poor neighbor goes not over thy threshold with an empty
bosom. He is not a Friend, which makes himself the sole Owner of his estate,
use for thy necessity, Vtere necessariis, da superflua, Aug. Quicquid ventria
subtrahis, tribuae esurienti. Naz. orat. de paup. amandis.
but give of thy superfluity. Whatsoever thou sparest from thine own belly,
distribute to the needy. He is real with the world, that turns Benefactour,
which has his spread table to witness his affection, when a man may smell out
the Friend in a Cook room, and get a taste of him in his messes, whose
almesdeeds are the pawnes of his affection, and the seals of his friendship.
Therefore the Apostle being to teach the world the duty of the Friend, says,
Be ready to distribute, sow liberally, 1 Timothy 6.17. 2 Cor. 9.6. Romans 12.13.
be given to hospitality. This same hospitality is a better argument of thy
friendship, then a hundred congies, and cringings. He loves the world, that
feeds the world; not which fills the ears of it with discourse, but the
bowels of it with dainties, the worlds great Friend, is a great Housekeeper.
Therefore Job eats not his morsels alone. Ioh 31.7. Genesis 18.1.5. Neh. 17, 18.
Abraham sits at his tent door to invite strangers, Nehemiah prepares Oxen
and Sheep, and Fowls, and Wine in abundance; this is serious affection, these
are the worlds fast Friends.

The use of this serves to reprove the hungry affection, Divitiis aligantur.
Cyp. Auram respicis, fratrem vero non aspicis, Basil. Ser. 1. in div. avar. Tu
phasianos, attagenas, turtures, and omnia volutilia coeli devoras, sed quod
pauperis repleat ventrem non largiris, Chrysostom. hom. 10 de divite, and paupere.
Thou look only upon thy cankring gold and not thy perishing brother. Thou
eatest Phesants, and Quails, and Turtles, and thy mouth is a lover to receive
all the fowls of heaven, but thou give not fragments to the needy. There is
an abundance of complement in these days, but little nourishment; thou may
be a consort, but no guest; thy friend may break his mind to thee, but he will
not break his bread to thee; our affection reaches not to belly cheer,
friendship is not Cauldron-deep No, such Friends we had once, which were known
by the. Dresser, they provided a Carver for the Country, the chief furniture
of their houses was the presence of neighbors, and the chief burnishing of
their rooms was hospitality, this they accounted better then stately
chimney-peeces, curious hangings, a goodly Balconey for Monsier to jet upon, or
a rich Cabinet for Madam to lay up her powders, and complexion-waters,
crisping-pinnes, and dentifrecis, civets and jewels. All the ambition of those
times was to get the long table filled, to have friends about them. Oh how did
charity ride then in a triumphant Chariot, and bounty flow in a full stream in
this Nation! But these men have left the ground behind them, but no such fair
feet to tread after them, they are lodged in another world, and a man would
think they died childlesse, so few of their true heirs do we find amongst us.
Some I confess there are, but they stand like Beauties in the midst of
steynings, they are not the Tenth to the full croppe, which we did once enjoy.
For many amongst us have magnificent buildings, but they might be pulled down,
for no Friend dwells in them; they feast none, or none but their kindred, and
their new created consanguinity, their Tenants, and their Workmen; if private
respects do not invite thee, thy trencher is not laid, thou shall then be fed
by the sight of their gay clothes, and not by the taste of their rich banquets,
by looking upon their painted Portals, and not by taking up a seat at their
garnished Tables. But oh! why do ye profess friendship to the world, and
maintain it with lean cheeks? no, provide diet for it, maintain it
full-fed. Therefore away with this saving humor, spare not more then is fit,
but be a helpful cherishing creature here below, Be a Friend.

The relation Our, Our Friend.

Now let us come to the relation Our. From hence observe, that we ought to
prize a Friend according to our own interest, Noster, Our (Our Friend) should
reflect strongly upon us, it should call us forth by name to witness our
particular respects. 1 Es.
The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters cribbe, where men have
received any food or nourishment, even for the cribbe and Mangers sake they
should know their good Masters. Worth ought to be acknowledged, especially of
them, which have received the benefit of it; it is accounted for inhumanity,
for the chief Butler not to know Joseph, Genesis 40.23. 1 Samuel 25.10.
and for Nabal to say, Quis est David? quis est filius Ishai? Who is this
David? who is this son of Ishai? knew he him not, when he had defended his
estate, and been a wall to him both by day and night. Benefits have a
resultancy of respect from all good natures; Can the Jews for get their good
Centurion? no, they plead for him, Luke 7.5.
He loves our Nation, and has built us a Synagogue. Can Naomi forget her
Boaz? no, he remained a Friend, when all other Friends were carried into the
land of forgetfulness, therefore whosoever is silent in his praises, she will
bless him. 2 Ruth 20.
Blessed be he of the Lord for he cease not to show kindness to the living,
and to the dead. Can the widows forget their Dorcas? no, they had a special
interest in her, therefore as others washed her, so they will bath her in
tears, as others laid her sorth, so they will lay her forth with honor, they
showed the coats and garments which Dorcas had made whilst she was living. 9.
Acts 39.
How dolefully does Saint Ambrose lament the deaths of Valentinian and Gracian?
Velut oculos mihi defossos dolco. Amb. orat. Auneb. de ob. Valentiniani sicut
duo vitulo simul educati, and sub codem jugo assueti -- lamentabili mugitu
omnia complerent, Greg. Naz. Monod. de vitae and morte Baz. Possum oblivisci
tui cum quo semper vitae hujus aratra sustinui? Amb. orat. funebri de ob.
Satyr. Use. Cantari dignus.
Oh (says he) they have pleasured me so often and were such a countenance to
my profession, that I bewail the loss of these two good Emperors, as if I
had lost my two eyes, Greg. Naz. speaking of his Basil, that they two being
brought up like two heyfers under the same yoke, when they came to part, they
filled all places with a lamentable bellowing. Saint Ambrose speaking of his
dear brother Satyrus says, Can I ever forget thee, with whom I have spent out
my life in laying my hand to the same plow-beame? no, these same relations make
holy men passionate, they speak feelingly of their proper Friend as our
Savior here, Amicus noster, Our Friend.

The use serves to reprove them which know not the command of an interest,
friendship is not in her right predicament in these days, we meet with few
Relatives in this age. For though a man be worthy to be celebrated, yet they
which have received the silvery shower of his perfections, are not moistened at
the root, with the apprehension of his worth, no, men are forgotten in the
place where they have done good: for how many parishes which have been
comforted, and honored with the presence of reverend, Eccles. 8.10. Geneva
transl.
and famous men, yet even amongst them the foot prints of their deserts are
worn out, and the memory of their excellencies is dried up? But oh know you
your celebrating part, especially when ye are prepared, and prompted to it by
personal advantages. Retaliating is the bond of Nature, Aristor. Praestita
dona numerantur, Cassio.
yea, its the justice of a grateful spirit, when benefits are kept upon tale,
when men are faithful Accountants, and skillful in this Arithmatique. Oh
therefore let not your Friend easily depart out of your mind, because he is
Yours, because ye have his friends tokens about you, in your judgments, in
your consciences; ye have been the limbecks through which his heavenly
doctrines have been distilled, ye have been the cruses into which his ghostly
counsels have been put, therefore whosoever expungeth the memory of his worth,
yet keep ye deep impressions of it, for ye have an inward feeling of it,
therefore call him by his right name, style him, and esteem him no less then
a Friend, if he should scarce be a neighbor to others, yet to you he must be a
Friend, for Amicus noster, Our Friend. But why does Christ say, Our Friend?
because he was a Friend to his person, and a Friend to his Cause.

First a Friend to his person, for he had often feasted Christ. From hence
observe, Charity is then in her eminency, when Christ is made the Guest; I
mean when profession has the taste of our bounty. For who deserves love better
then the Friends of Christ, those which sanctify the ground where they tread,
and bless Nations? This is no dress a dinner for the Church, Gal. 6.10.
and to put meat into the mouth of God. Do good unto all, but especially to
the household of faith; For ministering to the necessities of the Saints, is
Charitas ordinata, Charity rightly ordered. of the times, grace finds not the
age much charged with her. But whatsoever she spends upon others it is but for
her fame, Quicquid pro anima tua feceris hoc tuum est, Chris. in Mat. 6.
but whatsoever she spends upon the Saints is for your consciences, and that
which thou do for thy soul is only thine; Let them then be thy sable
fellows which thou look to have to be thy coheirs; that thou may have some
living Saint to pray for thee upon earth, that thou may have some dying Saint
to carry news of thy charity into heaven, endear thy self to God, and
ingratiate thy self chiefly to Christ Jesus, that there may be Amicus, and
Amicus noster, A Friend, and Our Friend, because a Friend to Christ's person.

Secondly a friend to his cause: from hence observe that religion ought to have
a portion in our affections, Doct. 2. These. 2.10. Luke 19.27. Acts 5.39. Mat.
12.30.
for the love of Christ is the love of his truth, the rest are accounted
enemies and fighters against God. For he that is not with me is against me. We
ought therefore to be printed Christ's, as Ignatius was said to have the name of
Christ written in his heart in golden Letters; Aurcis literis. Stricto ense
Plut.
yea as Scipio swear all his soldiers upon the edge of a naked sword to the
State of Rome, so we should all be sworn to profession. Can any man endure to
have his cause forsaken? no, he that will not insist in that his love is
suspected, and he will never be owned as a friend. Christ likes a feast well,
and will accept of a feast, but it is not a feast, that will perfect
friendship, no, the Pharisees often feasted Christ, and they were but
Charger-friends; therefore the main thing is to close with Christ in
profession, and to stand firm to him in point of honor, they are said to
receive Christ who receive his testimony, Acts 22.18.
that is those that subscribe to Christ's cause, and enter plea for him. Heb.
2.10.
Christ is called the Prince of our salvation, and wherefore? to signify that
there is some allegiance to be taken of us, and what greater then to maintain
Christ's crown, and dignity, those are Christ's loyal subjects which seek to
enlarge Christ's territory, and will draw their swords for their Prince, to
fight the good fight of faith, 1 Timothy 6.11.
which endeavor to make Christ great, and even walk with his princely robe
upon his back, and to sit in his imperial throne, these are those which are
true to Christ, which are his fast friends.

The use of this serves to examine, whether we have a^y of this love glowing in
our bosoms; no, Christ Jesus is even friendlesse, we are not much taken with
our Prince his scepter-point the Kingdom of heaven suffers little violence, we
do not gather parties and draw adherents to Christ; Christ is little the better
for us, his friend: do not pleasure him much, we do not furnish his banquet,
nor enter fellows into his service to wear his livery, not bring men to
repentance out of the snare of the Devil. 2 Timothy 2.26.
We plant no colonies, nor procure our Masters feet to tread upon new
territories; no, an outward league we are contented to maintain with Christ, a
civil combination to uphold correspondencies, but for Religion to prosper or
decay, to flourish or languish, to keep life or to draw home, it is all one to
us. But oh beloved, as Valerius was called Publicola for his love to the
commonwealth, so we should be called Christicolae for our faithfulness to
the common cause, Plutarch. 1 Cor. 16.22.
For if any man love not the Lord Jesus (and what greater love, then in seeking
to preserve the purity of the faith, and endeavoring to propagate the faith?)
let him be Anathema, Maranatha accursed, that is bitterly accursed; pity it
is, that thou should bear the name of Christ, if thou will not be a helper in
Christ, Romans 16.9. Col. 4.11.
a work-fellow to the Kingdom of Christ. Oh therefore be inward with Religion,
dear to Christ, sick of love to thy well beloved, justify his cause, vindicate
it from reproaches, every way endeavor to have souls added to the church, to
have numbers of believers turned unto the Lord, Act. 2.41. Act. 11.21.
for this is the cause of Christ, and they which love Christ, love his cause,
look therefore to the disposition, look to the relation, to be a friend and
Christ's friend, a friend to his cause, that it may be said, Amicus Noster. Our
Friend.

But why does Christ say Amicus noster Our friend, and not Amicus meus, my
Friend? because Christ was not contented to esteem him a Friend himself, but he
would have his disciples to own him, he would draw them into the bands, and
have a joint respect showed to him. Psalm. 15.5.
not only honor the Lord, but honor them that fear the Lord, not only
honor the Master but honor the servants; for as Alexander said of Hephestion,
This is also Alexander, Et hic Alexander est Plut. Deifici, Cypr. 1 Ioh. 5.1.
so this is also Gods; for godly men are particles of God, and God will be
honored in his particles. He that loves him that begat, loves him that is
begotten also. Gods Friends must not walk up and down as if they had none but
their master to take them by the hand, but the whole fraternity must
acknowledge them, for all my delight is in the Saints, Psalm. 16.3.
and such as excel in virtue; we should bless their expressions and desire
their acquaintance; if they be Christ's, they should be ours.

The use of this serves to reprove them, will love in man nothing but God, that
is the evidence of his grace, and how can the heart here be divided? no it is
coupled together with Christ's glue. Therefore Let God recommend friends to us,
Non amabit in homine nisi Deum. Aug. Christi glutino copulatur Aug.
if they bring along with them his certificate, that is, the fruits of his
Spirit for their Masters sake, let them be entertaind; if the Court has
bestowed honors upon them; and created them noble, let us give them their
titles, yea, carry ardent affection to them, for religion is the foulder of
spirits. Let us acknowledge the King in his image, God in his saint, for he is
Gods, therefore let him be ours, Ferrumen animarum Naz.
Noster Amicus Our Friend,

2 Part.
Now let us come to the name Lazarus, Lazarus, that was happy in estate, happy
in a privilege, happy in his kindred.

First happy in estate, for Bethany was his town, and he dwelt at the Castle.
Prove. 8.18.
God suffers them not to want that which is his, and thy will not suffer God to
want that which is theirs; he causes all things to abound to them, and
therefore they will not endure him to be scanted; the rich are not so unhappy,
but they may trust in the living God. 1 Timothy 6.17.


The rich and the poor meet together* and the Lord is the maker of them both.
Pro. 22.2.
Seeing then he is a common maker, his fingers have left no curse upon either,
they are kept asunder by some distance upon earth, Hoc attendite ne passim
divites reprehendatis. Aug. Non qui habet divitias sed qui custodit. Ier.
Sufficientiam rerum non indecenter vult, quisquis cum vult. Aug. Adsumenta
virtutum, Dishmar Ettim. Use.
yet they may both meet in heaven.

Take heed how ye reprove rich men hand over head, for not he which has
riches, but he that keeps them, is to be blamed. Whosoever desires it
sufficiently, desires it (if there be no other sinister ends) lawfully, riches
righty used are furtherances unto virtue. The use of this serves to reprove
them, which abuse Gods blessings; Oh that any man should be damned by riches,
yea that any man should not be saved by riches, for wherefore is there a price
in the hand of a fool to get wisdom (that is grace) and he has no heart unto
it? it is not the presence of riches which do the hurt, but the want of a
heart, not the liberal fortune, which brings the mischief, but the miserable
fool; riches are no manicles on the hand, but a price in the hand; he guides a
ship ill Pro. 17.16. Pro. 10.15. James 4.3. Prove. 3.9. 1 Timothy 6.19. Subsidium,
non pondus sunt. Greg.
that sinks by it. Order thy riches well therefore, make them not thy strong
confidence, consume them not on thy lusts, but honor the Lord with thy riches,
lay up by them a good foundation against the time to come, and thy riches are
not thy bane, but thy benefit; they are thy daily remembrancers of Gods favor,
and the high, lofty where thou may see Gods greatness, and goodness shining
the more brighty about thee. Thou may pray for all thy riches, and repent for
all thy riches, and bring forth fruit unto God for all thy riches; Riches
hinder not the motions of the spirit, nor intentions of grace. Thou may be
wealthy therefore, and for all this happy, for remember Lazarus the rich.

Secondly, Lazarus, happy in a privilege, Io. 11.4.
for This sickness is not unto death, but unto Gods glory, Lazarus was sick,
but not curse-sicke, but a I may say glory-sicke. Sick he was, but he should
fall into the hands of a good Physician, who would have credit of his Patient
honor of his Cure, the issue should be glory. From hence observe, that the
saints miseries, end in Gods glory. No marvel, that God says, Doct. Deuteronomy.
32.3.
that all his Saints are in his hands, for who can but wonder that calamity
should turn felicity, and affliction advantage, if the saints in these things
were not in the hands of God? but this is Gods workmanship, his Divine art the
skill of his providence, thus can the hands of God order things, that at last
there is nothing to be seen upon them but characters of glory. A godly man by
them is not pressed down, but lifts up; Non premitur sed levatur, Aug. ep.
45. Optimum genus gloriae, Bern. l. 2. Cons. c. 6.
yea, affliction to the Saint is the best kind of glory. All things shall work
together for the best of them which love God Romans 8.28. All things even the
worst things; all things even wretched things; let them work and ye shall see
them work kindly; God, and misery will at last work a strange work, though
they work not by themselves, yet they work together, not to tears, but to
triumph; not to confusion, but to admiration to what can be desired to more
then can be expected to the best; God will have the best out of the worst, if
people love God; he will have his love-markes seen upon them though they begin
in sorrow, or shame, yet they shall end in glory. Joseph got an Iron chain of
his heel (but oh the glory I) at last it ends in a golden chain about his
neck; Moses is cast into an Arc of Bull-rushes (but oh the glory!) at last he
is laid in the lap of a Princess; Jonas is cast overboard (but oh the
glory!) he is soon shipped into a new barge, a Whales belly, and after he has
been three days, and three nights Sea-sick, the crare shall turn the Prow to
land, and set Jonas safely on shore. Daniel droppeth into a Lions den (but oh
the glory!) not into the Lions jaws, no, the Lions are his Keepers, his strong
guard; the Lions at Court would not spare him, the Lions in the den would not
touch him; no, the Lions and Daniel are Chamber-fellows, Bed-fellowes; if
Daniel will take up a nights lodging with the Lions, he shall be as safe in
their den, as ever he was in his own chamber.

In sinu Dei positus, quid potest timere, Aug.
no happen what will, he cannot be shaken out of Gods bosom the rack of the
world may for a while terrify him, but the sight of Gods bosom soon
purifieth him, for the Saints rise up at last gayners by all their afflictions.
He knows my way and tries me and I shall come forth as gold; Job 23.10.
Afflictions are Gods melting vessel^, and the Saints never look so well as
when they come out of the fining pot, misery sets a kind of brightness upon
them they look as purely at last, as the tried gold. God will have glory in
us, not only in our welfare, but in our extremities. Out of the eater there
comes meat; the burning of the bush is a flame of astonishment, yea a blaze of
honor. As the Pomander being chafed, it gives the better sent, so a smell
comes from the Saints by their adversities; they are distressed for a while,
but in conclusion they are made future wonders, everlasting miracles,
spectacles of glory; The Saints miseries end in glory. This sickness is not
unto death, but unto Gods glory, Lazarus happy in a privilege.

Thirdly, Lazarus happy in his kindred; 3. V. 5. Doct. Nil prodest si moribus
dissidentes una habitatione jungantur. Rubar.
for as he was religious so they were virtuous. Jesus loves Martha Mary, and
Lazarus. From hence observe that it is a great blessing to have a sanctified
kindred, it profits nothing, if men differ in manners, though they be joined
together in the same family; no, this is like a godly picture, where the Graces
are wanting, as Apelles said of the piece of Protogenes; therefore that is
felicity, where all are drawing in the same yoke, and subscribing to the same
God, that there is not a lost sheep in the whole flock, nor a rotten cluster
hanging on the whole Vine, but every one waiting on the same Master, and
devoted to the same Savior; civil unity amongst brethren is excellent, how
much more unity in the same faith? it is a comfort for kindred to be prosperous
alike, how much more to be gracious alike that as they are partakers of the
same patrimony, so likewise they are partakers of the same promises? It was a
grief to Dives in Hell, Luke 16.
that any of his brethren should not go to Heaven, so it might be a grief to
the brethen of Dives upon earth, that they should have a brother lying in hell.
Genesis 25.22.
Rebeckah was troubled that the children strove in her womb; so a trouble may
it be to any, that there should be a repugnancy of qualites amongst them, which
come out of the same womb. It was honor therefore to the elect Lady, 2. Ep.
John 4.
that all her children walked in the truth, and to Moses Aaron and Miriam, that
generally they did conspire together in the same holy desires. Mare concussum,
Chrysostom.
oh such sit pensively to think that nature has not so firmly united them,
but after all smiles embraces, brotherly, and sisterly courtesies, Domesday
will part them; one must go amongst the blessed quire in heaven, the other
must weep, and gnash the teeth in hell. Therefore if desires, or endeavors,
counsel or reproof, bending of knees, or shedding of tears, can instill the
same affections, let them not be wanting, for it is a great happiness for
brethren and sisters to go hand in hand to the same God, as Lazarus was happy
in his kindred; happy in his estate, happy in a privilege, happy in his
kindred. Thus much for the name Lazarus.

3. Part.
Now let us come to the accident Sleeps. Death is the let of the best,
Lazarus is cast upon Natures couch, 3. Eccles. 10.
and what Saint must not go to be with him? yes, all go to one place. All,
this All is Saint-numerall, yertues bright pieces are ciphered out to the
Dormitory the sleeping room. 9. Job 22.
God destroys the perfect with the wicked. The perfect is imperfect, he may
have a little the purer motions, but not a whit the purer materials; his
conscience may be the more renewed, but his constitution is not the more
refined, they of the best house stand but upon a weak pinning. The wise die as
well as the foolish. Psa. 49.10.
Even they which were so wise as to shun the corruptions of the world yet they
cannot shun the coru tion of Nature, though they have the wisdom from above
yet they have the fari^ty from beneath. 1. Zach. 5.
Your Fathers where are they? and do the Prophets live for ever? No, the purest
gold in our treasury, is of cancred nature, the sweetest flower in our garden
is but a searing herb, these goodly Monuments of divine perfections Mecay
Gregory 3. deserved well of God and men yet he died. Monumenta fatiscunt. Been
meritus est de deo, and hominibus, sed mortuus est, Plat. in Greg. 3. Legimus
sanstos plenos gratiarum plenos virtutum migrasse, Bern.
We read that the Saints full of graces, full of virtues departed. St. Paul
brings in a Catalogue of Saints Heb. 11. but to me it is but as a buriallbill;
for those which obtained witness that they were righteous, and had this
testimony that they pleased God, which would not enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season, but wrought righteousness, which were so matchless, and
prizelesse, that this world was not worthy of them yet I find in these primer
Worthies, some of natures setlings, Deathsdroppings, they escaped away to their
graves they were locked up, but in perishing sins, people embraced in them
but armfulls of rottenness, they had their Writ of removal they were plucked
from the upper story to go live in the vault, Natures pursivant fetched them
away from us, Deaths Chamberlain led them to bed, they all slept, Our friend
Lazarus sleeps. at a common lot? if such a thing happened to them as never
man endured, it were another matter. but when all virtuous men that ever lived
before them drew this blanke, when nature has no other Lottery, why should
they be disquieted? It is well that they have lived so long as to deserve well
of the world to purchase to their selves the names of Friends, that they lent
out their virtues before hand and have the age indebted to them, that they have
honored their Callings, and honored their Families, but that they should live
ever is beyond Natures Covenant, or any divine grant; though they have many
privileges, yet they have not this in their Charter. Let it suffice therefore,
that they have not lost their graces, or lost their souls, but only a frail
life, a life that was never given them long to enjoy: Part therefore with such,
with an humble submission to Gods pleasure, seeing thou let them but go to
be Bed-fellowes with the Saints, for all Saints step into this couch Our friend
Lazarus sleeps.

But why is death here called a sleep?

The number of all our days are with thee. 14 Job 5.
They are upon tale, and God only knew the number of them; thou which have a
months-mind to this life, thou may be deceived in thy account, thou keep
no very good Almanacke about it, before the next new Moon come to the full,
thou may be in thy wane. No man knows his end; 9 Eccl. 12.
no this same end is of such a doubtful nature, that the wifest cannot resolve
of it. I know not the day of my death says Isaac. Genesis 27.1.
We may have skill in many things, but we have no skill in the death-point no
this were

-- Causas penitus tentare latentes. to busy our wits about hidden causes,
these are the secrets of Nature. Abdita natura.


Naiades ignorant, ignorant and Inachus ipse, The purest and the prudentest are
heart to seek we are not so much as morrow read, James 4.14.
for We know not what shall be tomorrow. A morrow there will be, but whether
out morrow or no, it is uncertain; something there will be but whether death or
life we cannot determine; No, we are deep scholars till death come to examine
as but she ever pose^ us in an Adverbe of time, and a future verse. Cras and
quid ^ls?
Oh then that men put such confidence in life, which looks so quick-sighted,
as if they had rubbed all sleep out of their eyes, as if it were a long time
before they should go to rest. For art thou summoned think thou yet with a
Deaths call? No, -- (...), thou say with old withered Galba still me thinks
my sprightly vigor remains within me; such men's spirits decay not, they feel
not a symptom of death about them; people think they may take their own time
of sleeping, die when they lift, howsoever they look for some warning some hint
of death; they think they shall not die in their suites, they shall live to pay
home such an adversary; they shall not die at their bowsing-bowles, they shall
live out such a joviall meeting; they shall not die in the midst of their
purchases they shall lock such a neighbor out of doors, chase such an heir
out of his burrow, his muse first; Die they shall, but they shall not die yet. Ex
infidiis adoritus, Bern.
But on beloved this same death works by stratageme her ambustment breaks
out, and her mine springs before persons ever dream of an enemy. None have a
more dangerous life then they which presume of life: None die more wretohedly,
then they which think to die at leisure. Oh therefore well tempered health,
strength of nature, let me send the Sepulcher fray to your doors, the
deaths-dread to your hearts, for the lasty Gallant is not so puissant, but he
may be instandy cast on his back the miracle of beauty has not such amiable
cheeks, but that she may ere long look carcass grisly: Oh think upon Herod,
who was struck from heaven, whilst the people were deifying him, and mark
Jesabel, who had her brains dashed out whilst she looked out at the window as
the Paragon of beauty; consider Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, which went down
quick into their graves, whilst they were priding their selves in their gifts;
and endowments; Oh therefere give over your thoughts of this world con^u^ not
with a Witch, that old witch of flesh and blood, but let God have thee to day
lest Death have thee to morrow, for Death is asleep and sleep comes
unexpectedly.

etc. So there are no pleasing objects to be presented to dead men, for has
Death any reservation of comforts? no We are as water spiltupor the ground; 2 Samuel 14.14.
that were we never so first of clear water, or siveet water yet the earthen
pitchers will be turned upward and the moisture of earthly contentments powered
out. Does not their dignity go along with them? Job 4.21.
yes, such is the indignity that death put upon us, that it will not leave us
any dignity. Psalm. 49.17. Eccles. 9.5.
We take nothing away with us when we die, we are all as stripped creatures. The
dead know nothing at all; no, they are strangers to those things which were
their daily recreements. Mine ey shall not return to see pleasure; Job. 7.7.
we have done with pleasure, when we have done with life; as the vermin run
away, when the house does fall, so do all the jovisances of this life forsake
us, when we drop into our graves; yea a Funeral does drown all earthly
delights, Vt naufragium submergit merces. Chrysostom.
even as shipwreck does the rich merchandise. Oh then that people are so
heart-deepe in worldly vanities, that they are generally so sense-sicke I to
please the senses to delight the senses, this is that which we all aim at our
Markets and Exchanges, our Ships, and our Shops our Stillaries, and our
fruiteries, are all for the senses; the senses have their needle stitching,
their spiceries seasoning their shittle running in every corner; there is much
planing and graving pruning and inoculating for the senses; we fetch down the
fowls out of the sky, we take the bottom of the Sea slay the earth, and dig
all the oar out of Mines for the senses; Milleners, Mercers, Minstrels,
Stage Players, Persumers Conservers Feather-makers, are a I Tradesmen to serve
five Customers, the five senses; or this whole world is but one entire
Incorporation divided into several companies for the senses. But Oh beloved,
are we not senseless in this doting upon the senses? yet, senseless, and
graceless too, for God has appointed us to seek for things permanent, and
what duration in those thing? they do but slenderly refresh us, Leviter
refrigerant, and breviter deficiunt Bern. Voluptatum sumus tenaces, ut illae
sunt fugaces. Amb.
and are suddenly perished; we are very tenacious of them, but they quickly
glide from us; they drop away like autumn leaves, and were off like a crimson
gloss, they go out like blasing stars, or loose their light like twinkling
gloworms, therefore let us study for our souls, and not for the senses, for we
have but a short time to make use of the senses, for when we die, we are as
persons fallen a sleep, who have their senses tied up.

Thirdly death is like unto a sleep, because as sleep takes away all the
sorrows of labor, (for the sleep of a laboring man is sweet) so death takes
away the irksomeness of all wordly employments, Eccles 5.12. Fuga laborum Naz.
Depositio sarcinae gravis. Aug. Aerumnarum requies. Salust. Genesis 15.15.
for what is death, but the flight of labors, the laying off of a heavy
burden, the repose after troubles. When the last hour of the day is come,
people leave working in the vineyard, when the master appears, the tasks are
taken out of their hands and they are no longer talent-busy. Abraham used
double diligence a while, but at last, he goes to his fathers in peace, no
more afterward to be disquieted. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.
they rest from their labor, a solemn and serious rest is then proclaimed,
Rev. 14.13.
therefore Paul that had felt enough of the exercises, and exigents of this
life, desires to be dissolved, and the faithful sigh, 1 Phil. 23. 2. Cor. 5.4.
and are burdened to have mortality swallowed up for they know that the grave
should be unto them as Gods pillow, to ease their a king temples, as his couch
to relieve them. Peace shall come, Es. 57.2. Non nobis ereptus es, sed peri.
culis, non nos amisisti sed ingruentium calamitatum formidine caruisti. Amb.
orat. Funeb. De Sat.
they shall rest in their beds every one that walks before him. Therefore
says Amb. of his brother Saterus, Thou art not taken away from us, but perils
thou have not lost us but art freed from the fear of future troubles. Oh then
that we know not the sweetness of death, that we fear it, lo^k pale at it,
shun it that we would beg a stay of it, that we would (if it were possible)
buy it off, we would do any thing rather then str p our selves for the grave,
endure all the calamities upon earth, rather then death, it is grief and
anguish to us to step into bed, but alas in the mean time we do not know it,
consider the nature of it, mark the issue of it, Non est damnum morientis
Paulin. in vita Amb.
for it is no damage to the dying as Amb. told Ca^igonus, unless freedom be
a damage, if thou be godly die when thou will thou die to comfort, we are
never happier then in death, yea never happy before death; Non major felicitas
est, quam in morte, immo nulla felicitas ante mortem. Ier.
then the manieles are taken off which did so pinch our wrists, and the yoke
slipped off, which did so chafe our necks; we have then given our last groan, and
shed our last tears. Oh then how joyful ought that passage to be which being
dispatched there remains no more care or grief, Oh therefore fear life, but
fear not death; Quam illud iter jucundum esse debet, quo confecto nulla
reliqua cura, nulla sollicitudo futura sit. Cicero 1 Tus. Quest. Eccl. 8.8.
Rev. 21.46.
here thou may be too secure, or else there thou can not be unhappy if
sin do not hurt thee, death cannot; nay, let us but carry inward atonement,
peace of conscience into our graves, and there will be no fearful dreams to
trouble us in our sleep, Here every day has its grief, but there is not a
minute of anguish; here is a correction house, but there all the whips are
taken off from our backs here we weep our selves half blind with the smart of
infinite miseries but there all tears shall be wiped away from our eyes; he
we faint under incessant employments, but there the labourer takes his rest,
there we sleep.

Fourthly death is like unto a sleep in respect of a resurrection for as the
sleepy man rises from his couch, so the dead from their graves; though we be
at our repose, yet we shall not quite sleep out our eyes, remain buried in bed,
no, he will draw open the curtains, pull off the clothes, Mors non absumptura
corpus, sed corruptionem corporis Amb.
and make us look up again broad-waken; death does not destroy the body, but
the corruption of the body it is but, the dissolution not the destruction of
nature; no, the body, that sweet companion of the soul shall again renew its
fellowship. Dissolutio non destruction naturae. Anselm. Dulcis animae socius.
Athenagoras.
For thou turnest man to to destruction and say come again ye children of
men; they which sleep in the dust of the earth shall awaken, there is a
resurrection of the just, we think we are quite buried, and we are but put to
bed. Oh then that we know not our dying hopes? the righteous has hope in his
death, when he suspends his life, Psalm. 90.3. Dan. 12.3. Luke 14.14. Prove.
14.32.
he has not ended his hopes: no, a g acious person, when he feels the
malignan cy of a disease, when he sees the impotency of physical receipts
when he perceives the death p^onges at his heart, when his sinews shrink u^,
h^s blood congealeth, his teeth set, when he is, stretching forth a dying hand
to seal away all his estate to a warm cloth, when the soule-bell is set out,
and watchers and winders are in his eye, when he apprehends sensibly,
apparently that die he must, all this does not terrify him; for though he has a
drowsy brain, and knows that he must go into natures black room, yea put his
cold feet into that same unwarmed bed even a bed of clay, yet he well
understands, that he shall but pull the clothes a little over him, cover his
naked limbs, remove himself out of the noise of the world, to take a short
nap, and then he shall drowse no longer, but step out of his grave, even as a
man at the least call, steps out of bed: What matter then if we should
instantly put on our night-clothes, if this hour were our sleeping hour, for
though we turn to ashes, we cannot turn to nothing; no, these ashes of ours are
sacred, God is the keeper of our dust, as out of dust he first framed us, so
out of dust he shall again restore us; we shall meet with our old bodies, and
we shall meet with our old virtues, there shall be redintegration of nature,
and grace, not a drop of contrition, a spark of devotion, a mite of charity
shall be lost, but all our good works, like old friends shall come again to
visit us at our return; we do not die to perish, but die to prepare for a
resurrection, for as the sleepy man rises out of his couch, so shall we out of
our graves.

So that beloved, the day of this life will not always last, no, the shadows
are stealing on the dial, the evening star at last will appear, sleeping time
will come. Oh let us be careful to put a Lazarus into bed, to have this sleep
come into the eyes of one of Christ's friends, so shall we sleep in a persumed
bed, yea sleep as it were in Gods withdrawing room, where our rest shall be
short, and our wakening sweet; we shall die comfortably, rise again joyously,
and reign gloriously, which that we may do the Lord grant for his mercies sake
Amen.

FINIS.

