A LETTER FROM A CATHOLIC GENTLEMAN TO HIS Popish Friends, Now to be Exiled
from LONDON.

Dated, Nov. 6. 1678.

Licensed, 1678.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the year, 1678

A Letter from a Catholic Gentleman to his Popish Friends.
SIRS!
MEthinks here is a strange disappointment! sow Tares, and reap Hemp! so many
Catholic Calves, that might have proved Bulls of Bashan, now turned to Grass
in the depth of Winter; fie upon two ugly Proverbs, All covet, all loose, and
people cannot see when they are well, not minding these has ruined us. Well may
our Irish Friends, cry Oh hone! Oh hone! and skulking Priests sing Lacrymae,
that lately hoped to have Chanted Jovial Anthems at Three Kingdoms Funerals. We
are certain, This is at least the Two hundredth Religious PLOT, we have
contrived against the Heretics, and as Hopeful as any; and yet to miscarry
thus at last, would make a Capuchine out-swear a loosing Gamester. Sure Holy
Church, though she be Infallible in divinity, is subject to scurvy Mistakes in
her Politics, though confident we are, had heaven stood neuter, things had
never come to this pass. But what signifies it to have the Keys, when the
Wards are alterad.

Well! since it must be so, Farewell LONDON! we thought once more to have
warmed our hands in Thee, before we went. I Will say that for thee, thou were
(...) of (...) For^^sts in the l^^d, for a Jesuitical ^ox to earth in. His
safest Kennel was a Ladies Chamber, the modesty of the Messenger left the Bed
unsearch'd, and so he missed him.

But Courage! stout Catholics! I trust you have learned (or else you were
never well Catechized in your Fundamental principles) to distinguish betwixt
your Kings commands, and your Ghostly Fathers, and which is preferable. If so,
you will see there is no such Necessity to be packing. How shall the dull
Heretics (without Infallible Spectacles, and those His Holiness reserves for
his own Nose) know a Romanist? Though he carry the Beasts Mark in his heart,
he does not yet, wear it on his Forehead. But you will say, they will purge our
consciences. Prithee tell me, what Protestant Scammony is strong enough to make
a through paced Catholic Disgorge Infallability, or the Popes unaccomptible
power? yet till they can do that, they do but restrain popery, just as Quacks
cure Agues with Jesuits powder? The Fit will certainly Revert, as soon as the
malignant Humors can gather Flead; and the new convert Relapse on the first
opportunity. Oaths will hind him no more than a twined Thread Sampson. He can
swallow the most Barbed Test, as cleverly as Hocus Daggers, or a Dutchman
buttered Cod-fish. A Dispensation (and that his Holinesses charity and zeal, in
so great and pious a Cause, you may be sure will never deny) is always an
infallible Help at Maw, a sure Antidote against perjury, though taken in never
so large a Dose. The Jesuits Doctrine of Equivocation, may hush the grumblings
of the most squeamish Soul. However our pious Maxim avowed by a Council, That
Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, is a most convenient Backdoor, that
will not fall to secure your Retreat.

But (because Examples are more persuasive than precepts) let me mind you of
two famous Instances amongst many that might be repeated, did not your short
time of stay forbid prolixitie. The first shall be that of the gallant William
Parry, sworn a Servant to Queen Elizabeth, anno 1570. who three several times
voluntarily took the Oath of Obedience to that Queen, prescribed in the first
Year of her Reign, and yet afterward (like a true and generous Catholic)
conspired not only to depose, but Murder her, and came but little short of
accomplishing it. For which brave attempt, in the Year 1584. he received the
Crown of Martyrdom at Tyburne. The other is, of the great Watson a Priest, and
one of our Modern Saints, who in his Book entitled Quodlibetical Questions,
makes a serious Protestation -- That albeit he differed in Religion from that
which was professed in the Church of England; yet if either Pope or Spaniard
should seek by Hostile means to invade his Co^ntrey, he would willingly spend
his substance, nay, his dearest Blood against any such as should attempt it. --
Could any promise more fairly or more fully? yet he himself, with Clark his
Fellow Seminary, were the first that saluted the Gallows, for acting quite
contrary thereunto, by Traitorous designs against King James. And who shall
boggle to follow such Reverend and Holy Precedents?

But, not to waste time in telling stories -- Will not our threadbare
distinction -- I am Catholic of the Church, but not of the Court of Rome, do
some feats? it is silly, I confess, as if all the Animal Powers did not flow
from the Head, or he that embarques with the Devil were not bound to sail with
him. But what then? we that have bubbled a grand part of the world into a
belief of Transubstantiation etc. why may we not presume to impose upon them
lesser absurdities?

To the case in hand: Would you know how to demean your selves in this unhappy
Juncture? I have partly told you already: if it be for the interest of the
Catholic Cause, or your own Conveniences, you may safely take the Oath of
Supremacy. The King is higher then the Highest; but ( I hope you mentally
think) there are (even on earth) higher th^n he. It Is not the first time we
have abused the Heretics Scripture -- you know your Privilege. But if you
m^st needs be jogging, be good Husbandmen in the Country, sow the Catholic
Seed, but with a cautious hand. Most of you, Priests and Jesuits I mean, have
good Mechanic Trades besides to live on, and help out at a dead lift. A poor
work-wanting Shoemaker, Tailor, or Weaver may unsuspectedly be entertained.
What think you of personating a Quaker? the End you know ballows the Means, and
the Badger makes a hole for the Fox. Speak loud of Catholic Loyalty -- You may
boldly outf^ce the Powder Treason -- Alas! 'twas above seventy years ago. And
as for the small business of Ireland, it is almost forgot, or at least our
Cruelties there were so incredible, that to those that know no better, they
will seem Fables, especially, if you assure them 'twas only a Rebellion on a
Civil, not Religious score, as Irish men, not as Papists -- But as to our Loyal
Adventures in England, perhaps they will tell you necessity made our virtue; and
though Whores are Car^ed, yet no woman had ever Rewards allowed her for not
being a common Prostitute. At most, that past-due Services can challenge no
protection for after Crimes, -- However, inculcate it still, 'twill amuse
vulgar heads; and why may not we that can claim Supererogating merits from
Heaven, Expect them from earthly Thrones?

When the Treason appears too bread-faced -- Then rail a^ the Jesuits -- Cast
the Odium there -- Though the other Orders would have claimed as great a share
both in the merit and booty; If the business had succeeded, at least, F^^r^ non
debet ^^ctum valet, had been their excuse; yet it is better a few bear the blame
(they have shoulders bread enough) than all.

Whisper where it may be safe -- That it is only a Trick of State -- A few
decoyed Desperado's concerned; a couchant project for a standing Army, (we
wish, they had been down then most probably had we been up) drive that nail
home, which alone well clenched in some thick scull'd heads, will notably
forward our work. Divide and alle^^te the peoples Affections: It Is the only
Card we have now to play. If we cannot wound the Government mortally, let us
Ply-blow it with Scandals and Suspicions, that no man trusting another, all may
at last become our prey.

Scatter privately some horrid impossible Rumors of our parties Plots, that
those being found filly and grossly false, our real designs may be disbelieved:
Promote Reports and Scandals on persons unconcerned, as if they were
Confederates: it is a blessed Line in Mat^hiavel -- If dirt enough be thrown
some will stick. This at least will render them suspected, and divert their
vigorous prosecution: and he that by Art can make a Neuter of an Enemy, gains a
Friend without being beholden to him.

They rail at us impertinently for Cruelty: for if we have, or shall (as who
knows what may happen) kill thousands of Heretics, it is all in love: Love to
Holy Church, that she may not be troubled with them: Love to the World, that it
may not be infected with them: Love to their Souls, that their Sufferings in
the other world may be the less, by how much the time of their sinning in this
in the shorter. And who will not rather applaud, than blame such pure Catholic
Charity?

That which may add most to your grief, is to see (before your departure) our
Holy Fathers Dignity so villified and exposed in the Streets, on that cursed,
unfor^unate Fifth of November. Those London-Prentices (the firstborn of
Heresy) we have vowed as eternal hatred to, as ever Hannibal had against our
Mother Rome. Yet are so far beforehand with them in Revenge, that whereas they
can but burn his Holiness in Effigy, he has formerly caused their Ancestors
(and we hope shall their Successors too) to be burnt in propri^^s personis.

But how came they to sacrifice so many Popes together? Though it must be
acknowledged, we had once a jollie Company actually in being at a time; I mean
about the year 1378. when Gregory the twelfth, and Benedict the thirteenth,
and Alexander, and John the twenty third, were all Four scrambling for the
triple Crown: A shrewd Gap in our Succession, and Flaw in our Infallibility,
especially since even the most unerrable Votes of our Council at Pisa, could
not compose, but rather increased the Sacred Brangle: Yet how these unhappy
Lads should come to know so much, to me is a Riddle. Though we should lock up
the Bible, yet unless we could bury History too, I see there is no good to be
done on this prying Age: I thought our good Friends, Leviathan, and Tractatus
Theologo Politicus, had done half our business; that those that value no
Religion but Interest, had been strong enough to introduce OURS, which is so
near of Kin. But if we are mistaken in our present Measures, let us wait a
while; An expert Seaman can sail with the Wind in his teeth. Patience is then
only a Virtue, when all others prove use less. Learn to be wise. Swim with that
Tide you cannot stem. Kiss those hands you would cut off; and Hung those you
thought to Hang, at least until you can. Put these few hasty Hints handsomely
in practice; and expect, after next Forr^ign Post, further Directions from

November the 6th, 1678. Old Style. Your Trusty Adviser, B. R.

FINIS.

