A MESSAGE OF PEACE: In a LETTER Consolatorie and Consiliatory to a neighbor
Minister, for Resolution in several Queres: but principally about the use of
the LITURGY.

Together with A friendly Letter sent to Sir EDWARD DEERING, About the time of
his Commitment: By way of Answer to his last SPEECH: As also, concerning the
LITURGY and Church Discipline.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Saterthwait, at the Sign of the black Bull in
Budge-Row. 1642.

A MESSAGE OF PEACE.
COncerning your Letter to me, consisting mainely of four particulars, I
shall endeavor your satisfaction therein. And first concerning your
disturbance even to discouragement about the great oppositions you meet with in
the work of your Ministry, from the People over whom the Lord has placed you,
I shall desire your consideration, first that your Ministerial Office in the
execution of it, is the Lords Militia, and I pray remember that a common
Soldier you are not in the host of God, but a special Leader of Gods people
against the Prince of darkness and the black Guard of his hellish infantery:
and in the Apostles words I would provoke your Christian courage, Endure
hardness as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. Secondly, consider your work is
preaching the Gospel, I mean the faithful Word, which the Apostle tells you,
is not after man, and if you should yet please men, you should not, you could
not be the servant of Christ; and you are so allowed of God to be put in trust
with the Gospel, not as pleasing men but God, who tries the heart. I shall
thirdly desire you to consider that one special seal and proof of your
co-ministeriall working with Christ; is grounded on this hostility of men
against you. Consider the same place 2. Cor. 6. In all things approving our
selves as the Ministers of Christ in much patience in afflictions, in
necessities, etc. Remember (says Christ to you) the servant is not greater
then the Lord, if they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you. In
sum you are presidented to this by all in all Ages, even to this very day,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Professors; yea, (says the Apostle)
and whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. Now I
beseech you my dear Fellow-Souldier in Christ comfort your self with these
words. Your second scruple concerning the Liturgy I shall endeavor to
satisfy; and concerting the use of it, I shall defer the full disquisition
thereof to our next happpie meeting: but de presenti I shall only desire you
to consider in general; that so much of it as in the materiality thereof is
not repugnant to the word of God, may at least for a time be tollerably used,
you know the Apostle did circumcise Timothy kept the Jewish Sabbath, shore his
head at Cenchrea commanded, yea docreed for Jewish abstinence, Aron did burn
and not eat the sin offering, and David did eat the show bread, which was
not according to the Commandment, and yet were blameless; St. Paul's policy is
exemplarily imitated by you in this case, I became all things to all men, that
I may by lay means save some; and your judicious observation of the 14. to the
Romans, with the 28. Chap. of the first to the Cori. I suppose will make up a
full resolution in this matter. Sir I beseech you satisfy your mind in this
particular, upon these grounds, if you shall find sufficient evidence of truth
therein: And I beseech you wait on God, and the Honorable High Court of
Parliament, till a reformation in these things be granted from Heaven unto us;
that by the plantation of a powerful, able and praying ministry, in all the
desolate and deplorable dark parts of this Kingdom, and that miserable poor
Country of Wales: in a few years, there may be, as doubtless there may be, as
little desire to the reading of a public liturgy, as in most places there is
already, of the cold and powerles use of homilies, they being both of them an
alike, uncouth, and Babish public mysteriall serving of God and his Church. To
the other quere and wonder, you seem to make at the general entrance, and
violent zeal of men, to the continuance of this public liturgique service; I
shall give shortly an account thereof to my ability; And first I shall say, it
is little commended by their eager desire unto it, the pure word, and the pure
worship of God, are much at one, in the esteem of vulgar corrupt and carnal
minds: The flesh lusts against the Spirit, Gal. 5. But I conceive, the
chief cause of the general great outcry, for this Liturgique Service as
great almost as that at Ephesus, Act. 19. to be principally this; that
forasmuch as the duty of Prayer is a natural universal duty, and imposed by
God upon the consciences even of all; the neglect whereof is obligatory, to the
necessity of the Divine vengeance; and most men not being nor living in a
spiritual and conseqnently an accommodious condition to this duty, they are
thereupon feign and forced to take up a way of such a praying, as most consists
with and is best agreeable to their unpraying unblessed natural state: and if
this staff of their age be taken from them, no marvel if they cry out with
Micah, Ye have taken away my Gods, and what more have J left me. There is yet
another thing which does further and much intend their violent zeal to this
formal service, and that is this, they thus conceive, that a way of conceived,
Ministerial Praying, although they account it praying, yet not theirs, and so
they speak; The Preacher is in his Prayer; his Prayer, not theirs: now a form
of Prayer especially if it come in the lofty high-sounding Language of the
Church Prayers, or divine Service, which in the continual use of it, they have
made the matter of their own memory; of this they cry; It Is ours, it is ours
as much as his, it is Common Prayer; and this, this only is the divine Service
of God: and which way of thus praying, the silliest Ignorant in all Wales may
with the Parish Priest, as expeditely and roundly go through (and even just so)
as any Forest Foale, can go, or trot, or gallop, before, beside, or after a
forest Filly, unto which course of this foppish Popish Prayer, no small
occasion is given, by the very appointment of the Service-Booke, wherein it is
appointed, that the people shall after the Priest say over the self same
words, by him before spoken, as in the Confession and other where, a thing
having neither show of reason, or warrant of Scripture. I shut up all in the
Prophets words; Cursed he the deceiver who has in his flock a Male, and voweth
and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing. To the fourth and last of your
Letter, as touching your informing the scandalous words of that unvorthy person
to the Parliament: although I thus think, that the least dishonorable word or
malignant thought against those noble Senators, be a near approach to to an
high degree of blasphemy; yet considering the baseness of the man, and the
inferior nature of the words spoken, your forbearance I verily think will be
your best course. We know the work is Gods, those Worthies are about Magnalia
Dei the high acts of God, and do you wonder that the dogs do bark, the Devils
no doubt do gnash their teeth at them; but our Prayer to God and hope is such
that neither Rome nor Hell nor men nor Devils, as hitherto they have not, so
never shall they have power (although to bark) yet not to bite them. To the
rest of your Letter I respit the Answer till the next opportunity.

I am your very friend. T. R.

A Copy of the Letter, which was sent to Sir Edward Deering.
SIr, upon my perusal of your last Speech in Parliament, I took to my self,
an humble purpose of signifying to your worthy self some animadversions and
notes, unto which the several particulars of your Speech occasioned me: In the
first place I shall be bold to say ingenuously that I heartily am sorry that
the bias of your judgment in hoc die after such a Meridian light shining upon
us (both from abroad in the reformed Churches, and at home in so many
judicious, elaborate and learned Treatises formerly and of late) should seem
so much to sway to that side which will certainly expose your late Honorable
esteem in the heartss of judicious and good men to a great, at ^east
diminution and distemper. I humbly conceive very many things in your Speech do
labor of a very great measure of affection: I shall be bold to instance in
some few for all. It is surely true that much of late has been written and
said to and fro on both sides about a right administration of Discipline and
worship: and truly Sir me thinks out of that diversity of what has been
spoken and written, the Parliament has a very fair overture given them to
discover and find out the truth which without it would be of more difficulty
to them; It is your own way in your Parliamentary affairs, and in all
Iudicatures concerning Episcopacie, so much has been clearly evinced against
it, and nothing of any weight for it, that I shall say nothing at all in that
particular: Only I shall beseech you to consider whether it can possibly be
believed, that amongst any sort of Protestauts, especially the conscien^cous
party (for the conceit of some giddy silly people is inconsiderable) there be
any that do protest against the 3. undoubted signs of a true visible Church. If
you mean purity of Doctrine, Sacraments, and Discipline; I know for my part
none that are quoad esse at any doubt in the former two, as concerning our
Church; and for the latter, I know no man of a right judgment that can
acknowledge it for other then such as it is Romish and Antichristian; Sir, I
do not doubt, but that upon search some may be found even amongst us, that
deny very Trinitte of Persons and of what number the Arminian Socir^ian and
other hellish Popish errors are I know you are not ignorant: But if these or
any other of the like nature should now press into your presence either in
word or writing, I doubt not your name in your Honorable House will show it
self in a sudden suppression of them. Concerning the Liturgy, I shall say
nothing, much has been judiciously said about it; but I am heartily sorry
that such words as these should ever have fallen from the learned lips of Sir
EDWARD DEERING; That the Church of England in her public Prayers, nay her
Offe^ture may be as a babbler at all adventure, a brainlesse, stupid, and an
ignorant conceit of some. Sir Edward Deering, if conceived Prayers be a
brainlesse, stupid and ignorant conceit of some, and not most proper to the
public ministration of an able Misistery: I will not Say that noble Lords eyes
that lately spoke in the House of Peers on this Subject, but better eyes of
multitudes then his or yours do fail them: Sir, I conceive you are and are
not a competent Judge in this matter: Sir, I heartily wish with you for a
National Synod well tempered with Learning and Pietic, that the wavering
judgments of unsettled men's winds might be rightly directed about as well the
Doctrine of the Sabbath, as other matters of right worship, and Ecclefiasticall
Policy, which by reason of the want of a present, public competent
determination thereof, suffer much in the mind of very many. Sir, I shall now
humbly desire but thus much of you, even that what I have written ex animo and
amore, may not be taken in any sinister or exasperate sense; Only I desire you
to be pleased to remember that you now stand in a public designation, of a
most considerable trust reposed in you by God and your Countrrey impartially
without passion; prejudice or affection, for your part to contribute your best
abilities, to make up the hedge, in the thorough Reformation of the Church and
Kingdom; that so the Church of England may by your blessed means become that
which it never yet was, (the glory of the Reformed Religion) which is the
humble and hearty daily prayer of him who is,

Your unfeigned wel-wishing Friend. T. R.
Ian. 21. 1642.
Follow Peace with all men and Holiness without which no man shall see the Lord;
Looking diligently, lest any man fall from the grace of God, lest any root of
bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled,

Hebr. 11.
God of his infinite mercy quench all unkindly heat in all your Honorable
Assembly.
FINIS.

