THE ACCOUNT OF THE Popes Procession AT ABERDENE, The 11th. of January, 1689.
which was delivered to the new Elected Magistrates and Council thereof, by the
Students of Marishal-Colledge.

WITH The Students Letter to the said Magistrates thereanent.

Printed in the Year 1689.

To the Right Honorable the Provost, Baillies, and new Elected Council of
Aberdene.
Right Honorable,
AS nothing can be more destructive to any City or Incorporation, than the
having of persons in public Trust, who mind not the public Interest of the
Society; so it is certainly the greatest Happiness they can enjoy, to be
governed by those who prefer the public Good to their own private Concern, and
their Religion to any State-Interest or Advantage. That the first has been in
part this Cities Fate these several years bygone, is so well known, that he who
runs may read it. But since now the Storm begins to Calm, and the ancient
Liberties and Fundamental Privileges of this City, begin to receive their
wonted luster, and such Governors set to the Helm of Affairs, as we hope will
never Impare the public Good, or give the World occasion to say, that ever
they Forfault their wonted Character of Religion, Loyalty, and Bon accord. And
since all good Citizens (now in the entry of your Government) are giving all
the Expressions of Joy in their Power upon this Exigent, we judge our selves
bound to throw in our Mite, knowing you to be Men, not only well principl'd in
the true Protestant Religion, but (as we our selves) are Abhorrers of all
Popish Superstitions and Designs. Have therefore resolved to add to the
Solemnity of this day of your Election, by carrying his Holiness in Procession
throughout this City in the greatest Splendour, where in end he will meet with a
fatal Doom. And lest any ill principl'd or malicious persons should represent
us or our Actions as Tumultuary, we have thought fit to give you assurance
there is no such Designs, neither intend we to injure the Persons or Goods of
any. And to evidence our Ingenuity in this, we send you herewith the manner of
the Procession, Indictment, and Sentence of his Holiness, with all its
Circumstances and Solemnities; which if ye will countenance with your presence,
will be taken very kindly. So wishing Prosperity and Safety to all the
Maintainers of the True Protestant Religion, the Preservation of His Sacred
Majesty, the Flourishing of our Noble Patron and College, the happy and
peaceable Government of you as Magistrates, and the wonted Unity and Friendship
among all the true Citizens of Bon-accord. We are in all Sincerity,

Right Honorable, Your Honors most humble Servants, R. R. and A. I.
Marishals-Colledge 11 Jan. 1689.
A true Account of His Holiness Procession at Aberdene, January 11. 1689. Which
was supposed to have been performed by His Holiness in the greatest Splendour,
having come on purpose to Congratulat the good Success the Roman Catholics had
in this Kingdom, and more particularly in Aberdene: In order to which His
Holiness being Seated on a Chair of State with His Crown on His Head, His Keys
on His Arm, and Clothed with Scarlet Robes Lined with Ermine; Began His
Procession from the Colledge-Gate, about four a-Clock in the Afternoon, and was
accompanied as follows.
FIrst Marched a Company of Men carrying Links, six abreast. Next Marched the
Janitor of the College, carrying the College Mace before six Judges in
Scarlet Robes.

Next Marched four Whislers Sounding.

Then four Priests, four Jesuits, four Popish Bishops, four Cardinals, all in
their Robes, at a competent distance each from others, betwixt a Lane of
burning Flambo's on each side.

Then followed a Jesuit in Embroidered Robes, carrying a great Cross.

Last of all came his Holiness, carried on a Magnificent Chair of State, with
his Privy Counselor the Devil sometime appearing at his back, having a great
number of burning Tapers about him. In this manner he is carried through all the
Streets of the City, distributing Pardons and Indulgences gratis: And being
come to the High Street, near the Cross, he places himself on a Theater
Erected on purpose; where after several Adresses made to his Holiness, one of
his Cardinals made the following Speech.

Car. MOst Holy Father, of all the Earth the Prince,
Who keeps the Keys of Hell, and Heaven, e're since
St. Peter's days: You God of gods on Earth,
Who can Bind, Loose, Save, Punish, at one Breath,
All Souls of Persons: Condemn both Kings and Crowns,
Who can make Soldiers Coats of Card'nals Gowns.
What Joy is here! To see that You should Grace
Us with Your Presence, in so Remote a Place:
We therefore to you Presents offer now,
For all the World to Baals gods must bow.
There Is none dare Question Your Prerogative,
Most Holy Father, then for ever live.
We'll make all own Infallibility,
Beside, we will add you have Ubiquity;
You're still at Rome, though ye have graced this day
With your own presence: Hail Father, Hail for ay.

Pop. Good Cardinal, we know this is the time
For to advance our Interest, let us Combine,
Spare ye no Arts our Luster to support;
Go search all Mines to enrich our shining Court.
You may sell Heaven, of Religion make a Trade,
Indulgences in plenty can be had.

Car. Most Holy Father, while Priestcraft bears the sway,
We'll make Heavens Gate a Lock to your own Key:
Against Heretics our Swords we'll quickly draw,
And will perform this Your so Sacred Law:
Hundreds of Thousands we will make to share
On common Doom; no Sex nor Age we'll spare,
No kneeling-beauties Tears, no Virgins Cries,
No Infants smiles, none spared with us, all dies.

About the time that his Holiness and the Cardinal is at this Conference,
Enters Father Peter's in great haste, who delivers his Holiness a Letter; upon
Reading whereof his Holiness falls a-Swown, and the Devil appears at his back
to help him; upon sight of all which the Crowd cry,

Now Babylon falls, come, come, let us pull down
That Scarlet Whore, and break the Triple Crown:
We'll Countermine her Plots, we will Combine,
And ever pray fo'Religion and our King.
His Holiness awakes, and being possessed with an extraordinary Colic, (the
Devil all the while holding his head) Vomits Plots, Daggers, Indulgences, and
the Blood of Martyrs, and cries,

Pop. Oh! We Are undone. Oh! Mr. Devil, pray
Help us with your advice, without delay.

Dev. Hells Plots, are ended, Isreal's GOD combines,
To crush our Counsels, to break our Designs.

Pop. Oh! Mr. Devil, pray then take me hence
Unto your Court, since ye'll find no defense.

Dev. Good Mr. Pope, my Court cannot contain
Your Holiness, except ye would go in
Into my Kitchen; for my Court is throng
With Popes, and Cardinals, who will admit of none
But Nuns amongst them, where all the World may see,
That they, with them, made pretty Company.
For while in Rome some Nephews got some Nieces,
They now get Sons and Daughters in their places.
But, Mr. Pope, since Priestcraft must be gone,
And since there is few that will your case bemoan;
To France I Will send you, where perhaps ye may
Be made Groom-of-the-Stool to's Majesty.

Pop. Oh! Mr. Devil, How can you thus torment
Your wonted Friend? Oh! Will ye not prevent
This fatal Doom? How can I go and Dight
A Princes Breech? Who oft-times in the sight
Of all the World, have made great Monarchs go,
And lay aside their Crowns, to kiss my Toe.
Pray then, Sir Devil, will ye but permit,
If not to Court, unto the darkest Pit;
Rather than send me to the King of France,
To wipe his Breech. Oh, most sad mischance!

Dev. To Hell then go, in Chains I will you bind;
But Jesuits a while must stay behind;
That while you are on your Journey unto Hell,
These Lads may go and Ring the Trin'ty-Bell.

At the end of the foresaid Conference, the Devil endeavored to throw His
Holiness in the Fire, but was hindered by Order of a High Court of Justice, who
having heard of His Holyness's Procession, resolved to give him a fair Trial by
Law: And accordingly having Erected a Bench, and the Judges having taken their
Seats in their Robes, caused bring in His Holiness, attended by his good Friend
Mr. Devil, (all the rest of his friends deserting him) and ordered the Clerk to
read the following Indictment.

Innocent the eleventh Universal Bishop and Pope of Rome, pretended Successor
to St. Peter, thou art Indicted and Accused of High Treason against the most
High and Eternal God, as an Enemy to Religion, Monarchy and Government, and an
open and avowed Murderer of Mankind. In so far as thou have taken upon thee to
Usurp the Titles and Prerogatives only due to the Heavenly Father, have most
blasphemously Erected to thy self unknown gods, and in contempt of thy Maker
have Worshipped and Adored them; have Usurped the Power of Dethroning Kings and
Disposing of Kingdoms: Have upon pretense of Religion committed Massacres and
Murders, and Canonized the Actors. And albeit thou thinks it damnable for
Priests to Marry, yet thou proclaims it Venial for them to commit Fornications
and Adulteries before and after Confession. Thou owns it meritorious for
persons to Cheat and Lie for advancing thy Interest, and Emittest Indulgences
to palliat these Faults. And therefore, Thou art guilty of the foresaid horrid
and execrable Crimes, which being found to be of verity, Thou ought and should
Forfault thy Life, Liberty and Goods, and suffer the Pain of Death, in such
Form and Manner as this High Court of Judicature shall think sit.

After Reading of the foresaid Indictment, the Lord Chief Justice Interrogats
his Holiness if he pleaded Guilty or not Guilty, to which his Holiness (being
conscious of the Guilt of what was laid to his Charge) made no Answer;
Thereafter the Court adduced sufficient Proofs by the Canons of the Church,
Bulls, Pardons, and Indulgences lying in Process, they found him Guilty of the
Crimes contained in his Indictment, and therefore ordered the Clerk to read out
the following Sentence.

Before Reading of which (the Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, and
Pursevants, being called to be present in their Robes,) the Trumpets sounded
three times; thereafter the Clerk read, and Dempster of Court proclaimed the
following Sentence.

Innocent the eleventh Universal Bishop and Pope of Rome, pretended Successor
to St. Peter; Forasmuch as thou art found Guilty by this High Court of Justice,
of the horrid, treasonable, and execrable Crimes contained in the Indictment;
Therefore, the Lord Chief Justice, and remanent Lords here present sitting in
Judgment, Decern and Ordain thy Body in all thy Pontificalls, to be taken
immediately to the public place of Execution, and there to be burnt to ashes,
and ordains thy Blood to be tainted, thy Honors, Reputation and Fame, to be
blotted out of all Records: That neither Thou, nor thy Emissaries, Nuncio,
Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, Jesuits, Munks, Friars, Nuns, Whores, Bawds, or
Protestants disguised, (tho by a Marginal Note of the True Protestant Religion,
without Suspicion in the contrair) be ever admitted in any Civil Society, or
ever have Power to bear Charge in any Office, Dignity or Trust within this
Kingdom, or City, in any time hereafter.

To which the Dempster of Courtadded; and this I give for Doom.

After Reading of which Sentence, the Trumpets Sounded again three times; and
the Lion King at Arms, and His Brethren Heralds and Pursevants in their Robes,
having the Pope's Arms in their Hands, Repeated the Sentence, Ranvers'd, and
Teared his Coat Armorical, and threw it in his Face.

The Lord Lion and Heralds, after Reading of their Sentence in face of the
Judicatory, March to the Cross in their Robes, the Trumpets all the way
Sounding before them; And again from the Cross Proclaimed the former Sentence,
with all its Solemnities; which being ended, his Holiness was taken away from
the Theater, and the Sentence put in Execution against him.

During the time of his Burning, the Spectators were entertained with
Fireworks, and some other Divertisements.

After all was ended, the Trinity-Church-Bell (which was the only Church in
Scotland taken from the Protestants and given to the Papists, wherein they
actually had their Service) was Rung all the Night.

FINIS.

