REMARKABLE PASSAGES: FIRST, A prayer for the Parliament.

AS ALSO THE ARCHBISHOP OF Canterburies Letter to the Archbishop of York,
and the Lord Keeper, to put in Practice the Kings desires.

WITH A PETITION TO His Majesty, by diverse Noblemen and Gentlemen estated in
Ireland, and now residing in London.

ALSO A NEW DECLARATION FROM Both Houses of Parliament.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that this be forthwith Printed.

Hen. Elsyng. Cler. Par. D. Com

Printed for W. G. 1642. July 15.

A PRAYER For the High Court of Parliament, to be read in such place of these
Prayers after the Letany, as the Minister shall think fit.
MOst gracious God, We humbly beseech thee, as for this Kingdom in general, so
especially for the High Court of Parliament, under our most Religious and
Gracious King, at this time assembled: That thou would be pleased to bless
and direct all their Consultations, to the preservation of thy glory, the good
of thy Church, the safety, honor, and welfare of our Sovereign and his
Kingdoms. Lord look upon the humility and devotion with which they are come
in^o thy courts: and they are come into thy house in assured confidence upon
the Merits and Mercies of Christ (our blessed Savior) that thou will not deny
them the Grace and Favor which they beg of thee. Therefore O Lord, bless them
with all that wisdom, which thou know necessary to speed and bring great
designs into action, and to make the maturity of his Majesty's and their
Counsels, the happiness and blessing of this Commonwealth. These and all
other necessaries for them, for us, and thy whole Church, we humbly beg, in the
name and mediation of Jesus Christ our most blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

The Archbishop of Canterburies Letter, to the Archbishop of York.
MY very good Lord, I doubt not, but before this time, you have received from
me the Directions of his most excellent Majesty, concerning preaching and
preachers, which are so graciously set down, that no godly or discreet man can
otherwise then acknowledge, that they do much tend to edification, if he do not
take them up upon report, but do punctually consider the tenor of the words as
they lie, and do not give an ill construction to that, which may receive a
fair interpretation. Notwithstanding, because some few Churchmen, and many of
the people, have finisterly conceived as we here find, that those instructions
do tend to the restraint of the exercise of preaching, and do in some sort
abate the number of Sermons, and so consequently, by degrees do make a breach
to ignorance and superstition; His Majesty in his Princely wisdom, has
thought fit, that I should advertise your Lordship of the grave and weighty
reasons, which induced his Highness to prescribe that which is done.

You are therefore to know that his Majesty being much troubled and grieved at
the heart, to hear every day of so many defections from our Religion both to
Popery and Anabaptisme, or other points of separation in some parts of this
Kingdom, and considering with much admiration: what might be the cause
thereof, especially in the Reign of such a King, who does so constantly
profess himself an open adversary ^othe Superstition of the one, and madness
of the other: his P^incely wisdom could fall upon no one greater probability,
then the lightness, affectednesse and unprofitablenesse of that kind of
preaching, which has been of late years to much taken up in Court, University,
City, and Country.

The usual scope of very many Preachers, is noted to be soaring up in points
of Divinity, too deep for the Capacity of the people or a mustring up of much
reading, or a displaying of their own wit, or an ignorant meddling with civil
matters as well in the private of several Parishes and Corporations, as in the
public of the Kingdom: or a venting of their own distaste, or a smoothing up
of those idle fancies, which in this blessed time of so long a peace, do boil
in the brains of an unadvised people, or lastly, a rude or undecent railing
not against the Doctrines (which when the Text shall occasion the same, is not
only approved, but much commended by His Royal Majesty,) but against the
persons of Papists and Puritans. Now the people bred up with this kind of
teaching, and never instructed in the Catechism and fundamental grounds of
Religion, are for all this Airy nourishment, no better then (abraiae tabulae)
new table-bookes ready to be filled up, either with the Manuals and Catechismes
of the Popish Priests; or the papers and pamphlets of Anabaptists, Brownists
and Puritans.

His Majesty therefore calling to mind the saying of Tertullian Id verum quod
primum:) and remembering, with what doctrine the Church of England in her first
and most happy Reformation did drive out the one and k^ep out the other from
poisoning and i^festing the people of this Kingdom does find that the whole
scope of this Doctrine is contained in the articles of Religion, the two books
of Homilies, the lesser and the greater Catechism, which his Majesty does
recommend again in these directions as the Theaters and proper Subjects of all
sound and edifying preaching.

And so far are these directions from abating that his Majesty does expect at
our hands, that it should increase the number of Sermons, by renewing upon every
Sunday in the afternoon in all Parish Churches throughout the Kingdom that
Primitive, and most profitable Exposition of the Catechism, wherewith the
people, (yea) very Children may be timely seasoned and instructed in all the
heads of Christian Religion the which kind of teaching, (to our amendment be it
spoken,) is more diligently observed in all the reformed Churches of Europe,
then of late it has been here in England. I find his Majesty much moved with
this neglect, and resolved: (if we that are his Bishops, do not see a
Reformation hereof, which I trust we shall) to recommend it to care of the
Civil Magistrate. So far is his Highness from giving the least discouragement
to sollid preaching or discreet, or religious Preachers.

To all this, I am to add, that it is his Majesty's Princely pleasure, that
both the former directions, and those reasons of the same, be fairly written in
every Registers office: to the end, that every Preacher of what denomination
soever, may if he be so pleased take out Coppies of either of them with his
own hand (Gratis) paying nothing in the name of see and expedition. But if he
do use the pains of the Register, or his Clerks, then to pay some moderate
fee, to be pronounced in open Court by the Chancellours and Commissaries of the
place, taking the direction and approbation of my Lords, the Bishops: Lastly,
that from hence forward a course may be taken, that every Parson, Vicar,
Curate, or Lecturer, do make exhibit of these his Majesty's directions, and
the reasons for the same at the ensuing visitation of the Bishops and
Archdeacons, paying to the Register by way of see, but two pence at the time
of the exhibit: and so wishing, but withal in his Majesty's name requiring
your Lordship to have a special and extraordinary c^^e of the premises. I
leave you to the Almmighty.

From Croyden, Sept. 4. 1622. Your Lordships very loving Brother, G. Cant.

The Lord Archbishops Letter to the Lord Keeper.
BY this you see, his Majesty's Princely care, that none should preach Christ
crucified, obedience to the Higher Powers, and honest, and Christian
conversation of life, but in a Religious form; and not that every young man
shall take upon himself an exorbitant liberty to teach what he lists, to
the offense of his Majesty, and the disturbance and disquiet of the Church and
Commonwealth. I can give your Lordship no better directions for the pursuance
hereof, then are prescribed to you in his Majesty's Letter, and the Schedule
herewith sent unto you, whereof I pray your Lordship to be very careful, since
it is the Princely pleasure of his Highness to require an account both of you
and me for the same. And so not doubting, but by your Register, or otherwise,
you will cause these instructions to be communicated to your Clergy. I leave
you to the Almighty and remain.

Your loving Brother CANT.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, The humble Petition of diverse Noblemen
and Gentlemen Estated in Ireland, now at London.
Humbly shows,
THat most of Your Petitioners, and many thousands of Your Majesty's most
faithful Subjects, and late Inhabitants of Your Kingdom of Ireland, being
robed, and spoiled of all their substance (and thereby many of them reduced to
a most miserable condition, who formerly faithfully served Your Majesty) are
now enforced to flee into this Kingdom by occasion of the unexampled, bloody,
and unhuman cruelties of the Rebels of that Kingdom, who through the
instigation of Papist Priests, Friars, and Jesuits and other malignant persons,
have risen in Arms in that Kingdom against Your Majesty's Crown and Dignity,
and destroyed, or banished almost all Yout Majesty's loyal and dutiful
Subjects the Protestants there, for no other cause, but for that they do not
worship God after their Idolatrous and superstitious manner: which is manifest
by their public Declarations, Speeches, Oaths, and Confederacies (albeit some
few other fond pretenses are added, to gloss their most barbarous actions)
That these four months past, the expectation of powerful Supplies, Treasure
and Ammenition from England and Scotland, has supported the drooping and
languishing Spirits of your Peti^ioners and others, the Protestants, interessed
in that Kingdom, who finding but small succors hitherto sent thither,
notwithstanding the several orders of both Houses of Parliament, do now with
unspeakable grief of heart, apprehend nothing but despair of ever being
restored to their habitations, if your Majesty be not graciously pleased to
give life and power to the painful endeavors of both Houses of parliament,
the prosecution of that War necessarily requiring a great sum of money to be
presently raised. And in all humility. The Petitioners conceive, the act lately
passed by Your Majesty's Royal Grace and Goodness, (upon the propositions
made by those who shall adventure their moneys) to be the only way left for
raising present Money for that work. And they find that the removal of your
sacred Majesty to places so remote, and distant from the Parliament does much
discourage the Adventurers in advancing Moneys for effectual proceeding in the
work, and consequently will be a means unavoidably to retard the long expected
supplies, contrary to Your Majesty's Royal intentions often expressed, and
will much encourage the Rebels, and their adherents in that Kingdom, and may in
the opinion of some, (as they fain) gain a belief of those false reports, which
diverse of the Rebels have taken the boldness to raise, even very lately, since
the publishing of your Majesty's Proclamation for suppressing the Rebels, that
they are your Majesty's Soldiers and that the supplies that arrived here, were
but the Parliaments supplies. And your further Petitioners humbly show, That if
strong Forces be not presently raised, and transported thither, (the season of
the year now serving) the British and Protestants in that Kingdom cannot long
subsist, but will be extirpated, and Papists and the idolatrous Mass thereby
established, which is already publicly used in most of the Churches of that
Kingdom.

May it therefore please Your most sacred Majesty, to reflect upon the desprate
and miserable condition of that poor Kingdom and waying the Premises and other
the consequences of delaying the effectual setting forward of the War against
the Rebels in Ireland, of Your Princely goodness and wisdom, to vouchsafe
Your Majesty's presexce unto Your Parliament, for the encouragement of the
Adventurers, and all other your Majesty's good Subjects in this pious work for
the discouragement of the Rebels and for expediting such further Acts,
Commissions and Warrants to issue as shall be requisite for the preservation of
the remnant of Your good Subjects, the Protestants yet left in Ireland, or
driven for the present thereout.

And Your Suppliants will pray, etc.

A NEW DECLARATION FROM BOTH Houses of PARLIAMENT.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament do declare, That it is against the Laws
and Liberties of the Kindom, that any of the Subjects thereof, should be
commanded by the King to attend him at his pleasure, but such as are bound
thereto by special Service: and that whosoever upon pretense of his Majesty's
command shall take Arms, and gather together with others in a warlike manner,
to the terror of the Kings people shall be esteemed disturbers of the public
peace, and to do that which may introduce a president of very dangerous
consequence for the future, and produce most mischievous effects for the
present considering the great distempers of the Kingdom, and what pernicious
Counselors and Incendiaries, are now about the King, and how desperate and ill
affected diverse persons attending upon his Majesty, have showed themselves to
the Parliament, and to his other good Subjects, threatening and reproaching them
publicly, even in His Majesty's presence, and for preventing and avoiding such
great mischiefs as may thereupon ensue.

It is Ordered and Ordained by both Houses of Parliament. That if the
Trained-band, or any other his Majesty's Subjects, shall upon pretense of any
such command be drawn together, and put into a posture of war, the Sheriff of
that County where there shall be such raising, or drawing together of armed
men: Do forthwith raise the power of the County to suppress them and to keep
his Majesty's peace according to the Law. And that the Lord Lieutenants,
Justices of the Peace, and all other his Majesty's Subjects, be aiding and
assisting to the several and respective Sheriffs in performance hereof, as
they will answer the contrary at their peril.

Hen. Elisyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.
FINIS.

