A RELATION OF THE INHUMANE and Barbarous suffering of the people called QUAKERS

In the City of Bristoll during the Mayoralty of John Knight, commonly called,
Sir John Knight commencing from the 29. of the 7. month 1663. to the ^9. day of
the same month; 1664.

Impartially observed by a private hand, and now communicated for Public
information by the said People.

Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried, but the wicked shall do
wickedly, and none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall
understand, Dan. 10.12.

Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is
the Kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute
you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they the
Prophets that were before you, Mat. 5. 10, 11, 12.

And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry night and day unto him,
though he bear long with them, I tell you he will avenge them speedily,
nevertheless when the son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth?
Luke 18. 7, 8.

Woe unto you when all men speak well of you, Luke 6. 26.

Printed in the Year 1665.

A Relation, etc.
FRiend John Knight (for unto thee it is that we direct this ensuing relation
of which we have suffered at thy hands, during thy being Major in this City,
for that by thee it was, and through thy influence that we have thus suffered.)
It had been well for thee, if thou had minded the stable condition of this
City, when thou entred'st into thy Government, both for trade and otherwise,
Robert Can Knight. And Barronet being thy Predecessor.
then which no time has paralleled it since the date of the late troubles,
when the King returned. A City at peace and unity, within its self; men of all
persuasions, as to Religion, well persuaded amongst themselves, and as to the
Civil peace united in the hearts, and love of each man to another, and the
public benefit; And thus it was whilst moderation sat in the Government of
this City, so that every individual might rest assured of the peace and safety
of his estate and Person, in the pursuance of the public.

And by the way, let us tell thee and all, to whom these presents may come,
that there was not a City more united in the public, then this of Bristol,
before thine entrance, whose shadowy steps therefrom, from this day forwards,
not upon our personal influence, or our principle, but thine own, receive their
gnomon, or direction from thy declention from it, and will have their let from
thee.

For thou art the man, whom rage and asperity, with a blind zeal to the
worships of the times, have set up to counter-buff the stability of this City,
and to overturn ex industria, or of set purpose the well poized Government of
unity and peace, into disunion and trouble; And to lay the sure grounded
Fabric of its prosperity in the dust, whilst thou walk over it, with arms
folded up, and a pitiful countenance, as if not thou, but the contrary (viz.)
moderation had there laid it; And so whilst with the one hand thou entrest in
thy sharp incision knife, thou stroakest with the other, as if so be that which
suffers were the cause of its running in, not thou of its suffering.

To manifest which, and (...) give thee to see that thou art not charged
amiss, something of thine own actions shall be drawn before thee, which by
thee have been perpetrated, during this thy year, to the intent and end, that
if thou have yet any thing remaining of true sensiblenesse, thou may reflect
upon what thou have don, and blush, and so may come to the knowledge of the
truth, as it is in Jesus, whom now in Us thou have thus persecuted, and be
saved, which is the desire of our hearts, and that it may be well with thee for
ever. But if not, that the ground of the miscarriage of this once, and very
lately flourishing City may be charged where it ought, and that after ages may
have somewhat upon Record, as an account wherefore it was, and how it came to
pass, that a place of so much weight and worth, should be laid even with the
dust, for though we may be much looked over by thee and thy generation, as a
people not of so considerable an interest as among men, though we may claim as
considerable a one as your selves, yet a higher interest we have then amongst
men, with him who looks ye over, who will render to you according to your
deeds; and this you will find, when the measure of your iniquity is fulfilled
upon us, which ye will be suffered to fulfill for the trial of our faith and
Patience; and what there is of God in us, that he may be glorified, for which
purpose he has suffered ye thus to do; and without whose suffrance ye could
not have done thus unto us, and therefore we are content, for he will then
fulfill upon you the measure of your iniquity, and then poor Bristoll will know
(as well as you, the sad effects of persecuting the innocent people of the
Lord, who are not its enemy, nor yours, nor the Kings, nor his Government that
is just, answering the just principle of God, which we are to follow, and
nothing but that which is according unto it. And where we cannot do to suffer
as is our principle, and our practice makes it manifest.) We say we are not
enemies to the City, to the King, nor you; but do desire the welfare of it, and
of you all; God is witness who will render to every man according to his deeds.

And this we speak before hand, that in the day of your calamity, which you
shall see will approach you, and compass you about, ye may remember that of it
you were foretold, and that it is come to pass what you were foretold in the
day of your prosperity, to the end that you might have heard and considered ere
it had been too late, for this is signified to you in the name of the Lord; and
let it be as the presage of what shall come to pass, and the presage it is;
The persecution of us will be visited by the Lord, with as sharp a hand as ever
was drawn forth against it, since the foundation thereof; And ye shall be
tumbled into the dust; and your carcasses shall fall as the mire of the
streets, who have stretched forth your hands without a cause, against an
innocent people, that have done you no wrong, and have made them to suffer, and
an execration you will be, and an hissing in the day of the Lords vengeance,
when he shall render to you according to your deeds; this is spoken to such of
you as shall not repent, as that which shall come upon you in the day that the
Lords vengeance shall be made manifest.

Not that we aspire after dignities, or greatness, or to be something in the
world, do we thus write, or that the thoughts of such things Buoys us up above
what we should be; no, we have learnt somewhat else (viz.) In whatsoever
condition we be, therein to be content, and to do the will of God, for which
purpose we came into the world, however the doing thereof may be attended with
the greatest sufferings, which we know we must pass through, viz. great
sufferings, even many Tribulations to the Kingdom of God, to our rest, and so
we look to the recompense of reward, as did Moses (viz.) the rest in doing the
will of God, who forsook Pharaohs Court, and chose rather to suffer afflictions
(and so do we) with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season: Who (it is said) endured, as seeing him who is invisible; and so as he,
so here we, rest in the doing of his will; and let the Lord do what he will
with us, we are content, who say, Thy will be done on earth, as it is in
heaven, be it to Prisons, to Banishment, to loss of all, to death; the good
will of God be done; as to us, the Lord be glorified by us, in what he will, we
leave it to him, who are come not to do our own will, but the Lords, the will
of God be done, says our soul, Amen.

Not that we are plotting, or conspiring, or do intend any such thing, as is
falsely suggested against us, and that under the pretense of religious meetings,
or coming together to wait upon the Lord, the Lord is witness that we are
clear of any such thing, and that our principle is against it, as is our
practice. Not that we have any expectation from man, or of any outward arm for
our deliverance; we disclaim any such thing; and do know, that not by man, but
the arm of the Lord, our deliverance must arise, though these things are
secretly suggested, and that our boldness in our sufferings arises from some
such secret assurance; no, no, it only comes from the good hand of the Lord;
because of his testimony which we bear, who is near us, and bears us up in and
through all our sufferings, and will all those that trust in him.

Not that these things are pleasant to us as men, that is to say, thus to
suffer, for we are men as you are, and are compassed about with the same
infirmities as you, that is to say, husband, wife, children, relations, estate,
Country, life, liberty, wholesome air, convenient accommodation, health,
prosperity in our affairs, going through without distraction, what we have to
do, or molestation are near us as men, we know what they are, and what they
cost, as well as you; and that to enjoy them is the portion of a man, and all
that he can have of them under the Sun, and that it is good in this sense, if
it may be with a good conscience, to know good days, and to see no evil, all
that we lay them down for; All that for which we suffer the loss of them,
which is as little pleasing to our flesh and blood, as to you is, it is the
will of God that it should be so to try us, and that the virtue of him in us
may be made manifest, and that in this encounter we may not make shipwreck of
faith and a good conscience, and so deny the Lord that bought us, for things
that perish, and hereby it comes indeed to be made manifest, that we know and
have the possession of something that is eternal, viz. that we endure, that we
suffer the parting with the temporal; And herein the Lord is glorified that we
choose not, or prefer that which perishes before that which endures, who are not
our own, but as has been said, are bought with a price, and therefore are to
glorify God in our bodies, and our souls, which are Gods; and by this you all
will see (and therefore it is that this day is suffered) that we have something
more then what is of this world for the enjoyment of which we leave the world,
and choose rather to suffer affliction, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season; For all that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution.

We say not for any of those things, or that we would seem to be something in
speaking of what shall be hereafter, and so to glory do we thus write. But the
Lord would have us thus to speak, that you may know that our sufferings will
have an end; and that it will be thus with those who fear the Lord, in whom he
rules, and that a day of deliverance there will be, a resurrection, a return;
and that the Lord therein will be glorified; and this we are shown, and it is
to be shown unto you, that it may be known, if so be that it may be believed;
but whether it be believed or no, the thing is so, that God is with us, and
that he has not forsaken us, though he suffers us to be tried, and that he is
present with us, and will be through all, and beyond all that ye shall be
suffered to do unto us, and that we are not left comfortless, but are shown the
end of, as well as our sufferings, even the glory that shall follow, the glory
that is to be revealed at the coming of the Lord, the manifestation of his
power, who is over all, and reigns for ever; And by his so keeping, and
preserving us, through all and over all, shows that he is with us, and that it
is Jesus in us whom you now persecute.

For we pray you what should support us, what think ye can keep us in the midst
of all these things, which you have set before us, and prepared against us, and
which you are preparing, and have made us, and which you are making us to go
through, Imprisonment, Banishing us our Native Country, taking us from our
Relations, Trades, Callings, Husbands, Wives, Children, native air and soil,
and whatsoever in this world may be dear unto us, casting us into noisome holes
and places, thicker in proportion then a discreet man would put dogs into a
kennel, or beasts into a pound, or horses into a stable, or pigs into a stye
amongst lice and vermin, and Fellons and murderers, contagious stinks, and
nastinesse sufficient enough to infect such as have lived in wholesome
cleanliness, good air, and diet; as you know it has been with many of us,
whose living has been as well as yours in the world, to the infecting of some
of us already, who have laid down the body at the foot of your cruelty, whose
blood you have to answer for, as for the blood of others of us, whom your
unmerciful barbarism by your Officers have sent out of the world, as Lidia
Tevy, and her infant, Alice the wife of William Peachy, who was big with child,
and hurt by the Officer in the meeting, who went home ill, was delivered the
next day, and a few days after, continuing ill, died; And Mary Knight did, the
servant of Nathaniel Milner hereafter mentioned; We say, what shall make us to
undergo all this cruelty, and that with cheerfulness, which thou John Knight,
and some of the rest of thy brethren are preparing, and have prepared for us,
have and are ready to execute upon us (of which, as to the things already done,
and the readiness of your hearts further to do this ensuing relation gives the
particulars) were it not for something that is mortal, that is more then man,
that bears us out?

We think you should come into consideration, and to sensibleness, and that
these things should bring you to it; And therefore it is, that we have thus
wrote for your welfare; We truly desire in the Lord, though you pursue our
ruins, and that without a cause, for which the Lord God will one day plead
with you, and let you know, that what we have said is true.

Is it the world think you that makes us thus, how can that do it, when this
leads us out of it, is it our country, wherewithal can that induce us, when by
these things we are threatened out of it, is it our relations, wives, husbands,
children, neighbors, kinsfolks, friends, acquaintance how can it be so, when
you take us from them? does greatness in the world tempt us? this very thing is
that which does diminish us; Is it honor and applause among men? This makes us
a spectacle both to Angels and men: Does ease and pleasure do it? this takes
from us our pleasant things, and does put us to sojourn (as it may prove) in
desolate wildernesses: Is it profit and advantage? this takes us from our
profits, and the places of the advantage; also of our estates and callings: Is
it health? what more hazardous thereunto, or more reasonably likely to be
destructive, then such a change of climate, and alterations of seasons thereby,
as by the Law you may cast us into.

Well, the Lord God eternal will plead with you, who have put us upon these
things, and with thee John Knight in particular: And thou and thy judgment must
then come to know for what thou have done from the hand of the Lord: But before
we proceed to speak to thee any further in this matter, we must lay before thee
in particular, and bring back upon thee thy wickedness thou have done unto us,
and then thou shall hear thy judgment.

No sooner was it entered into thine ear, but thy thoughts gave thee what thou
would do unto us, and before thou sleptest that night, after thou wast sworn
Major, did not thou express what thou would do unto us? this being the
opportunity thou longedst for, wherein to be dealing with us, thou know the
work thou wast driving on the year before, when (as has been said) moderation,
as to conscience, sat in the seat of the government. Thou know what
endeavors thou usedst to ill-be-speak that moderation to the Court; and what
thou said to one of the Kings Secretaries at Bath, as to us, and what he
answered thee, when thou did put the question (viz.) We have many Quakers in
the City; What shall we do with the Quakers: It is the Kings pleasure ( thou
know he said) that they be proceeded withal, with gentleness, and won with
with love, or words to that purpose. And yet thou know as not satisfied with
this, how thou spakest with him again about it; and how the same answer thou
receivedst, thou showing thereby what a mind thou had to be dealing with
us, even when the government was not in thine hands, at least to reflect on
those that hold thy hands, some of which were then present, if so be that a
word had slipped out of the Secretaries mouth for that purpose.

And then after thou wast Major, how soon thou did cause our peaceable
meetings, to be visited after thou had some enterchange with some of those
called Baptists, and Independants thou know; and what thou have done since
to us, which we are now intending to set in order before thee, and now hear
what we have to say to thee in this matter.

To omit many things that passed the several first days of the the week after
thy first entrance into thy Mayoralty, wherein the Officers, sometimes Civil,
sometimes Military, sometimes both came to our meetings, and required us to
depart, yet meddling with non except Elinor Maud, whom the Marshal with
Musketeers had away to the guard, but from thence she was dismissed again:
Thus compassing our City like a dog (as the Psalmish speaks, Psalm. 59.6. and in
the evening returning, and grudging, and not being satisfied, they return at
evening (says he) they make a noise like a dog, and go round about the City,
and at evening let them return, and let them make a noise like a dog, and go
round about the City, ver. 19. and ver. 20. Let them wander up and down for
meat, and grudge if they be not satisfied; for he that holds the waters of the
sea in his fist, and comprehends the dust of the earth in a measure, and
weighs the mountains in a balance, who declares to man his thoughts, showed
his dominion, and how he could keep thee off, who had preserved us hitherto,
and gave us not a prey into thy teeth. So that it was not when thou would,
nor as thou would, but when he suffered, and as he pleased to let it be, was
it that we were delivered into thy hands, who could not, nor can do any
thing to us, but as thou receivedst power from above; as he said to Pilate, who
is gone before, in that day, when he said unto him, Speak thou not unto me,
know thou not that I have power to crucify thee; and have power to release
thee ( Thou could have no power at all (said he) against me, except it was
given thee from above, Joh. 19.10, 11. So the time being come wherein we were
to be tried, and thereby the virtue that is of him in us to be made manifest,
thou had power given thee, and not before to enter in upon us; and so on the
28. day of the ninth month, called November, being within a day of full two
months after thou vvast sworn Mayor. Thou sentest thy Officer John Jones the
Lawyer, who with one of the Town Clerks servants, and some other Officers and
Soldiers of the Militia, which thou had got into thine assistance, came
with swords and arms upon a naked people, who make (and their principle is
so) no resistance. And after he had required us to depart, and taken the names
of several of us, he sent to the Guard these, whose names follow, viz. Edward
Pyott, Jeremy Hignel, John Gibbons, George Bishopp, Thomas Morris, Lewis
Rogers, Nehemiah Pool, Benjamin Cottle, Joseph Jones, James Sterridge, George
Oliver, John Spoore.

These being brought to the Guard, were continued there in the wind and cold
till about evening, and then Thomas Walter, Lieutenant to Captain Adams (whose
Company then had the guard) came and acquainted them that thy self, and the
Deputy Lievtenants, who some of them that very night denied that any such thing
was ordered by them, had ordered them to be sent to Bridewel, so to Bridewel
they were brought a place of reproach, appointed for Rogues, and no Prison of
the Kings) though they were pretended to be the Kings prisoners, though some of
them were Citizens, and men of quality therein.

Now it is to be noted, That Sheriff Streamer being Major of the Regiment, and
so having command of the Guard, coming to the Guard and understanding who were
brought thither, whereof one was his near relation, viz. his Brother-in-law,
and his friend, viz. George Bishopp, if so be his business was to have him up,
and that that was the end of that days work; came not into the Guard
(understanding him to be, if not seeing him there) but went his way to to the
meeting- house, and there in person dismissed the rest, without making so much as
one a Prisoner.

Which unnaturalness and high ingratitude he learnt, no doubt, of thee, who (as
the sequel of this relation signifies) wast well skilled in things of that
nature, and his orders (no doubt) he received from thee, who as thy Buffoon or
Martin-ape (as men use to say) most artificially followed the dictates of thy
mad and hasty spirit, who had not (nor had he) learnt that moderation which
the whole series of transactions in this generation (the most remakable of any
that had been in the world) would have taught thee, as would also the saying
of him who lives for ever, who is the Judge of all (viz.) To do to others
whatsoever you would should be done unto your selves; that is to say, when you
are in power, so warily to extend it, as that you may live with your
Neighbors, and have their love when your power is gone, and gain the good
reputation of moderate men. For the wheel turns round, and as the history of
former ages have proved on this, Date obulum Belisario, For Gods sake give a
halfpenny to Belisarius, comes to be the portion of many, which befell that
great Captain Belisarius, who in the days of Justinian the Emperor, did so
behave himself in Persia, Affirica and Italy, that he had the honor of this
Effigies on the other side of the Coin, with this inscription, Gloria and
Romanorum decus, The Glory and Grace of the Romans.

And of this you vvanted not warning, if you would have taken heed, nor good
Examples before you; but as it was said in another case, in a wrong spirit, by
Balack to Balaam, may be said truly of you, The Lord has kept thee back from
honor, Numb. 24.11. Or the infatuation of the Almighty, because of your lust
to oppression, has been so upon you, that in your day you have not known the
things that belong unto your peace, that is to say, you have not taken the
course that wise men have steered in all generations, upon the guidance of
their observation of the revolutions of this World, viz. so to behave your
selves whilst ye are in Power (as has been said) as that you may live in good
reputation with your Neighbors when you are out of it (that is to say) that
you may be men when you have no power. And this let us say to you all, who are
joined together in this persecution of the innocent, if such a hand had been
carried toward you and this City in former days, as you have done in this,
neither you had been so, nor this City; that is to say, neither had you, nor
this City been so as at this day: And some of them whom with so much despite
and ignominy you now rule over, have been instrumental that you and the City
have not been otherwise; and this is the requital you make of all that which
has sought to, and has saved you, thus to do.

But this your work will be your shame; and the day is at hand wherein you
shall hear of it with both your ears, that is to say, the Lord will so work as
that you shall see both where you are, and what you have been doing, when
repentance with some of you we fear may be too late, and the place of
repentance you will not find, though you seek it carefully with tears.

But to proceed, for thou must thoroughly be dealt with ere this is finished.

Having lodged the aforesaid Prisoners at Bridewell, the next morning thou
had them to the Council house, the Keeper of Bridewell being their leader;
and having set guards of Musketeers at the Tolzey door (contrary to Law, which
is, that Courts of Justice and Proceedings at Law, be open) keeping out whom
they pleased; thou said to them, what came into thy mind. And though they in
moderation told thee, that they had done no new thing, but what they had many
years before even ever since they had been a people. And that experience had
shown in the greatest revolutions that had been in this Nation, that they, and
what they professed and did, was not inconsistent with the public peace, but
that they, and the peace of the place and Nation might be. And that what they
did was not in obstinacy and contempt, as thou would have rendered it, but in
Conscience to the Lord, whose worship was in Spirit; and he sought such to
worship him, viz. in Spirit and in truth, Joh. 4. And that their suffering
Cheerfully whatsoever might be done to them in reference to this thing, who had
Estates, Relations, Families Callings, who knew (as your selves might judge)
what it was to get and to loose their Estates, Liberty, Countries, did speak
that there was something more in it then of this world, that made them willing
thus to offer it up. And though they told thee moreover, that as to Government
they were not against, but did own the Second Table, as well as the Frst,
Masters, Parents, Magistrates, etc. but all in the Lord; and that where they
could, and not sin against the Lord, they were obedient; and where they could
not, they did quietly suffer. And that ye had experience of them in such things
as they could do, that they rather went before you then otherwise. And though
they asked thee what thou would have them to do, seeing their Conscience was
not satisfied? Suppose (said they to thee) that we are mistaken, which (said
they) we are not, but are certain of what we do, would thou have us to do
that which our conscience is against, because of what may be done to our
bodies, before we are convinced of the contrary? Said not the Apostle, Happy
is he that condemns not himself in the thing that he allows? Yet thou would
not hear; and though thou pretendedst to a great deal of fairness at first, and
that thou had received a Letter from the Kings Council, giving thee direction
to take up the Heads of us, and secure them till the Assizes, unless they
should give Security for their appearance: And told that there was the Not
this latter, but the former.
New Act for Banishment, and did bid Edward Pyott choose which he would have
thee to proceed with him against, either the Councils Letter, or the said Act;
yet thou put him to the Oath of Allegiance; though when thou puttedst the
question, he said, there is the mercy of the Law, and the Rigor of the Law
before thee, if we must choose, let us have the mercy of the Law; thou said
we should have the mercy of the Law, he told thee, That thy fruits would make
it manifest, being sensible of thy deceit. And this was the mercy of the Law,
or that which thou might think too much mercy, viz. the severitie of the
Law, or rather the severitie which the Law does not require; for that Law was
made for Papists, and so we are not the people which that Law intends (as
Edward Pyott told thee) which is thy mercy; and these thy fruits made thee
manifest: And so thou did commit him (though a freeman of the City, whom
thou would make a stranger because he lived within a mile without it) and
George Oliver, John Gibbins, James Sturridge, Thomas Morris, John Spoore,
Benjamin Cottle, and Nehemiah Poole, because strangers, for being at an
Unlawful meeting, and for not taking the Oath of Alegiance, and for refusing to
find Sureties to be of the good behavior, for which thou signedst the Warrant,
(and with thee John Lock, Nathaniel Cale, and John Lawford,) who were sent to
Newgate, and the other five that were of the City (viz.) George Bishopp,
Jeremiah Hignell, John Summers, Joseph Jones, and Lewis Rogers, thou dismissed
upon their promise of appearance at Sessions; so the first eight were detained
in Newgate until the fifth of the tenth month following, who were then set at
liberty by thee, upon the promise of two of their friends that were of the
City, because they dwelt without the limit thereof, that at Sessions they
should appear.

Thus far matters proceeded at that time: Yet thou wast not satisfied, but as a
man restless to accomplish the end, thou had determined, viz. the rooting of
us, and the generation of us, out of this City, we, our families and Relations,
who (as has been said) are no inconsiderable company of men therein, as is
well known to the City, thou did work with the Deputies Lieutenants, what
with Arguments, what with Threatnigs to represent them to the King as persons
not well affected to his affairs, if they would not assist thee; and with them
did prevail to come down the next first day of the week, viz. the 6th of the
10th month, with the Sheriff to the meeting, which was then before the door
of their own hired house, being kept out of their own hired house by Armed men.
But the Deputy Lievtenants being men of more moderation, seeing no matter for
their arms to work on, after they had sent some few to Bridewell, and some
others to the Court of Guard, to see thereby how they might affect the rest,
came away, making no farther manner of proceeding in the case, then to set
those on the Guard and at Bridewel at liberty.

And indeed it was a thing preposterous and contrary to reason, as it was
against Law, that armed men in times of peace, should take upon them, or suffer
themselves by thee to be overruled, to execute the parts of Civil officers, in
the execution of the Law (suppose there had been the breach of any law which
yet is not granted, except of what was old and obsolete) when the Civil
themselves might well accomplish it, especially on a people who one of the
Officers might as well lead, as a Regiment (that is to say) would make no
resistance. For the times of peace differ, things in cases of that nature,
according to the old maxim, Cedant Arma toge, Let Arms give place to the Gown,
that is, to the Civil administration of the Law; for Arms are not things
natural to Law, but where the execution of Law, by the hand of the ordinary
Officer is weak, and cannot be by reason of Armed insurrections or designs of
War, there arms are levied and made use of as things extraordinary, as poison
in Physic, to cut off that exuberance, that so the body be not hazarded, that
the whole part be not endangered, according to that saying of the Poet, Cuncta
prius tentanda, sed imedicabile vulnus, ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera
trahatur; (that is,) All things are first to be tried, but an incurable wound
must be cut off with the sword, least the sound part be infected. Thus
according to your Law.

But this thou did not do, for (as has been said) there was no need of Arms
against them who had none, whom one Officer might order as well as a thousand,
as thine own practice mentioned in the ensuing relation has made good, and
which is a reproof, viz. what thou have done in the case to thy self. And was
it not a thing abominable, that thou should set the Citizens in Arms, to pull
their peaceable fellow Citizens from their peaceable meetings, waiting on the
Lord, into Prisons, and so to ruin (as it might fall out) by the tender of the
Oath of Alegiance; and the prosecution of the penalty on them that could not
swear, which Oath was not made for such. For when it was made, there was none
that could not swear at all: But for the Papists it was made, that could
swear, but would not swear Alegiance to the King, holding the Pope Supreme, as
the preamble of the Act, and the whole reason of it leads and shows.

Now if thou stumblest at this word peaceable, and peaceable meeting, so it is,
and will stand for ever, and the Lord knows it, who will one day plead for us,
and render unto thee according to thy deeds; and this their Neighbors were
well satisfied in, who when occasion presented, cleared them of any thing to
the contrary more then once or twice, when thou had them Jurors, that is to
say, of meeting with force and arms, or of being a terror to the people,
notwithstanding thou industriously sought to, and would have had it
otherwise: And for this purpose bespakest some of the men concerned thy self,
not like a righteous Judge or Magistrate, and contrary to the Law of the Land,
which is, That no man be a prosecutour and a Judge. But of this more hereafter.

Moreover, was it not a thing most unreasonable, that Arms should be required
for a people to find, and they to be imprisoned for not so doing; and to be
fined, and distresses to be taken for that purpose, whose principle is not to
fight, who cannot do it in defense of themselves, cannot resist evil because
of him that has said, I say unto you, resist not evil, but if the enemy smite
thee on the one cheek, turn the other. Those arms also being made use of to
keep them out of their own hired house, and to break their meetings waiting
upon the Lord; and to keep them in prison, as well as to bring them thither,
for their Consciences in Worshipping the Lord, and discharging a good
conscience toward him. And here boys and others, whom one would scorn to put
with the Dogs of ones flock, were set over them and our Meetings.

Lastly, Was it not a shame, as well as a very heavy burden, that such a
weekly charge as the Militia should be held on the City, for no other end, as
has yet appeared, but the disturbing of us (and other people) as to the Woship
of God.

Well, thus far thou did proceed, and thus it was, but to little purpose; for
thou made the City as weary as thy self, who began to think what would be
the end of these things, and to what pass the City in a short time would come,
being thus set, the one part of it against the other, pulling and endeavoring
to root one the other out of it, even that part who were peaceable and a good
example in it. And that this should be by those who were in the seat of
Government; for said not he who is Lord of all, A kingdom divided against it
self cannot stand. And then how could it possibly be well with Bristoll when
one part was turned against the other, as aforesaid? It may be told thee, that
it put the greatest thoughts of heart into the sober part thereof that has
been in the City, a City turning upside down, and those in the seat of
Government bearing against that part thereof which was to be cherished, which
was to be upheld. This is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation.

But thou missedst in that thine attempt that day, yet thou would not give
over, but fury rose up in thee, like one who having some notable enterprise in
design, with which to bespeak, or to raise up himself, missing in his first
attempt, is led forth with more vigor to accomplish in the next, so thou
surcharged with wrath and anger, did breath forth at the Tolzey, and threaten
what thou would do the next day to such and such, if they were at the
meeting; and that thou would have them up, and gave order for that purpose;
and much passed thee there, what thou would: do unto us.

So the next day coming, being the thirteenth of the tenth month, and the first
day of the week, thou did cause the meeting house door to be kept fast with
armed men, some of John Hicks his company. And so the meeting came to be in the
street, and there about the second hour in the afternoon, Captain Hicks (a man
as industrious as thy self in these things, and as full of mischief against his
quiet neighbors) came down with a fresh guard, relieves them that were there
before. And finding the men thou had threatened so, and took order about, viz.
George Bishop and Edward Pyot, for they were not ashamed to be found there, in
their testimony to the Lord, though they knew of thy order, notwithstanding all
was still, and not a word spoken, he led them away to the guard, and tw^lve
more, the names of all are as follows, Edward Pyot, John Withers, Lewis
Rogers, George Bishop, Nathanael Day, George Gough, Thomas Goldney, John
Summers, John Pickering, John Saunders, John Spoore, Thomas North, Nathanael
Milner, Henry Sutton.

Henry Sutton was discharged, being an ancient man; but the rest were had to
Bridewel, with a guard, as if so be they had been some notable offenders. And
the worst of men, and of most debauched reputation, to which place (after they
had been sometime before on the guard) Captain Hicks committed them, so they
were brought to Bridewel; and there lodged some of them the second time; as if
otherwise you knew not how to murder their reputation, who were men of good
reputation, who willingly went out of the Camp, bearing his reproach, who
suffered without the gate; And so good report and evil report was alike to them
in their testimony to the Lord, which they had learnt to go through, as did the
Apostles, and followers of Jesus, who were counted as deceivers, and yet true,
who had here (as is our case) no continuing City, but looked for one to come,
as he did who went before, who that he might sanctify the people with his own
blood, suffered without the gate; Wherefore Jesus also (said the Apostle, Heb.
3.12, 13.) that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered
without the gate; let us therefore go forth unto him without the Camp, bearing
his reproach, for we have here no continuing City, concerning whom when he
suffered some then said, he was a just man, some a deceiver; And the Apostle
speaking to the Hebrews of the Patriarchs, and those that went before them in
that day said, they confessed that they were strangers, Heb. 11.13, 14, 15, 16.
and Pilgrims on the earth, for said he of them, and we may say it now of our
selves in this day, They that say such things declare plainly (and so do we)
that they seek a country, and truly if they had been mindful of that country
from whence they came out, they might have had (and so have we) opportunity to
have returned, but now they desire (and we do the same) a better Country, we
speak of that which is spiritual, which is heavenly, wherefore God (says he)
is not ashamed to be called their God, and he will not be ashamed to be called
ours, for he has prepared for them a City, and as Paul said to the
Corinthians, so may we, I think (says he) that God has set us (and we may say
the same) the Apostles last as a spectacle (so are we) to God, Angels, and men,
and as Jesus himself said, John 16.1, 2, 3. so we find fulfilled these things
have I spoken unto you (and what he spoke unto his Disciples then, he spoke
unto all that should believe in his name, that ye should not be offended, they
shall put you out of the Synagogues. Yea the time comes, that whosoever
kills you (a true word of thee) shall think that he does God good service.
And these things will they do unto you (says he) because they have not known
the father nor me. Blessed are ye (says he) when men shall revile you (our
case) and persecute you (as you do us) for my sake, and shall say all manner of
evil against you fasly, (as they do of us for my sake) rejoice (our condition)
and be exceeding glad (and it is so to us) for great is your reward ( we shall
have the same) in heaven, for so persecuted they (as you do us) the Prophets
that were before you, Mat. 5.11, 12.

And this is manifest, for if you pleased you could have committed them as well
to Newgate, as to Bridewel; or you could have lodged them at some place, near
your guard; or you could have dismissed them till the morrow, who would have
appeared but you thought to hurt them, which you could not do, for they had
learned another thing, ( viz. to be content in all conditions;) and this is
their Crown, and will be their Honor, that they suffer for the truth, as it is
in Jesus, and this we tell thee John Knight, that their memorial will be
blessed, and of a good savor in England, when thou and thy name shall rot,
whose name is rotten already, who art the stench of the City; and of those who
are near it, who truly understand thee, who shall have thy portion according
to thy deeds.

Thus having pute them in Bridewel, one night thou fattest in council about
them the next day, and at the time of full Tolzey, thou must have them before
thee. And John Waldron the Keeper must lead them as in triumph, and before ye
they must be brought in a close Chamber, and all people must be kept out,
except such as you please; And what were of your own Spirit, that so what
passed, as to the making out of their innocence might not be heard; and to the
prison they must be sent as Offenders in the face of the City, and be reckoned
as transgressors, and some horrible ones too, that that which passed concerning
them, was kept so secret, as in a Chamber, and that those who ought to have
been suffered to come in to be satisfied in the cause of their commitment were
kept out; Now Courts of Justice should be open, which yours was not, which
is secret murder, which is abominable to the Law, which provides that
proceedings be public, which you seek to subvert. And therein that which is
the fundamental Law of this Nation, for which you may have a day to answer,
wherein you will know, what you have done, though now you will not hear
(supposing its like) that you will never be brought to an account, but we
would not have you to be deceived, as you have sown, so ye shall reap.

Well, this day thou beganest with Edward Pyot, and spakest many smooth
words, telling of the duty of thy place, and the Councels Letter to thee, and
the execution of the Law, and what was required of thee in all without,
having regard to what concerned the duty of thy place, as from the Lord; but
as if there had been a necessity for thee to persecute and force us to suffer,
so thou vventest on, to which Edward Pyot answered thee on this wise. As I
well understand the place of them that were to obey, so I have an
understanding also of the place of Magistrates, as they are the ordinance of
God; you that are in the places of Magistrates, ought to mind the Lord as your
supreme Lord, and over all in the government of the world, unto whom Rulers
themselves, as well as the ruled, must give an account; and therefore in the
execution of the laws, and administration of Justice, you are to have a due
regard to the Lord, and to his laws, and to do the Justice that is of him, for
Magistrates by the appointment of God are to execute in their several places of
Judicatory, as Gods ministers, and not as their own Lords, nor as Lords of
their own rule; but in the fear of the Lord, they, as Gods Ministers, are to
rule for God, and not for themselves, nor after their own wills and pleasures,
but according to the righteous law of God, in the just and equal principle that
is of God in their Consciences, that the Justice that is of God, and righteous
Judgment by Magistrates, as Gods Ministers, may be impartially administered, for
the punishment of evil doers only, and for the praise of them that do well,
that God over all may reign, and by all be known to rule in the kingdoms of
men; and after some interruption, as he could have liberty, he spoke to this
purpose: We being found in our innocent and peaceable meetings, only in the
worship of our God, and of the number of well-doers, whatever laws may be made
against us by men, yet according to the law and Justice of God, we ought not
for our well doing to be punished as evil doers: take heed therefore what you
do, that you be not a terror to good works. Now when thou wast not able to
resist what in truth and soberness was spoken to thee, though thou had
before told him, that thou would make use of the mercy of the law, yet that
thou might make him a transgressor by law, who had told thee before that he
could not swear, thou, without mercy, did again tender to him and John
Spoore the oath of allegiance, saying, thou would dispatch him first,
otherwise thou should not quietly proceed with the rest, so thy fruits
showed what thy mercy was, as he then told thee: and to Newgate thou sentest
him and John Spoor, for being at an unlawful meeting, and for refusing to take
the oath of allegiance, and for not finding sureties for the good behavior, as
is contained in their mittimus, for to the oath of allegiance thou did put
them again, though they could not swear at all, in conscience to the command of
Christ, who says, I say unto you, swear not at all, not as to the matter of
the oath, which was for Papists and not them; and this was thy mercy (as has
been said) to seek out ways how to make them to suffer, though thou
pretendedst to the contrary. And this warrant was signed John Knight Mayor,
John Lock, Nathaniel Cale, John Lawford, and it was dated 14th Dec. 1663.

Now as Edward Pyot was passing to Newgate through the Tolzey, and seeing there
many people, and some that were wise and sober men, and finding something
arising in him toward them to speak in reference to the matter, upon which he
was committed, said, I have something reasonably to speak to you, as to men of
understanding; We that are called Quakers, do own our selves to be subject to
Magistracy in all those matters and things which concern our outward man, but
as for our inward man, we own that to be the Lords only, and not at all to be
the servant of men; and as for that Scripture which says, let every soul be
subject to the higher power, we own its auth rity, but that it does not require
the subjection of the inward man, in the matters of conscience, which relates
to the worship of God, I offer, this is as a reasonable demonstration, which
is, that if this Scripture enjoined the subjection and obedience of the inward
man in the matters of Conscience, relating to the worship of God, if the then
Emperor of Rome, (who was a Heathen, and a worshipper of false gods) had made
an Edict to enforce the primitive Christians from their Christian worship
(which was in spirit, according to the Doctrine of Christ, Joh. 4.) and for
them to worship as he and the Heathen Romans worshipped, they must then of
necessity have been subject (which is ridiculous to affirm) for the Christians
to whom this Epistle was written, were Romans. And as to their outward man,
they were under the power and government of the Emperor of Rome: and therefore
it must needs follow that the subjection and obedience required in this
Scripture, is only in things relating to the outward man, and not at all of
the subjection of the inward man in the things relating to the worship of God.

So said Edward Pyot, but as he had spoken these last words, Captain Ollive
being then at the Tolzey, came and rudely took him by the shoulder, and would
not suffer him to speak any more, but caused him to be had to Newgate, to the
offense of several sober men present, and men of quality, who (some of them)
after Edward Pyot was gone, spoke to him about it, as disliking the thing, that
men for their consciences should not be suffered to speak, or that men should
suffer for their Consciences, which he and every man would willingly for
himself enjoy; but herein he showed himself rather a man made up of formality
and the authority of the times, than of true wisdom and moderation, so to deal
with one that he knew was a man, and his ancient acquaintance, and that had
been a Captain in the City.

Then George Bishop, and Lewis Rogers, were committed for being at an unlawful
meeting, under pretense of divine worship, and for refusing to dissolve being
thereunto lawfully required, and for not finding sureties for the good
behavior; Dated the same day, and signed by thy self, and the rest that signed
the warrant aforesaid, though they were all taken up in the street, near to,
and at the door of our meeting house, where all were still, and not one word
spoken, nor action done, only they, with some others of their friends, were
there standing, and then Captain Hicks spoke to them to depart; they refused
not, but presently went with the Officers, in a manner as soon as Captain Hicks
had faintly made the Proclamation for that purpose.

As for Thomas Goldney and the rest, except Nathaniel Milner, who being not in
the List of the Prisoners kept at Bridewell, was not there kept, you required
them to appear on the fourth day of that week, upon the account of Burgesses of
the City, who appearing, you bad to go home about their occasions, so there was
an end. And why not Edward Pyot and George Bishop, as well as they, seeing they
were Citizens? and why not Lewis Rogers, seeing he was the apprentice of a
freeman, and that his Masters family depended upon his labor in part, for
maintenance, against whom thou had nothing to say, whose name is Joseph Owen?
Was it not hard measure in thee to make the master suffer for the servant, yea,
the master and not the servant, for the servant was thereby kept from work, and
so would not suffer, but they would suffer whose maintenance in part came in by
his work, as thou wast told? And because thou wast so told in moderation and
meekness by one of the Prisoners, thou tookest the Statute book, and demanded
of him, who so spoke to thee, whether he would take the Oath of Alegiance (the
usual manner of thy Predecessors in the days of Queen Mary) who when they knew
not what to say against a man, or what was spoken presently, it was demanded,
What say you to the Sacrament of the Altar? as the book of Martyrs mentions. He
who spoke to thee was George Bishop, who demanded thereupon of thee, whether
what he had said was so offensive, as that it deserved the tendering of him the
Oath? but thou would not give over tendering it notwithstanding, till he told
you that you knew he could not swear, who before he spoke in this matter of
tenderness and equity had not the Oath put to him.

And now let all that are sober judge, whether what he spoke was not
reasonable, and that which should have been taken well at your hands, to wit,
to inform how the matter stood with the young man, that so you might not do any
wrong through mistakes or ignorance, which (though he did as aforesaid) with
all meekness and moderation, yet with you it bore no other weight then to be so
returned. So you have the Oath of Alegiance upon all essays as a weapon in
your hand at this day, to use to them that you know in Conscience cannot swear,
as they had in the Marian, which you exercise at pleasure upon the innocent,
when you have nothing else to say, or when what is said does not like you, as
they did then, who thus carried it against the inocent, as it is by you at this
day.

So ye be witnesses unto your selves, that ye are the children of them that put
to death the Martyrs, fill ye up then the measure of your fathers, that all the
righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel, unto the
blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, who you slew between the Temple and the
Altar, and that has been shed since may come upon you, and verily it shall
fall on this generation.

And why could not John Spoore have been sent home also, he being a poor man,
and living in the Country near, and having a family depending upon his
liberty, for his maintenance. One would think thou might have left the
strangers to their own Neighbor Justices to deal with them, who knew them,
seeing the Law is general?

And why not all of them sent home as well as some, for as much as all were at
the same place, and stayed as long or longer then they, and did no other thing
but what the others had done, whom thou had sent to Newgate, as aforesaid?

If thou say Edward Pyott lived not in the City, though he was a Burgess, it
is answered, his living is very near, as aforesaid. And it is strange that a
miles distance should set him altogether from being considered as a Burgess in
this particular, who removed there only for the air, when as in other things
you will deal with him as a Burgess; and with George Bishopp you dealt the same
as to imprisonment, who was a Burgess, and lived in the City, and was born
in it, who had done more for you and the City, then is here intended to be
related, though in recompense, and as a token of your love you made him the
only inhabiting Citizen prisoner, as Alderman Cale then observed to you.

If thou say they were taken up a week or two before, and set at liberty;
and now were had in Custody again: It is answered, the rest were in the same
places, and at the same time present, and yet neither imprisoned nor so dealt
with.

If thou reply, it was to make them Examples, being accounted as leading
men, and as heads (as you call them) Alas, how are ye befooled, when as daily
experience proves, that those people have a head and leader in them, whom none
of these things thou have devized and used (take in this to the number) has
deterred from, but rather brought to meetings. And herein you have honored
them though against your wills, in accounting them, by your proceedings,
Leaders and Heads of such a people, who stand to, and testify the dominion
that is Eternal over the Consciences of men in matters of Worship, which the
usurpation of man would stand over, and this is their honor. And this record
shall bear it for them to all generations, when you are gone and laid in your
dust, who have persecuted them for bearing testimony to his dominion in the
Conscience, who is Lord of all, against the usurpation of you and all men,
which as has been said, shall stand by them for ever and ever.

And these things are spoken to the intent that it may appear that your
proceedings are partial, and not out of Conscience, though thou John Knight
do so loudly boast, that what thou do is out of Conscience (of which more
anon) and therefore it is that thou thus proceedest.

We know thou will pretend that thou had directions from the Kings Council so
to proceed, which thou did produce, when they were first before thee, as
has been before mentioned, which gave thee orders (as thou read it) to keep
them in prison till the next Goal delivery, if they would not find sureties to
appear, or to that purpose; and thereupon thou biddest them choose whether they
would be so proceeded against, or on the late Act, whose end was Banishment;
and then did show some of them thy mercy in tendering them the Oath of
Alegiance, and committing them for that they could not swear, as has been said.

But this Fig-leaf will not cover thee, for who was he that Wrote up to
Whitehall, and gave the Council to understand otherwise of the City and us then
it was? And insinuated dangers that were not, and drew over them and the City
such an understanding as neither they nor the City did discern, and then
produced the Councils Letter upon such suggestions; thou should have shown
that, and have ingeniously confessed that thou wrotest such a Letter (for thou
might well conclude that we might come to know it) and that because thou thy
self would not seem to bring the ruin upon them, and so the destruction on
the City, which thou hadest in thy heart, therefore thou have done this, and
have laid it upon the Council, and so have abused the Council, as thou have
wronged us. This had been something, bare faced, and like a plain man, at least
like one that was so satisfied, and in love with his own actions, that he dares
to avow them before the world; and not as one that does mischief, and then
slinks into a corner. Indeed the Council (as has been said) could not be
expected otherwise to direct (being sworn to attend the safty of the Kingdom)
upon such suggestions, that such a City as Bristol, and so to England as
Bristol is, was in such danger, and that by such a people as we, and our
meetings, which in no more danger was, nor is, nor will be, as to us, and our
meetings, then of children in their beds asleep (as thou wast told) nor
deserving such suggestions. How could the Council answer the not sending such
directions upon such informations as these? But as for the King, thou knevvest
his mind at Bath by his Secretary, as aforesaid, and his good aspect of this
place when Himself was lately in it; and no hand of His was to the Letter.

So that it appears, that through thine own mischievous suggestions it was,
that Bristol came to be had in disrepute, and that such an innocent people
therein came to suffer, which thou would need cover with a necessity from
the Council, and their order, which thy suggestions procured.

It could here be reckoned up what heaps of Informations thou mountedst up
against diverse eminent men in the City, that had been, and were Magistrates,
because they had before thy day held moderation in the Government, as to
conscience (as has been said) and others, whose crime (as thou did endeavor
to make it) was because they came to visit those whom thou had made
Prisoners, of whom they were near relations, as Brother in-law, Uncle, etc.
Partners in Merchandising, as to which they had business, and how enraged thou
wast at the general applause of the sober part of the City with the Prisoners
and Cities detestation of thee, and what thou did to us, which (their visits)
thou laidst as the ground of thine Informations; and so, because they were thy
Prisoners, thou would not have them (though the Law allowed it) to be
visited, and this upon the foot of what has been mentioned; but because this
was somewhat after in order of time produced, though now in design and
preparation, it shall be in this place omitted, and a return made to our state,
as it was when thou made them Prisoners.

Much was the Love of the City manifested to the Prisoners, even beyond the
president of former days, and continual visits were to them, and as Doves
flock to the windows, so came they to see them, manifesting their great disgust
of thee for doing as thou had to us; and not a day passed without some
manifestation of their love. And whereas thou did seek by what thou had
done, to cool the esteem of the City to us, and to bring us under, it arose
the more abundantly, and so the more thou did persecute us, the more we grew,
so that thou lost on every hand the love of the people, because thou
persecutedst the innocent, and thy design to decrease them, which was the
intent of thy persecution. Therefore least thou should altogether miscarry,
and so on no hand be saved, one of the Prisoners being moved of the Lord, thus
wrote and sent unto thee:

Friend,
WE are innocent, as to God, to Men, to Thee, we live in all good Conscience,
giving no just occasion of offense to any; the King, thy Self, the Government
are safe in Us; we desire your welfare, God is witness, our meetings are in
obedience to the Lord, and not in any oppsition unto you, the Law or
Government, the searcher of the heart knows it is truth, who will render unto
every man according to his deeds, our refusing to swear, is in obedience to the
Lord, because the Law of him we cannot transgress; our behavior has been in
the fear of the Lord, and no other thing have you had from us; our conversation
has been blameless, as amongst men, and we are clear, as in the sight of the
Lord; we have not been an oppression to this City, nor the Nation, nor to any
particular therein, but what in us lies we have had peace with all men, and we
desire the destruction of none, but the salvation of all, even our enemies,
whom we pray for, whom we bless, whom we love; we cannot resist evil, because
of him that has said, Resist not evil. We are in Peace, and we would be in
peace; times have tried us, revolutions, great revolutions, the greatest
revolutions this Nation has had, have proned us a people not dangerous to
Government, nor to the peace and safety of this place. You have had no hurt
from us, we have done you no hurt, God is witness, and that of him in your
Consciences, which shall one day witness for us in you, that it is so whether
you will or no; we are ready to be offered up as to all we have or are, in the
testimony of the Lord, and the dominion of him in our Consciences, which we
cannot give nor bow to man that must dye, nor to the son of man that must
perish and come to naught, whose breath is in his nostrils; and wherein is he
to be accounted of? In other things (as we can in conscience to God) we are
subject, of which you your selves are witnesses, doing more then you have
expected at our hands, in some things, as you know we are a considerable body
of people in this City, we, our families, our relations, our estates; we are of
the City, and in the City, and inhabitants thereof, and interwoven are we
therein, and with the people thereof, as a man's flesh is in his body, and his
spirit in his flesh, the separation if us from the City will proves as of a
man's flesh from his body, and his spirit from his flesh, when you have liberty
to do it from above (for you can do nothing at all to us, but as you have power
from above) you will see it, the day of Gods vengeance is at hand, wherein he
will render to every man according to his deeds; the Lords controversy is with
all those who oppugn his dominion in the consciences of men; and he will pluck
them up root and branch, and they shall know that he is the Lord: It is the
word of the Lord, and shall be fulfilled in its season, and the time is near:
So my friend, take heed, there is no dallying in things of this nature, thou will find it so in the end. I desire it may be, before it be too late; for this
know assuredly, that the Lord will avenge the quarrel of his people, and he
will plead the cause of those that suffer for his Name, and ye shall be rooted
up, that rise up against them, it is the Word of the Lord; not with confused
noise, and garments rolled in blood, but by burning and fuel of fire, by the
spirit of the Lord; therefore take heed. I warn thee once more, in the Name of
the Lord, who am thy Friend,

George Bishopp.
The Newgate Prison Bristol, the 15th of the 10th Month.

The Original of this was delivered thee the day of the date, and thou did
receive and read it, though it held thee not long, for the 27th day of the same
month, the meeting was molested again, and the door was made fast, whereby
some were kept up in the Meeting House, and some in the street, being not
suffered to go in, and from being in the street before the door; thy men in
arms had Thomas Speed, who there sat in stilness and peace, and from out of
the meeting house was brought Charles Jones, and William Tailor (thy neighbor)
and in the high street, far distant from the meeting house, Miles Dixon was
met, and warned to appear before thee the next day, who with the rest, were
dismissed upon their promise of appearance upon Summons, and so Brideatel was not
made their Banqueting house, nor place of entertainment, as it was the others;
but they returned to their houses. Indeed Sheriff Streamer, the Major of the
Regiment, to whom was attributed that days disturbance, and who, out of the
naughtiness of his heart, was too much pleased with such actions, told Thomas
Speed, as something in excuse of what had been done (for T. Speed was his
uncle) That he was sworn to execute the Law. To whom T. Speed replied, They
that did put them to death, whom you call Martyrs, and I too, said they had a
Law.

So the next day, having notice, they appeared at the Tolzey, but thou having
something to do at thy Worship, put them off after it was ended, to the next
day, T. Speed then speaking with thee.

The next day they appearing, thou satest in the lower Tolzey, with thy
brethren, for they demanded an open place, where all that would might come in
and hear, and there thou did show thy self as thou art, a man full of rage
and violence, and that sought the blood of the innocent, most unlike a
righleous Judge or Magistrate; and then had thy Sheriff Streamer there, who,
though unconcerned as a Magistrate, for none he was, that is to say, a Justice,
yet he took upon him very much, which some of eminent quality in the City, who
being present, took part with the innocent, being grieved to the heart (the
place being full) to see such heat, partiality and prejudice with thee, that
did sit as Judge, and how contrary to Law thou did carry matters; for when
thou did demand sureties for their appearance, which they could not give,
because it was m matters of conscience, and their testimony to the Lord, which
they could not bring under by submitting to sureties, or yielding that others
should be bound for them, for if their own reputation stood good, what need is
there of another being surety for them? and they were conscious of nothing they
had done that might vail it, or bring it under, and therefore could not submit
the truth in them, which was yea, and not yea and nay to be brought under; we
say, when thou demandedst sureties for their appearance, Captain John Knight
and R^bert Yates ( late Aldermen in the City, whose uncle Thomas Speed was)
with others, who were ready to do the same, and tendered themselves, but were
not accepted, because the design was to make their conscience, or per^o^s to
suffer.
diverse friendly men of quality voluntarily present, offered themselves
sureties for them, which thou would not accept, except the persons concerned
would assent thereunto, which they could not do, for that was equivalent with
finding sureties themselves, and so they should bring under their reputation,
and the Testimony of the truth of God in them, which was yea, that is to say,
that which it said was so; but this they did, they tendered their promise, or
word of appearance, which they are known to be men to perform, especially in
matters of conscience, wherein the name of the Lord is concerned. Nay, Thomas
Speed told thee, that if thou could say in thy conscience that thou did
believe they would not appear, when they had given their word they would find
sureties, but what thy conscience was therein, thou would not declare, which
showed, that thou did believe in thy Conscience that they would, for if thou
had believed otherwise, thou would have said so, for it then did concern
thee so to have done, and to have taken him, but this thou would not do, nor
accept of those that proffered themselves, which is against law, and so did
show that thou determinedst in thy self to make them to suffer. We say, Captain
John Knight.
some of these that so proffered themselves, thy Sheriff reflected upon very
much, and high words grew from the one to to the other, which afterward made
matter of trouble at Court, the said Sheriff finding himself agrieved, who
offered the injury, and when it came to it would not appear at hearing, and
so shevved how little weight their was at the bottom, the great matter of
complaint being, that he was called the Kings Jailer, and no Justice which
was offered the Sheriff upon his interposing in the business of these men,
who was not concerned; so thou sentest them away prisoners for not taking
the oath of allegiance, which thou tendredst to them, (the old snare to entrap
such as cannot svvear, when no other vvayes they can well be reached) and for
refusing to find sureties for their appearance at Sessions; and though thou
could not but see how much it was against the hearts of the multitude
present, (who were grieved to behold thee ripping up the City (as it were)
and putting to trouble the honest substantial men thereof, and placing them in
order to ruin, and so were thinking to what these things would come) yet thou
would needs go on, and having made before some steps in persecution, thou
would proceed, though it cost thee the ruin of thy self and them.

And so blind vvast thou, and mad in thy pursuit, that when thou savvest, and
it was proved before thy face in the view and hearing of the people, that the
five vvitnesses produced against them were all false sworn in the particular
of Miles Dixon, who first swore that they saw him at the meeting, and so his
name was inserted in the mittimus, to go to prison, and then one after another,
when he demanded it of them, whether they saw him at the meeting? denied, and
said, they did not see him at the meeting, vvhereupon thou vvast constrained to
cause his name to be struck out of the mittimus, and one of them, viz. Sergeant
Sloper, said, I told your worship so before, that I met him in the high street,
yet your worship would have it in, that is in the Deposition a thing most
abominable, and to be noted! yet nothing was done to these men, who appeared
out of their own mouths thus false sworn in the view of the Court, but they
were suffered to be as good evidence against the other three (and other than
these thou had no evidence) and did upon what they swore, send them to
prison. And this is recorded as a perpetual mark of thy wickedness and folly
for which thou shall receive thy reward.

And so imperious wast thou and foolishly lording it (who art known well enough
in this City, what thou art, and from whence thou came, and how thou have
lived) that as if these men had been thy vassals, or such as did not deserve
the Civil appellations of men (whose reputation, as men, stands (saving thy
being Mayor) as good as thine, thou did Sirrah them, and Tom thou had up;
Alas John Knight! whither will thou drive? and how unhandsomly do thou clime
into the seat of Honor? (and yet of honor it is not, for an honorable person
would abhor so to do) out of which this cast thee, and makes thee to be the
scorn of the City, in which thou have been bred, and have lived; but this is
the reward of all those who turn against the truth, the Lord suffers them to
draw contempt and obloquy upon thmselves, and shame comes to be the promotion
of fools, as the spirit of the Lord testified by his servant Solomon, Prove.
3.35.

So this day ended not to the prejudice of them (as the hand of the Lord
ordered it contrary to thy will) or the cause for which they suffered. But the
advantage, for these things being open, and in the face of the City, it turned
the heart of it the more against thee, and caused their love to flow to them
whom thou would despise and trample under; and in their visits they
manifested this; nevertheless they were not thy enemies whom thou thus did
use, and clap up from their occasions and business, which was somewhat great;
and by what thou had done to them, had threatened the end of them (as to
liberty) and what they had in the world, but in love they sought thee, and thy
welfare, who never had done thee any wrong, if by any means thine eyes might be
opened, and so might come to see what thou had been doing, and turn unto
the Lord; which was manifested partly in a Letter which one of them thus wrote
unto thee;

From Newgate Prison 31th of 10th. month. 1663. Friend,
THe God of Heaven is not well pleased with thee, because thy ways are not
found right in his sight, the innocent ( who are to him as the apple of his
eye) are by thee oppressed and afflicted. The same Jesus against whom Saul
zealously fought in the time of his ignoranee, do thou now persecute in his
suffering members, of which, what can be the consequence (without Saul's
repentance) but a fearful expectation of wrath and Judgment from the hand of
the righteous God, the sovereignty of the great God over the Consciences of
men, do thou violenly attempt to invade, and to usurp to thy self who art a
man that must die, and the son of man whose breath is in thy nostrils, and
do thou judge thy self stronger than the Almighty? or can thou strive with
thy maker, and prosper? Consider, O man, what thou art now doing, ere it be too
late, and there be no place left for repentance. They that live godly in Christ
Jesus, shall suffer persecution, as say the holy Scriptures, but woe unto him
or them by whom they suffer, better for them, unless they repent, that they
had never been born, and that the womb that bare them had been their grave,
that they might never have seen the light; think seriously with thy self, how
thou will be able to stand in Judgment with him who is a consuming fire, in the
day when he shall come to plead with thee the cause of the innocent, will it
then suffice for thine acquitment, to say that thou had a law, and by that
law they ought to suffer? was not holy Daniel hurried into the Lions den, and
the three faithful children into the furnace, by a law? and will the Judge of
all the earth accept of that plea from the executioners of that law, so as to
acquit them? Did not the murderers of Jesus Christ ( in whose mouth never was
guile found) say, we have a law, and by our law he ought to die, but did that
save them from the wrath of God his Father, so as that he has not since sorely
visited his innocent blood upon them and their children, in the view of all
Nations? Will not Bonner and his Accomplices be found not guilty before the
Tribunal of the Almighty, if this plea prove valid, who ruined the estates, and
consumed into Ashes in the Flames, the bodies of many holy Martyrs, during the
time of the Marian persecution? by him who made heaven and earth, must both the
law, and thou, and we be judged, and then nothing but that which is righteous
in his sight will stand and abide his trial, and then will not that very law
which he has engraven in thine heart judge thee, which says, whatever thou
would that men shall do unto thee, do thou even the same unto them, which,
whether thou do now practice, we leave to the Lord, and to his witness in
thee, and in the Consciences of all sober minded persons within this City, to
judge and to determine. Let me yet further reason with thee, and be not
offended, for in tender love to thine immortal soul, ( the Lord is my witness)
do I write these things. Have thou the spirit of Christ? if not, sad is thy
condition, for he that has not the Spirit, ( as says the Scripture) is none
of his; If thou have it, O then where are the fruits? the fruits of that holy
spirit are love, gentleness, meekness, long-suffering, mercifulness,
forgiveness, etc. this spirit never prompted or prevailed with any man to
persecute others for conscience sake, they in whom this spirit dwelt in all
ages were persecuted, but never found persecutors, envied, but not envying,
hated, but not haters of others, suffering for the matters of their God, but
not causing others to suffer. Paul who had this spirit, speaking of things
appertaining to Conscience, says, Let every man be fully persuaded in his own
mind, (for mark) every one of us shall give an account of himself to God, Romans
14.5, 12. And, as you have received Christ Jesus, walk in him. Col. 2.6. By
this spirit the Apostle Peter said, Be subject to every ordinance of man for
the Lords sake. And the same Peter, by the same spirit, ( being commanded by
the Rulers not to speak at all, or teach in the name of Jesus) did ( choosing
rather to obey God than men) speak openly, and boldly in his name. Weigh these
things in a cool, unprejudiced spirit, and hearken to, ( and that thou might
also know) the things that do belong to the peace of thy precious soul in this
thy day whilst thou art on this side the grave. Remember, O remember in whose
hands is the breath of thy nostrils, who can soon turn thee into dust. Thou
know not how soon the King of Terrors may knock at thy doors, with a
Commission from the Lord, to romove thee from the land of the living, and then
peace with thy maker (against whom thou art now contending) will be more worth
than the whole world, but not then to be purchased with all the Treasures
thereof. I say therefore again, Despise not the friendly advice of him ( whilst
thou have yet a season) who in heart desires thine eternal welfare, lest when
thou come to lay thine head upon thy Death pillow, and the Terrors of the
Almighty seize on thee, thou should then cry unto the Lord for mercy; and he
should say unto thee, my love often called unto thee, and thou would not
hear, in the day of thy outward prosperity, I would have won thee with
kindness, but thou would not hearken; Now therefore I will stop mine ears at
thy cry, reap the fruits of thine own works, and let misery be thy portion,
until Eternity shall have an end. Hear and fear the Lord, and despise not the
Counsel of him who is truly breathing in his heart to the Lord, for the
salvation of thy precious soul, ( and in the Lord) wishes well to thee and
thine.

Tho. Speed.


This (as has been said) was wrote, and also delivered to thee, and with how
much tenderness, and an earnest desire of thy welfare, and how suitable it was
to thy state, and how weighty let the sober judge; one would have thought that
thou would have taken such a man in thine arms, and hugged him in thy
bosom (considering his love and zealous care of thy welfare) and never have
let him go from out of thy heart, whilst thou had a being or breathedst on
the earth, put case there had been a mistake in some particulars (as to which
there was non, and thou shall one day know it, the intent of his heart in such
a thing of weight as thine eternal welfare, that it might be well with thee,
for ever would have sunk into an ingenious breast, and never would have
suffered that man to die there, who would have thee live for ever; and though
the expostulations were quick and piercing, yet an ingenious man would have
considered with himself, why he minds my welfare, he judges me to be out of
the way, (and perhaps I am, it is good for me to consider) the things as they
stand are stated truly, granting them as they are stated, only he has mist
(and let me see whether indeed he has done so; for I may be in a mistake) the
application; Its good for me to heed whether it be so or no, a wrong zeal may
carry me forth as it did Saul; Who breathed forth threatenings and slaughter,
and haled men and women out of houses (as I have caused to be done) and though
(as I have done) he ought to do all things against that name of Jesus, and was
mad, as himself said (and am not I as he was then) and persecuted them even to
strange Cities (as I have in the Parliament, and in London and Westminster) and
sought to bespeak them the worst I could, and to cut them off from the face of
the earth, that so neither name nor remnant might be left of them from
generation to generation; and yet Saul came to see it otherwise, and to be
knocked down in the way. As he was posting to Damascus with Letters from the
high Priests and Rulers to persecute them there, and he was told, I am Jesus
whom thou persecutest; It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks, and he
became a Preacher of the same Jesus. (And O that it might be so with me, if I
am as he was, and do persecute Jesus) he was also an eminent Apostle, and
converted multitudes to the faith of Jesus, and suffered for his name, who for
his name made others to suffer; And when thy holy martyr Stephen was stoned
(said he) I stood by and held the garments of them that did it, and consented
to his death (as I have made them to suffer, if so be it be Jesus in them that
I persecute.) And it was his great grief (and I must look to it, that it prove
not to be mine) that he persecuted the Church of God. And therefore said, who
am not worthy to be called an Apostle, because I persecute the Church of of
God. Well I will ponder these things, wiser men then I and more zealous, and of
better reputation and profession ( I see have been mistaken, and why may not I?
well, I love the man, no harm shall come unto him.

Such would have been the reasonings of (as has been said) an ingenious spirit
to one who prayed and entreated when he was defamed by thee, abused and
persecuted; but alas there came no such moisture from thy flinty heart, but as
one Canon proof (as is used to be said) against all Exhortations and love in
this kind, the most pathetical and convincing argumentations have no place with
thee, but as a man has hardened his heart against love and reproof, and so
must fall without remedy, he and his letter were unworthily rendered in the
City; and it was (as was that aforesaid of George Bishops) put into the hand of
another, who had been their very great enemy, and much was spoken of the
Letters, which caused great inquiries after the letters by some of their
friends to see what was in them, because they were so rendered, which therefore
are now made public; that all that please may see their contents (as it also
concerns the relation to take notice of them, and let the sober in heart who
have heard thereof, and do now read, judge (as has been said) whether they
were worthy of such report as was made of them; And whether the spirit of
soberness and truth did not write them, and whether they deserved that which
they received at thy hands. But to proceed.

Having lodged the persons above named in the place of suffering, and took them
from their callings and occasions which thou knew was not a little in the
outward (as has been said) and placed them among, and as transgressors for
their consciences (for otherwise then as to the law of their God thou had
nothing against them) and so put them into a capacity of thy farther mischief,
who thus had reached them (as thou thoughtst) who never did thee wrong, nor
suffered'st thou by them at any time, thou did mind in thy self how thou
might do them farther harm; and accomplish thine own design upon them, which
thou had thus began in their mine.

To this purpose, because the Sessions was now drawing on, least thou should
be left in the lurch, and thine own hands fail thee, who had put thy self
(upon what necessity or ground, if any let sober men judge) on their fall or
thine, and so be laughed at, the necessity of which (as has been said) thou
put thy self upon, or made it a necessity to thy self, when no other
thing did, for the new Act said, it should be lawful, but did not so much as
require thee to put it in execution, and the Oath of Alegiance was made for
Papists, and that for Conventicles was old, and a doubt amongst the learned in
the Law, whether in force or not, and the common Law took no notice of
religious meetings, or religion, but the breach of the peace by some overt or
manifest act, or deed by force and arms, or words spoken to that purpose, so
thou made it (as has been said again and again) of necessity, which was not
so in it self, and for this purpose thou did consider with thy self how
thou should have been fit to answer thy end to pass upon them; and because the
City was large, and the prisoners had relations and dealings therein, and were
well known in the City, least such a grand Jury should be chosen, as might cast
out the Bill, and so blast thine enterprise in the bud, thou art said to get
the book of the Burgesses into thy custody, and to pick out a grand Jury thy
self, which was not thine, but the office of the Sheriff; and it ill becomed a
Judge to be a prosecutor; and the Jury should be indifferently taken, as they
lay in the neighborhood, and not picked out on purpose against the prisoner;
moreover it being matter of conscience; It should be of men that are able to
judge of conscience, for how can men be Judges of actions done from that which
they do not understand; so a Jury (it seems) thou did get, and the men out of
those that were summoned to appear, for the grand Jury pitched upon by thee,
were Daniel Adams foreman (a new made Captain of the Militia, and a man
concerned with thee, as a party whose soldiers brought the first prisoners
from our peaceable meetings, kept them on the guard (without a warrant) and
brought them to Bridewell aforesaid; George Gibbs (an inveterate man against
them, and sometimes a Lieutenant of the Militia, that had been to force our
meetings formerly, from which his soldiers brought away then diverse, and some
of them then, that were now to be tried; and so he was of the same spirit, and
might well be reckoned as a party, or a man that ought not to have been chosen
to pass upon them) William Jaine, Christopher Brunsden, Nathaniel King, Simon
Bowyer, Thomas Prestwood, Samuel Wedlack, Thomas Smalt ( Captain Lieutenant to
the Colonel of the Militia Regiment, another of the same, of whose drodigious
Barbarism, exercised a little before to some of us on the guard, will be
mentioned by and by) William Haman, John Thruston, Thomas Wells, Thomas
Stratton, Thomas Edwards, Matthew Stephens, Abraham Barnes, Richard Clifford,
Samuel Dobbins, and Matthew Rogers.

These on the day of the Sessions, viz. the 12th of 11th month, 1663. were
called and sworn, and a charge was given them, and the Bills against the
prisoners, which they quickly found; and now thou did set thy self as one
determined to try for the Mastery over a people that did neither wrong nor
resist thee; and thy weapons were thus prepared ready for thy hands, and so
thou did cause the Court to be adjourned, and gave order for the prisoners
to be brought in the afternoon, and then thou did arise to Eat and to Drink.

Multitudes were the people that in the afternoon were gathered to the Hall,
and the street in the which it was, to see the issue of this great, and
(before) never known day in Bristol, wherein men for their Conscience only to
God, knowing men, understanding men, substantial men, able men, men peaceable,
of good repute, of good desert, of good conversation, of good example, were
thus ordered to be brought before the Judgment seat of thee John Knight, to the
rending of the City, and the hearts of the sober therein, to see Citizens set
against Citizens, to destroy their fellow Citizens, and to seek their ruin,
and for no other cause, but their Conscience to God, and that in relation to
his Worship, when as wickedness passed without control, and met with no
reproof in the gate, this was indeed a day of sadness to such, a day of
darkness, and blackness, and of gross darkness; especially to see thee in the
head of it, working it, contriving it, soliciting it, prosecuting it, making it
thy business to effect it, putting thy fall or rise (as it were) upon the
accomplishing or not, of what thou wast about, who wast Major of the City then,
and should have done otherwise, and men's Expectations were on tiptoe to see
the issue.

So between the second and third hours in the afternoon, the Prisoners were
brought as thy Triumphs, and at thy Chariots wheels (as we may say) were
dragged, who (unless thus bound, when they did not resist) thou did never
overcome; the streets were filled, and so thronged at the door of the Hall,
that the Prisoners could not get in, but in the street, and about the door were
forced to stay in the wet and cold (who were somewhat in an ill capacity to
bear it, having been before some of them so long in Prison) till thou came
(which was about the fourth hour) from thy feast, where thou had the Bishop
and the Dean, and other of the Clergy to replenish thee; and so being fully
frought with mischief and envy, and prepared (as thou thoughtst) for thy work,
and in some kind of certainty in thy self, that thou should accomplish, thou
mountedst thy Throne, and thy brethren sat by thee, and the Candles being
lighted in affectation of the Grand Assizes when Witches are to be tried,
thereby to draw the more the wonderment of the people, thou did cause an O
Yes to be made, and required silence to be kept (which thou might have
forborne, for the people in the Hall being willing to hear, did of themselves)
and some of the Prisoners being set to the Bar, viz. Thomas Speed, Charles
Jones, and William Tailor, who were in one Bill put together, an Indictment was
read unto them at the Common Law, Charging them with being at an Unlawful
Assembly, under the pretense and color of Religion, on such a day, with force
and Arms and to the Terror of the people, etc.

To which they pleaded Not guilty before the Jury, which were Thomas Walter,
Foreman, (who was Lieutenant to Capt. Adams aforesaid, who had the command of
the Guard, when some of the Prisoners were had from meeting thither, and in
person with a guard without a Warrant, conducted them to Bridewel, as has been
said) Thomas Ballard, Richard Lucket, Samuel Lloyd, John Towgood (waterbayliff
one of thy officers Prebend Towgoods Son) a bitter enemy of theirs, and a man
so invenomed and prepared beforehand to make them suffer, that when G. Bishop
was committed, being in the lower Tolzey, as he came down out of the Council
house, he said behind his back, after he was pass him, in the audience of the
people, which were many, That he hoped to see him hanged (who never did him
wrong) for which the people reproved him, and when the Sessions drew near, he
was so replenished (having been, as he said, with thee, and coming then from
thee) that he could not contain himself, but alowd in the Kitching of the new
prison, and in the presence of some, and hearing of other the prisoners in
their Chamber overhead, vented himself after this manner, viz. That he had been
with the Major, and that he came from him then, and that the Major had spoken
to him to be one of their Godfathers, (viz. the Prisoners) and that he would
warrant he would do their work for them on Tuesday next, which was the day, or
words to that purpose; and now (it seems) was made one of them. But William
Willett, a moderate man, was refused by thee, though called and present; all
which showed what thou intendedst to do, and how thou wast a party in this
matter, for which thou will receive thy reward from the hand of the Lord. James
Millard, William Hartford, John Clarke the younger, William Holmes, Thomas
Lewis, John Tizon, and Thomas Standfast, whose father was then a Prebend.

Having pleaded Not Guilty, as aforesaid, and sworn, the Witnesses were
produced, which were some of the false sworn men aforesaid, in the case of
Miles Dixon at the time of their commitment, and there was no other, viz.
Lodowick Poole, and (...) Sloper both Sergeants to the Militia, and parties who
without a warrant, with force and arms took them from their peaceable meeting,
and Tho. Speed from the door of the meeting house, at which in the street he
was quietly sitting, which men passed with thee as good evidence; some of these
being sworn anew, spoke what they pleased. The Council pleaded against the
commitment, because it was without a warrant (which the witnesses confessed
they had not) and so not according to due course of Law, which was to have been
by Civil officers, and not by military, in time of peace, without a warrant,
and this the Council made out, whereby all their work in troubling meetings
that were quiet, was overthrown, which is something for thee and them to
remember.

The Prisoners confessed two of them, that they were in the meeting house, and
the other that he was at the door of the Meeting house, in the street, sitting
quietly, having not been in the Meeting house, for out of it he and others were
kept as aforesaid, and they witnessed a good Confession, as he did then before
Pontius Pilate that is gone before, and acknowledged the matter, and spoke of
the ground upon which they did it. And one of them, viz. Tho. Speed, delivered
it to the Jury in these, or words to this purpose, To you that are our
Neighbors and fellow Citizens of the Jury, I have a few words to offer; we
might justly except against some of you, as men unfit to pass upon our
liberties or estates, and particularly against thee John Towgood, who did
lately speak things touching us, not fit to be named in this Court; but we
freely forgive thee, and desire the Lord to forgive thee also, to whom we
commit our selves and our cause: That we were at a meeting in Broad-mead, the
place expressed in our Indictment, we may not deny, but do confess, being
there in the fear of the Lord (and in good will toward all men; in good will
to the King (against whom we are accused to be trespassers) to whom from our
hearts we vvish this happiness, That he may so reign and rule in the fear of
God, that he may live in his favor, and die in his peace, and may have a
habitation with him when time shall be no more. You have families, relations,
and estates, we have families, relations, and estates, weigh well (out of all
prejudice) and consider what you are now about to do as touching us. Suppose
with your selves that the verdict you are now going about to consult of, may be
the last that ever you may give in, in this would, and that when you have
brought in your Verdict on us, you your selves should immediately appear before
the high Tribunal of the God of Heaven; go therefore and do that wherein you
may have peace with your maker, when you shall go hence and be seen no more.
And so said it on the Consciences of the Jury, whether that were any breach of
the peace; nor indeed was there any proof that the peace was broken on their
part (nor was it) or that their being there was with force and arms, or to the
terror of the people; but the force and arms was on the other part, who by
force and arms, contrary to law, had (to the Terror of many that were not of
us) thus taken them away. Hereupon the Jury, after some time, brought in their
verdict, not guilty of force and arms, and to the terror of the people, but
guilty of an unlawful assembly, with which thou being not satisfied, they
withdrew again, and thus delivered themselves, Not guilty according to the
Indictment.

This gave so great a satisfaction to the Hall, and the generality of the
people that were therein, (which was very many) that some manifestation thereof
was given, the people then present being glad in their hearts, that innocent
men, and such as these were, and those unto whom they appertained, were not
found guilty; and that the City thereby so far was unconcerned in a verdict
against them, it being to their great grief and consternation of spirit, that
such men for their Consciences should be thus put upon the wrack, and sought to
be destroyed; but this their joy and gladness of spirit vexed thee to the very
heart, that thou wast so baffled, which thou could not forbear to manifest,
and so to prove undeniably thy self what has been here asserted, viz. that
thou designedly soughtst their suffering, for upon the general show that past
the Hall upon the publication of the verdict, as aforesaid, thou, as a man
sensible of thy disappointment, in that which thou had so designed, and
labored to accomplish, could not contain thy self, such was the overruling
hand of the Almighty, for his truth and his people, that in vehement passion,
as a man concerned in the contrary, and so did appear as an unjust Judge,
which sought the suffering of the Prisoners, and was not indifferent, which a
righteous Judge ought to be, and rather inclining (which the law does) to the
acquitment, than to the suffering of the Prisoners, said tthou could not
endure to sit there and see thy Sovereigns Laws trampled under soot, or words
to that purpose, who did trample thy Sovereigns laws under foot, in seeking
to make them to suffer, who by thy Sovereigns laws were acquitted, and so did
demand of them, whether they would take the oath of allegiance? which thou
before toldest them thou would do, if the Jury did acquit them: but in this
thou wast disappointed also, for the rest of the Justices would not yield to
it, as judging it a thing unreasonable, then to put the Oath to them, when they
were cleared of what they stood indicted by their Country.

This dissatisfied the Hall exceedingly, to see thee sitting on the Bench as
Judge, to act so contrary to Justice, for thou should rather have shown thy
self as glad of their liberty, the law acquitting them, (had thou been
unconcerned) than to have manifested thy desire to have had them to suffer: and
had thou been a wise man in thy generation, thou would have so done, But oh
the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! he knew thy
heart, and therefore would not suffer thy fig leaves to cover thee, but brought
thee forth stark naked to the worlds view in thy Wolfs dress, and then stopped
thee in thy course, so that thou could not neither prevail in this of the
oath; yet their liberty thou did detain, who should have been acquitted, and
to the next day adjournedst them, yet neither then, nor to this day, suffered
he thee to have what thou would upon them, who bore Testimony to his name,
for which we glorify his name for ever.

Thus passed the proceedings of the first day, the next day being the 13th of
the 11th month, George Bishop, Edward Pyot, John Gibbons, Nehemiah Pool, George
Oliver, Thomas Morris, James Sterridge, Benjamin Cottle, and John Spoor, were
set to the Bar, and an Indictment of the same nature exhibited against them
before the Jury, who were Richard Codrington (foreman) Francis Little, John
Clark the elder, William Loop, Hump. Barecroft, Walter Pain, Thomas Wright,
Peter Rosewell, John Collins, (Dep. Marshall) John Bradford, Roger Willoughby,
and Rich. Leg; and they were demanded to answer guilty or not guilty? to
which they pleaded not guilty of the Indictment, in manner and form as was
therein expressed, which their plea being entered, the Town Clerk asked them,
whether they would proceed to Trial now, or traverse it? they answered,
presently, if they pleased; so the witnesses were called, to prove them at the
meeting, and thou calledst for the Depositions that were taken at their
commitment, as if thou would have had them read, the Prisoners said, that
there must be nothing produced in Court but viva voce, by word of mouth; the
Town Clark said to thee, it was so; whereupon the reading of them was forborne:
the witnesses then being called upon to be sworn, the prisoners desired that it
might be a little laid aside, because they had somewhat to say which happily
might save them some labor, and so they began and said, and confessed that
they were at the meeting in Broad mead, and upon the day mentioned in the
Indictment, and that they were there to wait upon the Lord, and in obedience to
him, and to testify to his sovereignty over the Consciences of men, as to
worship, who was Lord of all, and sovereign in the conscience, who was a
spirit, and would be worshipped in spirit and in truth; not at Jerusalem, nor
in this mountain, as Christ said to the woman of Samaria, and that such the
Father sought to worship him, whose fear toward him is not to be taught by the
precepts of men; and so began to show, and would have done, from the three
childrens time, and so throughout all Histories to this day, how that there
were a people that bowed not to the worships of the times, but gave testimony
unto, and sealed with their blood, the dominion that is everlasting in the
Conscience, and the sovereignty of him there who is Lord of all, against the
laws of men, that sought to infringe, and did usurp upon his dominion in the
conscience, who lives for ever, and would have given reason and undeniable
demonstration for this, and have made it out, but thou interruptedst them, and
would not suffer them to speak, but with much vehemence did cry out, that
thou could not endure to sit there and hear a Religion instilled into the
Court, a Religion contrary to the laws of the Kingdom; and that the laws of
England were the supreme Conscience of England, and suffered them not to speak
further as to this ground or reason of their so being there, though the
attention of the Hall was very great and in deep silence, though very full,
being willing to hear that great point opened, viz. the sovereignty of God in
the conscience, as to worship, which was so near to them all, for conscience is
in every man, and every man would worship God according to his Conscience, and
would not have it dealt withal, nor thou thy self (to the witness of God in
thee we speak) as thou did to them. This being the matter so much in
controversy only, they had so much liberty further to speak, and to show that
their meeting was not in contempt of the laws, or with force and arms, to the
Terror of the people, it being a thing contrary to their principle and
practice.

So the witnesses were sworn and examined, who testified, that they were at the
meeting at such a place, and at such a time, but as to force and arms, etc.
proved nothing, for though thy Sergeant Jones would needs have argued the
matter (being put upon it by thee in the Court, and no doubt had before
received from thee his instruction) and thus would have brought it about, viz.
that it was a Terror to him to see the Kings laws broken, and he thought, it
being so with him, that it could not but be so to every good subject, or words
to this purpose, which signified nothing, for it was pleading, and so he was
told that he pleaded, and so his testimony in that particular signified not,
for thereby he showed himself a party and not a witness, who ought to be a
person in his Testimony leaning to neither side, but declaring the certain
truth in certain words, and not by argumentation, and so to leave it to the
Court.

And though thou endeavouredst to make something of the Testimony that was
against one Samuel James, who coming up the stairs at the time when thy
Sergeant Jones aforesaid, and and the Musketeers were at the meeting
aforesaid, and being presently commanded down, and he not in the very minute
observing it, but looking about him, being somewhat aghast at that unusual
company, was endeavored to be knocked down, the stairs, so muskets being
about his ears, and many men upon him, and he not knowing what they meant to do
with him, it seems, as the witness swore, he laid hands on one of the
soldiers sword in the scabbard, and endeavored to draw it, which thou would
have converted as an act of theirs, and so would have had it to bear the
interpretation of a Riot, which, no doubt, was the reason why thou causedst
them to be indicted on that days meeting, and not on that in the street, at
which they were taken when last committed. But this proved not to thy purpose,
(for unawares its like in thee, but otherwise in the ordering of the Lord) thou
droppedst this word when the matter was in Examination, speaking of James, and
what he was, a Ranter, said thou, which was observed afterward by the
Prisoners to the Jury, besides, it could not bear such an interpretation in
Reason or Equity, that a man's action (and what the action was has been said)
in a public meeting, where none are kept out who was none of the people which
usually there met, should be attributed to be the Action of that people, whose
principle and practice is contrary to to that action, and who owned it not, nor
abetted it, and it being transient, not between those people and him, or he and
those people with the officers, but between the officers and him, and that
chiefly down the stairs, and in a lower room, where (they say) the sword was
endeavored to be drawn by him, not in the place where those people were met.

But this strained interpretation would serve for little else than to show how
eager thou wast, and industrious to find something that indeed might have a
reflection upon them, so the matters being turned up and down, and many things
being spoken, the Jury came at length to be addressed unto, to whom the
prisoners summed up the Evidence, and repeated how that nothing of force and
arms was proved against them, (for there was indeed none) and how that that of
James had no other reflection, nor could have, but as between himself and the
officers, the Mayor himself (as was said to them) telling them that he was a
Ranter, and so none of those people, and how that their having been at the
meeting, they had confessed, and upon what ground, viz. that it was in
obedience to the Lord, and not in contempt to them, or to the Law, moreover,
that they had considered of the matter, and if any thing on this side their
peace with the Lord would have done it, they had not been at that which was
the occasion of their being thus brought thither, that the son of God was the
sovereign of the Conscience, and the worship of the Father was in spirit and
truth, and his fear was not to be taught by the precepts of men, but here thou
interruptedst him that spoke, which was G. B. of that any further, but he,
turning to the Juay, said to them, Neighbors and Friends, we have nothing now
to do with these, and so turned his hand to the Court, and to you I shall
speak; you have Consciences of your own, according unto which you would worship
God, and you would not take it well if some such thing as has been done, and
is now doing to us, should be done to you, for worshipping God according to
your Conscience. Now what says the Judge of all, whatsoever ye would that men
should do unto you, do even the same unto them, for this is the law and the
Prophets. And so I shall leave you. Edward Pyot also spoke to the Jury, and
said, you by the Court are made our Judges, and the matter of fact, for which
we are called in question this day is nothing criminal, nor any matter of
dishonesty, but only for our meeting together in the worship and service of
God, and nothing more than barely meeting together is proved against us, to
which our selves have confessed before proof was made, and as our meeting
together in such manner, and to such ends as is declared in the Indictment,
has been by us denied, so it is altogether without proof to you that which you
are chiefly to consider of in order to your verdict, is, whether or not we were
met together in manner and form according as is declared in the Indictment. As
to the manner of our meeting, it was not with force and arms, as you your
selves in your own consciences know, but we meet together in the fear of the
Lord, and to no other end than only in Gods Worship and Service; and therefore
take heed what you do; lest you be found striving against the Lord, for God
will be worshipped and served as himself pleases, and by his own direction
and prescription, in spirit and in truth, and not as man pleases, nor by men's
prescriptions and directions; for things may be highly esteemed amongst men,
which are abomination in the sight of God, and it is not in the power of any
Creature to prescribe to his maker how his maker shall be served and worshipped.

It is enough for the greatest of men to prescribe their own Homage, and to
direct their own service, and to leave that which concerns the worship and
service of God, unto God himself, and to his own prescription and direction,
who alone is Lawgiver to all, and the Judge over all, in all the matters and
things which concerns his own worship and service, and whom we choose to obey
rather then men. Here thou rosest from thy seat in great rage, and gave an
interruption, but when the Court was quiet and cool, again he spoke on, and
said, And forasmuch as it is oft-times proposed in Courts of Judicature, to the
prisoners at Bar, to be tried by God and the Country, in which words it is
acknowledged that God is the supreme Judge, and that the Verdict and Sentence
ought to be of the Lord; mind the Lord therefore, and his presence with you,
and Council to guide you, that the Lord may judge among you, that so your
verdict concerning us, may be of the Lord; to which some of the Jury answered,
That they would do us right: and there was a sense in many of them, which thou
could not take off, though thou endeavouredst it, and made a long
narration of the penal Laws against what was called Conventicles, and the not
coming to Church; and what fine it was to have Mass said in a man's house
(which related to Papists, and not to them) and what was in thy head came
forth, but not a word to the purpose. The Steward also, viz. John Robbins, kept
a great ado, and turned over the Statute book, which to consider (it seems) he
had been up (as is said) till about three in the morning, that he might be
ready to assist thee according to what is said, he said to thee the night
before, that he would, but it signified nothing. It was not to the point in
hand, for they were indicted at the Common Law; and thou and thy Council kept
ado about the Statute; and what is this to the purpose, said one of the
Prisoners? And neither thou nor he so much as showed the Jury what was an
unlawful meeting at Common Law. See how you were blinded, and what hand was
upon you. And the Steward most unworthy of his Master the King, as whose
Council he appeared, made a great Oration, how that we and our meetings were
that which did shake his Crown, and that the King was afraid of us, and that
he had been in the west, and what he had heard there, he told on purpose to
incense the Jury, but all would not do, the Jury had another thing in their
Consciences and matter of Law, not stories, was that which they were to
Hearken, to especially such large Expressions, which rendered the King and his
Crown so vveak, and his Government so tottering, that the meetings of a few
people (in Comparison to England) to vvait upon the Lord, who used not Arms,
nor resisted, and who were in good will to him, did shake it, and make him
afraid, but this is not all the unworthiness he then used to the prisoners also
of which he was was well told, but now is pretermitted.

The Jury being to withdraw, the prisoners moved for a special verdict in
these words, viz. That the matter of fact might be found specially, according
to what the Witnesses had spoken, and that might be left upon the whole matter
to the determination of Law, whether it amount to the making good of the
Indictment, which thou opposedst, for thou fearedst the sequel, which was,
that thou should not then have whereupon to pass Sentence upon them.

So the Jury withdrew, and after some time, delivered their verdict; and the
foreman said a special verdict, and it was this, Guilty of being at an unlawful
Assembly, according to the law of the Land, but not of force and Arms, or to
the terror of the people. The prisoners demanded the record of this to be read;
the record being read, it appeared that but the first half was set down, which
thon had caused (no doubt) so to be, for that served thy mind, viz. Guilty of
an unlawful assembly, according to the Law of the Land. But the other half was
omitted, as not being to thy purpose, but against it, viz. But not of force and
Arms, etc. The prisoners called to have the whole verdict recorded, thou
would not grant it, and said, they brought it in as it was recorded. But
that the prisoner that spoke, viz. G. B. had drawn the latter out by questions,
G. B. denied it, and affirmed that the Jury delivered their verdict as
aforesaid, and called to the foreman, to answer whether it was not so; the
foreman said it was, and so did one or two more of the Jury testify. The
Steward, to palliate the matter, would make the latter by consequence, the
former being found, that is to say, that it being an unlawful assembly, it was
by force and arms; but herein he was mistaken; for first, it was a special
verdict which stated the matter on the one hand and the other for to be pleaded
at Law, whether the evidence made good the Indictment, then the Indictment was
at Common Law, and there is no unlawful assembly at Common Law, but what is by
force and arms. Thirdly, they said it was not by force and arms, viz. Not
guilty of force and arms. Now if they had said, Guilty of an unlawful assembly
according to the Law of the Land, and no more, there had been some color of
the latter, of force and arms, which the Steward would have made by
Consequence, but they cutting off force and arms in the latter, without which
it could not be an unlawful assembly in the former, they made the former of no
force, and by consequence adjudged, viz. that it was not an unlawful assembly,
seeing that which only could have made it so, they brought them in not Guilty
of, and so the verdict was a Contradiction to it self.

Yet a great ado thou and the Steward made about it, but G. B. told ye both,
that they must have no wrenching the Juries verdict, but must have it in their
own words. And for the consequences he said, it mattered not, and therefore
demanded that the Juries verdict might be recorded as they brought it in, or
that they might have pen, and ink, and paper given them, to write their verdict
themselves, or if none of these, that they might go in again.

So the Jury withdrew again, and staid somewhat long, yet at length came and
brought in the same verdict as before.

Now whilst they were in the second time; thou (its like) fearing least they
should bring in a through not guilty, as the Jurie the night before did in the
case of Thomas Speed, etc. who in a manner delivered a verdict the first time;
much like to this, thou tendrest to Edward Pyot the Oath of Allegiance, that is
to say, thou having used reflecting words to him of what he had been
heretofore, viz. in arms in the City, as a Captain, and so looking upon him
as an enemy, who was a friend to the King and thee; Demanded of him whether he
would take the Oath of Allegiance? He replied as to the clearing of himself,
and how he was in principle and otherwise in good will to the King and them
all, and how his practice had been answerable, and that you should be as
Fathers to Children, that should not seek the hurt of them who were under the
Law, but their preservation rather. And that as to the thing demanded of him,
he was upon another issue, and till he understood what that was, and was
cleared from that, he should not answer: Well said thou, (showing what lay
rancoring in thy breast) as sure as I sit here, if the Jury bring ye in not
Guilty, I will put it to you.

And not let all that are sober judge in this matter, and whether as a man most
resolvedly concerned in the ruin of us, right or wrong, thou have not
proceeded in this whole transaction hitherto, and whether ever in the
Guild Hall of Bristol, in this generation, such partiality has been used, and
downright persecution in a Judge: And whether we are not (as to men) hard
bestead, when as for our Conscience we are thas hurried up and down from one
Law to another, from one penalty to another, if the first will not serve the
turn, or cannot be accomplished, who stand before the Judgment seat of such a
Judge, as has showed himself as thou, as aforesaid.

But to close up this part of this relation, and therein this present sitting
of the Sessions, the next day they were had to the Hall again, but not called,
but the day after, viz. the 15th of the 11th month they were brought to the
Bar, and then thou gave sentence upon them as follows, viz. George Bishop,
Edward Pyott, 50 l. John Gibbons, and Nicholas Pool, 5 li. each. John Spoor,
George Oliver, James Sterridge, Thomas Morris, Benj. Cottle 40 s. apiece, and
to continue in Prison till payment, Thomas Speed, also Charles Jones, and W.
Tailor, thou committedst to Newgate, though cleared by their Country, where
thou keptst them til the 27th of the 12th mon. and have so much of wrong
imprisonment upon thy back, as to them, for thee to answer.

Now how could thou in law proceeded to fine George Bishop Edward Pyott, etc.
when as the verdict was special, before the Evidence was stated, and had
Council debated whether the Evidence amounted to making good the Indictment,
which it could never do. Therefore thou thus carriedst it, who carries all
things according to thy will and humor, and yet thou cryest up the Law, and
thy Sovereigns Laws, when as under the cry and pretense of thy Sovereigns Laws,
thou ushers in thine own, and servest thy pleasure upon people that are
innocent. But this covering will not hold thee long, for the Judges at
Westminster may come in time to see farther through thee, who shortly hereupon
saw cause to say (one of the Judges of the Kings Bench expressing it) to this
purpose, What? will they have the King to be King of England, and not of
Bristol? And so an Attachment was ordered against thee (though thy Council
Robbins said thou wast a Member of Parliament) and Alderman Creswick, as to the
Affidavits then read against you, and presented by the Kings Soliciter General,
who in his speech set forth, that such things, as by those papers were charged
against you, did not only invade the Law, but seek to justle the King out of
his Courts at Westminster (of which that was the Chief and Superintendent over
other Courts of Judicature, in case of their going without the bounds of Law,
as it had cognizance of what applications was made to them) and so consequently
(as is said) out of England. So that (it seems) for thee and Alderman
Chreswicke, an Atachment was ordered, though thou wast a Member of Parliament;
and so whilst here thou cryest out thy Sovereigns Laws, to cover thy doings
against the Laws of thy Sovereign, there they find cause to proceed against
thee, as one that does that which tends to the unkinging of thy Sovereign,
and justling of the King out of his Courts at Westminster, and so out of
England. The truth is, thou would be Sovereign thy self; that is to say,
thou would fain have thine own brittle, peevish, hot, and malicious will, to
rule, which when thou have no other shift to excuse, thou seek to place it
under the skirt of thy Sovereign, but the Lord has and will find thee out,
and render unto thee according to thy deeds.

Thus far proceeded the business of the Sessions, in reference to our friends;
in the relation of which, many things are omitted which might appear of
consequence to be set down, least this little manuel should appear a volume.
Now we shall proceed to speak of something that was pretermitted in point of
time, but not unfit here to be brought in, which concerns Thomas Smart, one of
the grand Jury aforesaid, of whom some hint has been already a little given.

This man being on the Guard, as Captain Lieutenant to a Colonel of the Militia
Regiment, on the 25th of the tenth Month, 1663. commonly called Christmas day
(unknown to his Colonel) caused three of our friends servants to be
unmercifully tied neck and heels together, with half hundred weights and
muskets hanging about their necks, in the bitter extremity of the cold wether,
till the eyes of some of them were observed to be drawing out, and their faces
were growing black, and the natural spirits of one of them ready to fail, which
some who were not of the Guard coming in and seeing, took upon them to out the
cords and set them at liberty.

The Executioners of this inhumane butchery, were George Whitherley a Liter or
Barge man, and one John Boon. These having been abroad that morning, with
other musketeers, saw the Shops of some of our friends open (who in conscience
to their Testimony, against such Popish observations, could not cause them to
be kept fast) which caused their rage to arise, and to the Guard to bring
Samuel Hollister, servant and kinsman to Dennis Hollister, William Sawcer,
servant to Robert Nokes, and Richard Mercer, servant to the Widow Loverell.

Samuel Hollister was in his uncles shop when Witherley came, who required
him to shut down the door of the shop, (for the windows were down before, and
the door, they used to go in at and out at) Samuel answering that he did not
use to put it up, and now should not put it down; away Witherley had him to the
Guard, where Thomas Smart, and Henry Joiner Marshal were, who ordered him to be
tied neck and heels together, and a half hundred weight ( Smart ordered two,
but it seems but one was hung on) Witherley did it presently, and set him so
tied upon the stone bench, walking between him and Smart, and watching least he
or any should ease the weight on his breast or the bench which hung about his
neck; and if it happened so to be, either through the friendliness of any, or
his own endeavors, to bear it a little on his knees, Witherley with a swinge
would turn it off again, to the endangering of his neck and back, and then
tauntingly would come and look in his face, and mock him saying, What, you
look very cheerfully yet. The space of time of this his cruel Execution was
near the length of an hour.

William Sawcer likewise, the said Witherley brought out of his Masters shop to
the Guard, after the windows were thrown down, and there he and Boon tied him
neck and heels by the order of Smart, and the Marshal, with a half hundred
weight, so long, and after such a manner, that his face grew black, and his
natural spirits began to fail, so that the match being cut by one that was not
of the Guard, they were constrained to give him something to fetch his spirits
again. The time of his suffering thus was about three quarters of an hour.

Richard Mercer being in Sarah Bennets shop when they came to shut her Windows
down, or to require her to cause them to be shut, and for saying, It was a
reasonable thing to show their Warrant, was had away likewise to the Guard,
and by order of the aforesaid persons tied neck and heels, and two Muskets
hanged at his neck for the space of half an hour, which was performed by
Boon aforesaid, being the Servant of another, as aforesaid, who was none of
those people.

This Tiranical Act, without any Warrant of thine, as was produced, so
reflecting on thy Government, and so startling the sober people of the City,
tending also to the dissolution of Government, had no other reproof from thee
in public, that ever we heard of, except that thou thoughtest him a qualified
and fit person to be of the Grand Jury, to pass upon our friends as aforesaid.

Before we leave the Militia, we shall give one taste of Captain Hicks his
spirit to his near and peaceable Neighbors; it seems the Deputy Lieutenant,
and Commissioners of the Militia thought fit to fine some of our friends, for
not finding arms to the Guard (whose principle was against arms, and which arms
also were converted to the disturbing of our meetings, contrary to Law, and the
imprisoning of our friends) amongst the rest, Thomas Callowhill was one, who
dwelling a little below, on the other side of the high street, where Captain
Hicks kept shop, and being somewhat of the same occupation, Captain Hicks with
a Constable came, and though the Warrant was not directed to the said Captain
Hicks, yet with his own hands, he took down ten pieces of Manchester tape worth
15 s. for 10 s. fine, and gave it to the Constable, who carried it to the said
John Hicks his house, not returning the overplus.

Sometime after the said Thomas Callowhill having some business to do in
Captain Hicks his shop, and receiving 26 s. of him for Buttons, he demanded an
Acquittance in full of all accounts; T. Callowhill desired him to accept of it
in full of the buttons, and said, that he hoped he would return him his ten
pieces of tape again, at least the overplus, but John Hicks would not accept of
that, then T. Collowhill desired him to call in any Neighbor, and he would
acknowledge it in full of all accounts, only the tape excepted, the overplus of
which being not returned, he thought it not fit to give a discharge, Captain
Hicks replied, he had nothing to do with that, he might go to the Constable. T.
Callowhill answered, it is in thy Chest; and why should I go to the Constable,
seeing that he took it not from me, but several saw thee take it thy self;
Whereupon Captain Hicks brake forth into a great rage, and called him Rogue,
and Knave, and laid violent hands on him, and hurled him into a dark entry at
the further end of his shop, out of the hearing of the people in the street,
and there did strike him, and pull him by the hair of the head, demanding the
money out of his pocket, and thrust his fingers so against his throat, as if he
intended to choke him, and tore his coat; and so by beating, and haling, and
tearing, and desperate words, forced his money from him, which the said Cap.
Hicks detains to this day.

This is Capt. Hicks, a man that never drew sword in the field, that dare not
meet a man there, that dares handle a sword, one of thy chieftaines to do thy
drudgery; A member of the Council. and that has been Sheriff of the City in
this day, wherein as has been said, shame is become the promotion of fools.

And this is some account of the Militia, and the work of some of their
Officers and Soldiers, which put the City to so great a charge, as the
supplying of their arms for so long a season; of which the City began to grow
so weary, and the stomachs of the Housekeepers, and under officers (who had
formerly been in the field) were so clogged to be at such work, and to hale
their peaceable neighbors up and down, who did not resist them. And so to be
in order to the ruin of them and their families for their conscience, that the
Deputy Lieutenants (who in many things showed much moderation) laid it down,
whom thou had instigated unto much of what they had done to us, who had
no power to command them, but yet would not let them be at rest till they
had promised thee their assistance of whom thou had no need, one of thy
officers being as sufficient for thy purpose (as has been said) as a Regiment,
for they would not resist, though thou lovedst to appear a man in power; and
having thoughts that thou could never do too much against us, did think
thou never had too much power to effect it upon us, which cost the City so
much, and may do thee much more, if thou do not repent.

Thus ended the Militia, but here was not an end of thy rage and cruelty, for
perceiving how the City was bent in favor of the innocent, and how their love
was raised so much the more to them as thy cruelty exceeded and manifested in
their friendly visits (for that which was sober could not withhold it self from
its own which suffered.) Thou having mist that at which thou aimedst in thy
prosecutons aforesaid, and having little whereof to glory except that thou
had failed in thy enterprise as a man enraged because of the love of others
to those, whom without cause thou did hate, as if so be it had been crime
enough that thou had cast them in prison, and therefore none ought to visit
them. And having not the law on thy side to make them close prisons whose
misdemeaners brought not them into thine hands, but their conscience thou
tookest another course, and as if the King and his Council had nothing else to
do, thou troubledst their ears with thy Solicitors, and their hands with thy
papers, heaps upon heaps, with informations against several persons of note
and eminency in that City, whom otherwise thine envy could not reach. And the
great crime with which thou chargedst them, was that they visited the Quakers
in prison, which neither law made sooner true humanity, nor comerce amongst
men, for the visitors were concerned in the prisoners upon point of relation,
comerce, neighborhood, and Country, as aforesaid, and here thou keptst ado,
not worthy the rehearseing, saving that thus far by hinting it, on record it
may remain that what mischief in thy day thou did work against the innocent,
and how implacably malicious thou vvast without cause against them, that thou
would not alovv them a visit, whom thou thoughtest fit not to be at
liberty. And this will remain an everlasting brand upon thee, and thy perpetual
condemnation, who wast so far from visiting the prisoners, that thou cast them
into a prison, and sought to ruin those who came to visit them.

The next that comes to be related in order of time, is the imprisonment of
Joan, the Wife of Peter Hiley, who having been at the burial of Nicholas
Tilleys Wife, an ancient acquaintance and Neighbor of hers about three weeks
before, and at the said burial having spoken a few words, thou did send for
the Priest, and causedst him to inform against her, and Committedst her to
Newgate the 10 of the 1^ month, for disturbing Mr. Godwyn the Minister of St.
Phillips, and depraving the Book of Common Prayer, and for refusing to find
Sureties for her appearing the next Sessions, as the Warrant of Commitment has
it signed, John Knight, Mayor.

Whereas some of the words she spoke were contained in the Book of Common
prayer, viz. in the burial of the dead; I am the Resurrection and the life, he
that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live (said she, says
Christ) and against the Book of Common prayer she spoke no word; besides, the
Act of Uniformity, upon which thou did commit her, commits not to Prison till
after Judgment in Court, upon Trial by a Jury, and then it is matter of fine and
imprisonment for such a time in default of payment, yet thou did send her to
prison, as skilful as thou pretendedst thy self in the laws, and deniedst her
husband's bayl for her appearance the first time, though afterward (upon
better consideration its like) thou tookest his security for her appearance,
from whose family thou had detained her (which was pretty great) and her
children, for the space of two days.

This troubled the City very much, to see that thou could not forbear thy
hands, but must fall upon a woman, and that in revenge (as they did judge) to
her brother called Robert Yeamans, whom thou had a few days before caused to
be beset in John Bowers his house (one that had been Sheriff of the City, as
had the other but the year before) by thy officers in the cold wet weather, for
the space of the best part of a day, in order to his apprehension, the keeper
of Newgate being there also, and attending to take him, and all this because he
did not sit where thou would have him in the Council house, who,
notwithstanding at daylight passed out of John Bowers house, (the officers
appearing sensible of no such enemy) who going to his home, though the officers
warded the house aforesaid, till 10 at night, and then the watch till the
morning, and after a few days, taking his journey to London upon his occasions,
etc. so being out of the reach of thy malice, the City judged that thou fellest
upon her, it being the day after he was gone, that thou committedst her in
revenge of him, and so had thee in great abomination: and thus every action
thou did, laid thee more low, and brought thee into contempt with the City,
who by this time was full enough of thy barbarous and over rude proceedings.

Next to her was Roger Oldstone, who living in the Castle, and answering those
that came to look for Inmates, that he had none in his house, and that if they
would not believe him, they might go in themselves and see; he was taken up as
he was going by the Tolzey, and brought before thee, and because none of these
matters would bear weight to commit him, there being an itch in thee against
the whole race of the Jews, (the Jews in spirit, as Haman had against the Jews
in the flesh) thou could not tell how to let him go, without some print of
thy cruelty; and therefore, to ensnare him, did demand of him whether he was
not at the meeting the Sunday before? and because he said, it may be he was,
thou sentest him to Newgate, though there was no proof against him, and his
own words were but it may be, and there did cause him to be detained from
the 22d of 12th month, to the 26th of the same, from his Wife and Children,
who for maintenance depended upon his liberty.

Hitherto, from the time of the commitment of Thomas Speed and those with him,
as aforesaid, the meetings received continual interruptions by the visits of
thy officers, who continually attended them, warning them to depart and taking
names, carrying themselves with that insolence and ill behavior many of them,
espcecially thy servant Jones, and Yeoman Baal as was hard heretofore to think
it could be so in this City, having thee to back them, or rather thy spirit
acting in them, beyond the bounds of law or reason, but these things prevailing
not, for we were at a point, it being the Testimony of God in us against the
usurpation of man over his dominion in the Conscience, thou thoughtest thou
would: try thy self what thou could do in thy own person, and so in an
unwonted guise such as before thy day Bristol never savv, thou came down to
the meeting with Alderman Cresvvick, Alderman Cale, and thy officers, and
there layedst about thee more like a fool than a wise man, and to the Boys
did: then address thy impertinent discourses, and to the women,s making thy
self a laughing stock, and if any one spoke to thee in such a place, (as there
were many that in the power of the Lord, spoke to thee) thither thou would
get thee, and here take him away; and then another speaking, thither thou
would press, and what? who is that? have her away; and what Sirrah? are you a
Quaker? whose boy are you? put down his name, with a deal of such ridiculous
and foolish behavior, more like a boy than a man, a novice than a Justice, a
Stage Player than a Mayor, and so after thou had thus acted it for a while,
and sent to prison Thomas Atkins, Benjamin Maynard, and John Brooks, John
John's, Andrew Vivers, Susan Gotby, Joseph Kippin, Solomon Huntingdon, Elinor
Maud, and Elizabeth Wilkinson, as some show of thy Triumph, 21st 12th month,
1663. re infecta, thy work being unfinished, leaving many of us behind in the
meeting, upon whom thou commandedst the officers to nail the doors, and to keep
them there till the morrow, which thy Sergeant Jones performed, haling the
ancient widow Yeomans by the arm, and calling her old whore, because she was
going down the stairs, being hard of hearing, and so not knowing what order
thou had given, and her Grandchild Mary the Wife of Daniel Wastfield, who
went to attend her aged Grandmother, he called young whore, and Joyce Warren
widow, thy sister in law, whose husband had been Sheriff of the City, and his
Father Mayor, daughter to the said Widow Yeomans, he threw down stairs, to the
bruising of her head and arms, the hurt of which she has not yet recovered.
And so having shut up men, women, and children, together, women with child, and
nurses, he went his way. Then the Constables came, who had more sense of
humanity, and let out the women with child, and children: then when it was even
dark, came Sheriff Bradway, and set at liberty the rest, taking their verbal
engagement for their appearance the next day.

And this is the noble and worthy Exploit (as men use to call things by the
contrary) which thou performedst in the siege of a Company of innocent men and
women, who did not resist thee, and these are the things memorable therein.
Thou said when thou came up the stairs, see that none go down, and when thou
came into the room, thou commandedst all to depart, and when thou wentest
away, thou orderedst the doors to be nailed up, so that they that remained
could not depart, so contradictory were thy orders the one to the other; and as
they were contradictory, so they were not observed, nor had thou Dominion
over those people, but the good hand of the Lord was over them, and their
Meetings, so that neither the Officers civil nor military asunder, nor the
Officers Military and Civil together, nor the Deputy Lieutetenants and their
Guards, nor thou in person, nor thy Brethren, were able so to work, as to
discontinue our meeting, from the beginning of thy year to the end thereof; the
Lord hereby showing his dominion to be over all, and that his Throne was set up
in the midst of his enemies.

Now to these aforementioned, may be added William Wells, who for speaking a
few words to thy officers in the Meeting, (who take and leave whom they please,
and whom to speak to, be the matter or the occasion what it will, is enough to
be sent to Prison, themselves being Judges) was had to Newgate, and there
continued the space of eight days; at which time ( Sheriff Stremer having
heard that he was a poor man, and that his family depended for their livelihood
on his liberty) upon promise of appearance at Sessions, if called, was set at
Liberty.

And Philip Dimer, of Cork in Ireland, and a dealer there, being taken up at a
Meeting about the time of the fa^re, and sent to Bridewell by some of thy
Officers, was at the Instance of thy brother Francis Knight of London, and
other Londoners, with whom he used to have dealings, set free (it being a
great obstruction to the fair, that men of substantialness and dealing, as
were many of our friends, should be by thee thus proceeded with, who should
have been the great encourager of the Fair, in confidence of which (as of
right it ought to be) men do frequent the Fair. Yet thy fellow Citizens
therein (cry some) could not have that friendshid from thee as strangers,
though substantial men, and great dealers. But all thou could thou did bear
upon them, and by the Fair especially, keeping them up then from their
business, if so by any means thou could bow them unto thee. And that which
was of Argument why thou should dismiss them, to follow their business, that
thou turnedst as an Argument to hold them to it, supposing that by those
pressures they might fall under thee. But the everlasting arms were underneath
them, which did keep them, and will all those that abide with him.

Now the Sessions drew on, to attend on which thou wast come down from
Westminster, where thou had been for some time, having lest it in charge with
thy Officers, to visit our Meetings, in the mean time, on the first days of
the week, which they did, requiring us to depart, and taking names, which
were said to be sent up to thee; for thou could not be satisfied, for the
persecuting spirit in thee could not be at rest, but as by some way or another
that was done which was in order thereunto; and what use of those papers thou
made above, thou know, and what endeavors thou did use to bring through
the Act, which was then in hand against us, and how thou did work to have the
Convictions in order to Banishment, to be without Juries, expressly contrary (as
we Judge) to Magna Charta; for then thou thoughtest (it is like) thou should
have Matters in thine own hand, and so would do with us as thou please,
seeing that the Juries failed thee, and thou did that thou know. Thy
brother Lock, a man of that impetuous franticknesse, and silliness of
understanding, that he serves for little else (save except to set the Court a
laughing) if no more would stand by thee, so thou wast satisfied. And thy
Sergeant Jones when he came down from waiting on thee to Westminster, boasted
in the Meeting, that there was a Bill past the House such a day against us, for
that purpose, and Baall vapoured that there were ships coming about that would
carry us away, and he would loose his ear (yet he has not been as good as
his word) if we were there four Meetings more; and so Imperious was thy
Sergeant Jones grown (who from a Beggar of a piece of bread from door to door,
to a Sawyer, and from thence to a Sergeant, was advanced) that he took upon it
to Lord and insult it over his other fellow servants as well as us; and because
that Paul Williams (one of his fellow Sergeants) would not take names in the
Meeting at his command, he sirrah'd him (in imitation of thee) and laid violent
hands on him in the Meeting, and tore his Coat, and dragged him down by
violence, saying, He would send him to Newgate, and then brought up an other to
do as he commanded.

And this was the hostility with which our peaceable meetings to vvait upon
the Lord were exercised, by men whom (as has been said) one would have scorned
to have put with the Dogs of ones flock; whom they please must go to Prison,
whom they please must be set in their list; what they please they speak, and
what they please they do, and is well whatsoever they do.

This likes thee, to be exercised upon a people of such Estates (many of them)
and quality in the City, as thou know, whose Liberty, Civil treatment,
Estates, Families, Country, Lives (as it may happen) and all they have, must
stand at the courtesy of such (and if we term them so, it is but what they
are) base fellows. But the Lord was with his people, and gave them dominion
over all, and enabled them to bear with Patience this great exercise, through
the power and strength of him who was in the midst of them, whom your eyes
cannot see; Who persecute him in his truth and people, who will Reign over you
all for ever and ever, whom none of the Princes of this world knew, for if they
had, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory.

So the Sestions being come, which was held the 18th of the 12th Month, 1664.
and thou being come down (as aforesaid, to attend it) two Bills of Indictment
were drawn and presented the Grand Jury; the one against those seven whom thou
sentest to Bridewell, and then committed them to Newgate, when thou wast thy
self at Meeting; and the other against Joan Hiley.

That against the seven, the Grand Jury cast out, and the other against Joan
Hiley had like to have been too, had not Heyward the Tailor (one of the Grand
Jury) in the breach of his Oath, given information to one of the Sheriffs, and
so to thee, that it would be so if more Evidence were not brought in; hereupon
thou bestirs thy self, and caused the Priest to be sent for, in prosecution of
thy old design, which was to make us to suffer; and thy expectations was so on
tiptoe, that thou could not forbear to ask the Foreman, Whether the Bill was
found, before he came to deliver it in, who gave thee an answer as became a man
in his place (whose name is John Tyler) though thou vventest out of thy place,
though yet not out of the persecuting spirit that was in thee, unbecoming a
Magistrate to ask the question. So the Court wan adjourned, this being the
forepart of the day, to the afternoon.

Then she was had to the Court and set to the Bar, and thou feign would have
had the Trial put off, and spakest to her Husband so to do, and to enter into a
new Recognizance for that purpose, but she could not consent to that, so thou
wentest on to Trial, and the Jury was sworn, and the Priest set by her, and the
Indictment was read, and she pleaded to it Not Guilty, and the Evidence was
produced, of which the Priest was one, who said, He heard some body speak, but
could not say it was her. And the Jury went aside, and much expectation was on
the issue, for ye thought your Jury would serve your turner; and the names of
the Jury being looked over, they were judged to be all right; and Sheriff
Streamer (as was said) was very confident of the matter, and was over heard (as
is said) to lay a Wager with Capt. Hicks, that it would be so, which John Hicks
distrusting, the other is said to say, He would lay his life they would find
her guilty, and that there were four of them that would dye but they would do
it: Which appeared to have something in it, for the Baily Errand when he spoke
to the Court, said, That the Jury were all agreed save four (what Working here
is to make the innocent to suffer) yet the Jury brought her in Not Guilty, the
Indictment being not laid in the words of the Statute, as the Council made
appear; and as for the Words of the Statute, there was not sufficient Evidence
to prove that what she said was according to those words.

So the Lord wrought for his innocent servants which waited upon him, and so
two petty Juries the Sessions before having failed thee, and now the grand and
petty Jury made thee miss of thy end, and so that thy hands hitherto could not
bring to pass the thoughts of thine heart, for the Lords arm was against
thee, and indeed the Citizens began to nawseat this unusual trade of thine, in
putting them upon the tumbling their fellow Citizens into holes and corners,
and so thereby thou might serve thy will and pleasure upon them; and now thou
thoughtst it time to hie thee to London again, to get some new strength, and to
recruit thee, who hitherto had missed, and to work thou wentst above to get
the matters finished out of the old way of England, which was by Juries to the
conviction of two Justices, as aforesaid, and the Bill was past, and now thou
wast glad, and (as is reported) wept for joy; for now thy work thou thoughtest
was not likely ( Sisyphus his stone of which Histories speak) to return still
upon thee, and thou to be laughed at, which was the thing thou fearedst, and
therefore (its like) bespeakest the City to be in an ill condition, and as if
it were ready to be in a tumult (which was as still as the stones in the
street) and thou art said to have suggested that thou could not undertake the
safety of the place, without some such additional power, and would fain
have made it the same through England, and now thou vvast paramount, and down,
thou camst, and here thou thoughtst to make short work. And as to other
offices vvhereto some of us were called to serve, thou turn'st them by as a
people whom thou intendedst to make clear work with asking why they did
choose us for such offices, giving the people so to understand, and intimating
that a shorter course would be taken with us, which might put us out of the
Capacity of bearing Office, and so thou would have us reserved to the greater
blow, hoping at once to make riddance of us, and to quit us the Nation. But we
shall have a place and name therein, when thou art forgotten, except it be to
shame and obloquie.

Thus thy heart was lifted up, and thou preparedst thy self for the season,
wherein the Act should take place, viz. the first day of the 5th month called
July, following, hoping then and afterward at once to do thy work upon us, and
so high were thy spirits boyed to this attempt, that thou had not patience to
stay until the day; but before the day, thou wentst to work, (and yet we think
thee not very wise in so doing, but the Lord suffered thy haste to befool thee)
and on the 12th of 4th month down thou sentest thy officers, who to the meeting
came, and there played the mad men (some of them, Jones, etc.) halling and
pulling, striking and dragging, and thy said Sergeant Jones, put off his Gown,
and to work he went (for he must do something one way, as thou had done
another, and why not, seeing he was executioner as thou wast Magistrate? and
about he swings his Mace, and had bruised one our Friends hands therewith, in
pieces, in all likelihood, at which he struck, if it had not been taken away,
and here the peace came to be broke on a peaceable people; and those of the
officers that could not be as mad as he, but had some reluctance against such
usages to people of quality, and their loving Neighbors, he used as he
pleased; in particular William White, an old Royalist, whom he much in words
abused: and because we could not bow to his commands, he caused some of us to
be dragged and had away, and carried to Prison, as if he were Mayor, and
Justice, and King, and Parliament, and all, and above them all, in breaking the
Peace, which the Law is against, whose Names are as follows, William Ford,
Nath. Milner, John Love, Sam. Tailor, Will. James, Jos. Moor, John John's,
Israel Bird, Robert Claxton, Tho. Jaques, alias Jackson, Will. Emblin, Jos.
Canings, Hen. Prichard, And. Sole, and Tho. Atkins, and these the next day thou
committedst to Newgate, for being at an unlawful assewbly, under pretense of
Religious worship, on Sunday the 12th of June in the time of divine service,
and for resisting the Officers who were to disperse them, and refusing to give
sureties for their appearance the next Sessions, and in the mean time to be of
the good behavior. Signed John Knight Mayor, Hen. Creswick, Nath. Cale, dated
13th June 1664.

And this was the Sabbath days work of thy officers whom thou sentest on this
errand (breaking the peace) and confirmedst after they had done it, who yet
pretendedst to the keeping of the Sabbath, and criest out upon us for breaking
the Sabbath, in meeting on that day to wait upon the Lord, the work (as your
selves accounted it) of the Sabbath, and for coming to town on which day to
save a woman's life, who was in travel, thou causest a horse of a man-midwife to
be detained till he had paid a fine for riding on that day, for that purpose
being sent for in have, Richard Blackborrow Brewer, thy neighbor, and yet thou
could send a Capias on that day newly taken out of the Court (for the wax was
wet) to detain Robert Steward that was brought to Newgate late the night before
in a debt of thy brother in law Ducats of 200 l. who cryest out of the breach
of the Sabbath, thou Hypocrite, who make Sabbath, and Law, and all what thou
please, who show of what Religion thou art toward God by these things, as
of Loyalty to the Law and thy Prince by the other, but of this more hereafter.

And yet thou wast mistaken in thy warrant, and showed thy self thereby how
wrong thou did run, even as a man, headlong into any thing that seemed to
serve thy end, talking of resisting, and not dispersing, when as the new law
which enabled to such things, was not then in force, and there was no other (as
we know of) that so enabled, yet this is the usage that we and our peaceable
meetings receive from, the hands of thy officers, and this is the Justice we
receive at thy hands, to have thy confirmation of what thy officers have done,
and all the remedy we have; but we leave it to the Lord, who will render unto
you according to your deeds.

Now drew on the 1. of the 5. month called July, famous for the date of the new
Act, on which it took place, and became in force, which thou had so much
longed for; and for the accomplishing of which thou had so much trudged, for
which thou shall have thy reward from the hand of the Lord, and now the day
being come, having before hand caused the Constables to be warned, and the
meeting being on the first day of the week, and the third of that month, thou
sentest thy Officers first to bid them to depart, and to take nams, who took
away John Moon to Bridewel, as he was then declaring in the words of soberness
and truth, and between the first and second hour in the afternoon, thou came
thy self attended with Alder. Lock, and Alder. Lawford, (the other Aldermen it
seems being out of the way, or not caring to be about such work as this) and at
the door of our meeting house in the street, being set down with them, and the
Sheriffs, thou did cause an O Yes to be made in the form of a Court, one
which day no Courts are used to be kept in England, who talkest so much of the
Sabbath, and chargest us with profaning the day, because we meet thereon to
wait upon the Lord, the work of the day (as you use to say) upon the day; and
made the manmidwife pay the fine for coming that day to town, as aforesaid;
the effect of a murderous spirit shown under the pretense of Religion and
conscience, to the observation of the Law, as did the Pharisees, who put him to
death, who was the end of the Law, who healed on that day; whom he convinced of
the contrary in the example of David, in the shewbread, and their own in
taking an ox or an ass out of a pit) and sent'st the Capias in thy brother
Ducket's behalf on that day, as has been said, and (to add no more) did
constrain Christopher Woodward to bring upon the foot of a Mortgage payable on
that day of the week his money to the Tolzey, whether he was on that day
necessitated to bring it, least thou should take advantage of the forfeiture
of the Mortgage, who otherwise would not give him encouragement to accept it,
when he spoke with thee thereabouts; and is not this Hypocrisy, and that which
is like thee, in all thy actions pretend conscience, and do the contrary, In
which we shall farther trace thee ere this relation be over.

Well, the Court being set, as aforesaid, in the nature of a Piepowder one,
thou sent'st the Constables and Officers up into the Meeting, who brought down
the men first, whom thou did Maunder at as thou pleasedst, and then demanding
of some of them money (for of several thou did not, and yet sentest them to
prison contrary to Law) 10 s. 2 s. 6 d. and of some 6 d. ye 2 d. which they not
answering, thou sentest some to Newgate, some to Bridewel. Then the Women were
brought down, whom thou servedst after the same manner, many of them not being
fined then, nor so much as asked, Whether they would pay any Money, though the
Law places Imprisonment in default of payment of the fine, and not otherwise;
which practice thou did use many times after: but have them away, have them
away was thy cry; and to Bridewel and to Newgate were many of them also
carried, though it is contrary to Law also, to make a man suffer twice for one
offense, which thou made them to do, in committing them for being at a
Meeting one day, and the next day fining them (as by and by shall be related)
for doing of the same; so making the Law a nose of wax, bowing and bending it
as thou please, and yet pretending, as to what thou did to us, Conscience
to the Law.

About four hours time thou tookest up in this thy New found way of Justice,
sending Men and Women in heaps to both prisons on this account; some Husbands
one where, their Wives another; some Servants where their Masters and
Mistrisses were not, some old, some young, some under-age by the Law; some
Women with Child, and so big that they knew not of an hour to go, and this to
Bridewel; and yet others, who were of age, thou would not account so, but
placest them under, having a mind to excuse them, and yet thou pretendest
Conscience, and thou say. Thou must not be partial, and thou must execute
the Law, and thou must keep thy Oath; and though others fail of their duty, yet
thou must not. Thus, like the Pharisees, making thy Philacteries broad, but the
Exposition of the Law narrow, or none at all, as thou please; yet thou
could not accomplish thine end, viz. the sending of all away,
notwithstanding all this bussle, and the violence of some of thy Officers,
particularly John Jones thy Sergeant, who because Thomas Winfield answered not
presently his Command to come down, he violently threw him down the stairs,
from top to bottom, with such a fall as had like to have spoiled him (the fear
whereof seized on many) thus breaking of the peace, above, whilst thou wast
below, as seeming to sit and keep it; yet we say thou did not accomplish
thine end to put up all, and so to make clear work; for though thou sentest
away of Men and Women to Newgate 24. and to Bridewel about one hundred forty
and six, and satest at it so long, yet thou wast forced to arise and depart as
a man quite tired, saying, Thou could do no more, and so there was many of
whom thou tookest no notice.

So thou had thy Belly full of Prey this day, and as great an opportunity, in
this kind, against the Innocent, as thine heart could wish, and with thine
hands thou did the desire of thine heart, till thou could do no more, for
which the Lord will give thee thy reward, even blood to drink, for thou art
worthy; and in the Cup wherein thou have filled, shall thou be filled double,
as John saw in his Revelations, who prophesied of thy day in the fall of
Babylon, who had made he self drunk with the blood of the Saints and Martyrs of
Jesus, Rev. 18.6. In the cup which she has filled to you, fill to her double,
says he, which shall be thy portion from the hand of the Lord, except thou
repent.

And now the City was full of sorrow, and much trouble affected the sober
people therein, who before never saw such a day, nor heard of in Bristol,
wherein their quiet, peaceable, sober, innocent, and substantial
fellow-Citizens, were thrust in heaps into holes after such a manner for their
Conscience. Bridewel being full of them, like the place of a great Fair, five
and fifty Women in Bridewel, not having above four or five beds to lie on;
about the Bed of which in one Chamber lay about 30 on the form and floor,
which by reason of the uncleanness of that house in many places of it (being
cast in there in such numbers on a sudden, so that the house could not be
cleansed before) was so filled with vermin, that through the going up and
down of such multitudes, in every place, who in a manner filled every place
was contracted, so that sleep could not rest in the eyes of many who had not
been exercised with such hard lodging and troublesome guests; Who were people
of Quality (many of them) and Credit, and lived otherwise in the world. And in
Newgate, several such, viz. some Merchants, some Shopkeepers, were constrained
to lie on straw that night, above Twenty lying in the Circumference of one
narrow place (for such a number) called the Traitors ward, and indeed that
prison was so full, what with our friends before and now committed, and what
with old and new debtors, and felons, the time of the Asizes and Gaol delivery
drawing on, that they were cast thicker in proportion than a man that had
regard to his creatures, would put his dogs and swine, as if so be thou
intendedst by infection to have dispatched them in that noisome hole which is
scarce fit for dogs much lest for men, such men as they were and had been bred
and lived, though thou thereby should hazard thy self and the City, it being
the hot season of the year, and in that respect the more dangerous, much like
to Nero, whom Histories report to have caused Rome to be set on fire in several
places whilst he standing on a Tower, with his Musicians made sport thereat.

Yet this effected not what thou thoughtst to bring to pass, viz. by these
things to withdraw the love of the City from us, or to deter them from their
visiting of us, for it increased their love; and people by heaps came to visit
those of us whom thou had cast into prison; some by the sixth hour in the
next morning were there to visit them viz. at Bridewell, and by continual
intercourse both there and at Newgate, and expressions of their love showed how
much their hearts were touched with their sufferings, and let us tell thee, it
reached further than any thing of this nature had reached before, and many were
pained at the heart, and knew not what to do, such large furrows had these
thy cruelties made upon their souls; which shevved thee an unwise man in thy
Generation thus to Act, raising the fire so much the more, which thou
soughtest hereby to quench, and making those the more considerable, and to have
a deeper root in the City then ever, whom thou would and endeavourdest to
have rooted out; for as was wrote thee aforesaid; they being interwoven in the
City as a man's spirit is in his flesh, and his flesh in his body the suffering
of them proved as a man's flesh in his body, and his spirit in his flesh; and
thou came to be abhorred hereby, and thy name to be as stink in the City,
which as it never before saw such heaps of violence: So it never hated a man
more that thus did exercise it, and so whilst ages and generations lasts, this
thy work will be thy shame and in the perpetual Monuments of time will brand
thy name with ignominy for ever: Thou shall not avoid it except thou repent.

Nor was it only in Bristol, that these things thus ran, but in the Country
about, and in London, yea throughout England, which whilst it generally stood
in a modest sensibility and loathness to such Acts as these, had the leisure to
hear the sound of these cruelties and to abhor thee, so that thou becamest the
general talk in City and Country, especially at London, and not without the
like at Court, which thought thee had gone beyond the limit of the discresion
of their affairs, and mad man like had set all on fire, when as two or three
sticks (some of the principle of them) as the Law directs, might have tried how
that smoke would have proved, and 'its like thou had no thanks from thence
for so doing.

Yet the Lord was with his people who kept them in prison amidst all these
sufferings; praising, and glorifying his name as he was with them at the
meetings, and in the sense of his presence gave them the seal of his
Apobation, that, that their testimony to him was accepable in his sight, and
that they bore testimony to him, Whose Names are.

Newgate Men. Thomas Gouldney, Charles Jones, Miles Dixin, Charles Harvord, Will.
Tailor, Rich. Marsh, Will. Tailor of the Castle, George Gough, Rich. Snead,
Rich. Belshar, Hen. Dedicote, Jos. Owen, John Cole, Andrew Sole, Erasin Dole,
John Hunt, (16.)

Women. Mary Gouldney, Eliz. Pyet, Magd. Love, Ann Sole, Joyce Dole, Eliz.
Moore, Eliz. Gibbons, Joan Hiley. (8) 24 in all.

Bridewell Men. John Moon, John Batho. Thomas Lewis, Nath. Day, Edw. Bifield,
John Neeves, Will. Davis, John Ivear, John Dole, Ben. Maynard, Rich. Gotly,
Phil. Cook, Hen. Moor, Rich. Nelson, Hugh Hobhouse, Tob. Dole, Thomas Hilman,
John Bedford, Charles Sanders, Jer. Hignell, Rog. Oldstone, Liming Dickason,
Will. Noble, Will. Hill, Art. Hyat, John Summers, Rob. Summers, Roll. Dole;
Nath. Allin, Sam. Gibbons, Charles Bowen, Dan. Gibbons, Edw. Pain, Iam.
Slaughter, Rich. Horsman, John Styant, John Saunders, John Cox, Ed. Daniel,
Rob. Weal, John Neve, Thomas Whitturne, Will. Wells, Will. Tippet, Will.
Peachy, Sim. Cadle, Isa. Partridge, Cananuel Britten, John Price, Lew. Rogers,
John Herne, Griff. Bowine, John Martin, Sam. Rogers, Tho. Lofty, Will. Cawson,
Iarvis Wallis, John Crump, Robert Gerish, James Toghill, Morris Williams, Bern.
Lidman, Anistop. Bennet, Rich. Griffen, William Lane, Sim. Potter, John Morgan,
John Heart, Will. Maynard, Will. Blackway, John Bennet, Tho. Bows, Tim.
Hardiman, Tho. Bailey, Will. Atkins, Rich. Moor, Tho. Winfield, Bartho. Crocker,
Richard Willis, Tho. Stockman, Will. Collins, John Warwick, Tho. Window, Calib
Hill, Step. Cormell, Will. Gotby, William Williams, Will. Saweer, John Love,
Abra. Cole, Tho. Watkins, (91)

Women. Mary Prince, Han. Jordan, Mary North, Susan Pearson, Mary Nokes, Eliz.
Sturridge, Eliz. Jacques alias Iackson, Gartrude Boyte, Elen Cole, Joan Tucker,
Ann Chaffin, Ruth Davis, Marg. Thomas, Mary Naylor, Ann Brinckworth, Sara
Cattle, Fran. Styant, Ione Holister, Dor. Lord, Ann Phillips, Ione Lippiat,
Eliz. Child, Alice Norden, Briget Francis, Mary Cole, Elen Maud, Eliz. Maynard,
Brightward Geffries, Hest. Reinolds, Briget Wory, Mary Turner, Mary Hampton,
Ione Willy, Kath. Davis, Eliz Morgan, Ione Williams, Fran. Hobhouse, Han. Pit,
Ann Bateman, Sara Maynard, Mary Neve, Mary Rice, Ione Jones, Kath. Hughes,
Susan Gotby, Mary Willis, Joan Weal, Barb. Blackdown, (48)

More were committed of the women, which made the number 55. whose names the
Mittimus had not: who before the mittimus or warrent came, might be at liberty,
for it came not till the 18th of the same month; and then it was to keep them
Prisoners till the 3d of the 6th month called August following; at which time
they were set at liberty, the Warrant being not to suffer any during that time
to join with them under the pretense of the exercise of their Religion, under
the penalty of the Act. Signed, John Knight, Mayor, John Lock, John Lawford.

The next day being the 4th of 5th month, thy Sergeant Jones and the Town
Clerks man came both to Newgate and to Bridewell, and demanded of them to pay 2
s. 6 d. a piece, who the day before were fined (many of them) 6 d. each, and
committed for non-payment (as many were who were not fined at all, nor asked to
pay, as aforesaid) and so were fined twice for one offense, and committed
twice, and some committed, and then fined and committed; and this is the manner
of thy wild proceedings; which said fine, each refusing to pay, were committed,
as aforesaid, the Tenor of the Warrant, or rather Mittimus, for this was not
like a warrant, though it should have been a warrant, according to the Act,
being the same in both places, and coming, as aforesaid, which has been a
usual thing with thee, though without it there is no legal commitment, and an
Action lies against the Sheriff for so detaining them; yea some (hereafter to
be mentioned) were committed, and confined many days Prisoners, and no Warrant
of Commitment to this day, being contrary to Law; yea, after thou wast out of
thy year several days, came a Warrant to Newgate for the last 22 committed
thither before the expiration of thy Government; and what if it were signed
John Knight Mayor, after thy date was out?

And this is the trade, and this is the work thou drivest at Bristol, than
which, what more arbitrary? and this is thy conscience to the Law, to the
execution of the Law, unto which thou pretendest. When thou art spoken to about
this cruel persecution; O the Law, say thou, my oath, I must execute the
Law, I cannot help it, I am sorry for it, for Gods sake consider of it, and do
not ruin your selves; which, if it were a truth, it would as well extend to
Prisoners under the restraint of the law, or rather thine own, under the
pretense of the Law; for Conscience rightly informed, and working as it should,
works uprightly to the one as to the other; but these are but shifts of thine,
by which thou would make people to believe (such as are so weak so to do, and
there are but few of them in this City) as if Conscience sat at the Helm, and
steered these proceedings, and that nothing but Conscience was the cause of
what thou do unto us, who suffer for our Conscience: Now Conscience is not
against Conscience, where indeed it is so; but what Conscience thou have, is
in part already manifest, and shall further be demonstrated ere we have done
with this Relation; for which purpose, viz. to make manifest to thee thine
own work, and to bring it back again upon thee, it was in part undertaken.

To give one instance before we go any further, in the Case of Mary Gouldney,
whose mother and thine were own sisters, as thou know, and how her
mother was as a Nurse unto thee; for her Conscience thou committedst her and
her husband T. Gouldney, both on the day aforesaid, who have (as thou also
know) a Shop, and great Trade, as to Grocery, and several children. It so
fell out, that a relation of hers, unknown to her, laid down half a crown,
which thou had fined her, whereupon she was ordered to be set at liberty,
with which she not being satisfied, but fearing some underhand work, took the
under-keeper with her, and went down to thy house, and understanding there by
thee how the fine was paid, and that it stood as her first Conviction; being
without her knowledge and consent, for to consent was all one as to pay it, and
thereby she should have made her self a Transgressor, and by her own action
have spoiled her Testimony; she declared it to thee, and demanded the money to
be delivered back again, which being done, thou wast so unconscionable to her,
who did what she did in tenderness of Conscience, lest sheshould sin against
the Lord, rather than do which, she willingly offered up what she had in this
World; that thou deniedst her the liberty to walk sometimes in her own Garden,
which was near the Prison, (and there being no outlet to the Prison, which
ought to be for the health of the Prisioners) for her Milk sake, who was a
Nurse to her little Boy, it being hot Weather when she asked it of Thee; No
not for 500 l. thou would not do it, said thou to the Keepers Wife, and to
John Saunders his Wife who spoke to thee about it, not for 300 l. when she
was with Thee about her husband John Saunders his liberty (who was a Grocer
also, and a man of much business, and had many children, though her Father,
Alderman Deyes, was thy Mothers own Brother, and bred thee up) nor would
thou do any thing for John Saunders, but in the hurt of his Conscience, though
being committed by thee, he lay upon straw in Traitors Ward for his Conscience.

And this is thy Conscience, and the tenderness of thy heart to thy friends and
near Relations for their Conscience, yet a great deal of love thou would
needs pretend to thy Cozen Gouldney, as thou have to many more of Us, but
wherein it appears, is yet to appear. Sure We are that she continued a
Prisoner till the expiration of the time aforesaid, and her husband also, and
John Saunders, as thou do to us what thou please, whom without a cause
thou pursuest: but the day of the Lord is upon Thee, and thy Deceit is made
manifest.

The next first day of the Week being the 10th of 5th Mon. thou did cause the
doors of the Meeting House to be kept fast, having had thy belly full of toil
the day before; and being willing (its like) to hear how thy other days action
was resented at Court; the Prisons moreover being full, and the City
discontented, and the Sessions drawing nigh, so the Meeting was in the street,
which received the Taunts of thy Sergeant Jones, (who had newly bought his
office, and as the Proverb is, speaking by contrarie^, would needs be good in
it) and Baal aforesaid, who seeing two strangers there that came out of
Ireland, took them away to Bridewell, and having taken the Names of whom they
pleased, went their Way.

The Sessious being come, viz. the 12th of the 5th mon. a Bill of Indictment at
Common Law was drawn, and exhibited against William Ford, and those 14 with
him, that were had from Meeting the 12th of the Month before (as has been
related) and laid in Prison, which the Grand Jury finding, they were brought
to the Hall in the Afternoon, and there put into the Cub where Murderers and
Felons are used to be placed (though W. Ford, and Nath. Milner were thy near
Neighbors, and men of dealing, in whom the Poor were much concerned, and of
good Reputation) and the Indictment being read to them there, For being at an
unlawful Meeting, by force and Arms, etc. They pleaded (except Thomas Atkins,
and John John's) Not Guilty. The Witnesses, viz. thy Officers, were examined,
who swore. That in the Kings Name they made Proclamation for them to depart;
When as a Month before, when thou committedst them, they swore that it was in
thy Name, for which thou then reprovedst them, saying, It should have been in
the Kings; which in a Months time (it seems) was become so. This the Prisoners
observed, and pleaded against the Validity of their testimony, who swore one
thing one month, and another thing, as to the same matter, another month, as
they did against the falsehood of the matter of their Testimony. This thou
undertook'st to justify, and would needs (to show how thou wa'st still
concerned in the Prosecution of our suffering) prove by Consequence; thus, Thou
were the Kings Officer, they made Proclamation in thy name, who wast an officer
of the Kings; therefore it was in the Name of the King. Fine Logic in Law: But
a Bill of Indictment, as to Perjurie, before a Righteous Jury ( thou not being
the Judge, for thou art concerned, and no righteous Judgment can be expected at
thy hands) would clip the ears of thy Offiers, and give them other sufferings
of fine and Imprisonment; and then how could thy Logic serve them? For, Words
of Evidence ought to be plain, and the same; not one day one thing, and another
day another thing; and thy Name is not the Kings, and the Kings Name is not
thine in point of Proclamation, especially unless thou will needs be King in
Bristol, which, it seems, one of the Judges of the Kings Bench saw cause to
place upon thee, as aforesaid.

Take heed John Knight of these things; Ego and Rex meas, I and my King cost
Cardinal Poole something; thou must not come too near here; though thy mind
aspires too much. Remember the saying of old, viz. Kings and Concubines admit
no competitors. Take heed, John Knight, of Tower Hill, the Axe there has an
edge for all save Kings; and once know, that Proclamations as to Law, must be
in the Name of the King, not thine John Knight; unless in the Name of the King,
so thou may stay thy have, least thou repent at leisure. These things rendered
thy Witnesses in view of the Hall, not fit to testify, having appeared
forsworn: But thou did not think so, that was not to the business thou had
in hand, viz. Right or Wrong (as it seems) to make them suffer; so false
Witnesses may serve, any thing that is like that is called a Witness, that has
a syllable or two like the matter, may serve the turn; the matter is judged
already, viz. They shall suffer. The same was in the case of Thomas Speed, etc.
as aforesaid.

So Robert Edwards, Sergeant, swore Positively, that W. Ford was in the
meeting, when as he met William Ford in the street, and there took him up; and
when W. Ford asked him, In what place he saw him in the Meeting? he hung down
his head, and said nothing. The same he also swore as to John Love, whom he saw
coming down the stairs of the meeting Room; But all men that are in their wits
do know, that the stairs to a place is not the place; and Evidence in point of
Testimony, ought to be Positive, both as to Place and Time.

Yet this was the Entertainment that they met with at thine and the hands of
thy Officers. But this is not all; after these thy Witnesses had said what they
pleased, thou spakest a few words to the Jurie, and then they withdrew
forthwith, not having heard the Prisoners, who though they called upon them to
stay, and to hear what they had to say for themselves; for, Qui Judicat
aliquid, altera part in audita, haud equum facit Judicium: That is. He that
judges any thing, the other part being unheard, can hardly give right
Judgment, as the Maxim is; Yet away they went, as if having heard thee, it was
enough; and that the knowledge of thy mind were sufficient, so giving to
understand, as if there were a Confederacy between You, to make them to
suffer, which one of them intimated to thee in a Letter, hereafter to be
mentioned. Whereupon the Prisoners called aloud to thee and the Town Clerk to
cause them to stay; in which, being importunate (as indeed it did concern them)
thou and the Town Clerk called to them to stay, yet they would not return to
their place to hear them, but went in; and after they were vvithdrawn, Gunter
(the Foreman of the Jury, an Officer formerly in the Militia, and a known
inveterate enemy to us, came forth with the Book of Statutes under his Arm,
desiring to know of the Town Clerk, against what Statute it was, when the
Indictment was at Common Law. So well prepared was this Foreman and the
Jury (as men use to say by the contraries) and instructed in the case of the
Prisoners, that they departed before they had heard, and would not return to
hear what they had to say in their own behalves (as aforesaid, though they did
not understand) to which the Town Clerk replied to this purpose, That it was
not against any Statute, but the Common Law.

Nevertheless, the Lord overruled him and them, having a regard to his Name
and People, who were Innocent of any such thing as force and arms, etc. both
in heart and hand, in principle and practice, which thou endeavouredst still
notwithstanding to fix upon them. We say, the Lord overruled them so, as that
they brought in a verdict in Writing (as the Prisoners heard, for they saw not
the Jury, nor heard what they delivered, which ought to have been otherwise) to
this purpose, Guilty of an unlawful meeting, but not of force and arms, and to
the terror of the people. The same, in effect, as had been by all the Juries in
their Verdicts, as aforesaid. The Prisoners understanding that a Verdict was
delivered, demanded, What it was? The Clerk answered, Guilty of an unlawful
assembly. They said, They understood it was also, but not of force and Arms,
etc. He answered, It was force and arms by consequence, being found an Unlawful
assembly; the same which thou had answered in the like case before: for the
Clerk is but the servant of the Court. But you are mistaken in the Point, as
before in the case of Geo. Bishop, Edw. Pyott, etc. is declared at large. Then
thou did fine them 10 s. a piece, and committedst them to Prison till payment.

Now the Letter wherein their hard usage was rehearsed to thee, of which
something has been hinted, was as follows:

Friend,
I Am constrained for the clearing of my Conscience toward God and toward
Man, to write these few lines unto thee, in regard that on the 12th of this
instant, I, with many more of my friends, were called before thee at the
Quarter Sessions, being a full month and more in Prison, for no other cause,
but for being at a Meeting to Worship the Lord, who will be worshipped in
Spirit and in Truth, out of which all the Worlds Worships are. We being then
willing to come to our Trial, expecting that we should have been fairly dealt
withal, and we have referred our cause to that of God in our Juries
consciences, which we knew right well would have given Virdict according to the
righteous Law which ought to be a Perfect guide to all men, but they being
incensed by thy many false accusations, and the false evidence given by thy
servants, carried them (I mean the Jury) probably to manifest themselves so
wickedly, and so unreasonable toward us, For was it ever known that a Jury
should refuse to hear the Prisonners, or that a Magistrate should suffer a Jury
to deal so wickedly, and unreasonably contrary to Law, since that it was so
much desired by my self and others, which had very much to say to them? Was it
not like that thou, and they were agreed to ensnare the innocent? Think thou
that the Lord will not visit for these things, and that the wicked shall go
unpunished? Is this for the Honor of the King, or shall it be laid to his
charge? Remember how thy servants when they gave evidence against us, how on
their Oaths that they said that they made Proclamation twice in thy Name, and
thou reprovest them, and said, they should have done it in the Kings Name; Yet
when we were brought to our Trial, they on their Oath's said, It was in the
Kings Name, I declared their deceit to thee, thou end eadeavourest to blind it
over by thy consequences declaredst that they being thy Officers, and thou
being a Subordinate Magistrate under him, they declaring in thy Name, it was in
the Kings Name, but these things will not hide thee, neither do I believe that
the King will own the evil actions of evil Magistrates; which by such evil
consequence might be turned upon him, but the Lord will in his time find you
out, and make you, manifest, and plead the cause of the innocent in
righteousness, and avenge himself of of his enemies.

Friend, It is well known that we are a people which are of a good life and
conversation in this City, and thou in thy conscience knows that we have not as
to the Common Law deserved either bonds or imprisonments, but if for conscience
sake we must suffer, it is not more then we can exspect from the unrighteous,
and the disobedient, for they always did so; and by that character are they
known; for says Christ, They shall hall ye out of the Synagogues, and
persecute, and dispitefully use you, and speak all manner of evil against you,
for my Names sake; and he that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution: Did ever the righteous persecute, search the Scriptures, and be
not deceived; Was it not he that was born after the flesh, that persecuted him
that was born after the spirit? And was not he that was born after the flesh an
envier and a murderer, a scoffer, and a scorner, and a persecutor? And is it
not so now, and was not he that was born after the spirit Meek and Gentle, and
of a Lowly heart, being persecuted, suffered it, resisting not evil, but doing
good for evil; Search thy self and try which of these states are thine, for
assuredly the day will come when thou shall not hide thy self in pretenching
only that thou art sworn to keep the Kings Laws, and to put them in executions;
But what Laws is it that thou put in execution? How does wickedness abound
in this City, even almost all manner of profaness? How does Oaths sound in the
streets? How do Drunkards reile from Alehouse to Tavern, and Alehouses, and
Taverns, and Kettle Allies swarm with profane Persons; Take heed that thou art
not found to turn the edge of the sword, which is for the wicked, and for the
transgressor against the righteous, and so bring innocent blood on thine own
head, for thou may remember that when thou wast speaking of the Law, thou
said it was grounded upon the Scripture; then consider our indictment was not
proved against us, for it was false, we having no force of Arms, neither was
we a terror to any people, and as for our meetings we know rightwel it is
according to the will of God, and agreeable to the Scriptures, and it was the
practice of the Sts. of old, who met often together in private houses, and in
the fields, and on the mountains in season, and out of season for the edifying
of the body, not having any regard to the worshipping in Temples and
Synagogues, which Christ prophesied against: But one thing more concerning our
Trial, Is it not according to the Law, that the Jury should have given their
Verdict in open Court in our hearing, and so have been Recorded, but it we
never heard, neither did they all appear in open Court when the Virdict was
given, which was done so privately, I call it privatelie, because we Prisoners
heard it not, but when we demanded what Virdict was brought in, one of your
Clerks said, We were brout in guilty without any limit, but we are informed
otherwise, and that it was written in a piece of paper, so thou may see how
unrighteously thou have dealt with us, in casting us into prison: and so I shall
leave these things to the rightoous Judge of all the earth, which will Judge
righteously between us, and thee, Thus have I cleared my conscience, who am a
lover of thine immortal Soul, and desires the salvation of it.

William Ford,


Thus ended the Sessions so far as it related to the Prisoners afairs
aforesaid, now the Fair drew on, as to which both those in prison, and those
out were much concerned, what as to themselves, and what as to those who were
dealers with them, besides many accounts fell then to be made up, whilst those
strangers were here who had dealing with them, especially being upon the foot
of a Law, for Banishment, and many thought who were not of us, that these
things would have had some influence on thee, to have pretermitted the edge of
thy Prosecutions on us, at least till the Fair was over, it being a matter of
great cruelty that We should be thus put upon it, in one juncture to hazard so
much of our business, or our conscience.

And although thou had no reflection of tenderness, as to us, thy Neighbors
in this particular, to do as thou would be done unto, yet some thought both
of thy Relations, and others concerned in the Fair, that were not called by
our Name, that thou would have had some regard to them, and the City, seeing
we were concerned with so many people that were not of as well as with those
who were of us, it being thy Place to indulge the Fair by all means thou
could, but thou turnest the deaf ear to all, and would not here, no not so
much as to intermit one days furious onset upon us, but as if the Prisons were
not full enough already, or that the weather was not hot, or that there was no
danger of infection, thou drovest on without consideration like the Ostritch in
the wilderness that lays her egg in the sand, and considers not that the
horse heel may crush it, and when she lif^eth her self up regards not the cry
of the driver, and on the 17th of 5th Month, being the first day of the week
without any of the Aldermen with thee at first, (Alderman Sandy for whom thou
did send, coming after) thou came down to the meeting with the Sheriffs,
and an Oyes being made in the meeting Room, thou there behavedst thy self as
heretofore, and did commit to Newgate.

Men. Dennis Hollister, John speed, Daniel Wastfield, Edw. Martingdale, William
Yeamans, John Withers, William Rogers, Gobert Sykes, John Sanders, Nine in
all, whereof four were Merchants, two Grocers, two Soap-boylers, one Salter,
most of them considerable men, both as for estate and dealing: Will. Yeamans
son and heir of Robert Yeamans, who had been Sheriff of the City, and was
executed at his wives Fathers door in the beginning of the late war for the
King, John Speed and Dan. Wastfield sons in Law to the said Robert Yeamans, who
married two of his daughters, but none of these things could prevail with
thee, though thou wast not ignorant of them, and yet thou pretendest to be a
friend of the Kings, who then the sea Monsters wast worse, of which Jeremy
complains, for they draws out the breast, and give suck to their young ones,
but thou becamest cruel like the Ostritch in the wilderness. Lam. 43. And to
Bridewell thou did commit.

Men. Tho. North, (a Master of a ship, and on a Voyage to Sea) Tho. Baker,
Thomas Terret, Dan. Neal, John Mills, John Barns, Samuel Comb, W. Price, Rob.
Gibbons, James Barker, W. Wilcox, George White, Andrew Vivers, John Hardiman,
John Rogers, W. Tovy, John Naylor, John Smith, John Hale, John Clark, W.
Shatford, Theophilus Newton, Sam. Cottrel, Richard Lindey, Simon Cox; Morgan
Lamb. (26)

Women. Jane Batho, and Alexandra Harcourt. twenty eight in all, making up the
number with those at Newgate 37. and the number of those before committed, two
hundred thirty and four, that is to say, at Newgate 60. and at Bridewel 174.

On that day also Sarah Wilkinson was brought to Bridewel, for being with
Priest Horn at James Steeple house, and John Simons, the day before for words,
pretended to be against your Worship, though hardly so to be strained, making
up the number, as aforesaid.

The Sessions being upon the morrow, viz. the 18th of 5th Month 1664.(for thou
heldst them in Adjournment the greatest part of the Quarter to serve thy
Pleasure) thou did send for D. Hollister, John Speed, Dan. Wastfield, and
Edw. Martingdale, and there did sentence D. Hollister in 4 l. fine, the rest
in 2 s. 6. d. a piece, which they not answering, thou condemnedst Hollister to
ten weeks Imprisonment, (a day beyond the Date of thy Government) and the rest
at a Month, and then remaundedst them to Newgate; the rest at Newgate and
Bridewell, committed the day before, were sentenced in 2 s. 6 d. apiece, and a
Months imprisonment, in default of payment; which they not answering, viz. the
Fines, were continued till the expiration of the date aforesaid. Sighed John
Knight Mayor, John Lock, Walter Sandy.

Indeed Dennis Hollister had something to do with Thee at the Sessions, for
thou rambledst about there much according to thine old wont, talking what thou
pleasedst thy self, a^ charging up and down at what rate thou would, and
(...) would not let him speak in his own justification, wit^ much
interruption; calling him Rebel, and the Meeting a company of Rebels, with a
deal of other stuff not worth the Relation. So that he was constrained to tell
thee, That thou wast an Unrighteous Judge, who would not hear as well as
speak, who would charge a Man, and not give him leave to answer for himself;
and he alleged that he was not satisfied with his commitment, seeing that thou
had neither then nor before, made it to appear that the Meeting was under
pretense of Religion, or that he met so, which, that it was, thou had caused
to be set down in the Record, though the Witness did not so swear, and yet
would not hear, but did cause thy Record to be read, where it was set down
as aforesaid, viz. that he was there under the pretense of Religion, with which
he charged thee, and with the falsnesse of thy Record; whereupon William Kemp
the Sergeant which was the witness, was called again, and he affirmed, upon thy
demand, that he could only say, that he saw D. H. at the meeting, and that he
saw him there, but knew not under what pretense it was; and that he heard him
to speak to thee, viz. that he was there in the fear of God, and not in
contempt. Whereupon D. H. told thee of thy Unrighteousness, in sobriety, and in
moderation, and how thou saw that the Witness could not swear that he was
there under color and pretense of Religion, and yet thou had recorded it as
sworn, and how he did absolutely deny that he was there under any pretense, and
color whatsoever, but in the fear of the Lord; and he demanded of thee to make
it to appear that he had so broken the Law, which thou had inserted in the
Record without proof, and so was but thy saying so, who said what thou
would, and did what thou pleasedst; yet thou would not hear, but told
him that he was fined 4 l. as aforesaid, or he must lie in Prison 10 weeks, as
aforesaid; which he refusing to pay, for he told thee, he would not pay Thee
four farthings, thou sentest him with the rest to Prison. And this is another
Demonstration of thy Unrighteous, and Unjust Proceedings, in seeking right or
wrong, to make us to suffer, and is a proof of the falsehood of that thy Record,
which (it seems) though false; and thus Wrong must stand in force against them,
but these thy doings make thee manifest, and thou shall have rendered unto thee
from the Righteous God according to thy deeds.

Indeed, thou would needs have forced what he said to thee the day before, to
have been spoken by him in Contempt. viz. That he, hearing that thou had made
a strict enquiry after him in particular the last time thou wast there, he had
hasted to order his business in the Country, and to get home his wife and
family, and that he was come there freely to give up himself into thy hands,
and to manifest that he neither feared thy Prisons, nor thy Banishment, for he
said, he was not ashamed to suffer affliction with the people of God: which he
spoke upon thy saying to him, that thou did wonder that he was so unwise a
man as to be found in so unlawful an Assembly, whenas thou soughtst him there,
and understanding that he was there by thy officer, came down to the Meeting,
and behind his back upbraidedst his being absent. So it seems with thee he was
one thing absent, and another present, as to the same thing; but it appeared
that thou thirstedst to have him, and being absent, thou reproachedst him, and
being present, thou termedst him a man unwise, who was there in obedience to
the Lord, to bear testimony to his Name: So what will please thee? But no man
right in his wits can construe this matter of Contempt, but rather as a
Determined Resolution to abide what thou could do unto him for his testimony
to the Truth.

So this Sessions passed over also, receiving another Adjournment, for so thou
keptst the Sessions still on foot; loving to domineer it there, and thither to
drag after thee thy fellow Citizens, to talk, and do to them as thou did
please, where thou wast sure to keep them from answering thee, but as thou
pleasedst.

By this time the Prisoners were become very strait, what through Debtors, the
fair drawing on, what through Fellons and Trespassers, the Oyer and Terminer
and Goal delivery being near, what through the multitude of Us Prisoners, and
the heat of the Season; whereupon lest any infection should be, or other
inconvenience to the health, or life of the Prisoners, and so to the Sheriffs,
and the City, some then being not well, who had long lain on straw, though of
tender education, a Letter was wrote to Sheriff Streamer, by one of the
Prisoners, for him to communicate to his brother Sheriff Bradway also,
signifying these things, and warning them of the inconveniences, and desiring
an Enlargement of the Prison, as of Right it ought to be, and according to Law,
the Power of the Goal being in them, which they could enlarge and remove as
they would; which had the same resentment from them, who declared themselves
content, and orders they gave to the Jailer to enlarge the Prison, and Sheriff
Bradway ordered D. Hollister (who was an insirm man of Body) to have a lodging
near the Prison, which thou wast so offended at, though thou wast not Sheriff,
(and so thou medlest in other men's matters) that for quietness sake, and that
the Sheriff might not be too much taunted at by thee, (for thou threatnedst
much, though without Power) D. H. thought it convenient to return, and so went
to old Newgate again. Thou hopedst indeed to have taken the Jailer upon the
Hip, for letting him at large, because he was seen standing at the door of his
Prison; and without Court, Evidence, or Jury, did demand 10 l. of him
presently, as a fine upon the New Act; but thou wast mistaken, as aforesaid,
for it was his Prison; as thou wast also in thy manner of Proceeding, who did
use the Jailer at thy pleasure, though (as has been said) thou wast not
Sheriff, and had nothing to do with the Prison, further than Commitment
according to Law, and the Jailer was to observe the Orders of his Masters. So a
great stir there was, which was most unreasonable in thee, not only for the
Reasons aforesaid, but because thou had before by thy Sergeant John Jones,
upon the first great commitment on this Act, sent Orders to the Jailer of
Newgate, and the Keeper of Bridewell also, to enlarge the Prisons, into places
near, which thou did upon his informing thee upon his own View, and at the
desire of some of the Prisoners, how they were thronged together, and yet now
did find sault with what was done in pursuance of thine Own, as well as the
Sheriffs order.

But all these things do manifest thy insatiable rage against us, who would
not willingly have us breath in the Earth; and though Humanity sometimes did
touch thee, through the unreasonableness of their sufferings, and the outcry
of the City, and so would order something, as aforesaid, yet by and by, when
that insatiable, persecuting spirit was up in thee again, thou would do the
contrary, even contrary to Humanity, not considering that thou also wast a Man,
and subject to the same infirmities as they, and would not have the things
thou did to them done unto thee; yea, so inhumane thou wast, that a ruffling
fellow (in appearance) being a stranger, and passing by the Prison, with his
horse, seeing Company at the door of the Prison, and enquiring the matter
concerning the thing, and understanding of Our imprisonment, said, in a great
detestation of thee, to wit, Was this Man born of a Woman? Which question he
might very well ask, having understood how contrary to a Man thou had acted.

The same stir thou keptst, lest any of the Prisoners at the time of the fair,
should have any connivance to be a little at home to order their business,
(being very great with diverse of them) and to make up their Accounts with those
with whom they dealt; and thou would not yield that thy Cozen T. Gouldney
(who had great occasions) should with a Keeper be a day or two at his house,
and J. Speed could not be permitted one hour to be at home, to finish an
Account with an Exceter Merchant, who, it seems, for that purpose made the
desire; and thou did hope by all this to have bowed them unto thy will,
through the necessity of their affairs; for many friends were hard put to it,
having, several of them, themselves and servants in prison, and the fair being
the time of their harvest, as it were, for most of the year following; but the
Lord was with them, though thou vvast so cruel and unmerciful, and kept them
in this great Trial, wherein they were proved; and seeing they had done what
appertained, and what in a good Conscience they could do to their families,
submitted to the Will of the Lord, and were content, that he, through their
sufferings, might be glorified; for which the Lord will be their Reward, they
having chosen rather to suffer their Estates and Liberties to be forced, than
to force their Conscience.

Now on the 24th of 5th Month, the day before the Fair, and the first day of
the Week, thou vvast otherwise employed than to be at the Meeting; for thy
going to James Steeple-house, which was in the Fair, with thy train, hindered
thy coming thither, lest thy Pomp should be lessened by thy attending upon us;
so the Meeting had some rest from the trouble of thee and thy Officers that
day, though the strangers were not altogether free at thy Worship, whom to put
in those that followed thee, thou thy self (as was said) with thy own hands,
coming out of thy Pew, most unlike a Mayor, but some such work thou must needs
be at, as with us, pulledst out, forgetting (it seems) where thou vvast.

The first day of the week following, viz. the 31 of the 5th month, was much
like this, the Officers came and took some Names, but went their ways without
making any other disturbance, at least such as they were wont to make in that
place. For indeed, till the third day of the next month was over, the
expiration of the date of thy first Commitments, thou knew not well where to
put them, the Prisons there being full, would then have some ease, who on that
day were set at liberty; those in Bridewel being a Considerable number, going
in a Body to the Tolzey together, and then to their several habitations as they
were free.

So the Prisons being somewhat eased, the next first day thou came unto thine
old work again, being the 7th of the 6th month, and with such a greedy
appetite as a Wolf long vvitheld from his wonted prey, thou fell'st upon the
Meeting, and there having set up thy wonted Court, and caused an O Yes to be
made, Ald. Creswick being with thee, thou did send to the Prisons these that
follow:

Newgate Men. Nath. Day, William Davis, W. Tailor, W. Lane, Rich. Snead, W.
Pope, Christ. Bennet, John Brook, Jos. Kippin, Joh. Dowell, Robert Nokes,
Benjamin Maynard, George Gough. (13.)

Women. Mary Gouldney, Han. Jordan, Joan Hiley, Isabel Yeamans, Eliz. Rogers,
Mary Smith, Martha Smith, Mary Corbet, Bathsheba Speed, Grace Withers, Ann Day,
Sarah Bennet, Lidia Tovy, Joan Dixin, Mary Belshar, Eliz. Maynard, Eliz. Moor,
Ann Sole, (18.)

Bridewell Men. Dan. Gibbons, Charles Marshal, W. Davis, Jam. Neves, Phil.
Cook, Sam. Godfrey, Charles Bowen, Jam. Dimond, Joh. Martin, Edw. Bifield, Rog.
Oldstone, Griffith Lascomb, W. Cannings, Rob. Weal, John Styant, John Herne,
Ralph Cock, Sam. Gibbons, Not. Allin, Barth. Crocker, Thomas Bailey, Rich.
Willis, Edw. Daniel, John Seward, Griffith Brown, Thomas Saunders, Will.
Sawser, Jam. Toghill, Leming Dickason, Phil. Peak, Joh. Warwick, John Crump,
Will. Hill. Will. Tovy, Caleb Hill, Will. Atkins, Jam. Wallis, Joh. Price,
Ambrose Scot, Peter Hadeing, Char. Saunders, Will. Wells, John Neves, Will.
Britton, Edw. Pain, Tho. Wickdow, Lewis Rogers, John Martin, Sim. Cadle, John
Packer, Will. Cawson, John Jennet, Nich. Horseman, W. Peachy, Rob. Gerish, Tho.
Hilman, W. Pludwell, Tim. Harding, Tho. Bourne, Joh. Wear, Joh. Bennet, Joh.
Dale, Cananuel Britton, Bern. Lidman, Sam. Plumnely, Tho. Lofty, Joh. Knut,
Joh. Cox, Edw. Bennet, Jam. Slaughter, Thomas Stockman, John Summers, Will.
Gotby, Hugh Hobhouse, Richard Gotlies. (75.)

Women. Sarah Peak, Sar. Snead, Joan Day, Eliz. Driver, Sar. Maynard, Mary
Lindey, Sus. Pearson, Blanch Bough, Elinor Lewis, Ann Long, Sus. York, Elin.
Cole, Ann Hawks, Martha Chock, Joan Crew, Bridge. Wory, Joan Tomlinson, Rebecca
Howell, Han. Balle, Merlin Jones, Eliz. Stevens, Joan Britton, Joan Farmer,
Mary Jones, Dorcas Gibbons, Joan Hill, Ann Davis, Ann Phillips, Edith Byfield,
Sus. Styant, Frances Styant, Ann Watkins, Ann Britton, Eliz. Price, Kath.
Wakeliffe, Elizab. Matthews, Emme Simons, Joyce Warren, Joan Younger, Jane
Weal, Sarah Davis, Ann Hill, Eliz. Eagles. Mary Evans, Mary Neves, Ann King,
Margery Lovell, Mary Naylor, Eliz. Turford; Mary Leveret; Rebecca Jennings;
Grace Eaton; An. Sampson Elin. Maud; Sus. Gotby; Kath. Hughes; Ann Price; Mary
Harvord; Eliz. Ariell; Sarah Morris; Mary Rice; Alice Kill; Mary Cole; Mary
Cockman; Mary Lovell; Mary Knight; Ann Mayes; Mary Brock; Margr. Thomas junior;
Mary Chambers; Mary Toghill; Joan Williams Mary Hampton; Elizab. Wilkinson;
Gartrude Boiste Ann Bateman; Eliz. Martin; Eliz. Walker; Elinor Traverse Eliz.
Holder; Alice Slaughter; Marg. Thomas senior; Ann Chaffin; Mary Perry; Joan
West. (88.)

The whole number of this days commitment to Bridewell, of Men and Women being
One hundred sixty and three, and to Newgate Thirty and one. One Hundred, Ninety
and four in all.

And many of these were Wives, and Servants, and Masters, and Husbands, and
Children; the husbands of some in one place, and the wives in onother; for thou
willingly would not suffer any to pass, so greedy wast thou; and amongst the
rest were three Women whose Husbands were distracted, and had been so for a
long season; and several of these were poor, whose Families depended upon their
liberty for their maintenance; yet one and the other, old and young, master and
servant, children and parents, husband and wife, in poverty or abundance, all
must go; to no sort, or sex, or age, or condition had thou regard; but of thy
devouring spirit of rage and envy all must partake, and be lodged in these
prisons, however they come out, dead or alive, all was one to thee. Nay if so
be they, yea all the generation of us who fear the Lord, might have been so
disposed of, as that they never more might have seen the Sun, or been heard of,
it had pleased thee well, unto whom the Innocent are a burden, and thou would
be rid of it; but upon thee must their sufferings rest, till time is no more;
and Eternity be the everlasting portion of thy torment, if thou do not
Repent: For certainly they are the people of the Lord, and he brought them
thither, and it is Jesus in them that thou persecutest; who kept them in their
meetings, as he brought them thither, though thou saw him not; who is with
them in the Prisons, and in all their afflictions is afflicted with them; who
will raise them up over all your heads, to reign for ever and ever.

Now at this meeting thou carriedst thy self after thy wonted manner of Rage
and Envy; and thou broughtest thither with thee Alderman Lock, and Alderman
Creswick, who made up thy Court; the Sheriffs were present also; and even to
the Widow Yeomans (that Ancient, Grave Matron aforesaid) whose age rather
bespoke a Coffin then a Banishment) thou took'st as thou could meet, and
would have sent her to Newgate also with this crowd of Prisoners, had it not
been for Alderman Creswick (who it is like had little rest that night for that
days service) who caused it to be otherwise. Yet thou did commit her, though
thou released her presently; and made that her being with the people of the
Lord at meeting, to wait upon him, a step to her banishment; her Gray hairs
being thus honored of the Lord, to live to that day to bear a Testimony for
him in the face of thy fury, and of Banishment, who is scarce able in body to
reach to the place of Meeting.

And here we must bring in the sad Reckoning of Lidiah Tovy, Wife of Rich.
Tovy, Brewer, Alice the Wife of W. Peachy, and Mary Knight servant to Nath.
Milner, Prisoners aforesaid, whose lives (and the Infant of one of them) this
days work of thine took away from the Earth; whose blood cries cries for
vengeance against thee, and will lie upon thy head for ever, except thou
Repent.

Lidia Tovy was very big with child, a little Woman and Young; the only
daughter living of her Mother, who was a Widow; and except one son all the
children she had alive. Thou saw in what condition she was, when in the
meeting, as to her being with child; thou knew'st her to be thy Neighbor, thou
did nevertheless commit her; yet thou would seeine somewhat tender, and
said should be but till the morrow; though that was a step in order to
Banishment, which she was the nearer to, by how much her imprisonment was
short.

So to prison she was brought, and the very noisome sent of the old Goal at
the door as she was brought to come in, struck in upon her. In the Prison she
abode till the 7th day of that week, notwithstanding that thou said before a
multitude of witnesses, that it should be but till the morrow: There she
aylded, wanting breathing and room; which she usually in that condition needed
much. Her ilness grew on, and Symptoms of a Miscarriage, though so big and near
her time was on her. Her Husbands Brother ( Thomas Tovy, who lives on the
Bridge, and is one of the Council) went to thee on the 5th day of the week, and
her tender mother on the 7th day, giving thee to understand how it was with
her; for by this time her danger was so manifest, that she bled upwards; thou
would not hear, but bad her come to thee on Monday. That 7th day at night the
Keeper of Newgate being with thee, about the liberty of some of the Prisoners,
of whose having been at Bridewell thou had heard, and therefore sentest for
him thereabouts, he informing thee of her condition and danger, thou began'st
to be sensible, not for her sake (as we may judge) but thy own, and the outcry
that would be made against thee if she died. So thou did have him to set her
at liberty, saying, Turn her out, turn her out; so she came, and that night
sent her home. Well, Monday, of which thou spakest to her sorrowful mother,
came, but she was laid in her bed a most sad spectacle, continuing very ill,
and neither hearing nor seeing; her infant came dead from her that night, and
the next morning, being the third day of the week, she yielded up the Ghost,
laying down her life at the foot of thy cruelty, who with her tender babe
were laid in the earth together, never to return thence more for thee to
Banish, though after her death thy Warrant came to detain her in prison till
the 6th of the 7th month following the date of her commitment, with the rest
of them that thou then committedst with her; whose blood shall never depart
from Thee and thy house for ever, if thou do not Repent.

Alice the Wife of W. Peachy was a Young Woman also, very big with child,
which was her first; she was at the meeting when thou and thy Officers were
there. One of thy Officers hall'd her rudely toward thee, bidding her come
along, another was behind putting her forwards, which being beyond what she was
able to do, being very big as aforesaid, it hurt her, and in her face it was
discovered presently; and was so in the observation of some friends present,
who were about to call on thy Officers for halling her after that manner. So
she went home ill, and was delivered the next day, and never was well
afterward, but continued ill till the 14th day of the 6th Month, on which day
she dyed, her Husband being then prisoner in Bridewell, committed with the rest
the day aforesaid.

Mary Knight was also committed on the same day to Bridewel, and the next day
being very ill, was had to her masters house by thy suffrance, where she died
about twelve days after of a violent feavour, her body being brought to
Bridewel from thence to be buried, because she was a prisoner, there bled
afresh at the Nose for about an hour together (the certain observation of the
invisible judgment that that place was the cave of her death.) Yet thou wast
not satisfied that thou had her life, but her body being brought to Bridewell
to be buried there, as aforesaid; and the woman of the house desiring thee to
give leave to some of the prisoners to carry her to burial, thou wast very much
offended at its being brought thither, and with the woman for that purpo e,
pose, and despite said, that if they wanted Bearers, the Beadles should do it.

Thus was the Blood of the innocent shed, and of three, and an infant as the
issue of one of thy days work; yet wast not thou glutted therewith; but
although that thou had committed these as aforesaid, and laid up in the
prisons heaps upon heaps, though the prison was so unholsome, so unsavory,
though there was such danger of infection; yet thou thoughtst the Prisoners
were not straightened enough, but ever and anon thou had the Jailor by the ears,
rating him as thou pleasedst, and threatening him what should be done with him
at the Sessions, and that all that he had was forfeit to the King, if he were
worth thousands, so that the man was in a great strait, how to walk between the
pleasing of thee, who thirsted after their destruction; and the health of the
Prison and the prisoners, unto whom the Sheriffs had such regard, as to order
additional lodgings, as aforesaid, and were willing upon a sober letter of one
of the prisoners, that they should have, a little breath, which was all they
ask't whilst they were amongst you, which is the thing you would have your
selves, and to have granted them the garden of T Gouldney aforesaid, to walk
in, being so near the prison, and the prison of Newgate having no outlet,
though the Kings Bench, the Fleet, and other considerable Jailes in England
have, that so heaps upon heaps, men might not be smothered to death, and
prisons be made places of execution, and holes of murder, but thou would not
consent thereunto, but as if by all that thou could do, thou sought'st their
ruin; or to bow their conscience to thee, which was worse; thou did as
aforesaid, Haman like, but Mordecai. (the true Jew in the Spirit) cannot bow to
thee, though thou seek therefore to cut of the whole Race of the Jews, as
aforesaid, which as it did to Haman, will prove thine own portion (if thou do
not repent) in the day of the Lord, who will render to thee according to thy
deeds.

Indeed Mary Gouldney told thee in the meeting, that thou should have
provided wholson prisons for them, before thou had committed them, seeing
thou knew it was in thy mind to commit them, and not to throw them up in
heaps into Prisons, so full as were these; which was good counsel, if thou
could have hearkened thereto, and then the Blood of the innocent might not so
have come upon thee, but as the swine thou wast when she spoke these things,
and said to thee moreover, that the bread thou brakest, would be broken to thee
again; and as thou had shown no mercy, so mercy would not be shown to thee,
to which purpose Joane Hiley also spoke then unto thee; We say like to the
swine thou wast, thou turn'dst, and rent them, and on Joan Hiley laidst violent
hands thy self, for which she reproved thee there; and Baal (that bloody He
boasted how many of us he could dispatch in a day. He said, if he we e is the
Major, he would make our guts hang about our beds as our hats about o^r he^ds.
That those that feared the Lord would burn us alive, hanging was too good for
us (when one spoke to him to fear the Lord) that the hoped to see us burnt at a
st^ke with fire and faggot, that if we were in France and Spain, we should see
what they would do to us; that he could b^yle our limbs, and scum them; who
professes himself to be a Roman Catholic, and has acknowledged that he
worsh^ps Images. This is our executioner, and this bloody villain is made our
Judge.
Hangman of thine) did the same on Mary Gouldney, whom he had like to have
thrown down the stairs; whom for so doing, though in thy view, thou did not
reprove.

Well, these heaps upon heaps thus thrown together (as has been yet satisfied
thee not; but more thou must have, as Hell, and the grave, which are never
satified, and therefore the next first day of the week, viz. 14th. of 6th.
month to work thou go again, making it another day of muster, for so were
those days made from time, to time, till thy date was out, and so company
after companies thou sentest on those days, to thy Jailes to fill up thy
measure, and having brought Alderman Sandy with thee ( poor man, sorely against
his heart, for he loved not these things, though he knew not how to avoid thy
impetuous commands, who makes representations of all that please thee not) thou
erectedst thy Court in the Meeting room there again, and sent'st to Newgate.

Men. Thomas Speed, Thomas Gouldney, Tho. Callowhill, John Heart, Hen. Comely,
and Rowland Dole. (6)

Women. Eliz. Pyol, Magdalen Love, Mary Dedicot, Joice Dole, Jane Tucker,
Deborah Watkins. (6) 12. in all. And to Bridewell.

Men. Charles Harvo^d, Abraham Cole, John Batho, Sam. Rogers, Christ. Newman,
Charles Horsington, Jeremy H^gnel, Morris Williams, W. Collins, W. Blackway,
John Northal. (11)

Women. Dorcas Lloyd, Alexandra Perkins, Mary Willis, Dorcas Hewlet, Mary
Browchil, Alice Moor, Brightweed Ieffries, Mary Leech, Mary Hunt, Eliz.
Hogford, Anne Brinkworth, Eliz. Chamberlein, Anne Mogs, (14)

25, in all; this muster Roll of this day being thirty and seven, who were
committed by thee till the 6th of the 7th month following, though those
imprisoned by thee, the day before were to the 19th.

Now at this thy high Court, thou wast up with thy old trade again, and to
sirrahing of T. Speed thou wentest again; forgeting thy self what thou wast,
and what thou must be, and Tom was up again, so that sober people judged thee
little better then a Man distracted; and why all this? Because he coolely spoke
to thee to convince him first that he had transgressed the Law, before thou
sentst him to prison, as a transgressor of the Law. So then a Rebel he must be,
and thou calledst him so, but he told thee, That thou wast a rebel against the
God of heaven, and should have thy reward. At which words of soberness and
truth, thou wast so incenst, that had not a Sergeant (perceiving what thou
would likely have done) put him down the stairs, thou seem as if thou
would have thrown him down thy self; and with thy cousin Gouldney thou keptst
great ado, much after thy old wont.

So the Prisons became full, but thy belly was not. Too much liberty yet thou
thoughtst some of these prisoners to have, thy milstones ground not close
enough together, Edw. Pyot, Geo. Bishop (who were now bringing about the year
of their imprisonment) Thomas Speed, and T. Gouldney bore up yet; these to the
old prison must go, though crammed as aforesaid, and no nay there must be for
it; and Sheriff Str^a^ must give orders, though George Bishop was his brother
in Law, Thomas Speed his uncle, and Th. Gouldney one with whom he dealt, and
thy cousin as aforesaid: Away they must go to the old execution house, and
there that must try what that could do to them, and Roach must have orders so
to do, and his orders he signifies. The prisoners thought it convenient so far
to be unconcerned in their own suffering, whatsoever might happen, to signify
to Sheriff Streamer in what condition the prison was; and how there was no
place fitting for them into which he had ordered them to be cast, and therefore
Geor. Bishop wrote a Letter to him, and desired him to come down himself, and
to let his own eyes satisfy him, as to the view of the prison, who the day
following toward the evening (this being the second day of the week, and the
15. of the 6. month) coming down, and viewing it himself, with the
Sword Bearer, saw such an inhabitation of stench and company, that he continued
things as they were, and moreover granted liberty to all women with child to
make their houses their prisons, and all that were sick; Lidiah Lovy being that
morning passed to her long home upon the foot of what thou had formerly done
as aforesaid, with which order of his thou declarest thy self content; and so
ended this great contest with some addition of Liberty to the prisoners, as
aforesaid, through the Blood of their friend.

Thus Blood touched Blood, yet thou could not give over, but on the 21st of
6th month, sentest thy Officers to the Meetine, who warned them to depart, and
took names, and two to Prison, viz. Bartholomew Crocker, and Cananuel Britton,
who gave not their Names, knowing themselves to be on the Third Conviction, if
so be thou would so take it, which the next day thou did, and committedst
them to Newgate, and on the 28th came on with a fresh career, and having sent
thy Officer before to make fast the door on them that were in the Meeting-room,
somewhat early; thou came thy self down, with Ald. Lock, and the Sheriffs,
about the second hour in the afternoon, and seeing some friends in meeting at
the door of the house, in the street, (for coming after the door was fast, they
could not get in) the form of thy Visage was changed, and thou grew'st very
wroth, and hastedst to them in thy fury, so that thou wast observed to out-goe
some of thy Officers; and coming near the Place, and seeing Mary Prince there,
thou said, Where is Mrs. Prince? What do you do here? Unto which she
answering, That they were there to wait upon the Lord, Thou criedst, have her
away to Newgate (not suffering her to go to Bridewel, though she desired it,
her Son in Law being there, and her daughter likely to be sent thither, being
above in the meeting-room, and she desiring to be with her children) and this
thou did without asking her to pay any thing, or fining her, which is
contrary to Law, as aforesaid; and having sent some more thither also, whose
Names are hereafter mentioned, thou went up in the meeting-room, and there
did commit whom thou pleasedst, and had an especial eye upon; and then
orderedst the rest to be suffered to depart; but Hannah Marshal (Daughter to
Mary Prince, as aforesaid) continuing till last, for she could not go away at
thy command, as she came not there at thy Order, thou causedst her to be
brought before thee (who had set up thy Court in the Meeting-room, as
aforetime) and demandedst of her, whether she would pay 2 s. 6 d. to which she
answering, that she had something to speak to thee first, before she should
give thee any reply to that; Thou did bid her say on, and she thereupon
speaking to this effect; -- John Knight, The day will come wherein thou will
have cause to wish that a millstone were tied about thy neck, and thou cast into
the midst of the sea, for persecuting the people of the Lord -- Thou said,
Here is a bold Huswife indeed, have her away; and Alderman Lock with his own
hands, was like to have thrown her down the stairs; so thou orderedst her to
Newgate, without taking her answer, whether she would pay her sine, which thou
gave her time to do, after she had spoken, as aforesaid; but she asking thee,
Whether thou would be worse than an Infidel, to part man and wife? her
Husband being at Bridewel, thou sent'st her thither. So the Widow and the
Fatherless were the first and the last of this days execution, the Mother and
the Daughter, whom the Lord thus honored to suffer for his Name, with the rest
of his servants at that time, whose Names are,

Newgate Men. John Withers, Charles Jones, Andrew Vivers, William Peacher,
Richard Willis, Thomas Window, Tho. Lofty. (7)

Women. Mary Prince, Alice Tovy.

Bridewell Men. John Hardiman, W. Shalford, Tho. Baker, Geo. White, David
Simons, W. Maynard, John Mills, Sam. Cottrel, Ralph Cock, Richard Lindey. (10)

Women. Hannah Marshal, Hest. Rennolds, Jone Dapwel, Susanna Pearson the
younger,, Eliz. Turford. (5) 15 in all.

Those at Bridewel thou committedst to the 28th of 7th month, but those at
Newgate had no Warrant of Commitment, nor have to this day, yet were there
detained till the day after the Recorders departure; wherein they, and several
that were there on the third Conviction, with John Simons and Sarah Wilkinson,
(hereafter to be mentioned) were ordered to be set at Liberty. And as for those
at Bridewel, they had gone without one also, had they not refused to depart
from the Tolzey the next day when thou had them before Thee.

The Prisons now being very full, and the Goal delivery near, thy Sergeant
Jones, and some other Officers came, and took the Names of whom they pleased,
and then halled the Men out of the Meeting room, but the Women they let alone.
This was on the 4th of 7th month, being the first day of the Week.

But the Prisons being somewhat eased again, by the Liberty of those that were
committed till the 6th of 7th month, thou came on afresh, and it being the
first day of the Week before the Goal delivery, thou made ready for it, to
have as many as thou could on the third Conviction, in order to Banishment;
Thou having boasted not long before, that as near as thy Year was at an end,
thou hopedst to send one 400 of us out of the Kingdom. So on the 11th of 7th
month thou set to thy work, and sentst from the Meeting to Newgate and
Bridewel, these that follow;

Newgate Men. Miles Dixin, W. Tailor, John Packer, John Brooks, Griffith
Loscomb, Rowland Dole, Roger Oldstone, James Wallis Robert Gerish, John Styant,
Lewis Rogers, (11)

Women. Martha Lane, Sarah Cann, Eliz. Dowel, Mary Harbord, Mary Burg ss,
Elinor Maud, Margaret Thomas the elder, Susanna Pearson the elder. (8) the
number 19. None of these had any Warrant of Commitment; and to Bridewel thou
did commit of men and women about the number of seventy.

So the Goal delivery came on, at which One Bill of Indictment was exhibited
to the Grand Jury against Barth. Crocker, Lewis Rogers, Cananuel Britton, as
upon the foot of Banishment, being the third Conviction; and another against
Margaret Thomas the elder, Elinor Maud, and Susan Pearson the elder, for the
same, both which the Grand Jury found, as they did one against John Simons, for
words said to reflect upon your Worship; and another against Sarah Wilkinson,
for speaking to the Priest of James Steeple house aforesaid. These two later
were found Guilty by the Petty Juries that passed upon them, and were fined
in 100 marks each by the Recorder, and in default of payment, to lie six months
each in Prison. The other six were also found Guilty by the Petty Juries that
went on each Indictment, and they were sentenced the three men to Banishment in
the Island of Barbados, the three Women, because Wives, into six months
imprisonment in Bridewell each, unless redeemed by their respective Husbands,
according to the Act. So the general Sessions, or Goal Delivery had an end.

Yet thou had not thine; but as a man restless to bring to pass the thoughts
of thy heart against the Innocent, whilst thou had any breath, that is to
say, any time unexpired of thy Government, thou failedst not to improve it
against them; and for that purpose did send thine Officers to the Meeting the
next first day after the General Sessions, viz. the 19th of 7th month, who
took the Names of whom they pleased, at the Meeting; and on the 25th (the last
first day of the Week before the end of thy date, which was the 29th) thou
visitedst the Meeting again in Person; where did look thee and thy Banishment
in the face, thy Cozens, Thomas and Mary Gouldney, as to whose Conviction this
was the third time, Hannah Jordan, Charles Harvord, George Gough, W. Tailor of
the Castle, and several others whom thou did send to Newgate, whose names are,

Men. Daniel Wastfield, Tho. Gouldney, Charles Harvord, Geo. Gough, John Wear,
Rob. Gerish, Jos. Kipping, John Simons, Rich. Jones, John Saunders, W. Tailor,
of the Castle, John Hunt, Tho. Lofty, Rich. Wiles, Rog. Oldstone, John Dowell,
Theop. Newton, Tho. Window, W. Peachee. (19.)

Women. Mary Gouldney, Hannah Jordan, Mary North, Sarah Wilkinson. (4.) the
whole 23.

And to Bridewell thou did commit,

Men. Leming Dickason, Tob. Dole, W. Sawser, Maur. Williams, Christop. Newman,
Tho. Lambert, Rowland Dole, Simon Cox, Jam. Neves, Griff. Brown, W. Noble,
Tho. Holder, John Herring, John Crump, John Morgan, W. Tovy. (16.)

Women. Mary Cole, Dorcas Knight, (2.) The whole to Bridewel and Newgate, 41.
who were expected (those of them that were on the third Account) to be
severed to Banishment. But after the expiration of thy year came a Warrant
signed by thee as Mayor, though (its like) done afterward, to continue them
prisoners, both the one and the other, for the space of a month from the day of
their Imprisonment; and Dennis Hollister, though to a day after thy time set, a
Prisoner by thy Warrant; yet thou did cause him to be released a day or two
before thy time was expired: And Edw. Martingdale (with whom thou had kept a
great ado about a Letter of his which was intercepted; giving Account of thy
proceedings here against us. And another Letter wherein were Characters to his
Correspondent about his own business, because in Longhand his Letter would not
otherwise contain it, being sent by the Post; and after his Months imprisonment
(being commiteed when D. Hollister was) tendredst him the Oath of Allegiance,
and sentest him to Newgate for not swearing) thou released'st also somewhat
before the end of thy time, upon the application of some to thee, on whose
Vessel he was Imbarqued, that he was to go to Sea, and who went to s;ea on the
said vessel, being a stranger here, and coming hither to merchandise, and so
departed to Virginia in the ship on which he had taken Freight before his
imprisonment, as aforesaid. But as for Geo. Bishop, Edw. Pyot, and those 7 with
them, whom thou had Committed the 14th of the 10th month 1663. before, and
fined at Sessions the 15th of the 11 month following; and William Ford, and
those 15 with him (except two that were set at Liberty till the Sessions) who
were sent to Prison the 12th of the 4th after, and fined at the Sessions 12th
of the 5th Month with Tho. Gouldney and those at that time committed with him
to Newgate and Bridewell, and those for Banishment (to carry whom no ship
could thou nor the Sheriffs get) and the Women tried upon the same, in all to
the number of about forty and nine, left by thee prisoners in Newgate and in
Bridewel (with those committed the 11th of the 7th month, to the number of 95.
In all One hundred Forty and Five, John Moon being before set at liberty, near
the expiration of his three months Imprisonment, as aforesaid.

Thus ended thy Year, and thus went thou out as a snuff (as Hannah Jordan
told thee in the Meeting-room at her last Commitment) and have not
accomplished. The despised people of the Lord have stood over thy head, though
armed (as aforesaid) with all thy power, and upon them have thou not brought to
pass the desires of thy heart, though thou had opportunity in thy hand. The
plant of the Lord in and amongst us has thriven and prospered, Maugre all that
thou could do, in despite of all thy blusters. Not an Inch of ground has it
lost, but unto it has been drawn (through what thou have been doing to us and
it) the hearts of multitudes. The Just Lord is in the midst of us, he will not
do iniquity; every morning do he bring his Judgments to light, he fails not;
but the unjust, knows no shame, as the Prophet said, Hab. 3.5.

And this is thy state, who though thou have found a disappointment in all thy
attempts, so that thy hands have not effected the thoughts of thine heart, for
the Virgin Daughter of Sion shook her head at thee; she laughed thee to scorn;
as the Prophet Isaiah in the Word of the Lord said to Rabsheka, when he had
besieged Jerusalem and insulted over it, and boasted what he would do unto it,
and blasphemed the Lord, Isa. 37. Though the hand of the Lord has often been
on thee, and made thy Chariot Wheels (like Pharaohs) to drive heavily; though
he has made thee to pass (as it were) over Axes, and Harrows of Iron, and
through the Brick-kilne, putting stops in thy way, and blocks in thy
proceedings; though trouble has possessed thee so that thou have not s^ept, in
consideration of what thou have been doing to us; for the Witness of ^d has
been reached in thee, which has drawn thee somet^ into tenderness; yet thou
have gone over all again, and (...) ^isen up afresh, after all thy Pauses, and
to it thou have ha^ ^w, as if there never had been any such thing; and the
^nemie has driven thee along to do all these things against the Name of Jesus,
and has made thee as a man mad to accomplish them; yet thou have not seen it,
but have suffered the Enemy to hurry thee over that which would have shown it
to thee, which has checked thee, and made thee sometimes tender, as aforesaid;
so that thou have, as the Deaf Adder, refused to hear the voice of the Charmer,
charm he never so wisely; Instruction and Advice thou would not suffer to
come at thee; thou filledst thy self with the enemy so, and did let him so
in, as a flood, that thou would endure to hear nothing but what he pleased;
and when thou had taken thy liberty, and said all that thou would, for thou
lovedst to hear thy self speak, thou would not hear any thing willingly to
the contrary. The day of the Lord is upon thee, and he is making of thee
manifest; and there is but a very small moment, and thy day will be over. If to
all that has been said unto thee, and has come over thee, thou will not yet
hear, thy condition will be sad, thy day will have an end, and then what will thou do? He has moved this to be written to thee, being the Relation of much
of what we have suffered at thy hands, during the time of thy Mayoralty, and to
draw before thee back again as in a Glass, what thou have done, that thou may
see it, and seeing return to him from whom thou have gone, against whom thou
have gone; for which purpose has he caused this to be Argued with thee, and by
this way of Demonstration to be placed before thee, as in a lump together, what
thou have done by piece-meals, that so seeing this spirit, and the uglie face
of it, and how uglie it makes thee to look, which would hurry thee to
destruction, thou may be recovered from the evil of thy way, and thy soul may
be saved in the Day of the Lord. If this will not do, but if thou still shall
go on, to finish that which is to be done on us for our Trial, and so run over
all, know this for a certain, Thou shall be cut off, the Lord has spoken it:
And then all the blood that thou have been the occasion of spilling, and the
sufferings of the Innocent will fall hard upon thee, and all the despite
wherewithal thou have used us, and him who suffers in us, and whom in us thou
have persecuted, who is Lord and King, will fall upon thee, and grind thee to
powder, and then how sad will be thy case? Whether will thou fly for shelter,
when he that is thy Judge, who fills Heaven and Earth with his presence, and in
Hell is also, wh^m thou have persecuted, shall pursue thee, from whose presence
none can be hid? The Rocks and the Mountains cannot do it, though thou should
call upon them so to do. As John saw in his Revelations would be the Case of
Kings, and chief Captains, and, great men, and mighty men, and rich men, and
every bondman, and every freeman, Rev. 6.15, 16. For the thing is in thee,
that will rise up a worm that will never die, and a fire that will never go
out, go thou vvhither thou vvilt, which is that which thou now resists,
which thou call a Natural Conscience, which is not Conscience, but that
which sits in Conscience, and speaks for God in the Conscience, and there
witnesses for God, which whatsoever it hears the Father speak, speaks there,
which is the Son of God, the Savior of the World, the Light of the World, that
lights every one that comes into the World, which is come into the World not
to condemn the World, but to save the World, even all them that believe in him,
in that which vvitnesses, in that which shows thee the secrets and the
intents of thy heart, and all that thou have done, Is not this the Christ? And
so We leave Thee, being thy friends, that desire thy welfare, whether thou do
believe it or no. Known to the World and Thee, and persecuted by the Name of
Quakers.

Bristol, 13th 10th Month. 16^4.
THe ^ve Witnesses names that Swore falsely against Miles Dixon, mentioned in
page 39, and should have been then inc^d, but that their names came too late to
the Printers hand: yet must they remain up^ (...) to future gnerations, even to
their shame and loathing, who^e names are, John Scoper* ^er^eant to the
Militia, Edw. Lowis, who died in a short time after, L^d^ Pool, William
Stratford, Phillip Driggs.

Errata.
IN page 9 line 21 for mo^tal, read immortal, p. 10 l. 17 blot out and, l. 21
for no sooner wast entered into thine ear, read, No sooner wast thou entered into
thine year p. 11. l. 22. blot out the. p. 12 l. 22. for l^wi^r r. Sawier, p.
18. l. 21 for the r. thy, p. 20 l. 22 for woship, r. worship, p. 23 l. 21 for
my r. his, p. 24 l 8 for pute r. put, p. 30 l. ^ for you slew, r. was slain* p.
32 l. 6 for discern r. deserve, p. 44 l. 24 for though 1. thought, p. 45 l. 15
for persecute r. persecuted, p 48 l. 3 for smalt r. smar^, p. 50 l. 17 for
pass r. past, p. 51 l. 4 for John Tison r. Thomas Tison, p 64 l. 18 the blank
after Bishop should be 10 l. p. 70 l. 29 for p^isons r. prisoners, p. 71 l. 5
for sooner r. see, nor p. 80 l. 4 for and s. r. that so, p. 82 for Richard
Blackborrow, r. by Richard Blackborrow, p. 98 l. 11 for have r. having, p. 106
l. 6 for prisoners r. prisons p. 114 l. 2 for she r. he.

THE END.

