THE SCOTS GARDENER IN TWO PARTS, The First of Contriving and Planting GARDENS,
ORCHARDS, AVENUES, GROVES: With new and profitable ways of Levelling; and how
to Measure and Divide Land.

The Second of the Propagation and Improvement of FOREST, and FRUIT TREES,
KITCHEN-HEARBES, ROOTS and FRUITS: With some Physic Herbs, Shrubs and Flowers.

Appendix showing how to use the Fruits of the Garden: Whereunto is annexed The
GARDENERS CALENDAR.

Published for the Climate of SCOTLAND By JOHN REID Gardener.

Edinburgh, Printed by DAVID LINDSAY Partners, at the foot of Heriot's Bridge,
16^^

To all the Ingenious PLANTERS In SCOTLAND.
I Desire you to peruse this Book, for there are many things in it of singular
use, which I could never find in any, and the substance of what I could find
material (in the Practical part of Gard'nery) improven and applied home;
whereby I presume it may be Satisfactory to you when you operate in the choice
of Husbandry. Several weighty reasons induced me hereunto; as, the great
necessity of right contrivance, whereby you may do your works, both orderly and
cheap; The in-expressible need of Enclosing and Planting, whereby you may
improve your estates to best advantage, both in Profit and Pleasure. And
because the many Books on Gard'nery are for other Countries and Climates, and
many things in the more speculative than practical: this ensuing treatise may
the rather be acceptable; albeit obnoxious to the undoubted censure of
Critics, yet when I reflect on my Innocence in the design therein (the good of
my Country) I receive Encouragment. And that my Endeavors may prove Succesful,
is the earnest desire of

JOHN REID.

THE CONTENTS Of the First Part, which treats of Contrivance.
CHAP. I. How to make the Works about a House Regular.
Sect. 1. THe Introduction. Sect. 2. The Model of a House. Sect. 3. The
Foundation of Contriving. Sect. 4. To find the Central Line. Sect. 5. Example
by a draught, how to place the Works. Sect. 6. How to do where confined or
limited.
CHAP. II. How to draw by the Scale.
Sect. 1. The use of the Scale. Sect. 2. The same described. Sect. 3. How to
take Measures from the Scales. Sect. 4, How to proportion the Scale to any
draughts. Sect. 5. To know what Scale any draught was drawn by. Sect. 6. How to
diminish or enlarge draughts. Sect. 7. How to measure the distances on ground.
Sect. 8. My method of surveying Mechanically. Sect. 9. Instrumentally vide
Trigonometry.
CHAP. III. How to make Avenues and Walks.
Sect. 1. Some Generals aneut Walks. Sect. 2. How to stake out the Avenue.
Sect. 3. How to run a Walk through a Wood. Sect. 4. How to do over Hills and
great distances. Sect. 5. To set off Parallels where obstructions are. Sect. 6.
Figures for Avenues to end in, lead to, and past through. Sect. 7. The distance
of Trees in Walks.
CHAP. IV. How to Plant Thickets and Orchards.
Sect. 1. How they should stand by the fence. Sect. 2. Of the several Figures
that will admit of order. Sect. 3. Of the several ways of planting. Sect. 4.
The first way squair. Sect. 5. The second Rombusoical. Sect. 6. The third
Triangular. Sect. 7. A fourth depending on the first. Sect. 8. A fifth and
notable way. Sect. 9. A sixth way observing the Central line. Sect. 10. The
distance of Trees in Thickets and Orchards.
CHAP. V. How to make the Kitchen-Garden.
Sect. 1. The method and draught. Sect. 2. The proportion and order of
planting and sowing therein. Sect. 3. Of uniformity to be observed. Sect. 4. A
place for Physich Herbs. Sect. 5. Of Walls, and of the distance of dwarff, and
Wall-trees.
CHAP. VI. How to make the Pleasure-Garden.
Sect. 1. What draught I fancy best. Sect. 2. Of Boxing for all Gardens. Sect.
3. Of the proportion of Walks. Sect. 4. To lay Grass. Sect. 5. Of brick Walks.
Sect. 6. To lay Gravel. Sect. 7. The orderly ways of planting flowers. Sect.
8. Of Terrase Walks. Sect. 9. Of Pondes.
CHAP. VII. How to Level Ground.
Sect. 1. Of the Horizontal and sloping Level. Sect. 2. To proportion the Level
to the ground. Sect. 3. How to do with bad lying Plots. Sect. 4. How to level
great lengthes. Sect. 5. How to do over obstructions. Sect. 6. Of the solidity
of earth. Sect. 7. An Practice which is the cheapest way. Sect. 8. To bring in
water in pipes.
CHAP. VIII. How to measure, divide and lay out Land, etc.
Sect. 1. Wherewith we should measure. Sect. 2. How we should measure,
exemplifyed. Sect. 3. How to part off, divide and lay out land. Sect. 4. Of the
superficies of Solids. Sect. 5. Of their solidity. Sect. 6. Of Roots and mean
proportionals.
THE CONTENTS Of the Second Part, which treats of the Culture of Plants.
CHAP. I. Of the several ways of Propagation.
Sect. 1. THe Introduction. Sect. 2. The several ways are, Sect. 3. First by
Seeds. Sect. 4. Secondly by Off-sets. Sect. 5. Thirdly by Cuttings. Sect. 6.
Fourthly by laying. Sect. 7. Fifthly by Circumposition. Sect. 8. Sixthly by
graffing. Sect. 9. Lastly by Inoculation. Sect. 10. Of planting, pruning, etc.
CHAP. II. How to Cultivate and prepare grounds.
Sect. 1. Of Trenching Sect. 2. Of fallowing. Sect. 3. Several ways of
improving Land. Sect. 4. Of the best and worst Soyls, and how to (...) them.
Sect. 5. What dungs and manures are proper for the (...) Sect. 6. What sorts
are proper for the Plants. Sect. 7. How to make Hot-beds. Sect. 8. Of Watering,
CHAP. III. How to propagate and order Forrest-trees.
Sect. 1. How to govern them in Seminary and Nurserie. Sect. 2. When their
Seeds ripes, when to sow, in what soil, when they spring, etc. Sect. 3. How to
transplant out Forrest-trees. Sect. 4. How to prune them.
CHAP. IV. Of Hedges or Enclosures.
Sect. 1. What I esteem best for Hedges. Sect. 2. How to plant and keep holly
Hedges. Sect. 3. How to plant and keep Hawthorn. Sect. 4. How to make Ditches.
Sect. 5. How to have trees round for Shelter. Sect. 6. Of fencing the Quicks
from Beasts.
CHAP. V. How to propagate and order Fruit Trees:
Sect. 1. Observations on graffing, etc. Sect. 2. What soil they delight in,
and how propagated. Sect. 3. To raise stocks and govern young Trees in sem: and
Nurssrie. Sect. 4. How to transplant out Fruit Trees. Sect. 5. How to prune
both the Wall and Standard. Sect. 6. To prevent and cure the diseases of all
Trees. Sect. 7. To destroy vermin, etc.
CHAP. VI. Of Fruits, Herbs and Roots for the Kitchen.
Sect. 1. Of the Fruits of smaller Plants. Sect. 2. Of Sallads and Pot-hearbs.
Sect. 3. Of sweet Herbs. Sect. 4. Of Roots. Sect. 5. Of Weeding in General.
CHAP. VII. Of some Physic Herbs, Shrubs and Flowers.
Sect. 1. Physic Herbs distinguished into Perennials and Annuals. Sect. 2.
Shrubs distinguished into dry and green. Sect. 3. Flowers into Fibrous,
Bulbous, and Annuals. Sect. 4. How to preserve the tender sorts in Winter.
APPENDIX How to use the Fruits of the Garden.
Sect. 1. The manner and season of gathering them. Sect. 2. How to preserve
them when gathered. Sect. 3. Of their uses. Sect. 4. How we may have dishes of
them. Sect. 5. How we may have drinks of them. Sect. 6. To choice their species
for our Plantations.
CONCLUSION
Proposing Scotland's Improvement.
The GARDENERS CALENDAR, Showing in each Month
When to perform the particulars, etc. What Garden dishes and drinks are in
season.
THE FIRST PART Treating of Contrivance.
CHAP. I. How to make the Works about a House Regular.
A First and a Second part I thought necessary, that I might discuss things in
their order: for a House must be built before it be furnished. These who
inclines not to read this may step foreward to the Second; perhaps there they
will find Satisfaction, albeit others may be as desirous of this, who have any
works to make.

My design by contrivance, is to prevent the consequence of Inadvertancy, or
the abrupt procedure in Enclosing and Planting.

2. Here in the entrance you may take a view of a House which I have Invented
(See Fig. 1.) it is but little, yet very commodious and Cheap. There is only 4
Rooms on a Floor (you may have Closets within the wall, although not here
demonstrated) all which enter off the Stayr (yet comunication betwixt) and the
door is in the middle, and there is 10 steps up the first Story, (which is hall
or dining Room, withdrawing Room, Bedchamber and Waiting-Room) and 10 Steps
down to the lower Story, which is half under ground, and vaulted, this is
Kitchen, Cellers and Ladners, etc. That above the dining Room story may be
Bed-Chambers, library and withdrawing Room: and above these garrets for
wardops. The Roof may be in three so as the middle part may be flat and covered
with lead and the two sides more steep and flated: there is also a Stayr coming
down from the hall without to the parterre of grass and gravel, on whose
corners ar two Pavilions opening without the line of the House and sets off in
place of Iammes; one of which may be a Storehouse, and the other a Dove-house:
the Stables, Baking and Brewing house ar on the opposite side, most
conveniently placed, as hereafter I shall demonstrate.

3. Situate your House in a healthy Soil, near to a fresh-spring, defended from
the Impetuous-westwinds, northern colds and eastern blasts: and mind
regularity, viz.

Make all the Buildings and Plantings ly so about the House, as that the House
may be the Center; all the Walks, Trees and Hedges running to the House.

As the Sun is the Center of this World: as the Heart of the man is the Center
of the man: as the nose the Center of the face: and as it is unseemly to see a
man wanting a leg, ane arm etc. or his nose standing at one side the face, or
not straight, or wanting a cheek, ane eye, ane ear, or with one (or all of
them) great at one side and small on the other; Just so with the House-courts,
Avenues, Gardens, Orchards, etc. where regularity or uniformity is not observed.

Therefore whatever you have on the one hand, make as much, and of the same
form and in the same place, on the other.

4. But if you would work right, begin orderly, that is, find the central
line by erecting a perpendicular on the middle of the House-front, to extend as
far both back and fore as requisite: hence you may draw parallels, Measure and
Stake out your Avenues, Gardens, etc. as you please: ever minding to Measure
alike at both sides of the Central line; How to find this Central line and to
set off parallels is taught in Chap: 3: Sect: 1. and 2.

5. Yet for further Illustration take ane example by a draught of my own
inventing (see fig: 2.) which if rightly understood may be applied diversely and
Improven elegantly.

It is here in a small Scale. the House is in the Center, and at B, round by
the House is Balesters, the Common Avenue is by N, and ends in a triangle, c,
is the outer Court, and in the two triangular Courts marked with O, ar placed
the office-house most notably (with their back part to the Court c,) opening
without the line of the House: So dismounting at the gate of the Court (through
which you may walk on foot to the House) let the Horses be taken about to the
Stables by the Way the ending of the Avenuo leads. The two plots P, may be
Pondes, the two with G, Cherrie Gardens: a proper place also for goosberries,
Currants, and Straberries. On the south side the House there is the pleasure or
Flower-Garden called the Parterre, at the two sides thereof Kitchen-Gardens
marked with K, then another Walk ending in a Semicircle at S, Leading out to
the Lawn or deer Park. The vistaes or walks of view that runs from the 4 Angles
of the House ar very pleasant and convenient, and ar good Shelter; for which
cause there are two Thickets on the north side marked with t, on the south side
are two such marked a, for Nurseries, and at E, and W, ar two Orchards. The
whole is environed with two rows of Forest Trees without the wall: And if the
paper were large I would show you that the Park Wall should be parallel to
these, that is, every where equidistant from the House its Center at least, the
whole an octagone near to a regular polygon consisting of equal sides and
Angles. The walks with their fences (being run foreward from all the 4 sides
and 4 Angles of the House till they touch at the middle of each side of the Park
Wall,) serves in the Park for divisors: which divisors may be howthorn Hedges,
and these in the Gardens holly, except the Court in the entry and office-house
Courts, me thinks walls are requisite there. Also there should be ane ascent to
the House, (if possible) as at the first Court gate 2 steps, at the 2d 4 steps.
etc. But Leaving it to let every man apply as his ground and ability will best
admit, I come to speak of regularity, where confined.

6. But as to work or make regularity among confirments requires Ingenuity; so
is there difficulty in teaching the same, because of the great variety of
places: and being that I know not how to give precepts for it (except what is
said above of the Center and Central line) therefore I shall only instance in
by example.

As where I was confined, to add what I will, but to diminish non. I viewed the
works, and found several regular and Irregular things don on the one side the
House, and nothing on the other answerable: therefore I Staked out the same on
the other; still where I found an Irregular piece on the one side, I staked out
the very same on the other; and thus two Irregularities produced one uniformity.

Or where there had been much wrought for ane Avenue, but did not Front the
House right, by reason of a precipice on the west hand. I got on the house top,
viewed the ground immediately, saw that I might turn my face toward the East
and get stately Avenues with Gardens on each hand at pleasure, and the said
precipice turned at my back.

But to draw any place first on Paper, as they stand, we see faults plainly,
and how to help them accordingly: Therefore to assist you further in making
your works orderly I shall show you in the following Chap.

CHAP. II. How to draw by the Scale.
All draughts not drawn by the Scale at but suppositions, the Scale makes them
stand directly on Paper as on ground, or would stand, if put upon it: therefore
of singular use in contriving, you should have ane eye to the consequence of
all your undertakings, lest you run Inadvertantly into a snare: for when you
have determined or settled on the contrivance, perhaps has gone a great length
in working the same, yet as you proceed (one thing making way for another) you
may come to see a far better way, and so to overturne most or all that is
done, to get your new and better way accomplished; which oblidges you either to
double pains and Charges, or otherwise, in saving the same, to fit still with a
dissatisfied mind; all which may be easily and timely prevented by drawing and
projecting on paper, as is said.

2. You may make as many Scales as you think will be needful, insomuch that
when you have a draught at any time to draw, you have no more to do, but by
Arithmetic find which of them Scales you must draw it by. Therefore make a
Thinn broad rule 2 foot long Pear or Aple tree, Red of Plumtree, Planetree,
Boxwood, or Brass which is best: put as many on bothsides as it will contain. I
make most use of a Diagonal Scale, (see fig. 3.) its done by dividing the Inch
into so many equal parts, as 8 in the Inch, 30 in the Inch, 100 or 200 in the
Inch, the figure and Multiplication will inform you for 5 divisions, drawn the
length of the Rule and 7 in the Inch; the other way is a Scale of 35 in the
Inch, 5 times 7 is 35 and so forth. If your Rule be 2 foot, there may be 2
Lengthes on it, or as your largest Compass may conveniently reach. You may also
make some of the common Scales, that is, divide the Inch the ordinary way in a
straight line into so many equal, parts (see fig. 4.) seeing the Diagonals has
only such as Multiplication produces.

3. If you be to draw a draught, but knows not how to take your measures from
the Scale, then if you know the measures on ground take so many divisions (off
the Scale with your Compass) as you had feet, else, or falls (whatever you
measure by) and set on the Paper: example, if you were to draw an orchard whose
lenth is 680 else by a Scale of 200 in the Inch (as the upper end of fig. 3.)
you are to consider how many times 200 is in 680, that so many whole Inches you
may take on your Compass, and the odds or fraction you may get therewith from
the subdivided Inch: here if you set one foot of the Compass at 6 and reach the
other to a, which 6 half Inches is 600, and 8 divisions foreward on the
subdivided half Inch is 80; the same you may place on the Paper and draw
accordingly. Example 2. by the other Scale of 100 in the Inch, if you would set
the breadth of 23 foot-walk on Paper, here it is not one Inch, therefore you
(...) take but such a part of one Inch, viz. Set the Compass from (...) end of
the subdivided half Inch to o in the same, and thus (...) on the Compass;
therefore do as before. You may perceive that the 23 divisions on the Rule is
the 3 from 20 foreward on the line betwixt 20 and 30 where the o is placed to
make it plain. If your draught be so large that your Compass cannot reach its
length, then you may divide the same by 2, 3, or 4, etc. and take the product
on the Compass and set along so many times as was your divisor. This is so
plain that it needs no exemple.

4. But if you have a draught to draw on one or many sheets of Paper, and you
desire to draw it as large as the Paper will bear, not to go off; Then take the
length of your Paper in Inches, by which divide the length of your ground
whether feet, else, etc. and the quotient shall be the Scale you must draw it
by; that is, an inche divided into so many equal parts. Example, if you have a
plot 360 foot in length to draw on a sheet common Paper 16 Inches: but to make
it, keep a little within the Paper, at each end call it 15 inches; so 360 the
length of the ground divided by 15 the length of the Paper gives 24: therefore
take a Scale of 24 in the inche, and draw it by the same. Example 2. the
breadth of a field 864 Falls, I desire to draw it on the of a sheet viz. 3
Inches. Divide 864 by 3, it gives 2.88, but this being too small, I take the
thereof viz. 144 and draws it by the same, mynding that each division on my
Paper is 2 Falls on ground.

5. Or if you had a draught, and knows not what Scale it was drawn by, if you
know what ground it contains, the work is first, to measure it by a supposed
Scale, and secondly to find a mean proportional betwixt the true quantity of
Acres and that quantity found by the supposed Scale. And thirdly by the golden
Rule say, as the quantity of Acres found by the supposed Scale is to the mean
proportional: so is the supposed scale to the true Scale. Example, if you have
a plot or field of ground containing 72 Acres, and you measure it by a Scale of
18 Falls in the inche, and that makes but 40 Acres, the question is what Scale
was it drawn by? You will find the mean proportional betwixt 40.5. and 72 to be
54 (as in chap. 8. sect. 6.) and as 40.5. is to 54: so is 18 to 24. Thus it
appears that the said plot was drawn by a Scale of 24 Falls in the inche.

Example 2. If you have a plot (containing 14 Acres 64 falls, and measuring it
by a Scale of 40 in the inche makes 90 Acres, what Scale was it drawn by? You
will find (as is said) the mean betwixt 14.4. and 90 to be 36: therefore as 90
the Acres found by the supposed Scale, is to 36 the mean proportional: so is 40
the supposed Scale to 16 the true Scale. This tells that it was drawn by a
Scale of 16 in the Inche.

6. But if you have a draught, and knows not what Scale it was drawn by nor
what ground it contains, so as thereby you might find its Scale, and you
desire to diminish or Enlarge the same on Paper, and yet that it may bear the
same shape and proportion in every respect.

You may divide or multiply every particular line or part of it: as if you
would have it less, then divide each part by 3, and take one of these and set
on the Paper. Or if you would have it twice as large, then double every part
and portion of it, that is, take the double of each length and breadth on the
Compass and set on the Paper and draw accordingly.

But if your draught be a Taliduce, Mapps, or the like, draw a squair by the
outter edg thereof, and divide each side into so many equal parts, as you think
fit, betwixt which draw parallel lines all through crossing from opposite
sides, and notice what part of your draught falls within the precinct of each
little squair, and so Copy it upon another Paper whether larger or lesser, as
if you would have it one fifth less, take one fifth of the side of one of the
little squairs, and therewith Lottrie or square your clean Paper. And likewayes
take one fifth of length and breadth of each particular within each little
squair, and the one fifth distance that such and such parts, creeks and angles
are distant from any two of the angles of the same; and so place them
accordingly in the lesser little squairs of your clean Paper.

7. When you design to survey any plot of ground be careful in measuring the
distances truly, and keep exact account thereof. You may make first a supposed
figure on a Paper before you begin, that thereon you may write your measures,
as you go along: as if it be a Hexagon, ( see fig. 27.) draw a figure at random
containing 6 sides, and having observed the meridian on the ground (which you
may either find by the Compass or let the central line of the House its
perpendiculars or parallels serve in lieu thereof) mark down such on your
supposed figure: then let the two men with the chain begin at any angle; the
foremost may have 10 small sticks to thrust in at every length of the chain,
and let the hindermost man gather them up as he comes along; and when all up,
give them to his assistant to begin again, as before, calling that, one change
(still being careful to go straight betwixt the two ends or extremes) and when
yon come at the other end, count how many changes, chains, and links, as if
the hedge c. d. be 70 Falls, write that down as in the figure, and so proceed to
the rest observing the same method.

8. But albeit you measure round any plot or Field, yet you must know how to
find the quantity of the angles, and protract the same: therefore I shall show
you the most exact of all others and mechanical too* Example by fig. 21. When
you have measured the length of the 4 sides of this Trapezia (as is taught)
then measure also betwixt any of the two opposite angles, as from a. to b. or
from d. to a. and then you may protract it only with your Scale thus: draw a
given line on the Paper as a. c. and from your Scale take so many divisions as
was the lenth of the hedge a. c. and set thereon; and take the lenth betwixt c.
and b. on your Compass; set one foot in c. and discribe an obscure Arch at b.
also take the lenth of a. b. and setting one foot in a make another Arch to
cross the former at b. then draw the line a. b. likewayes take the length of
the side b. d. on the Compass, set one foot in b. discribe an obscure arch at
d. and take the length c. d. and with one foot in c. cross the former at d.
then draw c. d. and b. d. and so have you finished. By the same its easy to
protract fig. 26. and 27 or any other, and this is my method of Surveying.

6. As for the dimensions of Circles, see Chap: 8. for having the Radius, you
may easily find all things belonging thereunto.

As for straight lined figures, if you reduce them into Triangles, and measure
the three sides of each, you may protract them, as is taught: thus Trigonometry
or the doctrine of plane Triangles shows, that having any three things in a
Triangle, we may find the other three, either by the Scale or by Artificial
Sines, Tangents, and Logarithims: as having three sides, or three angles, or
one Angle, and two sides, or two sides and one Angle, etc.

I will give you ane example by Fig: 20. suppose you would have the distance
between B. and A. First measure off from B. (at any side most convenient) so
many else or falls, the more the better, I shall here supose 384 falls to C.
(as will appear by a Scale of 400 in the Inch) and in setting it off, notice
what degrees that angle makes by your protector, then hold the same at C. with
its Chord line on B. C. Turn about the Index till it point to A. notice what
degrees it cutts, as supose 80. and write down: here you have the side B. C.
384. the angle A. B. C. 60. and the angle B. C. A. 80. (and by consequence the
Angle B. A. C. 40. being its the complement to 180.) therefore go to your paper
and draw a given line as A. B. then open the compass to the radius of your line
of Chords, and therewith setting one foot in B. Discribe the Arch D. E. I. O.
likwayes take 60 degrees with your Compass off the line of Chords, and set from
D. to E. on that Arch line, and by the point. B. and E. draw the line B. E. C.
so shall the Angle. A. B. C. contain 90. degrees. But if the Angle had fallen
to be more than 90 degrees, then you may take it at twice (seeing the ordinary
line of Chords has but 90) as if the Index had Cut 120. first take 90 upon the
compass and set from. D. to I. then take 30 and set from. I. to O. which Angle.
A. B. O. contains 120 degrees. But to return, as you set off the Angle at. B.
so likewayes at the Angle. C. make an Arch and set off 80 degrees thereon, by
which point and C. Draw the line. C. A. lastly take the line B. A. on your
compass (i.e. betwixt the point. B. and the point at. A. where the line. C. A.
did cut the line. B. A.) and apply to the same Scale of 400 in the Inch, from
whence you took the 384. and you will find the distance betwixt B. and A. to
be 588 Falls: for,

As the Sine of the Angle B. A. C. 40 degrees 9: 808067 is to the Logarithm of
the side B. C. 384 falls: 584331 so is the Sine of the Angle B. C. A. 80
degrees 9: 993351 The sum of the 2d. and 3d. added 10: 577682 The first
number to be substr: from this sum 9: 808067 To the Logarithm of the side A. B.
588 falls 769625

If you would know how to find the superficial content of any plot of ground,
or how to divide the same, or to lay out any quantity of land in what form
soever, etc. see Chap: 8. for, I have to.

CHAP. III. How to make Avenues and Walks.
ALL walks should front the gates or entries, whether they lead to a house,
Garden, Gate, Door, Park, Wood, or highway. When you have determined on the end
of the walk as the door of the house, in the middle thereof on the line of the
House-front set off a perpendicular, to find the central line as aforesaid, see
Chap. 1. Sect. 4. and for your more exact performance thereof prepare this
Instrument, viz. take two straight Rules about 3 or 4 foot long, join them
Crosswayes in other, so that the 4 Angles where they cut may be exact squairs;
then at each end of these, join a piece Rule standing up about 4 or 5 Inches,
and in the exact middle of each of these pieces make a slit up and down, and in
the middle of these slits a piece small silk thread; these being straight and
perpend: up are excellent to view by. Place this cross on the head of the three
footed Staff, hing a Plumb whereby you may plant it Horizontale upon occasion:
on this you may also place your protector with the box and needle, when you go
to surveying, for every one has not a plane Table.

As to the Avenue, set one side of your cross parallel to the given line (the
House-wall) this you may do with most ease, by taking one end thereof within
the door till the side touch the door cheeks, and you may also view cross by
the side-wall backsight and foresight, till it stand exactly Parellel thereto:
then turn, and standing within the door, view straight out by the silk
threeds, and so direct one to drive stakes all along so far as you can see, in
a straight and perpend: line. You may also find this perpendicular central
line, tho Walls, Hedges, Houses, Trees etc. obstruct, if you can see over them
out at any Window or off the Battlement if there be any, otherwise recurre to
the Rules in Sect. 3. and 4.

And as by this Instrument you may raise any perpendicular, so by the same you
may let perpend fall: for you may alter it hither and thither upon the given
line, till it direct to the angle or point assigned.

2. The mid or central line of your Avenue being found out you must place your
cross thereon, and thereby set off the half breadth thereof at each side: do
this at both ends and middle, that they be exactly Parallel; and therein drive
stakes almost to the head. And when you come to mark out for the Trees, or to
plant them, set a straight pole at each driven stake, for your direction in
going straight betwixt the same.

If the length of the walk be confined, divide it by the distance you mind to
plant at; and if there be any odd, add or substract till all the distances be
equal: which distance you must take on a chain (for a line will reach and
shrink) and begin at one end, and go straight to the other, thrusting in a
small stake at each length; minding to let both rows go on squair together,
that is, one on each side and viewing will find the other two, if there be
sower rows, see the Avenues fig. 2.

And though the ground be unevenly, yet you must hold the chain level:
wherefore you may have a squair and Plumb fixed at your pole or staff for your
more exact performance thereof.

When you have staked out the ground, prepare the rounding string viz. a piece
line doubled and tied near the point of a stick, and so put the double on the
stakes where the Trees must stand, and streatching the same, make a scratch
with the point of the stick round; and with a spade follow that Compass and
make the hole. See the second part of this Treatise, where there be directions
how to prepare the ground and plant.

If you observe what is said, you may stake out any kind of walk, having one
line found; wherefore I shall show you how to find out one line whatever
obstruct.

3. As first, suppose you would run a line or walk through a wood: when you
have concluded on the end thereof, there erect a perpendicular as above, and
run it as far into the wood as you can; then at each side thereof set off a
Parallel line two or three foot from the central line, or half the breadth of
the intended walk: so shall you have three Parallel lines running on in
straight lines together. And where any one runns on a tree, run foreward the
other two, and set it off again (when past the Tree) as it was Parallel to its
fellows, and so proceed till you be through the wood, or thickets, still
marking the Trees that falls in the intervall to be cut.

A second way is by means of Lanthornes with burning Candles, in a calm night
when dark hanged on stakes, you standing in the wood may plant stakes at
pleasure, let the Candles furthest from you be highest, and remove foreward the
lights as need requires.

4. But if both ends of your walk be determined, and you cannot see betwixt, by
reason of Lengthes, Hills, Woods, Houses, or some such obstruction, in such a
case let two having each a pole go to the middle or to such a place betwixt
where they may (by looking backsight and foresight) perceive the two extremes,
(where should be a pole with white Paper on the slip boards to make the better
appearance) turn your faces toward other, standing at a large distance
asunder, but so as you may both see your respective objects. And let A direct B
to set the pole in line with his and that at the Northend* and B direct A to
hold in line with his and that at the Southend: so each directing other by
words or Signs; let both alter to and fro, till they have their desires at
once; then shall these two and the extremes be all four in a straight line,
whereby you may set as many as you please. This way I found out by experiment,
and thinks it worthy a place amongst the Mathematics.

But if you cannot see the two ends, when standing in the middle; although the
Poles be never so high, then if it be Wood or Hedges, the foresaid Lanthrons
and Candles will do the business.

But if the obstructions be Hills, Walls, or Houses, for which you cannot see,
standing in the middle, as a-foresaid, neither by Lanthrons, nor yet by high
Poles; then do by Parallels thus: set off a parallel line so far, as that it
may run quyt beyond the obstruction, (on the side most convenient) then set in
the parallel again at convenient places; so shall both agree, and as will
appear when the obstruction is removed.

But if none of these will do, run a line over by guess, and if it miss (as no
wonder) take notice of your Error at the end, by letting a perpendicular fall
on the determined point (by means of the squair or cross) and the measure
betwixt finds out the Error: then measure the length of your intended walk or
line, aforesaid; and at the quarter thereof, set off the of your Error: At the
middle the and at the of the length, set off the of your Error; this will lead
you straight upon your purpose.

Trigonometry will also solve this, if you could work exactly: for here you
have two sides and one angle; see the last Chap. Sect. 9.

5. And if you have a given line and desires to set of a Parallel therefrom,
but cannot measure off at both ends as is needful, there being, Trees, Waters,
Hills, Walls or Houses, obstructing, you may measure, squair or Perpendicular
off at any part of the given line (that is most convenient) so far as you mind
to go with your parallel; at, or upon which point erect another Perpendicular
to run backsight and foresight; the which shall be exactly parallel to the
given line, as was required.

6. Having given some directions for staking out walks for Planting, yet your
Avenues and Walks must end in some figure or another, whether Triangular,
Circular, Ovall, etc. For Coaches and Carts to turn in, as also where Walks
meets, or Cross other, its requisite that there be some figure for the same
reason.

How Avenues may end in Semicircles and Triangles, see fig: 2. and if it end in
a Semicircle, it may begin with the same or rather (if the ground will suffer)
it should begin with a whole circle having sower opposite opens the breadth of
the walk: If it end with a Triangle, it may begin so likwayes, but rather with
a squait (the endings Integer) whose entries or opens must be in its Angles.
And also where the Walks meets or Cross, I have a little figure or Open, see
fig: 2. And yet the Trees in the whole draught every way lineal, except in the
segment of a Circle, where they deviat a little. The figures should be at least
three times the breadth of the walk, but so as the ground will admit; let not
the Trees in the figure stand much above half the distance of these in the
walk, but divide equally make the breadth of the walk in proportion to its
length: I think an Avenue a mile in length may be 40 else in breadth, see Chap:
5. sect: 2. neither short Broad nor long narrow walks are handsome, except in
case of walks of Shade, and also of Avenues where the Front of the house,
Jammes, courts, or pavilions ar to be observed: for the breadth of the court
should be at least the whole length of the House-front; and if two Jammes the
middle walk of the Avenue may be the breadth betwixt, and the side-walkes the
breadth of the Jammes; or the mid walk the breadth of the whole Front, and the
side walks the breadth of the pavilions, which are on the corners of the Court;
or divide the House Front in three, making the middle walk the just breadth of
both the side ones: so shall they be every way lineall, but do not mask a fine
Front nor veyle a pleasant prospect. The length of the Avenue, it should run so
far as (when we stand at the house) we may lose sight of the far end, if
possible. When it runs over a Brae, then to the eye it appears Infinitum, and
where that cannot be had, it does very well where the sight terminates in a
grove or circle of Firrs.

7. The distance of Trees is sometimes according to the quality of the ground,
or Trees to be planted, sometimes to the number of Rows, or as the figure to be
planted will best admit. If a good Soil, plant at the wider distance; if 4
Rows, as an Avenue, Plant at 5.6.7. or 8 else distance; if 2 single rows at
4.5. or 6 else; if circular figures or the like at 2, 3 or 4 else, or as the
figure is in smallness or greatness, and Plant so as they may show the figure
well.

Some Trees requires wider distance than others, these that grow greatest, by
consequence must have the largest disrance, see the next Chap: sect: 10.

Note, that you Intermix not great Trees and small Trees in Planting, neither
quick-growers and flow-growers: for I observe a kind of Emulation amongst them.

For Enclosures See part 2. Chap: 4.

CHAP. IIII. How to Plant Thickets and Orchards.
AS the ground where you Plant must be Enclosed, so must the Trees stand some
distance off the fence: if it be a wall whereon ar Wall-Trees, let the
standards be at least one of their own distances from the same, and if you
design fine walks round by the wall, Plant the Row next thereunto with
Dwarff-Trees or some low Hedge, and the Trees half a distance off such; if the
enclosure be a Hedge. observe the same Rule. Also let the Trees be Parallel to
the Enclosure: but every Plot will not suffer to be Planted every way lineal
and stand Parallel to the Enclosure too; therefore it will be necessary first
to Inquire a little what figures they be that may thus be Planted, (a thing I
never saw Inquired) And secondly how to plant those that will not admit of this
order, and lastly how to plant the several ways.

2. The figures that may be planted every way in row ar many, yet for Brevities
sake I shall mention but some as oblong, and geometrical squairs (see fig:
5.6.7.8.9.) Rhombus (see fig: 10.) Rhomboides (see fig. 11.) Oxigone or
Equilateral Triangle (see fig: 12.) Orthygone or right Angled Triangle (see
fig: 13.) Ambligone or Triangle with one obtuse and two Acute Angles, (see fig:
14.) a sort of Trapezia, (see fig: 15.) Hexagone, (see fig: 16.) Octagone (as
the whole fig: 2.) these regular Polygones ar the nearest way for Planting a
Circle.

Many more figures there be both Regular and Irregular that will admit of this
order, but these may suffice for Illustration. As for these that will not, you
may Plant them Parallel, to as many sides as you can, and let the rest, fall as
they will.

3. Now as to the several ways so far as I know, there is but three principal
ways of Planting, every way lineal (although there be more built thereon) viz.
Squair, Rhombus, and Triangle: In the first, three of them makes a right
Triangle, and sower of them discribes a Circle; (see Fig: 5.) In the second,
three of them makes a triacute Triangle, and sower of them discribes an Elipsis
(see fig: 6.) note, that this way will admit of Variation. In the third, three
of them makes an equilateral Triangle, and sower of them discribes an Ovall,
(See Fig: 7.) And seven of them makes a Circle with a Center, See Fig: 17.

4. The manner of Planting the first, which is the common way is exemplified in
Fig: 5. take the length of one side, and divide by the distance you mind to
plant at, and the product tells how many, and what is over, if there be any, you
may proportion as before. Then with your determined distance on a chain, begin
at a Corner and go round the out-line exactly, where the outter row must stand,
thrusting in a stake at every length; these being in straight line and at
equal distances, also straight bodyed and perpendicular up. The way is thus:
One must stand at W. and view to E. another at S. and view to N. Causing a
third set a Stake in line with both as at L. So removing from Stake to Stake
(viewing still to the opposite) direct the third by words or signs till his
Stake be in line with both: thus proceed till all the plot be Staked out. See
Fig. 5. The way the Trees will stand when Planted.

But if the ground be unevenly, cause the Stake-setter, hold up a long and
straight pole (with a plumb Rule for holding it perpend:) and when he removes,
to thrust a stake exactly where the pole stood: but if the pole will not do,
let the viewers mount them on three footed or standing leathers; and if that
will not do, betake to the Rule, mentioned in the last Chap, for taking a line
over a Hill, where both ends ar confined, as I have done, in the like case.

But because some scarcely knows signs, the Stake-setter must be told that
when the viewer stands his face northwards and waves the right hand Eastward,
that he must go a little cast with his Pole, and when he waves the left, then
westwards, when both his hands at once east or west, then he must hold the head
of the Pole (if he have no plumb for his direction in this) but when the viewer
moves both Hands, or Hat, up and down, then the Stake-setter must fix there.

5. If you Plant the second way in a squair, the out-line round is not equal
distances tho the opposites side are, here in this example one side is about 12
and one half else distance, and the other 15. and the viewing being Angular,
and not from opposite sides makes the Trees stand about 10 and one half else.

But if you will Plant Rombusoical, as is designed, then its don by the equal
division of its four sides, and by viewing to its opposits, as the Rombus A.
B. C. D. Within Fig: 6. Does represent; for though its Angles be not squair nor
equal, yet its sides must be equal, and Angles opposite: and here it may be
varyed, as is said according to the shape of the ground, by streatching longer
or opening it wider. A. C. is its breadth and D. B. its length. Or you may also
plant by the Romboides, as I have done, D. A. E. F. and consequently many more
figures may be planted thereby as well as these may be, varyed or altered, and
yet all continue in this Cyrus order.

6. In the 3d way take an example in Fig: 7. where the length of one side must
be divided by the determined distance viz. the distance off the fence being
subtracted, the length of the side A. B. is 119 and I design to plant at 8
and ane half else: therefore I divide 119 by 8.5. decimally, the product is 14
distances; then there will be 15 rows; here one side is Staked out, whereby
you may Plant the whole plot thus: take two distances on the chain, that is,
hold one end exactly at A. And the other at C. Again with that measure on the
Chain, hold one end at the first Stake ( viz: A.) And the other at the second (
viz: L.) cause a third take the chain by the exact middle, and (holding it
stiff) thrust in a straight stake at the Angle of the Chain ( viz: N.) so those
three makes an equilateral Triangle; then remove, holding one end at the second
Stake ( viz: L.) And the other at the third viz. C. Streatch the Chain and
thrust in a Stake at its Angle or middle as before. Thus you may proceed from
Stake to Stake till that row be Planted: and so on from row to Row till the
whole Plot be Staked out, minding to set the Stakes straight and Perpendicular,
considering their thickness also; in all which if you be not very exact, ye
cannot avoid error before you come at the other side. Therefore I shall show
you another way of my own Inventing, which is more sure and exact and less
pains, viz: Let first that one side be marked out, as before, and having set
two or three Stakes of the second row, as is just now taught; then upon two,
hold to the Chain, and Plant another Stake to begin a third row; (as at D.)
then take the exact distance betwixt L. and D. On the Chain, and therewith
Stake out the side B. R. And because there is one Odd Row, take the exact half
of that distance (by doubling the Chain) and set from R. to L. then with the
whole length go betwixt B. L. thrusting in a Stake at each length, and here you
shall find three distances and the half that was set off at the Angle R. Thus
two sides ar Staked out, and he that can do this, can also Stake out the other
two, seeing the opposite sides are answerable: for as A. B. is to H. L. so is
L. B. unto H. A.

When the plot is staked out round, let one stand at X, and view to B. and
another at O. and view to R. cause a third, set a stake in line with both, as
at Q. Thus you may proceed from stake to stake, till all the plot be marked
out, still minding the way of your viewing.

A Plot will contain more Trees this way, than any other example. The two
Plots, fig. 5. and 7. are both alike in shape and quantity, each containing one
Acre, 2 Roods, 16 Falls, 30 Else: and fig. 7. holds 11 Trees more than fig. 5.
planted at one and the same distance.

7. A fourth way of planting, is that which I ordinarily use in thickets: (see
fig. 8.) for when the Trees grows large, every other row (suppose the short
ones) may be taken out, that the rest may have freedom, and so be benifited by
Sun and Air, where one Fruit-tree will bear more than sower crowded on others,
and yet continue in as good order; and in part answers some complaining while
their Orchards are young, as having few Fruit, seeing the more Trees there be
while such, the more fruit to be expected, therefore when their branches begin
to meet, remove them as is said, lop and plant by your Hedges, I mean by the
divisors of your Corn Land, and they being now great, are able to defend
themselves. Its also applicable to Forrest-trees seeing while they are young,
they afford little Shelter, except more than ordinary thick, and yet when they
grow large cannot prosper to that stately magnitude, unlelss the same cure be
used, viz. the removal of each second row, which may be effectually planted
about the Bordures of your Corn Land, Meadow and Pasture, who now needs no fence
save a few thorns hanged about to keep the Cattle from Rubbing, which thorns
they are now well able to bear, albeit small Trees are not: for the winds take
great hold on such. Moreover in Orchards, if the short Rows be Cherries and
Plumes, they not being long lived, will be past their best ever the Aples and
Pears (which may be in the long rows) require their Room from them.

As to the method you must mark out the plot round about, as in my first, and
view from Angle to Angle of each Geometrical squair; but then the distance of
the outter Row about, must be more than in the first way, otherwise the Trees
will stand much nearer. As 7. is to 5. so is the distance of the outter row
about to the distance of the Trees through the Plot.

Or you may plant it by viewing from opposite sides, as in my first way, only
you must plant the out-line of stakes round about, at half the former distance,
and let the Stake-setter pass by every other distance (except you mean to plant
Goosberries, and Curran-Standards in these blanks, and then the Trees and
Shrubs together makes it Entirely one with the first way,) and now the
proportion is, as 7 is to 10: so is the distance of the outter row about, to
the distance of the Trees; or as 10 is to 7: so the distance of the Trees to
the distance of the outter row about. Such proportion does the side, and
diagonal of a Geometrical squair, bear the one unto the other exact enough for
our purpose.

8. The fifth way, and very notable, where Orchard and Kitchen Garden are all
one, or where you have Corn or Grass amongst your Trees, or Trees (whither
barren or Fruit) among your Corn or Grass, ( see fig. 9.)

If for Kitchen Garden, divide it in Ridges, making the Tables or Paths in the
middle of the widest Intervall, and then subdivide so as the Trees may fall in
the middle of the Beds, or Bordures. If for Corn-land, the ridg must be between
each row, plowed within sower foot on each side the rows or ranges of Trees:
which eight foot Bordures must be delved each spring; or if stiff clay, at both
equinoxes, and no vegitable suffered to grow thereon. For a man or two with
large and handsome hawes 10 Inches broad, will quickly go through them in
Summer, and cut the weeds at their first peeping: this would certainly be a
great Improvement; and whither you apply to Corn or Grass, Fruit or
Forrest-trees, I would advise you to keep them thus clean of weeds, and if ever
you repent it, blame me.

9. A sixth way of planting Trees is, to make all the walks or Intervalls open
from the House proportionally, so as when you stand at the House, the walks
may appear all of an equal beadth to the eye, this would suit well with my
contrivance of the House, being like the Sun sending forth his beams.

10. The distance of Trees in Thickets and Orchards, is either according to the
quality of the ground, Trees to be planted, or method of planting.

If a good and deep soil, there Trees will live long and grow great and
requires a large distance: Apples planted the 1st., 2d., and 3d., way may be
from 8 to 10 else distance: Pears so planted at 10 or 12 Else, and of these
planted the 4th. way may be at the least distance mentioned, because they will
stand near the greatest when every second is removed; but if planted the 5th.
way they may be from 16 to 20 Else one way, and from 8 to 10 the other:
Cherries and Plumes from 5 to 7 Else being planted the 1st., 2d., 3d., or 4th.
way; as for the distance of dwarfs and Wall-trees, see the next Chap. Sect. 5.

At the Pears distance plant Oak, Elm, Ash, Plan, Beach, Wallnut, Chestnut; at
the Aples distance plant Geens, Service, Lines, Poplars; at the distance of
Plum and Cherrie plant Maple, Hornbeam, Hassell, Birch, Laburnum, Aspen, Asder,
Willowes, Pin, Firr, Yew. And see the last Chap. Sect. 7. for more directions.

If the ground be level, plant such Trees as grow lowest, at the South Side,
and still higher by degrees toward the North, that the talest and strongest
may be on the North-side; so shall the Northren blasts be guarded off, and the
Sunbeams the better received in amongst them. If the ground be not level,
plant such as grow low, on the highest ground, and the contrary. And set
always the crooked or leaning side, toward the Southwest; whence comes the
greatest winds, which in few years will make them the more erect: for you may
see that all Trees that are not well, sheltered from these Westerly winds,
leans or declines therefrom.

When the ground is all marked out with stakes, put on the roundig string, and
make the holes. See the last Chap. Sect. 7. I use not to make them less than 6
foot Diameter for ordinary Trees, and you may suffer the outter row of stakes
to stand, till you plant the rest that you may view thereby.

How to order the ground, and plant, see the second part of this Book; and for
Enclosures see the same second part, Chap. 4.

CHAP. V. How to make the Kitchen Garden.
THE Kitchen-Garden is the best of all Gardens, but to return. In all Gardens
it is ordinary first to make a Bordure at the Wall. Secondly a walk. And
thridly a Bordure on the other side thereof; here, the walk with a Bordure on
each side of it, going round the whole plot, Parallel to the Wall: but if your
ground be large enough, I bid you make a distance Intercept betwixt the walk
and the Wall. Its also ordinary to divide the Garden into four plots, by two
walks crossing from side to side: but I am not for any cross walks in
Gardens; yet if you would have more than one, (which divides the whole into two
parts) then make them all one way through the plot leading to the House, and
equidistant from the middle, still making the gates, doors or entries Front the
walks.

In your Kitchen-plots, and in Nurseries for Trees, plant no Trees through the
ground: for when they grow up, they cover and choke the ground so, that you
will be necessitate to seek for another. Therefore, make only three Bordures
next and Parallel to the walks round on each hand: plant the first or that
next the walk on both sides, with a holly Hedge, the second with Goosberries
and currants, the third with dwarff Trees, the ground all open and void within
for Kitchen-herbes and Roots; which must be orderly divided into ridges; and
these again divided into Beds, Furrows, and Drills for your more orderly and
convenient planting and sowing. As for the proportion note that.

2. The walks must be in breadth according to their length viz. 1000 foot
long, 30 foot broad, 500 foot long, 20 foot broad, 250 in length, 15 in
breadth, 100 foot long, 10 foot broad.

The Bordures 6 foot broad, the Tables or Paths betwixt the Bordures 2 foot
broad, and these betwixt the level-Ridges (wherein the ground is divided) 3
foot broad, the Beds 6 foot broad with foot and half furrows; you may make 7
of them Beds in each Ridg, and the whole length of the plot all Running from
the House: but if your ground be small you may make your Bordures and Beds
narrower, yet still let the whole plot, Ridges, Bordures, and Beds be equally
divided, and their Areas or Edges three Inches higher than the furrows or
paths, and so much higher than the side of walks, as the middle of the walk
is higher than its sides, all handsomely clapped up with the Rakehead, by a line:
(and the like order you may observe in your seminaries and Nurseries of Trees)
then plant and sow by lines and Drills, both for beauty and convenience.

When you would do this divide the Bed, Bordure or Ridg at both ends into so
many equal parts: (by help of the long Rule and small sticks) then streatch on
the line from end to end by these sticks, and with the corner of the Rule make
a mark by the line, and therein set your Herbs and Plants; and for setting of
seeds, measure out, and streatch on the line as before, and with the setting
stick make the holes by the line (not too deep) and therein put the seeds. And
if you sow in drills, make a scratch or little ebb gutter with the point of the
stick by the line, and therein sow. If the rows be two foot distance, let the
first be one foot within the edg; if 6 Inches sundry make them 3 Inches off the
edge, and so proportionally. Note, that I have told the distances of each sort
Kitchen horbes and Fruits part 2. Chap. 6. where is intended 6 foot broad beds,
but where they are less, there must be fewer rows.

3. The Kitchen Garden may be placed, its half on each side the House and
Courts, and when you plant or sow, place every species by themselves (except
such mixture as is mentioned part 2. Chap. 1. Sect. 3.) and where you have not
a whole Ridge or at least a bed of a kind, you may complete them with such as
are nearest of growth and continuance: also plant them of long last, and them
that must be yearly renewed severally, each in Ridges or beds by themselves
orderly; the order is to make every sort oppose it self. Example if you plant a
Ridge of Artichocks on the one hand, plant another at the same place on the
other: and still where you have perennialls on the one side, set the same sort
at the same place on the other; and so of Annualls. In short, what ever you
have on the one side, you should have the same in every circumstance on the
other. Perennialls are such plants as continues many years in the ground,
Annualls are such as usually die immediately after once they bear seed, and that
is usually (tho not universally) the first or second year.

4. As for physical plot you may have them in that ridge of the Kitchen Garden
next the Bordures: and if you will to have no other pleasure Garden, you may
have Flowers there, and on the Bordures next the walks also: and that ridge or
Intervall betwixt the walk and Wall will be excellent for all early, rare and
tender plants. You may rill your Physic Herbs in Tribes and Kindreds,
planting every Tribe by themselves, and you may also place one of each kind in
the Alphabetical order.

5. How to order hedges, see part 2. Chap. 4. as for Walls, Brick is best, next
is Stone and Lime; 4 Else is low enough, 5 or 6 if you please: but if you would
make the South-looking Wall semicircles in it, that would conduce much to the
advantadge of the Fruit, as well as Hot-beds under it; The distance of
Wall-trees will Inform you what quantity to make them, as for example 15 foot
is the distance of Cherries and Plumes, (except such as the May cherrie which
being Dwarfish requires less) 18 foot for Apricoks and Peaches, 20 foot for
Aples, 24 for Pears. Therefore if you make the semicircumference 18 foot for
Apricoks and Peaches, (you may plant two Dwarff Cherries therein) then 36 is
the whole Perifery, and as 22 is to 7: so is 36 the Perifery to 11 fere the
Diameter; and having the Diameter you may easily make any part of the Circle:
and let the plain or straight Wall betwixt each semicircle be just one Trees
distance likewayes.

And also in straight Walls divide equally, and plant non in the Corners,
measure first off 6 foot on each side the gates or doors for Honisuckles,
Jasmines, etc. And whatever be the distance of your Trees, set them half
therefrom, as also from the Corners, except where you make all their heads ply
one way; (as on a low Wall) such may stand three foot off the Corners, or
Honisuckles they lean from, and a whole distance off these they lean toward.
You may plant a Goosberrie and curran in the intervalls of your Wall-trees
while young, and when the Trees approach, remove them. Let the Roots of your
Wall-trees stand near a foot from the Wall with their heads inclining toward
the same. Wall-trees in Orchards (whose Standards are in the Quincunx) should
stand opposite to the mid intervall of the Standards.

The distance of Dwarff Standards is 16 foot where there is but one row, and in
following this Rule of the three Bordures, they will stand just 16 foot off the
Hedge, observing to plant in the middle of the Bordures. The distance of
Goosberries and currants 6 foot. But in all your plantings and sowings divide
the ground so as each kind may stand and grow equally.

To conclude, these three Bordures going round at each side of the walks
handsomely made up and planted, as aforesaid, will secure the ground within from
hurtful winds and colds, and make people keep the walks (handsome pale doors
being on the entries of the Hedges) so as they may neither wrong you nor
themselves. Also the Hedge, Dwarff Standards, Shrubs, and Wall-trees being all
well pruned and plied, with the Bordures and walks clean and orderly kept,
will make it look like a Garden of pleasure, and hide all the Ruggedness that
happens in Kitchen-ground by delving, dunging, turning and overturning
throughout the year.

CHAP. VI. How to make the pleasure-garden, etc.
PLeasure-Gardens uses to be divided into walks and plots, with a Bordure
round each plot, and at the corner of each, may be a holly or some such trained
up, some Pyramidal, others Spherical, the Trees and Shrubs at the Wall well
plied and pruned, the Green thereon cut in several Figures, the walks laid
with Gravel, and the plots within with Grass, (in several places whereof may be
Flower pots) the Bordures boxed, and planted with variety of Fine Flowers
orderly Intermixed, Weeded, Mowed, Rolled, and kept all clean and handsome.

Plain draughts at only in use, and most preferable; that which I esteem is
plain straight Bordures and Paths running all one way, that is, from the House
with one walk parting it in the middle, leading to the House door: and if the
ground be large, you may make one round by the Wall too, as the pleasure-Garden
of fig. 1. Let the Bordures and Paths be both of a breadth, ( viz. 6 foot) box
the Bordures, and plant them with Flowers, lay the paths as well as the walks
with Gravel, plant the Walls with Fruit and Flower-bearing Trees variously.

Outter Courts has only one Bordure at the Wall, planted with Laurels and
other Greens, one Pathed or Brick-walk in the middle, leading to the middle of
the House-front with along Grass plot on each hand.

2. The Bordures of your Kitchen-Garden round by the walks may be boxed with
Thyme, Lavendar, Hysop, Rue, etc. the next with Parsley, Strawberries, Violets,
July-flowers, etc. Cherrie-gardens and Physick-gardens with Sweet-brier often
cut, or Box cut three times Per annum as April, June, August, minding to cut
their Roots at the inside every second year, that they exhaust no the strength
or nourishment of the Flowers or Herbs. But that which I prefer for
Flower-Gardens above all, is Dwarff-Juniper raised from the seed and Planted
thus, When the ground is levelled, measure out the Bordures, (but raise them
not above the walks, except you mind to lay gravel) streatch a line and with
the edge of the Rule mark along thereby, and therein set the young sets of
Box or the young Plants of Juniper at 2 years grouth; then prepare the Bordures
by delving in consumed dung of Cowes and Sheep, covering on a little lime topt
with a little sand, to ly all summer, kept clean from by hawing. At the
beginning of winter delve and mix together, to ly all winter un-Raked, and at
the Spring redelve, stir and mix it thoroughly, and train and plant your
Flowers and other Plants in their seasons. See Part 2. Chap: 7.

3. In making the walks in any Gardens, first level up the Bordures at its
sides, secondly drive a Row of Stakes in the middle of the walk, and level them
accordingly i. e. streatch line cross the walk betwixt the two level Bordures,
and mark where it hits the Stake in the middle of the walk; do this at both
ends, and viewing betwixt, will level the rest, see the next Chap: of
levelling. But you may mind, that the walk must rise a little in the middle, and
yet the middle of the walk, and top of the Boxing of the Bordure must be level,
i.e. The Boxings so much above the side of the walk, as the middle of the walk
is above its sides. Where your Boxing is timber or Stone, fill up the bordure
of Earth to the top thereof, but where your Boxing is of box-juniper or the
like, the Earth within the bordure and edg of the walks and paths without,
must be equal. As for the rise or swell that walks has which makes them
Segmenta Circuli, grass or brick walks may have for 30 foot broad 6 Inches
rise, for 20 foot 4 Inches, 10 foot 2 Inches; and let gravel have an Inch more
proportionally: and it agrees with the rule of proport: in Arithmetic, as 20
is to 4: so is 30 to 6. If gravel or brick walks or paths ly by the side of
grass, make the grass half Inche higher than such. If the walk be Grass, make
2 foot Tables, or paths of gravel betwixt it and the Bordure.

4. To lay grass, first level the ground, whither walk or plot; and its the
better to ly a year so made up, before you lay the turff; because it may be
levelled up again, if it sink unto holes: If it ly wet, bottom with Stones and
Rubish; and if the Earth be fat, take it out, and put in sand; however lay a
foot thick sand immediately under the Truff: then by the squair streatch lines,
Ritt with the Ritting Iron (which is an half round put into the end of a
crooked stick) and raise the Turff with the Turff-Spade, (which is broad
mouthed, otherwise all one with the Husbandmens breast-Turffing-spade) let the
Turff be of equal thickness, near Inch and half thick, a foot and half broad,
and as much in length, lay their green sides together, when you put them in the
cart, but do not Roll them when brought home, lay them all even and closs;
Feeling each particular Turff with your foot, so as you may discern any
Inequallity, to be helped Immediately, in laying still, beating every two three
rows of turff while moist, with the Timber beatters, and when the the whole is
laid, and well beat, Roll well with the Stone-Roller, which should be as big
as a hogsehead, The Spring and Autumn is the best time. And if you mind to
keep a good pile of Grass, suffer it never to grow Inch long: beat, mow, and
Roll often, especially in the mornings and moist weather.

5, But if you would lay the hard tile or brick walks, prepare as for Grass,
minding it wants the breadth of the brick of the true hight: for you must set
them all on their edg closs by other on a bed of lime, laying the side, each
other Row crossing the ends of the other, and place one in the middle of the
walks that both sides may be Regular.

6. To lay gravel, cleanse first the bottomes of the walks of fat Earth, and
Root weeds, and bottom it with Stones; and lay over that about half a foot of
clean round gravel, and about three Inches top gravel of equal greatness which
may be like beans and pease: you must make it thus equal by sifting, and so
Rake, Tred, and beat; and when completely levelled, beart well with the Timber
beaters, while moist, then Roll soundly with the Timber-Roller, and afterward
with the Stone-Roller, especially in Rain, for which the spring and Autumn is
best; but if dry weather, you must dash water one the Roller (continually in
Rolling) with the watering pott, and if you ar forced to use Sea or water sand,
you may beat some good clay to dust and mix with such, before you lay it; weed,
and Roll frequently.

7. For the orderly planting of flowers there may be three ways, as first in
the Bordures of pleasure Gardens or Courts, plant 5 rows in the bordure, and
Intermixe them orderly i. e. divide and plant every sundry sort through the
whole Garden at equal distances, and not only so but every sundry color
thereof also; let never two of a kind nor two of a color stand together,
without other kinds and colors Interveening, so as there may not be two, three
of a kind or Color at one end, Bordure, Plot or Place, and non thereof through
the rest, but universally and ornamentally Intermixed, and when you find a
breach by some being past the flower, you may have various Annual Flowers sown
in potts, ready to plunge into the vacancies of the Bordures for continuing
this beauty.

Secondly, in my sort of flower Gardens which is Bordures and paths running
all one way viz: from the House, Plant 5 rows and intermix them, not as in the
last way, but set 5 rows of each kind cross the Bordure, so as 25 of each sort
may stand in a Geometrical squair. As if you set a squair of Tulips, a squair
of Boarsears a squair of Crocuses, a squair of July Flowers, a squair of
Anemonies, and a squair of Couslips: and so a squair of Tulips, another of
Boars Ears, etc: Through that Bordure Intermixing the Colors of each sort,
then may you make the next Bordure so Intermixed, but differing: minding that as
you Intermix the Bulbous and Fibrous in each Bordure, so must they be also in
the crossing, that the squair of Fibrous in this may oppose the squair of
Bulbous in the next, and likewayes whatever Bordure such sorts at in, on the
one side of the walk, set the very same in the Bordure equidistant from the
walk on the other side, that the whole may be Regular and uniformely Intermixed
all the year, looking from all sides, ends or Angles.

Thridly in nurseries of Beds and Ridges, Plant every kind in thickets by
themselves, and Annualls and perennialls by themselves (except only that you
Intermix their Colors) that is, make a whole Bed or Ridg of each kind, 6
Rows in the Bed, the Dwarfish may be 8 Rows: thus every thicket of them
Flowering in their own order, will have a great show, and at a great distance;
and here also observe uniformity, that is, alike on each hand, see the last
Chap: sect: 3. For if you have a Ridg or Bed of July-flowers or the like on the
one side, Plant another thereof at the same place on the other, etc.

And because Flowers must be removed some in one, two, or three years, and the
Earth renewed or enriched, and properly prepared, else they degenerate; (because
in long time they exhaust the substance of the ground, at least that part
appropriate to them) therefore you have a good convenience for effectuating the
same by these last two models perscribed: for often you will have some Beds or
squairs where your Annualls stood, to replant your Tulips, Anemonies or the
like unto, and so another sort where these stood, and your Annualls again where
this last was; and because here you remove a whole Bed or squair of a kind at
once, you may very conveniently prepare, Delve, Stir, Beat, sift and mix it
thoroughly with the soil proper (a thing most necessary) and this you could not
well do, where they are scattred as in the first way. See the Rules mentioned
Part 2. Chap. 1. Sect. 10. and Chap. 7.

As to Terrase walks, if the Brow on which you make them, be not too steep,
the work shall be the more Facile: if you build them up with walls, be careful
to found deep enough according to the level, and if the middle of the terrase be
on the Central line of the house or of any walk, make the Stayr of the upmost
and downmost there to part at a plat on the head going down at both sides, so
much of the stayr case may be within as that the outter edg thereof may be in a
line with the Bordure at the wall, by this it marrs not the walk, the rest may
be at the ends; Plant the Bordure at the upperside of the walk with wall
Trees, the under side (being but ell high) with Laurels: etc. But if your
Terrase consists only of walks and sloping Banks, you may have the Bordure at
the head and foot of each Bank on either side the walks, Planted with standard
cherries etc. and the Banks, of Violets, Straw-Berries or Grass.

9. As for Pondes make them large and broad, such being best both for the
health of Fish and Fowll, Clean, and most preferrable water for watering
Plants: squair, Triangle, Circle, Ovall, or what figure sits your ground best;
let them be 5 or 6 foot of solid water at least, with Sluices to let it Run in
and out at pleasure.

I am against Arbust and close walks except Trees their natural closing, where
we have both shade and Air.

CHAP: 7. How to Level Ground.
I Have often wished that there might be some Rules found, whereby this
expensive work might become more easy. There be two sorts of levelling viz:
the Horizontal, and Sloping. The first is best known, but the last more
profitable and convenient. Example, I have made a plot slop 4 foot in 200 long,
and 18 Inches in 380 foot the other way: this was not perspicuous to vulgar
eyes, yet to have made it Horizontal, would have been Ridiculous as to time,
pains and expenses. And in levelling the walks about a plot (which sloped
naturally) to make them correspond with the grownd rownd, I behoved to make the
middle walk agree with the side ones whereupon it slops 10 foot in 370 long: now
if I had made this Horizontal, it would have been 5 foot or 10 steps lower than
the one side walk, and as much higher than the other, and so worse and more
Inconvenient than before, both as it is a walk, and anent Correspondancy with
the rest of the ground within; therefore I am for levelling any ground sloping,
that it may turn a little to the Sun if possible, for drawing water, that it
may correspond with its adjuncts, and above all to prevent the more costly way:
for Its certainly a principal observation in levelling, not only to cause, the
ground of it self serve it self, but also to level it as it lies most
conveniently, which is the cheap and easy way of levelling. When you have a
Row of stakes set in a straight line and about 20 foot distance, as in the edge
of a Bordure or middle of a walk, the way of levelling them either Horizontal
or sloping, is to mark and put a nail in the two Stakes which are at the
extremes or ends thereof, and view betwixt, cause mark all the Rest which are
betwixt, in a level line, therewith; This is the easiest, the exactest and
quickest way: and in the same method you may go round any plot, and
consequently cross (every way) the same accordingly.

In that which you would have Horizontal, place the long Rule and the level at
one end, suppose the sole of the Door, till the plumb fall right in recovering,
and view along the said Rule (as on a fowlling piece) that you may see what
part of each Stake it hits, and cause one with a piece white paper or white
hefted knife hold the same at each stake, its heft tending out (as the nails
which carry up the line) and direct him by words or signs to hold up or down
till it be Just level: when they are all marked, measure down so much on each
Stake, as was raised up for convenience; in viewing there mark, put in nails
a little, streatch on the line, and level up the earth or gravel thereunto.

And where you would have determined slops, set on the level and mark the
far-end stake in a level line therewith, then measure down upon the said Stake
or pole from the marked place so much as you design the slop, and put in a
nail with white paper about it, and at the upperside of the Rule in the stake
at the door, put in another nail, and by viewing betwixt these two, mark all
the rest as before. If the distance betwixt the extremes be far where the
sight may dazzle, let the viewer descent his station, and come foreward at every
5 or 6 Stakes and holding his knife at the last marked Stake, cause his
assistant or stake-marker proceed.

To level as the ground lies, let its slop be what it will you need neither
level nor Rule (except you please to try how much it slops after its done for
satisfaction) only set stakes as before, and viewing the ground narrowly put
nails in the stakes which are at the extremes where you think the ground will
Run when levelled to make it serve it self, and as it lies best or easiest for
levelling: and when you have concluded upon the level at the extremes, make all
the stakes in the Intervall by viewing as above.

2. But to proportion the level to the ground is the whole art of levelling.
Its true it is easy, if you have a plot or walk a foot higher at one end, to
take half a foot thereof, and lay on the low end so as the two ends may be
Horizontal, (I have already showed how to level having the two ends found) or
if it be Horizontal to take 9 Inches off the one end, and lay on the other,
that it may slop 18 Inches: but if some places of it ly one way, and some
another, and some neither the one nor the other, this increases the
difficulty. Wherefore you must first drive stakes at the corners of the plot,
then view the ground about and put nails in the stakes where you would have
the level Run, or at least where you think by your eye it may most conveniently
come to make it contain it self, and easiest to be levelled: also set up
several stakes in the Intervalls and Crosswayes through the plot from opposite
Angles, and by viewing betwixt the foresaid nails every way mark all the
stakes level; but if you cannot see from the marks of this supposed level
which are on these corner stakes, seeing there may be some underneath the
ground, little Hills, or some such obstructions in the way, then measure
equally up upon each of them, so far as you think convenient for getting your
sight, and mind to take down the same again after viewing.

When all is marked with this supposed level, go over and note narrowly how it
will agree, that so as your reason shall teach you to alter, take up one end or
down the other, or up or down both till you bring it to such proportion, as to
do its own business it self. Or you may do more exactly thus.

Suppose you have a Bordure or middle of a walk with sixteen stakes driven
therein at 20 foot distance, all marked with a supposed level, and 10 of their
marks above ground, and 6 under ground: first measure how far the marks on
each of the 10 stakes is above ground, and write them down particularly, and
adding their measures together, you find 13 foot 4 Inches. Secondly measure how
far the marks of the 6 stakes ar under ground, and write down, adding them
together you find it 12 foot; substract the one from the other and the
difference is 16 Inches which must be divided by 16 the stakes in the Bordure,
that is, ane Inch to each stake, so that this supposed level is an Inch higher
over all than the true level, which being taken down will make the ground there
level it self, and no more. This may suffice for example, but I could say more,
if I did see your ground. And if you can thus proportion the level to one
Bordure, walk, or one Row of stakes, you may by the same Rule find the level
for the stakes round and cross the plot, and consequently level the same
accordingly: for having once concluded on the level, drive stakes over all the
plot as in my first way of planting Trees, (see Chap. 4. Sect. 4.) and mark
and put nails therein as above is taught for carrying the line. Except you
mean to follow my method of levelling the Kitchen-Garden, or the like for
planting and sowing, which is only to level one Bordure thus by stakes and
lines. Round each plot and by the eye level up the ground within thereunto all
along in Trenching, albeit this not so proper for Courts and Grass plots.
However as by this means, I use to level ground without a level, so do I think
this way of finding out the true level by means of a supposed one, worthy your
notice, and if rightly improven save you much money and pains.

Be cautious in founding your Walls lest you undermine them in levelling, nor
is it convenient sometimes to confine your level to the foundation of Walls
already built: for in so doing, you may lose more, than would cast down and
rebuild, but in such cases you may rather build under gradually.

3. There be some bad lying plots and walks, with an ascent at the head,
hollow in the middle, level at the foot, these and the like are very troublesome
to level under one denomination: for the taking down the Hill, bares it so,
that plants cannot prosper thereon. some ar necessitate to take out the Gravel,
Tile, or Stones so much deeper, and travel earth again: but I rather advise to
make terrases, you need not confine to the number of banks, but only to the
proportion and uniformity. If it tend all one way as high at one end and low at
the other, then its proper enough for perpendicular walks that front the
house, but if low in the middle and high at both ends, or low at both ends and
high in the middle, then more proper for Parallel walks, (whose extremities are
equidistant from the central line of the House) remember to divide and slop
them equally.

This minds me of some abuses, which I have seen, as a plot of sloping levelled
ground, with another Horizontaly levelled lying at the foot thereof, (at least
not under one slop) or Horizontal walks and bordures lying by the foot and
head of sloping plots; these are unseemly: for you should always make them
slop under the same denomination (except in steep and high banks) I have made
walks of 18 foot broad slop 18 Inches from one side to the other, because the
whole plot sloped the same way, so much proportionally, yet to the eye appears
very pleasant; but where such Horizontal and sloping pieces ly contiguous, the
defect is easily seen, therefore if you be necessitate to lay some plots so,
(albeit I know reason for laying walks so) make rather a Hedge to Intercept,
and in all your works let there be a connection.

4. There be some more obstructions in levelling, as in a long walk when you
have the two ends found and marked, (either with a supposed or true level) and
cannot see betwixt, to do it exactly by reason of length: here two may go to
the middle or near it, where you may conveniently see both ends, looking back
and fore, there drive in two stakes near the length of the long straight Rules
distance, at which hold on the Rule, and let one view along the same till the
mark at the West End be level therewith, and the other toward the East till
the mark there be also level with the same; so both may alter up or down till
they have their desires at once: then six the Rule, and having as many stakes
set as is needful, you may view backsight and foresight hereon, and level them
all exactly.

5. But if a Wall, a House, etc. Intercept, measure perpendicular and exactly
up to the top thereof, and on the other side measure down the same again; and
so set foreward the level, but so as it may communicate with the rest, when
obstructions are removed.

But if a Hill, go to the Top, set the Rule level, and laying ane eye thereto,
cause one with a long pole go down till its Top be level therewith (he holding
it level by a Plumb Rule) then descent your stations and set the upper-end of
the Rule where the pole stood, there level it and do as before: thus from
station to station to the foot of the Hill, (if it be so great) keeping count
in a Note-book what poles and parts; the which may be as easily taken down the
other side by the same method.

But if it be possible to see over the obstruction on 3 footed standing
leathers by help of long poles or Pikes, (as I have done in the like case)
raise your level thereon, and having viewed, and marked that on the other side,
measure down the same there, etc.

6. I might here speak of the solidity of earth, whereby you may move readily
count the expense of levelling, but having showed in the next Chap. Sect. 5.
How to measure solids, I presume its applicable to earth: (as well as Timber,
Stone, etc.) For if you know the breadth, length, and deepth thereof, you may
find how many solid Else, etc. And if you know how many Else and parts will
load a cart and how many carts a day, you may go near to calculat the cost of
the whole.

7. In levelling any ground for Kitchen ground, Orchards, or Nurseries, take
not away its good earth or surface, (as you bring down the hights) but always
turn over the upper part thereof behind you, carrying away that which is below,
so much deeper, that it may contain that surface, and put the bad earth in
bottom of hollowes with better mould above it.

In the practice of levelling (or other works) contrive the working, so as
there may be still a motion amongst all the parts; and albeit carts are
cheaper for levelling than Wheell-barrowes, if the way of carriage be not very
short, yet if you do not set as many men to fill the carts as may have the one
full against the other come in and no more, you lose considerably: and this
will be according to the distance of carriage, or as the earth is capable of
being wrought; and so with Wheell-barrowes for two Wheellers, three barrowes,
and one filler sometimes does well, sometimes more fillers or fewer Wheellers,
yet still let them have a led barrow. And if this could be done with carts
also, it would be of great Advantage. wherefore in my opinion there is no way
so probable to work this effect, as the carts with three Wheells where by 2.
men, with 2. of them carts, and one Horse can do as much as three Men, two
Horses, and 2 Carts: for one man to fill the led Cart, the other Man to drive
the one Horse: and when he comes in, he has nothing to do but take the Trases
and Hooks off the empty Cart and put upon the rings of the full one and so
drive on. This Cart has no Trams or Limbers, but a Swingle-Tree or Bread-board
before, where the rings that keeps the Trasses are: it has a handsome folding
body, the third Wheell is about 30 Inches Diameter all Iron and Runs in a
Shiers of the same fastened perpendicular under the middle of the forebreast with
a turning Pin of Iron; the other two Wheells are common, but if they have an
Iron Axis, the better.

8. To bring in Water in Pipes to your Houses, Courts, Gardens, Pondes, Parks,
etc. Consider on the level, for as the place where you convey it unto, must
always be lower than the Fountain from whence it comes, else thither it
cannot flow: so must you take notice that no Hill in the way of its conveyance
be so high as the Fountain it self. You may find the level by placing your
Instrument at the Well or Fountain, as I directed in walks. and if a Hill
intercept that sight, plant on the Top thereof, that by backsight and foresight
you may find the difference, that hence you may know whither you can carry it
about the obstruction: but if the distance be far, you need to be the more
exact. As for Instrument, the Cross discribed Chap. 3. whose sights may be two
Prospect Glasses, may do well whither for one or many stations. Let one stand
at the Springhead, another betwixt and the place whereunto you desire to carry
the Water, a large distance sundry, but so as a third man about the middle may
see both their Marke-boards that is on their Pikstaves, and direct them to hold
level by his back and foresight, desiring them to keep account what foot and
parts: and so come foreward till the assistant at the well plant where the
foremost stood, and thus proceed all in a straight line, and do as before, from
station to station so long as needful. at length add all the measures of
back-stations together, and all of the fore-stations: substract the one from
the other, and the remainders gives the difference of levels betwixt the
Fountain and the appointed place.

Allow to the fall of the Water for every 1000 foot in length 12 Inches slop at
least.

CHAP. VIII. How to measure, divide and lay out Land, etc.
SOme following other-Countrey-books Ignorantly measures our ground with their
measures, therefore I am here to Inform such that,

In measuring all figures whither superficial or solid, it is requisite to know
first, wherewith they should be measured, secondly how they should be measured.

Land is done by ell, or fall measure, (also Masons Roughwork-buildings) Stone,
Board, and Glass by foot measure: 12 Inches a foot (and no distinction betwixt
a Scots and English foot) the Glaziers used only 8 Inches, but the Act of
Parliament has reduced them to 12 as others. Some would think 12 Inches but a
third part more, whereas it is equivalent to 2 of theirs: for 8 times 8 is 64,
and 12 times 12 is 144, out of which I get 2 times 64, and the 16 remaining is
thereof. This minds me of that question viz. Whither is a squair half foot or
half a foot squair most? I have heard severalls say they were both alike, but
this was their mistake: For a half foot squair (superficial,) is but the half
of a squair half foot, and if solid its but thereof.

The Scots Ell according to several Acts of Parliament is three foot one Inch,
or 37 Inches long: 6 else long and 6 else broad is 36, a fall squair: 10 falls
in length and 4 in breadth is 40, a Rood squair: 40 falls in length and 4 in
breadth is 160, an Acre. See the Table of superficial squair measure. And these
that desires long measure, 6 else long is a fall, 40 falls a furlong, 8
furlongs a mile. See the Table.

A Table of Superficial squair measure, according to Scotland.
Acres 4 160 5760 Roods 40 1440 Falls 36 Else

A Table of Superficial long measure, according to Scotland.
Else 6 Falls 240 40 furlongs 1920 320 8 Mile

We differ in measuring land from the English, as the fall differs from the
pole: our fall is 6 else or 18 foot, their pole is 5 yardes or 16 foot.

By what is said I hope you know wherewith to measure, it only remains then
that you know how to measure; of which anon.

2. In measuring all superficies we take notice of the breadth and length, but
of solides the breadth, length and deepth. To instance in a few, and first of
some Superficial Figures; as a Geometrical squair, (see fig. 18.) it is
measured by multiplying one side in it self ( viz. a. b. or c. e: or a. c. or
b. e.) which here is 30 falls: In your workings I would advise you to make use
of decimal Arithmetic, because thereby you may work whole Numbers and
Fractions together with great ease and quickness, and you may reduce ordinary
Fractions into decimalls, by multiplying the Numerator by 100. or 1000. etc.
and dividing the product by the Denominator, so shall the of anything be 25,
the 5, and the 75: therefore multiply 30.5 in its self, the product is 930.25.
which is ^ 930. falls and of a fall. See the example, for when you multiply
decimally what ever fractions are in multiplicand and multiplicator, cut them
off after addition: the which if there be any will be Fractions, as here you
see two cut off viz. 25 which is of 100, the fall being here into 100 parts the
Integer of 25. And when you divide decimally, as whole Numbers and Fractions by
whole Numbers, put still a dash betwixt the whole and Fraction, and notice how
often you will get your divisor placed under the whole Numbers of your
dividend, and just so many whole Numbers will be in the quotient and the rest
Fractions: or if you divide whole and Fractions by whole and Fractions, notice
how many times you may place the whole Numbers of divisor under whole Numbers
of dividend etc. Or if you divide whole Numbers by whole and Fractions,
whatever Fractions be in divisor add so many Ciphers to the dividend, and do as
before.

You may reduce this (or any other) plot into Acres by dividing by 160 the
falls in one Acre, and the product here will be 5 Acres 130 falls and of a
fall. But if ^ you would further know what this Fraction (25) is in Else, say,
if 100 be equal to 36 the else in one fall what is 25 equal unto? Multiply
the 2d Number by the 3d, and divide by the first and the answer will be 9 else.
See it wrought.

Moreover falls may be reduced into poles, and poles into falls, or Scots
measure into English or English into Scots: one superficies is to another as
the squairs of their like sides, therefore as the squair of 16.5 (the English)
is to the squair of 18.5 (the Scots) so is the content in Scots Acres or falls,
to the content in English Acres or poles.

Example the squair of 16.5 ( i. e. 16.5 multiplied in it self) is 272.25 and
the squair of 18.5 is 342.25, And as 272.25 is to 342.25: so is 930.25 (the
content of the said plot in falls or Scots measure) to 1169.43 sere, its
content in poles or English measure. This I thought fit to mention, to let any
see that knows not the difference betwixt the English measure and ours.

Secondly an oblong squair or Parallelogram (see fig. 19.) by multiplying the
breadth by the length: a. d. or b. c. is its length and a. b. or d. c. its
breadth.

Thridly, a Triangle, (see fig. 20.) all Triangles are measured by multiplying
the whole base by half the perpendicular or whole perpend: by half the base; a.
b. is base and i. c. the perpendicular, or without the perpendicular at all,
add up all the sides, and take half the sum; from this half sum take every
side, which call the three differences, multiply these three differences and
the half sum continually together, the squair Root of the last product shall
be the Area of the Triangle.

Fourthly, a Trapezia (see fig. 21.) is reduced into two Triangles, and
measured accordingly.

Fifthly, and so is any irregular straight lined figure, and if any side of it
be crooked, draw a line that may leave out as much as it takes in. But if it
cannot be measured within because of obstructions, then add on the outside till
you reduce it into a squair, and after multiplication substract what was added,
the remainder shall be its Area.

Sixthly a circle (See Fig: 22.) is near equal to a squair made of the
diameter and the circumference or perifery, and therefore is measured by
multiplying a. q. c. o. b. the Semicircumference by a. d. or d. c. the
semidiameter. And having any one given you may find the other by the Rule of
proportion thus:

The lowest number is, as 7. is to 22: so is the diameter to the Circumference,
or as 22. is to 7: so the Circumference to the diameter, or thus: As 1. is to
3.1416: so the Diameter to the Circum: or as 3.1416. is to 1: so the Circum: to
the diam: or as 113. to 355: so diam: to perifery, or as 355. to 113: so
perifery to diameter.

In this the Diameter is 63 falls and as 7. is to 22: so 63 (the diam:) to 198
(the perifery) Take perifery which is 99. and multiply by: Diameter which is
31.5. and the product is 3118.5. or as 28. is to 22: or 14. to 11: or 1. to
785399: so is the squair of the Diameter to the Area of the circle: or as 22.
to 28: or 11. to 14: or 355. to 452: or 1. to 1.273239: so is the Area of the
Circle to the squair of its diameter. as 1. is to 282095: so is the circle to
the Root of a squair equal to the Area of the circle. as 1. is to 707107: so
is the Diameter to the Root of a squair to be inscribed in a Circle. as 1. is
to 225072: so is the perifery to the Root of the inscribed squair in the
circle, and as 1. is to 886227: so is the Diameter to the Root of a squair
equal to the Circle, which is the squairing of a Circle.

Seventhly, the Semicircle as measured by multiplying the Radius or
semidiameter by of the circumference of the whole Circle.

Eighthly, the Quadrant or of the Circle, by multiplying the Radius by of that
Arch line which is of the perifery.

Ninthly, to measure the segment of a Circle as q. i. o. c. first draw its
Radius from d. to o. which constituts the Sector d. o. c. And as the Quadrant
has 90 degrees so this Sector has 40: therefore say. as 90. is to the content
of the Quadrant: so is 40 to the content of the sector, the Triangle d. o. i.
Being subtracted from the Sectors content, Rests half the segment, that
doubled is the Area of the whole.

To do Geometrically, find the length of its Arch line thus: (See Fg. 23.)
divide the chord line a. d. c. Of that arch into 4 equal parts set one of
these from c. to i. on the chord line, and one of them from the Angle at a. to.
o. In the Arch line, then draw the line o. i. which line is half the length of
the Arch line, a. o. b. c. (but if the part of a Circle be greater than a
semicircle, then divide the Arch line into two equal parts and find the length
of one of these as is taught, which doubled is the half length of the whole.)
here take the half of the Arch line of Fig: 23. And multiply by its Radius e.
b. The product is the Area of the segment a. b. c. d. and the Triangle a. c. e.
which Triangle must be substract (...) therefrom, and the remainder is the Area
of the segment.

Tenthly, if you would measure the oval, then observe the Rules in measuring
the segment: seeing the oval is made of segments; If it be from two Centers,
then its but two Segments, If from four, then it is four segments and a
quadrangle.

Eleventhly Regular poligons ar such figures as consist of equal sides and
Angles, and which may be inscribed in a Circle or Circumscribed about a Circle,
whither pentagon 5 sided, hexagon six sided, Heptagon, Octagon, Nonagon,
Decagon, Dodecagon, for any of these take half the compass about and the
perpend: drawn from the Center to the middle of one of the sides, multiply the
one by the other, and that gives the content.

Twelvthly to measure any Irregular figure consisting of straight and Circular
lines, the arches and angles bending Inwards; If you cannot reduce them into
some of the Figures above mentioned within it self, you may do it by drawing
lines without: and after you have multiplied, substract what was added (whither
segments or others) and there will remain the Area of the figure proposed.

Mountains and Valleys ar best reduced into Triangles, and so measured: for
albeit they make rather spherical than plain Triangles, yet the way of
mensuration differs not; yet as in plain Trapezias there are other ways than
by Triangles (as taking the half of both ends and sides added for the mean
breadth and length) so for mounts and Valleys, viz: Measure the circuit or
base part of the Mountain and its top, add them together, and take half of that
sum for the length; do so with the ascense (or going up from foot to top) of 2
sides of the Hill, add the measure of the longest and shortest side together,
taking the half thereof for the breadth, and multiply the one by the other,
that gives the superficies of the Mount or Hill.

And as you measured the compass of the foot of the Hill so must you round the
circuit or compass of the hight of the valley or glen: and as you measured the
top of the Mountain, so must you the bottom of the depth of the vale (...) add
them together and take half thereof for the breadth likway (...) as you
measured the ascense of both sides of the Hill, so must you the descense or
going down of both sides to the bottom of the valley; add them together, and
take half for the length, and so multiply as before.

3. Albeit I have said enough anent measuring land, yet there is much more
required in dividing and laying out the same.

The first time I saw the need of it, was in making an Avenue of great length
which crossed a march several times, which did take in several pieces of land
and cast out others, but non of them being equal neither in shape nor
proportion, I behoved to measure both, and then cut off so much as might
Balance, and that from parts assigned.

As first, if from the Triangle a. b. c. (being Fig: 24.) which contains 870
falls squair, you would cut off 300 falls squair, then finding the base c. b.
of this Triangle to be 58 falls long, say, if 870 falls (the whole plot) have
58 for its base: what will 300 (the part I desire off) have for its base.

Answer, 20. therefore measure ^ along 20 falls on the base from one end
thereof, as from b. to d. then draw the line a. d. so shall a. b. d. contain
300 falls, and a. d. c. 570. Or

If it be required to take off part from a Triangle, according to any
proportion given, by a line drawn parallel to any of the sides assigned, as
let a b. c. (which is Fig. 25.) be a Triangle containing 7 Acres, or 1120
falls; and it is desired that 2 Acres be cut off by a line drawn Parallel to
a. c. Its base line is 57 falls which you must divide in proportion, as 5. is
to 2. in the point d. then seek the mean proportional between b. d. 42. and b.
c. 57. as b. f. 48 80/97 But having (as in the end of this Chap:) showed how to
find mean proportionals Arithmetically, I shall here show you how to do
Geometrically.

Therefore describe the semicircle b. e. c. and at the point d. on the base
line, raise the Perpendicular d. e. Cutting the Arch line in e. then set the
length of b. e. (which is the mean Proportional) from b. on the Diameter line,
and that will reach to the point f. now from the point at f. take the nearest
distance to the line c. a. and set that distance squair off at a. to G. then
draw the line G. f. exactly parallel to a. c. so will the Triangle G. b. f. be
5 Acres, and G. f. c. a. 2 Acres, the thing propounded.

If you would cut off some part from a squair parallel to one side, you need
only measure that side, whence you design to take it at; and divide the parts,
you ar to take off thereby: and the quotient shall tell how much you must set
off. Example by fig: 19. its ane oblong squair denominated a. b. c. d. I desire
3 Acres or 480 falls, cut off at, and parallel to the side a. b. which side is
32 falls divide 480 (the part you ar to cut off) by 32 (the side of the squair)
and the quotient will be 15 therefore set off 15 falls from a. to e. and from
b. to f. and the squair a. b. f. e. is 3 Acres, as was required.

But if its sides did not go squair off, as the Trapezia 21. then reduce the
Trapezia into a Triangle, and divide the base into so many equal or unequal
parts, (as you would have the Trapezia into) then find a mean proportion
between the extreme points of the base, and every particular point in the base:
from which means draw lines through the Trapezia parallel to the side assigned,
which may answer your requiring. Or

A more ready way to work on ground, is to find the mid line of the ground you
are to cut off, and divide thereby, etc. But the question, is how to effect
this, you may first set off the whole in two Triangles, viz: If you would cut
off 160 falls, at the end a. b. of fig: 21. Then set off the half thereof at
the Angle c. a. b. to cut the line a. c. by the first: for you will find that
as the Triangle c. a. b. contains 364 falls, so must you go 7 from a. to e. on
that base, to draw the line b. e. that Cuts off the Triangle a. b. e.
containing 80 falls. Likwayes as the Triangle d. e. b. contains 165, so must
you go from b. to f. that, a. b. e. f. may contain 160 falls. Only the line e.
f. is not parallel to a. b. therefore as b. f. is 5 longer than a. e. set 2 out
from e. to G. and in from f. to h. and draw the line G. h. parallel to a. b.
and to leave as much out as it takes in; then find the length of the mid line
betwixt a. b and G. h. viz. i. K. which is 16. and by the same divide 160. the
quotient shall be 10. And that will reach from a. to G. and from b. to h. so as
to cut off 160 falls at, and parallel to the end a. b. (by the line G. h.) as
was desired.

It is required to part the pentagon or fig: 26. Into two equal parts from the
Angle at a. The whole figure is 10 Acers, one Rood and 12 falls, that is, 1652
falls; then the half is 826. and the Triangle a. b. c. is but 441. which wants
385 of the half: therefore take 385 from the Triangle a. c. d. by the first
Rule, and there will be added the Triangle a. c. f. to the Triangle a. b. c.
which will divide the figure into two equal parts, the thing required.

I am desired to set off a third part of the hexagon or fig: 27. By a line
drawn from the point G. the whole plot is 45 Acers and 145 falls or 7345
falls, the thereof is 2448. and the Trapezia G. e. f. a is but 2041.875. which
wants 407 falls: (and the fraction which a little more than of a fall)
wherefore I must take 407.875 from the the Triangle G. d. e. by the first,
thus. If 2523.50 the content of the Triangle G. d. e. have for its base c. d.
62 falls, how far must I go on the same to get off 407.875? answer, 10
5325/25235 that is 10 falls and about of a fall; the which being set from e. to
h. to draw the line G. h parts off the of this Irregular hexagon, as was
desired.

If you were desired to lay out any number of Acres at pleasure into a
Geometrical squair, you need only reduce them into falls and extract the squair
Root thereof (as at the end of this Chap.) which is the length of one side, and
so measure, or set off by a Chain. Or

If you would have it ly in a Parallelogram or oblong squair, you may lay it
out, as I directed for cutting off some part from a squair parallel to one
side: for knowing how many falls you would have into the oblong squair, you may
make a side at pleasure (if not already confined to one) and divide thereby as
is taught. Or

If you would make a Triangle to contain so many Acres, Roods, or falls, double
the number of falls, then take for the base of your Triangle, any number at
pleasure, by which divide the double of falls to be brought in the Triangle;
and the quotient shall be the perpendicular to that Triangle, whose content
shall be the number of falls proposed. And herein consists the Reduction of
figures Arithmetical.

4. Perhaps you may have occasion, to measure the solidity of Earth, Timber
Trees, Stones, etc. Now to find the superficies of solides. as,

First the Sphaere or Globe, multiply its whole circumference by its whole
diameter, and that gives its superficial content. And as 7 is to 22: or 113. to
355: so is the Diameters squair to the superficies of the sphaere: and so is
the Diameter multiplied by the axis of a cylinder to its superficies: and so is
half Diameter of a cone multiplied in its side to the superficies of a cone:
and so the squair of the chord of half the segment of a sphere to the
superficies of that segment.

As 1. is to 1.772454: so is the Diameter to the Root of a squair equal to the
superficies of a Sphaere. Or as 1. is to; 564189: so is the Circumference to
the Rootsquair, that shall be equal to the superficies of the Sphere.

5. As superficial measure has 144 Inches squair in one foot: so solid
measure has 1728. every solid foot is like a Die, for what it wants either in
breadth or thickness it must have in length: for 12 times 12. is 144, and 12
times 144. is 1728. the cubesquair Inches in a cubesquair foot; therefore,

In measuring a squair solid, multiply its length by its breadth, and that
product by its deepth.

To measure a Cylinder (such as a Roller) multiply the Semidiameter by the
Semi-circumference, and that product by the length.

To measure a Cone ( viz. it has a Circular base, and ends in a sharp point)
take the superficial content of the base, and multiply by of the altitude or
hight.

To measure a Pyramid ( viz, it has an angular base, and ends in a sharp
point) make use of the last Rule.

To measure a Sphere or Globe, ( viz. a solid figure every where equidistant
from the Center) Cub the Diameter, and multiply that by 11. then divide that
product by 21. the quotient is the solid content of the Sphere.

As 1. is to 80604: so is the Diameter to the Root of a Cube equal to the
Sphere. Or as 1. is to; 256556: so is the Circumference to the Root Cube of a
solid, equal to the Sphere.

As 1. is to 523599: so the Cube of the Diameter to the Sphere. Or as 1. is to;
909856: so is the Sphere to the Cube of the Diameter.

As 1. is to; 016887: so is the Cube of the Circumference to the Sphere. or as
1. is to 59; 217629: so is the Sphere to the Cube of the Circumference.

As 42. is to 22: or 1. to 5236: so is the Diameter cubed to the solidity of
the Sphere. Or as 22. is to 42: or 1. to 1; 90986: so is the solidity of the
Sphere to its Diameter cubed.

As 28. is to 22: or 14. to 11: or 1. to 785399: so is the squair of the
Diameter of a Cylinder multiplied by its side, to the solidity of the Cylinder:
and so is the squair of the Diameter of a Cone multiplied by of its Axis, to
the solidity of the Cone.

As 1. is to 25; 1327: so is the Diameter cubed to a Cylinder.

To measure a Regular Polygon, (as a piece Timber hewed into 5, 6, 7, 8, etc.
Equal sides with both ends alike) multiply the semicircumference by the Radius
or semi-diameter, and that product by the length.

To measure a Truncus, ( viz. a Cylinder that leans) take the superficies of
the Circle, and adding the longer and shorter sides of the Truncus, take the
half for the hight.

The Sector of a Sphere is measured by multiplying its superficies Spherical by
one third of the hight.

The Segment of a Sphere measure it as a Sector, and substract from the Sector
the solidity of a Cone, whose Apex is in the Center, and base the Area of the
Segment.

The solidity of a Spheroid is got by multiplying the greatest Circle into two
thirds of the Axis about which the Spheroid is made.

The solidity of the Trunk of a Spheroid cut off with two Circles at right
angles with the base, such as our Wine Caskes are, is gotten by adding two
thirds of the Area of the Circle at the bung or middle together, and multiplying
the same by the length.

Irregular disorderly Solids ar measured by help of Water in a prepared Vessel
exactly cubical, so large as it may contain it; according to Archimedes: put
the body into the vessel, pour in so much Water as may just cover the same; and
make a mark where the superficies of the Water touched the vessel; take out
the same irregular body, and make a second mark where the superficies cuts the
side of the vessel; then take the distance between the two marks in Inches and
parts, which multiply by the squair of the side of the prepared vessel; and
that product shall be the solidity of the irregular body sought.

6. If you would measure any superficies by the Table of Logarithms, then set
down the Logar: of the length and breadth, add them together, and whatever
their sum be, the number answering thereunto is the Area or superficial
content. Which if they be falls and you desire to reduce them into Acres, then
out of the Logarithm thereof substract the Logarithm of 160 (the falls in one
Acre) and there shall remain the Logarithm of the content in Acres. Or

If you would measure solides by the Table, set down the Logarithms of its
length, breadth, and deepth: add them together; and the absolute Number
answering this Logarithm is the solid content required.

Also by the Table you may extract the squair Root (of any plot, field or other
superficies) with great ease and quickness thus:

Take the half of the Logarithm of the given Number whose Root is required, and
the Number answering this Logarithm is the squair Root sought. Or

For extraction of the Cube Root of any solid, take the third part of the
Logarithm of the given Number whose Root is required, and the absolute Number
answering thereunto is the Cube Root desired.

And to find a mean proportional (between two Numbers given by the Table) is to
add the Logarithms of them together, and take half. As if you would have the
mean betwixt 40.5. and 72. Thus:

The Logarithm of 40.5 is 1.607422 The Logarithm of 72 is 1.857290 The sums
added 3.464712 The half of the Logarithm is 1.732356

The Number answering this Logarithm is 54. for the mean proportional.

To find 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. means between any two Numbers, take their difference,
and divide it by a Number more by one than the Number of means desired, as if 3
means, divide by 4. etc. This Logarithmical quotient added to the last, finds
the first mean next it, etc. As, if you would have three mean proportionalls
betwixt 4. and 64.

The Logarithm of 64. is 1.806180 The Logarithm of 4. is 0.602060 The
difference is 1.204120

The thereof is 0.301030. which being added to the Logarithm of 4 makes
0.903090. the Logarithm of 8. for the first mean: again added to this last,
gives 1.204120. the Logarithm of 16. and added to this, gives 1.505150 the
Logarithm of 32. which 8.16.32. ar the 3 means betwixt 4 and 64.

But because the extraction of the squair Root is so needful to be known, I
shall demonstrate the same.

Example, If you were to find the squair Root of ^ 576. Supposing it the squair
of Fig. 18. Make first a dash at every other Figure, beginning always at the
first toward the right hand viz. at 6. and 5. that just so many Figures will
be in the quotient or Root; then say, what is the Root of 5. answer, 2. is the
nearest, therefore write 2. in the quotient and multiply the same, saying 2
times 2 is 4. write down that under the 5 and substract it therefrom, saying, 4
from 5 there remains 1. thus have you 20 the squair Root of G. i. c. f.
(considering that there is yet one Figure to follow) and now you want the
squair Root of the two oblong squairs, viz. a. b. G. h. and e. b. f. d. (out of
which you must substract the little squair e. b. i. h.) therefore double your
quotient or Root of the squair G. i. c. f. saying 2 times 2 is 4 write this
down for your divisor one Figure foreward viz. under 17. and use common
division, saying how often can we get 4 out of 17. answer. 4 times, write that
in the quotient and say, 4 times 4 is 16. that subtracted from 17. remains 1.
thus have you 4 the Root of the oblong squair, out of which substract the
little squair once, because you have it twice by the former doubling the oblong
squair; therefore multiply the side of the little squair, viz. 4 in it self,
that makes 16. substract the same from (...) and there remains nothing: so 24
is the squair Root or side a. b. whose squair is 576.

Example 2. If the squair of this plot be 543169. make the dashes, as before,
viz. under 9.1.4. and say, what is the squair of 54. (the dashes so directs,
and not to 5. therefore mind the usefullness of them) now the nearest squair
Root of 54 is 7. But ^ as in division, so you must look, if you will get the
double thereof out of the remainders and the little squair too: If you mind
this you cannot go wrong. But upon trial I find it will so work, therefore set
7 in the quotient and multiply the same, it makes 49 write that down under 54.
substract, and there remains 5. This tells that the Root of the large squair is
700. (considering that there is yet 2 Figures to follow as appears by the 3
dashes) now double your quotient, that makes 14 (this is the length of the two
oblong squairs) place the same, as in division, and say, how often can we get
14 out of 53. answer 3 times and, 11 remaining; now substract the little squair
whole side is 3. Thus, 3 times 3 is 9: from 111. remains 102. There is the
Root of other two oblong squairs wanting: therefore double the whole quotient
a. b. 73 that makes 146. place the same as before, for division, and say, how
often can we get 146 out of 1026, or gradually, how often one in 10. we get 9
ones in 10, but not 9 fowers in 12 which will remain. then try if we can have
8. No, therefore take 7 and set in the quotient, as before in common division,
viz. 7 times one from 10. remains 3. and 7. fowers from 23. remains 4. and 7
sixes from 46. remains 4. lastly substract the little squair, viz. 7 times 7
from 49. there remains nothing. So the squair Root of 543169. is 737.

And if the Number be never so great, you may observe that the first operation
consists of 3 parts. ( i e. first, finding the Root of the great squair;
secondly, the Root of the oblongs by doubling the quotient and using common
division; Thridly, substracting the little squair for the reasons above
demonstrated.) The second operation (if there be more than one as in this last
example) consists of garden diagram Fig 969 and 8 By a Scode of 92 Ell in the
Inch fig: 9.10.11.12.13.14.15.20 and 19 By a Scole of 8^ Ell in the Inch

garden diagrams garden diagram fig: 18

garden diagram fig: 19

garden diagram fig: 20

garden diagram fig: 21

garden diagram fig: 22

garden diagram fig: 23

garden diagram fig: 24

garden diagram fig: 25

garden diagram fig: 26

garden diagram fig: 28

garden diagram fig: 29

Fig. 10.19.20.22. by a Scale of 92 falls in the inch alben fig: 19 be also
Applied to 400 and fig: 21 to 201 falls in the inch and fig: 24: 25.26. and 2^
By 40 falls in the inch

garden diagram a scale of 20 feet in the inch

garden diagram By a Scole of 100 all in the inch

2 parts viz. first the doubling the whole quotient for your divisor, by which
you divide your dividend, as in common. Secondly the substracting the little
squair; (whereof the last Figure in the quotient is always the Root) and
hencefurth in every operation, if never so many, you must always now proceed
as in this second operation.

But to find the squair Root of a Number consisting of whole Numbers and
Fractions, as 930.25 the squair ^ of fig. 18. work as il all were whole
Numbers, as before, until one Figure of your divisor come under the Fraction
of your dividend, and then the rest of the quotient is Fraction, as in the
Example is plain.

But to find the Root of a Number, that is not a squair ^ Number, as 19. four
is the neatest, and there remains 3. now, how to know the denominator of this
Numerator, is to double the quotient and add one to it, and that is allways the
denominator to any Fraction happening in Roots; here the Root of 19 is 4 3/9.

I have given you the Geometrical demostration of the squair Root, which
shows the reason of its Arithmeticall operation; and this I could never find
in any Book.

I confess I need to Apologize for these and the like digressions, but the
earnest desire of severalls forced me.

Place the Figures here.

THE SECOND PART Of the SCOTS GARDENER, Treating of the Culture of Plants.
CHAP. I. Of the several ways of propagation.
I Am not to discribe the varieties in the Tribes and Kindreds of Plants,
(seeing I am not now writing a Herbal) but only what is most material to their
propagation and improvement: wherefore I shall show,

First in general the several ways of propagation, and then particulary some
of the most useful.

2. The several ways of increasing them are.

First by seeds. Kyes, Kirnells, Nuts, Stones.

Secondly by off-sets, Suckers, Slivings taken from then other-Plant.

Thridly by Cuttings, Stems, Slips set without Roots.

Fourthly by laying the branch of a growing Plant down into the Earth.

Fifthly by carrying up soil to it, where it will not bend down.

Sixthly by various ways of Graffings.

Lastly by several ways of Inoculation.

The business of this Chap: is to show the manner and time of performing each
of these ways.

3. And first by seeds, choice them from the fairest Plants, full ripe, the day
fair, and Plants dry. Lay them in the Sun and open air a little, some for
Rubbing out, others for winning in their husks. And as you should not sow
Fruits, Kirness, Nuts, or Stones with the Fleshy part on, (but eat or Rub it
off by Rolling in sand, and then dry them a little) so nor wash, Weet, or steep
them. Neither keep any long after they ripe, the most part will keep till
spring, but then many will ly till the next, especially stony Seeds, Berries,
and Kirnells. I do not mean, Ash, Holly, Yew, Mezeriom, Hawthorn, etc. Who
naturally lies a year longer, albeit sown Immediately when gathered, yet even
some of these namely the holly will ly sometimes a year longer than their
usual time, if the fleshy part be not Rubbed off.

I might say something of the timely Interring Tulips and others, but I come to
the manner of sowing: which is,

To cover the seed with the mould, whereof there is several modles according to
the nature of the seed, Soil, season, or fancy either to sow the Ground and
turn the seed in under the furrow, or by drawing trenches in the soil, and
then drawing the earth over them with a haw, or sowing the bed ready dressed and
hacking in the seed with the same Instrument, or by Harrowing, Raking with a
Rake or drawing bushes over the sowed Ground to cover the seed, or to put off
the surface of the whole bed with the Rake head and sow thereon, then draw on
the mould again with the same, and having cast up the furrows with ashovell,
smooth the bed with the Rake, or make drills by lines in made up beds, sow and
cover the same with the Rake head, not disordering the Ranks, or to set the
single seeds with sticks by lines, or to sow the bed, and then to silt fine
mould thereon, etc.

Sow the strong and hardy deeper than the small and tender, and sow ebber at
spring than before winter, and deeper in a light, than a stiff soil.

Albeit I use for the most part to Plant and sow every species by themselves,
yet you may sometimes use mixtures, as Carrots and Radish in one bed, because
the Radish may be gone e're the Carrots require much Room. Among new set
Liquorish sow Onyons, Radish, Lettice, and you may sow Radish, Lettice, Parsley,
Carrats, Parsneeps together, gathering each in their seasons, the Parsneeps
will stay till winter. And drop Beat-Rave or parsley in your onyonbeds to stay
winter after onyons ar gone. Also Beat-Rave, Skirrets, Beans, at considerable
distance in the Intervalls of new Planted Artichocks, also at a great distance
among cabbages, or in the edge of the furrows of other beds.

The most natural time for sowing is, when the seeds of their own accord falls
into the ground, nevertheless that many does well at this season, as stony
seeds and such as can endure winter, yet the tender which are many with us, does
best in the spring, but for convenience we sow at several other seasons, as in
summer, (at which time they require watering and shade) and in Autumn (which
is the only season for some) who if tender requires defense and shelter; nor
can we have others early at spring without hot beds, which is required in
special by such as comes not to perfection in our short Summer.

Endeavor to sow when the soil is in good temper, a hot-furrow is good, but
some grounds will not harrow or Rake when new delv'd or Plowed, which when
exposed sometime to air, Frost, Sun, and Showers does crumble and fall tender;
hence ought such to be prepared by fallowing. See more particularly the manner
and season for each sort in their respective Chapters following.

4. Suckers ar these which grows, Runs, Springs off, or about the
mother-Plant, whereof is made off setts by severing or parting them off
therefrom.

Take off these on Trees and shrubs with a violent but cleanly pull, be
careful of bulbo roots and Anemonies, that you wound not the mother-Plant.

To force such as are unapt to put forth Suckers naturally, you may bair the
Root, (of these of a woody substance,) cut it into the pith, slit it down a
little, and put in a stick to keep the gap open; level in the earth again: so
shall that lip raised spring, (and so much the better if there was an eye
immediately below the cut.) When the branches are grown, cut off this Plant to
live by it self.

Another way is to cut the Root through a little distance from the Tree, with a
cleanly slop down-wards, and raise up the butt-end of the Root, so cut off till
it be a little above the surface, as for Root graffing hereafter discribed,
level in and trade the Earth again: so shall the piece left at the Tree send
forth young Roots, and the Root so cut and raised send out a Top.

Better Earth for Bulbs and other Roots, will assist them to put forth Suckers.

Cutting the Tops of Fibrous Rooted-herbes, in growing-time will help them to
off sets, and to last long too.

The season for severing off sets of Hardie-trees that lose the leaf, is latter
end October and beginning November, albeit you may also any time till March,
weather open.

Young Tender-trees, with Hardie-greens, let the winter frost be over, and
before the sap rise, April best for greens.

Bulbo and Tuberous Roots, when they have done springing i. e. their stalks
and leaves beginning to wither.

All Fibrous Rooted-herbes, when springing and before they run up to Flower,
albeit you may Plant many after the Flower is past, Stalks end leaves cut, and
they springing a Fresh. But the first spring is best.

If drought, Water Shrubs, and Fibrous Rooted Plants, upon their first
Planting, at least shade from the Ensuing scorchings, by covering the surface
with some vegitable or leitter and Water through the same if needful.

And though you must Water Tubro, and Bulbo Roots, in drought once in two three
days; yet be sparing, and defend them from too much Raines.

5. To propagate by cuttings, is to cut off the branch or stem of a Plant, and
to set it in the Earth without Roots.

Strip it of leaves and branches, Plant deeper than these with Roots, and in a
rich and moist soil, keeping it watered and shaded, Until Rooted; cut off
their Tops save Greens, as if your cutting be 12 Inches long, let 9 be under,
and 3 above ground.

The better to effect their Rooting, (if a hard substance, as Yew, Quince,
etc.) Twist there ends a little or cleave them a piece: If tender Plants of
great Pith as Jasmines, July-flowers, etc. Cut only at a joint or knot, and
plant them: If large stems of Pithy Trees, as Poplars etc. Sharp their ends
down to a point, reserving the bark whole on one side.

If stock July-flowers, slit the Bark near the end in several parts round the
Stem, fold up the Bark so cut, and taking the peeled part close off, Plant the
same with this Bark spread as you do a Root.

The time of planting cuttings is, (if Trees and Shrubs,) a little before they
Spring, and if Herbs, when springing, as above for off-sets: and let the Stems
of July-flowers, and Wall-flowers be well shot i. e. something firm, and take
such as has not had a Flower.

6. To increase by laying is to bend down some branch to the ground, and with a
hooked stick thrust into the ground, stay the same in its place, and cover with
earth of deepness as you see fit: let the soil be good, watered and shaded in
drought, and from scorching Sun sheltered in Winter, if needful.

To force their Rooting (if July-flowers) Prune off the under and withered
leaves, and cut it at a joint into the pith ( i. e. half way through) and slit
it up to the next joint, thrust down the cut part Gently into the ground,
making it fast, cover as before. If Trees and Shrubs, prick the rind full of
holes at the place interred, or cut away the Bark round at the same place: but
if the branch be small, use it as July-flowers, and if any refuse, ty them hard
and fast above the slit with a piece Pack-threed or Wyre, to stop the sap in
its course, that it may provide for Rooting. Cut off all their Tops as you lay
them, except Greens and some very Pithy Trees.

The time for laying all Trees and Shrubs that lose the leaf, is October, as
also March, if secured from drought. All Greens in April, which therefore must
be shaded. July flowers in March, April, or July.

The Trees and Sherubs will be Rooted that time twelve months at which time
transplant them. the July flower laid in March may be transplanted in July, or
if laid in July transplanted next March or April.

7. Ciruomposition is in all cases, as laying, save only that the earth must be
raised up to the branch, because it will not bend down to it. Therefore fasten
a Pot, Basket, old Hatt or the like on the Tree (by a stake or some supporter)
let it have a hole in its bottom, through which you must put the branch to be
propagated, and then fill the Pot with rich earth, (having ordered the branch
as before to cause it Root) and Water it often; willow earth or Rotten willow
sticks at the bottom of the Pot helps to retain the moistuer. I have effected
this with clay and Cowes dung well mixed (after part of the Bark has been taken
off round) clapped about with a double or triple swaddling of Straw, or Hay Roaps.

This is a midsummer as well as Spring-work, and very notable for to propagate
such as can scarcely be otherwise obtained.

8. Graffing is to take a cyon or twig of atree and place into another (called
the stock) fit to receite the same that the inward Bark, or rind of Both may
Join and saps unite, etc. Whereof there be several ways, as,

First of Graffing in the clift, saw off the head of the stock in a smooth
place, about half a foot above ground, for Dwarffs and Wall-trees; as also for
Standard, Aple, and Pear, (for they will shoot up for a body) but betwixt 3 and
4 foot for Standard-cherrie, and Plum. Pare smooth its head Ragled by the sow,
then cleave it a little beside the pith, and with your Penknife cut away any
jags, roughness, or blackness that remains after cleaving on each side the
clift within; then prepare the graff by cutting on both sides from some knot or
bud in form of a wedg suitable to the clift with little shoulderings, not
Ragling the end: for if the bark be raised at the tail or lower end of the
graff, (especially the Cherrie) Impeds its growing, cut off its Top about 2
Inches above the shoulderings close behind a leaf-bud; then open the clift with
the Graffing Iron, set the graff (or two Graffs if the stock be great) in the
clift, so as the inward part of the rind of the Graff may join exactly and
close to the inward part of the Bark of the stock, and if it Pinch, as great
stocks will, ty it not as you must do the smaller: or put in a little wedg
Gently to keep it, take a Slicebark (from the cut off head) and cut a hole
therein, as it may slide on, and join round the butt of the Graff, and cover
the stock close over in form of a hawks hood, lastly cover with clay tempered
with Horse-dung, that has a little short leitter in it, or with soft wax for
smaller stoks: this is to preserve it from cold and drying-winds, and from wet
which harms most.

Note, if the stock stand perpendicular, set the Graff on the West Side: if
not, then place it on the upperside: if you fear winds support them with sticks
as Splinters to a broken bone.

Unbind, when you find their bands harm them, toward midsummer, at which time
top such as has shot so large as to be in danger of breaking with the winds,
especially them Graffed in the Bark, hereafter discribed.

Pull up Suckers, close and cleanly from the Roots: also Rub off buds that
appear on the stock. Graffs cannot thrive or prosper, if the stoks be uncleanly
or illthriving, and this is occasioned through bad training.

Another way of clift-Graffing is, to cleave the Graff and not the stock. Thus:
prepare the stock and Graff as for shouldering (next discribed,) then with the
Pen-knif, cleave the inward face of the Graff in the cut part, and cut up the
stock with a slop, so that one lip of the clift-cyon may by bound on the one
side of the stock, and the other longer lip on the outside, as in shouldering.

The Grauff sits here, as on a sadle, with a leg on each side the stock, and
therefore will better resist the Winds; as also the wound caused by the clift,
will soon recover. I have them wholly healed the same year, wherein I Graffed
them.

Shouldering is to cut off the head of the stock, and smooth it, as at first;
then cut the Graff from a knot, or bud on one side sloping about ane Inch and
half long, with a shoulder, but not deep, that it may rest on the head of the
stock. the Graff must be cut from the shoulder smooth and even, sloping
gradually, that the lower end be thin: place the shouldering on the head of the
stock, and mark by the end of the cut part of the Graff, and cut away so much
Bark of the stock as the Graff did cover; then place both together, that the
cut parts of both may join and saps unite one on the other: bind them close
together with bass, and hood them with clay tempered with dung or wax, as
before.

Graffing in the Bark may be used in greater stocks, or in regraffing of old
trees, and is only for aples; because later in performing, which may be the
latter end April, when the Bark of the stock will peel: for when both stock and
Graff is prepared, (as in shouldering) instead of cutting away some Bark of the
stock; for receiving the Graff you must slit it on the South Side from the top
almost as long, as the sloped part of the Graff, and loosen the Bark at the
top of the slit with the point of the half round wedg, (made a purpose tapering
down-wards to a point) which also thrust down between the Bark and stock, to
make room for the Graff; but first cut a little Bark at the thin end of the
slope of the Cyon, that it double not in going down, yet leave it with a sharp
edg; and because when the Cyon is put in, it will bear the Bark hollow from the
stock nick or slit, the Bark on each side the cyon, so that it may fall close
to the stock and to the edges of the cyon; then bind and cover, as before.

Graffing by approach, is good for these that holds not well otherwise: but
herein the stocks must be placed so near the Tree, (where the graffs are) that
the branch may reach it; then may you clift or shoulder-graff the twig you mean
to propagate, into the stock; and as soon as graff and stock do unite and at
incorporated together, cut off the cyon or graff underneath, close to the
graffed place, that it may subsist by the stock only.

Root-graffing is, to take the twig of any Tree you mean to propagate, and a
piece Root of the same kind (cut and Raised up a little as in sect 4.) and
graff them by shouldering, uniting the buttends of graff and Root, causing the
rind of the Root Join to the rind of the graff, and so bind them: the next year
they may be Transplanted to nurserie; these will be easily dwarffed, and
readily hold, beside that the defect of Stocks ar supplied, and they fit for
transportation. (...) There be many other ways, but these named ar the most
material.

The time of graffing is, when the sap begins to stir in the spring; you
must begin earlier with Cherries, Plumes, some later with Pears, ending with
Aples.

Choice not your graffs from such Trees as ar ill-Bearers, neither from such as
has not come to bear at all, but from constant and well bearing Trees, and the
fairest and fullest of buds thereon: let them have a piece of the precedent
years shot, whereof make the tail and shouldering Immediately below the butt of
young wood; and if the stock be large, make the graffs wholly of the lasts
years shot; and such (having blowing buds actually upon them) I have seen bear
fruit the same year. But some old bearing Trees yields no graffs: wherefore you
may cut out some great branch, that it may shoot anew, or rather take off the
same branch by circumposition and plant; the which new Tree may furnish you
with graffs. Cut your graffs e're they sprout, and keep them or carry them,
their ends in clay, or dry in a box, their tops cut off.

9 Inoculation, differs from the former ways of graffing, and most proper for
Apricoks and peaches: any sort will more readily hold by this than by graffing,
except Cherries; they come quickly to be a Tree: for I had a plum shoot above 6
foot, 10 Inches the first year; and tho they miss, yet the stock is not the
worse. Therefore.

In some convenient and smooth part of the stock (at the same hight as for
graffing) with the penknife cut the rind overthwart, and from the middle thereof
gently slit the bark about an Inch long in form of. a T, not wounding the
stock; then nimbly prepare the bud by cutting off the leaf till a little of the
tail, then slit the bark, on each side a little distance from the bud, and
about half Inch above and below the same, sharp that end below that it may the
more easily go down, and having a quill, cut more than half away about an Inch
long at the end, (for dividing the bud and rind from the stalk) therewith take
it off dexterously and leave not the Root behind: for if you see a hole under
the bud on the inside, the Root is gone, cast it away and prepare another. when
the bud is ready, then with a bone (made half round and sharp at the point
tapering on the one side) raise the bark or rind on each side the slit
carefully, not hurting the inner rind, and with care put in the bud, thrusting
it down till its top Join with the cross cut: then bind it close above and
below the bud with dried Rushes or bass. Or,

You may slit the bark of the stock upwards from the cross cut. Or,

Cut the edges of the bark about the bud oblong squair, and the bark of the
stock fit to receive the same. Or

Reserve of this squair piece bark of the stock untaken off at the upper end,
which must be raised, that the shild may slide up betwixt the same and the
stock; and so bind gently, as before.

The time for Inoculation is, when the sap is most in the stock, namely from
June till August, near a month after unbind i. e. cut through binding and bark
with a gentle slit on the back side of the stock, leaving the binding to fall
away of its own accords: at which time you will see who holds. In March
following, cut off the head of the stock 4 Inches above the bud, and that time
twelve months the stub too, that it may heal over the wound. you may prune as
graffes, and pull up suckers etc. See Chap: 4. for more.

Choice buds from good bearers, as before, take them from the strong and well
grown shoots of the same year, and from the biggest end of the same, and if
you must carry them far, first cut off their leaves, and top of the Stalks and
wrap them in moist leaves or grass.

This much at present in general for time and manner of the several ways of
propagation.

10. In planting all plants prune their Roots, that is, Top them a little with
a sharp Knife except Asparagus. Also cut their heads except Greens, and Tops of
Forrest-trees ordained for Timber, yet the Side-boughes must, that the head may
be proportioned to the Root.

Plant no Trees deep; (albeit some deeper than other) when their Roots runs
near the surface, there they receive the beneficial influence of Sun and
Showers, that makes vegetables fair and Fruitful.

Lay leitter or the like above ground the Compass of their Roots, especially
the first year of planting* and indeed all plants require some shelter and
shade with Moisture, when first planted, till they get Rooting and strength.

Cut the leaves and stalks of flowers and herbs, when past flower or yealded
seed, nor at any time suffer too many, rather purge them in time* no more
branches, flowers, fruits on any tree, or plant, than the root can nourish
perfectly.

Neither plant and sow every year the same plants, on the same Ridg or Bed: for
it Improves them to be changed, see more fully planting, pruning, preserving,
etc. in their respective places following.

CHAP. II. How to Cultivate, and prepare grounds.
1. HAving showed the several ways of propagating plants, it is also most
requisite that you prepare the ground for effectuating the same. And that is in
the first place,

To trench it, viz. Begin at one end of the ground, (you mean thus to culture
and open) a trench from one side to the other, thereof 3 or 4 foot broad, and
from one to two foot deep, as the qualitly of the ground admits and plants
require (therefore liquorish must have deeper,) this being open, measure off
other 4 foot parallel at its side, turn that into the open trench, with the
turf or surface in the bottom, and the clean earth on the top; the filling
whereof emptieth an other, therefore cut off other four foot and turn that in
as before; thus trench by trench till the whole be finshed. I presume you
carried the earth of the first trench to fill the last, or otherwise filled
hollowes therewith, and left the last trench open, (if convenient) for receiving
weeds. Or if the ground be hollow in the middle begin there, and trench both
ways to help the level; if high in the middle, begin at both sides or ends till
the two open trenches meet at the hight, for the same reason.

The latter end of harvest the ground is softest for trenching, and it lying
all Winter open to the weather is thereby meliorated. For as trenching does
well prepare hard, barren, and untoil'd ground, se does it such as is exhausted
by long and unskilful usage. and if at every trenching you apply proper
manures mixed with the second spading, or under the last shovelling, and in 5
years retrench, it will become to your wish, for all gardens, and plantations.

2. The next excellent way of preparing ground, is fallowing; begin as soon as
you reap the crop, but let the ground be something moist, albeit you should
stay for a shower, if this be not late in Autumn, you may fallow in November:
especially if stiff ground and restirre in March or April when you plant or
sow; and albeit you should neither plant or sow it that year, keep it clean of
weeds in summer by hawing, etc. and at Autumn fallow again. but as in
trenching so in this work you should mix with proper soil.

Make use of the English fashion of spades which are now common, and let every
two delvers, have a shoveller to cast up the small that falls in bottom of the
furrow, and the Delvers should turn up the point of the spade, and nimbly
break and chop all the clods thoroughly; this is very material as well as the
through mixing of the manures with the soil: So that mixing, stirring,
restirring, fallowing is most pertinent for the cold, chilled, barren
Rugged-natur'd-ground in Scotland all which softens and tenders it, and so fits
it for nourishing good seed and plants, as I can tell by experience, therefore.

3. I advise our Husbandmen also to the fallowing of their land, as one;
flitfolding the same, as a second; Watering, or overflowing land, as a third,
burning the Turf as a fourth, draining excessive moisture, as a fifth; applying
proper soils and manures, and that at proper seasons, as a sixth; laying the
land to rest, as a seventh; and above all, enclosing and planting about their
land, as the last, and best improvement.

Example: At the Autumnal fallowing, delve, or Plow deep, and apply hot
unrotted and uncompound dungs and manures: at spring re-plow or re-delve, and
apply such dungs and manures as has layn mixed and rotted with Earth; then Mix,
Rake, or Harrow. The summer following is to destroy the weeds, and may be done
by Turf, Plough or by hawing.

The Hushbandmens flitfolding is equivalent to Gardeners covering the surface,
especially of dry and barren ground with leitter, etc. The dung and urine of
Sheep and cattle washes evenly into ground, and should be turned down by the
summer, and Autumnal fallowing, lest its substance exhaust by Sun and Air,
(except that for grass, then only harrowed with a bush of thorns) instead
whereof Gardeners should top their coverings of leitter with a little Earth or
Sand, and at Autumn delve all down together.

Husbandmens watering is by Running Plough-furrowes (and trenches where
needful) along or cross their land, so as the water may gently sweem over the
whole: this in the Winter, on dry and barren grounds, which leaves Sulphurous
pinguidity behind it, and strongly improves either for grass or corn; but that
this Husbandry ought as well to be practiced on wet grounds, is evident, that
the Running of this carries away the sour quality of the other. I shall speak
of Gardeners watering more particularly.

Burning land is, to pare its surface with the Turf Plough and lay the same in
heaps to burn; and so spreads the ashes: but if moss and heath, set fire
through, without turfing it; this destroys the noxious sour nature and the
salt remains in the ashes, for the strengthening the Spirit of the Earth.

Draining the wet, bogie or dropsical ground is, by trenches a little deeper
than the Spring, (how deep soever) and then apply lyme, soot, ashes, pigeons
dung, etc As for the abounding of superficial water, that is easily helped by
common watersowers, or in some grounds by sinking holes down to the channel.

As the Husbandman should have his land laid out or divided into several
closes, some for corn, some for meadow, and others for pasture: so when he has
taken 5, 6, or 7 crops of corn, he should lay it out for pasture, otherwise it
will wear out of heart; and likwayes the pasture must be plowed up for corn,
especially when it begins to grow mossie.

The way that the Gardener turns his ground to rest, is by trenching and
retrenching, whereby it can never wear out: albeit he also observes to change
the crops as well as the Husbandman.

How to Enclose and plant about your land see Chap. 4.

4. Among all the Varieties of soils, that next the surface of them is best,
because prepared by the Influence of Sun and Showers,

That called a loam or light brick Earth is the most natural ground for gardens
and plantations; strong Blew, White, or Reid clayes are worst: but the nearer
they be to a mixture of loam (or if they have stones naturally in them) they are
the better; also, the nearer gravelly or sandy grounds incline to loam, so much
the better. therefore if your ground be stiff, trench with ferns, straw,
bean-ham, thatch, leitter, Earth under woodstacks, small sticks, etc. If
gravelly or sandy, then trench and mix with loam or the upper part of clay, the
Turf of both is good.

If strong clay, trench and mix with fat sand, highway Earth that has drift
sand in it, Rubish of buildings, Lime-Rubish, gravel. And if it be for gardens
or orchards, enrich it with dungs mixed with drift-sand or light mouldheaped up
stratum superstratum i. e. laying by laying. And if the ground be cold, the
more pigeons and poultrie dung you put in it, the lighter and warmer it will
be. Or make Stratums of Earth, dung and unslaked limestones to ly a year, and
then apply this composition, which has been hitherto a great secret: therefore
prize it.

Binding grounds, which will not Rake as you delve, if dry and hard, trenching
and fallowing exposes them to be softened by weather, as is said: But if wet
and tough, mix with Ashes, sea-Sand, etc. In Culturing.

For preparing my composts, I use a pit (wherein sometimes I make a hot-bed)
oblong, about 4 foot deep of length and breadth, as I can get dungs,
Vegetables, and soils to fill it: here to lay all Kinds or sorts with Stratums
of Earth, as horse, neat, Sheep, Pigeons, and Poultrie dung, ferns, weeds,
leaves, soot, ashes, sticks, saw-dust, feathers, hair, horns, bones, urine,
scouring of pondes, ditches, blood, pickle, brine, seawater, the the cleansing
of House of Office, etc. Let them ly a year at least, but not above two: then
take them out and there Stir, Air, mingle and work them with fresh Earth or
by themselves, as you have occasion, till they become sweet and of an agreeable
scent; (yet retaining their virtue) this frees them from the noxious qualities
they otherwise retain, and consequently not so apt to gender or produce
Worms, Weeds, and Mushroms instead of wholesome and pleasant plants, fruits, and
Roots for the table.

5. Observe what manures are proper for the soil, as, all hot-dungs and manures
are proper for cold, stiff, and moist grounds: so all rotten and cold dungs and
manures are proper for dry and hot grounds. All manures that retains moisture
are for poor, Sandy and Gravelly soils

As, Horse-dung for stiff and cold ground; Sheeps for hot and dry; Ashes for
cold, stiff and moist; old Woolen-rags for poor dry; Lyme most excellent for
moorish and heatly land; Hair of Beasts for dry and stiff grounds; pigeons and
poultrie dung for cold and moist; Rotten saw dust for dry; Rubish of buildings
for stiff, cold grounds; Salt for cold and moist; use it moderately, it
destroys vegetables on dry ground, especially at first, but when melted by
Winter Raines, it fertilizeth: Some has sown it on moist, moorish land to
great advantage, for being far from the Sun we have little volatile.

6. In your applications you are to consider, that Rotten dungs and manures are
proper for Trees and such slow growing plants, and unrotten dungs and manures
for Annualls, they being quick of digestion.

Let not the Root of any Tree stand on dung, far less unrotten dung which
burns them; but upon prepared and proper soil, and composed, well mixed, aired,
stirred or fallowed. Most fit is the cleansings of streets and highwayes
together, with the mud and scouring of pondes and ditches, if first laid on
heaps in the open Air to rott and sweeten, and if you mix it with stratums of
Lyme that adds much to its goodness and fertility.

Forrest-trees require not so much dung as Fruit Trees, but well mixed and
fallowed soil.

Kitchen Herbs and Roots requires very fat, light, warm and well cultured
ground.

Flowers and fine plants cannot endure soil too rank with dung, neither can
they prosper if it be poor; but fresh, clean Earth with rotted neats dung well
beaten and mixed together, and a little rotten willow Earth a little below the
Roots: here comes in that delicate soil, the Turf of the pasture mixed with a
little Lyme, Cowes and Sheeps dung, well rotted and mingled as before. See more
particularly what soil each kind or sort of plants delights in or loves best,
in their respective Chapters and Sections following.

7. As for making the hot-bed for raising early and tender plants, dig a pit (4
foot deep, and of length and breadth, as you have occasion) in a convenient and
warm place, lying well to the Sun and sheltered from winds (which you may help
by art, if not so naturally) fill it with dung and leitter from the Stables,
about a sourthnights gathering, (some makes it of Barley-straw, or the same
mixed with bran, because it keeps heat long, and its heat not so excessive nor
so noisome to plants as dung) and when well Tread, and even on the Top, lay
about 4 Inches thick of rich, light (but fresh and clean) sifted mould thereon:
arch it over with sticks, and cover with matts 4 or 5 days to cause it heat,
then uncover and give it Air a day or two, that its violent heat may pass; then
sow your seeds, and cover the bed again And the next day if you find the bed
over hot give it more Air, if too cold cast some Straw on the covering until
the heat return; so by airing and covering you may keep it in a constant
temper: when the Seeds come up, give them Air to dry the moisture raised by the
heat of the bed. How to cover the choice with Glasses, see Chap. 6. Sect, 1.
But as there is great trouble in rightly ordering this sort of hot-bed; so here
remedied by a better, which is only to fill and tread the pit full of new dung
and leitter, (not covering it with Earth) and place wooden cases therein, about
9 or 10 Inches deep and about 3 foot broad, (having wood-handles at the ends)
boar them full of Auger or Wimble holes at the bottom, fill them with the
foresaid earth; and therein sow your seeds: and these cases and the earth in
them will be kept warm during the whole season, wherein a hot-bed is
necessary* for if it lose heat add fresh dung and leitter under, about and
betwixt the cases; (there is Dew on the Glasses, while the heat remains, but if
exhausted, they will be dry) consequently the trouble of transplanting from one
hot bed to another is hereby saved. Provide a shelter over the whole, if you
please, and frames of Glass over some of the inside cases, where there is most
need; others you may leave open, as your Seeds requires. By this your pit and
cases are every year ready to your hand, requiring only a supply of fresh dung.
But this pit will be so much the more excellent, if lyn'd round at the sides
with brick: and where you cannot conveniently sink it for Water, you may build
the same above ground. And when this pit is empty it will be also ready for
wintering of Flower Pots with July-flowers, etc.

8. In watering plants, use not well-water, especially for tender plants,
neither Rivers that run long and quick on sharp gravel: these yields no
nourishment to plants, but rather chills them; therefore if you must use such,
let them stand sometime in the Sun and open Air, uncovered in tubs, mixed with
dung, and power it off the dreg when you use it. let the quantity and quality of
the dung be according to the nature of your plants (as if great growers and
require much heat, put horse or pigeons dung into the water, but for the more
durable put Sheeps dung) remembering if your ground be bad, to add the more
dung.

When dung lies above ground about any plants, (as I use to do with Trees,
Artichocks, etc.) The water descending through the same is very relishing to
the Roots, if you power the water at a little distance round the Tree: for when
lashed on the stem, it washes the Earth from the Roots.

Water no plants with standing, stinking Ditch-water, nor no Water that
stinketh: Rainwater and large Ponde-water is excellent, but keep it not too
long; yet if in a large Vessel, the oftener you Stir it, the longer it will
keep sweet: so the larger your pondes or Rivers be, and the opener to the Sun
and Air, and the more moving by horse, geese and ducks their Sweeming, the
sweeter it will be. and if the washings of stables, streets, dung Hill-water,
etc. Run into them, that adds much to their fertility, providing they have some
moving, as is said, to make them sweet.

If you fear dry weather differ not too long, but water while your ground is
yet moist; differ not, if you mind to water at all. these that Root deepest,
water most* and also when you do begin, Continue it so long, as you find
occasion. In watering Trees and greater Plants, stir and waken the Earth a
little about their Roots with a fork, so as it may drink the more evenlier,
minding to tread firm again. And for the same cause you may sink the Earth a
little in form of a shallow dish rownd your Coleflowers, Artichocks, etc. Dip
your Flower Pots in a Tub of water, to drink through the holes at the bottom.

When you water beds of small seeds with the watering pot, shake it nimbly*
that it may fall like a shower of small Rain. I have often made use of a handful
of small Straw or Hay drawn as thatch, tied in the middle, and at one end
powered water with a Cup, and shaked the same that it appeared like a Gentle
bedewing rather than a glutting Rain.

Some that are desirous to have the ground always moist about any plant, do
place near it a vessel with water, and in it a piece woollen clothe with one
end thereof hanging out to the ground, and the other in the water: the Cloth
being first wet, it will drop continually, if the end without be lower than
that within the vessel: and when the water within fails, it may be augmented;
If it drop not fast enough, the clothe may be increased, if too fast,
diminished.

Early in the Spring while the weather is yet cold, I entreat you be cautious
in watering the leaves of the young and tender plants, only wet the ground
about them when your plants or seeds are more hardy and the nights yet cold,
water in the forenoons: but when the nights are warm, or days very hot, then
the evening is the best time.

Plant in wet, and sow in dry. I do not mean over went or over dry. Withal let
them have good Air, which conduces much to their health and life, without
which nothing can live.

CHAP. III. How to propagate and order Forrest-trees.
1. OMmiting here the distinction of species, (having confined to one chapter)
I shall speak briefly, yet I hope plainly of their Government, thus:

Albeit the most of Forrest-trees may be Increased by Suckers, Layers, etc. Yet
if you desire Trees worth your while, Raise them from the seed. Therefore
prepare a seminary or seed-plot together with a nurserie well ordered and
handsomely made up in beds, as in part 1. Chap. 5. sect. 2. and there sow and
set your seeds and plants in their respective seasons; keep them clean from
weeds, and water them when need is: also Earth up and dible in these cast up by
the Frosts, as well as shade and shelter in time of necessity. Let them stand
some but one, others two years in the seminary after they rise, then remove and
plant in nurserie, a foot one way and half the other distance, or 5 Rows in
the bed (if 6 foot broad,) in straight lines, having first pruned their Roots,
especially toped the main Root that runs straight down; so shall they send
forth side or seeding Roots, and agree well with transplanting thereafter. Also
proportion the head to the Root by pruning up the side boughs, reserving some
smallest afterward all the way on the body, to stop the sap in its course,
that the Tree may grow great with its hight, and this will prove the best
fortification against the winds.

Cut not the tops of these Trees you ordain for Timber, except some grow
crooked in the nurserie; these save Greens may be felled near ground in the
Spring or at midsummer, and train up the streightest shoot again to be the
Tree. When they have stood 3 years at most in this nurserie, replant them at a
wider distance in Spad-bit trenches, 3 foot one way and two the other, where
they may stand till they be ready for planting out in your Avenues, Parks,
Groves, etc. Which will be in 3 years, if their Rules be observed. But if you
think them yet too small for setting out, you must transplant at a wider
distance, and at every remooval Top all their Roots with a sharp Knife, and
thin the side-boughes for lightning the head: but do not prune up all, as is
the Custom of the ignorants, whose Trees are so long, small and top-heavy,
that they cannot stand; but of pruning more hereafter. If you neglect this
transplanting and pruning the top Root, while young, your essays to do it when
old will prove ineffectual, nor will they ever be worth the while.

All the time that your Trees remains in nurserie, and at least the first and
second year thereafter, be careful to cleanse them from Weeds and Suckers by
delving, hawing, etc. The advantage here shall soon counter-ballance the cost.

Choice your Seeds from the high, straight, young and well thriving Trees; and
the fairest, weyghtiest, and brightest thereon: for its observed that the seeds
of hollow Trees ( i. e. Trees whose pith is consumed) does not fill well or
come to perfection, as Langford says of Pears, concluding that the Kirnells of
Fruit depend much upon the pith. And I bid you reject such as was never set by
art, as Peevish parents for Children, that must be thus accommodat with uncouth
lodgings as well as dyets in their travells: Its a mischief in many people that
accounts all ridiculous, that they have not been bred up with or accustomed
unto, so with Trees in some respect.

2. As for the Oak, the Acorns we get from (...) puts forth a lustier shoot
than ours; nor do I approve of them in natural woods, they ripe beginning
October, gather them in a dry day, and lay in some open Room to dry a month,
turning them, with a broom, then lay them in a couch dry sand till latter end
February, dible them in the ground 2 Inches deep, 12 rows in the bed, (if 6
foot broad;) they come up the same season, and all though they will grow on any
ground, yet they grow better on the best, that is a good loamy Earth. Order
them as is directed in nurserie.

The Elm that grows with a clean and taper body is best worthy your care, we
have extraordinary clean and smooth barked Elms from Holland: but I think they
take more pains in prefaring and making their Earth sine, which certainly is
most conducible thereunto. Their Seed falls beginning of June, (tho it does not
sill every year) when they begin to sall, gather them and spread on a Clothe a
little, then low them immediately promiscuously over the bed, and very thick
covered near an Inch of Earth; I had them come up within 10 days: they love a
light Earth something moist.

The Ash seed is ripe in November and December: having spread them a little to
dry, put them in a hole stratum, superstratum of Earth and Seed; take them out
at Spring come twelve months, and sow as Elm, for now they rise; and loves a
tender soil not too moist.

The great Maple, commonly, but falsely called Plan. its feed is ripe in
September: sow it at Spring it, comes up that season: affects a soil with Ash
or rather better.

The smaller Maple is rather for Hedge, its seed lies as Ash.

The Beach seed ripes the end of sept: but it fills not well every year, nor at
we so very plentiful of old trees, as could be wished: for that caufe we fend
abroad for seed. as soon as it comes to our hand, it may be sown, or rather
keept in a couch of sand, as the great Maple till the spring, for it comes up
that season: affects a light soil, no clayes.

The Walnuts, and chestunt, albeit they be fruit trees, I plant them without
the orch: walls, their nuts ripes beginning of October: when they begin to fall
take them off and rub off the outward husk, but do not weet them, then order
them as accorns; they come up the first season and affects a hight loamy earth.
I could wish for more horsechesnuts their seed from turkey.

The black cherrie or green is a tree that I love well in Avenues and thickets,
there is a sort at Niddrie-caflle where I was born 7. miles west from
Edinburgh, whose fruit is preferrable to any cherrie: I take it to be a sort of
heart, but it is a great bearer; (which property the heart cherrie wants) they are besl: stocks for slandard cherries. learned Evelen and Ingenious Cook takes
notice of this tree.

Gather their fruit wheen full rip, the beginning August, eat of the fleshy
part i. e. the fruit, and lay the stones to dry a little, then lay them by
stratums with earth, which prefares them, if sowed at spring to rise that
season, otherwise they ly till the next: they affect a light, sharp soil, and
if you may, mix it with compost; and then it shall be for cherries of all sorts.

The wild Service, commonly called Rons-tree, their fruit ripes in Sept: which
you may eat or Rub off by rolling in sand; then prepare and sow them as
cherrie. They love a moist Ground or shade not wet, if you will plant them in
better soil in Avenues, me thinks, they would be very pleasant when spread over
with their umblefashion'd, bright Red fruit.

The Line or Lidne tree, commonly called Lym, the broad leafed with odoriferous
flowers is best. the seed ripes beginning October: But fills not well every year
with us, and indeed we have few come to any considerable perfection; yet I have
seen them bear seed at Hamiltoun, it should be a little dried in an open Room
and couched in moist sand till winter pass, and then sowed in a little shade,
for they must not be too much exposed to the scorching Sun: they come up the
same season; but if not prefared through winter, they lie till the next they
love a fresh loamie earth (and in planting them I advise you to cover the
surface of the earth about them with leitter topt with earth the first year at
least.

The horn beam may be ordered as small maple they, like a dry stiff ground
they, are copsis.

The hassell and filboards seed or nuts is used as wallnuts, they delight in
dry banks, nor are they stately forest trees.

The Birch is a proper tree for much of our poor, dry and barren grounds: I
never raised any of them by seed in the wood, they are so plenty by suckers,
etc. Many of which handsome trees I have planted succesfully.

The Beantree foil vulgarly called peascod-tree, its seed ripes in Oct. and
being kept dry all winter, sown at spring comes up that season, and affects a
moist Ground but sweet.

The white poplar vulgarly called Abele, its a quick grower and pleasant tree,
so is Aspen; they are easily propagated by cuttings; so the last by suckers,
see chap. 1. sect. 5. They love a good soil something moist.

The Alder is so propagable and loves the marshes; and so is

The willowes, Sallows, and oziers, they all affecting a moist ground and must
be so kept till Rooted.

But I come to greens; as

The Pinetree and pinasters whose husks you may expose to the sun till they
open and seeds fall out, to be sown in March but if late ere they come home
(they requiring the summer sun to open them) if you then sow, they cannot get
drength sufficient to withstand the ensuing winter; therefore keep them in dry
sand all winter, and sow them in the spring; For they rise that season wherein
they are sowed, they love a good and tender soil, they are something tender
while young, (as all greens are) the great Pine is tenderer than pinasters, and
nice in transplanting. therefore observe the Rule in chap. 7. sect. 2. Shade
and shalter in both extremities of heat and cold while young. But non so proper
for us as

The Scots Fur, many one of their husks have I gathered any time between Jan:
and latter end March, lay them on a Cloth to the Sun which opens them, to be
sown latter end Aprile, they come up that season, and loves a soil with Pinus.
See how to order in nurserie: for they must be dibled in again the first year,
as spued up by frosts; they or any Tree will grow on most sorts of grounds if
well ordered, and prefared and secuted from drought the first year. And
therefore help the ground where its not to purpose, (they will pay you or yours
for your pains) as if you plant in gravelly or dry sandy ground, mix it with
clay and turfe a large distance round about the Roots: or if in stiff and moist
clayes,. trench 8 or 9 foot on each side round the compass of the Roots, adding
small gravel, fatt sand, etc. And plant ebb: but enough of his in the last
Chapter.

The silver Fur is so ordered, only its tender while young, and subjecl: to
blasting.

The Pitch Tree (as common Fur,) its a hardy Tree, and no wonder, seeing, as
I am Informed, it grows by nature plentifully in. Norraway.

The Yew is also a hardy Tree, only requires some defense while young, their
Berries ripes in Novem: Rub off the flesh or clammy substance, and lay them to
dry a little, (but not at the fire) then box them Stratum Superstratum of earth
and seed, placing them in the shade till the spring come twelve months; at
which time fow them, and then they spring, affecls a good soil, not stiff.

The Holly is to be used as Yew: for they ly as long; its the most proper for
hedges of all the plants in the World. Next thereunto, is the Hawthorne (tho
not a green) whose seed ripes in October: and to be used as Holly: for it rises
not till the spring come twelve months; and the better you prefare and mix the
ground with Rotted dung, the larger will they shoot. Nor let any Imagine, that
Holly also loves not dunged ground, nay, (say they) poor and gravelly soil; but
I know the contrary by experience.

I shall speak of some shrubs in Chap: 7. for I must leave them here, and come
show you how to transplant and prune the stately forrestrees.

3. In Transplanting remove with earth about their Roots (if you can)
especially greens, at least take all the Roots up a good distance from the
stem, by making a Trench round, and be not hasty: then top all their Roots
with a sharp knife, (slop tending down as a horse foot) cut off all the
bruised and broken parts till you come at firm wood, top the small Roots like
hair, to make them stiff, so as they fold not, when the Earth is put in, and
rott thereby: proportion the head also to the Root by thinning it, prune
fideboughs; (reserving allvayes some for tapering the Tree) these you cut, do
it close and smooth by the body, slanting upwards, and they will soon overgrow
the wounds, if the branch cut off be not great. Cut not the tops of Oaks,
Beaches they cannot endure it, neither any Tree that you ordain for timber;
albeit I have been necessitate to lop great old Trees, whose heads could not
otherwise be conformed to their Roots, which necessarly ardiminished upon
removal. But this is not the case of well trained Trees in anurserie.

The Rule for removing old large Trees out of woods or other places, who was
never before Transplanted, is to make a trench at two sides of the Tree,
distance considerable, till you can Enforce the Tree upon on side: then cut the
top Root through, saving as many collateral Roots as you can; lessen its head,
or lop it if it can suffer, and so set up the Tree again, and tread in the
earth about it, as it was; let it stand 2 years to emitt fibers or feeding
Roots to nurse it when Planted out.

But to my nursed trees again. When you remove, as is directed, carry them as
quickly to their new quarters as you can; let the soil where you set them be as
Connatural to the nurserie as nossible, see the last chap, for preparing
grounds and see part 1. chap. 3, and 4. for the orderly ways of planting.

The best way is to make the holes a year before you plant, and in summer stir
and tune their earth, that no weeds grow thereon: make them betwixt, 12. and
18. Inches deep, and betwixt 4, and 8. foot diameter, if ordinary trees: but
if the ground be bad and not proper for the trees, then trench, mix and apply,
till such become more agreeable.

When you plant, lay the surface in the bottom and fill up the hole with fine
earth, till it can only admit the upper part of the root to stand level with
the surface, (this is not to plant deep, for they that do; but cheat
themselves) then set on the Root of the tree in the middle of the hole, and if
no earth adhere to the same, make a little hut in the middle of small earth,
and lay the roots right spread round about with your hands that nonly folded or
disorderly, then put in fine small earth amongst the roots, and shake and move
the tree, so that the earth may go in amongst them till no cavity or void be
left to let in the air; such roots as folds raise up and level in their wonted
posture with your hands shovelling on more earth and tread gently, then fill
one more and tread well with your heels till it be as far filled up about as
it flood in the earth before, make the bulk about level on the top, and just
the breadth of the hole, and it will be about half a foot above the surface if
ordinary nurssed trees and good ground, you may put on the rounding string to
make its edges circular and handsome, or if you will to make it like a
geometrical squair, then straight lines from side to side of a thicket will
make up the bulks that the whole will appear as walks and bordours two ways:
lay new horse dung and leitter or ferns above the bulk (so as it touch not the
stem) covered with a little earth to keep it from drying, the Rains will wash
in its substance and refresh the Roots, besides it keeps out summer drough and
winter frofts.

The first year at leaft go through, now and then, and tread them right after
winds. I am not sor slaking trees (but for training them so as they may not
need it, except you drive three stakes about each tree at the out side of the
bulk, then the double straw Roaps tied from its body to all the three stakes
will secure; and if you fasten cross sticks briers and thorns, here shall be a
fence about each tree. Rub off buds that offer to break forth near the Root or
any place where you would not have them, (but still leave some here and there
on the side to stop the sap from running too much in head) keep them clean of
suckers and weeds by hawing in summer, and delving and loosening the mould
about them spring and Autumn i. e. at the two equinoxi alls, and tread fast
again, as fearing drought and winds.

Observing is what is said, you may expect monumental, clean and well thriving
trees, if right pruned and well Enclosed.

The time of planting, fee season for off sets Chap. 1. Sect. 4. neglect not
your time of early planting, that is, as soon as they give over growing, and
before the frosts come on, and you shall fee them far outstrip these set in
the Spring, though have often planted in the Spring through necessity, but then
I was always something more than ordinary careful to defend them from the
ensuing droughts, by covering their bulks and watering, etc. Yet I prefer the
Spring for Firr, and other such Greens, which therefore unavoidably requires
the same care.

4. I showed before how to prune in the nurserie while young now continue, when
planted out whilst they be small, prune every year, when a little older once
in 2 years, then once in 3 or 4. and never seldomer than in 5 or 6.

And as you prune up the body, till the desired hight leave small branches here
and there by the way, that it may bring greatness with its hight, and be by
consequence the more able to stand; let never a Tree get a greater head than
its Root is sufficiently able to nurse and bear; neither be Rash in loping
them, except, they be already top-heavy, which brings crookedness; if so, cut
at a crooked place, slanting upwards, clean and smooth, and train up the
streightest shoot again to be the Tree: or rather if you can save its head by
thinning and croping the branches on that side which leans i. e. the underside,
thus at midsummer, and flit the Bark in the Spring, so may it grow straight and
taper. Purge still the head when needful and prune superfluities, cut off all
that Cross, Rubs, Frets, and Galls on another. Permit not Trees to Fork, train
them with one straight and taper body, and a handsome round Pyramidall head.
And when you prune, cut close and smooth by the body or bough with the Knife,
or Chissell and Mell, or if the branch be great, cut with a saw (nicking it
underneath first) and smooth it with the Chissell, so will it the better heal:
but if the Tree be very old and the branches great, such will never be able to
overgrow the wound, therefore if you must cut such, do at a little distance
from the body, the wound declining the Horizon. Thus Train pines, Firrs, Pitch,
and these of the Conicall Tribe in stories only (which method they naturally
follow,) you may cut out some of the greatest branches of the under story, but
so as you leave them regular or equally furnished round: so may you leave one
story, cut out the second, leave the third, etc. Cut not their tops, yet you
may crop some of their side-boughes if the Tree be top-heavy, and afterward as
the Tree gets footing, cut these clean off.

There be two seasons for pruning such as lose the leaf: the first for these of
little pith is October and November, or any time in Winter: and for them of
soft wood and great hearts, and for Greens let the frosts be over, and before
the sap in them rise, except Firrs and other Rosinious Trees in November,
because if pruned in March they bleed, and in September and October they have
not given over growing.

The second time is midsummer, which is ordinarily about the end of June: this
is a safe time to prun them of great pith and any that is unapt to bleed; but
especially for cutting of young shoots of this year: extripate all such buds
and shoots as you desire not to grow, and hereby you may make clean bodied
Trees, albeit never so apt to break out in Side-boughes, as some Elms are. for
the diseases of all Trees with their cures, see Chap. 5. Sect. 8 and 9.

CHAP. IV. Of Hedges, or Enclosures.
1. AS there is no Country can have more need of planting than this, so non
more needful of Enclosing: for we well know how vain it is to plant unless we
Enclose.

I spoke of Brick and Stone Walls, in Part.1 Chap. 5. Sect. 5. Now for Hedges I
prefer the Holly and Hautkorn, raffed from the seed, albeit there be several
others, mix, not Hedges, because strong-growers over-growes the weak, neither
fusser Briers, Brambles, Docks, or Thissels therein.

2. Your hollies having flood two years in the seminary and two in the
nurserie, remove them by atrowall or a spade with a clod of Earth at their
Roots, croping such Roots as appears Without the clod with a sharp Knife, and
lessen its head by croping the side-boughes, (cut not its top) plant in made up
bordures, or at the back of Ditches at afoot distance in good earth. Let them
stand two years untouched except weeded, then cut their tops at a bud to make
them furnish thick, and ply their side boughs to grow through other, like
slicing or feathering, and next year fall to work with the Sheers, cutting both
fides and top as we use to do with Box, etc. Never supporting or binding any
Hedge, as is the Custom of some: plant your hollies in. Aprile, and when ready
for sheers, cut in May and July therewith, and so. train them close from the
bottom, but neither too broack nor too high.

3. The hawthorn having, sood 2 or 3 years in the seminary, pull them up and
cut the ends of their Roots, and their tops within 4 Inches of the Root, and
plant them within the fence or back of the ditches in the good earth, delve
them in spading by spading all along two rows, a foot distance, standing in
equilateral Triangles, still thickning your bordure by adding good Earth etc.
Let them stand 3 years untouched, except weeding and reparing where any is
dead; then fill them within half a foot of the ground, so will they shoot forth
a thicket of young shoots, which next year may be trained with the sheers, as
before is instructed.

4. If you would Plant your hedge on the face of a ditch, as in wet and tough
grounds, then streatch a line at both sides of the intended ditch, and ritt
with the spade along by the same, slanting inward: for if the ditch be 7
quarters wide; it must; be 5 deep (sloping to a foot in breadth at the bottom)
then cut the turf or surface of your ditch, and lay a gang or row of the first
spading along by the brink of the ditch (sloping at the face according to the
flop determined, with half a foot of table intercepting, because so much will
crumble down by the frosts, etc.) On the top of that, lay one row of quicks,
their tops standing up a little toward the ditch, cover their Roots with fine
small earth, and lay another spading above them, and if you will lay another
row of quicks above that, every one here opposing the mid-intervall of the
other, and so cover on the rest of the mould till the ditch be finished: being
allwaves sure to put good earth next the quicks, tho you should bring it from
some highway or ridg of land next thereunto, and every year scour the ditches,
claping it up about the quicks* or a far better way is,

To cast half of the Earth that comes out of the ditches, to each hand, and
quicks in both sides; accordingly this will make an Invincible fence: for then
the hedge grows up on both sides of the ditch, the gutter betwixt makes it
terrible, but that I am against the common double, (which is 2 ditches near
other, and the Earth that comes out of both laid betwixt them, with arow of
quicks in the face of each ditch,) is because here the quicks are obnoxious to
the croping of cattle; (besides they take much ground and the quicks are too
much burdened with Earth,) rather if you be for such, make a little space
betwixt of plain ground, where you may plant the Hedge.

5. But if you would have a vow of Trees round by your ditches, then make these
two ditches the breadth of a walk sundry, but parallel, and in that mid
intervall plant one single row of Trees, and the two hedges at the Back of the
ditches: here you have two excellent walks of shade, nor is the ground lost
between their hedges; you may have good Hay, and in large quantity. And in
effect: this is the besd way that ever I thought upon, for Enclosing and
sheltering our grounds and plantations; and you may make the Intervall betwixt
these hedges wider, so as you may have two rows of Trees.

6. Now for fencing the quicks in all the several sorts from the croping of
beast, as indispensibly necessary while young.

If the Hedge be planted alonght by the back or inside of the Ditch, then the
streng Ditch with its Earth easten to both sides will sense it: and if you
think that not sufficient, set, stake, and raise Hedge on the top of the bank,
or rather (which is indeed much better,) cuttings of Thorns set there in a
spade bit trench well backed: or for want of these, back up the Ditch with
Turf, which is like half Ditching. But all this time there is but one side of
them fenced, and that next the pasture; therefore no beasts can come on the
other side to eat the Fogage, except teathered horses: but if you make the hedge
or Hedges and Trees betwixt the two Ditches (you may cast half of their Earth
to each hand, and back them as is Said, which fences from all hands most
elegantly. And if you plant your Hedges in the face of the Ditches, the same
backing on each hand will also, fence them.

But where you plant Trees at a great distance through your fields or parks,
you may fence every particular Tree by cutting a little trench round 4 foot off
the Tree, and about 2 foot wide, facing it handsomely up like a ditch, laying
one row of Turfs or spadings above other, till it be 3 foot high from the
surface, backing them with the small Earth or shovellings, battering inward to
the Tree; here the Tree must be high planted: tho more the Soil inclyn to wet,
or the sourer that be, plant so much the higher above the surface; you may
stick some Briers, or Thorns on the top of this Tump.

CHAP. V. How to propagate, and order Fruit Trees.
1. THE only Fruits for this Country are Aples, Pears, Cherties, Plumes, (and
Apricocks, and peaches at South Side of walls,) Currants, Goosberries,
Rasberries, etc.

Before I begin, I shall premise some observations on Grassing, etc. a sure
means to obtain Fruits of the desired species, and that in short time: for by
taking the twig or bud of such a sort as is a good fruit, and bears well, and
Graff or Inoculate into a proper stock, you ar sure to have the same fruit;
because the Graff dominires, albeit it may have a little smack of its stock
whereon now Graffed. And you may expect fruit, because it may actually, have
the fruit buds, as being taken from a bearing tree. But if you sow the seed,
they will be long e're they come to bear, and at length perhaps bring no fine
fruit, and for the seed of Graffed Trees, they will not bring the same fruit;
Peats, and Aples will rather bring a Fruit of the nature of the stock,
whereupon they have been graffed; and although you should take a Cyon of the
same, and graff in its self, that will not alter the Fruit, nor better the
Tree, except a little check its aspiring, which may as well be effected by
pruning.

We can also be sure of the desired fruit, by cuttings, layings, and
circumposirion; but such are always Dwarfish and short lived Trees, as
wanting a main Root which all seedlings have. Hence arises one reason, why
stocks should be raised from the seed Suckers are not so clean and lusty;
therefore not so able to nurse the graffs, and they are apt to send Suckers
again. Only I look upon plum Suckers as very good, because when they Spring off
a Root at a distance from the stem, they strick good Root of themselves, very
much resembling seedlings. Moreover you may graff on a Root or a stock Sprung
off that Root as in Chap, 1. Sect. 4. and 8. which is near equal to a seedling.

The seed of crabs, or wild Aples. and pears, may be fit to make stocks of such
Trees designed for the fields, or more Rugged grounds; but for a cultivated
soil I would choice the seeds of finer fruits. And so the great White-plum is
the best stocks for Apricocks, or for want thereof any other White-plum with
great shoots, albeit it does on any plum: but we reject it self for a stock, as
being too spongie and not so durable. But Peaches and nectarins, takes only
best upon Peach stocks, so cherries on geens, and Plumes upon plumes.

Goosberries, and currants, needs not graffing; they do well by Suckers, layers,
and cuttings.

To make Dwarse Aples, Graff or bud on the paradise or any that has
Burry-knots, Codlings, Redstracks, etc. Dwarse Pears on the Quince: but no Pear
holds well on it (that I have tried,) save Red Pear Achans and longavil; but
you may re-graff for varieties. And if you be very curious for these stocks
(which; I am not) you may cut them at the Spring, when ready for graffing,
within 2 Inches of the ground, and at August come twelve months Inoculate in
that young shoot, and perhaps they will prosper the better, but I think
graffing in the Roots of Pears, will produce Dwarfs.

Dwarfe-cherries on the morella, or on the common Red cherrie. Or on that Red
geen spoken of in Chap. 3. Sect. 2. which is more Dwarffish than the black.

2. The mellow, warm and light ground is for fruits; and allthough the best,
warmest and lightest land, yields most excellent corn, yet the strong, stiff,
cold, moist yields not so good fruits, plants, Grass, Hay, etc. Aples affect a
pretty rich loamy soil, tho they will bear in clay mixed with lym, dung, and
Turff.

Pears will prosper well enough where the soil is mixed with Gravel. But both
Aples and Pears are better relished in warm grounds that are not over moist,
than in cold and wet: yet there be some grounds has swect moisture, others
sour; Which last is very bad, and therefore must be helped by draining and
application of proper Medicine, see Chap. 2.

Cherries, Plumes, Apricocks, Peaches affect a light, sharp soil thoroughly
prefared and mixed with Rotted manures. As to their propagation,

By Graffing are Aples, Pears, Cherries, Plumes, Quince, Medlar, Wallnut,
Chestnut, Filbeard, Service, etc.

By Inoculation or budding ar Apricocks, Peaches, Neclarines, Almond,
Goosberries, Currants, Aples, Pears, Plumes, Wallnuts, etc

By Suckers, are Currants, Goosberries, Barrberries, Rasberries, Quince, Vine,
Fig, Mulberrie; its the white that feeds the Silk-worme: But that is to little
purpose here.

By layers and circumposition are all sorts.

By cuttings are Currants, Goosberries, Vine, Quince, Aples, especially these
with Burrie-knots.

By Nuts and Stones are Wallnuts, Chestnuts, Filbeards, Almond, Peach, Plum,
Cherrie.

By Kirnells or seeds are Aples, Pears, Quince, Goosberries, Currants,
Barberries, Vine, Mulberrie, etc.

I have told whereupon to Graff Aples, Pears, Cherries, Plumes, Apricocks,
Peaches; and as for the Quince you may Graff it on it self or on the Hawthorn,
Almonds on it self, Medlars on Pears, or on the Service, Filbeards on the
Hassell; Service, Wallnut, Chestnut, Goosberrie, Curran, all on their own Kind.

3. In raising the stocks observe that,

Aple, and Pear seed, must be separate from the Fleshy substance and spread to
dry a little especially the Cyder-marie, lest it heat; you may roll it in Sand
to help the separation: keep it in a couch of dry Sand till Winter pass, then
sow them as soon as the frosts are over; they come up that season.

For raising Cherries or Greens see Chap. 3. Sect. 2. Peach, Plum, and
Almond-stones must be used in all cases as Cherries, only you may break the
Peach Stones.

Use the Quince-seed as Aples. As for the rest, I have showed how they are
increased in the last Section, and how to perform the several ways in Chap. 1.

But you must prepare a seminary and nurserie, as before for Forrest-trees, see
Chap. 3. Sect. 1. sow every species by themselves, keep them clean of weeds,
and the next or second year after the seeds rise, if they shoot lustily, (draw
out the biggest first) transplant them into the nurserie in single rows 2 foot
intervall, and half a foot in the rows, for convenience in hawing, graffing,
pruning, etc. and observe to prun Root and side-branches in planting, as I
directed with Forrest-trees; only when you have got them to a convenient hight
for graffing, you may cut their tops to make their bodies swell the sooner,
albeit this be not permitted with Forrest-trees. However graff and inoculat,
while the stocks are young, e're they be an Inch Diameter, and they will sooner
heal the wound: let them have a years settlement in the nurserie before you
graff; but you may inoculat that same ensuing summer after planting, especially
if they be very free and lusty. Next year after grassed, remove them to a
wider distance, viz. 3 foot one way and a foot the other, Prun there Roots at
every removal, and enter a pruning, that they may provide for a well shapen
head, cut them near now while young, if you would have all their branches of an
equal greatness, and of order proper, as anon. I shall inform you.

In setting your stocks in the nurserie, I presume you will set every kind by
themselves. i. e. Pears with Pears, and Aples with Aples, etc. And when you
graff or bud, write down in your nurserie-book their species as they stand,
viz. begin at the end of such a nurserie, and say the first row is graffed,
with such a sort and so forth: and if you have more than one in a row, then set
in a stake betwixt each species, and so write thus, from such an end of such a
row; to the first stake is so many of such a sort or species; thence to the
second stake so many, of another, etc.

4. When you transplant Fruit Trees into orchards, do, as I directed with
Forrest-trees in groves; plant not deep, neither trench too deep; but tempt the
roots by baiting the surface with dungs to make them run ebb within the reach
of the Sun and shoures. Therefore mix the Earth in the holes (which should be 6
or 8 foot diameter) with Rotted neats dung and Earth well turned, sweetened and
Prepared as in Chap: 2. Cover, delve, and haw their bulks as in Chap. 3. Sect.
3. and for further improving and keeping your Fruit Trees in good case, see
Sect. 6. of this Chapter, prune their Roots at every removal, as Forrest-trees,
(experience forbids me to make exception of the Peach or any other, as some
does) And proportion their heads to their Roots by pruning: but here note,
that, as Forrest-trees arc trained up high bodies and unlopt heads, so
Fruit Trees with low bodies, their heads lopt and branches topt; therefore
easily proportioned, as aforesaid.

Standards of 4 years old, may be planted out of nurseties into Orchards,
Wall-trees of 2 years old.

The season of the year is as soon as they give over growing; (if the leaves be
not off, cut them, saving a little tail of their stalks) its true you may plant
any time in Winter, weather open, but rather let the frosts be over, and the
spring Approaching, if you have missed the fore-end of Winter, which is the
better season.

For standards arc Aples, Pears, Cherries, Plumes, Goosberries, Currants,
Barberries, Quince, Wallnut, Chestnut, Filbeards, Service: But I think all these
deserves not a place in the orchard.

For Walls are Apricocks, Peaches, Nectarines, Almond, Vine, Fig, Currants,
Aples, Pears, Cherries, Plumes, etc. But you need not take up much with Almond,
Vine, Fig, nor Nectarine

On the south side of the Wall plant Apricocks, Peaches, Nectarines, Vine, etc.
On the east and west sides Cherries, Plumes, Aples, Pears, etc On the north
side Plumes, some Pears, as great Bargamor, some Aples, Currants especially, and
Rasps, etc.

When you elect them in the nurserie, hang sticks tied at them figured, and
write the same figure on the Paper at their name to distinguish their species;
and afterward being planted write them, as they stand.

5. Begin betimes to prune your Fruit Trees, spare them not while young: reduce
them into a good shape, and order while such; so will they not only Soon
over-grow the wounds, their branches being but small, but also when they should
come to bear fruit, you shall not need to cut so much, only purge them of
superfluities; and this is the way to make Trees Fruitful as well as pleasant.

Some Ignorants are against pruning, suffering their Trees to run and Ramble to
such a head of confusion, as neither bears well nor fair: for the Root is not
able to maintain such, far less fruit too; and therefore are their fruit so
small and Imperfect; in the mean time the Tree spends its strength, and so
cannot live long, nor make good service in their time: yea sometimes the Root is
not so much as able to bear such monstrous heads; I know one windy day
prostrate above half a score such in a little orchard.

Others again that are for pruning usually runs on the other extreme, by
cutting too much, and untimely; and some sparing what they should cut, and
cutting such as they ought to spare: but the general error even amongst the
learned is, that they spare them While they should prune, viz: the very first
and second year in special, yea the first 5 or 6 years; and then they fall a
massackering: at which time the branches being grown some of them greater than
other, who now runs away with all the nourishment from the smaller; insomuch
that no man can reduce them to order again, having thus neglected the time.
Albeit you should endeavor it by cutting deep, or exterminating these great
branches, which I confess is the next remeed; but then as these wounds brings
cankers, hollowness, etc. So does the work retard their bearing fruit. And
indeed its about the time that Trees ordinarily begin to bear fruit, that these
unskilful men begin to prune: and the more they are thus cut in the head, the
more they spring out to wood, and the less fruit they beat. But experience has
taught me to begin, While young.

And when you do begin consider on the hight of the body, (for as high Trees
are unprofitable, so too low Trees in orchards are inconvenient) for Aple and
Pear standards two or three foot, plume and cherrie 3 or 4 foot, Dwarff and
Wall-trees half a foot; there cut the top that Runs Straight upwards, making it
to spread out in branches round, suffer no branch to aspire beyond other in
hight, nor any to cross, Rub, or gall one another; and whatever branch or twig
you cut off, cut close and clean by the body or branch (except in the case of
old Trees and great branches as I observed in pruning Forrest-trees) and in
toping of branches cut close and smooth Immediately above a leaf bud, slanting
upwards. And when you prun, spare the fruit buds (the full ones are them)
except you see them too many; then purge by the Knife, likwayes if afterward
you find more fruit knotted than the Tree can be able to nurse to perfection,
thin them in time.

But your first work is to proportion the head to the Root, by pruning; cut the
tops at a convenient hight, that the Tree may grow equally furnished round; for
cutting as it diminishes, so it forms and shapes the head, insomuch as it
furnishes with new young shoots, that may be trained, as you please.

Standards should have but four Arms breaking out for a head, opening equally
round, these divided into branches, and again subdividing into twigs and that
you may the better understand what to cut, you may stand under, go about, look
up through the tree where you may espy superfluities: keep them clear, void,
open within like a bell and level on the the top make some larger opens toward
the the south for Sun beams entrance; let no branch grow cross through the
heart nor shoot spring up therein; (minding always to prun such as cross, Rubs
and galls other as above is noted) and any branches, shoots, or twigs that
grows not the way you would have them cut them at the place whence you think
they will send forth shoots which may lead the way you desire them: cut close,
smooth, and slanting at the back of a leaf bud tending that way; by this I
bring Trees to order.

Wall-Trees especially should be cut near, while young, that they may send
forth a thicket of small shoots for furnishing your walls from the bottom,
equally: and if you continue to top them every year at a convenient hight
(perhaps about half a foot above the last) that will make them shoot all their
branches of an equal uniformity of greatness, hight, and thickness, so that no
long, bair or naked branch be seen there, neither one or two great and all the
rest starved small; the common fault of our wall Trees, and is occasioned
through neglecting to cut while young even the first year, as is said above.

But albeit a Tree right begun and so going on, yet one years neglect or wrong
pruning may spoil it: for as I was once pruning wall Trees, an Ingenious person
standing by, said I cut them too low, alleging thereby, the wall should be
long uncovered, desiring me to cut them a little higher: I told him, that was
wrong, but for to satisfy him I did cut 2 of them about 8 or 9 Inches higher
than I designed or should have don. The next year these two Trees left about a
foot naked round, and above the same crowned like nests while the rest was
equally and orderly furnished; when he beheld this, his mind was changed, and
I obleidged to cut exactly where I should have don the precedent year: which
was now a little below the middle of the naked place, and this did put them
several years behind the rest of bearing fruit.

You may nail them at midsummer that year of planting, and so continue to do at
the seasons herafter, discribed: prepare double plancher-nails and tags of
hats, (which is better than leather) shape the tags about half Inch broad, and
betwixt 3, 4, and 5 Inches long, making a gash with the Knife near the ends by
folding, to put through the nail; then spread the Tree, laying, plying, and
nailing every individual branch by it self, all at equal distances from other,
not close in one place and wide in another, and let non cross other, the
superfluous and these that will not ply easily, and the exuberant or lusty
that Robs the rest, must be cut away.

Well plied Trees will appear like apricocks; train, spread, except these on a
low wall, which you may cause lean all one way, as half of the other: drive the
nail but half way in, and on the upperside of the branch, else it will lean and
gall; at every nailing alter the old nails and beware of pinching tags, etc.

The time for pruning old planted and hardy Trees, is any time betwixt the
leaf falling and the Spring, but let the frosts be over before you prune the
new planted young and tender, and before the sap rise, otherwise the frosts
will penetrate the wounds and make a sore: but if you must cut before the
frosts, because their heads may be obnoxious to the winds, (such are ordinarily
the new planted standards) then you may cut a little, and at Spring cut off
these pieces left cleanly, as before is noted. Also let the frosts be over
before you prune your Wall-trees and before they bud; only I use to let peaches
bud forth a little e're I prune them, otherwise pieces of their branches
sometimes perish after the Knife.

And besides, that you must Rub off all unnecessary buds, and pull up suckers
and weeds from the Roots, you must also give all your Trees a midsummer
pruning, (which is ordinarily the end of June and beginning of July) a good time
to cut any shoots of this year; any shoots or buds as tend not only to the
deforming your Trees, but Robs them of that sap, which may be otherwise spent
in nursing the Tree and its fruits, (but the spring is the time of croping or
cutting their tops until the wall be covered, then crop at both seasons) thin
and purge gently to let in the Sun, but not to scorch the fruit, this is also
the time of furnishing your Trees with pedastools or Bearers: therefore in
repruning, save as many of the likelyest shoots, as ar well placed, and cut
them at the 3d or 4th bud froml the Tree; but cut quit off the lustiest and
greatest of this years (whicn Ignorants do spare) and nail up such as are for
filling up the defects of the wall.

You may go through them in harvest and purge the fruit of superfluous leaves
which hinders the Sun: but do it so, as there may be leaves sufficient to
screen the fruit, and cut quit off the lusty shoots of this second Spring,
that Robbs the Tree and fruit.

As for goosberrie and curran standards, train them to a foot stem with a
handsome round but thin head: these at Walls half a foot stem with a well
spread head supported with Rodes laid cross, fastened with nails and tags.
Rasps may be in shadowy bordures or beds a foot distance, kept clean of
Suckers, weeds, and dead wood.

But because some years in some places we have ripe Grapes, especially that we
have under the name of Frontinak: therefore if you think a Tree or two of them
worth your while, plant them at a south Wall in a pure and fine mould, not wet,
sour, and crowd, but a light sweet soil mixed with some Cowes dung Rotted in
heaps with the mould. Plant ebb and trench not deep; prune them every year,
prune low in February, and at the true midsummer. Cut off the lusty young
shoots and tendralls with sheers betwixt the 2d and 3d Joint above the fruit;
and in August purge it of superfluous leaves, but reserve so many as may screen
the fruit a little.

There be some sorts of Fruit Trees that will blow and bear themselves to
death, when young or middle aged: For such out most of the blowing buds, and
thin the head to make it shoot again.

I got some cherries and other stone fruit from Holland, who rooke this decay:
wherefore in the Spring I did cut off the blowing buds, and the branches near
the place where the Tree headed, reserving only some buds for receiving the
sap; (in case they should have put forth at the middle of the body or a little
above ground) this made them shoot to wood. Therefore I conclude that by this
and delving about, you may help ill-thriving Trees.

There be also some Aples and Pears, that will be full of false bearing buds,
that does not blow, such having got more head the Roots can well maintain,
consequently has not strength sufficient to spare sap for blossoms, far less
for fruit, which by pruning and thinning the head, and by slitting the bark of
the body in the Spring, may be made afterward to bear well, when they have put
forth new shoots at the head.

Some Trees there be that will not bear of themselves till they be old: but if
you cut off the head of the shoots as soon as ever the Spring shoot is over
(which is at the true midsummer) and take out some great boughs then, if you
mind your time, and do it with discretion, you may force that Tree to put
forth blowing buds, and blow and bear the year following, as I shall inform
you in next sect: but,

6. One main business is to enclose your plantations: avoid planting too deep,
too dry, too cold, too moist, and guard your Orchards from winds by planting
two rows of Forrest-trees, at least round without the Wall, the breadth of a
large walk therefrom with Thickets of the same on the West, North and East, but
especially on the West. (Yet mind regularity) also observe my method of
planting, and pruning and ordering their bulks of 6 or 8 foot Diameter: but
when the Tree grows old and their feeding Roots far abroad, you cannot reach
to feed them with dungs in this narrow Compass; therefore enlarg it, or
otherwise confine them a little sooner and hinder their too far gauding, by
digging a Circle round the Tree perhaps 8 foot Diameter, and cut all the Roots
clean off there, that has run out, applying fresh and sweet Mould, so shall
they emitt Fibers or feeding Roots in thicket, which may be supplied with
refreshments once in two or three years, as shall be required. And this cutting
the Roots will cause Trees, that are apt to spend more in wood than Fruit,
alter therefrom, (add this to the latter-end of the last Section) and the ends
of the Roots cut off, and their buttends raised up a little, will serve as
flocks to Graff upon.

When you would enrich your worn out plantations, if the ground be poor and
dry, add well rotten dung prepared and mixed with soil. The Water that soaks
from a Dunghill is excellent: for it will follow the Roots and Enrich the
Trees. If the ground be cold and moist, add Pigeons dung or Ashes and soot;
which is also excellent if it be leopared with unskilful dunging, or by
noisome weeds that grows about such Roots, (where the owner is a sluggard) and
hatches or nests, moles, mice, toads, etc.

If you observe the premises, you may prevent their diseases, such as ill
thriving, etc. But if you have, or do neglect, and the diseases be come, as if
Cankers or Galls be entered, cut them clean out, covering the wound with a
Plaster of Cowes dung and clay compound; if the bark be pilled by hares,
conies or mice, apply a Plaster of the same; (but better prevent the last
three, by swaddling the Trees with Straw or Hay ropes, unloosed in summer and
renewed every Winter, if your fence cannot Guard them.) Ill taken off branches,
broken or rotten branches must be cut off clean and smooth. If any Trees be
bark-bound, (which is the misery of many and especially Forresttrees) slit them
in die Spring through the bark on both sides with a sharp Knife from the head
to the Root, and delve about them, otherwise raise and plant ebber if too
deep; which is the common cause of this disease together with bad enclosure.

If Jaundise, cut off the diseased wood; if moss, scrape or singe it off: but
its vain to attempt the cure until you first remove the cause; which you will
find to proceed from some malignity at the Roots, whither the disease be
Bark-binding, Cankers, etc.

And this most commonly by ill-planting, (and not enclosing) as among Clay,
Water, impenitrable Gravel, etc. Water must be draineds, it an intolerable
evil. Cold clayes, stiff and hard soil must be trenched and mixed with dungs
and soils, often stirred and fallowed, as above is directed. And if you would
have Trees to prosper, observe their nature, and wherein they most delight; and
so apply and help them accordingly.

9. And for destroying of vermin, there is traps for Moles of several forms,
besides you may watch and delve them up with the spade. And for mice, the traps
from Holland, or for want thereof, Pots sunk in the Earth (where they haunt)
till their mouth be level with the surface half full of Water covered with a
little chaff wherein they drown themselves; and so does Toads, Asps, etc. Cast
away the Earth where the ants lodge, supplying its place with stiff clay. Place
Cow-hooves for the woodlice, and erwigs to lodge in all night, and so scald them
early morning. Pour scalding Water in the nests of Wasps, and hang Glasses of
All mingled with Honey, where you would not have them frequent.

Dash Water on the Trees for Caterpillars, by the Stroups we get from Holland.
Gather Snails and Worms, shoot Crows, Pyes, Jayes, and spread Nets before your
Wall-Fruit for their preservation.

See the Appendix how to gather and preserve Fruit, and how to make Cider, etc.

CHAP. VI. Of Fruits, Herbs, and Roots for the Kitchen.
1. ALL the Fruits whereof I spoke in the last Chapter, are for the Kitchen or
Table, but they grow on Trees or Shrubs; yet there is some falls in here, the
tenderest whereof are

Melons, and are not worth the while: for you must raise them on the early
Hot-bed (the making whereof is in Chap. 2. Sect. 7.) which (when fit for seed)
prick 4 or 5 in together, at 3 Inches distance, through the bed, setting
drinking Glasses on them at first, and cover on the matts over the whole
carefully, to preserve from Snow, Rains, and Winds; taking off the marts in
temperate days, but keep on the Glasses, except in a warm space; that you
acquaint them a little with the Air, by raising the edg of the Glasses, with a
little Straw on the laun side, closing it at night again. When they stand in
need, Water with Water made warm by standing an day or two in the Sun,
impregnate with pigeons dung, but let it be fresh and clean, conveying it to
the Roots, not touching their leaves with it: if they be sown on the last
discribed hotbed viz. in cases, sow at a wider distance, and you need not
transplant, but renew the heat when needful, and as they grow larger, cover
with the Bell-Glasses, giving them Air by hoising the Glasses, till they can
endure the Sun without them, but dill cover all close at night again: when they
have put out runners 4 or 5 Inches long, cut off one or two joints at the end,
and when they have gathered more strength, cut off all but the prime shoots.
And when the Fruit knots, nip off that runner above the Fruit between the 2d
and 3d joint, cutting still off the new ones that spring, but do not expose the
Fruit to the Sun: lay tile under the Fruit: wipe the Dew off the Glasses and
plants every morning, but keep the Glasses on the Fruit, and Water non now.

Cucumbers may be ordered that same Very way, and so may Pompions, but they are
not so tender, I have raised them without Glasses.

Strawberries are a very fine and delicat Fruit, and are easily increased, but
best by the small Plants at the strings when taken Root at the joints: plant
them at any or both springs, but I find most of fibrous Rooted plants apt to be
spued out of ground by Winter, if not Rooted sufficiently before. Dung, delve,
mix and prepare a light and warm soil, prun their Root and top, and plant in
straight lines 5 rows in the bed, and suffer them never to overrun, but keep
each stock by themselves, still taking off all their strings, (except at
sometime you permit a few for increass) weed and haw among them; and in
September cut them within 2 Inches of the ground, and lay Cow dung over the bed
(reserving their tops free) covered with a strinkling of Sand; this will much
improve them. So as they will not need renewing for 6 or 7 years.

Artichoks is a fine and tailing Fruit, and is increased by offsets chiefly,
planted in the spring, a fat and well cultured soil, light and warm, enriched
with Sheeps dung, plant in straight lines, about 3 foot distance having pruned
their Roots, and cut their tops within half a foot; Water (if needful) with
qualified Water, and still cut away their under and hanging leaves, and haw the
weeds as they begin to peep: when their Fruit is spent, cut them within half a
foot of the ground, and delve and cover the plot over with dung and leitter,
keeping their tops free, and in Aprile delve down the same, and extirpate them
of Suckers, sliping them off carefully leaving 2 or 3 at most to each stock
forbearing; And they will flourish near 9 or 10 years.

Great beans must be planted early in the Spring, as soon as the great frosts
or over, in deep rich ground, 2 foot Intervall and half a foot in their rows;
these for seed when full ripe, cut and bind in little sheaves and lay on Trees
to dry

Kidnes in Aprile, a light and warm soil, support them with sticks.

Peace that you would have early, sow in the full moon of Novem: if a warm
place: but do not trust too much unto them. Sow in Feb. and hence monthly til
June, that you may have them till the frosts surprise: in an open light, warm,
dry soil; and if they ly on the bair ground, they will sooner ripe by
reflection* but if you would have them fruitful, set sticks amongst them while
young, for their tenderals to climb on; and keep them always clean of weeds:
when ripe, you may easily win some for seed, and sow not every year on the same
plot; to change the ground, Improves them. I prefer the setting them by
lines, 5 rows in the bed, as part 1. Chap: 5. Sect: 2. make the holes nimbly
by the lines with a dible 1 Inch deep, and 2 Inches, distance from another, or
the same hand, fallowing, and put one in each hole; then give the bed a smooth
with the rake head, which fills the holes and covers the peace: one pound makes
move service thus, than 3 otherwise; its soon performed, and they spring
orderly.

2. Of Sallads and pot-herbes, the choicest sallad is Asparagus: sow its seed
in March, good ground, and that time rewely months transplant into an
exceeding rich and well mixed ground of Rotted dung and light Earth. you may
streatch lines along and cross the beds and mark with the edg of the rule;
then gather little huts of Earth at the crossings, whereon you must spread the
Roots of your Asparagus, two or three on a hut, but do not top their Roots,
(you may perceive their points are like the runners of liquorish) then cover
the sets with the Rotted dung and Earth, 2 Inches over, which has been lying a
year incompose. They cannot abide wet grounds, and weeds will quyt destroy
them: at the Approach of winter, cut their stalks, and cover their beds with
leitter and dung from the stables. The winter Raines will wash in its substance
to their Roots; at Spring e're they peep, remove it, and loosen the Earth
amongst them with a fork, and cover them near half Inch with the mould Raked
and evened; but do not tread on them. Follow this direction yearly, and in 4 or
5 years it will be excellent for cutting out the biggest and tenderest, and a
little within the ground, but hurt not them ready to peep; the seed is ripe
when red.

You may have early Asparagus, if you plant some strong Roots on your early
hotbed; which about a month hence will Spring, and then die.

Purslain may be sown on the early hotbed, it cannot endure deep Interring:
sow on a fine mould like dust, and only clap it a little with the shovell;
hence on the cold bed, but fat and fine soil through the summer, in drills for
convenience of weeding and cutting: and if you please transplant it when 2
Inches long, reserve the early sown for seed, till their pods grow blackish;
then pull and hang to dry, and Rub out.

As purslain, so lettice by seeds only, at the same seasons; (but the winter
with corn sallad in August) they love a fat soil something moist, that for
winter, more dry. Suffer these for seed to run up, and only cleanse of under
and withered leaves: It Is ripe when it begins to fly with the wind; pull it,
and lay on a clothe, to perfect, and Rub out in a dry day.

Sow cresses at the same times. And plant

Tarragon by off-sets in the Spring.

The small cherault by seed, as cresses. As also

Burnet: but it continues many years, still yielding seed.

Sampler grows at seaside in Gallaway, not so well in out gardens.

Succory and Endive by seeds and offers at both springs; they continue many
years.

Sorrall by offsets (some by seeds also) in beginning of Aprile, a good fat
soil, a little shade, 6 or 7 rows in the bed, weeded all summer, and cut near
the ground in September: In 2 or 3 years replant into another place: for they
soon Impair the ground of that part appropriate for them.

Spinach by seed only in Feb: and March, but that sown beginning August is
most profitable; cut it beginning Oct: and it will Spring a fresh. And be ready
for Spring stoves; then reserve some uncut for seed; it prospers well in a very
fat Earth, Not too dry.

And so does beets, who are also propagate the same way, only them sown at
Spring are most serviceable.

Sow beet card in the fattest, and when something strong, you may transplant:
they seed the next, not that year wherein you sow them.

Order burrage as spinach, its also Annual; So bugloss: but it continues many
years.

Marigold may be ordered as burrage, and white Arage as Spinach.

Parsley by seeds in Feb: and March, they bring forth their seeds next year,
whereby they must be yearly renewed.

Sellery in a light fat soil, 8 rows in the bed, as parsley; it continues long,
yearly yielding seed after the first; and so does smalladg and Alexander. They
may be blanched as succory and Endive, viz. sellery wowen at spring Transplante
at midsummer in a very fat and fine earth, half foot deep furrows, 3 foot
between the rows, and but 3 Inches in the rows, and as it grows up, gather
the earth at its sides from the Intervalls, leaving the top free; and still as
it grows, earth it up: so shall it be blanched for a winter sallad.

Garleeks and shallot by offsets in March, a light and fat soil, 8 rows in the
bed: I use neither cutting nor twisting their stakes, but when their fibers
begin to Rott latter end August, take them up. and spread to dry a little, and
house them in a dry room with board floor for use.

Leeks by seed in April, a fat soil, though something stiff, In June you may
thin them by Transplantation: prun their Roots and tops, set them at three
Inches distance, and continue to crop them till October: the french seed is best,
ours not worth the while. Onyons by seeds in March, a Rich, Warm, light mould,
well mixed with Rotted compost, and sifted pigeons dung; give them a thin coat
or covering of earth. Sow also beginning July for Shibols; its not worth the
pains to win their feed.

Plant offsets of sives in spring, 9 rows in the bed, in a rich and low ground.

Cole Flower is a fine cole; sow on the early hot bed, (for its hard to get
winter plants through to purpose) sow thin and ebb, and carefully preserve them
from colds while young. If you water, Imbibe pigeons dung, but touch not their
leaves therewith; when their leaves ar 3 Inches broad, Transplant them into a
very fat and well mixed soil, 2 foot distance, prun their Roots and tops: and if
any worm knots, cut them a way, and in setting keep their hearts Immedially
above ground. And all along keep them clean of weeds, under hanging and
withered leaves: let them not suffer drought while young, make the water like
wort by dung, if the ground and seed be good, you may expect good heads; which
if you spend not altogether before frosts, (which spoils them) take them up in
a dry day and ty them in pairs to hang in a dry Room for use. the best seed
comes from Candia.

There be many Cabbages; sow the Savoy and such tender sorts, as cole-flowers,
albeit not so tender; sow the great white and Red, the full moon in July, Plant
them forth in October: 3 foot distance in well dunged ground: set some also in
March; but then the gardner finds multiplicity of business, therefore its his
wisdom to put as much work by hand as can suffer it, at least to have all his
grounds fallowed before winter, you may rake up and hang your Cabbages in
Novem: as cole-flowers: but plant some of the best and hardest for seed, up to
the neck; when they shoot, support with stakes and Ropes; when full, cut and
lay on a clothe to perfect. But choice the middle, rejecting the lower branches.

Catch snails and worms that graws the young sprouting plants; and set nets for
birds at the same time, the reason why old Cole is full of green worms is, dry
poor ground never weeded, or otherwise unqualified dungs and unseasonably
applied. If they would trench, mix, etc. As in Chap: 2. that their ground may
be clean and sweet, they shall ripen accordingly.

Common Colworts ar usually sown at spring, planted in summer and eaten
through winter, and at spring when other green herbs ar scarce you may also
sow and set them with Cabbages and ripe their seeds accordingly.

3. Of sweet herbs: as,

Clary by seeds and offsets in Aprile; at which time you may slip and set
Tansie, Sage, Cost, Mint, Balm, Winter Savory, Thyme, Penniroyall, Wild
Marjorum, Maudlin, Fennel, etc. Prune their tops and fibers, and plant in a
garden soil, 8 rows in the bed; they all continue long: but cutting their tops
in growing time makes them more durable: and cut them all within a handful of
the ground at August, that they may recover against winter. You may likewayes
sow the seed of Fennel, Thyme, Winter as well as Summer Savory, Dill, Sweet
Basil, etc. In Aprile, a warm cultured soil, ordering them as above: the
three last ar annualls. If you would have sweet Marjorum early, raise it on the
hot bed, the sweet Basil requires the same: sow it also the latter end of
Aprile in a warm fat soil, 8 rows in the bed. you may sow it in July, and
Transplant when two Inches high, in a warm bordure at a south wall; its seed
with Basil comes from hotter Countries. Sow Rosmary seed in Aprile, or at the
same time take its slips or cuttings and twist them a little at the ends, and
dible in good soil, on a south wall-bordure: but cut not their tops, they
easily root being watered in drought with soap water; you may ply it to the
wall as Shrubs.

4. I am now come to Roots, they require a light Earth, deep trenched, fat sand
mixed with Sheeps dang; its convenient that it be dunged a year before, because
new dung maks them forke.

Plant Liquorish offsets and Runners in February, in this soil well stirred and
mixed, after which do not tread save in the furrows, six rows in the bed, and
cover all the Intervalls with leitter topt with sand, but let the plants be
free: for this is to keep out drought the first summer; keep them always
clean of weeds and cut their stalks near winter, let it stand 3 summers in the
ground, and in Novem: take it up thus: begin at one side of the plot, and make
a trench, the whole deepth of their Roots, taking it out carefully (not
breaking it) at the face of the same, casting the Earth still behind as you
proceed; then cut off the plants, to divide carefully and lay them amongst
moist sand in a cellar till setting time. And because it stands three seasons
you may have three several plantations; so shall you have it to take up yearly,
if you plant accordingly.

Scorzonera by seeds and by offsets: (that is by parting the tops of the Root)
sow in the Spring, or when its seed ripes promiscuouly in the beds; it
continues many years in the ground, and grows still the greater, and is in
season at all times for eating, tho it yearly run to seed.

Order Carvy aa scorzonera; its Roots is eaten as parsneeps.

Skirrets by seeds, but chiefly by offsets, plant the small sets not many in a
bundle, in March, 8 rows in the bed: when their stalks begin to wither, fall a
spending them, and as you, break off their Roots for use, lay rheir tops or
sets in ground covered a little till the Spring for planting; (I cautioned you
before to change the crops) these you spend not e're the frosts come, hard
house among very dry sand, that you may have them when you will, rather as be
barred from them by the frosts.

Parsneeps by seed only: sow in March promiscuously over the bed, but thin;
spend and house them with skirrets, and cut quit off their tops, lest they grow
amongst the sand: reserve some of the best untaken up for seed, which will ripe
the next season, choice the middle stem seed.

Beat-Rave may be ordered in all cases as parsneeps, save that you may begin
sooner to eat them ( viz: as soon as they are bigg enough) tho they last as
long, besides these you pickle.

Carrots as beat Raves.

Turneeps by seeds in Aprile, May, June, July, (the first proves not best)
promiscuously over the bed, very thin and scarcely any covering of Earth. When
they rise, thin them; late turneeps may be housed as parsneeps and seeds reapt
accordingly.

Horse Radish by offsets, and lasts long too.

The Garden Radish by seed only: you may raise for early in the hotbed cases;
hence every 20 days with other sallading through summer, because they quickly
shoot for seed: sow black Radish in August and September: for winter, these seeds
next season.

Potatoes being cut in as many pieces as you please providing there be an eye
at each piece and planted in March, 5 rows in the bed, plant not deep, neither
in were or stiff ground; spend them with parsneeps, and in housing spread only
through a board-floor.

Parsley is also a Root for the Kitchen, and so is fennel; I spoke of them
before, only you may house some for winter.

See part 1. Chap: 5. for the orderly planting of Kitchen herbs.

5. Weeding (I think) may be accounted the most material part of Gard'nery: The
learned Evelin takes notice of it; his directions are, weed and haw betimes,
continue weeding before they run to seed, which is of extraordinary Importance
both for saving of charge, Improvement of fruit, and the neat maintaining of
the gardens: wherefore says he, keep your weeds down, that they grow not to
seed, and begin your work of hawing as soon as they begin almost to peep; by
this means you will dispatch more in a few hours than afterward in a whole
day; whereas if you neglect it till they are ready to seed, you do but stir and
repair the Earth for a more numerous crop, and your ground shall never be
cleared.

And this agrees with what I had written my self, viz: destroy weeds while
young: for when they have grown strong and got deep Rooting, they will not only
take the nurishment from the good plant, but there will be such difficulty in
grubing them out, that the good seed or plant is in danger of being destroyed;
but if you suffer them to bear and sow their seeds, then (besides that they
exhaust much more of the substance of the ground) you shall find the work
Intolerable, for they will poison the whole ground, insomuch that one years
seeds will cost many years weeding: and therefore prevent these things by
keeping down the weeds; so shall your work become easy and gardens handsome.

In beds where hawes cannot go, you must weed with your hands on both sides,
sitting in the furrow on a straw cushion, pull up the Root cleanly, taking the
help of the weeding Iron where needful: but make use of the haw in all the
Intervalls, drill-beds, nurseries, furrows, tables, or paths, whereby one
will cleanse more than some six by weeding with their hands; and if dry
weather, they will wither where they ly cut, otherwise Rake them in heaps and
spread again when Rotted, or carry them to some open trench or pit, and still
be visiting your plantations, that as soon as you perceive a weed peep, you may
chalk it.

CHAP. VII. Of some Physic herbs, shrubs, and Flowers.
1. ALL the herbs in the last chapter are physical, and having spoken to them
already, I have the less to do here; however there is more, as

Garden-Rue: I use to environe sage beds with Rue; (the soil not moist, mixed
with ashes not cinders) you may box bordures with it as well as lavender, or
hysop; which last is also Increased by seed, and so is golden Rod, feverfew,
verven, celandin; they last many years, and so does

Wormwoods, comfry, Solomon's seal, Catmint, Callamint, Elacampan, Masterwort,
wall pellitory, garden Germander, Beatony, Camomile, Swallowort, Suthernwood,
Lovag, Dwarf-elder, hart's-tongue, Maidenhair, Asrum, Dropwort, Birthwort,
Horhund, Spignell, Agrimony, Briony, Bearsbreach, Sea-holly, Madder, Rhuebarb,
Dogmercury; all which are easily Increased by offsets in the Spring, and
requires to be cut a little above ground at the beginning of Autumn.

Angelica, Spurg, scurvy grass, etc. Are Annualls, but yield seed the second
year from sowing: you may sow when ripe, or in the Spring; but if you prevent
their seeding by cutting, they will last longer.

Blessed thissell, Thorn Aple, Tobaco, stinking Arag, oak of Jerusalem, etc.
Yielding seed and dying the first year; therefore sow yearly in Aprile. The
Virginia Tobaco requites the hotbed, the rest a good fat, light soil, as does
Angelica: you must not bury stinking Arag deep, sow it as purslain.

There be many more, besides multitudes in the fields, Woods, Glens, Meadows,
etc. Of good use, many whereof you may bring into the garden as I have done: I
forbear, seeing the order is in part 1. Chap. 5. and the ways of propagation
in the first of this, and how to order the ground in the second. I do not
approve of planting the clod with them brought out of the fields, for it rotts
and turns sour, and so kills the plant, (albeit you may keep the clod about it
till you come home but,) then part it off carefully, prun their fibers a
little, make the holes with the Trowall, and plant in a Connatural Earth, to
that of their wonted abode, well stirred and aired, which is ane excellent mean
that makes all plants prosper, and therefore diligently to be observed.

2. Of Shrubs that lose their leaves in Winter, the choicest whereof are,

Roses of many sorts, they are increased by Suckers and layers. the musk may be
buded on the Eglantin and set at a Wall; the double Yellow bears fairest
Flowers, if you bud the single Yellow on a Frankfort, and rebud the double
Yellow thereon, (I have done it immediately on the single) planted as a
Standard, a little shaded in Summer, and kept clean of Suckers and superfluous
buds; and any that blow hot freely may be slit at the 5 divisions of the hose.

Prune your Roses after the Flower is past, viz. before the full Moon in
October, cut behind a leaf-bud and cleanse them of dead wood, and if you desire
fair Flowers, sufter but one Stem on a Root and keep it low, and every 5th
year, cut them down to the ground, renewing their earth with old Cow dung.

Jasmines. Honisuckles, Pipe-trees, etc. by suckers, layers and cuttings. See
Chap. 1.

Mezerion by seed, as Hawthorn; they ly as long.

Of Shrubs that be ever green there is Box, Savin, Arbor vitae, Tamerisk,
Privite, etc. by suckers, layers, and cuttings in Aprile; a shade and moist fat
soil till Rooted.

The Cherrie-bay is an excellent Green, and not very Apt to blast, there is
also Laurustinus, Philyrea, Alaternus, (I love not Pyracantha,) Juniper, (I
care not for ever green Oak and Cypress) all by seeds, which must be couched in
Sand before Winter, and sown in Aprile, to rise that season except the
Juniper, which lies till the next: transplant the second year after they rise
in Aprile, remove by a Trowal, with Earth at their Roots, toping such Roots as
appears without the clod, and lessen the head by thinning it. See where I have
spoken of Holly, for the same Rules may be observed for these to be spread on
Walls, but save the top of Standards: they do all well by suckers and layers
also, except Cypress and Juniper. Be careful to defend your seedling Greens
while young, from spring blastings; yet do not choke them for want of good Air.

The Pin, Cypress, and ever-green Oak, (the last in special) will scarce endure
a removal from seminary, therefore sow them in drills 2 foot intervall one way,
and half a foot the other; and the next year after they rise, make a spade-bit
trench between the rows, and work in cautiously, till you discover the running
down Root at one side, which you must top with the pruning Knite, and level in
the Earth as it was, cut off some side-boughes and thin the head: let them
remain two years; then remove and plant them, as is instructed.

Greens that are best worthy our esteem, are Scots firr Standard, Holly for
Hedges, the Cherrie-bay for Walls, or barren creeping jvy, which will neither
blast nor seek supporting.

There is Strawberrie-tree, and Tree nightshade, who are tender. But

Indian and Spanish Jasmines, Mirtles, Oleanders, and Oreng-tree yet tenderer,
wherefore I am not very curious of them, yet there is severals in this Country
has them, and are at great pains in governing them, by setting them in cases,
small stones at the bottom, filled with Earth mentioned for fine plants Chap
2. Sect. 6. at the season Chap. 1. Sect. 4. Housing in Winter between
latter-end September till beginning May, giving them fresh Earth as they
retire, and expose them i. e. takes out the upper exhausted, stirring that
below with a Fork (not wounding the Roots) and puts in its place, some rich and
well consumed soil, watering on all occasions with Water, wherein Neats dung is
steeped (not touching leaves or stem therewith,) whereof they are sparing while
remaining in the House, except after long frosts, in whose extremity is used a
little Charcoal free of smoke sunk a little in the Floor, and in warm days
free of frosts and fogs, aquainted with the Air, but shut close at night again:
and when they may expose to the free Air, yet even then sets them a week in the
shade, having first brussed them from dust, etc. For my part I rather be in the
Woods, Parks, Orchards, Kitchen Garden or fields measuring, planting, and
improving the ground to best advantage. However I will here take a little turn
among the Flowers.

3. Of Fibrous Rooted Flowers.

July-flowers are the best, and are increased by offsets, layers, slips, and
seeds. A light loamy Earth well mixed with rotted soil of Cowes and Sheep, a
year before hand.

Albeit I have raised many double by seed of my own reaping; yet the surest way
to preserve the best, is by laying, because seedlings are apt to die after they
have born a Flower: how to lay see Chap. 1. Sect. 6. Plant out your layers at
spring, and give these in Potts fresh Earth as the Orenge-tree, and yearly
cleanse the old Roots of withered, dead, and Rotten leaves, and leave not above
3 or 4 Spindles for Flower, (if choice) and nip off superfluous buds lest they
blow and bear themselves to death: and if any brust slit, as I directed with
double Yelow Rose. At midsummer shade from afternoons Sun a little these that
blow, support them against winds, set hoofs amongst them for catching erwigs
their enemies; Water well in drought, sparing their leaves, preserve the Choice
from too much Raines by laying the Pots on their sides, strick off the Snow
when it lies too weighty on them, these you will not to beat seed, cut their
stalks as soon as past the Flower.

Stock July-flowers by seeds or cuttings; the seed of single will produce
double, but the more leaves the Mother has, the doubler shall the product be;
sow and plant with carnations or July-flowers, they affect a soil with them.

Prim-roses, Couslips, and bears-ears by offsets in the spring, o when the
Flower is past, (viz. July) they affect a good natural Earth well mixed with
rotten Neats dung: the finer sorts loves a little shade in summer, if in Pots
or cases you may transport them to such at pleasure.

Great varieties may be raised from seed sown in Pots, the soil aforesaid mixed
with willow Earth in October, take head of deep interring bairs ears, sow them
as purslain: set the Potts and cases with them at the Southside of a Wall till
Aprile, at which time they spring, and must be now retired a little as is said;
transplant in July to Flower next spring, and neglect not to Earth up such as
are apt to work out of ground namely bears ears.

There is many other as

Noble Liverwort, Spring Gentianella, Virgines-bours, etc. and ar Increassed by
offsets in the spring or by seeds at the same time. As also Columbins,
Holihocks, Cransbill, Campions, and Constantinople Flowers, Catch Flies, Pinks
and sweet Williams, Throat Worts, and Bell Flowers, etc. Or Dasies, Violets,
Spidder Wort, double Mash, Mary-gold, by offsets any time when springing.

Of Bulbo and Tuberous Roots there is

Tulipas of great varieties, Increases them by offsets when their stalks
withers, which is generally about June, July, August; this is also the season
for other bulbo and tuberos Roots; keep them in a cool but dry place till Sept:
or October: and then plant them in a light sandy earth with fat soil an Inch
below the bulb, so that the roots may reach it, remove every three years and
oftener if they affect not the soil: they may be raised from seed but its
tedious.

Anemonies the same very way as Tulips, except that they require a rich earth
mixed with Rotten dung so that it be not Rank.

Apply this also to Rannuculases of the finest sorts.

Cyclamin Roots may be carefully parted in July and set in the soil for Tulips.

Crocuses and Cholcicums as Tulips, but requires a mixed rich light soil. And so
with

Irise Bulboses (but loves a dry bed) and Narcissuses, Ornithogulams, Jacenths,
Hesons, Aconits, Hellibors, etc.

Likewayes Iris Tuberosus, Crown Imperial, and Lilias of several sorts,
Pionies, Cynosorches. etc.

Indian Tuberose is tender. See Esquire Evelin's Kallendar.

There are many Annualls may be sown in pots, and plunged in hot bed, and some
under glass covers especially them sown in Autumn, as

Amaranthus, Marvel of Peru, flos Africanus, Convolvulus, etc. In Aprile you
may sow them on the cold bed, if good fat warm earth, together with double
Marygold, Cyanus, Nigella, Delphinus, Anterhinum, double garden and Corn
Popies, Fox Gloves, Flos Solis, Flos Adonis, etc.

But if you would be further satisfied in the varieties of plants, consult the
Learned and most Ingenious Mr. James Sutherlands Catalogue Physic Gardner at
Edinburgh.

4 I spoke before of preserving plants by housing. There is some that cannot
endure the house, who must be set at the South wall, the potts sunck three
Inches below the surface, covered with glass, first clothing them with sweet
and dry Moss: or in prepared boxed beds with folding Glass frames to lift up
and down at pleasure; because in all seasonable warm blinks of the Sun and
shoures they may be discovered of all that covers them, thus: Treat choice
Ranunculas, Anemonies, Amaranthus, etc. Neglect not to repair their earth as
(in sect: 2) the Oreng Tree.

Plants standing dry in Winter, earthed up, or the Earth made firm about them
are good means of preservation. Neglect not to cleanse all your plants of under
and withered leaves, superfluous offsets, etc. See Chap. 1. Sect. 10. and see
Part 1. Chap. 6. Sect. 7. For the orderly planting of Flowers. And I hope the
Reader will excuse for this brevity, seeing each Chapter herein would merit a
Book, neither will leisure permit me at present.

AN APPENDIX Showing how to use the Fruits of the Garden.
1. THIS necessarly depends upon the 5th and 6th Chapters, of Fruits and Herbs
eatable.

Gather Aples and Pears when full ripe, especially these for keeping, or for
Cider in a dry day, clear but not frostie, in large Baskets lined with Straw
Matts, upon the 3 footed or standing leathers: at least lay Straw under, if you
shake them, and suffer not too many at once thereon.

Gather Apricocks, Peaches, Plumes, Cherries, with your hands into clean
Baskets, when full ripe, whither for eating Green, preserving in Sugar, etc.
drying, or for Vines; as also currants, Barberries, Rasberries, Goosberries. The
Cucumbers for pickling must be small i. e. e're their seeds grow firm; as
Goosberries for baking, boiling, sauces.

Artichocks e're they grow too hard, let these for pickling be tenderest. Let
the purslain for pickling be hard and old, lay it a day or two in the Sun to
mortify. That which you eat Green must be tender. Eat Beans and Peace Green,
but do not slice down the Beans, nor break the Peace stalks, else them left
thereon cannot fill. You may out off the Beans with a Knife; and for the Peace,
hold with the one hand and pull with the other.

Asparagus when tender i. e. about 3, 4, or 5 Inches high. Lettice when young,
but its best Cabbaged. Succory, Endive, Sellery Blanched. Cresses, Parsley,
Chervil, Burnet, when young and tender. Sorrall, Spinag, beets before they
shoot for seed. And so is Arage, Marygold, Bugloss, Burrag. Shallot and onions
when their stalks withered, tho shibols are eaten green. Leeks any time before
they shoot to seed. Coleflowers when firm and white e're they spoil; And so
cabbage when hard. Sweet herbs any time either green or dried, but gather them
in their prime for drying.

Liquorish no dish but drink. see Chap. 6. Sect. 4. where you will also find
season of Scorzonera, Beetrave, Carrot, Turneep, Skirret, Parsneep, Potatoes,
etc.

2. Besides what is said above of planting and sowing at Spring, summer, and
harvest for somes longer continuance, as also of raising some earlyer than
naturally, by means of hotbeds, and what I might say of retarding others by
transplantations, etc. There be ways of preserving them out of the garden, etc.

Aples and Pears may be carried into the conservatory or storehouse in the
large baskets between two men; which must be a close but cleanly and wholesome
Room floored, lyned, and siled with boards and shelves of the same round: let
them sweat a little on the floor with clean oat straw under them; then dry and
lay them Aple-thick on the shelves, opening the north windows ill fair, clear,
windy days, especially at first that it may dry up the superfluous moisture.
turn them sometimes, and in frosts cover them with matts, and shut close the
house: some of the choice you may wrap in dry papers singly, and often visit,
that you may remove any that begin to rott: for they quickly affect the rest.

The way of preserving Cherries, Plumes, etc. In Wine, Cider, Honey, or sugar is
easy, as also of drying them in the oven.

And you may pickle barberries in Vinegar, and salt well dried, and sugar: to
each pound and a half fruit, a pound of salt cold again, pound sugar beat to
powder; put them by layings in a well glazed Earth pot, and when they have
stood a whole week well stopped power in a mutchken Vinegar to each pound fruit;
if you find the sawces too sharp put as much sugar as salt.

Range cucumbers the same way, and strew salt, and Vinegar till they be all
covered, and you may add a little dill and sweet bay leaves for odor, and
cover them close 40 days unbroken: then pare when you serve them up.

For Artichocks dissolve two large handfuls of great Salt (that is dried on the
fire in a pan) in one mutchken Vinegar and three of fair water, mix them while
the Salt is yet hot, (but put not the liquor on the fire) boil the Artichocks
till the leaves come off easily, and while the cleansed stools are yet warm,
you may have 3 nutmegs, 3 drop cloves, 1 dram mace, ounce white pepper, ounce
cinnamon, beat to fine powder and strew upon them; then pack them in the pot
with five or six spoonfuls the liquor on each stratum: when all potted pour on
the rest of the pickle, and stop close.

To pickle them green put to every pound of cleansed stools an ounce Salt dried
and ounce spices last named mixed in a mortar; and having dawbed the stools full
of holes, throw the powder thereon, when the pot is full, melt as much butter
as cover them over two Inches, and when cold, cover close with leather.

To pickle Beet-raves, boil and put them in glazed pots, with whole pepper and
as much Vinegar as cover all over, stoping them close.

Asparagus may be parboyled and pickled as Artichocks: and so may green peace
with cods.

Purslain as Cucumbers: and so may taragon, sampeir, broom-buds, etc.

Lettice, Endive, Sellery, etc. By blanching and Ranging among sand in Cellers.
Cabbage by Hanging* Roots by Housing, Sanding, etc. As is showed in Chap: 6.
Sect: 2. and 4. Sweet herbs as well as physical by Hanging to dry in some
open Room not in the Sun as some advise.

Put marygold flowers in paper bags near the chimney till they pass hazard of
mouldiness; do just so with true saffron. But because sew knows how to order
it, observe, to part its offsets and plant with other bulbs at half foot
distance in the beds or bordurs, it flowers in Septem: then be careful to go
through in the mornings and gather the saffron viz: the thrums that are in the
middle of the flowers, it bears not well till the 3d, 4th and 5th year; then you
must remove it. But to the matter in hand.

3. As for the use of these fruits, the phisicians knows their medicinalls,
the cook their ordering in the Kitchen, the Gardener how to propagate and
Improve them. For description and medicinal uses see our Countryman Doctor
Morisons herbal; and for mechanical uses, Evilins works.

To have dishes and drinks of them observe what follows.

4. Of dishes, as of Aples you may have baked without any ingredients save
sugar, Roasted alone, and so boiled, fried by shavers, with a little fresh
butter, stewed betwixt two plates, having cleaved and taken out their cors, add
a little sweet butter and sugar. Of Pears you may have Roasted and boiled as
Aples, also stoved being cut in four and put dry in a stoup or even of white
Iron; and so set in the pot among water to boil, you may have both Aples and
Pears green with chief.

Cherries are excellent baked, and so goosberries. Apricocks, Peaches, Plumes,
Cherries, Currants, Goosberries, Rasberries are all excellent dishes green, or
conserved. Strawberries and Red wine, or sweet cream.

Cucumbers pickled for sallad to roasted mutton: or if ripe, slice and lay them
an hour in Salt, and so power off their water. Artichocks are either pickled or
fresh, boiled and eaten with sweet beaten butter.

Beans and peace boiled with savory and thym faggot, served up with sweet butter
beat amongst them, and set a little on a coal or chaffing.

Boil Asparagus in fair water, and serve it up with a little sweet butter, beat
i. e. tumbled in the Sawce-pan above the coal. The young shoots of colworts
will serve the same way.

Purslain may be eaten green with sugar and Vinegar, or Oil, stewed with meat,
besides the pickled.

Lettice green as purslain; and so cresses, Chervil, Burnet, burrage flowers,
and wood sorrall.

Spinag is excellent floves being boiled with lamb or Veall with a little
sorrall therein, as also choped dishes thereof with butter.

The same way use beets; also make green broth of them with leeks, faggot of
thyme and parsley. In some stoves and broths you may put Arag, Marigold leaves,
Violet leaves, Straw-berrie leaves, Bugloss, Burrage, and Endive. In Pottage
put Juice of sorrall, faggot of thime and parlsly, and in most of broths.

In the sauce or gravy of Roast mutton and capon and in all stewed dishes bruise
shallot or Rub the dishes therewith.

You may stove leeks with a cock. Onions may be baked with a little butter if
you want meat: also make use of them with roast meat especially geese, and to
most fresh fishes in which parsley and thyme faggot is mainly used.

Boil coleflowers in water mixed with a little milk; then pour it off and mix
them in the stew pan with sweet butter seasoned with salt, and so serve them up
about boyld mutton.

Boil Cabbage with Beef, reserving the top of the pot to power on (when dished
up) about the beef.

Boil Scorzonera, pe^^e off its broun rind, wherein consists its bitterness,
slice and fry it with butter.

When skirrets ar boyld and pealed, Roll them in flower, and fry with butter.

Boil and peal parsneeps, chop and bruise them well, power on butter, and set
them on a coal, and if you please strew a little cinnamon upon them.

Carrots are so used or only dished by shavers. Beet rave boyld pealed, shaved,
and when cold served up with vinegar and sugar: besides the pickled.

Beet-raves, Parsneeps, carrots are very good served up whole or sliced about
meat, as turneeps usually with fat broth poured thereon.

Potatoes as Parsneeps: or for want of butter take sweet milk.

5. Of drinks, as of Aples to make cider: I cannot name our cider Aples, for I
use to mix all the ripe at once in the orchard, that is of a fine Juice and
easy to separat from the flesh, and pears that have plenty of Juice and hard
flesh though harsh.

In France they extol the Rennet cider, in England the Hereford Redstrake.
(Which in France they set at naught) they speak of genetmoil and musts, some
pipens and parmains. And for Perry the bromsbury, and Ruddy horse pear. All
which and many more Hugh Wood Gardener at Hamiltone has to sell. But now the
different soils begets alterations in fruits besides the climate; yet both
defects may be a little helped: The first by using all diligence to prepare the
ground thoroughly, as is directed in Chap. 2. Fallowing is a most commendable
essay.

The second by graffing and regraffing upon early: good fence and shelter round
the ground are very conducible.

To make this excellent Wine, provide trough and beatters, press and harbag,
lagallon and tappering fat, barrels and hogsheads; (for even by the common
screw press I have made a hogshead cider in a day) be sure your vessels be
sweet, else you spoil all; white Wine, Sack-cask or such, as keept cider
before. I have heard of cyder-cask 3 Inches thick in the staves, which I
believe is of great Advantage in preserving the liquor: but if any be tainted,
put a little unstaked Lyme Stone, and a little water in the Barrel, and stop
it close; when stood a little while and jumbled, pour out and wash clean, that
will cure.

The fruit being gathered ripe, as before, let them ly ten or twelve days, if
summer fruit; and near the double of that time, if winter sorts: (but the late
ripe that gets frosts is not good cider) mix not with unripe ones, neither
suffer leaves nor stalks among them. When they are small beat, put them in the
harbag within the press far, and so screw them hard again and again; and empty
it thereof and put in more, and do as before: and empty the receiver into the
tappering fat, and therein cover it close with a canvass till the morrow at
that time, before you tun it; where the gross lee may fall to the bottom, then
draw it off at a tap three Inches from the bottom, leaving that dreg behind.
(The which may go among the pressings for water cider) the clearer you tun it
into the barrels, the less it ferments, and that is best cider: for often cider
spends its strength to free it self of the grosser parts; therefore while your
cider ferments, leave the vent pin loose, but keep close the bung for
preserving the prodigal wast of its spirit; and as soon as the working begin
to allay, drive the vent pin dead to: and this will be perhaps in a fortnight,
if it begins to work Immediately, some times not till the Spring. But keep fast
the pin till it begins to work, and that you mind to bottle of it, do as soon
as fully clear and fine; which is ordinarily at Spring. Put a plum great of fine
white loaf sugar in each bottle, and above all, make your corks fast and close;
then set them in the celler amongst sand.

To make the water cider put 1/^ as much water as you had cider upon the new
pressed marce, to stand covered in tubs 4 or 5 days: then press them and boil
the liquor, scumming it till the scum cease to rise fast, then take it off (for
too much boiling wastes its spitits) and put in tubs or coolers, and when cold
tun it up; when done working (which ^ll not be so violent as best cider) make
the pin fast and in a short time, its for drinking. A little ginger, cloves,
juniper berries or such may be boiled in it, if they please your taste.

The making of Perry differs not from that of cider.

To make Cherrie Wine, to every pound ripe fruit stamped, put a Chopin
Spring Water and pound fin white sugar, boil the water and sugar, scum it and
put in the juice of your Cherries, let it boil up again, take it off the fire,
run it through a hair-sive and when its thoroughly cold, put it in a stone pot,
and after 6 or 7 days draw it into bottles, putting a bit loaf sugar in each,
in a quarter year you may fall a drinking, it will keep a year; if you would
have it stronger, then use no more water than sugar.

After the saw manner you may make wine of Rasps, Currants, Goosberries* or

Take currants very ripe, bruise and strain them, and to every pint of the Juice
put a pound and sugar into a stone or earthen pot, scum it often, and at a
weeks end draw it off, and take out the setlings and put in the liquor again;
do this till it be fine, then bottle it; and at a weeks end if it be not fine
in the bottles, shift it into other bottles.

Gather your Goosberries e're they be too ripe, and for every three pound
stamped fruit, a chopin of water and a pound sugar: steep them 24 hours, then
strain them, put the liquor into a a vessel close stopped a fortnight or three
weeks, then draw it off if you find it fine, otherwise suffer it longer; and
if not fine yet rak it.

Its usual to make it thus unboyl'd, because it contracts a broun color in
boiling.

To every pint Rasps a pound sugar, let them stand two days in an earthen pot,
often stirring and bruising them; then put them in a woollen bag to hang up 24
hours and more till the liquor drop out into a stone pot, suffer it there till
fermented and scum'd, and at a weeks end (or sooner if fine) bottle it, and at
another weeks end shift it into fresh bottles, that you may leave the setlings
behind: thus shift them so long as you see any settlement, the which you may
put in a bottle by it self.

Of some sorts of Plumes, as damasons, etc. may be made wine.

That called Cherrie brandie, is a bottle half full of geens, filled up with
brandi^, sometimes Jumbled a little; and in a months time is fit for drinking.
Or if you put the like quantity of Goosberries instead of Che^ries; that will
make the brandie very Delicious.

Cherries best for wine are blackheart, morella. I think the red geen most
excellent. See Chap. 3. Sect. 2.

Of Goosberries the great Crystal, and of currants the great Dutch red, also
the red Rasp.

To have Ail of Liquorish, slice it very small and pour Water on it when at the
boil: there cover it close till the morrow, power off this wort, and on more
hot-water, to stand as long to search it thoroughly, add your worts together and
boil with a little dry Wormwood Carduus Benedictus, but the greatest difficulty
is to barme it when cold, as wort of malt; yet the stronger you make it, the
easier it will take, or if you have the convenience of settlings of good wort
of malt to boil with it; that will facilitate the work.

To have good metheglin, take one part of clarified Honey and eight parts of
pure Water and boil well together in a Copper vessel till the consumption of
the half: but while it boyls take off the scum, and when done boiling and
begins to cool, tun it up, and it will work of it self; as soon as done
working, stop it very close. Some advises to bury it under ground three
months, and that to make if lose both smell and taste of Honey and Wax, and taste
very like Wine. I use to add dry Rosmary and sweet Marjorum in boiling: some
barms it as Ail; which I have practiced effectually.

6. To know what Fruits and Herbs to make choice of for our plantations:

The French Fruit succeeds not well with us, in England are good Aples, but
Holland for Ston-fruit especially Peaches and Cherries, and Scotland for Pears.

The best Aple for the Table is the Golden Pepin, we have also Rennets,
Russets, etc. very good. And for the Kitchen the Codling, Lidingtown, and
Rubies, with hundreds for both.

But the best Pears for the Table are English Bergamot, Swanegg excellent
Pears, and red Pear Achans, etc. The wardens are good Keepers and Kitchen
Fruit, and multitudes more.

Of Cherries, the Kentish, and Morella, etc.

Of Plumes, Primordials, Mussell, Imperial, etc.

The common and Orange Apricoks, the newington and nutmeg Peaches, (Peaches
bears better with us than Apricocks.)

The Portugal Quince, and thinshell'd Wallnut.

Of Goosberries great White, great Red, and great Yellow.

Of Currants the great red Dutch, early red, and the white.

Of Rasps, both the white and red. The great red Straw-berrie, and the
Virginian which is more early.

Of Artichocks both the great and the prickly.

Great white Beans, and white Kidnees. Of Peace Barnees, Hotspures, Hasties, and
the sickle Peace, etc.

If you can get Hordium nudum that is naked barley, and sow as I directed with
Peace, it yealds an incredible increass.

The Dutch Asparagus and Cabbage lettice. The sorrall that usually shoots not
for Stoves, etc. And Yellow wood and French for Sallades. The white Beet and
smooth Spinach. Curled Parsley and Cresses. Shallot and Roccumbol, French leeks,
and Straws-brugh onions.

Candy Cole-flower and our own great Scots white Cabbage.

Crisp Tansie, and curled Spearmint. Sweet Fennel, and common Rosmary. Sweet
Marjorum and red Sage.

The black Scorzonera and Orange Carrot. The small round smooth Turneep. Smooth
Dutch Parsneep and small Radish clear as Crystal. See Chap. 6. for more.

Its to be noted, that the ingenious and most industrious, Hugh Wood Gardener
at Hamiltoun can acommodate you with the above mentioned Fruits, together with
multitudes of other sorts, whither English, Dutch, or Scots.

THE CONCLUSION Proposing SCOTLANDS Improvement.
THere is no way under the Sun so probable for improving our Land as Enclosing
and Planting the same: Therefore I wish it were effectually put in practice.

FINIS.
Because of the Authors absence there are several things escaped the press:
wherefore the Reader is earnestly desired to amend these here marked, viz.
Page 1. line 22. these garrets Read these, Garrets Page 3. l. 20. Center at
least, the r. Center, at least the Ibid l. 31. confirments r. confinements P.
9. l. 21. 90 degrees r. 60 degrees P. 11. l. 30. fig. 2. r. of fig. 2. P. 17.
l. 17. Pole r. Pole so, P. 27. l. 9. from by hawing. r. from weeds by hawing.
Ibid l. 11. train r. trimm P. 28. l. 25. side, each r. side of each P. 32. l.
3. drawing r. draining. Ibid l. 18. recovering, r. recountring, Ibid l. 24.
convenience; in viewing there 1. convenience in viewing; there P. 33. l. 9.
make r. mark P. 35. l. 25. know reason r. know no reason P. 36. l. 23. move r.
more. P. 41. in the example of division the figures above the dividend stands
one place too far toward the right hand P. 52. l. 26.23. r. 32. P. 60. l. 10.
Cirumposition r. Circumposition Ibid l. 31. sow r. saw P. 61. l. 32. by r. be
P. 70. l. 16. heatly r. heathy P. 78. l. 3. seed in the wood, they r. seed, in
the P. 92. l. 17. know r. knew The Page before 96. l. 4. apricocks; train,
spread, r. a Peacocks train spread; Page 96. last line head the r. head than
the P. 101. l. 10. or r. ar Ibid l. 26. distance from another. r. distance:
another Page 103. l. 1. cherault r. chervil P. 105. l. 7. graws r. gnaws Ibid
l. 19 Balm. r. Bawme, P. 108. l. 29. chalk r. check P. 112. l. 33. ^o r. or P.
113. l. 29. Rannuculases 1. Ranunculuses P. 121. l. 21. r. one third P. 122. l.
4. saw r. same

THE GARDENERS CALENDAR Showing The most seasonable times for performing his
HORTVLAN AFFAIRS.

Monthly throughout the Year: AND A Catalogue of such dishes and drinks as a
complete Garden can afford in their seasons.

Published for the Climate of SCOTLAND By JOHN REID Gardener.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by DAVID LINDSAY, at the foot of Heriot's-Bridge, 1683.

READER,
AS in this little Calendar thou will find when; so in my Book (Entitled the
Scots-Gard'ner) thou will find how, to perform the particulars.

The Gardeners year is a circle as their labor, never at an end. Nevertheless
their term is

NOVEMBER.
COntrive or forecast where, and what you are to sow and plant. Trench and
fallow all your vacant grounds. Prepare and mix soils and composts thoroughly:
miss not highway Earth, cleansings of streets; make compositions of dungs,
soils, and lyme.

Lay bair Roots of Trees that need, and dung such as require it. Plant all
fruit Trees, Forrest-trees, and shrubs that lose the leaf, also prune such.
Plant cabbage. Sow hasties for early peace in warm grounds but trust not to
them.

Gather the seeds of holly, yew, ash, etc. Ordering them as in Chap: 3. furnish
your nurseries with stocks.

Shelter tender evergreen seedlings. House your Cabbag, Carrots, Turneeps: and
any time e're hard frosts your Skirrets, Potatoes, Parsneeps, etc. Cover
Asparagus, Artichocks, as in the last month. Sow bairs-ears, plant Tulips,
etc. Shut the conservatory. Preserve your Choicest Flowers. Sweep and cleanse
the walks of leaves, etc. Stop your bees close so that you leave breathing
vents.

Garden Dishes and Drinks in Season, are
Cabbage, Coleflower, Onions, Leeks, Shallot, etc. Blanched Sellery, Succory,
Pickled Asparagus, Purslain, etc. Fresh Parsneeps, Skirrets, potatoes, Carrots,
Turneeps, Beet-rave, Scorzonera, parsley and fennel Roots.

Aples, Pears, etc.

Cider, Perry, wine of Cherries, Rasps, Currants, Goosberries, Liquorish, Honey,
etc.

DECEMBER.
TRench and prepare grounds. Gather together composts plant Trees in nuseries.
and sow their seeds that can Endure it.

Gather Firr seed, holly berries, etc. Take up liquorish. Continue your care in
preserving choice Carnations, Anemonies, and Ranunculuses from Raines and
frosts. And keep the green-house close against the piercing colds. Turn and
refresh your fruit in a clear and serene day. Sharpen and mend tools. Gather
oziers and hassell Rods and make baskets in stormy weather. Cover your water
pipes with leitter lest the frosts do crak them, feed weak bees.

Garden Dishes and Drinks in season.
Colworts, Leeks, etc. Housed Cabbage, Onions, shallot. Several dried sweet
herbs. Housed Parsneeps, Turneeps, Skirrets, Carrots, Potatoes, Beat-rave,
Scorzonera, parsley, Fennel Roots. Pickled Cucumbers, Barberries, Artichocks,
Asparagus, Purslain, etc.

Housed Aples, Pears. Conserved Cherries, Plumes, Peaches, Apricocks, etc.

Wine of Aples, Pears, Cherries, Liquorish, Honey, etc.

JANUARY.
PRepare the ground, soils and manures. Fell trees for mechanical uses. Prune
Firrs, plant Hawthorn Hedges, and all Trees and Shrubs that lose the leaf
weather open. Also prune the more hardy and old planted. Dung the Roots of
Trees that need, draining excessive moisture, gather Graffs e're they sprout,
and near the end Graff; begin with the Stone Fruits. Gather Holly-berries, Firr
husks, etc. Secure choice plants as yet from cold and wet, and earth up such as
the frosts uncovered.

Feed weak bees, also you may remove them.

Garden Dishes and Drinks in season.
Coleworts, Leeks, etc. Dry sweet Herbs. Housed Cabbage, Onions, Shallot,
Parsneeps, Skirrets, Potatoes, Carrots, Turneeps, Beat-rave, Scorzonera, Parsley
and Fennel Roots in broth.

Pickled Artichocks, Beet-raves, etc. Housed Aples, Pears, and other conserved
Fruits.

With Cider and other Wines as before.

FEBRUARY.
PLant any Trees or Shrubs that lose the leaf, also lay and circumpose such for
increass, see June. Likewayes sow all your Seeds, Kyes, Kirnells, Nuts, Stones;
also the seeds of several Greens, as Holly, Yew, Philyrea, Laurells, etc. Prune
Firrs, etc.

Continue to destroy Vermin.

Graffing is now in season, see the last month.

Prune all Trees and Shrubs except tender Greens. Nail and dress them at the
wall. Cover the Roots of Trees laid bair the fore-end of Winter, if any be.
Plant Hawthorn Hedges, Willows, etc.

Plant Liquorish, Potatoes, Peace, Beans, Cabbage. Sow Parsley, Beets, Spinach,
Marygold, and other hardy Pot-herbes.

Let carnations and such sheltered Flowers get Air in mild weather. But keep
close the Green-house.

Now you may remove bees and feed weak stocks.

Garden Dishes and drinks in season.
Cole, Leiks, sweet Herbs. Onions, Shallot, housed Cabbage, Skirrets,
Turneeps, Parsneeps, Potatoes, Beat-rave, Scorzonera, Carrots, besides Parsley
and Fennel Roots.

Pickled Beat-ravo, Artichock. Cucum: Housed Aples, Pears, and other conserved
Fruits with Cider and other Wines and drinks, as above.

MARCH.
REdelve, mix, and Rake your ground for Immediate use. Delve about the Roots of
all your Trees. Yet plant Trees and rather greens. Also prun such except the
Rosinious. Propagate by laying circumposition, and especially by cuttings. Sow
the seeds of most Trees and hardy greens. Cover these Trees whose Roots lay
bair, and delve down the dungs that lay about your young Trees all winter,
covering on leitter again topt with Earth to prevent drought in summer: this is
a material observation and more especially for such as are late planted. Slit
the bark of ill thriving Trees. Fell such as grow crooked in the nurserie.
Graffing is yet in season, (but too late for stone fruit) cut off the heads of
them Inoculated.

Set peace, beans, Cabbage, Asparagus, Liquorish. Sow parsley, beets, Endive,
Succory, Bugloss, Burrage, Sellery, Fennel, Marigold. Plant shollot, garleeks,
Potatoes, Skirrets. Sow Onions, Lettice, Cresses, Parsneep, Beet-rave, Radish,
etc, And on the hotbed coleflour, and if you please cucumber, etc.

Slip and set physic herbs, July-flowers, and other fibrous Rooted flowers.
Be careful of the tender, the peircing colds are now on foot. Turn your fruit
in the Room but open not yet the windows.

Catch Moles, Mice, Snails, Worms, destroy frogs spawn, etc.

Half open passages for bees, they begin to fit, keep them close night and
moring: yet you may remove them.

Garden Dishes and Drinks in season.
Both green and housed herbs and Roots: also Pickled, Housed, and conserved
fruits: with their wines as in the former months.

APRILE.
PLant Holly Hedges and Hawthorn too if not too foreward. Ply and sheer Hedges.
Nail and prun Wall-trees, etc. Sow and plant firrs, and other greens. Slip and
set sage, Rosemary, thym, Rue, Savory, and all fibrous Rooted herbs and
Flowers. uncover and dress strawberries. Plant Artichocks, slip them and delve
their plottes. Set Cabbage, Beans, Peace, Kidnees, sow Asparagus, Parsley, Beets,
and Beet-card. Set Garleeks, Shallot, Potatoes, Skirrets, Sorral. sow Onions,
Leeks, Lettice, Cresses, Radish, Orach, Scorzonera, Carvy, Fennel, etc. And on
the hotbed Cucumbers, Coleflowers, Purslain, sweet Marjorum, Basil, Summer
Savory, Tobaco, etc.

Set Strawberries, Violets, July-flowers, etc. Also sow the seeds of july
flowers. etc. Sow all your Annual flowers and Rare plants some requiring the
hotbed. Destroy Moles, Mice Worms, Snails. Lay, Beat, and Roll gravel and
grass. Fall to your mowing and weeding.

Open the Doors off your bee-hives now they hatch.

Garden Dishes and Drinks in season.
Onions, Leeks, Colworts, Beets, Parsley, and other herbs: Spinach, Sorral.
Scorzonera, green Asparagus, Lettice and other Sallads. Pickled Artichocks,
Beet-rave, Barberries, Cucumbers.

Housed Aples and Pears, Conserved Cherries, Plumes, Peaches, Apricocks,
Goosberries, Currants. Also the wines of Aples, Pears, Cherries, Liquorish,
Honey, etc.

MAY.
PUll up suckers and haw about the Trees. Rub off unnecessary buds. Sheer or
clip Hedges. Prun tender Greens, (Not the Rosinious) bring forth the housed
ones refreshing and trimming them. Plant all sorts of medicinal Herbs. Sow all
sweet ones which are tender.

Gather Snails, Worms, catch Moles.

Sow Letice, Cresses, Purslain, Turneep, Radish, Peace, etc. Continue weeding
and watering.

Near the end watch the Bees ready to swarm.

Garden Dishes and drinks in season.
Coleworts and other Herbs, (being eaten with contentement is better than a
fatted Ox without it) sage (with Butter,) Leeks, Parsley, Thyme, Marjorum,
sorrall, Spinach, etc. Scorzonera, Asparagus, Letice, Purslain, and other
Sallades and Pot-herbes.

Pickled Artichocks, Barberries, Beet-rave, Cucumbers, housed Aples and Pears
for many uses. Early Cherries, Straw-berries, near the end.

Cider, Metheglin, Liquorish Ail, etc.

JUNE.
CLeanse about the Roots of Trees, Suckers and weeds, water their Covered
Bulks: especially the new planted.

Fell the long small ill-train'd Forrest-trees in the nurserie within half foot
of the ground. Unbind graffs. Prun all Wall and Standard Trees. Toward the end
you may Inoculat. And Increase by circumposition.

Gather Elm seed and sow Immediately.

Transplant Coleslowers, Coleworts, Beets, Leeks, Purslain, etc. In moist
weather; at least water first the ground if dry.

Sow Peace, Radish, Turneep, Letice, Chervil, Cresses, etc. Destroy Snails,
Worms, etc.

Begin to lay carnations or July-flowers: shade, support and prun such as will
blow. Water pots and thristy plants. Weeding and mowing is in season, and so is
distillation.

Bees now Swarm, look diligently to them.

Garden Dishes and Drinks in season.
Cole, Beets, Parsley, Sorrall and other Pot-herbes. Purslain, Letice, and other
Sallads. Radish, Scorzonera, Asparagus. Green Peace and Artichocks. Green
Goosberries. Ripe cherries, Rasps, Currants, Straw-berries.

Housed Aples and Pears.

Cider, Metheglin, etc.

JULY.
FAllow ground as soon as the crop comes off. Prune and purge all
Standard-trees. Ply, Nail, Prune, and dress your Wal-trees. Pull up suckers and
weeds. Haw and Water where needful. Inoculat Fruit Trees, Shrubs, rare Greens,
Flower-trees; Increase the same by laying. Clip your Hedges after Rain. Suffer
such Herbs and Flowers to run to seed as you would save: Cutting the rest a
handful from the ground.

Sow Turneep, Radish, Lettice, Onion, Cole-flower, Cabbage, and Coleworts in
the full Moon. Near the end sow Beets, Spinach, etc. You may plant
Strawberries, Violets, Camomile. Lay July-flowers. Plant their seedlings. Slip
and set Hypaticas, Bears-ears, Couslips, Helibors, etc. Take up Bulbo and
Tuberous ones that are dry in their stalks (if you mind to change their places)
and keep till September, but some would be set immediately.

Supply voids with potted Annualls. Lay Grass and Gravel. Make Cherrie and
Rasberrie Wine, etc.

Prevent the Bees latter swarms, Kill Drons, Wasps, etc.

Garden Dishes and drinks in season.
Beets and many Pot-herbes and Sweet-herbes.

Beet-card, Purslain, Lettice, Endive, etc.

Cabbage, Cole-flower, Scorzonera, Beetrave, Carrot, Radish, Turneep, Peace,
Beens, and Kidnees, Artichocks, Strawberries, Rasps, Currants, Goosbeeries,
Cherries, Plumes, summer Pears and Aples, Cider, Metheglin and other Wines.

AUGUST.
FAllow bordures, Beds, Nurseries, and the bulks of Trees. Yet Inoculat. Ply
and purge Trees. Pull up suckers and weeds. Clip Hedges. Gather the
Black-cherrie and Morella Stones. Gather Mezerion berries. Gather the seeds of
most Herbs and Flowers. Cut your Physick-herbes. In the beginning sow Cabbage
(tho I confess its too late. See the last month) Beets and Beet-card, Spinach,
Black radish, Chervil, Letice, Corn-sallade, Endive, Scorzonera, Carvy,
Marygold, Angelica, Scurvy Grass, etc. Take up ripe Onions, Garleeks and
Shallot, Unbind buds Inoculated. Cut and string Strawberries. Lay July-flowers.
Sow Columbines, Holyhoks, Larks-heells, Candytuffs, Popies, and such as can
endure Winter.

Take up your bulks and plant as in last. Sift the ground for Tulips and
Gladiolus. Plunge in potted Annualls in Vacants. Keep down weeds by hawing,
etc. Lay Grass and Gravel, Beat, Roll, and mow well. Make Goosberrie and Curran
Wines, etc.

Toward the end take Bees, take the lightest first; those who are near heaths
may differ a little. Destroy Wasps, straiten the passage by putting on the
hecks to secure from Robers.

Garden Dishes and drinks in season.
Many Pot-herbes and Sallades, Cabbage, Coleflower, Beet-card, Turneep, Radish,
Carrot, Beet-rave, Scorzonera, Peace, Beans, and Kidnees, Artichocks, Cucumbers,
Aples, Pears, Plumes, Apricocks, Geens, Goosberries, Currants, Rasps,
Strawberries, etc.

Cider, Metheglin, Cherrie Wine, Curran Wine, Goosberrie Wine, Raspberrie Wine,
etc.

SEPTEMBr.
FAllow, Trench, and level ground. Prepare pits and bordures for Trees. Gather
plan seed, Almond, Peach, and white Plum Stones. Gather ripe Fruits. Plant
forth Cabbage. Remove bulbs and plant them. Refresh, Train, and House your
tender Greens. Refresh and trim pots and cases with July-flowers and other fine
Flowers and plants, Carrying them to pits, shelter, and covert, giving them
Air, etc.

Toward the end gather Safron.

Make Cider, Perry, and other Wines, etc.

Straiten the entrance to Bee-hives, destroy Wasps, etc.

Also you may now remove Bees.

Garden Dishes and drinks in season.
Varieties of Pot-herbes and Sallades, Cabbage, Cole-flower, Peace, Beans, and
Kidnees, Artichocks, Beet-card, Beet-rave, Scorzonera, Carrots, Turneeps,
Radish, Cucumbers, Aples, Pears, Apricocks, Peaches, Nectarines, Quince,
Grapes, Barberries, Filbeards.

Cider, Liquorish Ail, Metheglin, and Wine of Cherries, Rasps, Goosberries,
Currants, etc.

OCTOBER.
GAther Winter Fruits. Trench and fallow grounds (mixing with proper soil) to
ly over the Winter. Prepare dungs and mannures, mixing and laying them in heaps
bottomed and covered with Earth. Plant Hawthorn Hedges, And all Trees that lose
their leaves; Also lay their branches. Prun Roses Gather seeds of Hassell,
Hawthorn, Plan, Ash, Beach, Oak, Aple, Pear, etc. Cut Strawberries, Artichocks,
Asparagus, covering their beds with dung and Ashes. Earth up Winter Sallades,
Herbs, and Flowers, a little. Plant Cabbage, etc. Plant Tulips, Anemonies, and
other Bulbs. Sow the seed of Bairs-cars, Cowslips, Tulips, etc. Beat and Roll
Gravel and Grass. Finish your last weeding and mowing. Lay bair leopered Tree
Roots and remove what harms them: also delve and dung such as require it. Drain
excessive moisture wherever it be. Pickle and conserve Fruits. Make Perry and
Cider.

You may now safely remove Bees.

Garden Dishes and drinks in season.
Coleworts, Leeks, Cabbage, Cole-flowers, Onions, Shallot, Beans. Blanched
Endive and Sellery, Pickled Asparagus, Purslain, etc.

Scor^onera, Beet-rave, Carrots, Turneeps, Parsneeps, Potatoes, Skirrets,
Artichocks, Cucumbers, Aples, Pears, Plumes, Almond, etc.

Cider, Perry, and Wine of Cherries, Currants, Goosberries, Rasberries, Ail of
Liquorish, Metheglin, etc.

FINIS.

