THE GARDENERS CALENDAR Showing The most seasonable times for performing his
HORTVLAN AFFAIRS, Monthly throughout the Year: AND A Catalogue of such dishes
and drinks as a complete Garden can afford in their seasons.

Published for the Climate of SCOTLAND By JOHN REID Gardener.



EDINBVRGH, Printed by DAVID LINDSAY, at the foot of Heriot's-Bridge, 1683.

READER,
AS in this little Calendar thou will find when; so in my Book (Entitled the
Scots-Gard'ner) thou will find how, to perform the particulars.

The Gardeners year is a circle as their labor, never at an end. Nevertheless
their term is (...)

NOVEMBER.
COntrive or forecast where, and what you are to sow and plant. Trench and
fallow all your vacant grounds. Prepare and mix soils and composts thoroughly:
miss not highway Earth, cleansings of streets; make compositions of dungs,
soils, and lyme.

Lay bair Roots of Trees that need, and dung such as require it. Plant all
fruit Trees, Forrest-trees, and shrubs that lose the leaf, also prune such.
Plant cabbage. Sow hasties for early peace in warm grounds but trust not to
them.

Gather the seeds of holly, yew, ash, etc. Ordering them as in Chap: 3. furnish
your nurseries with stocks.

Shelter tender evergreen seedlings. House your Cabbag, Carrots, Turneeps: and
any time e're hard frosts your Skirrets, Potatoes, Parsneeps, etc. Cover
Asparagus, Artichocks, as in the last month. Sow bairs-ears, plant Tulips,
etc. Shut the conservatory. Preserve your Choicest Flowers. Sweep and cleanse
the walks of leaves, etc. Stop your bees close so that you leave breathing
vents.

Garden Dishes and Drinks in Season, are
Cabbage, Coleflower, Onions, Leeks, Shallot, etc. Blanched Sellery, Succory,
Pickled Asparagus, Purslain, etc. Fresh Parsneeps, Skirrets, Potatoes, Carrots,
Turneeps, Beet-rave, Scorzonera, parsley and fennel Roots.

Aples, Pears, etc.

Cider, Perry, wine of Cherries, Rasps, Currants, Goosberries, Liquorish, Honey,
etc.

DECEMBr.
TRench and prepare grounds. Gather together composts plant Trees in nuseries.
and sow their seeds that can Endure it.

Gather Firr seed, holly berries, etc. Take up liquorish. Continue your care in
preserving choice Carnations, Anemonies, and Ranunculuses from Raines and
frosts. And keep the green-house close against the piercing colds. Turn and
refresh your fruit in a clear and serene day. Sharpen and mend tools. Gather
oziers and hassell Rods and make baskets in stormy weather. Cover your water
pipes with leitter lest the frosts do crak them, feed weak bees.

Garden Dishes and Drinks in season.
Colworts, Leeks, etc. Housed Cabbage, Onions, shallot. Several dried sweet
herbs. Housed Parsneeps. Turneeps, Skirrets, Carrots, Potatoes, Beat-rave,
Scorzonera, parsley, Fennel Roots. Pickled Cucumbers, Barberries, Artichocks,
Asparagus, Purslain, etc.

Housed Aples, Pears. Conserved Cherries, Plumes, Peaches, Apricocks, etc.

Wine of Aples, Pears, Cherries, Liquorish, Honey, etc.

JANUARY.
PRepare the ground, soils and manures. Fell trees for mechanical uses. Prune
Firrs, plant Hawthorn Hedges, and all Trees and Shrubs that lose the leaf
weather open. Also prune the more hardy and old planted. Dung the Roots of
Trees that need, draining excessive moisture, gather Graffs e're they sprout,
and near the end Graff; begin with the Stone Fruits. Gather Holly-berries, Firr
husks, etc. Secure choice plants as yet from cold and wet, and earth up such as
the frosts uncovered.

Feed weak bees, also you may remove them.

Garden Dishes and Drinks in season.
Coleworts, Leeks, etc. Dry sweet Herbs. Housed Cabbage, Onions, Shallot*
Parsneeps, Skirrets, Potatoes Carrots, Turneeps, Beat-rave, Scorzonera, Parsley
and Fennel Roots in broth.

Pickled Artichocks, Beet-raves, etc. Housed Aples, Pears, and other conserved
Fruits.

With Cider and other Wines as before.

FEBRUARY.
PLant any Trees or Shrubs that lose the leaf, also lay and circumpose such for
increass, see June. Likewayes sow all your Seeds, Kyes, Kirnells, Nuts, Stones;
also the seeds of several Greens, as Holly, Yew, Philyrea, Laurells, etc. Prune
Firts, etc.

Continue to destroy Vermin.

Graffing is now in season, see the last month.

Prune all Trees and Shrubs except tender Greens. Nail and dress them at the
wall. Cover the Roots of Trees laid bair the fore-end of Winter, if any be.
Plant Hawthorn Hedges, Willows, etc.

Plant Liquorish, Potatoes, Peace, Beans, Cabbage. Sow Parsley, Beets, Spinach,
Marygold, and other hardy Pot-herbes.

Let carnations and such sheltered Flowers get Air in mild weather. But keep
close the Green-house.

N^w you may remove bees and feed weak stocks.

Garden Dishes and drinks in season.
Cole, Leiks, sweet Herbs. Onions, Shallot, housed Cabbage, Skirrets,
Turneeps, Parsneeps, Potatoes, Beat-rave, Scorzonera, Carrots, besides Parsley
and Fennel Roots.

Pickled Beat-rave, Artichock. Cucum: Housed Aples, Pears, and other conserved
Fruits with Cider and other Wines and drinks, as above.

MARCH.
REdelve, mix, and Rake your ground for Immediate use. Delve about the Roots of
all your Trees. Yet plant Trees and rather greens. Also prun such except the
Rosinious. Propagate by laying circumposition, and especially by cuttings. Sow
the seeds of most Trees and hardy greens. Cover these Trees whose Roots lay
bair, and delve down the dungs that lay about your young Trees all winter,
covering on leitter again topt with Earth to prevent drought in summer: this is
a material observation and more especially for such as are late planted. Slit
the bark of ill thriving Trees. Fell such as grow crooked in the nurserie.
Graffing is yet in season, (but too late for stone fruit) cut off the heads of
them Inoculated.

Set peace, beans, Cabbage, Asparagus, Liquorish. Sow parsley, beets, Endive,
Succory, Bugloss, Burrage, Sellery, Fe^^ell, Marigold. Plant shollot, garleeks,
Potatoes, Skirrets. Sow Onions, Lettice, Cresses, Parsneep, Beet-rave, Radish,
etc, And on the hotbed coleflour, and if you please cucumber, etc.

Slip and set physic herbs, July-flowers, and other fibrous Rooted flowers.
Be careful of the tender, the peircing colds are now on foot. Turn your fruit
in the Room but open not yet the windows.

Catch Moles, Mice, Snails, Worms, destroy frogs spawn, etc.

Half open passages for bees, they begin to fit, keep them close night and
moring: yet you may remove them.

Garden Dishes and Drinks in season.
Both green and housed herbs and Roots: also Pickled, Housed, and conserved
fruits: with their wines as in the former months.

APRILE.
PLant Holly Hedges and Hawthorn too if not too foreward. Ply and sheer Hedges.
Nail and prun Wall-trees, etc. Sow and plant firrs, and other greens. Slip and
set sage, Rosemary, thym, Rue, Savory, and all fibrous Rooted herbs and
Flowers. uncover and dress strawberries. Plant Artichocks, slip them and delve
their plottes. Set Cabbage, Beans, Peace, Kidnees. sow Asparagus, Parsley, Beets,
and Beet-card. Set Garleeks, Shallot, Potatoes, Skirrets, Sorral. sow Onions,
Leeks, Lettice, Cresses, Radish, Orach, Scorzonera, Carvy, Fennel, etc. And on
the hotbed Cucumbers, Coleflowers, Purslain, sweet Marjorum, Basil, Summer
Savory, Tobaco, etc.

Set Strawberries, Violets, July-flowers, etc. Also sow the seeds of july
flowers. etc. Sow all your Annual flowers and Rare plants some requiring the
hotbed. Destroy Moles, Mice Worms, Snails. Lay, Beat, and Roll gravel and
grass. Fall to your mowing and weeding.

Open the Doors off your bee-hives now they hatch.

Garden Dishes and Drinks in season.
Onions, Leeks, Colworts, Beets, Parsley, and other herbs: Spinach, Sorral.
Scorzonera, green Asparagus, Lettice and other Sallads. Pickled Artichocks,
Beet-rave, Barberries, Cucumbers.

Housed Aples and Pears, Conserved Cherries, Plumes, Peaches, Apricocks,
Goosberries, Currants. Also the wines of Aples, Pears, Cherries, Liquorish,
Honey, etc.

MAY.
PUll up suckers and haw about the Trees. Rub off unnecessary buds. Sheer or
clip Hedges. Prun tender Greens, (Not the Rofinious) bring forth the housed
ones refreshing and trimming them. Plant all sorts of medicinal Herbs. Sow all
sweet ones which are tender.

Gather Snails, Worms, catch Moles.

Sow Letice, Cresses, Purslain, Turneep, Radish, Peace, etc. Continue weeding
and watering.

Near the end watch the Bees ready to swarm.

Garden Dishes and drinks in season.
Coleworts and other Herbs, (being eaten with contentement is better than a
fatted Ox without it) sage (with Butter,) Leeks, Parsley, Thyme, Marjorum,
sorrall, Spinach, etc. Scorzonera, Asparagus, Letice, Purslain, and other
Sallades and Pot-herbes.

Pickled Artichocks, Barberries, Beet-rave, Cucumbers, housed Aples and Pears
for many uses. Early Cherries, Straw-berries, near the end.

Cider, Metheglin, Liquorish Ail, etc.

JUNE.
CLeanse about the Roots of Trees, Suckers and weeds, water their Covered
Bulks: especially the new planted.

Fell the long small ill-train'd Forrest-trees in the nurserie within half foot
of the ground. Unbind graffs. Prun all Wall and Standard Trees. Toward the end
you may Inoculat. And Increase by circumposition.

Gather Elm seed and sow Immediately.

Transplant Coleflowers, Coleworts, Beets, Leeks, Purslain, etc. In moist
weather; at least water first the ground if dry.

Sow Peace, Radish, Turneep, Letice, Chervil, Cresses, etc. Destroy Snails,
Worms, etc.

Begin to lay carnations or July-flowers: shade, support and Prun such as will
blow. Water pots and thristy plants. Weeding and mowing is in season, and so is
distillation.

Bees now Swarm, look diligently to them.

Garden Dishes and Drinks in season.
Cole, Beets, Parsley, Sorrall and other Pot-herbes. Purslain, Letice, and other
Sallads. Radish, Scorzonera, Asparagus. Green Peace and Artichocks. Green
Goosberries. Ripe cherries, Ralps, Currants, Straw-berries.

Housed Aples and Pears.

Cider, Metheglin, etc.

JULY.
FAllow ground as soon as the crop comes off. Prune and purge all
Standard-trees. Ply, Nail, Prune, and dress your Wal-trees. Pull up suckers and
weeds. Haw and Water where needful. Inoculat Fruit Trees, Shrubs, rare Greens,
Flower-trees; Increase the same by laying. Clip your Hedges after Rain. Suffer
such Herbs and Flowers to run to seed as you would save: Cutting the rest a
handful from the ground.

Sow Turneep, Radish, Lettice, Onion, Cole-flower, Cabbage, and Coleworts in
the full Moon. Near the end sow Beets, Spinach, etc. You may plant
Strawberries, Violets, Camomile. Lay July-flowers. Plant their seedlings. Slip
and set Hypaticas, Bears-ears, Couslips, Helibors, etc. Take up Bulbo and
Tuberous ones that are dry in their stalks (if you mind to change their places)
and keep till September, but some would be set immediately.

Supply voids with potted Annualls. Lay Grass and Gravel. Make Cherrie and
Rasberrie Wine, etc.

Prevent the Bees latter swarms, Kill Drons, W^sps, etc.

Garden Dishes and drinks in season.
Beets and many Pot-herbes and Sweet-herbes.

Beet-card, Purslain, Lettice, Endive, etc.

Cabbage, Cole-flower, Scorzonera, Beetrave, Carrot, Radish, Turneep, Peace,
Beens, and Kidnees, Artichocks, Strawberries, Rasps, Currants, Goosbeeries,
Cherries, Plumes, summer Pears and Aples, Cider, Metheglin and other Wines.

AUGUST.
FAllow bordures, Beds, Nurseries, and the bulks of Trees. Yet Inoculat. Ply
and purge Trees. Pull up suckers and weeds. Clip Hedges. Gather the
Black-cherrie and Morella Stones. Gather Mezerion berries. Gather the seeds of
most Herbs and Flowers. Cut your Physick-herbes. In the beginning sow Cabbage
(tho I confess its too late. See the last month) Beets and Beet-card, Spinach,
Black-radish, Chervil, Letice, Corn-sallade, Endive, Scorzonera, Carvy,
Marygold, Angelica, Scurvy Grass, etc. Take up ripe Onions, Garleeks and
Shallot, Unbind buds Inoculated. Cut and string Strawberries. Lay July-flowers.
Sow Columbines, Holyhoks, Larks-heells, Candytuffs, Popies, and such as can
endure Winter.

Take up your bulbs and plant as in the last. Sift the ground for Tulips and
Gladiolus. Plunge in potted Annualls in Vacants. Keep down weeds by hawing,
etc. Lay Grass and Gravel, Beat, Roll, and mow well. Make Goosberrie and Curran
Wines, etc.

Toward the end take Bees, take the lightest first; those who are near heaths
may differ a little. Destroy Wasps, straiten the passage by putting on the
hecks to secure from Robers.

Garden Dishes and drinks in season.
Many Pot-herbes and Sallades, Cabbage, Coleflower, Beetcard, Turneep, Radish,
Carrot, Beet-rave, Scorzonera, Peace, Beans, and Kidnees, Artichocks, Cucumbers,
Aples, Pears, Plumes, Apricocks, Geens, Goosberries, Currants, Rasps,
Strawberries, etc.

Cider, Metheglin, Cherrie Wine, Curran Wine, Goosberrie Wine, Raspberrie Wine,
etc.

SEPTEMBr.
FAllow, Trench, and level ground. Prepare pits and bordures for Trees. Gather
plan seed, Almond, Peach, and white Plum Stones. Gather ripe Fruits. Plant
forth Cabbage. Remove bulbs and plant them. Refresh, Trame, and House your
tender Greens. Refresh and trim pots and cases with July-flowers and other fine
Flowers and plants, Carrying them to pits, shelter, and covert, giving them
Air, etc.

Toward the end gather Safron.

Make Cider, Perry, and other Wines, etc.

Straiten the entrance to Bee-hives, destroy Wasps, etc.

Also you may now remove Bees.

Garden Dishes and drinks in season.
Varieties of Pot-herbes and Sallades, Cabbage, Cole-flower, Peace, Beans, and
Kidnees, Artichocks, Beet-card, Beet-rave, Scorzonera, Carrots, Turneeps,
Radish, Cucumbers, Aples, Pears, Apricocks, Peaches, Nectarines, Quince,
Grapes, Barberries, Filbeards.

Cider, Liquorish Ail, Metheglin, and Wine of Cherries, Rasps, Goosberries,
Currants, etc.

OCTOBER.
GAther Winter Fruits. Trench and fallow grounds (raixing with proper soil) to
ly over the Winter. Prepare dungs and mannures, mixing and laying them in heaps
bottomed and covered with Earth. Plant Hawthorn Hedges, And all Trees that lose
their leaves; Also lay their branches. Prun Roses. Gather seeds of Hassell,
Hawthorn, Plan, Ash, Beach, Oak, Aple, Pear, etc. Cut Strawberries, Artichocks,
Asparagus, covering their beds with dung and Ashes. Earth up Winter Sallades,
Herbs, and Flowers, a little. Plant Cabbage, etc. Plant Tulips Anemonies, and
other Bulbs. Sow the seed of Bairs-ears, Cowslips, Tulips, etc. Bear and Roll
Gravel and Grass. Finish your last weeding and mowing. Lay bair leopered Tree
Roots and remove what harms them: also delve and dung such as require it. Drain
excessive moisture wherever it be. Pickle and conserve Fruits. Make Perry and
Cider.

You may now safely remove Bees.

Garden Dishes and drinks in season.
Coleworts, Leeks, Cabbage, Cole-flowers, Onions, Shallot, Beans. Blanched
Endive and Sellery. Pickled Asparagus, Purslain, etc.

Scorzonera, Beet-rave, Carrots, Turneeps, Parsneeps, Potatoes, Skirrets,
Artichocks, Cucumbers, Aples, Pears, Plumes, Almond, etc.

Cider, Perry, and Wine of Cherries, Currants, Goosberries, Rasberries, Ail of
Liquorish, Metheglin, etc.

FINIS.

