THE RELIGION OF THE Church of England, The Surest ESTABLISHMENT OF THE Royal
Throne; WITH The Unreasonable Latitude which the Romanists allow in point of
Obedience to Princes. In a LETTER occasioned by some late Discourse with a
Person of Quality.

ROMANS 13. 5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also
for Conscience sake.

LONDON: Printed for Randal Tailor and John Williams, junior, at the Crown and
in Cross-Keys Court in Little Britain. 1673.

THE RELIGION OF THE Church of England, The Surest ESTABLISHMENT OF THE Royal
Throne.
In a LETTER occasioned by some late Discourse with a Person of Quality.

Honored Sir,
I Cannot charge you with Unkindness, or say you have put me upon an unpleasing
Task by commanding my Thoughts about the matter of our last Discourse, (though
thousands of my Brethren might have done it to better purpose;) since you have
rendered me capable of expressing the Service I owe to my Prince, and the Duty
to my Mother the Church of England. She (like her Savior) has met with a
great many Reproaches, and by some either Ignorants or Adversaries, been
particularly misrepresented to you; and that Excellency wherein she has just
occasion to glory, above all the Churches in the world, so miserably sullied by
unrighteous Aspersions, that she appears not half so amiable to your eye as
formerly she has done. Give me leave then to wipe off the Dirt which has so
maliciously been cast upon her, to wash off the Spots spirted on her Face, and
her own Beauty will sufficiently commend her. I cannot believe your Judgment so
unsteady as really to be captivated with those false Insinuations; nor wonder
enough at the Impudence of some persons who dare insinuate such palpable
untruths as you seem in danger to be perverted with. In plain terms, That any
man should have so hard a forehead as to question the Church of England 's
Loyalty to her Prince, or maintain that she affords the least Encouragement to
any Rebellious Attempt either against his Person or Dignity; to shake the Crown
upon his Head, or make a Finger of his Hand to bleed; would put me into a
strange fit of Admiration, did we not li^e in so prodigious an Age, that men's
tongues are their own, and they will say what they please. For my part, I look
upon these charges to be so grossly slanderous, that for your Satisfaction, and
possibly the Conviction of others, I shall confidently assert,

That no King sits so securely upon his Throne as the King of England, by
virtue of the Religion established among us.

It is not to be imagined that the bare propounding this Truth should presently
gain it a favorable Reception, especially where the Judgment seems already
fore-stalled with no mean Prejudices against it: But still a Truth it is, and
to prove it one, I shall only proceed upon these two Grounds,

I. That the Church of England obliges all her Children to the most Dutiful
Carriage imaginable toward All Princes.

II. (To take off your Mis-prision;) That the Church of Rome allows those of
her Communion an unreasonable Latitude in this very point of Obedience and Duty.

I. That the Church of England obliges all her Children to the most Dutiful
Carriage imaginable toward All Princes.

It is but Reasonable we should clear our own Innocence before we quarrel with
another Guilt, least our selves fall under the charge of that Crime which is
so justly condemned in those of the Romish Party. Now certainly the most
Rational Account we can have of any Churches Principles, must be taken from the
Infallible Rule to which in all cases she submits; the Doctrine she professes;
the Worship which she owns; the Ecclesiastical Constitutions she has framed
for outward Order; and the constant Practice of all her Obedient Children. Her
Rule are the Holy Scriptures Commented upon and Interpreted by the Sentiments
of the Primitive Fathers; Her Doctrine is contained in the Articles and
Homilies; Her Worship in the Public Liturgy; Her Constitutions in the Book of
Canons; to which the Carriage of all those who have not only in pretense but
reality been her sons, has exactly corresponded. Nor is there any one of these
which furnishes us not with an abundant Confirmation of that Truth on behalf
whereof it is alleged.

No Church ever professed a greater Reverence to the Proved I. From the
Scriptures.
Holy Scriptures, nor charged her children more strictly to make them the Rule
both of Faith and Life. We believe nothing but what is therein revealed, and
are obliged to observe all the Commands therein contained, whatsoever sort of
Duties they have respect unto. Now it is beyond dispute that the Word of God
calls for Obedience to Princes, and forbids all Opposition to, and Rebellion
against them. Solomon in the old Testament speaks of a King against whom there
is no rising Prove. 30. 31.
up, which King is every King; for by virtue of his Supreme Authority, he is
beyond the reach of his Subjects Power and above the attempts of all their
Force. Nor is this only true of such who, like David, are men after Gods own
heart, or like Hezekiah and Josiah, not to be equalled, scarce paralleled by
those that either preceded or succeeded them; but of a wicked Saul, a loose
Amaziah, an Idolatrous Manasseh; These also being Gods Anointed; and wickedness
in the Heart wipes not off the sacred Oil from the Head. If we look into the
Gospels, our Blessed Savior commands the Rendering unto Matthew. 22. 21.
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, with the same care that he requires the
rendering unto God the things that are Gods; which Caesar was Tiberius, of whom
the Roman Historians give no very good Character. And rather than any Offense
should be taken, he works a Miracle for paying his Tribute-Money, sending S.
Peter to take it Matthew. 17. 27.
out of a Fishes mouth. To him succeeded the two great Apostles S. Paul and S.
Peter, the one with his charge, Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers.
Subject, Romans 13. 1.
not only for Convenience, but upon the account of Duty; not only as a piece of
Policy to prevent any Secular Punishment, but a point of Conscience to please
our Heavenly Father. Ye must needs be subject not 5.
only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. The other with his command,
Submit your selves to every 1 P^^. 2. 13 14.
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or
unto them that are sent by him, -- Fear God, Honor the King. And it is plain 17.
when these Apostles wrote, Nero that Portentum hominis, (as Suetonius calls
him) that Monster of men Suet in vita N^ro^^s.
was then Emperor; as wicked a tyrannical Prince, and as great an Enemy to the
Christians as ever lived. Whence we may rationally conclude, Though a King be
of another Religion, though his Life be extremely debauched, and his Government
severe and cruel, yet None of these singly, not All of them together will
discharge the Subject from his obedience. And to convince the World what
particular care this Church of ours takes that these Principles of Loyalty may
be imbibed by all her children, she has not only appointed those Chapters
(Romans 13. and 1 Pet. 2.) to be read in the constant course for daily Service,
nor designed those Passages in them only for the more especial Solemnities of
the Fifth of November, and Twenty nineth of May; but has selected them
likewise for her Sundays Epistles; the one on the fourth Sunday after
Epiphany, the other on the third Sunday after Easter.

But the Absolute Subjection she owns to the Holy 2. From the Writings of the
Fathers.
Scriptures does not in the least lessen her Honor to the Primitive Fathers;
from whose Writings (as the best Expositors of the Sacred Text) she would
satisfy her Children in this point of Duty. It may well be presumed that in
those early days of Christianity Religion was in its greatest vigor, and men
did not only best Know, but Practice what they were obliged to, both with
respect to God and their Superiors. She does not indeed allow us jurare in
verba, to pawn our Faith upon any man's credit, but to be Followers of Them so
far as They have been Followers of Christ; and to take directions from them
where those directions agree with the written Word. So that whenever any of
the Romanists would asperse us as slenderly regarding the Authority of the
Ancients, we boldly plead in our own justification the venerable esteem we
entertain of the Authors, and their genuine Writings for the first four
Centuries. And truly the higher we trace the better we like them. God in his
infinite wisdom resolved the seed of the Gospel should no sooner be sown than
watered with blood. A great while did his faithful servants bear a very heavy
Cross. The Roman Emperors were Heathens, and some particular piques most of
them had taken against Christianity, insomuch that the Professors of it met
with a great deal of misery during their life, and many with a great deal of
cruelty were put to death. Yet whether Martyrs or not Martyrs, this was still
the Doctrine they taught, and from them we learn it, That nothing can dispense
with the Subjects Obedience to his Prince. Pardon me Sir, if I spend a little
paper in presenting you with remarkable passages taken out of some whose heads
are the grayest among them. I begin with Ignatius, Scholar to St. John, and
twelve years old at our Saviors Crucifixion. Thus he instructs the
Antiochians: ( (...) Ignat. Epist. ad Antioch.
) Be obedient to Caesar in those things wherein you may obey without danger
(which is in all that are not sinful) provoke not your Governors to anger, that
you may not give occasion to them who seek it against you. But because the
Authority of this Epistle is matter of some dispute, pass from him to Justin
Martyr not much behind him in years: ( (...), Just. Mart. Apol. 2. pro
Christianis
) We worship (says he speaking to the Magistrates) God alone, but in all
things else we cheerfully serve you. A third among the Greek Fathers is
Theophilus Patriarch of Antioch, who delivered this good Rule; ( (...). Theoph.
Antyoch. lib. 1. ad Autolycum.
) Honor the King; honor him by being kindly affected to him, by obeying him, by
praying for him; for thus doing thou do the will of God. From those of the
Greek come we to them of the Latin Church, and certainly She preached the same
Doctrine. The Kings Supremacy, and the Subjects Obedience was never better
taught by any man in the world than Tertullian (a thousand pities he turned
Montanist at last) ( In cujus (Dei) potestate sunt; a quo primi, post quem
secundi, ante omnes and super omnes Deos Tertul. Apolog. cap. 30.
) They (i. e. Kings) are only under the coercive power of God, to whom they are
subordinate, under whom Chief; before and above all that are called Gods. (
Christianus nullius est hostis nedum Imperatoris; quem sci^n^ a Deo suo
constitutus, necesse est ut ipsum dilig^t, ho^o^^^, rev^^^atur, and salvum
(...). Idem lib. ad Scapulam cap. 2.
) A Christian (says he) is no man's Enemy, not the Emperors; (the great crime
objected against them) for knowing Him to be a Person of His Gods own
appointment, it is necessary he should love, honor, reverence, and wish him
all the prosperity imaginable. And upon a large discourse in his most excellent
Apology (a book that deserves the greatest commendation) he declares plainly it
was not want of Power but Will that hindered them from being rebellious; not
fear of Punishment, but sense of Duty; not Restraint, but Conscience that awed
them into obedience. They were gotten most numerous both in the Court, Senate,
City, and Camp: and it was the Heathens security to have them so: for ( Nunc
pauciores hosts ha^^tis p^ae multitudine Christi mo^um Idem Apolog. cap. 50.
) the more Christians always the fewer Enemies: I have made the bolder with
Tertullian, both because of his Antiquity, and the Pertinent Quotations
wherewith his Writings supply me. To him let me add Lactantius, who instructs
all Christians in Passive as the rest have done in Active Obedience. For put
case the Old Plea for Disobedience should be renewed, a Reformation of
Religion, yet will not that plausible pretense justify the failure in our
Allegiance, since a Christian must learn Patience as well as Courage, and
prepare to be a Martyr, rather than a Rebel. ( Defen^^nda est R^l^gio non
occid^ndo; sed mori^n^o non s^vi^ a sed patientia; ne^ scele^e sed fi^e. Il^^
enim malo^um sunt, ^aec ho^orum. La ^^ant. lib 5. cap 30.
) Religion is to be defended not by Killing, but by Dying; not by Cruelty, but
by Patience; not by Wickedness, but by Fidelity. Those are the practices of
Wicked, but these of men truly good.

To these might be added many others, which (for brevity sake) I omit, because
this Pamphlet would swell beyond what is intended, and create you more trouble
than is necessary in so plain a case.

Let me now fall upon what more peculiarly belongs to our Church. The Papists
keep the Scriptures from their people, which (God be thanked) we may have free
recourse unto: but they mightily brag of an Adherence to the Fathers. Had the
Writings of those Holy men as great an influence upon them as they pretend,
Princes Thrones and Lives would be much more secure than they are, and the
Church Censures not be thundered out against them as they be upon every trivial
occasion. (But of this hereafter) Now Sir give me leave to assure you that what
you have already read from the Scriptures and Fathers is but the same our
Church maintains in Her Avouched Doctrine, Her Public Liturgy, and Her
Ecclesiastical Constitutions.

Her Avouched Doctrine is declared in the 39 Articles From the Doctrine of the
Church in the Articles and Homilies.
and the Book of Homilies set forth by Authority exactly consonant to them.
These she acknowledges (next to the Scriptures) as the Measure of her Faith,
and the Rule for her Practice. And because they are no Novel Inventions, nor
the Products of any particular brain; but the first agreed upon by the whole
Convocation (the Clergies Representative) and the Other compiled by able
Persons appointed to that employment; we see they are of age, and shall speak
A^t. 37.
for themselves. The Queens Majesty (so it was 1562. now the Kings) has the
chief Power in this Realm of England and other Her (His) Majesty's Dominions,
unto whom the Government of All Estates in this Realm, whether they be
Ecclesiastical or Civil, in All Causes does appertain; and is not, nor ought to
be subject to any foreign Jurisdiction. Thus much declared in general terms,
the Explanation follows presently after. Where we attribute to the Queens
(Kings) Majesty the Chief Government -- we understand that only Prerogative
which we see to have been given always to all godly Princes in Holy Scripture
by God himself; i. e. that they should rule all Estates and Degrees committed
to their charge, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal; and restrain with
the Civil Sword the stubborn and evil doers. Then is there particularly added
The Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England. Upon which
passage a motion was made in the Hampton Court Conference for inserting Nor
ought to have; but King James in his wisdom rejected it with this answer,
habemus jure quod habemus; intimating that the Actual asserting that Privilege
argued a legal title to it. And it may be worth your observation that the
Title Page of the Articles tells you they were agreed upon for avoiding
diversities of opinions, and for the establishing of consent touching true
Religion. What these speak more concisely the Homilies teach more fully. I
refer you to the six Sermons against Rebellion, proving the greatness of that
sin from Scripture, and the remarkable Examples of Gods vengeance upon persons
guilty of it: and proceeding in a method of close and strong arguing, so that
the perusal of them will be a good improvement of your time and pains. Only
toward the latter end of one, there is this Exhortation (which I could not
well omit.) Let us as the Children of Obedience fear the dreadful (...). 3.
Execution of God, and live in quiet obedience to be the Children of
Everlasting Salvation. For as Heaven is the place of good obedient Subjects,
and Hell the Prison and Dungeon of Rebels against God and their Prince; so is
that Realm happy where most obedience of Subjects does appear, being the very
figure of Heaven, and contrariwise where most Rebellions and Rebels be, there
is the express similitude of Hell: and the Rebels themselves are the very
sigures of Fiends and Devils, and their Captain the ungrateful Pattern of
Lucifer and Satan the Prince of darkness.

With an exact agreement to this Doctrine is her From ^he Liturgy.
Liturgy composed. And because (according to the Apostles Exhortation) first of
all (as a duty never to be neglected) supplications and prayers, and
intercessions, 1 Timothy 2. 12.
and giving of thanks are to be made for all men, for Kings and for all that
are in authority: there are none of Her Services of daily or weekly use wherein
her Prince is not particularly remembered, and the Almighty Protection of Heaven
earnestly desired to be his continual defense: Nay, all the blessings in the
world, but especially what concern his Place and Station are the matter of his
Subjects prayers. ( Second Prayer before the Communi^n, and the Prayer for the
Church M^litan^.
) That He may be instructed for Government; ( Versicle after the C^^ed.
) Preserved in His Person; ( D^i^y Prayer
) Replenished with Heavenly Graces; ( Li^any Service.
) Prove victorious over his Enemies: And as Two of these fall within the
compass of Her constant Morning and Evening Devotions, so a Third is added
three times in the week, and all of them used every Sunday and Holiday. A piece
of duty which with some instead of a just applause has met with severe
censures, and been cavelled at like Mary's Box of ointment by Judas, To what
purpose was this Matt. 26. 8.
waste? a thing whereof our blessed Martyr took especial notice, as a reason
why so many Zealots of the times were eagerly bent against the Public Service.
One of the greatest faults, some men found with the (...)
Common Prayer Book I believe was This, that it taught them to pray so often for
me, to which Petitions they had not loyalty enough to say Amen. Not does the
Church only teach us to pray for the King, but to do it with an acknowledgment
of His Sovereign Authority, and subjection to none but God himself: whom
therefore she styles The only Ruler of Princes. To all this may be added, that
in some of those Prayers made for Him we are also enjoined to implore Gods
mercy for the keeping his People in their Allegiance, that they may obey him as
the Almighties Vicegerent. ( First Prayer before the Commu^ion.
) That we and all his subjects duly considering whose authority he has, may
faithfully serve, honor, and humbly obey him in Thee and for Thee. In a word,
our Prayers for their fullness and loyalty seem excellently framed after the
Pattern of the Primitive Church, as owned by Tertullian: ( Precati sumus semper
pro omnibus Imperatoribus, vitam illis prolixam, imperium securum, domum tutam
exercitus for^es, senatum fidelem, orbem quiecu^: and quaecunque hominis and
Caesaris vota sunt. Tertul. Apolog. cap, 30
) We pray at all times for all Emperors, that they may have Long Life, a Secure
Empire, a Safe Palace, Valiant Armies, a Faithful Senate, an Honest People, a
Quiet World: and whatsoever each of them can desire either as a Man or a Prince.

Pass we now from her Liturgy to her Ecclesiastical From the Canons of the
Church.
Constitutions agreed upon in a full Convocation 1603, and then ratified by
Royal Authority; where the first thing determined is this very Particular. All
Ecclesiastical persons having cure of Souls, shall to the uttermost of their
Wit, Knowledge, and Learning, purely and sincerely, Teach, Manifest, Open and
Declare four times a year (at the least) in their Sermons -- That the Kings
Power within his Realms -- is the highest Power under God; to whom all men do
by Gods Law owe most Loyalty and Obedience Before and Above all other Power and
Potentates in the Earth. Now certainly if the Incumbents are obliged thus to
Preach, it is an argument this is the received Doctrine of the Church; and the
design of this Duty imposed upon them is that the People committed to their
charge may be instructed therein for the conviction of their Judgments, and the
regulation of their Practice. Nay lest such Teaching should not produce an
effect answerable to the desires of these good men, but people should still
take a liberty of Believing and Asserting what they list; there is a severe
Censure to be inflicted upon such irregular Whosoever shall affirm that the
Kings Majesty has not the same Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical (for in
Temporal our Adversaries will grant it more than what they can hook in by In
ordine ad spiritualia) that the godly Kings had among the Jews and Christian
Emperors in the Primitive Church (which is the same we plead for) or impeach in
any part his Regal Supremacy let him be Excommunicated. So little do any of our
Church Constitutions derogate from the Kings Power, that they establish it,
both by their positive Command to have it preached and received as true
Christian Doctrine, and the Opposers of it thrown out of the Churches Bosom, as
not fit for the Society of Christian men.

And now, Sir, I cannot imagine there wants any From the P^actice of her
Children.
thing for your further satisfaction, unless it be to consider how the Practice
of the Children of this Church has agreed with the excellent Rules delivered
unto them. For although their Miscarriages could not justly be charged upon
her, yet we shall find that these Rules have had so great an Influence upon
them, as they have never dared to engage in any concern against their Prince,
nor ever been wanting in the manifestation of a due Obedience unto him. Be not
therefore (I beseech you) deceived with the vain Pretenses of the Romish Party,
who tell you openly in some of their Books; There have been more seditious
Insurrections since the Reformation of Religion, than were in some hundreds of
years before; For as there is no reason to take their bare word for it, so no
more are we engaged to vindicate any but those of our own Church. I dare not
undertake to justify all the Proceedings of the Hugonots in France, much less
of the Kirk-party in Scotland; but for the Sons of our Holy Mother of England,
let them (if they can) produce any Accusation against us, and we are ready to
submit to a fair Trial. The ordinary things pleaded are the late Rebellion, and
the Death of our Royal Martyr; neither of which touch us any further than as
our sins added to the rest filled up the Number, and provoked God to make use
of such Instruments for the executing his wrath, as startled not at the most
excerable Villainies in the world. It is notoriously known how many Persons of
Honor and Quality (out of mere conscience) attended that poor injured Prince
from place to place, during the unnatural War; and paid their Service to his
Son (our now Gracious Sovereign) throughout the many years of his calamitous
Exile. What Numbers spent their Estates, and sacrificed their Lives with all
the generous Alacrity in the world to maintein the Distressed Kings Cause, had
Heaven given success to their loyal Endeavors? How many Thousands might we
reckon up, who fought valiantly, fell gallantly and spent their dearest blood
in the asserting his Majesty's just Rights against all the Abettors of
Rebellion? Whereas those who either fomented the War or were afterward active
in the carrying it on, had receded from true Protestant Principles, and sucked
in those pernicious Doctrins from Scotland, which she had infectiously drawn
either from Rome or Geneva. It is not barely upon my own credit that this Truth
begs your Belief, take it from King Charles his incomparable Pen; (who being
the Sufferer might best distinguish between his Friends and Foes.) The Scandal
of the late Troubles which some may object and urge to you (writing to the then
Prince of Wales) against the Protestant Religion established in England, is
easily answered to them or your own thoughts in this, that scarce any one who
has been a Beginner or an active Prosecutor of this late War against the
Church, the Laws and Me, either was or is a true Lover, Embracer or Practiser
of the Protestant Religion; which neither gives such Rules, nor ever before set
such Examples. And for the Death of that Royal Martyr (the remembrance whereof
we so much detest as to keep an Anniversary Humiliation upon that day) Malice
itself dares not lay it at our Door. But if you would indeed be satisfied what
mischievous Wretches carried on this bloody Design, brought Majesty to bleed on
the Scaffold, and openly acted such a piece of Villainy, as the Sun never beheld
since Christ's Crucifixion: They were in plain terms the Papists and the
Sectaries: who (like Sampson's Foxes) have their Tails tied together, though
their Heads seem far asunder. For the Papists I shall satisfy you in their
Activity afterward. For the Sectaries, the Proof against them is but too
evident; and for those of the more refined sort, who have confidence enough
(with Pilate) to call for water and wash their hands, and say they are innocent
from his blood; yet their own Actions testify against them both before and
after that dreadful Blow was given. And what horrid Encouragements to and
Justifications of that abominable Act fell from the Mouths of those who were
then the Godly Preachers of the Gospel, remain upon Record. Not to surfeit you
with such coarse Diet, take but a Taste in two or three passages of some
eminently esteemed Persons; though their Names shall be spared. When Meroz had
been cursed from one Fast Day to another, and thereby men seduced to take Arms
against their Prince, called (in their sacred Dialect) Agoing to the help of
the Lord against the Mighty: Then were the people of this Kingdom possessed
with strange Apprehensions of the King and his Party; some telling us it was
their Design to root out all Religion. I know (says one among them) how
unsatisfied many are concerning the unlawfulness of the War which has been
managed, -- As I cannot yet perceive by any thing they object, but that we
undertook our Defense upon warrantable Grounds, so am I most certain that God
has wonderfully appeared through the whole. And as I am certain by sight and
sense, That the Extirpation of Piety was the then great Design, -- So am I most
certain that this was the Work which we took up Arms to resist. -- The fault
was that we would not die quietly, nor lay down our Necks more gently upon the
Block, nor more willingly change the Gospel for Ignorance, nor our Religion for
a Fardle of Ceremonies: with several things to the same purpose. Others
declared their Fears of a Tyrannical and Arbitrary Government, but the greatest
Number like the unruly Assembly at Ephesus, knew not wherefore they were
gathered Acts 19. 32.
together. When the Sword had for some years been glutted with Blood, men's
minds (at least) appeared a little more composed, Offers of Peace were made and
a Treaty managed, where Another (whom afterward his Masters rewarded but
unkindly) uttered these bitter Expressions in his Sermon: Whilst our Enemies go
on in their wicked Practices, and whilst we keep our Principles, we may as soon
make Fire and Water to agree, and (I had almost said) reconcile Heaven and
Earth, as their spirits and ours: Either they must grow better, or we must grow
worse, before it is possible for us to agree. Where I cannot omit the
Observation of an (...). l. 3, c. 2. p^g 1^6.
Ingenious Gentleman that our Dear Prince was beheaded just the day four years
aften this Sermon was preached. This and such like Stuff struck at length the
Kings Head from his Shoulders, and (though some upon sight of their Errors
repented, yet) when a disorderly Government had for several years appeared
among us in monstrous shapes, still the doings of those Usurpers were commended
by others, and large Harangues made upon solemn occasions to express the
Nations Happiness under them. One more particularly I have taken notice of, and
not a little wondered at. Worthy Patriots (says the Preacher, Anno 1656.) you
that are Rulers in this Parliament, it is often said we live in times wherein we
may be as good as we please; wherein we enjoy in purity and plenty the
Ordinances of Jesus Christ. Praised be God for this, even that God who has
delivered us from the Imposition of Prelatical Innovations, Altar-Genuflexions,
and Cringings with Crossings, and all that Popish Trash and Trumpery. And truly
(I speak no more than what I have often thought and said) the removal of these
unsupportable Burdens countervails for the Blood and Treasure shed and spent in
these late Distractions. Did the Gentleman (think you) remember that the King
was murdered almost eight years before this Pulpit-Caress? And did the Removal
of those Burdens countervail for his Blood too?) Nor did I as yet ever hear of
any godly men that desired (were it possible) to purchase their Friends (sure
that blessed King had a great many good men that were his Friends) or Money
again at so Dear a Rate as with the Return of these, to have those
soul-burdening Antichristian Yokes imposed upon us. (So that though the King
was barbarously taken from us, yet better lose him, than have a Resettlement of
the ancient Church Service and Discipline; for any other Thoughts would argue
the wickedness of our Hearts) If any such there be, I am sure that Desire is no
part of their Godliness, and I profess my self in that to be none of the
Number. By these three Testimonies from the Pens of three great Persons, you
may judge how far that Party was concerned in the bloody and dreadful Tragedy.
And now, I suppose you will favorably allow the first of my Assertions proved:
The strict Obedience charged by the Church of England upon all her Children.

The second will as evidently appear, That the Church Prop. II.
of Rome allows those of her Communion an unreasonable Latitude in the same
point of Obedience and Duty; freeing them from the Obligations which God has
laid upon the Conscience: for it is plain, that she exempts her Ecclesiastics
from the Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrate, referring them altogether to the
Popes Censure upon the Commission of any fault. She maintains those pernicious
Doctrins of Excommunicating, Deposing and murdering Kings for promoting the
Cause of Religion. She allows the Pope a Power of absolving all Subjects from
their Allegiance, and gives him a Right to dispose of the Kingdoms of Heretical
Princes. And if we look upon the Practices of the Romanists we shall find them
exactly fitted to these Maxims; that they have been, are, and in all
probability will be a Turbulent sort of people; despising Dominions and
speaking evil of Dignities. ^u^e 8.


For the Exemption of Ecclesiastical Persons from the Proved ^. By the
Exe^ption of Eccl^^^astics from ^^. civil ^ower.
Civil Magistrates Jurisdiction, it is a received Doctrine among them. In their
so much famed Council of Trent, when the Fathers there fell upon the
Reformation of Princes, several things were upon the Wheel. Like careful men of
themselves they propounded largely in favor of Ecclesiastical Immunities. That
such Persons might not be judged in a Secular Court, though there should be
some doubt of their Clerkship, or though History of the Council of Trent l. 8
p. 769 770.
themselves consent, notwithstanding it were under pretense of Public Vtility
or Service of the King. That neither the Emperor, Kings, nor any Prince
whatsoever should make Edicts or Constitutions in what manner soever concerning
Ecclesiastical Causes or Persons, nor meddle with their Persons, Causes,
Jurisdictions or Tribunals (no not in the Inquisition) but shall be bound to
afford the Secular Arm to Ecclesiastical Judges. That the Temporal Jurisdiction
of the Ecclesiastics (though with mere and mixed power) shall not be disturbed,
nor their Subjects drawn to the Secular Tribunal in Causes Temporal. All that
excellent Device concluding with a Command under the pain of Anathema, That No
Prince should either directly or indirectly under any Pretense whatsoever,
suffer any thing to be Enacted against the Persons or Goods of the Clergy or
against their Liberty, any Privileges or Exemptions (though Immemorial)
notwithstanding. It is true this was opposed, and so in some measure quashed by
the briskness of the Emperors and French Kings Ambassadors, and thereby
proceeded not to the height they designed; however it argued the daring
Confidence of the Attempters, the assurance they had of favorable Reception at
Rome, and the Privileges they either ought or would willingly have enjoyed.
And whatsoever passed, they gained a great deal more than either they deserved
or could challenge. But to omit what can be gathered from this Flourish, and
not insist upon things dubious; we refer the Cause to Bellarmin, and o^fer to
stand to his Arbitrament: The No^ possunt Cleric^ ^ (...) S^cul^ri judica^i,
e^iam si l^ges Civiles no^ se^v^nt (...). l. de Cle^icis, l. ^. c. 2^, p. ^p 3.
Clergy (says he) cannot be judged before a Secular Magistrate, though they
observe not the Laws in Civil Affairs, for that I suppose he means by Leges
Civiles. And when upon further discoursing the Point, he mentions the Apostles
indispensable Charge, Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, Rom 13. 1.
I must confess his Answer to it is as much below himself, (had not his
Interest been concerned) as can possibly be imagined. He will have that way of
arguing to conclude nothing, because sometimes one Power Nihil
e^ra^iocinatio^e. o^^li. d^.
is higher, sometimes another. -- But be it as it will, the Pope never loses
his Power therefore he infers, Because the Bishop of Rome has exempted Quo^iam
summus Pontifex Clericos o^n^s exemit a subjectione Principum Secularium,
sequitur ut respectu Cleric. rum, Principes non su^t potestat^s superiores: ac
^roinde non teneantur Clerici Pri^cipi^us p^rere neque jure humano nec Divino.
Idem ibid. p. 327. Edit. Celon. Agripp n.
all Ecclesiastics from Subjection to the Secular Princes, it follows that in
respect of those Churchmen they are not the higher Powers, and consequently
the Churchmen are not obliged to obey them by any Law either Divine or Humane:
except only in some trivial matters (which he there calls Leges Directivae)
such as a man's not stirring out of doors after a particular hour without his
Sword by his side, and a Light in his hand, etc. In these petty Trifles they
will out of good nature obey the King, but for any things of greater concern,
therein they beg excuse to be out of his reach. So that in plain terms at this
rate all the Clergy in every Kingdom are left at Liberty whether they will be
Loyal or no, and the Prince shall wholly lose his Coercive Power over a
considerable part of his Subjects. So that sometimes it may happen there shall
not only be a Refusal of Obedience to, but a downright Resistance of his
Commands. Instances hereof are numerous. How saucily did Anselm carry to King
Rufus, and Thomas Becket to Henry the Second, till the one died abroad, and the
other was killed at home? And upon every occasion it would happen so still: The
Clergy believing themselves freed from any Punishment their Prince could
inflict, and knowing full well that upon an Appeal to Rome, the Sentence would
surely pass in favor of the Church. Or let it but once come to a Contest, that
the Pope enjoins one thing, the King another; the Pope passes such a Decree,
the King gainsays it; who shall prevail? Shall not the Pope? because the
Churchmen are under his Lash, but exempted from the Kings; nor will they in
reason be easily drawn to provoke him who both can and will, for another man's
sake who neither must nor dare correct them. So that in effect they are but
titularly Subjects, and will so far be dutiful to the King, as their own good
Inclinations shall prompt them. Now how can he expect to be secured in his
Throne by those persons, who are not under his Jurisdiction? In case their Holy
Father for some particular pique at him, or to gratify a beloved Nephew,
declare him an Heretic, that he may dispose of his Kingdom, these good Children
must needs tread in his Steps, and do as he bids them; they being according to
their own Principles, as much obliged to take part against, as our Religion
would teach us to take part with our Prince notwithstanding all opposition in
the world. Besides, these Ecclesiastical Immunities drain a great deal of
wealth out of each Kingdom, which might better be laid up in the Kings
Exchequer. All the Profit of Collations to Benefices, First Fruits, Tenths and
several other Duties of that kind, these the Pope hoords up in his own Coffers;
a Grievance whereof this particular Nation was so sensible, that open Complaint
was made against it Temp. Hen. III
in Parliament: for such vast Sums were sent away out of this little Kingdom
from one time to another, that the People were much impoverished to make it
what he called it, Puteus inexhaustus, a Well not to be drawn dry: So that it
is strangely wonderful how the Princes abroad to this very day, bear so great
an Imposition upon them, and submit to such a Diminution of their Authority; so
contrary to the Rule of Scripture, so without all Precedent from Antiquity
(unless one spurious Passage palpably foisted into Ignatius his Epistles) so
Dangerous to the peaceable state of their several Countries, and so
Inconsistent with the Obedience owing to their own persons.

But it were something tolerable if this might prove II. By teaching the
lawfulness to excommunicate (...) and murder Kings for Religion.
the worst; so far is the Romish Religion from enjoining Obedience to Princes,
that it teaches those pernicious Doctrins of the Lawfulness to excommunicate,
depose and murder Kings, if their Religion may thereby be promoted. So that
not only the Clergy but the Princes too lie at the Popes mercy. His Fingers
indeed have long itched to be meddling with Crowns, and therefore he employs his
Agents abroad to whisper these Devilish Maxims into peoples Ears. Now when the
grave Fathers of the Church teach and their seduced Children admit them for
Truths, no marvel if the King sits uneasy in his Throne, and his Scepter be
ready to fall out of his Hand. For satisfaction herein I refer you to
Bellarmine again (for no man's Credit is better in that Church) Three Chapters
he spends very eagerly in one Book upon this Subject, fending and proving
(according to our Proverb) with might and main. The D^^^t ^ontifex R^g^bus
juber^ ^^ h^c faci^^^, (...) nisi f^cer^nt etiam cogere per excommunicati^nem
al^asque commodas rations. Bellarm. de R^m. Pont. l. 5. c. 7. p 505.
Pope, says he, must command Kings to do these things, (things relating to the
Service of God) and if they do them not, to compel them by Excommunication and
other commodious ways. This is pretty smart, but all the while sure there is no
fear of altering his Property or taking that Dominion from him which God had
given? Yes there may be Reason for that too, if the Cause of Religion require
the doing it. The Pope may Papa potest mutare Regn^ and uni a^ferre at que
alters confer (tanquam summus princ^ps spiritu^lis) si id necessarium sit ad
animarum salutem. Idem c. 6. p 901.
make an Alteration in Kingdoms dethroning one man and exalting another (as
being the greatest spiritual Prince) if it be necessary for the good of souls.
And this unlimited Power he endeavors to defend by a great many Authorities.
Nor may he only exercise this strange kind of Prerogative, but the good
Subjects also must be so much concerned for the Catholic Cause, as to set
themselves against their Heretical Ruler. Christians are Non tenentur
Christiant in ^ non debeat cum evidente periculo Religionis tolerare regem
infidelem. Idem p 94.
not bound, indeed they ought not to tolerate unbelieving King (and all of our
Principles are with them no better than Infidels) if Religion be in any
apparent danger. They must not tolerate him, but how shall it be helped? There
is scarce any Remedy left but the deposing him; and then to make sure work they
must either put him into a safe Prison or send him into a cold Grave. Now lest
this Position of his should be decried as strange and novel, being so contrary
to the practice of the Primitive Christians, who (without question) were the
best Subjects in the world; he presently answers, that they were not either to
be thanked for or imitated in their Obedience; since it was matter of
Constraint rather than Choice; And if they deposed not Nero the Cruel, Quod si
Christiani olim non deposuerunt Neronem and Dioclesianum and Julianum Apostatam
and Valentem Arrianum, etc. ^d fuerit quia deerant vires temporales
Christianis. Idem c 7. p. 904.
or Dioclesian the Persecutor, or Julian the Apostate, or Valens the Arrian,
their Weakness, not their Will was to be blamed; their Inclinations were for
it, but their want of Power persuaded them against it; which methinks is
strangely contrary to the account the Fathers of those Ages give us, whose
Religion had taught them rather to suffer than rebel. This is the sum of Hac
nostrae Ch^istianitatis summ^ est ut amantibus vicissi^udinem, ^aedentibus
patientiam repend^mus. Ambros. sermon. 10.
our Christianity (says he whom Bellarmine himself mentions as a stickler in
these cases) that we return love again to those who love us, and exercise
patience toward those who injure us. Let me then seriously ask, Can any Prince
in the world be safe whose fears and jealousies are thus strong to distract
him? who hears such doctrine buzzed into his Peoples heads as may quickly
strike the Crown from his head, and open a passage to fetch the breath from his
body? that shall give his People such an head against him, as they may disobey
his Commands, resist his Authority, and shake off all Allegiance, as if they
were no more concerned in him than a stranger? yet the Pope can with the same
ease disburden the Peoples Conscience, that he can destroy the Kings Authority.
Certainly these Tenets must make Princes very weak, and the Multitude very
strong, who are unruly at best, but much more troublesome when they can pretend
a plausible excuse to be so, Every thing they like not shall presently be a
grievance; and if they can but fasten the least seeming challenge against their
King, they will quickly employ the liberty given them of starting back in their
Obedience; or perhaps they may not only prove guilty of denying their known
duty, but of practicing seditiously against, and (if that will not serve turn)
of assassinating him at last. Whether these late Ages have not afforded such
examples let those who are conversant in history determine.

Their Doctrine of Excommunicating, Deposing, and III. By giving the Pope power
to dispose of Kingdoms, and absolve S^bjects from their Allegiance.
Murdering Kings does bravely make way for setting up the Pope as a Dominus fac
totum, to give him a power to dispose of the Kingdoms of Heretical Princes, and
absolve Subjects from their Allegiance. For being (as Bellarmine calls him) the
chief Spiritual Prince, all the Kings of Christendom must be his Vassals, and a
Plenitude of Ecclesiastical power is put into his hands; so that if any of
those Kings carry himself untowardly to the Church, or chance to fail in his
duty, presently a Bull from the Holy Chair proves as fatal to him as the
handwriting to Belshazzar, his Kingdom is numbered and finished; it is taken
from him, and given to another. Becanus has showed himself a fast friend in
Pontifex potest mandare et discernere ut subditi non teneantur praestare fidem
Regibus, quando Reges non servant ipsis fi^em Be^a^. Controv. Suarez de fide
Cath. lib. 6 c. 2.
determining this matter: The Pope can command and decree that the Subjects
shall not be engaged to keep faith with their Prince, when the Prince does not
keep faith with them: (a fine piece of Conditional Obedience). Yet does Suarez
so magnify this Doctrine, that he confidently asserts, whosoever maintains the
contrary does not only oppose the Customs of the Church, the Approbation of
General Councils, and the Consent of the Catholic Doctors, but he forfeits his
very reason also. Answerable to these Positions in the year 1558. Paul the
Fourth declared, that All Prelates and Princes even Kings and Emperors fallen
into Heresy, should be, and should be understood to be deprived of all their
Benefices, States, Kingdoms, and Empires without further declaration, and
incapable to be restored, even by the Apostolic sea; History of the Council
of ^rent, Book 5. page 109.
and their Goods, States, Kingdoms and Empires should be understood to be
common, and belong to the Catholics who could get them, which (says my
Author) did minister much talk, and if it had not been presently disesteemed by
the world would have kindled a fire in all Christendom. But of all the Romish
Writers welfare Tho. Bozius, who makes the Papal power so unlimited, that let
the Prince be never so harmless, yet if the Pope has a mind to take the
Scepter out of his hand, it is but reasonable he should do so; nor is he in any
fault for exercising his Authority. (I give you his words upon the credit of an
ingenious Gentleman.) Let a King be never so lawfully settled Sit a^ quis Rex
ju^e sol^rs, i^^ust^^us, potens, Ca^^o l^c^s, pius; tamen Pontif^x,
(^piscopiq^e Pontifice approb^i^te) valent huic auferre Regni; alteriq^e nullum
^us alioqum habenti, ad jud^c^re, ubi jud^c^ve (...) no^ modo nec^ssari^m esse
sed conven^ens. ^^zius.
in his Throne, careful, Industrious, Powerful, Catholic, Pious; yet the Pope
(and the Bishops by his approbation) may take from him his Kingdoms, and
confer them upon another, who can lay no other claim at all to them, when
such an act shall not only be judged necessary, but Convenient. So that upon
this score a Prince shall not so much as have the privilege of standing upon
his good behavior, or be Vi^. ^^lius History of Popish U^^^pations. li^. 2 c^p
1 p^g. 42.
cherished in case he favor the Catholic Religion, with enjoying what he has
securely; but still if it appear for the Romish Interest, the Pope may discard
him, and place a mere stranger in his Throne: and all people are bound to
believe it proceeds from very good reason, and great justice. I conclude what
has been said concerning these Papal Usurpations, and the strange slavery
whereinto Kings are brought by them, with the words of that learned and pious
Prelate, the incomparable Bishop Andrews. -- This Doctrine (the same whereof
D^ct^i^a hac (...) no^ multa p^st ^cept^a credo ^h^isto su^^^ci^ntur. Quid
enim? Rex Eth^^cus (...) no^ po^est a Pa^^a, Chr^st^anus pr^est: meliore erg^
(...) regn^tur apud Ethn^^^s Qu^s n^n (...) ^^m (s^cut est) ma^^bi. Eth^^cus?
(...) q^i E^h^icis^nt officio su^ in R^g^s lax^ri (...) at Christia^^ qu^u^^.
Quis no^ su^d^^os suos m^l^^ E^hnicos q^^m Ch^istia^^? Quis Christ^a^u^ Rex
esse velit ubi paretur, (...) pa^e^u^ ad nu^um Pont^ficis. (...) 1^. 11 page ^6.
we have been discoursing) once divulged and made common, there will scarce be
many Scepters henceforward subjected unto Christ. And why? because an Heathen
King cannot be deposed by the Pope, a Christian King may, does not then the
Heathen reign more securely? who will not hereafter (as the case stands)
continue in his Heathenism? The Heathen Subjects cannot be dispensed with in
their obedience, the Christians may: who then would not rather choose to have
his Subjects Heathens than Christians? What King would be a Christian where his
People shall obey or not obey, according to the Popes Beck and Command.

And now according to our former Method, let us IV. From the practices of the
Romanists.
pass from their Principles to their Practices, which have in all both Places
and Ages been exceedingly troublesome, tending to the disturbance of each
Kingdoms Tranquillity, and the injury of so many Kings, as either they could or
had occasion to deal with. Not to stir out of our own Nation, nor run so far
back as King John, who was miserably vexed with an Imperious Legate, proudly
keeping the Crown in his possession four days after it was tendered him by
laying it at his feet: and (as many Authors report) afterward poisoned by
Simon a Monk of Swinsted Abbey: I would only desire you to reflect upon what
has happened since the Reformation. When that incomparable Queen Elizabeth
began to reign, Pius the Fourth sent a gentle admonitory Letter to persuade her
into an Agreement with the Romish Church, and an invitation to send her Clerks
to the Council of Trent; (an Assembly so packed, and the Affairs of it so
managed, that no good issue could ever be expected from it) but these not
working the effects he desired, that holy Father proceeds to his severities.
Out comes a Bull of Excommunication long threatened, wherein by the Papal
Authority she is deprived of all her Dominion and Dignity: Her Nobles, Subjects
and People throughout the Kingdom are absolved from whatsoever Oath of fidelity
they had taken, so as it should not lay any Obligation upon them. But to make
all sure. The Subjects of her Kingdom are severely interdicted from paying Any
Obedience to Her, Her Laws, or Commands, and whosoever should fail in the due
observance of these Injunctions, must look to be fettered in the same Dreadful
Anathema with her self. This was no sooner come out, (and no sooner did it
come, then Felton an audacious fellow fastened it upon the Bishop of London's
Palace Gates) but one after another fell busily to work, creating the Queen a
great deal of vexatious trouble. Abroad, the Pope and King of Spain were very
busy, the former desirous to make England a Portion for his Nephew the Marquis
Vincolo: the latter to make it an Addittament to his own large Dominions: At
home Parsons and Campian talked loudly, and wrote seditiously: Somervile
threatens to kill the Queen with his own hand: Parry undertakes as much, being
encouraged with the Promise of a Plenary Indulgence from the Pope. Savage (with
whom Babington joined) was drawn into a Treason by Giffords Doctrine, who taught
it was a meritorious work to destroy Her, being a Prince already
excommunicated. By these means used to some, and the promise of Gratuities to
others, were Lopez, and York, and Williams all of them cajoled; and Squire
afterward, who practiced more cunningly to kill the Queen by poisoning the
pommel of her Saddle. How active the men of this persuasion were in the Spanish
Invasion every Chronicle will tell you. But lest they should pretend That
Business was only managed by Foreigners or Renegadoes, it is certain they
cannot so easily acquit themselves of that horrible Gunpowder Plot, for the
utter destroying King, Lords, and Commons in Parliament, the Alteration of
Religion, and Subversion of the Government; a piece of wickedness so
detestable, as nothing before that time could ever match it: and which when
once effected (as no doubt was made but the design would take) the whole blame
should be laid upon the Puritans. The particulars are to be found almost every
where. Now when upon such disloyal practices the Parliament did more strictly
urge the Oath of Allegiance, Pope Paul the Fifth sent his Admonitory into
England, advising all his dutiful Children that they should diligently beware
of that, and all such kind of Oaths; that they were not at all to be regarded;
concluding with this phrase, Haec est mera, pura, integraque voluntas nostra;
This is our plain and direct will and pleasure. Herein also he was followed by
his Successor Urban VIII. (at the beginning of King Charles his Reign)
Adhaereat faucibus vestris lingua vestra priusquam Authoritatem Beati Petri ea
jurisjurandi formula imminutam detis: Let your tongues cleave to the roof of
your mouths before you diminish the Authority of the Apostolic Sea by
submitting to such an Oath. Hence you may follow these good Subjects to the
Irish Rebellion, and there behold their so much boasted loyalty in the
slaughter of many thousands, and turning that Kingdom into an Aceldama; Men,
Women and Children murdered with an unparalleled cruelty in a months time, to
a prodigious number: the same fate awaiting all the Protestants and English who
should refuse to join with them. A sad beginner of our unhappy Troubles at home.

Well, but notwithstanding all that has been said, The Papists Plea of loyalty
in the late times.
the Papists have one Plea for themselves; and all objections against them are
presently answered with their Loyalty to King Charles the First in his
distresses, and the hazards they run both of life and fortune to defend his
Interest.

This I confess Sir seems very plausible at first sight, Answered.
and I really believe has had a greater influence upon you than all the
Arguments they have mustered up to gain you their Proselyte. It is possible you
will think me strangely disposed, whilst with one breath I both Acquit and
Accuse, Commend and Condemn them in this particular. That there were a great
many noble, brave, loyal spirits of the Romish Persuasion, who did with the
greatest integrity, and without any other designs than the satisfying
conscience, adventure their lives in the War, and leave their bodies in the
field for the Kings service, is a Truth beyond all question: and that several
(if not All) of these were men of such generous souls, that the greatest
temptations in the world could not have perverted, or made them desert their
King in the height of his miseries: but we know there is no arguing from
Particulars; nor did their Religion (as Romish) oblige them to this duty, since
it has in part, and will every day more appear to the world, that the Grandees
of that Church had the greatest hand in our intestine broils, were the main
Contrivers of the Kings death; and after his Head was cut off, did caress that
Piece of a Parliament which then had usurped the supreme power, with all the
flatteries which a Jesuitical Cunning could possibly invent. Heavy charges
indeed, but soon proved: the Truth of them is but too evident, and then, Sir,
be your own Judge, whether these Persons were the Kings Friends or no. That
they had the greatest hand in our intestine Broils, and were mainly
instrumental to cherish the Unnatural Rebellion which broke forth among us,
appears by their constant endeavors to create Jealousies in the Peoples minds
against the King and his Ministers of State; Scores of active persons being at
that time and upon that very Errand sent from Rome into England under several
Disguises, some pretending to be Gentlemen, some Merchants, etc. And so
extremely incensed they were at the King, for not granting them A Toleration of
Religion, which they verily expected, and by declaring that expectation made
the ordinary people of this Kingdom fear it, and by their fearing it to express
their Discontents at the Apprehensions of it: (the greatest occasion of so much
Bloodshed for many years after) so incensed (I say) they were that in the Cabal
at Rome it was resolved, since the King of England would not favor their
Profession, they would disturb his Peace, and endeavor the Ruin both of
himself and his Kingdoms: And however for the more effectual managing their
business, they did in outward appearance side with the Royal Interest, yet when
their Ends were obtained, they openly acknowledged how All Affairs had passed
through their hands, and were carried on by their Contrivance. That grave
Seignior delivered it ex Cathedra, when News of his Majesty's Death reached
Roan. The King of England (says Dr. Moulin's Vindication of the Protestant
Religion. p 58.
he) at his Marriage had promised us the Re-establishing the Catholic Religion;
(No wonder that a Lie drops from a Jesuits mouth) and when he delayed to
fulfill his Promise, we summoned him from time to time to perform it: We came so
far as to tell him, that if he would not do it, we should be forced to take
those Courses which would bring him to his Destruction: We have given him
lawful warning, and when no warning would serve, we have kept our word to him,
since he would not keep his word to us. Another Piece of Service wherein they
were mainly employed was the Vnhinging our Government not only in the State but
in the Church; bringing the Episcopal Order into Contempt, and raising a
Scandal upon the Public Liturgy. For they were so well read in Politics as
without much study to divine that when a Multitude is once left at Liberty
without any Coercive Power to keep Order; when the ordinary sort have no
prescribed Rules for their Devotions, nor the Articles of their Christian Faith
by frequent Repetitions riveted in their memory; they mey easily be perverted
by the crafty Insinuations of cunning Seducers; and having no Platform of
Religion that is good, be quickly drawn to embrace one that is bad. To this
purpose, let me give you the following Story from a very Reverend Prelate
lately deceased, of a Gentleman who Bishop Nicolson's Apology, and. Part 3.
Sect. 2. p. 154
being reconciled to Rome by one Meredith, an ancient and learned Jesuit,
(though afterward turning Protestant, and proffering to avouch the Truth of
this Relation upon Oath.) This Meredith told him that in England they had been
long and industrious about their work of Conversion but it went on slowly, and
so would till they took a wiser course. Two things there were must be done,
before they should bring their business to a full effect. They must first find
a way to remove the Bishops and Ministers, in whose room they must bring it so
about, All should have Liberty to Preach. Then secondly, they must get down the
Common Prayer Book, and suffer every man to use what Prayer he list. Now if
these were not the main things stickled about in the beginning of the Troubles,
All the Books of that time besides some of our own Observations, do very much
deceive us. So that the Presbyterian was but the Jesuits Agent, and did that
work for him, which he could not do for himself. Well, when the War had
continued some time, and the Independent Faction began Dr. Moulin's Vindic. p.
60.
to prevail, then the Romish Emissaries crept into that Part of the Army: about
thirty of them being met by a Protestant Gentleman between Roan and Diep, who
professed their Design was to be Agitators. There they struck in with those
bloody Villains in that unparalled piece of Wickedness, The Murder of King
Charles. A Reverend Person still alive, has proffered to justify, D. Moulin
p. 59.
whenever Authority shall require it, that the year before the Death of our
Royal Martyr a select Number of English Jesuits were sent from their whole
Party in England; first to Paris to consult with the Faculty of Sorbonne; to
whom they put this Question in Writing, That seeing the State of England was in
a likely posture to change Government, whether it was lawful for the Catholics
to work that Change for the Advancing and Securing the Catholic Cause in
England, by making away the King, whom there was no hope to turn from his
Heresy? And it was answered Affirmatively. This very Question was afterward
debated at Rome, where both Pope and Council declared it not only Lawful but
Expedient for the Men of their Religion to promote that Alteration of State.
And though when all people cried out of that Hellish Act, whereupon a Command
was given for all the Papers concerning that Subject to be gathered together
and burnt, yet one Gentleman in Paris kept his, showed it to a Protestant
Friend, and with a great Abhorrency related the whole Carriage of that
Negotiation. If you be not yet satisfied in the Loyalty of the Papists, you
shall have a few more Discoveries. Was it not a fair Argument of great
Affection to the King, to be present at his Murder with a great many
Demonstrations of Joy? Yet there are several Persons who could name you the
Priest and whose Confessor he was, who when he saw that Royal Head struck off,
Flourished with his Sword, (for he mounted the Scaffold in the Habit of a
Soldier) with words to this purpose, This Blow has dispatched the greatest
Enemy we had in the world, (Mr Prynne (I think) was the first Publisher of this
Story, and if there be occasion, it will quickly be verified.) In the mean
while do but reflect upon the sad condition of that Blessed Prince, The
Sectaries branded and rebelled against him for Endeavors to introduce Popery:
and the Romanists brought him to the Block as the greatest Opposer of Popery in
the World. There are some more Stories of this nature which you may read (and
worth the reading they be) in that excellent Book of Dr. Moulin's. Two parts of
my charge are by this time plainly proved, the Third will not require much
Trouble. How finely did they afterward wheedle the Rump-Parliament, promising
what dutiful Subjects they would be to that usurped Power, in case they might
but enjoy their Liberty; bitterly inveighing against the Severities exercised
upon them in the Kings time. If the Rigor of the Laws were qualified Christian
Moderator. part 1. page 16.
to a Temper of Mercy, that the Catholics might enjoy but half the Liberties to
which they were born, they would be the most quiet and useful Subjects of
England; since their Reconcile this with the former Relations.
Religion obliges them to obey the lawful Commands of their Superiors, not
only for Fear but Conscience. Nor did ever the very worst of them stir in any
Sedition, when they were admitted but to half the Rights of Englishmen: Nor
were they many that ever attempted their own Relief by Endangering their
Countries Peace, all the rest sitting Quietly and Patiently under the Burdens
which the heavy Hand of those Times continually heaped upon them. When Cromwell
had engrossed all into his own hands, then comes out a Book called The Grounds
of Obedience and Government, full fraught with the most pernicious Principles
that can be devised against the Interest of our Sovereign then in Exile, and
for the Encouragement of that Tyranny the rebellious Party had introduced (much
like another Entitled, The Holy Commonwealth, (though written by a Person of
a different Persuasion from the former) And had both those Books been burnt by
the common Hangman, the Kingdom had sustained no great Loss) Then who but
Oliver! because he was in possession, and it was for the Common Good to submit
unto him: Nay, the very dispossessed Prince was obliged to renounce all Claim
to his Government, else he would make himself worse than an Infidel. Here was
excellent Doctrine for Loyal Subjects to disperse among the infatuated Rabble;
and what could the Design of it be, but to make them stark mad, who were but
too mad before? It will perhaps be pretended, that these were only the
Miscarriages of some particular persons: but why then were not those persons
discouraged by the rest of their own Party? why were not their Writings
protested against? and Themselves Censured by their Superiors? Had this course
been been taken the Church of Rome had proceeded fairly to her vindication, and
we neither should, nor in reason could have blamed her. But there is not the
least ground to believe such a thing was ever attempted, considering how
serviceable those destructive Positions were in that juncture of time to their
grand Interest.

And now to dismiss you from your trouble, for a The Conclusi^n.
conclusion of the whole, I appeal to your own serious thoughts, whether it be
not the Honor and Happiness of all the People of England, that they profess so
excellent a Religion, which secures the King in his Throne, and teaches his
People a conscientious Obedience to his Commands: Which instructs them so
clearly in their Allegiance, and renders them inexcusable if at any time they
deviate from it: Which in the greatest extremities allows them no other weapons
against their Sovereign, but those of the Primitive Church, Prayers and Tears:
Which discourageth Rebellion though upon never such plausible pretenses; and in
case of miscarriages by Him who sits upon the Throne, looks upon him as
unaccountable to any Earthly Power, and leaves him to the Judgment of that God,
who alone has an absolute Authority over Him. Nor will it only appear the
Subjects Happiness to be Educated in it, but the Princes Concern to Defend this
Religion, and encourage all the faithful Adherers to it. We obey out of a
Principle of Piety, not out of any particular Interest; and discharge all our
Duties to the King in compliance with his Command, By whom Kings reign. Which
makes me very confident, that though we are now fallen to a low Ebb, he will
bring us to High Water again, and This Church thus firmly established upon the
Principles of Religion and Loyalty, will be so far The Object of Gods
particular Care, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it: that our
Lord the King, who is wise according to the wisdom of an Angel of God, will be
a Nursing-Father to the true Protestant Profession among us, as the surest
support of his Honor and Dignity. Let thine Hand therefore, O God, be upon
that Psalm. 80. 18.
Man of thy right hand, and that Son of Man (of that Blessed Prince, that Royal
Martyr, that Prodigious Example of Piety and Patience) whom (maugre the spite
of his Enemies) thou have now made strong for thy self. You see, Sir, how
freely I have discovered my Thoughts concerning our last Discourse. What
Satisfaction you may reap from them depends upon the Almighties Blessing. Only
I assure you with all faithfulness, they convince me of the Reasonableness,
Goodness and Divinity of my Religion, and furnish me with Grounds of
unexpressible Gratitude to God for my Birth and Education in the Church of
England: out of whose Arms I hope the Cunning Devices of Jesuitical Impostors
shall never be able to snatch you, to the endangering your Souls Eternal
Happiness, or the robbing your Sovereign of so good a Subject, as your Quality
and Faculties capacitate you to be. And if these Papers may be in the least
Instrumental to keep you steadfast in our Holy Communion, I shall infinitely
rejoice at so fair an Occasion of manifesting my self,

SIR, Your very faithful Servant.


FINIS.

