AN ESSAY Upon the Third Punique War. LIB. I. and II. To which are added
THEODOSIUS's Advice to his Son. AND THE PHOENIX; Out of CLAVDIAN.

By T. R. Esquire.

Scribimus indocti doctique poemata. Hor. In the SAVOY, Printed by T. N. for
William Not at the Queens Arms in the Pall Mall. MDCLXXI.

To the Illustrious Prince JAMES DUKE OF MONMOUTH, BVCCLEVGH, etc.
May it please your Grace,
THe Art of War being that to which all great Men should apply their Studies
(as the most Heroic Profession, to which Your Grace has dedicated Your
thoughts:) This Essay (besides that it has the Honor to be born in Your
Service) may justly claim Your Protection; and the rather, because in it there
is an Image of a Brave Young Hero, whose Virtue so far out-strip'd the
Deliberate Promotions of his Country, that He ascended to the Highest
Dignities by Dispensations of the Roman Laws, not sought by his Ambition; but
voluntarily indulged to his Worth: all which he obtained, not so much by his
Birth (though of the most Noble) as by an early application of Himself to the
Study of what a Great Man should do, and bringing into practice what he had
studied. And he was happy in this, that his Employments seemed to be conferred
on Him, rather by Necessity than choice, He appearing rather the Sanctuary,
than Servant of his Country, by securing them from the Fears of Carthage and
Numantia. Ipresent Him to Your Grace, in little and a rough Draught, leaving
Him to some better Hand to finish; hoping Your Grace will more regard my
desire, than my Art to express my self

Your Grace's Most humble and most faithful Servant T. R.

AN ESSAY Upon the Third PVNIQVE WAR. LIB. I.
TIme to that Point had run; when Conscious Fate,
Resolved no more to strive with Juno's Hate,
But with the Gods comply, who now their doom
Had given against Carthage, and reserved for Rome
The Empire of the World: while Libya sees
Signs of their Wrath, and their severe Decrees.
All that of Prodigy, in Heaven or Earth
Could be produced; All that with monstrous Birth
Could Nature fright; or fill the World with Fear,
Or could confirm the People in Despair,
Showed that all Causes must to Fates give way,
And, that the Gods themselves those Laws obey.
The Peace after the end of the Second Punique War, continued about 50 years;
during which time though the Carthaginians increased in Wealth and Pople,
Massanissa very injuriously possessed himself of much of their Territories, and
though they often appealed to the Romans, yet could they never have redress;
which in some of the Great Ones added much to their in bred detestation of
their power over them.
Scarce were the wounds of that Destructive War,
Which left in Africk's Face so deep a Scar,
Closed up, when a Disdain of Roman Chains,
And sense of Shame, through her yet Bloodless Veins,
Like a dire Fever, runs, inflames her Heart,
And with a troubled Pulse, strikes every Part.
Massanissa presuming upon his friendship with the Romans, had so highly
provoked the Carthaginians, that they sent an Army against him under the
Conduct of Hasdrubal, who was overthrown; by reason of which, Massanissa not
only more encroached upon them, but the Romans likewise (to whom they still
appealed for Justice) made this an infringement of an Article of their League,
obliging them not to take Arms against an Ally of Rome, and thereupon prepared
for War.
The Cause of so great Ills, my Muse relate;
And why the Ruin of an Anient State
The Gods, and Men should jointly so conspire.
Must nothing under Heaven be kept entire
When Great? then (Rome) thy Fate will be the same,
With that of Carthage, and when thy proud Name
Has filled the World so, that Thou can not rise
More high, nor be a nobler Sacrifice
To Fortune; Nations, conquered by Thee, shall
Divide, with Joy, the Trophies of thy Fall.
After the Ivory Palaces inlay'd
With Gold, and Syphax crown the spoils were made
Of Scipio, Carthage disarmed of all
Her Force by Sea and Land, and Hannibal
In all the World, Rome's Fear, Alone, remained;
Whose death, with infamy soon after stained
Bithyniae's Throne; as if above the stroke
Of Fate, or Fortune, Massanissa's Yoke,
Heavier than Rome's, on Libya's Neck was laid,
For than a Civil Hand, which has betrayed
Its Country, what can give a deeper Wound?
Such to serve Rome was Massanissa found.
What she had spared, He, cruelly destroyed:
And what her Pity left, his Pride enjoyed,
She, Honor; only, by her Conquest sought,
And lasting Trophies to her Temples brought,
Where emulous Nephews, might her Actions read,
And boldly in those steps of Honor tread.
He sought not to subdue, but to oppress.
And by extending Power, made Glory less.
No Bounds to his Ambition set a Bar,
But all was justly gained, achieved in War.
His violated Faith must serve the Times,
And give a Pious Name to greatest Crimes.
Poor Libya must believe, it is Heaven's Decree
That she to Roman Laws, should subject be.
Her Ancient Valor to Religion now.
Must yield, and to such servile Dictates bow,
The Numidians though their Country was very fertile, wholly neglected Tillage
and all sort of Husbandry, living in Tents, and removing as their Pasture
failed; till Massanissa having united Syphax Kingdom to his own Inheritanee,
reduced them to a more civil life. Vid. App. lib. Libyc.
As to her Fathers were unknown before;
And what she hated once, she must adore.
Unhappy State, where Treason takes her Stand
Upon the Throne, and does in Chief command;
All Rites, all Laws to Insolence give way,
And what should most command, does most obey.
The Voice of Heaven to attend all Power appears,
But a vain Sound still filis the Peoples ears;
What they expect, they seldom can enjoy,
And present Evils, all future Hopes destroy.
The gilded Name of Public Good brings in
All Mischief, and what Virtue seems, is sin.
Their use of Arms, under the Latin Gown,
Is lost, Rome's Rites the Libyan Customs drown.
As a fierce Horse, by stroaking, does admit
To bear a Rider, and receives the Bit;
Which settled in his Jaws, he quickly feels
The Wand, and sury of the Rider's Heels.
So by the Civil Customs brought from Rome,
By Massanissa, Libya lost at Home
That noble fierceness that once armed their hand
Against the World, and gained by Sea and Land,
Such Conquests, as no Nation, could exceed,
But that, to which, Heaven had the World decreed.
But in some breasts, the Ancient Tyrian Name
As yet survived, and Courage was the same,
As when Amilcar, or his Valiant Son,
For Empire, and Revenge the War begun.
The chief of these was Hasdrubal, who stood
High in the Peoples favor, as in Blood
Derived from Ancestors, who thither came
With Dido, and preserved a Noble Name.
Grief now to see the Carthaginian Bounds
Confined to Byrsa's Walls, his soul confounds.
Pity, and Rage, at once his thoughts divide,
Which straight are wholly to revenge appi'd.
Revenge, that gives all ease to present Ills,
And with false hope deluded Fancy fills.
On this he often meditates, yet dares
Not speak his thoughts, but while he hopes, despairs.
He Is safe, while his designs he lays alone
But still in danger, when to others known.
The Power of Rome, all Courage had suppressed,
And planted Terror in each Tyrian breast;
So that all confidence of Friends orethrown,
The Punique Faith (now to a Proverb grown)
The nearest Trust, and strictest Vows betrays,
And Treachery Religion oversways.
But yet this Fury, with another joined,
Dispels these doubts, and reconfirms his mind.
Ambition, which in Hell her Throne maintains,
And equal, every where, with Pluto raigns,
Adorned with spoils of Kings, of Crowns, of Courts,
With their sad Ruin, she insulting sports
Her Eyes, with Envy fired, still upward gaze,
As if she would blast, with those Infectious Rays,
All that above her shines. On either hand
Attending her commands, the Furies stand.
Rebellion, Murder Treason, with all Ills
Nurtured in Hell, she the dire Circle fills.
For Action arm d, and when from thence she flies
T'embroil the World, they all are in disguise.
Rebellion lifting up her zealous hands,
Dressed like Religion, at the Altar stands,
And to deluded gods her Incense burns.
Murder, her self to awful Justice, turns.
And Forms of Law, in all she acts proclaims.
Treason, the Loyal shape, and all the Names
Of Virtue takes, officiously attends
The Prince, and flattering, all he does commends;
Till his had Deeds, the good by much out weigh,
And so to Ruin, the secure betray.
It was a time, when Carthage (though her Fall
Recorded was, from rising Hannibal)
Grateful to his great Name, those Annual Rites Though these Sacrifices were in
use with some other Nations: (even among the Romans, until prohibited by Decree
of Senate, An. Urb. Cond. 657. Cornel. Lepid. and Licinius Crassus Consuls;
Plin. lib. 30. Natural. Histor.) yet most notorious they were among the
Carthaginians, who observed them yearly. Vid. Sil. Ital. lib. 4.

In Dido's ruin d Grove, three following Nights,
Performed, which dire Religion, long ago,
Had celebrated to the Powers below.
When at the Altars cruel Mothers stood,
And from their Breasts, while yet they suck d their blood,
With flattering kisses, smiling Babes betrayed
To Stygian flames, and dreadful Victims made:
While Nature in the Act subdued appears,
And Zeal choaks all their Sighs, and stops their Tears In great Calamities,
commonly the Children of the Nobility were chosen by Lot, who sometimes
redeemed them by the purchase of others; whose Mothers lost their Reward, if
they were seen to weep or sigh: continually kissing and flattering their
Children, that the Sacrifice might not he offered weeping or lamenting. Vid.
Arnob. lib. 8. Plutarch. de Superstit.

The Night was come, when to Barcinna, sprung
From the Bareean Line, and when but young,
(Scarce full three Lustra old) by Hymen join d
To Hasdrubal, when the glad Priest divined,
She, for her Country, with a Name above
Her Sex, should Valor's great example prove;
To Her, with a distracted look, he thus
Begins, What end to Carthage, and to Us,
Us born to Greater Things, does Fate design?
Fortune not Us, We rather Her decline,
While thus, with our unactive hands, we seem
As chained, nor seek Our Country to redeem.
Rome, though remote, with her Decrees alone,
Extends perfidious Massanissa 's Throne;
Our Walls contracts, deprives us of our Force,
And from Our Temples does Our Gods divorce.
All that with Us is Sacred, is their Scorn,
Our Altars Spoils, Triumphal Cars adorn.
It Is not enough that they should Us subdue,
Our Laws are lost, Religion's captived too.
Yet this, true Libyan Courage may restore,
We may do that which has been done before.
A Woman first Our Famed Foundation laid,
Heaven has to Thee, a Soul, as brave conveyed.
All that was Great in Her, Thou art, and more:
As to Begin is less, than to Restore.
Her weak Beginnings nothing did oppose.
Rome, and the World about Us, are Our Fots;
As if that Heaven had built up all these Powers
To be o'rthrowu, and make that Glory Ours.
Great Actions from their dangers take esteem,
And should we want success, we shall not seem
In Story less: it is next to Victory
To attempt bravely, and if Carthage be
Destined to Ruin, Future Times will call
Us Happy, who scorn to survive her Fall.
As thus he spoke, Barcinna whom the same
Thoughts and desires did equally inflame,
Prevents the rest with Kisses, and inspires
New Rage into Him with those melting Fires;
Applauds his high Designs (for her before
The Furies had possess d with this and more:)
Tells him, with smiles, This, Hasdrubal, alone,
Becomes Our Blood, and can give Thee a Throne.
Hopes of Revenge and Power, may Woman bear
To all Attempts, if not restrained by Fear.
Her above that Barcean Blood had placed,
And therefore all things else, she soon embraced;
All that his Reason could before Her lay,
As to be shunned, her Courage takes away.
She Rome's and Massanissa's force defies.
And fondly dreams of Future Victories.
Cries, Come ( my Hasdrubal) it is only Fear
Has kept that Yoke, upon Us, which We bear.
Now shake it off; United Force, though less
Than when dispersed, is nearer to success.
Our strength, which once their Policy disjoined,
Their Tyranny does now more firmly bind.
Carthage is One; not Hanno 's Race can call
Themselves more free, than that of Hannibal.
We all are equal Slaves, all equal Foes,
Rome after Victory, no Difference knows.
No Faction now, will for their Peace declaime,
All equally detest the Dardane Name.
Babes from Our breasts, an innate hatred take,
And curse a Roman, soon as they can speak
No Age, or Sex, will their best Aid deny,
And those, who cannot fight for Us, can die.
Die to appease those gods, whose Rites now lost,
Have made poor Carthage mourn, and Rome to boast.
As this she spoke, her hand she laid upon
A lovely Boy (scarce six year old) her Son.
Princes, in pious Acts, should Leaders be,
And this the gods expect from Us, (said she)
This was the First-Fruit of our Nuptial Vow,
And we the Noblest Victims should allow
To Powers, which we adore: Amazed he stood
At this, and Horror runs through all his blood.
Within himself he feels a cruel War,
And yet assents to what he does abhor.
And straight by either Hand, they lead the Boy,
A Sacrifice both of their Grief and Joy.
The Place and Season for the Fact conspires,
The Night in Horror wrapped up all her Fires.
The Moon to Hell retired, ashamed her Eye
Should see it, while She governed in the Sky,
The Place (a Place of Terror) was the Wood
Where once Elysa's Stygian Temple stood.
Where Birds of Night, perpetual Dirges sung
Of those were sacrificed, and among
The Boughs and hollow Trunks, sad howlings gave.
Under the Temple was a spacious Cave,
Where in eternal Darkness next to Hell,
The dreadful Priestess, ever chose to dwell;
Detesting all that pleased the Eye or Ear,
A constant Friend to Terror and Despair.
Three Lamps, with Sulphur filled, a noisome Mist
Expired, and Serpents in each corner hist.
The Roman General, who did abhor
What here was done, after the former War
This Temple with the Grove had quite destroy d,
But yet they, secretly, the Cave enjoyed.
In midst of which a Marble Altar stood
Still to maintain their thirst of Human blood.
Hither this Impiously Pious Pair
Conduct their Son, upon whose curling Hair
His cruel Mother several Fillets tied,
In each a Charm; pleased with their Fatal Pride,
The Pomp of his approaching Death, the Child
First on his Father, then on's Mother smiled;
Who takes Him in her Arms, and thrice caressed
With Kisses, while He, mutually expressed
His Joy, and's hands upon her Shoulders throws;
While the sad Father, by his silence shows
His inward grief. She like Medea round
The Altar trots, and with the dreadful sound
Of words, scarce understood, the Powers of Hell
Implores, with all that in those Mansions dwell.
All that she fondly, did believe could lend
Their Aid, or did of Cadmus Race descend.
Above the rest She Hannibal invokes,
And straight at his great Name the Altar smokes.
A thick and gloomy Flame from neighboring Hell,
Arose, and struck the Sense with Sulfurous smell.
Pleased with the Prodigy (she cries) See there,
My Hasdrubal, see where the gods appear.
From her own Throne, see Hecate, intent
In what we offer here, her Fire has sent
A friend to Hannibal, and all that are
Friends to his Name, and Carthage in this War,
The Omen (power full goddess) we adore,
And thy forsaken Rites we thus restore.
This said, the dire distraction of her Face
Creates and adds new Terror to the place.
The Boy snatched up, She on the Altar flings,
And horrid Notes in broken Murmurs sings.
So to delude, and to suppress his cries,
Till smiling on her Face with doubtful Eyes,
The Stygian Knife, was to his Throat applied,
Which twice the trembling Father put aside;
Until at length Religion oversway d,
And Nature Laws, which she detests, obeyed.
The Wound thus by the Mother given, the Life
O'th Child, straight followed the Retracted Knife.
Then with redoubled strokes she opens wide
His breast, where her dire Hands the Lungs divide,
And a fresh Part at every dreadful Name
Of Hecat, offers to the Rising Flame,
Till, with the Night consumed, th approaching day,
(Which must not see such deeds) them called away.
And now the noise of war all Libya fills,
And Prodigies denounce approaching Ills.
Wild Beasts the Deserts quit in midst of Day,
Run into Cities, and return with prey.
Serpents from thirsty sands to Rivers fly,
And poison springs, while there they drink and dye.
Earth in her Womb does strange Convulsions feel,
By which the Palaces of Princes reel,
As drunk, with lusts of those, who in them dwell.
And to fore-shew their Masters Ruin, fell.
The Sea, unmoved by Winds, is heard to roar,
And casts up bodies long since wracked ashore.
Prodigious Fires above her Surface fly,
While Mariners no more explore the Sky
For Guides to sail, but fooled by Pannick Fear,
Forsake their Course, and after Meteors steer,
Comets with points uncertain shine above,
And threaten all beneath them as they move:
Or menace, as their flattering Prophets say,
All Nations but their own, and so betray
To a secure Credulity their Friends,
Or to presume against that, which Heaven intends.
And such was Hasdrubal's sad Fate, who now,
Assumes the War, under a guilty Vow.
Turns all those threatenings of the gods on those,
Who Carthage emulate, or are her Foes.
Mong all the Nations, that in Libya dwell,
From whence the Niles eternal Waters swell.
To Ethiopian Woods, or dangerous Sands
Of Nasamon, none equal Force commands
To the Numidian, a People blessed
With Air, and Soil, more temperate than the rest.
They Natures Dictate follow every where,
And promptly, whatsoever Earth does bear,
Take up for Food, without all skill to raise
The Appetite, the Dews of Nights and Days,
Intemperate Heats, they patiently endure,
And to Continual Toil themselves enure.
Ready for War, flying the Arts of Court
And City-frauds, They to the Fields resort,
Lodge with their Flocks, still armed, expect the Foe,
No costly Equipage for Camps they know,
Nor ought that may effeminate the mind.
Over all these, since Carthage first declined,
Massanissa confident of the Friendship he had contracted with the House of
Scipio, at his death left his Kingdom to be divided among his three Sons, as
Scipio should determine; who so disposed the parts of it, as none of them
should be entrusted with too much power. Appian. ibid.
Great Massanissa reigned; but, soon as Fate
Took him away, Rome conscious of what weight
That Scepter was, not to be swayed by One
Alone, divides it. On his Eldest Son
The noblest Part, the Charge of Peace at Home,
Cirta, situate in the midst of Numidia, the Metropolis of Massanissa and his
Successors Kingdom, and by them made so potent, that it could furnish out 10000
Horse, and 20000 Foot. Vid. Strab. lib. 17.
Bestows, with Cirta's Riches, but (what Rome
Did more import) upon the Next confers
The Charge of all Numidia's Arms and Wars.
Whither they should pursue Maurusian Horse,
Or Byrsa's Walls, or Hippargeta Force:
Or following Roman Ensigns Cities aw
That doubtful stood, and to Alliance draw.
The Third the People did to Justice bring,
And Laws observed, in this no less a King;
Which Title by Decree they all did share,
And equally the Royal Ensigns wear.
With this Three Brothers who reigned in Spain, so unanimous in their
Government, that they gave occasion to Poets to fain them one Monster with
three heads, and all members trebled, etc.
Gerion Rome a while maintained
Th'instable power she had in Africa gained;
But when despair again had Carthage armed
By Hasdrubal's successful I roops alarmed, Hasdrubal had in the Field a flying
Army of about 20000 men, with which he contiuually infested the Romans then in
Africa; and upon some successes over Manlius the Consul, several Cities
declared for him, and some joined with him in the Field.

The Libyan Cities, the attested gods
Forget, and where they see the present odds,
To Carthage, or to Rome, as Friends adhere,
And lend their Aid, induced by Hope or Fear,
Some nobler Souls, their Countrey's Freedom fired,
Some Memory of Ancestors inspired,
Some that their Captived gods might be reslor'd,
Or Princes, whom they next to them adored;
Of these Numidia many yet retained,
Who Syphax Name still honored and disdained
The pride of Rome, who no distinction made
'Twixt Kings, and Slaves, but did alike invade
Their Necks with Chains, and those of highest Birth,
(The next to Heaven) levelled with basest Earth,
And, now with Hasdrubal Phamaeas joins Phamaeas was made General of the Horse
to Hasdrubal, and so active, that he in several conflicts, worsted the Romans,
and in their Marches cut off their Provisions. Vid. Appian. ibid.

Numidian Troops, and Rome's Command declines;
Derides her Fasces and her Consul meets
In open Fields, and valiantly defeats
Her late Victorious Bands, and by success
Her power impairs, and makes her Glory less.
So that the Faith of Massanissa's Heir, The ill success of the Roman Arms both
under Manlius and Calphurnius, gave courage to some to declare against them,
and many to appear Neuters; among others one Bithyas left Gulassa (the second
Son of Massanissa) and fled with 800 Horse to Hasdrubal, while Micipsa and
Mastanabas his two Brothers, could not be invited to take the Field, neither
would Gulassa march with the Army under his command, but with the rest expected
further Events. Vid. Appian. ibid.

In Arms is broke, or else depressd by Fear.
While, doubtful, He his promised Aid with-draws,
And seems to favor Libya's Common Cause,
Jealous alike, both of his Friends, and Foes,
Through Deserts, and through Sands, the Conful goes,
To seek a safe Retreat, sometimes he stands
In Battle, in a Plain; His weary Bands
Sometimes encamp d, are licensed to repose.
When straight they are surrounded by their Foes:
Whose active Fury, to disturb their Rest,
With showers of Darts, and Arrows them infest;
While, as besieged, they day and night defend
Their Trenches, and still fresh Assaults attend.
Here, with light Troops Phamaeas scoures the Plains,
There Hasdrubal all Forragers restrains,
Till Famine waked in every Roman Breast
That ancient Valor which their Fear suppressed:
Creates new Rage, gives such a Sense of Shame,
That, even the Common Men their Leaders blame,
Call for the Signal, and without delay,
Through their insulting Foes do force their way.
All Order's lost, and, what they did allow
Was Mutiny before, is Valor now.
In this brave Fury, with a joint Consent
They fill with Clamor the Pretorian Tent,
Where for the Rest, Sertorius thus begun,
Do we live, Consul, and behold the Sun,
While all the Victories, that Rome may boast,
In this Inglorious Camp, are tamely lost?
Even we are they, who in the Book of Fame,
Degenerate, and Base, expunge her Name;
All the Disgraces, which her Infant Wars
Had brought upon her, were with noble Scars,
In her Maturer Age to Glories turned,
And, where She once her slaughtered Sons had mourned,
Triumphal Arches stood, which now again
We here demolish, with a deeper stain
Than Where near the Town Caudium, the Samnites vanquished the Roman Army,
commanded by Sp. Posthumous, making them all to pass under the Took.
Caudine straits, or the Victorious Gaul
Could ere have given, what more could Hannibal
Before have wished, or Carthage now desire
Then thus to see the Roman Youth expire,
Armed, and without a Wound. It is Our Fear
Gives Strength and Courage to the Foe, it is here,
We put the Capitol, into their Power.
To ravish Matrons, Virgins to deflowre,
To captivate Our Sons, and what is more
To give Them, All that World was Ours before.
Oh base desire of Life! when abject Fear
Of Death, shall prompt Us all, those Ills to bear!
These Wounds (with that detects his Breast) these Scars,
Ensigns of Honor, gained in Former Wars,
Would blush for shame, did not the want of Food
Which makes them pale, deny supplies of Blood.
If after this, another life there be
Where Virtue has reward, unhappy We
Who, though this Infamy, no place can claim
In those blessed Shades, with those of Roman Name.
Unburied here, our Ghosts must wandr'ing go,
Lamenting still this Memorable Woe,
And never Lethe pass. As this he spoke,
A storm of sighs the Camp about him shook.
Their pallid Cheeks o'reflown with Silent Tears,
And Indignation strait expelling Fears,
Their Eagles are advanced, and every Hand
Armed for the Charge, expecting the Command
Which now the Consul gives, and leads them on,
With that the Gates and Ramparts overthrown,
They rush into the Plain, as when with rain
Increased, the Banks that lately did restrain
Its force, a River overflows, and fills
The neighboring level round, strait to the Hills
The Shepherds with their Flocks affrighted fly,
The Herds their Pastures quit, and suddenly
The Folds and Cottages are born away,
And to the Torrent, the whole Field's a Prey.
With no less Fury the Ausonian Bands
The Libyans invade; no Force withstands
Where they appear, but scattered through the Plain
Where Terror leads, they fly, while all, in vain,
Here Hasdrubal, Phamaeas there exclaims,
Upbraids their flight, recalls them by their Names
Into the Fight: but deafness every Ear
Had stopped, and Sense of Honor's lost in Fear.
All forward press, not any One is found
To turn his Face, and take a noble Wound,
But feel that Danger, which they never see,
While Showers of Piles and Javelins as they flee,
Fall on their backs. Confusion drives them all,
Yet stops their speed, while every one does call
On his Comrade, and with a threatening Hand
Repells his Steed, and bids him make a stand,
Yet spurs to be the first, until the Night
Approached, and better to secure their flight,
Upon an Hill a spacious Wood appeared,
Thither they fly: there, boldly, what they feared
Examine, why they fled? who first begun
To turn their backs, and from the Combat run?
None guilty are, on Fortune, all, the Crime
Reject, and vow Revenge another time.
And now with constant speed, the Hours had run,
To call to Thetis Bed the sleeping Sun:
Where while He lay, both Armies watchful are,
And fear, alike, the Stratagems of War.
The Roman General amidst the Plain
Sets out, anew his Camp, and calls again
His Troops from the pursuit, rewards the Toils
Of this so happy Day, with Libyan Spoils.
Spoils by despair, as well, as Valor gained,
And without danger not to be retained.
For now incensed, at their so shameful Flight
The Libyans in Counsel spend the Night.
And with the rising Day advance again,
And cover with their rallied Force the Plain,
Rending with barbarous showts the trembling Air,
When strait the Romans to their Arms repair;
And with prompt Courage in good Order from
Their Trenches March, as if in view of Rome,
Their Public gods, and every Private Lar,
Had witnessed, how they then pursued the War.
The Libyan Troops on every side appear,
Sometimes the Front infest; sometimes the Rear.
Then on the Flanks impetuously fall.
Or flying, Parthian-like, with Arrows gall
The advancing Foe, whose constant Valor makes
His way, and all Attempts against him breaks.
As when a Bull, first in the Cirque appears
While Cries of Dogs, and Showts of Men his Ears
Invade, He expects the sight, and murmuring stands
And kicking into Air the flying sands,
Prepares his Fury, that still greater grows
By the Attaques, and Clamor of his Foes.
Which, though on every side he bravely scorns,
Some crushing with his Feet, some with his Horns,
Tossed to the Clouds, through all he, fearless, runs,
Meets every Wound, nothing of danger shuns,
Till by his rage, his strength improved, he o'rthrows
The Bars, and breaks, a Conqueror, through his Foes.
Famed through the Libyan Coast, old Hippo stands This Hippo (for there were
two in Africa) was likewise called Hippargeta, situate betwixt Carthage and
Utica, of great strength, and very commodiously built upon the Seacoast by
Agathocles King of Syracusa. Their Emulation of Utica's power, made them
constant in their friendship to Carthage.

Whose Walls, at first, raised by Tinacrian Bands,
By Naval Power, o'r all the neighboring Sea
Such Terror spread, was so enriched by prey,
That, emulous of Vtica by none,
She was excelled, but Dido' Towers alone.
Resolved her Fate, whate'r it was, to bear
Where Carthage had a Foe, she, firmly, there
A Friend appeared, her Enemies defies,
And all her wants, with Roman spoils supplies.
Thither through all the dangers of a way Calphurnius coming before Carthage,
those of Hippo were so active in its Relief, by burning his Engines, and
destroying his Works toward the Sea, that quitting Carthage, he resolved first
to be revenged on Hippo; but spending the whole Summer in this Siege, with
great loss both of Men and Honor, he was forced to retire to Winter in Utica.
Vid. Appian. ibid.

That or to want or labor could betray
Their troops, the Romans march, with hope their Fame,
(By a fresh Conquest of so great a Name)
Again to raise, to wipe off Widows tears
At home, and Rome absolve from future Fears.
For weak, as at her Birth then Carthage stood;
Full of distempers, Faint with loss of Blood.
Like a sick body whose declining Parts
Supported are alone by outward Arts;
Which once withdrawn, to Ruin the whole Frame
Inclines, and scarce retains an empty name.
Such then with Hippo's (Carthage) was thy Fate.
Hippo, thy sole Support, and Prop of State.
Whose Friendship (which the World now only knows
By name) all Shocks of Fortune did oppose.
Scorning to base Advantage to give way,
Or let her Profit, 'bove Her Honor sway;
Still mindful of the Vows which she had made,
While even the greatest Libyans betrayed
Their Faith, and such Phamaea's, nor is it strange
That Men of Noble Birth are apt to change.
Since Interest first from Earth Astrea forced,
And Piety from Souls of Men divorced,
Fear to be less, and an untamed Desire
To be more great, so furiously conspire,
That rarely Virtue, mixed with their high Blood,
Makes them continue Valiant, Just, or Good.
Whether Ambition to be raised above
What Carthage did allow, at first did move
His thought to this, as Massanissa found
Himself above his hopes, with Empire Crowned,
After he Roman Arms to Libyan joined;
Or that the Fear of Rome's great Power inclined
His Soul to Treachery, He in the view
Of his Armed Friends, whom that they should pursue
His vile example, he invites aloud,
Phamaeas resolving to revolt to the Romans, would render himself to none but
Scipio Aemilianus then a Commander under the Consul, and famous for his
Integrity; who sent him to Rome, where the Senate received him with great
Honor. Vid. Appian. in Lybicis.
To Scipio flies, and to Rome's Service vowed
His future Arms, and safety, basely, sought
From that right hand, which so great Ruin brought
Upon his Country, the Infamous Reward
Of Treason, which all generous Souls abhorred,
At Rome receives, with honors seeks his shame
To hide, while Carthage execrates his Name.
And now about the Walls, their Eagles shine
With Silver Wings, while all within combine
Against their Force, no Age, nor Sex their hands
Withold, but bravely, in divided Bands
Their fiercest Rage, with equal Fury meet,
And Stratagems with Stratagems defeat;
Nor from the Walls alone, their Valor show,
But day and night, with Sallies vex the Foe;
Their Trenches, with their frequent slaughters fill,
And (as all Africa they excelled in skill
At Sea) the fierce Invaders from the Port
Repel, and in their Galleys Ruins sport.
Not Archimides in Sicilian Wars,
Tossing tall Ships, like Balls, unto the Stars,
As if he had designed to invade their Sphere,
And fix more wondrous Constellations there,
Then Colchis had renowned, could ever employ
More Arts, the Roman Navy to destroy.
While vain attempts, their Foes with terror filled,
And Winter's Cold, their Limbs and Courage chilled.
When both by Sea and Land incessant storms
Threatened to these a Wrack, the Use of Arms
To those denied, and the Besieged enjoy
All shelter from those Ills which them annoy:
And with their plenty from the Walls upbraid
Their Camps necessities, with Wealth displayed,
Their silent Bands to new Attaques invite,
And proudly, but in vain, provoke the fight.
For now the change of Fasces, as the year
Expired, and Augurs superstitious Fear,
The Consul to remove the Camp persuade,
And their known Valor to strange doubts betrayed;
While from their Birds fantastic Appetite,
Which Food rejects, or their Ambiguous flight,
They boldly dare pronounce the future State
Of things, as if they read the Book of Fate.
And from swollen Entrails of slain Beasts divine
That Carthage then should rise and Rome decline.
Even those who Nature's Secrets with a more
Sublime Conceit, and sharper Sense explore,
From the Aspects of Stars and Planets seem
To stamp their guilty Follies with esteem,
And Heaven entitle to the Crime, and stra it
The Consuls silent Orders for Retreat
Run through the Camp, and cover with the Night,
From Hippo, the dishonor of their Flight.
The Moon with all her Starry train gave way,
To the Alternate Empire of the Day,
When to the Walls the People have in Arms
Ready to entertain those fierce Alarms.
Which gave the rising Morn, a deeper Red,
And all the Furies with dire slaughter Fed
But now no Warlike Sounds invade their Ears,
Peace shines about, the Ensigns of their Fears
Are all removed, and what they there before
Had trembling viewed, they boldly now explore.
With busy eyes and hands their Children show
Each Quarter of the Camp, where every Foe
Of name his Tent had pitched, and, vainly, kind
Promise them spoils, of what was left behind.
No more confined, out at the Ports they run,
And, in their Sallies, what they late had done
With glory to their joyful friends repeat,
How here Phamaeas in a base Retreat,
A Libyan, from Libyan Ensigns fled,
And in the Roman Camp his hated Head
Secured. How there the stout Isalces, while
His Friends retired to saftety, till a Pile
Struck through his heart, from an unerring hand,
The Victime of his Country, kept his stand;
Not Cocles, when the Tuscan King pursued, Horatius Coccles, who gave a stand
to the whole Army of Porsenna, while the fliing Romans broke down the Bridge
over Tyber behind him, which saved the City.

(Though happier in his Fate) more bravely stood
The memory of his Fall mixed Joy with tears,
And thoughts of dangers past, revived their fears.
The wise, though safe, are doubtful still in War,
And think their dangers near, though never so far.
Back to the Temples then, with Garlands crowned,
They Paeans sing, and strew with flowers the ground.
The Priests their Offerings on the Altars lay,
And Vows for their Recovered safety pay.
All joys of People, who by Heaven are blessed,
With unexpected Peace, are there expressed.
As when his Vessel charged with all the Wealth
The East affords for Pleasure or for Health.
A Merchant in return by tempest tossed,
His Helm disordered, Sails, and Riggings lost;
While death and horror him surround, his prayer
Now undisturbed, and lengthened by Despair,
When beyond hopes, the Seas, and Angry Winds,
By some propitious god appeased, he finds,
And the desired Shore attained, at last,
He values safety, by his dangers past,
Which to delight his Friends, are often told,
And from his former Fears, create him Bold.
But Vtica, reserved by Fate to be Utica situate in the same Bay with Carthage,
and next to it in power, was the Receptacle of the Romans for the management of
their Affairs in Libya, and after the destruction of Carthage was the
Metropolis.

The last Retreat of Vanquished Liberty
(Since there, the After the defeat near Thapsus of Scipio, Cato (as the last
General of the Pompeian party) commanded then in Utica, and finding himself
unable to resist Caesar, (who marched toward him) in despair of a retreat from
his Power, (to which all Africa did then submit) slew himself, and from his
death, and Command there, was called Uticensis.
Senate's General must fall,
Whose envious Ancestors so often did call
For Byrsa's Ruin) the Ausonian troops
Receives, and to Inglorious Fasces stoops.
Not conscious then, that in succeeding time,
A Roman hand should vindicate that Crime,
And Caesar seem on Cato the Censor (Ancestor to the former) who never gave his
opinion in the Senate (after the second Punique War) but he added, This is my
Opinion, And that Carthage should be destroyed. That he was envious of the
glory of Scipio, who put Carthage into the power of the Romans, may be observed
in all Story.
Cato's Name to take
Revenge, in Vtica, for Carthage's sake;
Which Act, alone, could Juno's Wrath appease,
And in the Shades below, sad Dido please.
FINIS.
AN ESSAY Upon the Third PVNIQVE WAR. LIB. II.
NOw The ill management of this war, under the conduct of the Consul Manlius,
much distracted the Romans, till Scipio Aemilianus, who had gained a great
reputation (even among his Enemies) was chosen Consul and changed the face of
affairs, and under him the War was finished. Vid. Appian. Libyc.
with a thousand Tongues, and thousand Eyes,
Dispersing Terrors, Fame from Libya flies.
And, is at Rome, as readily, received,
As Truth it self, and easier, Far, believed.
Their long success, crowned, with so many years,
In Africa checked, revives, and heightens fears:
As if the Virtue of the Roman Name,
Were, now, extinguished, or not still the same,
No more the Famed Marcelli, Fabii, or
The Scipio's and Pauli, great in War,
In Italy survive. Luxurious Peace
Had made the Memory of their Deeds to cease.
Their sacred Images, alone, delare
Their Virtues, none their Imitators were.
It is enough the Italian Youth enjoy
Their Wealth, acquired, with honored Wounds, and cloy
Their wanton appetites so, that even Fate
Seems, now, to change, against the degenerate,
Who nothing of Themselves, can, justly boast,
But their great Father's glories, which they have lost.
Such, from Olympus Top, Eternal Jove
Romulus and Remus descended from Mars.
The Race of Mars, and of the Julius Caesar descended from Aeneas, the Son of
Venus and Anchises.
Queen of Love,
Beheld, and both the Deities arraigns,
In these mild words: What (Daughter) now remains
To ruin thy great Issue, or (Mars) thine.
If You, your Interest, fofar disjoyn?
You Cytherea may indulge to Love,
Yet suffer that, He Warlike Arts improve.
What will become of your The Son of Aeneas, from whom Julius Caesar, whose
Star appearing at Noon- day, while Augustus (his adopted Son) celebrated Games
to his honor, he was deifi'd, first of the Emperors.
Iulus race?
Where will They, who must this Celestial place
Supply, be found? who must the Heavens with Stars
Adorn, unless they, first, shall shine in Wars?
See how near Heaven, bright The Temple of Virtue, and that of Honor, were so
built one by the other; that they could not pass to that of Honor, but through
that of Virtue. It was first built by M. Marcellus (out of his Spoils of
Sicily) near the Porta Capena, through which they always entered in Triumph.
Virtues Temple stands;
And next Our Capitol, the Earth commands.
Your Issue (Mars) must that Highway pursue,
And though they keep Venus was honored with several Names among the Romans,
and with several Temples, but the first dedicated to Her at Rome was by Titus
Tatius, in that part of the Forum, where the Romans and Sabines laid down their
Arms and sacrificed. Vid. Plin. lib. 15.
her Temple, in their view,
Yet on those Altars first, their Victims lay,
And then to Her, their lesser Offerings pay.
With which, be The Temple of Mars was very magnificently built near the Porta
Capena in the Highway (called Via Appia) and so repaired (when decayed) and
enlarged by Sylla the Dictator, that it stood upon an 100 Columns.
you content, if more you claim,
What was for Honor meant, will turn to shame,
Bid then, that Mercury to Earth descend,
And to lascivious Rome this strait commend.
Tell her how weak, her Riot, and Excess,
Have rendered Her; how much, She, now, is less
Since She gave Ear to those Circaean Charms,
And, stood so deaf, to Libya 's alarms:
And, that He may, more readily, diffuse
This Our Command, some Noble Hero choose,
Who still preserves the Honor of his Race,
Nor will their Glory, by his Vice, deface,
An Opinion cherished by Scipio Africanus, that he was the Son of Jupiter. Vid.
Sil. Ital. lib. 13.
If any such Rome, yet, retains, he must
From Us descend, the Rest are lost in lust.
At this Command, strait the Mercury.
Cyllenian God,
Wings both his Head, and Feet, assumes his Rod,
With which, He can the Powers of Hell subdue,
Imprisoned Shades relieve, make them review
Desired Day: the restless Furies charm
To sleep, and their dire Ministers disarme.
Then, suddenly, to Earth, He takes his flight,
And summons, from the bosom of the Night,
Her Troop of dreams, that fly, in various Shapes,
Through all the World, commit their several Rapes
On Humane Sense. Some with dire Horror fill
The Fancy: Some the Stygian drops distill
Of black despair, into distracted Minds,
And where these fix, the Afflicted hardly finds
Relief, awake. Others, more lightly, fly
Through all variety of thoughts, and die
As soon as born. Some kind and gentle move,
Offering soft pleasures, and delights of Love.
All these, near Earth still hovering, strait the God
Dismissed, as useless, to their dark Abode;
And, from the numerous Throng, selected One
Of a Celestial Form, which waits Alone
On Souls, that still abstract from all that is vain,
None but divine Idea's entertain.
And when they wake, to what they dreamed aspire,
And cherish in themselves the Sacred Fire.
Not far from Rome, yet distant from the noise,
And tumult, that a Studious Mind destroys,
A Villa stands, in the Campanian Fields,
That, a Fair Image of Elysium yields,
Where a brave Youth, of that The Scipio 's.
Illustrious Line,
To which, the Fates of Libya did resign
Their power o'r Carthage, the great Acts revolved
Of Ages past, and with Himself resolved
To imitate, at least, if not exceed
His Ancestors, and each Heroic Deed.
Hither the God conducts the Heavenly Dream.
The Youth was studious on that Noble Theme,
Plato in his Phaedo.
That Immortality to Souls assigns,
And Man unto the Gods, by Reason, joins.
Soon as they here descend, the Arcadian Wand
Sheds Sleep through all the House. From Scipio's hand
Strait Divine Plato fell, and while with swarms
Of thoughts, the Brain his busy Fancy warms,
The Dream great Africanus Shape assumes;
Not such, as when to shun ungrateful Rome's
Impetuous Votes, He to Linternum came,
Scipio Africanus causing himself to be buried at Linternum a small Town in
Campania, with this Inscription, Ingrata Patria ne Ossa quidem mea habebis,
being persecuted by a Faction, after his great Service to his Country.
And on his Tomb engraved their lasting Shame.
But like Him, when his Valiant Hand redeemed
From Libyan Chains, the flattering Tribes, and seemed
A God, and, to the Capitol conveyed
It was the Custom of the Triumpher, soon as he had dismissed his Captives (at
the Gate of the Capitol) cither to death, or perpetual prison, to advance into
the Temple, and after his thanks paid (before the Statue of Jupiter) to all the
gods, and a short prayer for continuance of their favor, to offer his Laurel,
and deposite it, in the Lap of Jupiter, or redeem it, with a Crown of Gold.
His Lawrelin the Thunderers bosom laid.
Such, and so Great He now appeared, and while
The Youth, with horror trembled, with a smile
That promised safety, to a Starry Place,
(From whence, beneath Him, all of Humane Race
He might survey, conducts Him) Hence, said He,
The World, and thine own Fortune thou shall see.
Behold that City, which I first subdued,
By which a bloody War is now renewed;
Were Rome as Virtuous now as She was then,
Carthage could never shake off her Yoke again.
Rebellion never dares her Arms display,
But when the Rulers Virtue does decay.
Thou shall this Age redeem; Carthage by Thee
Shall be o'rthrown, and Thou shall honored be,
Coming to Rome, as Candidate for the Aedileship, he was chosen Consul, with
applause of the People, and undertook the War of Carthage which he destroyed.
He was Nephew to the great Africanus by Paulus Aemilius his Daughter, and by
Adoption his Son. In his first Consulship he had a Dispensation for being
chosen before the Age allowed, and was employed as Legate, or Proconsul in all
the places mentioned; but most famous (next his destruction of Carthage, for
Numantia, in Spain) which he likewise utterly destroyed; being chosen Consul in
his absence for that War. Vid. Live. Appian.
With envied Titles, heretofore by none
Deserved, nor due, but unto Us alone.
Yet other Honors Thee attend; Thou Nile
Thou Syria, Asia, Greece, shall rule, and while
Fame of a dangerous War, with terror fills
All Latium, to divert impending Ills,
To Thee, when absent, Rome shall recommend
Her Safety, and her unsought Fasces send.
Then Spain shall tremble, and, the vainly proud
Numantia, as with Thunder from a Cloud,
Dashed by thine Arms to ruin, shall proclaim
Titles as great as Carthage to thy Name.
This War of Numantia lasted 13 years, in which several great Captains, had
been employed; among others Tiberius Gracchus (whose Sister he had married) who
made a Peace with the Numantines, so dishonorable, that the Romans afterward
broke it. But Scipio undertaking the War, so closely besieged them, for some
time, that to the envy of all other before him, he forced them in one day to
burn themselves with all their Wealth together; not one remaining, says Florus
and Justine, to wear Chains in his Triumph; though Appian otherwise.
Thy Trophies then thou shall in Triumph bring
To Jove, and Rome shall Joyful Paeans sing.
But Envy will on all thou do attend,
Envy, that never does the Good commend.
She thy bright Glories, by thy Those who most envied him were the Gracchi his
own Kindred, whom he with Scipio Nasica so opposed in their Popular Faction,
that one of the Gracchi was slain in the Capitol; and Our Scipio resolving to
harangue the People the next day, his Wife Sempronia (as believed) poisoned
him, in revenge, and he was found dead in his Bed, when the Commonwealth, was
so distracted, that it was conceived, nothing but his being Dictator could
settle it. Vid. Cicer. Somn. Scipion.
Friends shall wound:
Yet persevere; Thou shall at length, be crowned
With all that Rome can give, nor safe will She
Her self esteem, till thou Dictator be.
This is thy way to Heaven, who deviates from
This path, can never to these blessed Mansions come.
For know that God, who did create this Place,
Reserves it, only, for that Glorious Race,
The praeexistence of Souls asserted by Plato in his Phaedo and Timaeus, and
Cicero in Somn. Scip.
Whose Souls from hence descending, while they are
Confined to Bodies, which, on Earth, they wear;
Love Virtue, and their Countrey's Good pursue:
Its Wealth and Power augment. Themselves subdue,
And, so the Fury of their Lusts restrain,
That, We, with Joy, receive Them here again.
This said, the God, and Dream, at once, forsakes
The Youth, amazed, who, at the instant, wakes,
And seems still to behold, with fixed eyes,
The fleeting Shade, to whom, he, thus, replies:
Whether Thou art a Deity, or Shade,
Or Dream, that thus do, now, my Soul invade,
Thine Image I'lretain, and so pursue,
That, though it Fiction seem, it shall be true.
Whether it be the Crime, or Common Fate
Of Rome, so vilely to degenerate,
From what She was; to scern Immortal Fame,
And Future Bliss, for present Lusts, disclaim;
My single Virtue, shall her Name redeem,
Her Honor raise, revive her lost esteem.
The Actions of Those, of Noble Blood,
Make all beneath Them, either bad, or good.
Example rules the World; and all that She
Should imitate, Rome shall behold in Me.
Assist me then thou God! if such Thou art!
Or Africanus Shade! to Me impart
All that was thine. I shall desire no more
To make Rome Greater, than She was before.
As this He spoke, the Night to Hell retired,
The Morn arose. He as from Heaven inspired,
To Rome strait posts, in's Mind revolving all
The Dictates of his Dream: the Capitol
First in his prospect, thither He repairs,
And, while He Jove consults, of all his cares,
The Genius of Rome the Senate fills
With Voices, that enumerate the Ills
That by their former Generals were brought
On Roman Arms, while They in Libya fought,
Till Africanus undertook the reins
Of War, and Carthage brought to Rome in chains:
This made Her Mistress of the World, but now
Since Fate would not the same Success allow
To other Chiefs, and Vtica alone
The Roman name, as Sovereign, would own.
Heaven had no other Hand reserved to effice
Those Stains, but one of that Illustrious Race.
With that, bold Factions the Court divide
Some for themselves, some for their friends employed
Their tedious Harangues, and, some who never
Had merited in Arms, more fierce appear
To undertake the War, and promise more
Then those, who had been Conquerours before.
But, while they thus contend, like Rising Day
Dispersing Foggs, and chasing Clouds away,
Young Scipio enters. The Majestic Grace
With which He moved, his stout and manly Face
Where all the Lines of sober Courage might
Be seen, and promised Victory in fight.
The Eyes of all the Assembly on him drew,
Who now, no more the fierce debate pursue:
But, as when first to the assembled Greeks,
God-like Achilles, did appear (his Cheeks
The newly clothed with down) deep silence through
The Camp was spread; while all admiring view
The vigor of his Eyes, and Limbs, his broad
And lofty Shoulders, like the Oetean god
In all. Him all the Captains strait commend,
As the most fit with Hector to contend;
Whose Fall alone must ruin hapless Troy.
So Scipio, with universal Joy
The Senate entertain, and, by their choice,
Raise acclamations of the Public Voice,
Which the Consent of Heaven, does strait approve;
While from his Shining Arm, by Thunder, Jove
Serene's the Capitol; with dreadful storms
Makes Libya tremble, and with strange alarms
The Carthaginian Walls and Temples shakes,
So that even Dido, in her Mable, quakes.
No place from Terror's free, the neighboring Sea
Swells, and with Waves invades, and drowns the Day.
Night intercepts the Hours, and fills the Sky
With Meteors, that in various Figures fly
Toward Saturnus ruined Fane, and, there
O'r his neglected Altars disappear.
Religion then (as Fear before) their Minds
Possessed, and its Effects most bloody finds.
For now Barcinna, whose Ambition fired
Her Husband first, and first the War inspired
With all the Cunning Arts, that do infect
Her Sex, or can their Minds to Ill direct,
The assembled Matrons (like the Theban Dames
At Trieterick Feasts) with zeal inflames,
Those Ominous Portents on Italy
To turn, and Carthage so from ruin free.
Behold (said she) how the Saturn, who when he fled from his Son Jupiter, lay
bid in Italy, and denominated the Country.
Ausonian god
You summons to his long-destroy'd Abode!
To memory recall, what dire effects
It was the Custom of the Carthaginians when in distress, to make these
Barbarous Oblations to Saturn;as when Gelon the Sicilian overthrew Amilear with
slaughter of 150000 Carthaginians, which constrained them to beg Peace; and
then when Agathocles so cruelly harassed and spoiled their Country, that
little was left to Them, besides their City, which Barcinna attributes to the
Neglect of those Sacrifices of the Noblest Children offered by their
Predecessors to the number of 200 at a time: after which their City by degrees
recovered. Vid. Diodor. Sicul. lib. 20. Herodot. lib. 7. c. 153.
Sicilian Armies, once, for such neglects,
On Africa had, until the god these Rites
Received, to which He now again invites.
This said, to the Senate (whom a Pannick Dread
Before had called) She (like Agaue) led
Her Frantic Troop. There with redoubled strokes
Her Breast invades, and with wild looks invokes
The cruel god! then to the Fathers thus
Directs her Speech. If, yet, these Walls, and Us
You will secure, if you will expiate
Those Crimes, which these dire prodigies create,
Give to the gods their due; think not your Arms
Shall prosper, while a Foolish Pity charms
Religion thus, and you those Rites forbear
Which to Our Fathers so propitious were.
Twice by Sicilian Bands, has Libya seemed
TO expire, as often by this great god redeemed:
Nor had the Roman Arms so far prevailed,
Had you in pristine Piety not failed.
If We are willing that you should exact
These Victims: We, whose Bowels have been wrackt
To bring them forth, why should you fondly love
To hug those Children, may your Ruin prove?
Or if your Consciences too tender are
To see them bleed, why do you pursue the War?
Mistaken Piety! What you to Heaven
Deny, will be to Latium Triumphs given.
This said, the Place, driven by Fanatic zeal,
She quits, and boldly does to Heaven appeal.
Deep silence seized the Senate, who amazed
At what she said, upon each other gazed.
This Hasdrubal was Gulussa's Sisters Son, whom the other Hasdrubal, suspecting
to hold intelligence with his Uncle, took occasion to kill in the Senate, with
some piece of one of the Seats. Vid. Appian. de Libyc.
At length young Hasdrubal; If it become
Your Wisdom (Fathers) to be ruled at home,
By this weak Sex, it is time that you withdraw
Your Armies from the Field, and take the Law
From Men The Romans.
whose Valor has the World subdued;
For what is now by these desired, even rude
And barbarous Nations have exploded long,
And when you shall such Rites perform, you wrong
The gods, who now are better understood:
They, kind, all Sacrifice of Humane Blood
Abhor: We 'ave store of Flocks and Herds, with these,
Or precious Gums, the Angry Gods appease:
For if your Sons on these dire Altars bleed,
Who shall preserve your Temples? who succeed
In Arms? who shall the Libyan Name defend.
Or Bounds maintain, for which you now contend.
And though Barcinna may our long neglect
Accuse, as if the Gods all else reject
That we shall do, think how great things, how high
Vid. Sil. Ital. lib. 4.
Brave Hannibal performed, who did deny
The same. What then her Hasdrubal has done,
Since, to inaugurate his Command, their Son
They sacrificed. As this he spoke, strait all
Their Eyes reflect, on the Elder Hasdrubal,
Who near him sat, and, as himself was named
(His rage already at his Speech enflamed)
Snatched up a mighty Beam, and strait his Brains
Dashed out, and with his Blood the Senate stains.
Is It not enough; that thus Gulussa's spy
Oppose our Rites, but He must all decry
That I have done (said He) I, who (you know)
So lately have repelled the insulting Foe;
After the defeat given by Hasdrubal to the Consul Manlius, the Romans kept
themselves within Utica, till the Arrival of Scipio.
While Utica. alone, the poor Remains,
In hatred to our Carthage, entertains,
And you with silence (while his Crime does call
Or for the Cross, or some worse torture) all
Approve! it is time (with that he spurns his Face)
That now I leave him to you, and this place.
This said, he strait retires. A sudden Dread
Of his revenge, through the Assembly spread,
They soon dissolve. Confusion through the Streets
Runs like Erinnys, seizes all she meets,
And their distracted Minds with terror fills!
Some least a Civil Rage (the worst of Ills)
Might the divided City open lay
To the neighboring Foe, some least they should betray
Their Liberty to One, who too elate
With his Command, durst, in a free debate,
With noble Blood, a sacred Council stain;
And, rashly, what was Holy held, profane.
But with the day, their fears increast, while they
A Fleet (the Burden of the Libyan Sea)
Beheld, where Scipio, as He approached the Rode,
Offered warm Entrails to the Indulgent god;
Who now with Him conspired, and drove before
The floating Sacrifice, to seize the Shore.
From his Pretorian Ship the General views,
And to the rest the joyful Omen shows.
Loud Clamors then o'r all the Ocean ring,
They ply their Oars to Land, and Paeans sing.
This to the Walls the City strait invites,
And all against the Common Foe unites,
None are exempt from Arms, each Sex, and Age,
For Universal Liberty engage.
Now to the Shore the Navy joins, on Land
Brave Scipio leaps, and seizing in his hand
The barren Earth; Thus in the name of Rome
And all her gods, do I (said He) resume
What Africanus did o'r Carthage gain.
No more shall She with Perjuries profane
Those Altars, where She due Obedience swore.
With that He calls the Army all ashore,
Their Courage, makes them hasty to obey,
And some precipitates into the Sea.
But all, at length, the Field, in Order, crown,
And show their threatening Eagles to the Town.
As thus a while, expecting the Command
To Advance against the Walls, they silent stand,
Fierce Hasdrubal from an adjoining Wood
That sacred from Eliza's Time had stood,
With his Maurusian Troops (like sudden rain
From Hills swelled to a Torrent) fills the Plain,
And strikes with barbarous Shouts the Marble Sky.
With which the City from the Walls comply,
And the still silent Roman to the Fight,
Vainly exciting their sad Fate, invite.
But Scipio, whom nothing could provoke
To any thing was rash, the Fury broke
Of his Impatient Bands, with these few words:
Reserve (Companions) your Victorious Swords,
For such a Foe as will with Courage flight,
Not such as these, who in their speedy flight,
Or those thick Woods, where they protected are
From your assault, seek to maintain the War.
As you advance, they will retire, they know,
It Is not a Manlitis now, but Scipio,
Who leads you on; that now, like Soldiers you,
The Roman Army under Manlius (says Appian) was so loose in their Discipline
in Africa, that they lived rather like Robbers than Soldiers, and were always
beaten; till Scipio, restoring the Ancient Discipline, made them Conquerors.
And not like Robbers, will the War pursue.
Then take your Piles and Axes in your hands,
Possess that ground, where now the Libyan stands;
None there will dare to see a Romans Face:
And, as you them, like Beasts, to Covert chase,
The Wood, before you, fell, and still pursue,
Till Carthage shall stand naked in your view.
This said, with cheerful showts, they all advance,
And as the approach the Enemy, his Lance
First Scipio threw, which through Himilco's Head,
(Their Standard Bearer) pierced, and struck him dead:
The Ensign, with his Body fell, and strait,
As if on Him, Alone, the Common Fate
Of all the Army did depend, they fly.
With that thick Clouds of Piles obscure the Sky
And fall upon their backs; while to the Wood.
They, routed, have, and various Tracts of Blood,
Detect their flight; the Romans still pursue
The Chase, as Hunters, having lost the view,
Follow the Slatt, till in some open Plain,
From Covertforc'd, the Stagge imbost, is slain.
The Libyans thus dispersed, their Axes all
Employ, and strait tall Pines and Cedars fall,
With aged Oaks, whose mossy branches wore
The Shields of several Nations, who that Shore
Had fatal found: Whether they wracked had been
Before they did on Land, the War begin,
While the perfidious Syrts, ashore had cast
Their Ruins, to be there, as Trophies placed:
Or that they had their way through Libya fought,
And thither spoils of other Cities brought;
To boast their Victories, while Carthage stood
Safe, in her Walls, alone, and sacred Wood;
Where She, at length, the Enemy subdued,
And, often, with Joy, as in a Temple, viewed
Those boasted Monuments, that now appear
To give new Matter of Revenge, and Fear.
For Fate, to hasten on what she designed,
Calls from Atlantic Hills, a sudden Wind
T'assist the Roman Arms, and so conspires,
To ease their Toils. A Pine then Scipio fires,
Whose unctuous, and impetuous Flame soon spreads
It self, through all the Woods, the tallest Heads
Of Cedars, Oaks, and Beeches it invades,
And turns to Ashes the delightful Shades;
Where Nymphs did, since the birth of time, resort,
And with the wanton Faunes and Satyrs sport.
Their Ancient Abodes they now forsake,
And with their dreadful lamentations wake
The salvage Beasts, that in their Dens still slept;
Till roused with sudden noise, strait forth they leapt:
But round besieged with flames, soon back retired,
And roaring in their bloody Beds expired,
Like a rough sea, the smoke to Heaven ascends
And over all the Town, it self extends
In Stygian Waves; the Walls, and Towrs, in Clouds
Are lost, while Scipio his Eagles shrowds
Under this ruin, and on Megarian Walls
With his whole force, like a rude Tempest, falls.
The Place, Religion had with strength indu'd,
This Amilcar commanding in Sicily, while his Army was engaged in fight,
withdrew himself, either despairing of Victory, or superstitious to obtain it
by Sacrifice; but being never after seen, his Army being Conquerors,
entertained an Opinion of his Sanctity, and built a Temple, and honored him
with Sacrifice. Vid. Herodot. in Polymn.
And in
Amilcar's Temple often renewed
Their superstitious Rites, since He in fight
Retired to sacrifice, and from their sight
Vanished to Heaven. Here nothing could retard
The progress of their Arms, but the reward
Of Valor (wealthy spoils) which they divide
In have, and vanquished Deities deride.
This Image of Apollo (of pure Gold, and very large) the Roman Soldiers took
and divided; which Sacrilege Scipio (after Carthage was taken) punished, by
refusing those that were guilty of it, to have any share in the spoil of the
City. Appian.
Here not Apollo did himself protect.
But seemed his Golden Image to neglect;
While some his Bow, his Shafts, and Quiver share,
Others his Head divide, and shining Hair,
And then to other parts as rich descend,
And who shall most despoil the God contend.
All sense of Piety in desires of Gain
Is lost, and Avarice does all profane.
But Scipio, like Janus several ways
The dangers past, and what might come survayes,
Considers, that when Victory her Wings
Does slack, the Conquered, often the Pean sings.
Delay of the pursuit, gives strength, and time
To turn the Victors Valor, to his Crime.
His men, He therefore summons from the Prey,
Who, starting, at the Signal, soon obey,
And with their Arms, again, all Rained with gore,
Threaten a greater slaughter than before;
While killing they went on, till streams of blood
At their entrance of Megara the Romans made so great slaughter, that the blood
of the Carthaginians made the way so slippery, that they could not pursue them,
as they fled into the other retreats of the City. Vid. Appian. Libyc.
Choked up the way, and the pursuit withstood.
But, now, the Sun declines, and either side,
Against future dangers, for themselves provide.
The labors of the Day could not appease
Their Cares, nor Night their weary Bodies ease.
Censorinus the Consul, had before persuaded the Carthaginians to deliver up
all their Arms and Ships, with promise that they should enjoy their Laws, but
this done pronounced the destruction of their City, and their removal higher
into the Country, that they might be wholly Strangers to the Sea, by which
they had rats'd their Empire. This Sentence drove them to that Despair, which
made them renew the war more fiercely, than when in a better condition. Appian.
ibid.
Not long before, by Censorinus doom,
Carthage, by fatal Change for Peace with Rome,
Her Elephants, her Arms, her Ships, with all
She or her Glory, or Defense could call,
Had to the Foe given up, and, every where,
Was naked left, till Ruin and Despair,
Armed her again, no weapons now remained,
But such, whose matter from their Temples gained,
Or stately Palaces, were forged by night,
And sitted, ever the following day for fight;
By weak and artless hands their Bulwarks are
From Ruins raised, and they maintain the war,
With all that makes them weak. Nothing for Sea
Or Land can be supplied, but by the Prey
And Spoil upon themselves. Their Cables were
Vid. Appian. ibid.
Composed of Mothers, or of Virgins hair,
Who cut the lovely Tresses from their heads,
And firmly interwove the Curling threads,
So, that their little Navy was supplied
With Cordage, late their Beauty and their Pride,
Such, as even Cytherea had bewailed,
Had not the Love of Rome, bove all prevailed.
All other gods bemoaned this City's Fate,
Whose Miseries no Muse can well relate;
Whose dismal Story does exceed belief,
And Cruelty it self afflicts with grief.
That City, which seven hundred years had stood;
Which with expense of so much wealth and blood,
Her Walls (first measured by an Oxe's Hide)
So high, had raised, and stretched her Bounds so wide,
That even Rome feared her Yoke, in a vast Flame,
Must lose, at once, her Empire, and her Name.
But Justice.
Nemesis that sometimes slow, sometimes
As swift, as thought's avenged on prosperous Crimes,
Their want of Faith, by which they did delude
The gods so often, their unjust Arms imbrued
So often in blood of Innocents, their dire
Excess of Cruelty, by sword and fire,
While they their Arms in Italy employed,
While Hannibal was in Italy, he destroyed (says Appian) four hundred Cities.
And twice two hundred Cities had destroyed,
Thus to the gods (who then in Counsel sat,
To understand the last resolves of Fate)
With just Complaint declares, If yet (ye gods)
The Impieties of Earth, to your Abodes
Have not arrived; if their repeated Faults
Have not with horror shook Celestial Vaults;
I, against Carthage, should not now declaim
Above the rest, did not her Impious Fame,
So fill the Universe, that Men begin
To question, that you are, or that you have bin.
Your Justice thus deferred, makes them grow bold,
And Crimes like Virtues look, while uncontrolled.
Though Carthage has been guilty long of all
Those Ills, for which you let your Thunder fall
Upon the World, yet can she not forbear
T'excite your Anger, even in her despair.
Not Tigers, nor her Libyan Serpents can
More Rage and Fury, against wretched Man
Express than She. See! what Insernal Arts
She now in practice puts, in all her parts!
Not Scinis a famous Robber in Thessaly, tied such as he took Captive, to
Branches of a Pine, bowing them to be fastened to their Legs and Arms, and then
letting them fly back, suddenly, to their Natural Position, tore the Bodies in
pieces.
Scinis Pine, nor dire Procrustes another Robber, who tortured such as he took,
on a Bed; to the length whereof he fitted all Bodies; which if too long he cut
shorter, if too short he extended by the Rack.
Procrustes Bed
So cruel were as these; nor Diomed King of Thrace, fed his Horses with the
flesh of such strangers as he took in his dominions.
Horses fed
With Humane Flesh. See! How around her Walls,
Hasdrubal to put the Carthaginians past all hopes of mercy from the Romans,
with several exquisite and most barbarous torments, put to death all Captives
upon the Walls, in view of the Camp. Vid. Appian. ibid.
To the Inhumane Spectacle, She calls
The Roman Camp, while tortured Captives lie
Killed in each limb, not suffered, yet, to die;
But are constrained, expiring, to revive,
And, Nature by fresh torments kept alive:
It Is therefore time this City to debell,
And let them know, such Cruelty's for Hell,
Alone reserved, and those who practice't there
On Earth, shall greater Plagues for ever bear.
This said, the Father of the gods, the Hour
Assigns to Fates, to execute their Power,
Which they to Scipio devolve, and He,
In the pursuit of their severe Decree,
Cotho was the strongest part of the Haven, encompassed by a Wall, which
Laelius took by assault in the night; and this taken, there was no possibility
of relief by Sea.
Cotho, their best support, first takes away,
And cuts off all Relief by Land and Sea.
Then Famine from the Libyan Desert comes,
And greedily their Stores, for Food, consumes.
Her ghastly looks, more dreadful than the Foe,
A long, protracted Death, and Ruin show.
Through the whole City then she raging flies,
And with nefandous Meats a while supplies
The weak remains of Life. All that before
Sagunthus felt, or angry gods could more
Inflict, poor Carthage suffers, till her strength
Unable to support her Arms, at length,
The City being reduced to the last extremity by famine, forty thousand (among
whom the Chief was Hasdrubal) came out and submitted to Scipio.
Twice twenty thousand to the Victor yield,
And treacherous Hasdrubal, who long the Field
Had kept, despairing to afford her aid,
Himself, a vile submissive Captive laid
At Scipio's Feet, and in the public view,
Hasdrubal was placed in Chains, at Scipio's Feet, sitting on a high Tribunal,
that he might be seen, by his Wife, and those with Her, in the Temple of
Aesculapius.
Enchain'd, for an Inglorious Life does sue.
And, now the Hour arrived, and, every where,
Death and Destruction in all Shapes appear.
Like Ghosts the Famished People in the Street
Offering their throats to slaughter boldly meet
The Conqueror, who now amazed stands,
And does a while with hold his cruel hands,
Till Pity the Relief of death affords
To those, who wanted Blood to stain their Swords;
Who this, their chief Felicity do call,
That with their ruined Country they may fall;
When Scipio saw the City first a fire, be (considering the instability of
Fortune, and that the same thing might happen to his Country) wept. Appian.
And leave even Scipio to bewail them, while
Carthage in flames, is made their Funeral Pile.
This Temple of Aeculapius (the most wealthy in all Carthage) with a Tower of
great strength, by reason of the narrow passage to it, was situate on eminent
Rocks, and had sixty steps to ascend to it, and was the last place of Retreat,
when the rest of the City was taken and fired.
High as the Capitol, and, long, above
All other sacred held, as that to Jove,
A Temple stood, where the Aesculapius.
Crotonian God
With Offerings rich, kept his select Abode,
And Libyan Votaries, restored to Health.
Here to preserve his Honor, and the Wealth,
A Tower was raised, from whence they could explore
The Country round, the City, Seas, and Shore.
Thither Bareinna, by her Courage led,
To be more honored then her husband, fled.
And, with a few defends the narrow way,
Against the Foe; and while she does survey
The Stately Palaces, whose lofty Rooms
Enriched, with Tapistry from Tyrian Looms,
And Rooss with Gold and Ivory inlay'd,
(To boast her former Wealth) to Vulcan made
A Sacrifice; It well becomes (said She)
( Dear Carthage) thy sad Destiny, and Me,
With Universal Ruin thus to fall;
This Pomp is fittest for Our Funeral.
I cannot wish thee stand, when Rome shall be
Thy Mistress, and imprse her Laws on Thee:
Those who do covet to survive Thee, are
Such, whom not Pity, but Contempt does spare;
Unworthy, in such glorious Flames to die,
Or mixed with Thee, as in one Vrn to lie.
As this She spoke, She some, whose little breath,
Could only beg a short Reprieve from death;
Verbenae (or Vervin) with other Herbs and Flowers, taken from the Altars, were
as often used as Olive Branches, to be held out by such as begged Peace.
Their hands (with Vervin from the Altar filled)
Extended to the Roman Camp, beheld,
Among these, as chief, her Hasdrubal was seen;
Then, as by Gorgon She surpised had been,
All tears with rage dried up; Wretch! worthy all
The Miseries, that can on Carthage fall,
(She cries) perfidious Wretch! who do desire
To live, when thy dear Country does expire!
Oh! born to be a Slave! and, what is worst,
Unto the Servitude of Rome accursed.
And most unhappy I, who live to see it!
What shall I say, when Hannibal I meet
In those Abodes where Noble Heroes shine?
How blush, that such degenerate blood, as thine,
I have commixt with His? but this disgrace
With Thee (vile Man) the last of all thy Race,
With Thee shall die; and these thy Sons shall be,
My last of Sacrifice, since got by Thee;
Worthy to be reserved, as they are Thine,
For Roman Triumphs; but as they are Mine,
Most worthy thus to die, and with Me go
To Hannibal's Embrace, in Shades below.
This said, into her hand, Erinnys puts
A Sword, with which their tender throats she cuts.
Then to the Fane her flaming Verbenae (or Vervin) with other Herbs and
Flowers, taken from the Altars, were as often used as Olive Branches, to be
held out by such as begged Peace.
Yew applies,
And, to deprive the Conqueror of his prize,
All that she precious held, or did esteem
Might to the Enemy a Trophy seem,
Into the Fire she throws: then on them lays
Her bleeding This Speech of Barcinna's to Scipio; and her detestation of her
Husbands pusillanimity is recorded by Appian.
Sons; and, as, a while, she prays Their hovering Manes to attend her fall;
To thee (said she) brave Scipio may all
The gods propitious be, as now they are;
Thou only do pursue the Laws of War:
But, may that most Effeminate of Slaves
Long, such, be thine; nor cross the Stygian Waves,
Till he shall wish, that joined unto my side.
As in our Nuptial Bed, with Me he had died.
This said, into the Flames she leaps, and all
The Temple, with the Towers together fall
Upon Her, in one Heap, as if to entomb
Barcinna's Ashes, in despite of Rome;
Fate had that Monument, that all surpast,
For her reserved, the Wealthiest, and the last,
That so with Carthage, equal in her Fame,
She might perpetuate to the World her Name.
FINIS.
THEODOSIUS His ADVICE to his Son E. Claudian. 40. Honorii Consulat.
HAd Fortune placed Thee on the Parthian Throne,
(Dear Youth) and far, in the East, adored, alone,
The rude Tiara crowned thy' Arsacian Brow,
Thy high Descent might then suffice, and thou
Secured by Birth, might in thy Pleasures flow.
But Rome's great Court, will no such Princes know.
There not in Blood, but Virtue, thou must shine,
And, to that Virtue, noble Actions join;
Which hid, is vile: for, what can it produce,
In darkness drowned? like Ships, that want the use
Of Helmes; or Lutes without their Strings, or Bows
Unbent. Yet this, who ever Himself not knows,
Nor can the Passions, of the Mind, allay,
Shall never obtain. To it is a rugged way.
Learn what Man is; when his Aetherial Flame
Prometheus mixed with Earth, our Parts to frame,
Sincere, as when from Heaven He stole't, the Mind,
Struggling for liberty, He kept confined,
And, when Things Mortal, nothing could compose,
Two more He added: with the Body those
Perish, but, this survives, when they are dead,
And upward flies. Her Empire's in the Head,
Where all Our Actions she directs and guides.
Their station's lower, which the Neck divides
From Hers. Where They her Dictates entertain,
And, that Things Sacred, might not with Profane
Be mixed, the Workman gave, to every part,
Its place, distinct. Anger, the Bloodlike Heart
Within the Breast maintains, as filled with Fire,
It swells, when headlong Rage, or mad Desire
Of Mischief, it inflames: when chilled, with Fear,
It self contracts; but, when 'twas found to bear
All things, with violence, and rest deny
To the whole Frame, the Lungs a moist supply
Of Air, yield to the liquid Flames, and, so
The swelling Fibers, through soft Conduits, flow.
But, weighing naught, all coveting, desire
Is forced into the Liver to retire,
And lower Tracts. Where, when she opens, wide,
Her Monstrous Jaws, she can be satisfied
With no supplies. Sometimes, she is wracked with cares
Of Avarice: sometimes the Wounds she bears
Of burning Love: sometimes her Joys o'rflow,
And then, oppressed with grief, the streams as low.
Then satisfied, again, does higher rise
Like Hydra slain, which Death with Strength supplies.
But, whosoe'r these Tumults can control,
Gives a safe Temple to the Purest Soul.
Though thou command the farthest Indian Shore,
Though Medes, soft Arabs, Serians thee adore:
If Anger sway thee, base Desires, or Fear,
Thou art a Slave: within thy Self shall bear
Unequal Laws: Thou, then, of Right, may bring
All, to thy Rule, when of thy Self, you are King.
It Is Custom makes Us prone to Sin, and We
To all the Charms, of rein-less Luxury,
By license, yield: it is Conquest to be chaste
When Venus tempts thee. Or when Wrong is placed
Before thee, to suppress thy Rage. But these
Dire Tumults, wisely, in thy self appease;
Nor what thou may, but, what becomes thee, do,
And teach thy thoughts, Things Honest to pursue.
But above All, think, often on this, That thou
Liv'st in the midst of all the World, and how
Thy Actions to all People are revealed.
A Princes Vices never are conceald.
For their high Fate discovers all they do,
And busy Fame explores, and pries, into
Their most reserved Retreats. Let Piety
Be thy chief Care; for though We' inferior be
In all we do, yet Piety, alone,
Can make Us like the gods. Jealous of none
Nor doubtful be, but, Constant to thy Friends;
Not greedy of Reports, who ever attends
Such Vanities, shall empty Rumors fear,
And, in Himself, be wracked with anxious Care.
No Strength of Guards, nor Rings of Piles can prove
So safe to Thee, as will the Peoples Love:
Which Thou shall never force. Thy Kindness must
Create this in them, and, a Mutual Trust
Thou see the Worlds fair Frame it self entire
Preserves, by Love. The Elements conspire,
Kindly, among themselves. His Tract the Sun
Still keeps. The Sea, within its shores, does run:
and The Air, by which Earth's compast, and upheld,
Nor presses on its Burden, nor does yield.
Tyrants, who Terrors give, fear more: They still
The Famous envy, and the Valiant kill.
Though Swords and Poison guard them, no Retreat
To them seems safe, they tremble, while they threat.
Like a Good Patriot, and a Father All
Advise not for thy self; and, what they call
The Public Good, prefer before thine own.
If a Decree thou publish, to be known
As sacred, first observe thine own command;
The People will submit, and never withstand
A Law, whose Author, first, Himself obeys.
A King's Example, all his Kingdom sways.
His Life, more than Edicts, upon the Minds
Of Men prevails; and, as the Vulgar finds
Him change, they follow. But when this is done,
Slight none beneath Thee; nor desire to run
Beyond the Bounds to man prescribed; for Pride
Like a black cloud, the brightest parts will hide.
We give Thee not Sabeans, apt to be
Enslaved. Nor the Armenian Monarchy,
Nor the Assyrian (once a Woman's) Throne.
Thou Romans must command: who, long, alone
Have ruled the Universe: who nor the Pride
Of Tarquins, nor would Caesar's Laws abide;
Our Annals ancient Crimes record, whose stains
Eternal are. What Age the Monstrous Reigns,
Of the Caesarean House, will not abhor?
Who knows not Nero's cruel Murders? or
Tiberius Caesar, retired to Capreae, a little Island in Campania, where be
acted many cruel Murders and abominable Lusts.
The horrid Caprean Grotto, by an old
Incestuous Man possessed. Thou may behold
Great Trajan-still, Immortal, in his Fame;
Not that, with Conquest, He from Tigris came,
And Parthia made our Province: Or, that He
In Triumph, for his Dacian Victory,
Entered the Capitol; but, that his Mind
Was Equal still, and to his Country kind.
Such Great Examples (my dear Son) be sure
To follow; and, when called to war, inure
Thy Troops to labor, and for sharpest fights
Prepare; let not the Ease, or warm delights
Of Winter Quarters, thy unactive Hands
Un-nerve: but, in some wholesome place, thy Bands
Encamp, and with strong Guards, thy Line defend.
Learn when to close thy Ranks, when to extend
Thy equal Wings, and them to close again.
What Troops are fit for Hills, what for the Plain.
What Valleys apt for Ambush; what ways are
Most difficult: And if the Foe the war
Within their Walls maintain, for battery strait
Prepare, and let thy Rams the massy weight
Of stones roll down; the armed Testudo shake
Their Gates; the laboring youth their passage make
Through secret Mines. If a long Siege delay
Thy hopes, let not secure Conceits betray
Thy Conquest, or believe them close blocked in;
Many by Careless Mirth have ruined bin.
Straggling they have perished, and while Ease they enjoyed,
Often Victory has guardless Troops destroyed.
Let not thy Tents be filled with the delight
Of Courts; nor let armed Luxury invite
Soft Ministers of Lust, still to attend
Thy Ensigns; nor be careful to defend
Thy self from Winds and Rain, nor seek to shun
With rich Vmbrello's, the too furious Sun.
Eat what thou ready find it, thy self apply
To constant exercice. Be foremost, high,
Steep Mountains to ascend; nor think it shame
To take an Axe in hand, when need shall claim
A Wood be felled. If thou 'rt to pass a Moor,
Or Lake, on Horseback, first, the depth explore.
O'r frozen Rivers let thy Chariot go
The foremost: first swim over those that flow.
When horsed, through Troops of Horse charge, boldly, when
A-foot, the Foot assist; all danger then
Will glorious, and grateful seem, when thou
Art present, and, shall each brave deed allow.
But, I thy early Inclinations know,
Be not too hasty, thou will stronger grow.
As yet not ten years old, thou do aspire,
To what even men may dread, I see the Fire,
The Marks of thy great Soul. It Is told by Fame,
That the brave youth, who Porus overcame,
'Midst his Companions joys, wept, when he heard
His Father's frequent Victories, and feared
Great Philip's prosperous Valor, naught would leave]
To him for future Conquest. I perceive
Like Motions in thee, and, may divine
(A Father may) thou will, hereafter, shine
As Great, as He; nor to my Favor owe
That Empire, which thy Innate Worth may so
Deserv'dly claim. So, when the painted Spring
Appears, the murmuring Bees their growing King,
Who must conduct them to the Fields, adore;
Their Public Laws for Honey, and, for store
In Combs, observe. So, a young Bull, whose Horns
Are yet scarce firm the Pasture claims, and scorns
A Rival in the Heard. But war forbear,
Till riper years, and, with thy Brother, here,
(While I Am engaged) my place secure; you may
Teach unsubdu'd Araxis to obey,
And swift Euphrates. Yours all Nile may be,
With whatsoever the Rising Sun does see.
But, if the Alps we pass, and our good Cause
Have like success, that Warlike France thy Laws
May hear, and Spain, obey thy just Command,
Thou then shall come, and, I, into thy Hand,
Will all my Conquests put. Then, then may I,
Secure of Fate, pleased with my labors, die:
While you both Poles may rule. Mean time, among
The Muses still thy self employ, while young,
And read what thou may imitate, converse
With Greece, and Rome's Antiquities; discourse
The Acts of ancient Captains, and apply
Thy thoughts to future war; on Italy
As 'twas of old reflect; if thou aspire
To a forced Liberty, Brutus the first Consul, who expelled the Tarquins, and
made Rome a Common- wealth.
Brutus admire;
If Treachery thou hat'st, thou will it approve
Of Metius Suffetius by the Command of King Hostilius, was fistned to two
Chariots, and torn in pieces; for that when be should have assisted him against
his enemies, he only looked on, resolving to side with the Conqucrour.
Metius torture. If thou do not love
Too great severity, thou will detest
Tit. Manlius Torquatus, who slew his Son for fighting without his Order,
though he had the Victory, and brought the spoils of the Enemy to his Father,
who crowned him for his Victory, and then beheaded him for his Error.
Torquatus Act. If a vowed death seem best.
The Decii were a Noble Family in Rome, three whereof successively vowed
Themselves to Death, for their Country.
The Decii, running into dangers, you
Will reverence. What one brave Man may do,
Horatius Cocles. Vid. supra lib. 2. 3tii. Belli Punic.
Cocles, on Tyber's broken Bridge, alone,
Engaged, and. Mutius Scaevola, who having vowed to kill Porsenna, then
besieging Rome, and killing another instead of him, burned his right hand for
the mistake, in presenee of Porsenna; who admiring his Courage, and terrified
with the Information, that 300 more had vowed the like, immediately made peace,
and raised the Siege.
Mutius burning Hand have shown.
From Fabius Maximus the Delayer, who tired out Hannibal, by his Delays of
giving Battle; and so relieved his Country.
Fabius learn the Effects, of wise delay.
What in distressed affairs, good Conduct may
Perform, Furius Camillus, the Gauls besieging Rome, being then in exile, came
upon them suddenly, destroyed their Army, and relieved the City.
Camillus sliughter of the Gauls
Declares. Hence know, whatever chance befalls,
True Merit still excels. The cruelty
Of Carthage gives Eternal Fame to thee
Regulus taken prisoner by the Carthaginians, was sent by them to Rome, upon
promise, that if he did not obtain such terms of Peace as they defired, he
should return to them. When at Rome, he advised them to pursue the war, and
returning to Carthage, was cruelly put to death by them. Vid. Sil. Ital. lib. 6.
Great Regulus. Had Cato Uticensis. Vid. lib. 1. 3d. Punic War.
Cata had success,
The Glory of his sufferings had been less.
Observe what sober Poverty may do,
Cutius Dentatus, thrice Consul, a Person of great frugality and integrity,
refused the large Offers of Pyrrhus and the Samnites, whom he overthrew.
Curious was poor, when Kings he overthrew.
Fabritius did the like.
Fabritius poor, when he scorned Pyrrhus gold.
L. Quintus Cincinnatus, chosen Dictator while be was holding the Plough, and
having overcome the Aequi, in sixteen days laid down his Office, and returned
to his Husbandry.
Nor did Serranus think it shame, to hold
The dirty Plough, when a Dictator, and
(His humble Cottage viewed) the Lictor's hand
Fixed to the Willow Posts, his Fasces. There
The Harvests by a Consul gathered were.
And the rude Fallows (to advance their Rate)
Tilled by a Ploughman, in his Robes of State.
Thus your great Father, like an Aged Guide
Of some tall Ship, by many Winters tried
With various storms, of the Sea weary grown,
And Age, commends the Helm unto his Son.
Shows him all dangers, and his Arts: What Star
The right hand guides: How swelling Billows are
By steerage, to be shunned: The Signs of Rain,
The treachery of clear Skies: When to the Main
The Sun descends, what will ensue: What Wind
Disturbs the Moon, and makes her Face unkind.
But now, great Prince, wherever thou do shine,
Whether the South, or Northern Heaven be thine,
See thy desire fulfilled; thy Noble Deeds
Thy Son not only equals, but exceeds.
THE PHOENIX: Out of CLAVDIAN.
BEyond the Indies, and where Eurus Wings
Are spread, by farthest Seas encompassed, springs
A Grove, which, by Sol's laboring Steeds, of all
Is, first, awaked, and hears the lashes fall,
When the moist borders, with the dewy Coach
Resound. Whence, by her Blush, the Morns approach
Is seen, and; in her flying Mantle, Night
From far grows pale, by the reflected light.
Here, the too happy Phoenix lives, alone,
Fenced with a matchless Climate, touched by none
Of Nature's sickly Race: where never oppressed
By those Contagions, that the World infest,
He (like the gods) continues Firm, as are
The Stars, and, with Recruited Limbs, the War
Of Time debells; not used, with Cates, the rage
Of Hunger to subdue: or Thirst assuage
In Springs. But, nourished by the purer Rays
Of The Sun, and harmless Vapors of the Seas,
Lives on that Airy Food. A Secret Light
Flies from his Eyes, about his Face as bright
A Glory shines, and, on his Radiant Head,
The rising Crest a Native Star does spread:
From whose clear Beams, divided Darkness flies,
As from the Day. Rich Scarlet paints his Thighs,
And his Wings (which Cerulean Flowers enfold)
Out-fly the Winds, above enriched with gold.
He, Sire, and Offspring of Himself, does come
Neither from Seed conceived, nor teeming Womb.
But, by a Fruitful Death, without the Aid
Of Parents, his Stiff Joints, with Age decayed;
(From duty now discharged) repairs and flies
To a fresh life, as often, as he dies.
For when his Summers, through a thousand Rings
Have run; with Winters, and as many Springs
And Autumns, that to laboring Peasants paid
Their wealthy Shades; at length unweildy made,
To time (by numerous Ages overcome)
He yields. As Pines by Tempests shaken from
The Head of Caucasus, decline, and are
Pressed into Ruin by the Weight they bare.
Some by continued Winds, some by the rage
Of wasting showers, and some by cankered age.
His sight now waxes dim, his aged Beak
Distills faint Isicles about his Neck.
As when the Moon, encompassed in a Bay
Of Clouds, with dubious Crescents shrinks away.
Those Wings, that through the Clouds were wont to fly;
Trail on the ground. Then knowing he must die,
Framing the Cradle of 's returning Form,
He chooses driest Simples, from the warm
Adjoining Hills, and, of that rich Perfume,
Makes both his future Birth-bed and his Tomb:
Where placed, (his former Strength and Vigor done)
He first, with Fainter Cries, salutes the Sun:
Then prays, and with a Suppliant Anthem claims
The Blessing of his youth-restoring flames.
Whom, when Sol sees from far, He strait appears
To stop, and thus his Pious Darling chears;
Oh thou, who shak'st off Age upon thy Pile,
And with false Sepulchers do Fate beguile,
Who, out of thine own Ruins, often, art born,
And from thy death, as young (as does the Morn
From Night) returnest, thy Beginning take
Again, and, here, thy withered Corpse forsake,
And, in thy Figure changed, come forth more fair.
This said, shaking his Head, a single Hair
From's yellow Locks, He, sudden, darts, and so
With Vital Lighrning strikes the Willing, who
That, thus from death, He may, with speed, return
To life, with Joy, does voluntary burn.
These Darts from Heaven the Heap of rich perfume
Soon kindle, and the Aged Bird consume.
The Moon, amazed, pulls back her Steeds; the Pole
Cease, the flow Naves of the World to role.
The Pile, thus teeming, Nature (careful Dame)
Least she should lose her Bird, the faithful flame
Removes, that so, the Immortal Grace of Things
She may restore; when strait warm Vigor springs
Through all the Members, and in every vein
Reviving Blood, begins to flow again.
Then, of it self, the living Dust assumes
Motion, and, the Rude Embers clothes with Plumes.
He, that, of late, the Father was, the same
Is now the Son, and New succeeds the Flame
The Confines of his double Life, awhile,
Divides. Then strait to hallow, near to Nile,
His Father's Manes, covering o'r with grass,
The Urn, and Parent-nest, He, swift, does pass
Into another Clime, and bears it to
The Pharian Land. A vast, un-numbred Crew
Of winged People (wondering as He flies)
Attend, and, in their varied flight, the Skies
Like an huge Army, cloud. Yet, among all
Those many Myriads, none their General
Presume, in flight, to cross, or go before,
But, all the Tract of their bright King adort.
Neither the furious Hawk, nor Bird that bears
The Arms of Jove, dares move, or think on Wars;
And, from their Reverence, Common Peace proceeds.
From Tygris so, the Parthian Captain reads
His barbarous Troops; in Gems, most proudly dressed,
A rich Tiara does his Brows invest;
Gold Reins his Horse; his Purple Robe is wrought
By' Assyrian Needles: and, thus swelled with thought
Of's high Command, through Tyrian Troops he goes.
There is a City (which all Egypt knows)
Where, in a stately Temple, raised upon
An hundred Theban Columns, they the Sun
Adore, with Sacred Rites. Here first (they say)
His Custom is the Parent-Urn to lay.
Then, prostrate to the Image of the god,
Unto the Holy Flame commends his load;
And, on the Altars offers up, instead
Of Incense, his own Relics, and his Seed:
When strait the Myrrh-annointed Pillars shine,
And holy Altars breath a Fume divine.
The Indian Odor, now it self dilates,
Through all the Pharian Coasts, and penetrates.
To the Pelusian Pools, all Egypt's filled
With wholesome Air, which, as if Heaven distilled
Immortal Nectar through it, all the while,
Persumes the seven large Mouths of Swarthy Nile.
Oh happy! thine own Heir! that gives to thee
New Life, by which, we all dissolved be!
From thy dead Ashes does thine Off spring rise,
And thou secure, thine Age before thee dies.
Whatever was Immortal, thou have seen,
And, Time calls thee to witness what has been.
Thou know what time, from springing Rocks, the Seas
Their swelling Waters to the Stars did raise:
What year it was wherein the Worlds great Frame
By Phaeton's Error perished in a Flame.
No Ruin can thee touch; when Earth shall be
Worn out, thou from Decay, alone, art free.
Against thee the Fates, nor Law, nor Power can have,
Till the whole World shall be thy Pile and Grave.
FINIS.

