A Relation Extraordinary Contained in a LETTER from LINTZ, Concerning another
great Victory over the TURKS.
January the 19 th. 1683/4.
ON Saturday the 15th. instant arrived in this Court the Prince Lubomursky from
the King of Poland, whom he accompanied at his departure from Hungary, to go to
Cracovia: He has told the Emperor, That his Majesty of Poland and the Senate
being ill satisfied with the Polonian Troops, who had without orders quitted
the Quarters that had been assigned them in Hungary, the Senate have ordained,
that those Troops should not have Winter Quarters allotted them within the
Kingdom of Poland; and that they should be only permitted to enjoy a bare
reception within the Country, to punish them for their disobedience. He adds
likewise, That the Count Humany, a great Lord of Hungary, who has latelyjoyned
himself to his Imperial Majesty, having requested a Polonian Regiment to
quarter on his Estate, Count Teckley had caused a part of them to be attacqued,
and had put them to the Sword; and that afterward Count Teckley had sent to
the King of Poland to excuse the matter, saying, that the thing was not done by
his order, and that he had no knowledge of it: Unto which his Majesty of Poland
(who was not satisfied with his excuses) answered, that he would speedily treat
him according to his merits, and would no more see Count Teckley's Deputies,
but commanded them immediately to retire: And that as soon as the Count
Sherfenbergh shall be arrived in Poland, to treat and adjust with that King
what measures are sit to be taken against that Rebel, it is not doubted but
that there will be affectual courses taken to that purpose. By the manner of
the King of Poland's proceedings, and by all that Prince Lubormusky has
reported, it may be evidently seen that his said Majesty acts very cordially,
and that he is firmly resolved with all possible vigor to prosecute those
intentions.

We may add to this, the important News which comes from Holland, which
imporrts, That after the Hollanders and some Loyal Cossacks had made themselves
Masters of all the Champion Country in the Vkrain, and had possessed
themselves of the Frotresses there, the Wallachians and the Moldavians had put
themselves under the protection of Holland; whereupon the Turks and Tartars
were commanded by the Grand Seignior to take vengeance of them by an Invasion,
which they could not execute, by reason the Christians, instead of staying for
them, went to meet them, forcing all the passages, and vigorously attacquing
them, have killed more than 30000 on the place; and having wasted 50 Leagues of
their Country with Fire and Sword, they have taken the Fortress Bialgorod, and
the black Sea, with two other Strengths thereabouts. They have killed above
80000 persons of all Ages and Sexes, and have taken a very rich Booty, and made
an infinite number of Slaves, besides the delivery of every many Christians
from Slavery. The good fortune of the Christians would have it, that the
Infides having passed the River Niester, the Bridges whereof they had broken to
hinder their retreat, the Poles and Cossacks, had mended the said Bridges, and
were entered farther into the Enemies Country, with an intention to prosecute
their Victory toward Adrianople* and if their success answers their
expectations, they hope the next Summer to approach very near to Constantinople
it self.

There are Letters which say, That after this great Victory, (than which none
greater has been obtained for many Ages) they did deliver more than 70000
Christians from Bondage.

His Imperial Majesty has dispatched extraordinary Couriers with the News of
this Victory to the Pope, and to the Republic of Venice. We are preparing
here, to render Thanks unto God, by having Te Deum sung.

So soon as more distinct Relations shall come to our hands of these
Advantages, we shall not fail to publish them.

Printed by Nathaniel Thompson at the Entrance into the Old-Spring Garden, 1684.


