A LETTER From a Gentleman to his Friend in London, In Confutation of the
scurrilous Libell of an Anonymus Blackloist, Against the Reverend and Learned
Doctor P. R. upon the occasion of his Latin Epistle of the Clergie's Obedience
to the Sea Apostolic.

With an enclosed to the Libeller himself.

Induantur qui detrahunt [illi] pudore, and operiantur sicut diploide
confusione sua, Psalm. 108. Printed in the Year, 1660.

A L^^ter from a Gentleman to his friend in London, in Confutation of the
scurrilous Libel of an Anonymus Blackloist, etc.
SIR,
THough I cannot choose but thankefully acknowledge the great benefit I receive
by that friendly correspondence and good Intelligence you are pleased in your
weekly Letters to afford me: which by a prompt endeavor of serving you, it
shall be my study to deserve: yet give me leave to chide you a little for your
last, since it bore no other mark of Friendship but your Name, which I ever
esteemed too sacred to accompany so froathy a Libell, stuffed only with
Billingsgate Language, too dearly bought at Six pence for the Poastage, and an
hour's reading. But since the Author is ashamed to own this spurious Bratt,
which for want of known Parents wanders abroad to beg the sometimes mistaken
Charity of well-minded persons, I shall take the boldness to send it back to
the supposed place of its birth: But lest it might find entertainment beyond
its desert, and so steal the Bread due to the Children of the Bride, I have in
lieu of a Passe-port given it this ensuing Character and Animadversion.

To the Libeller himself.
AS it is the greatest testimony of virtue to please good men, so it is no less
an argument of the same to displease the wicked; it being equally a blemish to
be praised by them, as to be censured by the other: which moved the worthy Dr.
P. R. not only to slight your calumnies, but even made him rejoice to have
received them from such, whose Rump-like Anarchichall spirits, kick against all
Authority not modeled by themselves, as inconsistent with their Fanatic
Notions: And whose evident Apostasy from the Church, makes them odious and
detestable to the genuine Sons thereof: and might therefore have driven me and
others, friends of the Doctor and Truth, to have passed by this Libel with
contempt, as confident it will find the same judgment in England, which it
could not have avoided in a Catholic Country, by Tobacconists, if it escape a
more noysom burial by piecemeal in a Close-stool, Yet lest it might fall into
the hands of some unacquainted with his merits and worth; and because
Reproaches confidently urged, leave some dirt behind them; I conceived it my
duty to wipe it off: a duty I owe to Truth, to my deceived Friends, to the
Doctors Innocence, whose eminent Virtues afford me a large field to wander (and
even lose my self) in, in his commendations, did I not fear to offend his
modesty, and derogate from his just merits by my humble Pen, as much below his
desert, as he is above your detractions.

But what should move the uncharitable Publisher of this scandalous Pasquill to
vent to the World so scurrilous a Pamphlet, whose Author he knew not, nor the
man he writes against; but covetousness, which legitimates any gain, though by
the hurt of others, yea scarce thinks it gain, unless others be hurt. A
notable wise Fellow that could think a Letter worthy the public, whereof he
neither knows the Author, whether he be a man who may deserve belief; nor the
man he writes against, whether his worth may not have heightened him above all
such barkings.

But whether I should believe him or you, I know not, whom I find like Susanna
her witnesses, in several tales; and while your Heads look diverse ways, are
tied only by the Tails, where in that of your Letter, you say, He knows the
hand, which he in full front denies, Non novi hominem. Oedipus solve me this
Riddle, Know and know not. But perhaps your Master Blackloe in his new
Philosophy has found a cure for it out of the World in the Moon, to which we
recommend him, since he has troubled this sufficiently: And in particular to
the Man thereof, who in all likelihood tired with great employment, may resign
his place to him, or at the worse, make him Reader of Divinity there, since all
Countries have refused him here.

It Is very credible that Dr. P. R. his nearest acquaintance and camerades
should so ill befriend him, as to give you Mr. Libeller, such a knowledge of
him as you blaze out in your scurrillous Pamphlet. I have the honor to be of
his nearest acquaintance, and (be it spoken with the respect I owe his person
and worth) of his Camerades, and out of mine own knowledge will make bold to
give you the Lie, and your very Pamphlet smells of so much baseness and
cowardice, that I believe you will cake it patiently. And I shall praise your
virtue.

But much more true, that you never had any commerce with himself, his spirit
ever disdaining so inconsiderable a Fellow, by whose company his reputation
might suffer in the opinion of men of worth, his nearest acquaintance and
Camerades.

Then you say, your profession has no relation to the subject of this
discourse, I believe so; for you not only seem no Scholar, but even not
worthy to look at schollarship, who could so little discern it, where it
appeared as fully and gracefully as the matter required. And therefore doubt
not but your own confession will easily be believed, viz, That you are neither
a Divine, nor learned in any thing: no not so much as in good manners, or the
duty of a good Catholic, though you profess your self a Roman Catholic.
Which whether I may take upon your own word, wherein you have faultred so
often, and is yet the only testimonial you have, I leave to honest men, and
such as have read your Pamphlet to judge: till then I shall be content out of
charity to hope, though I cannot find one word in all your Libell can induce
me to believe it.

Though I can easily credit, and you have demonstrated it more fully then your
Masters Chrysaspis did the Quadratura Circuli, that you are neither a Divine,
nor learned in any thing, only you pretend [and but barely pretend] by common
sense [which any one that reads your Pamphlet would swear you had lost]
bettered with conversation and reading, to have some knowledge [but that very
little] of the ordinary passages of the world, and in such matters as men
generally talk of: which whether any Tinker, Cobbler, or sweep-chimney,
especially in these times so full of news and business, may not more then
pretend to, I wish you out of your common sense bettered with conversation and
reading [your Masters Books] to determine.

You do well not to be of the opinion of those that think him hired: for in
that particular, you will be accounted less silly then they who think so, and
vent their venom so weakly and groundlesly.

You do well also not to believe that he is a Prevaricator, for no honest man
would believe you. And if those others you speak of, are ashamed to own that
belief before any person of honor; I pray you be you ashamed of them also, and
of your acquaintance with them. And I wish I could as easily acquit you of a
malicious design in your carriage toward him: that you were not the hireling
of some Pursevant, whom by this open discovery of his Name and Person you
endeavor to assist: that by the ruin of so worthy and learned an Adversary,
you might leave an open field to your baffled and runaway Champion Blackloe.

Good Sir begin to read his piece once more, and if you cannot for an example,
in the first dozen lines or more, show us that palpable lie, or slander, or
scolding injustice, or railing reproach, or at least ridiculous impertinency,
know what a fellow you are that dares say that there are not three lines in the
whole piece without some of this. And how guilty will your Reader find your
self of all this; when you begin so timely.

You say he deserves not to carry their Books after them. You say right, for we
cannot see how having ever made the good use, we know, of the best Books, why
he should be condemned to read such naughty Books as your friend's are: but his
zeal for our good makes him read them, to discover their venom to us, lest
they might infect us. Besides, the bulk of your Masters comes will never (I am
sure) oppress his shoulders, whose stomach accustomed to solid Learning will
easily digest his Pigge-wiggin Divinity into sippets.

Here again you do the Pursevant a pleasure. The party you write against does
not so much to his worst adversaries: he names but one, and him by two letters
only. If he names one or two of his friends at length, as you do him, it is
with their consent; I am sure you had not his consent to do so.

Poor man, though you conceal your name, yet least it come out at last, why
have you no more care of your credit, then to discover so much ignorance, since
you profess to have some knowledge in the ordinary passages of the world, as
to think that a man cannot leave being a Jesuit without Apostasy. We see even
Princes, both Temporal and Spiritual, Prelates, Doctors, Preachers, and other
persons of eminency and honor, often do it with the world's esteem, and
continuance of mutual charity betwixt them and the Society. But because you
think no ignorance can befall your friend Mr. White, from whom you raked this
with his other dirt, you were the bolder in shooting your bolt.

Your own Pamphlet and your friend's Mr. White's gives you the open lie, since
with the utmost of your fury and filthy language you cannot fasten the least
blemish upon any part of his life, even in the two or three particular passages
in matter of fact, wherewith you go about to do it here; he has so fully and
so openly heretofore cleared himself to all your confusions, that I extremely
wonder how like unknown Owls out of your Ivie-bushes you dare fly at a person
whose life has been so open and so esteemed by persons of all degrees, both
highest and lowest. For the satisfaction of those who know him not, I shall
anon take notice of your two or three fabulous calumnies.

Besides the baldness of your style all over, I take notice that all your
slanderous Epithers and Adverbs, run along barking in couples: as notorious and
foul reproaches, basely and unworthily abuses, frivolous and foolish Lines,
lewd and licencious Pen; and so all along. But all this will never bite. No not
your often calling him poor wretch, can no more wrong him, then Hugh Peter's
(with whom you jump in that Reviling Expression, take heed you jump not home
after him) did his sacred Sovereign.

How simple is your malice here, as if it were a disparagement to teach those
Schools which in course both Princes and Prelates, and whosoever was of that
Society, taught: And I pray you, who of your best friends did not the like at
Doway? Though any man that reads the bald expressions of your Masters, White
and Doctor H. H. would never think they had put foot into a Grammer-School,
whose Rudiments they are not worthy to read to Boys.

Your foolish jearing his Majesty's Army, in calling them the brave Blades of
the Land, makes it likely, that you are one of those Levelling Coxcombs, who
cared not much for that Cause, and so envied those you durst not aspire to
follow, and appear with; this worthy person whom you now sharle at, was a
constant comfort to the best Catholic Nobility and Gentry, with their Officers
and Soldiers, with open hazard of life in such encounters, where you my
friend, who dare not now own your name, durst not then show your face: his
wounds and imprisonment for that Cause, and in the performance of his noble
charity, have gotten him that esteem you will never deserve, without your
becoming another creature then you seem to be. And that with such success, that
many Honorable persons in their last agony, owe their Reconcilement to him:
the neglect of which duty, argues in your friends as little charity to the
dying, as their Doctrine expresses to the dead; who instead of such Heroic
acts of Fortitude, are sneaking in holes, where they strain all their forces to
gain some filly woman, whose purse out-weighs her wit, to contribute to the
maintenance of their Chimerical Chapter.

Your Ex-Jesuit being cast out, and being a Desertor, shows your nonsense and
contradiction; if a Desertor, which implies freely parting, how cast out, or
forced to depart?

The twang they retain (if you understood what you say) is their especial
adhering to the Pope, and zeal against Heresies and profane Novelties, which
they were particularly bred to in the Society: which with their indefatigable
charity, has carried them through so many dangers both by sea and land, to the
Conversion of millions of Souls in both the Indies; whilst your party in the
mean time imitating the incorrigible malice of some of those barbarous people
against the Spaniards, refuse Heaven, because you are sure to find Jesuits
there: and to that end use all your wiles to pervert those souls, whom they
with other Clergy Secular and Regular, have with so great pains gained to God.

You say the world takes, etc. You mean the senseless world, whereof you are
one, and in this also choose rather to run blind after your Master White, then
to inform your self of those who could have told you; and you might clearly
have gathered as much out of sundry places of the Epistle it self, which no way
agree to the worthy Lord Abbot you name, that the person meant by M. G. is a
virtuous and learned Cleargyman in Monmouthshire. And your apish following of
Blackloe in his very mistakes, how simple soever, makes you call the Author
Monumetham; which you that talk so much of Grammar and Pedantry, if you read
but Manutius's Letters should have known, where you find the names of the
places whither the Letters are sent. As for that illustrious worthy Prelate on
whom you would needs ground your sillymistake; all your slanders and
back-bitings will not lessen his affection to this worthy person, and his ever
owning his former services, as I and many more can still witness the constancy
of this persons professions of zeal for his said Patrons service. And moreover,
know my silly friend, that your Informer's too much snott stops their nostrils,
and their breath stinks if they are not sensible of the sweet odor still
remaining of his exemplar and obliging comportment at Pontoise. The best and
greatest there will testify it, as I dare undertake, to the confusion of any
that shall dare to appear in this slander. And here I must tell you, you
stumble against your will at an honor this deserving person was thought worthy
of, which neither your Dr. H. H. nor your Master the Trinobant ever yet
obtained, for what I hear, in any foreign parts, to wit, to be entrusted by
the King of France, under the great Seal, with the administration and
government of a Royal Abbey, with all its dependencies, to wit, above forty
Churches; a trust usually judged there too great to continue in the same hands
above six months without new Paterts; and in him was continued above two
years, in testimony of his prudent and knowing mannagement, that is to say,
all the time the Abbey remained in vacancy.

Then you so tumble and delight your self in excrements noisome and corrupted
members, ill sents and such like perfumes, that I doubt not but your sagacious
nose may well befit a Town-Sow.

And now my Dr. Dullman, let me once for all take notice, that however you
pretend by common sense bettered with conversation and reading to have some
knowledge, yet that it is very little, and your wit less, which for want of
better matter has forced you to harp so often on the same string, of the
Doctors teaching of a Grammar School: from whence it seems you are but lately
clapsed; and the marks of your ignorance on your Posteriors have made such a
fearful impression on your memory, it scarce retains any other Idea but of that
formidable bugbear wherewith it thinks to terrify others: But we manum
ferulae subduximus. And therefore let me tell you, for you are not able to
judge your self, that Dr. P. R's knowledge in all Literature both Divine and
Humane, is so general, his style in Verse and Prose so polite and terse, that
the truth thereof more forcible then any rack, has extorted this confession
from your Mr. White, a man otherwise sparing in his Praises: who in his Mon.
excant. page 5. says. Candide agnosco; nam and scriptum tuum Latin tersum
est, neque verbositate diffluis; and dignus es cujus stylo excolatur veritas;
and vidi aliquando versiculos a te profectos, qui lucem non vererentur.

Afterward, like him that would make Wind-mills on Salisbury Plains, to drain
the Fennes, you show your Asse's ears in going about, to excuse the Catholic
English Clergy from partaking in the guilt of Dr. H. H's Letter, touching the
reading of prohibited Books, (a book as destructive of Ecclesiastical, as the
Corolarium of his Analysis (...) of Civil Authority) I pray you who ever
accused them? or once thought them guilty of such a crime, which they equally
abhor with your Masters Novelties: You might have saved this breath to cool
your pottage. And then loudly bellow, Dr. P. R. was resolved to throw an
aspersion on the Clergy; a false slander, and such for which in conscience
(if you had any) you owe him a reparation: since all along he gives them those
Encomiums such venerable Brethren might deserve and expect from the eloquent
Pen of an affectionate Brother: It Is you and you Masters the trumpetters of
Novelties he justly strikes at; from such Wolves like a good Pastor he defends
his flock. Was ever Evangelist charged as injurious to the College of the
Apostles for blazing out Judas's apostasy? And what manner of Cleargy-men your
friends are, the Catholic and unextorted testimony of most of the Seculars in
England (not to mention Regulars, with whom you have no charity, but with your
father Luther cry, Monachus est, ja^^dudum illum valere jussi) in detestation
of your Master and his Doctrine, will evidently testify, when it shall be
required of them.

Then you blame him for praising Obedience to the Magistrate in general. A
great fault indeed; and such as with you and your Masters (whose seditious
Writings against the Supreme Magistrates, Spiritual and Temporal, have made
them deservedly odious to all honest men) deserves reprehension and punishment.

And that out of Cicero too: true indeed: And can your steeled impudence
refrain blushing to hear Cicero a Pagan outstrip you and your Masters,
pretended Christians and Catholics, in your duties to God and the King. Viri
Ninivite surgent in judicio cum generatione ista, and condemnabunt eam. Away
for shame, and disgrace not Christianity with your unchristian-like Doctrine
and manners.

For the Doctrinall part of that excellent Epistle of Obedience to the Sea
Apostolic, poor scribler, you reply so little to the purpose to it. that the
only thing I allow of in this railing Libell, is your own confession that you
are neither a Divine, nor learned in any thing. And you show it here
sufficiently. Neither will I so far show my self a Divine, as to forestall what
I am confident this worthy Author of that Epistle prepares for your great
Master the Trinobant himself, as I dare promise my self to the world's
satisfaction. And indeed this foolish piece being stolen from your Mastors
Excantation, deserves not to be taken notice of by it self.

Only by the way let me advertize you, that if it suffice in answer to the
Doctors Reasons, only to say, as you do page 4. You are ashamed to read them,
and should be no less ashamed to trouble your self so far as to answer them in
particular. What Idiot, though as your self not learned in any thing, might not
thus solve those Difficulties all the Divines and Philosophers of the world
have so long time beaten their brains about in vain. But the less learning the
more presumption. None so bold as blind Bayard: This is that compendious way
the ignorant Doctor Tolson took to confute the eminent and learned Cardinal
Bellarmine. Bellarmine thou lie.

Then with like confidence and as little reason you say, (and we must believe
your ipse dixit, as you do your Masters stat's, constats, certum est, etc. but
my name is Thomas) that no Law whatsoever did obliege the Subject till it were
promulgated. Wherein you discover your ignorance even in our own Parliamentary
Laws, which require no promulgation in the several Shires, but are binding when
they have thrice passed the Houses, and obtained the Kings consent.

Then you snarle at the Doctor for saying, That the Laws of particular
Prelates do not obliege but by Authority from the Pope, as though their
Authority were not immediately from Jesus Christ. How then comes the different
Authorities of Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops, Bishops, etc? were their
several Jurisdictions set apart by Jesus Christ himself, without the mediate
intervention of his Vicars on earth? But what speak I of Authority to you and
your Master White, who contemns all of Pope, Cardinals, Nuncio, his own Bishop,
etc? and will only bend the knee to the Baal of his own Fancy.

Then you say, He raileth (for to call a thief, a thief, with you is railing)
at the Provincial Letters, at the Jansenian Sect, which (by instinct no doubt,
or so told by your omniscient master, for you know him only by relation) you
are pleased to fable he never understood: Happy Calvin! happy Jansenius! happy
Blackloe! had they never taught it; and thrice happy world had it never
understood it, but left it in Hell, whencethese unhappy Masters have so fatally
raked it.

Next you strive to clear Dr. H. H. from saying these Roman Decrees numquam in
Galliis recipi: and that he says only, they are not always admitted, but
sometimes rejected. Very well! and has lawful Authority never been rejected?
Were the Patriarcks, Prophets, and even Jesus Christ our B. Savior himself
always received? were the Apostles and their Successors with their Doctrine and
Laws welcome in all places? No, and yet nevertheless binding. Well argued Dr.
and Libeller a facto ad jus: And even this sometimes refusal proceeds most
commonly not from disobedience to the decree, but the clashing of the Spiritual
and Temporal Magistrate in their several pretenses to the right of
promulgation.

But now the Fox begins to preach, Lambs look to your selves, for I must take
notice of this unknown Libeller's impertinency, who would persuade us that
those who maintain obedience to his Holiness his Decrees only in foro
conscientiae, and in such matters, as do no way meddle with the State, are
worse Subjects then those lurkers of his gang who brought a scandal upon
Catholics, by their publishing and maintaining of that detestable book of
Obedience and Government, printed in Cromwell's time, to assert his Usurpation
against the then dispossessed supreme Governor, our Royal Sovereign, whom God
grant long to bless us with his happy reign. It is too well known how these
petty Levellers were content to wait on, and brag of their favor with
Committee Men, persuading their friends still to a despair of the happiness
heaven has now restored to us. It Is well known to nobler persons then this
Libeller has the face to be acquainted with, how the person he rails at, by
his wounds, imprisonment, and many years banishment upon his Majesty's score,
gave most constant testimonies of his loyalty, and ever most zealously obliged
those he directed, to the like: let both your Master and Doctor take heed the
contrary be never laid home to their charge.

Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes?

You say the Dr. will be glad his Letter is called Harpya, for you think it was
so indeed, because it brought you more light. I fear you take Harpya to
signify a Lanthorn. Look in your Dictionary and think whether it was a Beast
or a Bird that hooked in and caught such fools as you into misperswasion. But
we are much beholden (you say) to Dr. H. H. for the light and knowledge of what
is truly of obligation in points of Religion, and what not, he affords his
contrymen shut up in an Island, and thence somewhat ignorant of the
proceedings of Foreign nations in relation to Rome. Very well! you are
pleased with any thing that tends to disobedience to the Sea Apostolic, let it
come from Geneva, Amsterdam, yea Hell it self: let it bring with it never so
great scandal to Religion, and the professors of it, though it derogate never
so much from the honor of the Church, the immaculate Spouse of Christ, and
those glorious Saints she has enrolled in the Canon of the Blessed: its
welcome, and believed as Gospel. But if some Jesuit write any thing (though
never so good) from Rome, or Ex-Jesuit bring it in his pocket: Then faenum
habet in coru.

You are troubled with Monumetham's non-sensicall Arguments, he will trouble
you no more, he thinks you not worth the pains. And I too.

Then you triumph in the condemnation of the Apology for the Casuists. And so
do I. As also in that of Jansenisme, the Provincial Letters, and Blacklos's
Books, and receive them equally with open arms; why do not you so too? And
though you falsely impose the contrary on the Jesuits, and for that pretended
disobedience would needs shake hands with them, like Horseleeches that fasten
only where the Blood is corrupted: know they scorn you. Nulla societas luci
and tenebris.

I will say nothing of the Dr. you so much extol, I know him not otherwise
than by his writings, which are weak and scandallous. This only I know, that
when better men than you shall question it, it will be made good, that the
Pastor of St. Nicholas warned him to keep out of his Church, rather then infect
any of his Penitents with Jansenism, and unwarrantable novelties, which I have
from a worthy Divine's own mouth, to whom the Pastor himself told it; and that
the Dr. thereupon promising to conform himself, was suffered to continue.
Neither did I ever hear that the Dr. came otherwise to St. Nicholas, then as an
extern or supernumerary: not as a domestic, either Collegiate or Seminarist,
as the person you foam at had the honor to be a long while at St. Sulpice,
where his singular exemplarity as well in the labors of that mission, as the
most desperate sickness which befell him in the administration of the holy
Sacraments to an infected poor creature, was even by the chief of the English
Clergy who often visited him, acknowledged and heartily joyed at, as a credit
to his nation among strangers. And when his decasions obliged him to retire to
the College of Authune, to spend some years in the Canon Law, in order to his
Doctorate in that faculty, the said worthy Pastor of St. Sulpice at his
departing entreated him, that he would still own himself as a member of their
mission; and gave order there should be a Surpless still kept ready for him,
when he would please to come, as he did now and then to help them. Now Sir,
where lies all this while the ground of your lie that he was infamously
expelled for such public and notorious scandals as you are ashamed to name? I
will tell you more than you seem to know, not for your own sake, but because
another of your companions (who being of a better tongue and more wit then your
self, though of as undiserect a temper, may be thought rather your Informer
then the Author of your Libell) had the face to come with some aspersion in
that kind, though far short of the height you raise it to, unto a noble
person, who knowing well with what particulars he might soon be confounded,
advised him for his own credit's sake to hold his peace. A Lay Gentleman, at
this person you would asperse, his refusal to pay him some money, which he had
yet no order to give him, by injurious language provoked him to some words of
choler, and thereupon also made complaint unto the said Pastor, who for his too
hasty crediting the Gentleman's report against his brother, became a day or two
after so sorry, that of his own accord, instead of the testimonial
commendations he had formerly given him, as the manner was, he would needs
bestow new ones, with an inserted clause importing his having been misinformed,
and that he not only acknowledged him free from the least blemish in all his
comportment, but most worthy of the commendations, he then gave him in writing
under his hand. This testimony and more yet upon the same occasion, will be
produced when any worth the satisfaction shall require it. And all this was so
far from an expulsion, as your impudence would persuade us, that this person
lived not then at St. Sulpice, but went thither only sometimes to help them,
as he did still a long time after this, at their earnest request; and being
obliged by the Pastor's new civilities, who in testimony of his further
affection, made his own brother, being the Lord Chancelour of France his grand
Audiencer, procure him the great Seal for his naturalization gratis, with an
intent to obtain for him soon after, as great a Benefice as the limitation of
his Patent for naturalization could admit of. Yea moreover, procured him
privileged Faculties for extraordinary extent of Jurisdiction over all that
Diocese. As that most illustrious Lord Archbishop of Roven, and Primate of
Normandy, did afterward of his own accord, inviting him thereunto, give him
equal faculties to his own Vicar General. To say nothing of the most
illustrious Lord Bayny his Holiness his Nuncio, since made Cardinal, his
swearing him one of his Assessours to examine the Witnesses and frame the
Interrogatories about the validity of the Duke and Duchess of Loreine their
Marriage, wherein I hear he labored with great applause and satisfaction of
the Nuncio. And all this after your pretended notorious slander, and he that
will dare own his name (which you do not) to the denial of it, will be proved
a notorious liar.

Now having abundantly cleared my friend, I will not go about to charge yours
the Doctor, though your officious over-clawing him puts the world in mind of
the reports they have often heard of him. I have heard the person I here
vindicate speak civilly enough of your Doctor, neither have I heard him
complain that your Dr. had personnally disoblieged him; only that his
crossing your Doctor's endeavors to recommend Blackloisme to us by such
factious Pamphlets, has hitherto reflected more upon the writings, and but
moderately enough upon the writer. Yet because your indiscretion, for which I
believe you will have little thanks from your Doctor, obliges me to it, I must
needs tell you, that besides what I have heard, I have seen Letters under
another virtuous deserving Church-man's hands, who was all this while at Paris,
representing the Doctors mannaging of those Alms you mention, far more to
his discredit, then you do, both for the manner and the persons they were
bestowed upon: yea, warning him of blemishes more openly spoken of, and of a
far worse Nature than any you have endeavored to asperse my friend with. I
will conceal the particulars, until I be called upon to make good what I say.
But before I leave your Doctor I must take notice, that you do not so much as
offer to clear him of the fickleness and inconstancy he is by my Author
charged with, for his subscribing in public to the condemnation of Jansenisme,
to the high dissatisfaction of his own party, and then owning that Heresy
still in private to regain their good wills: and that in his pitiful Epistle
thereupon to the Pastor of St. Nicholas, he so played the John of both sides,
that his Epistle and he were commonly hissed at. Perhaps you mean this for
one, in this place where you are pleased to play the Encomiastes, saying, Those
two learned and famous Epistles. As you do also in the next leaf on his
Preliminary Epistles to his Commentary on the New Testament, of which you only
saw the first leaves. Surely you are mistaken, it was his Preface (which gave
him the surname of Dr. Preface) the Book whereto we have for many years in vain
expected; and of which in a Modern Poets words we may sing, A Preface to no
Book? a Porch to no House?
We see the Mountain, but where is the Mouse?


Dr. P. R's disallowing the Provincial Letters, as being so many infamous
Libels condemned by his Holiness, together with the other Treatises in the
same Decree, is a testimony of his Obedience to the said Decree, which you and
yours will not obey. You call the Doctrine those Libels strike at, Profane and
Antichristian; I pray you how Sacred and Christian is that Casuists Doctrine,
who teaches you the strain of this your brave Epistle, and to allow of and
praise an English Edition of those Libels, bearing in the very Frontispiece an
open blasphemy against Gods Saints.

As for Arnauld you know not what you say, nor so much as why you style him
Doctor; we have heard that after that his Letter excusing Jansenius and the
Jansenists from Heresy, was solemnly condemned in the Sorbon, he was
disgracefully cashiered the said Sorbon, and had his title of Doctor taken from
him in the Year 1656. the last of January. Do you hear my friend that it was
since restored unto him?

You cavil even at a man's ingenuous confession, that when he writ his Epistle,
he had not yet seen your Masters Tabulae Suffragiales. He has perused them
since to my knowledge, and I believe will in due time give your Master a good
account of them. In the interim I must give you this account of your great
Master the Trinobant, in mine own and those many of my acquaintance their
names, who have read his Books, that besides the useless froth we meet with all
along, we find his pride and self-conceit now grown to so high a degree of
madness, that we wonder your selves do not perceive it, and bind him.

But I wonder you should insert among your Masters Praises, that you are sure
Dr. P. R. will never understand his Tabulae Suffragiales: where you make that
his glory, which is the disgrace of all good men and writers, obscurity. Yet
that I may not be wanting either to your or his deserts: give me leave to tell
you, you have in this Paragraph summed up all that can be said of him in these
few words. He is not to be understood, and he has extraordinary and exotic
opinions. The first being an effect of the later, a fit cloak for such knavery.

But now you strain higher, even above Ela, saying, Mr. White is so esteemed,
not to say admired, by all the world, for his solid and profound learning, and
so honored, where he is known, for his piety: who if now and then he have some
extraordinary and exotic opinions, etc. For what learning or piety was he ever
honored by any, but only such whom levity and inconstancy made to run after
every wind of new Doctrine? And I am persuaded scarce any Heretic ever had so
few followers in so long a time that he has been venting his Exotic Opinions.
But see what opinion the sound members of the Catholic Church have of him. The
Pope has already condemned many of his writings: and the rest are like to
follow. His own Bishop has severely reprehended him. The sacred faculty of
Divinity of Doway have censured 22. Propositions of his for Heretical,
Erroneous, Dangerous, Temerarious, Impious, Scandalous, and Offensive of pious
ears. These are the Elogiums, this the esteem, admiration, and honor, all that
know him have for him; who is scarce known for any thing but his Heresies,
scarce named but with regret and horror of his novelties.

And for the honor done him where he is known, it is so little, that he does
not trust himself in any Catholic Country, as France, Spain, Italy, Belgium,
yea, England it self, where his Exotic Opinions have bred as great an aversion
toward him among moderate Protestants, as they have begot a detestation of him
among true Catholics, who are ashamed of him, and grieve that the son of their
mother should fight against them.

But you continue, and say, If he have some extraordinary and Exotic opinions,
what is that to P. R.? Why not to him? You would have him see a thief, and run
with him; betray Jerusalem to the enemies, upon whose gates he stood
sentinel: yea then he had been your white Boy, then he might have obtained an
eminent place in your Chapter, and what not? But now that he has discovered
the thief ready to break into the house; repulsed the enemy by discharging his
warningpiece, he is a prevaricatour, a miscreant, with many other such titles
wherewith your uncharitable new Gospel is stored, and bountifully disposes of
to the obedient sons of the Church.

You come at length to the pretended Chapter, or capitular government of the
English Clergy, the very Epitome of the Rump, Has^erig, in a lesser Volume;
And now Sir, we must cry you mercy if we have hitherto thought you a Fool all
along: for here you are so wise as to say of the present Chapter. Truly I must
confess, I neither know what it is, nor wherein the validity or invalidity of
it may consist, and therefore I can say nothing to it. Get but your fellows
Blackloists to confess as much, and we shall soon agree, and his caball with
their unwarrantably usurped jurisdiction so serviceable to him for the
propagation of his Errors, and of so dangerous consequence as to the invalidity
of Faculties and Dispensations, will be soon defeated by this Confession; and
in fine, we shall acknowledge our obligations to the party you rail at for this
so necessary discovery of your present Chapter's nullity. Yet I would not have
you mistake Dr. P. R. as though he were against a Chapter, for I have often
heard him wish that there were here a competent number of the best and ablest
Cleargy-men empowered by lawful authority, with like Jurisdiction to that of
Cathedral Chapters in Catholic Countries, whereby the whole Clergy might be
governed, whilst there wanted a Bishop, and be by way of Counsel to him, when
we have one; whether it were called a Chapter, or by some other fitter name:
and that he acknowledged some worthy members in this present Chapter, to
deserve the said power, however they are now overborn by the more ignorant and
violent party of Blackloe's Faction. And even to these I find expressly in his
Epistle page 30. that he is most ready to submit himself and obey them, if his
Holiness should think fit to approve of them and confirm them. Where is then
that ambition you tax him with, of so poor a thing as to be one of this
Chapter, especially in the inconsiderable and pitiful condition it is now in?

But here again I find you play the fool by your venturing to play the
Statesman forsooth, when you say, You leave it to the State to consider, how
much it concerns them, not to suffer the Catholics of England to be daily
running to Rome for the least businesse^ that may belong them. The State has
found long since by experience that, of Catholics, they are most assured of
their fidelity and loyalty to their Temporal Monarch, who best maintain their
Obedience to their Spiritual Head. I have heard that some of your Principles
and no others, were complained of for their petty tamperings with the late
Usurper, Committees, and Levellers.

You charge Dr. P. R. with scandalizing, as you say, the dead. Were you but
half as honest, as your hob-naile Northern phrase, in your praising this dead
man, you would acknowledge, how sparingly he is spoken of, in the Epistle;
where nothing is said of him, no not what was already made known of him, even
by a notable stickler of your own gang, and commonly spoken up and down the
Town. Only that passage of my Lord of Chalcedon's Letter, forbidding him to
own his Subdeanship any more, and his continuing still to do it, was necessary,
the subject requiring it, to be taken notice of: and even this had been
published before in Doctor G. L's printed Manifest. But since I understand that
some of you seem not yet satisfied, you may perhaps hear more hereafter of
that dreadful example Almighty God seemed to warn us by in the circumstances of
this man's death, whether for his continued disobedience to his Ordinary, or
for his obstinately maintaining and propagating Jansenism and Blackloisme,
Almighty God knows.

You seem next, to know wonders, but that your compassion obliges you to
conceal the particulars. Of the matter you hint at in this place, he has
already fully laid all the shame at your own doors: and now again I must in his
name defy you to say the worst you can of him. Even the pretended calumny
reached not to any thing done by him, but to idle words spoken of him by a Lay
Gentleman, who notwithstanding has twice under his hand, and will still if
need be upon oath, deny all such words as your compassion would charge him
with. Now my Simpleton, where are you? the quarrel grows now between you and
that Lay Gentleman: he will show his face, when you dare not show yours.

As for your idle vapouring of Cudgels and Footmen, since you profess you have
some knowledge in the ordinary passages of the world, why have you not yet
learned, that there is not such a distance betwixt a Knight and a Gentleman
especially such a one as you bark at: But the two you would here set at further
variance, might be easily brought yet to a fair atonement by discreeter men
than you and your Master.

Your calumny of Dr. P. R. his going about to deceive a Dutch Merchant in the
Quinquempois-street at Paris, is a silly Devil that was never yet raised till
now, that your envy has driven you to these miserable extremities. You say the
Knight had no hand in it. I believe so too, and so does the Doctor, who says,
it is too simple and too ignoble a revenge for such a person to own. Yet I must
in a word stop your mouth in this also. The Bill, you have heard something of,
was a true Bill of Exchange; the English Merchant who sent it, is now in
London, and will avow it. A noble person who appeared in it, and is now also in
London, will justify to your betters, that there was no cheat done or
intended, but a great work of Justice and Charity. Yea part of that money was
afterward received by another Bill from the same English Merchant, and
disposed of as was ordered. There Is enough for you my Youngster. Yet I must put
you in mind that we know of later years, worse account, or rather none at all,
given by some of your pretended Chapter and Blackloists, of far greater sums
of money, to the scandal of the Laytie, both Catholics and Protestants.

But now

You sing Bellona's Battles, and the man's whose glorious deeds out-did great
Tamberlan's. We hear of nothing but army against army, single combats, Don
Quixots, Windmills, Soldiers, Captains, Castles in the air, with Thraso^icall
boasting and bragging, and such like terrible buggan boes, which have frighted
the poor Idiot out of his wits, especially since that dreadful apparition of
the formidable inchaunted Giant Monumetham, Monstrum horrendum, inform,
ingens, etc.

descended no doubt of the renowned and very ancient families of the
Dorobernian Gogmagogs, and Trinobantian Albii of the East Saxons: of which race
one Thomas the Englishman (the true parallel of Don Quixot, as your self of
Sancho Pancha his Esquire) begat him (as the Cyclops) of some windy phantosme,
that supplied the place of brain in his empty Pericranium, where, o the strong
force of imagination fertile to its own ruin! in small time it gained such
strength, that it is grown terrible to its own parent, whom neither his Golden
Shield can defend; nor the Sound of his Trumpet can drive away: nor Fourteen
Animadversions joined to Sixty six Excantations dissolve the enchantment. But
he lays so furiously about him on the Don and your self his Esquire, that
there is no hope of either of your recoveries, but by the Balsome of Fierebras;
more commonly known at the Anticyra's by the name of Elebore: whither I am
resolved to send you both to find your cure. And while the Curate and the
Barber are preparing a Cart to carry the Don: I will take charge of you 'Squire
Sancho: and when I have made an end with your Libell, send you after.

And now Sir, you see with what patience I have followed you all along to the
end of this your rare piece, where to save both your great Trinobant and your
wise Doctor with their adherents their credits, for their not dariug in almost
a year and a halfs time, to answer a modest challenge offered them in the name
of some of their Oxthodox Brethren of the Clergy, where they might upon
friendly terms have received such verbal satisfaction, as might have
prevented the scandal of such scurrillous and unchristian writing as you and
they use; you bravely out of an Ivy-bush slight your Challenger, who waits for
you in open field, and tell him that he never put his nose into a
Divinity-School; wherein you outdo your very Masters, who have made such
trial of his Divinity, that they believe you lie. And I with others do upon
enquiry believe, that he has many years given extraordinary public testimony
of his high abilities therein, in those Divinity-Schools where perhaps your
Master's noses would have gone out of joynr, and they have found him still able
to oppose their Novelties to their noses. You boast of your Doctors Learning
being known in those famous Schools and Countries where he lives, and I have
heard a person of Honor who lived some years at Paris, and was acquainted with
the best and learned company, wonder that your Doctor was so little known
and considered, after so many years spent in the very place where he lives. I
will not trouble you here with what I have heard others relate of the esteem
the Sorbon Doctors and other Divinity Doctors with whom Dr. P. R. lived in
communities and missions, made of his learned resolutions upon several
occurrent Controversies and Cases. I know your envy, if I should tell it you,
will hardly digest the credit he was in with that Reverend and learned
Official of Paris, now Lord Bishop of Toul, ever since in his presence he put
the famous Jansenist De St. Boeuf Dr. and Professor of Divinity in Sorbon, at
that time under-officiall, to a non plus, in a debate concerning a Dispensation
for a Marriage. It will make you burst to hear that the most illustrious and
most learned Primate of Normandy was heard often to call this worthy Doctor le
tout-scavant, and that some very intelligent Noble persons on this side the
water, have often reflected with what facility and clearness he resolved them
still in what difficulty soever they asked him. And all this has no more
puffed him with any part of that vanity your great Master is grown mad with,
then your scurrility is able to lessen his esteem with those that know him; and
for those who know him not, if they believe your Libell, no honest man will
desire to know them. Adieu, and learn more wit.

Postscript.
SIR
You date your Letter in 1659. whereas your Masters Excantation from whence you
borrow your stuff, was not printed before this year 1660. Let me for the
better dating of your Letters this next year, recommend unto you Montelion's
Almanac, you will find your own Picture in the beginning of it; and at the
end amongst the Books newly printed, your Masters Work under the Title of
Camera locanda in Purgatorio Odilonis.
Authore Thomas Anglo. A Romance.


This Almanac is sold at the Prince's Arms in Chancery Lane.





Honored Sir,

Thus you see how I have anatomized this pitiful Owl, which proves nothing
but a heap of Feathers, a mere aerie light substance, disowned by the
Publisher, scorned by the Stationer, and even a shame to the Author himself,
who durst put neither his Name, nor place of his abode, to it. And thus much I
thought fit to send open to you, that you may read it and then give it the
Libeller, if you discover him: he has the mark of the Beast, Since, he says,
he is not learned in any thing; he may perhaps prove some ignorant Lay
Scribler, and your self being a Lay man too, there will be no irregularity in
cudgelling him; Yet by doing so you may fail against Charity, which indeed will
be the greatest irregularity. And therefore if at the reading hereof he
acknowledges not the ugliness of his guilt, and repent, you may pray for him,
and for.

SIR, Your humble and faithful Servant, T. R.
From Shrewsbury, on the Feast of the immaculate Conception of our B. Lady.
FINIS.

