A two-inch Board for M. Prynne to peep through: Being a full and satisfactory
ANSWER To a late libellous Pamphlet (herein proved to be his) called, A
DECLARATION OF The Officers and Armies illegal etc. proceedings and practices
against the XI. impeached Members: And to other that Authors scandalous Papers
lately published, purposely to asperse the Army and their proceedings. WITH A
discovery of his lies, subtilties, and delusions therein, and a Justification
of the Armies Charge and proceedings against the XI. impeached Members, by Law,
President, and Reason. WITH Certain considerable Queries and observations upon
the Cities late tumultuous rebellious proceedings against the Parliament.

Written by T. R. Gent.

Pro. 26.5. Answer a fool in his folly, least he be wise in his own conceit.

Printed in the Year 1647.

A two-inch Board for M. Prynne to peep thorough, etc.
THe Declarer (whether M. Pryn or whosoever) tells us in his introductorie part
of his Declaration, how quondam great Cromwell, Earl of Essex, lost his head by
an illegal Law or President, which himself procured to suspend from, and
attaint others in Parliament upon mere general accusations, without
particular proofs, and before answer given, intimating, and in his subsequent
discourse, audaciously and falsely affirming, that the Army have done the like
against the eleven Members, therefore this perilous President should admonish
some of the Earls name (Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell he means) and the rest of
the Army etc. it being a memorable Maxim of a learned Judge Sir Edw. Cook,
That the more high and absolute the Jurisdiction of the high Court of
Parliament is, the more just and honorable it ought to be in the proceedings,
and to give example of justice to inferior Courts.

Now the Army have neither suspended nor attainted any upon mere general
accusations, for they have brought in particular Articles of Treason and
misdemeanour against them, and expect daily a Plea or Answer to them, that they
may proceed unto trial and produce their proofs, upon which they doubt not
but to have them attainted and convicted also: and therefore truly, neither
Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell nor any other Officer or Member of the Army need
to fear (nor can they incur) any such danger by this just and legal
accusation, as unhappily happened to Cromwell the great, unless he or they
should unhappily fall under the power of Mr. Declarer, or those he declares
for, who indeed have used like unjust, arbitrary practices, as that Cromwell,
Earl of Essex did, nay worse: for they have occasioned and voted many a one to
be suspended and imprisoned without any charge or accusation at all. I will not
instance, because every man knows it, even thou thy self, O Declarer. And if
the eleven Members were served as great Cromwell was, to wit, not only
suspended, but executed (the which nevertheless I desire not, nor is it, I am
sure, either endeavored or intended) without any answer or proof produced, it
was but just upon them, Lex talionis: for they and their Accomplices have done
the same to others, though not to deprivation of life, yet of, Liberty,
propriety and estate, equivalent to life, and was there any more then a
general charge at first given in against Strafford and Canterbury, upon which
they were presently restrained? And by how much the more superlative the
Parliament ought to be in justice above other Courts, for that its power and
Jurisdiction is so; so much the more vile and shameful, culpable and
condemnable are those Members thereof, who have been more impious and unjust in
the use and the execution of that power, then the most contemptible Officers of
the meanest and lowest Courts, of Judicature. And where now, I pray you, is the
parallel M. Declarer, instances of illegalitie and arbitrarinesse, between the
Lord Cromwells Attainder, and the proceedings of the Army, and in particular of
Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell, which he names there in special, against the
eleven justly accused Members? So much in answer to his Introduction. Now to
his particulars, by which he pretends to demonstrate the unjustnesse of the
Armies prosecution.

1. The unjustnesse thereof he says appears by the generality and incertainty
of the Accusers, the charge against them being presented in the name of the
whole Army, without the hands of any particular persons to it, who will
undertake at their perils to make it good, or else to give the accused Members
and House due reparations if they fail to do it, contrary to the Common and
Statute Law of the Land. Was it not in the name of his Excellency Sir Thomas
the head in particular, and of the Army in general as of a Body, owned by
all, and presented by some of the principal Members thereof in name of the
whole? A way and usage most certain and sure: had it come in these words, viz.
in the name of certain persons, or of the general and major part of the Army,
it had been justly chargeable with incertainty: But what act can carry with it
more certainty, then that which has the joynt-concurrence of an entire Body,
or Community? Has not the practice of the House of Commons for form and
manner in things of the same nature, been ever the same? and did not they
impeach Strafford, Canterbury, Judge Bartlet, Finch, Windebanck and others,
this present Parliament in the same general uncertain manner, in the name of
the House of Commons, and of all the Commons of England? And if this of Sir
Thomas and the Army be unjust, so then was that; if that was just, so then is
this: the matter is the same, and the manner is the same, and there is more
ille gality and incertainety in the factious Petitions and Remonstrances
heretofore presented by the pretended Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council
in name of the City, (which the City never owned) then in this Charge,
preferred in the name of, and owned by the whole Army: and there is no dread M.
Declarer, but his Excellency and the Army will make good their charge against
the accused to their sorrow and your shame, and I doubt not, but you who are so
much now in their behalf for reparations, according to Law before the issue
be proved, will then be enforced, according to your own litigious Doctrine, to
make reparations to his Excellency and the Army for all your pernicious,
seditious, false, scandalons, notorious, shameless reproaches, revilings,
imputations, accusations, and aspersions, published and uttered in your
invenomed Declaration against them and these their just, legal, and honorable
proceedings, which are so much affected, honored and promoted by all in
general, unless it be such as are alike guilty and desperately wicked, who
neither fear God, nor love their King or their Country.

2. The unjustnesse of the Armies proceedings, he says, appears by the
incertainety and generality of the charge it self in mere general and
ambiguous terms, to which the parties accused can give no answer nor make any
defense, and thereupon voted insufficient by the House, 25. Junii to charge or
suspend them by the Law of the Land. Here note, that he means the general
heads of the Charge, given in 15 June last, and not the particular Charge which
came in Tuesday 6. July, although like a Juggler he inserts it in such a sort
as to have the multitude believe it the same. And as for the general heads,
there was no answer thereunto required, only therefore a suspertion of the
accused, as being charged, and truly, with M. Declarers leave, there was both
reason and president for it, although the House voted against it. Look back
and consider the Parliaments proceedings in all times against their Members in
such cases, and in particular in the last and latest presidents, Strafford,
Canterbury, Barkley, etc. nay have not the Fouse of Commons suspended and
excluded diverse of their own Members this Parliament, for words and particular
actions in the House, cases of inferior nature and consequence, to the matter
of charge against the 11 Members? And again, if those general heads, five in
number against the 11. Members (which are more large and special then the
general charge the House of Commons preferred against the E. of Strafford, and
B. of Canterbury) were insufficient to charge or suspend them, of what
validity then were those general charges of the H. of Commons, so vehemently
prosecuted by some of these very 11. whereupon Strafford and Canterbury were
both charged and suspended, yea and secured, which these vipers are not? what
justice then, I say, in their case, had those two and others? Peace for shame
good M. Simpleton, it is an ill bird that bewrayes her own nest, you will help
to enlarge their charge by and by, and while you plead like a madman for their
justification, you will, like a fool, lay more guilt and condemnation upon them.

3. The unjustnesse of the Armies proceedings aginst the 11. Members, he faith,
appears by the multitude and quality of the parties impeached, eleven at once,
all men of approved integrity, fidelity, and abilities, and there in this third
instance, he tells you of all their good acts, and enlarges their praise beyond
their deserts. A silly argument without sense or reason, to prove the
unjustnesse of the charge by the multitude and quality of persons accused, as
if a multitude, and those men eminent both for estates and authority, could not
act treason, or be as culpable of criminal trespasses, as the poor and mean:
What think ye of the Complotters and Actors of the Gunpowder plot, the rising
by the Earl of Northumberland, and his confederates in the North, in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth? Absalom and all the heads of the people against King
David? Here were as great multitudes and as gallant men in these traitorous
actions, as any of these 11. Members: truly, I never think of M. Hollis, the
principal of the eleven, but I call to mind Cataline of Rome, whose sole
ambition was to be the head of a faction, though it turned to his ruin: as for
M. Massey we know he is a good Soldier, but no Christian; and if the number
and the quality be a sufficient excuse to these eleven, and of condemnation to
their Accusers, Sir Tho. and the Army for injustice against them, Oh how unjust
then were all the proceedings against all the aforesaid in those days! but I
will ask this Rabshekah whether he ever heard or read of any grand treason, (for
the 11. Members actions, as slight as he and other knaves and fools make of
them, when they come to the test, will be found no other, even exceeding
Straffords, and in effect equal to that of the Gunpowder) wherein there was
not more then a few, and those no mean ones, confederates? Nay do not such
abominable actions evermore accompany the greatest personages and spirits? for
mean men have neither wit, power, opportunity or audacity, to contrive or act
them, and therefore are never tempted (unless by so great ones to be
instruments) to do them. And as for their abilities, and acts of merit, by how
much the more able, and by so much the more wicked, therefore by so much the
more odible and condemnable. The Devil has as exquisite gifts and endowments,
and more then any mortal, yet not therefore to be either pitied or justified:
and for the good they or any of them have done, why did not they continue in
it? who hindered them? Not to him that runs, but to him that holds out to the
end of the race, belong's the praise: Finis coronat factum: Justice (is like
death) it takes a man as it finds him, it considers neither quality nor
condition, what a man was, is, or has done, but of what he is accused and
found guilty; and so it renders unto him, either by acquitting or condemning
him. The old Earl of Essex in Q. Elizabeth's days had deserved as well of the
Kingdom, and was much more honored and beloved of the people, then ever any
of these 11. Members, yet ye know his end; he being found guilty, justice
forgot his former good services; his honor was tainted, and all his merits
were forfeited: and this manner of proceeding is justified by the example of
God the most just Judge of quick and dead, Ezekiel. 18.24. Nor are these men of
such great eminency and quality in themselves, as they are by that authority
wherewith we have invested them as our Trustees, the which they have unworthily
and unthankfully perverted and abused, M. Hollis is the most honorable amongst
them, but by the evil of his actions is so much the more dishonorable; for
nobilitas est unica virtus: and the rest do we not know them? The Merchants of
Hamborough can tell you of Massy, his manners and his quality; and without
question there are those can give as true a character of the rest, as Mr.
Declarer or any other. As for the House clearing any of them by Vote, or M.
Prynnes (who never knew aright how to examine or cast up any account)
acquitting them in their accounts, is of no value, non valet ova duo: For if an
illegal factious Vote may clean any Member of an accusation of breach of Law,
or public trust, where then is Englands Law? dic quaeso. No Sir, he that is
accused to transgress the Law, must be acquit or condemned by the Law, in a
public Judicatory, and not by arbitrary Votes within a close room and private
walls: Strafford and all traitors and trespassers against the public, have
been always tried publicly; and so it is just, legal and meet these should
be. As for the Committee for Accounts, their acquitting men by As Sir W. Lewis
was by name.
Vouchers, that is, if they bring in but one or two, though they be suborned to
swear that their false accounts are true, is of as much credit and value, as a
thiess procuring witnesses to avouch a stolen horse, for which notwithstanding
he may be hanged.

As for his fourth instance of the Armies violence to have the eleven Members
suspended before any real particular charge or proofs produced against them,
taxing the Army with threatening the House by their Remonstrance, June 23. if
they would not suspend them upon their (as he says) illegal impeachment. And
what M. Declarer, if the Army did require the suspension of them before any
particular charge exhibited? It was not before their general charge was
delivered, which was not only in its self more parricular and special, I
tell you, then the general charges given in by the House of Commons (which
some of these accused were then violent promoters of) against Strafford and
Canterbury, but sufficient and legal also, or else those against Strafford and
Canterb. were not. Truly M. Declarer, while you strike at the Army, the stroke
falls upon your own friends, you still make their case worse: And as for
proofs, would you have them produced before the accused have answered? Did the
H. of Commons do so in the cases aforesaid? no, nor deliver in any particular
charge in many months after, and yet both the Earl and the Bishop were
presently not only suspended, but committed also; and so are not these 11.
traitorous men, though there be particular Articles, and those no small and
light ones, nor so uncertain and dubious, as most of theirs were against
Strafford and Canterbury: these are all for traitorous and unjust arbitrary
actions, those were many of them for traitorous and arbitrary words and
intentions; these are all for matter of fact, those were only many of them for
discourse purpose; and speech. And good M. Declarer, do not abuse your calling
and your knowledge too, for I know you are a Lawyer, and M. Prynne by name, if I
be not mistaken, your style, your terms, and your venom declare so. What Law
is there, either common or Statute in this Kingdom or elsewhere, that requires
the production of witnesses, before the accused have pleaded and made their
defense? Do not men in all cases and causes, civil and criminal, whether true
or false, first put in Bail, or submit to restraint, to answer the action bill
or complaint, against them, and then after they are charged, put in their Plea
or Answer and so join issue for trial, and then the Plaintiff or Prosecuter,
brings in his evidence or profs? Is not this the common and constant, yea, the
true and legal course in all Courts of Judicature, and at all Benches of
Assizes throughout the Kingdom? if there was any other, your Margent, I am
sure, would show it us, for you are full of your quotations, though they be
feigned and false, making a fair show (like many poor beggarly tradesmen)
upon the stall, when alas there is little or nothing of any worth within: but
you think, that by these means, the Army, to stop your scandalous clamours,
will like fools be provoked to declare their witnesses before hand, that so you
may tamper with them, and by indirect wares either pervert, deter, or divert
them. Stay good M. Declarer, your Worship, as I tell you, is no good Accomptant,
you are too short in your reckoning. Nor do the Army use any threatening, as
you say M. Declarer: in that, to speak plain truth, you declare your self a
liar, and by this sure token I know your name is Prynne: for in their
Remonstrance is; June; having showed, that whereas they had exhibited their
Charge against the 11 Members, and made mame other proposalls conducing to the
settlement and safene of the Parliament and Kingdom, the Houses slighted and
neglected all, and could not, according to justice, suspend the accused from
sitting and acting in the House: and for that there were secret designs and
practices by the influence of the guilty and their Accomplices, to imbrolle
the kingdom in a new war, a truth now as manifest as the Sun. They say page
14. of that Remonstrance,

That upon al these grounds and for all grounds, (therein) primised, they prould
be enforced to take such courses extraordinary at God should endble and direct
them to, to put things to a speedy issue the which Mr. Declarer represents, as
if the Army could by violence murder the 11. Members: for so that word
assasination imports in such cases. And now I appeal to all Judicious men, the
presedence and the subsequence, the premised reasons and considerations weighed
and compared, whether that saying of being enforced to take extraordinary
courses, can be adjudged a treating or commination? And truly Mr. Declarer,
where ordinary means are inefectuall, to use extraordinary, is both requisite
and Lawful. It is Justified in Scripture, when all warnings and wishings,
reasons and counsels rules examples and directions would nor rectify and
reform Joram and Jesabell, you know what Jehu did, and what means he used:
Nor can you be ignorant what the men of Israel did unto the Tribe of Benjamin,
after that they had used ordinary means, and demanded those Sons of Belial
(who had destroyed the Levits wife) unto justice and were den'ed them, Judge.
20.12.13. and so forward. And though the general rule be, Non eundu^ est ad
extraordinaria cum per extraordinaria eundil est: fiere potest; yet a contrario
and by necessary co^scquence, in all just cases, Cum per ordinaria non fiiri
potest, ad extraordinaria eundum est and therefore it is beyond scruple or
question that in case the Army cannot obtain their just and Lawful ends by an
ordinary way, they may take a course extraordinaty for attaining them. But what
threatening do these words of the Army more emply, then those of the Parliament
in their petition to the King. 1. March 1647. concerning the Militia: Book
Declar: page 93.
where they speak thus viz But unless your Mati, shall be graciously pleased to
asure them by these messengers that you will speedily apply your Roya ascent to
the satisfaction of their former desires they shall be Note.
enforced for the safety of your Majesty and your Kingdoms to dispose of the
Malitia, by the authority of both houses in such a way as has been propounded
to your Majesty and they Note.
resolve to do it accordingly: now was such language, Lawful then in the
Parliament, (subjects and servants) to their Sovereign: and are not the like
or word to the same effect in the like case, now Lawful in the Army, to the
Parliament, who are only their trustees, and have swarved from their duties
much more then the King did from his, and have much more abused their trust?
And if this be so great a fault in the Army, then a minore ad maius, much
greater was that in them to the King, and thus still Mr. Declarer instead of
extenuating the accuseds guilt, aggravates and augments it.

And whereas the Declarer, in his said fourth instance says; the Army have
exceeded the Kings proceedings against the five Members, who within five days
after retracted his charge and proceedings against them, and never prosecuted
their suspention from the house, which the Army press and reiterate again and
again. I answer; that if the King did recede or retract his charge against the
five Members, it proves not that the five Members were innocent, no more then
it argues, that because a man Robbed, will not prosecute the Theife, he is
guiltless: nor does, or can it condemn the Army, because they are more
resolute in the prosecution against these eleven, then the King was against
those five. What if my neighbor be content to remit or pretermit a Felony,
etc. for present, because of some inconvenience lying in the way of
prosecution, and the same person having taken thereby encouragement or
advantage to rob, and spoil me; I afterward will prosecute him thereupon to
Justice; am I therefore injust? No sure. It is injust to say it: But here I
will prove that the King did never retract his charge against the five Members,
and that he did more then once or twice press the house, and most earnestly
prosecute for their suspention and restriction. For the first, page 49. book
of Declarati: The King in his message to both Houses concerning this very
business says. That his Majesty taking notice that some conceive it
disputable, whether his proceedings with the Lord Kymbolton, Mr. Hollis, etc.
be legal, and agreeable to the privileges of Parliament; and being very
desirous to give satisfaction to all men etc. is pleased to wave (not retract)
his former proceedings, and all doubts by this means being settled, when the
minds of men are composed, his Majesty Nore, and in book Declar: page 50. In
another Message the same words are expressed.
will proceed thereupon, in an unquestionable way. But this settlement of
doubts and composure of men's minds; it is evident Mr. Hollis and others
endanger, prevented: by raising the storm higher, and making the breach
widder, by which means his Majesty could never enter upon that unquestionable
way, to make his Charge good against them. Now judge I pray you, if here was
not a reserved resolution in the King, of proceeding upon his charge, (and no
retraction) and I am persuaded there is so still, if things settle and
concur; albeit for present he waved it: And it follows not, because I say I
will not call upon such a man this day, by reason it is not convenient, that I
have said or resolved to call upon him no more.

Here is only proved, and the falsehood disproved: And for the other, that the
King never prosecuted the Suspention of the five Members from the House, did
not the King first send a Sergeant at Arms to the House, to demand and
apprehend them? Secondly, did he not go Himself and demand them, if they had
been there, yea and seeing they were not there, did he not tell the House that
he would have them wheresoever he found them, and did expect that they
(meaning the House) should send them unto him, so soon as they returned to the
House? See his Majesty's speech 4. January, 1641. page 36. book Decl. and did
he not also after all this go in person into London to demand them of the
City? and exhibit articles against them also? but they then, pleaded
privilege, as they do now, a thing I conceive Mr. Prynn can instance no
example for, in all his reading; and thus here is another of Mr. Declarers lies
manifested: But by these infallible marks it is apparent that the Declaration
is Mr. Prynns, whose natural quality is to ly, rail, scandalize and clamor.
I remember Mr. John Lilburne charge him in one of his Books with 13, or 14.
positive lies in less then 8. lines, and to speak truth this Declaration and
his justification, and demands written libellously against the Army, are
merely a composure of lies, calumny, forgery and sophistry wherein he powers
forth the poison and bitterness of his spirit against the Army. Oh quantum
mutatus ab illo. How desperately does he now prosecute that way which he formerly
professed, and those whom he formerly pretended to affect, building again that
which he heretofore destroyed, the truth is he is Apostatised, and for
preferment has forsaken the truth and much it is to be feared God has
forsaken him. Remember Spyra Mr. Prynn and that is in Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6. A man ye
know may give his body to be burnt, and yet without charity it avails him
nothing, think not what you have suffered but consider from what you are fallen;
it is hard kicking against the pricks, woe be to him that is found a fighter
against God, this being of God, as questionles it is to extirpate oppression
and injustice and to establish Righteousness; All the Malice, Policy and power
of you and of the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.

For that fifth reason of Mr. Declarers, where he says that the injustice of
the Army appears by their unjust and unreasonable demands of the Members to be
suspended, after the House had voted that it did not appear to them there was
any cause of suspension, etc. it is reasonles, and answered sufficiently above;
Had the Charge been a bare suggestion, confess their votes had been
colorable, but here was matter of fact charged upon them, and the House to
vote them quit without a heareing was illegal, and a mere forestalling of
justice. For his insinuation to excite the Countys and Buroughs for which they
ate Members to Petition the House for them, as they did for Mr. Hampden etc. it
is not to be weighed, nor are they worthey of that honor or favor of their
Country: the Coutryes and Buroughs for which they serve, have more cause to
petition and importune the House for to admit a legal and speedy trial
against them that they may receive justice for falsifying their trust, and
betraying of the Kingdom, and I wonder with what face Mr. Declarer can
attribute faithfulness to their votes and advice, when as all the land
knows, that their votes advice and practices have been generally treasonable,
pernicious and destructive, but in this he appears a brazen faced Lawyer, who
for the wages of Balaam shall Justify the Deivill, and Counsel Moab against
Jsraell.

In his fixed instance there is nothing material or observable, but his Malice:
how willing and industrious he is to cast dirt upon the Army, though it light
upon his own face; for there he charge them for want of more material
matter, with bringing in their Artickles on Tuesday the sixth of July, whereas
the House ordered they should bring them in the Friday before, was not here a
great trespass and offense a high point of unreasonablenes and injustice? I
belive the accused think it too soon: and the House of Commons were not so
expeditious in delivering in their particular charge against Stafford,
Canterbury, and Berkly, yet kept them under restraint a long time before, and
after many month study and preparation their charge was both lamb and
imperfect and far below this, as low as Mr. Declarer does declare it to be: but
I am persuaded he could be content to have it yet lower, even under the earth,
or in the bottom of the Sea if it could be. And so I come to his seventh
instance.

Wherein instead of producing any reason or good argument to prove the
unreasonablenesse of the Armies charge and proceedings against the eleaven
Members, he falls on railing according to Mr. Prynns. manner on certain men Mr.
Liburne, Amon Wilbee and others (inserting Jndge Jenkins for company) and calls
them Mercenary Pamphleters, only because they declare the truth and avow
justice, nor are those tracts he there censures pamphlets but solid tracts or
treatises, to inform the too much deceived people; the which he migth do well to
refute or disprove (if he can) by solid argument, for reproach and clamor is
neither legal nor rational answer. And it is sufficiently known to men of
more integrity and less corrupt in judgment then Declarer the shamles supposed
Prynn who speaks for his own Diana, that those Gentlemen he terms
mercenary, were never of so base a Spirit, for if preferment or profit would
have by assed them or made them base, like him and others apostatised persons,
whereas they long have suffered both in their estates, and persons, they might
I believe long since have equalized him and other such Temporizers, both in
place, and power, though not in Bribery deceit and knavery: but Mr. Pryn is
Chairman of a Committee, and was appointed a principal Commoner for the
deforming (reforming it was said) of the University of Oxford, and happily the
man had some thoughts of obtaining the Chancellours place; give him leave
therefore to speak for himself his fee and reward; his place, and his office
and authority Committee man was therefore bestowed upon him, it is more I am
confident then Mr. Lilburn or Mr. Wilbee ever got by the Parliament, and
therefore justly may the term of mercenary, be retorted upon himself, and
has he not done them good service for their wages, casting away for their saks
both honesty and Conscience, modesty and good manners, religion and wisdom in
all his writings in the behalf of these Traiterous persons (his promoters and
supporters) and their adherents? And of late the man is raveing mad see his
Queries his Declartion against the Army and their proceedings, his
Justification, his Vindication and full answer in behalf of the eleaven justly
accused Members, wherein he terms the Charge a scandalous Libell, and yet
himself the only Pamphleter and shameless notorious Libeller, for he subscribs
his name to none of these his papers, and if his cause be good what need he
fear? but he is sensible that his ears are already so short, they will not
stretch to make satisfaction and as for the brands of L. in his cheeks set upon
him as a Libeller though then they were unjust, yet now he justifies them, he
is wise and loves I see not to wear any thing improperly or impertinently.

But I will come to that passage in the Declarers ( Prynns doubtless)
declaration, concerning the accused Members in the Declaration of Sir Thomas,
and the Army June 14. last, and lay open unto you how this Impostour (after the
manner of the Devil his master in using of Scripture who only takes and
applies what serves his purpose) has taken certain peecemeales of the Armies
Declaration out of several places of it and put them into a continued saying
together in his declaration against them, marking them in the margent thus as a
matter of special discovery: by which diabollicall practice, the which few
usually will or can examine he imagens he has stricken the Army throrow, and
given them an incureable wound in their reputation and honor: I will first
give you the pasages as he cites it, and there I will open and disect it that
ye may see his pernicious policy, malice and villainy. He says that in the
said Declaration of Sir Thomas, and the Army page 7, 8 14. June, it is rendered
thus, we humbly desire for the settling and securing of our own, and the
Kingdoms common right freedom peace and safety: that the persons who have
abused the Army etc. may be some way disabled from doing the like or worse to
us: and for that purpose may not continue in the same power (especially as our
and the Kingdoms Judges in the highest trust) but may be made incapable
thereof in future etc. Nor would our proposals of this singly, be free from
the scandals and appearance of faction or designs, only to weaken on party
(under the notion of unjust or oppressive) that we may advance another, which
may be imagined more our own: which Proceedings since (says the declarer)
against these Members demonstrate it to be a most real truth. Now the Army
having in page 4. of that their declaration laid down the grounds and reasons
they had before disbanding to proceed to act something in reference to their
own^ as private persons and members of the commonwealth) and the Kingdoms
freedom peace and safety in page 5. (not the 7. nor the 8, as he cites) they
say thus. viz. Now having thus far cleared our way in this business: we
shall proceed to propound such things as we humbly desire for the settling and
securing of our own and the Kingdom's common right freedom peace, and safety
(as follows) and then they go to particulars. As 1. that the houses be
speedily purged etc. secondly page 6. that those persons who have [in the
unjust and high proceedings against the Army appeared to have the will, the
confidence, credit, and power,] (all which he has left out [to abuse the
Parliament] (the which he has also left out) the Army besides the better to
bring in his praevaricated sense, he transcribes it, have abused, for, to abuse
as depending on the precedent words: and there he puts an etc. and comes to
these words, viz. may be some way. where as the sense is still continued thus
viz to abuse the Parliament and Army [and endanger the Kingdom in carrying on
such things against us (while an Army)] ( all which also is omitted) may be
some way speedily disabled from doing the like or worse to us [ (when diasbnded
and disperced, and in the condition of private men) or to other the freeborn
people of England in the same condition with us] (all which he also omits
because it demonstrates that they act as well for the people in general, as
for themselves) and skips to viz.: and for that purpose may not continue in the
same ( especially as ours and the Kingdoms Judges in the highest trust, but
may be made incapable thereof for the future and from thence pretermitting all
the there intervenient reasons and discourses, he leaps to the bottom of that
6. page and comes to these words viz. nor would our proposing of this singly be
free from the scandal and appearance of faction or design, only to weaken one
party under the notio^ and of unjust oppressive, that we may advance another
which may be imagined more our own. And having thus omitted both precedent,
concurrent and subsequent matter, and only picked and chosen what best fitted
his base purpose, by which false subtle deceitful recitation he endeavors to
make the Armies present justifiable proceedings to savor all self, and not to
be in the least feasoned with the love of the public, or peoples welfare,
although they do amply (as ye see) declare so; he brings in his Jesuiticall
and scandalous inference and assertion in the close of this passage saying
which their proceedings since against these members demonstrate to be a most
real truth, but as Jesuitically leaves out these words of connection: viz [Wee
therefore declare] which conjoine and usher in what the Army there imediately
do declare and lay down, they would have further done in order to the settling
and securing of the public, together with their own peculiar right and
safety: as ye may see at large in the said declaration of Sir Thomas and the
Army, and this diabollicall Jesuiticall practice and president of foraine
falsehoods out of truths and perverting of the authors genuen words and
intentions, to the belying of the author and deceiving and intraping of
others, this praevericatour has learned of that old Sophister and grand
Machiavilion the Devil who dealt in like manner with Adam and Eve in Paradise,
and with Jesus Christ the Son of God: and truly, it seems he has been a good
proficient in the Devils School, for he has very notably performed this his
public exercise and therefore deserves to go out doctor, whenever the
Devil pleases: but I hope his Riddle being unfolded there is none so ignorant
or maliciously wilful as to be deluded into any prejudicate opinion through
his misty writing and unsavory railing against the proceedings of the honored
and ever approved Army who as ass^ly and vigorously seek the universal good
and wellbeing of the Kingdom the King and his posterity as conducing thereto
(...).

And Mr. Prynn, if that be your name; Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne and Amon
Wilbee dare do that you dare not by this your Declaration, and other your
libellous pamphlets against his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Army:
own what they have written, and do by their subscription. And I dare affirm
will upon just occasion, make that good, and much more to the shame and horror
of you and all that abhorred party you plead for. And I doubt not but before
long Mr. Wilbee or some other will ring you such a peale for your railing as
will make so much of your worships ears as is left, to tingle. So farewell
Rabshakeh, Shimei's Firstborne.

Considerable Queries concerning the railing Declarer, the eleven impeached
Members, and the Cities rebellious proceedings.
I. WHether the Railer be not a Commissioner for Accounts (as Mr. Prynn is) and
having for bribes, passed many unjust and false ccompts, as that of Sir William
Jews, and Clotworthyes probably be, and Breretons and others are supposed to
be, under the notion of being vouched, and being therefore liable for breach
of trust, bribery, perjury and falsehood, to be questioned: does it not behove
him to stand up thus stiffely for these rotten eleven Members, and others their
accomplices and confederates, in whose discharge or condemnation he is
interested?

II. Whether the eleven Members, Mr. Hollis that Roman Cataline and the rest,
do not plainly argue themselves guilty of the treasons and trespasses
wherewith they stand charged, by craving leave to go beyond Seas, though (as
they pretend) but for six months? For if they were not, what needed they to
stir, especially after so much lying, boasting, pleading and apologizing in
speech and print for them?

III. If they do go, whether they ever purpose to return again? But what
need that? Mr. Hollis his mother, son and sister are gone before into France,
there to prepare for him a place. Mr. Massey may go Trade again in Hamborough,
if he has had but the honesty to pay the 10000 l' he brake for there, which I
know he has in these wars got plunder enough to do long since, and to leave
himself a Stock sufficient besides. And wealthy Sir William Waller,
Clotworthy, and the rest, it is well known have had wit enough to provide
against a wet day, and to make themselves a banck in foreign parts as well as at
home for they always feared a flight, and now they are ready to take it.

IV. Whether it be not an Act illegal and unjust, and contrary to the practice
of all judicial Courts, to Vote any man that is charged with treason, felony,
or any other criminal trespass, free; or at liberty to travel whither he
will without bail or mainprize? And whether such ought not rather by the Law
of the Land, to be secured by safe custody unto trial? And whether these
eleven Members being at liberty have not procured all these new tumults and
troubles?

V. Whether they who shall vote, or set such Offenders free to depart the
Kingdom before Justice done, are not by the Law of the Land, to be taken and
adjudged principals, and to have judgment of life and limb as guilty of the
accused's crimes?

VI. Whether Mr. Prynn was not marked with an L. in both checks for a
Lay-Elder: And now finding that the Presbyterian Kingdom will down, and
himself in danger to lose his government and dignity, is not grown frantic
and distracted?

VII. Whether the now rebellious proceedings of the Lord Major, Sheriffs,
Common Council, and others of the City of London, to raise forces against the
Army of the Kingdom without Commission from the King, and contrary to
authority and command of Parliament, be not after the manner of Jack Cade and
Wat Tyler indeed, and deserve the like reward?

Resolved upon the question; That they have made work for the Hangman; and
that Gregory by these means is likely to be well stored against next Winter
with furred gowns. For: the Reversing of the Votes against the Cities late
destructive Petition, and of the new Ordinance for return of the Militia; by
the Parliament on monday last, was no Parliament Act, they being thereunto
enforced through imprisonment and violence, and is of no more value then a
bond, grant, or release sealed by a man per minas, or per duces imprisonmenti,
through menaces, for fear, or by constraint of imprisonment; And therefore all
these military preparations and proceedings of the City, notwithstanding
mondayes Votes and Orders are not only without, but against all legal
authority whatsoever. And truly in that their tumultuous proceedings on monday
they not only violated and assaulted the two Houses of Parliament, but the
very Majesty and Authority of the King in Parliament. It is good therefore for
such as have been so forward in these mutinous courses to repent, and desist,
and not proceed to run their lives and estates into a snare, for they know
not whom, nor can tell what; unless it be to save the heads of a company of
desperate Traitors, the chiefest of which Mr. Hollis and Stapleton have been
ever exquisite in raising of tumults and commotions; witness the Kings departing
through the like affronts; nor do they do this in any affection or respect to
the Kings person (for then they might more easily have fecht him home, and
restored him long since) but that under this notion they may raise a power to
rescue him (as they conceive) from the Army, and to gain his person again into
possession, that so having him under their power, and a force sufficient on
foot (as they think) to disperse or suppress the Army, they may put their own
terms upon him, and archive their old design of Presbytery and tyranny: but I
know his Majesty is as an Angel of God for wisdom and discernes their base
treacherous ends, and I am confident he will never entrust himself, let them
speak never so highly for him, in the hands of the City and Presbyterian party,
for he knows they are professed foes to his Monarchy, hold a compliance and
confederacy with the Scots, and are no more to be trusted, then the father of
lies, and author of these their desperate councels and rebellious actions, the
Devil.

VIII. One question more upon this emergent occasion, newly occasioned and
conceived, and so I have done. Whether the Cities imprisoning of the two Houses
of Parliament on Monday 26. of July instant, and enforcing them by power to
grant their traitorous demands. Did not far exceed all breach or violation of
privilege, commination or threatening that ever the King or Army used, as is
objected against the one, and falsely pretended against the other? And whether
they have not so far as lies in them utterly subverted the power and essence of
Parliaments?

An answer to an Objection.
Object. The Presbyterian party are all driven out of the House, so that there
are none but Independants left, and they comply with the Army, and do what they
list.

Answ. Why did the Presbyterians leave the House and disert their duties? Who
drove them thence? Did any Tumults or assaults from the Independent party in
the City, or the Army? Or did not their own guilt and evil consciences? And
why may not the Independent party act and comply with the Army in their just
and lawful demands and proposalls to the settlement of the Kingdom in peace
and safety? as well as the Presbyterian did with the City in their unjust and
unlawful demands and proposalls conducing to the enthraldome and inslaving of
the Kingdom.

And note that by the Law of the Land an Abettour in any insurrection, murder,
treason, or rebellion, is a principal, and shall so suffer: Look therefore to
your selves ye Masters, and others, who on monday last animated and abetted
your Apprentices and others, to imprison and assault the two Houses. Remember
Stamford and Ashenhurst who were both condemned at Guild Hall, and hanged at
Tyburn for acting in the like sort (though in an inferior case) in the
Insurrection which was many years since in Fleetstreet, upon an Arrest. And
was it high treason for the Apprentices tumultuously to assault the late
Archbishop of Canterburies house at Lambeth, because a Privy Counselor, and
one of them therefore suffered for it as a traitor? And was it high Treason
for the E. of Essex in Queen Elizabeth's time, only to lock up some of her Privy
Council in his own Study, which the Queen sent to confer with him, and was he
therefore executed? And is it not high Treason in a more transcendent manner,
tumultuously to assault, and by force to lock up and imprison the Supreme
Council of the Kingdom, Sitting by the Kings authority in the Supreme
Judicatory of the Land? Compare, consider and judge.

Remember ye proud presumptuous Men of London, that dreadful saying of our
Savior concerning Capernaum, viz. And thou Capernaum, which art exalted to
heaven, shall be cast down to hell. And truly I fear ye hasten your own
destruction, and that the day of your humbling is at hand.

FINIS.

