A Second Complaint: BEING An Honest Letter TO A DOVBTFVLL FRIEND, ABOUT The
rifling of the Twentieth part of his Estate.

Read and burn. M DC XLIII.

To his much esteemed friend and Kinsman Sir H.W. at his house in Westminster.
SIR,
THe indisposition of my body has confined me to my Chamber, we must now
therefore discourse by lettors; your Petition for peace I see is not so happy
as to find success in Parliament, at which while I (...) I began to consider
the reasons, which are diverse ^s the persons opposing it. Therefore you must
first (...) the opposors; and then the reasons will be evident. It is not fit
the Houses of Parliament should deny the obedient Citizens of London any thing,
for that may be distastefull to the City; nor yet grant the Request of the
Petition; for that may be distructive to the Profit of many Members of both
Houses, and to some even of the City it self. It was therefore wisely done of
my abortive Lord Major and his Zeelous Sectaries to attempt the strangling of
it in the birth, by committing some that were active about it; the Reasons are
Reformation of Religion, that is, abolishing the Book of Common Prayer as
Popish, though justified by the Compasers Martyrdom under the popish tyranny,
but that will make way for their new Doctrines and extemporary bablings, next
the dissolving of Bishoprics and Deanries will repay the money lent upon
public faith, for advancing the Lords war, (for so they miscall treason)
and to conclude, that being the Lords debt, it is fittest to be paid out of the
Lords inheritance, then Bishops being eradicated, Elders may grow up and
flourish as in Susannaes days. And it is Considerable, that the estates of
Malignants, will be just rewards for the godly laborers in this harvest, all
which will be lost by a beggarly accommodation.

Touching the Houses of Parliament which consists of about 140. Lords, and 500.
Commoners, of which not a fifth part do attend in their several Houses, some
being voted out, others committed for not conforming their Consciences to the
sense of the House, and very many, disliking the proceedings and tumults, left
the House and repaired to the King, with whom a greater part I am sure is then
attend both Houses, being come to preserve their oaths of Allegiance which is
personal to the King.

Take (Sir) but a view of such as fit and act the business in the Houses of
Parliament, observe who among them have Commands and places of profit in and
about this war, then examine their small estate, with the great debt and
charge; the rich profit of their command with their poor Revenew. You may find
the Earls of Northumberland, Pembrook, Rutland, Salisbury, Holland, sitting in
the Lords House; and in the House of Commons Sir Edward Hales, Sir George
Stonehouse, Sir Alexander Denton, M. Edw. Waller, M. Maynard, M. Thomas Cook,
Sir Thomas Hutchinson, M. Philips, M. Ellis, and others, all voting for Peace,
to preserve the estates they have, not find them in the list of Officers to get
maintenance. All men know my misled Lord of Essex lost the best of his estate
in lost Ireland, and his whole debt, and great Account to his Nephew Shirley is
to be paid out of a small Remainder, has not my Lord of Warwick sold all he
can, but yet his creditors take new promises for old debts, though he be
responsall for 400000. pound prout per account? are the Lords of Peterborough,
Stamford, Say, and Brook, necessitous? their debts and charge pressing? then
their commands are double; both Horse and Foot. The Lords Hastings, Rachford,
Wharton, S^ John, Mandevill, Feelding, Gray of Grooby, Sir Hugh Chamley, Sir
Samuel Luke, Sir John Merrick, Master Nathaniel Fines, Mast. Martin, Mast.
Wingat, Mast. Walton, Mast. Cromwell, Collonell Venne, M. John More, and
others, are men whose credit (as appears by Screveners books) is as great as
their estates, not invited to Commands by the profit of the places, but by
their Conscientious zeal to the Cause, others of the Houses (least any water
should run beside their mill) prefer their Sons, Brothers, and near
Friends, to places and employments of profit about this war, as M. Pym his
son Alexander, Sir H. Mildemay his brother Anthony, my Lord Say his son John,
and others other friends, while some men of the House have confessed that the pay
made them undertake the cause, and which of all these, save Sir John Merrick,
knows ought of his place but the profit? Nay, many of them for the better
service fight by their Lieutenants, as they pay debts by their sureties, and
how many of them, save two or three which are taken prisoners, received a
wound, or struck one blow in the late battles of Edge hill and Branceford, what
hopes then that these men will give their Votes and 12. or 1500. l. per ann. for
a barren peace? will my Lord Major subscribe a Petition that shall take away
his toll, 12.d. for Passes out of London? or Colonel Mannering, the crased
Mercer, Captain Basse, the Lace-man, Captain Mason, the Button maker, Captain
Witherly, the Pewterer, Captain Capcote the Broaker, Captain Lee the Vintner,
with the Cunnyskin-Captaine in Southwark, and diverse other
Debt-compounding-Citizens, their pay and protections against Creditors, and
leave themselves naught but a Jail to live in? What can you hope for by your
Petition that these men, and the like, can hinder?

Now surveigh the Popish and beggarly Lords and Cavaliers for and about the
King, as the Duke of Richmond, the Marquess Hartford, Earls of Cumberland,
Darby, Lindsey, Bath, Dorset, Bridgwater, Denby, Leicester, Devonshire,
North-Hampton, Chesterfield, Bristoll, Westmerland, Barkshire, Newcastle,
Carnarvon, Kingston and Thanot. The Lords Mowbray, Mountague of Baughton,
Daincourt, Shandoys, Spencer, Gray, Mohume, Dunsmore, Newarke, Seymore, Capell,
and others: Then of the House of Commons, Sir Christo. Hatten, Sir Iarvas
Clifton, S. Guy Palms, Sir James Thinn, Mr. James Coventry, Mr. Henry and John
Bellassey, Sir Thomas Fanshaw, Sir Richard Lewson, Sir Thomas Danby, Sir John
Packington, Sir Ric. Lee, Sir Charles le Gross, Master Catline, Mr. Holborne,
Mr. Bridgeman, Mr. Chadwell, Sr John Stangwayes and his son, Mr. John Digby,
Sir Edw. Deering, Sir William Widdrington, Master Venables, Baron of Kinnerton,
Mr. Rogers, Mr. Newport, Sir Edward Alford, Mr. Whitmore, Mr. Chuchley, Mr.
Edgcome, Sir John Stowell, Mr. Crook, Mr. Nowell, Mr. Sutton, Sir Will. Oagle,
Sir Will. Poole, and one hundred more then my paper will hold, men of
understanding and known integrity, and which of all these whose age and health
would permit, adventured not their lives and estates in this war with the King?
Now let us examine their Religion, you shall find them daily at Sermons and
Service with the King, hearing and practicing the same Protestant Religion and
Liturgy, that saved our Fathers, and has been in our Church ever since the
Reformation, and which we have vowed by the late Protestation to maintain, then
(no doubt) neither the King nor they are likely to bring in Popery, nor be
Separatists.

That they are men of Estates the Counties that elected them (if not the
Kingdom) knows, and which of them has any profit by the war: which of them
goes not himself and servants to the war at his own charge? Nay, which of
them have not otherwise in a large manner contributed to the maintenance of the
Kings Army, and that without any Commands of an Ordinance; yea, even against
the Declaration of the House? what would they land others then have done, had
an Order of the House directed it as on the other side? By this then you see
they are neither Popishly nor beggarly; nor can have any reward or hopes of
repair out of the estates of the adverse party.

But they would induce arbitrary government: I pray what proof is there of
that? what one act has the King done since the Commence of the Parliament that
favors of arbitrary justice? whom he has distrained, committed, or turned out
of the Town for not lending? Nay, what has he not done to assure us the
contrary? Read His Declarations observe his regal promises and Protestations,
and then tell me what Christian (that has charity) or what man (that would be
believed) will not believe him? Has he not regulated the Council Table?
damned the Sipwrits? suppressed the High Commission and Martial Court? Nay, has
he not left all things to be tried by strict proceedings of Law?

Whom can arbitrary justice more prejudice, then those now about and with the
King? the Rich and wealthy men? surely then they will not be a means to induce
that Law that shall undo, and inslave them, their children, families, and
estates. Yet must we lend money, send horses, and raise Arms against these
popish and beggarly Cavalliers. For it is not against the King, that were
Treason, and breach of our late Protestation, which is to defend his Majesty,
yet was the Kings Person in danger at Edgehill Battle, when the
undistinguishing shot took some persons about the King, but God did then, and
I hope always will cover his head in the day of Battle.

Upon these considerations, Sir, I cannot believe or fear the reducement of
popery or arbitrary Justice; nor think my conscience, person, or estate, tied
by the necessitous Ordinance of both Houses (for want of an act of Parliament)
to pay, or let the twentieth part of my estate (which you know may come to
three or four hundred pound) be taken to support a war, wherein the person of
the King (which God forbid) may be hurt.

I am sure that while God promised the Scepter to Juda, he put the Lawgiver
between his feet, to let us know, That the legislative power is neither above
or without the King. And I know the King by His Writs, does call them to advise
with him, not to resolve without him. I will therefore keep my hands from
giving; and so preserve my conscience; I will fast bolt my doors, and so
preserve my person and estate until a stronger then I come. For I had rather
others committed trespass in taking, then I treason in giving. And I am sure
that both Armies are not on the right side, but one, with all their voluntary
maintainers and abetters, must, without Gods infinite mercy be guilty of the
blood of all the men slain on either side. I shall therefore, for my
particular believe and follow the rule of the Apostle, to obey the King, for
He is set over us by God, rather then run with the new opinions and contrary
doctrine of our militant Evangelists, Dr. Burges, Dr Downing, Mr Marshall, and
Sedgwicke, whose consciences start out of the way at a white Surplesse, but
never boggle at garments rolled in blood. There are other things considerable
with us Citizens also, as the return of Sir Faithful Fortesoue, Lieutenant
Colonel Wagstaffe and my Lo: Essex favorite, Captain Scrimpshaw, unto the
King, next the danger and jealousy we are in, that even some of the great ones
will follow, (for these are but harbengers,) and rather then come empty handed
to their King, will make us their peace offering.

Let us consider the event of war, wherein we can yet boast nothing but our
success at Winchester. But had we had the day at Edge hill, and totally
routed the Cavalliers, would that have determined the war? I fear rather
have called in all the Monarchs of Christendom, to maintain Monarchy, and
then were we engaged like the Low Countries, in perpetual blood. How great
then is our straight, for if we succeed we undo our selves. If the King by
victory (or treachery of our Commanders) the labor is saved us then, for
having refused his mercy, we must expect his justice.

I have now, Sir, unbosomed my self to you my friend, let therefore my errors
find a friendly reproof, rectifying my mistakes by your advice, which I shall
take as Commands, return you the thankful acknowledgement of

Read and burn.

Your friend ane Kinsman T. R.
Milkestreete London, 28. December. 1642.

