NOW or NEVER: Work out your Salvation with fear and trembling; OR, A Serious
Exhortation to all poor Sinners to lay hold upon Christ Jesus, who is the
Fountain of all Happiness, and who is the Only Rock from whence does spring
all their Comforts.

Herein is also laid down several Motives declaring the Necessity of this Work,
that it ought not to be put off for to morrow; but that every poor Sinner
should strive to enter in at the strait gate now, while he has an opportunity
in his hand, lest he be snatched away by death, and then it will be too late.

The Third Edition, with Additions.

2 Cor. 6.2. Now is the accepted time: Behold, now is the day of salvation.

Math. 25 13. Watch therefore, for ye know not neither the day, nor the hour
wherein the Sun of Man comes.

By B. R.

London, Printed for Charles Tyus, at the Three Bibles on London Bridge. 1663.

NOW or NEVER.
Heb. 3. from the 7th to the 16th verse. Wherefore as the Holy Ghost says, To
day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation,
in the day of temptation in the wilderness: when your fathers tempted me,
proved me, and saw my works forty years. Wherefore I was grieved with that
generation, and said, They do always err in their hearts, and they have not
known my ways. So I swear in my wrath: They shall not enter into my rest.

Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in
departing from the living God. But exhort one another daily, while it is
called, To day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.
For we are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence
steadfast unto the end. Whilst it is said, To day if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts, as in the provocation.


THese words of the Holy Apostle Paul, are a serious exhortation to all poor
sinners to lay hold on Christ Jesus; we are stirred up speedily to believe in
him; to day, while it is called to day, lest we by neglecting of this
opportunity, and by our unbelief, do incur a heavier and more sore judgment
upon us, then hard-hearted Israel did, who grieved Moses forty years together,
and by reason of their unbelief, there did not enter into the rest that was
promised them, but fell by the way of the wilderness.

Now then, poor sinners, I would in this small Treatise, endeavor to stir you
up to lay held upon Christ Jesus, who is the Fountain of all our happiness, who
is the Wellhead from whence does spring all our spiritual and temporal
enjoyments: and the more earnestly to encourage you to lay hold on this your
only Supporter, I shall endeavor to lay down some Motives to stir you up to
this work, and that it may be done speedily, to day while it is called to day,
I shall desire you to read the words of Solomon the wisest of men and best of
Kings, as you will find them written in the 9 of Ecclesiastes, 10 verse, the
words are these, Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might, for
there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whether
thou go.

The principal aim of Solomon in these words, are to show that men are mortal,
and that wisdom piety, and riches, and all the earthly enjoyments that a poor
soul can have in this life, it will not exempt him from death, all our
creature comforts are but transitory; we are here to day, and in the grave to
morrow, therefore we have little reason to set our affections on things that
are parting from us, or otherwise we are parting from them; but let us take the
advice of the Apostle St. Paul, to set our affections on things above, and not
on things that are beneath Before I come to lay down the M^tives to stir you to
the work you are to do, I shall lay down this general observation, which is:

Doct. That the work of this life cannot be done after this life is ended;
therefore while we have time in this life, we must use all diligence to make
our calling and election sure: To day, while it is called to day, harden dot
your hearts. This is the day, NOW or NEVER. There is no repentance in the
grave, the grave has no work, but heaven has work, and hell has suffering:
Now then to incite you to this work, let me tell you

First, Know that time cannot be recalled, that which was once will be no more,
yesterday will never come again, and this day is passing away, therefore work
while you have day, the night will come and then you cannot work: It Is true,
while the Candle burns you may make use of its light, but when that is done,
it is too late to use it. The time that is now idled and talked away, the time
that is now feasted and complemented away, the time that is unnecessarily
sported and slept away, the time that is wickedly and presumptuously sinned
away, how precious will it one day seem to all! O how happy would it be to soor
sinners, if at the ^earest rate they could redeem it! but this cannot be.

If cries, or tears, or price, or pains would bring back lost abused time, how
happy were this dead-hearted world, if it would then serve their turn to say to
the vigilant Believer, give us of your O^l for our Lamps are gone out: or to
cry, Lord, Lord open unto us, when the door is shut, the foolish would be saved
as well as the wise, but they shall not attain sal^ation who have nor strived
in some measure to make use of their time to a better purpose than they have
done, who have vainly and foolishly lost their precious hours after their bain
delights. Math. 25. This is the day of Salvation, this is the accepted time,
while it is called to day hearken, and harden not your hearts.

Secondly, As time can never he recalled, so life shall never here below be
restored, Job 14.14 verse. If a man die, shall he live [here] again? All the
days of our appointed time we must therefore wait in faith and diligence, till
our change shall come. We have but one life here upon earth, to dispatch the
work that our everlasting life depends upon, and if we lose that, we are
undone for ever. While you are on this side of the Grave you have time to read,
to hear, to pray, but when this time is done, it shall be no more, you shall
rise from death to Judgment, according as you have lead your life here, you
shall have your Reward hereafter: Now you may enquire of your friends and
Teachers what you should do to be saved, and you may receive particular
instructions and exhortations, and God may bless the endeavors of those who are
assisting to you in the work so far, that your poor soul may be saved, but when
life is past, it will be so no more. Had hell but such an offer as this, and if
any cries would procure it from their righteous Judge. O what a change would
there be among them? how importunately would they cry to God, O send us once
again upon the earth, once more let us see the face of Mercy, and hear the
tenders of Christ and Salvation, once more let the Ministers of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ afford us their help, and teach in season and out of season, once
more let us have the help and company of thy Saints, and we will scorn them,
abuse them, and persecute them no more; that we might once more be admitted
into the holy assemblies, and have the Lords days to spend in the business of
cur Salvation? It makes my heart even tremble to think how those poor damned
souls would strive with God, to try them once again, if they had but the least
encouragements of hope, but it cannot be, it will not be, they had their day,
they cannot lose their time, and have it; they had faithful Guides, and would
not follow them: long did Christ wait with the patient tenders of his blood and
spirit, his grace was offered, but it would not be accepted. Such mouths must
be stopped for ever with a [Remember thou in thy life time receivedst thy good
things, Luke 16.25.

If ever you will repent and believe, it must be NOW or NEVER. If ever you will
be unconverted and sanctified, it must be NOW or NEVER If ever you will be
pardoned and reconciled to God, it must be now. O that you were wise, and that
you understood this, and that you would consider your latter end, Deuteronomy. 32.29.

O let me entreat you to let the words of our blessed Redeemer sink into your
hearts, Luke 19.41, 42. If thou had known, even thou in this thy day, the
things that do belong unto thy peace; But now they are hidden from thine eyes.

Thirdly, As there is no return after this life to live upon the earth, so
there will be no doing this work hereafter; heaven is for a more glorious work,
and hell will be for most horrible punishments; it is now that you must sow,
and hereafter that you must reap; it is now that you must work, and then that
you must receive your wages. O therefore poor soul where ever thou do abide,
let me persuade thee to be up and be doing, be not like the children of Israel,
who murmured and repined at the providence of God, because they did not
inherit the Land of Promise presently, but do thou patiently wait Gods time,
and be thou never idle, but still setting forward to the heavenly Canaan, that
so thou marst be ready when God shall please to call thee to the inheritance
thereof.

Let me lay before you your duties by way of Motives, in some few particulars:
To begin with the lowest of all: Then

First, In the works of your bodily calling, you must use diligence, In the
sweat of your brows you must eat your bread, Genesis 3.19. Six days shall thou
labor, and do all that thou have to do, Exodus 209.

Success is Gods ordinary reward of temporal diligence; and diseases, poverty,
and shame are the usual punishments of sloth.

Secondly, Are you parents or governors of families? you have work to do for
God, and for the souls of them that God has entrusted you with. Be diligent in
Family Duties, remember that you and your familles are going to the grave,
where you have heard there is no working, therefore what you do must be NOW or
NEVER, to day while it is called to day, put not off any work which will
forward you to heaven.

Thirdly, Have you ignorant or ungodly neighbors, whose misery calls for your
compassion, speak to them, and keep them with all diligence, lose not any
opportunity of doing good while you are alive, to do what thou can to keep
thy ignorant neighbor from eternal death; for when thou art in the grave, thou
can do no good; up therefore, and be doing with all your might.

Fourthly, Has the Lord lent you riches in this world, he does expect then
that thou should relieve those that are in want, especially do good to those
who are of the household of faith. Cast thy bread upon the waters, for thou
shall find it after many days. Do good before thy heart be hardened, thy riches
blasted and consumed, thy opportunities taken away; part with it, before it
part with thee.

Fifthly, Has God entrusted you with power? O then seek to promote the Glory
of God. relieve the oppressed, right the widow and the fatherless, cherish them
that do well, be a terror to them that do evil; Let those that work the work of
the Lord, be with you without fear, 1 Cor. 16.10.

Sixthly, To come a little nearer to you yet, (...) any of you yet in the state
of nature, born only of the flesh, and not of the spirit, make cut to Christ,
cry mightily to him for his renewing and pardoning Grace, for there is no
conversion or repentance unto life in the grave whither thou go; if ever
thou will be saved, thou must do it NOW or NEVER.

Seventhly, Have thou any predominant sin that over-ruleth thee, or wounds
thee, or keeps thee off from being acquainted with God? Strive to resist
those things, abhor them in thy very thoughts, hate the doors of the Harlot, or
the Alehouse, where thou formerly have committed many griev us sins.

Eighthly, Art thou in a declining condition, have thou lost thy first desires
and love? O then up, and be doing thy first works, and remember from whence
thou art fallen, cry cut with Job, Job 29.2, 3, 4, 5. O that I were as in
months past, as in the days when God preserved me, when his Candle shined upon
my head, and when by his light I walked through darkness. As I was in the days
of my youth, when the secret of God was on my tabernacle, when the Almighty was
yet with me.

Ninethly, Art thou in ignorance concerning thy converted estate, do thou not
know whether thou art in a state of life or death? Be thou careful then, and
use the means that God has appointed thee for assurance; search the
Scriptures, for in them are the words of Eternal Life. Examine your selves
whether you be in the Faith; prove your selves. Know ye not your own selves
that Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? 2 Cor. 13.5.

Lastly, In all the duties of thy Calling, whether Civil or Religious, seek to
inflame thy Soul with the love of God, admire his Mercies. O taste and see that
the Lord is gracious, let his fear command thy soul, and trust in him alone,
cast all thy care and thy self upon him. When thou art reading of the Word,
have an obediential fear and love to it, and let it be sweeter to thee than the
H^ney^com^; resolve to do what thou therein find to be the will of God.

Thus have I showed thee, O poor soul, in some measure what is thy duty to do;
but these are but short hints of what might be laid down: but I must be but
short, because there are some other things of great concernment to thy poor
soul to speak something to before I come to a conclusion: And that I may not
leave a poor soul in darkness, there are some few particulars that I would
persuade a Christian to: The first is this.

First, Let me beg of thee to live as one that believes there is a God, and
that this God is the Creator, Lord, and Ruler of the whole world: Believe that
this God is Almighty, and that the greatest of men are less than worms in
comparison of this great God: Believe that God is wise, powerful, and that he
is able to save thee; and as he is able, so he is willing, if thou by a true
and lively faith do lay hold on him O live in the belief of this.

Secondly, Live as one that does believe mankind is fallen into sin and
misery, and that all men are under the condemnation of the Law of God, till
they are delivered; and live as men that consider that there must be a great
change wrought in you before you come to die.

Thirdly, Live as men that verily and truly believe that you are redeemed by
Jesus Christ who has suffered for your sins, and brought the glad Lydings of
Salvation to your poor Souls: O believe in this Christ, and lay hold on all the
precious Promises that are in the Gospel: O cast your selves upon him, who is
the Physician of your poor souls.

Fourthly, Believe that the Holy Ghost is given by Jesus Christ to convert, to
quicken, to satisfy all that he will save; and that except you be born of the
Spirit, you shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and that if any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his, Romans 8.9.

Fifthly, Live in this belief that Sin is the greatest evil, and that which
does give the greatest offense to the Great and Holy God, and that is the evil
which the Lord abhors.

Sixthly, Believe that this Sin will not be pardoned without repentance, and
this must be true repentance also: which if it be so, it will not let thee live
in any gross sin.

Seventhly, Live as members of the Church of Christ, having communion with his
Saints, and live as those that believe there is a life everlasting, where the
sanctified shall live in endless joy, and the wicked in everlasting woe.

Lastly, Live as those that believe that this Life is given only to make
preparation for a better: All that ever shall be done for your Salvation, must
be NOW or NEVER. Live and believe that the world and the flesh are the deadly
enemies of your Salvation; If you live after the flesh, ye shall die after it,
but if by the Spirit ye mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live, Romans
8.13.

Christians, let me tell you, that in all undertakings your only aim should be
the glory of God, and you ought to do every thing with an obediential fear,
knowing that there is none in Heaven nor upon the earth can save your souls,
but the great God of Heaven and earth. To this Obedience let me persuade you in
a few particulars.

First, The work of God must be done with fear and reverence, God will be
sanctified of all that draw near him, God will be served as God, and not as
man, God will not be prayed to with a regardless mind. It is a dreadful thing
for poor dust and ashes to speak to such a great God, but it is a dangerous
thing to speak slightly and irreverently of him: It concerns every believing
Soul to have more of the fear of God upon his heart, than the common people of
the world have; for they that have tasted that the Lord is gracious, have a
great cause to have a reverential fear of his name.

Secondly, It is requisite that you be very serious and sober in all your
services you perform to God: Be fervent and serious in seeking of God, and your
own salvation.

Thirdly, Let your service to the Lord be performed with an understanding
heart: God delights not in the blind devotion of men that know not what they
do. Prayers not understood, are not prayers; for no man's destres goes beyond
his knowledge, and he expresses nor his destres, that knows not what he
expresses: If understanding be necessary in our common discourse, much more in
our Addresses to the Most High. A man of understanding is of an excel ent
spirit, but God has no pleasure in fools, Prove. 37.27.

Fourthly, God is a Spirit, and he must be worshipped in spirit and in truth,
John 4.24. The Father seeks such to worship him: God calls for the heart,
he looks upon the inward destres of the soul; if that be right, all will be
well.

Fifthly, The body has its part in the service of God, as well as the soul:
the body must express the inward reverence and devotion of the soul: there
ought to be a very decent behavior in every child of God at all times, but
especially when he is about any work that concerns his souls health.

Sixthly, God will be served with purity and foliness: God a^^ rreth the
sacrifices of the wicked and disobedient, those that serve him must have
undefiled garments, they must put on the white Robe of Christ's Righteousness.

Seventhly, God will be served universally and entirely in all his commands,
and with all your faculties; your work of piety, justice and charity must never
be separated: God will be served with love and delight. O dear Christians,
consider what a glorious privilege the Saints have, who live always in the
joys of the Lordland truly a Believer has great cause of Joy, and the chief
cause of his Joy is, that his sins are pardoned, that God is reconciled to him
in Christ Jesus: he has the promises of God, that all things shall work
together for his good, even his greatest sufferings. He is always in the care
of a tender Father, and he has leave to draw near unto him, and open his heart
to him in prayer, even in the greatest straits and wants that can come to him.

Having thus in a brief and short discourse laid down in some particulars the
duty of every poor soul that would have an interest in Christ Jesus, I would it
were the Lords good pleasure, that I could persuade any poor soul to be
desirous and diligent in attaining to that happiness, which is, to lay hold
upon Jesus Christ, and to rely only upon him: Cast thy self, and all that is
thine upon the shoulders of him, who is able to hear thee, and he is willing to
bring thee through all difficulty, if so be thou art willing to leave thy sins,
and repent thee of all thine iniquities.

If any man have an ear to hear, let him hear: O dear Christians, consider
these words, now is the time that you are called upon; now, while you have
opportunities; now, hear the Word preached by the faithful Ministers of the
Gospel, lest by death you are snatched away and then it is too late.

Now you have abundance of private helps, now you have the Lord's Day to spend
in holy exercises for the edification of your poor souls. Now you have choice
and serious Books to meditate on, and blessed be the Lord, you have the
protection of a Christian King, O these are great Mercies, and we do not know
how long, or how little while we may enjoy them! O therefore make use of time,
for this time will not last always: therefore NOW or NEVER work out your
salvation with fear and trembling.

Consider the words of the Apostle Peter, in the second Epistle, the first
chapter, and the tenth verse, Wherefore the rather brethren, give diligence to
make your calling and election sure, for if ye do these things ye shall never
fall. In these words there is the Christians duty laid down in the former part
of the verse, in these words, wherefore the rather brethren, give diligence:
then in the succeeding words, are the reasons laid down wherefore this
diligence is required, and that is, to make your calling and election sure:
then in the last clause of the verse, there is a gracious promise to all that
are diligent in this work; for if you do those things; you shall never fall. O
what comfortable words are these to a poor soul, who strives to attain to this
work, who is diligent in working out his salvation with fear and trembling! O
let us labor earnestly for the true faith, that we may attain to some assurance
of our-salvation: let us consider, and meditate upon those words of the holy
Apostle Paul, Hebr. 10.21. to the 25 verse, the words are these, And having an
High priest over the house of God, let us draw near with a true heart, in full
assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and
our bodies washed with pure water. Let us hold fast the profession ^f our faith
without wavering, for he is faithful that promises; and let us consider one
another, to provoke unto love, and to good works.

Beloved, these things must be done now, or else when we have lost our season,
it will be too late. Before I come to a full conclusion, I would once again
persuade thee to a holy life, for fear thou art overtaken with an untimely
death: I call that untimely death, that is, if thou art not prepared for it: we
have not so much cause to fear death, as we ought to bewail our wicked life: It
is too common a Reception amongst many, that Death puts a period to all our
troubles, (a short life, and a sweet life, being the vulgar proverb) the sense
of their pain, more than the desires of their being freed from their sins,
inviting the hastiness of their lips. I confess it is a happiness to die
indeed, if we are fitted for death, if we die with a conscience void of offense
toward all men: but alas if otherwise, our corporal death is but a separation
of soul and body. Death is common to the good, as well as the bad; to the
Prince as well as the Peasant, as the Woman of ^ekoa told David, We must all
die, and are as the water spilt upon the ground that cannot be gathered up
again, 2 Samuel 14. verse 14.

But who is it that truly considers the fearful separation of soul and body
from the gracious presence of a merciful God? who is it that would here live in
a prison, a dungeon, a sink of sin, rather than in a Palace of royal freedom?
Oh Lord, who is it that does not tremble to think upon this fearful parting?
whose heart does not ache within him, to think after that woeful Sentence of
Condemnation, Mark 24.51. Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, this will be
a sad parting to all those who have not tasted the Lord is gracious, and who
have not labored with diligence to make their calling and election sure.
Consider of it poor soul, who ever thou art that remainest in an unregenerate
estate, whether it be not thy chief concern, to be earnest with God in prayer,
and in all other duties of a Christian now, while thou have health in this
life, left when thou come to die, death prove an eternal death to thy poor
soul: I do not mean that the soul can die, but when the soul and body part, thy
soul will be eternally burning in hell fire, and never die. O let the
consideration of the shortness of this Life, stir thee up to preparation for
death, that whenever it comes upon thee, it may not come at unawares to thee,
but be thou ready to embrace death, and say, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

What are Hon^rs, Beauty, Riches, high p^a^es, wit, strength, friends, are they
not empty viols? are they not common to the wicked as well as the good? surely
they cannot help, they cannot satisfy in the evil day, when death comes all
will forsake thee, and prove but as miserable comforts, and deceitful friends;
therefore NOW or NEVER is the time for thee to work in. O let the soul take
heed in time, let not the love of the world be witch thee: die thou must, it
cannot be avoided, but when thou know not, all the days of thy appointed
time thou shall wait, till thy change come, job 14.14. Can that tennant be
light at heart, that knows he shall quickly be turned out of doors, and has no
place provided wherein he may put his head? or can thou eat, or drink, or
sleep quietly, and art no way assured of a better dwelling, when this earthly
house of thy tabernacle here shall be dissolved? Oh poor s^ul, be no longer
deluded, be no longer so desperate as to hazard thy eternal happiness for the
shadows of pleasure, for the shadows of profit, which are all but vanity and
vexation of spirit.

To conclude then dear Christians, let me exhort you in the fear of the Lord,
to a serious diligence in seeking those things which conduce to the happiness
of your poor souls: what though persecutions arise, be not troubled,
persecution is the crown and rejoicing of a true Christian. Our Savior
pronounces them happy who forsake Father, and Mother, or Land, or any thing
for his Names sake: As tribulations abound, so do our consolations, our enemies
being instruments of comforting us by afflicting us: what creature then should
be more joyful than a Christian? for God the Creator he is a comforting us,
while the creature is afflicting us: Be not impatient then, O suffering soul,
at the rage and malice of the greatest adversary thou can have, since by the
enjoyment of our heavenly Father we are more than conqueror^^

Account it the greatest benefit to lie down patiently in the bed of
affliction, where Christ rests himself with thy soul, and will shortly come and
lodge with thee in some gracious visitation, yea, he will visit thee with
abundance of consolation, and then thou shall count thy self a gainer if thy
afflictions have been so great as to bring forth an eternal reward of joy and
blessedness.

To bring all then to a conclusion, let the consideration of all the foregoing
benefits which thou will attain unto by serious diligence in the practice of
holiness, incite thee NOW or NEVER to work out thy Salvation with fear and
trembling.

Books sold by Charles Tyus, at the Three Bibles on London Bridge.
THe Wise Merchant: Or, The Peerless Pearl. By T. Calvert, Minister of Gods
Word in the City of York.

The Christian Combat: Or, His true Spiritual Warfare. By C. Love, late
Minister of Gods Word in the City of London.

The Book of Graces, with Prayers for Morning and Evening: All but three pence
a piece.

The Sinners Warning-piece: Or, Heavens Messenger. By Tho. Robins B. of D.

Man's Chief Guide to Salvation. By T. R. B. of D.

The Scholars Winter Garment: Or, The Garment of Righteousness, By T. R.
Bachelor of Divinity.

A Wonder of Wonders: Or, Gods people the Worlds Wonder. By R. Hough.

Englands Golden Legacy: Or, A brief Description of the Mercies of God bestowed
upon England. By L. P.

Gods Message from Heaven to Sinners on Earth. By T. P. B. of D. L.

The School of Learning: Being Prayers for Morning and Evening for every day in
the Week; with Graces before and after Meat, and a short Catechism for Children.

The Virtuous Wife is the Glory of her Husband: Being a new Book, showing the
care qualities of the truly virtuous woman.

Christ upon the Cross suffering for sinners, by S.S.

Gods Call to Unconverted Sinners.

These ten last are but two pence a piece, and very seasonable for these sinful
times in which we live.

FINIS.

