ACT, For a New Election of Magistrates in the Town of Edinburgh.
Edinburgh, the fifth day of April, 1689.
THE which Day, the Meeting of the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, taking
to their Consideration, the great Invasions that have been made of late years,
upon the Privileges of the Royal Burrows, particularly these of Edinburgh, in
the Election of their Magistrates by Re-commendations, and Nominations made by
the late King, in an Arbitrary and Despotick way, contrary to the Laws and
Liberties of the Kingdom; so that the present Magistrates and Council of the
said Burgh, are not their true Magistrates and Council, by them freely Elected,
but plainly such as have been (at least by progress) imposed by the aforesaid
Court-methods and practices: And the Meeting of the Estates Considering, That
the Constitutions, Liberties and Privileges of the said Burgh, being so far
violated and perverted, the only natural and just way to Restore the same, is
to allow and authorize the Incorporation it self, and whole Members thereof, to
whom the said Liberties and Privileges were originally granted, to make a new
Choice and Election of Magistrates and ordinary Council; Therefore the said
Estates, Do hereby Authorize and Require, Sir James Rocheid and Aeneas Mcleod,
present Town Clerks of Edinburgh, to conveen the whole Burgesses, who has born,
and does bear Burgage-Duty, and are liable to Watching and Warding within the
City (excluding from this number, all Honorary Burgesses, with the
Town-servants, Pensioners, Beed-men and the like,) to meet upon Wednesday next,
the tenth Instant, at eight a Clock in the morning, in Saint-Geils-Church, with
continuation of days, to the effect, that the said Burgesses, and each of them
may give in their subscribed Lists of Twenty five persons, to be the Magistrates
and ordinary Council of the said Burgh, according as the plurality of Votes
shall determine, and that they give in their Burgess Tickets to the Clerks
timously, that they may be Enrolled before the diet of Election. And the
Estates Do Nominat and Appoint the persons after-named of their own Number,
viz. The Lords Barganie and Belheaven, Sir John Maitland and the Lord of
Ricartoun, Mr. James Ogilvie and Mr. James Smollet to be present, and to see
the foresaid Election made; and Appoints the foresaids Magistrates and Council,
so chosen, to continue until the first Tuesday after Michaelmass next, that
then, and on that day, a new Election for the ensuing year, of both Magistrates,
Council and Deacons of Crafts, may proceed in all Points, conform to the Set
and Decree Arbitral, pronounced by King JAMES the Sixth; The Lists of the
Magistrates then to be Chosen, being always made of such who are capable to be
Elected, with power to the persons abovenamed, to Issue out, and publish all
Orders necessary for this effect. And it is hereby Declared, That the
Magistrates and Council to be Chosen by Warrant of this present ACT, as said is,
shall be repute, and holden als lawful and sufficient in all respects, as if
they had been truly and duly Elected at Michaelmass last, conform to the
aforesaid Set, Customs and Privileges of the Burgh in all Points. And Ordains
the present Magistrates to continue till the said new Election be made: And
Appoints these Presents to be immediately Published at the Mercat Cross of
Edinburgh, by Macers, or Messengers at Arms, in the usual Way. Extracted out of
the Records of the Meeting of Estates, by me,

JA. DALRYMPLE, Cls.

Edinburgh, Printed in the Year, 1689.


