C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT For a Solemn Anniversary Thanksgiving, for His Majesty's Restoration to
the Royal Government of His Kingdoms.
At EDINBVRGH the thirteenth of May, 1661.
THe Estates of Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland, taking to their
consideration the sad Condition, Slavery and Bondage, this ancient Kingdom has
groaned under, during these twenty three years Troubles: In which, under the
specious pretenses of Reformation, a public Rebellion has been by the
treachery of some, and mis-perswasion of others, violently carried on against
Sacred Authority, to the ruin and destruction, so far as was possible, of
Religion, the Kings Majesty and His Royal Government, the Laws, Liberties and
Property of the People, and all the public and private Interests of the
Kingdom; So that Religion it self, which holds the right of Kings to be Sacred,
has been prostitute for the warrant of all these treasonable invasions made
upon the Royal Authority, and disloyal limitations put upon the Alleagiance of
the Subjects. And has it not also been pretended unto, for the warrant of all
those vile and bloody Murders, which in high contempt of Almighty God and of
His Majesty's Authority and Laws, were under color of Justice committed upon
His Majesty's good Subjects, merely for the discharge of their Duty to GOD and
Loyalty to the King? Has not that Royal Government, under whose Protection
this Nation has, to the envy of the World, been so famous for many ages, been
of late trod under foot, and new Governments and Governors established and
kept up without His Majesty's Authority, and against His express Commands?
Has not Law, which is the Birthright and Inheritance of the Subject and the
security of their lives and fortunes, been laid in the dust, and new and unjust
Edicts and Orders past and published, for subjecting both life and fortune, and
what else was dear unto any of His Majesty's good Subjects, to the Cruel and
Ambitious Lusts of some usurping Rulers? Has not Religion and Loyalty been the
only objects of their Rapine and Cruelty? And has not their new and arbitrary
Exactions and Burdens upon the People, exceeded in one month what ever had
been formerly in many years paid to any of the Kings of this Kingdom? And when
the best of men and the most excellent of the Kings of the earth, had in an
unusual way of confidence rendered His Person to the trust and Loyalty of his
Native Subjects, was not the security of Religion pretended unto by some, who
then governed in Church and State, for the ground of that base (and never
enough to be abhorred) transaction, in leaving such a Prince their Native and
Dread Sovereign, to the will of these who were in open Rebellion, and for the
time had their swords in their hands against him; And that when by these and
many such like undutifull carriages the Kings Majesty was removed from His
Kingdoms, the foundations of this ancient and well constitute Government was
overturned, the Liberties and Property of the people inverted; And this Kingdom
exposed to be Captives and Slaves to Strangers, and nothing left unto them but
the sad meditation of their increasing miseries, and the bitter remembrance of
their bypast disloyalties? Yet even then it pleased Almighty God to
compassionat their low condition, and by the power of His own Right Hand, most
miraculously to restore the Kings most Sacred Majesty, to the Royal Government
of His Kingdoms; And thereby to redeem this Kingdom from its former Slavery and
Bondage, and to restore it to its ancient and just Privileges and Freedom. And
the Kings Majesty, acknowledging, with all humility and thankfulness, the
goodness, wisdom and power of God, in this Signal Act of His mercy to him and
his people, Does, with advice and consent of his Estates of Parliament, Statute
and Ordain, That in all time coming there be an Solemn y^^^ly Commemoration of
the same; And for that end, the twenty ninth day of May which day God Almighty
has specially honored and rendered auspicious to this Kingdom, both by His
Majesty's Royal Birth, and by His blessed Restoration to His Government) be
forever set apart as a holy day unto the Lord, and that in all the Churches of
the Kingdom, it be employed in public Prayers, Preaching, Thanksgiving, and
Praises to God, for so transcendent Mercies: And that all Trade, Merchandise,
Work, Handylabour, and other ordinary employments be forborne, and the remaining
part of the day spent in such lawful divertisements as are suitable to so
Solemn an occasion. And it is hereby recommended to all Ministers of the
Gospel, and to all Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, and other public Ministers in
the several Counties, and to all Magistrates with^^ Burghs, to be careful,
that for this present year, and in all time coming, the twenty ninth day of
May, be accordingly kept and observed within their several Jurisdictions. And
for the speedier and more full intimation hereof to all His Majesty's Subjects,
it is appointed their Presents be printed, and published at all the Market
Crosses of the Royal Buroughs.

A. PRIMEROSE, Cls. Reg.

Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1661.


