REMARKS UPON AN Advertisement, OF A MEETING At Turners-Hall.
He that is first in his own Cause, seems Just; but his Neighbor comes and
searches him,

Prove. 18.17. The foolishness of Man perverteth his Way; and his Heart fretteth
against the LORD,

Prove. 19.3.
HAving seen an Advertisement, subscribed G. K. Relating to a Meeting to be
held by George Keith and his Friends in Turners-Hall, London, the 11th of June,
1696. My Curiosity led me to Read it, having heard he was a Man of Learning and
Distinction. And therein I observe these things:

First, That it Principally related to some things already Expressed in Public
Print.

Secondly, To four Men expressed by Name, viz. William Penn, George Whitehead,
Thomas Ellwood, John Pennington.

Thirdly, To a Meeting called the Second Days Morning-Meeting, for Limitations
he preicribes, Countenancing, some Books, Particularly one from Pensilvania;
called, A Modes^^ Account of the Principal Differences in Point. of Doctrine,
etc. which is chiefly, as I perceive by view thereof, a Collection out of
former Books of G. K's. etc.

And the other part of this Advertisement is, to give Account of the Cause to
Intimate such a Meeting.

And one Cause assigned is, That he has neither Time nor Abillity to Print
Answers.

And another, That a Meeting of People have owned him in their Printed
Testimony, called, A Seasonable Testimony; which therefore he accounts is
Paralleled with what the Quakers did some Years ago against Tho. Hicks.

And much of the other part being Invectives, and black Epithites, he brings
forth and casts upon the said Persons.

All which I must need say falls greatly short, in my Opinion, of rendering the
said G. K. a Person justly Meriting the Character of a Man of Learning and
Distinction, or Wisdom, or Justice.

For had he been such an one, so much Folly, Pride and Conceitedness would
never have dropped from his Pen.

His, Folly 1st, In proposing a Meeting under the Restrictions and Limitations
he prescribes, without Throng or Crowd, when he gives a Months public notice
in Print, of Time and Place, in this Populous City.

2dly, In desiring them to be there to hear themselves Charged, and Proved
Guilty, of the following Things; when he has already Charged them to be
Guilty, and that in Public Print, of Defamations, etc. and most Erroneous and
Hurtful Principles, to the great Shame and Scandal of the Christian Religion:
But he pretends a Justness, in desiring them to be there, to hear themselves
proved Guilty; by which he shows he has not yet been so Just, as now he would
seem to be; but so far as his Charge will go toward Proof, he is not wanting
to do it, and that in Print, before such hearing

Would ever a Scholar, or Wise Man, manifest such Folly, thus to expose the
said Persons, without hearing, or being justly desired to be present, to answer
to their several Charges.

Is not this like Abbington Law, viz. Condemn first, and Try after; and
contrary to the Wise Man's saying, viz. Blame not before thou have examined the
Matter; first understand, and then Rebuke; And below Felix his saying of Paul,
I Will hear thee and thy Accusers when they come Face to Face?

3dly, The Pride and Conceitedness of this Man to me greatly appears, in his
taking upon him so Peremptorily, in Public Print, to summons so many Persons
to attend him at Time and Place he sets and Appoints; ought not they to be
consulted with, about such a Meeting, and Inquired of, whether they would
Consent thereto, and agree to Time and Place? Was it not so with the Baptists
and the Quakers formerly? If not, I think it ought to have been so; but for
this Man, that without so doing, appoints Time and Place, and Summons; and
moreover suggests, that if few or none of them be present, that it is from a
being conscious to themselves of the badness of the Cause: This makes me think
of the Proverb, Hasty Folks never wants Woe. Why so hasty to conclude they are
Conscious of the badness of their Cause, before they are heard? Besides, are
there not many justifiable or allowable Reasons, to Enduce them to the
contrary, or occasions to Excuse them? Therefore why should this Man of all
others, be so hasty to Condemn them ALTOGETHER UNHEARD?

For instance, If these Men, with regard to the preservation of Peace, and
preventing such Disorders and Riotous Actions, that may be committed at such
Assemblies, shall rather choose to content themselves with such a Vindication,
that may be more Peaceably, and Inoffensively managed, must there be no less
then a Consciousness of Guilt to be presently concluded on their side, without
hearing and perusing their Answer already in print? For will not such that
impartially examine what both writes, be a fitter Judge then this Man in his
own Case, who Accuses, Summons, and passes Sentence, upon his own Authority,
and without hearing? For the time he has appointed for that, is not yet come:
But the Proverb is, Cursed Cows have short Horns.

But truly after all, it is my Advice both to this Man and the Quakers, to make
better use of the present Privileges and Liberty they enjoy from the
Government, than to incur their Displeasure, and expose themselves to the rage
and fury of a mixed Multitude, to the Endangering the Breach of the public
Peace, and thereby give a just occasion of Offense to the Magistrates, which
though it may not be by them immediately, yet may occasionally, and may tend to
the great shame of their Profession, and Scandal of the Christian Religion.

And if the People G. K. is joined with, are so few, so poor, or so Niggardly,
as they will not be at a little Charge in Printing Books, relating to their
Religious Controversies, in matters of Faith, they will show less Zeal to the
Cause, than those G. K. writes against, and accounts in Error: And his Friends
thereby give but little Demonstration of their love to him, or of their owning
him, except in Words

And although I have made some Remarks on the Method proposed by G. K. to show
his Folly therein, and also his presumption, as it appears to me in his
Concluding others to be, what he thinks and says they are, without or before
hearing (for that time is not yet come) as if he, though in his own defense, was
the great Judge of Matters of Fact, and prime Director of Method and Manner to
proceed, Summons, Hear, Try, Judge, Condemn, Acquit, Excuse or Discharge, Alter
and Change, Way, Method, and Place, as well as prescribe, if he sees meet. Oh
what a great HE this Man conceits himself! And what a power he. assumes! It be
speaks his Pride, and he to be such an one as seeks Pre-eminence. For what Just
or Legal Power or Authority has he to do this? Sure he does not well
understand our English Laws, which have made better Provision, than to admit or
allow any to Exercise an Arbitrary Power over her freeborn English; to
Summons, Hear, Judge, at will and pleasure, and in their own Case.

This, as an English Man, I so Illy resented, that I have Adventured thus to
show my Opinion, and give my Advice, not designing to Interpose in the
Management of the Controversy: But rather desire the Provoker, and the
Provoked, may dispose themselves to the study of Quietness, and in a proper way
to be Instrumental to put an End to their Controversies, and get a winding
Sheet for it, that it may be Buried, and never have a joyful Resurrection, what
ever they may, that are concerned therein.

VALE.
FINIS.

