ACT Concerning the Receiving of ENGAGERS IN THE Late Unlawful War against
ENGLAND, To public SATISFACTION.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, 1649.

Edinb. 20. Julii 1649. Antemeridiem, Sess. XIX. Act concerning the receiving
of Engagers in the late unlawful War against England, to public Satisfaction.
THE General Assembly considering what great offense against God, and Scandal
to his People at home and abroad, has arisen from the late unlawful
Engagement in War against England, whereby contrary to the Law of God and of
Nations, contrary to the Solemn League and Covenant, contrary to the Petitions
of almost the whole Kingdom, contrary to the Declarations of the Judicatories
of this Kirk, contrary to the Protestations of a considerable part of the
Parliament, contrary to the frequent and clear Warnings of the Servants of God
in his name, not only an Association in Counsels and Arms was made with
Malignant persons, who had formerly shown their dis-affection to the Covenant
and Cause, but an invasion of the Neighbor Nation was prosecuted; from whence
flowed the oppression of the persons, estates and consciences of many of the
People of God in this Land, the shedding of the blood of some, the loss and
dishonor of this Nation, and several other inconveniences: And considering
that the Commissioners of the last General Assembly have acquit themselves
faithfully, in ordaining to be suspended from the renewing of the Covenant and
from the Ordinance of the Lords Supper, such as are designed in their Acts of
date the 6. of October and 4. of December last, referring the further
consideration and censure of the persons foresaid to this present General
Assembly: Therefore the General Assembly for removing of such offenses, and
for prevention of the like in time coming, and for restoring of such as are
truly humbled, do Declare and Appoint,

I. That all those who have been guilty and censured as aforesaid, and withal,
do not by their addresses to Kirk Judicatories testify their dislike thereof,
and give evidences of their Repentance therefore, That these be processed, and
continuing obstinate, be excommunicated; But if with all they go on in
promoving Malignant Designs, that they be forthwith Excommunicated: As also
that all such persons guilty as aforesaid, who after Profession of their
Repentance shall yet again hereafter relapse to the promoting any Malignant
Design, that these be likewise-forthwith excommunicated.

II. That all these who have been guilty and censured as aforesaid, and desire
to testify their Repentance and to be admitted to the Covenant and Communion,
shall besides any Confession in public before the Congregation subscribe the
Declaration, hereto subjoyned, of their unfeigned detestation and renunciation
of that Engagement, and all other Malignant courses conses contrary to the
Covenant and Cause, Promising to keep themselves from such ways in time coming,
and acknowledging that if they shall again fall into such defection thereafter,
they may justly be accounted perfidious backsliders, and breakers of the
Covenant and Oath of God, and proceeded against with the highest Censures of
the Kirk.

III. That of these who have been guilty and censured as aforesaid, and desire
now to testify their Repentance, Whosoever were formerly joined in Arms or
Counsel with James Graham in his Rebellion, or who were General persons or
Colonels in the late unlawful Engagement, Or who went to Ireland to bring over
Forces for that effect, Or who have been eminently active in contriving of, or
seducing unto the said Engagement, Or whosoever above the degree of a
Lieutenant Commanded these parties, that in promoving of the ends of the said
Engagement shed blood within the Kingdom, either before that Army of Engagers
went to England, or after their return, Or who above the degree foresaid
Commanded in the late Rebellion in the North; That none of these be admitted or
received to give satisfaction, but by the General Assembly or their
Commissioners.

IV. That all the rest of these who have been guilty, or censured as aforesaid,
may be received by the Presbyteries where they reside.

V. That all who have been guilty as aforesaid, before their receiving to the
Covenant, shall make a Solemn public Acknowledgement in such manner, and
before such Congregations as the Commission of the General Assembly or
Presbyteries respective shall prescribe, according to the degree of their
offense and scandal given.

VI. That none of the foresaid Persons be admitted, or received as Elders in
any Judicatories of the Kirk, but according to the Act of the General Assembly
of the last of August 1647. against complyers of the first Class.

And because many have heretofore made show and profession of their Repentance,
who were not indeed convinced of their guiltiness, nor humbled for the same,
but did thereafter return with the dog to the vomit, and with the sow to the
puddle, unto the mocking of God, and the exceeding great reproach and detriment
of his Cause: Therefore, for the better determining the Truth and sincerity of
the Repentance of those who desire to be admitted to the Covenant and
Communion: It is appointed and Ordained that none of those persons who are
debarred from the Covenant and Communion shall be admitted and received
thereto, but such as after exact trial, shall be found for some competent time
before or after the offer of their Repentance, according to the discretion of
the respective Judicatories, to have in their ordinary conversations given real
Testimony of their dislike of the late unlawful Engagement, and of the
courses and ways of Malignants, and of their sorrow for their accession to the
same, and to live soberly, righteously and godly; And if any shall be found,
who after the defeating of the Engagers have uttered any Malignant speeches,
tending to the approbation of the late unlawful Engagement, or the bloodshed
within the Kingdom for promoving of the ends of the said Engagement, or any
other projects or practices within or without the Kingdom, prejudicial to
Religion and the Covenant, or tending to the reproach of the Ministry, or the
civil Government of the Kingdom; Or who have unnecessarily or ordinarily
conversed with Malignants and disaffected persons, Or who have had hand in, or
accession to, or compliance with, or have any ways countenanced or promoved
any Malignant Design, prejudicial to Religion and the Covenant, That these,
notwithstanding their profession of Repentance be not suddenly received, but a
competent time, according to the discretion of the Judicatory, be assigned to
them for trial of the evidence of their Repentance, according to the
qualifications abovementioned. And the General Assembly Ordains Presbyteries
to make intimation of this Act in the several Kirks of their bounds so soon as
they can, after the rising of the General Assembly, that none pretend
ignorance; And that Presbyteries make account of their diligence in prosecuting
of this Act to the Quarterly meetings of the Commission of this Assembly.

A. Ker.

The Declaration and Acknowledgement beforementioned.
I (...) after due consideration of the late Engagement in War against the
Kingdom of England; And having also considered the course pursued and promoted
by the Earl of Lanerk, George Monro and their Adherents in and about Stirling,
and by others in the late Rebellion in the North, against all which not only
eminent Testimonies of Gods Wrath have been given in defeating of them, but
they were in themselves sinful breaches of Covenant, and preferring the
interest of man unto God; I do herefore in Gods sight profess, that I am
convinced of the unlawfulness of all these ways, as contrary to the Word of
God, and to the Solemn League and Covenant, not only in regard of the
miscarriages of these that were employed therein, but also in respect of the
nature of these courses themselves; And therefore professing my unfeigned sorrow
for my guiltiness by my accession to the same, do renounce and disclaim the
foresaid Engagement and all the courses that were used for carrying on the
same, either before or after the defeat of the Engagers, as contrary to the
Word of GOD and Solemn League and Covenant, and destructive to Religion and
the work of Reformation; And I do promise in the power of the Lords strength,
never again to own any of these or the like courses: And if hereafter at any
time, I shall be found to promote any Malignant Design or course, that I shall
justly be accounted a perfidious Covenant-breaker and despiser of the Oath of
God, and be proceeded against with the highest Censures of the Kirk: Likeas, I
do hereby promise to adhere to the National Covenant of this Kingdom, and to
the Solemn League and Covenant betwixt the Kingdoms, and to be honest and
zealous for promoving all the ends thereof, as I shall be called thereunto of
God, and to flee all occasions and temptations that may lead me into any the
like snares against the same. Subscribed (...) at (...) the (...) day of (...)

FINIS.

