Act made at Aberdeen the nynteenth day of April 1677 Years.
THere being been Advertisement given to the whole Commissioners of Excyse of
this Shire, to have met here at this time, for settling the said Excyse for an
Year, after the first day of May next, there has but a very few of them
conveened for that effect; and these conveened, finding themselves not an
competent number to conclude so weighty an effair, have therefore adjourned
their Meeting to the fifteenth day of May next, being the third tuesday
thereof, at which time they resolve to settle the said Excyse, be Ferming,
Rouping, or any other way that shall be thought most expedient, be those of
them who shall be then present. And requires the said whole Commissioners, to
meet at Aberdeen that day, be ten aclock in the forenoon, for settling the said
Annuity of Excyse, for the ensuing Year, which is expected they will do, it
being a matter wherein the good of the Shire is so much concerned. Withal
intimating to all interested, that the Commissioners will be then ready to
accept of reasonable offers, of an Ferming and Rouping, and will give all
suitable encouragement to those who shall offer upon that account, so that any
person who has an inclination to serve the Shyre, and Town of Aberdeen in that
effair, may be present at that time, furnished with sufficient and responsall
Cautioners. And in respect, that James Moncrief is shortly to come North, with
a party of Horse, of his Majesty's Lyfe-Guard, to quarter upon the account of
an Arier the Shyre is in* to his Majesty's Cash-keeper, These are requyring all
the Heritors, Lyfe*renters, Brewers, and others who are deficient in any
public dues, to pay in their deficiencies to the Collector, betwixt and the
eight day of May next to come, that the Shire in general may be free of any
quartering upon the Account of their deficiencie, and ordains the Collector to
give up an impartial list of the deficients names, and their deficiencies (who
shall not pay in against the said day) to the said James Moncrief, that he may
cause the said party to quarter therefore, till satisfaction be made, be which
the Shyre may be in no future danger. And that none may pretend ignorance, the
Collector is appointed to cause Print and publish their presents, at the
several Parish Kirkes of the Shyre, the ensuing LORDS-DAYES.

Sic Subscribitur, John Foullerton I. P. C.

Another Act made at Aberdeen the twentyeth day of April 1677 Years.
THe Earls of Erroll and Marischall, and Sir John Keith, three of the Lords of
his Majesty's Privy Council, having met this day, with severalls of the
Commissioners of Excyse of the Shire and Burgh of Aberdeen, for putting in
Execution the Laws and Acts made anent the pryces of rough-Bear, Ale, and
drinking-Beer. Have with consent of the said Commissioners, in pursuance
thereof ordained, and hereby ordains, that no Malt-Man nor Brewer within the
said Shyre or Burgh of Aberdeen, buy nor sell any Bear or Malt of the Cropped
1676 Years, under the price of seven pounds scots the Boll, the Brewers having
liberty to sell their Ale at twenty pennies the pynt or to sell double or three
shilling Ale: With certification that the Contraveeners names shall be given up
to the privy Council, and they fined and punished conform to the Acts of
Parliament and Privy Council made thereanent. And appoynts their presents to
be printed, recommending to the Magistrates of Aberdeen, to cause publish and
intimat the same to those concerned, within their Burgh and Freedom. And
ordains the Conveener of each Parish of the Shyre, to cause publish the same at
the respective Parish Kirks the ensuing Lords-days

Sic Subscribitur, John Foullerton I. P. C.
Given under the hand of Collonell JOHN FOULLERTON of Dudwick, Preses to the
said Meeting.


