The Loyal Health: Occasioned by His Majesty's most Happy Deliverance from the
late Horrid Phanatical Conspiracy, by the Fire at New Market.
^ YE Monarchy haters,
And VVhiggs of that Leven,
With Associators,
See the care of kind Heaven.
Great CHARLES still obtains,
Whose will never was bounded,
His Pleasure, and Reigns,
While you are Confounded.
II.
In Old time by Fire,
Kind Heaven directed,
And to their desire,
His Chosen Protected.
So CHARLES was defended,
As Heaven appointed,
And Angels descended
To save its Anointed.
III.
I or which to kind Heaven in Praises let us sing,
That saved our Liberties, Lives, and our King,
And brought those Villains to Justice, who would
Have Gloried in Treason, and Revell'd in Blood.
Then let every one stand
With a Glass in each hand,
So to Charles and to James let it freely go round,
Praying Joy in full measure
May wait on their Pleasure,
While Heaven and Earth with our wishes resound.
LOYALTY TRIUMPHANT: OR, Phanaticism Displayed,
A SONG.
^ JOY to the bonny bold Britains did merrily sing,
In Oats his Reign,
And stood up for their Senses, their Liberties, Lives, and their King,
Who in Bumpers would boldly assert Charles's Right,
And still maintain,
That it is just the true Heir should Inherit, for whom they would Fight.
While the Villainous Whiggs would be
Bawling against Plotting and Popery,
Bouncing for Oats and a Parli'ment,
When see what 'twas they meant,
To kill the King, and so undo us
With True Protestant Blunderbuss,
'Cause the Votes of their Commons House
Proved not all worth a Louse:
But kind Heaven that waited on Charles from the Womb,
Assisted now,
And broke their damned Plot, and Rewarded them with their just Doom.
Now they find that to murmur against Kings is in vain,
And all must bow,
And submit to the Fate, with the mark of Cursed Murdering Cain,
While the Tories may Glory still,
And of Pleasure enjoy their fill,
'Cause they in the Gap firmly stood,
And stem'd the growing Flood,
While the sneaking VVhiggs hang or hide,
And nor can, nor dare the Test abide.
So may all be Cursed, I sing,
That do not love their King.
By the Author of Ferguson's Remonstrance.
Printed for Charles Corbet, at the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane. 1684.


