THE SCOTS COMMISSIONERS, Their desires concerning unity in Religion, and
uniformitie of Church Government, as a special means for conserving of Peace,
in his Majesty's Dominions.

Presented to the Kings Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament in England.
MARCH. 1641.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by James Bryson, 1641.

THE SCOTS COMMISSIONERS, their desires concerning unity in Religion, and
uniformitie of Church Government, etc.
AS we shall not make any proposition about the last Article, of establishing
a firm and happy peace, but that which we conceive to be both expedient and
just; So will your Lo. (we doubt not) in your wisdoms consider; that since
that which is sought, is not a cessation of Arms for a time, but peace for
ever, and not peace only, but a perfect amity, and a more near union then
before, which is of greater consequence, then all the former Articles. It is no
marvel that a composition so excellent, and so powerful, to preserve the
whole Yland in health against all inward distempers, and in strength against
all contagion and wounds from without, require many ingredients, of which, if
any one be wanting, we may on both sides please our selves for the present,
with the sweet name of Peace, and yet for no long time enjoy Peace it self,
which has in it not only sweetness and pleasure, but also much more profit
and true honor, then all the triumphs on earth.

As we account it no less then usurpation and presumption for one Kingdom or
Church, were it never so mighty and glorious, to give laws and rules of
reformation to another free and independent Church and Kingdom, were it never
so mean: civil liberty and conscience being so tender and delicat, that
they cannot endure to be touched, but by such as they are wedded unto, and
have lawful authority over them, so have we not been so forgetful of our
selves who are the lesser, and of England who is the greater Kingdom as to
suffer any such arrogant and presumptuous thoughts, to enter into our minds.
Our ways also are witnesses of the contrare against the malicious, who do not
express what we are, or have been, but do still devise what may be fuel
for a common combustion; Yet Charity is no presumption, and the common duty
of Charity binds all Christians, at all times, both to pray, and profess
their desire: That all others were not only almost, but altogethe^ such as
themselves, except their afflictions and distresses^ And beside common
Charity, we are bound as Commissioners, in a special duty to propone the
best and readie^ means for settling of a firm Peace, as we love not to be
curious in any other Commonwealth, nor to play the Bisho^ in another man's
Diocese: So may we not be careless an^ negligent in that which concerns
both Nations.

We do all know and profess that Religion is not onl^ the mean to serve
God, and to save our own souls, b^^ that it is also the base and foundation
of Kingdoms, and Estats and the strongest band to tie the Subjects to their
Prince in true loyalty, and to knit the hearts of one to another in true
unity: Nothing so powerful to divide the hearts of people as division in
Religion, nothing so strong to unite them as unity in Religion: And the
greater zeal in different Religions, the greater division. But the more zeal
in one Religion, the more firm union. In the paradise of nature the diversity
of flowers, and herbs is pleasant and useful, but in the paradise of the
Church, different and contrary Religions are unpleasant and hurtful: It is
therefore to be wished, that there were one confession of Faith, one form of
Catechism, one directory for all the parts of the public worship of God, as
Prayer, Preaching, administration of Sacraments, etc. And one form of
Church Government in all the Churches of his Majesty's dominions. This would.

1. Be acceptable to God Almighty, who delights to see his people walking in
truth and unity, and who would look upon this Yland with the greater
complacencie that we were all of one heart and one soul in matters of
Religion.

2. This unity in Religion will preserve our Peace, and prevent many divisions
and troubles. Of old (as Beda records) the difference about the time of
observing Easter, although no great matter in Religion, and although in diverse
independent Kingdoms, had troubled their peace, if the wiser sort had not
brought them to one uniformitie, wherein they were so zealous, that they would
not suffer so much as one small Yland, which differed from the rest to be
unconforme.

3. His Majesty and his Successors in their government shall be eased of much
more trouble which arises from differences of Religion, and has been very
grievous unto Kings and Emperors; As Eusebius witnesses in his third book
chap. 12. of the life of Constantine. Sedition begotten in the Church of God
(says Constantine) seem to me to contain in it self more trouble, and
bitterness, then war or battle.

4. Since by divine providence, his Majesty is King of diverse Kingdoms: It
shall be much content both to himself, to his Nobles and Court, and to all his
people: When his Majesty shall in person visit any of his Kingdoms, that
King, Court, and people, may without all scruple of conscience, be partakers
of one and the same form of divine worship, and his Majesty with the Court
may come to the public Assembly of the people, and serve God with them
according to the practice of the good Kings of Judah: As on the other part;
difference in forms of divine worship divides between the King and the
people.

5. This shall be a great comfort to all his Majesty's Subjects, when they
travel abroad from their own Country, to any other place in his Majesty's
dominions, whither for commerce, or whatsoever negotiation and effaires: That
they may with confidence resort to the public worship, as if they were at
home, and in their own paroch Church, and shall satisfy many doubts, and
remove many exceptions, jealousies, and scandals, which arise upon resorting to
different forms of worship.

6. The names of Haeresies, and Sects, Puritanes, Conformists, Separatists,
which rent the bowels both of Church and Kingdom, are a matter of much
stumbling to the people, and diminish the glory of his Majesty's reign, shall
no more be heard, but as the Lord is one, his Name shall be one, and the name
of the people one, in all his Majesty's dominions.

7. Papists and Recusants shall despair of success, to have their Religion
set up again, and shall either conform themselves, or get themselves hence,
and irreligious men shall have a great scandal removed out of their way, which
shall be a mean of great saftie and security, and of many blessings both to
King and people: I am persuaded (says Constantine) as Eusebius records in
his life lib. 2. cap. 63. Were I able as it is in my desires, to bind all the
true worshippers of God, by the common bond of concord, all the Subjects of my
Empire would quickly turn themselves to their pious ordinances.

8. This unity of Religion shall make Ministers to build the Church with both
their hands, whiles now the one hand is holden out in opposition against the
other party, and shall turn the many and unpleasant labors of writting and
reading of unprofitable controversies into treatises of mortification, and
studies of devotion, and practical divinity.

This unity of Religion is a thing so desirable, that all found Divines and
Politicians are for it, where it may be easily obtained and brought about, and
as we conceive so pious and profitable a work, to be worthy the best
considerations: So are we earnest in recommending it to your Lo. that it may be
brought before his Majesty, and the Patliament, as that which does highly
concern his Majesty's honor and the well of all his dominions. And which
without forcing of consciences, seems not only to be possible, but an easy
work. But because the matter is of great weight and of large extent, Our desire
is, that for the present some course may betaken for an uniformitie in
government.

1. Because there can be small hope of unity in Religion (which is the chief
bond of Peace and humane society) unless there be first one form of
Ecclesiastical government.

2. Because difference in this point has been the maine cause of all other
differences between the two Nations, since the reformation of Religion.

3. Because (although it ought not to be so) we find it true in experience,
that Churchmen through their corruption are more hot and greater Zelotes
about government, then about matters more substantial, their worldly dignities
and wealth being herein concerned: As Erasmus rendereth this reason of the
animosity of the Church of Rome against Luther, seeking after Reformation, that
he medleth with the Popes crown, and the Monks bellies.

4. It is observed by Politicians, and we have found it in experience, that
Churchmen do not only bear with different Religions, and suffer division
both in Church and Policy to rise and grow, but do also foment and cherish
the contrary factions, that they themselves may grow big and swell to a
greatness, while both sides have their dependence upon them; and has their
thoughts busied about other matters, then about Church Government, and the
ambition, pomp, and other corruptions of Church governors.

5. None of all the reformed Churches, although in Nations far distant one
from another, and under diverse princes, and Magistrates are at so great a
difference in Church Government, as these two Kingdoms which are in one Yland,
and under one Monarch, which made King James (of happy memory) to labor to
bring them under one form of government.

But since all the question is, whither of the two Church-governments shall
have place in both Nations (for we know no third form of the government of a
national Church distant from these) we do not presume to propone the form of
government of the Church of Scotland, as a pattern of the Church of England,
but do only represent in all modesty these few considerations, according to
the trust committed unto us.

1. The government of the Church of Scotland, is the same with the government
of all the reformed Churches, and has been by them universally received and
practiced, with the reformation of the doctrine and worship, from which so far
as we depart: We disjoyne our selves as far from them, and welosse so much of
our harmonic with them: Whence it is, that from other reformed Churches, it
has been written to the Church of Scotland, That it was a great gift of God,
that they had brought together into Scotland, the purity of Religion, and
Discipline, whereby the doctrine is safely, kept, praying and beseeching
them, so to keep those two together, as being assured, that if the one fall,
the other can not long stand. Upon the other part, the government of the Church
of England, was not changed with the doctrine at the time of the reformation:
The Pope was rejected, but his Hierarchy was retained, which has been a
ground of jealousy and suspicion to the reformed Churches, of continual
contention in the Church of England these foure-score years past, since the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth her reign, and of hopes, and expectation to the
church of Rome, for says Coulzen in his politics, l. 2. c. 18. Were all
England brought once to approve of Bishops, it were easy to reduce it to the
church of Rome. But what one Prince has begun, and by reason of the times, or
of other hindrances could not promote or perfect, an other raised up by the
mercy of God, may bring to pass, according to the example of good Josiah,
like unto whom there was no King before, which we heartily wish may be
verified of King Charles.

2. The Church of Scotland has been continually and sundry ways vexed, and
disquieted by the Bishops of England. First, by the continual and restless
negotiation of the prime Prelates in England, with some of that faction in
Scotland, both before the coming of King James into England (which we are
ready to make manifest) and since his coming, till at last a kind of
Episcopacie was erected there, by the power of the Prelates of England, against
the confession of Faith, the Covenant, and acts of the national assemblies of
the Church of Scotland. Secondly, the Prelates of England, without the consent
or knowledge of the church of Scotland, gave Episcopal consecration, to some
corrupt members of the Church of Scotland, and sent them home to consecrat
others like unto themselves. And when some great men have been for their
obstinacy in papistrie excommunicat by the Church of Scotland, they have been
absolved from the sentence by the Prelates of England: So that they have
usurped the power of that which indeed is the highest point of jurisdiction.
Thirdly, they rested not here, but proceeded to change the form of divine
worship, and for many years bred a great disturbance both to Pastors and
people, by five Articles of conformity with the Church of England. Fourthly,
having in the former prevailed, and finding their opportunity, and a rare
concurse of many powerful hands, and heads, ready to cooperate, they made
strong assaults upon the whole external worship and doctrine of our Church, by
enforcing upon us a popish book of common prayer, for making Scotland first as
the weaker, and thereafter England conform to Rome: And upon the consciences,
liberties, and goods of the people, by a book of canons and constitutions
Ecclesiastical, establishing a tyrannical power in the persons of our
Prelates, and abolishing the whole Discipline and government of our Church,
without so much as consulting with any Presbytery, Synod, or Assembly in all
the land, Fifthly, They procured subsidies to be lifted for war against us,
under the pain of deprivation to all of the Clergy who should refuse.
Sixthly, They commanded both preaching and imprecations against us, as enemies
to God and the King. Seventhly, they have received into the ministry, and
provided place for such of our Ministers, as for their disobedience to the
voice of the Assembly, and other faults and scandals, were deposed in
Scotland. And finally they have left nothing undone which might tend to the
overthrow of our Church, not only of late by the occasion of these troubles,
whereof they have been the authors. But of old, from that opposition which is
between Episcopal government, and government of reformed churches by
Assemblies. Upon the contrare. The Church of Scotland has never molested them,
either in the doctrine, worship, ceremonies, or discipline of their church, but
have lived quietly by them, kept themselves within the line, and would have
been glad to enjoy their own liberties in peace, which yet is, and by the
help of God shall be our constant desire, yet can we not conceal our minds,
but in our consciences, and before God, declare not from any sassinesse, or
presumptuous intention to reform England, but from our just fears and
apprehensions, that our reformation that has cost us so dear; And is all our
wealth and glory, shall again be spoiled, and defaced from England? That
whatsoever peace shall be agreed upon, we cannot see, nor conceive the way how
our peace shall be firm and durable, but our fear is, that all will run
into a confusion again ere it be long, if Episcopacie shall be retained in
England, for the same causes will not fail to produce the same effects: Their
opposition against, and hatred of the government of the reformed Churches;
Their credit at Court, and nearness to the King living in England, the opinion
they have of their own great learning, and of the glory of their prelaticall
church, joined with the small esteem and disdain of our Christian simplicity,
the consanguinitie of their Hierarchy, with the church of Rome, and their
fear to fall before us, at last will still be working, especially now when
they are made operative, and shall be set on work at the first advantage, by
their vindictive disposition, to be avenged upon us for the present quarrel,
which can never be changed by any limitations. As on the contrary, the cause
being taken away, the effects will cease, and the peace shall be firm. It
would seem that limitations, cautions, and triennall Parliaments may do much:
But we know that fear of perjury, infamy, excommunication, and the power of a
national Assembly, which was in Scotland as terrible to a Bishop, as a
Parliament, could not keep our men from rising to be Prelates, and after they
had risen to their greatness, their apology was, Conditiones illa pro tempore
magis quo contentiosis rixandi ansa praeriperetur quam animo in perpetuum
observandi acceptae. These other cautions or conditions were rather accepted
of, for the time, to prevent all occasion of jangling with the contentious,
then out of any purpose to observe them forever. Much is spoken and written of
the limitation of Bishops; But what good can the limitation do to the Church?
if ordination and Episcopal jurisdiction shall depend upon them, and shall not
be absolutely into the hands of the Assemblies of the Church? And if it shall
not depend upon them, what shall their office be above other Pastors? Or how
shall their labors be worthy so large wages? What service can they do to
King, Church, or Estate? Rome and Spain may be glad at the retaining of the
name of Bishops, more then the reformed Churches, which expect from us at this
time some matter of rejoicing.

3. The reformed Churches do hold without doubting, their Church officers,
Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons, and their Church government by
Assemblies to be jure divino and perpetual, as is manifest in all their
writtings: And on the other part, Episcopacie as it differs from the office
of a Pastor, is almost universally acknowledged, even by the Bishops themselves
and their adherents, to be but an humane ordinance, established by law and
custom for conveniencie, without warrant of Scripture, which therefore by
humane authority may be altered and abolished, upon so great a conveniencie,
and is the hearty conjunction, withal the reformed Churches, and a durable
peace of the two Kingdoms, which have been formerly divided by this partition
wall: We therefore desire that Ius divinum and humanum, conscience and
conveniencie, yea, the greater convenience with the lesser, and we may add a
conveniencie with a inconveniencle, may be compared and equally weighed in the
balance, without adding any weight of prejudice.

4. The Church of Scotland warranted by authority, has abjured Episcopal
government, as having no warrant in Scripture; and by solemn oath and covenant
before, and now again of late, has established the government in the Church
by Assemblies: But England neither having abjured the one, nor sworn the
other, has liberty from all bonds of this kind, to make choice of that which
is most warrantable by the word of God. And least it be thought, we have
wilfully bund our selves of late by oath, that we be not pressed with a change,
We desire it to be considered, that our late oath is nothing, but the
renovation of our former oath and covenant, which did bind our Church before,
but was transgrest of many by means of the Prelates.

5. If it shall please the Lord, to move the Kings heart to choice this course,
he shall in a better way, then was projected, accomplish the great and
glorious design, which King James had before his eyes, all his time of the
unity of Religion and Church government in all his dominions, his Crowns and
Kingdoms shall be free of all assaults and policies of churchmen, which
whither in the way of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction and Church censure; Or by
complying with the Pope, the grearest enemy of Monarchy; Or by bringing of
civil government into a confusion; Or by taking the fat of the sacrifice to
themselves: When the people are pleased with the government, and when they are
displeased by transferring the hatred upon authority, which was never wont to
be done by any good Statesman; Which all these ways have proceeded from
Bishops, seeking their own greatness: Never from Assemblies, which unless
overruled by Bishops, have been a strong guard to Monarchy, and Magistracy,
both the one and the other being the ordinance of God: The Church shall be
peaceably governed by common consent of Churchmen in Assemblies; In which the
Kings Majesty has always that eminency which is due unto the supreme
Magistrate, and by which all heresies, errors, schisms, before abounding under
Episcopal government, shall be suppressed, and the State, and all civil
matters in Parliament, Council, and other inferior Judicatories, governed by
civil men, and not by Churchmen, who being out of their own element, must
needs stir and make trouble to themselves, and the whole State, as woeful
experience has taught. The work shall be better done, and the means which
did uphold their unprofitable pomp and greatness, may supply the wants of
many preaching members to be provided to places, and without the smallest loss
or damnage to the Subject, may be a great increase of his Majesty's revenues,
his royal Authority shall be more deeply rooted in the unite hearts, and more
strongly guarded by the joint forces of his Subjects, as if they were all of
one Kingdom, and his greatness shall be enlarged abroad; by becoming the
Head of all the Protestants in Europe, to the greater terror of his enemies,
and the forcing of greatness to his Posterity and royal Succession. All which
we entreat, may be represented to his Majesty, and the Houses of Parliament,
as the expression of our desires, and fears, and as a testimony of our
Faithfulness in acquiting our selves in the trust committted unto us: But no
ways forgetting, our distance, or intending to pass our bounds in prescribing
or setting down rules to their Wisedom^ and Authority, which we do highly
reverence and honor, and from which only as the proper fountain, the Laws
and order of reformation, in this Church and Policy, must proceed, for the
nearer union and greater happiness of his Majesty's Dominions.

FINIS.

