REMARQUES UPON Mr. PALMES'S ANSWER TO SIR RICHARD TEMPLE'S CASE
1st. MR. Palms having agreed with Sr. Richard Temple's Case, that the Point
in Question, referred to the Committee, was; in whom the Possession remained at
the meeting of the Parliament, of the place where the Breach of Privilledge
complained of, by both Parties was done: To prove it to be in him, he Alleges,
that all the Lands in Question, were the Lands of Mrs. Danby, who Dyed without
Issue; but takes no Notice that she had Mortgaged the Inheritance thereof to
Sr. Richard Temple, and given him Possession in 1686, according to the Deed of
Mortgage; and that Sr. Richard had received three half Years Rent before Mrs.
Danbys Death: And was in the peaceable Possession till the 14th. of March last.
And as to Mr. Palms's pretended Attornment, it was not of all the Tennants; but
only of one in six, that had any Interest in the Land in Question.

2dly. As to the Delivery of any Leases of Ejectment, though it was alleged at
the Committee, yet no such thing was proved: For in truth what Ejectments were
delivered, were for part of the Jointure Lands, which sell lately; and not the
Lands now in Question: So that Mr. Palms has no Color for his Pretenses, that
Sr. Richard was out of Possession.

3dly. Whether the 21 Persons that came with 7 Teems Forceably to enter upon,
and Plough the Middle Field, or those three complained of, that endeavored
only to defend the Possession, and hinder their Ploughs, were the Ryoters and
Breakers of Privileges, is Submitted to every Man's Judgment.

4thly. As to the false Suggestion, that the Attornment of the Tennants to Sr.
Richard Temple was to avoid Creditors; he appeals to the Committee, whither any
such thing was to avoid Creditors; he appeals to the Committee, whither any
such thing was proved, or so much as mentioned there, but the Mortgage admitted
to be good.

5thly. And as to the Specious Offers, pretended by him to be made to Sr.
Richard Temple it is to be observed, that in Cases of Ryots and Forceable
Entries, there is no Privilege of Parliament; all the Parties on both sides
being bound over to Answer it, there was no need of Waver of Privilege, or
troubling the House about it; and if the designed to obtein any Complyances by
those Methods, surely he was in a very Improper and Unreasonable Way.

But he knowing the Equity of Redemption, was given from him to another;
therefore he tries all ways to compass the Possession and Incumberances, to
defeat him and the Creditors and Legatees, which Sr. Richard neither in
Honor, nor in Justice can comply with.

That the last Note is both false and frivilouse, since the Attornment was
pursuant to the Deed, and the Agreements therein; and the former Mortgage
assigned, was in the same manner; but the Possession as well as the Attornment,
and the Receipt of the Rents being proved; Sr. Richard's Attornment was never
questioned, nor indeed material: But Mr. Palme's Pretense for the Possession,
was only the Attornment of one of the six Tennants; and Mr. Palms having no
Estate in Law, only an Equity of Redemption, could not be good or effectual to
our Sr. Richard of his Possession.


