ACT OF PARLIAMENT AND COMMISSION, Anent the EXCISE And the COLLECTING thereof.

29. July 1644.

EDINBURGH, Printed by EVAN TYLER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

Anno Dom. 1644.

COMMISSION for the EXCISE, anent the COLLECTING thereof.
29. July 1644.
THe Estates of Parliament presently conveened, by virtue of the last Act or
the last Parliament, holden by his Majesty and the three Estates at Edinburgh
in Anno 1641. Having taken to their serious consideration the course and way
laid down by the Convention of Estates for raising and up-lifting of Moneys by
way of Excise, for supply and relief of the necessities of the Armies raised
and sent forth by this Kingdom, for Reformation and Defense of Religion;
Together with the Acts made and set down by the said Convention of Estates and
their Committee there anent. And after mature deliberation, finding the same to
be the most just and equal way, least prejudicial to this Kingdom for
raising and uplifting of Moneys, for supply and relief of the Armies, and for
defraying of the public Debts and Burdens contracted for that end.

Therefore the said Estates of Parliament now conveened, Have ratified,
allowed, and approven, And by the tenor hereof Ratify, allow, and approve, the
Act made and set down by the said Convention of Estates for imposing and laying
on of the said Excise, to be up-lifted off the particular Goods and
Commodities, contained in the Table annexed thereto: With the Acts and
Ordinances made and set down by the Committee of Estates anent the Regulating
and up-lifting of the said Excise, Together with all others Acts and Ordinances
made and set down by the said Convention of Estates and their Committee, or by
the Commissioners for the Excise concerning the foresaid Excise, and the
in-gathering and up-lifting thereof. And the said Estates of Parliament Ordain
the foresaids Acts and Ordinances and every ane of them, To have the full force
of ane Act of Parliament: Except allenerly in sua far as the famine are
hereby altered and changed, In manner after mentioned: Of the which Act made
and set down for imposing and laying on of the said Excise, and Acts for
Regulating thereof, The tenor follows.

AT EDINBURGH, 31. January 1644.
THe Convention of Estates considering that this Kingdom having entered into a
solemn League and Covenant, for Reformation and Defense of Religion, the
Honor and Happiness Kings Majesty, and the Peace and Liberty of the
Kingdoms of Scotland, England, and Ireland: and in pursuance of these ends,
being forced to leavie an Army to be sent into England: and that by the said
Covenant they are bound in Conscience, Duty, and for their own safety, To
contribute their best endeavors in providing of some means for preservation
of Religion, Laws and Liberties, from utter ruin; for relief of the
necessities of the Army sent from this Kingdom for that purpose; and for some
supply of the extreme wants of the Scots Army in Ireland. And also remembering
that the great burdens of this Kingdom have hithertills line upon the
well-affected, who did willingly embrace the same, whiles the Malignants were
using all cunning ways, both to free themselves, and hinder others, Do find
it absolutely necessar, that some constant, just, and equal way, least
prejudicial to the Kingdom, and most beneficial to the Cause in hand, be
resolved upon, for settling ane solid foundation of a stock of credit and
security, whereupon sums of Money may be raised for the present supply, and
future relief of the necessities of these Armies: And after serious
deliberation have agreed, that the same shall be by way of Excise.

And accordingly Statutes and Ordains, that the several Rates hereunto annexed,
shall be laid on all and every the Commodities following, over and above all
Customs, and other duties due and payable for the same: And recommends to the
Committee of Estates, To take some course how this Excise may most speedily,
and with least trouble and expense to the Kingdom, be up-lifted through the
Shires and Burrows thereof.

The Roll of the particular Commodities subject in payment of EXCISE, and of
the RATES laid thereon.
ON every pint of Ale and small Beer sold, to be paid by the Brewer or maker
thereof, and to be allowed to him in the price, or which any Housekeeper
breweth for his own spending, to be paid by every such Housekeeper, Four
penies.

Beer or Ale exported for provision of Ships is to pay no Excise.

On foreign imported Beer every pint, Twelve penies.

On every pint of strong Beer to to be paid sicklike by the Brewer or
Housekeeper, Six penies.

On every pint of French wine already imported, or to be imported, to be paid
by the first buyer thereof (the buyer being ane Vintner) after the sale of the
same: Providing it sell before Lambmes next, Or by the Buyer for private use,
immediately after the buying, One shilling four penies.

On every pint of Spanish wine, in like manner, Two shillings eight penies.

On every pint of Aquavitae or strong waters sold within the country, Two
shillings eight penies.

On every pound of Tobacco, Six shillings.

On every slaughtered Oxen, Bull, or Kine, of sixteen pound price, or above, to
be paid by the buyer or slayer, Twenty shillings.

And on every one of them under that price, Thirteen shillings four penies.

On all Oxen, Bulls, or Kine transported, to be paid by the transporter for the
piece, Twenty four shillings.

On all Sheep slaughtered or transported, at or above Forty shillings price,
to be paid by the slayer or transporter, Four shillings.

And under that price, Two shillings.

On all slaughter Stirks of eight pounds price or above, Six shillings eight
penies.

Sicklike on every such Stirke beneath that price, Four shillings.

On all calfes or goats of Forty shillings price the piece or above, sold, or
for private use, Four shillings.

On each of them under that price, Two shillings.

On all Swine, Six shillings.

On all Lambs and Kids, Two shillings.

On the Merchandise of every elne of silk stuff from five merks value to ten,
to be paid by the buyer, Six shillings eight penies.

On every elne thereof above ten merks, Ten shillings.

On every elne of plush or panvelvet, Twenty shillings.

On every elne of satin, Thirteen shillings four penies.

On every ounce of gold or silver lace, Thirteen shillings four penies.

On every elne of gold or silver cloth, Three pounds.

On every bever hat, Twenty four shillings.

On every half bever hat, Twelve shillings.

On every pair of silk stockins, Thirteen shillings four penies.

On every elne of broad cloth, not exceeding seven pounds. Retailed six
shillings.

On every elne of cloth exceeding that price, Twelve shillings.

On each elne of narrow cloth, serges, and other worset or hair stuffs
imported, at, or above Forty shillings the elne, Two shillings.

On the elne of baise or freezes, at or above Thirty shillings the elne, Twelve
penies.

On all cambricke, lawne, or holland cloth, for the value of every twenty
shillings, Twelve penies.

On every elne of imported perline of thread or silk betwixt three and six
pounds, Twelve shillings.

On the elne betwixt six and twelve pound, and so forth proportionably, Twenty
four shillings.

On coal exported in Scots or English bottoms of the value of twelve pounds,
Six shillings.

On all coal of the same value exported in foreign bottoms, Twelve shillings.

On every twelve pound value of all kind of made work brought home, Thirteen
shillings four penies.

All manner of work made within the Kingdom to be free of Excise.

THis Excise to begin upon the 10. day of February next to come; And to endure
only so long as the necessity of the Army shall require, and at the farthest
but for ane year: And if the Parliament at their next meeting shall in place
hereof find out and appoint a better and more expedit way to provide money for
supplying of the Armies, and paying the provision made to them in the interim,
then this way of Excise is to cease.

And it is hereby declared, That the remainder of the brotherly assistance, The
arrears due to the Army in Ireland, And What shall be due for maintenance of
this Army, and all other sums addebted to this Kingdom by the Kingdom of
England being paid, and therewith all public debts and burdens of this
Kingdom, with what shall be due to the Armies being defrayed, The remainder
thereof over and above this defrayment, shall be employed for repayment of the
Excise, in manner following, viz. What ever shall be the proportion of the
Excise gotten within the Town of Edinburgh and Liberties thereof, The equal
half of the same shall be repayed to the Magistrates and Town Council for behoof
of the said Town. And every other Burgh shall have repetition of the tua part of
the proportion of Excise furnished by them. And the remainder not allowed to the
Burghs in manner foresaid, shall be given proportionable for the public use of
the several Shires, according to the quantity of Excise paid by them.

AT EDINBURGH, 15. February 1644.
FOrsameikle as the Estates of this Kingdom finding it necessary that some
means should be provided for settling a Stock of credit or security, whereupon
Moneys may be raised for supplying the necessities of the Armies sent from this
Kingdom into England and Ireland, did by their Act of the last of January
unanimously agree and Ordain, that the same should be by way of Excise, and
recommended to the Committee of Estates to take the best way how the same might
be most speedily and with least expense managed and up-lifted: And the
Committee of Estates having taken the same to their consideration, they have
thought fit, and accordingly concluded and agreed upon the Acts following, as
most conducing to the better regulating and up-lifting of the Moneys to be
raised on this Excise: And Ordains the same to be Printed, and published at the
Market Crosses and Parish Kirks of the Kingdom, where through none pretend
ignorance of the same:

of which Acts the Tenor follows.
THe Committee of Estates think fit, that for the better ordering Commission of
Excise.
of this Excise there should be a Commission settled to have the charge
thereof; And for that purpose nominate and appoint John Earl of Lauderdale,
John Lord Balmerinoch, and Robert Lord Burghlie, Sir Patrick Hammiltoun, Sir
Michael Balfoure of Denmylne, Master James Reid of Pitlethie, Sir John Smith
Provest of Edinburgh, John Semple Provest of Dumbartan, and James Stuart
Merchant in Edinburgh, or any three of them, and the Lord Chancellor to be
supernumerarie, to be Commissioners of Excise; With power to them to govern
the whole Office of Excise, To make Acts and Constitutions for the better
regulating thereof, and the more speedy up-lifting of moneys to be raised
thereupon, and to see the same put in execution: With power also to them, To
nominate, appoint, censure, or displace, as they shall find occasion, all
subordinate Officers, as Collectors, Surveyers, Keepers of the Registers of
Entries and Accounts, and all other subservient Officers: and at their entries
to take their oaths and surety for the faithful discharge of their Offices,
and to allow them such yearly and proportionable allowances for their pains,
as they with approbation of the Committee of Estates shall think fitting.

As also with power to them, To call to an account, als often as they shall think
fitting, the Thesaurer of Excise, Collectors, Surveyers, and others
Intrometters; And to keep in record all the moneys and entries that shall come
into the Office, to be represented by them to the Estates or their Committees,
as the same shall be called for: And generally with power to them to do every
thing that may tend for the right regulating of this Excise, and to give their
oaths de fidele administratione. This Commission to endure ay and while it be
recalled by the Estates or their Committees, to whom the Commissioners are to
be answerable for their proceedings.

Likeas the Committee of Estates nominates and appoints (...) to be Thesaurer
of this Excise, Thesaurer.
With power to him and his servant or under-Receiver, for whom he shall be
answerable, to receive the whole Moneys of Excise from all the Collectors
thereof, and to disburse the same as he shall receive warrant from the Estates
or their Committees, without whose warrant he is to disburse nothing, except
the ordinary allowances, and other incident necessaries belonging to the
office, as he shall be warranted by the Commissioners of Excise: And the
Thesaurer is hereby appointed to make and deliver a faithful and true account
of all receipts and disbursements to the Commissioners or Quorum thereof
monthly, or oftener, as he shall be required by the Estates or their
Committees, and shall give his oath and find caution for the faithful account
and discharge of his Office.

Registers and Clerks
It is also ordained, That there be a Register belonging to the Office, who
shall keep a book wherein are to be insert all the receipts of moneys raised
upon this Excise (being allowed by the Commissioners) according as the same
shall be given up by the several Collectors in Burghs and other places in the
Country. Wherein also are to be insert the names and surnames of the
Collectors thereof, and of the several places and Parishes whereout of these
sums were collected, with the date of the deliverie thereof to the Thesaurer.
As also all Extracts that the Surveyors shall take out of any Note or Book
belonging to the Custome-houses, and entries to be made by the Surveyors of
Exciseable goods, remaining in Cellars, Storehouses, or any other places or
houses of any persons that sels, buys, or spends any of these Commodities.

And this is to be without prejudice of the Office of Clerk to the Excise and
his deputes, who are to minute and frame all Acts and Warrants that comes
before the Commissioners, or issues from them, and keep a Register thereof,
write Missives, and do every other thing incumbent to the Office of a Clerk.

The Collectors are to receive and leavie money of all Exciseable Collectors.
goods, within the hounds appointed to them: And to receive from the Surveyers
of these bounds, the Inventar of Exciseable Commodities, conform to the
Survey: or they themselves may enquire and take up the Excise, as they shall
think best for the Service. The Collectors of the Shires of Edinburgh, Lithgow,
Haddintoun, Berwick, Roxburgh, Peebles, Lanerick, Stirlin, Perth, Fyffe,
Forfar, Clackmannan, and Kinrosse, shall the second Tuesday of March next, come
to the Office of Excise, and bring in the Excise money paid the month before;
they shall enter the same in the book of Office, and then by warrant deliver
them to the Thesaurer. Upon the second Tuesday of April, the Collectors of the
Shires of Renfrew, Dumbartan, Argyle, Tarbet, Bute, Air, Dumfreis, Stuartie of
Kircudbright, Wigtoun, Kincardin, Aberdene, and Bamss, shall do the like since
the tenth of February. And upon the second Tuesday of May, the Collectors of
the Shires of Murray, Innernesse, Nairne, Sutherland, Cromartie, Caithnesse,
Orknay, and Zetland, shall do the like since the tenth of February last. And
the Collectors are to do every other thing as they shall be warranted by the
Commissioners.

The Surveyers are hereby authorized and warranted, Surveyers.
To enter the Custome-houses, fearch, view, examine, take Copies of any Custom
and Impost-book belonging thereto; As also to enter the Sellers, Storehouses;
Brew-houses, or any other houses or places belonging to any persons, that sels,
buys, or spends, any of the said Commodities liable to Excise: And to take
Inventar thereof for the Collectors use in levying the Excise money. They are
also to perform this Service, as they shall be commanded by the Commissioners.

The Subservient Officers, are hereby authorized with power, Subservient
officers
To make search for un-Excised goods, and of all those who shall refuse to make
true entry of their Exciseable Commodities: And to summond offenders before
the Commissioners: And to do any other thing competent to such Offices, as they
shall be warranted by the Commissioners.

And that their Officers may the more readily perform their several charges,
and the Excise-money timeously lifted; Ale and Beer.
It is statute and ordained, That all Importers, or Brewers of Beer to Burgh or
Land, for sale, or private use within this Kingdom, shall weekly deliver to
the Collector of Excise, or Surveyer, a true and perfect List of the Beer
weekly brewed, or imported by them, as said is: And that they pay the Excise to
the Collector weekly, and the Brewer for private use monthly: And both are to
give up an account, and make payment, as aforesaid, under the pain of forfeit
of the double of the Beer concealed; Beside, that the Brewer or Importer for
sale, shall be discharged his Trade for a year thereafter; And this failzie to
be proven by any lawful manner of probation.

And it is declared, That the Excise of Ale and Wine shall be uplifted,
according to the several Rates in the Table of Excise, allowing to every Boll
of brown Malt, containing four Furlots of prickmet, within the Kingdom,
fifteen gallons of Ale; and to every Tun of Wine sixty gallons. And it is
ordained, That the buyer of Ale, Beer, or any other Merchandise exciseable and
retailed, shall notwithstanding of the trust of the stock, be obliged to pay
the Excise in ready money.

It is ordained, that all Malt-men in Burgh or Land, shall keep a book, wherein
shall be insert all the Bols of Malt made by them, and the names of all the
Buyers thereof, with the quantity sold to every person, and what quantity they
brew themselves, and which book or double thereof, the said Malt-man shall
deliver under his hand to the Office of Excise Collectors or Surveyers, when he
shall be required; and failing herein, he shall confiscate all his Malt
concealed and not given up, as said is.

Likewise it is ordained, That all Millers shall declare and give up to the
Collectors and Surveyers as they shall be required, of all the Malt, ground at
their several and respective Milnes every week, under all highest pain, and as
they will be answerable to the Commissioners of Excise.

Whereas a great quantity of Malt is usually transported to the far High-Lands;
It is ordained, That the buyers and transporters shall pay the Excise to the
sellers thereof, notwithstanding they buy the same upon trust, and take a
Ticket of payment of the Excise, which being produced to the Collector or
Surveyer where they live, shall be freed of the Excise, otherwise shall pay the
Excise, and forfeit the whole Malt concealed.

It is also ordained, Wine.
That the Custom and Impost books, be made patent to the Surveyers, or other
Officers of Excise, who are ordained to take a note of the same, and of the
Wines entered therein; Besides, That the Merchant-Venturers or Owners, shall be
obliged to declare to whom he has sold the same, Vintner or other person
whatsoever; and what they sell for private use, that the first Seller or
Importer shall be liable for the Excise thereof, which is to be paid in by the
Buyer for private use to them before the delivery thereof, notwithstanding the
Wine it self is taken upon trust. And for such Wines as the Merchant-Venturer
has before this time sold and delivered for private use, It is ordained, That
the buyer or receiver shall be obliged to give up an account thereof to the
Collector or Surveyer of the Excise, and pay the Excise thereof; As also that
the Vintner give up a weekly account to the Collector or Surveyer what they
sell, and pay Excise accordingly: Wherein if either the buyer of Wine for
private use, or the Vintner shall failzie, they are to forfeit the double avail
of the Wine, concealed and not paid for: Besides, That the Vintner shall be
discharged sale of Wine for a year. And this failzie to be proven as of before.

Aquavitae and strong Waters.
That all makers and sellers of Strong Water and Aquavitae, give up a true
Inventar under their hands to the Office of Excise, or to the Collectors and
Surveyers of the bounds where they dwell, as they shall be required, of all the
Strong waters and Aquavitae made by them before it be sold, and after it is
sold, give up a List of the first buyers thereof, with the quantity sold to
every person; to the effect the Excise may be tried and paid to the Public.
And it is declared, That the maker or seller of the said Strong Water, shall
pay the Excise after they be sold, and take the Excise from the first buyer.
And if the maker or seller failzie to give the said Inventar or List, or if the
samine shall be improven according to the Laws of the Country, the said maker
or seller shall for fault the value of the Strong Water so concealed and
improven. Likeas the first buyers of Strong Water for sale, shall give an
account of all the Strong Water and Aquavitae lying in their hands as yet
unfold, and of what they have sold, after the tenth of February instant, to the
Collectors or Surveyers within their bounds: To the intent what is sold after
the said day, may pay Excise; and sailing herein, to forfault the value of the
waters not compted and Excised. And the maker or seller paying the Excise,
shall give a ticket to every other seller of the said Strong Water, testifying
that the Excise is paid, and whosoever shall not instruct the payment of Excise by
the ticket foresaid, shall be liable in payment of the Excise, and forfault the
value of the waters not excised.

And whereas it is the custom of all Merchant Ware excised, Merchant Wares.
That at the receiving of their Goods, they make Entry to the Office of
Excise, and pay the Excise before they retail the same: Or otherwise that the
Surveyers enter their Shops, Warehouses, or such other places where their
Goods may be apprehended, and take oaths for help and qualification, and
confiscate the double of what is concealed for the first fault* Yet
notwithstanding, for the ease and better accommodating the Merchants Traders
with Excised Goods in this Kingdom, It is ordained, that the Retailers and
Sellers of Goods chargeable with Excise, shall monthly give in to the
Commissioners of Excise, or any having their warrant, a Book subscribed by
their hands; containing a note and an account of all the several Goods and
Commodities Exciseable and sold by them within that month, with the days of
the month, and persons names to whom they were sold, and pay the Excise
accordingly. And the failzie or omission herein, to be the triple of the price
of the Commodities omitted or concealed, and to be proven as aforesaid.

And it is ordained, that all Exciseable Commodities that are bought by a
Shopkeeper or Retailer from another, the first Retailer or Shopkeeper is
liable in payment of the Excise. Also whatsoever Commodities are bought by
others then Shop keepers, for private use from the Importer, the Importer or
first Seller is liable for Excise. And whatsoever Commodities are bought from
any Importer, by any other Burger in any other Burghs, or by any Merchant that
keeps Booth, the first buyer from the Importer pays the Excise in the place
where he lives. And therefore it is hereby declared, that the first Importer is
only liable to pay the Excise of those Goods he sels to any that have no
residence within Burgh, or Chapmen that have no constant residence, but travels
with his Pack through the Country. And therefore upon the Importers certificat
of the first payment of Excise, these parties are free.

It is also ordained, ^leshes.
That the Deacons of Fleshers within Burgh, or any Flesher elsewhere, shall give
up the names of all the Masters of their Calling, and the names of all those
that presents Fleshes to be sold in Markets: And that every Master shall give
up the names of all their Servants and Slayers; And that the Fleshers and
Slayers of Oxen, Bulls, or any slaughtered Goods, mentioned in the table of
Excise in Edinburgh, Leith, Cannongate, or Liberties thereof, Potterraw,
West-port, or Pleasance, shall compeir on Monday of every week before the
Commissioners of Excise, beginning the fourth Monday of February, the 26. day
of the month: Bringing with them a List of all the slaughtered and sold Goods
from the tenth of February, to the intent they may pay the Excise thereof; And
failing of compeirance or paying the Excise, they shall forfeit the price of
each Beast concealed, toties quoties; And failing thereof, shall be imprisoned,
till they make payment of all bygone Excises and forfeitures unpayed: as also
find caution for their appearance, and paying of Excises and forfeits they
shall incur in time coming, and be discharged of that Calling, during the
pleasure of the Commissioners of Excise.

It is also ordained, That every Porter, or any other that shall be appointed
within Burgh, shall keep a Book, to be given in under their subscription and
declaration to the Commissioners, wherein shall be insert the number and
several kinds of all Excisable Beasts, both slaughtered and unslaughtered,
that enters within the Ports thereof, with the names of the persons to whose
behoof those Beasts are brought in. And the said Porter, or other appointed,
shall receive the Excise of the slaughtered Goods from the in-bringer thereof,
not showing a ticket from the Surveyer, that it is already paid; otherwise he
shall take the Excise, and give a ticket to warrant him at all other Surveyers
hands, and deliver the same to the Collector. And whosoever buyeth Skins or
Hides of slaughtered Goods within Burgh, shall keep a Book to be given in
under his subscription and declaration, wherein shall be insert the names of
the Fleshers, and sellers of the Skins and Hides within the said Burghs,
that the more exact trial may be had of all the slaughtered Goods therein,
lest the Public be defrauded of the benefit of the same. And if the said
Buyers of Skin and Hide neglect to bring in this Book monthly, and oftener as
they shall be required, they shall forfeit all the Skins they have cost and
not given up; and this concealment to be proven, ut supra: and the like or any
other course shall be taken by the Commissioners for the rest of the Kingdom
in Burgh or Land. The Excise of Fleshes is to be paid by the Slayer or Flesher
for sale; And siclike by any that have of their own, whether paid by their
Tenants, or of their own plenishing.

Touching Tobacco, ^obacco.
It is ordained, that all the Custom and Impost Books be patent to the Office
of Excise, or to the Collectors and Surveyers, to the intent an entry may be
known for the Excise; And that all Skippers, Mariners, and owners of Tobacco,
are obliged before they put out any Goods out of their Ships and Vessels, to
make a true entry thereof under their subscription, and upon declaration, under
the pain of confiscation of what is concealed. And that they give up an
Inventar of all the Tobacco Imported in their ships or vessels, with the names
of the Owners thereof; and that no taksman shall take entry of other Goods,
till the whole Tobacco be entered: to the effect it being sold, the Excise may
be paid to the Public, for which the Owners shall be liable; and shall keep a
Book, which under their handwriting, and upon declaration, they shall produce
to the Commissioners, Collectors, or Surveyers, as they shall be required; in
which Book shall be insert the names and sir-names of all the buyers, with the
quantity bought by every one.

And it is ordained, That the first seller of Tobacco shall give a ticket to
every buyer, showing the Excise thereof paid to the Public: And if the buyer
cannot instruct payment of the Excise by this ticket; he is to be liable in
payment of the Excise by and attour the confiscation of his Tobacco.

And for trial of all Tobacco already imported, and yet unsold within the
Kingdom; It is ordained, that Shopkeepers, Taverners, Ale-sellers, or other
sellers of Tobacco whatsoever, shall be obliged to give a true Inventar and
account of all the Tobacco lying in their hands, or what they have sold, after
the tenth of February, to the office of Excise, or to the Collectors and
Surveyers within the bounds where they dwell: Which if they delay, till search
and trial be made thereof, they shall be liable to the double of the Excise by
and attour the confiscation of the Tobacco. And it is ordained that all
Skippers, Mariners, or Owners of Tobacco, when they make entry of the same,
shall find caution to make payment of the Excise after the sale thereof.

Coal trasported.
It is ordained, That all Coale-Masters be obliged to cause their Grieves at the
loadning of any Ship, or other Vessel with Coal, to be transported out of the
Kingdom, keep a Book, wherein shall be insert the just price of the loadning
of the said Ship or Vessel, with the name of the Ship, Master, or Skipper, and
date of loadning, which book or double thereof he shall give up under his
handwriting to the Collector or Surveyer, the first Tuesday of every month,
beginning the first Tuesday of March next to come, for the Excise payablel
after the tenth of February before: As also the Master and Owner of the Coal,
shall upon his honor and credit subscribe the book foresaid, that it is just
and right to their best knowledge. And failing of the giving up of the said
Inventar, and paying of the Excise thereof, the Master and Owner of the Coal
shall pay the triple of the concealed Coal.

Bestiall transported.
It is ordained, That all Taksmen of the Customs on the Borders, for the
Bestiall driven into England, shall keep a book, and give in the same under
their subscription and true declaration to the office of Excise, wherein shall
be insert the number and several kind of beasts, with the names of the
Drovers, and days of the month when they pass* and shall be comptable for
the Excise thereof four times in the year and oftener, as they shall be
required. And failing of their compearance, compting and paying, shall forfeit
the triple of the Excise foresaid.

^le and ^eer trans^orted.
It is statute and ordained, That no Brewers, sellers of Ale or Beer, give any
Beer or Ale to Skippers for provision of their Ships, before the Skipper
deliver to them a Warrant and License for the quantity of the same from the
Collector or Surveyor within the bounds where they load their Ships, or (in
their absence) of the Magistrate of the bounds, to the intent they take in no
more Beer nor Ale under that pretext, nor may be judged sufficient for the
voyage. And in case of the deliverie of any Beer or Ale, without the Warrant
foresaid, the said Brewers or Sellers shall pay the double of the Excise of
all Beer and Ale, so and without Warrant delivered by them.

Made work imported, which is the explanation of the penult Act contained
within the printed Table of Excise.
It is ordained, That all kind of made Work, brought home and sold, viz.
Brasse-Chandlers, Spurs, Bridle-bits, Stirrop-irons, Horsecombs, Knives,
mounted-Swords above ten marks, or Guards above the same price. All manner of
Saddles, Saddle and Horse-graith, Goldsmith-Work of all sorts of Plate, Rings,
Jewels set or unset. All foreign Pewter, Hangins, Tapestrie, mounted Beds,
Stools, Chaires, Cushions, Carpets, Blankets, Rugs, Coverings, Feather-beds,
Cods, Bowsters, Quilts, Trunks, Chamber-stools, Hat-cases, Caves, Cabinets, and
Cloak-bags, Gloves and Purses of all kind. All made Work of Holland, Cambrick,
Lawn, Tiffanie plain or laced, Needle or Cut-Work, Muffs, Fannes, Feathers,
Pokes, Embroidered Caps and Slippers or with Lace, drinking Glasses, wrought
Petticots, and Wascots, Clocks, Watches, and Munters, Boots and Shoes, shall
be given up by the Merchants-sellers thereof, under subscription and
declaration to the Commissioners, Collectors, or Surveyors, and pay the Excise
thereof for every twelve pound value 13. shillings 4. pence: And failing of
giving up, or paying the Excise, to forfeit the worth of the Goods concealed.

The Committee of Estates, Ordains the Commissioners of every Parish, and
Collectors of the bounds jointly, to appoint the Surveyers, to take sufficient
caution of them, and administer to them the oath for faithful administration.
And the Surveyer shall give in their weekly or monthly accounts to the
Commissioners of every Parish, who shall subscribe the same jointly with the
Surveyor, and upon their credit and honor, to their best knowledge, testify
the truth of the said accounts; to the intent there may be a true charge to
the Collectors of Excise: And also that the Collectors shall give in the double
of the Surveyers book so subscribed, with their own books, under their hands
and declaration to the Commissioners, that the accounts of moneys therein
contained are just and true.

If any person or persons, liable in payment of Excise, shall refuse, conceal,
or neglect to pay the same, according to the rates contained in the table of
Excise, or do any thing contrary thereto, the same being proven before the
Commissioners, they shall forfeit the triple of the value of the goods or
commodities so by him concealed or not paid: And the Commissioners has hereby
power to give order for poynding the readiest of the offenders goods, and
commit them to prison till they pay the forfeit; And that the Informer shall
have paid him from the Thesaurer, which shall be allowed him, the third part
of any forfeits that shall accresse by his information. And it is ordained,
that all confiscate goods, fines, forfeits, and penalties, taken by the
Collectors or Surveyers, or other Officers, shall be paid to the office of
Excise, with the Excise moneys payable by them, the same confiscate goods and
penalties being insert in a book, with the names off whom they were taken, and
for what causes; which book they shall give in to the office under their hand,
and upon declaration, allowing the third part to the Informer, as is aforesaid.

The Commissioners of Excise have hereby power and authority to call before
them any person or persons they shall think fit, to inform and testify
touching all and every one of the said ordinances in the Excise, and to
examine any persons upon oath for the better discovery of any fraud or neglect
in the not entering of any commodities to be entered, or not paying the Excise,
conform to the ordinances made thereanent; Which oath the Commissioners, or
any they shall appoint by their hand-writings, shall have power to administer,
and the testimony of two credible witnesses to be sufficient in that behalf.

It is hereby ordained, That all Commissioners, Thesaurers, Clerks, Registers,
Collectors, Surveyers, or other Officers of Excise, and all other person or
persons who shall do any thing in execution or performance of any ordinance of
the said office, shall be therein from time to time protected and saved
harmless, by the power and authority of the Estates and their Committees.

Like as all Provests and Bailies within Burghs, Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailies,
Constables, and their deputes, and other Magistrates to Burgh and Land, and all
Colonels and Committees of war in the Kingdom, for the time, are hereby
commanded and ordained to be aiding and assisting to the said Commissioners
and Officers of Excise, and every one of them, in the execution of their
several offices and articles therein contained: and that they have a special
care that the Excise of Beer and Ale, Wines, Fleshes, and other things, be
duly paid, and the refusers punished, according to the Statutes in that
behalf made: And hereby they fail not, as they will be answerable to the
Estates, or their Committees.

ANd albeit by the foresaid Act made and set down by the Convention of
Estates, the said Excise is only appointed to endure for the space of a year
after the tenth day of February last bypast; Yet in respect the public debts
and burdens of this Kingdom are increased, and daily increasing, not only by
supplying of the necessities of the Armies first sent to England and Ireland,
but also by raising and maintaining of new Armies for resisting of the late
invasion on the South Borders, and suppressing of the insurrection in the
North; The said Estates of Parliament do hereby declare, statute, and ordain,
That the foresaid Excise, and the collecting and uplifting thereof, shall now
begin upon the first day of August next to come, in this instant year of God
1644. years, and shall continue and endure until the first day of August
thereafter in the year of God 1645. years. And whatever Excise is already
uplifted or exacted for Ale, Beer, Wine, or any other Commodity whatsoever
contained in the Table of Excise, by the Collectors, Brewers, Vintners,
Fleshers, Merchants, or any others persons whatsoever, since the tenth day of
March last bypast; The said Estates of Parliament ordain the same to be
uplifted, collected, and paid to the Thesaurer of Excise for the use of the
Public.

And the said Estates of Parliament, Declare, statute, and ordain, That the
Excise of the Ale and Beer shall be paid by the Brewer, either for sale or
private use, according to the rate of four pennies for ilk pint of Ale and
Beer strong and small over-head, counting and allowing fifteen gallons for ilk
Boll of Malt brewed in Ale, and twenty gallons for ilk Boll of Malt brewed in
Beer strong and small overhead; And the Brewer for sale, for his relief,
shall exact from the buyer for ilk pint of Ale or strong Beer four pennies,
and for ilk pint of small Beer two pennies.

Item, The said Estates of Parliament declare and ordain, That Beer and Ale
for provision of Ships shall no ways be freed and eximed from payment of
Excise, but shall be liable and subject in payment thereof, notwithstanding of
the exemption contained in the Act and Table of Excise; which exemption is
hereby discharged.

Item, The said Estates of Parliament discharges hereby all Vintners of Wine
to exact hereafter the Excise of any French Wine already imported; And statutes
and ordaines, That the new French Wine to be hereafter imported, shall be
liable and subject in payment of a full years Excise. And ordaines the Excise
of the Spanish Wine to stand and be uplifted and exacted from the said first
day of August next to come, during the space above-written.

Item, The said Estates of Parliament for ease to the Merchants do hereby
declare, That the Merchant Wares brought home before the first day of March
last bypast, shall only be liable in payment of the half of the Excise
thereof contained in the Table, after the selling of the same, To be cleared by
the Merchants declaration upon oath.

And the said Estates of Parliament, finding it necessary that a Commission be
given to some able persons, who may have the ordering of every thing concerning
the said Excise, and the speedy uplifting thereof; Have nominate and appointed,
and hereby nominate and appoint, John Earl of Lauderdail, John Lord
Balmerinoch, Robert Lord Burleigh, George Lord Forrester, Patrick Lord Elibank,
Sir John Hope of Craighall, Sir Patrick Hammiltoun of Prestoun, Sir Gilbert
Ramsay of Balmaine, Sir Michael Balfoure of Deanmylne, Master James Reid of
Pittlethie, Sir John Smith Provest of Edinburgh, John Semple Provest of
Dumbartan, James Stuart, John Binnie, and Laurence Henderson Merchants
Burgesses of Edinburgh, and John Earl of Lowdoun, High Chancellor of Scotland,
to be supernumerarie in this Commission, or any three of them, to be
Commissioners for the Excise. And the said Estates of Parliament have given
and granted, and hereby give and grant, full power and warrant to the said
Commissioners, or any three of them, as said is, to govern the Office of
Excise, and to nominate and appoint Collectors, Surveyers, and others under
Officers; And to make and set down all such Acts and Ordinances as they shall
find necessary and expedient for the speedy uplifting of the said Excise, and
to see the same put to execution. And also to call before them all persons
whatsoever who shall happen to violate or transgress any of the Acts and
Ordinances made or to be made and set down anent the Excise, or who shall
happen to do or offer any wrong or injury to the Collectors, Surveyers,
Messengers of Arms, or any others persons, who are or shall be employed in
the Excise, and to censure and punish them as their fault deserves. With power
also to the said Commissioners, To grant and direct forth Letters of Horning
upon so many days as they shall think expedient, poynding, caption, and all
others Letters and Executorials necessary and requisite for the speedy
ingathering and uplifting of the said Excise; And for fulfilling of all Acts
and Ordinances made or to be made thereanent: And also for fulfilling of the
bands given or to be given by the Collectors and their Cautioners: And for
charging of all persons who are or shall be nominate Collectors, Surveyers, and
Commissioners of Parishes, to accept the Office, find caution, conform to the
order, and discharge their duty therein. And in like manner with power to the
said Commissioners, To grant suspensions upon good reasons of the charges of
Horning, to be used for payment of the Excise, and to decide and discuss the
said suspensions, and also to discuss, decide, and determine all Actions,
Questions, and Controversies, that may arise betwixt party and party, or
betwixt any party and the Collectors or Surveyers anent the Excise, and to
pronounce decree and sentence therein, and direct Letters of Horning,
Poynding, and others Letters necessary and requisite thereupon. And siclike
with power to the said Commissioners, or any three of them, as said is, To
modifie and allow to the Collectors, Surveyers, and others under Officers, such
reasonable fees and allowances for their pains and service, as they, with
approbation of the Committee of Estates, shall think fit. And generally with
power to the said Commissioners, to do and perform every thing, concerning
the right ordering of the Excise, and speedy uplifting thereof.

And the said Estates of Parliament do hereby statute and ordain, That the
Elders of every Parish in Landward, and the Magistrates of the Royal Burrowes,
ilke one within their own bounds respective, shall nominate and appoint
Surveyers, and two honest men within ilke Parish, and ilke Burgh, who shall be
Commissioners, to subscribe the Collectors and Surveyers compts, and attest the
truth thereof, according to their best knowledge. And it is declared and
ordained, That the Roll to be subscribed by the Collector and Surveyer, and by
the Commissioners for the Parishes, shall be a ground for the charge of
Horning, to be given to any person for payment of the Excise; And also shall
be a ground for the Collectors charge at the making of his accounts. And if
any person shall find himself hurt by the said Roll, he shall give up a Roll
himself to the Surveyer and Commissioners, of his Exciseable Goods and
Commodities, under the pain of confiscation of the triple of the value of the
Goods concealed. And ordains Letters of Horning to be direct by the said
Commissioners for the Excise, to charge the Elders of ilk Parish in Landward,
and the Magistrates of ilk Burgh, to nominate and appoint the said Surveyers
and Commissioners, and being nominate, to charge the Surveyers and
Commissioners to accept the Office in and upon them, give their oath, De fideli
administratione, before the said Elders and Magistrates respective, and
discharge their duty therein, under the pain of Horning: And in case of
failzie, to denounce, etc.

And the said Estates of Parliament do hereby declare, statute, and ordain,
That the general Letters of Horning, already direct, or to be direct forth by
the said Commissioners, for payment of the Excise, being execute against any
person whatsoever, liable and subject in payment of Excise, either personally,
or at his dwelling place, and denunciation following thereupon for disobedience
of the charge, The said Horning, notwithstanding of the generality of the
Letters, shall be als valid, effectual, and sufficient, as any other Horning
whatsoever.

And sicklike the said Estates of Parliament do hereby give full power and
warrant to the Collectors, to poynd for the double of the Excise, if any person
shall refuse to pay the same thankfully before the expiring of the days of the
charge to be given for payment thereof: And declares, That it shall not be
necessary to take the goods and geire to be poynded to the Market Cross of the
head Burgh of the Shire, or other jurisdiction within the whilk they are
poynded, but only to apprise the same upon the ground, which shall be
sufficient in this case.

And the said Estates of Parliament do hereby declare, statute, and ordain,
That whosoever shall refuse to pay the Excise thankfully and duly in
time-comming, shall be liable and subject in payment of all by-gones since the
said tenth day of March last bypast.

And the said Estates of Parliament do hereby command and ordain all
Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies, Provests and Baillies of Burrowes, Colonels, and
Committees of War; And all others Judges, Magistrates, and Officers
whatsoever; And all Masters and others whom it concerns, To give their best
concurrence and assistance to the said Commissioners, Collectors, Surveyers,
and others Officers of Excise, in every thing that may tend to the furtherance
of this service, and speedy uplifting of the said Excise, and putting of the
Acts and Ordinances, made or to be made thereanent, to due execution, as they
and every one of them will be answerable to the Estates of Parliament and
their Committees. And the Estates declares this Commission to be subordinate to
the Committee of the Estates of Parliament, and but prejudice to the Clerk of
Register of the nomination and placing of the Clerk of this Commission.

Alex. Gibsone Cler. Registri.

FINIS.

