ACT Act for putting the Kingdom in a Posture of Defense, to join with the
present standing Forces, and new Levy.
EDINBURGH, 3. July, 1650.
THe Estates of Parliament now presently conveened in this fifth Session of this
second Triennal Parliament, Considering the great preparations made by the
Sectaries in England, to invade this Kingdom, To destroy the Religion, Laws,
and Liberties thereof, wherein every ones private condition is included; And
that sundry of their Ships are already taken, and that an Army in an hostile
manner is daily marching toward their Border, And having several Intelligences
that they intend without keeping of the Order of the Treaty, or giving any
previous warning, to fall in upon this Nation; And withal, Considering that
the Kings Majesty has given satisfaction to the Demands of the Parliament, and
has sworn and subscribed the National Covenant, and the solemn League and
Covenant; And is safely arrived within this Kingdom, and that they are obliged
to defend his Royal person and authority in preservation of the true Religion,
and Liberties of the Kingdom; And that according to the Law of God and Nations
and the continued Acts and practices of the Nation, All sensible ^ersons
betwixt 60. and 16. are bound to rise in Arms to defend the King and Kingdom
from Invasion. Yet, The Estates of Parliament being desirous to avoid the
confusion by the coming together of all sensible persons, Have rather thought
fit, that a select number of Horse and Foot be in every Shire put in Companies,
Troops, and Regiments; That they withal the Noblemen, Gentlemen, Heritors,
Life-renters, Fewars, Wod-setters, may upon the sight of the Be^cons, or
advertisement from the Parliament, Committee of Estates, or General Officers,
march to the Rendezvous of the Shire, and from thence to the place where the
Army shall be, or where they shall receive Orders to go to for defense of the
Kingdom: Therefore the Estates of Parliament does appoint and ordain, that
every Shyre shall have in readiness in Companies, Troops, and Regiments, the
proportion of the Foot and Horse, as after follows; Viz.

For the Horse.
Roxbrugh, 180. Inde 2. Troops, Rests 30. which being joined with Selkirk,
whose proportion is 47. makes 1. Troop, rests 2. Dumfreis 146. Inde 2. Troops,
wants 4. Wigtown and Kirkcudbright 110. 1. Troop; rests 55. which being joined
with Dumbartan, whose proportion in 30. makes 1. Troop, rests of Dumbartan 10.
Air 173. and Renfrew 58. makes 3. Troops, at 73. the Troop. Lanerk 117. one
Troop, rests 42. which being joined with Clakmanan 28. makes one Troop.
Haddington 133. makes 2 Troops, at 67. the Troop. Edinburgh, 133. makes up 2.
Troops, at 97. the piece. Peebles 49. with the rest of Dumbartan, which is 10.
and the rest of Selkirk, which is 2. makes 1. Troop of 61. Lithgow, 66. 1.
Troop. Stirling 90. and Bute 13. makes 2. Troops at 52. the piece. Pearth 228.
three complete Troops, rests of Pearth 3. Fyfe and Kinroshire, 290. 4. complete
Troops. Forfar 160. makes 2. Troops, rests 10. Kincardin 44. which with 10. out
of the rest of Forfar, makes 1. Troop, at 54. Aberdeen 186. makes 3. Troops at
62. Elgin 54. and Nairne 14. makes a Troop at 68. Bamff 56. one Troop.
Innernesse and Rosse, 138. makes two Troops, at 98. the Troop. Sutherland 15.
Caithnes 24. Cromartie 3. one Troop at 42. Orknay and Zetland 54. one Troop.
Argyle 80. one Troop.

For the Foot.
Mid Lothian 900. one Regiment. Haddington 900. one Regiment. Barwick 900. one
Regiment. Dumfreis 900. one Regiment. Roxbrugh and Selkirk, 1500. Peebles 300.
Inde 1800. Inde two Regiments at 900. a piece. Fyfe and Kinrosse 1800. two
Regiments at 700. a piece. Lithgow, 374. Stirling and Clakmanan, 750. Inde
1124. one Regiment. Wigtown and Kirkcudbright, 900. one Regiment. Lanerk 900.
one Regiment. Air and Renfrew 1500. with Dumbartan joined, whose proportion is
240. makes in all two Regiments, at 870. a piece. Pearth 1840. two Regiments.
Forfar 1214. one Regiment. Kincardin and Marshalls part of Aberdeen, 900. one
Regiment. Rest of Aberdeen and Bamff, 1200. one Regiment. Elgin, Nairn, and
that part of Inneresse on this side Ness, 750. one Regiment. Seaforth and
Lovats division of Innernesse, 750. one Regiment. Rest of Innernesse,
Sutherland, Rosse, and Caithnesse, 1200. one Regiment. Orknay, and Zetland,
750. and Bute, one Regiment. Argyles division of Innernesse, 800. one Regiment.

And that by and attour, these of the late Leavie of the date the twenty fifth
of June last bypast, who are no ways to be retarded by this Act, which is in
place of the Act of Posture of all the sensible men, and which is appointed for
the strengthening of the new Leavie, and of the old Forces, And this is also by
and attour the outcoming of all Noblemen, Gentlemen, Heretors, Life-renters,
Fewars, and Wed-setters, excepting as is after excepted. Likeas the said
Estates nominates these who are herewith sent to be Colonels for the Regiments
of Foot above specified, viz. For the Sheriffdome of Edinburgh, The Lord
Balmerinoch to be Colonel. For the Shyre of Haddington, The Lord Angus. For
Berwick, The Lord of Iddington. For Dumfreis, Archbald Douglas of Dornoch, and
Crawfurdtown his Lieutenant Colonel; Roxbrugh, Selkirk, and Peebles, The
Earls of Lothian and Buckoleuch; Fyfe and Kinroshire, The Lord Burgly, or the
Lord of Waghton, and Sir William Douglas* Lithgow, Stirling, and Clakmanan
Shyres, The Lord of Buchanan and Sir Joseph Donglas, Lieutenant Colonel.
Wigtoun, and Stewartrie of Kirkcudbright, The Lord Kirkcudbright. Lanerk, Sir
William Carmichael. Air, Renfrew, and Dumbartan, The Lord Chancellor, or the
Lord Mauchlein his son, and the Earl of Cassils Colonels. For Pearth Shyre,
the Lord Couper, and the Lord of Gleneagies Elder; Forfar, The Lord of Edell.
Kincarden, and Marshals part of Aberdeen, The Viscount of Arbuthnot. Rest of
Aberdeen and Bamff The Lord of Leslye younger. Elgin, Nairn, and the Earl of
Murrayes division of Innernesse, Sir Alexander Sutherland of Duffus. Seafort,
and Lord Lovats division of Innernesse, Alexander Frazer Tutor of Lovat.
Marquess of Argyles division of Innernesse, The said Lord Marquess of Argyle,
or any he pleases name. The rest of Innernesse, Rosse, Sutherland, and
Caithnes, The Earl of Sutherland or any he pleases nominate and appoint, Major
Ross, Sir John Sincler of Dumbeath. Orkney and Zeatland, And anent the foot
appointed to be put forth by the Shyres of Air, Renfrew, and Dumbartan, if the
Earl of Loudoun, Lord Chaucellour, or L. Machlein his Son, and the Earl of
Cassils Colonels aforesaid or any one of them, crave that such a number of the
said foot be converted unto horse, as with the proportion of horse above
mentioned, to be put forth by the said Shyres, will make up a Regiment of
horse; In that case the said Estates of Parliament, do give Power, Liberty,
and Freedom to the Committees of War of the said Shyres in their option, to
convert so many of the said foot into horse, at the rate of one horseman for
three footmen, as shall be desired by the said Colonels, or any of them. And
the said Estates Ordains the Committees of War, with the advice of the
Colonels in the several Shyres and divisions they being present, to meet all
in their own several Committees, immediately after the receipt of this Act;
And that they sit continually from day to day, until they determine,
proportion and settle the said numbers of horse and foot in several Troops,
Companies and Regiments, and choose and appoint more Colonels, Rootmasters, and
all Officers necessary; they being persons so qualified, as is required in the
late printed Act of Leavie, for leading and commanding the said forces, and
that they send in the names of these whom they appoint, unto the Committee of
the Parliament which is appointed for purging of the Army. And the said
Estates Ordains the footmen to be sufficiently armed with Muskets, Pikes, and
Swords, and any other their best arms, and the horsemen to be armed with
Pistols and Lances, broad Swords, and steel Caps. And if any of the Heritors or
other persons aforesaids be aged, or known to be infirm, or be persons
excepted, as after follows, That they send out able men with their best horse
and arms, and that the Magistrates within Burghs, Heritors, and others
designed as aforesaid, or in their absence, the Baillies and Factors to
Landward, shall be answerable for bringing the persons within their bounds,
according to their proportion armed as said is, and where they have no arms,
that they bring money to buy them with, and that under the like pains as is
contained in the late Act of Levy. And the said Estates Ordains the Noblemen,
Gentlemen, Heritors, Fewers and Woodsetters, to provide themselves, and the
proportions whom they hereby are to put forth, with 30. days provision, for
these on this side of Aberdeen, and with 40. days provision for these by North
Aberdeen. And farther, the said Estates appoints the Committees of War, to
provide as many Arms and Ammunition, as will arm the numbers aforesaid, craved
from the Shire, and that either by giving present money for them, or Bands for
payment thereof, at a certain (...) ^ey to have letters of releif against the
Heritors for repaiment of the same; with power to the said Committees, to
distribute arms to these who wants, and with direction to the Colonel to cause
dreill and train the said men, put them in Companies, Troops, and Regiments.
And the said Estates appoints the Committees of War, and Colonels, to agree and
resolve upon such place and places, whereunto they will appoint the foresaid
horse and foot of the Shyre to have the Rendezvous within the Shyre, upon the
seeing of the Beacons burning, or upon other advertisement from their neighbor
Shyres of the country, or from the general Officers, for to rise, that from
thence they may march and join with the army where they shall be, or according
as they shall receive Order from the Parliament, Committee of Estates, or
general Officers, and to the effect foresaid, The said Estates appoints the
Comittees of War in every Shyre, without failie or delay, at the first meeting
to cause erect Beacons, and have all other things necessary ready upon the tops
of the highest places within the Shyre where Beacons used before to be put;
that by the firing of the same, the people of their own Shyre may be warned to
draw presently to the Rendezvous, and the other Shires also may be warned to
draw to their Rendezvous, that so they may all the sooner join with the Army
for defense of the Kingdom; Likeas they appoint the Committees of War of the
Shyres, or any of them, or any of their Officers, to give present advertisement
thereof to these of their neighboring Shyres, and so from Shyre to Shyre with
all possible speed, and also to the Committees of Estates and general
Officers. And further, The Estates of Parliament Ordains all Noblemen,
Gentlemen, Heretors, Life-renters, Fewars and Woodsetters, to come forth
themselves, under the pains following, (except the Burgh of Edinburgh,
Sterling, Pearth, and Dundee, who are ordained hereby to put all their sensible
persons within their towns, in Arms and Posture of Defense, for safety of
these places; and except these persons who are debarred from public trust, by
the first and second Class of the Act at Saint Androos, 1646. and at
Edinburgh. 1640. who are hereby appointed to put out all their proportions
within their bounds, with their best horse and arms at the sight of the
Committee of War, under the command of these who are appointed by the
Parliament, or Committee of War of the Shyre as aforesaid; but are hereby
discharged under the pains contained the Band, for keeping the peace, either to
associate themselves in parties in arms, or to join with our army) viz. Ilk
Nobleman, Gentleman, Heritor, Life-renter, and Woodsetter, under the pain of
being esteemed infringers of their Covenant, neglecters of the defense of
Religion, the King, and the Kingdom; and of being punished by death, infamy,
loss of all their movables, and forfeiture of a third part of their Estates.
And further, The said Estates does ordain and appoint, That by and attour the
numbers aforesaid, in the bordering Shyres, and the other Shyres where the
actual Invasion shall be; That upon the said Invasion, or upon the sight of
the Beacons. The whole persons sensible rise in arms, and draw together to the
place where the standing forces of the Kingdom are at a Rendezvous, or whereto
they shall receive orders to march, and to the end none may pretend Ignorance,
Ordains the Act to be published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh; and withal,
Ordains it to be printed, and sent to the Committees of War of the several
Shyres, who are hereby required to put the same with all possible diligence in
execution, as they would not be esteemed and punished as infringers of the
Covenant, and neglecters of the defense of the Religion, King and Kingdom; And
withal declares, that the publishing hereof at the Market Cross of Edinburgh,
and Printing of the same, shall be a sufficient intimation against the
contraviners thereof.

FINIS.

