A Message from Tory-Land To the VVhig-Makers in Albian.
To the Tune of, Sawney and Iockey. 11. July. 1682.
[1]
FRom Rome I am come, His Holiness sent me
To you his fast Favorites, to complement ye
Saint Peter's Successor his friends does impute ye
Expecting you will Firmly abide in your duty,
And daily scribble, nibble, quibble,
Your mother defend, you sucked at her nipple,
She who did breed you, lead you, feed you,
Claims your Assistance now she does need you.
[2]
And with me I bring the Popes Dispensations,
To furnish you all on any Occasions,
Then swear and forswear as occasion requires,
And Cities inflame with your Catholic fires,
If you cannot turn um, scorn um, burn um,
Else with your sanctified Daggers adorn um,
Bring to Perfection Distraction, and Faction,
The Pope will account it a glorious action.
[3]
I come to encourage Projectors and Actors,
His Holiness implements, and the Church Factors
Your Zeal for the Cause is put to a Trial,
When you at the Gallows can die in denial,
Thousands of Crosses, Masses, passes
To mount your blessed Souls to Peter's embraces,
You his Inditers, Biters, and Writers,
Have done him more Service then Armies of Fighters
[4]
Poor Towzer returned when the Parliament ended
His Politic wit our Cause still befriended
For his flying Pen so swift is in Motion,
More blessed with the Craft of St. Giles's devotion
Thy Observator's matter, scatter,
In Rome he is a Saint that in Albian's a Traitor,
Since these Dissenters ventures, enters,
Toss the Plot back, we will swear't at adventures.
[5]
The chief of our Foes are now out of favor,
This, this is the time, there never was a braver,
Our Politics now has an excellent face on it,
Then down with these Whigs, not bate um an ace ont
Those dull Romances, Prances, fancies,
To Catholic Not much credit advances,
Let his Pen Rogue on, tug on, jog on,
Were Albian our own, stand clear Hogan Mogan
[6]
Godfrey's Murder was rarely contrived,
To kill himself, he walked abroad while he lived,
Heraclitus, Not and the brave Observator,
Ingeniously each has stated the matter,
For if to fright us, Titus indite us,
These valiant Hero's stand up to right us,
those who were stringed, swinged, hanged
As innocent Babes were certainly wronged,
[7]
But dear Madam Celiers intrigue did miscarry,
You see that it is dangerous to be unwary,
these Heretics must by all means be destroyed,
And all the Church Rights by us be enjoyed,
Yet if we arm us, ram us, damn us
these Heretic Dogs will find Ignoramus,
Still it miscarries, it tarries, it varies,
Yet never were days so blessed as Queen Mary's.
[8]
Cloud the Whigs Evidence with high Dirision,
And make it your Care to foment Division,
Divide if you can the Prince from the people,
And that will advance the Crown that is Triple.
Now is the time boys, mine boys, thine boys,
Eclipse but the Whigs, the Tories will shine boys,
But if you will root um, smoot um, blot um,
Cut the Duke's Legs, and swear the Whigs cut um.
[9]
If mortal Assistance should happen to fail ye,
As't did to St. Colema^n, St. Whitebread, St. Staley,
St. Pickering, St. Grove, or such Holy Martyrs,
stand fast to the Cause, never value your Quarters.
You shall be when dead, painted, sainted,
With Purgatory you shall never be acquainted,
When you are Torter'd, Quartered, Martyred,
You Are Cananiz'd Saints all pardon is granted.
[10]
There never was more hope since the Spanish Invasion
to bring in subjection this Heretic Nation,
And now should it fail and our Plot be defeated,
it is vain to expect 'twill e're be completed,
Win it and wear it, clear it, share it,
Possession's the due reward of your merit,
You shall have Guinnies, and it no sin is
to build up with blood on the Protestants-Finis.
R. S.

Printed for J. Conyers at the Black Raven in Duck-Lane, MDCLXXXII.


