DOLEFUL NEVVES FROM IRELAND SENT IN A LETTER BY A GENTLEMAN TO A
BROTHER-in-law here in London, wherein he relates the distressed condition the
English are in, in that Kingdom. With the Copy OF A COMMISSION GRANTED BY LUKE
BIRNE a prime Commander of Ireland, whose Grandfather was M. Feagh Hugh an Arch
Traitor in Q. Elizabeth's reign, to execute marshall Law upon all the
Protestants.

Printed at London for T. Bates. 1642.

Good Brother, my love with your Sisters remembered to you and yours, etc.
I Have been long silent, because I determined ere this (by Gods permission) to
have seen you; but such is our present condition, that a second resolution has
altered my former determination; And here now I intend to end my days with
your Sister and her Children, preparing our selves for death, which we daily
expect; for the hand of God was never stretched out more against Christians then
at this time in these parts against the English both Protestants and Papists,
so inhumane are the cruelties of the Irish.

I presume you will be glad to hear from us, though sorrowful to have such
tidings, for not one syllable of comfort can I send you; for when the Rebellion
first began, we expected aid and speedy help from England, which might in
some measure have quelled their outrages, if supplies had been timely sent,
but being now altogether hopeless of such happiness, we are not only daunted
and disheartened, but our merciless enemies hardened and encouraged to go on in
their bloody Massacres.

The last of December 2000. of the Rebels led on by Kilmore their Captain,
went against the Town of Kilcallane, in the Province of Limster 18. miles from
Dublin; and though the Town gave them no opposition, but yielded themselves to
their mercy, hoping to have Q^rtor, yet the blood-thirstie miscreants spared
neither man, woman nor child Protestant and Papist, but after they had ravished
their wives and daughters, put them all to the sword, sparing not so much as
the Irish themselves, if they were lately descended of English parents.

Upon the third day of this instant month January, the same Company of Rebels
assaulted the Town of Castle Dormott, nine miles from the former, who hearing
how bloodily their Neighbors had been butchered, resolved to give them
Battle, and to dye manfully, their wives and children being as willing as
themselves, but in the end they fared no better then their Neighbors had done
formerly, for the enemies was of such force, that they were overcome, and put
to the sword, except a poore-remnant that escaped by Flight, and what is become
of them as yet is unknown.

The like cruelty was committed the same day by another Company of Rebels upon
the Town of Navan, 20. miles from Dublin, as last night I had Intelligence,
and though their massacre there was not so general, yet their behavior was so
inhumane, as I blush, and my heart bleeds to write; For after they had hanged
up many women's Husbands before their own faces, Knights, Gentlemen and others,
they put their wives to take their choice of one of 3. Demands:

First, whether they would renounce their Religion, and marry such Irish men as
they should tender unto them:

Secondly, whether they would freely and willingly prostitute their bodies to
so many send all men as should desire it.

Thirdly, whether they would be killed and put to the sword.

Oh woeful conditions! Was there ever such villainy read upon, or heard of to be
amongst Christians: Nor are those all the cruelties that are here committed,
for in the very Fields, men, women, and children lie scattered up and down,
most of them naked, being murdered and sterved, and many of them mangled and
dismembered, some having their hands and feet cut off, others their eyes and
tongues pulld out, and some their very bowels ripped up: And in a little Village
near unto the Town of Lurgan, where a worthy and religious Knight one sir
Thomas Betton lived, two of his Daughters were most barberously deflowred in
the presence of their aged parents, and after all of stifled and put to the
sword.

And that which adds more to our misery, is, that the Rebels Army do daily
increase, and our Forces hourly grow weak, having our Forts and Towns
blocked up by the enemies on every side, so that there is no hope but ere long
Ireland will be totally lost, unless a considerable Army be speedily sent
over, which we exceedingly fear will hardly be done in time, because we daily
hear, to our great sorrow, that there are jarres and differences among you in
England, which God prevent for his mercies sake.

More I have to write, but I fear I have enough unless my tidings were
better, and therefore I will say no more on this Theme, lest it should grieve
you as much in reading, as me in writing; wherefore good Brother, let me
desire you and yours to pray for me and mine, as the best means to prevent
those Judgments which otherwise God may bring upon us for our sins: And
although we are all in danger each day of death, yet while we live it will be
a comfort to us to hear from you: And therefore since Dublin is so blockt up
by Land and Water, that it is almost impossible for me to receive any Letters
there from you, be pleased to send them to your Cousin Iackson at Londonderry,
and if we live they will come to my hands. So wishing you all health and
happiness, and that we may hear better news one from another, I rest, and
ever will remain,

Your loving Brother-in-law till death, P. S.
From Kells this 5. of January, 1641. The Post is in haste, otherwise our
Brother Thomas would have writ unto you, who prays me to present his best
respects to you and yours in a Postscript.



THE COPY OF A COMMISSION GRANTED BY LUKE BIRNE a prime Commander of Ireland,
whose Grandfather was M. Feagh Hugh an Arch Traitor in Q. Elizabeths-Raign, to
execute marshall Law upon all the Protestants.
KNow ye to whom these presents shall come That I Colonel Luke Birne do
constitute, ordain, and appoint my wel-beloved A. T. to be our lawful Deputy
and Substitute in our Names, and to our and his own, and the welfare of the
Weal publickes, uses and behalf, to execute our power in the defense of our
faith and the Liberties of our Country in all parts, to the uttermost of his
power, according to our Superiors and our own vows and promises made and
taken in that behalf, and to seize, rescue, take, and keep all Protestants
goods wheresoever they shall find them, and to be responsible to us for the
same, as occasion shall require: And also to execute Marshall Law after mature
deliberation and due examination on all malefactors and Offenders, according to
the nature of their offenses, and as they shall demerit, and what our
substitutes shall lawfully do, execute, or cause to be done or execute in the
premises, we do ratify allow, and confirm, as we had been present, as
witness our hand this 14. of December, Anno 1641.

Luke Birne.


