THE RELIGION Established by Law, asserted to conduce most to the true Interest
of Prince and Subject.

As it was delivered in a Charge, at the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace,
held at the Borough of Newark, for the County of Nottingham, by adjournment for
taking the Oaths of Supremacy, etc. July 21th. 1673.

According to the late Act of Parliament.

By Peniston Whalley Esquire;

I. Esdr. 3.12. Truth overcomes all things.

LONDON, Printed for John Place at Furnivals-Inne-Gate in Holbourn; and Thomas
Bassett at the George near Cliffords-Inn in Fleet Street. 1674.

TO THE READER.
I Did not intend to have given thee the trouble of an Epistle, very well
knowing, that men are not to be persuaded by Argument to like any thing of this
nature, that they have an aversion from: But that on Sunday Aug. 24. 1673. a
day as famous in our English Calendar, as the French, A Quaker came to
discourse with me, There were present at the Discourse the chief Constable of
the Hundred, the Parson of the Town, an eminent Physician, besides others.
about executing the penal Laws, wherein he had a five shillings concern: I
asked him the reason of his opinion, knowing that he had been, a rational
Countryman, before he fell into those fopperies; He replied, That he had a
call from above, and the words were, Obey the Lord; and from that hour he
turned Quaker, and I have reason to believe with as much resolution, as any man
of any persuasion in the world; Now I do not see, but its as good an authority
as St. Benets single Testimony of seeing his Sister Scholasticas soul go to
Heaven: Nay it is as good an Authority, and as argumentative as the
Independents unintelligible notions about Conversion, Sanctification and Grace;
for they arise but from a self-satisfaction within them, as they say, which is
no more to be urged to a stranger then my Quakers voice; nor is this the single
saying of this Quaker, but if it be inquired, you will have the like account
from most of them, and therefore for ought an indifferent person can judge, as
good or better authority, witnesses Viva Voce being always of more credit then
Here-say evidence, then the many Revelations about the immaculate conception,
now made an Article of Faith, Cited by Still.
or Bell armin's vision to prove auricular confession, or Urban the 4th.
instituting of the Feast of Corpus Christi, in confirmation of
Transubstantiation upon the Revelation of a certain woman, or old Simon Stocks
Revelation from the Blessed Virgin for the habit of the Carmelites, or as John
19th. instituting the Feast of all Souls 1004 upon the dream of the Abbot
Odilo; Ex Becanth. in prol. 4 Lib. Sect.
who dreamt that he heard the Devils roar for the Souls taken from them by
Masses and Dirges,: By this thou may easily see, that most of the many
differences betwixt Us, and the Romanists, with the Independents, and their
Adherents, are resolved into Revelations, and Fancies, and so of no more
Authority to indifferent persons than the Enthusiasms of the Quakers; But the
Church of Rome can by no means fall justly under such a censure, considering
she is, as we say a true Church, and acknowledged by all to be ancient, and how
all along she has been like Syon, a City that is at unity in it self; but that
unity will not be much admired when this short Ecclesiastical History of twenty
years, commencing 1030 is considered: In the Church sat Benet the ninth twelve
years: Benet is deposed, and Silvester the third comes in by Symony, and is
expelled by Benet, and he by the people, Ros. Chron.
he resigneth to Gregory the sixth; so now three Popes in Rome, all deposed at
Sutrium, and Clement the second chosen, who flies into Germany, and is
poisoned; Benet again eight months: And is not here a blessed harmony for
fifteen years; Then Leo the ninth succeeds five years; but least I should
enlarge my volume to the rate of a Play, and so undo the Stationer, I will only
tell thee that I gave it in Charge, because I thought it my duty, and Printed
it, because it may from my hands be more indifferently looked on, as one known
to have no worldly Advantage by the Church, then from a known or suspected
Divine, who will by prejudiced men, which are now too many, be looked upon as
partial, and so may have a better effect then ordinary; for though the world
generally be Sermon-proof, yet possibly it may not be Charge-proof, and that
encouraged me to make this venture. Yet, because of a thing like a text, which
like one of your old fashioned Sermons, chimes in every Paragraph, some to
discredit it, will according to their scoffing way call it a Preachment; well
be it so, it was neither preached in a Church, nor according to the Liturgy,
and so consequently a Conventicle, (a name amongst many so sacred, that it
apologizes like Corban amongst the Jews for omitting the duties of the fifth
commandment) and so then there is no great fear of well coming of; but let all
conventicles take Example, a thing more revered now than Precepts, and assert
the Laws and Religion established as I have done, and its very probable, they
may get a bill of comprehension, and in the mean time his Majesty's Justices, I
believe, will be unwilling to disturb them.

Gentlemen,
THis being a time that the true Sons of our Church might devoutly wish for,
but could not Morally few months ago hope so soon to have seen; wherein, as by
a Touchstone, gold is distinguished from baser metals, the true Protestant
Religion from Fanaticism and Popery, it may not be improper to say something to
you, by way of Preamble, of Religion; and the rather, because you know there
are so many professions, all pretending to an Equal and Apostolical Right.

Now to enable you the better to distinguish, I lay this down for a just and
true measure of it, That Religion is the best and safest, that most magnifies
God, and likewise most advances a peaceable Christian conversation amongst men.
I shall not say much of the former at present, considering that all professions
equally pretend to it, but make the main subject of my discourse concerning the
latter. Our blessed Lord and Savior left this for a standing rule to his
Church: Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so do to them: By
the strict following of which, so much advancing a Peaceable Conversation
amongst men, she triumph't over the Roman world in less than three hundred
years, notwithstanding the opposition of all her Legions. The Professors of
Christianity amongst us, may be reduced to five heads: Quaker, Independent,
(under which may be comprehended all the Rabble of Sects, as Familists,
Anabaptists, Fifth Monarchy men, etc. for Independency is like a Mathematical
line, divisibilis in semper divisibilia) Presbyterian, Church of England, and
Papist. Now when I have set forth the Principles and Practices of all
severally, it will not be hard for a Rational unbyast man to judge which is the
safest Religion, that is, which most advances a peaceable conversation amongst
men.

The Quaker has a plausible pretense, by his Principles of the unlawfulness
either of Swearing or Fighting, and his practice accordingly, which, if so, (as
he may very well be suspected to have none, considering their being still acted
by a light within them) are absolutely inconsistent with Government, and
consequently with peace; which will be easily granted when it is considered,
that the first moment a man turns Quaker, the King loses a Subject, as to the
being useful to him, and every man a Neighbor; for he that will not fight in
an honorable and just War, of which no private person is judge, is as dead to
his Prince: And likewise, he that will not assert truth, by oath thereto
lawfully called in vindication of his Neighbors Interest, there being no other
way to do it by the Constitution of the Law, is worse to him. As for their
pretensions to perfection, contrary to Scripture and their own impure practice,
I shall leave to the Divines to consider of, and conclude that Quakers are like
salt that has lost its savor, Mar. 5.13.
and thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out, and to be trodden under
foot of men: For it is not at all consistent with the prudence of Princes, to
connive at, much less to tolerate an opinion that renders the abettors useless,
if not worse, to all the ends of Government.

The Independent now pretends to a kind of Call or Election into the Pastoral
Office, as they term it, by a Company of people who say they are Saints, and
that is all the reason we have to believe it. I should wonder how it can come
into any man's head to accept of an Office, according to their own opinion,
sacred too, upon such a title (but that we see ambitious men will accept of
Power upon any terms) it being a principle in Law, Nemo potest plus juris in
alium transfer quam ipse habet, None can transfer or give a greater right
then he has. And I think all sober men will grant, that the people, viz. Tom,
Dick, and Cis, originally have no such power as to confer Holy Orders. Electo
then may be a fitter name then Pastor, for those Boanergeses. I have heard of a
Garrison that in a high mutiny, turned out the Officers, and chose out of the
Commonalty, others into their rooms, by the name of Electoes, to supply their
places in martial conduct, who acted their parts stubbornly enough against
their General, as fearing to return to a private condition, if not worse. So
our pretended Saints have thrown off their Spiritual Governors and Directors,
and have done worse then the Idolatrous Israelites; Exodus 32.23.
for they so far observed the Decency of Order, as to desire the High Priest to
make them Gods, which should go before them: But ours have of themselves chose
their Gods or Electoes, who are not likely to return in haste to the Communion
of the Church, and consequently to the condition of Private men, being that
they exercise as absolute an Episcopal and Despotical power, over the Estates
and Consciences of their respective Congregations or Troops of Bandetti, as
ever any Pope pretended to, in the days of the greatest Ignorance and Bigotery;
it being their design (I suppose) to take the Kingdom from men, and to give it
to Jesus Christ; and then the Saints and the secret ones shall work
destruction, J. Owen p. 22.165. T. Goodw. P. Nigh. Skid. Symson. W. Bridge. Jer.
Burrows Apol to the Parliament.
as the same Author elegantly has it. Now what may be the end of that, is not
hard to say, when a Club of them have jointly declared: This Principle we
carried along with us, not to make our present judgment and practice a binding
Law for the future. Now if these be not as slippery Chapmen, by virtue of this,
as either the Papists with their Fides non est servanda cum Haereticis, Faith
is not to be kept with Heretics; or the Quaker with his Light within, I am
much mistaken.

Now that something has been said of their Principles, it is fit you should know
likewise of their Practices; which have been such, as have not at all shamed
their Principles: For all our late Civil War and Bloodshed, with the never to
be too much deplored Fate of the best of Kings then, or many ages before
living, was the result of their most holy Faith, and all justified by following
Divine Providence; Caryll.
and not only so, but they persisted in their Rebellion to the last too, as is
evident to all knowing men of that time; nay they were so generally involved in
it, that Capua it self was comparatively loyal: Sir W. R. Hist. World. Pun.
War. 2.
For there were upon a strict scrutiny two found not guilty of Rebellion; but
to these Gentlemen the saying of the Psalmist may be applied, There is none
that does good, no not one: And none that is loyal can take the application of
that Scripture amiss, that considers, that in the year 1648 a Book was printed
and licensed by the then Authority, with this Title, Several Speeches delivered
at a Conference concerning power of Parliament to proceed against their King
for mis-government, which is word for word taken out of Parsons the Jesuits
book, as the learned Dr. Stillingfleet has observed; which Book was written
under the name of Doleman, as I take it, to invalidate the Scotch succession,
and consequently our Kings Title to the Crown of England: so harmoniously did
the Independent and Jesuit agree against the common enemy; Herod and Pilate
were not so unanimous in crucifying the Lord of Glory, as these were; and
probably will be again upon occasion, in quenching the light of Israel: And yet
a modern Author, Rehear. Trans.
that takes himself for no small fool, has the confidence to say, that the
Cause, meaning the Rebellion 1642. was too good to be fought for. But it may be
presumed by what over acts we see of their Allegiance, that had they the same
opportunity again, they would not have so Venerable an opinion of it.

It will not now be difficult from what has been said to conclude, that
Independent Principles and Practices notwithstanding the unintelligible Jargon
that their Sermons and other printed discourses are full of, are far from
making any thing toward a peaceable conversation amongst men, and so to be
looked on accordingly. Now what severity soever is showed them, must come far
short (because the Laws are not strict enough for it) of what they have showed
to others: For it passed for Orthodox amongst them, Th. Case.
That God would have Judges to show no mercy, when the quarrel was against
Religion.

The Presbyterians pretend to a constant succession of Holy Orders or
Ordination by imposition of hands from the Apostles time, as well as we, but by
the Medium of Presbyters, as we of Bishops. They, that is the sober part,
Clevel.
(for There is a Church as well as Kirk of Scots) wave enthusiasms and such
like dreams, and make the Scripture the rule of Faith, as well as of manners;
all the difference then lies in the construction of the word (...), which they
say signifies a preaching, ruling, and sometimes a lay-elder, and our Divines
(and doubtless with more reason) say a Bishop, and such an one, as has
superintendency over Presbyters too; but this having been the subject of the
learned pens pro and con, I shall say no more, but that many of them are worthy
in their generations, and eminent both for Learning and Piety, and have been
instrumental too in the Kings, and consequently the Churches Restoration; let
them now come into her bosom, who is always willing to receive them, and reap
at least the fruits of those worthy labors, least the controversy betwixt us
and them be decided by a third party, as that of the Mouse and the Frog in the
Fable, was to the ruin of both the gladiators: And I hope there may be an
expedient found out for it, for I am sure the Church of England is not of the
humor of Pope Paul the fourth, Cor. Trid. p. 406.
who said, rather then he would loose one jot of his due, he would see the
whole world ruined. It cannot be said, that they were ever immediately guilty
of any Sovereign Princes blood, yet they were a little Schoolmen like, too
nice in the distinction betwixt the Politic and the Personal capacities of
Princes, and did a little too inconsiderately swallow the Vulgar Error of the
Kings being one of the three I humbly propose to those worthy persons of that
judgment, whether the making the King an Estate makes him not a coordinate
power, and where such is, then in reason, all matters are to be decided by
majority of suffrages, and how that will lesson Majesty, he is very shallow
that cannot discern.
Estates, not having a due regard to the ill consequences of both, which
naturally are such as must render the assertours of those opinions, liable at
least to a suspicion that they have been far from being zealous in every thing
that may advance a peaceable conversation amongst men.

The next in order is the Church of England, whose Credenda, matters of Faith,
are according to the holy Scriptures, and the first four general Councils, and
are such as all her opposers (but the buzzardly Quakers) believe, or at least
pretend so, to be true and Orthodox; she claims a succession of Bishops from
the Apostles, and has as much authority for it, notwithstanding the Fryer-like
tale of the Nags-head-Tavern, as any of the most potent of her adversaries; she
directs Prayers to God, according to his command, and not to the uncertain ear
of a Creature intercessor; in fine, she believes according as they believed, in
the purest primitive times, and directs men's practice accordingly; and though
her directions are not so successful perhaps as then (yet then there were
immoralities, as may be seen by the irregularities in the infant Church of
Corinth, and the impurities amongst the Nicholaitans and filthy Gnostiques) it
can no more be attributed to her, then the Idolatry of the old Israelttes could
be to Moses, who directed them otherways. I shall not use many Arguments, for
truth needs not many Champions, but only say, That if Loyalty and Obedience to
Lawful Authority, be an argument of a peaceable conversation, the Church of
England is to be preferred before all others of our Cognizance; witness her
brave and patient suffering during the almost 20 years of tumult and tyranny,
in which her sons asserted their allegiance with so much cheerfulness to the
loss of their lives and fortunes, as is not to be paralleled in any age; to
whose restless endeavors and constant struglings against the pretended powers,
his Majesty's happy return may more justly be attributed then to any other
second Cause. Independency it self was not more eminent for Rebellion, then she
for Loyalty, which is as inseparable from her, as light from color; for its as
well known as a Negative can be, that never any of her sons ever made
defection, as to that, except one Apostate Bishop (which is the less to be
wondered at, considering there was a Judas amongst the twelve) since the
Reformation from Rome; and though many did pay obedience to the late powers,
yet it was for wrath, not conscience sake. All this considered, it will appear
no great wonder, if her sons be still kindly looked on by his Majesty, according
to the saying of his Royal Uncle to his Cardinal upon another occasion: There
was no reason he should forsake them that loved him, Lust. Ludo. p. 169.
to humor the Caprichio's of those that did not love him. So what the Spirit
said to the Church of Philadelphia, may I hope without presumption, be applied
to that of England: Rev. 3.10.
Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the
hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell
upon the Earth.

Now we come to the Church Triumphant, that of Rome, whose Grandeur has over
gone all the Churches that ever were; in the pomp and vanity of this wicked
world, she professes the well-bred (that is) the Traveling Religion, and
thinks, I suppose, that we are as discerning in the point of Religion, as we
are in that of Clothes, in love with every thing that is Foreign; she would
never offer else to impose all her little tricks upon us.

The two Pillars or Staves, Zec. 11. v. 7.
on which this mighty Machine of Popery is supported, are not Gods staves of
beauty and bands, but Supremacy and Infallibility; Pope Boniface the 8th was a
great Asserter of the former, when he made it Authentic Law, in these words:
We say and define and pronounce, that it is absolutely necessary to salvation,
for every humane Creature to be subject to the Bishop of Rome. A new Article of
Faith never heard of amongst the Ancient Creeds, Antiquity making out the
contrary; Cited by L. Cook Re. 5.
For S. Edw. Laws c. 19. delivers this for Law, Rex autem qui vicarius summi
Regis est, ad hoc constitutus est, ut Regnum and populum Domini, and super
omnia sanctam Ecclesiam regat, and defendat ab inimicis, maleficos autem
destruat. By this you may see that the King was owned by the Law then to be
Gods Vicar or Vicegerent, not foreseeing the proud decree of Boniface. Inter
omnes convenit, quod nemo possit appropriare ullam Ecclesiam cui animarum cura
incumbit, cum sit res Ecclesiastica, and Ecclesiastica personae approprianda,
nisi ille qui jurisdictionem habet Ecclesiasticam; sed Gulielmus primus ex se,
sine quovis alio Ecclesiarum curam personis Ecclesiasticis, ut Rex Angliae
appropriavit, unde ipsum Ecclesiasticam jurisdictionem habuisse consequitur. It
is agreed of all hands, that no man can appropriate any Church with cure of
souls, because it is wholly an Ecclesiastical affair, and to be appropriated to
an Ecclesiastical person, except one that has Ecclesiastical jurisdiction; but
William the first King of England did do it, from whence it must follow that he
had jurisdiction Ecclesiastical.

Now if the Kings of England had Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as it appears
they had, by the exercising of it, notwithstanding the decree of a little
Council or Conventicle to the contrary, which decreed that no spiritual person
should enter into any Church by any secular person; Con. Mant.
where was the Popes Almighty Power almost, that he pretended to, about that
time in every thing?

By the ancient Laws of the Church of Rome, the issue born before marriage, is
as lawful inheritable, marriage following, as otherways; yet that was never
allowed in England for all the Popes power, as may appear by the Statute of
Merton, 20 H. 3.
when the Bishops instanted the Lords that they would assent that the Custom
of England should conform to that of Rome, in that particular received this for
answer, Nolumus Leges Angliae mutare, Cook 5. Rep.
we will not change the Laws of England.

By this may be seen what a small influence the Popes had even at that time
upon our Parliament, notwithstanding the assistance of the Bishops, and mitred
Abbots.

Yet afterward P. Inno. 4. occasionally with a great deal of Magisterial
Indignation (being very angry that Grosted Bishop of Lincoln, refused a Nephew
or nearer Kinsman, Fox p. 407.
for a Prebend of that Church) said that the King of England was his Vassal,
Mancipium.
his Page, his Slave, reflecting I suppose upon that submission that King John,
as the Emperor Frederick said in his Letter to Henry the third his son, more
like a woman than a man, made to Pandolphus the Legate; yet Edward the first
that Heroic Grandchild of that unfortunate Prince, was of another sort of
metal, for in his Reign a Subject brought a Bull of Excommunication against
another Subject of this Realm, and published it to the Lord Treasurer of
England, and this was adjudged Treason by the Ancient Common Law of England,
against the King, his Crown and Dignity, for which the offender should have
been drawn and hanged; but at the great instance of the Chancellor and the
Treasurer, he was only abjured the Realm for ever.

Certain Messengers had from the Pope served Process upon an Officer of
Chancery then held at York, Vid. le Regist. f. 224.
to command him by those Bulls to appear at Rome, and for this contempt the
party that served the Process, was committed to York Castle; and at length the
Kings Majesty, by the entreaty of diverse great men of the Realm, was content
upon taking bond, that he should answer the said contempt ad proximum
Parliamentum nostrum ubicunque illud summoneri contigerit; at our next
Parliament, where ever it happens to be assembled or summoned, to deliver him
out of Prison.

Edward the first presented his Clerk to a Benefice within the Province of
York, who was refused by the Archbishop, for that the Pope by way of Provision
had conferred it upon another; the King thereupon brought a Quare non admisit,
the Bishop pleaded that the Bishop of Rome had long time before provided to the
said Church, as one having supreme authority in the Case, and that he durst
not, nor had power to put him out; who by the Popes Bull was in possession: For
which high contempt against the King, his Crown and Dignity, in refusing to
execute his Sovereigns command, fearing to do it against the Provision; by
judgment of the Common Law the Lands of his whole Bishopric were seized into
the Kings hands, and lost during life: So all these Presidents considered, it
is no wonder if that bold Briton who published the Excommunication against
Queen Elizabeth in Pius Quintus his time, met with the sinister accident of a
Halter.

For if it be treason in a Subject to do so against a Subject, as it was
adjudged in Edward the first his time, a fortiori, as my Lord Cook says, it is
treason for a Subject to do so against his Sovereign: It may very well be asked
now, considering these high Practices, and some strict Laws to abate the power
of the Sea of Rome, how the Pope could possibly have so considerable an
Interest as we know, or at least believe, he had in Henry the eighth's time.
The Statute of Provisors of Benefices of 27 Ed. 3. gives you a reason to that
time, in these words, That though the Statute of Ed. 1.25 Which Statute is not
in the printed Statutes, either by negligence, or probably because it was made
at Carlisle, the Roll was not transmitted to London.
, stands good, yet by sufferance and negligence, it has been attempted the
contrary. The Pope afterward got ground by the remiss latter end of Edward the
third's Reign, and the whole one of Richard the second, who though he made the
strict Law of praemunire, yet it did much abate of the strictness of the Common
Law before spoken of, which unhappy Prince was deposed and murdered by his
Cosen and Vassal Henry of Lancaster, who though the murdered Prince left
neither Children nor Friends, yet by reason that the murderer was not next
Heir at Law, he was a little uneasy all his Reign; so that he was forced to
comply, by reason of the badness of his title, contrary to the humor of his
great Father, with the ill designs of the Roman Clergy (who of all are the best
at soldering cracked titles) and make bloody Laws against the Lollards under the
notion of Heretics; H. 42. c. 15.
yet Henry his son, who had no fault but his title, let them know other, I will
not say better things, by suppressing the Priory Aliens, which was all that was
done to show the Courage of the English Kings in that particular, till H. 8.
who was, if you peruse the Chronicles, the first that had leisure to question
his Holinesses encroachments upon this Monarchy.

Neither was the Supremacy much more ancient abroad, Ros Hist W. Chronolog.
for the first that had any thing like it was Boniface the third, to whom
Phocas about 606 granted that he should be the head of all Churches; 'twas that
Phocas that murdered his Lord and Master Mauritius; and to say the truth, the
Popes have arrived to that height they now pretend to by the wickedness of
Usurpers, who having no title themselves, made little regard what they gave to
others, to countenance their own Rapine; yet this grant was not so authentic
as to make the succeeding Popes stand upon their own legs, for the first
downright opposer of the Emperor, was Constantine the first, who opposed
Phillipicus about Images, and not only so, but for the greater affront,
Stilling. Fanat. of the Church of Rome. 362.
forbad the public use of the Emperors Name and Title, his Successors Leo
the third and Gregory the second, wrote so after his copy, that they stripped the
Emperors of all they had almost in Italy, by absolving the Subjects of their
Allegiance, that they fell into Rebellion and destroyed their Provincial
Governors. The Popes of that time were encouraged to this insolence by
correspondence with Charles Martell, Major of the Palace, who more then
probably had some design of usurpation upon the Crown of France, at that time
managed by a race of weak Princes, which afterward Pepin his son executed by
the help of Pope Zachary, who understanding his meaning when he sent to know,
whether it was not fit for him to bear the name, who did all the business of a
King, readily absolved him of his oath to his Lord and Master with all his
Nobles and People: Pepin upon this deposed his Master Chilperick, and put him
into a Monastery, and by some such way or worse, made sure of the remaining
house of Pharamond. By this may easily be seen the danger that attends lawful
Sovereign Princes by the exorbitant power of the Pope over the consciences of
their Subjects. The successors of this Zachary, notwithstanding the succors
that Pepin gave them, which needs must be very great, having nothing to adjust
his perjury and usurpations but the Popes supremacy; as on the contrary they
had nothing to save themselves from the fury of their justly provoked Liege
Lords, but the strictness of that League; yet some of his Successors by reason
of the Lombarde power, were not free from trouble; for Pope Leo the third was
put into Prison for some enormities, and escaped to Charles into Saxony, who
brought him to Rome with an Army to clear himself, where calling a Synod to
examine whether the matters were true or no, that he was accused of; the bold
Pope took the Chair and jollily determined it, that the Bishop of Rome was
above all men, and to be judged by none: But to make Charles amends, he Crowns
him and Proelaims him Augustus, and Emperor of the Romans, to which he had the
same title as his Father had to the Kingdom of France; and Charles in requital
conquered the Lumbards for him, and bestowed most of those Lands upon him,
called now the patrimony of the Church; for which he was, I suppose, Ros. p.
128.
Sainted many years after, having no other virtue but that to deserve such a
favor; and who knows but that some kind Pope hereafter may canonize the
Rump-Parliament, or at least the High-Court of Justice, they having as much
right to do what they did, as Charles had to be King of France (for the Fathers
prosperous treason could never create a title in the Son) or Emperor, and I am
sure they did the Sea of Rome more service then that great Warrier for all his
enfeoffing her in those Italian Provinces. And this is the Original of the
Popes greatness, who as long as the Empire continued in the line of Charles out
of common policy, if not gratitude, were very mannerly to the Emperors, Hist.
Coun. Tren. 835.
for they still dated their Bulls, Privileges and Grants, with these formal
words, In the Reign of such an Emperor our Lord and Master.

But Hildebrand was of another temper to the German Emperors, for he forced
Henry the Emperor with his Lady and Prince, to attend him three days at the
Gates of Cannusium, before he would admit him to his presence; Alexander the
third was not much more modest, when he set his foot upon the Emperor
Frederick his neck, profanely applying that saying in the Psalms, super
Aspidem and Basiliscum ambulabis, and conculcabis Leonem and Draconem.

To this submission was the Emperor forced to save the life of his Son, who
was lately fallen into his malicious hands by misfortune: But least these
Examples should by reason of their Antiquity be objected against, it may not be
amiss to give some later instances of their being busybodies in managing of
Crowns; Julius the third very briskly told Henry the second of France in the
year 1551. Con. Trid. 314 by his Ambassador. Foul. page 725.
That if he took Parma from him, he would take France from the King; and in the
year 1626 Urban the eighth sent to forbid his beloved sons the Catholics of
England, the taking of the pernicious and unlawful Oath of Allegiance; nay
more, the Catholics of Ireland submitted that unhappy Kingdom to the said
Urban, and after to Pope Inno. the tenth, who bestowed it as a favor upon his
dearest Miss Madam Olympia. In the year 1662 Cardinal Barbarino bids the Irish
take heed they fall not foul upon some things condemned by holy Church, in
adjusting their Loyalty, which they at that time stood in need of, considering
the then posture of affairs: But these however, the latter is a private Doctors
opinion, and the Church not at all answerable for it, says the little Priest
that leads the silly women captive; for to give them their due, they will never
justify any thing but what may conduce to their ends, like them that never
tell truth for truths sake, but because it is fit to be so; they give the best
words of any people in the world to bring people into their Communion, but when
once in, they will show you another manner of Countenance, especially where they
have a coercive power, you must then believe all their little things upon pain
of being delivered up to the secular power, that is to Fire and Faggot, as it
was almost in our Grandfathers days: and what fair dealing can we expect from
them? when the Author of the History of the Council of Trent gives this
Character of the Pope Paul the third, that he was a Prelate endowed with good
qualities, C.T. p. 71.
but among all his Virtues, he made more esteem of none, then Dissimulation.

But to make this more appear, I Will give you a relation of some transactions of
the Inquisition related by a Romanist, which clearly make out, that, that Holy
Office, as he devoutly terms it, did take upon them (and I Am sure do so still,
if they do any thing) the cognizance of things, of which, by their first
institution they were not at all appointed Judges; that Office or Court was set
up at the instance of Dominick (whose Mother dreamt when she was with Child of
him, Martyr. in vit. Dom.
that she had a whelp vomiting fire in her womb) to reduce the Waldenses about
the year 1205, and afterward brought into Spain upon the Conquest of Granada
by Ferdinand and Isabella Kings of Arragon and Castile, as an expedient of
discrimination of Christians from Jews and Moors: But Charles the fifth made
other use of it in the Low Countries, for by its help he burnt and otherways
destroyed 50000 of his poor Subjects, little thinking that his memory, as well
as the persons, of his most inward friends should fall under their lash.

The Story lies thus, which for the Novelty I have translated.

Amongst all the Reports that had been raised in the world concerning the said
Emperor, Vite Don Carlo.
viz. Charles the fifth's retreat, the strangest was, that the continual
commerce he had with the German Protestants inclined him to their opinions, and
that he had retired himself only that he might have liberty to end his days in
the exercises of piety, conformable to his secret dispositions; it was said he
could not forgive himself the ill usage which so many brave Princes of that
party, which the chance of war had put into his power, had received from him,
their Virtue, which in their greatest unhappiness shamed his fortune, had
insensibly raised in his soul some sort of esteem for their opinions; he durst
no longer condemn a Religion, to which so great persons thought it their duty
to sacrifice all that mankind holds most precious: this esteem appeared by the
choice that he made of persons much suspected of Heresy, for his spiritual
conduct, C.T. p. 417. called his confessions
as Dr. Ca Calla his preacher, the Archbishop of Toledo, and above all
Constantius Ponce Bishop of Dross his Director.

It has been since known, that in the Cell in which he died at St Just, was
filled of all sides with writings, wrote by his own hand, upon Justification
and Grace, which were not much different from the opinion of the Novellists;
but nothing so much confirmed this Report, as his Will, there were no pious
Legacies, nor foundations for prayers, as made it so different from those of
the zealous Catholics, that the Inquisition of Spain thought they had reason
to be offended at it; they durst not for all that break out before the Kings
arrival, but that Prince having signalized his first coming into the Country,
by the death of all Abettors of the new opinion, the Inquisition becoming
bolder by his Example, first attacht the Archbishop of Toledo, then the
Emperors Preacher, and at last Constant Ponce; the King suffering them all to
be imprisoned, the people looked upon his patience as the excess of his zeal for
the true Religion: but all the rest of Europe saw with horror, the Confessor of
Charles the fifth the Emperor, in whose arms the Prince had deceased, and who
had as it were received that great Soul into his bosom, delivered by the hands
of his own Son, to the most cruel and shameful of all punishments. In fine, the
Inquisitors in the process, having accused the said persons to have had their
hands in the Emperors Will, they had the boldness to condemn them with it to
the fire: The King awakned at this Sentence, as with a Clap of Thunder, at
first the envy that he bore to the glory of his Father, made him take pleasure
in seeing his memory exposed to this affront; but having more maturely
considered the consequences of the attempt, he by the safest and securest ways
that he could choose, hindered the effects of it, that so he might save the
honor of the Holy Office, and make no breach in the Authority of the Tribunal;
in short, the Dr. Ca Calla was burnt alive, and with him the Effigies of
Constant Ponce, dead some days before in Prison: the King was constrained to
suffer the execution, that so he might oblige the Holy Office to consent, that
the Arch Bishop of Toledo C. Tr. ibid. He had notwithstanding, his profits
seized on for life, so its humbly conceived that the vast revenues of that See
were the best mediators for that unfortunate Prelate.
might appeal to Rome, and that there might be no more speech about the
Emperors last Will and Testament.

But they left not there, for taking advantage of the credulousness of that
Priest-Peckt Prince Philip the second; they never left imposing upon him that
Don Carlo his son was dangerous to his Estate, and intimated too much
familiarity with his Mother in Law; so that at length, the Prince, though heir
apparent to the Crown, for showing too indiscreet an indignation at that
affront to his Grandfathers memory, and some other demonstrations of his ill
sentiments of their tyranny, was given up to them, who did him only the favor
to give him the choice of his death: the mischief ended not there neither, for
the jealous Prince in a manner commanded his Queen, though great with Child, to
be poisoned, to expiate the supposed Crime How far that Office had to do in it,
I Will not determine; but its no great breach of charity to think, that those
persons who would not spare the Heir apparent of his Catholic Majesty, would
not be very scrupulous in attempting upon Heretical Princes, especially when
the Inquisition preferred that barbarous and unnatural murder of Don Carlo,
before the obedience of Abraham, and in a Blasphemous Zeal compared the King,
all with one voice, to the Eternal Father, who had not spared his own Son for
the salvation of mankind; now what sins will not they pass by for the advance
of the Papal authority, when so black a crime has got such an extravagant
encomium.
: There was a design upon the Queen of Navarre and her son, after ward Henry
the fourth of France, to seize them when they lived at Pan, by the villainy of
one Captain Dominick a Bernois, but by the kindness of the Queen before
mentioned, the generosity of Don Carlo concurring, which might be one thing
that cost her her life; it was discovered, but what they failed in at that
time, their Factors afterward brought to pass upon one with a knife, and upon
the other with poison; by this you may see what they would be at, none must
make a Will, except they have a share, or else his memory must be exposed to
contempt and scorn; for had the Emperor given according to his quality, a good
sum of money for foundations for prayers, as my Author terms it, the Will nor
any thing else had been questioned, and the Dr. had escaped Spitchcocking, and
though the Inquisition is a stranger in most of the Popish Countries, yet this
abates but little of the force of my argument, for who knows not that it is
none of the Popes fault? When C.T. 405.416. De seres in vita H. 3.
Paul the fourth said that it was the principal secret and mystery of the
Papacy, and at his last gasp recommended it to the Cardinals, exhorting them to
establish it where ever they could; and his Successors have always been ready
to show their good will to it, witness the endeavors to introduce it into
France, by virtue of the Holy League, under the ministration of that bloody and
perfidious Prince the Duke of Guise, and afterward of his Brother the Duke de
Main: How many horrid murders were perpetrated in order to it? but above all,
the murder of Henry the third, by a Jacobin Monk at St. Cloud, is most
admirable, for in the same room at St. Cloud, where he amongst others had
contrived the bloody Massacre at Paris, the greatest piece of villainy and
treachery that the world ever knew justified (except that of the Mamertines,
upon their hosts at Messana) was slain by a Monk for not being papist enough,
Sir W. R. l. 1.270.
though he had formerly so signalized it, by an Act so Heroique, that his
Holiness thought fit to celebrate, by calling his Cardinals together, to give
God thanks for so great a blessing conferred upon the Roman See, and the
Christian World.

To omit many more notorious practices, it is very principles are inconsistent
with Monarchy, for it sets up at the best two Supreams, like Hobs his two
omnipotents, DeCive.
which will like them too, be in a continual state of disobedience to each
other, which is utterly inconsistent with the ends of Government.

Now we have a great deal of reason to submit, which they call reconciling our
selves to the Sea of Rome, when we consider how the Council of Constance broke
the public faith, in burning of John Hus and Hierom of Prague, C. T.
and as the Diet at Worms would have done in the case of Luther, had not the
Prince Palatine Lewis, used his power as well as reasons against it; and no
wonder, when it is considered what Paul the fourth, December. 20.1555. in the
Consistory after wards declared, a among other things, that it is an article
of Faith That the Pope cannot be bound, and much less can bind himself, C.T.
396.
and that to say otherwise is manifest heresy, and if any after that should
say so, the Inquisition should proceed.

I shall not say much of Infallibility, their second Staff or Pillar, because
the pretenses to it (one would think) cannot be very strong, when you consider
that there have been about 30 Schisms in that Church, that is more then one
Pope at a time, and Council against Council too in the Case, as that of Basil
under Felix the fifth, against Florence under Eugenius the fourth, besides
others, and all equally pretending, and I think with equal right too, to
Infallibility, which is not much strengthened by the Act of Parliament that
declared, 2 R. 2. c. 5.
that Urban was duly chosen Pope, and so ought to be accepted and obeyed.

Image worship, I shall wave as being (by an able Champion of our Church,
sufficiently proved to be Idolatry, notwithstanding the nice distinctions of
(...) and (...), Stilling. of Idol.
and shall speak first of Transubstantiation, as being the greatest, if not the
only part of their Religion, that they are content to have the Scriptures
extant for, but with what reason we shall briefly examine [(...), this is my
body) it is here observable that the word (...) is not the Relative to (...),
Ham. annot. Mat. 28.
bread, but of the neuter gender, and consequently it is not here said, that
this bread is my body (the body of Christ) but either indefinitely this, or
(...), take, eat, this is my body; this taking or eating is, or denotes my
body, which is more fully expressed, Luke 22.19. This is my body which is given
for you, do this in remembrance or commemoration of me.

There are many other arguments made use of thereby this Learned Doctor, to
whom I refer those that desire further satisfaction in this point, whereby he
does invalidate the literal and carnal meaning of these words so far, as you
may as soon prove Extreme Unction by them as Transubstantiation.

Now having done with the Scriptural part of it, Acts and Mon. 218.
it may not be amiss to tell you, that it is but a Novel, being but established
under Pope Nicholas the second, against Berengarius in the Council of Lateran:
Yet Hildebrand his Successor had no great faith in it, though so established,
when he desired the Church to pray that God would show by miracle whether
Berengarius was rightly condemned or no, an argument of his doubting; but after
he gave a special one, that he no longer doubted, though I cannot say it was
any great argument of Faith, when in a fit of madness he burnt the Host,
because it did not give an answer concerning the success of Henry the Emperor:
But since that doctrine, with a great many other worthy ones, has been
confirmed by the Council of Trent, Con. Tr. Ses. 13.
which decreed that Divine honor should be given to the Bread. But no wonder if
you consider the Bishop of Quinque Ecclesiae's Letter, an eminent member of the
Council, to the Emperor Maximilian the second; What good (says he) could be
done in that Council, where Votes were not weighed but numbered; and a little
after, They were hireling Bishops, who as Country Bagpipes, C.T. 84.
could not speak but as breath was put into them, the holy Ghost had nothing to
do in this Assembly. For it consisted of Tituladoe's, Beardless boys, old
flatterers, unlearned and simple, Ibid.
yet fitted by their impudent boldness; generals of orders, names, nor things
ever heard of in the primitive time, but they are the Popes Mamalukes, with
whom he does enslave a great part of the world, and desigus the same to the
rest.

Now if the point of Transubstantiation, for which divine honor is given to the
bread, come to be examined by reason, which is not wholly to be declined in
matters of Faith, it will notwithstanding the Fathers of Trent, be found little
less then a mere Invention: God Almighty requires a reasonable service of us,
it is then impious to think that we must wave that faculty, by which we are
distinguished from Brutes, in becoming his servants, as all men must, that
believe that Doctrine: And though they pretend that the doctrine of the Trinity
is as irreconcilable to reason, as the other, and yet not to be disputed; they
may as well argue thus, the Doctrine of the Trinity is not to be comprehended
by reason, Ergo the Pope is Infallible.

St. Peter on the day of Pentecost used other kind of Arguments, when 3000 were
converted; for if he had said, Acts 2. from v. 6.
instead of God has made the same Jesus whom ye have crucified both Lord and
Christ: that the wafer or piece of bread then showed them, was the same Jesus
that not many days before was crucified at Jerusalem, what would a rational man
think would have been the sequel, they would have counted him at the best, as
they did the Eleven, full of new wine; V. 13.
nay rather some of the Zealots would have stoned him, as they afterward did
St. Stephen and St. Paul upon a less occasion: Therefore no wonder if the
Jesuits so often miscarry amongst the Japaneses, a very wise and rational
people, when the strongest arguments to induce them to Christianity, consist in
carrying a bit of bread in procession and worshipping it.

I Will give you one Philosophical argument for all out of Father Gage a late
converted Dominican, hoping it may be as lawful for me to have a Batt at the
Pope with the Butt end of a Dominican, as it was for Merry Andrew to have one
at the Church of England with the Butt end of an Archbishop; Rehearsal
transprosed.
and that is thus, When Mr. Gage was at Portabello in his return for England
from the West Indies, as he was celebrating Mass, and being devout in his
memento prayer, Survey of the West Indies. 197.
a mouse came and stole away the Wafer, which being recovered from her by the
help of some Priests, though half eaten up, was a great motive for him to rub
up his Philosophy concerning substance and accident, and so resolved (as any
reasonable man would) that what was eaten up by the mouse, was no accident but
a real substance, which no Papist will be willing to say was the substance of
Christ's body (because of the absurd consequence) Ergo, it must follow it was
the sustance of bread, and so no Transubstantiation: Besides it contradicts the
Philosophical Axiom, Duo contradictoria non possunt simul and semel de eodem
verificari, two contradictions cannot be verified both together, and at the
same time, for here in Romes Judgment, the body of Christ was gnawn and eaten,
and in another place it was not gnawn and eaten. To this purpose Father Gage,
and rightly too; For nothing is more absurd then this Doctrine, for it implies
contradictions, which are reconcilable neither to right reason nor to
omnipotency it self, for that can do any thing but lie, that is, act
contradictions: They Will tell you of many miracles about it, but the greatest I
believe in the case is, that men, otherwise of great wisdom and learning, should
so much deny their sense and reason, as to believe such a notoriety of
contradictions and fopperies: And to complete the absurd consequences of it,
Dean Tillot. son.
our senses are deceived too in their object, and that at a due distance; and
if they be to be imposed upon in these circumstances, all and at the same time,
their's an end of all argumentation.

To conclude, that opinion is hazardous even according to their own principles,
for it is decreed under an Anathema, That the Ministers intention is necessary
to the essence of Sacraments, C.T. Sess. 7. Can. 11.12.
and that the Minister who is in mortal sin gives not the true Sacrament, and
that certainly made the condition of Henry the seventh Emperor, very
lamentable, being poisoned by a predicant Friar in the Sacrament, and damned
too, for committing Idolatry, in worshipping the elements, for though the Priest
might have a right Intention in the consecration, yet no man can excuse him
from mortal sin in the Execution of so nefandous an act; but it may be
objected that the Pope who was then at enmity with the Emperor directed it,
and then the intention was right, and no mortal sin in the Priest neither; and
so the good Emperor that was poisoned in the simplicity of his heart, might
get to Heaven, especially if the Pope would have put to his helping hand, as he
did to Father Garnet the gunpowder man, who died in a worse cause, thought not
so much out of the Popes favor; Fullers Chapter Hist. l. 10. p. 41.
and so the heavenly Crown would make him ample amends for the loss of his
Earthly.

And here I cannot but admire the great Prudence and Piety of the late Act of
Parliament, which I know has been much misconstrued by the malice of some, and
weakness of others, who seem to intimate that the Parliament has declared the
Sacrament to be mere bread and wine, according to the opinion of the
Sacramentaries, which is most contrary both to the words of the Act and the
Doctrine of our Church; for the words are these, I do believe that there is not
any Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or in the Elements
of Bread and Wine, at, or after the Consecration thereof by any person
whatsoever; which clears the point to the meanest capacity, that nothing is
affirmed, nor nothing denied but Transubstantiation, Not Con-substantiation it
self, the known opinion of the Lutheran Churches, although as little believed
amongst us as the other; so that it is evident that this Act, penned with all
the modesty that became dutiful Sons of our Church, and the wisdom befitting
most worthy Patriots, was not intended to define Doctrines, but to distinguish
persons.

The next point to be examined is Praying to Saints, crept into the Church
before, but confirmed by Gregory the Great, An. Dom. 590. which is not only
against the command of God, but more then probably lost labor, for the
Scripture tells us, that Abraham knows us not, and Israel is ignorant of us,
and it is rational to believe that they are in as great a state of Bliss, as
Tho. Becket, Dominick, St. Francis, or Ignatius Loyola, who was a Gentleman of
such behavior, that a Country Justice, and no Adam Overdoe neither, would have
whipped for his good breeding, as any body will believe that peruses the life of
that glorious Saint, Stilling. Fan. 273.
and indeed so it was done by a Spanish Governor, to meliorate his
understanding in the Ethiques of putting off his hat to a Magistrate: yet all
are solved by miracles, which are such that all the Romances from Grand Cyrus
to Tom Thumb put together, compared to them, may pass for Classical history: To
omit the 200 miracles wrought by Ignatius after his death, I Will give you a
short story out of Father Cressy, Chapter Hist. 195.
St. Piran fed ten Irish Kings and their Armies with three Cows; raised dead
men and dead pigs to life.

Now I wonder what should come into his politic pate, to stuff a book with
such Tales as these, in order to the propagating any opinion soever, now
Miracles being commonly wrought at the Intercession, or by the merit of some
Saint or other, adjust the praying to them; but they being such as are greater
then any that the Apostles or our Savior himself did, and to no purpose
commonly, as St. Bennets mending a Sieve by miracle to save two pence, Ex leg.
in vita Ben.
and throwing the Helve after the Hatchet into the water, miraculously bringing
them together again (which either made good or gave occasion for the Proverb)
may justly bring them under the suspicion of Romances, not to say worse; many
tricks have been done by combination, which have amazed the credulous people,
not having the privilege or opportunity, or perhaps skill, for an Inquisition
or search, and therefore pass among some devout ones (that have more Faith then
reason) for miracles of the first Magnitude: To omit the ancient ones I will
give you one of a late date. Friar. Egan. Fran. conv. p. 15.
About seven years ago, a Priest nigh Limbrick named William Sackvel had for
50. s. hired a woman to pretend her self a Criple from her birth, and that she
had a Revelation; that if she dipped her self in such a Well, whilst a Priest
said Mass by the place, she should be recovered; The Plot thus laid and
accordingly executed she comes halting to the Well, but returns out of it
perfectly sound, which was a miracle to the people, and got the contriver a
great Sum of money, and confirmed many in their Superstition: after some time
the woman had some remorse of conscience and came to the Author of this
Relation, o confession, in order to absolution, which he would not grant, till
an account of the cheat should be given to the Congregation, which she did
accordingly.

Yet for matter of Fact, against which there is no arguing they will tell you,
Mat. Paris 880 Lew. 9.
both out of History and by daily experience too, that many have been recovered
out of desperate sicknesses by having a piece of the Holy Cross, or some other
But of all relics the most admirable is the Hem of the Carpenter Joseph
enclosed in a Set of boxes, to be seen at Nints in Britany, the first a
Wainscot, within that a Silver box, within that a golden, or guilt box, within
that a Crystal box, containing a wooden plain one, visible through the
Crystal which conteins the Holy Hem, and reason enough for so many boxes; for
if it should get loose after so many hundred of years confinement it would be
as boistrous as the Liquor so famed by a Poet of our own, when,

It bounces, foams, and froths, and flitters
As it were troubled with the Squitters.
Virg. Travesty l. 1.
Relic applied to them and therefore those things are not to be derided: In
answer; I will give you the reply of Diagoras of Samothrace to a friend weakly
though truly arguing for providence, from the pictures of a great many persons
hung up in a certain Temple, that had by prayers escaped Shipwreck; Pet. Ga^^.
in Diog. Laer. an imad. p. 739.
Ita fuit, illi enim nunquam picti sunt qui naufragium fecerunt, in marique
perierunt: Very likely; for there are no pictures for them who have suffered
Shipwreck, and are lost in the Sea; So they generally apply to all sick
persons, some relic or other, and if any live, it is forsooth by the merit and
intercession of some Saint or other, but if the party dye, then no story of the
Application; Parallel to this the Portugals have a custom, after praying to St.
Anthony, to give them a good wind, to attempt, or bind a little Image of the
Saints, but commonly upon the Pilot's intercession, who passes his word for the
Saint, telling them, he is so honest he will do it without being bound, Travels
of Ped della valle into the E. Indies. p. 550.
they forbear; A barbarous superstition (says my Author) but yet such as
sometimes through the Faith, and simplicity of those that practice it uses to
be heard, a very worthy observation and fit for Pope Urban viii. his
Chamberlain of honor: ibid. page 218.
As the Heathens had their particular Gods, for particular things, as Cuna for
Cradles, Hebe for Youth, Morpheus for Sleep, etc. so they with an equal reason,
as well as devotion, have their Saints for particulars, as to offices, persons,
diseases, callings, Countries, and brute Animals too, as St. Patrick for
Ireland, St. Luke for Painters, Sr. Hubert for hunters, St. Gertrude for
Rat-catchers, St. Clare for sore Eyes, St. Roch for Cobblers, St. Iue for
Lawyers, St. Gallus for Geese, derogating thereby from the worth and honor of
those blessed Saints, as if they could not, and that implys weakness; or, as if
they would not, and that implies spite, benignly concern themselves in the
general affairs of mankind.

One especial Argument they have for the truth of their Religion, especially
against us, the many severities, in order to mortification that many of their
orders impose upon themselves, but if they would consider, that herein they are
quite outdone by the Chinese and other Eastern Idolaters, and that Baals
Priests had no great applause from the Prophet for the like, they would not
much press that point: Lucian tells us of strict severities, that the Priests
of Hieropolis a Town in Syria were guelded, Now if there was so sharp a
ceremony to their admittance into England, It would keep this Land as safe from
them, especially the Jesuits, as the flaming Sword did Eden from our Ancestors.

Thus have I hinted the most considerable Doctrines of that Church, for
Purgatory, Prayers for the dead, Indulgencies, or Pardons for forty thousand
years to come sometimes, are but, as indeed many of the rest, the wanton
excrescencies of Infallibility which was not in Pope Alex. vi. when he was
poisoned by mistaking the cup of Wine, that he and his hopeful Son Caesar
Borgia had prepared to poison Cardinal Carnete with. I will now superadd a
little of their Principles of morality, which are such as cannot be grateful to
Society; for the Jesuits have sound out a way by directing the intention to
sanctify the most Flagitious act imaginable, I will not excuse their other
orders neither, for a Franciscan lately converted declares thus, F. Egan.
I thought it a meritorious action to murder either Prince or Protestant
Subject, provided I was commissioned so to do by the Pope: And this cannot be
concluded to be a single opinion, when one considers the Assasinations of the
two Henrys of France, though Papists; the many attempts upon Queen Elizabeth;
the Gunpowder Treason, and the late Rebellion in Ireland, none of which was
ever yet by any Public instrument of that Church disavow'd Now comparing all
what has been said together, it will be easy to determine what Religion makes
most for a peaceable conversation, and that I am sure is the true Interest both
of Prince and People: Now considering what has been discourst on, you will
conclude I suppose, that penal Laws about Religion will be given in Charg,
which some kind natured man, may perhaps say were made only in terrorem, and
therefore not to be strictly executed, but as that is but a weak Argument to
defend those Felonies, that are made so by Statute, so ought it not to be of
more force here, for the Magistracy is rationably in point of prudence, though
there was no other obligation bound to do it: For the Congregations or troops
of Dissenters filling every day by reason of the Itching ears of the Populace,
especially the Independants may possibly encourage their Ledders by their
number (that being the ordinary way to take measures of strength by) to attempt
upon the Government, which we have reason to think not impossible, when the
attempt of Venner and his accomplices with that of the Anabaptists, a tribe of
the Independents upon Germany, is considered; and all Casuists do agree, it is
as lawful to levy war against this King, as it was against his Father, and
though something may be pleadded for those Sects, if any such be amongst us,
that like the * Bramans, or Banians amongst the East Indians hold it sin to
destroy any creature though of never so mischievous a kind, and strictly
practice it even in their diet, yet nothing can be said for such, who like the
Mohammedan Dervices hold it an acceptable service to God, if not meritorious, to
destroy any person of an erroneous persuasion, as they count all who are not of
their Judgment.

And as at the Council of Clermont about the holy War, Holy W. c. 8. l. 1.
the whole assembly said, God wills it, so to encourage you further in your
presentiments, the Bench says, the King wills it, which is sufficiently made
out, when you consider the Law, for as there is no ordinary way of knowing Gods
Will, but by the Scriptures: So the most proper way of knowing the Kings will,
especially at this Distance is by his Laws; from whence is that Principle in
Law that the King can do no wrong, because he is still presumed to act the Law,
which is the only true Standard of wrong and right. It Is true it was a maxim
amongst the Civilians, Ulpian.
when the Government was arbitrary, Quicquid placuit Regi, legis habet vigorem,
Whatsoever pleases the King, has the force and vigor of a Law: But such is the
happy constitution of our Government, his Majesty's Grace concurring that it
may pass for a Maxim in England; Quicquid est lex, Placet Regi, whatsoever is
Law pleases the King, which his Majesty has sufficiently evidenced, by not
attempting in the least, upon either Religion, or property; The Laws being the
King of Englands Edicts, by which he reigns more in the hearts of his, then
others over the fortunes of their Subjects.

You are therefore to present Recusants of all sorts, because disobedient to
the Laws, under which we enjoy more happiness than any Nation whatsoever.

FINIS.

