A COLLECTION Of Some of the Murders and Massacres committed on the Irish IN
IRELAND Since the 23 d. of October 1641.

WITH Some Observations and Falsifications on a late Printed Abstract OF
MURDERS Said to be committed by the Irish.

Now Published by R. S.

LONDON Printed for the Author 1662.

A COLLECTION Of some of the Murders and Masacres committed on the Irish in
Ireland, since the 23th. of October 1641.
HAving with sad thoughts reflected on the continuance of my sufferings, amidst
the many joys wherewith my fellow Soldiers with whom I served my
Apprentiship, under the Royal Banner in this Country, nay, all my fellow
Subjects of all sorts, and sects, are duly solaced, I found thereby my
afflictions became less tolerable then before the Royal Authority was
established, so as I could not contain my self within my wonted bonds of
patience, whithout seeking after the causes of their joys and my miseries, and
examining in my own thoughts wherefore I should not partake of the happiness of
such, with whom I did undergo many hardships for the Royal Cause, or why such
who either as primary causes or imediate actors imbrued their hands in the
Royal blood, they who thought to pluck up by the roots Monarchy; Hirarchy, and
the fundamentals of all Christian Piety, they who betrayed their trusts and
prostituted for money, or other private advantage the Royal Intrest, should now
live in the condition of free borne Subjects, enjoy their Estates and Fortunes,
some of them bear Offices, and promotions, and I who bestowed the Flowers of
my youth, nay, all my life, since I could write man (without the least
Appostacy) in the Royal service, and sought out all opportunities not only in
England, as long as any held up for the King, but in all the parts of Ireland
even in the utmost confines thereof to support the Royal Authority, should now
after my long sufferings under the usurped power, be (very near two years after
his Majesty's happy Restitution) still kept out of my Estate and livelihood,
and deprived of my Birthright and liberty of a Subject. They who robbed me of
these precious things always told me, that my Loyalty to my King was the cause
thereof, and I was well pleased to lose all I had, and my life also for that
cause, and now contrary to all principles of Philosophy that cause ceasing, the
effects in me still holds.

Having thus with perplex't thoughts ruinated upon the sourse of my miseries,
and finding no natural cause thereof arising from my deportment during the late
Wars, I at length bethought that the same may proceed from some constillation
over that unhappy Country Ireland, wherein I was born; and that although I was
not involved in the actings of my Country men, yet I may by influence of that
constillation be rendered Subject to their misfortunes and this made me some
what curious in the search of the ground and progress of the Rebellion in
Ireland (which being very odious to me, all my knowledge thereof being deceived,
at second hand from the Gassets and Pamphlets printed at London, which
ordinarily during my abode in the Kings Garrison of Oxford, and elsewhere, came
thither fraught with many execreable and heinous Murders said to be committed
by my Country men, I had much difficulty to reconcile my self so far to them,
as to admit any other information, until by chance I lighted on a printed
Paper, entitled a Narrative etc. In which Narrative is set forth in several
instances the odiousness of that Rebellion and of the barbarous actings of the
Contrivers thereof in the eyes of all the Sober Catholics of Ireland, their
votes and offers for suppressing thereof in its first rise, and the Artificies
used and provocations for involving them therein, in it I found my first light
of the assertions of the said Catholics in their own behalfes touching that
Rebellion, and it brought to some solitude; for better and further information
in those matters, which I since had from discourses of several disinteressed
persons as well Protestants as Catholics, and being thus informed, it was my
hap to light of a Pamphlet lately printed under the Title of an Abstract of
some few of these Barbarous cruel Masacres and Murders of the Protestants and
the English in some parts of Ireland, committed since the 23 of October 1641.
upon perusal of which Abstract I was satisfied that the design of Printing the
same in a time when the setlement of that Kingdom was under his Majesty's
consideration, was for no other end then to render all the Catholics there
(in all good men's opinions) blasted and unfit to partake of his Majesty's grace
and favor. The notions I had by my said former communication touching these
matters did enable me to confute several particulars of that Pamphlet, and I
found my self as a person suffering under the Calumny of my Country obliged to
retort those Calumny's, and to vindicate the honest party of my Country men, in
what I may without which (as I am verily persuaded) I must still continue under
my wonted afflictions. And this occasioned my publishing of the ensuing
Collection, wherein the Reader may be assured, that I have not taken president
from these scurrilous and lying Pamphlets, nor inserted any thing herein, but
what is an undeniable truth to be justified by many thousands, for it is
publicly known that Cromwels pretended High Court of Justice past through all
the parts of Ireland, and picked out of the people all such as could be in any
manner tainted with the spilling of English blood, with that rigor as may be
esteemed rather sumum jus then moderate Justice, that upon trials in the said
Court and examinations taken in order to those trials, there were but a few of
the many thousands said to be murdered, in printed Pamphlets, found to be
real, and it is well known that there were not so many Protestans of the
British Nation, living in Ireland in the beginning of that Rebellion, as have
been printed, to be Murdered, also it is undeniable that the first Massacres
committed in the time of the said Rebellion (which occasioned all the mischiefs
thereafter happening, was as done upon the Irish, and the several Murthes
perpetrated in cold blood, upon them did twenty fould exceed these which were
committed on the English, and that they who took in hand the publishing of the
murders done upon the English, did raise the same to an immense number, and
painted the hardness thereof with such barbarous circumstances, thereby to win
compassionand succor from England, and to stain the unblemish able honor of
his Sacred Majesty with some reflections from that Rebellion, as has been
manifested upon the trials of several persons in the said High Courts, and at
the trial of Qualifications in Ashloane where the book, called the black book,
being a Collection of the examinations taken in the year 1641. of Murders said
to be then committed, being produced, the same was so falsified in most
paticulars thereof, as well by the witnesses pretended to be fondly sworn, as
also by some of the persons then and now living, who were in the said book
sworn to be Murdered, that the said book was, for shame laid aside as no
evidence, and several other persons who have taken examinations touching
murders, have several times since acknowledged the falsity of the matters
published by them, as being had by the false information of others, who in the
hurry of these times and their own frights were so transported as they swore
all their neighbors whom they left behind were all murdered, when all or most
of them were afterward found to be living, and yet all these mistakes although
well known, remain yet unrectified. The truth is, that all sober and estated
persons of the Irish Nation did desire nothing more then the punishment of
those murders, and it was at their humble proposals that all murders were
excepted out of the Articles of peace; they also desired lately (by their
Agents) to except all murders out of the Act of Indemnity, and still desire
the same, and think that until the blood maliciously spilt on both sides, shall
be expiated by condign inflictions of punishment upon the Murderers, Gods
wrath will hardly be averted from that Land, and although the Irish have been
in the highest degree aspersed by the many brutes raised of those Murders, yet
the honest party of them found themselves so unconcerned therein, otherwise then
that they were born in a Country where those heinous facts were committed, that
they have not until this time writ a sylable in vindication of themselves,
neither would I now if I had not been by my sufferings with them forced into
it, and finding that a bare defense without some retort upon the offenders
would not be deemed a good defense, I found a necessity immediately to lay open
the falsehood of the said printed Pamphlet, and to publish a Collection of some
of the many Murders committed on the Irish hereafter; ensuing, circumstanced
with time, place and persons with as much certainty, as upon my best scrutiny
here in Eng. I would inform my self. Which Circumstances I find for the most
part omitted in the abstract, charging the Irish with Murders. And certainly
were those Murders true which are accompanied with those horrid Circumstances
mentioned in the said abstract, either the Murthes or murderers names in all
likelihood would be known and set forth with some other marks of truth for the
more belief. But I find the said Abstract is much mistaken and false as
hereafter expressed, by which the impartial reader may judge of the rest, as of
the verity of this Collection, published to undeceive the misled by the said
Abstract and former Pamphlets set forth at first and now revived by those who
always adheared to the usurped power. Wherein is observable that in the first
and second page of that scandalous Abstract, is said that at Kilkeny in the
year 1642. many Protestants were Murdered in a barbarous manner, and at Grag
in the County of Kilkeny seventy Protestants were likewise murdered with most
horrid circumstances, whereas there was at Kilkeny but one woman smothered in a
tumult in 1641. and the late Lord of Mount Garret coming to appease it, found
one Cantwel active therein, and shot him dead, and wounded others. As to Grag
aforesaid there was not any murdered there during the War, the truth of both
which is so confidently averred by persons of honor and quality, as that they
are content to allow the whole Abstract for truth, if any protestant was
murdered in either of those places other then the woman aforesaid. Other
falsifications will be found in their proper places in the Province of Connaght
which might have been done in most particularls, but that I would not retard
the publishing of this at present in expectation of farther information out of
Ireland.

R. S.

AS for such who in the Usurpers time have been unjustly executed by the
pretended High Courts of Justice, are omitted here for brevitys sake only a few
instances, viz. The Lord Viscount of Mayo under color of being guilty of the
murders committed at, Shruell was put to to death by a Court confistng of
eleaven officers, amongst whom there was not one Lawyer, whereof five did
acquit him when the said murders was committed, the said Lord was a
Protestant, had no command amongst the Irish, and urged at his Trial by good
proofs, that he escaped the Murderers with his life by great providence. Col.
Bagenal in 1652. a very loyal Gentleman, executed at Kilkeny for signing a
Warrant to hang one John Stone a known spy, the said Col. being then left for
a public hostage, for performance of Articles concluded there and not
discharged before execution, Mr. Edward Butler son to the Lord of Mont Garret
having notice sent him that some Protestants were a hanging at Ballaragad, came
with all have to preserve their lives, which he did of such as he overtook
alive, yet was condemned and executed because he came not time enough to save
two of them that were hanged upon a suspicion he might save them as well as the
rest; how unjustly the Lady Roch was put to death for murdering an unknown
person, is notoriously known; And Mrs. Fitz. Patrick was executed on the
testimony of one woman who afterward did acknowledge she was set on by Col.
Axtel, and had a sum of money from him for such prosecution.

A Collection of some of the Massacres and Murders committed on the Irish in
Ireland, since the 23 of October 1641.
County of Antrim.
ABout the beginning of November, the English 1641.
and Scots forces in Cnockfergus and murdered in one night, all the
Inhabitants of the territory of Island Mr. Gee to the number of above 3000 men
women and children, all innocent persons, in a time when none of the Catholics
of that County were in Arms or Rebellion. Note that this was the first
Massacre committed in Ireland of either side.

1641. Mr. Mae Naghten having built a small fortress in the said County to
preserve himself and his followers from outrages, until he had understood what
the cause of the then rebellion was. As soon as Col. Campbel came near with
part of the Army, he sent to let him know that he would come to him with his
party, which he did, and they were next day murdered to the number of 80. by
Sir John Clothworthy now Lord Masserin his Soldiers.

About the same time 100 poor women and children were murdered in one night,
at a place called Balliaghiun by direction of the English and Scots Officers
commanding in that County.

County of Derry.
1641. Some 300 men women and children of the Irish, having freely come under
the protection of the Garrison of London Derry, were stripped plundered and killed
by the said Garrison.

1644. Mr. Morris, Mc. Daniel Natural son to the late Earl of Antrins, was
hanged at Coolrane by the Governors orders, notwithstanding he had Col.
Michael Jones his pass.

County of Down.
1641. The Burgesses and Inhabitants of the town of Newry, meeting the English
Army on their march to besiedge the Castle of the said Town, were received into
protection, and after quarter given to the Garrison of the said Castle, the
said Inhabitants and the Soldiers of the said Garrison, to the number of 500
and upwards, men, women and children were brought on the Bridge of the Newry
and thrown into the River, and such of them as endeavored to escape by
swimming were murdered

County of Donegal.
1641. About the 20 of Nov. Sir William Steward commanded the Gentry and
Inhabitants of that County to join with his Forces in opposition to the Rebels,
and accordingly they came to the place appointed where Captain Cunningham with
a party of the said Sir Williams Regiment, under pretense of incorporating with
them, fell upon the Inhabitants with his armed Soldiers, and killed very many
of them, among whom were Owen Mc Sherney Morris O Farey and Donnagh O Callan,
Gentlemen of quality and Estates.

About the same time Cap. Flemming and other Officers of the said Regiment,
commanding a party, smothered to death 220. women and children in two Caves.

About the same time the aforesaid Captain Cunnigham murdered about 63 women
and children in the Isles of Rosse.

1641. The Governor of Letter Kenney, gathered together on a Sunday morning 53
poor people, most of them women and children, and caused them to be thrown off
the Bridge into the River and drowned them all.

1641. In November, one Reading murdered the wife and three children of Shane
O Morhghy in a place called Ballikenny of Ramalton, and after her death cut off
her breasts with his sword.

1641. 1642. The Garrisons of Rapho, Drombo, Lifford, and Castle-raghen
slaughtered no less then 1500 of the poor neighboring Inhabitants, never in
Arms, and three persons were chiefly noted among them for their barbarous
cruelty, by name James Graham, Henry Dugan, and Robert Cunnigham, commonly
called the killer of old women.

1641. 1642. About 2000 poor Laborers, women and children of the Barreny of
Terhu were massacred by the Garrisons of Bellashanny and Donegal and Lieutenant
Thomas Poe, an Officer among them, coming under color of friendship to visit a
neighbor that lay sick in his bed and to whom he owed money) carried a naked
Dagger under his Cloak which (whilst he seemed to bow toward the sick man in a
friendly manner asking how he did) he thrust it into his body, and told his
wife, her husband should be no longer sick, and so killed him.

1650. In the month of June about 3000 Horse and Foot of his Majesty's Army,
being defeated near Letter Kenny, by the English Rebels adhering to Cromwell
most of the principal Officers of the said party taken Prisoners, in the
Battle were killed in cold blood, by order of Sir Charles Coot late Lord of
Montrath, notwithstanding they had quarter from the Officers who took them
Prisoners.

County of Monagham.
1641. Captain Townsley Governor of Magherneckle, killed four Laborers and a
woman being under protection.

Captain Bromwel Governor of Clunes meeting upon the road with Mr. Charles O
Connelly, a Gentleman living under his Protection, caused him to be shot to
death.

1641. The Soldiers of the Garrisons of Dundalk and Trim, killed no less then
500 poor innocent persons, women and children in that County.

1641. 1642. The Armies of Montroe and the Legan in their several marches
through that Country, slaughtered about 2000 poor old men women and children.

1652. Col. Barrow of Cromwels Army having taken an Island defended by
Lieutenant Col. Patrick, Mr. Mahon for his Majesty after killing the said
Lieutenant Col. and his Soldiers, put all the women and children to the sword,
to the number of 80. among whom a little pretty child of 6 years old, being
spared by the Soldiers, was killed by order of the said Col. Barrow.

County of Cavan.
1641. Mr. Dela Pool an English Gentleman having taken Lands in that County
some years before the war, invited several of his friends to come out of
England and sive with him, who were all murdered in their Houses by the Army
(only the said Dela Pool who was brought into the Town of Cavan and there
hanged) for no other reason, but their being Roman Catholics, and living
among the Irish.

1641. Sir Alexander Gorden and his Lady being Scotch, but Roman Catholics,
each of them above 70 years old were plundered of their goods and stripped naked.
And all their Tennants, Servants, and all their Sons murdered.

In the same year the English forces in this County drowned 600 men, women, and
children, in and about Butlers-Bridge, no murders having been committed on any
Protestants there although in the Pamphlet lately printed, several murders are
said to be committed in that place.

County of Mayo.
In this County few murders were committed by either side, though the Lible
says that about 250 Protestants were murdered whereof at Bellicke 220,
whereas not one person was muthered there, which the now Lady of Montrath can
witness, her Ladyship, Sir Robert Hanna her father, with many others being
retreated thither for security, were all conveyed safe to Manor Hamilton, and
it is observable that the said Lady and the rest came to Mr. Owen O Rorrkes who
kept a Garrison at Drumahier for the Irish, before they came to Manor Hamilton
whose brother was prisoner with Sir Frederick Hamilton, and the said Mr Rorrk
having so many persons of quality in his hand, sent to Sir Frederick to enlarge
his brother, and that he would convey them all safe to him, Sir Frederick
instead of an enlarging the brother, hanged him the next day after be received
the message, which might have well provoked the Gentleman to a revenge, if he
had not more humanity, then could be well expected upon such an occasion, and
in times of so great confusion yet he sent them all safe where they desired.

There was a murder committed near the Moyn on 27 Protestants which was all
(and that too many) that was committed in that County, Buchanan said to be
buried alive, was killed in a private quarrel, and he cut off his adversaries
hand before himself was killed.

County of Galway and Province of Connaght.
Anno 1642. Seirjeant Redmond Burk of the Lord of Clanmorris his Foot Company
and two more, were hanged by the then Governor of the fort of Gallway, the
said Lord being then of his Majesty's Army, for which action no reparation
being given to his Lordship, he pretended it to be the occasion of his Revolt
from the Lord Marquess of Clanriccard.

Anno 1642. A party of the Garrison of the said Fort, murdered six people in
Rinveel, amongst whom one Geffery Fitz Thibot, aged about 70 years and in a
burning Feavour, with his wife who was as old, were murdered in their beds,
which action provoked many of the neighbors to stand on their guard against
the said Fort.

Anno. 52. Redmond Burke a Col. in his Majesty's Army had quarter given him by
some of Col. Coots men he being taken in a skirmish between Col. Grace and some
of Cromwels party, and being prisoner for some time, Col. Henry Ingelsby caused
his head to be cut off.

Anno 52. 53. It was an usual practice with Col. Stubbers then Governor of
Galway, and others commanding in the said County to take the people out of
their beds at nights, and sell them for Slaves to the Indies, and by
computation sold out of the said County above 1000 souls.

Murders committed in the said County of Gallway on Protestants.
Anno 42. It is confessed that two Protestants were murdered in that County,
whereof one was a Minister as the Libel says, but it is most certain, that the
Lord Marquess of Clanriccard caused the three men who murdered one of them to
be hanged in Gibbets in three several places, and by his Lordships orders Sir
Roger O Shaghnesy hanged the two Cow-heards who murdered the other.

Anno 42. It is confessed that the Lord of Clanmorris having declared against
the said Fort, for hanging his Sergeant as above expressed, took Sergeant
Rowleright, and two or three more of the Soldiers of the said Fort pilladging
a village near Gallway, and hanged Rowleright and the other three.

It is also confessed that a barbarous murder was committed by one Edmund
Alta, an irreligious profane fellow of the County of Mayo, and his wicked
accomplices on some Protestants at Shruel a place mearing with the county of
Gallway on about 30 persons, and the Pamphleter might well remember that the
neighboring Gentry came with all expedition to rescue the said Protestants,
and that they did rescue the Bishop of Killala (who by the Pamphlet seems to
have been murdered) and his wife and children* with the most part of the said
Protestants, and Bryen Kilkenny a Friar, then Guardian of the Abbey of Ross near
Shruel, was of the first that made have to that rescue, and brought the said
Bishops wife and children, with several others of the said distressed
Protestants to his Monastry, where they found as much civility as was in the
said Friars Power to give them for several nights, until Mr. Burk of Castle
Hacket brought the said Bishop, his wife and family to his own house where they
wanted nothing he could afford them for some weeks, the like being done by
several other neighboring Gentlemen to the rest of the said Protestants, until
they were sent to places of security by the Lord Marquess Clanriccard his
order, yet the said Friar has been these eight years past kept a Prisoner for
his function or calling without any other crime laid to his charge, now being
about 80 years of age.

And it is observable that in this county of Gallway all the war time several
Protestant Ministers viz. Dean York, Mr. Corroyn, Mr. Nelly, and other
Ministers, had their Protestant Flocks and meetings without interruption living
amongst the Irish,

County of Roscoman.
No murders were committed by any party in this County only five persons at
Bellanafada by one Roger O Conor; and no murder was committed at Bellalegue
during the War, although in the Pamphlet the contrary is expressed, nor no such
man as William Steward was known in that County, nor to have been murdered
there though the said abstract sets forth his being murdered in a most
barbarous manner.

County of Leotrim.
Anno 1641. It was commonly known to all sides how cruel the Governor of
Manor Hamilton was in that County, how he usually invited Gentlemen to Dine
with him, and hanged them after Dinner, and cause their thighs to be broke
with hatchets before execution.

Also the said Governor being in Vlster when then Rebellion broke forth,
desired one Mr. Iraght (a Gentleman who professed much friendship to him) to do
him the favor to guide him in safety to Manor Hamilton aforesaid which the
Gentleman did, and came near upon a 100 miles with him, after being friendly
treated for some days by the said Governor he hanged without the least
occasion, neither was the Gentleman in the Rebelion, but was hanged least he
should. The Libel says three Protestants were murdered in this County, but on
due examination it will be found three was none.

County of Sligoe.
Here is none at this time who can give any exact account of the murders
committed in this County, but one remarkable murder, that in Creanes Castle in
the Town of Sligo, the Irish had a party commanded by Major Richard Burke
after obteining quarter for them to march away, to the number of about 200 were
murdered rendering the Castle, this Sir Audley Mervyne knows to be true.

County of Dublin.
1641. About the beginning of November, 5 poor men (whereof two were
Protestants) coming from the Market of Dublin, and lying that night at Santry 3
miles from thence, were Murdered upon their Beds by one Cap. Smith, and a
party of the Garrison of Dublin, and their heads brought next day in triumph
into the City, which occasioned Luke Nettervel and George King and others of
the neighbors, to write to the Lord Justices to know the cause of the said
murder, whereupon their Lordships issued forth a Proclamation that within 5
days the Gentry should come to Dublin to receive satisfaction, and in the mean
while (before the 5 days were expired) old Sir Charles Coote came out with a
party plundered and burned the Town of Clontraffe distant 2 miles from Dublin
belonging to the said Gorge King nominated in the Proclamation, and killed 16
of the Townsmen and women and 3 sucking Infants, which unexpected breach of the
Proclamation (having deterred the Gentlemen from waiting of the Lords Justices)
forced many of them to betake themselves to their natural defense, and others
to abandon their houses.

In the same week 56 men, women and children of the Village of Bullogge (being
frighted at what was done at Clontarff, took boats and went to Sea, to shun
the fury of a party of Soldiers come out of Dublin, under the command of
Colonel Crafford, but being pursued by the soldiers in other Boats, were
overtaken and thrown over board.

One Russel a Baker in Dublin coming out of the Country, in company with Mr.
Archbold of Clochram (who went to take hold of the said Proclamation of the
Lords Justices) were both hanged and quartered.

1641. In March, a party of horse of the Garrison of Donsoghlin, murdered
seven or eight poor people in Protection, Tennants to Mr. Dillon of Hunstowne
having quartered in their houses the night before, and receiving such
entertainment as the poor people could afford.

About the same time, a party of the English quartered at Mallahyde, hanged a
servant of Mr Robert Boynes at the Plough, and forced a poor Labourer to hang
his own brother, and soon after they hanged fifteen of the Inhabitants of
Swords who never bore Arms, in the Orchard of Mallahide, and hanged a woman
for bemoaning her husband hanged amonst them.

In the same year after quarter given by Lieutenant Colonel Gibson, to those of
the castle of Carriggmain they were all put to the sword, being about three
hundred and fifty, most of them women and children, and Colonel Washington
endeavoring to save a pretty child of seven years of age, carried him under
his cloak, but the child against his will was killed in his arms, which was a
principal motive of his quitting that service.

1642. In April one Nicholas Heart and fourteen Laborers, going with corn to
the market of Dublin, and having a pass, were all murdered upon the road, by a
party commanded abroad by Lord Lambert. The same day Mr. Sarsfield of Lucan,
sent his Groom to guide the Lord of Gesils Troop, which the fellow having
performed, was knocked in the head for his labor. The same day eighteen
villages in Protection, the furthest within six miles to Dublin, were plundered
and burned, and to the number of four hundred men women and children, were
cruelly massacred.

About the same time, a party of the Garrison of Swoards, having brought in
thirty poor Laborers, forced them to digg their own graves and then killed
them.

Much about that time, one Benet Sheriff of the county, killed sixteen men and
women coming from the market of Dublin in May. A party under the command of
Colonel Crafford murdered one hundred forty women and children in Newcastle
and Coolmine, being under protection.

1641. 1642. Many thousands more of the poor innocent people of that County,
shunning the fury of the Soldiers fled several times into thickets of Firres
which the Soldiers did usually fire, killing as many as endeavored to escape,
or forced them back again to be burnt, and the rest of the Inhabitants for the
most part dyed of Famine.

1649. Captain Harrington a Protestant, and three hundred Officers and
Soldiers, taken Prisoners at the defeat given his Majesty's Army before
Dublin, were after quarter given, put to death by order of Colonel Michael
Jones.

Mr. Wogan of Rathcoffie, having quarter given him in the same time, by Captain
Ottoway, was killed by Lieutenant Tomson, as he rid behind one of Ottoways
troopers, and one Mr. Hiny an aged person after dividing his goods to the value
of fifteen hundred pound among the Soldiers, was knocked in the head, together
with his daughter, her husband and four children after quarter.

Note that no less then twelve thousand of the poor Inhabitants of that county,
were cruelly massacred the first year of the War.

County of Kildare.
1641. Captain Thomas Hues having summoned thirty three contributers to meet
him at Hodgestowne, caused them all to be murdered.

1641. The said Hues murdered Mrs. Eustare Aunt to Sir Robert Talbot ninty
years old (with two gentlewomen that waited on her) after she entertained him
friendly in her house.

1641. The Soldiers of Clongowes wood and Rathcoffy yiedling upon quarter,
were conveyed to Dublin and hanged there and upwards of an hundred and fifty
women and children, were found in the said places murdered.

Anno 51. Capt. Hulet coming to Sir John Dongans house at Castle town, to
search for a Priest, tortured a child of Sir John's of seven years of age with
lighted matches, to force a confession from him where the Priest was, and the
poor child not telling, or not knowing, Hulet hung him up with the Reins of
his bridle, but the Troopers when Hulets back was turned, cut him down half
dead, whereof the child dyed soon after.

It is well known that the Commons of that county were for the most part
destroyed and slaughtered by the English, in so much that there were not so
many left living as could gather the 20th part of the harvest.

County of Mead.
1642. In April Mrs Elinor Taaffe of Tullag hanoge, sixty years old, and 6
women more were murdered by the Soldiers of the Garrison of Trim, and a blind
woman aged eighty years, was encompassed with straw by them, to which they set
fire and so burnt her, the same day they hanged two women in Kilbride and two
old decrepit men that begged Alms of them.

In the same year Mr. Walter Dulin an old man, unable to stir, abroad many
years before the war, was killed in his own house by Lieutenant Colonel
Broughtons troopers, notwithstanding the said Broughtons Protection which the
old man produced.

1642. Mr. Walter Euers a Justice of peace and Coram, an aged man and bedrid of
the Palsy long before the Rebellion, was carried in a Carr to Trim. and there
hanged by the Governors orders.

Anno 1642. Many Ploughmen were killed in Philbert-Stowne by the Garrison at
Bective.

1642. 40. Men women and children in Protection reaping their harvest in
Bonestowne were killed by a troop of the said Garrison, who upon the same day
killed Mrs Alfon Read, at Donsaghiln being eighty nine years old, and forty
persons more, most of them women and children shunning the fury of the said
troop, were overtaken and slaughtered.

1642. About seventy men, women and children, tenants to Mr. Francis Mc O voy,
and under protection, were killed by Greenvils Soldiers, and 160 more in the
Parish of Rathcoare, whereof there was an aged couple blind fifteen years
before.

1642. Cap. Sandford and his troopers, murdered in and about Mulhussey upwards
of one hundred men, women and children, under protection, and caused one Conor
Breslan to be stuck with a knife into the throat, and so bled to death, and one
Eliner Cusaack one hundred years old, was tied about with lighted matches, and
so tortured to death in Clonmoghan.

1642. James Dowlan about a hundred years old, Donagh Comen, Derby Dennis,
Roger Bolan, and several other Laborers and women, to the number of a hundred
and sixty making their harvest, were all slaughtered by the Garrison of Trim.

1642. Mr. Barnwal of Tobertinan, and Mr. John Husseg innocent persons were
hanged at Trim, by old Sir Charles Cootes party.

1642. Gerrald Lynch of Donower aged eighty years, was killed by troopers of
Trin being in protection.

Mr. Thomas Talbot of Crawlstowne about eighty years old being protected, and a
known servitor to the Crown, (having been Lieutenant of horse, to the Lord of
Hoaths troop in the Battle of Kinsale, in Queen Eliz. Reign, was killed at
his own door by some of Captain Marroes troop.

1642. About the month of April, the Soldiers under the said Greenvils
command, killed in and about the Navan eighty men, women and children, who
lived under Protection.

1641. Captain Wentworth and his company, garrisoned at Donmo, killed no less
then two hundred protected persons, in the Parish of Donamore Slane, and
Barroni of Margellin and Ovmorein, the town of Ardmulchan Kingstowne and
Haristowne, all protected persons.

1642. Sir Richard Greenfields troop killed forty two men, women and children,
and eighteen Infants at Doramstowne.

2642. A woman in Protection was by Capt. Marrowes Soldiers put into the
stock of a Tuckmil and so tuckt to death, in the town of Steedalte.

Lieutenant Ponsonby put two aged protected persons to death at Dowanstone,
each of them being about eighty years old.

Captain Marrow caused about an hundred protected persons, men, women and
children to be put to death in the Barrony of Dooleek, and Lieutenant John
Tench killed a protected person 70 years old near Duleek.

Mr. Patrick White, son and heir of Mr. White of Clangil* in protection, was
taken out of his bed and knocked in the head, by Lieu. Luaton of the Garrison of
Trim.

1647. Three thousand Soldiers at the Battle of Donganshill, were killed
after quarter given them, by Coll. Michael Jones, and many Irish Officers taken
in the battle, and deeply wounded were killed the next day after, when they
could not march on foot.

1649. After the taking of Drogheda by Cromwell, the slaughterer of men, women
and children, continued there for four or five days together in cold blood, to
the number of about four thousand.

Many thousands of the poor Inhabitants of this county were destroyed in the
Firrs, as those in the county of Dublin, and the rest for the most part
perished with Famine.

County of Westmeath.
1642. About the latter end of March, Mr. Christopher Mac Gawley
notwithstanding the protection of the Duke of Ormond, was killed in his own
house with two of his servants, by a party of the English Aarmy marching to
Athlone, who laying the said tection on the said Gawleys breast, shot him
through his protection, to try whether it was proof against a buller.

1942. Mrs. Ellis Dillon of Killenenin having the Lord Justices protection for
her self, and her tennants, was plundered and 40 of the said Tennants their
wives and children were killed by soldiers under Sir Michael Earnely's command.

County of Louth.
1641. In the month of February, about 300 poor people men women and Children
were cruelly slaughtered in the wood of Deruer by a party of the Garrison of
Dondalke and Tredath.

1641. About the beginning of March about 300 hundred Farmers and laborers
never in Armos, with their wives and Children were masacred by a party of the
Garrisons of Dondalke and Tredath in the Redmoore of Braganstowne.

About the same time Captain Charles Townsly and Lieutenant faithful Townsly,
with a party of the English Army and Garrison of Dundalke slaugtered at
Dunmogham 220 Inhabitants of several Villag es commanded by the Officers of the
said Army to live in that place for their greater security.

A party of the said Garrison of Tredath and Dundalke, killed above 200 persons
in the Castle of Reaghstowne after quarter given.

1641. One Anthony Townsly hanged Mr. Dromgole of Dromgoolstowne at his own
gate, the said Townsley hanged upward of 30 poor men and women, going to the
Markets of Dundalke and Tredath, on a tree commonly called eight mile Bush
midway between the said Towns.

1642. A party of horse and foot of the Garrison of Tredah, killed and burnt in
the firres above 160 men women and children of the Inhabitants of
Termoufeighin, within three miles of Tredah no less then a 10000 of the poor
Inhabitants of that County though they are not taxed with any murder committed
on the Protestants according to their own abstract, were masacred.

County of Wicklow.
October 1641. Three women whereof, one Gentle woman big with Child, and a boy
were hanged on the Bridge of Neuragh, by command of of old Sir Charles Coote in
his first march to that County, and caused his guide to blow into his Pistol and
so shot him dead, he also hanged a poor Butcher on the same march, called
Thomas Mc William.

1641. Mr. Denis Conyam of Glanely aged and unable to bear Arms was roasted to
death by Capt. Gee of Col. Craffords Regiment, and in all the marches in 41,
42, 43, the English Army killed all they met in this County though no murders
are charged on the said County, to be committed on Protestants by the Abstract.

In the Usurpers time Captain Barrington Garrisoned at Arcklow, Murdered
Donnagh O Doyle of Killoarrow and above 500 more Protected by himself, and it
is well known that most of the comonalty of this County were murdered.

1650. Mr. Birne of Munneg a Gentleman of an inoffensive Demeanor being then in
protection, the Governor of Carloe, marched with a party to this County; the
said Birne came to him and two of his servants produced his Protection,
notwithstanding which he and his two servants were hanged, for no other reason
then that the Gentleman had a great stood of Horses and Mares, besides a good
stock of Cows which were out of hand seized on by the said Governor and his
party.

County of Kilkenny.
1641. The English Soldiers of the Garrison of Ballenekil burnt an old woman
of ninety years old in her own house in Idough.

1642. The said Soldiers massacred a hundred eighty men, women and children,
who were cutting their Corn near the said Garrison. They dragged Mr. Thomas
She an innocent person out of his own house with five of his Servants, and
hanged them all at Ballenekil.

1650. Col. Daniel Axtel cut of the head of of Mr. Fitz Gerret of Browneifords
Son, and hanged the sons of Mr. Butler of Ballikify and Mr. Butler of
Boni'dstowne because their fathers inlisted themselves in his Majesty's Army.

One Francis Frisby an English man and a Protestant, Butler to the Duke of
Ormond having had quarter upon the Rendition of Killkenny to Cromwell was
apprehended by the said Col. Axtel, and for not confessing his Lords plate, was
tortured to death by burning matches between his fingers, in the castle of
Killkenny.

1651. Major Shertal, an Officer of his Majesty's Army having delivered the
Castle of of Ballimay upon quarter of life and liberty to Col. Axtel, was run
through the body by the said Col. and all his Soldiers to number of 190 were
killed.

1651. Captain Thomas Shertel, a Captain of horse in his Majesty's Army coming
to Killkenny upon a safe conduct, was hanged by the said Axtel, because he had
a good estate, within 2 miles of Killkenny.

1650. Col. Axtel hanged 50 of the Inhabitants near Thomastowne, living under
his protection, for no other reason but that a party of Cromwels Army was
defeated the day before in that place, by some of the Royalests.

Col. Axtel meeting one day 40 men women and children near the Wood of Kildonan
who were coming for greater security to live within his quarters caused them
all to be killed.

Some Soldiers of the Kings army being taken in avillage in Graces parish,
Col. Axtel caused all the inhabitants of the said village to be apprehended,
hanged three of them, and sold the rest to the Barbados.

1650. The said Axtel (as matter of recreation) commanded his troop to gather
together a great number of the protected people near Kilkenny, and being all in
a cluster, bid the troopers rush through them and to kill as many as hapened on
the left hand of the troop, and to spare the rest, 30 persons were murdered
then on that account.

County of Wexford.
1651. Col. Cook in one march out of Iniscorphy into the Barronyes of
Ballaghkene and Goury, murdered a hundred poor Laborers in Protection, and
five hundred women and children whom he caused to be locked up in their own
houses, commanding his Soldiers to set fire unto them, and one woman having
escaped out of a house, was killed, and her belly barbarously ripped up, others
thrust their sucking babes out of the windows, hoping that their innocence
might beget pity in the Soldiers, who by their Colonels command received the
poor Infants upon the heads of their pikes and thrust them back into the fire.

1650. 1651. The said Coll. Cook in his several marches into the Baronyes of
Bellaghkine and Skarawalsh, murdered upward of three hundred men women and
children under protection, yet the wife and children of this Cook
(notwithstanding all his barbarous cruelties committed against the Kings
Subjects, and having always emminently appeared against his Majesty and his
Royal Father) have been so well befriended as to be provided for by special
name in his Majesty's Declaration for the settlement of Ireland.

1650. 1651. Captain Thomas Barrington murdered no less then 300 men, women
and children under protection in the Barronyes of Goury and Bellaghkin.

1650. The said Barrington killed fifty women and children at a place called
Layen, he was so noted through Cromwels Army for his cruelty, that they called
him Barrington-kill all.

The above Coll. Cook caused twenty two of Sir Walter Dongans men, taken at the
fight at Clonigal to be killed after quarter given, and one Captain Birne of
his Majesty's Army wounded in the fight, and much made of by some of Cooks
men, who took him Prisoner, was soon after stripped and killed.

Major Thomas Heart forced a country fellow under protection to leap into the
River Bana, and took pleasure to see him drowned.

1650. Captain William Bolton of Colonel Prettys Regiment, slaughtered about
two hundred and fifty men, women and children under protection, in the said
Barronies of Karawalsh, Bellaghkine, Bantry and Gillmalere.

1650. The said Bolton gave quarter at Castle Kirk to nine Soldiers, who after
delivering their Arms were slaughtered by his order.

1650. Mr. Pierse Butler, eldest son to the Lord of Galmoy, and Captain of
horse in his Majesty's Army, being taken prisoner in the fight at Lampstowne,
was killed in cold blood, and after quarter by the said Bolton.

1651. The said Bolton hanged Pierse Doran, who collected his contribution, at
his own door and one of his servants to keep him company.

1651. Nicholas Lenagh a man known to be frantic, was killed in his own house
by the said Boltons orders.

Daniel Birne and Morogh Redmond were murdered in their houses by Cap.
Barrington, they being in Protection, and Collectors of the contribution.

1651. Colonel Pretty meeting one day upon the road with Mr. Phillip Hill a
Gentleman of his acquaintance, and his collector in the Barrony of Ballagh Keen
hanged him on the next Tree.

Notwithstanding all those murders and massacres acted upon the Inhabitants of
this county, it is observable that by the late Pamphlet and all the papers that
have been published to that subject, they could not say that one English man
was murdered in that county since the Rebellion.

County of Typperary.
1641. On the 24. of October one Brown and Cap. Peasly murdered eleven men
women and children in their own houses at Goldin Bridge, before any of the
Catholics took up Arms in that county.

About the same time the said Captain Peasely going through Cloneulty, Phillip
Ryan a peaceable Gentleman, and owner of the said Town, came out of his house
to salute the Cap. who pulled out his Pistol and shot the poor harmless
Gentleman dead at his own door.

Note that these two murders occasioned the rising of the Gentry and
inhabitants of that county.

1641. One John Wise of Balliowen, an English Soldier came several times in
women's attire upon the road, and committed diverse murders upon simple country
people coming from the Market.

1649. A Soldier of Cromwels being killed by some of the Irish Army, Col.
Jeremy Sankey summoned all the Inhabitants of the Parish wherein he was killed,
being under his protection, to come to Fethered, where he put them to the Dice,
and hanged five of them.

One Lieutenant Mac. Gragh of his Majesty's Army, being taken prisoner by
Captain John Godfroy, was five days after hanged in the town of Fetherd by
Colonel Sankey notwithstanding the said Godfroys protection to have given him
quarter.

1652. Seventeen poor women and children in Protection were murdered at Tullow
by Major Elias Green and his party, and one of the Troopers refusing to kill a
woman big with child, by name Eliz. Cugly, was wounded by the said Major, who
thrust his own Sword through the woman's Bowels.

Within a while after, thirty women and boys, ready to starve, and digging of
Puttatoes in their own Gardens in the said Village of Tullo, were all killed by
orders of the said Major Green.

1649. Captain Cantuel, and Captain Fitz. Gerrald of his Majesty's Army, were
tied to a tree and shot to death by some Officers of Cromwels Army after
quarter given.

1651, Colonel Richard hanged Ed. Mockler a protected person, and also a woman
bigg with child, saying he did it least she should be delivered of a Traitor.

Major Bolton, killed in the high way near Thurles, one Phillip Pursel an
honest Gentleman in Protection.

Major William Moor murdered upon the highway near Thurles a servant of Mr.
John Bryans, carrying provision to the Lady of Thurles.

1651. Morish English a Gentleman in Protection, was dragged out of his own
house by the said Cap. John Godfroy, and brought to Cahirr where he was hanged
next day.

1651. Sixteen Soldiers of his Majesty's Army taken Prisoners by Col. Abotts
troop near Nenagh were all killed by them after quarter given.

1651. One Moran a Soldier after quarter promised, was by Colonel Abots
command hanged three hours by the heels from the Battlement of the castle of
Nenagh, and next day hanged by the neck until he dyed.

1651. Some of Abots troop having brought a Labourer out of Mr. Grace of Clogh
Priory his house, to show them the way, cut off his head within a Musket shot
to the house.

Two Laborers thrashing of corn in Ballinanan were killed by Cap. Barker.

In the year 1650. David Walsh Esquire, about eighty years old, was murdered
by Major Morgan, now Sir Anthony Morgan, in the road between Clonmel and
Waterford, and one of the said David's daughters endeavoring to preserve her
Father, was murdered over him, and a Granchild of the said David's, seven years
of age, then in the company, was murdered by the said Sir Anthonies own hands.

The troopers having absolutely refused to kill him, and several others of the
said David's kindred were murdered for no other cause but that his children and
relations were active in defending Clonmel for his Majesty against Cromwell, and
for his son John Walsh Esquire, his attending on the Lord Lieutenant in order
to his Majesty's service.

No less then 500 poor laborers and women were hanged at Clonmel, and other
Garrisons in this County, guilty of no other crime but being found within the
imaginary lines drawn by the Govenors of the several Garrisons in the said
County.

A woman being big with child, having in presence of all the people the child
stirring in her womb, was hanged by Colo. Richards at Clomnel.

County of Clare.
1644. 40 families in protection were murdered by the Garrison of Inchicronan.

1646. several residing near Bunratty were Murdered by the Soldiers of that
Garrison under Command of Lieutenant Col. Adams.

1651. Sir Hardress Waller, and Col. Ingoldsby commanding two parties into the
Barronneg of Bueren then under protection killed in one day, upwards of 800 men
women and children, and meeting with Squire Donogh O Bryan an aged Gentleman,
and protected by the said Waller they locked him up in a Country house to which
they set fire and burnt him to death.

1651. the said Colonels Troop of Dragoones murdered in the Town of Quenne 30
aged and poor persons.

1651. The said Ingoldsby after giving quarter to 9 soldiers of his Majesty's
Army, and a weeks imprisonment hanged them,

1651. The said Ingoldsby's men killed about 1000 poor laborers women and
children in the Barronists of Corckromroe and Inchiquin being all under his
Protection, Capt. Puerefoy and other officers commanded by the said Ingoldsby,
murdered upward of 100 men women and children in the Barrony's of Bunratty and
Tullagh protected by the said Col.

Captain Stafe and Capt Apers under the command of the said Ingoldsby
murdered no less then 500 families in protection in the Barronies of Island I
Brackane Cluandarala and Moyfarta.

1651. The said Ingoldsby's men when the were surfeited of killing, made it an
ordinary practice to bridle the poor people, men and women to tie them to their
horses tails like beasts and sell them to the Barbados.

County of Limericke.
Anno 1651. The said Col. Ingoldsby being one day with a party in the teritory
of Cleanlish, slaughtered upward of 500 men women and Children, all under his
protection.

1651. The said Ingoldsby and his Dragoons murdered in one day about 300
protected persons in the teritory of Tullagh hill.

County of Kiery.
1653. The Inhabitance of the Barrony of Dunkueran being ordered by Lieutenant
Col. Nelson then Governor of the County for Cromwell, to remove with their goods
and Cattels near his Garrisons for their greater security were met by the said
Nelson Major Peppard, Capt. Thomas Barrington, Capt. Hasset, and other
Officers, with a party of horse and under color to secure their removeal, and
on a sudden upon a sign given, the soldiers fell upon the poor people, and
killed upwards of 300 men women and children, the cruelty of Barrington and
Hasset in that massacre was remarkable, causing many women to be shamefully
stripped naked, and afterward most inhumanly butchered, the fingers of such as
wore rings to be cut off, and the Babes and Infants to be tossed on Pikes and
Halberts, in sight of their dying Parents.

1653. The said Nelson having granted his protection under hand and Seal to
Tecig Morearty and Conor Mc Donogh Catholic Priests, until their
transportation for Flanders by a time limited; before half that time was
expired apprehended the said Priests, and hanged them with their Protection in
their hands.

1653. The said Nelson and Captain Peeter Carry meeting with one Thomas O Bryne
a Butcher by trade, hanged him for being sometime a lay Friar.

Many hundreds of the poor people of that county reduced by the exaction and
cruelty of their Governors, to a starving condition, were by Nelsons orders
for smelling of horseflesh which they were necessitated to eat or starve hanged.

1653. Captain Thomas Barrington aforesaid, caused the arm of a poor woman to
be cut off with a hatchet, and perceiveing that she grasped with the other hand
a sucking babe, she had at her breast, he caused that arm to be also cut off,
and the Infants head dashed against a Rock, in her presence.

The said Barrington caused a Lieutenant and some Soldiers of his Majesty's
Army, taken prisoners upon quarter, to be stripped naked, and their brains
knocked out with a hatchet.

County of Cork.
Ann. 1641. In Condons country above 300 Laborers, women and children, were
murdered by some of the now Earl of Ororrys Soldiers.

In the said country amongst others, they guelded one Denis Downey* and pulled
out one of his eyes, and sent him in that posture to his wife.

Anno 41. It. fifty six persons or thereabouts, were brought Prisoners to
Castle Lions (most of them Laborers who did never bear arms) were put into a
stable, and the women in that Garrison at night fired their beards and the hair
of their heads, which so disfigured them and burnt them, that their nearest
friends could not know them next day when they were a hanging.

Anno 42. In the same county 355 persons, men, women and children were
murdered with clubbs and stones, being in protection.

Ann. 42. Mr. Henly an English Gentleman, dwelling in Roches country, but a
Roman Catholic, had his wife and children barbarously stripped, and most of his
tenants inhumanly murdered by the adjacent English Garrisons. He the said
Henly nor his tenants being never in Arms, and such cruelty was used, that
they stabbed young Infants, and left them so half dead on their mothers dead
carcasses, in the said Henlystowne and in the adjacent villages, at that time
there were murdered about nine hundred Labourets, women and children.

Ann. 43. Cloghlegh being Garrisoned by the Irish and surrendered upon quarter
of life to Sir Charles Vavasor were all inhumanly murdered, and the hearts of
some of them pulled out and put into their mouths, and many other Massacres
were committed the same time there on women and childred.

Ann. 43. At Lislee 24 men in Protection were murdered by Col. Mynns Soldiers.

At Beallauere the same year Teig O Mungan and David Broge blowing by command
into Pistols, were shot to death by some of Cap. Bridges men, and eight poor
Laborers more were killed by them being in Protection, and then employed in
saving some harvest of English.

Anno 42. At Clogheiulty about 238 men, women and children were murdered, of
which number seventeen children werie taken by the legs by Soldiers who knocked
out their brains against the walls, this was done by Phorbis his men, and the
Garrison of Bandon bridge.

At Garrane near Ross, Conor Kinedy, who had protection for himself and his
Tennants to save their Harvest, were murdered by the said Garrison of Ross as
they were ditching about their (...)

Anno 41. At Bandon bridge, the Garrison there tied 88 Irishmen of the said
Town back to back and threw them off the bridge into the River, where they were
all drowned.

Anno 50. At Shiel there were 40 labors with women and children put on the
edge of a great cliff over the Sea, a Rope being drawn about them with six
Soldiers on each and and so thrown into the Sea, and drowned, this was done by
Major Wallis and his party, who about the same time murdered in the west of
Carbery upwards of 800 men, women and children.

Anno 41. Patrick Hackett Master of a Ship in Waterford, the Duchess of Ormond
being desireous to be conveyed by him to Dublin after leaving her safe with her
family and goods there, the Lord Justices and the Duke of Ormond gave him a
pass for his safe return who being driven by a storm into Dungarvan, the said
Master and all his men were hanged by direction of the Commander in chief
there, notwithstanding he produced his said pass.

Anno 47. Sir Allexander Mc Donnel a known eminent serviture to his late
Majesty in the wars of Scotland was murdered by Major Purdome after quarter.

Anno 51. Charles Mc Carty of Killmydy being in a party with Coll. Phayre at
the Grate of his Castle, Col. Ingoldsby rides up to the Grate with a span'd
Pistol and shot him dead, at which action the said Phayre was much
dissatisfied, being Commander in chief of that party.

Anno 41. The English party of this County Burnt, O Sulevan Bear his house in
Bantry, and all the rest of that Country, killed man, woman and child, turning
many into their houses then on fire to be burnt therein, and amongst others,
Thomas de Bucke a Cooper about 80 years old, and his wife being little less,
and all this was done without provocation, the said O Sulevan being a known
reliever of the English in that Country, observe that this County is not
charged in the late Abstract with any Murders.

County of Waterford.
Anno 41. In Decy's Country the neighboring English Garrisons of the County of
Cork after burning and pilladging all that Country, they Murdered above 3000
persons, men women and Children, before any Rebellion began in Munster, and led
a hundred laborers prisoners to Caperquine, where being tied by couples were
cast into the River, and made sport to see them drowned; observe that this
County is not charged with any murders to be committed on Protestants.

ANd to conclude, how can any indifferent man believe that late Abstract of of
murders said to be committed by the Irish to be true, when it concludes with a
passage so well known to be otherwise, as to charge the Roman Catholic
Members of the Parliament held in Ireland in the year 1641 with obstructing the
transportation of the disbanded soldiers of Straffords Army for the King of
Spains service, purposely to advance the said Rebellion. Whereas it is most
certain that stop was put on them by orders sent out of England; and it is
observable the said late Abstract and other Pamphlets say, that so many hundred
thousand Protestants were murdered in Ireland in the year 1541. which can
never be made to appear, nor that 4000 were murdered there of Protestants all
the War time. And it is no small inducement for any impartial man to give
credit to this allegation, when those who act for the Irish here have always
and do still make it their request that the murderers of both sides be left to
the due punishment of the Law. The scope and intent of the publishers of those
pamphlets by fayning of so many cruel and inhumane murders upon that Nation
being no other then to render them odious to their natural Prince and fellow
Subjects of Enland, whereby many have the easier access unto their estates.

Faults escaped by the Printer.
Page 4. line 13. r. Flower, p. 5. l. 6. r. ruminated, l. 18. r. derived, p. 8.
l. 18. r. Athloane, l. 23. r. formerly.

FINIS.

