A MIRROR OF TRUTH. OF THE HIGHEST CONCERN To all sorts of People, Noble and
Ignoble, Rich or Poor, Sovereign or Subject.

1. Romans 14. To the Greeks and to the Barbarians, to the wise and unwise I am a
Debtor. Printed in the Year 167^.

A MIRROR OF TRUTH.
The Preface.
IT is for the Lovers of Peace, and naked Truth, for whom I write this in a few
but substantial words, declaring the grounds thereof, and no more, without the
least dispute or Contest with any.

The Truth.
KNOW therefore that as all things are Vanity of Vanities, but only to Love and
serve God: Eccl. 1.2.
So all Knowledge which is not to that End is blind ignorance; And all
otherwise seeming Truth plain deceit and falsehood. For there is no Truth but
that which leads to God, Truth it self the Beginning and End, Alpha and Omega:
nor any Error or falsehood, but what seduces from Him. Truth indeed is the
chief of all, most to be loved and sought after. Esd. 3.4.


All the Earth calls for Truth and Heaven blesses it, thus Esdras. And let
it be seriously sought after and firmly embraced above all in this foundation
and groundwork of all true Virtue and Perfection, Divine Faith, without which
it is impossible to please God. Heb. 11.1.


Now Faith is the ground of things to be hoped for, and the evidence of things
which are not seen. If this point be rightly understood and well observed the
great stumbling block to Errors and Heresies is taken away.
This is St. Paul's definition of Faith, and most true it is. Observe then,
that since Faith, a supernatural gift of God, is the Evidence of those things
that by no sense or understanding can be perceived, but only through this free
and gracious gift of God, why do we so much busy our Understandings to conceive
the Articles of our Faith, and believe in a manner Nothing but what we would
pretend clearly to know and understand? All which is incompatible with Faith
which must have no other Operation of the Understanding, but simple subjection
and obedience to that Divine Light. And for this reason He teaches us to bring
into Captivity all Understanding in Obedience to Christ. 2 Cor. 10.5.
As if he should say, Good People in vain it is for you to trouble your heads:
discussion, and search in these matters will not quiet or satisfy you, The true
Rule of Faith.
you must simply believe, because God reveals and the Church proposes.

That which Faith tells you is above your capacity. You may as well put the
whole Ocean into a small Pit, as the least of these high mysteries into your
Understanding, you may as well understand the nature of God Himself as the
least of them. They are all alike, little and great, high and low as delivered
by Faith.

We may not therefore search them, Pro. 25.27 Exodus 19.12
For who is a searcher of Majesty shall be oppressed by Glory. And the Beast
that touches the Mountain shall be stoned. These be Edge-tool's, there is no
jeasting with them. Humane reason cannot reach thus high. We must simply submit
to the Divine Revelatian and the Churches Proposition.

All the Disputation in the world is to no purpose in these matters. We must
not contend in words, for it avails nothing but to the subversion of the
Hearers.

It is not Man's Wisdom can teach us these things, but the plain evidence of
the Spirit of Truth. And for this cause St. Paul gave this Admonishment to
Timothy, saying, O Timothy! keep that which is committed unto thee, 1 Timothy 6.19
and avoid profane and vain babbling, and opposition of science (falsely so
called) which while some profess they have Erred concerning Faith. A Sentence
worthy to be written in every Man's heart with indelible Characters for his
direction to attain and gain the true Faith, which must be committed by the
Church to Him, and he must take heed of loosing it again through vain Science
(falsely so called) by the curious itching of which we come to break out in
Faith, and loose our integrity.

How come we then to hear these vain bablings and oppositions of Science falsely
so called, from many who Esteem themselves right believers, yea Masters in
Israel, vaunting of their light from God to know and discern all truth and to
dive into the highest Mysteries of Faith; yea assume unto themselves a
Prerogative Royal (proper to Christ only and his Substitutes and Commissioners
endued with his Holy Spirit) to define what is Faith, and what is not. O Petty
Undertakers! who receive no Rule of Faith but their own fancies which they
would have all to follow. Saying this is no Article of Faith. How can we
believe a piece of bread or white wafor to be turned into the Body of Christ? I
see not to what End there should be a continual sacrifice, since Christ has
been offered once for all? How! does it not derogate from the honor of God to
pray to the Saints? what power and virtue can there be in their Relics? what
vain superstition is it to use the sign of the Cross? holy water, Beads etc.?
How can Man forgive sins? How ridiculous is it to think there is a third place,
or Purgatory? with infinite other such like Infidel questions, if they knew
what they asked.

For by these and the like questions they seem to show they believe no more
then they see reason for, according to their own conceits. And so in Truth and
very deed they have no Divine Faith at all, which is above humane reason and
understanding, and not by it to be judged. Yea these profane voices sound so
high, that they themselves will rule and be Judges of that which they
constitute the rule of Faith, I mean, the holy Scriptures, admitting and
refusing what they please, as the Machabees, the book of wisdom, the Epistle of
St. James, with much more. And why? because they like them not and so judge
them not to be Scripture. And the like is not only of the word of God it self,
As God himself is inscrutable to our understandings so is his holywrit. Lib.
32. contra-Faustum. (...). 19.
but also of the true sense and meaning of it, of which they will have no other
Judge but their own sense and meaning; so that we may say unto them what St.
Augustine said to Faustus, one of their own Crew, You seem to do that (says
he) which takes away all Authority of Holy Scripture, making every ones Mind
the Interpreter of it; As God himself is the Author of holy Scripture so must
^^e be the sole ^^terpreter ^^y His Holy and infallible Church.
what in every place he please to make the sense and meaning of it. That is not
to be subject to the Scriptures in believing, but to make the Scripture subject
to Him. Not liking any thing because it is right, written by Supreme Authority,
but therefore it seems to be right written because it likes Him. Thus this Holy
sublime wit shows the Truth indeed. ^bserve this truth well.


If we interpret Scripture according to our own humane sense and understanding
and accordingly believe it, ^e must ^^me to true ^isdom by (...) Misterious
^^orance, ^^d to be in ^^reated ^^ght by ^indness.
we thereby make our belief humane conceit and not divine Faith, which must
have nothing in it, but the pure Revelation of God and Proposition of the
Church guided infallibly by his holy Spirrit.

To speak Truth I know nothing by which People are more deceived then in
taking that to be Faith which is merely humane Conceit and the Invention of
Man, having nothing Divine but only a gloss and color of Holy Scripture, which
truly examined proves but Dross and Counterfeit as by what has been said does
manifestly appear to all that are not wilfully blind.

Hereupon St. Augustine says of such as Obstinately and perversely obtrude and
thrust their understandings into these divine Mysteries (to which they cannot
by such means reach) That instead of the right Worship of God and Truth, A
golden sentence worthy to be written in every Man's Heart. And besides that
it is Augustines it is most venerable for the certain Truth of it.
they worship their own Understanding and adore their own Errors. These are
his very words, Homini extra Ecclesiam Religio sua est cultus phantasmatum
suorum, et Error suus Deus suus. A Man's Religion who is out of the Church is
the worship of his own Phansies, and his Error is his God. I wish with all my
soul All men would consider and ponder well with true Indifferency and earnest
desive to know the truth; this solid Truth of St. Augustine. That those who are
in the Church guided ^y the infallible Spirit of God may conti^ue subject to it
in true humility without ^y pride of their own understanding: and those who are
not may unbeguile themselves and acknowledge their error submitting to her and
truly captivating heirunderstandings in Obedience to Faith proposed by, her by
whose mouth we must hear it, not otherwise to be learned: and unless we do
this by hearing and believing the Church, the Evangelist passes thi^ clear
and definitive sentence upon us that we should be esteemed as Heathens and
Publicans.

Neither can we ever hope to have God for our Father unless we take the Church
for our Mother.

Much may be said in this matter, And the holy Writers, Fathers, and Saints of
God out of their great Zeal to this Fundamental Truth have written abundantly
thereof to ground all upon this firm Rock which shall never fail. Much I say
may be said to prevent Errors and declare the truth of our Faith, but this
little only which I have gathered out of them may suffice and will firmly
establish us, if sincerely practiced. That is once again in (...) word to
suppress the curious itching of ou^ understanding from meddling with these
Mysteries of Faith with which it has no thing to do by way of searching, but
mus^ simply believe it is divine light from the Churches proposing through God's
Revelation.

The understanding therefore having nothing to do with Faith but only simply to
receive it, and propose it to the will to practice upon it: It cannot err about
it; and so as to all Errors in matter of Eaith the understanding by this means
is debarred and the proud comb of it cut; and these Errors can creep in no
other way, God keep them always out, and us in the Truth and true Faith. The
Mysteries whereof because we cannot discern them in themselves, we must simply
believe them as revealed by God and proposed by the Church without further
discussion.

That we may not mistake the true Church of God: There are certain infallible
\Marks, Signs, Notes or Proprieties which be inseparable from It, and agree
with None but it, as natural light may evidently discern, if considered and
duly weighed even by the simplest Man living, and supernatural light confirms
them: so that there can be no mistake of the true Church and consequently of
the true Faith; if we observe these visible Notes and Marks. For none, either
remayns Infidel or becoms Heretic, but who either does not or will not observe
them. They are such as St. Augustine made choice of to direct himself. Hear
what he says and follow his example. These worthily (says he) keep me in the
lap of the Church. UNITY
THE CONSENT OF NATIONS. AUTHORITY BY MIRACLES BEGUN, HOLINESS.
NOURISHED BY HOPE, BY CHARITY INCREASED, BY ANTIQUITY MADE FIRM AND SURE.
SUCCESSION
THERE KEEPS ME THE SUCCESSION OF PRIESTS FROM THE VERY SEE OF PETER THE
APOSTLE (to whom our Lord after his Resurection committed the feeding of his
Sheep) EVEN TO THIS BISHOP THAT NOW IS. There KEEPS ME FINALLY THE VERY NAME OF
CATHOLIC, CATHOLIC.
which not without cause amongst so many Heresies, the true Church alone has
obtained. You perceive St. Augustine stuck fast to the Churches Faith after his
being an Heretic, and all his bickering with Errors through the Motive of
these infallible Marks which are proper to it alone: and relied not on his own
Judgment or wit (as great and as strong as it was the like to which perchance
was never or ever will be) which he found to be too shallow to dive into these
high Mysteries of Faith.

If any one think his wit deeper and sounder then this great Saint's was: And
that these reasons were not sufficient Motives, I will not contest with his
over-weened conceit of himself, but let him runn headlong whither the spirit,
or rather sprite of pride will drive him.

I know as the Apostle tells me, Every Man has not Faith, and that there must
be Heresies. But woe to them that are infected with them. They are blind and
obstinate and Condemned by their own Judgments. There is no End of disputing
with them, and so I leave them and come to propose those Marks which may serve
any well minded Man to find out the true Church, Mother of all true Faith and
Religion.

These are the Marks or Signs of the true Church of Christ.
THe Church of Christ must be One. ONE
That the true Church of Christ and the Religion professed by it, be but One is
most necessary, for since the Divine Providence governs the Church, we must
needs grant that the Government thereof is the best of all being the chief of
all, as ordered by him by whom Kings reign and govern. And the best Government
of a Multitude is Monarchical. That is when One Head and Chief governs the
whole multitude. This is manifest by the End and Scope of Government, being the
Peace and Union of the Subjects, which is most excellently enjoyed when One
governs the whole Church; for by that means all Occasion of Schism is taken
away.

Moreover the true Militant Church (which is a Company of Faithful Believers
under One chief Pastor) is so much the Perfecter by how much more like it is
to the Triumphant, What the Church is.
and the Triumphant has but One governor, the Lord God himself. So the
Militant Church has but one head and Chief, God's Vicegerent and Deputy.

In the Old Law there was but one High Bishop. Osee. 2.
Cangregabuntur Filii Judae and filii Israel pariter and ponent sibimet Caput
unum. The Children of Judah, and the Children of Israel likewise shall be
gathered together and they shall Place one head over them. Even so in the New
Law there must be but one Head and Chief, and fiet unum Ovile and Vnus Pastor.
Joh. 10.
And there shall be made one Sheepfold and One Pastor.

Neither can this be understood of Christ and this time only. For Christ after
his Ascension into Heaven would not leave the Church without a Guide, Joh. 12.
Pastor and Head; His Flock without a Shepherd; And therefore naming Peter his
Vicar, particularly charged him to Feed his Flock, and would have him to
Confirm his Brethren as Head: Which Christ very plainly expressed saying, Luke.
21.
Tu es Petrus and super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, and portae
inferi non prevalebunt adversus eam. Thou art Peter and upon this Rock will I
build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. For no
power infernal, either by Tyrants, Heretics or other instruments of Satan
could ever extinguish or overthrow this Church built upon Peter and his
Successors. And to thee (says our Savior) will I give the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven etc.

Neither may it be replied, this Power and Dignity was granted to Peter only
and not to this successors: For Christ instituted a Church to continue for
ever, always to be built and Augmented, and must therefore have allways a Head
or Foundation upon which it may be built. Christ surely would not have his
Church now in a worse Condition then at that time, since the government is
allwaies necessary. And as Peter was then Christ's Vicar and Pastor of his
whole Church: So must his Successors necessarily have now the same Power and
Authority over the true Church throughout the whole world, from which we must
receive the true Faith. And whosoever dissents and breaks from the Union with
this Church, and declines the Doctrine thereof, forsakes the Truth of Christ,
leaves the royal high way, and runns astray i^ dangerous paths of his own
Invention.

Hence arises the great disunion and Confusion amongst Heretics, and their
division into sundry sects, and Various Opinions, by reason of their uncertain
Rule of Faith, which is their own Understanding, and Private Spirit. Whereas the
Rule amongst Catholics and true Believers is most certain and solid (to wi^
the Judgment of the Church) they having nothing of their own in it. And
therefore daily experience shows and teaches us (our adversaries being not able
to deny it) that those of the true Church thought of diverse Countries and
Kinghoms spread through out the whole world in all times and places yet all
agred in the same Doctrine necessary to Salvation, as in One Sacrifice, One
Uniform number and Administration of Sacraments etc.

The Spouse of Christ the Holy Church has but One and the same Faith over al^
the world in all times and Places.

It is worthy observation and the like can never be shown out of the true
Church to see the Unaminous concord and agreement betwixt the holy Doctors of
the Church in Faith and Doctrine though they taught in diverse Ages and Places.
St. Gregory. S. Augustine. St. Ambrose. St. Jerome.
St. Augustine only and St. Jerome saw each other and were Contemporary. And on
the Contrary side amongst those out of the Church, what Discord and Babylonical
Confusion, every One following his own spirit, Luther. Calvin. Beza. Zuinglius.
so many heads so many Heresies. They are carried on headlong with Giddyness,
they yield to nothing but Error.

St. Jude describing in his Epistle such misled People and Heretics says:
Jude. 10.
But these blaspheam the things they know not, and whatsoever they naturally
know as beasts without reason in those things they Corrupt themselves. And no
marvel; for as there is but One way to Truth, so there are many ways to runn
into Error and deceit. Let us therefore cleave close to this Rock of Unity; let
us not forsake this One Church which has no division. It is like our Saviors
garment it must not be divided.

Our dear Savior prayed for his Church that it might be One saying. Jo: 17.
Father I Pray not that thou would take them out of this world, but that
thou keep them from Evil. They are not of the world as I am not of the world;
Sanctify them with the Truth, Thy Word is Truth. I sent them into the world,
and for their sakes I sanctify my self, that these also may be sanctified
through the Truth. I pray not for these alone, but for them also who shall
believe in me through their word, that they also may be One in Us, That the
world may believe that thou have sent me. This Prayer of our Saviors was heard
and granted, and therefore we must be On^ in Faith if we will be of his Church.
And observe He prayed not only for his only then present disciples, but for
them also who should believe through their preaching, their successors even to
the end of the world, that they should continue still One without Division.

And consider well how our Savior concluded his Prayer with this strong motive
of Unity to belief. Even (says he) that they may be One in us, that the world
may believe that Thou have sent me.

You see our Saviors reason why they should be One is, that he may be believed
to be sent. This Unity therefore is an unanswerable motive to the true
Religion, and an assured infallible mark thereof. Where therefore Unity is not,
there is no true Religion: And where it is we may there surely trust our souls,
and rely on that Faith. And as we are One in Faith so shall we be in Glory: for
such was our Savionrs Prayer in the same place saying: Father, such as thou
have given me my will is that where I am they may be also with me, that the may
see my Glory which thou have given me. God therefore grant that through this
Unity we may come to his Glory: to which We cannot arrive but by Holiness. And
therefore (...)

The true Church as it is One so must it also be holy.
ANd this is another Mark as evident, Holiness.
infallible, and certain as the former (to wit) Holiness, which cannot be found
out of the true Church. For the holy Ghost has no influence but upon the
members of the true Church: by their Fruits we shall know them. I mean not but
there are wicked men and misdemeanors amongst the true Beleivers, yet so that
there are many also most holy and virtuous, which is sufficient to show the
Holiness of the Church together with the Doctrine thereof which is always pure
and holy, tending to Virtue. View and Consider the Tenets and practices of
Both, true and false, and then judge.

The Religion which is true and holy, is that
WHich has Calendars full of approved Known Saints of all Ages and
Professions? A kallendar of (...) approved known Saints.
whose Sanctity none dare or can justly oppose.

That which has wrought evident and true miracles in all Ages from the
beginning till this hour, True Miracles.
and shall work upon occasion to the Consummation of the Saints.

That which has converted all nations to the Faith of Christ from Judaisme,
All Nations Converted etc.
Idolatry, Heathenisme etc. and whose teachers and Professors have been of
known sanctity and holy Life. To name One for all, St. Augustine our Apostle of
the holy Order of St. Bennet who converted England to the Faith of Christ from
blind Idolatry, and Heathenisme: Sent by St. Gregory the great then Pope of
Rome of the same holy Order.

That which has built all the Churches, Churches. Monasteries. Nunneries.
Hospitals. built etc.
Monasteries, Nunneries, Colleges, Hospitals etc. in Christandom, endowed them
with rents, instituted the Universities, distinguished the Multitude into
Parishes, proportioned the Tyths, annexed the glebe Land, ordained the
Bishoppricks, lymitted the Diocesses and decreed the Ecclesiastical Laws so
full of learning, and Piety, that they are now all good and learned Men's
Studyes: besides infinite other good Works of all sorts.

That which from the Flower of her Infancy (the Apostles themselves being such)
ever had, still has, Religious Orders.
and ever shall have infinite Multitudes of Beleivers of either sex professing
Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience; the three chief Evangelical Counsels, so
highly commended and practiced by Antiquity not only as Sonveraigne divine
helps to perfection, but also as Beautiful Ornaments to Christ's Church, raising
the Professors to a supreme degree of Grace and glory. Witnessed. and sealed
with the Blood of holy Martyrs and Confirmed by Miracles.


That which has been testified, and sealed with the blood, and sufferings of
such Martyrs and Confessors as are allowed by the adversaries thereof, and all
Points and Articles of her holy Doctrine confirmed by most authentical and
approved Miracles (which no other Contrary Religion ever was, or shall be able
to do) sufficient to convince the whole World if they were not extremely blind
and perversely Obstinate.

That which has instituted the Feasts, Fastingdays, and feasts. Holy Rites.
and wholesome Ceremonys.
Fasting days, and all good Ceremonies, and Observations used through out the
the whole Church. As Christmas, Easter, Ascension, Whitsontide, Corpus Christi:
the Vigils and Feasts of the Apostles, and other Saints, the fast of Lent,
Emberdays, Abstinence from flesh On Frydaies, and Saturdads, very wholesome, and
commodious even to Common Wealths, and private Families. Rites likewise, and
sacred Forms and Ceremonies observed in administering the Sacraments,
Consecrations, Coronations, instalments and all other solemnities which carry
with them Veneration, State, and decency.

That which professes not the large, The Narrow way of Morification and
Penance.
and Broadway but the straight, and narrow, such as the holy writ affirms to be
the way to Heaven, as Annual Confession to a Priest, Penance, Restitution,
Satisfaction, performance of Vows, Mortification of the old Man, and the like
injunctions observed by none but those of the true Religion, Libertinisme being
the sole Profession, and the very soul of all Sectaries in One kind, or Other.

That unto whose society whosoever truly enters, Change of Manners upon
Conversion.
lives forthwith in more fear, and love of God, hatred to sin, and changes his
former life into a better.

That which most has, The most learned holy and able Men.
and in former Ages ever had, and ever shall have the most Famous Men for wit,
Judgment, reading, writing, true schollership, and solid Virtue (Qualityes of
all Other most likely to discern and abandon errors) to her Teachers, Doctors,
and instructers.

That which has excelled in spirituallity, True spirituallity.
and whose beleivers have interiourly Conversed with God in a most experimental
and Ineffable way, and thereby satisfied their Propension (not possible to be
satisfied out of the true Faith and Religion) and have chosen the best part
never to be taken from them. And this is most evident by many Admirable Books
written by the Practisers of this spirituality and professors of this only true
and holy Religion.

That whose public Church Service is performed, Public Church Service.
and executed with that Reverence, Venerable gravity and Majesty. And the
several parts, and ceremonies so admirably and aptly composed, and ordered for
annual Commemorations, and representing of our Saviors Incarnation, Birth,
life, Passion, Burial, Resurection, Ascension, Coming af the Holy Ghost, the
institution of the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, and other passages as well of
Christ our head, as of his Members the Saints.

That whose Secular, The single ^ife of the Clergy Secular, and Regular.
and regular Clergy live without wives, free from Care of providing for Wife
and Children, and the second sort no way distracted with Affairs, and
encumbrances of the World, but Cloistred (unles some of the more Able and
Virtuous be through special want, and to Gods greater Glory called to Episcopal
Sees and other employments in the Church) pass their whole time in Prayer,
watching, Fasting, Continual study of Scriptures, with daily Conferences for
the full and perfect Understanding of them. Add to this that all their Priests,
and beneficed Clergy are bound to say every day an Office in their Breviary.
^ound to say ^^e Breviary
A Book of that Excellency that none but the Spirit of God could have composed
it, and which alone is sufficient to make them Devout, and learned.

That finally (though there be many other motives of Holiness in this true
Church) which by reason of her Holy Doctrine, Royal, Loyal and divine Obedience
and subjection to all Power Civil and Spiritual.
and Ordinances keeps all subjects in due allegiance to their Temporal Kings
and Princes, and to all power spiritually constituted over them. And has
evermore blessed. Popes, Bishops, Abbots, Superiors, Kings and Princes,
Magistrates and Subjects with Constant and permanent Peace, true Happiness,
Prosperity and Victorys, true Glory temporal, and Eternal together with
unfeigned Love One to another, neighbourly and just Commerce. And in a word so
that all things go on with Order, Love Justice, and Peace.

Now as the true Church and Religion has these glorious fruits and evident
Effects: So have all Heresies and Sects the clear Contrary Foul and monstrous
Fruits and Effects: And most apparently abominable to all who are not wilfully
blind, and perversely Obstinate.

Consider then on the Contrary side how the False Church, and Religion is

That which is void of Saints, A Calendar of Hipocritical, ridiculous Saints:
Foxes Acts and monuments sufficiently witness
and has no other but vile hypocrites such as after some time even those of
the same profession are ashamed off, and do loath their very naming and that
with just reason. The Crafty Fox shows it fully in his Acts and Monuments by
which he hoped to have erected the Glory of his braynsick Martyrs, and doting
Confessors.

That by which and whose Professors never any Miracle was Wrought or ever can
be. No Miracles


That which has no religious Orders, No religious Orders.
or peoplei professing a peculiar perfect state of life through Poverty,
Chastity and Obedience.

That which is destitute of all wholesome Laws for the Direction of the
Ministers and People toward God and his holy Service. No Canon Laws.


That which professes the large, Libertinisine.
and broad way leading to Perdition, granting Libertinisme to the highest
degree of wickedness in One Kind or Other to all Its followers.

That into which whosoever enters forsaking the true, Wickedness of life.
begins presently to leave all goodness and becomes an outcast and Scumm of the
earth as to all wickedness and profaneness.

That which enjoyes no true Spirituality ^ut brainsick Fancy, No solid true
Spirituality.
as being void of all true Humility and Mortification, the only sound
groundwork and foundation of all true Spirituallity and interior correspondence
with God; and this appears most evidently by the fruits. The divine Book of the
Following of Christ.
For never any sound spiritual Book has been written by them, but excellent
Ones written by those of the true Religion corrupted by them. They have the
Lord indeed much in their Mouth but their hearts are far from him. Mat. 19.8.
I wish therefore with all my Soul that all such as have an Interior
Propension would seriously ponder this Motive (if they desire to satisfy such
their Interior Propension as they must needs be inclined to do) thereby to
discern, A good advice.
and shun these Sectaryes, and to embosome themselves in the true Catholic
Church, as they love the real and otherwise impossible true satisfaction of
their Propension. And they shall receive and experience a more beautifying kind
of spirituality then ever they have done, or could do out of the true Church.
Remember this again and again you who are called Puritans, and pretend to be
spiritual, and come the right way home to your selves.

That whose public and common service is without all Ceremony, Public service.
and Majesty, no Commemorations of the mysteries of our faith, no Ceremonies in
administration of the Sacraments, or much more truly no Sacraments at all, [and
most of all to be noted] no true real propitious Sacrifice, no honor to the
Saints.

That lastly (though much more may be said of the wickedness thereof) which by
reason of its wicked Obstinacy and libertinsme brings all the professors
thereof to disobedience, Rebellion, and disobedience.
and Rebellion to their Princes, and Superiors, takes away all neighbourly Love
and just dealing one with another, and hereby brings Ruin and Confusion upon
all Commonwealths, yea Kingdoms and Ecclesiastical power where such sway, and
domineer. To all which give evident Testimony, the late bleeding Experience of
our own miserable Country, and the General History of former Ages. Read
Monarchomachia or Jerusalem and Babel, a Book so called printed in London 1653.
and then give Credit.

The Church of God as it is One, and Holy, so must it be Catholic.
THe true Church must be Catholic that is Universal; Catholic.
sprend over the whole world, since by it all must be saved. The sound of it
must Come to all Men's Ears of what Nation, Romans 10.17.
and Country soever. For Faith coms by hearing. And therefore beginning at
Jerusalem, river-like through the length of her Course has ever more
increased, and spread it self from time to time even to this hour, and shall
do for ever till it pour it self forth into the triumphant: as the records of
all Nations, and Ages, and the approbations of 18. General Councils (the
highest Consistories upon Earth, and Oracles of the greatest infallibility: as
being the sentence of all the most learned in the Christian world, and assisted
by the holy Ghost) bear evident witness. And this is so palpable and Visible
that He must be most blind, deaf, void of all sense, and a stupid block who
cannot discern it. Look upon the whole world at this present and behold if this
One holy Church be not Catholic, that is spread over the whole world a being
in Italy, Spain, France, Germany Poland, Portugal, China, the east and wes^
Indyes and infinite Other Places of the World which are governed by no other
Religion but this; and all consent i^ One and the same. Now as St. Augesti^
said very well, if any thing be done by the whole Church, to call that in
Question is insolent Madness. What Madness i^ it then in this Island of England,
and Scotland (I must not include Ireland) a little corner of Europe to question
no^ only some things done, but the very Fundamental Religion of the whole world
besides. O insolent Madness to be thus singular and peculiar! which must bring
upon our Country singular and peculiar Misery before we can Enjoy the blessing
and true happiness which always wait on the true Catholic Faith. This Note and
Mark is so proper to the Church that no heretical Congregation, sect, or
Company, could ever obtain it, though they have endeavored much for it, and at
this present do, but fail of their enterprise. Wherefore what St. Augustine said
of old we may now with truth say, and it will ever with Truth be said, If any
ask to go to the Catholic Church they dare not show their Conventicles,
Congregations, Churches, or houses. And therefore (says be) the very Name of
Catholic, which not without cause the only true Church has obtained, keeps me
in her Bosom. This Name Catholic no heresy could ever obtain, let them labor
never so much for it: and Justly. For how can they be called so, since their
Congregations or Churches, are neither One, or holy: And therefore cannot be
Catholic. True it is Heresies may be spread over the world and then you may
call them Epidemical, that is a general Plague, but not Catholic a general
union, holiness, or Blessing. No no: their names are very proper for them which
they assume, and style themselves withal, and are so known, and called by
Others to wit Lutherans, Calvinists, Protestants, Puritans, Brownists,
Anabaptists, Armenians, Socinians, Independants, black and white, with an
infinite rabble besides. Lutherans, you shall find few out of Germany, Swedland,
and Denmark, Calvinists in Geneva, some places of France, and Scotland, England
is not wholly subject to them. Prelatical Protestants no where but in England.
Brownists, Anabaptists, Armenians, Socinians etc. are individui vagi,
wanderers, sculking in every Corner: but the sink of all and Confusion of Babel
is at Amsterdam in Holland. Judge then if there be any Religion Catholic but
One true and Holy^ And hereupon Cyrillus Jerosolomitan^^ said very Learnedly,
and to the purpose As the name of Christian does distinguish the Church from
Jews, Gentiles, and Heathens: so the name Catholic from fals^ Prophets and
peculiar Sects who glory under the name of Christ, and belong not to him And to
this purpose said Pacianus, my Name is Christian, my Surname Catholick^ This
Name therefore is most deservedly put into the Creed of the Apostles a^
distinguishing from all Sects, and Heretics, and most proper to the true
Church Only. None therefore can miss of the true Church who follow the
Catholick^ The general name will most certainly inform you, her very
adversaries being Judges. Luke 19.22.
Out of thy mouth I Judge thee O wicked Servant.

The true Church must be One, holy, Catholic, and Consequently Apostolic.
THe Fourth and last mark is Apostolic, Apostolic.
showing the true Church and Religion (not taken up at the second hand as many
do now a days) to be derived from Christ, and his Apostles, and so to us, as an
inheritance from our Ancestors by a continual succession of Bishops from the
Chayr of Peter to this present Pope, and so to continue without ^ayling: every
One holding Union with his Predecessors, True Religion no Inve^tion of Ma^^
and keeping still the same Profession of Faith so visibly, and apparently that
it is like a City upon a Mountain, or a Candle on a Candlestick to give light
to all in the house of God. Whereby it is manifest that it is not the Invention
of Man, it never being contrary to it self in Doctrine, but allwaies running in
the same Current of Apostolical Tradition, and through this united strength
has out lasted many hundreds of Heresies, which though manifestly divided in
themselves, did ever join hands to overthrow this One holy Catholic
Apostolic Faith, but never found any other Rock then It, against which they
split themselves. And thus we know it to be that kingdom of which Daniel
Prophesies, saying, Dan. 2.44.
And in the Days of these Kings shall the God of Heaven set up a kingdom,
which shall never be destroyed, and this kingdom shall not be given to any
other people, but it shall break and destroy, all those kingdoms and shall
stand for ever. Observe therefore I beseech you out of this Mark that those who
pretend to be founders of new Religions, Reformers, or what else they please to
be called, were once of this Apostolical continued Faith, and went out, and
forsook it, and consequently their Doctrine is later or less Ancient, Math. 14.
and for this very reason not good seed, but Cockle, which the envious Man
sows after. For these are the Properties of Heretics and false teachers to
be inventors of new Doctrine, to divide and separate themselves, to cause
dissentions, and scandals against the Doctrine they had learned. The true Faith
therefore is Apostolical to be traced up to the Apostles, and Christ himself
the fountain, and author of all truth. Now if you desire to know in particular
the positive tenants of the true Catholic Faith which I find St. Augustine the
Monk of the holy Order of St. Benedict preached and professed, who planted the
Christian Faith in England above a thousand years ago in the year 596. in the
reign of Elbert, otherwise Ethelbert, King of Kent who married Queen Bertha of
France a Catholic: sent by St. Gregary the great the^ Pope of Rome: (in that
Apostolical Mission) Doctor of the Church, Monk of the same holy Order, who
founded seven Monasteries himself, six in Sicilia, the 7th. in Rome dedicated
to St. Andrew, of which St. Augustine was Abbot. And in very deed searching into
Antiquity, and the Tradition of the Church (by which the Truth infallibly is
delivered to us) I find the very same Articles plainly to be traced even to
Christ himself, and his immediate successor St. Peter, and so down to us, till
this day, and shall be till the worlds end visible and Apparent, which is the
sure Footing for every one to tread in. They are these contained in the
Profession of Faith, received by the Church, to wit.

I. N. Do by a firm Faith believe and Profess all and every thing contained in
the Symbol of Faith, which the Holy Roman Church uses, viz.

I believe in one God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and Earth, and of
all things Visible and invisible: And in One Lord Jesus Christ, the only
begotten Son of God, and begotten o^ his Father before all Ages^ God of God,
Light of Light^ very God of very God; begotten, not made, Consubstantial to the
Father by whom all things were made^ who for us men and for ou^ salvation
descended from heaven, and was incarnated by the holy Ghost, of the Virgin
Mary, and made Man; was also crucified for us under Pontius Pilat, suffered,
and was buried; and rose the third day according to the Scriptures^ and
ascended into Heaven^ sits at the right hand o^ the Father; and shall come
again with Glory to judge the quick, and the dead; of whose Kingdom there shall
be no End: And in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of ^ife, who proceeds
from ^he Father and Son; who together with the Father, and ^he Son is equally
adored and ^onglorified, who spoke by ^he Prophets; And One Ho^y Catholic, and
Apostolic Church. I confess one Baptism for the Remission of ^^ns, and I
expect the resurrection of the dead, and life ^f the world to come. Amen.

The Apostolical and Ecclesiastical Traditions, and the other Observations, and
Constitutions of the sam^ Church, I do most firmly admit, and embrace.

Likewise I admit the Holy Scripture according to that sense which our holy
Mothe^ the Catholic Church eve^ did and does hold, to which it belongs to
judge of the tru^ sense, and interpretation o^ the Holy Scriptures, neithe^
will I receive or interpre^ it, but according to the unanimous Consent of the
Fathers.

I profess also that there a^^ Seven true and proper Sacraments of the new Law
instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, and necessary to the salvation of Mankind,
though not all to every particular Person, To wit, Baptism, Confirmation, the
Eucharist, Pen-nance, Extreme Unction, [holy] Order, and Matrimony; And that
they do confer Grace, and of these that Baptism, Confirmation, and Order,
without Sacrilege cannot be reiterated. The received and approved rites also of
the Catholic Church in the solemn Administration of all the foresaid
Sacraments I do receive and admit.

I do embrace and receive all and every one of the Doctrines touching original
Sin and Justification, which have been defined and declared in the Holy Council
of Trent.

I do in like manner profess that there is a true proper and Propitiatory
Sacrifice for the living and the dead offered to God in the Mass by lawful
Priests truly ordained. And that in the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist
after Consecration there is truly, really, and substantially the body and
blood, together with the soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ: And that
the whole substance of Bread is converted into the Body of Christ, and the
whole substance of Wine into his Blood; Which Conversion the Catholic Church
calls Transubstantiation. I acknowledge likewise that under One only form all
and entire Christ and a true Sacrament is received.

I do constantly hold there is a Purgatory, and that the souls there detayned
are helped by the Prayers and suffrages of the faithful.

In like manner that the Saints reigning with Christ are to be venerated and
invoked, and that they offer up Prayers to God for us, and that their Relics
are to be reverenced.

I do most constantly affirm that the Images of Christ, of the Virgin mother of
God, and of other Saints, are to be kept, and had in due honor, and
Veneration: That the power also of Indulgences was left by Christ in his
Church; and the right use of them to be wholesome and profitable to Christian
People.

I do acknowledge that the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church is the
Mother and Mistress of all Churches: And I do promise true Obedience to the
Bishop of Rome the Successor of St. Peter Prince of the Apostles and Vicar of
Jesus Christ.

This was the Constant Profession of Faith in those days by St. Augustine and
all his disciples. Venerable Bedes Hist^ry set forth by Docter Tho. Stapl^ton
and Pr^sented to Queen E^^zabeth in the Year. 1565. And For Further proof read
(...) Book Call^^ Englands (...) old Religion set forth by H. B. Printed at
Antwerpe. 1659.
Now that you may not think I impose upon St. Augustine read the History of
England written by Venerable Bede 800. Years ago, and other most authentik
Histories. St. Augustins very letter to Pope Gregory before mentioned
acknowledging Him chief Pastor, ruled by Him as head and Chief. His life
practice and Conversation holding forth both by word, and Example, all and
every Article of Faith aforesaid, daily sacrificing, and offering up the Holy
Mass even in the same manner as now it is, praying to the Saints, and for the
dead, administering the Sacraments, in a word doing all the Catholic Church
does now at this Day, and ever shall. For as I have often said, and say it
again, There can be no new Article of Faith. The Articles are always, and ever
will be the same.

Methinks I hear some Murmur, and mutter, Catholic, Apostolic Christian
faith, such as Christ and his Apostles planted, and taught, and continues from
Christ to this hour, and ever shall; as is here set down, That is to say again,
and again a Truth never too oftento be repeated, The Christian Religion planted
by Christ, and his Apostles (as is here set down) derived by infallible
Authority of Tradition down to us without Addition, or diminution: Then in Gods
name let such Popery be introduced every where (if that be Popery) to the Glory
of God, and salvation of all Men's Souls. But if you mean by Popery,
Superstition, Idolatry, and that the Pope is infallible in his Person, That he
has power to depose Kings, and over temporal possessions: I would have no such
Popery introduced, I defy! and abhor it knowing it to be novelty and the
invention of Men. I am none of that Company, gang, or Crew, I am I hope a good
Christian, and Loyal subject. I acknowledge the Pope chief Pastor, Successor of
St. Peter, supreme head of the Church, to whom all owe Obedience, and
Subjection in spiritual things, and from whom as from the Fountain all
spiritual Jurisdiction is derived. But as St. Bernard observes well: His Power
is over the Sins of the People not over the Possessions of the Earth. Math.
22.21.
Give to Caesar what is Caesers, to God what is Gods And here I leave you. and
if this be not sufficient to satisfy any indifferent man seeking the Truth of
Religion, let their own Conscience be judge, which will give Testimony against
them in that day when Jerusalem shall be searched with Lanthorns and the Hearts
of all made known and manifest, Sopho. 1.12.
and the veil of Hypocrisy and vain Fancy taken away from the Face of the
pretended Saints.

A Prayer.
O Our Lord God, most humbly prostrate at thy feet, in this perillo^^ time we
most heartily supplicate thy divine Majesty as thou desire not the Death but
repentance of sinners be propitious (...) thy People returning to Thee that
the^ remaining devout to thee, Thou mai'^^ mercifully remove the scourge of thy
Anger^ and absolve us from all Errors whereby w^ shall be delivered from the
Perdition which hangs over us. Through our Lord Jesus Christ.

AMEN. AMEN. AMEN.

Ezec. 16.55.
Et tu, and filia tua revertimini ad Antiquitatem vestram.

And thou, and thy Daughters shall return to your Antiquity.

Errare possum, haereticus esse nolo.

Err I may, a Heretic I will not be.

ECCLESIAE JUDICIO SUBIECTA SUNTO.

B. P. S.


