Two CASES Submitted to CONSIDERATION. 1. Of the Necessity and Exercise of a
Dispensing Power. 2. The Nullity of any Act of State that Clashes with the Law
of God.

I Publish This Paper, out of a Sense (as Things stand at Present) of what I
Owe to the King; To my Religion; To my Country; and to my Self; and would
neither Mislead, nor be Misled. If I have Reason on my side, No Good Man will
Blame me for what I have done: If I am in an Error, I shall so Gladly submit to
be Better Informed, that No Charitable Man will refuse Lending me his Hand to
put me into the Way. Beside, that it will be a Matter of Importance, for those
that are of Another Opinion, to satisfy the World whether I am in the Right,
or Not. I speak to the Case of All Governments; i. e. of Government according
to the Divine Appointment, and Institution of it, without Any Restriction, that
is either Partial, or Local. I have had an Unlucky Hand, and so must Every man
Expect to have, that makes so many men his Enemies, as Value a Trimming
Interest before an Inflexible Honesty. For want of Better Matter, I am Charged
of late with Contradicting my self, which I am not yet Conscious of, in Any
Act, or Syllable; either in my Allegiance, or in my Religion, from Fifty years
Last past, to this very Day.

R. L. S.

CASE I. Of a Dispensing Power.
IF it be True, that Humane Laws can never come up to All the Ends and Cases of
Government.

If it be True again, that where They fall short, there are Certain Fiduciary
Powers still ready at hand, in the Foundations of All Governments to Supply the
Defect.

And if it be True in the Third Place, that without such an Auxiliary Reserve,
Government falls to the Ground, for want of means to Support it: The Inference
is Plain and Natural, from the Admittance of These Three Propositions, to the
Doctrine of a Dispensing Power.

The Laws of Man are the Work of Frail, and Fallible Lawmakers: Or supposing
them to be Men of the most Consummated Wisdom, and Integrity; and their
Statutes as Extensive, as Civil Prudence, and Precaution can make them: there
will be Omissions yet; Change of Interests; Cross and Surprising Accidents;
Necessities Innumerable, and Fresh Matter Every Day Started, to make Work for
New Methods, and Expedients. What would become of Government now, under This
Incompetency of Humane Constitutions, without taking-in Those Fiduciary Powers
(which are Wrapped up in the Laws of Nature, Equity, and Right Reason) to their
Aid?

Those Subsidiary Laws, or Powers, are Everlasting, Universal, Uniform, Steady,
Just, Infallible, and All-sufficient: The Authority of them is Unquestionable;
the Equity Undeniable; and the Power Irresistible; They are No Other in Effect,
then the Instincts, and Impulses of Providence it self, Graven in the Hearts of
All Reasonable Beings. But in short; If it be by God, that Kings. Reign, and
Administer Judgment; it will then follow, that All the Prerogatives of Power
are as Sacred as the Ordinance it self. They are Sovereign, Inalienable, Ever,
and in All Places, the same.

Now taking for Granted, the Imperfections of the One, and the Ample
Sufficiency of the Other, to All Intents and Purposes; That Government is of
God; and Humane Society the Work of Providence; That God's Vicegerents are
Answerable to their Principal for the Care and Protection of the People
Committed to their Charge; That it is Impossible for them to Acquit Themselves
of their Trust, Duty, and Commission, purely by the Force of Laws of Man's
Making, without some Higher Power to Resort to for Relief; And that it is the
Office, as well as the Prerogative of the Sovereign to Interpose with his
Authority, for the Well-Beeing, and Safety of the Public: Taking all This for
Granted, I say, the Bare Supposal of so Mortal a Failure, for want of a
Dispensing Power, would Imply, either an Oversight, or an Injustice, in the
Original Grant, and Command: An Oversight, in the Disproportion of the Means to
the End; or an Injustice in Exacting Impossibilities, and requiring from
Governors, More then they are able to do. To keep Clear now of so Lewd an
Imagination, it must be Honestly Presumed, that God has not left us without
some Appeal from the Infirmities of Mankind: So that I shall now speak a
General Word or Two, concerning the Rise, Make, and Obligation of Humane Laws;
and what Affinity they Have, or Ought to have, with Laws Divine.

The Great Dictator of Rules and Measures for the Governing of Men in Society,
was GOD HIMSELF; and Those First Principles have been Handed down to us, in an
Uninterrupted Course of Practice, and Tradition, from their very Institution to
This Day, by the Voice of Nature, and by the Universal Assent of All Ages, to
the Eternal Equity, and Reason of them. They are of the same Force at This
Instant, that ever they were; and so much the Standard of All Political Acts,
that they are No further Binding, then as they Conform to this Test.
Government, in short, is no more then Right Nature put in Exercise; General
Precepts Distributed into Particular Provisions; the Secret Influences of
Rectified Reason made Public, and Digested into Laws. It is the Law of God,
in fine, that speaks in the Law of Man; And This Law Paramount, is the
Sovereign Guide that Lawmakers Ought to Follow. Not but that Governors, and
Legislators have a Liberty of Discretion, in Things Indifferent; but they are
Nevertheless Bound up not to Depart from the Equity of the Primary
Fundamentals; for No Provision of State must be Admitted in Bar of those
Prerogatives.

There will not be much Difficulty, I presume, to Yield the Imperfection of
Humane Laws; the Sufficiency of the Laws of Government; the Necessity of
Government it self, and of a Dispensing Power to Uphold it; Nor, finally, to
Grant that All Laws of State are to be Tried by God's Laws, and that the Use,
and Intent of Those Laws of Prerogative is to Supply, or to Correct, what is
Wanting, or Amiss in the Law of the Constitution. All This must be
Acknowledged; for, otherwise, we shall have the Law of This, or That Community
set up against the Law of the Universe. Man's Contrivance against God's: Laws
that leave us at a Loss, a Thousand Ways, for want of Power, Direction, Due
Application, and the like, against Laws that Provide for us in All Instances
whatsoever. We have spoken of the Need, and Use of a Dispensing Power; The Next
Point in Order will be the Proper Receptacle of it.

If the Dispensing Power be an Essential of Government; where should it be
Lodged, but in the Common Repository of All the Ensigns of Majesty? for it is
Incorporated with the First Principles of Government; and so to be Exerted,
from time to time, at the Will and Pleasure of the Supreme Magistrate; with a
Saving only, to the Sacred Obligations of Right Reason, and the Indispensable
Privileges, and Duties of the Ruling Office. Humane Laws, are, at Best, but the
Specification of Particular Duties, drawn from the General Lights, and Precepts
of Nature; and recourse must be had in All Cases, to Those Authentic
Originals, for the Correcting of False, or Imperfect Copies. What Is to be done,
where the Letter of the Law draws One way, and the Conscience of the Prince,
Another? He must, of Necessity, Dispense with One of the Two Laws. He is
Accountable to God, for the Breach of Trust, if he does not Act, according to
his Judgment, for the Good of his Subjects; And the Law of the Land can never
Oblige the Sovereign to do any thing contrary to the Law of his Authority, and
Commission; which is no more, then Employing the Law of his Prerogative for the
saving of a State from the Law of the Land, which, (as it may happen) would
Hazard the Ruin of it. But where is the Danger at last, of This same
Bug-bear-Prerogative of a Dispensing Power?

The Right, and Practice, (they say) of Dispensing with One Law, lays All the
Rest at Mercy. But I am of Opinion rather, That the Want of such a Power lays
Government it self at Mercy. And whereas it is Objected, that it sets up
Absolute Power under the Cloak of a Dispensation; it does; in Truth, prevent
the Introducing of an Anarchy for fear of Tyranny: Neither is it the Business
of a Dispensation, to Invalidate Humane Laws, but to Uphold the Authority of
Laws Divine. Reason of State, and Equity, make All Governments to be Absolute,
in Some Cases, and Occasions; and what matters it to Us, Whether This comes by
Creation, or by Accident? Briefly, He that Quarrels Government for being in
some Respect, Arbitrary, Quarrels God's Providence, for Making it so; and for
finding it Necessary so to be: And This Exception strikes at the very
Foundations of Power it self. If a Prince cannot Dispense, he cannot Govern,
where Necessity is too strong for the Law. His Commission is Positive, and he
Acts under a Command, as well as under a Duty. He is, upon his Peril, to
Execute the Powers that are Given him, and as much Obliged to Assert his
Prerogative against all Usurpations, as not to abuse his Power, to Violence,
and Oppression: Or even in case of such an Abuse; a Prince has a Power to do
many things that he has not a Right to do; and therefore the Morality of Acting
must be Distinguished from the Authority of Governing; for the Character stands
Firm, in Despite of the Male Administration.

There is Another Unlucky Mistake too, that is very Rife. [ Stay for a
Parliament, they Cry, and let those Laws be Repealed, that are not fit to be
Continued.] This is the Best way certainly, where the Time, the Quality of the
Case, and the Temper of the People will Bear it. But what if the Danger
Presses? What if the Delay be Certain Death? and the Disease cannot Wait for a
Remedy? The King's Duty never Sleeps; his Authority never Intermits; and he is
as much Accountable to Almighty God, for the Exercise of his Function, Out of
Parliament, as in Parliament. If YOUR OWN Laws will not do it (says God) make
Use of MINE, as you will Answer the Contrary. Shall a Prince say, Lord, I must
not Dispense? as if he might Dispense with God's Law, though not with his Own.

And then for the Quality of the Case; the Privacies of Statematters, as the
Manage of Secret Commissions, Negotiations, Intelligences, Counsels, and
Intrigues; These are Affairs, so peculiar to the Cabinet, that they are Wholly
Foreign to the Cognizance of a Parliament; and yet these Invisible Wheels are a
kind of Political, Perpetual Motion; and of Absolute Necessity to the Great
Design of Government it self. There are Other Cases, where the Ground of the
Suspension is only This or That Particular Emergency. And in These Cases, it
often falls out that it may be Death almost, Not to Suspend, and yet as Mortal
to Repeal the same Law.

And so the Temper of the People must be Allowed to go a great way too; when
the Mobile are Poisoned with Ill Opinions, and Iealousies of their Superiors;
as in the Instance of That Fatal Parliament of Forty One: And the Danger of Two
Parliaments since, at Westminster and Oxford, where his Late Majesty escaped,
very narrowly, the Dear Experiment of the same Remedy.

Well! but it is a Temptation, they pretend, to the setting up of an Arbitrary
Power, to say, that a Prince MAY do it, if he WILL] Now this is to Suppose that
Whoever MAY do it, if he WILL, WILL, do it, if he CAN; and if it holds That Way,
there is Nothing but Oppression and Tyranny upon the Face of the Earth. For the
Prince that has it not in his Power to Oppress, has it not in his Power to
Govern; for he is Governed, where he is Impotent, and the Control sets up One
Sovereignty against Another.

The Republicans insist mightily upon the Trust, the Receptacle, and the
Possible Abuse of it: But what now if there be No Avoiding of such a Trust?
What if there never was any Government in the World; Or if Humane Society
cannot subsist WITHOUT it? What if at the same Time that this Trust is
Controverted, there are a Hundred other more Dangerous Trusts, Admitted? That
is to say, as to the Enabling of a Prince to make Slaves of his People? What if
the Trust, and the Power have Always been in the same Hands? And in Conclusion,
if it be Utterly Impossible to secure People against a Possible Abuse: how
Wild, and how Unreasonable a Thing is it, to raise Scruples against the Eternal
Course of Nature and Justice!

To speak to the Matter as it lies, somewhere or other there must be a Trust,
and That Trust may be Abused, wherever it is Placed: So that a Trust is
Inevitable. 2ly. If it never Was Otherwise, the Case is Universal. 3ly. There
must be a Trust amongst All Sorts, and Degrees of Men, in All manner of
Dealings; and in a Million of Common Cases, where Life Limb, Liberty, Fortune,
Body, Soul, and Good Name, (perchance) may all be Concerned. There is No Place,
in fine, for the Offices, either Public, or Private, of Humane Society,
without it. What Is the Chancery, but a Court of Dispensation for Granting
Relief in Equity against the Letter of the Law? Do we not Trust Divines,
Surgeons, Physicians, Lawyers, Bankers* Relations, Children, Servants? Nay, and
so Trust them too, as in some Cases, to Allow them a certain Latitude of
Abating somewhat of the Rigor of their Commission: And in a Word, there is a
Law of Necessity, that supersedes the Obligation of All Our Positive Laws. Upon
the Main, we cannot Live Man by Man, without Trusting one Another: and
Providence has made This Trust so Necessary, that we can have neither Peace,
Safety, Conversation, nor Property, without it: and shall we make a Greater
Difficulty to Trust Governors with the Administration of Justice? Nay, and
where God has Entrusted them Beforehand; for Kings are God's Trustees, not the
Peoples. Will Men have no Government at all, unless they may have such a
Government, as God never made, and which God has made Impossible ever to Be?
Why This would be to make Every Will and Tom an Umpire of the Controversy;
Where Every Body is No Body; and yet This very Mobile, must be Trusted over
again, and find Their Vouchers too.

But 4ly. Why is so much more Stress laid upon this Single Prerogative, then
upon All the Rest, that may do Fifty times more Mischief? Why are not People as
much Afraid of Rapes, Massacres, Robberies, and other Military Violences, from
the UNDISPUTED Power of the Sword* as they are of Tyranny, and Oppression, from
the Prerogative of the Dispensing Power? Why not of the [ Mint] [ Life and
Death,] [ War and Peace,] for fear of False Money, Protecting Criminals,
bringing in Foreign Forces? etc. All comes to This at Last, that a Just, and a
Gracious Prince, WILL not Misapply his Dispensing Power; and He that would
make himself Wholly Absolute, can do his Work, in Despite on it and without it.

5ly. The Power, and the Trust are so Inseparable, that where there is no
Public Power, there is No Public Trust; and where there is No Public Trust,
there is No Public Power. What Is Authority, without the Right to Judge of the
Time, the Case, the Measure, etc? as if the Multitude were to Judge, and to
Appoint, and the Sovereign only to Execute; or, in Plain English; to Depose
himself, in a Resignation to the Dictates of the People. Let them once
Prescribe to a Prince what is Fit for Him to do, and they shall soon put it to
a Vote among Themselves, whether it be Fit, or No, for That Person to Govern.
But what Pretense have they to Govern in This Prerogative more then in All the
Rest? And how come they to be Rulers in This Case, and Subjects in All Others?
To Close This Point; the End of Law is Equity; and where the Letter of the Law
will not reach That Equity, it is to be presumed, that the Law speaks One
Thing, and means Another: In This Case it belongs to the Sovereign, to Explain,
and Execute That Law according to the True Intention of it; The Equity of it
being the Rule of Government.

6ly. It cannot be Imagined, that the Possible Abuse of Power (which is
Impossible to be Cleared, or Prevented,) should be Offered as a Reasonable
Argument against the Divine, as well as the Political, and the Necessary use of
it; for it puts a Stand to the Sun in its Course; which is all one with a Stop
to the Orderly Motions of Government.

It is Objected once again, What if the Chief Ruler shall say there Is a
Necessity where there is None; and make That Pretended Necessity, the Ground
for his Proceeding at Will and Pleasure? Necessities, they say, are Notorious,
and carry Pomp, and Noise along with them: In Sea Breaches, or Conflagrations,
the Multitude are Witnesses to the Stress. To which I Answer, that if a Prince
says there IS a Necessity where there is None; The People, on the other hand,
may say there is NONE, where there IS; and no Umpire at last to End the Strife;
But, Right or Wrong, the Former is a Sentence of Order and Authority, upon a
Foundanion of Law, and Conscience; The Other, an Indeterminable License, in
Opposition to Practice, and Common Sense; and an Usurpation, over and above.
The People Judge by their Eyes, their Ears, and shortly, by what they See,
Hear, or Feel; but the Magistrate reads Effects in their Causes; and it is both
the Prudence, and Duty of his Function to Prevent Mischiefs in the very Seeds
and Roots, before they come to a Head.

To Sum up the Whole now; If Government; The Rules, Powers, and Measures of
Government, be all of God; If Those Foundations be laid in Right Reason, and
Justice, and Communicated to All Mankind, in the very Bowels, and Instincts of
Reasonable Nature; If Humane Laws fall short of the Ends they were Designed
for; and No Means left us to supply That Failing; the Inference is, that either
Those Original Lights are given us in Vain; or that Providence has made a False
Reckoning, which are Two Points that cannot be so much as supposed, without the
Highest Indignity to God's Power, and Wisdom. As to the Receptacle of this
Sovereign Prerogative, and the Judgment, Where, When, How, and in what Degree,
it is to take Place, the Order of Nature, and of Government tells us, that It
is impossible to Vest it in the People, without Confounding Sovereignty with
Subjection.

CASE II. The Nullity of any Act of State, that Clashes with the Law of God.
THe Two Cases above, are but, Effectually, the Abstract of Twenty or Thirty
Observators upon the same Text. I have done with the Former, and as to the
Other now; It is out of Doubt, that all Those Pretended Laws, are Nullities,
that take upon them to Forbid, what God and Nature Commands, or to Command what
God and Nature Forbid. This Single Position might serve for a Full, and a Final
Resolution upon This Point* but having Touched upon One Particular under This
Topique in several Observators, (in the Case of Charles the First) and
particularly in my Late Answer to a Letter to a Dissenter, etc. I would
willingly Propagate the Opinion, if it will hold Water; and I am as ready to
Relinquish it, if it will not Abide the Test. But however, I shall recommend it
to the Public, Once again, in the very same Words.

In the Case of the Proceedings, under Charles the First against the Papists.
That Excellent Prince, according to all Reasonable, and Humane Presumption,
lost his Crown, and his Life, in Complement to a Void Act of his Own, in
pretending to Bar himself the Use, and Service of his Subjects: As if an Act of
State could Supersede a Fundamental of God and Nature. I have the Authority of
a Great Man (Bishop Sanderson) to Back me in the Casuistical Stress of This
Instance: [ God (says he) has given to his Vicegerents here on Earth, a RIGHT
In, and a POWER Over the Persons of ALL their Subjects, within their several
Respective Dominions, even to the spending of their Lives in their Countries
Service; WHENEVER they shall be by Their Authority called thereunto. Five
Cases, p. 71.] Now if they have These Privileges of RIGHT, and POWER, from GOD;
and Extending to ALL, and WHENEVER, without Exception, either to Time,
Number, or Distinction of Persons: What Earthly Power shall dare to Control
This Commission? And I have One Word more to Offer now, (that I have formerly
spoken to) which comes a little Closer yet to the Point.

The Precept of [ Honor thy Father and thy Mother] is undoubtedly of Divine
Authority; and a Command, of an Immutable, and Indispensable Obligation: And it
has Catholic Assent to it, that it Extends, as well to our Civil, and
Political, as to our Natural Parents. By This Law, All Subjects are Bound in
Conscience to Attend the Call, and the Service of their Prince; for the Precept
is Positive; without Any Qualification, Limitation, or Condition whatsoever.
The Question will be Shortly This now; Whether Any King, can by any Act of
Civil Authority, Divest himself of This Right, over the Persons of his
Subjects? I do not say but he may Choose whether he will Command them, or Not;
but he Cannot Discharge his People of their Duty of Obedience, in case he
Requires their Service; That is to say; In any Case, which is not Contrary to
the Will, and Word of God; No Humane Law Can Absolve them from That Office of
Allegiance: So that in the Conclusion, either Those Subjects are Clear before
God, that serve their Prince, when by him thereunto required, notwithstanding
any Law of Man to the Contrary; Or the Ten Commandments may be turned to Waste
Paper; If the Law of the Land shall Forbid upon a Penalty, That which the Law
of God, Commands upon a Penalty.

London, Printed for R. Sare; and Published by Randal Tailor, 1687.


