An ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS AGAINST THE REBELS at an ASSIZE holden at
EXETER, On the 14th. of this Instant September, 1685. where to the Number of 26
Persons were Tried for High Treason, and found Guilty. As also an Account of
the several Persons Names that were appointed to be Executed, and the places
they are to be Executed at.
SIR,
I Having already given an Account of the Proceedings at Dorchester; I shall
now proceed to to that at Exeter; where on the 14th of this Instant, were
Arraigned for High Treason the Persons whose names follow.

John Oliver, Henry Knight, Abraham Hunt, Christopher Cooper, Edmond Bovet,
Samuel Pots, William Siller, Jun. John Knowles, John Follet, Elias Holman,
William Parsons, Thomas Quintin, Thomas Broughton, Peter, Bird, John Kamplin,
John Gosling, John Sprake, William Clegg, Walter Teape, James Cox, Timothy
Dunkin, John Ross, Thomas Connet.
The Persons abovenamed, being in Numer, Twenty Three, were Indicted for
High Treason, and upon their Arraignment of Death pleading Guilty, and have
since received Judgment.

John Foweracres, and Robert Drower, putting themselves upon Trial were found
Guilty, and received Judgment as the former.

Thomas Hobbs, Tried for Proclaiming Monmouth King at Crediton in the County of
Devon, was found Guilty, and received Judgment.

These are all the Persons that were Tried at Exeter and received Judgment, in
Number Twenty Six, out of which Number, Fourteen are ordered to be Executed at
the several places following, viz. John Foweracres, Executed at Exeter. Thomas
Hobbs, at Crediton. William Parsons. at Ottery St. Mary. Thomas Quintin, at
Ottery St. Mary. John Sprake, at Collyton. William Clegg, at Collyton. John
Oliver, at Honiton. Henry Knight, at Honiton. Samuel Pots, at Honiton. John
Knowles, at Honiton. Thomas Broughton, at Axminster. John Gosling, at
Axminster. Timothy Dunkin, at Axminster. John Ross. at Axminster.


The Heads and Quarters of these Persons are to be fixed where the King shall
appoint.

Your Servant, T.S.
September the 15th. 1685.
This may be Printed, R.L.S. September the 25th. 1685.

LONDON, Printed by E. Mallet, in Blvck-Horse-Alley, near Fleet-Bridge, 1685.


